FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10398

17 March 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 13/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but.a1so from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and saterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. ‘l'imss within items are as
given by source.

Ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, vim or attitudes of the u.s. Goverment.

OOPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GWBRNING WSHIP OF
MATERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
‘0? THIS PUBLICATION IE RESTRICT- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HORLDHIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(2000 13/ 82)

CONTENTS

AUSTRALIA

International Drug lung anaehed in Melbourne
(Various sources, various dates) ..........................

Foreign Connections Found
Charges Against Four
Passport Crackdown, by Ian Davis

Briefs
Prison Irug Problem
Italian mug Problem
Queensland Cocaine Arrest
13mm

Briefs
Chittagong Opium Seizure

Briefs
Opium Seizure in Katha
Opium Seized on Train
nous KONG

Hong Kong W Become Center for Harcotic Export
(THE W0 PBOP‘LB'S W1, 19 Feb 82) ................,.

-s- [III-WW-13SPOU

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDIA

Aid in Redmtiom of Opitn Stockpile Seen
(P‘mlm, 15 Feb 82) .0...I...I....00...OIOOOOOOOOIOOIOOOOQ

Briefs
Heroin Seized, Syndicate hushed
Heroin annular Arrested

PLUM

Golden Crescent Brings Heroin haggling Alarm
(“thou W; m 1811‘”, 26 Feb 82) oeeeoooooooooeoooooo

Over 70 Kilogram of Heroin Seized, Vorth 1 Billion Rupees
(mu m, 20 Feb 82) COO...0.000.000.000.000....00....

Briefs
More Hamish Seized
Hashish Seized From Ship
Ik'ug Haul in Karachi
Opium Seized Iron Slip

mm

Briefs
Revised Dangerous Irugs Act

SRIMNKA

Haven for Hard Drugs
(m1 kerasmg‘e; m, 23 Rb 82)....000000000000.0000...

'UIAIIAND

Kriengsak Interviewed on Ties With Irug Kingpins
(blmsak Chm Interview; mncm“, 28 J” 82) eeseooeo

Cow-lento ies Voice Questions Over Anti-Sue Operations
(Various saunas, Various dates) oooaooooeeeoeooooeoe see...

0.8. Connection Cited, by Phschon Phinthu

'Bin Dieo' Cements

R‘I'O Links With Minorities, Trei’fickers, by Do No In
Other Opium Trafficking Groups, by ﬁui Bangkhunthien
Columnist Slam: Inaction Against EMT, Saeng San Han Athit

mestions Raised on Timing of Anti-Sue Operations
(mum, 31 Jan 82) 00....OOOIOOOCOOOOPOCOOOOOIOOO0......

Relations With Bums Viewed in Context of hugs
(MTIcHw, 31 J” 82) 0.0..OOOOOOIOOQOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00.0....

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\O\O

10

12

Fit—'58

16

17

22

31

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Post-331d Situation at Bean Bin ‘raek Described
(M “An“ m, 13 Feb 82) 00.0.00...000.000.000.000...

mug Ofﬁcials Believe Heroin Refineries Have Moved
(NATIm mm, 22 Feb 82) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI00.00.000.000.

Briefs
ﬂat Yai Trafficker Suspect Nabbed

Home Kong Man Arrested
meeng wooked Opiun' Seizure
Hat Yai Opium Seizure
northern Drug Reid

Nakhon Psthom Morphine Seizure
Mg Arrests in Chiang Mai
Kong Hand Over Opium

cm

Government Dela in Reducing Harshness of Harihuane Lev Cited
(John Gray; THE GLOBE ANDHAIL, 26 Jan 82) ...............

Lawyer Gives Opinion on Writ of Assistance Needs in mug
Cases
(Michael Valpy; THE ems: AND HAIL, 10 Dec 81) ...........

Briefs
Drug, Gun Raids

EAST EUROPE

mosnm

Data on Dog Addiction in Croatia
(mtko MBKOVIC} v! ’ 16 J” 82) 00000000000000.9000

mm “RICA

JAMAICA

Briefs
Harihuene Arrests

MEXICO

Large-Scale Traffickers Captured, Marihuana Seized
(BI: mmm’ 20 Feb 82) 00.0....OOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOO

oc-

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mug Processing Laboratoriee mecovered in Honterrey
(ml m0 m m m, 20 Jan 82) oooooooooeeooeeooo

Briefs
Heroin Trafficker Arrested
Harihuana Shimsnte Seized
‘l‘raffickere Battle Police
Bolivia-0.5. Cocaine Traffickere
Harihuana Shipping Points Reported
Opium Gum Seized

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

Guns, Marihuane Seized; Police Say Pusher Har Averted
(mm comm, 8 F9!) 82) 00.0.00....OOOOOOOIOOOCOOOQ

Briefs

Mg Arrest of Four
Fine for Venezuelan

NEABEASTANDNOR‘IHAMCA

AFGHANISTAN

Briefs p
Heroin Factories in Pakistan

mm

HaJor Opium Ring Captured
(3118”!) chum“, mm, 31 J” 82) ooooeee'eeeooeeoeeeo

mug Seizure Reported
(Husm Ghmin; AIS-m, 6 me 81) oooeeaoeeeoeeeeeeoeee

Briefs
Opium Seized

Briers

Tehran Drug Seizure, Statistics
Iranshahr Mg mecovery
Tabriz mug Catch
Tahoe Opium Find
Provincial Drug Discoveries
Qon Heroin Find
Zahedan, Jahrom Seizures
Tabria, Banurd Discoveries
Heroin Discovered

- d -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SUB-SAHARA]! AFRICA

SOUTH AFRICA

Indians Arrested for Possessing Kendra:
(Key Turvey, Rika van Graan; THE CITIZDI, 27 Feb 82) ......

WEST KUROPB
CYPRUS

Alleged Narcotics Production, snuggling in North Reported
(I m, 9"” 82) O...I.0.0.00000000IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI

MARK

Nordic Ministers Report on ﬂeeting in Stockholm on Drugs
(Jens Thonsen; moan mus, 20 Feb 82) .............

Paper Attacks Position of Danish Minister at Nordic Panel
(Editorial; 8mm Hm, ZO'Peb 82) seeseeoeeeoeeeoe

Conservative MP Demands Action Against Christiania
(Bent Dak Andersen; WEB TIME, 22 Feb 82) ........

Customs, Police to Tighten Border Controls Against mugs
(Bent Bak Andersen; amen rm, 22 Feb 82) ........

Briefs
Christiania Mg Seizure Statistics

ITALY

Heroin Laboratory in Palermo amt Dom
(Francesco La nests; 0101mm; DI SIGILIA, 12 Feb 82) .....

Newman“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

swam:
’ Police, Custous Report Decline in Hashim Seizures
(mm m, 10 Rb 82) 0......OCCOO0.0...’............

Stuck! Registers Continued Heehish Use Decline by Papdls
(Borjs Karlseon; moms um, 12 Feb 82) ...............

Briers
uglishmen Expelled for Drugs Grime
Successful Raids Against Pushers

SWITZERLAND

Extent. of Drug Problem, Seizures, Deaths in 1981
(m mm mm, 3 FCb 82) seoeoeeeoeoeeosoesooeooooe

UNITED mama

Ponce (Merged Hith Supplying hugs to Pusher
(Stanley Goldsmith; m BAIL! mm, 2 Feb 82) .........

Briere
Cleric's Robes 81d Drugs

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
INTERNATIONAL DRUG am 9118!!!!) IN moon»:

l’oroign Connection- round

.2me 3:.“ M»: mm mm Wm a...“ m
WWW Wm a W Wm W W £3 WW
ﬂaw“? . WE. _ “W m a: m
m w ”pm“ WWWWWW: «WMWWWWWW 5% WW
WW..WWWWWWWWWmmwmmmfﬁW E wﬁmﬁ
at? “W Wummzﬁm .WWEW
W .m WW. WWW “WWW
WW Wmmmmmm WW WWW; WWWWWWWWWWW
wmmmmmmm mm nu mm mm? mmmwﬁm .M. m Wk
”am .3 WWW mm W W“ m“ a m
WWW“ WWW :WJWW WWW WWW WW W m
yma mm“ mwmmmms w WWW Mum “mm” w
WWW WWW ,Wmmmm WWW: W xWWWWW ”
WWWWW mmmmmmnmmwmm mm W “Wmmmmmm W
charges Against hour

Canberra. m AUSTRALIAN 1n Bullish 7 Jan 82 p 2

[M]

onehedimportedetleut

. A DRUG-trailidthtg syn-
dicate used the names oi
dead intent: to obtain ialse

passports ior overseas drug
mmacourtwastoldymr-
y.

Warm mponalblenla‘
was or
importing heroin valued at
more thnn no million.

Senior otiloera involved in a
Joint hderel Polioeothorh

Police mention which
emailed the ring told the Nelo
hourne llama-awe Court

that old newspaper death
notices were scoured by the
syndicate to
identities.

Detective Senior Sergeant
Peter Driver. of the Victorian

some use oi the (our people
eocuaed.”heto|dtheoourt
lie aid the Joint operation.
involvintmemhereoitheAue-
cmmummwc-
toria Police end cutouts om-
dela. had begun in February
lettyear.
the Chiei

sl-le told I A
ti dhry . r .
Vlmt involved wrveillencc

mtgedseid it "1.3:“ bending
ms onen an

mo. involved trip- by 0!. least
two 0! the seemed min i
postpone. and thet the

23}

mm “De-

5.
F
g
1;

Passport Crackdoun

Melbourne THE A63 in English 6 Jan 82 p 3

[Ankle by Ian Davis]

[Text]

CANBERRA. - The Federal Government will make
pessportsheadertogetinan effort to crackdownon
the use of false passports by drug syndicates.
3 ' a 5.75%?!
Egsggggiiéiizi

32!... is
mars

PRISON DRUG Plow-Sydneyw-Prisoners at Sydney's Parranatta Jail were
locked in their cells last night and will stay there for at least two days
while prison offiohrs search for weapons and drugs. After a year of violence,
drug and gun hauls and continuous allegations of an organised drug network.
the New South wales Government decided yesterday to withdraw several privil-
eges and to review all other freedoms in the jail. The lock-up at Sydney's
naxinun security jail cones after 19-year-old Peter rhoeas was found strang-
ledmderhisbedonﬂondayafternoon. lhoeaswasthe fourthnurdsrvictin
in the jail in 10 moths. The killing has been linked with the jail's drug
network. The Minister for Corrective Services, Mr Jackson. said yesterday:
”The indications are that certain prisoners have control of the jail end other
inmates won't talk because they fear for their lives.” The search for weapons
and drugs will last at least two days. All furnishings, including cwboards
and curtains, in which contraband can be concealed, will be rsnoved. [macerpt]

[Melbourne 1'83 A68 in English 6 Jan 82 pp 1. 3]

ITALIAN DmG I’M-All but 16 of the 130 alleged Calabrian mafia nenbers
detained since early last year in Ioori, Calabria, have now been released.

And the Australian Departunt of Porsign Affairs is seen as being partly re-
sponsible. Several of then were suspected of links with drug growing at Grif-
fith. However. despite the investigating ngistrate's request to the Italian
mbaaey in Canberra for an authmtioated copy of the Woodward Report. it did
not arrive in tine for its sections on Griffith-Calabria drug links to be used
as evidence. the Pirst Secretary of the Italian anhasay in Canberra, Dr Gian-
carlo Izso, said yesterday the enbassy had node a request to the Department of
Pureign Affairs for a copy of the Woodward Report in July or August last year.
No response had been received fro. the departnent. [Sydney was smart MINING
HERALD in English 6 Jan 82 p 3]

90mm COCAIRB MSW-Police on Queensland's Gold coast have seized co-
caine worth 81 aillion. Detectives took possession of the drug. and sore than
$6000 in cash, in a raid on a house in Surfers Paradise. Phillip Issue Abdi,
31, was arrested at Coolangatta Airport on Monday. Abdi, a Gold Coast res-
tauranteur, appeared before the Southport Magistrates Court yesterday on char-
ges of having possessed and trafficked in a dangerous drug. [Canberra m
aus'rmm in mglish 7 Jan 32 p 3)

C908 5300/7531
BRIEFS

3 Max (”Du-Customs officials in the port

city of Chittagong have discovered 17.2 kilogra- (38 lbs) of opim, valued at
more than $600,000, in a cargo ship, it was reported here today. Reports said
the ship belonging to Bangladesh's national flag carrier "Shipping Corporation"

was also carrying huge quantities of unauthorised electronic goods and cosmetics
the suns ship was detained

worth thousands of dollars. According to the reports,
in a port in the mited States on 8 November when 11.8. customs officials found
more than 9.5 kilos (21 pomds) of hashish and 26 kilos (58 pounds) of opium.

The ship, "Banglar Maya," sailed to Glittagong on Honday from new York after
calling at Karachi in Pakistan and Tuiticorin in India. custom officials were
quoted as saying. [Text] [BKOSOMS Hong Kong APP in English 1631 our 3 Mar 82]

CHITTAGONG OPIUH SEIZURE--Dacca,

650: 5300/5667
OPIUH SEIZURE IN Kama-Abdu- the Katha Township opiun suppression caspaign,
Katha Tovnship People's Concil, Kyandaw Hard People's Oomcil and arned forcea
members at about aidnight on 31 January laid in wait near Kymdav Village.

They later arrested Sai Nan together with 72 packages of opiua, each weighing
1 vias [3.6 pounds], and one packet of opium weighing half a visa. The other
gang leathers transporting the opium—fled. Later. following a teatimy given
by Sai Nan. 12 more packages of opium. each mighing 1 vise, were mower-ed
buried underground near a hayetack near Kyandav creek. [33050745 Rangoon
LOKTEA PYBI‘I'HU NEZIN in Burmese 18 Feb 82 p 5]

OPIUH SBIZED 0N mam-Luau Railways police on 15 February boarded the Leshio-
Mandalay Train No 132 at Haipaw station and searched the bedroll of Na Chan wan
of No 4 Aryondau Ward, Laahio. The search uncovered two packages of raw opium
weighing 2 vies. usipev people's police station has filed charges against

Ma Chan Hen. [BKOSOMS Rangoon HYAIIHA ALI}! in Burneae 25 Feb 82 p 6]

080: 5300/5667
PDNG WC HAY 3m CENTER FOR MIC EXPORT

Rangoon THE WORKIN PEOPLE'S DAILY in 319118!) 19 Fob 02 p 6

[Text]

" Rom. x'oué; I, bob—A 3am» mung

Manon In:

W
Malt-{Medan night-plum
torn-tende- ukummz°m

K8Tm~Chiefoft£€
c . . .
Burma. “1“ My

mm" m

one: main put on: Ron:
into distepute." he said.
He aid tlmjn the ﬂat
use, police nixed [.5
kilo. of heroin in the: alt-

ei ﬁuh bdonsi m a
mach: yet.-

I“!

moﬁcmemﬁna-
ted 3:3kilot ofhaoia‘
{mm lwofm
whowaabouc tole'nc'

__fotAmdun.

«be: mun-in. - -

He said that following
the bumper Invent, the
wholesale price of black
":2” :2 m,“ i: 1*
co ny a y
:zwamfmm 198°-
an: In We» or cam swoon; sum

I'D-act]

E, u an mg m m .0 Hm»
mm ms. mm“ Wm W“, m Mm
mmwmﬁ» mm ; ..__mw..mu yum .w. W
mi mm; mm... ,_ Maw
mm E m . “mm Emmy
Pub ”Law Th (.3. mumanwm ﬁn...»
mum._.u.. m.» an .wmawuw
“me Wmmm mm Mm“ ”w. m "mm. mm
mm” M mwmw wwmuww mwm MM
Am .m um m. ... u... u ”mum... .aMumumu
Emma mmﬁmmwmwmmmmmmm
c in snuggling tech: which
to. illicit heroin factoricrin A!
, (:81 sources said. “while, police in Cu
30 lane (18 miles) from he ,

ch: «played a fleet 6f "hide: to transport
marijuana and win. from Nepal d in Uttar Preach. (Text!
(“050745 Hang Kong APP in English 1510 an- 3 Ha

Dalia m
twin to «attain the noun. 0: in Want. [How Dam ”mow in Eng-
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040044-4

GOLDEN CRESCENT BRINGS WIN mm mm

Calcutta m ISLAND in mount: 26 tab 82 p 6

(Article by Anthony Hyman]

' [Ml

' Pakistan hasappealedfortaaasive
international aid to fight drug
smuggling. The prohlent is huge. In
roam yaara the wild horderland

' rt hettvaen Iran. Pakistan and

you“ has surpassed “The
Goltn Tringle" region of Indo-
China as a soura of opium for
nald when. They call it “The
Ooltkn Cresoerl". Alarrnlngy. a
h“?- indastry 'a now enrgtngaa

In Pakistan‘s harder region.
angling it a way ol life. The
Padtans and Balucltis hecornh
ant alrnost as naturally In
people ‘at the Western Worid
haoonte factory workers or clerlo.
The mountainous. semi-desert
r nshetveanlran.Paltistan and

ghartistan. have little natural
wealth. and very few factories.
onions or fertile agricultural land.

In vast stretch- o! unguarded
hordarhnd alrnoat the only v'nhle
causation is smuggling. dealing 'n
imported goods free of heavy State
duties. or mggling out the opium
produced in ahttndartee hy loal
farm

And art's are only a part ol’tha
standing scone. An enorrooo
range of manner goods from
Japan. Western Europe and the US
has long come into hkistan and
Iran. often vn Duhai. mutating
capital of the Golf.

This smuggling trade. worth
handed: of millions of dollars a
year. is in such item an electrical
goods watches. US and British
«games. Scotch whialty. foreipt
cloth. auto spec runs and ryrca.

Everyday Item of g
and plastic from abroad
smuggling outlier. as at
exparoive larnu. At Nos
Quetta (capital of
We province). I
deaeription are rudiy t

The last thraeyeartht
an expana‘on of saw
lranhn Revohtrion rent
checkpoats more or lest
Afghanistan‘s Ion hon
virtually open when wt
there.

Even mam. the
revolutionllalranort
occuption lie Milt
serious hortr policinl
of the three pverntnen
successful in tryin
smugglitg Low ll:
ofﬁcial: ntakes h
corraption hy wealthy
tetaptatton rnany oann

11m are other

failure. Baluoltistan's VI
larger than Italy-p
prohlena I’or patrdr
ofﬁo‘ah or Coast Goa
tlt'at on the ground. Sn
often better artned
torus—and hetter aoq
the terrain.

The Pakistani Gov:
recognises the int:
mugging as the big.
and sources of incon
rural areas. It has alwa
data: of illegal activil
state iooorne. ratttet
political instability
hord- regions

The entire hader re

10.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600040044-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040044-4

CSOt

lran. Palrietan and Altlanlaean 5

among the poorest and least-

developed part ol‘ each country.

The local population it all
erainly nit-I. many ol‘ timn
nornada. living between their
village and mountian pastures for
their lioeita.

They are of independent mind.
often armed. deterrahed to keep
free of central integl‘erengianin
333d wlIt they regard an the?
fixed thin to make a Iivh; as
mowers or producer: of opiatn.

Sonia experts eia‘nt that up to
moo tone of opiunr front “The
Goitkn Creeoent“ are smuggled out
of Pakhtarr and Alduniatan each
year on to world when 'n the

. Middle East. Barge and the US.

Scene two-thirds of its oridnaiee
in PaIt'ntan. Highland triheairten it
Pathan or hindraroeean produce
opium with a it perunt tnorpifate
com—not tar below the pelted
opiun lrorn Torltey and
Afghanistan.

Heroin. the deadly sedative drug
prepared from neorph'ate war intﬂ
reeently. virtually nnknown in
Pakitan'etrbalbelt. Nowaheroit
.indtntt‘y for export. based ta
Pakistan's North West Frontier
Province. in: been created with the
technical help of experts teen
European untrea. where hi;
international drug. syndicates

operate.

5300/4924

11

international eritne

beeataee_b_gt'ueu can he
relative refit—y if tribal
para of Pakistan. All
madly wooedng deal
inustha Middk East. Eur

The Pakistani Go
request for 'atternationa

Wit on! deals
the progenyOpimn'

eaporh are Itely r
vowing. even with no
eludes at Karachi or

The problem has to h
root—that is. at produ-

Nareotia experts at
new have to he I
poppy fields liaetinur
aehievedJ'heeotreetu
cut oil by whetitutin:
crop for opium—by
payir‘ crop for peaeat

what is bound to be r
policy with their rural

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600040044-4
OVER 70 MW 01" neon: SRIZED, “0m 1 BILLION EUPBBS
Karachi Mamas NEWS in English 20 Feb 82 p 1

[Text] Peshawar, Feb l9--About 70 kilograms of heroin, worth about 100 crore in
the internetionsl market one today seized by the custom suthorities in an opera-
tion on the DJ. Khan-Tank Reed.

Customs sources said here today that the seizure as I.“ by the DJ. Khan Anti-
Smggling Mobile Squad from a truck vhich was overpowered sfter a hot chase.

The heroin as artfully conceeled in the secret cavities of the truck which use
recovered after a thorouﬂn search of the vehicle.

The driver and cleaner of the truck, nil-sly Sarder Khan and Qeyyu Khan, belonging
to Khyber Agency, hsve been arrested. The truck No “51073 has also been
impounded, Collector Jehagir Khan said, although the local arket velue of the
seized heroin use estinted st Rs. 50 lakh, yet it would have shot-up to over

Rs. 100 crore in the international nrket.

A teen colprising senior officials has been deputed to carry out in-depth
investigstions of the seizure ibich my lead to the disclosure of useful inform-
tion about the activities of the narcotic smugglers.

Today's seizure use the second mjor haul of heroin in the province during the
week.

The Customs Intelligence Hing had earlier confiscated 80 kilogrsns of heroin
on Feb. 12.

Hr Jehsngir Khan said that more special squads were being deputed to curb
snuggling.

The teens which have the power of taking on-the-spot action were part of a
vigorous calpeign launched by the Custom to check snuggling, Hr Jehangir edded.

cso: 5300/5660

12
BRIEFS

MORE HASHISII SBIZED—On the third day of run-aging of nv 'Kaptai' at East wharf.
the Directorate of Customs Intelligence and Investigation recovered 321 kilograms
of high grade hashish bringing the total of seired hashish to 356 kilos on Monday.
The contraband was cleverly concealed in the walls of Crew Hess while 35 kilos
recovered on Saturday night were found fron the walls of Petty Officers Mess.
Arrest of at least three crew mubers were reported last night. while a city-wide
search is on for others. Hr S.T.R. Zaidi, director of the DCI and I, said "it
was a very bit haul aboard a cargo ship. we are trying to establish how such a
big consignment (over nine maunda) cc uld be boarded and then concealed so cleverly.
Meanwhile, the ship which was scheduled to leave for a German port on Monday has
been detained pending investigations. [Text] [Karachi DA“! in English 23 Feb 82

P 12]

HASHISB 5312!!!) FROM SHIP--The Directorate of Customs Intelligence and Investiga-
tion have recovered 35 kilograms of high-grade hashish from the Europe-bound ves-
sel n.v. Keptai in a raid Saturday night. Mr Manaoor Iqbal. Superintendent of
Customs told nevseen aboard the ship, belonging to._the Pakistan National Shipping
Corporation (PNSC) that on a tip-off by the Customs informers. 35 packets of
highly refined "uport quality“ hashish worth over Rs 17 lakh in the European
streets were recovered froe the cavity of a wall of the ship. The drug was con-
cealed very artfully in a canon place in the Petty Officers mess to escape aus-
picion. The Customs intelligence and investigation squad led by Superintendent
Khurahid Ali Khan runs-aged aleost all the sections of the ship before success-
fully laying hand on the contraband drug. The Customs got suspicious on notic-
ing false ceiling and fresh coat of paint in the Petty. Officers use. The false
ceiling and other chip-board covering the concealed drug were removed and the
hashish vas recovered. No arrest has so far been aade in this connection. How-
ever, the Customs believed it was the work of more than one person from among the
crew. They expect to lay their hands on the culprits before the ship sails off.
APP. [Text] [Karachi MORNING NM in mglish 22 Feb 82 p 5] '

l3
DRUG HAUL IN KARACHI-om a city-wide crackdown on mti-eociel elenente the
martial law [ML] authorities, police, cuctome and excise romded up 74 pereone
including a city mill-owner and a gold smuggler during the lent 26 hours. In
a surprise raid on the narcotic den of Abeconding Seifur Rahnan, alien Sefoore.
in Vehid Colony, North numbed, jointly hunched by m. authorities and
police force, a large quantity of narcotics and arms etc. were recovered.

They recovered 32,500 kilogram of cheru. and 5,500 kge of opium. Excise
police (south) reported erreete of Hali nun, June Gul. Hir Baehim and Zehir
Khan following seizure of 120 kilograms of haehiah from a Toyota car (326-063)
and from the embankment of Clifton Beach. where it was buried for 'illegal
export' to a European comtry. [GP051049 Karachi DNA“ in English 3 Her 82 p 1]

091m sum no! sunk-Custom Antiohuggling Organisation recovered and
seized 94 and a half pomde o! contraband opium worth about 8!. 1.5 million
in local narket from a foreign flag chip docked et Beet mart, on Sunday.

Cook A.B. Jim. a Phillipino, wee booked tor drug wiggling and two othere
detained for questioning while eearch for local connectione' ie on. The opi-
un-yielding veeeel IN “New Lark“ hee been detained pending further ranging.
It wee echeduled to leeve for Huecat with general cargo on her way to a atmo-
pean country, it wee stated. 'l'he opium wee recanted after two daye of hectic
managing by the cuetome Iron a 3-teet deep oil-drainage place which wee no-

wae drained out duly concealed in 23 Cellophane paper bege in the oil drain
of the ehip. [Kendal DAWN in uglieh l he: 82 p 10)

630: 5300/5671

11:
BRIEFS

REVISED DANGEROUS DRUGS ACT—President Marcos has sined inno Law the revised
dangerous drugs act. The law raises the penalties for possession and trafficking
of illegal drugs. The president signed it in the presence of ranking leaders of
the Batssan. the nilitsry end the cabinet. Mrtly after the signing, Philippine
Constabulary [PC] Quiet Fidel P-os ordered the increase of personnel end funding
support for all PC sntinsrcotics units in the country. The new lsv is expected
to be a big deterrent to drug sbme. The new law strengthens the governsnt's
consign sgsinst drug abuse. It ispoess heevy penalties for violators. UnauthoI:h
ised possession of marijuana is punishable by inrisonlent of 6 to 12 years and s
fine of 6,000 to 12,000 pesos. Illegal possession of narcotics is punishsble by
iwrisonnsnt of 12 to 20 years and s fine of 12,000 to 20,000 pesos. Hilitsry
and government persomel convicted of violating the law my be jailed for 12 to
14 years and fined 10,000 to 20,000 pesos es sell ss bsnned perpetually fro.
holding public office. Cultivetion of nrijusns snd sinilsr plants in punishable

by ll. yesrs to life inprisonnsnt and a fine of 20,900 to 30,000 pesos. President
Marcos has certified to the urgency of the dangerous drugs act in view of the
dangers posed by prohibited drugs. Last year nearly half a nillion Isrijusns
seedlings were uprooted and destroyed in 269 cultivstion sites discovered in 50
provinces. [Text] [M30255 hsnila Donstic Service in English 2300 on 2 liar 82]

680: 5300/ $658

15
HAVE! FOR HARD DNGS

Oolotlbo SUN Ln 31911311 23 Feb 82 p 1

[Article by mu Heerasingho]

[Text]

111euceltcrukdownontheuﬂttnttennd.lllepl
apt-t ol «unable he resulted tn toe-l nemtlee ring
tuning to tnlicklng In hauler dun.
Members of these rings who have m

of black money and International connections in thte
tlle trade. on std to have found that the mug
is

mwuottheeeuntry.
min'dt‘nmutgmwu undue Inel-
en
cool bentneventnn continua-likelihood
gates-notional amazon g are. wanton

Mamba-beau mum-mm
been In I the eollectton end
I mmm a

3
I
E
.3.
E
3

it: ﬁtment.

d t
mwhmbtrutokmnmmm
. anodeovetotnercottu cutlets-Ina
0’ of one x
KRIANGSAK INTERVIEWS!) ON TIES WITH DRUG KINGPINS
Bangkok HATICHOR in Thai 28 Jan 82 p 3

[Interview with General Kriangsak Chananan, the Head of the National Democracy
Party and Former Prime Minister; date and place not specified]

[Text] [Question] There have been news stories implying that you have been
involved with Khun Sa. Would you give us sons of your views on this?

[Answer] Concerning the matter of Khun Sa, I have not....Let me change what

I was going to say. The minority group policy set forth by the National
Security Council in order to protect the interests of Thailand is that we

do not want to alow foreign forces to enter the country. The entry of foreign
forces is considered to be dangerous for the country. This was the policy

of the National Security Council and we followed this policy. As for myself,
my duties did not involve me with Khun Se in any way. The newspapers have
slanderously said that I have been involved with Khun Sa in matters concerning
opium. I categorically deny this. If anyone plays with me, I will sue them.
And if I had any contact with Khun 8a as the newspapers say, I am sorry.

Concerning this, you can go investigate things for yourself. Whatever was
done cannot be kept secret. And if you do not believe that I carried on
suppression operations, you can go ask Phao Sarasin himself what I did.

I will tell you what I did. During the time I was supreme commander and
prime minister, I carried on suppression operations resolutely and there
was cooperation with Burma.

All of you probably remember the incident of the helocopter that got lost
in Burma and that necessitated negotiations during a major suppression operation.

After that, news reports indicated that suppression operations declined.

This is true. In addition, because of the many political events, we did

not have a chance [to conduct suppression operations]. At present, the government
is free and will probably do something to show the world that we are not

sitting by idly. During the period I was in power, we carried on suppression
operations all the time.

If you want to know things, I would like to clear myself of the things printed
by the newspapers.

17
[Question] Many people misunderstand and say that when you were in power
you did not carry on suppression operations.

[Answer] There were suppression operations during that period. He had to
solve the problems one by one. he did not live in the country. We drove

him out of the country in order to 'solve the problem. when he left, this
became the problem of another country, which had to solve the problem itself
or cooperate in solving it. But if he had.entered our country [again], we
would have had to expel him. After he was driven out, what should we have
done? Should we have sent forces to carry on suppression operations in Burma?
We had to see what would keep peace in the country. The important thing

was not to allow him to produce opium and make heroin in our country. By
ourselves, we could not solve this great problem.This was an international
problem that required further action. concerning the production areas in

the Golden Triangle, we closed all the doors.

Now, whoever wants to do this cannot be caught. But in these circles it

is known who is involved and if people come and engage in activities in

our country. we can stop them. When I was in office. I made investigations
and carried on suppression operations. He moved the Mac out of the mountains.
As I have stated, we obtained helocopters from the United States. Those

that we received each year were always used for suppression operations and
were turned over to the police. We carried out major suppression operations
during the time I was prime minister.

[Question] when you were in office, did Khun Sa make contact and ask to
hold discussions?

[Answer] My duties did not involve me with Khun 8a. Hy duties were concerned
with Supreme Command Headquarters policies for demobilizing the remnant

KHT forces in Thailand and for suppressing the transport of opium. That

task was completed and they took up other occupations instead of transporting
opium from Burma into Thailand. Now, Supreme Command Headquarters has provided
jobs for them and normally they cultivate 7-8 million tea plants. They grow
new varieties of tea and there are tea production factories so that they

can make a living cooperatively. Besides this, they grow apples. pears,
strawberries, coffee and lichees and engage in other occupations. Also,

they have been entrusted with doing afforestation work for the government.

Some newspapers have printed stories saying that I built a house in the
mountains there. This is not true!

[Question] And what about the 93rd Division?

[Answer] It was at Mae Salong [under] General Tuan. The 3rd Army, the 5th
Army under General Li and the 93rd Division all returned long ago. There
are no [KIT] armies now. These are just ordinary people now.

[Question] Did they build a house for you at Mae Salong?

18
[Answer] [They did this] out of respect for what I had done in helping them
to have occupations in accord with the policies of the Security Council,
which ordered me to carry out tasks for 20 years. And at present they have
occupations and can support themselves.

[Question] At that time, did you respond to the policies of the government
or the Security Council?

[Answer] To both the government and the Security Council. And now, more

than 80 percent of the work has been completed. I wanted to build a pavilion
and donate it as a platform which I could use to inspect the forests they
had planted. But out of respect, General Tuan built a guest house in memory
of the things that I had done for them. I stayed there once when I went

to inspect things. With good intentions and to honor me, they built a round-
shaped cement pavilion about 1 wa [l wa equals 2 yards] in diameter. This
was nicer than what I had planned. Concerning that house, they built that
for themselves and only used my name. After I left the military, I never
stayed there and never got involved. They named the house Chamanan in remenberance
of me.

We tried to find out whether he was engaged in opium trafficking. When General
Tuan died, he owed 1,800,000 baht which he had borrowed to take care of

his soldiers. This shows that, concerning the charge that he was engaged

in transporting opium, which is the feeling of people in general, he had

in fact stopped as we wanted. I remember that when opium was burned during
that period, he burned 28 tons. As far as I remember, few United Nations
cosmittee members or experts came to inspect this. The burning took place

at the military base in Chiang Mai Province. I was involved with this m
group that was admitted by the government but that could not go anywhere.

As for Khun Sa, my duties did not involve me with him because we were not
allowed to become involved with this minority group. Just because he was
an enemy of the Burmese government and was forced out does not mean that
he could come and use our country as a base. This was an internal affair
that they had to settle themselves.

Concerning solving the problems facing our country, new problems have continually
arisen. There are the Kampuchean and Lao problems and the problems that

affect Burma. We have not started wars on all fronts. But there [is fighting]

in the south, in the east and in Laos. We must carefully discuss policies

for maintaining the security of the country. As for what he [Prem] has done,

I believe that these are correct policies. First, we do not want [foreign]

troops in the_country. Second, concerning-those who have married and formed
families, most of whom are Thai, we have acted in a humanitarian manner

and allowed them to stay.

I have never been to Ban Hin Task. You must ask someone who has been there.
There is a squad of border patrol police stationed there. Schools and roads

have been built. I once questioned why those people whom the Security Council
wanted to accept did not build roads so that it would be easier for us to

go manage things and promote agriculture. You should go and see the road to

19
Ban Hin Task. I have never been there but I know there is a school there
and the school sign is a Thai sign. This is recognized as a 11m village.

Occupations have been promoted. Supreme Cor-land Headquarters is not involved
with any of this.

As for one tine that I was involved with Khun Se, when he entered the country
in 1979, I sent 3x04 to tell him to leave and he left. Previously, he entered

occasionally but his family was still living here and so he had to cone
see then at times.

Another time that I was involved with his: was when I was ordered by Frills
Minister Sanya. through Air Chief Marshal Them, to go bring back the Russian
doctors that Khun Sa had captured so they could be returned to masia. I
tried for a long time. It took as 9 aonths to get the first one released
and 14 months to get the other one released. Both were returned to the Soviet

Union safely. The Soviet Union appealed to our govermnt and I carried
this out.

[Question] Later on. Khun Sa had great 'influence. He was engaged in heroin
trafficking and he had any weapons.

[Answer] I do not know anything about this. I did not have any relations
with his. If you want infomtion about this, you should go talk to Phao
[Sarasin] . He can tell you how much influence Khun 8a had and what he did.

[Question] Did you ever have an opportunity to meet Khun 8a?

[Answer] I once net Khun Saeng, who is Khun Sa's uncle. But I have never
met Khun Sa. [Khun Saeng] is still alive. I net his when I went to get the
Russians out.

[Question] what do you think the situation will be like now. He has threatened
to respond 10-fold to any act against him.

[Answer] He is boasting. Forces are not stationed there but the poeple of
Chiang Rai are.

[Question] What is your view about this suppression operation being a real
attempt to suppress him?

[Answer] He must be suppressed. If he has forces, they must be suppressed.
I agree. We are conducting suppression operations in our own territory.
We once asked for cooperation but there were a few minor probless with Burns.

[Question] There are only a few people. Why has the Burmese government had

to reshuffle the government two or three tines.? It has still not been able
to suppress him.

20
[Answer] The terrain is very difficult. Khun Se and his group are cunning
and it is their territory.

[Question] There is criticism to the effect that we acted on Burea' s behalf
in this suppression operation.

[Answer] Concerning this, I do not know how they contacted the United States
or Bur-a but the suppression of narcotics is essential.

This can be looked at in two ways. Opium can destroy. the world. If they
acted seriously. I support this. Porceful suppression operations aust be
carried out, particularly against their forces. Regardless of who ordered
that they be suppressed, I think this was correct. When I was in office.

bombs were dropped on their forces too and arsed helocopters were sent to
fire on those transporting opium.

Concerning talking about these probleus, if I talk about them myself, people
will say that I an trying to exonerate myself. To clear me, you should go
talk to those responsible for suppresssion operations and ask then whether

I was connected in any way with opium trafficking or whether I really carried
on suppression operations. Swearing others for political gain is natural.

Nonetheless. if anyone does something like this, I will take legal action
immediately.

[Question] Concerning the weapons that were seized, where do you think they
obtained then?

[Answer] I do not know how long they have been gathering then. Pro- what

I saw on television, they had both old and new weapons. I saw an old machine

gun. There were M19s and H163. The rest were all old weapons. It is my understand-
ing that they obtained these weapons in battles and that they were kept

at Ban Hin Taek. However. this should not be ignored. [People] cannot be

allowed to have such rifles and weapons in Thailand.

11943
C80: 5300/5640
COMMERTARIBS VOICE 908811085 OVER ANTI-SBA OPERATIOﬂB

0.8. Connection Cited
Bangkok TAHAN SIAM in Thai 29 Jan 82 p 5

[Phachon Phinthu column]

[Text] If you asked me how I felt about the suppression of Khun Sa's armed forces
who established a base in our country, resulting in'a clash in which soldiers

of ours were killed, regardless of the side, I would answer sincerely that

'1 an deeply sorry that we had to sacrifice the lives of our soldiers since

we should not have had to lose people like this.“

he sufferred such losses because of the insanity of the 'big shots'I and
people's ineffectiveness.

I certainly do not believe those people who say that this suppression operation
had nothing to do with the visit by important relatives (whose I don't know)
from the United States. Because if this suppression operation was carried

out without anyone giving their opinions or encouragement in order to exchange
various proposals. we should have carried out suppression operations long

age-

But we ignored matters for a long time until the once small forces grew
into a village having even a swinning pool. What was the reason for this?

Lets look back in time. Formerly, how important was Khun 5a? How many important
politicians, military officers and police officers did he have close ties
with? I too don't know who: he had secret ties with.

Yes, if it is thought that the free forces that have assembled in our country
must all be suppressed, then the Free Karens. Pree Hons, Laos, Kanpucheans,
Free Burmese and various minority groups living in Thailand should all be
suppressed.

would it be good to start wars all throughout the country? Why? Why don't

we use these groups in a way that benefits the country? when we want to

do something in our country. why do we have to tie ourselves to other countries,
particularly the United States? Are we a colony that must follow orders?

22
I think it would be highly fitting if we formed relations with these minority
groups. Host of these minority groups know the terrain very well and could
provide information, or obtain information. that would be of great use to 9
us. If we support them covertly and. with proper reasons, reach an agreement
to limit their forces and weapons, they can serve as armed forces to block
outside forces, or be “buffer states“ as they say. But instead we have created
enemies all around us.

And will we have to lose more men and weapons, almost everything. in order

to carry on such suppression operations endlessly just to gain face with
foreign countries? If this is the case, I feel that, soon. poeple from Bangkok
who visit the north or. the northeast will have to surrender their indentity
cards and carry passports instead.

'Bin Dieo' Comments
Bangkok TAHAN SIAM in Thai 29 Jan 82 p S

[Bin Dieo column by Chaiya Bansuwan]

[Text] 1 did not stop over in Chiang Mai for 2 nights to help the border
patrol police attack Khun Sa's Ban "in Task. I went to spend my Chinese
New Year's holiday there.

In Chiang Mai there were stories about Khun Sa. the heroin kingpin who was
under heavy attack. They said that this Khun Sa has influence all over the
north and that he owns houses worth several million baht in Chiang Mai and
Bangkok. On certain days, Khun Sa comes into Chiang Mai and goes dancing
at the Blue Moon and Honey nightclubs. After he finishes dancing, he gets
a massage.

Recently, Cho wen Pa gave a concert at the Ambassador Hotel in Bangkok.

It is said that Khun Sa sat in the front row. Be wanted to come see Wi An An's
show at the Dusit Thani Hotel too but had to miss it because of the attack

by the border patrol police.

People say that there are several hundred government officials in the north
who are paid by both the government and by Khun Sa. I cannot swear to the
truth of this. They told me this and I am simply repeating it.

Concerning this attack by the border patrol police, they say that Khun 8a
was caught unaware while watching the program 'nok Sok' on video tape. while
he was engrossedin this program, police suddenly rushed in. Khu did

not have time to take any of his possessions but had to flee lately.
The police seized many items.

They seized two to three color television sets and many video cassettes.

The police have viewed these. Among them were Sanoh Noi Buong Ngam. Laksanawong
and Dui Pik Khong Rak and two to three pornographic films, including Secrets

In a Convent, the Nun Gathers Mushrooms and the Destruction of Mae Yai Cave
(his son-in-law was certainly the star in these latter films).

23
At Khun Sa's house there, there were many items for entertainment and even
a swimming pool that is more modern than that at the Department of Physical
Education. There was a stereo tape player and [tapes of] the songs “The

One In Hy Heart“ and 'Ask Your Heart Pirat.‘ It seems that Khun Se was very
modern. But the prettiest song and the best one to dance disco to was 'Khun
8a One-Half, the Thai Police One-half.“ This was an abusive song (it was
probably made during the period he transported opium through Thailand a
long time ago).

People also said that one of our former prime ministers was once very close
to Khun Sa. But I cannot guess who this night be since we have had many
prime ministers. It night have been Phraya Hanoprakorn Nitithada, the first
prime minister of Thailand, or Mr Khuang Aphaiwong. Who Can Say?

Now. Khun sa has fled and the police have not been able to catch him. The
only people caught were his underlings, such as Khun Suai and [hon Sunk.
Theyfirst refused to talk to the police except to shout 'Phang Nae, Phang
Nae.“ At first the police thought that they were speaking in Haw Chinese
and spent half a day trying to figure out what this meant. But later, these
- two uaw Chinese probably got fed up and said that they were not using code
but were speaking Thai.

'Destroyed. "hat was destroyed?" asked the border patrol police.

"The Prachathipat Party! You live in Bangkok and don't know this? Even those
living in Ban Bin Taek know this. You are so dumb!" said the two Haw Chinese
.bu. ive ly .

Concerning this attack on Ban Bin Taek, they said that Khun 5; sufferred

a terrible blow because lo tons of heroin was destroyed. Khnn 8a was making
preparations to sell this heroin during the 200-year Ratanakosin celebrations
when it was destroyed and so he sufferred a terrible blow.

Khun Sa has not fled far. He is probably in hiding somewhere around Ban

Hin Task. when our border patrol police withdraw, he will probably return
and set up a new heroin refinery and continue to ship heroin through Thailand
to the outside world just as before.

There is only one way to completely suppress and eradicate poppy cultivation
and heroin refining in that area and that is for the Thai army to station
a division in Ban ain Taek permanently.

but this should be thought about carefully too because if it turns out that
our own division cultivates poppy and produces heroin in place of Khun Sa,
General Prayut Charunani will be very depressed.

A border patrol police official who [took part in] seizing Ban Hin Taek
.said that he saw one nan fleeing right behind Khun 8a who resembled Police
Colonel Niran Nithayawutikun. But this police official could not confirm that
it was Colonel Niran for sure. He claimed to have a cataract in his eye
which prevents hin form seeing clearly.
A secret agent reported that Khun Sa secretely went and watched the elephant
festival at Kilometer 25 at the Don Huang curve. Police officials want and
snooped around and some of them quietly asked the ticket seller if he had

seen Khun Sa. 'There is no Khun Sa here; only a Khun So," shouted back the
ticket seller. The police left.

RTG Links With Minorities, Traffickers
Bangkok BAN HUANG in Thai 28 Jan 82 p 5
[be M0 L0 column]

[Text] I wrote about the Khun Sa affair yesterday but it seems that what

I wrote was not clear. That is, I was unable to clarify things concerning
the following question: ”What did the Thai government do that allowed Khun
5a to establish an army, equal in size to an army corps, in Thailand?”

To suppress him. bombs and border patrol police had to be used.

”This is because some of our people were involved with Khun Sa, isn't. that
right?‘'

Concerning this question, I do not have any data. I will instead provide
some information about the first question in honor of the Thai police and
in honor of Thailand, which has the bad reputation of being the largest
narcotics exporting country in the world.

Khun Se is the leader of a minority group that claims that it is waging

a struggle against the Burmese government in order to win independence for

the Shans. At present the size of their (regular) armed forces is approximately
2,000 men. And they can mobilize another 10,000 men or more.

Their real source of income is opiulm from the Golden Triangle, a place
known throughout the world.

National liberation and opium trafficking are the national liberation funds
of Khun Sa, who has settled down along the border between Thailand and Burma.
when Burma carries on suppression operations, he flees into Thailand and
Burma cannot do anything. And when Thailand carries on a suppression drive,
Khun Sa flees to Burma and Thailand is powerless to do anything. This is
because there is an internation law prohibitng officials from one country
from pursuing criminals across the border without permission.

Those of you who frequently watch American cowboy movies will understand

since when the county sheriff tries to catch the criminal, the criminal

flees into Mexico. The sheriff can only watch in frustration while the criminal
makes faces at him from across the border.

25
Concerning this international law, I do not know what has happened. Governments
throughout the world are very strict about this. If officials from one country

cross the border an enter the territory of another country. it inediately
becomes a mojor incident.

The officials of both sides must, therefore, observe this strictly. Thus.

the international border is a free area for large nubers of national liberation
groups and bandits.

xhun 8a has been able to survive because of this. In addition. the terrain
along the border is composed of jungle and mountains and this forms a natural
base that provides excellent protection for Khun Sa. He cannot be cornored.
If he is attacked from one direction. he flees in amther direction. The
jungles and mountains provide good cover and fortifications.

Also. the forces of Khun Sa travel with their wives and children. if an
attack is made in the wrong area, or the target is missed and their families
suffer casualties, hulanitarian problems arise.

His News UPITN. a foreign news service, has helped to brand Thailand as
uncivilized.

This is not all. The movement of narcotics kingpin Khun Sa has the political
ideals of a movement that is trying to win independence from Burma. It

is like an institute that uses the word I'i.ndependence" as a sacred word

to protect it. It also has international organisations that have “taken

them under their wings" to protect it. The Thai government cannot take resolute
action.

If international organisations and the United Nations do not give the ”go-ahead”
and if the United Nations does not extend its friendship, Thailand can do
nothing.

Do you see how many "layers" of protection Khun 8a has? us has international

laws, the political issue of independence for the minority groups. which
are supported by international organizations. humanitarian issues and the

jungle terrain. which forms an excellent natural fortress, as protection.

Both Thailand and Burma are slaves to these international laws and this
has turned a small matter into a major issue.

And in making decisions, the government must listen to the people too. For
example. suppose that the Thai government allowed Burmese suppression forces
to pursue and destory the forces of Khun 8a, an international opium kingpin,
in Thailand. The Thai newspapers would certainly raise a hue and cry. And

an example of this is the problem in the south where an agreement was reached
between Thailand and Malaysia.

26
_ It is because of these insane conditions that nothing can be done to Khun.
.Sa. And besides this, the Tahi government also has to allow the families
of the forces under Khun Sa to live in Thailand along the border in such
places as Ban Hin Taek, Huang District, Chiang Rai Province.

They are like duckweed. That is, 2 or 3 days after getting rid of them,
they will be back again. And this is a very large area. If we guard one
place, they will sneak back in at another place.

If you cut down the trees and destroy the headwaters; everything will go
to ruin.

In the end, the government will have to allow the families of Khun Sa's

forces to live in Thailand in order to create order and facilitate controlling
them. But it will have to be agreed that only their families will be allowed
in and that Khun Sa's armed forces will not enter the country. They can

swear to this but. concerning what they actually do, how can we watch them
everywhere and at all times?

And there are others besides Khun Sa. There are the independence movements
that are being waged by the Karena, Shans (different groups) and Mons, who
are all fighting the Burmese government. There are the ﬂaw Chinese, who

are called the gypsies of the East. As mentioned ab0ve, there is the 93rd
Division, which is an armed force. There are their families, who serve as

a shield and prevent the Thai government from taking stern action. And there
are the profits from the opium.

The Burmese government in Rangoon has been angry at the Thai government
for many years.

Other Opium Trafficking Groups
Bangkok BAN HUANG in Thai 29 Jan 82_pp 4, 5

[Independent Thoughts, Forest Breezes and Sunshine column by Nui Bangkhunthien:
"Who Is Responsible“!

[Text] The behavior of Khun Se and of the various influential groups of
narcotics traffickers in the north is a great puzzle that is challenging
the minds of the Thai people.

The points to consider are:

1. Concerning these influential groups. which are minority groups along

the northern border and which have constantly been driven south along the
western border from Chiang Rai. Mae Hong Son, Tak. Kamphaengphet, Uthaithani,
Kanchanaburi and Ratchaburi to the Ranong area. altogether. how many groups
are there for sure?

2. Is any group that is carrying on a liberation movement receiving secret
support from some foreign country?

27
3. Concerning the Thai citizens who live in those areas that are under the
influence of the minority groups, how do they live and has the government
ever looked after them?

4. have these influential groups established administrative territories,
like states within a state, in Thailand? If they have done so by having
their own leaders and forces and by promulgating regulations in their areas
without acknowledging Thai laws, what should the Thai government do to solve
this poroblem?

5. Who is responsible for allowing these influential groups to gather here
and expand to the point where they have become a problem or a threat to
stability and security in Thailand?

All five points have been posed as questions for the prime minister who,
as the head of the cabinet, may answer if he wishes.

As for the little that is known, the northern border area is the area of
operations of the 93rd KIT Division, which was driven out of China by the
conmunists and had no way to join Chiang Kai-shek on Taiwan. They thus settled
down here and acted like a hill tribe group. That is, the hill tribes cultivate
poppyand the 93rd Division sells opium. They have built their own towns,

which they adeinister. Previous Thai governments did not carry outthings

well and allowed these foreigners to trespass on our territory at will.

Some previous governments used politics as a guise, that is, they claimed
that they were using the 93rd Division as a buffer against the communists.
But in fact it is well known that the main occupation of the 93rd Division

is producing opium and selling heroin and that some people in the government
have received money.

Besides the 93rd Division, there is the Shan group that is known as the
”bold young warriers,‘ and there are the hon and Karen groups. All of these
claim that they are fighting for national liberation to retake from Burma
those lands that were once theirs.

These influential national liberation groups are engaged in narcotics trafficking

and it has reached the point where the 'fame' of the Golden Triangle has
reached everywhere in the world. Thailand, as one of the countries with

a piece of the triangle, is paradise for foreign drug addicts.

At a cabinet meeting, General Prem Tinsulanon said that he feels ashamed
that foreign troops have used Thailand to assemble weapons and war materials,
carved out a territory that they govern themselves and collected taxes even
from Thais, who are the real owners of the land. Thus, the governsent will
try to eradicate them completely.

The 93rd KHT Division has been making use of an area in the north for 30
years. As for the Shane, Hons, Karens and heo, these groups have been making

28
a living there and expanding their influence for a hundred years. They should
be suppressed and cleared out of every nook and cranny.

The United Nations and some great powers will realize that the present Thai
government means what it says and will really act and that it is not feigning.

The image of Thailand will improve and those border patrol policemen, soldiers
and government officials who died will have sacrificed their lives for the
honor of their country.

Columnist Slams Inaction Against KHT
Bangkok Dao SIAM in Thai 31 Jan 82 p 5
[Saeng San Han Athit column by Taphaya]
[Text] Who does the 93rd Division belong to? Is it an enemy of Khun Sa?.

There is still no indication that [the conflict] will stop even though both
sides have sufferred many casualties. And in addition. the important person
escaped again. he seems to be able to flee invisibly like always. Needless
to say, there is something behind this. Or are we deceiving ourselves?

Opium. heroin and smuggled goods -- were these the targets of this suppression
operation? The police sacrificed 20 men but did not seize any opium or heroin
at all. Instead, they found weapons and war materials that [Khun Sa's forces]
had been collecting for years. They seized a huge number of weapons.

Yesterday, a Shan friend of mine who calls himself a 'Tai' came to see me
at the newspaper office. He admitted that he supported the government's
attempt to suppress Khun Sa, or Chang Si Pu, who is an opium and heroin

kingpin.

But this suppression operation has caused trouble for those Thais who are
Thai by citizenship but shan by birth and even for pure Thais who live and
work in that area. This is because, in making the arrests, or carrying on
the suppression operations, the officials used a “blanket type“ attack and
this caused trouble for everyone. Many people did not know anything and
were not involved with Khun Se in any way.

Besides this, my Shan friend cheerfully admitted that the weapons seized

by the officials belonged to the Shane [Tail and that they had been readied
in order to liberate their country. They trusted some important Thais and,
therefore. they had carelessly stored these weapons in Thailand.

And it is worth asking who the 93rd KMT Division, which is composed of Haw

Chinese living in Hae Salong, Mae Chan District, and in Pang District, belongs
to and who is behind it.

29
These groups have been allowed to live in Thailand, accuslulate weapons

and form strong forces. Whoever wants to enter or leave [the area] is disarled.
This is Thai territory, but Thais are disarsed by these groups when they

enter these areas.

It is these groups that cultivate poppy and that are international traffickers
in opium, heroin and snuggled goods.

Are there any officials who dare to touch then, to suppress Khun 8a?

But if the forces of the 93rd Division are allowed to live here in great
contort. Thailand will never be rid of opiuu and heroin. The 93rd Division
lives in Thailand but it has never obeyed Thai laws. They have sent their
children to Chinese schools in the mountains. And they have grown very wealthy
from the opiue and heroin trade.

The forces of the 93rd Division still live there without anyone daring to
touch them. This is true even for BKO4 [officials] at the Sua Pa Camp who

are responsible for watching over this group. But why were these forces
allowed to grow stronger and stronger and compete against the owners of

the country without the officials doing anything about this? Or were the
forces of the 93rd Division involved with sons important person in the country
which resulted in others being afraid to touch then?

The government has a policy of not allowing any group to establish forces

in Thailand. But if we look at the 93rd Division, it see-s that the government
has been only feigning. And if these people have been involved with i-portant
people in the country. just let it go!

Caption: Who is his friend? who is he a friend to? [rhotogrephs of Krisngssk
Chomanan, Khun Se and Thawee Chunlassﬁ7

11943
CSO: 5300/5638

30
QUESTIONS RAISED ON TIMING OP ANTI-SUI OPERATIORS
Bangkok MATICHON in Thai 31 Jan 82 pp 6-9

lArticle: “Khun Sa -- Has He Risen to Such Great Heights By himself Or
Has Someone Done This For Him?"l

[Text] ”This was the biggest battle in 10 years,“ said Police Colonel Nikhom
Chongchira. the deputy commander of the Police Aviation Division. He added
that "this was the second largest battle since the battle at Khi Theo."

This battle lasted only 2 days but 16 border patrol police officials were
killed and 50 were wounded.

Concerning the forces that were thrown into the battle, almost all nearby
units sent forces. Per example. the border patrol police sent five companies
from Chiang Rai. Chiang Mai and Tak. A battalion of soldiers was sent from
the Phaya Hengrai Casp. And toward the end, reinforcements were mobilized
from irregulars at the Pakthongchai Camp in Nakhon Ratchasima.

Aircraft and helocopters of the Police Department. army and air force flew
over Ban Hin Task day and night.

why Here Suppression Operations Carried On At This Particular Tine -- Politics
Or Narcotics?

Concerning the forces of Khun Se and his secure base at Ban Hin Taek in

Pa Sang Commune, Has Chan District. Chiang Rai Province, this problem did
not arise just recently but has been in existence for a long time. Police
General Suraphon chunlaphrom, the director-general of the Police Department,
has admitted that Khun Sa's house at Ben Hin Taek was built securely and
strongly.

A story in the newspaper THAI RAT stated that this house had a swimming
pool and a 20-inch video tape machine.

This is not all. In an interview, Mr Phisan Mulasatsathorn, the undersecretary

of interior, stated that Khun Sa even has houses in the middle of Bangkok
and Chiang Mai. Pricha Kunpricha, a reporter for DAD SIAM who has followed the

31
operations of Khun Sa for a long time, confirmed that Khun Sa has a
lS-million baht house on Sci 71, Sukhumwit Road.

“why have they been allowed to grow so powerful before suppressing them?‘
asked one border patrol policeman who was wounded in this fight of a reporter
bewilderedly.

“Exactly! I do not know either why a suppression drive was mounted at this
particular time," stated General Pram Tinsulanon, the prime minister, even
though he was the person who signed the order.

“This was by chance. There was nothing else involved," said General Prachuap
Suntharangkun, the deputy prime minister in his capacity as head of the
Office of the Narcotics Control Board (OMCB) in summary after saying that
the I'intention to suppress narcotics trafficking has existed for a long
time, but the prime minister gave the order only recently. we therefore

set a date.”

Movements Prior to the Suppression Operation

Regardless of whether this drive to suppress and eradicate the armed forces
of Khun Sa, who is engaged in producing and selling narcotics, resulted
because of the initiative of the prime minister or because of some secret
political reason, there have recently been some very interesting movements.

Between 14-16 January, Air Chief Marshal Sitthi Sawetsila, the minister
of foreign affairs, visited Burma and on his return he stated that:

'Ccncerning the narcotics problem, we informed Burma that we firmly intend
to suppress [narcotics trafficking] resolutely. General Prachuap Suntharangkun,
the depuity prime minister, will travel there to discuss this problem again.“

Between 18-23 January, Mr Luigi Cotta, the deputy secretary-general of the
Unitd Nations and the director of the United Nations Office in Europe, visited
Thailand. He held discussions with Police Major General Phao Sarasin, the
secretary-general of the ONCB, and wentto see the opium crop substituion
program in the north.

Admidst these movements, at the end of 1981, Mr Prok Amaranan, the Thai
ambassador in Washington, returned to Thailand to file a report and confer
with the government. He just returned to the United States on 17 January.

A military news source has stated that before the attack on Ban ﬂin Task

was launched on 21 January, Major General Chawalit Yongchaiyut, the director
of the [army] Directorate of Operations, visited the north and joined high-

ranking border patrol police officials in formulating plans.
And then the “Ban Hin Taek' operation was launched. The objective was to

expell and annihilate Khun Sa's "foreign“ forces, whose basic activity is
not to liberate their nation from Burma but rather to produce and sell narcotics.

32
Khun Sa Has Betrayed. Does This Concern General Krisngsak In Any Way?

"Concerning this operation to eliminate Khun 8a, I feel that this was carried
out in order to cut of certain people's sources of funds,“ said Mr Hattana

Khieuwimon, the 'big Nawaphon' and the head of the Pracha Seri Party during
an interview given to MATICHON.

Even though he would not state during the interview whom he was referring
to, Mr Wattana Khieuwimon observed that during the.period when this problem
arose and during the clash with Khun Sa's forces, General Kriangsak chamanan,

the former supreme commander and the head of the National Democracy Party,was
on a visit to Taiwan.

General Kriangsak Chamanan has not denied that he knows Khun Sa. ”My allowing
the families of khun Sa's [forces] to live in Thailand was an act that was

in accord with the policy of the National Security Council," said General
Kriangsak to a Thai news agency.

General Kriangsak stated that during the time of the Sanya Thammasak government,
Khun Sa captured two Russians. General Kriangsak. in his capacity as chief

of staff of Supreme Command headquarters, was assigned the task of making
contact and asking for their release. He contacted Khun Saeng, Khun Sa's

uncle, and was successful in securing the release of the two Russians.

However, a report by Sahatchai Sorat, a special reporter for PRACHAMIT,
states that the person who captured these Russians was actually Chang Su
Choen, who was acting in place of Khan Sa, since Khun Sa was in a Burmese
prison in Mandalay. They were captured in order to bargain with the Ne "in
government for the release of Khan Sa.

who Is Behind Khun Sa's Rise? The BK04 Responded Better Than Who?

BK04, which is a special-action section of Supreme Command Headquarters,
'was established in accord with a 1970 cabinet resolution.

General Kriangsak Chamanan, who was reponsible for this from the very beginning
has stated that the establishment of BK04 in Chiang Mai Province was the

policy of the National Security Council, with the aim being to preserve

peace along the border since it was not desired to have enemies on several
fronts.

Based on this policy, BK04 was responsible not only for controlling the
“refugees: which included Haw Chinese, Shane and Free Karens,but also for
making beneficial use of these minority forces.

A report by the National Security Council states that BK04 used elements

of these foreign forces for both independent operations and joint operations
with government forces to drive out the conunist terrorists. It was because

33
of such operations tht General Li, the comander of the 93rd IKHT] Division,
was later granted Thai citizenship, taking the name Hr Chai 8aeli.

Osneral Kriangsak once stated during an interview that General Li was granted
Thai citizenship because he had performed beneficial acts for Thailand.

It was not only the Thai government, through BKOd, that was involved with
these foreign forces. A report by the Thai Phithak group in the United States
states that the United States poured in more than 10 billion baht in order
to support various minority groups in Burma with the aim of creating a state

of war between the minority groups and the Burmese government under the
claim of national liberation.

Because of the massive injuections of weapons and money from the United

States and the Thai government, these “foreign“ forces gradually grew stronger.
But [their] power and growth [was not used for] waging national liberation
wars but rather for producing and selling narcotics. This hidden activity
damaged Thailand and created great dangers for the Thai people.

The lance that a Thai government sharpened so that it could serve as a I'buffer"
has returned and pierced its owner. -

If It Is Said That a Person Has Engaged In Narcotics Trafficking, What Honor
Does He Have Left? - .

Concerning Khun Sa's forces that fled from Burma during that initial period,
many of these people were suffering from malnutrition, malaria and other
diseases and were almost on the point of death.

"But now, all of then are well-fed and content, they are free from disease,
they are strong and healthy and they have modern weapons,‘I stated a Police
Departaent source. 'They regularly cross back and forth across the border
and their power has constantly expanded in narcotics trafficking.“

A report in THAI RAT stated that at San Hin Taek, Khun Sa's base, there
are schools that teach Chinese and Thai and a loo-bed hospital.

A total of 10 tons of modern weapons and war materials belonging to Khun

Sa was seized and five helocopters have had to make trip after trip to
transport all these things. Also seized were large quantities of foodstuffs,
including both fresh and canned food. It was sufficient to feedthem for
more than a year. There were all types of medicines and the two trucks used
to haul all the medicine away have not yet cmpleted the job. All 'of these
medicines were modern medicines and they can be found in markets throughout

Thailand.
Khun Sa's forces in both Thailand and Burma total almost 6,000 men.
Khun Sa's main source of strength is narcotics trafficking, but at the same

time, he received a “green light" from the policies of former Thai governments
through 3x04.

31;
But when Khun Sa became powerful through the production and sale of narcotics,
the matter of national liberation becase just a pretense. And the setter

of using [his group] as a buffer state to preserve peace along the border

was just a way to facilitate the transport and sale of narcotics.

Having been friends with a heroin trafficker is a setter al-ost coapletely
devoid of honor.

The Ban Hin Taek Operation, a Protracted Campaign

”We will retaliate and our attacks will be 10 tires stronger than your attacks
on us.“ This is an excerpt free a letter written by Khun 8a that was sent
through Police Colonel Bin Prasopchok. the Chiang Rai provincial police
commander.

As for their response after Ban Hin Taek was seized, the attack on the provincial
police station in Nae Sai District early on the morning of 26 January. in

which they attacked like Fbandits.“ did not look like the work of national
liberation forces with political ideals.

“I did not dare open the door. When I turned on the light, they fired into
the house," said one owner of a shop at the Mae Sai District larket. 'The
streets were filled with these soldiers.”

”The governnent should stop the suppression operation once Khun Se is out
of Thailand," said Mr Hattana khieuwiaon. “Because if we pressure Khun Sa
to the point where he joins with the Karens, the anxiety in suppression
operations will be increased even more."

The worry of the government and people is that, after the soldiers and police
withdraw, how can safety be ensured?

A 50 Percent Reduction In Heroin. what Hill the Govern-ent Do Next?

Concerning the government's decision to supress Khun Se, regardless of purpose,
one good result that Police Major General Sarasin foresees is that this
will reduce heroin production by about 50 percent.

But something that sould certainly not be foregotten is that 16 border patrol
police were killed and 45 wounded. And a very disgraceful thing is that
these foreign forces violated Thailand's territorial integrity and used
Thailand as a place to produce narcotics and distribute the- throughout

the world with the tacit support of previous govern-ents.

The question that should be pondered seriously is whether or not this 'farner
and snake' policy will be retained.

The truth at present is that, along the Thai-Burmese border. other forces besides
Khun Sa's are present also. since there are still Pree Karen, Free Mon and even
free Chinese KHT forces there, does the Thai government, through BK04, intend to
contine to benefit from these illegal forces?

35
If it does, the lesson of the snake named “Khun Sa' should certainly not
be forgotten lest there be even greater pain.

Quantities of Items Seized Prom Khun Sa'e Armed Porces

 

 

Item Number
Carbine rifles 252
H168 43
Chinese machine guns 3
sikase rifles 3
PM rifles 2
63 rifles 2
Recoilless 57 rifles 3
Bazookas 9
88-type self-loading rifles 21
AK filfe mununition 52,000 rounds
M67 grenades 210
Sony taperecorder l
Cased radio receiver-transmitters 7
Side-band radio receiver-transmitters 9
Hand-held radio receiver-transmitters 197
Halkie-talkies 6
K10 (H793) - 8
AK rifles 17
SK rifles 140
APGs 2
87 light machine guns 29
K603 l
Sten guns 20
Various tyupee of small arns 173
K308 15
H61 grenades 90
PC 15 radios 23
Field telephones 3
Transmitters l
Megaphones 1
Power saw 1
Portable radio equipment 3

11943
CSO: 5300/5640
RELATIONS NITN BURMA VIBHED IN CONTEXT OF DRUGS
Bangkok NATICHON in Thai 31 Jan 82 p ll
(Article: 'Thailand and Burma -- an Old Story That Never Ends“!

[Text] Air Chief Marshal Sitthi Sawetsila, the minister of foreign affairs. made
another visit to Burma between 14-16 January after having gone there in
1980.

If we look at the real heart of this trip, we find a recurrent theme that

can be likened to an old story that never ends. It seems as if no progress
at all has been made in matters concerning relations between Thailand and
Burma.

These old problems that never go away are:

1. Air Chief Marshal Sitthi Sawetsila held discussions with Mr 0 Chit Hlaing,
the new Burmese minister of foreign affiars. concerning the suppression

of narcotics, the cultivation of alternative crops in place of opium and

the smuggling of narcotics.

But everywhere in the northern border region where Thailand and Burma meet,
which is known as the "Golden Triangle" because of long being known for
the opium cultivation there, there has been a switch to heroin and it is
flooding world markets.

However. during the discussions this time, both Thailand and Burma agreed
to hold more detailed discussions on cooperating with each other. General
Prachuap Suntharangkun, the deputy prime minister, who is responsible for
matters concerning the narcotics problem, will visit Burma sometime in the
near future in order to hold detailed discussions with Burma.

2. A problem that is coupled to the narcotics problem is the problem of

the minority groups who are enemies of the Burmese government. Nhen Burmese
officials carry on suppression operations against them. these groups flee

into Thailand. These minority group rebels from Burma are involved in narcotics
smuggling also. And at present. there are reports that the Burmese Communist
Party too is making money from trafficking in narcotics.

37
About 5 years ago, it was observed that the Thai government had a policy

of using the groups that were engaged in narcotics trafficking and that
opposed the Burmese government as a buffer between the countries. But in
1978, the government of General Kriangsak Chamanan changed course and really
wanted to be friends with Burma. It announced that it would drive the armed
rebels who opposed the Burmese government out of Thailand.

The Prem government has continued to follow this policy and tried to form
a close friendship with Burma.

During the latest discussions, Air Chief Marshal Sitthi, taking the same
standpoint as before, affirmed that Thailand would give no support to the
various minority groups in Burma and that it would try to prevent weapons
and ammunition from reaching these groups. And he proposed various measures
for preventing the minority groups from controlling trade across the border.

3. 0n the economic front. Air Chief Marshal Sitthi proposed several programs

for cooperation for Burma to consider. Examples are the salaween River program

to build a dam to generate electricity and provide water for irrigation,

technical exchanges in developing oil and resources, exchanges in the agricultural
field and an expansion of air services between the two countries.

Criticisms

Prom the essence of the talks as presented in the three sections above,

it can be seen that these are the same points that are always raised and
discussed by Thailand and Burma at ministerial-level meetings. This makes
us doubtful about how much progress has been made in fostering cooperation
between Thailand and Burma since the time of General Kriangsak.

In particular, the first and second points above benefit the Burmese government
directly because the income earned from selling opium is the main income

of the rebel groups and Burmese communists. income that they use to purchase
supplies and weapons with which to fight the Burmese government. One time,

the leader of a Burmese rebel group suggested that the United States give

his group large sums of money directly instead of spending it on ineffective
narcotics suppression operations and in return his group would destroy the

poppy fields.

As for the third point, it will be very interesting if Burma cooperates

with Thailand on the economic front as Thailand has suggested, particularly

in expanding airline service between the two countries. This is because

Burma is one country in this region that is capable of attracting foreign
tourists. And it looks as though Burma is looking for a way to promote foreign
tourism.

But concerning other economic fronts such as oil drilling and mining, the
Burmese government will probably maintain its present position and act very
cautiously. But if some country is allowed to participate in these areas,
it will “smile contentedly' because of the great sums of money to be made
from Burmese minerals and oil.

In particular, the Salaween dam-power and irrigation project has been under
discussion by Thai and Burmese leaders since the end of 1980 but to dste
no important progress has been made.

4. In addition to the three matters discussed above, there is the problem

of Kampuchea, a problem that was certainly discussed. In the document presented
by the Ministry of foreign Affairs, the only thing mentioned was that Air

Chief Marshal sitthi told Burma that Vietnam's extension of its western

border to where it now borders Thailand is something that Thailand is concerned
about and that it cannot accept. And this is also one reason why Thailand

has had to involve itself in the situation in Kampuchea.

As for Burma and the Kampuchean problem, Burma will probably remain neutral
and not lean toward eithe.‘ side in accord with Burma‘s principle of not
getting involved with either side. Last year, Burma was the site for political
talks between the Thai deputy minister of foreign affairs and Vietnam. As

for the future, whether or not Burma will again play such a role cannot

be determined for sure. Besides this, the previous Burmese minister of foreign
affairs is still acting as a political intermediary between Thailand and

Vietnam and has gone to Hanoi to hold talks with foreign minister Nguyen
Co Thach.

Thus, concerning the trip by Air Chief Marshal Sitthi Sawetsila, even though
only old matters [were discussed], because of the fact that Burma has a
new cabinet due to the resignation of former President He Win, since we
are neighbors, this trip to get to know each other was a correct step.

It can be said that Air Chief Marshal Sitthi Sawetsila was the first foreign
visitor to hold discussions with Mr 0 San Yu, the new president of Burma.

Seni Saowaphong, a foreigner observer, has expressed the view that this
trip was a proper diplomatic move and a good innovation.

11943
5300/5640

39
POST-RAID SITUATION AT MAN BIN TAR DESCRIBED

Bangkok nu: NATION nevmt tn English 13 Feb 82 p 13

[Text]

MORBTHANthreeweehal'ter ntent force: agahtatarebell‘orceon
eight companlea of border the That-Dunne. bordertahktog'.
patrol policemen mounted what could be aeen everywhere it
was deacrlted aa an ‘htptootln; vtllaae. Bullet holeaateonthewala
0 tion" agalnat nototloua drtr of aonte house. The charred
it Khun St at Bean Hit 1‘ wredtage of burntdownhouneare
in ohoehtaeChanoI'Otlanakal attlltherm‘l'ltedeedbodteaaeenll
Provincenha mood remalttatenae tnaorneatoaaSotne
antljtttera continue to haunt the och“ to buried properly.
areanear the Bunneu border; ate “harrowing.
The lighth; has died down fol- The latest count
truth; 1 days of aktnnhhes and tol on the SUA’I at
mm "w W "tr rm» mm heme
a an oroe.utoreroat yeoop
more than 2.000 Shah. "w. andVC-lOa.

Mutt htlltribcra and Theta at Dan The vleat low.
"In Mr the'sltuall'on Kramer» 'tﬂbm'ﬁ't truehoua
normal. a have .chosn to pack of ChamStschttan.Khan Sa‘a chtef-
29 lg}; be angry amid“ headed ol-eta?‘ﬂ who waa ht
our on u rm to eta

wih «armpit. A’t'nphoe Mac 51 Run Seminar“ 8t«fu,had ﬂed
Mac Chan and the stovtnclal am of M0 in!!!“ one day
Chung Rat to avo' heir; caught in MP '
the crossfire. van

The central government in Barre.

ltolt to have oat' dented W on
that “l‘yt'uoe mm... Id be- main time! of malt ofth

tween the government forces “a dc: Patroll’olloa towardaKhuoSa t

tlte armed htera of the Shah 10' of W-
Unlted Army UA). Butarnllta kakhatu MP3. mm 5023”
IV.

I“
anee.
that

a
ll'loerlnch ofthe eialta ﬁll-“We!!!“ dude val.
gorce on them ercPohnt- WW0 3mg”!

t. Col :th
oak said that mot-80 per centol‘ WWW“ [”05 did not
' omit Khun Sa‘e nronahold. The
the to may now return to '0.” of ‘w llvea [or 81M m

their h a follow ace
'talte'? ouae ha up: not "“‘0

The'rnlltary omoer aald that the forced to

SUAleadera reeddu thetalka W" '
on three magfohtat-T‘lhal they .50
would atop tra

in d . oeaae cute ”I“ W tOhlnwlten
mpmttoaoor‘cohact ‘23“m the Bonnets oveanntentlatrnehed
opera magenta!
rnrtte t. natty rebel a metal yeara
003m 3mm that 0.. mum ago. aatd a mom aoutee
will return to normal aoon.‘ the ml- ” "‘0 W-

llt omoer aatd. He added: “When the ThalGo-
'31.: the mood tn the nu. re- mat-twat aid-o “gag-Is. a;

aha utet. Some it an hthﬂdMOSOO
hum ré'opmd ‘0! n3.” Eat the me of Khan 33.0"

aonte htlltrbeamen have retorted to here k them “'1 VOW“ are
m theft Oath“ houaea vacated dlatrlbu e them. Khun 3a once de-

y villaaera who had ﬂed in theclaredthathewould ayooenttl.
wakeofthe “chum. lion baht to any who we:
1he aura of the fth the tt- thlnltln; of trim to hand hurt our
prom launched by govern- to the ‘l‘hal Government ht ex-

lto

MiorSOOM baht.”
local till a wlto know the
area we] 'a that altl: the

at had dealt a a b r
Kitty‘Sa'a barradra .vtcrsue n m:
‘l‘aelt. another Vilma nearby.
known at Bean Mun; Song, ..

mahelntact.

Dean M Sol; It known to
he the alte of concentrationa
of SUN! aoldleu. l’uly tripped
"Phi" ”xterm
° '9 0' 0‘ atae tt .
ed by aboutedt'ltoswann‘edre-
belt. It is about four knotnetrea
l‘tontBaartﬂln‘l'aek._ .

'o“Baan It So

“MW

wall: about half an hour into Ban
ltln Taelr aaord .lnnocent citi-
zens.” said the well-informed
source.

The lateat The! Government
0 album dﬂ not touch Bean
trans A few bomb craters
mcht have een sighted at the mt.-
lttaty tratntn; centre and aonte da.
mac mbht have been done to
aome barracks but the ntah head.
quarters. donnkorba and wells re-
makt Intact. The only also of abhor.
maltty mght have been that the
heel vlllaoera had all cremated.
But tyrlthh New“ hatter a
rou o reporteta t t pace.
anp Mum; Sou became allve
wilt actltn'ty agaln. Televtalon and
video at: were back it the houae
no trace: of horaea and muleawerc
wen gala.

‘Thal antl-narcotlca oft'rclala eat!
that Khun Se hurl at leaat tour
heroltt reﬁneries III that area near
Tachtlelt nearlaeSd on the Thai
aide. They and that KhunSa when
he deals tn narcottoahwottﬂ handle
on “the bu deal: worth about

to 1.000ntllllon butt whhthc
(In. merchant: c all the way
from Sin: re and ngKon; to
dtacuudet oftltetmctbna.
Ind vm ta were laat week
at!" talking a a turnout that
two American CIA omchls who
were on a aectet mission to tal: to
Khun Se were late: kidnapped and
later teleacd. “But the two Amen
can: were reportedly run over by e
tenuheeled ttuclt aﬂu they read».
ed Chhng Rel." aaltl a localomchl.

That omelala and that the due-
tlc cm W Khun 8:
push him deepee Into the embnce
of the Communist Party of Donna.
a move which caucd aome
actions conoem among That sewn-
ty ofﬁcials.

”But Khun Sa and the Bounce:
Communkts certainly disagree on

cs0: 5300/5665

many Issues. For one thing. Khun belt who pmido com-it; meet
8a toe: on Bum Communists aevetal hemh ”that”. nil ano-
aa auoup twin; to uko etate poo thee infouned omdal. who all!
wet whlh hie movement wants an that en opium canvan in the atee
autonomous Shan State,” and I now It being plotected by about
local lnt'onned aoutoe. .7!» heavilyoatmed men. competed
cutlee helm that even lthon to about 30 to $0 torment
Sewaaneuteallml -endthaleteet uoopen at each you elem the
d¢§3"133333 "ﬁiétf"33 "m3; nun: donlnedkd

a or e o
mttade tithe InStete fat am.m’i':n been
(mam-lee.
OI . n
DRUG OFFICIALS BELIEVE mm mes HAVE m
31.2201” Bangkok NATION m in hglieh 22 Feb 82 p 2

[Text] (hiang Hei—Anti-narcotics officials believed the centre of heroin
refineries has loved fro. the north to elsewhere due to tight Ieesures to eeke
the region off-limits to chenicale needed for the heroin production.

"The centre could have towed to mother region in the country or outside the
comtry. This is a njor question we are seeking to answer," thief of the
North Narcotics Control Centre (MC) llarong Suwenpiae told the M110! over
the weekend.

He said the theory was based on the fact that officials recently seized large
anounts of rat opiue being transported fro. the north southurde than the pre-
viom years.

\

Narong said that raw opiuI itself is allost worthless unless it has been pro-
cessed into morphine or heroin. "The raw opium could only be enoked or used
as ndicins by tribes-en," he added. '

He said that lost of the opiul to be processed into heroin here was snuggled
fro. the neighbouring countries.

"The latest survey conducted between 1979 and 1980 shows that only about 40
tons of opiun was cultivated in about 37,000 rai of poppy fields in the north."
he said.

He also quoted another survey conducted by the North Narcotics Rehabilitation
Centre a showing that about 12 percent of the 300,000 hill tribes-en nation-
wide are addicted to opium.

"If we could bar the material fron being snuggled from our neighbours, the
drug trafficking here would be greatly affected. But then it is very difficult
to do so because of hundreds of kilometres of ‘l'hhi-Burnese border," he said.
He said that he was syepathetic with the Burnese Government which could not
effectively eradicate poppy fields in the country despite its arduous efforts
to do so. ”We have to understand the problen facing the Burmese; mat of the
poppy plantations are in areas under the influence of rebel uinorities. The
areas are alnost inaccessible to the Burnese troops," he said.

080: 5&0/5668

1:2
BRIEFS

HAT YAITRAPPICKER SUSPECT NAMED—ﬁat Yai-U.S. and Thai anti-narcotics officials
yesterday nabbed a nan who is believed to be a aajor drug trafficker whose ring
has connections in four comtries, police reported. The smpect, identified as
Sanguan alongcharoen, 51, was arrested with 199 fake banknotes. each of which

in u.s.$100 denonination with face value totalling about 400,000 baht. The fake
banknotes fomd in his residence on Sinin Road in this tourist town were believed
to have been acquired when Sangusn presueebly traded drugs with one of his
customers, police said. We believe that Sanguan was duped by the customer who
paid his bogus banknotes for the snout of narcotics delivered, one of the anti-
drug officials said. The Thai and 11.3. officials who belong to the Drug Enforce-
nent Agency (DEA) arrested Sanguan after they had fond the banknotes in a safe
built in a recess in one of the walls in his residence. The officials raided

the house to search for heroin believed to be hidden in the house, police said.
Sanguan who is believed to have connections in Malaysia, Singapore and Hong Kong
was quoted as confessing that he received the fake noney from a nan identified
only as Sin and two other Malaysians. Police were reportedly intensively inter:b
rogating the suspect whose name appears on the DEA's lists of najor drug
traffickers. [Text] [Bangkok RATIO! KEVIN in English 8 Feb 82 p 3]

Raw KONG HAN ARRESTED—A Hong Kong nan. believed to have connections with a

drug trafficking ring allegedly involving three Thai drug suspects now in police
custody, was arrested yesterday in an apartnent here with over 3 has of heroin.

a senior police official reported. A teas of policenn of the Crime Suppression
Division (081)) burst into a room of Chaenchan Court in Soi disenchan off Soi
Masai (Sukhu-ait 63) and arrested Mr (hang Tuk Lu: or Peter. Pol Lt Col
Nitiphan Singhonlaka, deputy chief of Division Seven of CSD, said two [pieces

of) luggage were found in his roon. They contained at least 3 kgs of No lo heroin.
he said. The drug was estimated to be around one nillion baht in the local nsrket.
Peter was quoted as confessing that he possessed the drug, he said. Pol Lt

Col Nitiphm said Peter was believed to have connections with a drug trafficking
ring operating from Bangkok. he linked the drug trafficking ring to the seizure
of over 7 kgs of No 6 heroin at Don Huang Airport last Monday. A movie director,
Phichsi Noirot, and two actresses were also arrested in connection with the

drug seizure at the airport. [Excerpt] [BROSOZOO Bangkok 1“le REVIEW in
English 9 Feb 82 p 3]
LAMPANG 'COOKBD OPIIM' SBIZURB—Lanpanngolice yesterday seized 107 kgs of
cooked opiun from a jeep and arrested two nen at a road checkpoint in Bang Chat
District. Acting on a tip that an mspecified amomt of drugs would be trans-
ported through this province to Bangkok, a squad of police from the Office of
Narcotics Control Board led by Pol Col Kosol Limpichsrt, and a Bang (hat police
team rushed to a spot on the axiang Mai-Lawmg Highway and set up a roadblock.
At about 1020, a land rover carrying a Bangkok licence plate arrived at the
checkpoint and was stopped by the policemen. A search of the floor and a special
compartment mdsr the body of the jeep revealed 50 packs of opium weighing about
107 kilograms, police said. Two men in the jeep who later identified them-
selves as Songpol Sae Thai and Somsak See Thong, both natives of Bangkok, were
apprehended for questioning. They reportedly 'tsid they were hired by a man,
"this, to pick up the opium in Chiang Hai and drive it to Bangkok. [Text]
[Bangkok POST in English 18 Feb 82 p 3]

BAT YAI 0P1!!! SEIZURE—Bat Yai custons officials yesterday [18 Pebruary] seized
over 6 kgs of raw opium and arrested a suspect at a Sadao District checkpoint,
an inforned source said. The suspect was identified as minpeng Sae Lao, 36.
No other suspects who were with Chimpeng in a taxi at the time of the arrest
managed to escape. Chimpeng reportedly adnitted to the charge of possessing
opiun with intent to sell. [Text] [Bangkok POST in English 19 Feb 82 p 3]

NORTHERN new RAID-«hing Nab-Northern police on 19 February seized 7 kilo-
grams of heroin and arrested three suspected drug traffickers believed to have
been operating in Bang and San Kasphaeng Districts. The suspects were arrested
after police intercepted their pick-up truck in San Kamhseng District and
searched it. Pol Col Prakop Chuanthesa, assistant chief of the provincial
police Zone 3 who led the search team, said he fond 2 kilograms of heroin in
four plastic bags hidden in the truck. Police identified the three as Sonbm
Khamsuwan, 65, Samran Prayatyot, 51, and his wife, Mrs Giamphen. After
questioning police took Hrs Granphen to her house in Fang District where they
allegedly found 5 kilograms of heroin hidden under the roof, police said.
Police said the heroin was packed in 16 plastic bags. [Bangkok WORLD in English
20 Feb 82 p 3]

NAKHm PATRON HORPBINE SEIZURE-manna Pathomn’lwo suspected drug traffickers
were arrested in this provincial town yesterday by narcotics suppression police
who followed them for more than 700 kilometers fron the northern province of
Cnisng Hai, police reported this morning. The narcotics police clsiaed that they
found 12 sticks of aorphine hidden behind a seat inside the car driven by the two
men. The morphine was worth about 19 aillion baht in the country, they said.

The police said they had been following Pankaew Pengroj, 28, and Somboon Jirasak,
48, from Chiang Mai since Monday. They once stopped the two men and searched
their car in Suphan Buri Province but nothing incriminating was fomd, they

said. Yesterday afternoon, the police lay in wait for the two men at the
Malaimsn intersection in Nakhon Pathon Town, about 30 kn from Bangkok, after
learning that the use would allegedly deliver morphine to a buyer there. The
two men allegedly told the police that they had been hired by a shopowner in
Chiang Mai for 6,000 baht to deliver 12 sticks of morphine to a certain person

in Nakhon Fathom. The same shopowner hired them in Decanter last year to
deliver norphone to a man in Chiang Mai, they allegedly said. [Text] [Bangkok
WRLD in English 12 Feb 82 p 3]
DRUG ARRESTS IN CHIANG MAI—Chiang Mai—Police seized over lo kgs of pure heroin
and arrested five people, four of whom are Chinese have, on drug trafficking
charges in two separate raids here over the weekend. Chiang Mia's chief anti-
narcotics police officer Pol Capt Phayung Chinachit said yesterday the five
people were nabbed with about 1.6 kgs of No lo heroin in Olisng Dao District here
on Saturday. He said that about 1.4 kgs of heroin worth about 250,000 baht

on the local market was found hidden in fertilizer bags seized from the five
suspects. The first two suspects were identified as Yingchan Sae Ma, 30, and
Pricha Kaeomalai, 19, while the others are Chsiching Sae Po, 20, Thibui Sae m1,
19, and Saeokwa Sa Yes. 19. Four of the five arrested were faund to be remants
of the 93rd division of the Chinese Nationalist Party of Kuomintang, according
to the officer. Police also seized 2.86 kgs of No 6 herein fond hidden in the
oil tank of a pick-up truck owned by a man identified only as Withaya in Huang
District yesterday. (Bangkok NATIG! REVIEW in English 1 Mar 82 p 3]

HUNG HAND OVER OPIUHuPour former Hang commists surrendered 1,280 kilogram-es
of raw opium and a number of war weapons to the military last week. Third Army
Region Oomnder Lt Gen Phrom Phimuan revealed yesterday. The four Hong were
among 1,500 Hong insurgents and dependents from six villages in (hiang Kai who
surrendered to the third army region following secret negotiations in January.
The former political comissar of the Communist Party of Thailand‘s Biylth Zone,
Yuathong Sae Yang, led the four Hang, from Therng and (111mg Khong Districts,

to a meeting with military authorities at the Ban Yang Hon base in Therng ‘
District last Thursday. Saying they realised opiu possession was illegal, the
four Moog handed over the 1,280 kilogram-es of the drug as well as a small anti-
aircraft gun, a 75- recoiless gun and a bazooka anti—tank gun with mmition.
The military, in return, gave the Hang vegetable seeds to grow in place of

the opium. Yuanthong said that the 1,500 Kong, from six villages along Doi
Yao-Doi Pha Hon Mountains, which were under CPT control during the past 14 years,
had earned their living by growing opima. Last year's crop was good, he said,
and each fsaily sold between 5 to 8 kilogramss to Chinese haw merchants who
resold it on the black market in Laos. Last year's raw opiun price was about
45,000 baht per kilograms, Yuathong said. [Excerpt] [Bangkok POST in English
2 Mar 82 p 5)

CSO: 5300/5662

1:5
GOVERNMENT DELAY IN REDUCING HARSBNBSS 0P MARIHUANA LAW CITED

Toronto THE GLOBE AND mm. in English 26 Jun 82 p 7

[Article by John Gray: "The Marijuana Prodicomnt")

[Toxt ]

- neruohi'mn" " ‘3' ma.“ am“ "1;.
Au - and one: the'ooovlouoo o! who
that mono Candi-m — the. ”hall?

The summon“ éays penned W
ty isn't tho moon hls‘rotomlm
cooled somewhat; um. ho mm, "M's~

The Trude» com-mum’s moan about
"mum nm Macao tot-molly In May. IND.
MJoMmeonmlmuothe-lmand

WmmmmotMmMth-r

emmmumryoolookm
thwholospoctnmoﬂheooo-medoolmoof
merit. they were united in their insistence that
the lawoncamabis—marliuanaandbssblsh
- should be soitened considerably. The majorl-
ty wanted no prohibition mum either posses-
sion or cultivation ior personal use.

An uncertain Government wanted nothing oi
that. but John Munro promised that there
wouidbelegislationwithinaiewmonthsto
transier cannabis to the Food and Drug Act.
away irom the much more severe strictures oi
the Narcotics Control Act

Thatwas in Imandwaatheiirstoiasuc-
cession oi Government promises. Mr. Munro
repeated his promise iormaliy two years later;
indeed. he issued a written statement and
called it a policy on cannabis. M years later.
his successor. Marc Lalonde. went so tar as on.
produce legislation togo with the policy. and he
said. lilte Charles Dickens that the law was an
ass

That legislation was introduced in the Seu-
ate. and the senators made valiant attempts to
improve it. held long hearings and then
watchedastheGovernmentquietiyletthebili
die on the order paper.

By 1978, with cannabis convictions naming
at the rate of more than 35.0» a r. Mr. Ls-
londe said he really would like to ve new leg-
islation to reduce marijuana penalties. He said
itwasbeingstudiedonanurgentbasisand.
citing the number oi convictions. commented:
“You have to ask yourseli serious questions
aboutthatparticularlawandwhetherltis
really responding tothevaluesotthesocietyln.
whichyoullveandwhetheryoucancontimeio
haveaiawthatisreallyreiectedbynicha
large number oi your citizens."

When the Conservatives were in power.
David Crombie held the health and welfare
portiolio. lie. like his Liberal
promised legislation but produced nothing.

Ayeariater.withthei.iberalsbackinpowo
er. Solicitor-General Kaplan was making all
the right noises. lie even made a to his
Don Valley riding association in be out-
lined the iamiliar position. ”i personally ieei it
2.32 5.. 08% 888
03%;.

.3 ca 5896. .8 a8?
93 .88 a. 3... 2 .3558.
:0 3:8 8 .5 :8 383.
09335.8. 59381:... 3
”in 38-58 19 32a

6

, Quasi?!-
Bong—835.533.:5
383998933853?

ﬁ:=.x.u§8u?

.33....aieas

Ontario side. The raid includes officers from the m. QPP, OPP, Ottawa, Bull,
Aylner, Venier end Timing. Ont. police forces. Police eeid officers entered 40
houeee end epsrtnente at 8 e..., seizing narcotics, stolen goods end veepone.

The Quebec Police Force was in charge of the operation. [Text] [Otto's m
WEEKEND CITIZEN in English 9 Jan 82 p 3]

6802 5320/21

50
DATA ON DRUG ADDICTION IN CROATIA
A0201707 Zagreb VJBSNIK in Serbo—Croatian 16 Jan 82 p 16

[Saturday supple-eat SEDAN DANA Article by Vletko Hiskovic: “Threat of 'The
White P1ague'“]

[Summary] "In recent times Yugoslavia has ceased to be a mere ‘transit coun-
try' for the trade in narcotic drugs because more and note of that poison now
stays in Yugoslavia." According to the Federal Secretariat for Internal
Affairs. the number of reported users of narcotic drugs in Yugoslavia in-
creased fron 250 in 1970 to over 8,000 in 1981. Last sunner in Belgrade, nine
drug addicts died from the effects of drug addiction and another three drug
addicts died in Belgrade for the sane reason in October. According to an
enquiry conducted in Zagreb schools, about 6 percent of ole-entary and 20
percent of secondary school children have experimented with narcotic drugs.

The following table shows the increase in the number of reported drug users
and distributors in Croatia, by regions, for 1979 and 1980:

Number of Reported Users and Distributors Percentage
Region: In 1979: In 1980: Increase:
Rijeka 131 157 16.5
Iatria 1‘4 234 62.7
Lika O 0 0
Split 191 262 27.1
Sibenik 65 45 0
Zadar 64 106 29.6
Dubrovnik 102 105 2.8
Oaijek 61 61
Slavonski Brod 55 75 26.6
Vinkovci 7 7
Zagreb 306 637 52.0
Karlovac 39 65 13.6
Bjelovar 9 29 68.9
Siaak 37 37 0
Varazdin 60 60 0
Total 1,327 1,862 28.7
The nﬂer of drug addicts trsatsd in hospitals in the Socialist Republic of
Croatia has also increased as tho following tabla for the 1976-80 period shows:

Nusbsr of Addicts ‘rrsatsd In

Type of Addiction: 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
Horphiun ' 20 20 31 62 69
Barbiturstss 17 17 11 38 55
Cocaine 0 0 0 0 0
Cannabis 1 6 1 12 17
uphstaninss -. 0 0 0 0 0
Hallucinogens ' 2 2 2 0 1
Evaporative solutions 0 0 0 7 6
Various cosbinations 51 73 96 65 65
Unidentified 39 68 70 77 74
Total 130 186 211 262 278

The quantities of various drugs confiscated by authorities has increased
simultaneously with tha spreading of drug addiction in Yugoslavia as the fallou-
ing tabla for confiscated hsroin shows:

Quantity of Confiscstsd

Year: NW: of Cases Involved: Beroin in Kilograns:
1976 2 1.18
1977 5 0.27
1978 7 31.70
1979 22 91.60
January 1980 6 70.70
BRIEFS

MARIJUANA mus-4 notor boat, more than 5.000 lbe of ganja, a quantity of.
cocaine have been eeited by the police, and five Alericane and two Janicane

arrested on drug charges in Trelewuy, St. Ann. and Manchester. Five other: have
been detained. The boat, the Bolycol, wee intercepted about four nilee off the

Palnouth coast. Trelewny, on Friday morning by the Janice Defence Force Coeet
Guard. The ganja waa found on board. the police intonation centre eeid.
Kenneth Smith, 32, Janee Wollon. 28. Steve Heeeiur. 35, all of South Carolina,
U.S.A.; and Janaican Allan Ellis, 30, lifeguard. of Gorinaldi Avenue, Hontego
Bay, were arrested end charged with poeeeeeion of ganja and attenting to export
ganja. [Excerpt] [m22230 Kingeton DAILY CLEANER in English 15 Feb 82 p 1]

CSO: 5300/2170

53
LARGE-SCALE rumours CAPTURE», W 88123!)
Ciudad Juarez 21. mo in Spanish 20 Feb 82 Sec 3 p 2

[Text] Yesterday, agents free the Federal Security Office in this town confiscated
drugs. specifically. nerihuana and cocaine, worth 36.626 nillion pesos.

They arrested the individuals who had been dealing in drugs for a long tine, and
,on a large scale, who proved to be: Arnulfo Quinones Avila, and hie nephew, Eduardo
Vargas Quinones. '

The head of that group. Luis Garcia lisdrid, who has often been involved in crinea
against health and in trading powerful weapons in exchange for powders and herbs.
managed to evade the action of the law enforcers.

lie found out in tine that he was being sought, nade arrangements and succeeded in
obtaining protection.

Therefore. he was not arrested together with his two accleices.

The breakup of that ring, and the seizure of the shipnent which is the most. valuable
one taken by the police in the last 20 years, wee achieved by (bad: Ranon Rodriguez
and group chief Ouauthenoc Ortiz, after an investigation effort lasting for over

2 months. -

They learned, after four individuals were arrested in Chaparral, New Mexico, with
more than 7,000 pounds of narihuana. that those tra..'ickers had been working together
with the group from Ciudad Juarez, and that the shipments were arriving via 81
Granjero. and were being taken, subsequently, to Yankee territory.

They undertook a search, and soon learned that heavy vehicles were arriving at
residence No 55 on Sierra del Carlson Street in that section, and that furtive
unloadings were taking place by night. They also found out that other furnishings
were being loaded on the sane praises by night. and sonetinea during the daytime.

The operating nethod was planned, and they raided that residence. finding Arnulfo
and Eduardo inaide.

They were holding in the inrovised storage sites 79 bales of nerihuana weighing
a total of 1,600 kilograms.

5h
Arnulfo Quinones Avila and Eduardo Vargas Quinones. uncle and nephew, respectively,

are the traffickers who were captured by Comdr Ramon Rodriguez's agents with the
million-peso shipment.

2909
C30: 5330/67

55
DRUG PROCESSING LABORAIORIBS DISCOVERED IN MONTERBZY
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DB NUEVO LARIDO in Spanish 20 Jan 82 Sec C p 3

[Text] The Regional Coordinating Unit of the Office of the Attorney General of the
Republic, with headquarters in this border port, administered by Carlos Aguilar
Garza, will take over the investigation associated with the breaking up of a ring
of drug processers captured recently in the city of Monterrey, where two clandes-

tine laboratories wers discovered and five persons, including three Americans, were
captured.

Following an anonymous phone call which disclosed the location of two clandestine
laboratories in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, State Judicial Police agents from that
state, aided by Army forces, succeeded in capturing the Americans Danny Brand,
Charles Brown and Ira Bochardo, as well as the laboratory workers Jorge Luis
Bermudez Betancourt and Luis Ruben Orozco.

Four days ago, these individuals had set up two clandestine laboratories, one in
the Cerro de la 8111a section and another located at 1031 Huasteca Street, in the
Model Unit Housing Development, where they intended to process about 1 kilogras of
chemical material to convert it into the drug known in the underworld as "speed".

When the aforementioned subjects had been captured, they were turned over to the
Monterrey Federal Public Ministry agents, Jose Luis Montoya Centeno and Alejandro
Garza Delgado, who will, at the proper time, report on the investigation to the
coordinator of the Attorney General's Office in the states of Tamsulipas, Nuevo Leon
and Coahuila.
BRIEFS

HEROIN TRAFFICKER ARRESTED--Rafsel Amador Valdez was arrested by members of the
Federal Judicial Police as a result of investigations conducted by that entity to
locate the individual responsible for distributing heroin to the addicts in the
state, and it was found that this individual was one of the suppliers of that drug.
After being questioned, the subject under arrest said that he had actually been
engaged in the business of selling the drug to anyone seeking it. At the time of
his capture, he was found to have in his possession seven small aluminum foil
packets containing heroin which had a total weight of 8 grams. The subject explained
that he had been involved in that activity for some time, and gave the names of his
customers, whom he knew quite well, because they are complete addicts. The Federal
Judicial Police investigations are being continued. because an attempt is being

made to establish the identity of those engaged in marketing the drug, so as to
learn its origin and arrest those guilty of that illegal activity. Meanwhile,
according to the Federal Judicial Police, this individual will be turned over to the
agent of the Federal Public Ministry to be held for whatever crimes against health
result, beginning with the possession and distribution of drug products. [Text]
[Culiacan BL SOL DB SINALOA in Spanish 22 Feb 82 p 8] 2909‘

HARIHUANA SHIPMENTS SBIZED--Mexicali, 3.0., 13 February (BXCBLSIOR)-A marihuana
shipment worth over 33 million pesos was seized by inspectors from the Calexico
Drug Traffic Department, who arrested the Mexicali resident Francisco 8. 0rduno.
It was officially reported that Francisco 8. 0rduno was carrying the grass in a
special compartment on a freight truck, which was also left at the disposal of the
Calexico authorities. The individual under arrest was summoned to make a statement
at the court in El Centro, California, under charges of smuggling and conspiracy.
Personnel from the Calexico Drug Traffic Department announced that, this week,
another shipment of smuggled marihuana had also been discovered, and that it was
apparently related to the grass shipment seized from Francisco 5. 0rduno. [Text]
[8. Hatamoros BL BRAVO in Spanish 15 Feb 82 Sec A p 8] 2909

TRAFFICKERS BATTLE POLICE-Mexico City, D.F., 16 February (BXCBLSIOR)-After a gun
battle which lasted over 2 and a half hours, between drug traffickers and Federal
Judicial Police agents in the middle of downtown Salansncs, Guanajuato, Comdr Jose
Mendez Rico succeeded in capturing three criminals who, in addition to being sought
for drug trafficking, had seven stolen cars in their possession. The confrontation
took place at 008 Reynosa Street, in the Bellavista housing develop-ant, at 2100
hours last Monday, and it was not until 0650 hours that they overcame the criminals
who, in fact, had an arsenal at that residence. Francisco Jose Robles Castillo,
identified as head of a ring of drug traffickers and car thieves, was sought after
four members of that organization had been arrested; and when the agents went to

57
arrest him they were net with bullets fired by Robles Castillo and two more of his
associates. After the gun battle, Pernando Arroyo Rojas and Juan Isauro Velasquez
Solis were arrested, along with Robles Castillo. The ring, which was operating in
Gusnajuato, Jalisco and San Luis Potosi, had in its possession .11 cars that had been

“3].; 901191 those states. [Text] [11. hetenoros El. BRAVO in Spanish 17 Feb 82 See A
p .

BOLIVIA-v.8. COCAINB MPIWCocaine valued at more than 50 sillion pesos was
seized by federal law enforcement officers at the Mexico City International Airport.
An Italian n‘da bolivisn were stopped with lthe shipnent when they arrived from
Bolivia. According .to experts, the drug, whose purity would have taken up to 8
"cute," was brought in hidden between double insoles of their shoes and in suit
coat shoulder pads. Paacual Sannella Carona, an Italian, and Luis Fernando Marcel
Urioste de Avila, a Bolivian, were caught at the inspection station in the air
terninal when they became highly nervous. On being discovered, they tried to es-
cape, but were held by the police. Ihe two foreigners said they bought the drug
in La Paz, bolivia, fron an individual named Antonio Bea-antes and that they were
to deliver it in Mexicali, Bajs California, to one Giorgio Bukoski, an American,
who was to cone fron Los Angeles, California. The buyer in the United States,
according to investigations by the federal officers is a drug dealer of Italian
descent who is now a naturalized 0.8. citizen. Investigations also revealed that
Paacual Sannella Carona, besides being involved in drug trafficking, did so using
U.S.-mde automobiles, including trucks and stationwagons from San Prancisco to
Panama City. As for Urioste de Avila, he said he was invited by Pascual to get in-
to drug trafficking and that he had been guaranteed big profits. The two foreigners
will soon appear before a federal judge charged with responsibility for crimes
against health in all its aspects. [Text] [Hexico City 310315103 in Spanish

16 Feb 82 p 32-A] 9908

HARIHUANA SHIPPING POINTS REPORTED-4hr“ drug traffickers who were transporting
some 150 kilos of narihuana valued at a little over 3 nillion pesos in the black
market were intercepted by federal law enforth officers at the crossroads of
the Pan American and Zacatecas-Guadalajara Highways near the town of la Bscondida.
J. Jesus Hernandez Arroyo, a Federal Public Ministry agent, said the drug traffickers
are Rosalie Aparicio Caldera, Doningo Gonzales bias and Enrique Ramirez Mendez.
The detainees were carrying the "grass" in a stationwagon bearing license plates
ZA-86Sl; the drug was purchased in the State of Hichoacan and was being taken to
Neuvo Laredo, 'l‘aasulipas, for sale. Several H-l rifles and lZ-calibre shotguns
were also confiscated. [Text] [Keatico City EXCBLSIOR in Spanish 8 Feb 82 p 31-A]
9908

OPIUH GUN SEIZBD-ol’ollowing the confrontation that occureed between drug dealers
and Federal Judicial Police the day before yesterday at Presidente de Zihuatanejo
Hotel in Guerrero, two brothers, both fugitives, are being sought by law agents.
Antonio and Gervasio Rios Bustillo, who took part in the shoot-out with Federal
agents, are being sought in the Costa Chica between Guerrero and Oaxaca by investi-
gators fron both localities and by detectives from the Federal Government that work
in the various co-unities near the Costa Chica. During the confrontation, Ober-

lin Penasola and a person known only as Teodoro, who had in their possession lo kilo-
grams of spin gun when intercepted in the lobby of the 31 President Hotel by the

Federal agents, were killed. [Excerpt] [Mexico City BI. SOL DE MEXICO in Spanish
13 Jan 82 p 12A] 9907

cso: 5300/wa 58
GUNS, MARIJUANA SBIZED; POLICE SAY PUSHBR "AR AVBRTED
Port-of-Spain TRINIDAD GUARDIAN in English 8 Feb 82 p 1

[Text] Six persons were held, and two shot guns and three revolvers including
one .44 (an unusual calibre) were seized when team led by Police Comissioner
Hr Randolph Burroughs intervened to halt an upsurge of violence in the San
Juan area.

Early Saturday morning the Police averted what they described a war between
rival marijuana peddlera when they made a surprise raid at Hunt Road, San

Juan, on premises barricaded with a high concrete wall guarded by armed
sentries.

Mr Burroughs and his men broke through the barricade and seized the shotguns
and revolvers and shotgun and other ammunition.

In this raid two women and four men were held and also a quantity of mari-
juana seized.

Residents in the area praised Mr Burroughs who used subtle strategy with his
raiding party to gain access to the protected premises which provoked anxiety
and fear among people in the neighbourhood.

They claimed of having heard shots being fired from passing motor-cars during
the past few days, and these recent events had generated a high level of
agitation.

One revolver seized during the operation has since been identified as having
been stolen from Mr Eugene ﬁernandes, a barrister-at-law employed with an oil
company and residing at Goodwood Park, sometime in October last year.

Two persons have also been detained for questioning in connection with a
recent murder at San Juan. They are also being questioned in connection with
$11,000 armed robbery outside an Arima Bank. Hr Burroughs explained that
the murder at San Juan took place on January 9, and it was drug related.

He said there have been exaggerated reports on the crime situation in this

country. In fact he said. crime was on the decline and advised the public
not to be taken in by a scare campaign.

59
Mr Burroughs reported that a raid was lads at a certain hone at San Juan
where sons five persons were held for possession of marijuana and investiga~
tiona revealed that they were prohibited imigrants from St Vincent.

Operation "FAN," (firearms anunition and narcotics), he said, had cut down
some of the seasonal reports which were dranatised.

Nenty one people in all were picked up over the weekend.

"We were able to smash two of the gangs responsible for the armed robberies,
and with the upcoming Carnival there were persons trying to give the wrong
impression to our visitors," Hr Burroughs said.

Mr Burroughs said that for theoperation he merged the Flying Squad. Narcotics
Squad. Special Tactical Unit; members of the Guard and hergency Branch;
Canine (Dog) Section; "omen Police and Divisional Police, using acting
Deputy Connisaioner Sampson Phillip as coordinator.

Even despatch riders were used and numerous road blocks were set up throughout
the country and this paid off verywell, the Comissioner added.

CSO: 5300/7 530
BRIEFS

DRUG ARREST OP mun Venezuelan national who uttered Trinidad aboard a pirogue
on Monday was picked up by Flying Squad detectives on Independence Square. near
the Drag Brothers booths. and when searched a quantity of cocaine. haehieh and
marijuana was found. The detectives. headed by Cpl. Mervyn Lynch and including
Cpl. Eugene Granger, journeyed to the Haraval district where they detained a 38-
year-old salesman of Hayfield Road, Valeayn Park, a clerical officer of aayehore
and the occupant of the Haraval home. The party seized a quantity of narcotics
among other things at the home. All four are due to appear before a Portdof-Spain
gagigtzgte today to answer charges. tPort-of-Spein TRINIDAD GUARDIAN in English
P p 3

FINE FOR VENEZUELAN--Venezuelan national who was held on Independence Square
last week with cocaine in his possession was fined $1,000 after he was found
guilty by a Port-of-Spain magistrate. on Monday afternoon. Reuben Gonzales

of Caracas, had pleaded not guilty before Magistrate Pat Jaggesar in the Port-
of-Spain Fourth Police Court. The Court was told that the defendant who had

entered the country the previous day was held by Detective Cpl Eugene Granger
who was on patrol duty with Cpl Hervyn Lynch-~both members of the Flying Squad.
Gonzales, who was deemed a prohibited immigrant was handed over to the Immigra-
tion Officers and was deported yesterday. [Text] [Port-of-Spain TRINIDAD

GUARDIAN in English 10 Feb 82 p 3]

CSO: 5300/7530

61
BRIEFS

HEROIN PACTORIBS IN PAKISTAN-JIM Afghan comterrevolutionaries who had fled

away to Pakistan are resorting to smuggling of narcotics. According to a
report received from authentic somcea. about 20 heroin production labora-

tories are active inside the territory of Pakistan while Pakistani authorities

are fully aware of them. [Text] [GN31715 Kabul Radio in English to South Asia
1530 CHI 3 Mar 82]

cso: 5300/5374

62
MAJOR OPIUH RIM CAPTURE!)
Cairo AL-AHRAM in Arabic 31 Jan 82 p 1

[Article by Busayn Ghanim: "Opium Worth 5 Million Pounds Seized After An Adven-
ture Aboard a Ship in the Suez Straits"]

[Text] The entrance to the Gulf of Sue: Straits witnessed a rousing adventure
for the first time by the Egyptian security machinery one midnight last week on
a Pakistan ship arriving from Pakistan while the ship was stopped waiting to
transit the Canal. It ended with the surrender of an international ring of Pak-
istani drug smugglers and the seizure of large shipments of opium worth 5 mil-
lion pounds that had been readied to be smuggled into Egypt with other shipments
destined for Europe.

The machinery of the General Anti-Narcotics Department had been keeping an eye
out for the snuggling of opium shipments from Pakistan into Egypt to stop them
from flooding into the illegal drug peddling market and to frustrate the scheme
for this. It had in fact been able to prosecute many cases which had a great
role in the unprecedented rise in drug prices. the price having risen from about
30,000 pounds per 'uqqah [1.258 kilograms] to six times that in 6 months.

Ihere was information that new attempts were being made by an international ring
from Pakistan to flood the country with large' shiments of opium. Minister of
Interior Hassan Abu Basha directed Maj Gen Semi As'ad, First Assistant Minister
for Social Security, to focus efforts on the heads of this ring and that the
schane be frustrated.

In accordance with a plan that was laid out, Maj Gen Hamduh Salim Zaki, director
of the General Anti-Narcotics Department, instructed Col Muhammad 'Abbas Mansur,
director of the operations department, to go to Pakistan, the prime source for
snuggling opium into the Middle East and some European countries to make inves-
tigations. During his 2-week trip, he was able to get acquainted with two lead-
ers of international rings, the first named Huhamad Asghar Malik and the second
named Muhammad Zayar Raja. The officer introduced himself to them as an owner
of a fishing vessel in the Gulf of Suez. When he had won their confidence, he
gave them to understand that he engaged in smuggling operations in this area in
cooperation with some persons who had been helping him for a long time and over
whom he wielded influence and control.
Report and a Meeting in Egypt

tional ring in Pakistan to Haj Gen Mamduh Salin Zaki, director of the General
Department for Combatting Drug Smuggling. Then, during last July and October,
the two gangleaders came to Egypt to meet with their friend, the undercover
officer, and to confirm his identity before they engaged in any mggling opera-
tions. During the third visit last January, while dining at the Sheraton Beli-
opolis, the two gangleaders asked the officer to help thn work a snaggling op-
eration through the Port of Suez. lie pretended to go along with them and one
of the leaders returned to Pakistan on 17 January to complete arrangements for
smuggling a shipment of opium. He returned on 19 January under the seemed
name of 14qu Amin 'Arif and gave the officer half of a Pakistani 10 Rupee
note and a picture of a ship (al-nusayn) carrying Pakistani nationality. he
asked him to meet the ship before it left the Straits of Sue: on 21 January and
to get acquainted with two crew members, Ghulam Rusul Jadawat and (Rules Qadir
Muhammad al—Razzaq, giving them the half of the note, the picture and the sum
of $25,000. their fee for the operation, and taking delivery of the drug ship-
ment from them. This meeting was tape recorded by permission of the chief jus-
tice of North Cairo.

The ship, al-Husayn, arrived on schedule, stopping about 10 kilometers from the
Port of Sue: in territorial waters awaiting permission to continue ahead to
transit the canal enroute to Enron. After legal arrangaaents were made, a plan
was set up to maintain surveillance in conjunction with the Port Suez Police
Department and its branches in Southern Sinai and the Port of Suez. At about
1500 hours, (:01 Muhammad 'Abbas Honour, director of operations, took a Launch
out to where the ship was anchored, carrying with him the articles to be used
for identification and accompanied by Col al-Sayyid Ghayth, chief of foreign
operations, Lt Col Kat-aid 'Abd-al—Raahid and Lt Col Hasan Fathi, chief of the
port department, who were pretending to be dockhands working in the port. They
boarded the ship, carrying some Khan al-Khalil goods and actually sold the: to
the ship's crew. In the meantime, the undercover director of operations was
able to get acquainted with Ghulam Rusul and Ghulam Qadir. He showed then the
stuff used to identify him which had been given to him by the Pakistani, Muhammad
Asghar halik. After they felt reassured about him, they asked him to approach
the ship from astern no later than midnight, along with the $25,000, making sure
to have with him four persons to help move the opium shipment. The officer left
with the rest of the undercover force without anyone discovering their identity
or becoming suspicious of them.

Plan to Raid the Ship

A complete plan to raid the ship was set up under the supervision of Brig Gen
Husni 'Abd-al-‘Azin, deputy chief of the drug department for operations. The
plan was based on a sketch of the exits to the port after it emerged that the
ship carried about 58 crewman. The forces were split up among a number of
radio-equipped launches under the comand of Col Hustafs al—lcashif and Col
Asamah al—Hamamiei and Lt Col's Shafiq al-‘Ashri, ‘Imad Rashid. Hajdi missyn.
Sayyid Muhamadin, Ahead al-Ghaffar, Paruq Namnam and 'Abd-al-Hun'im al-Sharabi.

6h
After the place where the ship was anchored was surrounded, Col Huha-ssd 'Ahbas,
along with four drug inspectors secretly boarded the ship from the stern by
means of a rope ladder while the rest of the force monitored their movements
while in radio contact with tha.

After the director of operations reached the spot where the spins shipments
were concealed, he carried on his pretense to the two embers of the ring and
told the: that he was prepared to pay the $25,000 and gave thu to understand
that he was ready to transfer the shipment. At the same time, he gave the other
members of the force the prearranged signal and the ship was taken over in order
to block any resistance which the crew mesbers might try to make. The two gang
leaders, Chulam Rusul and Ghulam Qadir, were surprised and dineyed when the
members of the force revealed their identity and arrested then. They seized

the opium shipments which were being smuggled for the ring inside four bags in
the cabin of the second leader. The shipment comprised 100 packets of opium
weighing 136 kilograms, as well as four other cartons in the same cabin contain-
ing 9!. packets of opium weighing 122 kilograms. The two accused persons con-
fessed that they were for another ring in a European country and had been re-
ceived in return for half of a 50 Pakistani rupee note with the serial amber
713505. The half of the note which Col Huhaulsd 'Abbaa. director of operations.
had given them, along with its matching half , was seized.

Intonation and investigations revealed that the other two leaders of the inter-
national ring, Kuhamad Asghar Malik and Huhanad Zayyar Raja. had rented a fur—
nished apartment at 25 Ahmad [word illegible] St. in al-Ruzhah District in Heli-
opolis in anticipation of the arrival of the opium shipments where they had
concluded deals for sale to some drug dealers in Egypt. Col Huhamad 'Abbas and
Col Sayyid Ghayth went there and recordings were made of their conversations in-
volving the success of the smuggling operation and the role of each in it. "hen
there was sufficient evidence against thu, the two were arrested and the office
of the prosecutor general notified. The investigation was handled by Muhammad
al-Batati. chief prosecutor of Suez. The four accused persons confessed to all
the facts and it was decided to hold them in prison for 55 days. At the same
time, steps were taken to watch for the arrival of a leader of the international
ring named Muhammad Afyar Khan, also known as "the doctor," as he was expected
to arrive within a few days carrying new articles used for identification for
other shipments of opium to be smuggled from Pakistan aboard a ship. 80, this
operation uncovered dangerous leaders of international rings which muggle opium
into Egypt. The shipments seized are worth an estimated 5 million pounds.

8389
050: 5300/5011

65
DRUG SEIZURE REPORTED
Cairo AL-ABRAH in Arabic 6 Dec 81 p 10

[Article by Busayn Ghanim "Seizure of Drugs Worth Half Million Pounds Hidden by
Snugglers in Caches in Eastern Desert"]

[Text] Agencies of the Anti-Narcotics Department have seized a big shipaent of
hashish worth one-half million pounds hidden by smugglers in several caches in
al-‘l'all al-Kabir Desert, in al-Sharqiyah and in Ismailia before the market could
be flooded with the drug. The seizure was made after an exciting chase and three
major smugglers were arrested.

Information received by thj Gen Phnduh Selim Zeki, the director of the Anti-
Narcotics Departnent, indicated that the snugglers had hidden the drugs with some
desert bedouins in Isnailia and al-Sharqiyah governorates while waiting for the
opportunity to flood the market with than. Brig Gen whee-lad Busni 'Abd al-‘Azin,
the department deputy director, examined the matter and determined the hiding
places. Agreement was reached on a plan supervised by Col Huhanad 'Abbas Hansur,
the director of operations, Col Tariq Salim, the head of the internal investigation
section, and Brig Gen Handuh al-Janal, the director of the lsmailia intelligence,
to watch the movements of the major drug smugglers and traffickers between Cairo
and the desert areas whhre the bedouine known for hiding and trafficking in drugs
gather and to examine all the conditions surrounding these areas.

These efforts resulted in determining the hiding places in the Ismailia and al-
Sharqiyah desert and in identifying the smugglers. Ambushes were laid to attack
these hiding places. Forces of the Anti-Narcotics Department and ofuthe canine
units whose dogs are to sniff out drugs at the Police Academy took part in the
anbushes which were supervised by Colonels 'Isan al-‘l‘arsawi and 'Abd al-Khaliq
al-‘rahawi and Lieutenant Colonels Huhanad al-lman, Semir badawi and 'Ala' 'Abd
el-Latif. Several caches were discovered in the sand dunes containing large
quantities of hashish blocks valued at one-half million pounds and bearing such
brand names as al-Zahrah, al-Dhahebiysh and al-‘A'ilah al-Karimah. Three najor
smugglers, namely Salin manna- a1-'Abdi, Husallan Salim Jani' and 'Abd al-Karin
Dayfallah Rashid, were arrested after an exciting chase in the desert. The prose-
cution was notified and the investigation was conducted by mhamd 'Abd al-
Rahman, deputy prosecutor in al-‘l‘all al-Kabir, who has ordered that the three

smugglers be jailed and that the drugs be confiscated.

84910
080: 5300/5007
BRIEFS

OPIUH SBIZED-oSuez--Nercotice agents toiled an attempt to snuggle quantitiee
of opium into the country valued at BLIOrnillion. Invaetigationa indicated
that the opium, weighing 260 kilograms, wee amuled aboard the Pakiateni
ship (Sonar) which wee due to arrive yesterday in Port Suez. Two Pakietanie
carried the gooda, they are Ghulan 'Ahd-al-Qedir and Ghulan 'Abd-al-Ruaul.
They vere apprehended on board the ahip u eoon ea it anchored in the port,
and the opium wee found on then. Haj Gen Handuh Sali- led the investigation
aided by Gen Huani 'Abd-al-Azin, and Col Muhammad 'Abbae, Sayyid Ghayth,
Ueana al-Rana-a. Lt Col ‘Abd-al-Latit 'Ali and Ma] Haaan Fathi. The two
accused were interrogated by 'Ali Huha-ad ail-Betti. the chief proeacutor.
He ordered their detention for lo daye pending the trial. [Text] [Cairo
AL-JUMBURIYAB in Arabic 31 Jan 82 p1]

CSO: 5300/5012
BRIEFS

TERRA" DRUG SEIZURE, STATISTICS-‘i‘he Public Relations Department of the Office
of the Antidrug Prosecutor has mnemced that neebera of central antidrug
headquarters have arrested an individual in Shemiran and confiscated 12.1 kg

of rolled opiua. The same source issued the following statistics for drug
seizures nationwide for the period 31 Deceaber 1980-11 February 1982: 16.005.501
kg heroin, 945.892 kg hashish, 70.223 kg burned opium, 11,468.661 kg opiun,
1.105.586 kg snuff [naas], 162.515 kg norphine. 83.2101 kg opium juice and 55 kg
of opiun residue. Sone 15,857 individuals have been arrested in connection

with these drugs. [GPOIolloZZ Tehran m in Persian 15 Feb 82 p 15]

IRANSHAHR DRUG DlsmVERY—Iranshahr gendarnerie personnel have seized 74 kg of
opiun and 146 kg of hashish as well as a kalaetmikov from a mater of arned
traffickers after a heavy clash in which one trafficker was killed and two others
were arrested. In a related incident another trafficker was arrested for
possession of 1410 kg of hashish. [GPOblloZZ Tehran BTTELA'AT in Persian 15 Feb 82
v 13]

TABRIZ DRUG CATCH—Revolution Guards of the Tabri: antidrug squad have arrested
a father and son and confiscated 10 kg of opiu and 2 kg of heroin fron two
individuals. [GPOblloZZ Tehran ETTBLA'AT in Persian 18 Feb 82 p 1.]

TABAS OPIW PINDuThe action group of the Tabas Islamic Revolution Comittee
has arrested two individuals and confiscated 20 kg of opium. [GPOlolloZZ Tehran
JOHHURI-YE ESLAMI in Persian 20 Feb 82 p 9]

PROVINCIAL blur; DISCOVERIBS—Gendarnerie personnel in provinces of Sistan va
Baluchestan, Homgan. Lorestan and Kernan have confiscated a total of 392 kg
of opium and 118.5 kg of heroin in the past 15 days. [62061622 Tehran
JOMiURI-YE ESLAHI in Persian 15 Feb 82 p lo]

00!! HEROIN PIND--ﬂenbers of the Q01! Revolution Guards have arrested an individual
on Qom-Kashan Road who had 1.05 kg of heroin in his possession. [63041522
Tehran JOHHURI-YB BSLAHI in Persian 15 Feb 82 p lo]

ZAHEDAN, JARROM SEIZUREs--During the past 1.8 hours Zahedan police were able to
confiscate 1 kg of opium. In the same period Jahron Revolution Guards confis-
cated 8 kg of opiun and 500 gram of heroin. [GPOlolloZZ Tehran JOEURI-YB BSLAHI
in Persian 17 Feb 82 p lo]

68
TABRIZ, BOJNURD DISGWBRIBS-During the past 10 days personnel of Tabriz
narcotics squad have confiscated a total of 10.5 kg of opim. In Bojnurd numbers
of the Islamic Revolution Cot-titres arrested an individual on 17 February who
had 1.37 kg of opium and 134,250 ride in cash in his possession. [610611.22
Tehran JOHHURI-YB ESLAHI in Persian 18 Feb 82 p 1.]

mom DISCOVERED-June antinsrcotica tea- of the Ramadan police last Thursday
discovered 26.591 kg of heroin in a welding workshop and ironwork: in Ramadan.

Four people were arrested. [1.0280338 Tehran Don-eerie Service in Persian 1630 GIT
27 Feb 82]

C80: 5300/5373
BRIEFS

SEIZURE 0P RARCOTIcs—‘lhe Beirut airport eecurity authorities have arrested
'Ali Hanan Banzah as he was trying to smuggle 30 kilogram of hashiah to Heat
Germany. lie ad-itted that an organization had asked hi. to take the parcel with
him to Germany. telling him that the parcel contained political leaflets.
[NC262028 Beirut Voice of Lebanon in Arabic 1015 cm- 26 Feb 82]

C50: 5330/0711

70
BRIEFS

NAROOTICS SBIm-Dmecus, 28 Feb (SNAP-Yesterday, customs officials were
able to apprehend a truck with 366 kg of snuggled bullish at the Syrian-khan“:
bordercrossing point. 'me hashish is worth 1.4 million Syrian pounds. A
responsible source at the Syrian-Lebanese bordercrossing point said that the
truck is of the Henechel type, burs a Kuwaiti license amber and was on its

way to Saudi Arabia. [Text] “1082036 Dmscus SANA in Arabic 1805 GMT
28 Feb 82)

(:80: 5300/4711

71
INDIANS ARRESTED FOR POSSESSIm HANDMX

Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in English 27 Feb 82 pp 1, 2

[Article by Kay Turvey and kilns van Green]

[Text]

ONE of the biggest
drug hauls in
South African hisp
tour was made this
week when nine
Indians were as-
rested for being in
possession of R1,?-
mtllion worth of
Mandrax ﬁlls and
Narcotics Bureau
detectives seized
daua valued at
“450000

Seven lndians-ﬂl
men and a women
— were apptehended at
Jan Stunts Aitpost on
Wednesday altemoon
when a customs oﬂidal
dimted packets at
the tablets hidden in

the false bottom o! a
suitcase.

Theothettwopeople
involved in the drug
socket wete later at-
rested by the police.

Seven suitcases cow
tainlna moon of the
methadone tablets.
valued at about no

each on the black nar-
ltet. vase confiscated.
The Indians arrived
ioSouthMﬂcaonsepe
rats nights {Iota Brit-
ain and Madrid. Both
"aha—DAWN]!
007 — new via Nainohi.

we
g3}:
:35

g 55:3;
5

£§§§§3§
$322.?"

“%
3:
l2

ggfgéggggggg
$5333;le
igiﬂ- Eml E
Fa $5”

3
E%

gésizsiggg E
ii i. 35?:
3x gig-E. is 5:?

E
aiési

2‘33 JENSE .3 Elﬂlﬂ‘ﬁf

2‘

Pet
”I"... :3...
m. .5

._...._=..m__..
_ mm... imam

...wu ~.:

a_M...m _.__

3:
m.” .mmm..m.m_

l/5666

73
ALLEGED NARCOTICS PRODUCTION , SHIGG'LING IN NORTH REPORTED

80091301 Nicosia I DIIILINI in Greek 9 Mar 82 pp 1, 8

[Excerpt] There is a workshop in occupied Karpaeha that produces heroin,
while in other parts [of the occupied north] there is systematic cultiva-
tion of cannabis and opium (peppy). what is of most concern in the produc-
tion and marketing of narcotics in the occupied territories is that members
of the Turkish Wpriot leadership appear to provide cover to the smugglers.
This shocking information was confirmed by the Cypriot police, the narcotic
division services of various countries and Interpol, who are in a very good
position to know what is going on in the occupied part of Cyprus with regard
to cultivation and marketing of narcotics, which started. grew and was
systematized after the Turkish invasion.

According to the same information, both the Cypriot police and "Interpol" are
in possession of uncontradic'ed proofs and evidence that the occupied part

of Cyprus is the center of narcotics trading--even hard narcoticsnthat large
quantities of heroin are available and also that the Turkish narcotics
smugglers in occupied areas can respond to any size order.

The information received by our police and by "Interpol" on the smuggling of
narcotics in the occupied territories is practically identical. According

to this information the Turkish smugglers are cooperating with Turkish
Cypriots and foreigners, who arrive undisturbed and they move freely. channel-

ing, through occupied northern Wprm, great quantities of narcotics to other
countries, such as Britain.

The same authoritative information adds that after the invasion. the mass influx
of Turks from Turkey in the occupied areas. among them many narcotic smugglers,
resulted in the systematic cultivation of the poppy (opilll) as well as in the
disposal of any quantity of morphine and heroin base. which is channeled to
illegal workshops in Lebanon and Italy through the occupied northern part of
Cyprus.

cso: 5300/5375

71;
NORDIC MINISTERS REPORT ON W IN STOCKEOIH ON DRUGS
Copenhagen BERLII‘GSKE TIDDIDE in Danish 20 Feb 82 pt II p 1
[Article by Jens Thomson]

[Text] The Nordic ministers of justice and ministers of social affairs
yesterday agreed to increase their efforts to combat drug abuse, among

other things, through increased cooperation among customs authorities
and the police.

After the meeting yesterday at the Swedish Ministry of Justice, the Nordic
ministers of justice and ministers of social affairs were unable to provide any

deadline for the goal on which full agreement was reached, via. making the Nordic
countries a drug-free area.

On the means to achieve this goal, it was stated, however, that the Nordic govern-
ments will increase the cooperation among the Nordic customs and police authori-

ties, and that the anti-drug efforts constitute an important and essential part
of the Nordic cooperation.

The participants in the meeting were from Denmark Minister of Justice Ole Espereen
and Minister of the Interior Kenning Rasmussen, from Sweden Minister of Justice
Carl Axel Petri and Minister of Social Affairs Karin Seder, from Norway Minister
of Justice Mona Rokke and Minister of Social Affairs Leif Arne Heloe, from Iceland

Minister of Justice Fridjon Thordarseon and from Finland Secretary General hrgit
Eskman of the National Finnish Social Welfare Board in Helsinki.

Participants from Denmark, in addition to the two ministers, were Permanent Under-
secretary Ole Asmussen, Dr. B. E. Knipschildt, city officer of health, Jacob
Turning, chief of section, as well as Permanent Undersecretary Niels Madsen of the
Ministry of Justice and Peter Rhedin, chief of section.

Christiania not Mentioned by Name

Despite the recent sharp condemnation from Sweden of Christiania as responsible
for a large part of the hashish abuse in Norway and Sweden, the official communi-
que issued at the meeting of the Nordic ministers, fails in an almost too con-
spicuous manner to mention the free town by me. 'lhis probably deliberate
omission in order not to create any unnecessary jars in the Nordic cooperation

75
was, however, not forgotten at the subsequent meeting with Swedish and Danish
press people and TV crews from both countries. Here Minister of Justice Ole
Espersen came in for severe criticism both in respect of the continued existence
of Christiania as a Nordic hashieh center and the lighter sentences applying in
Denmark for possession of hashish. Ole Espersen stated that first-time users of
hashish as a rule got off with a caution, whereas the Swedish Minister of Justice
Carl Axel Petri stressed that that practice certainly did not apply to Sweden.

It was, furthermore, established that drug abuse is more widespread in Denmark,
Norway and Sweden than in Finland and Iceland. Bashish abuse is most widespread,
but, in several of the Nordic countries, heroin abuse and stimulants for the
central nervous system are a serious problem. Cocaine abuse is fairly limited,
but there is a danger that there will be an increase also in the abuse of cocaine
unless steps are taken in time. In a document from the meeting of ministers it
was stated that in Sweden, in 1981, 8.6 kgs. of heroin, 0J6 kgs. of cocaine, and
“06 kgs of hashish were seized, while the same figures in the case of Denmk
were somewhat higher, viz. 9.2 kgs. of heroin, 10.“ kgs. of cocaine, and 1,292
kgs. of hashish.

Ebtpansion of Danish Narcotics Police Force

Ole Espersen stated that a major expansion of the narcotics police forces in all
of the Danish police districts had taken place during the summer of 1981, and
that major results had already been achieved. For a number of years, the Ministry
of Justice and the Danish police have found it most expedient to concentrate the
efforts of the police in particular on the principals and the middlemen. The
viewpoint has been that criminal action against the individual drug abuser who
often is in an unhappy social situation, in many cases serves no purpose.

For that reason, the number of charges for breaches of the Narcotics Act has,
during the last decades, been at a somewhat constant level of 4,000 cases annually,
while infringements of the more severe narcotics provision has shown a marked in-
crease from approximately 1000 cases in 1975 to 1,600 cases in 1981.

"The sale and abuse of hashish in Christiania must be stopped," said Ole Espersen,
thus departing from his previous statement that the traffic in hashish in the free
city ought to be kept "at a reasonable level."

"A reasonable level" is, according to the Swedish minister of justice, a zero
level.

Ole Espersen went on to say: "But Christiania cannot be made responsible for
narcotics abuse in all of the Nordic countries. Christiania is Just one of the
places where hashish is traded." According to Ole Espersen, the police has no
proof that Christiania, as claimed, for emple, in the Swedish and Norwegan
press, would be a major trading center for euphoriants other than hashish.

More generally, it may be mentioned that the police authorities have found no
basis for the claims made in the press of the Nordic‘countries that Christiania
would be 'the biggest crime center in the Nordic countries or the like, Ole
Espersen added.

76
Ole Espersen commented on the table, showing the quantities of drugs seized,
stating that nearly twice the quantity of drugs seized by the police in 1980 in
Sweden and Norway together had been seized in Denmark. The high figures from
Denmark must, to some extent, be viewed against the background of Denmark's

geographic position as the gateway and transit country for the rest of the
Nordic countries.

However, the figures show, at the same time. that there is no basis for claims,
if any, that the Danish authorities would not take effective steps against drug-
related crimes. The fact that the efforts on the part of the police alone are

not adequate to solve the drug problems neither in Denmark nor in any other
country is a different matter, he added.

In the resolution adopted to increase the cooperation among the Nordic police and
customs authorities, this was stressed in a proposal for the same technical
means, exchange of personnel, coordination of training, and increased efforts

on the part of the secret police among the Nordic countries.

Police officers have already been sent from several Nordic countries to partici-
pate in the anti-drug efforts on a world-wide level. Sweden has made an arrange-
ment with 'hzrkey for the exchange of police officers, and the possibility of
placing an expert in Greece is, at the same time. being looked into. Denmark
will station a drug expert at Wiesbaden, and a Danish delegation will shortly go
to South America for negotiations on drug control. Norway will station experts in
Islamabad. in Pakistan and in London. '

7262
050: 5300/ 2201

77
PAPER ATTACKS POSITION 0F DANISH MINISTER AT NORDIC PANEL
Copenhagen W810: TIDDIDE in Danish 20 Feb 82 p 6
[Editorial: "Euphorizing Denmark"]

[Text] The Danish participants left for the meeting of Nordic ministers of justice
and ministers of social affairs in Stockholm with an attitude which exerts a seri-
one strain on Nordic cooperation. The difficult situation in which the Social
Democratic Party has been put by Christiania in the arena of domestic politics
has caused the government to reject Norwegian and Swedish protests against the

role played by the axe-called free city as a center for hashish traffic and to
maintain the claim that this is a purely Danish matter.

The government party maintains that Christiania should be carried on as a social
experiment, an "alternative" to the society which is based on the citizens' respect
of law and their willingness to carry the economic burden brought about not least
by the social welfare legislation. They imagine that this provocation to the
orderly society may be put into a constructive framework as long as the drug
problem is kept limited. All other people view this as Utopian. -

The inhabitants of Christiania who would be non-consumers of the drugs in question
are, at best, neutral, but the fact that they remain in the area must be regarded
as a support of all that the "free city" stands for, with all of its good and bad
qualities. The unlawfulness is a cannon concern to all of those supporting the
dubious philosophy of the alternative, whether they are active or passive.

Christiania apparently cannot exist without the drugs which attract young people
from far and near, and which, in Sweden, are regarded as a threat to Swedish young
people, particularly in the Sound region. It is in the line which they have chosen
to follow in Sweden that the mistakes of the Ihnish government must be sought.
Christiania as a phenomenon is a Danish matter-the fact that it still exists is
due to our own decisions--but the traffic in drugs taking place there concerns,

in the highest degree, our neighboring countries. If this spread of drugs is a
Danish concern, the Social Democratic Party must acknowledge its responsibility
for the tragic consequences of this spread of drugs. On Tuesday, 1 December 1981,
Minister of Justice Ole Espersen stated that he had entered into an agreement with
inhabitants of Christiania not mentioned by name, to the effect that they were to
"reduce the hashish traffic from its present very high level to as low a level as
possible." A few days ago, Minister of Defense Poul Segaard stated in the Folks-
ting that the traffic in hashish at Christiania is no greater than in other places.

78
This is in conﬂict with the mm report for 1981 or the commissioner of the

Copenhagen Police. in which report it is stated, among other things: "Christian“.
where the major part of the hanhieh turnover in Copenhagen talces place.”

The statements made by the two ministers constitute an insult to the public opinion
in this country and are not calculated to prepare the ground for joint Nordic
efforts in respect of the entire drug problem. The Nordic cooperation is. in any
case. a sensitive nutter. With its preconceived idea; on e serious international
problem, the Danish government makes that cooperation vulnerable.

7262
cs0: 5300/2201

79
COWATIVE MP W ACTION AGAINST CHRISTIANIA
Copenhagen m Tulsa in Danish 22 tab 82 p 2
[Article by Bent Bak Andersen]

[Text] Against the background of statements made by Minister of Justice Ole
Espersen at the meeting of Nordic ministers of justice and ministers of social
affairs held at Stockholm, to the effect that “all traffic in, and abuse of,
hashish at Christiania must be stopped," Annelise Gotfredsen (Conservative MP)
now wants to take the initiative for the setting up of a fast-working committee
which must work out a complete set of solutions to the drug problems in Denmark.

"It is no use for us to keep dealing with the problems as individual cases. A
political decision must be made which provides a broader solution to the problems.

We have to get together across party lines and make the maximum and minimum
penalties the same as in other Nordic countries so that it is not 'cheaper' to

so that it will be possible to provide medical aid to them under a coordinated
system, involving compulsory treatment where needed. In addition, the instruction
in schools must be expanded so that children will come to realize the danger of
drug abuse," Annelise Gotfredssn said.

On the possibilities of the police to put a stop to the traffic in, and use of,
hashish in Christiania, Deputy Commissioner of the Copenhagen Police Ole Norgaard
says: ”We know that practically all of the traffic in hashish in Cepenhagen is
taking place via the pubs in Christiania. They are centers for the illegal
traffic in hashish, and we may legally close all of the pubs in Christiania.

but the next day they will be open again, and the traffic in hashish will continue
to the same extent as hitherto.”

One of the reasons why it is possible legally to close the pubs in Christiania
is that none of them has a license to deal in liquor or foodstuffs.

The Copenhagen licensing authorities now seek to convince the 'owners' of the
pubs that the absence of such a license is necessary for operating a pub in Den-
mark. "It does not make sense that there is an enclave of pubs in Copenhagen
which are able to serve their customers over the counter without having to make

the same payments to the state as others. Unfortunately. they have not been
approved by the food control authorities and do not possess licenses," Tage Klausen
of the licensing authorities states.

7262 '
050: 5300/2201
cusm, POLICE TO nonm 30mm commie mum Dams
Copenhagen BERLDBSKE mm in Danish 22 rob 82 p 3
[Article by Bent an: Andersen]

[Text] The border controls against the steadily increasing flow of drugs entering
Denmark illegally will now be tightened in a cooperation between the police and.
the customs authorities.

”We have for many years endeavored to limit the amounts of drugs entering Denmark
via the airports and especially via Kastrup. But the experience from our southern
neighbors shows that narcotics are being smuggled into the country to an ever in-
creasing degree via highways and across the borders. That is why we are now on-
deavoring-—to the extent it is legally possible—to stop the snuggling into the
country of drugs concealed in vehicles," says Bent Hansen, detective superintendent
of the Copenhagen Narcotics Police Department.

Longer Waiting Time at Border

The tightened border controls-«especially at the borders to the south—are already
in force, and people traveling on hidiwegs will have to put up with longer waiting
periods at the border crossings.

The controls will mainly concern the borders from Vest and East Germany. "We have
been informed. for example from West Gemny, that a steadily increasing number of
vehicles have been seized, especially with heroin. And we have the feeling that
nearly all heroin and other drugs produced or processed in the Middle East are
snuggled into the country via the highways.” says Bent Hansen.

The control will be undertaken by the local police in close cooperation with the
customs authorities and their well-trained dogs for shifting out caches of narcot-
ics.

7262
cso: 5300/2201

81
BRIEFS

CHRISTINA DRUG SEIZURE STATISTICS—Defense Minister Poul Bogaard does not find
it particularly alarming that 1 million boner worth of hashish is being traded
every day at Christiania. In a reply to Agnete Iausten of the Conservative Party,
Poul Sogsard says that the traffic in hashish in the free city does not at all
come up to the quantities of harder drugs traded in other parts of Copenhagen.
According to the latest report from the police, which was presented to the Folks-
ting by Poul Segaard himself during the question time of the i‘olketing yesterday.
the following quantities were seized in Christiana last year: l+5.5 kgs. of
bashish, 1.8 grams of heroin. 7.7 grams of opium, 3 kge. of marijuana. and 7.3
grams of amphetamines. Poul Sogaard says that these figures give no reason to
focus specially on the drug traffic in Christiania. Several non-socialist politi-
cians are extremely dissatisfied with that position. Agnete Iausten, Conservative
Party, thus calls the minister of defense arrogant and accuses him of playing down
the problems in Christiania. In March, the Folketing will have its big discussion
on the future of the free city. Several non-socialist members referred to it as'a
nere charm offensive' in that the inhabitants of Christiania yesterday paid an
especially large amount to the state for electricity and water. [Text] [Copenhagen
mums TIDENDE in Danish 18 tab 82 p 1] 7262

080: 5300/ 2201

82
HBROIN LABORATORY IN PALERMO 8801' m
Palermo mom DI SICILIA in Italian 12 Feb 82 pp 1, 2, 7
[Article by Francesco La Licata]

[Text] Palermo-0n Hessina Marine Road. before the unseeing eyes of thousands
of persons who, every day. travel on this major Palermo highway. could be
found the biggest laboratory for heroin production ever seen in Sicily and
perhaps even in Italy. It was camouflaged inside a villa under construction.
As of yesterday morning. it is no longer in operation: federal police of the
Palermo Group took steps to put a stop to the production cycle. involving hun-
dreds of kilograms of drugs. A lucky stroke? The result of complicated and
thorough investigation? The answer is not known. In any case. it is certain
that the police has struck another serious blow to the mafia criminals who, for
sane time. had transformed Palermo into the biggest center for the production
and export of heroin. An initial estimate of the laboratory's production
capacity--a nonofficial estimate not made by expertsnbased on the stills
found at the Messina Marine Road 'den,' indicates that quintals of heroin
were leaving the premises. liowever. to have a more realistic picture of the
magnitude of this operation, it will be necessary to await the arrival of the
615 (Scientific Investigation Group) experts frat Rate.

The investigators did not want to release any official statement to members of
the press prematurely and. in additim, the press has been kept away from the
laboratory.

Not until evening was a short visit permitted. limited to the rows mere the
police had found equipment for distilling the heroin. hundreds of kilograms of
morphine-base material and a plastic bag containing a white crystalline sub-
stance which could be the drug already refined. The bag contained more than
30 kg: if it should prove to be heroin. the scone-1c loss suffered by the
mob would reach a figure to make me dizzy. Not to mention the ”dosage“ the
raid will cause as a result ofthe investigatim itself. there is a mole
series of confirmations and connections the investigators will get from the
suspects.
8h
cerned with the mafia and drugs on Messing: Marine bad, at Sperme: agents of
the criminal police, mobile units and the federal narmtics squad. And it is

(33’1me m.

I [If 4 --

 

.4

.4 I]
W

mg;

g
NW
Key: 1. Morphine base naterial in drying stage
2. Chemical treatsent in pessure cooker
3. Distilling and drying equip-ant
4. Bags of soda and other dialical products
5. Questionable bag of pure heroin

It is also paid that six or eight persons are still being held: they might be
the workmen mo were in the villa under cmstruction when the police broke in.
Absolute retioence at this aspect of the investigation leads one to think that
the investigatim is far frcn closed and that, in the next few hours, the inves-
tigators night obtain other noteworthy results.

The federal police arrived at the villa on Messina Marine Road at ahout 1030
hours. They stopped at an AGIP filling station and then proceeded toward the

entrance to the villa mich is just in front of the filling station and is null-
bered 504.

Even hefore the officers set foot m the path leading to the villa, a man was
seen fleeing as fast as he could go. leaping over the low walls surrounding the
neighboring villas. It seems that, until a scent before, he had been wearing
white overalls; perhaps he was the 'dIesist' who was in charge of the laboratory.
The teen succeeded in escaping. A wot-an claims to have seen his juap into a has.
It is not known whether others nanaged to escape or, if at the tine of the raid,
the owners of the villa were present. Scraps of uneaten food and a student's
notebook were found on the ground floor of the building.

In view of the way in illich the raid was carried out, it appears that the police
treeselves did not have any clear idea as to what was going a: at the Hessina
Marine Road house. Perhaps the police expected to find only the hideout of
ease iaportant fugitive fral justice. This theory would seen to be confirmed
in what was to be the "writeup’ of this notorious raid. It scene that agents
of the I'Piazza Verdi“ Canpany had been following the trail of an autonobile
seen several times on Messina Marine bad and in which one of the passengers
was a eajor figure of the Corso dei Mine sob, perhaps the "oapo"-- nanely,
Pietro Vernengo. Therefore, it is possible that, yesterday morning, the police
wanted to pay Don Pietro a "surprise visit." And, instead, they made a 'big
strike,“ all enclosed in three roas bordering upal an innocent-looking building
with an innocuous facade in Mediterranean and flamboyant style.

The laboratory was divided into three areas: the first row where morphine-
base material was spread out on jute sacks to dry: the seam! with pressure
cookers for boiling the morphine: and the third with furnaces and stills for
the final processing stage. The police found the equipaent still "want."
Therefore, the laboratory work was in full swing.

It was also ascertained that the villa. not yet finished (in fact, the fraing
and flooring were still completely lacking) , was built not more than 4 months

ago. Consequently. the laboratory itself is a 'fresh" installation. Perhaps
this was its first production cycle.

This detail leads the police and federal agents to think the laboratory belongs
to the Corso dei Hille mafia group, the clan which is cmsidered "winning" in
the war along the mafia mobs. The investigators believe this "theory' is cm-
fimed by the fact that they have found members of that clan to bethe owners of
the raided property.

In pursuing the investigations the federal police will be assisted by the mobile

squad and the criminal police. The first link was forged with the raid carried
out at Villagrazia in October. Other inportant developents are planned.

85 68
C80: 5300/2199

88
POLICE, CUSTOMS REPORT DECLINE IN HASHISK SBIZURES
Stockholm DAGENS NYHBTER in Swedish 10 Feb 82 p 12
[Article: "Hashish Seizures Drop Dramatically“)

[Text] Hashish seizures by narcotics police have decreased dramatically
for the second year in a row.

Reinforced by 56 new surveillance officers and inspectors, narcotics police
confiscated only half as much hashish last year as in 1980. The decrease
is almost 60 percent compared to 1979, from ‘56 kg to 193 kg, despite twice
as many arrests as in 1981.

For many years, when large seizures were made, police and customs officials
indicated that they confiscated 5 to 10 percent of the total quantity
entering the country.

Thus, contrary to popular belief, hashish consumption has been cut in half
since 1979.

Now that confiscations are smaller, however, the police have chosen the other
possible interpretation of the figures: despite annual reinforcements,
police are even more ineffective in tracking down hashieh.

"There is no connection between the figures and decreased consumption,"
detective superintendent Hugo Nyberg, chief of the narcotics squad of the
National Criminal Police, said.

"Smugglers have become much more clever. There is also less opium, cocaine,
and morphine in police laboratories. Seizures yielded only several hecto-
grams of cocaine, compared to 2 kilograms in 1979. It seems that opium and
morphine substances are becoming just as exclusive as mcscaline and LSD,
police statistics indicate. A total of 22 kg amphetamines was found, which
has been a normal amount over the past 3 or 6 years."

In the case of heroin. police exceeded all previous figures. The 8 kg confi-
scated this year is as much as during the past 4 years combined.
Figures frol the Custons Office are similar. In Trellebor; only a fraction
of the hashish confiscated in 1980 was found. In Hal-o the result was less

hashish and considerably fewer amphetamines.

Overall, hashish confiscations by custons officials dropped fron 366 kg to
255 kg. Amphetamine seizures were less than half the previous year.

9336
030: 5300/2189
STUDY REGISTERS CONTINUED RASHISE USE DECLINE BY PUPILS
Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 12 Feb 82 p 21

[Article by Borje Karlsson]

[Excerpts] "School children in Stockholm smoke less, drink less, snort
less. and take less snuff, and in any case use no more hashish than previ-

ously."

This is how chief school physician Lars Cernerud sum-arized a recent report
on the use of tobacco, alcohol, and drugs by pupils.

At one time or another 22.6 percent of the girls and 21.6 percent of the
boys have used hashish. This is an increase by several percent over 1978,
but a slight decrease compared with the 1975 figures.

Officials at the Stockholm Board of Education believe that the report is
accurate. The study was made in April last year, but only now the extensive
material has been processed and compiled. All pupils in Stockholm schools
in grades 9 (15 year olds) and 6 (13 year olds) participated. Few pupils
failed to answer. About 5,500 15 year olds and about 4,200 13 year olds

responded (anonymously, of course).

Hashish smoking among 13 year olds has decreased since 1972. Now only
1 percent of the boys and 1.5 percent of the girls have used hashish at

least once.

"Hashish smoking among 15 year olds is no more widespread than previously,"
Lars Cernsrud said. Nevertheless, last spring we had a "run" on hashish,
according to unanimous reports from police and social workers.

"It seems, instead, to be the adults that have increased their hashish abuse,"
Cernerud continued. Drug users in "three—piece suits" have become more and

more common, according to police.

91
More Adults with Liberal Hashish Attitudes

"This is a serious matter, of course. If the older generation adopts a
liberal attitude toward hashish, use among young people soon will increase
again."

"Abuse of other drugs by young people is extremely rare." Cernerud said.
Only fractions of a percent of all pupils are involved.

The study shows, however, that 190 pupils in grade 9 have tried LSD, opium,
heroin, amphetamines. or other types of hard drugs. Ten pupils in grade 6
had experimented with these drugs.

"It is questionable whether narcotics were involved in each case," said
Hakan Serden, who compiled the report. "It could have been a tranquilirer
or pain killer that looked like amphetamines."

Serden does not wish to nake light of the matter. however.

"There may be genuine drug addicts among 15 year olda and we know that in
each class in grade 9 there is an average of one or two pupils who smoke
hashiah. That is bad enough.

9336
CSO: 5300/2189

92
BRIEFS

ENGLISHMAN EXPBLLBD FOR DRUGS CRIH2-A 26 year old Englishman, arrested in
his absence on suspicion of felony drug-related crimes, was flown: on Monday
from London by way of Arlanda to Visby. This was the first time England
extradited a suspected criminal to Sweden. The English-an, who was involved
in one of the largest drug deals ever made in Sweden, is suspected of
smuggling heroin worth millions of hronot to the Swedish drug market. The
Englishman, along with seven other suspects, is under arrest in Viaby.
Three others are in Kronoberg Prison in Stockholm and it is expected that
10 others will be apprehended. The Englishman who was extradited was a
close accomplice to a fellow countryman of the same age who was found just
over a month ago murdered in a house in Amsterdam. According to police,
they had smuggled heroin, cocaine, and hashish valued at over 10 million
kronor to Sweden. It is expected that two other Englishmen suspected of
participating in the gang's activities will be extradited to Sweden in a

week or so. [Text] [Stockholm DAGENS NYHBTKR in Swedish 10 Feb 82 p 12]
9336

SUCCESSFUL RAIDS AGAINST PUSHEnSc-The police campaign against street sales
of drugs last fall was extrenely successful. This was indicated by figures
compiled by the National Police Board. In November 1981 the number of drug-
related cases was 45 percent higher than in November 1980 and the number of
arrests increased 85 percent. Amphetamine confiscations increased in
November by 152 percent, while cannabis seizures increased dramatically
early in the campaign. but later decreased. During the nonth-long campaigns,
initiated at different times in the various provinces. personnel normally
involved in other cases was used to combat street sales of drugs. A maxi-um
of 661 policemen were used, which means an increase of 85 percent over the
same month in 1980. [Text] [Stockholn SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish

5 Feb 82 p 3] 9336

050: 5300/2189

93
mm 0? DRUG ”DBL”, 83120338. DEATHS IN 1981
Zurich mm m mum in Got-In 3 Feb 82 p 21
[Article: "Victims of Drug Conountion number 107 in 1981"] .

[Text] In 1981 the water of drug victins in Switzerland reached a new high point.
According to statistics published on Monday by the Federal Prosecutor's Office
107 people died as a result of drug msmtion. At the sons tine, there was
also a significant increase in the nutter of charges (9.096 in contrast to 8.181
in 1980) and judgnsnts (6,460 in contrast to 5,581). In 1979 the nulhor of drug
deaths rose to 102. then declined in 1980 to 88. Now it has once again clearly
started to rise; this is prinsrily becasue at present s lot is on the narkst
(especially heroin). Sons 19.6 kg (16.9) of heroin were seized, as were 579.2 kg
(673.6) of cannabis. 15.1 kg (20.1) of hashish oil. 11.0 kg (15.0) of cocaine,

15 g (800 g) of asphotaninos and 7.388 (3 .698) LSD tablets. Burglaries in
physiciane' offices and pharmacies nulberod 251% (249).

Large Supply of Heroin

Last year's increase in drug victils is nainly due to a larger supply of heroin on
the Swiss nerket. According to Walter Sibold of the federal Prosecutor's Office
the "stuff" cones not on1y from tho Middle asst. but also increasingly from the
"Golden Triangle" (Burns/Laos/Ihailand). After several poor years there was a
very good harvest there in 1981. The drugs. which for the most part are prepared
in the vicinity of the site of origin. as Sibold went on to explain. nornolly are
brought into Mturland by individuals in the so-callod ”ant traffic"-in part
directly. in part via various European cities such as Milan and Anstordos.

Va1ter Sibold, director of the Central Police Section in the Federal Prosecutor's
Office. and Jean-Pierre Bortschingor. director of the Pharuacy Section in the
Federal Office for Public Health and secretary of the Federal Narcotics Co-ission,
reported in an interview with 80A (Swiss Dispatch Agency) that the lost inportont
turntable for illegal heroin trade in Europe today is Milan. Also, the illegal
drug trade in Switzerland is primarily supplied in the North Italian trade center.
Other transfer sites are Frankfurt. Berlin. Munich, Paris and now once again.
Amsterdam. For the Swiss drug scone Hilan is oxtronoly attractive because of the
1srge currency difference between the Mes franc and the Italian lire and because
there is an excess of heroin there which results in low prices. The street price
in Milan is at least one-third less than in Svitsorland.

9h
The Swiss heroin narket is considered to be "very profitable" which guarantees
good profits for dealers from Switzerland and abroad. Most are themselves addict-
ed. A heroin addict Illlt constantly "hook" new pccple in order to satisfy his
addiction. Even if the illegal heroin market in Switzerland is considered to be
financially profitable, in the view of the Federal Prosecutor's Office there should
be no fear that therefore the large gangs might now begin to get organized in
Switzerland. Our Iarket seems to be too null for that.

Cocaine "Just at the Beginning?"

In addition to heroin. today primarily cocaine and hashish are causing the drug
experts headaches. In contrast to the Scandinavian countries, LSD no longer plays
an important role with us. The cocaine market is established in Switzerland. yet
not to the same degree as for heroin. Cocaine comes exclusively from countries

in South America. According to the experts' opinion, we are at the very beginning
of its distribution. Its forward progress is slowed by the excessively large
heroin supply and by its relatively high price. Cocaine is widely consumed as a
substitute for heroin, one speaks of "polyvalent consumption." Moreover, cocaine
can also be found in groups that are part of the upper middle class. among artists,
journalists and the like.

Hashish Experience by Young People

The nain suppliers of hashish are the countries north of the Sahara and more
recently south of the Sahara, in addition it is also brought in from Lebanon,
Pakistan and Afghanistan. ”Private plantations" in Switzerland also play a role.
Bashish is very widespread in Switzerland. The police accord hashish a "pacemaking
function" as an entry drug. It is also being consumed primarily by young people

at increasingly younger ages. By age 16 half the young people questioned have had
experiences with drugs.

Escaping to Smaller Villages

The drug flood cannot be combatted in the country alone: cooperation with the
responsible police agencies in neighboring countries is supposed to have "become
a part of the action." Interpol is responsible for international cosbatting of
drugs; approximately one-third of all reports from the Interpol radio network have
to do with drug investigation. In all of Switzerland, at the federal, canton and
municipal police offices, in the past 8 years approximately 600 officials (of a
total approximating 12,000) have been trained in drug control and have been put
into service. Their level of training is considered good; although more might be
done (personnel freeze), an efficient operation is definitely possible.

The strategy of the police against the flood of drugs is concentrated on constantly
confusing the scene so that at all times people have to reckon with the possibility
of a check. Of course, this procedure can only be practiced in the large cities.
Because drug dealers and addicts elude these controls.in the cities, recently the
habit shifted to the other densely populated col-unities and the smaller villages.

Efforts Toward Prevention

In the area of preventive measures informtion ranks in first place. In August

95
1979 a first large-scale information campaign agath drugs was launched. For
exalple, numerous slide and sound shows were created for the schools. A repeat

of a national drug campaign is conceivable because of the publication of a conte-
hensive "Drug Report" (stipulated by the National Council). If asked about the
effect of such informational efforts, it is claimed that police agencies have since
ascertained a "small change in consciousness" among young people. Today it is no
longer unconditionally in good taste to have sacked a "joint."

Information work, just as the care and treatment of drug addicts. in the business
of the cantons. At the federal level coordination of these efforts is the focal
point. To do this. at the Pads 11 Office for Public Health. within the meaning

of a ”service operation" for the cantons, a "Coordination and Intonation Office
for Drug Questions" was established. Today. in every canton and all larger cities
there are special counselling centers. The level of development of such facilities
~name1y in large centsrs--is characterized as good.

Lack of Treatment Places

A real gap exists, on the other hand, in respect to treatment centers. Throughout
Switzerland the nuﬂaer of heroin addicts is quoted at 5.000 to 13,000. Hovever,
there are only 350 treatment places. They are also expensive: If one wanted to
create therapy places for all drug addicts, this would cost—as counted in 1975
«250 million Swiss francs. The operation of such sites which is extremely
personnel- and thus cost-intensive, is never included in these figures.

An additional handicap in caring for drug addicts is a persistent argument among
experts: no method of care has become established internationally, and even the
cantons are not in agreement as to what the situation is for enswle. with

methadone treat-ant: in 11 cantons it is rejected as prusly treatment of symptom
and as an unsuitable agent for therapy with drug addicts.

12126
CSO: 5300/2163
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040044-4

POLICE CHARGED WITH SUPPLYING DRUGS ‘10 PUSHIR
London m DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 2 P01! 82 p 3
[Article by Stanley Goldsmith]

[Text]

A DRUG pusher was supplied with heroin."
cocaine and-LSD by police so that theyI
could arrest his buyers and win convictions
against-them, it‘ was claimed in court yester-'
day. ; ' _ - . .
_ On one ocasion minnooentyoungmotgood
character was dried bee-nee the pusher slipped anna-
bls into his hand while police ,ngng said Mr.
Benn Wm. QC la" the

Crown - . declare alumni! w’
W . ym‘»u:u:?nm
o linemen were leaner-eat then
ellexedtrhevenedeﬁnb- Hammad-god
mmiel sums of mi? Manual-mannered
from drugs cold 5 m. wwmuammnm
”.33.. mm mm? mm
.1 to” all eta e! the In
Dimere we: paid {or hle coated” au'lubmbm
mkﬂt'am“““g thedrupteodermm
we:
pedt‘ltoetlesmetetepreag “mam muted " 70“
"without let or hindrance ”Wm“ ll
Welsh. three; "a“, unable (mu mm
DeL-lup “M :3: Q Mn” ‘5. aﬁ‘ w
31"” lhl'l. m' an.“ m "" M
wﬂm u 1!ch .m 1. m
"a,“ “MRWMHN
mﬂg‘heﬁmcﬁ mgmgnm
““9 “""m‘mﬁ‘ dhﬁmdoentogetue-
“.2: iuummwm' w-mmwa
- 3:0! the. am No In WW Mn"
welelmf' 1'. Mdmmweeuae-
N. m..." .m". ‘12“: to W rogue up" a
cubic «mung-elm. %. ”a" ”mullmh
9?

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600040044-4

—‘-___ _‘__._,-‘ A‘s-ﬂ...

-_._._._- __--_._ 4

a..- L‘ -u-_o_n

BRIEFS

CLERIC'S Roars BID DRUGS—A deacon in the Free Catholic Church 0-1de cocaine
into Britain under his clerical robes, which included a do; collar, and had an
airline provide s wheelchair for his so he could be wheeled through Customs at
lleethraw. loves Crown Court heard yuterday. willie. Clugpton Thonpaon. 79,
fomerly of Cloudesley Road, St Leonards. and now living in an old people's hole
admitted two charges of conspiring-to illport drugs from South Anrica. lie wee
given a two-year suspended prison sentence coupled with a supervision order.
[Text] [London m DAILY puma in maliah 2 hb 82 p 3]

080: 5320/ 20 END

99