APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROPoz-OOOBOR0001000400204
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040028-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY

Jl'w: L/8392

11 April 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS nnues
(Fouo 16/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVIG

FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040028-8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in pcrentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGNT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUC. HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOPFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mas 1/339
11 April 1

IRMSLATIDNS (ll NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 16/79)
Commas

MIA
AUSTRALIA

Vest Anstrnlisn Lshor Psrty Dshstss Drug Policy
(m “ST ”mm. 9. 21 'Gb 79)soossossossossssssssso

usrihusns unlintion mentioned
Decision ‘l'erlsd 'lll-Oonceived'. lditorisl
Bvidsnce Aasinst lisrihnsns Cited. Editorisl

Australian Officisln Discuss Prescription Safegusrdn
(Vsriou sources. 22. 28 Feb 79)........................

Report to loysl Co-ission
Color (bdin; Plsnnsd

Intelligence. Nsrcotics Agencies To Get Hider Powers
(Melbourns Oursess Servics. 8 hr 79)..................

Ststistics on Drug the in Austrslis Tor-st! Insdeqnsts
(m COURIER NAIL. 21 Feb 79)...........................

Ten Appssr Before Irishsne Insistrsts on Drug Chsrgss
(TIE comm HAIL. 23 Peb 79)...........................

No Perth llsn Jsiled for mu; Rsid on Bospitsl
(1118 "£81 ABSI'RALIAN. 9 no 79).........................

Perth's lisjor Dru; Center in Need of Funds
(1'33 "281' AUSTRALIA”. 21 Feb 79)........................

Irish
)Iorphins Addict Sentenced
lisrihusns Psrn Ilsidsd
Heroin 'l‘rsfficker Ssntsnced
M OFFICIAL USE OIL!

comma (Continued)

Heroin Suspect Killed
Sydney Drug Alma Lettuce
Sniffer Boga Proposed
Eaton Suapect Charged
Drug Defendant tuning
lhrflnana (intimation nen

"MARIA

Narcotfca Arreeta. nun. Senora Reported
(Venom aourcee, varfona datea).......................

Auatralian Geta Life Sentence
Heron: 1n Luggage

Drug Seizurae by Onto-a
Addicta Raepomme for Thefta

PEILIPPIﬂBS

Hercoa Detenfned ‘ro Sta-p Out Drug Aimee
(m, 13 mt 79)....D0.0.00.00...OOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOO.

Briefa
Morphine Seizure

THAILAND

Seven Arrested ﬁfth Morphtne. Heroin
(W‘ ”st. 20 hr 79)....l0000000000000000000000000

Ger-en. Aeerican Arreatec on Drug Poaaeeeion
(“m N”, 19 m: 79)....OOOODO\OOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOO

Briefa
Heoa Arrested

VIEW”!

0

Dealora in Foreign Exchange. Gold and 0p!»- Apprehended
(m w. 1‘ "b 79)...000.0.0.00...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

LATIN ”ERICA

13
13
13
16
16
16

15

18

19

20

22
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

comm; (Contimod)

BRAZIL

llapnrtase on Arreat of Drug kaiiickin; kin; lichen in
Lablon

(Variona aourcu. variona data)......................

four unborn Arreated

Actora Inlicated
Arraiguont in Crininal Court
Arraat of Carlinhoa

roar Dru; hattickara

ho Dru; Trafiiekara

COMM

Govern-ant Oppoeed to legalizing line of larihsana
(mm “ago. “ckul. 15 ht 79)....0000000‘00000000

Any Protaata High Coat of Antidru; Canaan
(“den haul sum, 19 hr 79)...aeooaeoeeeaeoaooooo

Brief.

lhrihnana horned
Trafiiekera' Arreat

moo

UN llaetin; Citaa Ionian Propane in Antidm Battle
(n mm. 27 ’“ 7’)QOIOOIOOOOQOO00.000.000.00.

Coceine ha Cuetmla Seized in llerida
(a. 80!. DB ml“. 3 “If 79)....aaooaeoooooeoooaeoeao

Cocaine Snuggle“ Caught at mm Airport
(LA V02 DE LA mm. 3 lint 79)....................

PR! Sponaora 2&0 Antidruge Clinics
(m Leonor lender (oboe; moron DE 31. MA.

1 at 79)..eaaaaanae.aoaeaeeoaaeaaeoaaaooaaaaoaeooooa

International Trafficking Ring Broken Up
(mmlo‘. 6mt 79)..O'COOOUOOOJOOOOOOOOOOIOIOOOOOO

Contuala Springboard for Cruse. by Joae Calderon
Salazar
International hafficknra Seized, by Rafael Medina

- c -
FOR OFFICIAL 08! ML!

26

35

36

37
37

‘0

£1

£3

47
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm-rs (Continued)

Trefficker'e Hidoe Pound Holding Druse for lhrketim
(BL mmnuo. 1 mt 79)....COOOOIOIOOOIOOO‘OOOOOIOO

need of Initiating kin; Arreeted. Convicted
(“I W. 27 13b. 2 n: 79)...OOOOOUIOOOOOOOOOUOQOO

'3]. Lupe' Ceptured
‘l‘reiiicker Jailed

Treffickere Kill Penny in Vendette
(Lorena Die: Garcia; mam. km 79)...........

Heroin Treffickin Ring Ceptnred in Sineloe _
(31. 501. D3 8““. 25 "b 79)eoeeoooeeeoeoeoeeeeooee

lieroin. Hermann Tuttiekere muted
(u voz ”tumm’ 21 ’.b 79)....000000010000000

Grovere' Rueone for Producing Prue Explained
(BL MARIO 03 Pm ms. 26 Feb 79).............

Brick
Antidrug Celpein Reporte
Invite in Verioue Stetee
PJl' Deetroye Poppy Crope

a Hat Querter Prose Seimee Reported

Cocaine Seized in Tijuene
Porter Petrollen Arreeted

VENEZUELA

FRANCE

Drone Reid Yielde Iour Arreete
(all “elm, 23 1.5 79)..0.0000000000000DOOUOOOOOO'.

mm ”ROPE

Brief:
Drop Seized in Streeboura

ummms

No Indoneeiene Arreeted in mterden
(nu-mu REVIEW. 2 Her 79).

- d -
FOR ORIGIN. US! OIL!

Page

50

52

61

6‘
65
65
65
66

67

69

70
'Oli OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continua)

TURKEY

Narcotics rem Not lo mo. of Pure Heroin
(Tm. 23 "b 7’).OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0...

Reduction Noted 1n 0pm: Poppy Quantum 1n Aryan
“Inn“. 8 HO! 79).ao...oooooooooooooouooooocooooooo

Briefs
Heroin Arrest

POI ORIGIN. US! ONLY
wEJT AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY DEBATES DRUG POLICY
Marihuana Legalization Questioned

Perth THE NEST AUSTRALIAN in English 9 Feb 79 PD 1.“

L'lext] The ALP decision favouring legalisation of Mflhuam “”9
certain to be referred to a special State conference of the party.

lain mnﬁﬁoonweeuuuu’uu autumn
«tuneuhhnwwvuIMUnnm
t“? 1

31
in
i:
;i
if

I;
g:-
E

é

E
__§

“3!:
if;
i
.5

E
:25
g

g
'25
3
3

a“ I M II ult- the.”
“Jrklﬂul'ﬂﬁfﬂgiunn-ueagb-IIIO
shunnnooknht «an ”‘éf'l:
kul‘w'" Jim-lg mu m u-
kh.b tomancldnlﬂh hi
bacon. on urpnunnuuei
at can N

i
5

ii
E3
Egg
3'

£35;
:2
EE‘
EEE

‘§
2

a:
i
2

p-
EEErE:§EriEEEEEE:EE EEEEEEEI 1
gig; Egiggléﬁgfk gggﬂaﬁg 2%”
125?“; ii; 2 2?;

E55 25%;?! 53}

338835;; i: é?!

_ >95: n: :5 2.9.33: 8.. 33-.
:3 o. 3535- 5 .33 o as.
581. :53 8 59523 333:
3838 :3. :8 on. 3 .5335. «a
:5 22813 3 .8: =3 .3 353
8.39332155138236
83¢ :80 36:6 3: ~33 2:9. I.
988 1:6 8 :5 835.55. 3336
2388 32.3.

8o :33 .63 8193 9623.- 1::
p.850. .2. 8083. 2 Sun 8 9-.
38.55:- .» no 3.3 :8: «55. 2
523.935: 638-883 8165.
Boa—3 «a. 26:5. .82 .5: 58 :8.
83358— 33... .

v JIIII'u.4..O.I IL! t. t
AUSTRALIAN OFFICIALS DISCUSS PRESCRIPTION SAPEWARDS

Report to Royal Commission
Brisbane ms COURIER NAIL in English 22 Feb 79 p 10

[Text] A disturbing quantity of drugs was obtained in Australia

each year on forged prescriptions. the Federal drugs Royal Com-
mission was told in Brisbane yesterday.

The Federal Health Department drugs of demons section acting
director (Mr. Conrad Mackenzie) told the pin! or special pre-
scription forms which could solve the problsa.

' m. c. r. K. mum on, as n, a «mu A one: out: In Weno-
QC. lemma: the mm- no number at tannin ern Alumna. Il'lll‘ col-
mlulonn.uud mule salami-muted“. end. mum new
clme Illegal wwlm el «run. The; III-Mano «noun-1 you lot mu
1 amp had data up could «nanny u (am In ol «mam. had met
commas to tumor! that . m mm \mm ., gnu-Inna mnlu. hr-

beu ‘Iulnl whatnot» . ”m, "ft non-calm
05mm on load 9". Will “a e! 0e

art-mom mm each u m locum till can-
at. Jamie all lab certain. “we may.

Color Coding Planned

Canberra THE AUSTRALIAN in English 28 Feb 79 p ll

2.5 "I. “3

[Text] Aummm medical mm 3:? :3 stumﬁ om-

llu en planning a cuckoo-n Mn had bun oonoemed lot

muuuuollmcdommo- mumamummw

“g“ V) “I'll Cm mm 0' (W W

Under lhe plan. mum {at eddlcllve em

to: own ct addlcllen would be -‘

wlnled In dlﬂcrcnl colon or

with mu! nunban.

mu would mm m
mnpclom bung eluted by
drug adowu and malt: ll cool:
or elolen tum one lo

lucked my 0‘ .

080: 5300
IITSHJOIKB. M300?!“ manna 10 081' umln mm
(#081832 holbourne overaeaa aervue in [:3th l2” our 8 liar 19 on

[text] wider pours are to be given to the Auatralian Security intelligence organiaation.
A310, under legislation introduced to rederal Parliaeent today. 0nd» the new act. A810
and the Federal larcotice mreau rill be able to aonitor telephone. tel“. telex
aesoagon and any other for- or omnicatlon. A310 agent: uill aleo be able to open nail.
install and operate listening devicea and carry out aeerohea. All thia (ibein; done)
only on the iooue or a nrrant by the attorney ‘eneral. and the bill I.” he not be
uatiorieo that auch action ie neoeeeary. 'lhe bill also civee A810 aide freed- to
counter aubveraion and terroriee. There will also be a not of appeal for anyone In

in subject to an adverae A810 report. Uhile A810 will be under the direction oi‘ the
attorney general. the ainieter vill have no apeoial ocean to inapeot the organization“
records. and it «ill be up to the director general of A810 to decide \hat infomtion

ie pelted to the covert-ant. Radio Auatralia'e political oorreepondent eaya the bill
follow: in not nopeote the 1911 report of Ir Juatioe hope mo I‘d-00606 an overhaul
of Asm'a povero and function.

cs0: 5300
JTATISTICS 0N DRUG USE IN AUSTRALIA TERIED INADEQUATE

:
.w: -m.mw.wmm “imam Emmy.

“m smmmmm “man: 2.3

“mm mmmwxé.“ .mm WW.me .M.

.. memum
ﬁat I- wwwwﬂm ”35.3mm

 

Brisbane TEE COURIER MAIL in English 21 Feb 79 p 7

LTextJI

_
u
6.1!

5300

630!
TEN APPEAR BEFORE BRISBANE IAGIS‘I‘RATE 0N DRUG CRAROES

Brisbane 1'!!! COURIER HAIL in much 23 Feb 79 p 10

[Excerpts] Seven Ien and three wosen faced a total of 33 drug
charges in the lagistrate’s Court yesterday following drug squad
raids and work by an undercover police-an.

One Ian was jailed for six aonths for having possessed aarihuana
for sale and four other people were reaanded n custody on
heroin charges.

Jailed was Edwin Alfred Plant. 26. laborer. of Ierthyr Street.
New Para.

He pleaded guilty before Ir. Cook. Senior S.I. to charges of hav-
ing possossed aarihuana for the purpose of sale and a utensil for
sacking asrihuana.

Ir. Cook rofused bail for two people who faced eight joint
charges involving heroin.

They are Alan Robert Iarshall. 29. uneaployed painter and doctor.

and Leith Davidson. 25. unesployed bar attendant. both of Char-
lotte Street. Paddington.

They entered no pleas to char es of having sold heroin on six
days since February 13. and th having on Iednesday possessed
heroin for sale and money froa the sale of drugs.

Senior Sergeant Iurdoch said tho police case would be that lar-
shali and Davidson sold a gras of heroin to an undercover police
officer on six separate occasions.

0n Uednesd night. they allegedly sold his another b grass of
heroin for 520.
The couple fled by car when they were approached a short tiae la-
ter and it would be alleged they threw from the car a plastic con-

tainer holding nine grass of heroin. Senior Sergeant Iurdoch said.

hr. Cook rsaanded Marshall and Davidson without bail to harch 28
for hearing.

Hotel Raid

A raid b police at an Annerley hotel led to the appearance of

Anne Lou se Grsnnan. 20. housewife. and Gregory Jaaes Clarke.
26. rigger.

Both entered no pleas to charges of having possessed heroin for
sale. having possessed a set of scales and other aaterial for the

preparation of heroin. and possession of a needle and a syringe
for the adainistration of heroin.

Clarke also was charged with having sold heroin on Usdnesday and
with having possessed aoney from the sale of drugs.

Grennan was charged separately with herein possession.

Senior Sergeant Murdoch said drug squad detectives searched a
room at an Annerley motel and found white powder. scales. foil
paper. a packet of glucodin. and two needles and syringes.

Clarke did not ask for bail and Ir. Cook refused Orennan'e
bail application.

Both were reaandsd in custody to larch 9 for aention.

Hilliaa Henry Plant. 2“. laborer. of Ierthyr Road. New Para. was

fined $250 when he pleaded guilty to having possessed aarihuana
on Usdnesday.

Dereck Michael Brian Savage. 22. salesaan of Locke Street. New

Para. was fined SHOO for aarihuana possession after his arrest
in the raid at Plant's flat.

Another young woaan arrested there was reaanded on $200 self bail
on a charge of having possessed a needle and syringe for heroin.

080: 5300
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040028-6

AUSTRALIA

W0 PERTH HEN JAILD POR DRUG RAID 0" HOSPITAL
Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in “lion 9 Pub 79 p 9
[Excerpt]

680 a

5300

AI-mummuimuuluul‘
MdeuhmwlMuﬂpud
mummnunucumwmvl

mmmummu

nnmm

10

i3:
3;:
:2
E5

5;
o!
§
2

-3
:3;

3
§

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040028-6
Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in English 21 Feb 79 p 5

PERTH'S MAJOR DRUG CENTER IN NEED OF FUNDS
LTcxt]

my am... “.2... £3”. NW
N Wm... m gm 5
mm a“ “mam mwmmmm

 
    

m 2 WWW um. $4...-qu n- mm...

mm
m a in ”my“ a.“

gm: wmmmm mmmmmwmwmﬂm a-“ mmlll a.

 

ll

5300

030:
BRIEFS

uORPﬂINB ADDICT SENTENCED--Iark Richard Dickinson. 23-year-old
unemployed salesaan. of Gloster Street. Subiaco. was sentenced
on 8 February to h years' imprisonment on charges of possessing
and supplying morphine. Dickinson was charged with possession
of 6 grams of morphine and with selling #00 milligrams of it

in Perth in August 1978. The presiding judge said that Dickin-
son had been involved with drugs since 197%. He had been
placed on probation then. but had breached it within a year and
had since been convicted of a wide e of crimes associated
with his drug addiction. The Judge s d that he accepted that
the person to whoa Dickinson sold the morphine was also an ad-
dict. end that Dickinson had bought the morphine in the first
place to satisfy his own addiction and not to make money.

These facts brought the criae into a lower order of gravity.
[Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in English 9 Feb 79 p 23]

MARIHUANA FAR! RAIDBD--Police from Newcastle. Cessnock and
Muswellbrook converged on a fara near the village of Camberwell
north of Singleton on 8 February and found marihuana worth a-
bout $l.3 million. larihuana plants. some more than 2 meters
high. were growing in a 1 hectare plot. police said. lore mar-
ihuana was found n a large machinery shed. soae hanging on
wires stretched across the iron shed. In Singleton Court of
Petty Sessions on 9 February. Paul James Oliver. 28. farmer of
Nadorney. Glennies Creek. via Singleton. his wife Jan. 2%. and
warren Hugh Johns. 23. laborer of warners Bay Road. Charlestown
were each charged with possessing and cultivating Indian hemp.
[Sydney was stuns! uonumo am in English 10 Feb 79 p 1]

HBROIN TRAPPICKER SENTENCED--A drug trafficer who made $2h00
profit in 10 days by selling heroin capsules on the streets of
St. Kilda was sentenced yesterday to s x years' jail. Judge
Read. in the County Court. said James Paul McCrystal was prob-
ably being supplied by some other trafficker. ucCrystal. 28.
of Pentridge prison. pleaded guilty to having trafficked heroin
between Kay 20 and June 2 last year. Judge Read said lcCrystal

12
adaitted to selling 300 capsules in 10 days in St. Kilda. He
sentenced HcCrystal to six years Jail. to serve a miniaun of
five years. He said the sentence was not concurrent with the

one HcCrystal was already serving. [Excerpts] [Melbourne THE
AGE in English 10 Feb 79 p 10]

HEROIN SUSPECT KILLED-~Helbourne--Hore than a dozen people
watched as an alleged drug dealer was gunned down in what po-
lice described as a “straight-out execution“ on an inner Hel-
bourne street yesterday. Victor Frederick Allard. #2. slumped
dead on a footpath outside a block of flats in Fitzroy Street.
St. Hilda. Detective Inspector Brian Ritchie. acting head of
Helbourne's homicide squad. said two men walked up to Allard at
1.15 am yesterday and shot him at point blank range. Police
described him as a known drug dealer and said: “He was owed a
fortune for heroin but in turn owed plenty of money himself.”

[Excerpts] [Sidney was SYDNEY MORNING HERALD in English
10 Feb 79 p 5

SYDNEY DRUG ABUSE LECTURES--The Association of Drug Referral
Centres organised a 12-week series of lectures on drug abuse.
The lectures. which were to begin in Sydney on 27 February.
were designed to familiarize people such as social workers.
welfare workers and industrial psychologists with the reasons
for drug abuse. Scheduled speakers included Prof Ronald Sack-
ville. chairman of the South Australia Royal Commission for
the nonnedical use of drugs; Dr James Rankin. director of the
Division of Drug and Alcoholic Services of the New South Hales
Health Commission: and Dr Alfred IcCoy. a lecturer in modern
Southeast Asian history at the University of New South Hales.
[Sydney THE srnusx annulus HERALD in English 26 Feb 79 p u]
The unemployed can attend the Association of Drug Referral
Centres Ltd's introductory course for voluntary counsellors

at a concessional rate. reports the association's education
officer. Hrs Elvira Adelstsin. The ninimum age for the course
is 18. Anyone wanting more information should contact the
Association of Drug Referral Centres Ltd. Administration and
Education and Traini . 9i Pittwater Road. Hanly. telephone

9?? “632. [Excerpts Sydney THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD in Engo
lish 26 Feb 79 p 11

SNIFFER DDJS PROPOSED-oAustralian Customs inspections and con-
trol branch chief preventive officer (Hr. Ian Poster) told the
Federal Drugs Narcotics Commission narcotic sniffer dogs could
examine vast numbers of packages quickly and tell if drugs
were hidden. He said proposals had been submitted to the Con-
sumer and Business Affairs Hinister (Hr. Fife) to experiment

13
with dogs at airports. State police also had shown interest

in the dogs. SExcerpt] [Brisbane THE COURIER NAIL in English
28 Feb 79 P 8

HEROIN SUSPECT CNARGED--In East Perti Court on 28 February.
ball was set for unemployed man charged with possessing heroin
with intent to sell or supply it and possessing marihuana with
intent to sell or supply it. Bail for Christopher John Plea-
ing. 26. of Abernethy Road. Cloverdale. was set at 16.200.
[Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in English 1 Mar 79 D an

DRUG DEFENDANT NISSING--A young New Zealand man on a charge of
selling heroin failed to turn up for his trial in the Supreme
Court yesterday. Ewen William Rendel (23). an electrician.

of Abbett Street. Scarboroush. had been charged with selling
heroin from a flat in Hastings Street. Scarboroush. over a pe-
riod of months before his arrest in July last year. The crown
prosecutor. Mr M.L. Murray. told the court that Rendel was re-
leased late last November on 310.000 self-bail with a surety of
$2500. No money had to be loeged with the court. Rendel had
to report each day to police and notify them a day in advance
of any change of address. Rendel ceased reporting on February
21 and a police check showed that he had left his address with
his belongings. Nr. Hurray said. [Excerpt] [Perth THE WEST
AUSTRALIAN in English 28 Feb 79 P 28]

MARIHUANA CULTIVATION PLAN--0n 3 March. Alexander Bianchi. 22.
and Murray Ross Kuhnell. 22. both of Stubbs Terrace. Daglieh.
were sentenced to 2.5 years in Jail after having pleaded guilty
to conspiring to grow marihuana by hydroponics. The District
Court in Perth was told that the pair had leased a factory under
a false name and built scaffolding. constructed troughs. and
installed lights and reticulation equip-ent to grow the mari-
huana. They had got the idea when they came to West Australia
from Victoria in 1978 and learned that there was a shortage of
marihuana in Perth. The presiding Judge said that the two had
invested a considerable sum of money to grown marihuana under
artificial light. The project showed detailed planning and a

high degree of criminality. [Perth THE NEST AUSTRALIAN in Eng-
lish 3 Mar 79 p 11]

C80: 5300

16
NARCOTICS ARR-TS, TRIALS. SEIZURES REPORTED
Austrnltan Get. Life Sentence

Kualn Luupur NIH STRAITS TIMES in English 7 Feb 79 p 20

[Text]
Mam.- m — ‘ .;
sons-1mm. nit. mtaﬁgﬂﬁ. Mr ric- I.

w mm. w mm tho
It“! 0mm 0‘ £0 m. tum-hon
nonunion. a. one-wok.
at tho Mu: u convicted 0!
mm In 1.“ 1'1...“ at mm}.

    

15
Hero in In luggage

Kualn hmpur NEH STRAITS TIMES 1n Engllﬂh 7 Feb 79 p 7

[Text]

KUALA LUNPUIJ?

“on”:
ﬂour t—old In

common um um
h'o noon" at

Elana pain- a con-
: autumn!
cl

“WW
its???“ «.3 °3....

.
I'.
I

E

ﬁx.
it
2

§
3:;
‘§

5

i

E;
325
Egg
n

”2’:
«er»,

8
3
E

S
i;
2 i!

5

9553
2535
E25;
3‘:
‘1
é

E.
E%
E3

5
a
E
__£§.
g:

i
5

2

i

"nu-[I-
WEﬂﬂ
cu M I! new a

Inflw.

B?

o

3!
E
iii:

i
E

In.“
Ionl'n

“that
rot-In an
“ion In: MAl?
null: all u «a

Eli

Kuala tamper NEH SUNDAY TIMES in English In Feb 79 p 15

[Excerpts]

A A LU amusem- m
a? in .a....'.‘.. w«.mmmml&wm&u
Dop Amati.” omt- rmmn'uﬂ 0.
4|, no.1 '0“ (our mm-a In “M - .
yaw mu m- . m

3 Wm n- «con-M «ﬁn-w:
“M" ”‘33.: II n In I.
"“00ng mum-Imam”
W" '“‘ ""- amum-m-u m
MIDI!” ”Pu-cal
on anus. ”m “mung”
Guam Dual AI“!
WHOM”

03ml Dr Koo all
Ill- Iu In. mood

won at am. mm‘

16
‘2'” I“! 1315555 5 : [1mg
{25:55 i5? i5 113'! {nifﬁgy‘hr
33:5! 323% 35:55.52: Hi 5:“ m},
“ANGUS DB‘HMIIBD 1’0 31‘“? OUT DRUG ABUSE
0Ui'li621 lionuo use in English 2330 M i} Flor 79 0V

[Tut] Tho prooidont ooin hio aovormont in dotorlinod to ondiooto an; “moo Ind ouod
intomotionai oooporotion osoinot norootioo trorriokim. ‘lho poo-Mont cool-rod tho
Phiiippinon' otond on tho norootioo problol ot I nootinc with )0 doiosotoo to tho M-du
noting of the International Dru; mroroonont Aooooiotion. 'nao doiogotol nodo o com-too!
oou on the prooidont ot Hoiooonon‘ yootordoy. Tho prooioont oxprooood oonfidonoo thot
n11 notions would givo Jupport to tho uorldvido otfort to It.) out drug trottiokins ond
drug nbnoo. Mo «to: On tho port of tho Philippinoo. no ortort Vin ho opox-od in out.
hating the drug Ionooo. Lotor on At tho dm onforoonont oontovonoo. Soiioitor aononl
Katoi no Rondo“ noted-y ooiiod for o worldvido oooporotion noon; tho vor‘n'o am
ontoroon in ondiontins tho on; motion. liondou iuuod tho oon no ho Indrooood tho
uponing at tho N-ooy oonroronoo of tho tntomotionol Dru IMoroonont Anon-Lotion ot tho
exec (Philippine Intomotionoi Convontion contor). Tho oonroronoo in boilu ottondod w
sono 200 loooi ond foroign doiosotoo. Mutations in tho noxt 5 doyo viii moivo niniy

around otrotogioo to to odoptod in counting oyndiootoo onsuod in tho mm: trottin-
im or druo.

080: 5300

18
mam: mamas“ operetivee nde e meant hreekthrouah in the
eneteined cenpeig: epinet e Jolo-heeed illegal drug eyndioete with the
seizure of morphine valued et 150,000 pence. Colonel Bienvenido hlix,
conndins officer of the conetehulery entinercotioe unit, identified the

mpect ee (Alfredo lineal) of Manage city. Colonel Felix eeid the
arrest or the enepect wee effected nfter e nth-long surveillance by e

conetebnhry teen. [Emu Donetic Service in mm ohoo our 7 in: 79 057

030: 5300

19
sum ARRESTED mm mm. anon!
ungkok MK“ POST in mlieh 20 Her 79 p 3 It

[Text] Seven people. including two wonen, were erreeted in e eeriee of
reide in Bengkok Hetropolie which reeulted in the eeieure of 21.06 hiloe
of norphine hloeke end three hethrohee end e towel coeted with Io lo heroin.

Nercotice Suppreeeion police yeeterdey efternoon reided e honee in Soi
Klongten off Sukhu-vit need. The houee wee owned by Preeert alotee-i-
thikul whoee ectivitiee hed heen cloeely wetched by police for eene tine.

Ten norphine hlocke were found in the trunk of e Toyote m eeden
ellegedly belonging to Preeert.

Three othere, Preeert'e wife llipheporn. Hr Pendtoi eee Lin end hie wife.
Hre. mey. who etteqted to eecepe during the police reid were erreeted
for elleged involvement with the drone.

Leter. police picked up the four pereone' reletivee. Prechneh choteee-i-
thikul end hie wife, Henide free: their houee in Soi Cheroenjei. eff Soi

Ekenei.

Another eight hlocke of norphine end three hethrohee end e towel coeted
with Ne le heroin were found hidden in e euitceee in e roan of their

home .

The elleged druge courier, identified ee Boonee Prone-nu. e reeident
of ﬂee Sei Dieuict of Chieng llei Province. wee erreeted following e
reid on hie rented hovee in Soi Ina-itr off Chen Ioed. were he eteyed

while in Bengkok.

The eeven pereone initielly denied chergee of poeeeeein; norphine end
heroin with intent to eell.

They heve been hended over to the Orine Suppreeeion police for further
detention end queetioning.

20
The noun suspect. vtth the «nod nor-phlo- nd heroin at the lone.
Nucottcu Suppression Centre.

no. man lumen mm in mum 20 lb: 79 p 1 OK

030

5300

21
arm, mum mm!) on onus mama
lauhok man post in run-n 19 har 79 p 1 It

[Text] No Gar-m vara arraatad at Don luau airport dulla a harlcan
glrl and hat That baytrlaod can hold in Chad lord Saturday night on
char.“ of drama pouaaalon.

The two Gar-Ina. Illaa Patrlcla Patra vapor. 21. and Cal-hard Mar, 26,
ware hold ulth 130 an of cooked oph- aa thay vara bout to board a
flight for Frankfurt.

Tha harotn vaa (and in tha hoota torn by tha pair and to tha Ian’r
handbag. According to Ouatoar officiala both aald they var. addlcta

and had attqtad to anal. tha druga (or thatr m cmtlm.

the Andean girl. Mu lam lobarta. 19, ad har 1hal hoyfrlnd. Pradlth
Choovou, vara hald la a raataurant and charged with poaaaaam harola

for thalr on conawtlan.

Police (and two tubaa of Ito. lo hatch and a ayrluga la tha drl‘a poraa.

They rald they wra addicta and la ‘lhatland on vacatton fra- atudlaa at
an miner“; collage in an human unlvaralty.

680: 5300

22
I!!!"

mos Autumn-own: "Alumnae yutuday urn-cod that tho hilltribu-
In and «ind about hall a kilo of lo. 6 high-3nd. hot-oil: in a houu
aid in Hum Matrict. no three oucpocto, idntiiiod u an no (lain
no Ibo (7!). am he u. (an; (M) and dam N on In; (10). van
initially elm-cod vith mooning brain with intact to all. m drug
was found hiddcn in tho toilot and several qty till: cm. All than

output. 9mm guilty during interrogation, polico “portal. hut)
1W max roar in mm» l6 m 19 p 3 u]

C80: 5300
“ultimatum mmmomm
mxmcmumnnbnn
[Ion ooh-n tap-ma. “mu wow-J

[MjmmMmmommun-m hummus-moat
tob'pld.‘ 'WqumpmHuy.mmm n.
Mummu.m¢un.amnm. In
mum‘otmmmmmmommummoy.
www.momuommum£mmmmmm
“Mummpnmy.

mammxmmmwmmmmmu"
“ammusmm.nua.smotwm.m

MIMhounmuu-motu
mam-cohooomumm.

mum-utm.mm.mmmmwwm
mu. mmunmmmupu.mm.umm.
mmumumzmwpu-hmm.un

NIHWWW‘UM.

5616
“.3209

26
”I!"

owe mnxcxm Alums-nu Crun. 26 ﬂer~8¢von foreign sirle heve
been errooted end 2.5 kilogram of coceine hue eeired during e police
operation in tho ll Peri neighborhood of thie city. The nercotice

deport-ant roported the: three ere Mericene end (our ere Puerto licene

but did not reluoee their n-ee. [Le Per rmncu in Spenieh 17 her 79
p 2 "I

080: 5300

25
REPORTAGR 0N ARREST 0? DRUG TRAIIICRIRG RING MEMBERS IN LEILON
Four Heebore Arreetod
Rio de Jeneiro JORNAL DO IRASIL in Portugueee 3 Feb 79 p 22

[Text] Loot night at 77 Rue Artur Araripe, aparteent 302. in Leblon. the
police aeizod 250 graoo of cocaine and a kilo of coepreeaod earihuana free
drug treffickoro Jair Borgoa do Olivorira and Doniee Correie Pinto. both
were arroated together with lone dee Rovoe lerboea and Itecir Paini. a
lawyer charged with being the diotributor of the drugo.

The police were in the apertnent for 6 houre eating the arrest of the

four addicta end taping eeveral telephone cello (roe people inquiring about
the price of the drugo. A revolver wee oeired and eovoral agendao contain-

ing the naeoo of theater and televiaion actore. all addicto. Carlee Gon-
calves Barbooa. the hueband of lone and eleo a neebor of the ring. eanagod
to flee.

Actoro Inplicated
Seo Paulo 0 ESTADO DE 3A0 PAULO in Portugueee 6 Rob 79 p'62

[Report iron ita bureau in Rio]

[Text] "aria bothania. Caetano Veloeo and hie wife Dede. Gal Coate.
Claudio Rerzo. Daniel Pilho. Gracinhe Note and a peroon known at Edy (who
eight be the brother or eiotor of Roee do Fri-o. the eodel) ere aoee of
the nonee of ectore found in an eddreeo book belonging to a ring of
cocaine traffickere broken up by the Rio police in the early norning houra
yesterday. The lawyer Itacyr Paini waa eleo a eeebor of the band and wao
arroatod with the other three.

The firet tine the lawyer'e naeo cane up wae during the ieprieonnent of
the actreee Scarlet Moon Chevalier. A check node out to ltacyr Reini

one found in her handbag. Since then in aleoat every arroet of drug
traffickere, the none of the lawyer has appeared on a lieiaon element.

26
Itnryr Vaini wee finelly erreeted in the early morning houre yeeterdey
when pnlice tron the Nnrcotice Squad. efter receiving e cowpleint reveel-
ing deteile concerning the drug treffic, circled end entered en eperteent
in Gevee where they erreeted Jeir lorgee de Oliveire end hie conpenion
Deniee Correie Pinto end eeieed 250 green of coceine end e kilo of con-
preeeed nerihuene plue e .38 celiber revolver.

The police then went to the epertnent of the lawyer ltecyr !eini in Cope-
cebene. end erreeted the lewyer end lone dee Nevee lerboee. eleo e neeber
of the ring. In their eeerch of the eperteent the police found en eddi-
tionel 50 grene of coceine reedy for eele. cliente "were treneecting the
purcheee of the nercotic" by telephone end the police. efter deciding to
lieten in. ended up erreeting eddicte Solon Jeci end Jorge Peulo. They
eleo tepid e convereetion with Grecinha note.

Heuro D'Avile. who went to the epertnent to buy druge. wee erreeted leter.
Cerloe Concelvee Derboee. the huebend of lone. eeneged to get ewey before
the police could cetch hin. The Rio police proeiee to inveetigete eech
of the neeee in the eddreee book belonging to the treiiicere.

Arreigneent in Criminel Court
Rio de Jeneiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portugueee 8 Feb 79 p 20

[Text] Sergio Coveliere Pilho. judge of the 23 crininel juriediction.
yeeterdey heerd e coepleint [roe proeecuting ettorney Ednundo Joee doe
Anjoe Continho egeinet the lewyer ltecir Alberto Veecovi Peini. lone Nevee
Berboee end the couple Jeir lorgee de Oliveire end veniee Correie Pinto.
he eet Hondey for the erreignnent of the (our. who were erreeted on
Seturdey in en epertnent in Leblon with 132 grene of coceine end 060 of
nerihuene.

The proeecutor etteched to the coepleint the 5 rebruery end 6 Pebruery
cditione of the newepeper ULTIHA none requeeting the Nercotice Squed to
provide "on en urgent beeie the neceeeery confirnetion of the newe report."
The reporte nention eix eddreee booke. ellegedly eeized in eperteent 302

on Rue Arthur Areripe. where the erreete were node, end eention othere
allegedly eleo erreeted et the eene tine.

The Ring

In three typewritten pegee. Proeecutor Joee doe Anjoe Coutinho chergee
the four with violetione of Articlee 12 (treffic) end lb (eeeocietion)
of the Nercotice Lew (Lew 6 368/76). eccueing the- of "for-ing e ring.
neeocieting for clendeetine treding in nercotice."

The defendente were erreeted in the epert-ent of Jeir end Deniee et ebout
I600 houre on Seturdey when detectivee Nelio Mechedo, Oeveldo Devid Ribeiro

27
and Antonio Ferreire. alerted by enonylous telephone cells to the ﬁerce-
tics Squed. nsde e "seerch end errest" operetion. The three police-en
were enlisted by the prosecutor es witnesses.

The sccused nede few clerificetions to the police. preferring to spesk
in the presence of the judge et the erreignnent on 12 Iebruery. lone
noid she went to the hone of Denise to pey e bill end ltecir weited in
the car. A ssell bottle with coceine wes found in the visor of the cer.
Jeir seid the drug found in the closet was for his own use. he being on
eddict.

Policemen

in their depositions. the policesen effireed thet. eccording to inforse-
tion provided by the eccused. the drug seized wes to be serheted end thet
the suppliers ere Cerlos Concelves lerbose eke “Cerlinhos" end enother
person known es Nelsinho who lives on Rue Julio de Cestilhos. In view

of the newspeper reports. the prosecuting ettorney eshed the Nercotics
Squad for inforsetion on the deeler Csrlinhos.

He justified this request by ssying thet. elthough there is no eention in
the legel briefs of whet hes been published in the press. "this is of un-
equivocel concern to the ceuse of justice end isportent to the clerifice-
tion of the crimes." The lewyer for Itecir Peini. Hr Jeir Leite Pereire.
seid he will request his client's releese fros jeil efter the erreignsent.

Protection

Police from the hertotics Squsd provided protection to Jeir Borges de

Oliveire. 27 yeere old. errested with seven others. so he night leed to
the whereebouts of Cerlos Conceives lerbose. the trefficher who fled on
the day police entered epertsent 302 et 77 Rue Arthur Areripe in Leblon.

The agents believe thet Cerlos Goncelves de Oliveire will give hisself up
soon. Denise Correie Pinto. the wife of Jeir. hes eccused his of supply-
ing her husbend with drugs.

The police errested four other eddicts who went to the epertsent to buy
drugs. An egende with sevenn neses wes seized end inspector Eveldo Runes
believes the nsses ere custoesrs of Jeir Borges de Oliveire. He expects.
sterting todey when the investigetions begin. to question those people.
since in his view st lesst 20 percent of then ere involved in the treffic
and use of nercotics.

Agenda

Jacstcr Ribciro. the lewyer for Jeir Borges de Oliveire. said his client
wents to help in the investigetions end eshed for protection beceuse of

28
the dengeroue nature of Cerloe Ooncalvee Barboee. reeponeible for the die-
tribution of cocaine and eerihuena in varioue parte of the city.

The police plan to have the drug addicte go with thee in their efforte to
locate the trafficker but eoee eey he ia "a long way froe Rio." Deniee
aaid the neeee in the agenda are her "dreeeeeher cliente."

Televieion. eovie and theater ectore and other people will be called in
by the Nercotlce Squad to explain their involve-ant with Deniee end Jair.
Soee police feel thie will do no good becauee "people can eay they do not
know how their naeee got in the agende."

A eodel

Edy Harquee. the aieter of the profeeeionel eodel Ioee Di Prieo. eaid ehe
ie ready for a confrontation with the wife of Jair eince her ne-e wee eleo
in the addreee book. She eaye ehe never knew Deniee Correia Pinto end
doee not know why her naee ie on the liet.

According to the police. the agenda hae eoee 60 naeee. the eajority reei-
dente in the "Zone Sul" [eouthern area). The police aleo eaid they were
able to eeke eeveral tapee. te‘ephone calla to Jair'e aperteent. of addicte
who wanted to eake a buy. On one of the recordinge. the caller threatened
to kill Deniee becauee ehe "gave hie a bath" (bought and did not pay) at

e cocaine party. enphaeieing the! "a guy ie coeing froe Rio Grende do Sul
to straighten out accounte with you."

lnnpector Eveldo Nunee refueed to reveal the naeee in the agenda, cleieing
thia can only be done "after we begin the inveetigatione."

He believee that Ielipe Aguier de Oliveira. a etudent-~who according to
the police plunged out of a cover aperteent in Leblon on 17 January after
taking an overdose of cocaine in the vein--got the drug free one of the

people under arreet.
Deathe

The Narcotice Squed ie eleo inveetigeting the dcthe of two young een whoee
bodice were left on the Guendu Sene highway in lengu near the 16th Hilitery
Police Battalion by three people in e lraeilie. One of thee wee Oewald
Charlee Marquee Evene, an architecture etudent froe Nogi dee Crueee.

Another agenda wae found neat to the other body. lduerdo Augueto Linden-
berg. with doeene of neeee. eoetly woeen, including loee Di Prieo. the
eodel. The neee PM lueeo. whee police are eearching for. wee written on
a piece of paper with the letterhead of Auto-Radio Volkewegen.

Today a etateeent will be taken fro- Luie Felipe Geeper Sella. Eduerdo'e
brother-in-lew. Uhen he identified lduardo'e body at the Coroner'e

29
lnetltute. he eeid he hed gone out on Monday afternoon with hie brother-
in-lew to pick up eoeeone at the Galeao airport. Hhile driving out in a
car that belonged to hie eieter. Angela Maria Gaepar Sou-a. he wee inter-
cepted on the road by a group of non. who let hie go end took Eduardo
with then.

The police find it strange thet it wee only ycetcrdey. when the preee
reported the finding of the body. that Luie Felipe took the firet etepe
to identify the corpee. He filed no coeplaint of the kidneping or theft
of the blue Braeilia. licenee ZX-7162. which wee found yeaterday on the
Rue Louee. Iloco doe Sergentoe. in Guadalupe. with the windowe on the
right eide ehettered by bullete.

in the car there wae e bag with a pair of ueed een'e ehoee. a pair of new
tennie nhoee. red eetin troueere end a blue eetin blouee. In the agenda.
next to the neee Gieele. there wee the notation "0.600 crueeiroe--a blouee."
no for me the police are concerned. a eert blouee doee not coet that euch
and the note euat have eoee other leaning.

The notetion of the naee of PH Rueeo caught the attention of the police
eince the bodiee were left alloet acroee froe the leth If". whoae eentry--
Adair Everieto Oniee--errived. eew the car end did nothing to erreet ite
occupente. Another notation being inveetigated eaya "Avenide Prancieco
hicelho-—Adalberto--Detren--froe 0800 to 1700."

Early in their inveetigation. the police learned that Oewaldo Charlee and
Eduardo had eleoet 2.000 dollare (eoee 55.000 crueeiroe) in their poeeee-
eion. he no eoney wae found in the car nor on the bodiee. the ceee eay
be deecribed ae burglary and be traneferred to the Robbery and Theft
Divieion.

The police aleo aecertained that laet week Oewald Charlee--who wee helping
inetell a boutique in Poruci--wae eeen in the Zone Sul with a young woeen.

A Houeebreeking

The police ere intrigued by an entry into the bone of the aieter of lone
den hevce Berboee. at 83‘ Rue Alcidee in lengu. 0n Honday. a black nan
of ecdiun etature who identified hieeelf ae a eeeber of the Nercotice
Squad. entered the aparteent after forcing the door, etole eoee jewelry
and e third egenda.

A neighbor eew the Ian trying to force the door. which ie when he eaid he
wee n police-en. Sone 20 einutee later. a teen free the Narcotice Squad
arrived at the aparteent looking for Carlee Concalvee larboee and they
found everything in a eeee.

30
Carlinhoe appears alongside Ione. a niece and other relatives were found
in Carlinhoa' possession and seized by the police.

Meeting Place

The police feel that the Cantinho do Soaaego restaurant was a meeting
place for the narcotics addicts. The trnfficker says he leased the

establishment a short tile ago but revealed he had no employees and was
working as the waiter. cook and cashier himself.

After the questioning. Jadir da Silva Pinto. a lawyer. came to the Narco-
tics Squad offices and said he would defend Carlinhoa. "I only know
there is no evidence against him or against lone, his former wife. She

was in Denise's apartment buying clothes when the police -rrived." he
said.

LSD Capsules

Inspector Evaldo yesterday showed star-shaped LSD capsules seized from a
woman who was arrested a few days ago and whose name has not been re-
vealed. According to the police official, she. a foreigner with when
she lives. and a Iilitary nan brought the drug in fro- abroad.

Evaldo Viana guaranteed there would be no interruption in the investiga-
tion of narcotics traffic in Baixo Leblon. and said there are already
clues that will lead to the arrest of other traffickers who frequent the
neighborhood. He said they also have addresses of suppliers given by dope
addicts under arrest. The locations include streets near the Diagonal

and Guanabars restaurants. He said people whose names are in the six
agendas seized in the apartment of Denise Correa Pinto would be called
upon to give depositions. The agenda had nearly 100 names, sany of which
are naaee of prouinent people in the theatrical world and society.

  

e‘

"Carlinhoa" at the narcotics squad offices.

Jl
Arrest of Carlinhos
Rio da Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 9 Feb 79 p ll

[Text] Yesterday at 0630 hours and after a week of searching for him.
agenta fro. the Narcotics Squad arrested Carlos Goncelves Barboee aka

Carlinhoe. e narcotics treffickar and fornar hueband of Iona Navas
Berbose who was arrested several days ego with cocaine and eerihuene in
her possession et apertnent 302. on Rue Artur Araripa 072 in Leblon.
Alao arrested with her were Denise Corrae Pinto. Jeir Borges da Oliveire
end Itacir Alberto Visconti feini. a lawyer.

Cerlinhoe. 33 years old. was arrested when he returned to e reeteurent he
owns at 2 Avenide daa Aaericee. called the Cantinho do Soseago. which he
left on Saturday when hie wife was arrested.

In the opinion of inspector Eveldo Nunas Viane, who is heading the invas-
tigetion. the narcotics traffickers who were arrested the past few days
are probably involved in the deaths of Felipe Aguier de Oliveire. a stu-
dent who plunged or wee thrown iron the apartment of Denise Huniz
Ferreire Tegher, and Daniel Alberto Nino. en Argentina whose body wee
found on 25 January in apartment 302. Rue Gilberto Cerdoso 270 in the
Salve de Padre couple: in Leblon.

Hhcn he was questioned at the narcotics squad offices. Carlinhoe said he

had nothing to say about hie involve-ant in narcotics trafficking and

stated he would only talk in the presence of a judge. he denied he still
had any connection with lone and said he had been aepereted froa her for

8 months. he cleiaed he knew the lawyer Itacir Faini "only professionally."
since the latter had handled his saunttion and had visited his in the
restaurant twice "as a lawyer."

Carlinhoe said he did not personally know Denise Corree Pinto and her
lover Jeir Borges de Oliveira. and referred to Denise es "the woman
from when lone bought clothes."

when he was shown vouchers from remittances wade by his to the ltau Benk'e
agency in Caspo Grende (Heto Groseo). in the naaa of ﬁles Martins and
Dirce Evangeliste Martins, he was unable to explain the reason for the
remittances.

According to the Narcotics Squad. Cerlinhos supplied Denise Correa Pinto
with cocaine and she resold it in her apartnent. The drug was brought or
sent from Canoe Grende by Blze and Dirce who received noney through psy-
nent orders.

In addition to the two deposit vouchers and checkbooks from the lteu Bank.
the addresses of niddlenen in Camp Grende and photographs in which

32
33
Jorge (with Denice, In the Narcotics
Squad offices) admitted he VII the

owner of the cocaine and narlhuann.

34
amnion 0PM 'ro menu!” was 0' mum»
“160016 boots nsdio Oodsno Isoionoi in apsnish 1730 m 15 nor 79 n

l‘hxtl 1ho lotion“ Assooistion of ”mid Institutions (Asuncion lscionsl do
Institucionos ”Minions-4m] todsy sshod tho sovormnt to loplizo tho cultivstion
or urilmsm. but ssid tho dooision should to odoptod Jointly with tho Uuitod atstos.
All! Chou-non lrnosto donor Ilium propoood tho oration or s cousission 01th roproson-
totivos fro- tha too (won-onto to study tho proposoi.

Spooning st tho upon“; or s confounds on norm. Savor nut» ssid thst tho control
Iossuros sdoptod by tho gout-moat hsvo not yoiodod tho oxpootod "suits: on tho oontrory.
thoy hsvo oontritutod to on nor-in; inorooso in donostio commtion. Ho sddod thst
ovor 600.000 Cola-him oro hsbiwsl doors or 500 tons of Dos-um mu.

Tod-y. tho court-out ssid it In dotirdtoly opposod to looming tho oultivstion or
comption or Isl-imam in cola-bio sud hsrshly oritioisod tho onto-out by All)
Choir-n lrnosto s-oor Pisa-no. Attornsy oomsl minor-o don-1o: curry sud tho
gout-uncut is not st u: oonvimod it should no:- is thoro snythinc thot could omoursso
it to study ouch s lossuro. uo insiotod thst AID hos voicod sou soon-so rossons hut
no norsl «aunts. and our sooioty is vory oomornod shout this.

no sskcd tor Ins-o ofrioiont oooporotion tro- tho «.3. oovormout in ordor to worsntoo
s snocosml cousin smut mootios trsrrioldns in tho country.

C50: 5300

35
WY RUB"! 1110! 0001' 0' Am OMAN”
PA192027 Down 0060” am“ Savor 1n SM“ 1100 on 19 IIII‘ 79 PA

[wt] Boson-4M cola-abun Any nu wow-too the run out of tho «min to an:
an; "Arnold“ in u mm. nun-nu to «no «not van and. by Any orﬂooﬂ
\ho hold mount! an“) ”atom! owning with tho" 0.8. Am column. cola-MOW
would. Ln nut»; WI "It!“ won alumna (III-tn: WI noting.

the Colo-bun ofﬂooro noted on» mu. Colman mot“ amt-Italy 50 ulnon puoo
in tho um: taunt an; truuouu not you. tho 0.8. Mort-one contraband only 2
Innon puc- ond ha and on» an 1th 3406.. IIOIMWOG 1n ﬁllnuoonoto.
menu owl-Icicl- 01-11» to thou emu plooo 1n n mm.

1'hc Colman otﬂoou o‘oo «comm about an noun.» an: “on on Colman
unmet-1:1“ no" boon «an; to 1001130 tho mu our to tho W of ammo“,

50 which. that run boon «1:06. no for vduclu am no" "111on on in poor
oondtuon. -

080: 5300

36
”IBIS

mum IMD—latranquina, Colo-Ma. 31 ﬂat (m)-t: vaa raportad to-
day that tha 2d Military lriuda band 100 tona oi aarihuana valuad at

932 aillion. Tha Iarihoana vaa aaiaad on Friday vhila it II. hains tranc-
portad through Magdalana dapattnant in 20 trucka. It vaa conaidarad one

of tha Ioat valuahla ahipaanta aaitad thia yaar. 8i: paraooa vata arraatad
during tha action. can Joaa “aria Villarraal. Zd unitary ltigada co-andar.
aaid today that 3,000 tona o! Iarihuana hava haan human! ainca Octobar.
[Paria m in Spaniah 1316 err 31 PI: 79 PA]

mmcms' MST-c0030“. 30 "at (m)—m Dafanaa Hiniatry anmncad
hara today that it atraaud 3S Colo-Man drug traffickata and aaiaad M753
bundlaa of Iatihuana on tha country’a coaat ova: tha paat vaals. It alao
aaitad 23 am of vatioua calihara. a-mition. 1 ahip and 26 vahiclaa. ﬂoat
of tha arraata vara Iada batman 23 and 30 March in La GnaJin «part-ant.
1.300 in iron lo‘ota. [Paria m in Spaniah 0253 Oil 31 liar 79 PM

can: 5300

37
Uh MINING cuts MEXICAN 93.063388 m mmwc M1113
Ciudod Juoroo ll. nonmzo in Oponioh 27 rob 79 pp 1. 2

[Toot] Tho todorol .ovornoont will put on ond to tho growing of drop in
Moxico within 2 yooro. by mono of tho joint progroo thot io boio; corriod
out by tho Offico of tho Attornoy (hoorol of tho lopublic ond tho Socrotori-
ot oi hotionol Dofouo.

‘l'hio oooortion woo oodo by tomndo Ioou. o loodin; otticiol iroo tho At-
tornoy Gonorol’o Offico. upon hio roturn tron Gonoyo. Switoorlood. whoro ho
ottondod tho looting of tho Unitod lotiono 300806 [Iconooic ond Sociol Coun-
cil] Co-ittoo on Dru”.

At thio looting. which woo hold (too 12 to 23 Pobruory 1979. ond in which
150 ooobor notiooo ond oboorvoro porticipotod, moi-mo rocopition woo
givon for tho offort oodo by tho lioxicon Govornooot in ito cowoip ouinot
tho plonting, cultivotion. hot-noting ond troiiickin; oi drup.

It woo rooolvod to uoo tho oxporionco pooood on by lloxico oll ovor tho world,
inoomch no it io tho loot ouitoblo ond ottoctivo for orodicoting tho oourcoo
of production.

For thio purpooo. tho Attornoy Gonorol'o Oiiico currontly hoo tho lorpoot
oilitory oviotion floot in Lotin horico. oo woll oo in tho world.

It conoioto of 36 holicoptoro. ouludin; oipht which will go into oorvico
thio yur. oo woll oo 70 oirplouoo.

Thoro oro two roooono why tho honicon Cowornoont io coﬁotin; drugo rolont-
loooly.

In tho firot ploco. bocouoo thoy injuro tho phyoicol ond oorol woll-boin;
of hoxicono; ond. oocondly, bocouoo it io ottowtin; to dootroy o oourco
oi oorol contooinotion. Tho lottor io rolotod to tho nroliootion comip
of tho public odoioiotrotion.

‘No yooro op. Homo rookod ooon; tbo looding producoro of oorihuono; ond
it ronkod fifth in opiul production.

38
At the present tine. Colonbia is the largest narihuena producer. and the

"golden triangle." conprised of Burns. Thailand and Laos. is the largeat
opiun producer.

The Geneva nesting vas attended by Undersecretary of Stats Metea Falco.
representing the United States.

The Aaericen delegation reported that doaths fron overdoses of heroin in
the United States had declined by 80 percent in 1978. It also said that

the degree of purity of the heroin produced in Mexico had dropped fron 9.3
to 3.6 percent.

0n the other hand. the price of opiun and narihuana in the lbxicen Republic
has tripled during the past 2 years.

The United States currently has 12 nillion narihuana addicts and half a
nillion heroin addicts.

The Mexican delegation. headed by Basra. announced that. during 1972. the
Attorney General'e Office and the Secretariat of National Defense had des-
troyed 33.‘00 Ierihuana and opium plantations.

A total of 5.1‘9 Mexican citizens and 215 foreigners were arrested. all of
who- were involved in crinee agath health in all degrees; vhile 730 auto-

nobilee. and sail and large trucks. M: airplanse. 760 high-poured firearne
and 83S short-barrelsd weapons were confiscated.

Also seized were 3.7 nillion depressant pills and 18 nillion ati-ulente.

The poppy growing area has been reduced by 80.5 percent. and the narihuana
growing area by 60 percent.

hence. the federal Govern-ant satinstes that it will put an end to the grov-
ing of drugs on national territory in 2 years' tine.

This year. it will inrove its advanced system for identifying crops by
using the spectral effect to spot plantations fron airplanes in flight.

The largest nerihuana producing area in the country, contributing 80 percent
of the production. has been the triangle corpriaed of the states of Durango.
Sinaloa and Chihuahua.

During his recent visit to Mexico. United States President Jenes Carter.
while he was vith Oscar Flores Sanchez, the attorney general of the repub-
lic. expressed recognition for the federal govern-at in the effort that
it is asking to put an and to the cultivation and trafficking of drugs.

This year. five air bases vill be built to intensify the battle. located in

zorrillo. Chihuahua; La Magdalena. Jalieco; Uruapan. Michoacan; Sen Pulipe.

Oaxaca; and Arcelia. Guerrero. The surveillance at the Mexico City interna-
tionalairport will aleo be intensified.

2909
COCA!“ PM mam sum II “In!“
hoaioo City 3L 801. D! mxco in Spanish 3 Mar 79 p O-h

[hut] -1ho Podoral Judiciary Polico dolivorod a hard blow to intamational
dtug traffic whon it locatod 6.8 kilogram of puro cocaino. yostorday, that
was going to bo introducad into Hoxioo at tho southorn bordor.

A Potuvian. Guillono ﬂosron Valdos, and a Onitod autos citison. Dolons
Ma Ruiz do Casillas. wars travoling on amnca night 920. caning tro-
Ouatonala. Thoy varo atnstod by tho Pd? [Podoral Judiciary Policol in
Honda. Yucatan.

Tho tonignors had with thos a law with a loathorcovorod baso. that thoy
handlod vory carotully. This soasod suspicion to tho fodoral dotsctivos.

man tho todotal aqonto inspoctod tho lam. thoy roaliud that it was hol-
low and that insido thoro woro sovon plastic bags of cocaino.

Tho South Anoticms wars amstod and lads awailahlo to tho Gowom-nt
Attornoy's Ottioo in Horida.

man may wars intotroqatod, Nosron Valdos and Doloros Ada said that tho

drug had boon bought in Porn and that thoy intondod to taho it to tho Unitod
Statos.

10,0d2
C80: 5300

50
COCAINE SHUGGLBRS CAUGRT AT HERIDA AIRPORT
ﬂexiceli LA V01 on LA FIONTBRA in Spanieh 3 Her 79 See I p 16

[Text] Mexico City. 3 Herch--Two drug traffickera of Latin Alerican origin
were caught by federal agenta at the international airport in Herida. Yuca-
tan. while they were attaapting to bring nearly 7 kilograee of pure cocaine
into the country in the baee of a "floor" leap covered with leather.

The Office of the Attorney General of the Republic announced that the total
price of the druge on the black nerket waa over 180 aillion peeoa.

The ingenioue aethod that waa being need by Guillarno legron Valdez. of Pe-
ruvian nationality. and Dolorea Ada Ruiz de Caeillae. a Latin Aaerican of
United Statee nationality. failed when the federal egente detected then "act-
ing an if they were pretending to be touriate etopping by.”

The drug traffickera told the authoritiee that the route to be ueed for the
druge wee Herida. Mexico City and than the United Staten. where "contact R"
would receive the leap in which the druge fron South Alerica were contained.

Both were erreeted by the Federal Judicial Police a few adnutee after they
had landed froa Avieteca'e flight No 920. arriving froa Guateaela.

Gen Reul Hendiolea Cerecero. head of the Federal Judicial Police. announced

that the arreet wee aade yeeterday by Coadr Roberto Eepinoea Moreno and hie
detacheent in the capital of Yucatan.

According to the infornetion provided by the head of that entity. the fede-
ral ogente eeeighed to that air terainal noticed the great care taken by
the couple with the wooden leap covered with leather.

They eaid that the "etrange behavior" had eroueed the euepicion of the fe-
deral police. who proceeded to take than in cuetody end aeke a careful aaerch
of the leap.

A few ainutee later. they diecowered that the object weighed too auch for

ite nice. that it wee hollow. and that it contained within it 7 kilograaa
of cocaine packed in the eane nulber of pleatic bege.

‘1
Upon bvinu interrogated. the (oreignere aduitted that they had contacts with
the drug trafficking ring which operataa in Peru. which gave thee inetruc-

tione to take the leap and drug. to Mexico City. and from there. to carry
the- auhaoquently into the United Statee.

Each one would have received 92.000 in the event that the ehiplent of the
drugs had been carried out. according to their claie.

2909
C80: 5330

62
PR! SPONSORS 2C0 ANTIDRUGS CLINICS
hexico City 11:11!)le DB Bl. on in Spanieh 1 Her 79 p 11
[Article by Eva [senor Mendel Coboel

[Text] Next Monday. 240 clinica. eubeidired by the PM (Institutional Revo-
lutionary Party]. will begin to operate in the ntropolitan area. may will
approach a eolution to drug addiction problem. pri-arily in the fringe
aectore. Likewiee, phyeiciane and peychiatriete will go into the poverty

bolts to handle behavior aepecte at every level: children. edoleecente and
adulte.

The above wee etated by the deputy eecretary for Social Action o! that po-
litical party. Dr Enrique Die: nichel. who added that. juet yeeterday.
training coureee atarted for the nedical and pare-edical pereonnel to ate“
the ebove-nentioned centere.

he pointed out that this in part or the progre- of the Drive Againet Drug
Addiction. alcoholiea and Tobacco Addiction that the PR! hae eat up per-
unently in the federal Dietrict and in the interior of the republic.

Diet Nichol added that, of the caeee detected, the onee regarded ea epeciel
will be channeled to the Youth Integration Centere. eo that rehabilitation
treatment nay be carried out there.

llo pointed out that the new clinics have been eet up in fringe area. be-
cause theee areas are the once lacking radical and care eervicee and eleo.
owing to a lack of activation. they prezer to treat theaeelvee with home-
hold renediee or they neglect dieeaeee with lamentable eubeequent conu-
quenoce.

In the case of drug addicts, he added. there hae been eucceee in incorpor-
ating then in the country'e active life by neane of guidance telke. Never-
theless. the problen attaine eirable proportione that met be attacked in-
ecdiately by properly trained pereonnel.

63
in addition. when Dr Dias Hichel pentioned the courses given in the Pill. he
said that they are taught by recognised physicians and psychoanalysts who
train the personnel so that they may know adequate handling. detection and
prevention of drug addiction.

Later. Diar hichel added that. in the future. it is planned to increase the
lumber of clinics. so that the commity say go to then and receive adequate
treatment for solving their health problems.

lie added that we must realize that. as long as the situation of sick people
prevails among us. it will very difficult for us to cos-a out of the under-
developnent in which we are at present. mly by adopting preventive nea-
suree will it be possible to prevent addicts from having access to the va-
rious druge that have corrupted our young persons.

one aspect very isportant to us. our informer renarhed. is to sake parents
aware. so that they will really participate with us. Most of then. over-
whelsed by their econopic or rental problems. neglect their children's edu-
cation. giving rise. with their apathy. to an increase in corrupt individuals
with linited ideals.

We are also attempting to guide children and to channel their energy and
concerns toward more constructive activities (sports and oanual activities)
that may produce physical. moral and economic benefits in then and will
turn than into young persons productive for the country.

Very Neglected Youth

Dr rernando Valade: Peres. technical director of the Youth Integration cen-
ters. in turn. declared hiuelr in favor of the establishnent of an agency
(at the secretariat level) that will approach every aspect of youth guidance
exclusively.

Ile said that our youth is very neglected. and because they are potentially
young they require special attention. because these are the persons who
will run our country in the (euro.

Our young persons oust be given security. 'lhey out be shown their inporo
tance for the development of our people and they oust be made aware that
their participation in every activity (political. social. econoeic. and
so on) is a determining factor.

lie pointed out that it an institution devoted to the problems of youth is

not established inediately. the future will be very discouraging. because
drug use and abuse will continue to increase. giving rise along us both to
unenploynent and a lack of opportunities to be incorporated in active lite.

when he discussed the Youth Integration Centers. the psychoanalyst stated
that. at present. there are eight centers in the Federal District. in which

6‘
an average or 3.200 consultations a nonth are conducted. In addition, 24
more centers are Operating in the interior or the republic.

he added that another objective of these centers is to give prevention
to the youth sector by means of coordinating recreational and cultural
agencies.

Ile rtated that. although recently a stagnation in the increase of drug ad-
dicts has been obserVed. the problel is quite serious. primarily along
young persons from 16 to 25 years old.

Only about 20 to 30 percent of persons admitted to the Youth Integration
Centers succeed in being rehabilitated. Because. in spite of the fact
that this is on A par with the greatest success worldwide, there is a high
rate of desertion, because, in most cases. they attend treatment four or
fivo times and finally desert.

Use of Psychoanalysis

The physician added that the met lodern system of psychoanalysis are used
in the Youth Integration Centers. with various modified techniques. depend-
ing on the patient's case. it has been observed. with this action. that
rehabilitation of those young persons is achieved renarkably.

with regard to the various enacts and consequences to uhich drugs give
rise. the specialist stated that. in the case or inhalants. it has been
ascertained that they cause severe renal damage. psychic probie-s (lihe
nsdness, withdrawal. and so on), in addition to severe brain (la-age (de-
struction of neurons).

Harihuana. in turn, produces special mtivational syndromes. high social
costs (he does not study. grasp or work) and serious problems are evident
in the areas of interpersonal relations (rejection or surrounding society).

He described the problem of the so-calied social drugs -- alcoholic. and
tobacco addiction -- as extreeenly serious. They also cause serious physi-
cal and mral danange. but are penitted by society.

He stressed that the problee of drug addiction exists on every level in the
netropolitan area, because they are used depending on incon. (roe cigarettes
to cocaine. And he censured the sale of drugs at the doors of schools.

lie said that this is done es haniui propaganda to encourage the use of
drugs more. This is owing sieply to the fact that the hunan being is con-
tradictory by nature and. when he is forbidden soeething. he tends to de-

sire it. He offered. as an exasple. the case or seekers, among when sales
continue to increase, in spite of the (act that they are warned right on

the cigarette pack that the product is hanfui to the health.

(.5
rineny. he etetod that both the governnent. private initiative and priurily
the people who ere the onee met effected by thie mproductive. problen eo-
ciety not eat in the probiel of drug eddiction.

10.0.2
C50: 5300

Q6
INTERNATIONAL TRAFFICKING RING BROKEN UP

Guatemala Springboard for Drugs

Mexico City WELSIOR in Spanish 6 liar 79 p 26-h
[Article by Jose Calderon Salazar, correspondent in Guatemala]

l'hext] Guateeala, S Harchu'rhe national police revealed today that "the
international ring of drug traffickers is attemting to set up a permanent
operations center in Guatelala for drug traffic."

The sources added that ”cocaine and Iarihuana worth many millions are being
transported tron South Anerica -- concretely from Colomia -- to the United
States and Guatelala was selected for making contacts.”

The details of these international criminal activities were learned as a
result of the arrest of a Colombian. Jorge aurique sierra. fro- vhon a
double-bottomed suitcase. ooncealingdrugs worth $300,000 that he was at-
temting to introduce into the United States by Deans of Ianeuvers not yet
revealed in Guatemala. was seized in the La Aurora Airport.

The Coloiaian said that he "did not know what was contained in the suitcase
that he was to deliver in the United States” to a person whom he refused to
identify.

It leaked out here, today. that both Sierra and other South Americans who
have been discovered in Guatemala transporting drugs worth hundreds of
thousands of dollars are in the service of the ring cos-anded by Joe Co-
lombo and that. since his death. it has been headed by Sonny Pransese.

It was said that this traffic is carried on constantly because of the tac-
tics of dividing the drug shipments among several traveling traffickers.
The total traffic amounts to several million dollars.

The Guatemalan police stated today that ”the traffic scheme has been already

brought under control in this country by agents regarded as among the lost
specialized in the world."

47
Internet imml ’l'ral’l’ickorn Seized
Mexico City BXCELSIOR in Spanieh 6 Mar 79 p 26-h
[Article by Rafael Medina]

[Text] A ring of drug traffickere. operating in Guateeala. the United
Statee. Peru and Mexico and trying to introduce counterfeit money in cir-
culation. wee broken up by agente of the Judiciary Police, under the con-
nand of Gen Raul Hendiolea Cerecero. when seven persona were seized.

Brick Rafael. Julio Cesar end Janee ﬂendoza Quandt. Francisco Urbine Mo-
rales. Jesus Heliodoro Gone: Serne, Victoria Caetellanoe Hartinez de Ur-
bina and Ingeborg Quandt de Mendoza. are in the cells of the Office of

the Attorney General of the Republic. undergoing eevere interrogations on
their activities.

According to the investigations by the federal agents who achieved the
arrest of the drug traffickera and counterfeitare. the counterfeit money
was made in South Anerica and it wee planned to circulate it in Mexico.

The erreet of the ring oerbere was made in a downtown hotel on Avenida
Reforma in this city and also in Monterrey. Nuevo been and Tapecula. 011.-
pee.

The following was the prieonera' manner of operating: They would arrange
the cocaine buyingand selling operation in Peru. tron there. its transpor-
tation to Guatemala was planned. in order to introduce it subsequently by
way of Tapecula into our country and free here to the United States.

As soon as the second in contend of the police. Rodolfo Castano Araﬂmla.
learned that a cocaine buying and eelling operation was being arranged in
this city. he ordered a very close watch to be set up in the hotel where
the drug traffickers had been detected.

Once they had located the ring neebere and it had been learned what acti-
vitiee they were engaged in. they were detained with almost a kilogram of
pure cecaine. Hhen the roo- in which they were lodged was searched. they
discovered eight bmdlee of $50 and $100 bille.

The name of the contacts in Peru. Guatemala and the United States have al-
ready been furnished to INTERPOL in Mexico. so that. in turn. they night
report it to their branches in those countries and the arreet of the cri-
minals night be achieved.

According to information provided by the director and deputy director of
the Federal Judiciary Police. Hendiolea Cecrecero and Joaquin Figueroa Luna.
the counterfeiting of $50 and $100 bills is on a large scale. because the
series are different.

108
Accordlnq to what was stated by the police chiata, the counterfeiting in
"all-loot perfect." Altogether. 1,7“ bul- war. wind.

The bills. the drugs and tho detainees were made available to the agent of
the Covet-mun: Attorney's Office.

 

Joana Gout, Julio Cour Mendoza Quandt, Prancuco Ur-
blna and Jun Mendoza Quandt are {our of the seven
prisons“. numb-u of a ring of drug traffickers.

10,042
C80: 5300

149
TRAPPICKBR'S HIM POUND HOLDING DRUGS FOR MARKETING
Ciudad Juarez El. HOMER!” in Spanieh 1 Her 79 Sec A p 2

[Text] Yeeterdey. Hireya Martinez. widow of Humor. who wee the wife of the
drug trafficker Alfredo Munoz Mendez. aliae "Bl Chonene," confireed her
etetenenta to the agent of the Federal Public Miniatry. J. Norberto Salinae

Nevarrcte. to the effect that ehe had actually been trafficking in heroin
end cocaine for over 2 yeare.

According to her etatenente. theee druge colprieed a ahipeent that ”81 Cho-
nene" had left in her cuetody ehortly before he wee killed in an autono-
bilc accident in the atete of Sinaloa.

Hith the announce-eat yeaterday of the erreat of the drug treffickera Hire-
ya. Arturo bozoye Plorea and Gloria Saucedo de Arenae, a well organized ring
that had been operating for acne tile on a large ecale and whoee traneec-
tione involving the purchaee and eale of heroin had been bringing it fabu-
loue carninge wee broken up.

The Federal Judicial Police. under ordere froe Coldr Daniel Garcia Canalee.

learned that heroin wee being "puehed" at No 571 57th Street, in the Obrera
development.

They "etaked out" that location and. leat Monday, captured Arturo bozoye
Floree, who at one tine wee a radio patrol officer for the police inepec-
tor'e office. Upon being interrogated. he claimed that hie couein. Gloria
Saucedo. wee actually the one who wee marketing the druge.

Soon afterwarde. Gloria wee captured while arriving at her hone: and ehe
ndnittcd that ehe had on two occeeiona eold heroin and cocaine to "cuetonere"
in El Paeo, at the inetruction of Hireye Martinez. widow of limoz.

She eaid that, on thoae two occeeione. ehe had acid an ounce of cocaine each
tine for $1,600. and that Hireye had paid her $300 for theee traneactiona.

Then Gloria took the Federal Judicial Police egenta to Hireye'e reeidence.
where they arreeted her. She turned over the teat of the druge that ehe

50
had in her house. consisting of a bag containing 70 graaa of heroin and oth-
er packages containing a total of l kilograa of cocaine.

Those drugs have an astilated value of 2 million pesos on the United States
black market for drugs.

Gloria also adlitted that she had been "pushing" drugs at Hireya's "instruc-
tion." because this brought her large profits; adding that the custoaers
were people when she already knew. but she did not give any naaas. but only

vague inforaation. perhaps out of fear that she night be the victim of re-
prisals.

In her stats-ant. Hireya said that she had the drugs in her possession. be-
cause her husband. "El Chonene." had then in their house before he was in
the accident which coat hil his life.

She made use of her familiarity and contacts with the trafficking rings and
Mafia to "market" the drugs in the neighboring country. using Gloria for
this purpose.

The agents of the Federal Judicial Police were not satisfied with these state-
Ients. and are intensifying the investigation. because it is believed that
Mireya still has contacts with international drug traffickers, and possibly
all over the world. Several clues that this investigation afforded are being
followed up, and it is possible that more arrests say be Isde in this case.

2909
080: 5330

51
"MD 0? TRAFFICKING RING ARRESTI. CONVICTED
'Bl Lupe' Captured
Nuevo Laredo Bl. HAM in Spanish 27 Feb 79 Sec 3 p 3

[Text] Yesterday. Guadalupe Gonzalez Solis. alias "El Lupe." was being sub-
jected to close questioning by the federal Judicial Police. because they
had inforaation that he is head of a well organized ring of drug distribu-
tors. according to a report issued by the agency of the Federal Public Hi-
nistry.

Approxiastely 2 graas of cocaine were confiscated froa Gonzalez Solis.

The Federal Public Ministry announced that. on Sunday afternoon. federal
agents under orders fron Condr Margarito Phndez Ilieo vent to the tovm of
Cerralvo. Nuavo Leon. because they had a tip that an individual nanad Gua-
dalupe Gonzalez Solis was engaged in drug dealing.

At dusk. the agents discovered and arrested "Lupe" Gonzalez. who use relieva
ed of a call foil envelope containing about 2 gram of cocaine.

The individual in custody was being questioned in detail yesterday. because
the cocaine seized fron hin vas apparently only a "salple"of a larger amunt
that he intended to sell as soon as he found a custoner.

Traffickar Jailed
Nucvo Laredo 21. HAW in Spanish 2 Mar 79 Sec 3 p 2

[Text] Yesterday, the day laborer Guadalupe Gonzalez Solis. alias "Bl Lupe."
a native of Gerralvo. Nuevo Leon. was declsred officially iqrisoned as an
individual preauasd guilty of conitting a crils against health in the degree
of cocaine possession. Julian Barbersna Gains. secretary of the third dis-
trict court. announced that there was sufficient evidence to iqose preven—
tive incarceration on the eforenentioned person.

52
"Lupe” Conulu vaa arroatad on 25 Pebtuary. in Corralvo, Nuovo Leon. llc
hml in his ponavnaion n amll envelope containing about 2 stnaa of cocaine.
vhlrh ha intandud to unu no a "aaaple" for thc purpoao of aallins 1 kilo-

araa of that drug.

Previoualy. the Federal Judicial Police had arreatod Enriqua Battada Zapata
and Daniel Pena Gana, who diacloaed that they had intonation to the of-
fact that ”Lupa" Gonulaa vaa going about offating a kilograa of cocaine
for aala.

2909
(:80: 5330

$3
TWICE” KILL PMILY 18 WA
Mexico City IXCBLBIOR in Spanish 4 Mar 79 p 30-h
[Article by Lorenzo Dias Garcia. correspondent]

mm Hatehuala. San Luis Potosi. 3 March-4n Santa Rita. municipality of
Vanado. San Luis Potosi, a ring of drug traffickers killed Albino and As-
cension Arriaqa "enemies. as well as ”aria del Consuelo mine. brother.
sister and wife. respectively, of Anacleto Arriaqa. and hidnaped the lat-
ter's two children. Ascension and aiginio Arriaga. These events occurred
early this earning.

The criainals. about 10 armd sen, appeared in three vehicles at hrriaga's
residence. attacked the house. Indexed, kidnaped and fled. apparently.
toward this city. about too kilonters from the scene of events.

The police. who acted hours later, said that the perpetrators are people
connected with drug traffic who kidnaped Macleto Arriaga, on 22 Nova».
bar 1978, for rcfusinn to deliver a load of earihuana. because he was not

paid.

One of his children. unaware at that ties that his father was engaged in
drug traffic. reported his father’s kidnaping to the State Judiciary Police.
thinking that a real kimaping was involved.

As a result of this accusation, the Judiciary Police arrested five indi-
viduals -- nodolfo Felix. Leiza. Ruben Penuelas. Dionisio Velez. all three
fros- Chihuahua. Abel Murillo Ari-ants. alias Bl CapitanValdes. and Juvsntino
Hurillo. both free Jalisco -- who turned out to be drug traffickers.

Because of their statenents, it was smpected that Arriaqa was also a
drug trafficker and he was arrested for investigation. lie turned out

to be the supplier of the grass for a vast organisation with ra-ifications
in Sonora and Jslisco.
m Judiciary Police. unsigned hon. atatad that at that tina thay throat-
anad to kill Maciato Arriaga. if he intonad against tha ring. Navartha-
iaaa. ha contaaud avarything. manta“. it ia baiiavad that the attack

and cordon. early thia morning in Santa Rita. are part of tho drug traf-
fickara' vangaanco.

10.0.2
C50: 5300

55
HERD!" TRAIPICKING RING CAPTUIBD IN SINALOA
Culiacan El. 801. DE SIM in Spanieh 25 Feb 79 p 12

[Text] The capture of Juan ﬂedrano. or Ignacio Valdez Pbrano. enabled the
Federal Judicial Police to arreat other individuale who had been engaged.
with hie. in the purchaee, eale and trafficking of druge in the etate of
Sinaloe.

Juan Hedrano declared that he wae a native of the United Staten (eonething
which could not be proven. becauae he had no identification papera). and
that he had cone into the country illegally, by pretending to be Hexican.

Ilie occonlicee were Alberto Lopez Cervantee and Lorenzo Aiepuro Acoeta.
The latter waa engaged in altering with acide and ealta the emlea of pure
heroin that Juan hedrano purchaaed, eo ae to take the- later to the United
Staten. where their Iarket wee eatabliehed.

Aleo arreeted waa Jeeua Lopez Cervantee (Alberto'a brother). who. Hedrano
paid to keep eaqlea. acida and aalte at lancho Nuewo, in the townahip of
Coete Rice.

The other pereone under arreet are Crietobal Valenzuela Gutierrez. Guada-
lupe Lara Felix. Iaabel Seleno Aguirre. Rafael Galindo Galindo, taxi driver
Liberato Bajo brace-ontea. Fer-in Arredondo Lopez and etoneleaon Bucadio
Sanchez Beltran. aliae "Lalo."

All of the. had been collaborating with Hedrano "N" in verioue waye; be-
cauae thoae who were not obtaining the aaaplea. were diatributing or keep-

ing then.

The confiecation aade by the Federal Judicial Police coreieted of 135 grace
of eerihuana aeed. 100 graae of poppy eeed. 209 green of ealt for cutting.
130 groan of heroin. and bottlea containing acide for proceeeing the druge;
oe well ae a Renault taxi. with licenee platee 60-m, and aerial outer
3066.

S6
Aftor tha proliainary quationins had boon cowlatad. the agent of tha
Pedoral Public Hiniatry aaoignad to Coordination 06 of the Par-anont Ca.-
paign againat tho Dru; Traffic dacldod to turn thoaa individuals ovar to
tho diatrict judga. ao that tha partlnant procaodinsa night he lnatitutad
auinat than for crinao aulnat health in tha dosraaa in which thay vora
co-ittad by aach ona of tha paraona undar arraat.

L909
(:80: $330

$7
NEROIN. HARIHUARA TRAFIICKBRS ARRESTED
Heniceli LA V02 DE LA SIONTBRA in Spenieh 21 Peb 79 See a p 16

[Text] Hexiceli--Driver Silveno Header Areente. aged 66. end Ierthe Olguin
Aiepuru. eged 38. vho cleieed to be e coeeetic eeleewoeen. were ceptured by
the Federel Judiciel Police. who eeired froe then 506 greee of heroin. e
kilogree of e euhetence which they ueed to increeee the volume of the druge
end e precieion ecele.

The peir heve been involved in drug trefficking for eoee tine. elthough Ber-
the confeeeed thet they hed been engeged in the illegel hueineee eince
1975. when ehe begen teking cerloede of eerihuene (roe Sen Luie-lio Coloredo
to the Heride coneunel fern.

Agente of the Pederel Judiciel Police erreeted driver Silveno Mendez Arlen-
te. e netive of El Doredo. Sineloe, reeiding et lSll Lerdo Street. ee he
wee driving e 1962 Chevrolet without licenee pletee elong Lope: Heteoe high-
wey.

Under the front eeet they found four polyethylene hege. eech conteining five
"pedesoe" [e little over en ounce] of heroin. Ieting e totel of 20 portione.
which weighed 306 greee.

He hed purcheeed thee for $1,600 per portion (roe Berthe Olguin Airpuru. end
intended to eell then to en elleged purcheeer for $1,500 per portion.

with thie clue. they epprehended Berthe et her reeidence et 300 Cerecee Street.
She in e netive of Theezule. Durengo.

Proe Sen Luie to ﬂexiceli

Leet yeer. the two drug treffickere eoved to Hexiceli to reeide. ee e re-
eult of the legel prohleee thet they hed in Sen Luie-Iio Coloredo.

Silveno Header eeid thet the Pederel Judiciel Police hed erreeted en indi-

viduel nickne-ed "Bl Ceepee" in the letter town. end eeized e "pedezo" of
heroin fro- hie. In hie confeeeion. he cleieed thet Silveno hed eold it

58
to him; and the latter had no recourse other than to put nose distance between
then. and he case to Heslcnll to live.

Olga. an Entire Dossier

According to information provided yesterday by Oscar Pelipe Castro San Martin.

Olga confessed that she had a restaurant in Sen Luis-Rio Colorado. called the
Cafe berths.

Pros 1975 to 1977. two individuals. Jose "N" and Francisco Aseacue Sanchez.
constantly left vehicles outside her establishment.

Those cars were loaded with narihuane. and she was responsible for driving
then to the Herida communal fare. receiving between $500 and $1.000 per trip.
depending on the load that the vehicle contained.

She Has Given heroin

She said that. last year. her sister. Amelia Olguin Aizpuro. arrived at her
house from San Luis-Rio Colorado. with 10 portions of pure heroin. which she

sold to Jose "N" for $2.000 per portion. receiving a bonus of $2.000 from
her ”later.

Before delivering the drugs. she resoved ease of the drug free each portion
and sade another portion. which she turned over to a fesele relative of here
so that it would not be sold.

Since the Federal Judicial Police were on the trail of the letter. and per-
haps were following her also. she decided to sove her residence to Mexicafi.

There. she set Silvano. who had been the common-law husband of her sister.
Alicia Olguin Aizpuro. a year before. end who has a cafe on the lower level
of the El Quensdo pool rooII.

Since they trusted one another. he told her that he would let her know if
there was a customer who wanted to buy heroin.

A aonth and a half ago. a friend asked her to obtain a portion of heroin
for him. It coincided with the visit that Francisco Asescua Sanchez Iade
to Bertha's new house at 300 Caracas Street. when he sold her six portions
of heroin at $2.500 apiece. and 3 kilograss of a substance which was not a
drug. but which is used to increase the voluse of heroin. and is known

in the underworld as "cut."

There is sose discrepancy about the price that she paid for the "cut." be-

cause. wherees she told the Federal Judicial Police that she had paid $100

per kilogram. she told the agent of the Federal Public Ministry. Castro San
Martin. that she had bought the kilogrsn for $300.

59
Nearly a week later. Gabino "N." a taxi driver who had been her neighbor in

San Luis. arrived bringing her three more portions of heroin. which cost
$2.000 apiece.

She Increased the Drugs

To this drug she added half a kilogram of ”cut.” and thus ssde 25 portions
which she concealed in a trash can in the backyard of her house.

Silvano contacted her. first requesting a portion which she sold his for
$1.£00 and which he sold for $1.500. because it was not of good quality.

The next day. Silvano asked her for five sore portions to take to the sane
purchaser. who paid hie $6,000. and he left her owing $1.500.

Bertha had 19 portions of the drug in her possession, which had already been

cut. Silvano went to obtain his $1.500 froe his purchaser. of which ssount
he was to give Bertha $1.000.

His custoser asked him to bring another 20 portions, saying that he would
pay for thee all together.

Silvano set with Bertha. and asked her for the 20 portions. At first. she
refused to give his so such of the drug at one tine. because "it was den-
gerousz" but. finally. she agreed. and ”cut" the heroin again. so as to ob-
tain 20 portions fro- the 19 that she had left.

Silvano took the four polyethylene begs containing the drugs, to carry then
in the purchaser's own car. in which he was arrested by the Federal Judicial
Police.

Upon being arrested. Bertha said that about 1.5 kilograms of the "cut" had
been thrown away, because it had becoes wet. and she had to discard it.

Cnstro San Hertin announced that, yesterday. the case was to be turned over
to the first judge of the first instance for penal setters. who would assist
the federal court with a petition for a warrant for the arrest of Jose "N,"
Francisco Asescue Sanchez. Gabino "N." and Amelia and Alicia Olguin Aizpuro.

2909
C80: 5330

60
GROHBRS' REASONS FOR PRODUCING DRUGS EXPLAINBD
Piedrss Negrss BI. DIARIO DB PIEDMS NEGRAS in Spanish 26 Feb 79 pp 1, 6, 7, 8

[Text] Hexico City, 25 February (ANPE)--Hexico and its land are ideal for
growing nsrihusna and poppies, because three quarters of the 31 states that
conprise the republic have the weather conditions which "J‘uanits" [Isarihuana]

and "Anapols" [poppies] require for germination, growth and harvesting, so
as to finally reach the "market."

The states containing the largest numbers of narihuans planters and culti-
vators, in order of production and quality, include: Sinsloa. Oaxaca, Guer-

rero, Hichoecan. Guadalajara. the state of Mexico, Chihuahua, Durango, and
others on a ssaller scale.

The cost of the grass depends on its quality and the processing that it is
given for purposes of selling it. For esseple, if it is raw, it connsnds
a price of 3 million pesos per ton; to be sure, if it is the "golden" va-
riety, in other words, the Hercita type that Mexico "produces."

If "Juanita has been groomed and polished," of course the price per ton

increases, because it is delivered ready to be packaged into joints and
distributed in the busy nountains of "green Juanita."

The farssr has been neglected by the SM [Agrarian Refors Secretariat] and
prefers to becose associated with the drug traffic.

In a certain village somewhere in the republic. we conversed with Juan, a
tall nan with dark, sun-tanned skin and a penetrating gaze which scans one
from head to toe, as if he were trying to guess whether this was some kind
of trap. Juan was surprised at first and, with a rough manner but trying
to be pleasant. showed us a read where his children were, and offered us

something to eat. We accepted, so as to dispel. somewhat the tension in the
swoop-here.-

He asked the first question without further ado: "Hint made you lease your
property to grow Iarihuans?"

61
The rough-mannered farmer scatched his head and sailed: "You see. lady, it
is better to accept the money that the drug traffickers offer us some tiles
in exchange for allowing them to plant the grass. rather than wait forever
for credit that the Rural Bank is never going to grant us.

"They (referring to the drug traffickers) pay well; they give us from 5.000
to 7.000 pesos a month. which we receive with no strings attached. Besides,
we don't have to invest anything; all we have to do is see that the plants
grow and. when they are ready, they themselves send us men to pick them.
Then they tell us where to leave them. and soon the deal is finished."

"Aren't you afraid that the police will catch you?"

"Sonetimes. yes. but then I think that they.too, approve. because my plot

is almost in the backyard of the Federal Police, and they have never bother-
ed me about anything. Also. the grass has always been grown here, but the
site is changed, because of the danger." The farmer explains: "But it is
worthwhile for the money that we make. You know that the children have to
eat; those urchins don't understand seasonal land. or waiting for agrarian
credit. They screen and ask for beans and tortillas.

"I wanted to plant corn. but it was difficult because of the lack of funds
in this region. The loans are kept for a.few so-called leaders and repre-
sentatives of the people. A person cannot make anything.

"when I tried to talk to the gentleman at the bank. all that he told us was
that he didn't wait on dirty people; and insofar as credit is concerned.
they say that we are starving and have no aoney with which to pay. But

all is not lost; there is always soaeone who offers a good deal."

"If they take away your plot of land because you are growing marihuana, what
will become of your family?"

"Nothing; whatever happens we won't lose. because we never have. The Secre-
tariat of Agrarian Reform only knows how to threaten. but what does it do

to solve the probleaa?"

"where is your plot? I would like to know where the plants are."

The sun laughs aloud at my question. and answers: "I won't tell you that.
lady. The only reason that I have talked with you is that my friends in-
troduced me and assured me that you were not an informer. but a good per-
son and not at all malicious. Don't meddle in this; it might be dangerous
and it might not. but we had better stop. Cone whenever you want; you are
welcome. But don't ask anything else."

Convinced that Juan will not have anything more to say. we take our leave
of his; but not before giving him our word that all we want is to write

an article about the situation being experienced by the farmer who places
himself in the hands of those who are poisoning the youth.

62
The Federal Judicial Police Ara Combating the Drug Traffic Notoriously and
Conatnntly

The Federal Judicial Police. for their part, agree that the conversation
that we held with the farmer in a village located in the southeastern part
of the republic in 100 percent factual. They have started a campaign to
create awareness among the lndians and farmers throughout the entire re—
pwum hrmupmwu,manusham.mwmnsmdwuuamtm
subject. warning then of the harm that they are inflicting on themselves

and on the young population by making their property available for the
growing of narihuana and poppies.

They have also offered the farmers assistance in obtaining loans that will
enable them to plant legal products which. rather than harming them. would
bring them benefits. and they would not have to hide fros the police.

The assistant deputy attorney general of the republic, Samuel Alva Leyvu.
remarked: “This campaign has brought very good results, particularly in
Sinaloa and Oaxaca, which are regarded as the leading producers of the 1w

jurious grass. Now, many of them are growing corn. wheat. sorghum and eruv
cr products."

"To date. the planting and cultivation of marihuana and poppies has declined

85 percent. thanks to the personnel that have been provided to the Federal
Judicial Police to detect these plantations.

"In the permanent campaign which Mexico has undertaken against the drug
traffic, we are receiving cooperation from the United Staten." Alva Leyva
added: "That country sent us an aircraft which. while aloft, can photograph
plantations; and. depending on the colors in the photon. it can be ascer-
tained whether the plantations are corn. sorghum. narihuana or poppies."

The official explained that if the only color appearing is green, it is
marihuana that is being grown. and if it is purple, the crop is poppies;
and. in such instances. they are immediately fumigated.

lhe Office of the Attorney General of the Republic has outstanding personnel
all over the country to combat the planting and cultivation not only of ma-
rihuana. poppies and hashish. but also of any other type of drug that may

be diacovered. according to the statement made by the high-ranking official
upon concluding the interview that he granted the AH?! reporter.

2909
050: 5330

63
BRIEFS

ANTIDRUG CAMPAIGN REPORTSuﬂexico City. 26 Pebruary--The latest reports fro-
the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic on the antidrug traffic
cospsign within the nation's borders state that a helicopter fros the de-
part-ant in the state of Sineloe crashed. and that Capt Rafael Vazquez. who
was piloting the aircraft. was killed. The incident occurred when the cap-
tsin and hie copilot. Eduardo Sanchez (who is in very serious condition)

were returning from the Hestern Sierra Hadre. after having perforsed a job

in which they fusigated sarihuene end poppy plantations. The official report
from the Attorney General'a Office. dated 26 February. also notes that two
clandestine landing strips were located northwest of the town of Villa Juarez.
in the stnte of Puebla; a fact which was i-edietely reported to the local
agency of the Public Ministry. which ordered the runways inedietely destroy-
ed by the silitary. Infomtion was also provided on the burning of drugs

in the town of Cinco de Mayo. in the state of Durango. under the supervision
of the Federal Public Ministry agent assigned to that state. In the presence
of silitary end sunicipal authorities. 1!; kilogra-s of heroin. 2 of cocaine
and l of sorphine were destroyed. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo BL MARIANA in Spa-rich
27 Feb 79 See A p S] 2909

RESULTS IN VARIOUS STATES-*xico City. 26 Pebruary--Agenta of the Federal
Judicial Police confiscated over 10 nillion pesos worth of drugs. consisting
of sarihuana. heroin. sorphine and cocaine. in various actions carried out

in different states of the republic. They also arrested 10 traffickers and

a "desler.” The ssin action took place in Tijuana, Baja California. when

2 kilograms and 500 greats of heroin bound for the California area were inter-
cepted. The coordinator of the caspaign against drug trafficking in the town
of Tijuana. Carlos Aguilar Ceres. backed by federal agents. succeeded in cap-
turing Jose Manuel hidelgo. Gilberto Ruiz Valencia. Felix Alfonso Medina bo-
pez. Jose Luis Uriarte Pelix. and his brother Alfonso; as well as Rosario Car-
rillo Nunez, Javier Nunez Genet. Rector Roberto Runs: and Dosingo Urisrte
Felix. In the town of Culiacan. Sinaloe. Salone Astorga Ranirez was also
arrested. having been identified as the nain nsrihusna distributor in that
area. A total of 100 kilograms of cannabis indies. ready to be shipped to
the black narket for drugs. were confiscated [run his. Northwest of Villa
Juarez. in Puebla. the Pedersl Judicial Police discovered and destroyed two
clandestine landing strips which had been used by American sasll planes
engaged in shipping asrihuasa to the United States. Another action carried
out during the past 68 hours took place at the side of the highway between
Valle Necional and Oaxaca, near, Turtepec. where eight bags of aarihuana.
each containing 100 kilogram. a press and three hydraulic jacks, were dis-
covered. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo u. HANANA in Spanish 27 Feb 79 See A p 5] 2909

PJI‘ DBS'I'IDYS POPPY CIDPS--During the last 72 hours, agents of the federal
Judiciary Police [Par] and pilots of the Air Services of the Office of the
Attorney General of the Republic destroyed 930 poppy patches that would
have been used to produce 50 kilogram of heroin at a coat of 250 million
pesos. The patches were in the states of Oaxaca. Sinaloa. Jaliaco and
Guerrero. Baeze Mendez said that Mexico has already cons off the list of
the leading heroin producers supplying the black market in the United States.
He said that the 930 patches had over 7 nillion poppy plants all ready to
be ”slit" and thus to extract sons 21 tons of opium gm. Once processed
they would have produced a minimal yield of 50 kilogram of herein. In
addition, in the sane 72-hour period. the agents of the Judiciary Police
and of the Air Services also destroyed 50 sarihuana plantations with over

100.000 plants. [Text] [Mexico City BXCELSIOR in Spanish l Mar 79 p 32-h]
10042

FIRST QUARTER DRUGS SEIZURES tummy-comm. Sinaloa. 1 Hatch-“1n the
first two ubnths of the year. the Federal Judiciary Police seized 9 billion
poses in drugs in the states of Durango, Chihuahua and Sinaloa. To date,
“.5 tone of aarihuana, worth 2 billion pesos; 69.5 tons of narihuena seeds.
1,300 kilograms of poppy gun, 3.034 kilograa of opiun gin and elnost 500
kilograms of heroin and cocaine have been seized. After reporting the fore-
going. the coordinator of the drive against drug traffic in the border states,
Cruz Lopez Garza, stated that 122 drug traffickers have been arrested --
four foreigners anong then -- and at least 5,000 poppy patches and 110 la-
rihuana plantations have been destroyed. with the support of the Amy. he
concluded. "we have delivered final blows to drug traffic. The drive will
continue until an end is put to that activity." l‘next] [Mexico City
BXCBLSIOR in Spanish 2 Mar 79 p 26-h] 10042

COCAINE SEIZED IN TlJUANAuTijana. Baja California Norte. 24 February--‘Do-
day. the Federal Judiciary Police arrested five drug traffickers and seized
2.5 kilograms of pure heroin, worth over 5 nillion pesos, from then. The

persons arrested are Felix Alonso Medina. Gilberto Ruiz Valencia. Luis Ha-
nucl llidalgo. Francisco Meza Medina and Jose Luis Uriarte Felix. 1hey have
already been held for trial before the federal judge. The arrest. in house

65
nuwor 261 on ansenadn street, Francisco Villa District. took the criminals
by surprise and the offered no resistance. The coordinator of the drive

nqnlnst drug traffic. Carlos Muilar Garza. and the coal-antler of the Federal
.Imllulnry l'nl lev. ('Iumnm Momno Ilornandnz. statud that this action in tho

runult of long investigations. [Text] [Mexico City ExCELSIOR in Spanish
25 Feb 79 p 28-h] '0042

POKER pmnomu ARI-Tabuciuded Juarez. Chihuahua. 28 Pebruaryu‘lbday. over
I kilogram of cocaine, worth 6 million pesos, was seized by agents 0: the
Judiciary Police from a loner aunicipal patrolman and two noun. The cost-
nander. David Garcia Gonzales, in charge of the arrest of the drug tafficksrs.
stated that they belong to a ring operating on the entire border and cross
over into the United States. The persons arrested are Arturo Lowya Flores.
Mireya Martino: widow of honor and Gloria Saucedo Arenas. who bought drugs

from the first ones mentioned. [Text] (Mexico City BxCBLSIOR in Spanish
I Mar 79 p 32-” 10042

C30: 5300
DRUGS RAID YIELDS POUR asnnsrs
Caracas BL MACIOMAL in Spanish 23 Feb 79 p 0-20

[Textl Metropolitan Police intelligence agents found weapons. checkboohs.
drugs. autonobile license plates. business records and false documents and
licenses and Iade four arrests when they raided an apart-ant on Andres lello
Avenue.

Inspector Pedro Osvaldo Acosta, chief of investigations of the Metropolitan
Police Intelligence Division. added that the prisoners are Aaalia Angela
Naval. 29; Orlando Enrique Salazar Hernandez. 28; Marina Hotels Madrid. 21;
and Andrea Segundo Peinado Martinez. 26. The raid took place in the build-
ing in which there is a usll-hnovn depart-ant store on Andrea hello Avenue,
7th floor. apart-ant 71. East Tower.

In the rooa occupied by the couple Orlando Salazar and Analia Naval. the
agents found an M-l rifle, which had been converted into a short-barreled.
high-pouered firearm. cartridges. cocaine Mandrax. LSD and Iarihuana.

The chief of police said that the prisoner Peinado had a record of auto
theft and Salazar Hernandez had a record of robbery in several cities in
the interior.

The prisoners were turned over to the Judicial Technical Police where an
effort is being aade to deternioe whether these individuals took part in
recent crisinal activities in the metropolitan area. such as avindlea and
robberies.

A black LTD parked near the building was started with one of the automobile
keys found during the raid. as was a blue Dodge Aspen with license plate
nulber MOT 658.

Inspector Acosta explained finally that the police operation at the apart-
ment begun with a search for a nuaber of cocaine traffickers in the Sabana
Gronde area. "We are also seeking several Colonbians in this case who vote
possibly the prieonera' contacts."

67
>3: »- 35$- 2::
BRIEFS

DRUGS 881230 IN smsousc—uou sod nors drugs are bsing ssiud in
Strasbourg. In February. 69 grass of pure heroin wars nixed; st the
“ginning of this week. 10 guns of morphine bus vars ssizsd; sud on
Usdnssdsy. 1.5 kg of hashish and nor. than 1.5 litsrs of csnnsbis oil
usrs seized. [Text] lPsris Dolsstic service in Prsnch 1500 GMT

31 "st 79 L0)

C80: 5300

69
N0 INDONESIAN}! ARREST- IN AFSTBRDAM

lungkok NATION REVIEH in English 2 Her 79 p 8 BK

[Text] INTERPOL police have arrested two Indonesian-born drug suspects in

Amsterdam in connection with attempting to snuggle 2b kge

Bangkok, Thai police said yesterday.

Police said the arrest of the two, both Indonesian
origin but holding Dutch passports, was made following
a tip-off by Thai authorities lste lest month.

The two were identified as Huner wewengkang end "so
Udin, police said.

Thai Customs officials discovered 68 bags of heroin
No 3, weighing 26 kgs, at Don Huang Airport on

Feb 21. Part of the heroin was found at the de-
parturc lounge and the rent near e counter of KLH.

Police said owners of the heroin managed to board
a KLM flight and left the country when Thai Customs
officials found the drugs.

CSO: 5300

70

of heroin from

 

NENEWCKANU
NAICOTICS TIM! "If k K1108 0? war HINDI
Istanbul mm in Turkish 2) Feb 79 p 7

[Tent] Nut, days ago. 2 hilogr-s of heroin vere discovered in a special
radiator conpart-nt of an autonobile bearing British license plates. In
a second seerch conducted yesterday, four additional hilogrens of pure
heroin, with a nsrltet value of 120 Iillion liras, were found in the car.

Five suspects in the biggest drug-enaggling incident in recent years are
under arrest and are being held at Sepeciler Prison.

south-long Operation

0n 6 February as a result of continuous opustions over a period of a tenth.
Istanbul Narcotics Depart-ant tea-s. at the buyukcehece-Catalca turnoff,
confiscated 2 kilograms of pure heroin fron a specially constructed to.-
part-ant located beneath the radiator in the engine section of a Iord bear-
ing license Ilo ‘l‘JO 067 l’. Apprehnded in reletion to the nuggling of the
narcotics. which have a narhet value abroad of 60 nillion liras, vere
Andreas Ilacigil, a lritish citisug Variyan Avedikyan. of Arnaian origin;
Abdurrahen Aydin Akkus; Hebe: Siddih Yildishen; and haysdin Adah. Pol-

loving initial questioning, the five were placed under arrest and held in
prison.

last Search

Yesterday. narcotics dapsrtnent detectives. continuing their investigation
of the heroin-nuggling case. learned. through a tip received by telephone.
that nora heroin use hidden in the autonobile they had in their possession.
A second search conducted because of this turned up four sdditionel kilo-
grans of pure heroin in eight bags located in a hiddn coqsrtnsnt con-
structed behind the mudguard on the left front side of the euto-obile that
bears British license lo 1‘30 04.7 P.

Officials stated that the l. kilogram of heroin confiscated in the second
search has a foreign nerket value of 120 nillion lirss end that their in-
vestigation continues.

11673 71

030: £807
newcnon noun IN 0mm POPPY mum-Ion I]! mac
Iotenbul mum in mrkieh 8 Her 79 p 11

[Text] Ae e reeult of e liinieteriel Council decieion to reduce the mount
of lend which My he plented in opiu poppiee iron 5 dekere to 3 dekere,
it hee been leerned thet opiu- poppy cultivetion in “yon ehinietretive

dietrict end eurroundin; villegee hee dropped fro- 50.000 delete to 21.000
dekere.

with e reduction in the mount of lend e family ney plent in opiue poppiee
tron S dckere to 3 dehere in 1978, 3,000 teniliee hove given up opiu-

poppy cultivetion end. thue, fielde under opium poppy cultivetion heve
dropped by 68 percent in conperieon to the figure for 1978. In 1978, 10,000
feniliee cultivating 50,000 dekere of opiul poppiee produced 1.500 tone of
opiun cepeulee end received in exchenso 37.5 Iillion lire.

M e reeult of the reduction in per-ieeeble cultivetion to 3 dehere. 7,000
(milieu received perniuion to cultivete e totel of 21,000 delure of lend.
The producere, pointing out thet "the Hinieteriel Council decieion hee

left the. in e difficult poeition," requeeted thet "the enount of pennie-
eehle cultivetion he reieed once egein to 5 dekere.” any eteted: "If

the limit ie not reieed to 5 delete, the netion'e oil nude .111 increeee
in direct proportion to thie reduction end en inportent eource of income
will. heve been restricted."

C80: 5300

72
BRIEFS

11mm ARREST-ﬁne pereon’vanted in connection with the 7.5 kiloa of heroin
seized in the PR6 aoaa tine ago wee caught in 8iitt'a Bataan Diatrict today.
The anapcct waa caught with 7.5 kiloa of heroin in the m: and had cecapad
in October leat year. The auapect haa repottedly ahittad to hia crila

during his tirat inten'ogation. [Ankara Doaaatic Service in mhiah 1600
cm- 27 m: 79 n]

080: 5300 m

73