FDR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPFIS L/10203
22 December 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 58/81)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFF-10A]. USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the orfginal phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within item. are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HORLDHIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND Daueeaous Danes

(P000 58/81)
CONTENTS
ASIA
BANGLADESR
Briefs
Opiun Arrest Reported
INDIA

Country's Prublens in Marketing Opium Told
(Shree Sondhi; THE TIHBS OP INDIA, 8 Nov 01).................

Briefs
Opiun Seized in Delhi

INDONESIA

Thousands of Marihuana Plants in Hejelengka Aree
(MRIAN U” “0 12 s.p 81)eeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee-eeee

Deputy Attorney General Calls for Stricter Penalties
(KWASO 22 wt 81).0.e.00...OOOOOOOOQOOOOOOOOOOOO...00.0.00.

Narcotics Suspect Deported to United States
(KWAS. 2‘ Oct 81)eeeeeeeeeeOoeeeeeeeoOeeee'eeeeeeeeoeeeeeee

Briefs
Bali Narcotics Traffic
Snuggling Cases in North Sumatra

MALAYSIA

Drug Abuse Laws To Be Recoditied, Baniehuent enforced
(NW STRAIN TIMES, 7 NW 81)eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee~eeeeeeeeeeeeeee

- a - [III - WW - 138 PO

[0.10‘1ar15' lﬁﬂiﬂhﬂfv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Data on Addicts at Sarawak Rehabilitation Center
(30mm Bowl". 17 wt 81)COOOO.I.OIOIIOOOIOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

NEW ZEALAND

Regional Drug Law Enforcement Officers Meet in Capital
(EVENING POST, 22 Oct 81; NEW ZBALA.J HERALD. 2‘ Oct 81).....

Cocaine Inports Threat

Computerized Custons Controls
Countermeasures Proposed

Tougher Penalties Sought

Man Adnita Smuggling Drugs via Connercial Air Flights
(WING ml 30 mt 81)0.0.00.00..C.IOOOOIOIOIOOOOOOIOOOOO.

Court Ruling Alters Distinction Between Classes of Drugs
(Jean'Baptiste P1991", WING m?! 31 mt 81,000.00000e0000

PAKISTAN
Briefs
Opium Seized in Peshawar
LATIN AMERICA
ARGENTINA
Briefs
Coca Leaves Seized
BAHAMAS

Three Boats, Eight Men Seized with Harihuana.Riflee
(“in TRIBUNE, 31 m: 81)00.0.3000...IIOCOOOOOOIUOOIO000......

Briefs
Forfeited Bail

BERMUDA

Briers
Drug Seizures

BOLIVIA

Authorities Announce New Price of Coca
(108 Tim, 1 NW 81)eeaeeaaDecoaeaeeeaeeeeeaeeeeeeaeeeeaoa
FOR OFFICIAL 058 ONLY

New Drug Lav Provides for Rehabilitation Progra-
(BL DIARIOJ 1 NOV 81)seeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Briefs
Savings of Coca Dollars
Clandestine Landing Strips
Coca Traffic Upturn
Coce Bust in Santa Cruz
'Pouerful' Drug Ring Busted
Snugglers Arrested
Traffickers Forge Bospitalisation Per-its

BRAZIL

Drug Addiction, Trafficking Devastating Sao Paulo interior
(Renato Lonbardi; O ESTADO DB 8A0 PAOID. 0 Nov 81)...........

Cocaine Seized, Five Arrested in Ipenena
(Jomll DB amt!!! 30 “'t 61)0.0.0.0...OOOCOIOOOOOIOIQOOOOOOC

Briefs
Bolivian Cocaine Seized
Argentine Cocaine Trafficker Arrested
Musicians with Drugs Arrested
Drug Traffickers' Escape Aborted
Police Chief Dismissed

CHILE

Briefs
Peruvian Drug Traffickers

PERU
Briefs
Drug Traffickers' Plan Revealed
Cocaine Refinery
Cocaine Seizures
Colosbian Cocaine Smugglers
51‘ K HTS-NEVIS

Briefs
Harihuana Plantations

NEAR EAST AND NORTB AIRICA

IRAN

Opium Seized in Esfanan. Shires. Ker-an
(KBYIiAN, 24 Nov 81)..........................................

-c-

POI! OFFICIAL 053 MIN
DENMARK

Article Examines Financial Aspects of Narcotics Trade
(Troels Aegaerdx BERLFNGSKB AFTER, 16 Oct 81)..;.............

Briefs
Cocaine, Heroin Seized at Airport
DrugsTied to Robberies
NORWAY

Book Describes Drug Milieu in Norway
(Tote H0e1:ARBEIDBﬁBIADET, 26 Oct 01)Covoolooooooolboeooeooo

Funds Approved for Increased Narcotics-Control Effort
(AWNSM. 1‘ NOV 81)UO0.00.00.00.00000.000.000.0I...l...l

Briefs
Mood-Altering Pills in Trondheim

- d -

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
BRIEFS

OPIUM ARREST REPORTED--‘lhe Kotweli police recovered ten score of opium

worth about Take 80,000 fron the poeseeeion of one Abdul [held at Bede-tall chat
on Friday. The police on duty challenged and arrested him while he was loving
suspiciously there. says a Press release of D.M.P. Abdul lurid hails from
Toothpere in Khulna District. A case has been started against the arrested person
under Ogiun Act. Meamihile. acting on a secret infomtion, a special squed of
the Detective Branch of Decca Metropolitan police recovered one .32 bore revolver
from Rrom no. 176, 8.“. Hell, Decca University. None as arrested in this connec-

tion, the Press release added. [Text] Indeed m sameness ossamn in august:
15 Nov 81 p 3]

080: 5300/7012
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010001-4

coumu's ML“ 11! mm OPIUMTOLD

. Boday 1113 MS 0? IDIA 11! 30311.1! 8 luv 81 p 22

[Article by shm Scum]

[Text]

NEEML'CH mum Paced».
5mm U.

MKSSIVE Man In hm;
bum hero to «on L2!» to»-
0- ol opiu- when the mem-
ml has bun unable to all.

\ solo.- to new“ 5»
mum at om at month eon-
pkml at the gum a” .nd
aimed: (“My Tao not. your:
01530 was and .100 mm a»
it“ till ho cam-nun! an.

The lam mama ham ”on I
nomul- «oval in polythene tux
In aha My. am no“ mo n-ghl
m long and Mm m. Nun
qua-aim. 0! mm Mn N. Ion
II" In. uni IN :wmeﬂ
val-w me and 0: Mom. A Im-
nlouu. a mammal-IN b.
”0 duo- me dn-I.

handing 1-) MA. T. S I. KIM
gum mm." 0‘ m gown-m
0mm and alulod com «Mor-
uk-n. Sum-h. m ' a clul in
II: .wmn h mauve the can-:-
at may an Mun II” It» on.
mnu N. cum ‘I’aicy and Amm-
lia .- an «amt. “nut-c sou-"la
and conﬂict union: lun- "or
my ohm. dun-lulu II. 0960.
cut. The m b a «only-nub
rd nun. _

[UL IN DEMAND

May at man comm an
luli'.‘ moan. In a My un-
due: mm to m hit doc-m:
mum-m (at opium. on an.“
IM mm mm nu lam. 11.0
Glut-nu ”do" no bu lawnm-
«acute! woolen-«doubt

I.“ you. n- Mans-h nun
who. goal! upon onlv 171 loan
.4 omn- ﬂai- war {mm April ‘o
Oman. no um um has .4
Th 3mm: In! announced-3
«In: on m I‘M MI ‘7
coumriu in cum 0‘ 1w \eu'o
cum-m in .m ”(on In dear «uh.

world's m In!
Indiana! ultimo!
a moaned» in the l

A .mc on. In
ﬁrst mam. uh
-) own mm
A than it |\ laud l
and not than NJ
anion! um.

TM 81.1mm: (1.1:
rm. “a Made me
to OI. cl m emu.
til 0! WI. a
opium hot this In
no!“ Till lul
VI! not will. u
madam 0‘ M
llm in It“ you
add u on“ d I

The amp maul
aha-c. mat-no II!
ohm mini-w. 9:
Mn all am».
0! “an. new
«and only o In
Codci. (“In ow
lg. cm: a: u a
swim. «I it I:
«d u mo . I.

n: my Ind

m: iov‘ who
uﬂmu loam

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010001-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010001-4

C30:

Mn summon-nu Inn-2.! .1 «mm
mung! In! ”no" a \u! and a II?!
II“ Danube: NI" nun “1 MB
no i“ moo-need

The (man h» acumen .m ctumi d
not mama-mi mum: on m in".
Only ”out ll Mn «0. a “who
mum nu 4mm“! um a um
0! mm- momh-. \ll Wm hm hub
and he pvodmuna d drum.

lace-uh. 1M phat had Malta
do“ ml .mL . .me to a \EJDJxli'l
:1 mc‘c -n no 0 pm: on Mad :0
menu we «Rwanda.

Now can be cuiu'wmd ooh am!
a lame "on me yup-nine.“ 5mm
weal-1| the cum ol lazlJ m Mull
h .an M noon. 1‘: lumen have
to hand me: mu mm Jan Io tho
p-vannnm. k um" uh about Ii.
no lo I“. :3) pet in. 0! but depend-
m. on m c-‘mmtnu' Th: lam 3
mm .n-ul In 'hc wn and waned
n can It un he manual only
“I“ «Ma-mm an "we .InJ dlh'
sow-u rum-I.

Tout n Iniuc u all luck.
Fume“ .mcn ho"; had. mm “mu-n
tot Ihm mammal us: a: III-.I cm.
I- h" n Kub‘hul L‘l’. 304

5300/7011

)lsdhu Pulpit. 'I» o:
um mm. mm b Gui
mm m M goo-hike

WC! OS cox

Auovdim to 0!. Dem
Mum d-mw o! lb!
0‘ ”mm-y. nu All-Ia
M Medual Sumo. uh
dead a mmbt- ol «:1
sum and their minim.
m hue .nm ulkllcd n:
M". 0m, drum 0:!
ocnm nu Wm: an:
lumlul.

A «am by him in .\
ha 4mm IIOI :0 p"
would-on to was no:
m mu were unnum .
coding to him. «um ;
m {gun-n} poo-HAM)“

Itctml‘. 1 \chVJ
vim: In nun-II In
at mom." in M kw»
m were found be I
an Inn atl hm- dun
cord-n: «- Mv. Kriun:
”on“ m "um.“ Io
Jvul nut ol line “not!
«cm-u.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010001-4
BRIEFS

OPIUH SEIZED IN DELHI-—New Delhi, Noveuber 22-Sriniwespuri police last night

apprehended two persons. Hakimuddin end Lexni Herein, both fron Hedhye Predeeh
and recovered 10 kg of opium from then. The euto-rickehaw in which they were

travelling has also been impounded. Their interrogation has revealed the

retail network for opium sale in the capital and the police are investigating
further. [Delhi NATIONAL HERALD in English 25 Nov 81 p 3 ax]

CSO: 5300/4568
TIDUSANDS 0P MARIJUANA PLANTS IN WALWA ARIA

Jakarta HARIAN UHUH AB in Indonesian 12 Sep 81 p 9

(Excerpt? The Majalengka Pol ico Korea 054 (Civil Arcs Conand) have confiscated

thousands of marijuana plants in the West Java area. The fields were found in
several remote regions in the Hsjalengka District. Sons had just been planted,
others were ready to he harvested. The estimated value is several nillion of
rupiahs. Several residents inforned the police after they had been accused of
being involved in helping to plant the forbidden crop.

The suspects were questioned as to where they had obtained the asrijusna seed
that they had planted. They said that soneone had given it to then. Almost all
of the suspects claiaed that they did not knot-v it was dangerous and therefore
banned by the governnent.

The information gathered fro. the suspects indicates that there is a connection
between all of then. This scene to point to the fact that their efforts are
being orchestrated by some group or nrijuans dealer and they are nerely the
accomplices. However, at this tin there are still no clues as to whom night be

behind this drug prohlen. inspite of the continued investigation by the authori-
ties.

The Police. Koselt 854-11 (Section (to-and) Haja. Hajslenglta, reported recently that
their operations to combat sarijuans growing in that area. had constantly net with
difficulties. This was priaarily true in the locations that had been under
suspicion as in the case of the fields lentioned above.

The operations aentioned er’lier are carried out by providing infornation as
clearly as possible about the various types of nrijuana plants. These instruc-
tions are given to the police. the village guardian apparatus, "ANSI? [Civil
Defense Organization leaders] and "AMA. Following this guideline, they

then inspect the various villages. The village guardians and man were each
instructed to inediately report to the police should they encounter any plants
that might be suspect.

The police also called attention to the above Isntioned marijuana fields and
presume that there are still asny in other remote areas of the Hajalengka
Regency. It is hoped that the police in each region will carry out aieilar
operations. The public as well as the govern-ant officials in the area have been
extremely nlarned by this recent enae where thoueande of narijuana plants were
dlscovercd 1n the Hajalengka Regency. It is far beyond what anyone had 1nag1ned.
Because of the enornous amount of nerljuana found in this case, the area 10 now
regarded as the largest marijuana producing region in “est Java.

9556
C80: 8305
DEPUTY ATTORNEY CHEM CALLS FOR STRICT!!! PWL‘I‘IBS
Jakarta KOMFAS in Indonesian 22 Oct 81 p 3

[Excerpts] Datuk Hulia, Deputy Attorney General for Intelligence noted that juvenile

delinquency was a social problem. "Because of that, we nust have a comprehensive
policy to deal with it."

He said this in a lecture organized by the Association of Law University Students in
the Young Tourists Building in Ancul yesterday. The title of his lecture was, "Juvenile
Delinquency and Drugs."

He said the goals of narcotics trafficers in Indonesia were unclear. Did they intend
to harm Indonesia's youth, or were they solely interested in profit?

The drug problen is not confined to Jakarta and Medan. The problem has spread because
smaller cit iea are easily reached by drug dealers.

According to Datult, Indonesia has relatively light penalitiea for drug trafficers.
He compared this with Singapore, who is not reluctant to hang someone found with just
15 grams of heroin.

Henbers of the judiciary who are part of the Implementation Coordinating Connirtee for
INPRES 6, dealing with eradication of rarcotics traffic, are proposing a review of
Public Law 9, 1976, especially with regard to penalties for narcotics offenders.

Datuk cited 259 cases of narcotics abuse in 1978, 538 in 1979 and 669 in 1980. The
prime areas for arrests were North Suaatra (182), Jakarta netropolitan area (1240),
Aceh (71), West Java (52), Riau (26), Bali (18), and East Java (18).

The number of cases this year is not known, but Detuk said, "perhaps it hasn't
inc reased . "

he noted that sense people took advantage of lessened security during the pilgrimage
season. "This information cannot be confirmed," he added.

When asked to elaborate, he explained that drug mgglera taking advantage of the

pilgrimage season are either caning to Indonesia Iran abroad, or going abroad from
Indonesia. lie did not say how any people were being investigated in connection
with that information.

9197
050: 5300/8306
NARCOTICS SUSPECT DEPORTED T0 UNITED STATES

Jakarta KOMPAS in Indonesian 24 Oct 81 pp 1, 9

[Text] An American prisoner was deported to his homeland fro- Bali: Perdanakusulsh
Airport, Jakarta, on Friday. His departure was closely supervised by police narcotics
detectives, police headquarters personnel. Indonesia Interpol, and personnel fro-

the American narcotics agency and the 0.5. Embassy.

The suspect, Anthony Ross Brinkvnrth, 28, alias Prank Joseph Smith, was arrested by
Indonesian police at the request of American Interpol because of his involvsasnt in
a drug smuggling syndicate.

The American narcotics agency classifies the suspect as s nesher of a dangerous
syndicate. In addition to trafficing in drugs, he has tried to kill A-erican narcotics
agents on several occasions.

The suspect worked the Thailand-Halaysia-Singapore-Peru-United States snuggling route.

Indonesia was not part of that route. According to inforlstion, he cans to Indonesia
as a tourist on vacation, to surf in Bali.

The torn requesting his arrest sent by Interpol included a photograph and identification
data on the suspect, including his fingerprints and aliases previously used. Thus.
the suspect was placed under surveillance by Police Headquarters since his entry to

Indonesia via Halin Perdanakusunah. He arrived at Bali. on 28 August, and traveled
to Bali.

In Bali. Police Headquarters and Police Regional Connsnd x1, Bali, investigated the

suspect to confirm his identity, particularly through fingerprints. he was followed
from the Hotel Pups Ayu to the Hotel Sunset Beach.

Police arrested him on 25 Septenher. after taking his fingerprints fron glasses and
beer bottles. Those prints matched the prints sent by Anerican Interpol. Based

on this evidence and interrogation of the suspect, police were certain that he was
the fugitive sought by Interpol.

According to Brig Gen Drs Darnavan Sudarsono, head of the Police Headquarters
Information service, the suspect tried to bribe police with an offer of 20 million
Rupiahs at the tine of his arrest.
During interrogation, the suspect said he had cone to Indonesia as a tourist. Bis

traveling conpanion, a Peruvian named Miguel Tu Dela. was not involved, and has returned
to Peru.

Drs Darnawan did not know if the suspect had nade contact with any Indonesians. He
also did not know if this was the suspect's first visit to Indonesia.

A police official once told KDHPAS that Indonesia is included in narcotics snuggling
routes. Some Indonesian businessmen are involved with a narcotics syndicate which
maintains a network in Peru.

Because of the sensitivity and importance of the case. the natter was handled
directly by the chief of Indonesian Police, according to Dar-swan.

9197
cso: 5300/8306
BRIEFS

BALI NARCOTICS TRAFFIc--Police regard Bali as a transit point for international drug
traffic, Bali is an international tourist attraction. Police Lieutenant Colonel

Drs Soetrisno, commander of the llOlst Regiment, Badung, tolo ANTARA Wednesday in
Den Pasar that some foreign tourists are narcotics trafficers who discuss deals while
in Bali. "But the trade route is not know," he noted, adding that "at present, we
have trouble monitoring every person who cones to Dewata Island because we do not

yet have the spc~ial equipnent needed, and are short of manpower." He noted that
narcotics snuggling in Bali, especially in Kuta, had dropped :onpared to previous
years, but could not cite specific statistics. {Excerpt} [Jakarta HARIAN “HUM A8

in Indonesian 16 Oct 81 p 2] 9197

SHUCGLINC CASES IN NORTH SUHATRA--80th in the nulber of cases and the anount of
evidence seized, narcotics cases handled by Police Regional Lonnand 11, North Sumatra,
have increased from year to year. The connand's Inforsation Office noted that in 1979,
there were 39 cases involving 61 suspects and 187,683 grass of confiscated evidence.
In 1980, 81 cases involved 162 suspects and 659,932 grass of evidence. These cases
were solved thanks to the cooperation of the public, which is aware of the dangers

of drug smuggling. The following data is available for 1981: January, 5 cases, 7
suspects. 72 grams of evidence. February, 6 cases, 18 suspects, 152.868 grams.

March, 7 cases. 10 suspects, 49.95 grams. April, 8 cases, 11 suspects, 68,265.50
grams. May, 6 cases. 6 suspects, 3,039.80 grams. June, 6 cases, 6 suspects, 16,016
grams. July, 8 cases, 16 Suspects and 28,380 grams, including 13,250 grams of ganja
oil and 30 grams of morphine. August, 8 cases, 16 suspects and 7,690 grams of
evidence. September, 11 cases. 27 suspects and 284,728 grass of evidence. The bulk
of evidence seized Ls dried ganja leaf and lorphine, originating in southeast Aceh.
[Text] [Jakarta SINAR HARAPAN in Indonesian 19 Oct 81 pp 1, 12] 9197

C80: 5300/8306

10
Kualo Lulpur NE" STRAITS TIMES

KUALA LUMPUR» Fri. -- The

Hat] Government plans
Isu- Inn on drug

C50: 5300/8310

who vu cloning LII.
t Non~Govonmonul
m. we

to unity 3!! ex-
uhuoe Into u

(bin!
0:-

.- .‘m . .
the mummies to

death. dually.
mum and n-

Humanism
M M W
m who‘ll which not
mmaMuw
um»

only” has“
coma-Mum
vldc couulllu ur-
«a.»

in odd an aunt!
”mum-(My
”WWW
mmmm
Audienc- could
mt“! nan-00M
”Manual-u.-
WW
KUCHING. — Th.
mte‘i rehebihtatioa an.
Ive {or drug addittt here
M been giver. an added
role — the actual do.
teetion cf drug men.

With the letter. at.
centre It Mile 6. Air.
Wt Rad, hu recently
”“1 29 9001* relerud
to it (or "minus”.

But the main vote 0!
the place. which opened
It the «an 0‘ Int yen.
is “ﬁling: eur'i'n' ol .4.
diet: in t in respect
it has now handled 206
em

0‘ the total. N. were
released cured utter the
centre‘s ulna! mat-mouth
court: 0! tl’eltmt.

Obviously though, the
treatment doeut't work
{or every addict.

O! the 53 it the cen-
tre It the end 0‘ lat
month. 23 were teeood
timers—they “ere caught
wing drum nuin elm
releue {cum-in. their
lint coune of tmunent.

.Qdm inletndo‘
statistics from the m.
tre's oﬂiur in chem,
Mr 0am sun. is m
of the 58. am but
-26) me from Kiri.
the rut {tout Kuehin‘
and mo et ell Iron
Sibu or Samar: othee
min town.

Police add that then
has been a ﬂight do.
ereue In the number cl
Kueltine addict; hem
rehabilitated and an In-
aene in number: [m
Miri.

The Meat omoa
eunmtlv time to IS. IN
e'dett 33: All use tulle.
Mm ct the editing he.
it" ﬁtted in between 2!
and 2°.

A lunhev mtiuia‘
bee-Edam is that to o!
the wines were out
drum {in l~e then a
war. 20 on than to, Me
on tun "an. in (or
thm to live mu. ﬁve
'nr six to eight wan and
ﬁve vet-re than nine
vein.

12

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010001-4

Computerized Cu- tou Controls

welltngcon 13mm; POST in English 22 Oct 81 p 15

[Text]

Auckland NEH ZELIAND HERALD in English 2‘ 0c: 81 p 12

[Text]

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-ROPBZ-OOBSOROOOSOOO10001-4

zooming mm at
_ alaod': International

upon; - bl next
year - 'illmidym

meat MP. Ir Goof!
son. Mel-m to :1: MW
muoduction hon when,

mm at
x 0 loads 0! “non!
mm In mm

mm» not
swinmunm
9mm helm In
slant-um

The m at a Cu-
tm W's ora-
mm m II: D I.
and m- ad .«
mm m up w
10 percent at the tune
mm

We how ya, yen um

Countermeasureo Proposed

Polk. an: we! um and
laden ﬂ:- menl gar! I: mm
mules an 500'
minglquﬂ-M ”Ens-"w
WW“ W ‘ .3...“ W ‘

“I." dmlli
(kn. Imamhllllhocdu

‘l'bodhctudbow Mhm.:um
mmmhodﬂ- “MM-cu
numb? [Almanac In; In W
maul um.“ ”mm“
mu m an rem col- orme
loan. mu mm In an m than
drug W V W m M
mmmu an lawman-ml
mmam-, madam-ma
In wmmwm 7.?-
nglymvdm “80.4%."3‘
human”: 30;.“
,w"“°,mm"‘”I-°‘w° .3 mum;
«mammal- mun-moo
dry. ham 3‘
“masts-mad, an "a?

m an m.m
rﬁmﬁtdwnﬂ- MW“
“Mushroom” “awnings“
”Mama-meg!” gagginﬁamﬂ

1‘
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010001-4

Tougher Penguin Sought
Auckland NZ“ 2m HERALD in English 26 Oct 81 p 3

 

[Text]
I
ﬂout-v undue: hr m m
IMMM “ﬁt“.
" ”" V" "‘ o um um
aumpuﬂmlbysaiwcu» Inna .. anwa
‘ Woman-(ml. mm
' “commune-d ° ““1
minimum MIL d
cmmthehclﬂcnnd South- rmmd
ct! Mumwhmﬂ- .5,
Hilton this wk. have rt mm
‘ command that govern» ma. ..
uuuu h an «Inn mu». numb
murmur: : 1b.. I
0_ Pm hr minimum. want "I!“
Muhmeuwmm muggy”:
Mamas Ileana (Mn any ﬂjm.ﬂﬂ [unﬁt
heme/halve than in- wﬂcll's at t.“
chaﬁngumlmoxmumnpmr unanOUIdna:r
man Immdulh
0 Do not allow an (a but: u M
onencubymmmchm. W
0 Allow for yum” “W

080: 5320/9103

15

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600010001-4
Mm.
m m
A m...
n. W mmmmmmmm ”mm.”
mm.

m.
a

mu
.wmmm

w

M

M.

minidotrlaltoda

dock

«mm—M .mmu
“:4 mﬂmwm
meWm, . mmme -m4 5mm» mm...

m.

mmmmw. ”...... a n m w.
m ....Wm “aim in.
.5 mm...” mm mmmm. mm...

Wm“ mmwwmm mum“. «mmmmmm

mm

m
m

mum-allow:

n
.aw
Mm
...
n
.m
o

./9103

16
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010001-4

COURT RULINC ALTERS DISTINCTION BETJBEN CIASSES OF DRUGS

Wellington EVENING POST in English 31 Oct 81 p 1

[Article by Jun-Baptiste Plain]

[Text]

an." mwuhm uuﬁwhnu .mmﬂnumm mhgun nuunm and

mum W... mm. W.” mum “mm“... EN...
mum.“ aﬁW W. “WWW WWW .WWW .WWWf WWW.n

”MW. m...“ WWWW mwnmw
War 31?.me .Em. .. WWW“

Wu mm mm“ mummhmu

”mm“ mm“ um.“ .36.“ a.“ .L mmwmm m.
ﬂumwmmm WWWWWWWWWWE WWW. WWW
wwmwwm mmum umMMyMMHmmmummMm ,mnw-Mmm .

mu mummmw

WWW...“ ﬂaw. Wig $5.3.

5320/9103

(:80:

17

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010001-4
sums

OPIIM 8312:!) IN PESHAM-Peohavar, Nov. 20-d'l’he Peehewar crimes police has

seized about 55 kilograms of contraband opiul in an operation on the mtbai

road here on Westley night. According to e Preee release. the contraband charao
m concealed in tour tine and was being ennggled to Punjab tron naiakand Agency
by a motor car for onward transportation abroad. 'l'he value of the coin vac esti-
uted at about Re. 50 lakh in foreign whet. The driver of the vehicle use].
man at Derqai (Halakand Agency) hoe been apprehended and a one under Section 34
ﬂedood Ordinance he: been rcgietered. [Ieialabad m msun in much 21 Nov 81
P 7]

050: 5300/4570

18
BRIEFS

COCA LEAVES SEIZED--Cordoba (NA)-Units of the third region have arrested several
Bolivian citizens while trying to introduce 377 kilogram of coca leaves fro.
Bolivia through the La Angosturs pass. The following Bolivian citizens were
arrested: Jose Coronel Rios; Aniceto Cheque; Juan Hands: Gonzalez; Ricanor Ronero;

Casimiro Torres; Andres Corzea; and Santos Gallo Cardenas. [Dumas Aitss LA
PRENSA in Spanish 3 Dec 81 p 7]

C80: 5300/ 2092

19
THREE BOATS. EIGRT HEN SEIZED RITE MARIHUANA, RIFLES
Nassau THE TRIBUNE in English 31 Oct 81 p 1

[Text] Eight nen, three boats, two sutonatic rifles, hundreds of pounds of
scale fish and almost $2 million worth of narijusna were landed by the Defence
Force at Prince George dock this norning.

They were picked up by “NBS lnagua, under the connsnd of Lt Jackson Ritchie, in
the Anguilla Cay area. ENDS Marlin, connanded by Cldr Amos Iolle. assisted
Inagua in bringing the Ian. boats, fish and drugs to Nassau.

Standing in the rain to neet then at the dock at 9:45 this warning were Defence
Force Counander Hillian Swinley, Capt Derek Hatthawe, other Defence Force
officers, and police officers.

Two of the arrested men were Colombians. They were found on Anguilla Cay.

Also found on the cay were two new US-nade AR-lS autonatic rifles. which were
loaded and cocked, and 96 bags of marijuana, with a street value of between $1.5
and $2 million.

The other nen-five Cuban-Anericans and one Anericen--wtre picked up on two
fishing boats in the Anguilla Cay area. Three men were on each boat. Cedr
Swinley said the fisher-en were in no way connected with the men found on the
cay.

Found in one of the fishing boats were 500 lbs of scale fish. and in the other
between 200 and 300 lbs. There were also "a few crawfish." The boats were two
niles off Anguilla Cay on the Cay Sal bank.

The Defence Force also brought back a Haitian sloop. which. they said. had been
stolen.

when HHBS Inagua spotted the men and boats, ENDS Harlin was sent fro. Nassau
to give support in naking the arrests. The operation took from about l0 an
to 5 pm Thursday.

P-30, a snaller Defence Force boat. brought back the Haitian slocp, which was
found off Golden Cay Thursday.

CSO: 5300/751b
20
BRIEFS

FORFEITED BAIL-Bail of $100,000 was forfeited when five men, arrested at
Bimini in January and charged with possession of marijuana and cocaine, failed
to return for trial today in the Magistrate's court. Represented by lawyer
Arlington Butler the two Americans and three Cuban Americans were Jose Camino.
20. kaul Pal. 28. Primitivo Preez. 38, Allan Xainan, 38. and John Johnson, 53.
They were charged with possession of two blocks of hashish weighing three and
a half pounds and possession with intent to supply. They were also charged
with possession of 33-1/2 lbs of cocaine at South Bimini on January 8. and
possession with intent to supply. Canine. Pal, Press. Kainan and Johnson were
also charged with possession of 73 plastic boxes containing marijuana and
possession with intent to supply. They were arrested shortly after their DC-3
aircraft landed in Bimini. The nen. who pleaded not guilty to all charges,
were each granted $20,000 cash hail. [Text] [Nassau THE TRIBUNE in English

28 Oct 81 p 1]

cso: 5300/ 7511.

21
BRIEFS

DRUG SEIZURES--Drug squad officers seized cannabis, cocaine and heroin in the
past week. Police Comissioner Frederick Bean said yesterday. M consign-

ments of cannabis were found at the Civil Airport-4.7 lb. on October 29 and
13.2 lb. two days later. The drugs are believed to have been found on board
the "ganja" flight from Jamaica. Thirty-five silver foils of heroin and 15
foils of cocaine were found in Snith'a. Sixteen arrests for drug offences were
made last week. Fifteen of the suspects are Bermudian and one an American.

[Text] [Hamilton THE ROYAL GAZETTE in English 6 Nov 81 p 5]

C50: 5300/7516

22
AUTHORITIES ANNOUNCE NEH PRICE OF COCA
Cochabanha L08 TIEHPOS in Spanish 1 Nov 81 p 7

[Text] The new price of coca takes effect today in Chapare: 4,000 Bolivian pesos
per load of 2 drums weighting about 60 kg.

Leaders of the Tropical Agriculture Federation of Chaparae indicated that the Council
Against Drug Trafficking decided to readjust the price per ahipnent of coca from

3,600 to 6.000 Bolivian pesos in the secondary collection centers of Zinahota, Villa
Tunari, and other Chapare towns.

They noted that the new price will remain in effect until November 1982, and thus

lower the price of coca on the illegal, or parallel. market as a result of the higher
production it will sti-ulate.

Moreover. they indicated that this situation will, in part, cause peasants to prefer
to sell their coca to agents of the Office of Trade Control and Inspection without
restriction, rather than illegally to the drug traffickers at night, thus risking
being punished by the police.

However it is believed that the illegal coca aarkst will also he readjusted up to
10,000 Bolivian pesos per load, because when the official price was 3,600 holivian
pesos on the legal market. on the illegal aarket it rose to 9.000 Bolivian pesos.

The nain coca market is the town of Zinahota. about 30 kilometers from Villa Tunari,
where buyers and sellers neet today.

Bradicating Cultivation

The leaders of the Peasant Federation say the eliminating the cultivation of coca "is
impossible"; what can be done is to regulate cultivation to permit growers annual
incomes that meet their economic needs.

Horeovera. technicians of the Yunges-Chapares Development Program (PRODBS) say that
one cannot speak of substituting or eliminating the growing of coca in the Chapare
district. because it is difficult for the peasant to change to any other product.

They noted that the PRCDBS programs are intended "to decrease the growing of coca
and to permit agricultural workers a sinilar profit with other products such as
palnito, naracuya, rubber. cacao, and others."

8587
C80: 5300/2070

23
NEH DRUG LAW PROVIDES FOR REHABILITATION PROGRAM
La Paz EL DIARIO in Spanish 1 Nov 81 p a

[Text] The bill for the nev Dangerous Substances Lav, besides providing for punishment
of drug traffickers in Paragraph VII, has important considerations in the areas of
prevention, rehabilitation, and research. nainly intended to aid in the recovery of
drug addits.

Thus there will be emphasis on systematic preventive education to prevent improper

use of drugs. To achieve this. pertinent work will be coordinated by the Ministries
of Education and welfare and Public Health.

Rehabilitation centers--both closed and self-contained, and open and with outpaitents--
will be built and operated in departnent capitals where the people to be treated make
then necessary. Such centers will treat drug addicts sent to then by the courts (in
closed centers), as well as voluntary patients (in open centers).

In closed and self-contained rehabilitation centers and in those existing in regular
detention centers, the latter uill be entirely independent of the rest. This section
uill be guarded by members of the National Directorate on Dangerous Substances, but
the treatment will be exclusively under the National Directorate of Prevention,
Rehabilitation, and Research.

Drug Addiction

In this field the bill establishes that, considering the use of dangerous substances
an illness or the beginning of one, it is a social duty of parents, teachers, owners
and managers of public places, and all citizens to give any infornation to the
Prevention Directorate.

The voluntary standing of the consuner or addict with that Directorate will be of the
same nature, with a prohibition on revealing the patient's nane vithout written
authorization.

Another aspect of the law is protection, when it states "Esployers cannot fire a user
and/or addict who submits to treatment under the outpatient systen, Uhether in the
rehabilitation center or in private clinics. as long as they carry out their duties
at work."

With regard to drug addicts undergoing compulsory trestnent under the closed systea,
enplnycrs are obliged to give then their jobs back vith their regular salary once they
have reached the open or outpatient period. They cannot dismiss then during a 1 year
follow-up period vith the center or clinic, as long as they perforn their duties.

8587
C50: 5300/2070

2‘
SAVINGS or COCA DOLLARS--The high profits free the purchase and sale of dollars have
caused several taxidrivers to go into that business. as observed in the vicinity of
Jorge Hilsternan Airport. when tourists arrive, the taxidrivers offer Bolivian currency
at the official exchange rate of 25 Bolivian pesos to the dollar. Many foreigners

are unaware of the fluctuations of the dollar on the black market, where they go as
high as 37 Bolivian pesos to the dollar. The tourists well their dollars for 25
Bolivian pesos. thinking they are getting a good deal. Meanwhile. the taxidrivers

are pleased with their sharpness, and make high profits selling those dollars for a
better price. The money changers who go to the doors of the hotels to buy dollars are
left out because another sector heat then out. Also, many chapare peasants now refuse
to sell their coca dollars, because they heard there would be devaluation and they
prefer to have their savings in dollars. Honey changers who until recently frequented
Zinahota have no stopped going there, since the peasants "wise up" and are Jealously
guarding their dollars in anticipation of a devaluation, to achieve greater econonic
benefits. [Text] [Cochabanba L08 TIEHPOS in Spanish 1 Nov 81 p 7] 8587

CLANDESTINE LANDING STRIPs--According to Director General or Gusto-s Arturo Doria Medina,
there are about 200 clandestine landing strips through which contraband enters the
country. That top-level custoes authority also announced that he has contacted the
Ministry of the Interior and the Bolivian Air Force to check all those airstrips so

as to prevent large anounts of contraband from entering the cauntry. Doria Medina said
that the smugglers are now using this new nethod for their illicit operations. particu-
larly because of increasingly rigorous inspections at the official airports in the
country. which has iiaited those gangs' activities so that they nust use secret air-
strips. Doria Medina act a few days ago with President Celso Torrelio Villa, who
supported the actions he has taken and the honest personnel who are assisting his.

He said this squelched runors that he would retire as Customs Director. he attributed
those rumors to interested sectors which have been especially hurt by the vigorous
caupeign to suppress smuggling which his office has undertaken. [Text] [La Pas

ROY in Spanish 6 Nov 81 p 6] 8587

COCA TRAFFIC UPTURN—-Production and traffic in drugs any increase as a result of a
surplus of coca, according to Col Rene Ocanpo, director of the National Council
Against Drug Traffic. He said that another coca harvest began recently. raising
expectations of a surplus and therefore an increase in the production of cocaine.
Nevertheless, he added that he expects that directorate will soon be set up with the
necessary means to curb the illegal action (production and traffic of cocaine). He
also announced that the new Dangerous Substances Law will soon be cospleted. giving

25
judges and prosecutors a legal base. Ocampo added that the new law will benefit
citizens. He arrived yesterday in Santa Cruz to familiarize himself with the

activities of the regional narcotics office. [Text] [Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish
1 Nov 81 p 8] 8587

COCA BUST IN SANTA CRUZ--Nine kilograms of sulfate base and cocaine chlorhydrate

were seized by narcotics division officers in an operation that resulted in the arrest
of several people. Maj Manuel Hurtado, head of that organization. stated that at about
0700 hours on 3 November in Villa Primero de Mayo a total of 7.5 kg of cocaine sulfate
was found, resulting in the arrest of Nerland Cespedes Guznan, Herminia Raquel Pinto
Zabala, Eladio Hurtado Barrientos Freddy Vacs Oritz, Lucio Anez Vacs. Ezequiel Hurtado
Burgos, and Mancio Zabala Arias. The other operation took place in the Chane Rivers
district in Warnes Province. where a laboratory was discovered actually processing
cocaine. Officers seized 1.5 kg of sulfate base and chlorhydrate there. Among those
arrested were Aldo Mclgar Erguez. Jose Pedro Kenaf, Freddy Murtado Morales, Juan Carlos
Aguilera Ortiz, and Permian Calvimontea Vacs. In addition, last Sunday in Brecha 13,
in the southern part of the city. another laboratory in full operation was discovered
and a considerable quantity of coca and other implements used by drug traffickers

to prepare cocaine were seized. It was reported that the laboratory belongs to Nelly

Vacs, who was arrested, as was her husband. [Text] [La Paz ROY in Spanish 5 Nov 81
p 6] 8587

'vowERFUL' DRUG RING BUSTED--The government has reported the existence of a powerful
organization engaged in drug trafficking and in smuggling leather and other
valuable goods after seizing two planes which were being used by members of the
organization in the Beni Department. Speaking at a cabinet meeting, Interior
Minister Romulo Mercado Gsrnica made the above disclosure and gave preliminary
details of the operation which with the support of the Bolivian Air Force, made
it possible to seize the above planes. In a statement to the press. government
spokesman Jaime Numerez said: [Begin recording] The interior minister has also
reported on a verv import-“t entidrue operation. 91th the support of tr air
force fighter bombers, two small private planes were seized and are now being
held at Trinidad Airport. One or the planes was carrying a shipment of weapons--
namely submachine guns and ammunition—-and 5 kilos of cocaine. The other plane
was carrying alligator skins. The skins are also being held in Trinidad. [End

recording] [Excerptl [PY031255 La Paz Radio Illimani Network in Spanish 1100 GMT
3 Dec 81]

SMUCCLHRS ARRESTED--Cordoba-(NA)-0ne Bolivian was wounded and five others were
taken into custody on 25 November when a border patrol surprised a group of coca
smugxlrrx [n a spot called La Angostura (in Argentina) near the Bolivian border,
nrcurdlng to a statement yesterday by border police officials. [Text] [PY060130
Buenos Aires HERALD in English 2 Dec 81 p 11]

TRAFFICKERS FORGE HOSPITALIZATION PERMITS--Ls Pet. 11 Dec (APP)--The National
Bolivian Board for Control of Dangerous Drugs reported here today that fraudulent
international medical permits facilitate the hospitalization of arrested drug
traffickers at hospitals and private clinics, from where they escaped easily.

In view of this situation, the state prosecutor has determined that imprisoned
drug traffickers or those who are being tried will have to apply for special

permits in order to obtain their transfer to specialized health centers. Probation

applications presented by persons accused of cocaine trafficking will be studied
in more detail. [Text] [Paris APP in Spanish 1503 GMT 11 Dec 81]

650: 5300/2092 26
DRUG ADDICTION, TRAFFICKING DWAS‘I‘ATING 8A0 PW INTERIOR
Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE 5A0 PAULO in Portuguese 8 liov 81 p 63

[Reportage by branch and correspondent network and Renato Wardi. who was also
responsible for final text]

[Text] Traffickers Increasing. Police Ineffectual

JL. aged 11., took so any drugs that he became ill end could no longer study; out
of shame, his parents withdrew fro. their friends and neighbors.

RF. aged 16, a pretty girl, blue eyes and brown hair, becane severely depressed
through excessive drug use and threw herself froa a viaduct.

NE, aged 26, addict for 12 years, left his job, f-ily and friends and killed hinself
with a shot in the head after taking cocaine.

AS. aged 16, an industrialist's son, obtained a aarihuana cigarette free a friend
at school and proceeded to spend his nonthly allowance and steal anney fron his
parents to purchase drugs. he was killed at a drug sales outlet in Rio.

Ll. aged 50, was a successful businessman in the furniture line with stores in any
cities. He becaae involved with cocaine addicts and traffickers, lost his stores, was
arrested and is now serving a 20-year sentence.

These are some of the drug victin cases which are causing panic and despair in the
interior of Sao Paulo State. Fanilies destroyed. girls and boys involved in criae.
Thefts, assaults, deaths-wall with the objective of obtaining drugs. "These days,"
an elderly police officer says, "the interior is beconing as dangerous as the capital.
Television and easy and rapid connections are ending the peaceful life of the cities.
we are in the midst of a dance of drugs. a dance of death. A dance of tragedies."

For 2 months 0 ESTADO DE 8A0 PAULO has been sending its network of correspondents
throughout Sao Paulo's interior to try to deteninc the status of drug trafficking
and addict ion in snall. nediun and large cities. Clinics and hospitals are beco-ing

more in demand every day. The number of traffickers has increased; the police are
ineffectual and without funds.

27
"Bridge" to Coins and Hinas Gersis

France, with 150,000 residents, is among the cities of the interior faced with the
serious problem of drug use and trafficking. Furthermore, it is used as a "bridge"

for the transportation of drugs to Coins and Mines Gerais. The local authorities have
been strict with the pushers and, in the past 2 months, seven traffickers were sentenced
to a minimum of 3 years in prison.

Despair among the parents influenced the thinking of the law enforcement agencies
which, supported by the community, decided to initiate a campaign of "moralization"
and try, as one of the instigators said, "to save the greatest number of lives."

Many children start on their way toward addiction by sniffing glue from shoe factories.
From glue they go on to marihuana and then to crime.

A short time ago, social organizations discussed this subject at a local meeting and,
with the support of District Judge Halder Bsbrogeo and prosecutors Wellington Jorge

and Lucio Tersia, collected money and purchased two new automobiles which they presented
to the Civil Police and Military Police. The cars were delivered to the police units
with the stipulation that they must be used to combat traffickers, with fuel and
maintenance to be paid for by the community.

Prosecutor Wellington Jorge said that the law is trying to rehabilitate the addict and
that “we are even giving the trafficker a chance." Action taken by the special teams
has produced results and, according to Deputy Naur Cerise, "the problem has been
considerably alleviated. Now, the families must cooperate; for, if they do not, we
shall have to place a police officer in every city block." Four persons have died in
Franca in recent months, victims of overdoses of drugs, all minors.

A total of 2,000 addicts--30 percent from 12 to 16 years old-~plus an increase in
crime (thefts and assaults) perpetrated by persons using drugs, and a lack of funds

by the police are problems experienced by Batataia, a city of 37,000 residents. This
year, six addicts were caught red-handed using marihuana and barbiturates and, in the
city deputy's opinion, the establishment of a group of inspectors for the various city
blocks would be essential in preventing drug traffic and leading to the arrest of
traffickers.

In Ribeirao Preto traffickers have been particularly active near the universities, and
sales have also increased at discotheques and movies. This statement was made by an
addict involved in a murder: "The trafficker is not an addict. as knows the harm
drugs cause but profits from that vice, trying to promote it every way possible and
corrupting youth such as myself. Because of mai‘huana I became involved in the
death of another addict and now, in prison, I see that drugs bring only misery and
cause one to live outside of reality, in an unreal world."

A police officer who worked in Ribeirao Preto until the beginning of this year estimates
that the city has more than 7,000 drug addicts and that the percentage is high in the
lZ-l7-year-old range. "People in the interior," he said, "do not like very much to
comment on this subject, but I believe the problem must be discussed at all levels of
society and not avoided. Unfortunately, the police are totally unprepared to combat
this type of crime. I am a former policeman, and I hope that my superiors will take
what I am saying as an admonition and not a criticism. With the funds and means we
have, we are even doing a lot."

28
J, aged 16, began sacking marihuana and from an addict became a trafficker. He
frequented the hose of one of the principal drug traffickers in Araraquars: heloisa
Helena de Freitas; one night, after a sarihuana and cocaine “session," he took an
overdose and died from heart failure. To get rid of the body, Heloisa and other
addicts left it at a spot far from the center of the city, where soae people found
it. The police were notified and Heloisa was arrested and tried.

AraraQuara is the city chosen by traffickers who "import" marihuana from Hato Grosso
and Goias. There has been a substantial increase in drug addiction and traffic in
recent aonths. and the Civil Police, fearing that the actual figures "light alar-

the people," have refused to say how Iany addicts there are or what action the police
are taking. But Prosecutor Sergio de Oliveria Medici stated that. in 1980, 46 persons
were penalized for using drugs and 30 more for trafficking, with 35 investigations
made due to the involvement of minors. Traffickers fro. Sao Paulo and Ribeirao Preto
are also selling narihuana and barbiturates in Araraquara where marihuana sells for
60,000 cruzeiros per kg and cocaine 7,000 cruzeiros per gras. Pedro de Toledo Square,
nicknamed the "swoke square," is where one can find the most addicts and traffickers,
since it is near the Duque de Caxias and State schools and the colleges of engineering
and surveying, law and adainistration, dentistry and pharmacy. Three months ago,

Antonio Carlos Cardoso stole a car after killing the driver and traded the autoaobile
for marihuana in Goias where he was arrested.

The Northwest-a Traffic Corridor
"ln Bauru, 70 percent of the students 16 years old or sore have already tried marihuana."

This information came from District Judge Reynaldo Galli of the First Court of
Casarca who maintains that in the past 3 years drug addiction and trafficking has
increased greatly in the city. Because of its geographical location, its proximity
to most of the highways and the railway traffic it gets from Hate Grosso, Bolivia
and Paraguay via the Northwest Railroad, Bauru is of necessity a corridor for the
sarihuana and cocaine traffic.

The police and law enforcement agencies do not believe that Bauru is a part of the
international drug traffic route, a theory discussed last year with the seizure of

a suitcase with 6 kg of cocaine found in the baggage departsent of the train station.
Deputy Antonio Carlos Pimentel of the Federal Police asserted that traffickers light

be dropping off the drugs in as many as 60 clandestine landing fields in a radius

of 60 km from Bsuru, where many kilograms of marihuana and cocaine are being "spawned."
Federal Deputy Alcides Pranciscato, who has runways on his ranches between Bauru and
Agudos, placed drugs throughout the length of the runways to prevent traffickers and
smugglers from using them.

Last month in Bauru. the Federal Police arrested trafficker Alceu Pernandes who had
been making trips every week between Pedro Juan Caballero, in Paraguay, and Bauru,
bringing marihuana. On his last trip, when he was arrested, he had 60 kg of Isrihuana
and a bill of lading for 690 kg which was to be shipped by truck. Alceu related that
his brother, Aristeu, sentenced by the court in Rio de Jeneiro to 9 years in prison
and residing in Paraguay, is one of the principalttnffickers-

29
There are many addicts in Bauru and, as in all municipalities, the police do not

have adequate resources. Thieves arrested for robbery and assault confess that they
spend almost all the money they receive for stolen goods for Iarihuana. But Beuru
also has cases of persons who died or killed themselves because of drugs. In January,
a boy of 17 was found dead in an autonobile in Jardin Petropolis.. Beside his body
were hypodermic syringes and medicine he was using. He died from cardiac arrest and
had been a drug adoict since the age of 13. There are also many boys who are addicts,
particularly in using shoemaker's glue and narihuana. In Judge Reynaldo Galli's
opinion, "the drug problem is becoming intolerable and is tending to increase still
more, not only in Bauru but in the entire country, since nothing is done against the
trafficker; the sentence is ridiculous and the trafficker can even count on the approval

of prison therapy which he does not deserve and is not capable of receiving, as a
guest imprisonment."

Harihuana sold in Jan is delivered to "city couriers" by traffickers fron Piraciacaba,
Limeira and Americana, where clandestine landing fields are being used. The police
know that 30 persons are operating in Jau selling drugs; but they cannot catch then
red-handed, and some of then are relatives of influential persons in the city. In
the opinion of civil and nilitary authorities in Jau, drug addiction and trafficking
is becoming much more serious than theft. This year, only four persons were arrested

for using narihuana, which is very few considering the large number of persons involved
in drugs .

Brawls and Killings Among Drug-Trafficking Gangs

Two boys died from an overdose of drugs; two others. addicts since childhood, conmitted
Suicide; gangs are fighting over the sale of drugs and three traffickers were killed;
clandestine landing fields for the "spawning" of marihuana and cocaine. This is the
picture of heels, now facing an "alarning" increase in drug addiction and traffic.

The police have information that Assis is a traffic "bridge" between Pedro Juan
Caballero and Sao Paulo; four traffickerswere arrested at the beginning of the year
and 500 kg of marihuana was confiscated. Statements made by the prisoners led to the
seizure of an additional 1,473 kg of marihuana in Presidents Prudente. In Candido
Note, 10 km from Assis. a plane node a forced landing and its occupants set fire to
the aircraft to escape the police. Many packages of narihuana were burned up inside
the plane.

It is estimated that Assis has 2,000 addicts and, according to the police, the pioneer
in the sale of marihuana was "Baiano Pe Torte," killed in a shootout in 1972. At

present. dozens of persons are involved in the trafficking and sale of marihuana and
barbiturates.

RS, aged 8, a glue-sniffing addict, had been missing since the night of 29 June and,
in the afternoon of 17 August, his body was found near a tree at the city garbage dump
in Ourinhos. The police arrested another minor known as “Hanguinho,” aged 9, who is
being Lrvnrﬁdln the nose and nouth for having sniffed an abundance of shoemaker's
glue. He related that RS had died after sniffing almost a whole can of glue. "He
began to feel sick and fainted. I became afraid and tried to rouse hin; I then
dragged his body over to the tree, covered hin with my shirt and left. I did not say
anything about the death because the police were wanting to send me to court for
sniffing glue."

30
This is only one of the many cases which have occurred and are occurring in Ourinhos
where the police are totally unprepared to combat drug addiction and trafficking.
Deputy Francisco Jose Rise of the city's investigation sector admitted that the so-
lution for a more intensive fight would be "an interchange of police officers, since
the interior police are unprepared and some know only narihuana and nothing of cocaine,
opium, LSD and other drugs."

Curinhos is also included in one of the many traffic routes, principally those of

Hate Grosso, Paraguay, Bolivia and Parana. A short tine ago. an autonobile turned

over in Rnposo Tavares and the car's two occupants died. The vehicle's seats were

nade of leather; the padding was of compressed narihuana and also contained anpoules

of Pervitln and 9 no autonatics. Aldo Those. mayor of Ourinhos, says he is cooperating
as much as possible with the police, with vehicles and fuel. In addition to my concern
as a father," the mayor said, "the only step I can take is to ask God to rid ne of

this problem." The Ourinhos police have a 0-16 car, a 0-10, two vans and two Volkswagen
sedans, cars used to transport prisoners, for general services-delivery of summonses-
and answering robbery calls.

In Carca, two youths died-—victins of druga-and more than 1,000 persons are addicts.
Being near Bauru, Narilia, Lina, Ourinhos and Assis, it is in Garca that the residents
of those cities buy their marihuana and other drugs. A great mnber of persons in

the 13 to 16 age range are involved in drugs and, to combat traffickers nore directly,

a "life squad" was established in Garca with its aenbers giving talks at schools and
clubs.

At least 60 percent of the adolescents in Harilia have experimented with some form
of drug. The biggest consumption is of narihuana and traffickers are operating
intensively near primary and secondary schools. This explanation was given by Deputy
Amir Neves Ferreira da Silva, regional official of Harilia, who caught 31 persons in
the art last year involved in drug trafficking and addiction.

At the beginning of this year in Tupa, near Harilia, the police seized 500 kg of
narihuana which was to be taken to the capital, and it is estimated that there are

more than 10.000addicts in Marilia and Tupa. In Penapolis the police are confiscating
small quantities of marihuana, but traffickers are operating on a large scale. About

2 years ago, after a drug "session," a young girl was placed on some train rails and
died after being run over. The case was finally investigated by the capital's police,
but, up to now, there are doubts as to those who are really guilty. The girl's boy
friend was pointed out at the time as one of the principal drug traffickers in Penapolis.

Harihuana--Drug Most Frequently Used in Cities

Marihuana is still the drug most frequently used in the cities of the interior and,
somewhat like the harder drug, cocaine, is being sold to a reduced group in each city.
In Rio Claro, a city of 110,000 inhabitants. it is estimated that almost 6,000 use
drugs, principally marihuana. A municipal committee has now been set up for the
prevention and control of drugs.

In Espirito Santo do Pinhal. 36 persons were reported as addicts and traffickers in

the past 2 years. with 45,000 residents, the number of persons involved in drugs is
increasing and particularly involving ninors. In Braganca Paulista, of the 80 prisoners

31
in the public jail 25 are being tried and sentenced for drug trafficking. The
activity of the pushers of marihuana and other drugs is concentrated principally at
the gates of the schools, and the police do not have the means to combat the traffickers.

In Sao Joao da Boa Vista and Hogi-Guacu there are many cases of marihuana addicts.
A few weeks ago, police from the capital arrested a trafficker who said he belongs
to a group who sell drugs to addicts in Sao Jose da Boa Vista and neighboring cities.

Completely unorganized, the Campinas narcotics sector is unable to keep pace with
the growing drug trade in the city. Cocaine and marihuana are being sold on a large
scale. and the most active traffickers are "Silvio Gordinho," Epitacio, Coutinho,
"Batata," "pestana,"'1bninho Cabeca Branca" and Mario Lucio. "Silvio Gordinho" is
serving a sentence for murder and, even from prison, is directing his marihuana
pushers.

In Campinas, the seven detectives assigned to clean up drug trafficking and addiction
are well known, and, in the opinion of one deputy, "we need a greater number of police
officers to handle this problem in a city of 700,000 inhabitants."

1.000 Kg per Day in Via Dutra

"Every day trucks go by on via Dutra carrying an average of 1,000 kg of marihuana,
sold in the cities of Vale do Paraiba," a Jacarei police officer says. "To escape
inspection, traffickers use the Don Pedro I highway to bring marihuana and cocaine
to other cities of the interior. There is a large number of addicts in almost the
entire Vale do Paraiba and drug pushers are highly active near schools."

Hany kilograms of marihuana are sold every day in Sao Jose dos Campos, and the same
is occurring in Taubate where 30 percent of the crime is directly connected with
drugs. Police resources are nonexistent; however, the arrest of a trafficker with
53 kg of marihuana last month enabled the Taubate police to discover a gang with
pushers in the Vale do Paraiba and the capital. Lorena, Cruzeiro, Aparecido, Sao
Luis do Paraitinga, Pindamonhangaba and other cities are also faced with the problem
of the drug traffic.

Some authorities are concerned about the drastic escalation of drugs in the Vale do
Paraiba, particularly because this area is between the country's two “principal
sources of drugs: Rio and Sao Paulo." In the opinion of Deputy Celso Haasarolo,

"via Dutra is the obligatory drug route" and Jacarei is reputed to be the distribution
center for marihuana in the Vale do Paraiba, part of Greater Sao Paulo, Campinas

and the coast.

No Age Limit in Addiction

Every day minors between the ages of 10 and 17 are becoming increasingly involved
with marihuana, and "punctures" (injections with Alfagan, Catovit and Provergil)

are killing youngsters and, in some cases, causing infection in their arms; cases of
gangrene have occured. This is happening in Sao Jose do Rio Preto where Ilta Iris
da Silva Romano. regional coordinator of the program, "Standards of Health," reports
that drugs are even taking a toll among children 10 years of age. Deputy Henrique
Celso Cherubini of the city's 2d Police Precinct advises that the problem of minors
being involved in drugs is serious. He says that many parents have come to the
precinct to report their own children and seek help.

32
Sydnei Comes Correa, aged 26, marihuanatraffickerand addict, arrived home after
smoking three cigarettes. argued with his wife, Elizabeth Carvslho. and beat her .
until she was dead. Sydnei was a distributor of drugs in the district of Arvore Grande.
in Sorocaba; he was sentenced to 12 years and 6 months of imprisonment for the murier.
After he was imprisoned, Sydnei also killed a cell mate at the Pebem Unit where he was
being held. Harihuana is sold on a large scale in Sorocaba inasmuch as the city is

on the drug route between Paraguay and the capital, passing via Parana, Itarsre,
Itapetininga and finally arriving at Sorocaba. According to the police, the number

of addicts is now in excess of 8.000.

In Capao Bonito. the police are also faced with the drug problem, but they are most
concerned with minors. In Itapetininga, 15 to 20 persons are booked each month for
marihuana use or addiction and. since 1959, the City Council has been reporting a
steady increase in the marihuana traffic. But the police are not able to stamp out
the activity of traffickers who sell drugs near the schools. In Salto. residents
are requesting stronger action by the police against assailants and traffickers.

In crimes committeed within the past few months-assaults and murders-witnesses have
said that the perpetrators were "completely drugged." Moreover, there are also many
marihuana addicts in Itu and Itarare. In these two cities the civil authorities are
engaging in campaigns and asking help from the secretary of the Department of Public
Security.

Transportation of Cocaine From Bolivia and Paraguay

The upper northwestern area of Sao Paulo State is one of the routes used for the
transporation of cocaine and marihuana from Bolivia and Paraguay to Sao Paulo and
Rio de Janeiro. In Andradina, Castilho and Tree Lagoas (the last in Hate Grosso),
frontier cities of the upper northwest, traffickers hire minors to "pass" drugs from
one side of the Parana River to the other. The children's participation became worse,
and Judge Paulo Hatanaka, while at a meeting in Andradina, changed the Castilho
prison. which had two cells, into a prison for minors. Andradina is recording many
incidents involving addicts and traffickers and, in the first 6 months of this year,
the police seized 60 kg of marihuana and booked 7b persons on suspicion, 29 for
trafficking.

In Pereira Barreto there are many cases involving boys and girls of the city's social
clubs. Drugs, a serious problen. are also prevalent among the students of state
schools. city schools and colleges, even in Ilha Solteira.

SSB, aged 22, is one of the worst drug addicts in Presidents Prudence. He cannot

get out of bed in the morning without injecting himself with some drug, and his arms
and logs are greatly scarred. "I began as a small child. I went from addict to
trafficker and now I am vegetating, for I am living only on drugs." There are many
addicts and traffickers in Presidents Prudente, and the boys and girls are not using
just marihuana but also Alfagan and Gluocoenergsn. psychotropic drugs sold clandestinely
at pharmacies.

In Regents Pcijo, a city of more than 12,000 inhabitants, there is also drug trafficking
on a large scale. Recently. one of the principal traffickers, who was supplying
marihuana to students and members of society. was assassinated in Ports Pore by
Paraguayan suppliers.

33
Police Believe Santos Biggest Addict Center

Drug use is hmaense on Sao Paula's coast, and the police believe that Santos, with
416,000 inhabitants. is the city with the most addicts in the entire state. The city
has no difficulty keeping itself supplied with drugs, since, in addition to islands
for the "spawning" of bundles of marihusna, the port is used to bring in hard drugs.
There are also many pharmacies which sell Optalidon, ether and other noncontrolled
drugs, and hardware stores sell shoemaker's glue to minors. Host of the thieves
exchange stolen goods for drugs. Here are a few figures: in 1979, the police arrested
261 persons; in 1980, 100 persons; and this year, up to September, 221 addicts and
traffickers. Even in the case of prisons, the plan for controlling those involved
with drugs is very week, according to one detective. 'ﬁhese days. drugs are running
rampant and no one wishes to do anything about it."

In Ilhahela, where many years ago international gangs of traffickers were well
established, drug use and trafficking are continuing. The age bracket of 14 to 17
is the most consistent in the use of mnrihuana and cocaine. A short time ago, BHR,
a 15-year-old girl, told of threats she, a sister and her mother had received from
a gang of traffickers. She quit smoking marihuana but is forced to hand over 6,000
to 6,000 cruzeiros per week in order not to be "singled out and killed." Certain
hotels in Ilhabela are noted as meeting places for traffickers where deals are made,
since cocaine and smuggling are "spawned" in the city. According to one of the
traffickers, the drugs arrive in large boats. In confirmation of this we have the
deposition of TR, who frequented llhabela's prostitution area and was offered money
to accompany a young man to the island of Guaeca, 3 km from See Sebastiao. They
proceeded in a yacht to a point on the high seas indicated by the ship's radar and
hoisted some sacks containing iron boxes out of the water. The boxes, containing
cocaine, were taken back to shore and to highway SP-SS between Sao Sebastiao and
Bertioga where other men were waiting and took the "merchandise" away.

Registro, Iguape and Cananeia now form a triangle in the Vale do Ribeirs. Registro
is located near highway BR-ll6 used by trucks carrying marihuana and, in view of this,
use has spread. The criminals who were arrested say that almost all the money obtained

from the sale of jewels and stolen objects was spent to purchase drugs.

Arrests--No Solution in the ABC

in the ABC {industrial sections cf Santo Andre, Sso Bernardo do Campo and San Caetano
do Sul], the police have recorded an average of 20 cases per month involving the use

and transportation of drugs, but trafficking continues heavy and without letup. The
most recent arrest of a major trafficer in this area was that of Italo D'Alessandro,

an Italian known as "Gringo," in Sao Bernardo do Campo; he was in possession of almost

300 kg of marihuana at the time. In Diadema this year, 20 persons were arrested after
being caught red-handed. 9 for trafficking. Those involved with marihuana and cocaine,

arrested by the narcotics division of the DEIC [Criminal Investigations Department],
say that the sale of marihuana and other drugs is widespread in the ABC.

8568
050: 5300/2068

34
COCAINE SEIZED, FIVE ARRESTED IN IPANDIA
Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 30 Oct 81 p 18

[Text] After a sonth of investigations, a group of police officers of the General
Department of Civil Police [DGPC] managed to catch cocaine trafficer Antonio Airton
de Oliveira Leal red-handed. At his residence--Rua Barao de Torre, 82, Apt 210, in
Ipanena--they confiscated 250 grams of the drug, precision scales, a revolver,

Checkbooks and checks signed by addicts, five address books and 58,230 cruzsiroa in
cash.

The following were a.‘ so arrested with the traffickar: Rajane Teresinha Regs, his
wife, Rosa Halvina wege, her aother, Marlene Terasinha Pedebos, a family friend, and
Carlos Antonio da Silveira Pires. an acquaintance. Antonio Airton de Oliveira heal
immediately adaitted that the saterial confiscated was his but later said it belonged

to Cesar Bastos. a resident of Berra da Tijuca, who had been arrested and later
released by the police.

Suspect Fled

The arrests were made by officers Jose Augusto, Clemente, Evilasio, Reinaldo and
Coutinho who work directly with Deputy Rogerio Mont Karp Viana, director of the

DGPC. They advised that they had been observing the cocaine traffic at that address
for 1 month but had not been able to catch anyone red-handed. Hednesday evening, the
police arrived when Cesar Bastos was leaving the apartment and tried to catch him.
Cesar threw a bag of cocaine away and fled.

"we learned fros the doorman that he had come from Apt 210," officer Jose August:

said. "Just as we were going up the stairs, a maid left the building and told us no
one was at honeﬂ'

The officers then entered the buidling, see 'ehed the apartment and confiscated the
cocaine, the checks and address books-Jive- 'th asses of addicts, a damaged 22-

caliber revolver, two scales to weigh the drug, paper to wrap the cocaine and
58.230 cruzeiros in cash.

Sick Child

When Antonio Airton de Oliveira returned later in the evening with his family and

two friends, he was surrounded and arrested by the police. lie had taken his 2-year-
old Child to the doctor. because the child was not feeling well and had fever, They

35
were all taken from Ipanema to the Narcotics Bureau where they were booked on
suspicion. Antonio Airton, who, at first. admitted that the cocaine was his (he said
he had bought it in Carumha), later denied that story and said the drug had been
delivered to him by Cesar BasLos for safekeeping.

He also said that Cesar Baatos had been arrested before he had arrived and that the
police had released Cesar. Yesterday afternoon, Antonio Airton confessed that the
cocaine was his and said his wife was in no way responsible although an addict.

 

Antonio, Rejane and Rosa were booked with Carlos and Marlene
who denied any connection with the trafficking, saying they
were only friends of the family

36
Marlene Teresinha Pedebos, one of the three women arrested, said she works at
Confecoes Lanparina, on Bus Xavier da Silveira, in Copacabana, a property owned by
Antonio's mother, and was arrested because she happened to be with the fanily. The

police learned that there were actually four persons among those arrested who worked
at Confecoes Lanparins.

with regard to Carlos Antonio da Silveira Pires, he said he was renting a house so

that his family could stay there a while and that, since he had a car, he took the
group hone after seeing the sick child.

Concerning the address books, the police said that there are dozens of uses of
addicts in the books and that all such persons will be investigated and later called

to appear. The police also seized checks in rather large anounts node out by individuals
who had purchased cocaine froa Antonio Airton.

8568
C80: 5300/ 2068

37
BRIEFS

BOLIVIAN COCAINE SEIZED-A total of 500 grams of cocaine, valued at 10 million cruzeiros
but purchased in Bolivia at a cost of 1.5 million cruaeiros, was seized Tuesday in

the heart of Campo Brande while being transported by the trafficker; he was arrested

by agents of the Federal Police Department [DPF], but his name is being withheld from
the press "so that the case will not be prejudiced in any way." Four other persons

arrested within a few days. Moreover, in Lima, Peruvian authorities advised that

they are seeking two Brazilians, accused of taking part in the assassination of two
Italians. and a Peruvian. According to the local police, the homicides were undoubtedly
a "settling of accounts" between rival gangs engaged in cocaine trafficking. [Text]
[Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 12 Nov 81 p 23] 8568

Social Order] arrested Argentine Hector Orlando Conde Pelliza, aged 29, who was

trying to board a plane for Zurich with 2.765 kg of cocaine in powder form hidden

in a corset under an elegant Italian suit. The drug is valued at 15 million cruzeiros.
According to DOPS Director Romeu Tums, this is the biggest cocaine seizure ever made

at a Brazilian airport. hector was arrested for two reasons: carrying a small suit-
case, the Argentine arranged to be the last to go aboard when the plane (which was

to take him first to Rio) was already preparing to take off; and during customs
inspection he appeared highly nervous, not knowing that the Viracopos airport inspec-
tion officials reserve special attention for late passengers. Hector became still
more norvaus upon being frisked after a check by the electronic instruments used by

the pnlice to prevent any weapons from being taken aboard. when an inspector discovered
the corset under his Suit filled with bags, Hector Conde confessed: "It is cocaine."
And he did not show the slightest reaction when advised of his arrest. "hen questioned,
the Argentine refused to reveal the names of any others implicated in the operation.

He showed a passport in the name of Sandro Caborassi, an Italian. Another passport
was found in his small suitcase, this one in the name of Jose Calabro, Argentine.
However, in a second interrogation he revealed his real name, said he resides in

Buenos Aires and pointed out the members cf the Sao Paulo connection involved in the
traffic. Until last evening, DOPS had still not managed to contact INTERPOL. Accord-
ing to Deputy Romeu Tuna, Hector Conde’s arrest has left the police concerned about

the "definite possibility that Sao Paulo has become another Europe.“ [Text] [Rio

de Janeiro 0 CLOBO in Portuguese 6 Nov 81 p 6] 8568

38
MUSICIANS WITH DRUGS ARRESTED--Drummer Roberto bins Cartier. aged 23, and guitarist
Pedro do chdonca Lima, aged 30. musicians at the Nestern Club nightclub in Numaita,
were arrested yesterdny by Narcotics Bureau agents at an apartment in Copacabana.
They were in possession of 5 kg of compressed meribuane and 3 hashish tablets. The
officers also confiscated an address book with names of musicians and artists. The
nightclub where Pedro and Roberto were working belonged to Denise de Sousa Martins
who died at the beginning of the year from an overdose of cocaine. At Apt 504 of
building 87 on Rue Francisco Otaviano. which they entered armed with a search warrant,
the agents found the aforementioned drugs, paper for packaging the drugs and a preci-
sion scale. The two musicians were booked as traffickers, and all names contained

in the address book will be investigated by the police (at present being withheld).
The hashish found at the npartmentcomes from Asia and was wrapped in laminated paper.
This was the second seizure of hashish made by the Narcotics Bureau. The first was

in 1977 when an American trafficker was arrested. [Text] [Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO
in Portuguese 16 Nov 81 p 13] 8568

DRUG TRAFFICKERS' ESCAPE ABORTED--Brasilia. 22 Oct (APP)-—The police reported
today that four Spanish-speaking armed men failed in their attempt to free two
Colombian drug trrffickera who had been detained while carrying b kg of
cocaine aboard a plane. [PY021756 Paris AF? in Spanish 1636 GMT 22 Nov 81 FY]

POLICE CHIEF DISMISSED—-Justice Minister Ibrahim Abi-ackel yesterday dismissed
Roberto Felipe de Araujo Porto. superintendent of the Rio de Janeiro Federal
Police. at the request of Col Hoacyr Coelho, general director of the Federal
Police Department. The dismissal was prompted by the escape of surgeon
ﬂosmany Ramos. [Rio de Janeiro 0 CLOBO in Portuguese 23 Nov 81 p 13 FY]

(ISO: 5300/2082

39
BRIEFS

PERUVIAN DRUG TRAFFICKERS--Arica, Chile—Carabineroa have arrested four Peruvian

citizens. one of then a woman on charges of drug trafficking. ‘mey have been
identified as 31-year old Tomas Caljaro Vicanqui. 27-year old Antonia Chmbilla
Colque. 25-year old Fabian Hanali Hanchaca, and 26-year old Cunarcindo Hanani
Hanchaca, all of whom are residents of Tacna. Carabinaroa alao confiscated 2 kg
of cocaine. With this operation Carabineroa have cmletad their 10th operation
to combat cocaine traffic and have confiscated about 26 kg of cocaine. [PYMODO

Santiago Chile EL HERCURIO in Spaniah 1 Nov 81 p (2-5]

080: 5300/2089

‘0
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFICKERS' PLAN REVEALED--After eliIinating competition by the Italian drug
traffickers, the drug traffickers‘ mafia vhose nain partner in our country is
Victor Carusso Tiburcio or Victor Carusso Lujsn. alias "One Thousand feces"

from Huanuco (living at present in Leticia). intended to invest $6 Iillion in
arms and explosives smuggling and in currency forging. The purpose of this maneuver
was to distract the police authorities' attention in order to have freedom of
action. The Civil Guard's Intelligence Service has managed, through the Civil
Guard Antidrug Department, to obtain infatuation on the Colombian drug traffic
organization's planned activities. It has also detected that pert of the noney
referred to was used to acquire properties in the Selva region and to build
luxurious hotels where they reportedly hosted drug traffickers and bought and sold
drugs. [Excerpt] [PY100008 Lina EL CﬂHBRClO in Spanish 15 Nov 81 p A-33]

CDCAINE REFINERY--The Peruvian investigative have arrested drug traffickers
Pelicita Paulina Nau (29) and Huaygua Csyllahua (32) who for over 1 year had
been manufacturing cocaine base in the "layover" shantytovn in the Lima district
of San Juan de Lurigancho, for a total amount of 10 nillion soles. Two Cubans
acted as distributors. [PY1023S9 Lina EXPRBSO in Spanish 5 Dec 81 p 8]

COCAINB SEIZUREs-ln the last 10 months the Peruvian investigative police have
seized over 4,000 kg of cocaine base and 88 kg of cocaine hydrochloride, and they
have discovered 21 cocaine base laboratories and 26 hydrochloride laboratories.
They have detected 966 drug traffickers, out of which 82 were foreigners.
[PY102359 Lina BXPRESO in Spanish 5 Dec 81 p 13]

COLOMBIAN COCAINE SHUGGLERS--Police have arrested Ofelia de Jesus Peres de Carvajal.
20, and Nudyo Maria Montoya Campino, 20, of Colombian nationality, at the Jorge
Chavez International Airport yesterday for trying to smuggle 2 and 1/2 kg of cocaine
base hidden in their underwear. [PY102359 Lima BL COHERCIO in Spanish ‘ Dec 81

p A—lé]

650: 5300/2091

‘1
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA PLANTATIONS--Baseeterre, Sun; (CANA)--Sevaral ganja growing dreadlocked
farmers in St Kitte are in police custody here after police tactical squads,

now reinforced since the army was diebanded. swooped on their plantations dur-
ing the past four days. Acting on a tip-off the squad first cane upon what

they then said was the biggest haul of narijuana that the aecurity forcsa here
had ever encountered--in the foothills of greenhill. Pour long-haired youths
who had ret up house in the area were arrested at the site deecribed "As big at
Warner Park" (the sporting centre in the capital) which is round 10 acres.

In a later raid however, police squads noved in on the ialand’a eouth-eastern
peninsula, known as "Salt Pond" and diecovered a Inch bigger, plantation, and
what appeared to be a family busineaa with two children living there, one about
a year old, and nursing bottles containing Iarijuana tea were also found, they
said. Other reports said that one dread-locked youth is in hospital in Basse-
terre following a turtle with police. Plante up to three feet tall were destroyed
on both plantations. Police have not given any aatinate of the street value of
the marijuana destroyed. [Text] [Port-of-Spsin TRINIDAD GUARDIAN in English

9 Nov 81 p S]

cso: 3300/7514

42
OP!!!“ SEIZBD IN BSPMIAN, Slum. Km
Tehran mm in Persian 2!» Nov 81 p 3

[Text] Sheniran, KEYEAN reporter. The Antinarcotics Headquarters of Bafaban and
Khomeyn confiscated 607 kilograms of narcotics and four weapons last month.

In an interview with the KBYHAN reporter. a spokesman of the chief of the Public
Relations Office of the Central Antinarcotics Bendquarters said: "By virtue of
the efforts and persistence of the antinsrcotics brothers of Esfahan last month.
380.854 kilograms of opiun, 3.851 kg of [opium] burnt cake and sap. and ‘19 grams
of heroin were discovered."

Also. the Antinsrcotics Headquarters of Khomsyn seized 17.85 kilograms of opium.
four 6-3 rifles and Colt pistols from armed smugglers. In this connection, a
number of smugglers with police records and narcotics merchants were arrested and
turned over to the IRI Revolutionary Court of Bsfahan and Khomayn, and the con-
fiscated items were turned over to the Central Antinarcotica Headquarters.

Kerman, Shiraz. Four-hundred and fifth-eight kilograms of opium was found in a
farm in Shiraz and in a pistachio grove in lerman. Regarding the circumstances
of the seizure of 395 kilograms of opium in lerman, the Public Relations Office of
the Cendarmerie of the Islamic Republic of Iran stated the following: "On a tip
from the 36-Hillion Intelligence Organization, officials of the Gandermerie check-
point at Sat Asyab discovered 395 kilograms of opium in e pistachio grove belong-
ing to a person named Bagher Hussvi. In this connection, three persons were
arrested, and naasures to arrest other suspects are continuing."

According to the KEYHAN reporter in Shiraz, officials of the Antinarcotics office
of the Revolution Guards Corps of Shiraz discovered and confiscated 63 kilograns
of opium in the village of Kolsetun in the suburbs of Shiraz.

In connection with these finds. two smugglers named Mohammad Essen noseyni. son
Khalil, and 'Abdolmajid Nasseri were arrested.

CSO: 5300/5332

43
BRIEFS

HERO!" HAUL 1N ZABEDAN--Pollowing a clash last night with a number of smugglers,
the Gendarmerie Regiment of Zahedan discovered 290 kilograms of pure heroin at the
Hormak checkpoint which is ten kilometers from Zahedan. killed one smuggler. and
wounded another. Col Razavi, commander of the Gendarmsrie area of Sistan van
Baluchestan. while announcing this news said: "At about 1800 hours yesterday, one
of the groups of the Gendarmerie Antiamuggling Area of Sistan van Baluchestan
blocked the road of some international smugglers and merchants of death at a pass
named Gazu located ten kilometers from the checkpoint of Hormsk [near] Zahedan
and, after an armed clash which lasted three hours succeeded in arresting one of
the smugglers alive. killing another. seizing five burlap bags containing pure
heroin weighing about 290 kilograms. as well as immobilizing their two vehicles.
The commander of the Gendarmerie area of this province stated that the investiga-
tion of the person captured is continuing; he is an international smuggler; and
his son is now in prison on the same charge." he added that officers are busy
investigating around the checkpoints and are pursuing the smugglers who fled. Col
Razavi said: "As a result of this big find, it has been requested that all per-
sonnel who took part in this clash get a promotion of one grade." [Text] [Tehran
SOBH-E AZADEGAN in Persian 16 Nov 81 p 7]

050: 5300/5331

d‘
BRIEFS

HASHISH 53126!) IN GALILBE-w‘l‘he Galilee police today seized 116 soles of hashish
weighing about 23 kg in 'Akko today. Eleven people were picked up on suspicion
of possessing this drug. The seized hashieh is worth about 1.5 million shekels.
[Jerusaleu Doaestic Service in Hebrew 1200 M 18 Nov 8].]

RECORD HEROIN SEIZURE-0n 25 Rover-her 3 kg of pure heroin was seized at Ben-curion
Airport. This is the largest amount of that drug that the police have ever seized.
The heroin, worth more than 0.5 million shekels. was found in the suitcase of a
33-year old tourist who had case to Israel on an El Al flight froa Paris. The

nan and another nan. both of the: citizens of the United States. have been arrested.
Com Yehezqel (Karti). the police deputy col-sander, expressed the hope to our
correspondents that the seizure of the heroin would disrupt the drug trade in
Israel. [Jerusalem Donestic Service in Hebrew 0500 GMT 26 Nov 81]

C50: 5300/6705

05
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA PLANTATION Dlscom-ﬂalanjr-Eight fields of narihuana were discovered
in the municipality of Hukari. province of Halsnje. by the OD? [People's Defense
Organization] municipal consnd. These fields. which earned thOusands of lateness
for their owners Antonio Suende. Antonio Kituxa. Doeingos Van-Dunes. Salvador
Hulato. Peliciana Hulato and Gaspar Antanio. vars discovered by the 00? during the
course of an operation in this municipality. According to intonation from the
ANGOP [ANGOLAN ms AGERCY]. earihuana growing is quite extensive in the micipality
of Kukari. a fact which resulted in the launching of a caspaign against this toxic
product which is responsible for a great part of the mental troubles encountered in
aany cities aromd the country. The people in question are being interrogated at
the provincial criminal investigation department. [text] (Luanda JOBIIAI. DE ANGOLA
in Portuguese 28 Nov 81 p 9]

C50: 5300/5615

46
celled on ell eqenciee involved in the control of drugs to wege an all cut wer
egeinet its abuse. Openins en exhibition on the prevention end control of drug

He said my people were now “19.9“ in the illegsl peddling or drugs in the cities
end villages and called on the police, the Pheuecy Board, chiefs. town mud village
comittees to help street this unﬁnrtunete eitunticn. The Minister luented that
'esny Ghsnsiens have been jeiled in foreign countries for dealing in 'wes‘ end

INRRIWI’IOIN. nauc TRAFFIC swans-dado heves Cuhsgee, one of the three sccused
persons suspected to he neebers of en internstionsl 'Vee" trafficking syndicete,
wee yesterdsy grented e 8200.000 beil with two sureties by en Accre Circuit Court.
The court presided over by bliss belie Aryee, however. rennded ‘iheophilus Ani
Bsnpoe and Julius llsyes omega, in custody. ‘l‘heophilus Beqoe is charged with

jointly charged with possessing 2,076 are-es of the "hen.” They hove ell pleeded
not guilty end will eppesr before the court sysin on Hondsy. Acting upon e tip-
off the Police Flying Squed. on Handset 16 this year, arrested 'rheophilus m
hence at his Sehon Zongo residence with ten jerry csns, eech conteinin; ps1:

oil end two percels of 'hrec" hidden in s specielly crested coqsrteent undernesth.
Ani BeIIpoe, who, according to the prosecution, indiceted he wee in lesgue with
Julius Cubegee, letcr led the police to the Grsnsds Hotel nesr the lotoks Inter-
netionsl Airport where Julius resided. It as er the Grsnsds llotel where the
police, sccording to the rosecution. errested Julius end Lerio Ouhegee with e
quantify of the leeves. Excerpt] [Acorn mm curate in English 21 nov 81

pp 4-5

CSO: 5300/56l2

47
337m

316 BEAM: BUST--Police have unearthed bhang worth nearly one million chilling:
at chui Village in Hannah. A apokeenen eaid that acting on informtion. police
searched the hone of a suspect at the weekend. they uncovered a nutter of drum
containing bhang which had been buried in the ground. The drug haul Ina worth
700,000/-. "It took than more than too boon to dig up the drune," the epokeelan
said. The search also revealed 1000/- in ten and five cent coina hidden in a tin
buried underground. Four people were erreeted end are expected to appear in e
Kangena court this morning. but mnth another 16‘ kg of bhang wee seized in

the area and two people charged in court. Sourcee told Nation array vehicles were
used to transport bhang to the village at night. The police chaeed one of the
vehicles on the day of the raid but gave up due to heavy rain. the aource added.
[Text] [Nairobi mm rumor in Bngliah l6 sov 81 p 3]

(30: 5300/5600

48
ARTICLE mm FINANCIAL ASPETS or memos mm
Copenhagen mumsm AI-‘I'EN in Danish 16 Oct 81 p 10

[Article by Troels Asgaard]

[Text] Investments in heroin yield several thousand percent. ‘lhe best
passbook yields only 15 percent annually. ‘Ihe police note that several
individuals try their luck in the narcotics trade. Within the last
month, three have been arrested. The authorities are seizing an in-
creasing quantity of narcotics. but is that l or 10 percent of the
consumption? liobody in this country knows the number of drug addicts.
nor the consumption of narcotics. but there is no doubt that the turnover
amounts to billions of kroner. Two. 5 or 10 billion kroner? 'lhe police
do not know for certain where the money goes. M hundred drug abusers
are expected to die in 1981.

Fairly often. the police at Kastrup Airport notice people passing through the
customs with several hundred thousand lcroner in plastic bags.

”Savingsuput aside at home," is the standard answer to the question from the
police where the money cones from. It is true that it is possible to seize the
money. but if there is no proof that it stems from illegal activities, it will
have to be paid back. "Although any tool can see that there is something complete-
ly wrong about that money," as a coworker in the narcotics department of the
narcotics police put it.

"The narcotics trade yields huge profits. but we actually do not have the
slightest idea what the turnover in the narcotics trade actually is." says
Mikael Lyngbo, police court prosecutor. the Department of Mootics.

In the opinion of the police, the narcotics trade is fairly constantly in the
same hands. Not with a single person but with a rather big circle of persons
who know each other to a certain extent and who cooperate sporadically in
current business. Different combinations of people who can assist one another
if need be.

"Most of the concentrate exclusively on the wcotice trade. There is far more
money to be made here than in many other forms of 'business'," ms Mikael Lyngbo.

d9
"Once they have discovered how easy it is to make quick money and lots of it,
they clearly find it difficult to muster sufficient strength not to continue,"
Mikael Lyngbo states.

But a new tendency in the market is increasingly for Northern European citizens
to try their luck in the narcotics trade on their own. Apparently, many people
cannot resist the temptation of a highly uncertain but most lucrative business,"
says the deputy chief of the narcotics department, Bent Hansen.

within the past month, the narcotics police in Copenhagen have arrested one Dane,
one Swede and one Dutchman with h kilos of pure herein in stock. Ellie amateurs

who have started from the bottom by purchasing drugs themselves abroad. ‘lhey
thus avoid a number of previous middlemen and develop their own distribution
networks in Denmark.

The police find it easier to locate these dealers because they are less smrt
than professional people. The amateurs are, for emple. not as aware of the
importance of diluting the heroin before it is being used. 'nie straws sold
on the street normally contain 10-15 percent pure heroin.

The blunder committed in failing to dilute the heroin has this year cost several
narcotics addicts their lives in that they have unknowingly consumed an overdose.

A Mere Estimate

0n the basis of investigations undertaken in London and at the hhus Youth
Center, the Anti-Hard-Narcotics Movement estimates the annual increase in the

number of drug addicts who take drugs by injection at 20 percent on a national
basis.

There are no total statistics on the number of drug addicts in Denmrk. Nobody
in this country knows the total extent of drug addiction. 'me number of.drug
addicts has been estimated at between 5,000 and 20,000 people. A number of
physicians estimate the figure at between 8,000 and 10,000.

The mortality rate among drug addicts is stated in warm FOR WEB to be
1 percent. Conversely, on the basis of 165 deaths in 1980, the number of drug
addicts would thus be 16,500.

The consumption of drugs is not known either. Nor is it known exactly how

drum addicts finance their purchases of drugs. The only fairly 'certain'

factor on which to base oneself in calculating the turnover within the narcotics
trade is the retail price in the street, where drug addicts purchase a straw

for an amount of, on the average, 1,200 kroner.

Gaps in Accounts

A total presentation of the narcotics economy in Denmark would be subject to
numerous uncertain factors.

The narcotics police in Copenhagen, for example, will not venture to state

whether it seizes 1 percent or 10 percent of the quantity of drugs mggled into
the country.

50
However, on the basis of an average drug consumption among a certain number of
abusers, the following estimates my be made:

The number of deaths aaong drug addicts is upected this year to exceed 200. If
the ratio 'of the physicians between dead and live drug addicts proves true.

by the end of the year. Denmark would have 20,000 drug abusers. whose average
consumption of 3 straws per week gives an annual consumption of 1,500 kilos of

diluted heroin e; a street value of between 5 and 6 billion kroner. For heroin
alone.

To this comes,in the total narcotics economy, the trade in Cannabis products,
Paldstsn morphine pills. cocaine. etc.

If the number of narcotics addicts who take drugs by injection is put at 10.000
or 20,000. if the comercial value in the mootics market is estimated at 5.
10 or 20 billion kroner, the turnover in Icroner is inconceivably large.

Drug addicts finance their consumption in all kinds of conceivable and in-
conceivable W6:

1. A few are employed and spend their earnings on drugs.

2. Some deal in hashish and/or hard drugs. ll'he profits are spent to cover
their own consumption.

3. some procure money through prostitution, both females and males.
‘9. Some get money froa parents, aid organisations and unemployment benefits.

5. But it is estimated that the majority finance their mrcotics consurption
by way of different forms of crime: burglary. fraud, shoplifting. etc.

The damages paid by the insurance conmies speak for themselves. he Ibpsikring
insurance company paid in the first 6 months of 1979 9.8 million homer, in the
first six months of 1980, 1‘4.2 million kroner, and for the first 6 months of 1981
the damages disbursed had increased to 21 million kroner. This money is being

paid by the policy holders in the form of increased on risks and higier insurance
rates.

Without sticking to any point of vilew, the insurance companies thus estimte that
a considerable portion of the damages paid after burglaries that have been re-
ported are due to the hunt on the part of drug addicts for "easily sold items."

the characteristic thing about this kind of burglary is that the thieves consist-
ently select valuable articles which may be converted into money. Typically,

no wanton destruction of property is couitted in connection with these burglaries.

A drug addict who is seriously addicted to heroin needs at least 2.000 kroner
each day just to cover his purchases of drugs. 111° usual way in which to get hold
of this kind of money is to commit burglary in the suburbs in broad dayliQIt
when the owners are at work. "The goods" are sold to fences or more or less
directly to those who deal. in precious metals.

51
In this way. gold and silver items. worth millions of honor. end up in smelters.
People in the business who are familiar with the situation estimte that one-
third of the turnover in gold and silver is illegal and has been purchased at
prices far below the official current prices. In the Copenhagen area. it is a
question of approximately 500.000 kroner daily which are not recorded anywhere.

0n the basis of a number of 20.000 narcotics abusers, the Anti-Hard-Ihrcotics
Movement has made a hypothetical calculation of how much two-thirds of them have
to steel to cover their narcotics consumption. Normally. the price paid by a
fence for stolen goods is estimated at one-seventh of the new value. That is
to say, that an amount seven times two-thirds of the comercial value of heroin
has to be stolen for 15.000 drug addicts. Approximately 25 billion kroner.

An amount which does not at all correspond with the insurance companies'state-

ments of 75-300 million kroner as costs in connection with the payment of in-
demnities.

The opposite calculation and an equally hypothetical emmple is to convert the
costs of the insurance companies of 300 million boner into drug addicts with a

consumption of 3 straws a week. That way. the number of drug addicts using drugs
by injection turns out to be 250.

Money Disappearing without a Trace

All those who are familiar with the Danish narcotics enviroment state unanimously
that the atmosphere has become more brutal during the last few years. Heroin has
gained considerable ground. and a drug such as cocaine. which used to be hard to
get hold of, finds an increasing number of buyers.

Cocaine is considered more chic tc use. It is being used. to a greater extent.
by a closed. luxurious clientele who are considerably more difficult for the
police to trace.

The con:=umption of hashish is assumed to be at a rather constant level.

A new factor in the narcotics market is that methadone. which is being used
legally for the slow withdrawal of drug addicts. is being sold illeplly in the
street under the same conditions as all other drugs.

According to sources within the I’htional Health Service. 600-700 narcotics
addicts are on prolonged methadone maintenance. An average methadone prescription
is of 100 milliliters per day. equivalent to approximately 25 tons on an annual
basis for the entire group.

The trade routes for narcotics to Dir-ope have clearly become disturbed by the
tightened visa requirements during the last few years on the part of the countries
in the West. It is no longer Just Chinese. Pakistanis. and Turks who are
travellers in the misery of narcotics addicts.

On the other hand. the police do not doubt that large-scale internationally
organized trade systems. to a large extent. are behind the major part of the
drugs smuggled into the country. The money taken out of the country by hand
is an indication of this.

52
The only concrete thing which the narcotics police say go by is that they seine
an increasingly large quantity or drugs. Which. in turn. is an indication of an
increased rate of smuggling into the country, presumably because the market is
growing. Police-court procecutor Mikael Lyngbo states that the cases on which
the police are working are gradually becoming increasingly larger.

"In many areas, we are getting on the track of considerably more central persons
than we previously have been," he says.

The police do not know for certain where all the money made in the narcotics
trade actually ends up.

Some of the money is spent on an enormous private consumption. Time and again,
the police will find when, once in a while, a major narcotics dealer is arrested.
that the man. simultaneously with an enormous consumption of money, has an ex-
ceedingly low legal income. And to make the confusion total. the same man may
hold piles of strange private mortgages, for example in a property with signed
debts due to people who are completely unqualified to lend money.

Another possibility of storing money derived from the trade in narcotics are
Swiss hanks, hut here the money is not very secure. seen from the point of View
of a criminal. If the police has merely got reason for suspicion regarding an
account, the money may be seized. "Honey assumed to come from the narcotics

trade will be allotted to the Swiss treasuryi' also even if the crime was committed
outside of Switzerland.

The Danish police would, in principle, like for this practice to be adopted in
this country as well. Having mysterious sums of money seized without the need
for exact identification of a specific crime.

.!‘( U NARKODGDsi‘ALD mm unnn |
.

I

Alarming increase in mortality rate among drug addicts.

     

  

Key:
1. Number of deaths from narcotics abuse in entire country.
Narcotics and Currency Seized in Copenhagen by hrootice
Department end Trouble Spotters

 

Entire 1m hitire 1280 T12 Oct 1281
Approx. Approx. Approx.

Cannabis Products eeeoee'eeoooooeoo. 9% R53. 1.” me 9% R83.
Heroin .‘D..............'..........' 12 kss. 11 m. 8 “3.
Pakistan Pbrphine Pills 7.500 pills 3,000 pills 16.048 pins

Cocaine 0...0....0...‘............'. 5” m 1 m. 10 m.
Raw Winn OOCCCCCCCO..C...’......... m We 12.75 “a. m We
Money Seized in Danish Kroner ...... 5.5 mill. 16.5 11111. 5.53 mill.

An increesingly large quantity of narcotics is being seized by narcotics police
and trouble spotters.

7262
cs0: 5300/2066

54
BRIEFS

COCAINE, HEROIN SEIZED AT AIRPORT-ﬁocaine and heroin of a street value of
approximately 2 million kroner were seized yesterday at Kastrup Airport. ﬁrst.
the narcotics police. last Sunday, brought a nun back from the airport bus for
a bodily search. In a bodybelt, he carried 551* gram of cocaine. lhe person in
question is 31-year-old Hungarian-born Canadian homes Rocsiz. who both to the
police and in a preliminary examination refused to make a statement. Detective
Superintendent Bent Hansen of the narcotics police states that the Canadian was
exposed in a cooperation between the Danish and the Swedish police. In Sweden,
they were following up a clue that he was a large-scale supplier of cocaine,

but they only knew his nickname and a connection to Demark, where the narcotics
police managed to identify him. ‘lhey found out that he was in Lima in Peru and
would be arriving at Kastrup on the Sunday. Here, they allowed his to pass
through customs without customs examination in the hope that he would contact
accomplices. When this did not happen. he was arrested in the airport bus.
Early yesterday, the customs authorities seized 27-year-old Indian Ashar Kunar
Gupta who landed, carrying a briefcase. Inside its lid, the custom officers
found 1000 grams of heroin. Gupta claimed in court yesterday that he did not
know anything about the contents of the bag. An acquaintance had paid his

fare, given him 500 dollars, asking him to take the briefcase along to Copenhagen,
where an unknown man would take it over. Subsequently. the unknown Inn was,
incidentally, to ass; at the Indian in getting to Gem for treatment of a
heart ailment. [Te..t] [Copenhagen BERLIN!!! W in Danish 3 Nov 81 p 2]
7262

...—. ——

DRUGS TIBD ’10 ROBBERIESnmenty-five percent of the number of bank robberies
which have been solved and which were committed in Copenhagen in 1980, were
comittod by narcotics addicts who had to procure money to pay for their
consumption of drugs. A total of 38 robberies were omitted last year. and
32 of these have been solved. In eight of the cases, the robberies were

comitted by narcotics addicts. [Text] [Copenhagen MIME mm in
Danish 16 Nov 81 p 3] 7262

050: 5300/2066

55
BOOK DESCRIBBS DRUG MILIBU IN NORIAY

Oslo ARBEIDERBLADET in Norwegian 26 Oct 81 p 1‘

[ﬁeview by Tore Hoel, consultant to the Central Council for Narcotics Probless. of

book "Nar du horer an mitt liv ..;/ [When I Tell You of ﬂy Life .../ by Inger
Bentzerud and John Arne Markussen/ -

[Peary 'rore noel, consultant in the Central Council for Nar-
cotics Problems. here reviews the book ”when I Tell You of My
Life" by Inger Bentzerud and John Arne Harkussen. the sale of
which has been stopped by the court. In the reviewer's opinion,

the book Violates personal privacy, but as a whole it is
surprisingly good.

In the wake of the banning by the court of sales of "the Report on Narcotics in
Norway“ by two journalists of daily newspapers a debate has begun on how "narcotics
journalism~ should be carried on. The debate is isportant because. with the present
strong focus upon narcotics problems, it seem that many are willing to step across
bodies to produce "shocking reports on the narcotics hell' in the nane of documentary
journalism and truth. In this area journalisn has a great responsibility. a fact
Inger Marie Bentserud and John Arne Harkussen are aware of . “The sass media are often
justifiably criticized for ronanticising the addict silieu and stinulating curiosity

among young people" (p 237).

In this context the book "when I Tell You of My Life . . ." must be evaluated on
whether it is a good or poor piece of journalism My answer is yes and no. First,

to take the book's much discussed introductory chapter about Mario: The criticise
about roeantization of the addict nilieu does not apply to it, but it does violate

personal privacy. It should. therefore. have been given a different fore. Addicts
and their fanilies have the sane right to privacy as other people.

As a whole, however. the book is surprisingly good. Surprising because the two
authors have in their careers contributed solely to the flood of poor narcotics
reportage: Bentzerud by presenting cocaine as the new 'in' drug) Harkussen by being

the 'press spokesman" for the physician who provided the worst exasple of inexcusable
treatment of addicts: the prescription of morphine by the liter.

"When I Tell You of My Life . . ." also contains weak and nisleading chapters but its
strength lies in the fact that the authors have, despite everything, managed to dig
down behind the superficial picture of the drug problem that duinates the uses nedia.
Many individual chapters are very good. such as, for examle. the historical presen-

tation of the "drug culture“ in Norway and the confrontation with Syphilis, of
GATHVISA.

56
The chapter on narcotics deaths reveals convincingly the role of legal drugs in
the abuse picture. The picture of the drug criminal, well dressed and owner of a
race horse, is also rich fare. But the book is uneven and straggly. It lacks a

common frame of reference, on the basis of which the individual stories could be
understood.

their sources. The quest on then becomes whom they select to inform them. who- they
let speak. According to the foreword, some were deliberately cut out, namely the
'narrow expert milieu” that for too long has held the exclusive right Of knowledge and
opinion on narcotics problems.” Who they are, we are not told. but we can guess when
we see who is missing in the book. In Norway they are psychiatry and the preventive
authorities who have had the most to do with addicts since the problem cropped up in
the middle 19603. It is strange that the experience gained here is not mentioned.

on treatment: "To an even less degree than formerly can one depend upon the addicts
own motivation for quitting” (p 242) and consequently one must ”make it clear that
one starts endless therapy sessions with talk about childhood and youth" while
waiting for an “inner change" (p 246). This sounds vague, and one asks oneself who
is standing in the wings whispering when the authors must hide their sources behind
the obscuring ”one.” when Bentzerud-Markussen attack the neglect by the authorities
they do not have enough concrete ammunition. They become only a weak echo of the
National Association's Drug-Free Society. "Those who traditionally have had some-
thing to say about the care of addicts have been too liberal in their attitude toward
them (p 234). ”The question is how long Norwegian addict care is to let the addict's
daily life and whim of the moment be decisive to the treatment offered and the result'
(p 246). ”A heroin addict is seldom receptive to sensible argument and is also resis-
tant to all competent therapy' (p 245). it is not at all clear what the authors mean
by this, other than that they want a more restrictive narcotics policy in the treat—
ment field--something that can mean a number of things as the treatment debate goes
today. Whore, for example, do the authors s.and in the matter of compulsory treat-
nent? This is not made plain. Bentzerud/harkussen go a long way toward presenting
the addict as not amenable to treatment. “ten in addition they assert that studies

in the United States "show how addiction. so to speak, spreads of itself" they are

rm dangerous ground. Treatment pessimism combined with a theory of cortagion of
house is the "professional“ foundation required to feed Carl I. Hagen's reactionary
narcotics policy. And I should like to see the study that is the basis for “the
Junorllon by the Swedish circle that one drug addict infects on the average two
others, who in turn infect two others each, and so on“ (p 234). If this were the case
we should all be addicts in Norway today. Many other assertions in the book provoke
debate. For example. the authors seem to have an exaggerated faith in information

and education as vaccines against drug abuse. Their attitude toward the use of
narcotic substances (methadone, morphine and the like) in the treatment of addicts

nurtyi's status in a chapter we could have done without. when the treatment work
that despite all has been done in Norway is described it is done summarily and with
errors of fact in a chapter given the flippant title 'Out Into the Country, Up Into
the Trees." Preventive work is completely forgotten. And other things. I find much

57
The concrete reports are the best parts of the book. Often in a condensed and

intense fora we obtain a vital impression of, for era-pie. the experience of being
isprisoned for narcotics crises. There is little help to be had in prison and few
opportunities for a new start at the end or the sentence. The entrance ticket to

the labor market is difficult to obtain. as is illustrated in the book by both figures
and examples.

The alternative projects aimed at rehabilitating addicts are also well presented. For
exanple. the ideology behind the 'Hestoy' boat project, the motorcycle project in
Barus and the treatment collective at Tyrili are dealt vith in a way that shdus that
the authors faniliarized themselves with the probless and becaae sympathetic to both
the leaders and the youths in the projects. It is. therefore, doubly regrettable

that the book does not discuss in which way these projects are to be alternatives to
the treatment work of a sore established apparatus. i.e. psychiatric health care,

or do the authors think alternative treatsent should account for all treatnent?

When drug abuse is discussed it is easy to get lost in the young addicts group. It
is to the credit of Bentzerud/Harkussen that they subject the society of intoxicants
to a broader debate. in which abuse of legal medications is also a part.

it is said in the last chapter of the book that 'the struggle against 'dope' is a

struggle in the area of culture,‘ i.e. an ideological struggle. Thus Bentserud/
Markussen surely regard their book as an ideological call to battle.

11.256
C50: 5300/2069

58
FUNDS APPROVE) P03 INCREASE WICSWL 3mm
Oslo MENPOSTBN in Norwegian 14 Nov 81 p 10
/Xrticle: ”Starting Says Yes to Increased Struggle Against Narcotics:7

/Text/ The justice coanittee of the Storting supports the proposal of the uinistry
of Justice for extra appropriations of a total of 17.8 sillion kroner in this year's
budget for intensifying the struggle against drug abuse. live million kroner is to
be used for an opinion campaign. counties and municipalities will receive increased

support, and the prison system. the police and the custms service will have increased
resources at their disposal.

Morten Steenstrup (Conservative). spokesman for the proposal in the Storting. points
out to A'ﬂ’ENPOSTEN that the justice couittee regards it as a very serious matter
that professional drug gangs have plainly picked Norway as a new market for drugs and
that the comittee is also aware that recently cannabis and heroin have been increas-
ingly available in this country.

“This is a very serious matter. The justice co-ittee. therefore, asks that the
struggle against narcotics be escalated. It is disturbing that in sale silieus the
use of cannabis is socially accepted. All drugs are dangerous. even hashish. It
must be euphatically asserted that all drug abuse. even in ssall amounts. may produce
lasting harmful effects," says Morten Steenstrup.

Five million kroner is to be used for a broadly based opinion camign. The Conser-
vative Party. the Christian People's Party. and the Center Party want the Central
Council for Narcotics Problems to act as the secretariat for the camaign. while the
minority, the Labor Party, wishes a separate secretariat established. The justice
committee unaniaously approves of the proposal for an extra appropriation of 4.3
million kroner for the work of counties and municipalities on drug problem. In the
opinion of the comittee the means should be used where the problem are greatest.

The justice connittee supports the social ministry's proposal for aid for parents
of durg addict children. In the opinion of the consittee 1.5 million kroner should
be set aside for such efforts in the budget for next year. In the opinion of the
comittee members a visitation patrol should be established to prevent snuggling

of narcotics into prisons. and use of urine sasples to reveal drug use anong prison
inmates should be increased. The police are also to prepare for data processing

of all available information on drug cases. at a cost of 150.000 kroner. The
justice comittee‘s approval of a further appropriation of 1.3 sillion will provide
an electron microscope and other special equipment for the criminal police.

59
In addition. the comittee thinks the narcotics police should have none scout

cars, more radio equipment and other material this year. at a cost at 3.7 ninion
kroner. The customs authorities will get a new diesel-driven boat for use in the
Oslotjord area. In addition, custom oust equip its border patrol cars with Nordic
mobile telephones. In total. therefore. this year's appropriations for custc-s will
increase by 2 nillion kroner.

11. 256
C50: 5300/2069

60
BRIEFS

HOOD-AMERING PILLS IN mark-Strong tranquilizers are extensively sold in the
street and in sons cafes in Trondheim Pills of various kinds-among then Valium,

vival, Surnontil and ’rruxslucan without difficulty be bought for between 10 and 20
krone: ea :h. “I have suspected for a long time that this was possible. and I wanted
to try to buy some pills myself. Without difficulty I obtained a vial containing
Sumontil,' says a 30-year-old man to s-snssssu. Ile paid 200 kroner for 100 pills.
The deal was sade in the street. The vial bears the mark of a label free a drug
store and the nase of the patient who really should have received the Isedicine. The
label had been torn off when the 38-year-old bought the vial, of course. There are
indications that the pills are medications legally prescribed by physicians. Instead
of using the pills themselves. sons patients sell the- to drug abusers. Whether
some of the tranquilizers sold in the street in_‘i’r_ondheia originate at Reitgjerdet
Hospital is for the tise being uncertain. [rextl [Oslo museums-r in Norwegian
24 Oct 81 p §/ 11.256

C50: 5300/2069 3ND

61