FOR OFl-‘ICIAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10032
6 October 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 46/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGFT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10032

6 October 1981

WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(POUO 46/81)

CONTENTS
EIA
AUSTRALIA
Briefs
Harihuana Crop 1
Heroin Smuggling Conviction 1
“0N6 KNG

Narcotics Chief: Go After Drug Traffic Funds, Assets ,
(SOUTH 011M mmmc P051, 15 Aug 81)............................ 2

Custom Department Podemization Aids Narcotics Fight
(SOUTH aiINA mmmc P081, 17 Aug 81)............................ 3

Female Custom officer Has Top Drug Detection Rate
(SOUTH CHINA WWINC Post. 17 Aug 81)....0...oooocvtooooooooooocc 4

Article Describes Life at Drug khabilitation Center
(Tavier Lou, Lou Uni-Kong; SOU'DI (“INA mMING POST, 7 Sep 81)... 5

Heroin Base Seized From mduty Detective at Airport
(SOUTH OiINA MORNING P051", 29, 30 Aug 81)........................ 7

First Such Arrest, by Walter 012mg
Detective (merged
Editorial Comnt

Detectives Make Record Haul of High-Grade Heroin Base
(SOB?!i GiINA “DINING POST, 26, 27 Aug 81)......................... 10

Seizure Total 25 Kg, by Frank 0101
Company Owner (harged
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Amterdam-Bound Woman Arrested, Heroin Board in Baggage
(scum GINA MORNING POST, 27, 28 Aug 81)......................

Seizure at Airport
Cmtons Staff Boosted, by Roy Bdlonds

Ship Mere, Charterers To Face Tough New Drug Laws
(Halima Guterres; SOU'nl GINA NJRNING HST, 3 Sep 81)..........

Brie fs

Drug Syndicate Smashed
Thai krchant Jailed

INDIA
Minister Reports Opium Stocks Accumulating
(ma HINDU, Ssep 81)....OOOIOOICCOOO0......0.0500000000000000.
ija Sabha Discusses Steps To End Drug Smuggling
(m3 TIES OF INDIA, asep 81)....000OOOOOOOOOICIIO00.0.0000...
Briefs
Calcutta Marihuana Haul
Opium Seizure Near Amritsar
INMESIA
Indonesia Used as Transit Area by Drug Syndicate haters
(smARHAmAN' 5 Jul 81)....‘0000000000000001 OOIIOOOCOOOCOOOO
Briefs
Narcotics Trafficking Centers in Jakarta
NB! ZEALAND
Fears of large-Scale Heroin Smuggling Not Realized
(NEW ZEALAND HERALD, 31 Aug, 1 Sep 81).........................
Seizure Total Increases
Other Drug Abme Rises
PAKISTAN

Finance Minister Affirms Government’s Policy on Drugs
(Editorial; THE PAKISTAN TIES, 11 Sep 81).....................

Briefs
Quet ta Heroin Seizure

Pakistan-Iran Border Heroin
Heroin Extraction Plant Discovered
(hares, Oplll'l Seized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (“LY

LATIN AMERICA

BRAZIL

International Ring of Cocaine Traffickers Arrested in Rio
(0 cho, 29 m 81)....ODOOIIOUOOIO10......OODOOOOOIOOOOOQIIOOO

Bolivia-Netherlmds Drug lbute
[retails of Drug Operation

Arrests of Drug Traffickers Detailed
(0 6mm, Val-mm ates)IO...O000......OOIUOOIOOOOIOCIIOCOCOOOO

Arrest of Trafficker-Rapists
Arrest of Government Official
Arrest of Spaniards, Uruguayan

Briefs
Drugs ﬁlmed in Caju

Problems With Drug Incineration

COLOPB IA

Traffickers, False Cops Arrested
(EL lemo. 26 Aug 81)....UOOOIOIOOOOCOOOOOOCOCOOO...IOOOOOOCCOO

Traffickers' Arsenal Seized
(BL HBWO’ 9 M8 81)....OOOOOOOCIOOCOOUOOCOOQIOICOOOOOOOOCOIOOI

Briefs
Drug Raids Described

Former Judge Sentenced
Cocaine Seizure Described

PEXICO

Trafficker Ordered Meaty Murders
(Rafael Edina, Victor Payan; EXCEISIOR, 27 Aug 81)............

Drug Raids in Five States Reported
(EXGISIOR, 20 Aug 81)...0000......OOOOOIOOOOIOOOOCOU0.00.00...

Briefs
Ecuadorean "omen Arrested With Cocaine

Drugs Seized in Pbxicali, Colima
Cocaine Seized in (hetumal

Opium, Other Drugs Seized

Cocaine Trafficker Seized at Airport
SSA Incinerates Assorted Drugs

FOR OFFICIAL [BE (NIX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NE'IHERLANIS ANTILLES

ERRATUN: In JPRS L/10011 of 25 Septeliaer 1981, No YOUO 64/81 of
this series, please make the following corrections in the article
entitled "Cocaine, Heroin, Harihuana Smuggling Activities" on
page 26: '

In the subslug and paragraph three, "Seaview" should read
"Zeezicht."

In paragraph two, "tens of thousands of gilders" should read "tens
of millions of gilders."

PERU
Briefs
Drug Burning Operation
Harihuana Plantations Discovered
Anti-Drug Operations
Drug Ring Deserter
Coca Planting Eradication Plan
VENEZUELA
Briefs
Drug Seizure
NEAR EAST AND NOR‘m AFRICA
AFGIANISTAN
Briefs
Opium Seized
IRAN

Briefs
Smuggling Operation Halted
Smuggler Sentenced
Drug Arrests
Sabzevar Opium Haul
PARS Heroin Haul
Opium Seizure
Narcotics Seizure
Drug Seizure

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“)R ("51‘1“ Isl UNI \

S lB-SAHARAN AFRI Q
MAURITIUS

Briefs
Opium Seized

WEST EUROPE
FINMND

Narcotics Police Discuss Illegal Drugs Pactoris
(“EISINGIN smomr’ 18 m8 81)QOCIOOOOOOOOODIQIOOOO0.0.0.0000...

Medical Authority To Tighten Prescription Controls
("Isl SUM. 20 Aug 81)....OOOQ...00.05.000.900.00.000.000.00...

NOWAY

Justice Minister Pledges Increued Funds To Stop Drugs .
(‘lhorleif Andreassen; AF‘ENPOSTEN, 27 Aug 81)...................

Authorities Step Up Drive Against Drug Violators
(Jul-Ivar Askelin; SVENSKA manner, 13 Aug 81)................

Briefs
Hashish Spreading in Society

SHE [EN

'mo Swedes, Greek Bmded Sentences in Narcotics Case
(Henrik 5km; SVENSKA DACBLAIET. 8 Aug 8b)..............-.......

Police Break Up Gang which Sold ﬂashish to Youth
(”ms “HEER. 28 Aug 81).OIIDOOOOCCIIIOOOOOCOCIQOOCOCCOCIOOOO

Norrkoping Custo- Seizes Record Anomt of Cannabis
(scum mun; DAENS WEBER, 28 M8 81)....0.’ICCOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

Police Find Additional Drugs on Pakistmi Ship in Port
(sme olofson; SVENSKA Dam. 29 M8 81)....OOIOOOOC'OOOOOOI

Restaurant Owner Accused of Smuggling Heroin
(Claes von Hofsten; SVENSKA DAQLADET, 29 Aug 81)...............

Club Owner (harged in Heroin-Smuggling Case
(Claes von Hofsten; SVBNSKA DAQIAIET, 1 Sep 81)................

Briefs
Pakistani Drug-Smuggling Ship Freed

Scandinavians Cooperate in Drug Fight

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIE?S

HARIHUANA CROP-«The police yesterday released details of the discovery of a
narihuana crop at Hanneroo with a potential street value of $2 million. A CIB
spokesman said that the 23,000 seedlings were found in virgin bush north-west

of the "anaeroo lion park two months ago. The discovery was kept secret till
yesterday because drug-squad officers had hoped to clear up the matter quickly.
But their inquiries had set with no success. The CIB spokess.n said that 11
plots of plants had been found on private property. The plots were arranged in
a rectangular shape. They were surrounded by overhanging trees, which prevented
serial detection. The potential crop also was surrounded by steel posts and wire
mesh to protect it from grazing stock. No other details were available last
night. [Text] [Perth THE "EST AUSTRALIAN in English 12 Aug 81 p 1]

“BEGIN SMUGGLING CONVICTION-A mother of two young children who concealed 23
packages of heroin internally and tried L0 bring them into "A was convicted in
the Supreme Court yesterday. Dianne Marjorie Jeffries (26) was said to have
bought the heroin in Penang, Malaysia. and packed into condone which she swal-
lowed before boarding an aircraft for Perth. Mrs Jeffries, of Kew Street.
Kewdale. pleaded guilty to importing and possessing 26.5 grass of heroin on
February 7 at Perth Airport. She was remanded for a pre-sentence report.
[Excerpt] [Perth THE REST AUSTRALIAN in English 18 Aug 81 p 17]

650: 5300/7585
unnhvllcs CHIEF:

am a

CO AFTER DRUG TRAFFIC FUNDS
Hong Kong SOUTH CHI

tem of int
mm and
much and I much lea can:

When
consider-N
neurons and

«tested he had
e gambling gon-
mtemts m a
legitimate butt-
!) as 'resmmuu
' mutter". thm

1ny wandered
mooey from it

He aid t
nation it

rained met time
t 40.000 ant;

kwuumwuu.
1 straight mutter hey but no infor-

orruuds fromthelu

clear that there
much more ”phi:

must he I
timed sysn

mutton! co- r:
exchange oroiﬁo‘
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060009-2

CUSTOMS DEPARTMENT MODERNIZATION AIDS NARCOTICS FIGlﬂ'

lions Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST 111 English 17 Aug 81 p 19

[Excerpts]

The moderrtiaation ol' the
Custom and Exeiae Depart-
rnent is nearing completion.

The Coatmiaatoner of C»
tome and Controls. Mr Dotty-
laa Jordan. who nae hroar
“2'3"...“ “‘3'"‘“tim"
to t at.
eaid he was eatial'ted
can the melt: to lend over
t

r Jordan aaid one of the
remaining itenta on his agen-
da is to integrate the trade
toetion oil the naive Trade
lndaatvy and Cutouts De-
partment. with his man eas-
ton tection.

He .that thta an he

aeoontpl' helore hie tertn
foam expires at the and of

“The reason for the inte-
grsion it tether simple.“ he
ea

"l’hetwoaeetionaoorne

'nndar the auto departntent.

and althoaah their tutu til.
ler.they have the same goal.
"That is to maintain
Hongkon ‘3 good name
ahroadJI heritiainre-
"“ 1‘ "332““..“ti”
ante tn; n " ea .
#1 Jordan “gone ofthe
hiueat improvements ia the

C80: 5320/9089

~fottr years he has been with
the department is in the Cu-
tonts lnvesti tion' Daren
and the In licence Unit.
which have had extreme! Ia-
vottrahle malts in pat ling
air and tea roam into Hm-
hon; and teizinn drags and
otheroontrahand

“I attest attrlhate the re-
ealta to the oﬂloen of the
Cl! who have sometimes had
to work eontinaouly. night
and day." heeaid.

Mr Jordan eaid plans are
in hand for increasing the
department's aea patrols.

Ie the near More the
fleet woald split ap into
sectors with the main hate at

_ rtimcm

“I think “at; very impor-
tant that re keep the tea
roatea covered to as to entire
that nothing till he ahle to
alipthroanhourlin re.“

Plans to prov' hetter
aeoornntodetioa and beneﬁts
for d rtrnent worker: are
gradua Iy hein; realited.

with only six expatriates
rentaini in the whole of the
Trade In nary and Customs
Department there will he a
day when the department will
he operated hy an entirely
loealttelf.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000400060009-2
FD‘IALE CUSTOMS OWICER HAS TOP DRUG DETECTION RATE

Kong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNIliG POST in English 17 Aug 81 p 19

[Text]

A roman customs oﬂieer
has twice been commended
by the Commissioner of th
toms for having the hi hest
single detection rate of rogs
smgggled through Kai Tat
airport

Chic! customs ofﬁcer Li
Suh hen. whojoined the Cu-
toms SerVice IJ vearsl o.
detected more dru at t e
airport than any her male

rts dtsrtng her years
of service with the deport-
ntent.

Miss Li s latest ftnd ll the
airport last month was a eon-
si ment ofNo J heroin base
I 'h was concealed in )6
haireream ars brought to
Thai hong y a man from

She“ told the SCM Post
that her high record of detec-
tion was mainl) achieved
through commonsense.

Miss Li re:.t|led that her
ﬁnd last month ‘as no sur-
prise. because "tho would
want to bring jars or hair-
cream to lionakottg when
:here ore so moo) cheaper
brands available here."

She said when she Ited a
pencil Into the side o one of
the ’35 containing the hair-
eream ll looked as though it
Ms enu-ne

she repeated the
move through the centre and
realised that the pencil was
being diverted

When she emptied the
cream there was a false hot-
tom containing the heroin
hose.

“is! Li also recalled her
ﬁrst big hreslt two years ago
when she had to search a man
who was in a wheelchair.

“He was about 70 and had
with hint ﬁre small stools
which he said were a gift to
his friends in Hongltong.

”Again. why would on)-
one ant to bring in stools as
hm. e ally then the mart

d di cult) m min
was conﬁned to a u eel-
chair.” she said.

"When I poked a pencil
through the le 5 of the stoois
I found that al were stuffed
eith plastic lugs containing
heroin hose.” \itss Lusaid

Miss Li's remrd oi detec-
tion has earned her no com-
mendations from the Com-
missioner and she u proud of
them.

Miss Li. uho ts named
and has a sort and twin girls.
cums her job In the Customs
Department

"I think I made lhe nght
choice when lptned I) tears
ago. 'she and
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007l02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060009-2

ARTICLE DESCRIBES LIFE AT DRUG REHABILITATION CENTER

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST In English 7 Sep 81 p 25

{Article by Tavier Lau and Last Vat-Kong]

[Text]

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000400060009-2

There is an idyllic is-
land in Hon ltong — a
Shangrtla o sorts —
Where the inhabitants all
call each other brother.

For them the pressures of
Me are almost nil They work
or study pretty much as they

. that“. are prurided trill! three

good meals a day and they go
swimming or hiking as the
mood moves them.

They can wear Whatever
they wish and most opt for
only a pair of shorts and sent
dais.

Their sun-tanned bodies
glow with good health

And it ts all free.

The ice of admission is
drug ad iction.

his Shangrila is Shel:
Kwu Chau Rehabilitation
Centre for male drug abusers
run b the Society for the .-\id
and ehabilitation of Drug
Abusers.

Since it was set up in
I961. the centre has helped
thousands of addicts

Many soctal workers and
medical practitioners from all
over the world have beer.
drawn to it by its fame.

The addicts are given
vocational training after
detoxification and are recom-
mended to stay on the Island
Where they can full recover.
physically by nor mg and
exercising and menu", with
the help of counsellors who
are mostly former addicts.

But some staff members
on the island have et ted
the fear that whi the
centre‘s treatment seems to
be effective. more and more
fornter inmates are returning
for treatment.

One addict holds the
undistin uished record of
being a mitted ll times. and
quite a number of the inmates
now on the island have been
in the centre about three or
{ourtimes

“Those who come to the
island now just don‘t have the
will power to rid themselves
of the habit.” said a longtime
staﬂ member who is himselra
former addict.

He recalled that when he
came to Shek Kwa Chau

more than I0 years ago it was ’

with the utmost determina-
liotl to give up the habit be-
cease it was the rule then that
one was admitted for reha-
bilitation only once in his life-
time.

This rule has been abolish-
ed and since then he has seen
the same faces again and
again

“The addicts not don‘t
seem to strive very hard to
keep away from drur alter
they are discharged or they
know the can always go
back to S eh Kwu Chau or
other treatment centres which
are open to them." said the
stall’ member.

However. he admitted that
it is not easy for an addict to
turn a new leaf.

“It i
that uni:
nating.”

“It s
males yt

tall th
tf .

ﬁ'Bacl
environn
an ext-at
is likely
again It
edandc

“Sort
also srr
rebelliot
they ft:
themhet
Ingt en

The
out \"l
haveoo

"I h
sider tel
smokinl
membei
and with
island [-

“l i
would s
daughti
able lil
smoking

"Bu
diets at

"Th
there
lead a r

“50‘
am for
though
time 3
interest

UN
has dot
it can t-
= .u 33 a Gain: «2:.

$.3- nwoa 253 «a: '33
.83 3.5:... 22:6 3.. a
.25 "53.. 58 2.652 5.
330 $8 :3 .83 3.228
2:8 .5 t: Z.

J an; in; 3 33» 8 u
:3. 3:32.52 8 :2. a
sat ..”.o we. 52. 25 was. _
to... can.” 8 .3 a: 333-

..= s 3:. 8 a: can on:
nan an... 32.9 m: .n an!
228. I: = w :2 8...

9: Ir: :8... .313 8
u not 228 IE. 3a.. 395
..33 163 can an: .2 8:.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02l09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080009-2

llEROIN BASE SEIZED FROM 0NDUTY DETECTIVE AT AIRPORT

Pits: Such Arrest

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA HORNING POST in English 29 Aug 81 p 1

[Article by Walter Cheung]

[Text]

Customs ofl'toers
yesterday seized two
bags of heroin base
from a detective
constable on duty at

_Kai Tak airport.

The ofﬁcer was inter-
cepted with the drugs —
worth $900,000 on the
retail market if convert-
ed to No 3 heroin — as
he was leaving a toilet in
the airport's restriCted
area.

It was the ﬁrst tune a
police ofﬁcer had been arrest-
cd in connection with drug
trafftclung at his: Talt. a reli-
able source said.

Up to early this mornmg.
investigators under the com-
mand of the Senior Su rin-
tendent of the Customs nvca-
tiption Bureau. Mr K. S.
Tong, were still trying to
trace the source of the heroin.

It was believed that the
detective constable had help-
ed an arriving passenger
transfer drugs inside the toilet
before the passenger wcﬂl_l0
the customs counter for in-
women.

Customs offenls suspect
that Hongltot.g's high detec-
tion rate and tight watch at
the airport had forced drug
trafﬁckers to hire the consta-
ble.

Following his arrest. inves-
tigators seized a note boolr
belonging to the ofﬁcer in his
locker at the airport.

Sources said customs ofﬁ-
cials were still studying the
addresses in the note book '0
see if the people mentioned in
it were involved.

ClB ofﬁcials were also
vetting passenger lists of
flights arming near the tune
of the seizure.

The detective coostable‘s
arrm came after four months
of investigation into a local
intell:genee report that air-
port staff who had access to
the restricted area were in-
volved Iﬂ drug trafficking.

The report and airport
staff ‘llh permrssron to enter
and leave the restricted area
carried drugs for passengers

At ﬁrst investigators sus-
pected cleaners and airline
staff who also have access to
the restricted areas.

They finally narrowed
possible suspects to police
ofﬁcers and suspected that
drug trafﬁckers used the to:-
let totransfer dru .

Yesterday-.0 ofﬁcerson
the lookout within the re-
stricted am noticed | man
walking in and out of the
:met behind the animus
matter at the usual OWN“,
several mm in about In
m.nt::cs.

They-raterce ed the man
and found tv-o gs of drugs
on his person — one tied to

the abdor
the left lq
Follow
ed that tl
dut dete
been
Talt for m
The ol
his revolv
found in h
C is
raided tin
Kun Ton
Boundary
further ar
ed The so
to app:
Court ted

mm

C [3
would inl
lancz‘iu
lPl'lemswlbl
Triangle.

They
trafﬁcken
more sc
better-org
smuggle
ofﬁcialso
d He sa

rugs set
had incre
percent t:
the oorrer
year.

Before
last one in
airport or
2.5 ltg of
found in
26-yard

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080009-2
De rec t he Charged

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 30 Aug 81 p ‘

[Text] A We W ar. 0. the applkatlo
wwmm omens u wee-tho. the at
the hat aha ooFrld.’ renaaded Chang la
kWh-naught. uttlSeptu-bersto
L7“??? 3'. K W '

a “I “on Sedoe -
your”. that '“5 Dos- W
aaoioeold .31. .d'na 1., gmm'“ W“
an n” d that. Gears application
No all r sa tilts was a vet]
its “ tom 0 eoee atolriag 1.
Cheat lentil mt. when u. leroh wtta e retail
$900.00..

a "die! e." ‘
gstuta'u'h ""

Ed not 1411 Cement

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 29 Aug 81 p 2

[Editorial: "War on Drugs Is Far From Over")
[Text]
H hauls of this an den «tin the st few eo-operatlon of the an
magnate made "‘30 draught the Warngaiast border. could play e a
narcotics smugglers is far fro. Met. on a relatively new polt

It has been a record gel! for custom! Investigation
ofﬁcers and the police. More than 5&5. million worth of
drugs have heett seiud. with their blue?! success. I
haul of 25 kilograms of -\o 3 w». llns week. And
the arrest at Kat Talt yesterday 0! ea oo-dety
policeman alleged to hate drop map 0 to his body
may mean another significant omit tough, So we
can he jastiliahly proud that these em"! melanin out
line e of being probably the that successful in the
no d in dealing With the narcotteg pro

But 0|ch the Custom [mall etloa some
reel;o that the s‘llze of the seine“ it rates mt the
out rides are oh»: “Wm! Well.“ "Well
this may only he the tip 0! the leeltdt- A senior C13
ollicial conceded this week it is with large alto-ll!
are ettlog throu hundetected.

on'honx's tee to" policy omens enotm
ptObletns In controlling the no» or d So there la
no way of assessing the scale of m In thing.

Signiﬁcantly. howeter. the police he" not ruled 0"
the possibility 0! drugs bell; ed in via a new
trail pushed off through. Chlm, hnottsly a break-
throttgh in this area. it thus is has.“ a source, with the

555 lint »

The CIB ls conﬁde
used as a tttaior trot:
known instances ol’ dt
ﬁve years it seems

isolated cases.

But the bumper l‘

: Golden Triangle has
- 50.000 Iddicts. So tht
' trafﬁckers being tetn

ooeeseoo-u

cheaper drugs here an
eeatre.

Afler all. the proﬁ
worth taking the risk

- afford to relax vigila
'oar borders. Unlike T

has no death peualty v

One puzzle is whe
locally. The site of
seizures indicates the
toriea heck ltt hush
underground as the 1
process is usually eat
Ied res-operation of ll
rles are lo he smasher
One 0! the frustrations lacing the illicit 51::
ﬁghters is the helm at legislatiie hacking {or Jetai
investigation into where drug lunds are channelled.
Commissioner for Narcotics. \lr Peter Lee. has long
louzht lor proiislons to strip the kingpins of the trade
0! their profits. He feels the next line of attack on the
drugs business must he to go after the money and the
assets of those who direct. ﬁnance and manage It.

But the Government seems to he reluctant to gm
this nettle. For there is no simple solutlon to closln; a
the legal loopholes. Certainly there Is no sense in
launching an ea ire court action If It is goin to
founder on on in ringement of the d runner‘s rl ts.

It is generally known that our .\lr lgs launder their
narcotics money through legitimate businesses such as
restaurants or real estate dealings. But our law makers

will have to decide whether proﬁts from these interests
can he conﬁscated.
Mr Moms shows of! [M h-gh—gada drugs haul. watched by Mr Hui.

Narcotics Bureau dclcctivcs seized 25, The bureau‘s chief staff ofﬁcer. Mr John Mor-
k of herom base from 3 ca b:ct a d ns. sand [was the biggest srnglc scuzurc of Pug
afrcsted the driver when they rpounced ﬁn and: hem" base CV“ made '0 Hongkong.

The drug would have been wonh Sll million on the lomi
markcl ifoonveneq into No 3 hcrom. Mr Mom: sud.

North Point yesterday.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060009-2

 

Mar: nun too detective ~ nhoqt "yo-thud or tn: m i: . m-n bl" to
burau's total mmr —- in: runs. In North Punk m but 4'“ tutu but
yulerdayundeer Moms't mm. . ‘ I ")0! tritmt I." the 9°-

Thcy stopped a T on sedan II the ﬁlmuoﬂ o! Tut Tu “a: in the !'

. . I ht luimt drug
Mun Rand Ind Km": and mu Sh Kn; Strut II 8.30 am. ~ .n .

In the boot were two anon: mum!" 48 pckeu of .mfmwh‘?d. bureau
bermn but. The Arm: to I 30-yar-cld mm at Potomac tutor m" ofﬁcer. Mr Eddie

on n. , HI' the en t retail '
r.- wil! nppar ll Cutaway Bay Mmtncy why to {we I“; kg cm 3 hum
charger. of drug mfﬁcluttg. ' _ A “a" 3! 50.000.
After manning the mamdcxwwunndadfonr wanna This H mm chap
' In North aim and out in Central. No timber arrests were, m M tolut n".’ m
made. a: lament prevtou Ici-

Onoofucmmhdbym-HI'W‘W unmmambembn
wmhouse in Tut T11 Mli Rod. 1‘ when ”lung oﬂ'm

It um believed to ha a hiding pin: for drug muuld {and 2, of heroin hue o.
intocheCdoa bysyndiam- . thiuh/n ta.

If" “~12” lair-a mam we mt In '° W" The a.” u . potential

t um ru were on . - n -.
on Poss-:2" 22‘. mm a: a...“ 9.. mt. Mr MW. vuucotm an:
M 'ttd moon/emu“ . _ mm heroin

712.1344: "The aim: will naughty “fact the reurl N92. b: Mad by .
market pm: a! heroin. which ha 58! mnmly 5"“? an“. m m me
recently beamed: “ﬁrm the Golden 7W6 (N 3 olNo 3 hem.
an? two-mo N- am the °' mm- 3m" “d r Morris an an the

u . ‘

hum wind yutadny would
wobbly have been delivered
to men] you“ labor-lam

{or
ailh tgc laboratory

on" t Innate lo them.
ta than“ have boa
I to comm the 15 k; into

No 3 herein in I mum of
bumbuddd.

ll

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060009-2
Company Owner Charged
Hong Kong SOUTR CHINA MORNING POST in English 27 Aug 81 p 12

[Text] The proprietor of III

lupin-upon compuy Ip-
uod u Canny a;

No no aha I’m
3"- "as; m...) ... W
In.
au fa We: days for (who:
:nqulriu.
”Sat m W in yo-

W3 to have

“Whack!
(II on‘l'oedayin
1min Point.
Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING
(Article by Roy Edmonds}

p 1
[Text] Custom: .inmﬁuﬁm ,wffgf‘m’, on" u m “-12:15: 3%? 3::
$52"! “ML "fin"? "'M‘ “n a Mg. 0m 1m: the Imu and detained-mm
«:1 mm x «$33.? am °' «We»?! 3:" 5"” [ﬂufmﬂammm m
. , I
"m “'9 'ﬁ‘hﬁ‘ °L“'°°‘"‘ Senior. $233331": K. S . mu bumu W“) 0
mm?“ 0 onion. 1- ' mug-‘13; r . ﬁ'm" um”? Wow:
The custom I ‘ - . on; ' P‘” .. - W"
m. WE. m «3“; m“ ,M-U » m M “.3122 $1,732:
'9'" m” ‘9] "m u" «and»? Ham It fondant Omncdom
mm {nu u M. be a Imam the mat hm any camera: "idea“ to
5 Imrmmandu ' ; o! a mgr-old 331"" thing!“ ngkqngbbcinn
. . womb matto vacuum-cram:
.gmm’? '1" ”9'“ "‘5 “ board an Ameow untrm“uidSen.§upt 7003'
The .latest seizure on nigh '- I d "1:.” Hr. "”“d
- heron. om: at am.
WW’kfizﬁ??~°3 innouu'u «:32». Sea Sup: Tan; «H the
“mm” m tom hm 5?: Then an Wm Dunner ham-u had Mm
amid“, m to m. has «but die my!» pm mm price. cruising my
,4, mm“ amaze mﬂkkm‘ «a E - :22» ‘mm- M: mm
:30; 5320/9089

13
SHIP OWNERS, CHARTERERS TO FACE TOUGH NEH DRUG LAWS

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 3 Sep 81 pp 1, 10

[Article by Halioa Guterres]

[Text]

pwners and charterers of
ships found carrying drttgs
face a heavy ﬁne or confisca-
tion of their vessels under
laws now an the final stages of
drafting.

This was disclosed yester-
day by the acting Comnttsn
sioner for Narcotics. Mr C.
ht. Leung. who added that

more tough moves are being _

considered — the most dras-
tic being the possibility of
stripping convicted drug
smugglers of their ill-gotten
gains.

Apart from sequestering
the assets of ma;or convicted
drug traffickers. other
proposals which would git-e
more teeth to Hongkon ‘s
drug his include raising t
existing $5 null-on maumum
level of fines for convicted
offenders. and linking the
tines with the value of drugs
seared

Compared with the Bill on
drug-carrying shape. which is
“relatively straightforward."
these proposals involve far
more complicated issues and
are still being summed by
the police. the Trade Industry
Ind Customs Department as
well as the Narcotics Divi-
sion

The new move on drug
ships is aimed at tightening
controls over vessels "th-
ly found to be carrying dan-
gerous drugs to Hengkong.

And the new ordinance. if
it is passed. would assume
that owners and chartercrs of
seagotng vessels are responsi-
ble for ensuring that nothing

illegal is carried on board
their ships before sailing

"The new ordinance will
impose a heavy ﬁne. and I
can assure you it will be
heavy. on the owners of ships
that :re frequently fund to
be smuggling drugs to Hon!-
long.

“If the fine is not paid
then the ship that is detatned
may be confiscated by the
courts.“ Mr Leung said.

It had earlier been thought

unlikely that the d
trout-rm:- -- \thich ﬂats beet-
activety considered for about
a year — would seek to con-
ﬁscate ocean- ’ng vessels of
more than 2 0 tons which
hase been used for drug
smuggling.

It was felt that the confis-
cation of vessels — most of
which are well over l.000
tons — may be too drastic.
considering their multi-mil-
lion dollar value.

Under the existing law the
only assets of dru trafﬁckers
which can be con nested are
such things as premises. cars.
lorries. pmate aircraft and
vessels under 250 tons.

But the new Bill still be
speciﬁcally directed at larger
vessels. Mr Leung said.

The Government is well
aware that certain ships
plyin between Hongltong
and utheast Asian
are repeated drug offenders.

The records show.,_for

example. that more than 50
drug seizures have been made
tn the vast nine years from

the British-
er Tai Chut
Other p
httting the
trat'ftckers
added ting
huge hair
the past fe‘
larly the re
kg of hero
boot of a c
last week.
Awordi
the current
one kilogra
about SIO
would hatn
million if c
heroin.
Drug-lit
world are
up a new
against dr
cash flows
assets of m
And
Leung sait
more sucr
with dang
anywheret
“vary muci
movement
tdhat wtll l
rug smu
“l belie
of gotng af
be the ma
cuuton fo
the rm:
Governt
now studyi
ing report
League Cc
group set It
into th: \
how to I
drug traf it
E. ii. 255-... = luv .:u-
excvnon 5 9» 93358...
2. 8a 2.30:2. z... V22
r3. a: v3: ago

.5 a: 3.3.2.83. can?
5. 823 $2.58... :3
922 :2. 2:33 2.28:.»
39:53?

>392 823: a :5.
.3323: .3 .281... 8
£2.32: .3 26:: :9:
.3: EH: 3... 535.. .0.
«:56; 1558-8 :3 m.
‘85 I <5 25. 8 as...
:5 1.... 3.3.. 2. 5.9..
BRIEFS

DRUG SYNDICATE SMASHED-The Narcotics Bureau yesterday arrested seven people. in-
cluding four Thais, when they smashed a syndicate suspected of being involved in

importing dangerous drugs into Hongkong. After a two-conch investigation, police
officers tailed two Thai men and a wonan who collected a parcel from Kai Tak air-
port in the morning and delivered it to a unit at Tsui Ping Road estate, Kun Tong.
At 1 pm, the officers raided the unit and arrested three women. They seized 5 kg
of suspected heroin base. In two later operations, police arrested four Thai men
in Ysumati. [Text] [Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 21 Aug 81 p 11]

THAI MERCHANT JAILBD-A Thai merchant was yesterday sentenced to 10 years' imprison-
ment by Mr Commissioner Barnes in the High Court for possessing $850,000 worth of
dangerous drugs for unlawful.trsfficking. Vichai Sae Tang alias Chan Nai-choi (63).
who pleaded guilty, was arrested by the police in Jordan Road on February 19 when
he was found carrying two bags, one of which contained 1,393.73 grass of a mixture
of esters of morphine. The court was told that the drugs were of a very high grade,
and its purity was 86 per cent. Senior Crown counsel Nigel Aiken said Vichai ad-
mitted on his arrest that he had brought the drugs from Thailand. Defence counsel.
Mr Thomas In. said Vichai came to Hongkong regularly as s merchandise agent. On
this occasion. he was asked by a man in Thailand to bring two empty suitcases to
Hongkong for buying goods to take back to Thailand. He was not told that there

were drugs in the suitcases. However, he came to realise the existence of the
drugs hidden in the suitcases after they were brought to Hongkong. But he was
promised a reward if he was willing to take part in the transportation of the drugs
from his hotel to the street. and as he was in financial difficulties, he agreed to
do it. Mr Iu was instructed by Francis Chains and Co. [Text] [Hong Kong SOUTH
CHINA MORNING POST in English 25 Aug 81 p 15]

680: 5320/9089

16
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060009-2

MINISTER REPORTS OPIUH STOCKS ACCUHULA’IING

Madraa THE HINDU in English 5 Sep 81 p 7

[Text]

CSO:

mwOEu-ISQQA

TNUN Nana-6W on
trauma-common!“
ovaooccyWMM-u
no! '0 am ooooy mom w
dam-c reedsJoauomM
mm «on» d hag. unmauw
mammmomm.
aomxaﬂa

0mm mo dorm-a- n the Lou

5300/7021

17

mmmmq
mﬁoacdmsuoa

Thu-ecoloovnnr
Mm Wad also con
Comm Md doc-d:
magma-c
mum‘qum

aunt-on
In mew of :N 5d! n
dex:
mat-coma
born 6365 we: 4
ﬁlnmwnnlm-B

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬁ09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080009-2
RAJYA SASHA DISCUSSES STEPS TO END DRUG SHUGGLING

Bombay THE TIMES OF INDIA in English 8 Sep 81 p 22

[Text]

New Delhi, September 7
(PTI)--Several members

in the Rajya Sebha today
expressed serious concern
at the spurt 1n the snug-
gling of narcotics into
the country and the ad-
verse effect--1ts use,
particularly by the youth
and students, was causing
to the general health of

society.
hnidpettm in a talks-amine

monoo on the «Meet. members he-
looettte to both sides tweed the tow-
emu-at to take t'mtttedtate and stutte-
ettt nee-amt to mbtt I»! that».
end bt'n; to book the culptit: behind
this nelauoue activity.

The minister at etate toe hon-,3”.
Yoeettdn ”than. who revised -to
the 'ttotaoe. seated the washer coo-
mud umedthehoeee than!

wattle stem we behe taken with
the help of the Bade: Security Foeee.
th. uoteIl-eeoce net-0th ted the whee
to prevent the males; of Meta-es
me she bordet.

Eadier. metal Militia when
Mon-in to the mam). the
Jan-to. the I". the [at Del tndthe
CPM walked cot in "met team
the tdtttiuicn ohthe cannot-attention
victim on e menu Ithieh wae "not
of national nmoonattce.‘

C50: 5300/7022

Mr. Piloo Moth- amen). tho led
the walk-mt. aid the eallitutentioo
motion but been admitted been;
several team 0! national meme.

Sgt. Sultan sin; Igor-0.9mm

Coon-m member noted
Mr. Mod, to be «yelled from the
baton. Mr. Yathv tutored the demo“
Mt. Meta-em ietotned the home
that the dmotate at moo intelli-
eenee Iotked ’o eeilehomiee rid! the
intellinoce motion at when coca-
ttinindehtomuttheeaauot
smnuu! nan

“an o! {augment elutemb
mote to mun ' activities, can.
"tinny denied the ooooivaoee o! the
yoliee to the mutton. .
.\'otiee o! the motioa 'at am by
Me. Norma 8mm Peadey and
Mt. Rab-123th lat tooth Cool-n e;
eatdiae ' e wed motion;
mitotic: in Delhi I» e we called
“later hetioe international lab and
the action token by the met to
the met.” .

mutt-nu IN JAIL

_M'. Mehm told-Mr. hi. the
Inttieted the ﬂoatation. thee Iathit
S'Mh ah‘at 1nd tut e.oetmet h a
cinema in north Den-ii. lie-had e 4':-
n-tte with hie putt-m too on the to»
plaittt of his partner. a eate was re-
severed at the Atholt Vihar para

l8

swim on July :2. 1331. He was

-enetjed on hit 30 and the venﬁeatioo

o! he ntcedeets teveeled that he
no Mom in m eatei in
Author. Mr. huh-am said oddb-
that under ordett {tom the coun. Jeni
had not hate natured (ton Deni
to Anette-t.

Further Wtfet had revealed that
level in unused on Dv’mbet Id.
Im,ﬂ°ﬂyliminmhy the
French yoke and no h at hetlt‘xh

The te'vti'tee toid Mt. Herkheniter
Ihahhta‘tlm that no member at the
tuna outy m [out-d invoked in the
who entrant-m try-hen. He

the hetoe uhiuee‘e vita to Tim irl
tone imadwitiet hed Nest 'G‘ﬂf' .‘nd
the authon‘tiee ltad Like: meme:
ec-mt.

Ne w to ’oolt into the aile-
n'iw levelled by Mr. A. G. Kulktni
(Cone-S) thet a onton'om mute-e!"
had been Demit‘ed to en'et Inda end
one cmted with a have mute!"
who had donated It. s cram ,0. a
hem-iv! in the «Hume-ct of Mr.
A. I. Antutay 'et Mahtwhm. Ne aho
weaned to look into the alleeed it:-
v-olt-eneot ot mgemn to satellite
operattmt boo Noel.
BRIEFS

CALCUTTA HARIHUANA uAUL--About 1.700 kilograms of contraband ganja were seized
from the Tollygunge area by Calcutta Police on Monday night. Four persons were
arrested. the seizure was preceded by a scuffle between the police and the
alleged criminals. A senior police official said on Tuesday that the police had
prior information that the ganja would be transported through Sarat Bose Road

in south Calcutta on Monday night. A police party of four officers and five

constables chased the lorry and intercepted it near the crossing of Lake Terrace
and Haharaja Nanda Kumar Road. It is learnt that the ganja was being carried

from Assam to Kanpur. It was stacked in the lorry in 64 gunny bags, the entire
lorry being covered with wooden planks. The police estimated that the value of

the seized ganja would be about Rs 2 lakhs. [Text] [Calcutta THE SIATESHAN in
English 2 Sep 81 p 9]

OPIUH SEIZURE NEAR AMRITSAR--A patrol party of the border security force at
(Dharkiwind) near Ameritsear seized a quintals and 60 kilograms of contraband
opium last night. The seized opium is estimated to be worth about 500,000 rupees.
[Text] [Delhi Domestic Service in English 1530 GMT 18 Sep 81]

C50: 5300/4501

19
INDONESIA USED AS TRANSIT AREA BY DRUG SYNDICATE MERS

Jakarta SIMR HARAPAN in Indonesian 5 Jul 81 pp 1, 12

[Article: "Three Syndicate Members Slip Into Indonesia To Snuggle 40 Kilogram of
Heroin"]

[Excerpts] Three members of an international narcotics syndicate, who are listed
on the Interpol and Customs black lists, were noted as operating in Indonesia.

No are American sales, J.H. (30 years old) and 8.3. (30 years old), while L.T. (27
years old) is a Thai female. They entered Indonesia via Halia Perdanakusumah
Airport about 10 days ago and then went to Denpasar, Bali. by plane.

While in Indonesia, they were under continual surveillance by state officers because
they had been alerted to the fact that the three had contacts with certain persons
in Indonesia to smuggle loo kilogram of heroin out of the country. The narcotics

originated in Bangkok.

Extraordinary activity by the state officers was noted last week at llalim Airport.
Even more striking was the arrival at the airport of a high police official along
with a number of his men dressed in plainclothes.

No officials from the American Narcotics Control Agency of the 0.5. “easy in
Jakarta were seen at the same time. They were busy running around the terminal.
One of them was even equipped with a camera, and customs officials were also being

briefed in the area.

A prominent Indonesian Police officer from Interpol along with several of his men
sat on chairs outside the restaurant on the second floor of the airport terminal.
In the restaurant a dark-skinned female and a foreign sale sat facing each other at
a table. The woman was L.T. while the foreign male sitting opposite her was 3.3.

The clock showed 1600 Nest Indonesian time. The two paid their bill for drinks and
went to the terminal to depart. Their plan was to take a foreign airline's airbus

to Bangkok.

A thorough examination of their carry-on luggage was done by the customs official
as is customary and other security personnel also examined it. Unfortunately no
heroin was found as had been expected by the state officers.

20
The arrival of another syndicate member, J.H., from Denpasar was awaited in the
afternoon on an aircraft which was due in Halim at about 1700. The name of the
person sought, J.H., was listed on the passenger roster in seats 36 and 37. Would
he be J.H. or J.A., another leading figure also targeted?

Apparently it was J.M. who arrived. He was young, dressed in blue jeans and a white
jacket. He reserved a room in a certain hotel but would leave again from Halim for
Noumea that evening on a foreign aircraft.

The awaited passenger arrived at 2300. he took a taxi from the airport. The
arrival and departure of this character was surveilled by the officials. He had
reserved a seat on a plane that was scheduled to depart the airport at about 0100
after midnight.

The state officers were puzzled as to where the taxi would take him. He apparently
did not go to the hotel where he had originally reserved a room but went to a hotel
in Senayan. He reserved a room there.

Fifteen minutes before the aircraft was to depart, the leading syndicate member
arrived at the airport by taxi. His luggage was examined carefully but unfortunately
again no heroin was found as had been expected by Interpol.

The three will not be allowed to bo about freely, said the officer who had been
unable to arrest them because no evidence was uncovered. They will be under
surveillance wherever they go. It is believed the three will meet again in Bangkok
even though J.M. will circle by way of Noumea, Tahiti, Peru, and Mexico. Neverthe-
less he will eventually return to Bangkok.

According to Interpol, the three syndicate members were unable to gather up 40 kilo-
grams of heroin as had originally been planned. They were able to get only 13
kilograms but where it was hidden is still unknown. It is not clear whether they
collected the heroin in Bali or in Jakarta.

It is clear that they used Indonesia as a transit area to smuggle the narcotics to

Europe or America through Denpasar and Halim. Their contacts with the syndicate in
Indonesia are still under investigation.

6804
C80: 5300/8352

21
BRIEFS

NARCOTICS TRAFFICKING CENTERS IN JAKARTA--The Hatraman area of Central Jakarta and
its environs was pointed out by an AB source yesterday [15 June] as a narcotics
trafficking center for local youths. The source went on to say that the narcotics
traffic has been conducted there for a long time. local youths as well as those
from outside the area have bought drugs there. In certain circles this area is
well known as a market for such narcotics as morphine, marihuana, and other banned
drugs. Those who buy the drugs do so secretly. using certain codes known to both
buyers and dealers. According to this source the dealers are free to roam around
the kanpungs without fear of being raided by the police. Moreover, the police
probably are aware that the traffic goes on in the area. but they are afraid to do
anything about it. The A3 source also said other areas besides Hatranan, such as
Kwitang and the Kali Pasir area and its environs. are also narcotics trafficking
centers. A dealer in the Matraman area reportedly had been picked up a number of
times by the police but for some reason has always been released. "I know that he
was picked up three tines but, lo and behold. he's out again," the source said.
Other than distributing narcotics, the dealers annoy the merchants and school chil-
dren in the area. They are so bold the local Civil Defense personnel are unable
to do anything about then. [Excerpts] [Jakarta HARIAN UHUH AB in Indonesian 16
Jun 81 pp 1, 2] 680k

CSO: 5300/8352

22
FEARS 0F LARGE-SCALE HEROIN SMUGGLING NOT REALIZED

Seizure Total Increases

Auckland 3m: ZEALAND ammo in English 31 Aug 81 p I.

[Texc]

Although heroin seizures in
the llrst halt oi this rear are
above the total [or teen. drug
enforcement ciﬁcers say the
'nrqe-seale Emoortatio-Is :hey
had ieared have not been
made so far.

Up to the end oi June. the
police had seized 77089
aegis of heroin in New ha-
lan .

The total seizure (or 190
amounted to 2m 71 grains.

The ﬁgure so {outﬁts year
is more in line with the 157!
total 0! 2107.6 trams.

However. the discovery oi
360.8 grams of morphine this
rear l5 drattically on on iast
year's total oi 72m grams
ml 3.05 grams the prevtous
year.

Inflated

But the coordinator ol the
police national drug_mtelll-
genee bureau. Detective in-
spector Paul Fitzharris. said
the bumper "Golden
Triangle" harvest was hav-
ing no eiiect on the local
drug scene.

He said that althouah he
min and morphine seizures
uere up this year. both
James had been inﬂated by
:one large seizure. _

.‘m coeratzzn in May had
rotted no gram ti heron: ml
Taurarta .‘nd most oi tire.
:mo-ohne eeizrd \va: iron: a-
-single haul in Aucaiand. g

1 "Apart from that thin:
have been fairly static {or
some time." said Mr Fitz-
harns. I

The opium-derivative: that
were reachine New Zealard
were the work oi irdividuals
Iand small (roux rather than
Irmept up" syndicates.

IBracing' -
. He said the treats of sev-
ieral alleged maior dealers
am the put year may hex-e
deterred some would'he
traifichers.

Earlier this year drug en-
!orcernent oiiicers were
racing themaelves for an
rosurge in heroi1 inﬂict-in!
after it was lean-ed the
Aetan o ium harvest wo-ld
he by or the hissest {or
some years.

In February. the

Herald reported the
New Zealand police
liaison officer in
Bangkok, Detective

Chief Inspector

Brian Duncan, as
saying that if only
half of 1 per cent

of the harvest was
landed in New Zealand,
it would be worth
$300 million.
Other Drug Abuse Rises

Auckland NEW ZEALAND HERALD in English 1 Sep 81 p 4

new The scarcity of heroin on the streets is the only relief
trot: a worrying growth in drug abuse, any Auckland field
"or en

The director 0! lbe out-W ' or mind from "whom"
o! Theclhtlemnowduhrig gulerEvm.

51m, ultflu: aim *hwmwsm‘ml . a. a, M a
the: every other form 0! m'émﬂumm‘ﬁ.ﬁ WEB «grime
. - in“. m u

mm was on the h “33”.?“ ward” hid mums In . cw Zen and

.. lackoflml . old» b- mathttoothhgolhe:
“Al; the number of “In M m pro w or M'“:,,,._., is?
harem Mfume, “I: new be comforting to mm} via an Govern-

‘ﬂm ﬁlm one 0! believe that because sur- meatlormnatomelivo
muymmwNm "ﬁlm by police and la tmtmm «an. 1
lust 4: Wave and 2mg.“ $3.»on - Meanwhlag hangings,
won-rm Wm - menu or dual: _
mange" 3|.ka It” "Wale." linen Odﬂsev houses in Am-'

mug. But this was prawn;
'hgures on Him 0! ‘r t. '-'
Momma" mandmoredlicul sud

. . ' Wm”?! llr Evans.
5n If: mm '5' :32 l the "v “M "lining «mus Ill-sell
moment.“ with! ,.‘ '1” l 1:: the low: a! the uni;
comm Wig, {or an“; ml WM» dusky um lllle an»
noun are um present. be M _ one

   

mar drug, a Mn. is now how to
Memdmjorcoocem. “Ln“mh'mﬁ‘ odmﬂltcengotlookalgm
. own-adieu.
McDonald sad we -- '
m lled An addict will tool: to

mid alter—
Wigwam. and

24
TS POLICY ON DRUGS
Lahore THE PAKISTAN TIMES In English 11 Sep 81 p 6
{Editorial "DrugAbuse"1
[Text] The

d P kj are hmauufa
Pakistan has tux-e . I stan 83 st:
. . a meeting over but lakh Persons ad~ Pcd 9P Vigilance conﬁde
ml]: the Director of the dicta! to drugs. The ﬁgur‘ 95’! H: mm

United Nations Fund for g. for America and Euro

Drug Abuse Control has’

Raﬁumed

m h 712mg“ VIC efﬁcienc
Pun countries are pro or. M: w 2: page: and cus
the Govern- tiooately much higher,p m toms autboﬁue; “to“:
my,“ the dizmemm‘onfch; 5‘“ ‘3 “lose socie es the narcotic laws. Even
Inmate .
“'0!!! the country. He m. Widespread abu
ted that eﬁo

labxh to gated a d punts: 3";
c" ms t com inc
and commumty . , , .
d d .f M: as we" as making a my 31:15:: 3:?” _'° C0"-
dz? Uﬁcm 32:31:: %‘ centdbuuon to ch: -
success, and t t o ium ":23 t? can? The dc
cultivation has 4 1“! a”? 3g, “h n ygmuag
four ﬂag“? $2,953 cau§e to: grief and m.
tons. puma, 000mm“ Loading anthem: at Va.
ym‘th the temtiaaa] "m.“ ”"18 "tee war
land” managed with laws: the clandestine
narcot' control and is I C ﬁn drugs and 1 cu-
actively working on ‘chem- gbl‘lsfnmmagﬁuuse; The
en for crop substztuuon in “*3 P o
trad tional pop

many
but other: es.
Coordn are “light
“‘2:“f°2:;:*~gw;; :23: 222232222:
In 0 rs Pm a small (”2 are con.
«garments to advzse th "'0tu actwe. P reducing
h “m Nm‘k’ Coon-o! countries tend to la hi
Board on problem; "13:. blame on , Y
‘1” ‘ dms abuse d the
BRIEFS

QUETTA HEROIN SEIZUR£--A customs team in Quetta, after an armed confrontation,
captured a jeep at (Rabat), 650 miles away from the provincial capital and seized
42 kilograms of heroin. [Karachi Domestic Service in Urdu 0200 GMT 23 Sep 81]

PAKISTAN-IRAN BORDER HBROIN—-The customs guards on the Pakistani-Iranian border
seized heroin worth 630 million rupees weighing 43 kg on 21 September near Quetta.
The guards seized the drugs after an exchange of fire with persons who later fled,
abandoning the jeep in which the drugs were found. The jeep was traveling from
the Afghan border toward the Pakistani-Iranian border. [GP261659 Karachi JANG

in Urdu 22 Sep 81 p l]

HEROIN EXTRACTION PLANT DISCOVERED--Karachi excise police made history by unearthing
a heroin extraction plant in an improvised apartment in the densely populated
people's colony in north Nazimabad yesterday. A self-styled "pharmacist" and the
plantowner were also arrested after a month-long surveillance. The excise hounds
also claimed seizure of 13 kg of heroin of different grades which is stated to be
worth about 88200 million in the international market. Besides the 45-year-old

Syed Musharaf, shah of Peshawar, running the "plant," the courier, Hr Mohammad
Ismail, 25, a denter [car body repairman] was also held. During the last 18 months,
the excise police have seized 500 maunds of charas: 8 maunds of opium; half a

maund of heroin; 6,500 bottles of foreign liquor and 3,500 ampules of pethidine

and morphine. The seizures made during the last 1 year were more than what had

been seized in the previous 5 years. [GF271747 Karachi DAHN in English 24 Sep 81

pp 1.6]

CHARAS, OPIUH SEIZED—-CIA police arrested a man following recovery of 120 kilos

of charas and 120 kilos of opium, worth over a crore of rupees from his Bungalow

in the North Nazimabad area yesterday. The accused was identified as Mohammad His-
keen of district Hansehra. [Text] [Karachi MORNING NEWS in English 16 Sep 81

p 5]

080: 5300/0502

26
INTERNATIONAL RING OF (”CAINE TRAF’F‘ICEGIRS ARRESTED IN RIO
Bolivia-Fietherlamls Drug Route
Rin de Janeiro 0 31030 in Portuguese 29 Aug 81 p 1

[Texﬂ The Federal Police yesterday raided two apartments in Copacabana that were
being used for the distribution of cocaine by the international ri which carried
on traffic from Bolivia to the Netherlands. This ”connection"--which involved
messages in code exchanged among traffickers in Santa Cruz de la. Sierra, Rio de
Janeiro and Amsterdam-was revealed by the Belgian woman Manoela Goossens, 22 years
of age, who was arrested at the International Airport with 2 kilograns of the drug
concealed on her waist inside a. themal girdle. A total of four (hileans and one
Bolivian were captured in the two apartlents. (See Page 13)

 

The Chilean brothers Juan (hrlos and Jorge Enrique and the Belgian woman Hanoela

27
Details of Drug Operation
Rio de Janeiro 0 61030 in Pbrtuguese 29 Aug 81 p 13

[Text1 Following the arrest of the Belgian woman Panoela Coossens. 22 years of age.
at the Rio de Janeiro International Airport as she was about to depart for Zurich
with 2 kilograms of cocaine concealed inside a thermal girdle. the Federal Police
discovered two apartments in Copacabana that were being used for distribution of
the drug and arrested four (hileans and one Bolivian who were in charge of the
Latin Alerican “connection" with the Netherlands.

The Federal Bolice yesterday displayed to the press--in addition to Manoelanher
husband Ramon Enrique Peralta. the Chilean brothers Juan Garlos and Jorge Enrique
Reyes Eidalgo, the (hilean Ernesto Hejias. and the Bolivian Hinber Rumberto Juarez
Uutela. INTERPOL was activated in an attelpt to locate a man known only as Shnith
[as published], who was awaiting arrival of the drug in Alstez'dan.

Organization

Hanoela was arrested night before last as she attempted to depart on Flight 1&3 of
Swissair. carrying on her waist the 2 kilogram of cocaine concealed in a thermal

girdle. When searched at customs she explained her bulky waist as the result of a
recent operation. but after the cocaine was discovered she Iade a detailed confes-
sion of her participation in the intermtional group of traffickers.

The Belgian wonan and her husband Ramon were paid to transport the drug fron Brazil
to the Netherlands. The air route from Rio de Janeiro teninated at Zurich, from
where the journey to Ansterdan was made by train. Hanoela said. "to avoid the rigor-
ous police inspection at the airport of the Dutch capital.‘ The couple had arrived
in Brazil last Saturday: Hanoela was supposed to leave Wednesday and her husband
was to have followed today.

The organization (concerning which the Federal Police said they did not yet have any
additional details) maintained at least two apartments in Copacabana for the hand-
ling of the drug. One of the apartments was Apartment 60b at 11:48 Avenida 11.8. in
Gopacabana: it rented-~furnished--for 60.000 cruzeiros.

It was in the aforementioned apartment that Ramon and the brothers Juan Garlos and
Jorge Enrique Reyes Hidalgo were arrested. Following Ramon. the next one scheduled
to transport the drug to Amsterdam was to have been Juan @1105, who had been in
Brazil for alnost 1 month. Jorge Enrique, who has been in Rio since last Friday.
was to have been the last to make the Journey.

The other apertunt maintained by the organization was Apartaent 901 at 86 Avenida
Bainha Elizabeth: it had been assigned to the group that was bringing the cocaine
from Bolivia. It was here that the (milean m'nesto Augusto Iglesias Mejia and the
Bolivian Hinber Humberto Juarez Outelouboth of whom are residents of Santa Cruz de
la Sierra. the principal Bolivian city involved in the cocaine trade-were arrested.

28
Traffic by Code

Hanoela told the Federal Police that the connection operated as follows: one or
two persons would remain in the apartment on Avenida N.S. in Copacabana. awaiting
word as to the date of arrival of the drug. when the initial encoded lessage
arrived in Rio it was retransmitted (likewise in code) to Amsterdam. Then. in the
Dutch capital. the "pilots” (persons charged with transportiru the drug) were
designated for the trip to Rio. When the cocaine arrived in Rio it went directly to
the apartment on Avenida Rainha Elizabeth and was subsequeme transferred to the
apartment on Avenida ms. in Copacabana. where it was packaged preparatory to the
trip to Ehzrope.

None of the prisoners wished to make any statement to the press except to say that
they were innocent and were in Rio as tourists. When approached by 0 cwno Hanoela
said--in French--that she did not speak French.

Virtually hire

Divided into individual doses (called 'curlpapers") of approximtely 1 gram. cocaine
sells for approximately 3 million cruzeiros per kilogram in the Southern Zone of
Rio whereas it brings $60,000 (6 million cruzeiros) per kilogral in the United
States and Btu-ope. the Federal Police reported that tests mde by experts using
reagents showed the confiscated drug to be 95 Percent pure.

Slall sample quantities of cocaine packaged in small plastic bags were also fourti
in the two apartsentsx they were used by the traffickers to test the drugs for

purity. A Federal Police source said that such of the cocaine produced in Bolivia
for shipment via Brazil arrives in the fora of paste (the sulfate, an intermediate
stage) and that the final product (the hydrochlorate) is distilled in Greater Rio.

In return for getting the cocaine to its destination the trafficker Hanoela was to
rcceive--in Amsterdam-42.000 (200.000 crueiros). She said that for their trip to
Brazil she and her husband had received their tickets and "a snail anount of cash
in cruzeiros and Belgian francs." When she tried to board the plane she had 5,000
Belgian francs (approxilately 12 .500 meiros) in her possession.

The Federal Police made no content concerning the 3 kiloymns of cocaine seized
night before last at Santos mmont Airport. The seizure was confirmed, however, by
a source within the Military Police. who took part in the Joint operation with the
federal agents.

10992
050 3 5300/2187

29
ARRESTS CF‘ DRUG TRAFFICKERS DBI‘AILED
Arrest of Tni‘ficker-Rapists
Rio de Janeiro 0 cum in Portuguese 15 Aug 81 p 13

[Text] An anonymous telephone call made by a wonn Thursday night to the Robbery
and Auto Theft Division (DEFA) led a group of police early yesterday Iorning in
Gampo Grande to the robbers and drug traffickers hula Gesar Queiros Diniz. 29 years
of age, known as ”hues." and Marcos Antonio Saul mntas. 20 years of age. They were
found to be in possession of three bricks of pressed Iarihuana (nixed with honey)
weigiing approximtely 15 kilograms apiece. and also a quantity of boric acid (which
is mixed with pure cocaine to dilute the cocaine and increase its volule) and vari-
ous itens of stolen property.

Ruco and Marcos are also accused of at least 20 arsed robberies of residences durirg
which they tied up all the sale members of the family and forced them to watch as
the women were violated. They then stole everything of value in the house, loaded
it into the fasily car and disappeared, turning the car over to other traffickers
and gangs of pushers. The Narcotics Bureau jmt yesterday took over the investiga-
tion with respect to the drugs, while the DRFA will continue to take testimony from
the fuilies who were robbed.

It was Heckel Raposo, head of the DRFA. who himself took the telephone call from
the woman. who said that Ruco (who resides at 12 Run das horangas in Canpo Grande)
had just received a large shipsent of Iarihuam and was preparing to flee because
he feared that the police were looking for his. The woman gave a description of
the robber that latched the cosposite portrait created h months ago on the basis of
information from various fasilies who had been assaulted in Ganpo Grande. Santa (his
and Jacarepagua. At the moment of his arrest Ruco ilplicated Marcos Antonio, who
was arrested ianediately thereafter.

Arrest of Governnent Official
Rio de Janeiro 0 610130 in Portuguese 29 Aug 81 p 13

[Text] Zilnar Madeira Hatos. who identified hisself at the 21st n? [Police Head-
quarters] as an adviser to the administration of the Federal Railway Network with
accreditation to the office of the president of the republic, was arrested night
before last with six "cu‘rlpapers' of cocaine in his possession at the exit to the
shantytown of Vsrginha. in Bonsucesso, where he had gone to buy the drug.

I!)
Zilmar (who resides on Avenida. N.S. in Go cahm.) was arrested in a. taxi by
police of the 16th 3PM [expansion unknown? who discovemd the cocaine in the
suspect's eyeglasses case. At the time of his arrest Zillur refused to identify
himself and did so only later at the Zist DP. where he was booked, Iade bail and
was released.

Arrest of Spaniards. Uruguayan
Rio de Janeiro 0 (H.030 in Portuguese 28 Aug 81 p 13

[Text] Brasilia (o Gwm)--Agents of the Federal Police have arrested the Spaniards
Juan Lopes Salinas and Haria Ginenez and the Uruguayan Maria Angelica. Disz, who were
found to be in possession of more than 8 kilograms of cocaine on the night train
that connects Santa Cruz de la. Sierra, Bolivia, and Gerunha. Brazil. We train
(which is known as the "train of death") traverses one of the lost important routes
of the intemtional drug traffic. The cocaine seized from the three aliens weighed
a total of 8 kilograms “95 grass.

10992
(:0: 5300/2197

31
BRIH’S

DRUGS BURIED Ill CHIP-Representatives of the state semtariats of security and
health and of the Federal Police yesterday Iorning witnessed the burning-4t Sao
Sebastiao Hospital in Ga.Ju~-of 220 kilograms of narihuana. 8 kilograms of cocaine.
1,130 units of 181.). 29 tablets of Hatapirona, six tablets of Diazepan. eight tablets
of Mandi-ix and two pressurized upoules of perfumed ether. The drugs were valued at
60 million cruzeiros. It was the second incineration of drugsthis year: the first
took place in April. [Text] [Rio de Janeiro 0 cmao in Portuguese 26 Aug 81 p 12]
10992

PROBLEMS WITH IRUG INCIHERATION--(Fr<>n local news service and our correspomentk-
Three representatives of the State Narcotics Control Gouission of the State Secre-
tariat of Health yesterday afternoon witnessed the banning in the Ponte Pequena
municipal incinerator of 1,200 kilogram of lurihuam and 2 kilograms of cocaine
with a combined value of appmxinately 12 million cruaeims. all of which were
seized by the police during the past 5 months. Another 1,500 kilograms was inciner-
ated at Presidente Prudente. The Division of Inspection of Professional Perforlance
of the Secretariat of Health--an organ of the Secretariat of Health which is charged
with the custody of narcotics seized by the police--had already carried out a number
of incinerations this year, but in none of then was such a large quantity burned.
According to its director. hancisco Pmdente de Aquino. the quantities involved in
the incinerations, and the number of incinerations. depeni on the seizures made and
on the completion of a bureaucratic process of valuation made by personnel of his

passage through the courts. In the meantime, the drug was piling up at the various
police headquarters. The judge-magistrate then decreed the 20/80 provision author-
izirg collection of the material by the Division of Inspection of Professioml
Performance. with only a part of the drug relaining at police headquarters for
possible use as evidence against the defendant. At Presidente Pnniente 1, 500 kilo-
grams of narihuana was incinerated in the furnace of a ceramics plant. The mari-
TRAPFICKERS. FALSE COPS ARRESTED
Bogota BL TIEHPO in Spanish 26 Aug 81 p 6-0

[Text] An operation carried out by P—Z personnel against a gang of drug traffickers
ended with a surprising outcome when the secret agents not only succeeded in appre-
hending the drug traffickers, but also several delinquents who were passing them-
selves off as police detectives, and who were on the point of seizing 35 kilos of
cocaine and 6 million pesos in cash.

The event, which could go into the P—2's strange cases file, occurred last Monday
evening in Journalists' Park, situated along 6th avenue between 16th and 17th streets
of this city.

Luis Guillermo Perez Avella and Doris Garcia Gutierrez, drug buyers, met with Jesus
Arturo Hernandez Osorio and Teresa Diaz de Hedina in the mentioned sector with the
purpose of examining a sample of the cocaine and carrying out a business deal for
35 kilos of the same.

As the buyers were checking the purity of the drug in the presence of the sellers,

the F—2 personnel showed up. They were surprised to discover that the four persons
involved in negotiating for the alkaloid had already been arrested by six subjects

armed with shortrange weapons and displaying handcuffs, who were passing themselves
off as agents of the PLZ police.

The two couples of narcotics traffickers were arrested immediately, as were the
so-cslled detectives, identified as Fernando nozo Alvarado, Alvaro Urrego Calderon,
German Agudelo Casas, Jaime Rodriguez Pedraza, Janos Buitrago Rubiano and Isidro
Rodriguez Pedraza.

The false secret agents were found with 35 kilos of cocaine and 6 million pesos that
Perez Avella and Doris Garcia were going to hand over to Hernandez Osorio and Teresa
Diaz as the transaction's initial payment. Also found were two 38-long revolvers,

a 7.6Smm pistol, another Bowing pistol of the same caliber, a Smith & Wesson pistol,
a large quantity of ammunition and three pairs of handcuffs.

The F-2 personnel also seized an orange Renault 12 automobile with license plates

RD-9373, a white-topped Nissan with free transit, a Dodge Dart taxi SD—3773 and a
red Volkswagen registered under AF-S390.

33
Jam-4- ncdntuu 1‘
Palm r-z

 

Luunu- Ku;l!;‘,. n
“In: r z Lun (i l'em A
(‘nmpudor

 

f. »u~ \ Ncl. J'IIEV; I] “'va (Luru (2
\ “mm.- I 'nr-l u-lnu

Iaro Urrego C., false F-2
Lme Rodriguez P., false F-Z
ime Bultrago R., false F—Z

is G. Perez A., buyer

 

 

PHOTOGRAPHS

5

.6.
7.
8

34

 

Gem-In Muaolo (‘
Fain f-Z “I“, P 2

r‘rsn‘mln “on: A

Jesus A. Hernandez 0., seller
Doris Garcia 6., buyer

German Agudelo C., false F-2
Fernando R020 A., false F-2
The authorities told the press that one of the false detectives, Rozo Alvarado, had
been arrested last yet for drug trafficking, and that the same gang of delinquents,
using the same method, a‘Eew months ago robbed some narcotics traffickers of 10
million pesos in Villavicencio.

Colonel Nacim Yanine Diaz, F—Z chief of the staff, reported that that organization
is continuing the investigation, because with the frequent supplanting of the autho-

rities the secret corps of the police have been discredited in recent months in
Bogota.

The officer noted that during the course of this year his office has received 31
accusations of proven theft and 11 accusations of holdups of business firms and pri—

vate residences. The perpetrators of these crimes were individuals who passed them-
selves off as F-2 detectives.

9706
650: 5300/2446

35
Traffickers' Weapons

Barranquilla--In recent days the Second Brigade has seized many weapons of various

calibers, grenades and ammunition from gangs of drug traffickers operating along the
northern coast of Colombia.
BRIEFS

DRUG RAIDS DESCRIBED--The special group created by the National Police to coabat
narcotics trafficking in the country, especially on the Atlantic coast, has so far
this week dealth the "mafias" five important blows, as a result of which it seized
5,588 kilos of pressed narihuana, as well as 532 bundles of the same plant that were
ready for export. The first of the operations was carried out in the village of
Pelechua in the Riohacha jurisdiction, where 106 bundles of the plant were confis—
cated, along with the truck bearing Venezuelan license plates HBB-lZl used for trans-
porting the drug. Later, in "Hatitas," in Guajira, 3,500 kilos of the narcotic were
seized in addition to 2,088 kilos in Teorama to the north of Santander that were to
be handed over to international narcotics trafficking organizations by the woman
Nelly Hoyos, who was captured. One of the most important operations was carried

out in San Juan de Cesar in Guajira, where 315 marihuana bundles were discovered
near a secret airport in operation in Caracoli jurisdiction. Finally, in the "La
Duds" jurisdiction, municipality of Codazzi, Cesar, 111 bundles of the plant were
Confiscated as they were being transported in a Hillys camper with plates UH-0367.
[Text] [Bogota BL ESPBCTADOR in Spanish 29 Aug 81 p 15-A] 9766

FORMER JUDGE SENTENCBD--Cali, 26 Aug-~Guido Alfredo Miller, the labor judge arrested
at his home here a year ago and charged with possessing an enormous quantity of
cocaine, was condemned today to 3 years and 1 nonth in prison. The ruling of the
fifth criminal court of the circuit also includes Bertha Restrepo de Miller, his
wife, Alexander Miller Restrepo, his nephew, and Nelson Mendoza, who were tried in
absentia and condemned to the sane punishment. Miller was caught 13 August 1980 with
a load of cocaine calculated at 300 kilos. The three persons tried in absentia had
been granted conditional freedom, but the Cali superior court recalled them to trial.
At the time of his capture Miller was discharging the office of ninth labor judge

of the Cali Circuit. [By Alvaro Caicedo] [Text] [Bogota BL TIEHPO in Spanish 27

Aug 81 p 3-A] 9766

COCAINE SEIZURE DESCRIBBDb-Pasto, 26 Ang--Twenty-seven kilos of cocaine valued at
about 100 million pesos were seized by units of the public prosecutor's antinarcotics
group as the cocaine was being transported aboard a truck loaded with potatoes. The
vehicle was intercepted in the outskirts of Pesto on the Pan-American Highway. The
drug was concealed in a double-bottomed basin in the body of the truck with plates
TK-0587 and driven by Luis Gerardo Coral. Authorities also reported the detention

of another occupant of the vehicle, Jorge Edgar Rosales Arciniegas. The truck had
been loaded with potatoes in the locality of Aldana south of Pasto, and was inter-
cepted during a vehicle inspection in the outskirts of the capital of Narino. In
recent days the antinarcotics action has produced positive results for those dedicated
to erradicating this type of crime. [By Edison Parra] [Text] [Bogota EL TIEHPO in
Spanish 27 Aug 81 p 3-A] 97b6

CSO: 5300/2466
37
TRAFFICKER ORDERED TWENTY HURDBRS
Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 27 Aug 81 P 26-A

[Article by Rafael Medina and Victor Payan: "Merced Honje Confesses That He
Ordered 20 Murders"!

[Text] Twenty persons have become victims of drug trafficker Merced Honje.
Because of disloyalty within the mafia, Monje ordered the murder of both drug
traffickers and police officers over a 5-year period, according to Honje's
confession to Chief Florentine Ventura Gutierrez. who ordered Honje's arrest
a few days ago.

Shortly before Honje was transferred from this city to La Mesa prison in Tijuana
and consigned to the District criminal judge for allegedly being responsible for
the collection and storing of weapons and the trafficking of drugs, Honje gave a
detailed account of the reason for the murders that he had emitted: chiefly,
disloyalty on the part of mafia members and of the police.

In the custody of 20 federal police officers, Merced Honje was transferred by
special plane to Tijuana. Baja California.

Having been involved in other trafficking of drugs and weapons, the prisoner has
cases pending against him in Nogales, Sonora and in the Federal District.

[He is wanted] in Nogales, Sonora, for the trafficking of drugs and crimes against
health. He is also wanted for murder by a judge having jurisdiction in the town
of San Luis Potosi, who determined Honje's responsibility for the murder of
Armando Ramirez, chief of the state of Mexico.

The judicial authorities will have to accumulate and impure the crimes before a
single judge. After the judge has been informedof the criminal aspects of the
case, he will pronounce a sentence, which hopefully will be more than 40 years
of imprisonment.

Ventura Gutierrez also said that several chiefs of state judicial police depart-
ments were suspended as a result of having been linked with Herced Honje and

38
explained that they were not taken into custody because it was not proved that they
had been involved in drug deals with the nafia member.

He also said that, on orders of Attorney General Oscar Flores Sanchez and of
Federal Judicial Police Chief Raul Mendiolea Cerecero, chiefs and police officers

of the Federal Judicial Police are being investigated. If a relationship with
Honje is proved, they will be suspended and dismissed according to circmstances.

82 55
CSO: 5300/ 2461

39
DRUG RAIDS IN FIVE STATES REPORTED
Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 20 Aug 81 p ZS-A

[Text] Marihuana and opium gum, valued at more than 20 million pesos, were in-
tercepted in five states by police officers of the Federal Judicial Police. In
addition, 21 traffickers were arrested.

In Chihuahua, Chihuahua, drug traffickers tried to resist arrest by firing

their guns. But the police succeeded in subduing them, with only one nafia
nember being wounded.

The arrests were made in Culiacan, Sinaloa; Guadalajara, Jalisco; Veracruz,
Veracruz; Milpillas, Zacatecas; and Chihuahua, Chihuahua.

Rogelio Chaires Garcia, Jose Luis Mora Rurtado, MiguelAngel ElenesValenzuela,and
Patricio Lopez Medina were arrested in Culiacan with a little less than half a
ton of msrihuana.

Miguel Morgado Reyes and Alejo Rodriguez Lopez were arrested in Guadalajara.
They had more than 3 kilograms of opium gum.

Candido Hernandez Hernandez, Eiginio Zamora Lands, Alejandro Hernandez Trujillo,

Armando Martinez Sanchez, and Simon RoblesAnimaswere arrested in Veracruz. They
had msrihuana and opium gun.

In Milpillas, Zacatecas, the following were arrested while packaging half a ton

of marihuana: Rigoberto Castaneda Rivas, Elpidio Romero Castaneda, and Antonio
Muro Correa.

Finally, federal police officers arrestedﬁbeIVegaMadrid,Arturo Amador Rivera,
and Alvaro Baldon Gama in Chihuahua while they were transporting a ton of msrihuana
in a Dodge truck.

After the confrontation, the police officers were able to apprehend Javier

Martinez Garcia, Jose Garcia Alvidrez, Efren Cordova Garcia, and Arturo Contreras
Villanueva.

Those arrested and the drugs were placed at the disposition of the Federal
Public Ministry.

8255
C80: 5300/2461

40
BRIEFS

ECUADOREAN "OMEN ARRSSTED WITH COCAINB-The Federal Judicial Police dealt another
blow to drug trafficking when they arrested two women at Mexico City International
Airport. The women had come from Quito. Ecuador. Bach had a supply of excellent,
unadulterated cocaine. capable of being cut several times and valued at several
million pesos. Evelin Celia Antoaen Lopez and Alicia Bueno Cruz arrived at the
airport from the same Ecuadorean capital and had already succeeded in bringing the
contraband drug into the country when they were surprised by federal police
officers. Ecuadorean Antoaen Lopez arrived at the capital air terminal on flight
042 of the Ecuadorean line. She was carrying 500 grams of the drug in 7 small
polyethylene bags attached to her ankles, the soles of her feet, and her pubic area.
And Alicia, also coming from Quito, Peru, on Aeronaxico flight 580, tried the same
thing, but was also surprised red-handed, when she was found to have 500 milligrams
of exceptionally pure cocaine inside an aluminum tube. [Text] [Mexico City

EL SOL DE MEXICO in Spanish 3 Sep 81 P 10—A] 8255

DRUGS SEIZED IN MEXICALI, COLIMA-—Packaged unadulterated heroin and marihuana,

valued at more than 20 million pesos, were intercepted by the Federal Judicial
Police in two separate operations, one in Mexicali, Baja California, and the other
in Colima. In Mexicali, Baja California. the police officers of the Federal
Judicial Police apprehended ﬂonorio Ramirez Leon, Graciela Felix Sicairos, and
Ricardo Lopez Leon. with 1 1/2 kilograms of heroin. The purity of the latter

could make it possible for the drug to undergo several cuts, which would result

in multiplying its weight and value fivefold. Upon being questioned, the arrested
persons said that they were thinking of selling the drug in the United States. On
the road from Manzanillo to Barra de Navidad. near the village of Emiliano Zapata, in
Mmtzanlllo Municipality. the police intercepted a small pick-up truck that was
transporting marihuana that was going to be sold by Crescencio Morfin Orozco,
Emedel Serrano Barreto, and Manuel 0. Barajas. The arrested persons revealed that
Manuel Bernaj Gonzalez had 1 ton of marihuana at "El Corrido" ranch, in the munici—
pality of Tomatlan. The marihuana was already packaged and ready for sale. [Text]
[Mexico cm excusron in Spanish 4 Sep 81 r 8-0] 8255

8255

61
COCAINE SEIZED IN CHETUMAL-Chetumal, Q.R., 20 Aug' --Seven persons were sur-
prised with contraband cocaine valued at 3 million pesos. The drug had come from
Central America. The arrested persons, Alberti Barradas Montero, Raymond Edward
Flores, and Enfield Agosto Hilly, who brought the cocained in in two plastic bags,
and David Aguilar Herrera, Agustin Montero Earradas, Gregorio Barradas Montero, and
Alvaro Felipe Velazquez were turned over to the authorities. They were arrested

in the Continental Hotel while trying to get in touch with buyers. [Text]

[Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 21 Aug 81 P 28-A] 8235

OPIUM, OTHER DRUGS SEIZED—-An anti-drug operation [was carried out] in six states.
[The confiscation] of 6 kilograms of opiul, valued at 6 million pesos on the drug
trafficking black market, half a ton of marihuna, one 113.: aircraft, the destruction
of 8 plots of land ready for the sowing of Cannabis Indies, and the arrest of 16
persons resulted from a simultaneous operation on the part of the Federal Judicial
Police as part of "Operation Condor" in six states of the country. [Thxt] [Mexico
City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 26 Aug 81 P 27-A] 8255

COCAINE TRAFFICKER SEIZED AT AIRPORT-A woman who tried to bring a kilo of cocaine
into Mexico was arrested yesterday at Capitalino International Airport by the
Federal Judicial Police. Evelyn Celia Antoncen, a Mexican, was to meet her contact
in the air terminal. But that did not happen. She was spotted by a woman
inspector minutes after she left the ladies restroom Evelyn's attitude roused the
suspicion of Mexican authorities, especially after the trafficker became aggressive
in the inspection line when she was required to submit to a routine inspection. The
drug was attached to her body. She was to deliver it in the ladies restnoom' to
her contact, Alicia Eueno Cruz, an Ecuadorean woman. The arrested woman. along
with her possessions, personal documents, and plane ticket, were placed at the
disposition of the federal public ministry. [Text] [Mexico City EL SOL DE MEXICO
in Spanish 2 Sep 81 P lZ-A] 8255

SSA INCIHERATES ASSORTED DRUGS-Thirty-three kilos 885 grams of cocaine and more
than 580 grams of codeine, valued at more than 200 million pesos, were incinerated
yesterday in the furnaces of the Public Health Department Laboratores in the
presence of officials of the Secretariat of Health and Assistance and of the Office
of the Attorney General of the Republic. The destruction of the drugs followed
intensive vigilance carried out at Mexico City International Airport for the pur-

pose of preventing the smuggling that is attempted by criminals from South America
who are bound for the United States. Adan Punaro Rondanini, chief of the Toxicology
and Narcotics Control Department of the Food, Liquor, and Medicine Control

Directorate of the SSA, stated that, from a nedical point of view, the cocaine and

codeine have no therapeutic value or application. [Text] [Mexico City EXCELSIOR
in Spanish 20 Aug 81 P 25-A] 8255

C50: 5300/2661

42
BRIEFS

DRUG BURNING OPERATION--Surrounded by strict security measures the Peruvian
police yesterday burned 3 tons of various drugs valued at 15 billion soles.
The burning took place at one of the furnaces of a police-owned brick factory
and was attended by Interior Minister Jose Maria de la Jara y Ureta. This is
the third lot of drugs which has been burned this year. The total amount of
drugs burned so far is 9 tons. [Lina EL COMERCIO in Spanish 2 Sep 81 p AL PY]

MARIHUANA PLANTATIONS DISCOVERED--The investigationspolice has discovered 10,000
square meters of marihuana plantations in Ichocan village in Cajanarca. The
police destroyed the plantations and arrested nine persons involved in drug
trafficking. The arrested persons are: Teofilo Diaz Quispe, 3S; Raulo Isodoro
Rumay Cruzado, #8; Guillermo Damacio Valdivia Quispe, 23: Edgardo Mercado
Guerrero, 28; Jorge Italo Cubas Jaeger, 19; Walter Abarca Cabanillas, 27;

Frank Rojas Buenos, 26; Julio Cesar Corcuera Castaneda, 17; and Ernesto Centur-
ion Vargas, 16. [Lima EL CONERCIO in Spanish 3 Sep 81 p A10 PY]

ANTI-DRUG 0PERATIONS--The intelligence service and the Civil Guard Drug Depart-
ment have seized approximately 3,000 kg of cocaine base paste. cocaine hydro-
chloride, marihuana and coca leaves and arrested some 1,500 persons charged with
drug trafficking and consumption during the first half of the year. [PY182325
Lima EL COHERCIO in Spanish 10 Sep 81 p 14 PY]

DRUG RING DESERTER--Sega1 Iches Kell, a Romanian who also holds a U.S. citizen-
ship, turned himself over to the Peruvian Investigation Police (PIP) after re-
ceiving a death threat from one of the members of drug ring he had deserted.
Kell had made a fortune selling cocaine hydrochloride produced in Cuzco in the
United States and Europe but deserted the organization when he presumed that
Interpol was about to break the ring. [Lima EL COHERCIO in Spanish 8 Sep 81

p 26 FY]

COCA PLANTING ERADICATION PLAN--Agricu1ture and Nutrition Minister Nils Bricsson
Correa stated yesterday that the government will replace and gradually reduce
coca planting through the Alto Huallaga Integral Development Program, until the
total eradication of coca planting is achieved. The objective of the project is
to eradicate coca planting and, consequently, drug trafficking. He said: "It
is an attempt to attack the roots of the evil which is doing so much harm to
youth." During his customary dialogue with the newsmen at Government Palace,
Ericsson said that the project will be undertaken with an investment of $120
million, out of which $60 million will be used initially to develop alternate

:ropsproggams in that region. [Excerpt] [PY181317 Lima EXPRESO in Spanish 1]
-ep P

43

PEA. Kannl'DLLI
BRIEFS

DRUG SEIZURE--The Venezuelan National Guard has seized more than 6,000 (7nandrax)
pills and 26 packages of marijuana. according to a border post commander in Zulia
state. (Eudo Enrique Gonzalez) was identified as the driver of a car in which
the drugs were found. However. (Gonzalez) managed to escape while leaving his
identity papers behind. The seizure was made at the Linen River checkpoint in
Mara District. [PA220015 Caracas Radio Runbos Network in Spanish 1530 GMT 18

Sep 81]

C30: 5300/2463

44
BRIEFS

OPIUH SBIZED--Kabul--7SO kilograms of opium which had been concealed with special
skill in the ceiling of bus 80 7589 and was being snuggled from Kabul to Kandahar
was seized by guards of the Antinarcotics and Smuggling Directorate of the Ministry
of Internal Affairs. A spokesman of the General Crimes Directorate has reported
that the vehicle carrying the snuggled opium was driven by Zamir Vslsd-Darani, an
inhabitant of the Province of Nangarhar, who was arrested at the site and is under-
going investigation. [Text] [Kabul HEHYAD in Dari 22 Sep 81 p 8]

C50: 5300/5300

45
BRIEFS

SHUGGLINC OPERATION HALTED--The Islamic committee in (?Bandar Rig) stepped the
illegal exportation of five very precious carpets worth 35 million rials and

6 million rials in cash via the Persian Gulf. According to Bushehr's Central
News Unit, the carpets and money were being transported illegally. This opera-
tion was uncovered and the goods were confiscated through the awareness of
agents. [GP031711 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1530 GMT 3 Sep 81 GF]

SMUGGLBR SENTENCED--According to PARS, the Islamic Revolution Court in Kerman
found a smuggler named Hoseyn Dezfuli, son of Mohammad 'Ali, corrupt on earth
and sentenced him to death on charges of distributing narcotics and possessing
334 kg of opium extract. The verdict was carried out last night. [Text]
[LD111223 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1030 GMT 11 Sep 81]

DRUG ARRESTSc-The PARS NEHS AGENCY reports that the Islamic Revolution Guards
Corps of the drug squad headquarters in the office of the public prosecutor of
Mashhad, during the past week, succeeded in confiscating 308 kg of opium, 5.5 kg
of heroin and 16 fire arms from 9 drug smugglers in Khorasan. In this connection,
nine persons were arrested and were handed over to the officials in charge. [Text]
[Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 12 Sep 81 LD]

SABZEVAR OPIUH HAUL--During the past 2 days, Sabzevar Revolution Guards have dis-
covered and confiscated 10 bags of opium weighing 72 kg from Hasan and 'Abbas
Cheshmi. Qasemzadch and Kadkani, two dealers who tried to escape were arrested
and delivered to the Sabzevar Islamic Revolution Committee. [CF241834 Mashhad
domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 24 Sep 81 GP]

PARS HEROIN HAUL-~Dehdid Revolution Guards have arrested a man named Hahangiri,
who had 167 packets of heroin in his possession, and Hoseyn Bozorg, who had some
drug paraphernalia in a Peyhmivehicle. IGF241834 Shiraz Domestic Service in

Persian 1530 GMT 26 Sep 81 6F]

OPIUM SEIZURE--According to a report by PARS the public relations office of the
Islamic Revolution Guard Corps in Esfahan has announced: In an armed clash,
which took place on 25 September between the agents of a great gang of smugglers
and brothers from the Islamic Revolution Guards Corps of Esfahan and Na'in in
the region of Kavir in Anarak, 200 kilograms of opium were discovered. There
were more than 30 members of the aforesaid gang, 5 of whom were killed in this
clash and the rest escaped. leaving behind two motorcycles and a pair of bino-
culars. In this clash one of the guard brothers was injured in the leg. [Text]
L0270048 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 26 Sep 81 L0]

NARCOTICS SEIZURE--According to a PARS NEWS AGENCY report. 12 kg of opium and
7.75 kg of opium juice have been seized from smugglers by the antinsrcotics
personnel of the Ramadan Gendarmerie Company, the Nahavand Committee Islamic
Revolution Guards and the personnel of the Kumeh gendarmerie post in Torbat-e
Heydariyeh. The accused together with the files on their cases have been handed
over to the Islamic Revolution public prosecutor's office. [LDZ61236 Tehran
Domestic Service in Persian 1030 GMT 26 Sep 81 L0]

DRUG SEIZURE~-According to PARS NEHS AGERCY. 12 kg of opium and 7,750 kg of
opium juice have been seized by the antinarcotics squad of Ramadan Gendarmerie,
Nahavand Islamic Revolution Guards and members of the [name indistinct] gendar-
merie post of Torbat—e Heydariyeh. [CF261238 Tehran Donestic Service in Persian
1030 GMT 26 Sep 81 GP]

CSO: 5300/5600

67
BRIEFS

OPIUM SEIZED--Police culminated one of their most successful operations yesterday
when they opened a container yesterday and found, inside a Strongbox, 20 kilos of
opium, valued at 500,000 rupees (RS). Acting on specific intelligence, the secret
police had placed the suspect container under surveillance after it had been un-
loaded from the French ship "Ville de Brest" on 29 July. A person in transit,
suspected of having imported the container for a client is under investigation.

A 22-year old Port Louisian is under arrest. The "Ville de Brest" put in at

Bombay before casing to Port Louis. [Port Louis THE NATION in French 21 Aug 81 p 1]

C50: 5300/5600

48
NARCUI'ICS POLICE DISCUSS ILLEGAL DRUGS PAC‘I'OBIES
Helsinki EEISINGIN swam: in Finnish 18 Aug 81 p 10

!Article: 1"Amphetamine laboratory Attracts Drug Peddlers; More Profitable ‘Ihan
ins"

[Text] During the past 4 years the Criminal Investigation: Department (CID) has
been uncovering illegal drug laboratories at the rate of one a year. ENerything
points to the fact that this rate will be mintained, at least for the present.
Independently operated drug factories have become an attractive altemative for
drug peddlers since wiggling has become more difficult.

"'me manufacture of amphetamines is at present easier than snuggling them in and
the profits derived from it are bigger," CID Narcotics Squad chief, Inspector Olli
Heckman, felt were the reasons for this interest in laboratories.

The raw materials for the manufacture of 10 kg of drugs at the Finnish laboratory
discovered in Stockholm cost about 10,000 marks. In Sweden the wholesale value of
manufactured amphetamines is 400 kronor a gram. (1: the streets a capsule contain-
ing 0.2 grams of amphetamine my cost as such as 300 kronor.

Sweden's large market and convenient manufacturing situation in the hidden corners
of the big city are attracting Finnish drug offenders. Since it is harder to get
raw materials in Sweden, they are snuggled in from Finland.

Raw Materials from Finland by Mercedes

The CID recently seized 26 liters of chemicals needed in the manufacture of amphe-
tamines in an apartment in Espoo. ‘lhe materials were purchased from unsuspecting
wholesale houses and were destined for a laboratory in Sweden.

The Finnish businessman, who was arrested in Sweden, himself went to get the raw
materials from Finland. The chemicals were loaded into the trunk of his Mercedes
which was parked at a Helsinki luxury hotel.

Inspector Heckman stressed the fact that the manufacture of amphetamines is an
activity that is extremely effectively organised by professional criminals, one in
which large sums are at stake.

"Imrestigating these cases requires a great deal of patience under tension and
exactitude. He had the Stockholm laboratory under observation for 6 months

109
before we could close in on it. Pemission to tap phones would make the handling
of ham drug cases considerably acre effective,” Veokmn felt.

The first amphetamine laboratory found in Finland was in 1978, a factory mn by
Kosti Kustaa Kartiokari, fonerly called the drug Icing of the North. For his fac-

tory Kartiokari got Finland's harshest sentmce for drug offenses, 6 years and 4
months in prison.

A drug laboratory operation run by three men was uncovered in Helsinki in
1979. The men did succeed in Ianufactnrine anphetaaines in Finland but, trans-
ferred to Stockholm, the set-up had already produced a quarter of s kilogram of
poison.

An engineer forced to act as the factory's chemist is still serving a 5-year prison
sentence in Finland, ()1 the other hand, the Finnish men who headed the operation
have already been released from a Swedish prison.

In 1980 me, ”the snob," Jokinon, who achieved fans in a shooting incident on
Villinki Island, was convicted in Helsinki Mcipal Court for having set up amphe-
tamine laboratory operations.

11,466
cso: 5500/2440

50
MEDICAL AUTHORITY TO TIGBTEN PRESCRIPTION oomons
HolsinkiUUSI SUM inPinniBhZOAug81 1)}

[Article: "New Prescription and AT! Procedure to Go into Effect; Narcotics Super-
vision Tightened']

[Text] 'lhis fall the Medical Authority will tighten controls over the use of nar-
cotics. m devices to be employed are a special narcotics prescription and s.
computerized procedure for prescribing medicines.

"The new prescription forms are already available. So that they will be hard to
counterfeit, they are being printed on weternsrked paper at the Bank of Finland, "
chief pmrsician Juhana Idanpem-Heiknla cf the Medical Authority says.

Narcotics prescription forms are for doctors only and doctors get them only on
order,

'lhe writing up of narcotics prescriptions will be checked as regards the doctor,
’patient and pharmacy by means of an Al! [automatic data processing] procedure.

'mose reforms will require an increase in manpower. And the comittee that worked
on the matter has proposed that one new chief prursician and one lawyer be added to
the medical Authority, but creation of such positions has not yet been decided on.

Particularly doctors who do mental health work have proposed that a user of medi-
cations that effect the central nervous system should always rennin in the care
of one and the same doctor. ‘lhe Medical Authority's five-nan official ccnittee
is of the same opinion, but realising — or burying — that goal my take years,

its Medical Authority feels that it is warranted in stepping up its supervision
over the misuse of medications. Since lack of personnel has prevented systemtic
supervision, it has had to be satisfied with spot checks.

What nukes supervision difficult is, among other things, the fact that it has been
hard to determine when a. doctor or dentist has Violated his right to prescribe
drugs. Also promenatic is the Medical Authority's right to report an individual
patient to a doctor, pharmcy or the police.

11,466
050: 5500/2440

51
JUSTICE MINISTER PLEDGES INCREASED FUNDS TO STOP DRUGS
Oslo AFTENPOSTEN in Norwegian 27 Aug 81 p 3
[Article by Thorleif Andreassen: "Promise Repeated of Efforts to Combat Drugs"]

[Text] The government ispromising increased efforts to combat drugs. "But what
about the extra appropriations and the concrete measures?" asks Nona Lokke, chair-
man of the Conservatives' narcotics committee. "The money is now just around the
corner," states Justice Minister Bjorn Skau. telling AFTENPOSTEN that the government
will very shortly propose extra appropriations for the narcotics police. He did not
wish to comment on the size of the appropriations.

The justice minister denies categorically that the government has gone back on its

promise tostrengthm1effotta to combat narcotics. "On the contrary." Sksu asserts.
"the appropriations‘aill.among other things. be used for increasing investigations

and for new technical equipment for the police."
"what kind of equipment will now be used by the narcotics police?"
"We are speaking of special equipment needed to do away with the trade in drugs."

The justice minister does not wish to comment on the equipment to be used. Accord-
ing to what AFTENPOSTEN has learned it is a matter of advanced techniques to prevent
smuggling and special automobiles for use in narcotics investigation.

Storting member Mona Rokke asserted that conditions in the narcotics market are
getting worse every day, with the police not getting the funds necessary to combat
them. She recalled that the Conservatives' action plan against narcotics proposes
a rearmamentinpersonnel and equipment of the police. sheriffs, and customs author-
ities. "This proposal. which we proved was necessary, was voted down in the
Storting," said Hons Rokke.

Rokke called for a clarification by the justice minister in the matter of additional
appropriations for the present budget year. The Conservatives refrained from pro-
posing extra appropriations before the Storting adjourned; this because certain
signals can from the justic ministry to the effect that it was in favor of providing
more money to the narcotics police.

11.256
CSO: 5300/2346

52
AUTHORITIES STEP UP DRIVE AGAINST DRUG VIOLATORS
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish 13 Aug 81 p 4

[Article by Jan-Ivar Askelin: "Drugs Can Never Be Stopped"!

[Text] Oslo-—During one week in July, three heroin addicts died in Oslo after
taking overdoses, and a doctor in Oslo warns that heroin may be killing more young
people than traffic accidents before next year is over.

Although Norway was regarded as free of narcotics for a long time, it is now expe-
riencing the same frightening developments as Denmark and Sweden. At many places
in Oslo, dealings in drugs are going on quite openly in the midst of the stream of
tourists. A scribbling campaign advocating the legalization of hashish is being
carried on on the fronts of the buildings of the university, and leaflets bearing
the same message are distributed in the crowds on Karl Johan.

"In my opinion, hashish is the worst of all," says Arne Runes. of the Narcotics
Section of the Oslo Police. "It constitutes a gateway through which people move on
to more serious drugs. Nobody starts out with heroin," he says. Arne Huuse's
Narcotics Section, which is made up of 95 people, is only one indication of how
earnestly the Norwegian authorities are taking these developments. A year ago the
police did not have any strong organization with which to confront the growing wave
of drugs in Norway. Now the Oslo Police are perhaps better equipped than their
colleagues in the other Nordic capital cities. But out in the countryside there

usually are only one or two men in each district who work on narcotics offenses.

Dependency of Drugs

"The tremendous development during the last 2 or 3 years is chiefly characterized
by the facc that drugs have been distributed over the entire country,“ Arne House
says. "Formerly, we had the impression that dope was a big-city problem and was
concentrated in the center of Oslo," he says.

One can read about big drug deals way up in Finnmark, at places like Iromso and

Alta, in the newspapers now. In Arendal, on the southeast coast, the police say
that it is just as easy to get hold of dope as it is to get bread in the city.

Arne Huuse does not believe that it will be possible to rid Norway of narcotics
again.

53
“Possibly that can be an ideological objective," he says, '%ut looking at it reuils-
tically we can only hope to check its development. The same thing is happening

here as is happening in the rest of the North, but Sweden has better resources than
we do in many respects. we have no counterpart to the Hassela Collective. We only
have two institutions for the heavily addicted, and one of those can only accept

six cases. Of course, that is only a drop in the bucket. It is impossible to say
how many addicts there are in Norway, but there certainly are several thousand," he
says.

Political Unity

The narcotics question is said to be the only one on which political unity prevails
in Norway, but the struggle against drugs has not been carried on without any fric-
tion at all. The Oslo District has a special external section consisting of social
workers who try to save drug addicts in the field. Their methods are not always in
harmony with those of the police.

"Punishment first of all. Then one can think about treatment later on," says Arne
Huuse. “Only where cases of heavy drug addiction are involved can the demand for
treatment take over. But one must distinguish between those who are only users and
those who both use and sell dope. And how treatment is to be paid for is not the
concern of the police; the social authorities have the responsibility for that," he
says.

But Arne Huuse does not conceal the fact that drugs have reached the prisons. "There,
too, I think Sweden has gained control to a greater extent," he says.

Couriers to Sweden

The first confiscations of narcotics were reported in the mid-1960's. At that time,
Norway was chiefly a country through which couriers passed on their way to Sweden.
The police now think that recent indications show that drugs got a foothold in
Norway earlier than the checks which were made at that time were able to reveal,

for they were imperfect.

The first seizure of heroin was made in 1977, and the police reported eight deaths
from narcotics that same year. In the following year, 26 died, 27 were claimed by
drugs in 1979 and last year the number of dead rose dramatically to 43. Arne Huuse
thinks that the number of deaths this year will be even higher.

Dope in the Schools

"The death of heroin addicts is often due to the fact that there are various kinds
of heroin on the market. It is easy to make a mistake and take a fatal overdose,"
Arne Huuse says.

An increase in offenses against property and the number of street-walsing prostitutes
follows in the footsteps of drugs. Dope has gotten into the schools and is being
sold to lZ-year-olds.

There is no single, unambiguous answer to the question as to why dope came to Norway.
Perhaps it was just that Norway quite simply was an unexploited market which finally
became ripe for the drug dealers. The increased prosperity because of Norwegian
011 made that market even more interesting. It is said that Norwegian addicts

have the most money to speed of any in the Nordic countries. People also say that
there has been a change in society. Young people join gangs where narcotics have

taken over the role of bringing people together which formerly was played by the
traditional Norwegian occupations.

9266
C50: 5300/2444

55
BRIEFS

HASHISH SPREADING IN SOCIETY--"I regard it as not unlikely that there are about
20,000 persons in Norway who have used or are using narcotics. Host of them are in
the Oslo area. where sales and misuse are spreading steadily to new environments.
He can never win the struggle against the hell of narcotics. but we shall do all we
can in the struggle." says Arne nuuse. chief of the Oslo narcotics police to
DACBLADBT. The riot squad of the narcotics police was doubled last Honday. In the
coming months the patrol will make a maximum effort to catch the last link in the
sales chain. the pusher who offers the drugs. "He shall lake this effort with the
idea in mind of tracing the real 'big boys'" says Huuse. Since Monday. the riot
squad has had 12 persons in service. It is behind several of the large drug
seizures made by the narcotics police during the past year. The patrol members
dress in civilian clothes and drive unnarlted cars. They are found in all narcotics
environments in Oslo. watching them to survey sale and misuse and identifying persons
in the various areas. [Text] [Oslo AREBEIDERBLADBT in Norwegian 21 Aug 81 p 3]
11.256

CSO: 5300/2346

56
TWO SHEDES, GREEK HANDED SENTENCES IN NARCOTICS CASE
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish 8 Aug 81 p 7

[Article by Henrik Ekman: "Twelve Sentenced in Narcotics Network-30 Years of
Imprisonment for Drug 0ffences"]

[Text] Sentences of imprisonment for a total of 30 years and 2 months were handed
out in a big narcotics trial in the Sollentuna district court on Friday.

A caretaker from Ostermalm, Enar 0stman, and his wife, Ulla 0stman, were the center
of attention. They were sentenced to 7 and 6 years imprisonment, respectively.

The principal character in the network is a Greek who is a resident of Corfu and
sought after by Interpol. He had been punished before for narcotics offenses in
Sweden and expelled, but he continued to live here illegally and carry on drug
dealings.

The Ostman couple became his intermediaries along the road traveled by heroin from
Amsterdam to Swedish addicts.

The first contact was made in 1979. A mutual friend brought about the contact on
Solvalla. The Greek needed a place to live and Enar 0stmsn was consulted.

The next step was a trip to Kongsvinger in the Norwegian mountainous region. The
Greek contacted the couple and asked for a lift to Stockholm, and the couple drove
up and picked him up.

During 1980, the couple made several trips to Amsterdam in the Creek's company.

Each time they returned with approximately 300 grams of heroin. A third Swede,
Anders Bleckhorn, accompanied them on most of those occasions. In contrast with the
three other dealers in heroin, his job was to test the drugs. He also sold them.

He was sentenced to 5 years imprisonment.

Enar 0stman persistently denied the actions he was charged with. He maintained that
he had not had any idea at first that those actions had anything to do with narcotics.

However, the district court put more faith in Ulla 0stman and Anders Bleckhorn,
who admitted having committed narcotics offenses.

Eight other people appeared before the court who were involved in the network, and
that included two cousins of the Greek leader of the group who was wanted by the
police. Each of them was sentenced to 8 and 1/2 years of imprisonment and deportation.

9266 57

C80: 5300/2444
POLICE BREAK UP GANG WHICH SOLD HASHISH TO YOUTH
Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 28 Aug 81 p 1,

[Text] A narcotics gang which sold something like 50 kolograma of hashiah for be-
tween 5 and 100 million kronor to young people all over Sweden has been broken up
by the police in Handen. which is located to the south of Stockholm. A 29-year-old
man was the leader of the gang, and he planned the selling of the drugs. which
originated in Handen. The gang also sold amphetamines.

The 29-year-old had couriers from towns all over the country who came to Handen
regularly, bought large consignments of hashish and sold them to groups of young
people in their hone towns. Up until the present. the police have captured and
interrogated some 20 people. About 15 people are now in custody, under arrest or
in jail. The police expect to make more arrests. Inspector Bernt Sahlin of the
Criminal Police in Randen says:

"On Monday, for example, we carried out a raid at an address in Tyreso and took
several kilograms of hashish. He think even more drugs are concealed there. Three
people were taken at that time. Two of them are now under arrest and keeping them
in custody will be requested next week. Four people are being kept in custody in
Handen, including the 29-year-old leader of the gang, and two people have been
arrested. Three of the gang's couriers from Norrkoping were given sentences of
imprisonment late last week. In addition to Handen and Norrkoping, drugs were

sold in Enkoping, Vaateras. Uppsala. Gavle. Palun and elsewhere. The operation has
been going on since at least 1979.

9266
C80: 5300/2kb3

58
NORRKOPING CUSTOMS SEIZES RECORD AMOUNT OF CANNABIS

Stockholm DAGENS NYHBTER in Swedish 28 Aug 81 p 3

[Article by Sture Rynan: "Another Cannabis Seizure; Drug Find Breaks Record"]

[Text] Norrkoping--The customs service in Norrkoping has made a record confisca-
tion aboard the Pakistani drug ship "Pussari." Yesterday, which was Friday, the
customs service found 6.3 kilograms of cannabis oil, and that is now up to 11.5

kolagrans.

That is the largest find which has been made in this country in a single place.
With the 17 kilograms of cannabis cake which were found, the market value is now

calculated at up to 10 nillion kronor.

On Friday there were 23 customs officials aboard the ship. Norrkoping had help
fron colleagues from Stockholm and Oxelosund all week long. There also were dogs
aboard the ship every day and it was one of than which found 13 kilograms of
cannabis Thursday evening.

Coast Guard divers also came late Thursday aftannoon to search the dock. The
customs people suspect that a considerable amount of the drug was thrown out of
the boat. Fourteen arrestees are still being held by the Customs Criminal Police.
They are the captain, all the officers and most of the crew members who work in the
engine room. Some of them had to be released because the pumps had to be tended
on the ship all the time and it was taking in water.

The actual interrogation began Friday evening. So far, it has been difficult to
find enough interpreters.

9266
C50: 5300/2663

59
POLICE FIND ADDITIONAL DRUGS 0N PAKISTANI SNIP IN PORT
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADBT in Swedish 29 Aug 81 p 7

[Article by Suns Olofson: "Boat A Floating Central Headquarters for Narcotics;
Customs Finds 10 Million Kronor worth of Dope"]

[Text] The Pakistani ship H/F "Pussur," which is lying in the Norrkoping harbor,

is weighed down with narcotics. Up until the present, customs officials have

found almost 30 kilograms of cannabis aboard which is valued at approximately 10
million kronor. The captain and 15 members of the crew have been taken into custody.

During a voyage from Karachi to Sweden by way of West Africa and West Germany, the
NI? "Pussur" smuggled more than 100 kilograms of cannabis and cannabis oil. The
boat is a floating central headquarters for narcotics.

Under interrogation, one of the crew members taken into custody said that drugs
were tossed overboard at certain agreed-upon places during the voyage and were sold
in ports in Heat Germany.

The Customs service in Norrkoping had been tipped off to subject the HIP "Puesur"

to especially careful inspection when she arrived at Norrkoping on Tuesday. It

turned out that the ship was full of drugs stowed away behind beans, in oil containers,
under ceilings and under the floor in the engine room.

During the trip from Karachi, in Pakistan, the officers received orders from the
shipping company to search the vessel. The reason was that the shipping company's
management suspected that the crew was smuggling dope on a large scale. The
officers aboard the vessel found slightly more than 100 kilograms of cannabis in
tightly-pressed cakes. Forty-five kilograms were concealed in the engine room in
a full oil container and 50 kilograms were found in small amounts in hammocks and
behind bolts and doors.

The customs people in Norrkoping have subjected the drug boat to a detailed search
lasting 4 days. So far, the customs personnel have found 17 kilograms of cannabis
cakes and 11.5 kilograms of concentrated cannabis oil.

Customs Chief Lars Hidholm, in Norrkoping, says: ”Swedish customs personnel have

never captured such a large amount of cannabis before. The boat is completely
flooded with dope." The anount captured was so large that permission to incinerate

had to be obtained.

60
"We probably will find more. The search is continuing," Lars Hidholn says.
Bought for 50 Kronor per Hectogram

The customs people and the police are convinced that large amounts of dope were
disposed of during the voyage from Karachi. In the crew's quarters and the storage

spaces, the customs people found large quantities of expensive products-refrigera-
tors and freezers, television sets. tape recorders and videotape recorders. The
police believe that these products were obtained in exchange for cannabis.

In Karachi, the smugglers buy cannabis for 50 Swedish kronor per kilogram [sic].
In Stockholm, a gram of cannabis costs 75 kronor. The concentrated cannabis oil
costs 750 kronor per gram.

The role played by the Pakistani captain in the drug trade is not clear at present.
The customs personnel were able to find part of the dope by reading the boat's oil
log book. It is noted in that book that cannabis caused a stoppage of the bilge

pumps.

9266
080: 5300/2463

g 61
RESTAURANT OWNER ACCUSED OF SMUGGLING HEROIN
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish 29 Aug 81 p 10
[Article by Claes von Hofsten: "Six Kilograms of Heroin Ordered and Sold"]

[Text] A restaurant owner in Stockholm has been arrested on suspicion of having had
6 kilograms of heroin smuggled into Sweden from the Netherlands.

That narcotics shipment is worth almost 10 million kronor when sold to users of the
drug. The smuggling allegedly took place 3 years ago. According to information in
the hands of the police, the restaurant owner at that time hired a couple of other
men to go to Holland and buy the heroin for him. The drug allegedly was actually
delivered to Sweden and sold.

The restaurant owner denies the charges. Prosecutor Bernt Adanason decided on
Monday to have the man arrested. Another individual was arrested in connection

with the same investigation.

In another narcotics investigation, the police of Stockholm raided an automobile
repair workshop in Sodermalm which was suspected of serving as a center for dealings
in amphetamines. A man and a woman were arrested on suspicion of engaging in serious
narcotics offenses and assisting in the commission of serious narcotics offenses.

In that raid, the police confiscated 2 hectograms of amphetamines from one of four
other individuals who were arrested on suspicion of distributing narcotics from the
automobile repair workshop.

The police believe that they prevented the development of a very extensive narcotics
business in connection with that repair workshop. The owners of the shop had grad-
ually bought up businesses in that vicinity on the same street. The proprietor

of the workshop denied engaging in narcotics crimes but he admits a number of other
irregularities in connection with that business. However, from another quarter.

the police have obtained confessions from people who handled consignments of
amphetamines weighing a hectogram in the workshop.

In this operation. too. it is suspected that the drugs came from Holland and that
they were smuggled into Sweden from there in consignments weighing about a kilogram.
9266

C50: 2300/2100

62
CLUB OWNER CHARGED IN HEROIN-SHUGGLING CASE

Stockholm SVENSKA DACBLADET in Swedish 1 Sep 81 p 8

[Article by Claes von Hofsten: "Club Owner Charged with 12 Million Kronor North
of Drug Deals") "

[Text] A Stockholm club owner was indicted on Monday by the Huddinge district
court on suspicion of making heroin deals worth 12 million kronor.

The man was arrested by the police at the end of 1980. Since then he has been
under arrest and in custody, suspected of having been one of the biggest heroin
dealers during the second half of the 1970's.

He denies all accusations of narcotics offenses and only admits to heavy gambling.
There have been facilities for gambling for money in his club on Sodermalm in
Stockholm for several years.

They Remain Silent Out of Fear

In narcotics cases, the difficulty involved in proving the offense is usually
greater trxn in cases involving other offenses. Those who are implicated generally
elect to remain silent to avoid the danger of reprisals from other people who are
involved in the illegal activities. and they do so even if they are caught with
narcotics in their possession.

In the police investigation lasting 8 months which was concluded on Monday with the
indictment referred to above, not a single gram of narcotics was confiscated. To

a large extent, the proof consists of information from people who have already been
sentenced for narcotics offenses and are already incarcerated.

In addition to the club owner, who is the main person in the network, four other

people have been indicted for various forms of narcotics offenses. A fifth indi-
vidual has been indicted for involvement in the portions of the activities under

investigation which had to do with heavy gambling.

Caused Others To Smuggle

The club owner is suspected, on the one hand, of having smuggled heroin into Sweden
himself and, on the other hand. of having caused others to smuggle heroin in for him.
Furthermore, he is suspected of having carried out deals with heroin belonging to a
big narcotics dealer who was sentenced to 12 years of imprisonment last year. In
all, he is suspected of deals involving 8 kilograms of heroin plus some amphetamines,
too.

9266
C80: 5300/2443 63
BRIEFS

PAKISTAN! DRUG-SHUGGLING SHIP FREED—-Norrkoping, 1 Sep 8l--The Pakistani drug ship
"Pussur" left Norrkoping for Amsterdam on Tuesday, 1 Sep 1981. The customs service,
which had up to 23 men aboard the ship every day for a week, confiscated cannabis
and cannabis oil having a market value of 10 million kronor. Seventeen men-
officers and crew members-~were taken into custody and interrogated by the Customs
Criminal Police, but all of them were released over the weekend or on Monday.

During the interrogations, it became clear to the customs investigators that the
presence of the narcotics was known to most of the people on board. various groups
made insinuations and accusations against each other, but the accusers did not
supply any valid proof. The Customs Criminal Police also examined the lists in
which the crew members declared their currency holdings when they left Karachi. The
information on those lists does not tally with the large purchases of expensive
products which were made in Bremen and Hamburg. There are large numbers of video-
tape recorders, television sets, refrigerators and freezers, etc. aboard the ship.

A crew member on the "Pussur" earns about 800 or 900 kronor a month, and in the
interrogations they said that they smuggled money out of their homeland to be able
to trade in Europe. The interrogators did not succeed in proving that they sold
naroctics aboard the ship and that they probably will be disposed of in Antwerp.
[Text] [Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 2 Sep 81 p 7] 9266

SCANDINAVIANS COOPERATE lN DRUG PIGHT-Sweden, Norway and Denmark have agreed to
place seven members of their police forces as narcotics liaison people in countries
which have strategic positions in regard to the smuggling of narcotics. They have
not yet come to any decision in Finland, but they favor the idea. It was at the
meeting of the ministers of justice of the Nordic countries this summer that making
a vigorous effort against drug-related offenses was discussed. The Swedish govern-
ment has given the National Police instructions to send a man to Copenhagen. The
Swedish National Police already have a man in the Hague, and he is to stay there.
Plans are being made just now for a Swedish liaison man in Ankara. Norway is
probably going to put its narcotics liaison men in England and Pakistan if negoti-
ations with those two countries go off all right. Denmark has undertaken to place
liaison men in West Germany and South America. Representatives of the Nordic
countries are to meet again in October to continue the discussions about joint
drug—fighting undertakings. {Excerpt} [Stockholm SVENSKA DABBLADBT in Swedish

20 Aug 81 p 9] 9266

cso: 5300/2441. 3"”

64