FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10595
17 June 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 27/8?)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NORLDHIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Daues

(POUO 27/8 2)

CONTENTS

ASIA
BURMA

Briefs
Opium Seized in Pegu

PHILIPPINES

Dogs Used in Anti-mug hire
()1. Silva; PHILIPPINES DAILY muss, 18 May 82) ......

Advantages of Drug Detecting Dogs Noted
(Editorial; PHILIPPINES DAILY mass, 20 Hay 82)......

Briefs
Marihuana Plantations Raided

SINGAPORE

Briefs
Opium Seized Prom Burmese Ship

SRILANKA

National Narcotics Control Board Secretariat Opened
(Peter Balasuriya; m ISLAND, 12 m 82)eeoae eaeoeaaee

Sri Lanka warned on Tranmtting mugs
(mu! “m, lamse) 0..0..0..0......0000000'0000000

St'ern Measures for Foreign Mg Dealers
(Peter Balasuriya; THE ISLAND, 7 W 82) ..............

-a- [III-WW-138P

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mug Abuse Prevention Plan Drafted
. (MLY m, 12m82) 00......OOOOOCOOCOOOOOOOOOOOCOOO

Briefs
Airport Surveillance Up

Narcotics Board Headquarters

THAILAND

Khun 5a Attempts ‘ro Bargain With RTG Noted
(81“ MT mm “cm, 16 H” 82) OOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOIOO

n-ug Dealing Diplomat Controversy Discussed
(81m RAT 8mm “cm, 16 m 82) oesoeeeeeeee-eeeeee

Heroin Hailorder Scheme Reported-
(HAHCHW’ 2h Apr 82) .‘C..............Q................

Columist Hits Singapore as Source of Chemical
(”1cm K‘mpric'Ia‘ “081m, 3”” 82) IOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOO

Prosecutors Told To Stiffen Control of W Cases
(mo SI“, 3” 82) 0....OOOOOOCOIOOOIOOOO...IIOOOOOOOO

Briefs
Italian Arrested nth Heroin

Heroin Seized After Chase
Arrests Follow Heroin Seizure

Acetic Anhydride Shortage

CANADA

Cocaine Seized in Drug Roundup; Nine Charged
(THE vmm 8"", Izmez) 0.0.0...OOIOOOICOOCOOOOOOC

Briefs
n'ug Cache Seized

Trafficker Jailed

LATIN AMERICA

0010431 A

mug 'l‘rafrickers Kill Indians
(Walter Martinez; EL TIDIPO, 28 Apr 82) .o...............

Briefs
Cocaine Confiscated
NEAR. EAST AND mun AFRICA

Fifteen International Narcotics Snuggle” Executed
(M, 3m 82) 00......0.00....OOCOOOOOOCOOOIOOOOIC.

Briefs
Huge Opium Haul

Sarakhs Mg Seizure
Court Sentences Traffickere

Bandar 'Abbas Opium Seizure
Bender 'Abbas Heroin Find
Opium Seizure in Haahhad
Drugs Seized in Zahedan

Drug Arrest
LEBANGI

Briefs
Hashi eh Snuggler Arrested

SUB-SARAH.“ AFRICA

SEYCHELLES

Judge Warns of Crackdown on Mg Smugglers
(RATION’ Zsmea) .00...0.......OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO'DO
SOUTH AFRICA

Smear on Use of mugs at mtvatersrand Reported
(Anthea Tasker; SUNDAI T1163, 16 May 82) ..-..........

SWAZILAND

Increase in mug Abuse Deplored
(lldvuna martini; TH! TIMES OF SWAZILAND, 17 May 82)...

REST EUROPE
GREECE
Briefs-
French Heroin Snugglers Convicted
Italian Herc-in Traffickers Arrested
ITALY

Overview of Illicit Narcotics Activities
(Fabio Scaramucci; L'UHAIIITA, 20-22 Apr 82) ...........

More Stress on Social Aspects of Anti- Plan Needed
(Alvaro Benedetti; AVAN'I'I, 27 Apr 2) .................

NORWAY

Irug Overdose Deaths Tied to Heroin Gangs in Middle East
(Fetter "om; MT, 8 m 82) oeeoeeooeoeeooe

Trial Begins; Man Accused of haggling Hashish Fran Morocco
(Helge Serenaen; mmm, 27 m 82) oeeoooeeoeeooe

Briefs
Trondheim Narcotics Use Up

View of Higly Organized mug Network (mallenged
(Go "a “1.380“, was mm, 28 Apr 82) oeoeeeleeeoo

Madman Sentences Seen for Anphetuine mugglers
(Sune Olsson; SVENSKA NOW, 17 May 82) ...........
UNITED KING“

Lenient Sentence for Head of mug-mung Ring
(Ian 3811133133 mm mm, 15 m 82) Ooeeeeeee-eeee

Briefs
Airport Spot Fines Planned
BR]. BPS

OPIUH SEIZBD IN PBGU--0n 2’4 Hey, police Lance Corporal Tin Than and Private
Aung Naing. acting on their suspicions, asked Dsw Thein "yin: and Dsw Her
Chu, who were on No 1 platforl st Pegu railway station, to acconpany then
to the police station. On arrival at the police station, police, in the
presence of witnesses. searched the belongings of the two won and found
5.7 visa [1 viss equals 3.6 pounds] of black opium hidden in baskets
containing yellow pumpkinsand reps tamarind. [31(060821 Rangoon LOKTHA
PYEITIIU NEZIN in Burmese 27 May 82 p 5]

(280: 5300/5770
DON'I’ i“ suited when you—£7:
(out big dog Mun you go to the

Manila post ofﬁce in Unsung
Bonifaclo 0! to the alt petal action

at the Manila humtéoulnkpon to
claim you: [mull ov mill.
“Dino." “Ado.” "Zinc!“ and
“Bjorn." is they on and. m {90!
60.7 Tm 'Goinﬁy ;W_inhod

s
!

aim». amulet and «Mn

but do; can on may: of
PlQMuch-Mwllumcnoul
of ".5” My fot food ind
”(lulu-lam
ADVANTAGES OP DRUG onecrmc m5 NOTED

Manila PHILIPPINES DAILY EXPRESS in English 20 May 82 p ‘0

[Editorial:

[Text]

"Airport Sniffers: Not Just Novelty"]

M ANY view the recent acquisition by the Bureau of Customs of
but dogs trained to detect prohibited and regulated drugs as a
novelty. which it is in this part Pof the world.

But the move is merely the latest measure adopted by the
government to curb the growing drug menace in the country. The
dog, which are specyiall -trained to sniff out such drugs as mari-
iuma. cocaine. opium, morphine and amphetamines, will be able
to assist customs policemen substattially in the aprehension of
culprits who persist in their nefarious and socially channful trade.

it is also expected that soon customs officials will benefit from
the services of,“ dogsy et-to-be purchased that will help them detect
explosiva and anmunitlons that continue to slip into the country,
only to end up in the hands of criminal elements.

With all these measures, lncludhg previous ones imposing stiffer
penalties on violators of the prohibited drugs law and the firearms
ban, thereshouid be no reason why customs policemen and other
law enforcers should still bungle their worlr

Of course the matter of strict enforcement is something else.
If the government has somewhat fallen short in combatting the
widespread smuuiing of prohibited dnigs and firearms into the
country, it has been due to, in most instances, the laxity and on.
sustained nature in enforcement by those charged with the lob.
Either- becaise of personal gains that may be realized from looking
the other way, or simply because of complacency these marshalis
become as guilty as those directly involved in these activities.

The harmful effects of drug abuse have been publicized often
enough. So has the actual threat to society of firearms and ammu-
nitions falling into the wrong hands. Yet we do not seem to be
coming any closer to the satisfactory solution of these problems.
The purchase by customs officialsory of the special dogs should not
begin and end as a novelty.

CSO: 5300/5760
SKIES

MARIN PIMATIONS ”Instr-Government operatives raided marijuana planta-
tions in Benguet and Ilocos Sur last Tueeday and Sunday, uprooting more than
I5.5 million worth of marijuana plants and seedlings. Lavmen uprooted the
other day ".5 million worth of dried marijuana leaves in two plantations in
sitio Legleg, barangay Palina. Benguet, the biggest marijuana seizure so far
this year. Haj. Roberto Ortega, chief of the special intelligence branch of
the Metrooom intelligence and eecurity group (H198), said the plantation care-
taker. Colva Donglal. 60, was arrested. A .22 caliber paltik revolver was
found in his possession. M sacks of dried and fresh marijuana plants were
seized as evidence while the rest were burned as means to transport them was
difficult. One sack contained 35,000 piecee of marijuana leaves while the
other contained 10,000 pieces. Donglal and his unidentified companions will
be charged of violating anti-narcotic law: before the Benguet fiecal's office.
[Manila BULLETIN mm in English 28 hey 82 p 40] cans mm, Benguet. Hay
27--Hore than 10,000 fully grown marijuana plants. including seedlings. worth
more than ’1 million were uprooted last Sunday by government operatives in bar-
angay Buburan, Del Pilar, llocoe Bur. [Manila BULLETIN TODAY in English 28 May

82 p 40]

680: 5300/5769
BRIEFS

OPIUH SEIZED FROM BURHESE SHIP-Custom officers yesterday seized 9.5 kilos
of raw opim worth about $210,000 from a Burmese ship in the harbour yesterday
morning. The seizure, described by a customs official as the "biggest"

in recent years, was made during a routine check only 2 hours after the
cargo ship. Friendship 387, sailed into the outer roads anchorage. The drugs,
wrapped in five packages, were found hidden among stacks of rubber bales and
firewood in the ship's cargo hatch. Customs men have picked up a suspect
from among the 39 crew masters to help them in their investigations. lhder
the misuse of drugs act, anyone caught peddling more than 6 kilos of raw
opiun faces a maximum penalty of 30 years' jail plus caning, on conviction.
[Text] [BKObOBZl Singapore THE SUNDAY TIMES in English 30 May 82 p 7]

(:80: 5300/5770
A Secretariat for the Natal-rial
Narcotics Control Board declared
open by Deputy Minister oldel'enee
Mr. T. a Werapitiya on the 3rd
ﬂoor of the New Secretarial. Fort.

Associated with Mr. Werapttin
on this occasion were the It}? Mr.
Rodi-a Ramingharn. senior Dle
Mr. R. Sunderalingarn. Mr. Hubert
Weerasinghe. Mr. S. S. Joseph. Mr.
Edward Gunawardene. Mr. Ernest
Perera. and other seniorhotftcerr
Mr. Henio Weerasinghe SP of the
Narcotics Division was also present.

Mr. Werapitiya. shortly after the
opening told the press that President
J. R. Jayewardene had given high
priority to narcotic drugs in view of
the phenomenal increase in the illicit
manufacture of various types of
narcotic drugs in the courttries
within the Asian region. This
situation had been further
aggravated with West Asian
countries now manufacturing a very
highly potent type or herion and
rusing Colombo as an outlet to
western markets.

“It I! to avoid the possibility olSrt ‘

’60

lanka becoming a vulnerable point
for the transhiprnent of narcotic
drug from the Golden Tringle area.
Nepal. Pakistan and the Golden
Crescent areas that high prionty has
been given to its prevention.“ Mr
Wenpitiya said.

He added the present office was
completeineveryaspecttorneetthit
challenge.

The ofﬁce has separate sections
devoted to crime prevention.
hightny accidents etc. There were
also exhibits at various types at
dangerous weapons now in use in
the county. a rogues gallery with life
size photographs of hard core
criminals. the various ltinds or local
and foreign narcotic drugs in
coninton use. the utensils used for
their processing the contraptions
used to smuggle them out and a
complete ilicit laboratory which had
been established in Hilrltaduwa and
later raided by the Police.

Among the portraits of hard-core
criminals were the pictures of Podi-
Wije Who terrorised the
Anuradhapura area and Willie
Kulatunga. with 19 hold-ups to his
credit. who Jumped tail last ueelt.
SRI LANKA WED 0N TRANSMITTING DRUGS

Colombo DAILY NEWS in 511311811 18 May 82 p 1

transit

An international airports in Asia are
points for narcotic snuggling. Interpol and the Nar-

cotic mm 01 the United Nations have inform-

ed the manta Narcotic Bureau.

ai r-
narcotic

y major sea port and all international
not“ in Asia are being used by big-tune

In th. latest communicator: the bureau has re-

‘ceived tram these agencies. 1th” been said that

m 3% Wumm

mum!

M 3““

:ammm

www.mmmm mum mmmm

w

m

:mmmw Mm mmmmwmm

:mmm sum mmmwmmm

Law a:

mummmmm

mwmmmmam

mm?
wwwm an»

“mmmmw

mm mmmmmwwm

mwwmwum

Wm
Wm

awn
STERN MEASURES FOR FOREIGN DR“; DEALERS
Colmbo THE ISLAND in English 7 May 82 p 2
[Article by Peter Balasuriya]

[Text] Government is to come down hard on foreign drug addicts finding their
way into Sri lanka. It has been found that the drug addicts are bringing a
highly potent opium, heroin and other narcotic drugs of West Asian origin.

Perturbed at the manner in which these drugs are coming into this country

a three-pronged attack is now being envisaged to root out this dreaded
menace. lhe Police and Customs in collaboration with Interpol are attempting
to identify these noted addicts and pedlars and keep them and their activ-
ities under stricter surveillance.

This measure follows the spate of deaths in this country of foreigners who
had left tell-tale evidence of their drug addiction. "Fortunately none of
these victims are Sri Lankans which evidently proves these drugs are not in
cos-non use by locals," a Police spokesman told The Island.

Interpol is to assist Sri Lanka giving detailed information in respect of
internationally known drug addicts and even pedlara to enable Sri lanka to
curb their activities here. It is understood these addicts were the carriers
for a more potent type narcotic drugs manufactured in the Crescent Triangle
area for which there are little outlets now.

This new strategy had been bared shortly after a Canadian national who had

visited Sri Lenka on several occasions was sentenced to a long term of
imprisonment in Montreal.

(230: 5300/5760
”:4 “WEE

mwmm mmm
mm_w~ “Wm

.WM ?m
mwmm
my:

I“
BRIEFS

AIRPORT SURVEILLANCE UP--Deputy Defence Minister 1.3. werapitiya has ordered
intensive surveillance of hard drugs at the katunayake Airport following
five narcotic induced deaths of foreigners during the last ten days. The
Deputy Minister who also serves as (hair-an of the Narcotics Control Board
has said that the best officers with a good knowledge of narcotics work be
deployed on this operation. [Text] [Colo-b0 DAILY ms in English 10 May 82

91]

NARCOTICS BOARD HBADQIIARI‘BRS--lhe Deputy Defence Minister Mr 1‘.B. Herapitiya
who opened the new headquarters of the Narcotics Control Board at the new
Secretariat office yesterday said that President 3.8. Jayewardene was very
keen on checking drug abuse in the country. The Minister who said that
legislation was ready to stamp out drug abuse raarked that the problem here
was not as acute as in many other parts of the world. The 16?, Mr Rudra
Rajasinghan said that while the authorities were arning themselves with the
necessary legislation to act swiftly against offenders, it was necessary
that the public co-operste with the police if this probla was to be
effectively tackled. The 16? added that the Australian Police would supply
Colombo with specially trained dogs for narcotics work. [Text] [Colombo
DAILY NEWS in English 12 my 82 p l]

680: 5300/5760

10
KHUN SA ATTEMPTS TO BARGAIN WITH RTG NOTED
Bangkok SIAM RAT SAPPADA RICHAR in Thai 16 May 82 pp 4, 5
[Article: “Ban Hin Taek: The war Is Not Over"!

[Text] The thing that was expected has been confirmed by Hashington. The sun
forces of Khun Sa. whose secure base at Ban Hin Taek was destroyed at the
beginning of January, have been pressured to cooperate with the forces of

the Burmese Communist Party in expending their influence in the drug trade

and in opposing the Rangoon government of Burma. A 0.8. congressional committee
on the BC? revealed that Burmese forces number 12,000 men and an additional
3,000 can be called up. A government has been formed in the jungle in the
Golden Triangle area near the Thai-Burmese border.

Colonel Choe Phosrinak, the commander of the Hang Rai Haharat camp in Chiang
Rai Province stated that, at present, opium caravans using 2,000 mules are
transporting the opium from Yunnan in southern China down into the northern
region of Thailand. This made it necessary for Thailand to send in troops

to annihilate the forces of Khun Sa once again on 9 and 10 May.

The Thai forces that were used to expel the forces of Khun Sa that had returned
and set up a new operations base in Thailand for the second time were composed
of four companies of border patrol police -- two companies from the Naresuan
camp and two companies form the Dararatsami camp -- 300 thahan phran irregulars
from CK 513 in Pakthongchai. Nakhon Ratchasima, soldiers from the 3rd and

5th battalions of the 7th Infantry and forces from the Special Warfare Center.
These forces were supported by armored vehicles and 16 military and police

helicopters and four aircraft.

During a reconnaissance patrol near Ban Lao Lu in Mae Chan District, which
is about 8 kilometers northwest of Ban Hin Taek, just when the helicopters
were bringing in support troops theycame under fire. One soldier was killed
and three were wounded. Three of the helicopters were hit. Police aircraft
No 1718 had to make an emergency landing at the Ban Hin Taek base because
of the extensive damage it had sustained. Another aircraft was damaged but
managed to return to the base of BPP Company 4. It could not be used again
because the diecharge was damaged and the control stick had been broken.

11
The clash began at 1100 hours on 9 May. Thai government forces encountered
approximately 40 men of Khun Sa at Ban Lao Lu. The battle became more and
more violent.Artillery fire had to be called in for support and airc1aft had
to drop bombs in order to seize Khun Sa's base at Ban Lao Lu. Eight of Khan
Ba's men were killed and two who were wounded were captured. Ml6s, carbines,
antitank rocket launchers, ammunition, 10 kilograms of raw and cooked opium,

100 bags of glucose, rice, blankets and a large quantity of medicine were
seized. ‘

General Athit Kamlangek, the assistant coamander in chief of the army and
the commanding general of the First Army Area, stated that this operation
was launched because recent aerial photographs taken by the air force had
shown that new villages had been set up and that defense shelters different
from those at other villages were being built. In particular, at Ban Lao Lu,
there were originally only a few houses there, but the aerial photographs
showed several hundred houses there. This made [officials] suspect that this
was the site of a heroin refinery or a base for foreign troops. Thus, troops
were sent to determine what was going on there and the clash broke out.

A Fight Over the Body of a Reporter

General Prachuap Suntharangkun, the deputy prime minister, and his entourage
recently visited Burma. During the visit, the matter of Khun Sa was discussed.
Thailand and Burma will cooperate in suppressing Khun Sa and in suppressing

the forces of the BCP. Concerning the agreement that was reached, Burma requested
cooperation from Thailand in suppressing the rebellion by the minority groups,
such as the Karens and Burmese communists. Burma will send troops to attack

these groups and Thailand will station troops along the border in order to
prevent the minority group forces from retreating into Thailand when they

are attacked.

Another point is that the forces of Khun Sa that fled into Burma when they
were attacked at Ban Hin Taek fled into a gap between the Burmese and Thai
forces. The terrain here is composed of complex mountain ranges and rivers
that hinder the Burmese forces from making attacks. Thus, the latest report
stated that 'Khun 8a is still quite well.‘ And the fact that forces of Khun

Sa assassinated Mr Thawip Kaenthapthim, the editor of the newspaper HATUPHUH
who disappeared while gathering information on the first suppression operation
against Khun Sa, and refused to return his body forced Thailand to take strong
action in order to pressure them to return the body. A military news source
stated that the fact that Khun Sa refused to return the body of Mr Thawip
Kaenthapthim or allow the body to be taken out has greatly tarnished the image
of the Thai government since even though this was a Thai who died in Thailand,
the [government] has not been able to get the body back.

A Bargain

When Khun 5a was attacked the first time, his forces suffered very few casualties.
Even Chang si Chuan, [Khun Sa's] chief of staff, was able to escape the attack

12
by Thai forces and move his forces to Ban Lao Lu. This is a new base from
which to carry on the fight. however, Khun sa is still making contact in order
to bargain with the Thai government for the return of Ban Hin Taek, Thoet

Thai village. to SUA forces. In return, he has agreed to return the body of
Mr Thawip Kaenthapthim and serve as a buffer state against the BCP.

The most important thing that Khun Sa has bargained for besides the base is
the return of all the weapons that were seized by the Thai forces. Otherwise,
he may have to take some action to secure the return of these weapons. This
has made it necessary for Thailand to mobilize both civilian and police forces
to defend the four border districts of Mae Sai, Hae Chan, Chiang Saen and
Chiang Rai's Muong District. These districts are in an area of influence where
Khun Sa can carry out terrorist operations.

These negotiations took place only 4 days before the sweep operation was launched.
Thailand refused all of the prOposals that were put forth. General Prem Tinsulanon,
the prime minister, stated that Thailand will not allow any minority group

forces to live in Thailand. The Thai government has definitely never had a

policy of allowing minority groups to come live in Thailand.

The reason that Thailand has had to suppress Khun Sa is that the Thai government
believes that this is an internationally important pirate, or criminal, group
that has gained influence. amassed forces and weapons, expanded large troop
bases and violated the sovereignty of Thailand. In addition, Khun Sa produces
approximately 70 percent of the narcotics that are produced in the Thai-Burmese
border area. The Thai government seized and destroyed three heroin refineries

in the attack on Khun Sa's forces in October 1981. This occurred prior to

the attack on Ban Hin Taek in January 1982. In the latter attack. 16 Thais died and
50 were wounded; 200 of Khun Sa's soldiers were killed. Weapons, war materials,
communications equipment and medicines were seized. This included more than

700 weapons, including small arms such as carbines, M16s, AKs, RPGs, bazookas,
grenade launchers, 52,000 rounds of ammunition. more than 300 grenades and

Inore than 300 Sony radio receivers.

The two operations this year that used forces to wipe out the forces of Khun

Sa show that the Thai government has not really been able to suppress the
minority group forces that know the jungle-mountain terrain very well. Even
though suppression operations have been carried on using aircraft to drop
bombs, the minority group forces are still active, and they have found a way

to set up a new secure base. The war against this minority group that has

been forced to fight for its survival by cooperating with other groups that
have influence and that have greatly expanded their influence will be difficult.
The war against the minority groups in the Thai-Burmese border area is not
over.

11943
CSO: 5300/5756

13
DRUG DEALING DIPLOMA? CONTROVERSY DISCUSSED
Bangkok SIAM RAT SAPPADA HICHAN in Thai 16 May 82 p 4
(Article: "Special Diplomatic Rights and the Drug Trade'l

[Text] Concerning international drug smuggling, new tricks are used all the

time. The latest method that was discovered involved a Japanese who swallowed

the drugs in order to take an airplane to the drug market in Japan. But there

was an "explosion,” his stomach burst and he died iumediately. Besides this,

many other methods are being used to smuggle drugs from the sources in the

Golden Triangle to world markets in various countries. Drug suppression officials
are often "followers“ of the clever tricks of the drug dealers.

But something that narcotics suppression officials never thought about was

the possibility of there being a relationship between “special diplomatic

rights“ and the narcotics trade. Then last Friday, a 0.8. drug suppression

unit, in cooperation with a metropolitan narcotics suppression unit, arrested

Mr Sihadet Chindawong, the Thai vice consul in Chicago, on charges of being
involved in the drug trade. Thai police revealed that the more than 7.5 kilograms
of heroin that was seized this time was sent in Ministry of Foreign Affairs

mail that was stamped as having special diplomatic privileges. Neither Thai

nor American customs officials have the right to open such mail for inspection.

Thai police revealed that before Mr Sihadet was arrested, DEA police arrested

one Thai and two Americans of Italian descent. They were identified as Mr
Alexander satiwing, who was arrested in Baltimore, Maryland, with 1 pound

of heroin in his possession. The other man was Mr Pauly Patrick, who was arrested
in New Jersey on 9 April with 2 pounds of heroin in his possession. From the
investigation, it was learned that this heroin had been obtained from the

Thai consulate in Chicago.

But this investigation did not produce enough evidence to prove that officials
of the Thai Ministry of Foreign Affaris assigned to this consulate were involved
in the drug trade. However, DEA police were suspicious and they asked for
Thailand's cooperation. The Ministry of Foreign Affaris immediately gave them
the “green light" to “make arrests if there is evidence.” Following this,

Thai police began to investigate the matter and checked communications between
the airport and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. After approximately 1 month,
it was discovered that a quantity of narcotics had been sent to the consulate
in Chicago.

"He did not conduct a scientific investigation in this case. we just made

an investigation and made things stricter. We could not open the pouch for
inspection since it was protected by special diplomatic privilege. We just
relied on the reaction of the I'dogs" that smelled the mail at the airport

and knew that there were drugs in that pouch. But we allowed the owner to

come pick it up so that we could identify who was ‘responsible! That was

the first check, especially at Chicago's ohara Airport," said a police official
who took part in the investigation to SIAM RAT SAPPADA WICHAN. And the United
States withdrew Mr Sihadet's right to diplomatic immunity without his prior
knowledge.

However, concerning the arrest of Mr Sihadet, at first when it was decided

to arrest him, the police did not find any evidence on him. But when they

went to search the apartment where he was living the next day, that is, 1

May. the U.S. drug suppression unit found 5 pounds of heroin and eight illegal
pistols hidden in a wall that had been specially built for concealing items.

Thus, in addition to the charge of having narcotics in his possession with

intent to sell, he was also charged with illegally having pistols in his possession.

One offici l in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that no one had ever
imagined that an official of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs would join a
narcotics gang. This news has "shocked” everyone in the ministry. In particular,
Mr Sihadet is usually a very polite and good tempered person. But he lived

in Hong Kong before being transferred to the United States. He was in Hong

Kong for 4 years and was transferred only a year ago. Thus, it is believed

that Mr Sihadet got involved in the drug trade when he was living in Hong

Kong, which is one of the leading drug trafficking centers in Asia just like
the Golden Triangle area.

At present, the police have completed only 60 percent of the work [in this

case]. Police Lieutenant General Sen sithiphan, the assistant director-general
of the Police Department for suppression activities, who is in charge of this
case, revealed that there are still others in Thailand who are involved in

this case, and it is believed that it will be possible to arrest the ringleaders.
Police Lieutenant General Chamrat Chanthonkhachon, the commissioner of the
Commissioner's office of the Metropolitan Police, stated that this case has

been under investigation for a long time and that Mr Sihadet is only a minor
person.

Concerning narcotics suppression in this case, an official in the narcotics
suppression unit once made the comparison that this is similar to drilling
for water. when we have drilled far enough, we can discover the network to
see where it leads and then make arrests, if influential people do not exert
pressure first. But it is very difficult to discover [the network].
Concerning the events surrounding the identification of a man who abused his
special diplomatic rights, which are considered to be an honor granted by
each country in order to help carry out the secret policy activities of the
country more quickly in international activities, such actions make use of
the rights of the Thai people for personal gain and this is reprehensible.

This amounts to throwing away the honor others have for Thais and reduces
the honor of all Thais.

Based on the police investigation, it is believed that there are still other
narcotics rings in Thailand.But evidence is being gathered in order to seize

the “mail pouch.‘ There is certainly someone in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
which has been given this special privilege, who is concealing narcotics in

the pouches before they are sent to the United States. There must be an investiga-
tion to discover this “dark hand.“ He may be calm, feeling that there is not

enough evidence to arrest him or there may be a major purge in the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs.

However, even though the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has announced that it

is cooperating fully in eliminating this group, there has been a report that

the Ministry of Foreign Affairs investigated the posting of this mail pouch

and found that it may have been someone else who was involved. In particular,

it may have been officials at Don Muong Airport or airline officials who secretely
placed narcotics in the mail pouch before it was loaded onto the aircraft.

This may mean that it was not the fault of Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials
that there were drugs in the mail pouch that had special diplomatic rights.

Rather, out of carelessness, some other “guilty“ person was able to do this.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has encountered weaknesses concerning this
special privilege before.Por example, there was the case of people taking

in goods without paying taxes in Korea and the case of diamonds being smuggled
out of India. Such things have provided frequent examples, but the Ministry

of Foreign Affairs has not taken steps to prevent such things or solve this
problem. Thus, the fact that a narcotics group has been found to be active

in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs provides a good opportunity to clean up
this "devine ministry.“

11943
CSO: 5300/5756

16
HEROIN MAILORDER SCHPME REPORTED
Bangkok HATICHON in Thai 24 Apr 82 p 3
lhrticle: ”Letters Containing Heroin Secretely Sent. Most Are Sent to Canada']

[Text] It has been revealed that most of the letters containing heroin are
sent to Canada, followed by France and Germany. The people who do this post
the letters to themselves while they are still travelling in Thailand.

A report from the Communications Authority of Thailand informed MATICHON about
reports that German officials have requested cooperation from Thai officials

in blocking the export of herein in letters. The report said that this has
actually been taking place. Those engaging in this sprinkle heroin onto stationary.
sometimes they sprinkle it onto newspaper, which is them rolled up and sent

by mail.

“One time, I discovered a letter sent to Thailand from Germany. The envelop
was torn and inside I saw German marks. I opened the letter to see if all
the money was there. It turned out that the letter had been sent to purchase
heroin,” said one official. He said that, normally. when heroin is sent by
mail like this, [the packages] are sent as if they are birthday gifts for
friends or sweethearts or gifts on various occasion such as Christmas and
New Year's. This is because it is difficult to purchase heroin abroad and
it is more expensive than in Thailand.

"Some of these people send the heroin to friends who are travelling in other
countries. Others send it to their own homes by addressing the letters to
themselves. When they get home, they have a large quantity of heroin from
the many letters they posted waiting for them,“ said the same official.

MATICHON inquired about this at the Postal Exchange Center at Don Huang Airport.
MATICHON was informed that such letters are found frequently. In 1981. 20

were found and each contained approximately 2 grams of heroin or less. Most

of the letters were addressed to places in Canada, followed by France and Germany.

"we use officials who are really talented to check the letters. Such letters

are softer than normal letters. Host of these are registered letters,” said an
official who works at the Postal Exchange Center. He 9also said that, in addition to

heroin, marihuana is sometimes found.

ll9h3
080: 5300/5756

17
COLUMNIS': HITS SINGAPORE AS SOURCE OF CHEMICAIS
Bangkok 0A0 SIAM in Thai 3 May 82 p 3
[Scratch the Itch column by Pricha Kunpricha: ”white Powder Chemicals"!

[Text] Thailand has been labeled as a country where it is as easy to purchase

drugs as it is to purchase sex. And Thailand's image has been tarnished by
the I‘Golden Triangle“ matter. Actually, this is not a definite area but only

a designated area. However, people in general think that it is in Thailand.
The "insane triangle," this is what belongs to Thailand.

Those who make a living from the tourists have made things even worse. They
take people on trips to the Golden Triangle and they have created a "bad area“
in Chiang Saen to serve as a “Golden Triangle.”

There is probably less heroin in Thailand than in Burma, where poppies are
grown freely in the Shan State. But Burma cannot control things there because
this is an area under the control of more than 10 shan State liberation groups,
which have divided up the area among themselves.

Heroin is not produced from opium only. The production of heroin requires
the use of other chemicals too. without these chemicals, heroin cannot be
produced. If there is just one type of chemical, heroin cannot be produced.
The two important chemicals are anhydride and acetic chloride.

The market for chemicals used to produce heroin is in Singapore. They can
be purchased and sold freely there. There are no controls even though these
two types of chemicals are contraband goods and cannot be purchased or sold
in Thailand.

In Singapore, how much do you want? One liter is 40 baht and you can purchase
as much as you want. How much do these two chemicals sell for in Thailand?
Eight thousand baht per liter!

18
Since there is such a great difference in price, there is great traffic in
these chemicals, which are transported from Singapore to Malaysia and then
into Thailand.

People who go to Singapore do not have to go to the trouble of bringing in
electrial goods or other types of goods on which taxes have not been paid.

If they bring back just 1 or 2 liters, they have recovered the cost of their
air fare.

There are several places in Thailand where chemicals are purchased. They can
be purchased along Suriwong Road, in Bangrak and in Babe: these are the major
sources.

Having Thailand stop the cultivation of poppies, destroy the refineries and
scatter the forces of the international narcotics traffickers such as Khun

Sa all by itself is impossible unless there is “cooperation" in stopping,

or prohibiting, the sale of these two types of chemicals in Singapore.

But this would be counter to Singapore's trade policy since these two chemicals
are goods that are used in other industries too.

Whoever can suppress this can go ahead. Whoever can sell this can do so. People
can carry on suppression activities until they die, or people can use drugs
until they die. There will always be heroin!

11943
CSO: 5300/5756

19
PROSECUTORS TOLD TO STIPPEN CONTROL OF DRUG CASES
Bangkok 0A0 SIAM in Thai 3 May 82 pp 3. 10

[Article: "Prosecutors Ordered to stiffen Control of Drug and Corruption
Cases“! ‘

[Text] Mr Suchin Thinsuwan, the director-general of the Department of Public
Prosecutions, revealed that he has ordered prosecutors throughout the country
to control and monitor important cases closely. This includes cases involving
drugs and corruption. He has made those prosecutors who are skilled and honest
responsible for this. These cases must be prosecuted fairly, in accord with
the laws and in accord with the files compiled by the Investigation office.

As for the cases that the people are interested in, the director-general of

the Department of Public Prosecutors stated that he has ordered people to

stiffen control a d take special responsibility for these cases, including

drug cases in which the value of the drugs exceeds $0,000 baht. This has been
done becasue it is felt that these cases pose a danger to society and the
country. This control has been stipulated as the first step. That is, in Bangkok.
it is the special case prosecutors who are responsible while, in the provinces,
it is the zone prosecutors who are responsible.

A reporter asked whether this was ordered because of the case in which a prosecutor
in Chiang Mai ordered a New Zealand man ilprisoned on drug charges released,

a case concerning which there have been widespread reports that it was Mr
Prathuong Kritibut, the former director-general of the Departsent of Public
Procutions and the minister of interior, who issued the order. Mr Suchin said
that this was not true. It is the policy of the Department of Public Prosecutions
to control the prosecution of each case strictly. As for the withdrawl of

the charges in this particular case, at present the Investigation Office is
conducting an investigation. If a proposal is made, the Departsent of Public
Prosecutions will be the one to decide whether further charges should be filed.
The case cannot be kept quiet.

11943
CSO: 5300/5756

20
BRIEFS

ITALIAN ARRESTED WITH mom-Jo what is believed to be the biggest haul at
Don Huang airport this year, customs officials arrested a 30-year-old
Italian, Bonano Vincenzo, and seized 13.66 kgs of top grade heroin, initially
valued at 2.3 million baht. The heroin was in 12 plastic bags wrapped in
paper and covered with cloth inside a piece of his luggage. Vincenzo
reportedly entered the country on 26 May and stayed at the Dusit Thani Hotel.
He was about to board a Qantas flight for Belgrade when the heroin was dis-
covered at the iI-Aigration checkpoint. [Bangkok RATIO“ REVIEH in English

29 May 82 p 1 BR]

BEROIN SBIZBD AFTER CHASE—Highway police seized 22 kgs of heroin fros a
truck that was abandoned after a police chase on Phetkasen Highway in
Phetburi Province. The police, acting on a tipoff that a lO-wheel truck
was carrying narcotics from Bangkok to the south, set up a checkpoint in
Cha An District. "hen the driver failed to stop, police gave chase. The
truck struck another truck and was abandoned by the driver who fled the
scene after julping aboard a passing bus. The police found the heroin
when searching the truck. [Bangkok wom in English 29 May 82 [page not
given] BK]

ARRESTS FOLLOW HEROIN SEIZURE—Chiang Mai-Pour suspects were arrested on
charges of possessing heroin with intent to sell after an investigation by
s Huang District drug squad revealed that an illegal drug transaction was
to occur at a house in Tanbon Chang Phuak. Police followed two sea from
the house to the Western Region Technology and Vocational Institute and
arrested then when they left a foodshop. They had 1,000 grams of dragon
brand heroin, with an estilated narket value of 300,000 baht, in their
possession. The police then radioed their colleagues to raid the house,
when Phinit Tanthanasin, 55, the owner of the house and alleged leader of
the gang, and Pat Khanthawong, 55, the alleged contact nan for the gang.
were arrested. The two nen arrested earlier were Phinit's son Bunthawi.
26, and his friend Suraaak Ali, 25. A motorcyclist who had been at the
house earlier escaped. [Bangkok POST in English lo Jun 82 p 3 BR]

21
r- I1 1- Mlll'u’lll'llllt -:uu|rrnv:a: 1‘hrn- in a nlmrinqv of tho rhnniv-nl uned to refine
urinm lulu hululu. Hun qullun vunla svvvrul hundred thousand baht. it has

hvrn rvvvulvd that Taiwan is secretely producing this chenical and selling

it even LhOugh it is on the control list of the world community. In Thailand,
the factories that produce medical drugs are experiencing problems because
prices are high and officials are strict. Yesterday, one industrial chemist
who produces medicines said that, at present, the factories that produce medical
drugs are experiencing great difficulties because of a shortage of acetic
anhydride, a liquid chemical that is used to extract drugs from various raw
materials. 'At present, the price of 1 gallon is at least 200,000 baht because
of the inspections and import restrictions since it is a chemical that is
controlled by government officials,“ said this chemist. Besides being used

to produce medicines, this chemical is used to produce synthetic plastics

and synthetic fiber. "But concerning its being used to refine heroin fro-

opium, it is frequently snuggled in from abroad. usually from Taiwan, which
secretely produces it without informing foreign organizations in order to

avoid the controls." In addition to acetic anhydride, ether and ammonium chloride
are chemicals that are used at each stage in refining heroin from opium. [Text]
lBaanok SIAM RAT in Thai 27 Apr 82 p 11] 11943

CSO: 5300/5756

22
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00850R000500070041-4

COCAINE SEIZED IN DRUG ROUND/JP; NINE MG.

Vancouver THE VANCOUVER SUN in English 12 Hay 82 9 A7

[Text]

Former B.C. Lions iootball player
Paul Giroday is one of nine persons
charged todayinadrugroundupbytbe
Coordinated Law Enlorcententllut.

During the 10-month invetigation an
estimated 27 ounces n! high-grade co-
caine was seized in Prince Rupert.
West Vancouver and Washington state.

Charged are: Gisoday. :1. ol 1010 Lil-
looet. North Vancouver. two counts at
traﬂiciring and one count oi conspiracy
to import; Sean Anthony O'ﬂalley. 30.
at 3632 Ash. three counts at conspiring
to trafﬁc in cocaine. one count at con-

spiring to import the drug into Canada
and one coon; oi poaaeuing cocaine (or
"19m Wills;

Warren Paul Schiewe. 33, o( 403—
1363 Clyde. West Vancouver. thne
counts ol conspiring to trailic. one

‘ to import and one

Ira/licking; his Alberto Queenda. 3.
dt-uQWeumlourconntsolcon»
spiringtotraﬂie;

Gary Christopher John Vicee. a. o!
WWeettlaLtvocountaolconsplrlng
ton-anteandonecotmtotconsolﬂnaoo

CSO: 5320/31

import; Daniel Steven Hooper. 3d
m-mosmaum. threecot
oiconsnlrlngtotramc;

June Anne Hooper. 34. also at ’1
”Street. . thnecottntsol.
w to ; Role Garcia. 3!
1 me liarwod. two counts oi
spiring to trafﬁc and one count oi
eeedon for die purpoee of traﬂich
Jorge Pizarro. 8. o! m Fulton. Pr
Rupert. t'o counts of conspirin
trame.

Five other: are named as unindl
W * .. y

The major charge. naming all
accused. aliens a mommy totr
in cocaine in Vancouver. North‘
couver. West Vancouver, Born.
Prince Rupert and other location
the province between last July 1 a:

‘l‘h eight-com! indictment als
Iegea Giroday and Vicce conspirr
import cocaine into Canada bet!
Mllﬂdﬂntﬂ. I'LMO'I
and Schieve conspired to ilnporl
drug into Canada between Nov. 1.
Feb. totthiagear.

5

5

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-ROP02-00850R000500070041-4
BRIEFS

DRUG CACHE SEIZED—‘l'oronto (UPC)-Hatro 'l'oronto police have arrested 36
people, laid 143 drug-related charges and seized narcotics with a street
value of about $30 million in what is believed to be the largest drug
seizure in the city's history, a police spokes-an said today. An investiga-
tion, nicknamed Project Rose after one of the central figures in the plot,
began ll maths ago and ended with the seizure of drugs froa six hones on
Friday. "It was a najor drug bust because such of it was destined for the
streets of Toronto," said 8. Sgt. Dennis Robinson, who directed the investi-
gation. Police seized 93S kilogram of Lebanese hashish. ll kilogram of
liquid hashish, 22 kilograaa of narijuana in the fora of ‘rhai sticks, 136
kilograns of narijmna and about 283 gram of cocaine. In addition to the
Toronto-area arrests, police earlier last loath arrested two Montreal resi-
dents. David Stone and Michele Burke, both 32. Police seized a car in an
underground hotel parking lot and found about 300 pounds of hashiah. The
United States drug enforce-eat agency also seized drugs in Portland, Maine,
after receiving tips froe the ‘l‘oronto drug squad. [Text] [Vancouver I'll!
"Em SUN in English 1 May 82 p A8]

mmcm JAILm-Sarnia-Randal Cree. 26. fornerly of Ottawa, was sen-
tenced Wednesday to 27 nonths in a federal penitentiary by Lanbton County
Court Judge Michael Heehan for possessing about $100,000 worth of aarijuana
for the purpose of trafficking. Oran had pleaded guilty to the charge
March 30. Crap was arrested by me officers at the Canada Customs office
at the Bluewater Bridge last February when he crossed the bridge in a car

loaded with narijuana. He told police the narijuana had cone from (1110.
Police' said the narijuana was destined for Ontario narkets. [Text]

[Windsor THE WINDSOR STAR in English 6 Kay 82 p A12]

(:80: 5320/31
DRIB morass KILL INDIANS
Bogota El. TEMPO in Spanish 28 Apr 82 p 3-A
[Article by Walter Martinez]

[Tut] Santa Marta—Sons 12 natives were killed in recent weeks by presumed
drug traffickers in Sierra Nevada de Santa Maria. according to a report made
known yesterday.

Napoleon Torres, chief of the Arhuacos tribe, told 3!. mo that the offenders
attack reservations and comit all kinds of outrages against the aborigines.

The native chief vent to Bogota a few hours ago. he was accapanied by other
tribal chiefs from Magdalena to denounce the slaughter.

According to Torres, departnental authorities do not pay any attention to

these denunciations. let alone the problems confronted by the various tribes
in Magdalena.

The native chief indicated that messages have even been sent to the authorities
in Riohacha, Valleo'epur, and Santa. Hat-Lina, but they have never received a
specific reply. They therefore decided to go to Bogota in order to seek justice
from the central government.

he said that the attackers prefer the ooca plantings that the aborigines use
for their own needs in the newer of their ancestors.

he specified that the most violent attacks occurred against the reservations
of San Miguel, San Pedro, Mingueo, and Pundacion.

Panic has become evident, especially in recent days, along the Arhuacos and the
Koguis tribes. descendants of the powerful Tayronas.

In his denunciation Torres stated that the vhites are nercilees with respect
to the natives and that they also rape their young girls. In conclusion. he
said that he vill deliver a full report of these acts of violence to President
Julio Cesar Turbay Ayala, the Minister of Government, Jorge Mario Bastian, and
the head of Indigenous Affairs. Julian Nsrvaes.

8255
080: 5300/2175

25
BRIEFS

COCAINE CONFISCATEDuBogota, 11 May (AFN—Narcotics police spokesmen reported
here that the Colombian authorities dealt a new blow to drug traffickers today
with the confiscation of 126 kg of very pure cocaine. The authorities of
Natagaina, Tolina Department, located approxilately 270 la: southwest of Bogota.
arrested seven persons and seized several vehicles, weapons, money and other
items in this operation. [PA311240 Paria APP in Spanish 0401 GMT 12 May 82]

C80: 5300/2305

26
BRIEFS

SEIZURE 0P MARIJUANA-Jrhe police yesterday morning destroyed 138 pounds of
marijuana which had been seized in a number of operations. the nrijuana was
taken by the police squad to the incinerator and destroyed in the presence of
a number of people including Corporal Geer who headed the police teen, cde.
Jasson Bhngwandai of the Government Analyst Department. Cde. Ian Chung the
Police Legal Advisor and Demo: Susaenden of the custom Department. Some

”of the marijuana destroyed had been found in a auitcaae addressed to a Guyan-
ese doctor but according to the information it was not claimed. Hembera of the
Customs Department have been working along with the police department in an
effort to curb trafficking in marijuana in Guyana. [Text] [Georgetown GUYANA
CHRONICLE in English 7 May 82 p 16]

080: 5300/7557

27
BRIEFS

HE'ROIN, OOCAINB CONFISCA‘I'BD—Jijuana, B.C.N., 29 ”rib-Federal Judicial Police
officers confiscated drugs valued at more than 70 million pesos from two drug
traffickers. Aaron Juarez, coordinator of the Office of the Attorney General
of the Republic reported that those arrested are Sh-year-old Jose Jimenez
Pulido and 70-year old Rafael Vega Pico, They have previous prison records

for crimes against health and for illicit trade. are kilo of pure heroin and

l and 1/2 kilos of cocaine were taken from them. According to Aaron Juarez,
the drugs are valued at more than 70 million pesos on the drug market. The
arrested persons confessed that they had acquired the drugs in Sinaloa, and
that they were taking them to the United States. ﬂex}? @exico City EXCBLSIOR
in Spanish 30 Apr 82 p 8-27

050: 5300/2306 -

28
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA SHIPMENT SEIZED—Panana City. 15 Hay (MAM—Panamanian authorities
seized nearly 1.500 ks of narihuana aboard the vessel "llalcon," with six
Colombian crew-en. Agents of the National Investigation Departlent (DEM),
the state security and national guard marine operations. participated in the

operation near San Miguel Island, on the Panannian Pacific waters. (”281269
Panama City ACAN in Spanish 0212 GMT 15 Kay 82]

cso: 3300/2301.

29
FIFTEEN INTERNATIONAL NABCOTICS SHDGGLERS ExECUTED
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 3 May 82 p 3

[Interview with Public Relations Officer Bafi'pur of the Islamic Revolutionary
Antinarcotics Prosecutor's Office]

[Text] Shamiran-K£YHAN Correspondent-Fifteen hardened international
smugglers were hung by order of the courts of the Special Antinarcotics
Prosecutor.

Rafi'pur, spokesman for the Central Antinarcotics Prosecutor's Office of the
Islamic Revolution, told a KEYHAN correspondent in an interview: During,this
initial period, since the time the huge tree of the splendid Islamic revolu-
tion was effected and became fruitful with the shedding of the blood of thou—
sands of martyrs, and even now as the dear children of Islam are freely
sacrificing their lives with the forces of faith at the battlefronts against
world imperialism and Saddam‘s infidels lest the greening tree of the Islamic
revolution be damaged, a number of godless people and foreign mercenaries,
knowingly or otherwise, have drawn the youth of this land into the net of
addiction and corrupted their creative power. what do the fathers and bereaved
mothers of our nartyrs expect of us? Do they not cry out that these corrupt
vermin and merchants of death be dealt with in a revolutionary manner and hung?
In answer to the offended voice of this martyr—nurturing nation of Iran, by
decisive order of the courts of this prosecutor's office, 15 professional
international heroin smugglers were sentenced to death. Their files were con—
firmed after study and review by the Supreme Judicial Council. Their sentences
were carried out at 4 pm yesterday in the yard at Qasr prison. The bodies of
the condemned were then taken to the coroner's office for legal processing.

The names of the executed are:

l--'Ali Bisepari, son of 'Aziz of Tabriz, was convicted of addiction. procure-
ment and distribution of heroin, possession of 21.2 grams of heroin, and in
view of 6 pervious offenses was condemned to death under paragraph A, article

6 of the antinarcotice law.

2-— Hasan Rostami, son of Mohammad, alias Haean Shokri, of Nehavand.

3--Shokrollah Rests-i, son of Mohammad of Nehavand.
6--Sirus Rosseyn-Nezhad, son of Bamszan, of Ardebil. The above-named
persons, in view of their extensive records, were sentenced to death for the
crime of extensive activity in the procurement and distribution of heroin and
possession-of 86 grams of that heroin.

5--'Ali Hijatol-Eslami, alias 'Ali Tala, son of Mohammad, of Bahar-e Hamadan.
for the crime of selling 48.5 grams of heroin and having a record of 9 previous
offenses. The above had been sought on numerous occasions, and he confessed to
this filthy and satanic act after apprehension, whereupon he was sentenced to
death.

6--'Abbas 'Ali Rastaqi, son of Hajji, alias ‘Abbas Qomi of Qom.

7--Sattar Khorshidi, son of Hirza 'Abdolhamid of Qaryab. The above defendants
were convicted of organizing a smuggling ring, possession of 1.25 kilograms

of heroin and two scales and an opium pipe, and of buying and selling 5.5
kilograms of Sattar Khorshidi's heroin.

8--'Azizolla Hosibi, son of Heydar, of Khuzan-e Homayunshahr, convicted of
activity in the procurement and distribution of opiates, selling 2 kilograms
of heroin, and possession of 26.8 kilograms of opium.

9-Bahr'ali Resa'i, son of Karim, alias Bah-an, of Urmia, convincted of inten-
aive activity in the distribution and procurement of heroin, and the confessed
seller of 2 kilograms of heroin with two previous offenses.

lO--Akbar Ha'sumi, son of 'Ali of Tehran, convicted of activity in the distribu—
tion of heroin, who was sentenced to life imprisonment before the revolution,
escaped from prison after the triumph of the revolution, and has a record of

18 previous offenses.

ll-Gholam'ali Keshtkar Rajabi, son of Ya'qub of Qazvin.

12--Seyyed Fattah Hosseyni, son of Seyyed Hedayat of Qazvin. The above were
in possession of more than a kilogram of heroin. They were convicted of
activity in the procurement and buying and selling of heroin and leading their
sons into deviation, and they had committed numerous previous offenses.

13--Ahmad Khaki, son of Hassan of Saqez, convicted of organizing a smuggling
ring, importing heroin, and possession of 1.349 kilograms and a sidearm.

lé--Heydar'ali Jahanshahlu, son of 'Ali Asghar of Zanjan.

lS-'Ali Jalilvand, son of Shir'ali of Tavisorkan, convicted of extensive
activity in the buying and selling of narcotics. The above-named persons
confessed to the selling of 13.585 kilograms of opium and were sentenced to
death and hung.

9310
050: 5300/5396

31
BRIEFS

HUGE OPIUM Emir-Due to the sleuthing efforts of the valiant Islamic revolution
guards corps of Gonabad and the anti-drug squad of Kashmar, 56 kg of opius was
seized from one of these "merchants of death" named ﬂasan Safa son of 'Ali, who
had concealed them in 8 bags in the dust. [GP051900 Tehran BTTBLA'AT in
Persian 30 May 82 p 15]

SARAKIIS DRUG SEIZURE—Gendarmerie officials of Sarakhs were successful in
seizing 35 kg of opium from a pickup owned by one 'Ali Najafi son of Esna'il,
resident of Gorgan. He was arrested and handed over to the authorities.
[GF051900 Tehran ETTBLA'AT in Persian 30 May 82 p 15]

COURT SENTENCES TRAFFICKERS--The anti-drug Islamic revolution court disposed

of 1998 cases of drug smuggling during the past month of which 10 persons were
sentenced to execution and life imprisonment while the others were sentenced to
terms of 25 years. 20 years, four persons to 15 years, 18 persons to 12 years,
and 231 persons to prison terms ranging from 1 to 10 years. Sons were given
lesser sentences, while others were referred to the addiction cure centers.
[GP051900 Tehran W in Persian 24 May 82 p 16]

BANDAR 'ABDAS OPIUH SBIZURE--The Bender 'Ahhas revolution guards report that
a patrol unit seized 126 rolls of opim weighing 2 kg which was hidden in a
handbag from an individual. The smuggler was arrested and handed over to the
Islamic prosecutor's office. [GP021700 Dandar 'Ahbas Domestic Service in
Persian 1330 our 2 Jun 82]

BANDAR 'ABBAS REROIN FIND--Bandar 'Ahhas Revolution Guards arrested a man For
possession of 62 grams of pure heroin hidden in the sole of his shoes.
[017171626 Bandar 'Abhas Doaestic Service inPersian 1330 cm 17 May 82 GP]

OPIUH SEIZURE 1N HASHBAD—The Mashhad Islamic Revolution Guard Corps members
have seized 30 kg of opium from a nuuber of persons. [$010944 Tehran
ETTBLA'AT in Persian 18 May 82 p lo GP]

DRUGS SEIZED IN ZAHEDAN—The Zshedan Anti-Drug Squad members have seized 27
kg of opium and 600 grams of heroin from a nmizer of smgglers. [GF0109M
Tehran ETTBLA'AT in Persian 18 May 82 p 8 GP]

DRUG ARREST-—According to the Central News Unit, the anti-narcotics central
headquarters of the Islamic Revolution Committee of Mashhad announced that
after several days of trying, the guards discovered 26 kg of heroin possessed
by 7 death-peddlers and handed the accused over to the authorities. [Text]
[1.0310036 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 30 May 82 LD]

080: 5300/ 5607
32
BRIEFS
HASHISH SHUCGLER ARRESTEDMBeirut security officials have arrested a an hold-
ing a forged passport in the name of Niqula al-Khuri who was attempting to

snuggle 40 kilograms of hashish hidden in two-suitcases. [Text] [NCZ92150
Beirut Voice of Lebanon in Arabic 1715 cm 29 Hay 82]

cso: 5300/6717

33
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070041-4

JUDGE WARNS 0F CRACKDOHN 0N DRUG smmns
Victoria RATIO" in English 25 May 82 p 2

[Text] A HIGH Court pug. warned 9“?" wlth brindlm 000“

yesterday mornlno that 301'
chellea‘ courts would crack

down hard on drug smuggler!
as he sentenced a. young
dreaa dealoner lrom 'l’enzanla'
to three para WM
and a H 5.000 line tor related
otlencea. Failure to pay the
line will lead to an extra 00!

months in prison.

Anthony Namata. who had
pleaded guilty to the "lea-l
importation and W
of dangeroos m “5 “’

reeled at Seychelles Interna~
tional Airport at Alice dea GO

Mt: last month when customs
ollicera discovered 020 grame
or cannabis. worth about
893.000 at street Mace m.
in two large DOW“! °l 0M0
soap powder he was cam
in his hand Nosed.-

Teara ran down 1M
Namata‘s cheeks as Puiene
Judge Andre Sauzier told him
that Seychellee' court: would
be ".very very aevere" in
drug smuggling caea and
would not allow anyone to

harmful inﬂuencee into the

country.
"W is not g nard
«no but it is Marcus be-
cuiae it leads to hard 01993
and so can read! in a young
paaon becoming an addict
for lite." Mr. Satzier eaid.

Namata'a lawyer, Mr. ﬂavin
Allecar had earlier pleaded
tor leniency lrorn the court
because his client was young,
had accepted lull responsibi-
lity for what he had done and
had been asked to carry the
two sealed packets to Sey-
chelles by a more mature cu-
rio dealer in Danes-Salaam

called Ben Kyela.

Namala. said Mr. Allecar,
did not perhaps realise the se-
riousness of his oﬂence.

Kyeia. claimed the delence.
had assured Namata that cue»
tome omcere in Seychellee
"would not dream" or open-
hg the two packets and that
someone would contact him

in Seychelles.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA—ROP82-00850R000500070041-4
in tact. Mr. Ailecar said. an same in“; ass-eycheiloia: oi cannabis hidden in coiiee
anonymous clier had called ~.th'e.’i‘n'6re so ss-hy importing tins past customs oiiicials at
iriends with whom Nannie dangerous drugs into Seychei. Sevcheiles Airport last March

was to have stayed here. ask-
ing whether the accused had
crived. '

Assistant Attorney General
Pesi Perdiwalla said however
that someone in Tanzania
claiming to be a “Miss Nama-
ta" had telephoned an Avis-
tion Seychelles worker and
the manager oi Air Tanzania
asking whether the 0000000
had cleared customs saiety.

Namats was so distraught
on heing'caught, the prosecu-
tion sud. that he tried to
cornmit suicide with an oven
dose oi Aspirin and malaria
tablets He spent three days
in hoeoital.

”amasntsnceHOyeers.
8100.000

in his judgement yesterday
morning Judge Sauzisr said
that the maximum sentences
tor the oiiences oi which Na.
mate had been convicted was
to you! in jail and a R
100.000 tine

"in unending the Dange-
rous Drugs Act in 1973 to in-
crease the maximum senten-
ces. the legislature has shown
its approval oi the strict atti-
tude oi the judiciary with re-
gard to drug oiiences.

“These oiiences must be
stopped. Foreign nationals
must be treated with the

C50: 5300/5768

les they impose a way or lite
on the Seycheiiois people
which is quite ioreign to
thorn."

Mr. ‘s'au'zler added. how
ever. that he had taken into
consideration Namela's youth.
his guilty plea and the fact
that is was his iirst oitence.

The me also gave die so
cused the beneiit oi the doubt
that he did not actually know

hewascarryingcannshie.

"However he must.- have
known that he was doiru
something unlewiul as the
circomstences were so myste-
rious." Mr. Sauzier said.

"You were very luck to get
just three years." Judge Sau-
ier told Narnata later. hinting
that he would have imposed
a harsher sentmce ii no tor
the mitigating circumstances
listed in the judgement.

Namata. who said he we
the son oi the Executive Di-
rector oi the Tsnzanisn Ern-
ployers Association, chimed
he made about R5000 a
month back home as a dress

designer. songwriter and bud-
ding novelist.

in s more serious case next
week. Chiei Justice Eerie Sea-

ton is expected to pass ludge-
merit concerning Mr. A. Mo.
hamoud. a Somali citizen liv-
ing in Tanzania who allegedly
tried to smuggle seven kilos

35

14.

SAP

INCREASE IN DRUG ABUSE 11mm

mammmmsormzmnmwuhumazps

[Article by Mm Dlmnil

[Text] quum use: up:

C80

0
o

m dam m
M no denied In uh:
“mam acclaim.

M M wins is":
m of hp. amt“)
dun.

The question '3 thy dob
he yeah. tm'vall‘ at
until). undone b w-

main. to an «My
I'lllil'l Ihc Soul Weill":
omen in W. Ila:
Inga mood of awe-mu!
heiliib VA» out 0‘ lb:
mnuibul'mu two".

"I: has do“!!! on an:
um um nook-all about
retrain“! beams. the)
mail) «In .0 “‘5‘
590'“ and winning pooh.
Link ‘ondu and:
conccnlulionlmllﬂlﬂi’
wmo'c new.

Rocmtion

"mm. I am: llu.‘
\W cumin lo
duets“: um" Iteration“
tannin. Momma IN)
mm comm Iht you!
Men-aunt”. out
um um." um elf-ml
sud.

In a man} “N" m
law «can mil-«ed by «It:
pays 0' Mg“ a'ﬂl”
{m mmw&
dangling humus Ilu-
man «I Ilnt dzn

Thu tax «an M mo”
nun ‘lm cum“: mm mm
alum uoU mogul dnnh

5300/5768

and m ‘0 Is Io um I
'in'ls.

The woolen would nu!
Mine tho! the! m

cumin. the 1mm-

Ikiv Not» the) hall
Mic Indium)
m» nilhin Ibdr various
'Iunﬂia. unveil; In the
NW.

ﬂu MW mm
«ml. mm) and
an." In: «Wu!
outputs.
Iummlmmm|
hwoﬁu up I») won» um
«W on the "do and
Jan‘s" lam oi oul and
“in.

When a child Ind h!"
manned Io avoud o: m
to much I email wing. it
curious'u) new i woo” or
uowd.

He would «I! no not
to lo why ht w m
uohibued Io do than
plﬂicululhin'.

But. out «melons in
the Unmet) Cola: ul
Suuilud. nonunion Ihll
\ocia) Ind bmmc um
mumc.

"(‘hildtcn haw hath loll
m in “MS" ‘ild (IR I0
Cut“ ‘0 much "I.

“19%: In» mow m k“
unwind in mos! [My

"It is "melon am In
uondcv lo we you“; punk
imuuusllmuu onus Mun
If: utd «I 0: chain
MM“.

"13¢:st «I.
helium: Irina-c
moniﬁduwdo-hak
like no no w «t
aux-icy can Guam! It
“I”- '

"Harlem-tux
ht is vie-ed a pub.-
mymhrl.“

W

Dam on: In! led lo
biota: Innis. ”in.
to not. LP. mm.
hob-KM1W0'M
[hwy Mm I the
Dam («lac o!
W.

to am on long up
w th and in than!
III.

in new all: the
W“ \in'ou a law;
In» and \«y Mac.

A main M1. Hut»
Ital Ibis w a} —

"WI-ammo;
usa- bun be mu hr
and any to a wall at
am. In a mu when
In win be ‘W a.»

m m- haul. tel-5a
"file.

"H: W“ m Bk
mm“ and amp: that of
kin: lined not! In»
Mrs“.

“Coomﬂykuoou
In (and lo the" Human
and ii: in m: anus.”

37

”it“ than m' a

with deeming Iih‘ down
«In! in a mum Wm
H n ma tun h tbc mu-
uho I'm Iil’r all! all us
at." {Indian Inc's!

«er-t
(mum quot“!

“an taci- lm book. '1"
MI AMI; livd!‘

"It's “an mu law
you've lulu! below 3m-
hli" W m Min ”may
00‘ you uw u mural: on
“In dual."
BRIEFS

FRENCH HEROIN SHUGGLERS mNVICTm—In separate cases. a court in the northern
Greek town of Komotini has sentenced a Yugoslav and a French couple to long
jail terms for attempting to smuggle Turkish heroin worth more than six
million dollars into Greece. a police spokemn said. The spokesman said
Perez Attia, a 27-year-old metal-worker and his sister Bantu, 31, both
French citizens of Israeli origin, (no honetown available). were jailed

for 20 years on Thursday. Customs officials at the Kastania border crossing
found 27 kilograms (59 pounds) of heroin valued at five million dollars
concealed in their car. he court also sentenced Sancakli Hamdi, a
45-year-old Yugoslav restauranteur resident in Vienna to 15 years for
entering Greece with seven kilogram (15 pounds) of heroin valued at

1.3 million dollars stashed under the windshield of his car. Randi also was
arrested after a customs search at Kastania. [Text] [NCOSZISZ Athens

ATHENS ms in English 5 Jun 82 p lo NC]

ITALIAN liEROIN TRAFFICKM ARRESTED--From the Ministry of Finance it was
announced that agents dealing with the pursuit of customs violators arrested
at the Bvros customs station two Italian citizens. Peton Armando and
Lorentzana Berotti, for att-pting to smuggle into Greece 1,200 grams of
heroin valued at 12,000,000 drachmas. The heroin had been meticulously

hidden in the motorcar airvent. [Text] (Athens ATHENS NEUS in English
5 Jun 82 p lo NC]

C80: 5300/5412
OVERVIEW OF ILLICIT NARCO‘I‘ICS ACTIVITIES
Rome L'WI’M in Italian 20-22 Apr 62

[2'0 Apr 82 p 27

[Article by Fabio Scarnucci: "Trip to the Drug Planet. 1]
[Text] The proble- of a few has becale a mass tragedy.
Heroin victias have aultiplied from year to year.

A phenonenon that requires the constituent of everyone in order to obtain a
reversal.

ninister of Interior Rognoni recently said that the drug phenomenon in Italy is
now sore disquieting, nore dangerous. end nore deep rooted than terrorism
That is why the governnent has decided to conbat it at all levels, since it

considers drugs to be one of the greatest dangers with respect to the distortion
and regression of Italian society.

The figures, in addition to being valuable in other respects. speak clearly.
Frau 1973 to the present, there has been a steady and striking increase in
drug aortality. The single victi- recorded in 1973 was followed by 8 in 1971:.
26 in 1975. 31 in 1976. 40 in 1977, 62 in 1978, 129 in 1979, 208 in 1980. and
230 in 1981. And these are only the official figures, which do not include
those of drug deaths that are not known because they are recorded in reports
that speak vaguely of cardiac and circulatory disease, of viral hepatitis,
inexpleinahle road accidents, or suicides during periods of obvious absten-
tion. But how did things get to this level?

The drug calality started to take shape in our country in 1970. One set of
statistics shows that there were about 500 drug addicts in Rona (none of then
heroin addicts). all less than 26 years old. But already in 1975 this reality
had radically changed. There was talk in Rome of 1,000 persons addicted to
"heavy" drugs. while in Italy as a whole there were probably 6.000. Thus, in
5 years the nature of drug dependency had changed substantially. Around 1970
the nest widely distributed drug was hashish. followed at a distance by mari-
huana. That is, we were still in the field of ”light" drugs.

39
But this situation did not last long. While in 1972 the distribution of
uphetaniaes was already a big phone-anon, it did not take long for the "new
stuff" to’appear. First cane norphine and then, toward the end of 1971., cane
heroin, the lethal "white death" that decimated young lives.

Distributors carefully chose s-ple cities for their "1amches"-md fro-
Milan, Turin. Genoa, Livorno. and Rene cane the second phase of drug dependency.
1t seens that at first distributors offered heroin completely free of charge.
but it is definitely known that in Milan, in December 1976, a dose (60 percent
pure) cost about 10,000 lire, an attractive price.

However, it tool: a couple of years sore for the phenonenon, which in the
neantine had spread like an oil stein, to reach its present tragic dinensions.
But it is now a fact. In big cities, the distribution of heroin exceeds the
glooniest of predictions. At the sane tine-but certainly not by chance-
saphetanines and "light" drugs are disappearing little by little fraa the
Iarket. Distributors are nultiplying and now the nost conspicuous person is
the victim. hinself, the drug addict, forced to become a distributor in order
to obtain noney for his own drugs. Deaths are beginning to be counted.
increasingly nuerous and to a great extent of very young persons. It is
estimated that there are at least 100,000 users of opiates today in Italy,
while speaking conservatively at least 600,000 persons were or less consistently
use "light" drugs. But there are also those who speak of a nillion drug
addicts, young people in particular, from 11 to 25 years of age, whose average
age unfortunately is decreasing.

Taking. for example, the 636 official drug victims recorded from 1977 to 1980,
it is noted that until 1978 the deaths were included in the 18-25 year old
group (63.3 percent), and the 26-60 year old group (36.7); while fro. 1979 on,
the phenonenon extended to other ages. both older and younger, with a such
higher incidence for those younger than 18. Thus, in 1980, 6.3 percent of the
victins were younger than 18 and 1.5 percent older than ‘0. Still in that

year, out of 208 deaths. 182 were sales. but the percentage of deaths for females
younger than 18 was 15.6 percent, snared with 2.7 percent for males. The
sane was recorded in the over 40 group. Bowen represented 7.7 percent, coa-
pared with 0.6 percent for sen.

Thus, in a short tine drug addiction changed fro. the problem of a few to a
mass tragedy. Because of the enornous nuaber of young people involved,

because of the power of drugs to ravage phycho-physical integrity and the social
and noral behavior of entire generations, because of the waste of resources con-
nected with the use of drugs, it is a question of a phenonsnon that assues
specific political. social. and cultural iaportance. It requires the conitnent
of everyone in order to attain a reversal.

60
[.51 Apr 82 p 37

[Article by Fabio Scaramucci: "Trip to the Drug Planet, 2"]

[Text] Heroin abounds in big cities, but also in small localities, and in

vacation spots. Organized crime controls drug trafficking, with enormous
profits.

In recent days, during the course of a big sulmit meeting of magistrates, poli-
ticians, and police officers, striking figures on the distribution of drugs

in Rome were made hown. They were collected by the Drug Squad of the
Solicitor's Office in 2 years of full-time activity in this field. In the
capital 20 kilos of cocaine and as many of heroin are secretly sold daily to
meet the demand of at least 70,000 drug addicts, with a wholesale "turnover"

of about 2 and 1/2 billion lire. 0n the other hand, magistrates of the
Solicitor's Office said that it is impossible to furnish precise data on the
distribution of "light” drugs, since the use of hashish and of marihuana ”is

so generalized that Rome is literally inundated with them."

Thus, in Rome there are at least 60,000 young heroin addicts; but these preoccu-
pying levels are certainly characteristic also of other big Italian cities,

such as Milan, Turin, or Naples. However, the drug phenomenon is no longer
limited to big urban settlalents. In fact, beginning with 1979, many small
centers--in particular, vacation spots-have exceeded every forecast in the
matter of drug sales. Mass tourism of course is among the causes of the
spreading of the phenomenon in bathing resorts. At most beaches in the st-er
there is now an enormous availability of heroin, supplied not only by the usual

venders, but also by Italian and foreign tourists who pay for their vacations
through the sale of drugs.

Along all Italian shores, the market has become very prosperous. It is esti-
mated that last sinner, on the Adriatic coast alone, the quantities of drugs
sold were much greater than the annual consumption in big cities. The same
phenomenon was ascertained at all of the beaches on the Tuscan coast, where
the drug problem, which in winter is relatively contained, assmes particular
virulence in manner. The traffickers, from the clearing bases at Grosseto and
Hassa, supply the market with an abundance of drugs, to meet the increa -. in
demand. However, Pesaro on the Adriatic, Naples and Salerno on the Tyrrhenian
Sea. Sanremo and Ventimiglia on the Ligurian Sea, still constitute the biggest
bases from which heroin radiates to vacationers.

A particular reference to the drug narket increase in smaller centers should be
made in the case of Verona. Out of a population of 270,000 inhabitants, there
are more than 10.000 drug addicts. This means that percentage-wise, this

city of the Scale family can truly be characterized as the drug capital of our
country. Heroin comes to Verona directly from the Middle East (by sea or on
board the ﬁlls, and the ilmense quantities on the market cost less and are

61
purer; they contain 20-30 percent heroin. conpered with 5-6 percent on the
Rome "market." Daily consumption has reached 3 kilos of heroin, 90 kilos a
month, valued at 27 billion lire. Taking 15,000 lire as the base price of a
dose, it is vithout doubt one of the lowest in Italy.

It is well know that the biggest existing crime organizations are behind this
enormous drug trafficking. In Rome-«ms the magistrates of the Solicitor's
Office emphasized—the trafficking of cocaine can be traced back to South
American criminality, to the Neapolitan Camorra [Neapolitan secret organisation].
and to the Calabrian 'ndrangheta; heroin, on the contrary, is controlled by the
Sicilian mafia and, to a lesser degree, by Arab criminality. However. the

mafia exerts an undisputed leadership in the control of trafficking, not only
with respect to the national market, but also the foreign one (Host Germany.

the United States, Canada), with tremendous proceeds. It is enough to realize
that the proceeds of annual drug sales has been estimated at 20,000 billion

lire in Sicily alone.

Just to get an idea of the enormous profit realized by the criminal organizations
that control the production and trafficking of drugs. one must realize that to
obtain one kilo of heroin in a well-equipped laboratory (and in Sicily no less
that 7 were discovered in recent months). 850 grams of morphine are needed;

while to obtain one kilo of basic morphine, 10 kilos of opium are usually needed.

At present 10 kilos of opiul cost the trafficker about 800,000 lire, but the
full kilo of heroin that can be obtained fron it, once fractionated and dis-
tributed on the international market, can amount to something like 1 billion lire.

It is thus a question of the nost gigantic criminal speculation ever carried
out in any sector. It has induced big crime to definitively abandon other
classic channels of support: prostitution, illicit gubling, the snuggling of

cigarettes.

152 Apr 82 p 37

[Article by Fabio Scaramucci: "Trip to the Drug Planet, 3"]

[Text] Italy has become an international drug trafficking crossroad. In the
face of a phenomenon of such proportions, the ways and means of transporting
the "stuff" are varied.

Drugs start with the cultivation of poppies, from which opium is derived, the
main economic support of some countries. The biggest producers of opim are
India, the Asian "golden triangle" (Thailand, Burma, and Laos), Pakistan,
Afghanistan, Iran, and the Soviet Union, but the material that is trafficked

is distributed on the international market, in order of importance, from the
"gold triangle," India. Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Mexico.

102
The most inortant world distribution routes of the bulk of the drugs are the
"golden triangle"-Bong Kong—the United States, the Turkish-Russian (which
transports drugs from the Middle East to the United States, through France).
and the Turkish-Slavic-German, by land, through Italy. However, drugs arrive
in our country for the most part from Holland, Monaco (one of the transit
routes), Afghanistan, and Thailand.

The ways and means of transporting the "stuff" are varied, but recently
"couriers" have resorted with greater frequency to using suitcases with false
bottoms. They have also tried to inort drugs by concealing quantities in
pictures, statues, or on thmnaelves. in the heels of shoes. or even in their
intestines (in small containers placed in the rectu).

In the face of a phenomenon of such proportions and scope, police forces every-
where find themselves in great difficulty. Our police force for its part is
doing all it can. According to the figures of the anti-drug administrative
department of the Ministry of Interior, 15,225 persons were involved in drugs
in 1981 (compared with 14,222 in 1980). Of these, 9,477 were denounced for the
trafficking and sale of drugs. or other drug-connected offenses (there were
7,783 in 1980); 2,500 were found to be in possession of drugs; and 3,369 were
declared to be users. In absolute terms, the monthly average of those who
were denounced was notably greater compared with the preceding year: 790 in
1981 compared with 6108 in 1980. The amber of kilograms of drugs confiscated
last year by the police, carabineers, and customs officers was 11,437, an
increase of more than 109 percent compared with 1980.

without doubt it is a question of brilliant operations, but which unfortunately
have an impact on only the base (the "com-ism") and the adjacent, non-carrying
structures (sellers-drug addicts) of the trafficking pyramid, while the top
levels remain in the shadow. It must be remembered, in fact, that the drug
phenomenon has a great crime potential. not only because it finances and sua-
tains the most dreadful of international "gangs," but also because it leads
drug addicts to crime when in search of money needed for their "debt." It is
not for nothing that the magistrates of the Solicitor's Office of Rome have
stated that absut 80 percent of the thefts and robberies committed in the
capital and in neighboring areas are carried out by drug addicts. lhe drug
"circuit" thus produces all kinds of crimes.

In a short time, chiefly because of its particular geographic location and its
coastal development, Italy has become an important international drug trafficking
crossroad. Because of its extreme seriousness (official estimates speak of at
least 100,000 drug addicts, and of 600 deaths a year, but it is well known that
the hidden reality is even more preoccupying). the drug phenomenon has become

such a great political problem that it has induced the government to assume a
responsibility.

Minister Rognoni announced that a plan for intervention in various sectors
will be implemented and that it will be articulated along four strategic lines.

63
First. a cultural continent is envisioned. and a co-itnent to obtain the
knowledge‘neoded to closely prohe all aspects of the prohlas; then, a couitnent
to fight hard against the crininal circuit that prospers on drugs; finally, a
thorough new of sensitization of public opinion, on the one hand. and of the
organization of pertinent agencies. on the other.

The custons officers, for their part, have recmtly concluded a conplete study

of the subject. in which sane financial. penal. and adninistrative neasures

are suggested. in order to stimulate the anti-drug fight in our country.

Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Costa. on the other hand. has proposed that

a network of Italian investigators he established in countries from which the
drugs that are destined for our narket enanate. in order to block the trafficking
of drugs at their source. The Foreign Affairs. Health, and Finance ninistries
are working on this plan. Their intention is to equip anti-drug offices with
specialized personnel, to he supported by enhassies and consulates, in about

20 countries where the greatest quantity of opiun. coca, and canabis is produced.

In short, 1982 should he the year for anti-drug mobilization. But to break this
spiral that is heconing nore tragic with each day, a co-itnent will he needed
from everyone, because drugs no longer are the private affair of a few. They
cut deeply into the social fabric and very life of the country.

8255
cs0: 5300/2299

lob
MORE STRESS ON SOCIAL ASPECTS OF ANTI-DRUG PLAN NEEDED
Rome AVANTI in Italian 27 Apr 82 p 8

[Artic;e by Alvaro Benedetti: "Psychologists and Sociologists in Combatting
Drugs"

[Text] There is one "point" in the government's plan for combatting drugs,
presented during the past few days by Interior Minister Rognoni, that is very
interesting, but not treated in sufficient depth, at least as presented.

This was the point about psychological and social treatment of the drug
dependent after detoxification; a process which doctors and experts agree
should be maintained as one of the basic opportunities within the overall
strategy toward achieving the breaking of the drug dependency phenomenon,
obviously in combination with the strategies of combatting smuggling,
education, preventive measures among youth, and public enlightenment.

Therefore, one of the four guiding principles for implementation of the
plan, which, it should be remembered, was prepared by the Ministry of the
Interior with the close cooperation of the Health Department, is a "cul-
tural and informational commitment" by the government to explore the drug
problem more fully in all its aspects, and, internally, to review "the
quality and quantity of the public and private institutional response in the
areas of prevention and treatment of drug dependency."

This is the point we find interesting: this is the new aspect. The govern—
ment, convinced until yesterday that the drug problem could be dealt with
and resolved solely by massive measures to combat smuggled goods, wholesale
or retail, and, more recently, also with the medical approach based on
methadone and morphine, has now come around to proposing new initiatives,
for example, some kind of education program for youth in the schools and
barracks.

Now, finally, the government has reached what we may call the third stage,
and has approved the plan, which is described as offering hope of providing
an overall response to a serious problem.

Therefore, there is to be not only an intensified combat of smuggling, in-
crease in the educational campaign, and more thorough enlightenment of the
public--all, whether or not directly affected at this time--on the "problem,"
but also intensive work on the psychological and social level.

45
Thus, alongside the work of the law enforcement organizations and the doctors.
there will be a greater role for the psychologists, physchoanalysts, and
social aides, who are, we repeat, the only ones capable of bringing to a
successful conclusion the work begun by the doctors, i.e., to psychologically
heal the drug dependent, and convince him that he can "live without drugs";
and reeducate him to live with himself and others in the reality of daily
life (school, work, conduct, esthetic appreciation, value of money etc.), in
summary, to put him back in society.

However,the public organizations best able to perform this delicate and
determining role do not in fact exist, or rather there are some, but in
very limited number, and most of them operating on meager resources. There
are, on the other hand, a considerable nunber of the so—called' 'communities,"
nost of which have shown good results.

However, strange as it may seem, nobody knows exactly how many there are

and where exactly they are located. The map showing them is notable for its
outline character, and notes that the situation is in constant change. How-
ever, by deciding to tackle the drug problem also on the psychological and
social level, the government in the person of the minister of health has con-
ducted an information survey of these "communities," both to determine the
number and location, and to study the structure, methods of operation, results
achieved, and experience developed.

A few months ago the minister of health assigned this research project to the
"Abele Group" study center with headquarters in Turin. It specializes in
maladaptive behavior, and should come up with a picture of the real situa-
tion, though that is subject to rapid variations.

In Italy there are about a hundred "communities," but only 27 are devoted
to drug dependents and alcoholics; the others are open also to other youths
who are maladaptive for various reasons.

These "communities" are spread widely over the country in smaller or larger
concentration depending on the extent of the drug phenomenon in the various
areas: about 75 percent in the north, 20 percent in the center, and the
remaining 5 percent in the south and the islands.

They have developed in various environments: 40 in the country, 35 in the
city, and 25 in semirural areas; only 35 describe themselves as treatment
centers, the others call themselves "communities of service, of life" and '
other purposes.

Overall, these "communities" can shelter 1,500 people, most of whom are
between 18 and 25 years old. Ninety percent of the communities were the
-rcsult of private volunteer activity, and only about 7 percent were set up
by local institutions. Overall, there are some 500 social-health workers
serving in the communities, about 40 of whom are former drug dependents.
As for the most difficult problem, which they have to face virtually every

day, the matter of financing, half of these "comnities" live off private

contributions or their own work (agriculture, handicrafts, and other), and

only four are financed entirely by public organizations. The remaining 46

receive both public and private contributions, and of them all only 10 per-
cent request payuent directly by the families of youth being sheltered.

Those "coamunities" are said to be able to handle about 1,500 young people,
and this means that despite their best intentions and the beneficial work that
they do with the totally disinterested contribution of several hundred social-
health workers, they are not capable, and perhaps never will be capable, to
respond to the psychological and social needs of more than 100,000 drug
dependents, particularly the 60,000 heroin addicts.

Thus, it is the state that will have to take action, on a large scale, to
establish specialized organizations. A while ago the exalted minister of
health affirmed that his ministry spends annually 2 billion of his 26 billion
budget on coabatting drugs. However, as Beria D'Argentine, chairman of the
judges association, so aptly observed, the point to examine is whether these
billions are being spent in the best way.

9920
CSO: 5300/2297

47
DRUG OVERDOSB DEATHS TIED T0 BBROIN GANGS IN MIDDLE EAST
Oslo ARBEIDERBLADET in Norwegian 8 May 82 p 11
[Article by Petter Nome]

[Text] A routine mistake by one of the narcotics syndicates in the Middle
East--this is the probable reason why four young drug users died of overdoses
in Oslo last week.

The extremely strong heroin never should have reached the market. The drugs
must be of "high quality" and not too strong--this is the motto of the drug
syndicates. In this way, the customers live longer.

According to all indications, this motto is being followed.

"In Germany the number of drug-related deaths has been reduced by half in a
few yoars--from over 600 per year to 'only' 300 to 1000," said Helge de Fine,
a Norwegian police officer with Interpol's narcotics section in Paris.

More Addicts

"This is not because the market and drug abuse have declined. 0n the contrary,"
de Fine said. "But those who process the drugs have gained considerable skill.

They carefully monitor the additives to be sure they are not poisonous and they

see to it that only 'cut' heroin reaches the street market."

Thus, all indications are that the extremely strong heroin that took the lives
of four young drug abusers in Oslo in 1 week had slipped through the quality
controls. The drug was 70 to 80 percent pure. Normally it is about 20 percent
pure.

"There are no indications that parts of the same shipment have reached other
European countries," de Fine said. "The overdoses in Oslo must be due to
chance."

The "Golden Crescent“

Neither do Fine nor investigators in Norway know where the deadly heroin came
from or how large the shipment was. It is believed, however. that it accidently
escaped detection in routine quality controls at one of the drug factories in

108
the Middle East.

Ninety percent of the heroin confiscated in Europe cones iron the "Golden
Crescent,"' the region fron Pakistan in the east to the Mediterranean Sea and

Turkey in the west. The drugs are refined in this sane region by several
independent criminal organizations.

“at 1a

Previously, the mropesn narket was douinated by the Italian Mafia with drugs
iron the "Golden Triangle" (Southeast Asia). After lying low for several
years, the Mafia now seas to be involved more and acre in the production and
sale of narcotics. Since l97[onission] this ruthless organization has
reestablished laboratories in southern Europe. The drugs produced here go
primarily to the American market.

9336
C50: 5300/2296

109
TRIAL "3188; MN ACCUSED Ol' SHJGGLING HASHISH PROM W0
Oslo “181005138 in Norwegian 27 May 82 p 5
[Article by Helge Sorensen]

[Text] The main hearing continued Wednesday in Bidsivating superior court
with statements by all concerned and an examination of the man accused of
narcotics violations. Hakon Hilloch. Along with four members of the crew
of the seagoing ship "Baby Bel," he is accused of having smuggled a total of
115 kilograms of hashish from Morocco to Norway in the period from October
1979 to June 1980. The charges against Hilloch also included a number of
other serious violations. These were examined in more detail during yes-
terday's hearing.

Uilloch has confessed to only one of the items in the accusation without
reservations. This involved helping to finance Binar Aarseth's stay when
he was on the run in Spain.

"Aarseth is a friend of mine and I was glad to help him. I ur‘erstood that
he needed money to stay in Spain and it seaned like the right thing for me
to do."

Another item on the list of charges is that Uilloch and a friend twisted the
arm of 60-year-old Georg Alstad behind his back and forced him into a bath-
tub full of water in September 1978 in Goteborg. According to the charges,
the two held the bio-year-old man's head under water until he began to lose
consciousness and then left him lying in the bathtub.

Hilloch said Wednesday that he had been in Demnark at that time and that
the story was not true.

"That is a gruesome story. I am not violent; I am a peaceful sort of per-
son. Hhen conflicts arise, I use my mouth and not my musclesuthere are
some people who have already found that out," said Uilloch.

Both the friend and Georg Alstad have been called as witnesses in the case.

In a detailed statement to district attorney Stein Husby this February,
Hakon Hilloch gave a detailed account of what he knew about the smuggling

50
trips to Morocco. Hilioch said in the statement that he was forced to take
that step to clear himself of information given and accusations made by the
smuggler'gang. Hilloch said in court Hednasday that he had to do that to

show how the others in the case were covering up for each other and putting

the blame on him.

Before the statement was sent to the district attorney, Hilloch had sent
letters to the others charged in the case, strongly urging them to make
correct statements and tell the truth about his participation in the narco-
tics trafficking.

"The letters were a straightforward recommendation to tell the truth, but
the accusations were not withdrawn and I sent the story of the real

smugglers to the district attorney.

"I was not interested in bringing out the truth about them, but in bringing
out the truth about myself. They ignored that and I had no choice," said

willoch.

1n the comprehensive letter to the district attorney, Hilloch said that a
woman from Dramnen knew that her husband was involved in smuggling hashish
from Spain to Norway. But in the police hearing a month later, Hilloch
withdrew that allegation because he felt it was pointless to create prob-
lems for the woman. in the written police statement, Uilloch characterized
the motives for presenting incorrect information as "other than bringing
out the truth."

Hilloch said in court Hednesday that he himself used hashish and he also
used the occasion to tell about the admirable effects of hashish.

"I am definitely of the opinion that hashish should be legalized. It is a
pleasant intoxicant that make: people talkative, tranquil and good-tempered.
People who smuggle and sell hashish have my full sympathy,“ said Hakon
Hilloch.

Hilloch said that ever since he was released after his sentence in 1977,
he had felt persecuted by the police.

6578
C50: 5300/2301

51
BRIEFS

TRONDHBIH NARCOTICS USE UP-oTrondheim--0eapite the fact that the Trondheim
narcotics police cleaned up a gang selling amphetamines on a large scale
last year, there are still rumors of widespread use of the substance in
Trondhim. According to the rumors, there are several small groups of people
smuggling the drug in from Sweden. This appears from the annual report of
Trondheim police headquarters which has just been released. The report
also says that LSD is again making its way onto the Trondheim narcotics
market after the drug was apparently rejected by addicts for a while. The
police suspect that cocaine is also being used and they think they have
good reason for saying that this drug is not unknown in certain artistic

and pop circles in Trondheim. In general the report from the Trondheim
police narcotics division indicates that narcotics abuse is increasing.

There was an increase in drug seizures last year compared with previous
years and 128 cases in all were investigated compared with 60 cases the
year before. These cases led to 31 sentences compared with 15 in 1980.
The police feel the use of cannabis has spread both geographically within
the district and to a lower age group. [Text] [Oslo AFTBNFOSTBN in Nor-
wegian 25 May 82 p 11.] 6578

C80: 5300/2301

52
VIE" 0F HIGHLY ORGANIZED DRUG NETHORK CHALLENGBD
Stockholm DAGENS NYBETER in Swedish 28 Apr 82 p 4

[Commentary by Leif G. u. Persson: "The Narcotics Officers’ Cops-andekobber
Romanticism Has Taken Over Reality"]

[Text] All the talk about dope kings at the top of a
pyramid is sheer nonsense, says crime researcher Leif

c. H. Persson. The narcotics market is in reality a very
flat pyramid, with people moving up and down and in and out
of the structure. The organisation is dissoluble and the

individuals are easily dispensable.

The narcotics king is of no more importance to the structure
as a whole than the mere user.

Evil will be driven out by evil. This is the thought behind the suggestions
of heavily increased authority for the police. The fight against narcotics is
to be paid for by our giving up fundamental principles of law and order.

First a comment.

There is no given place for the narcotics problem in a debate on law and order.

On the contrary, the discussion benefits when such questions are ignored.
Here this is, unfortunately. impossible because of the approach chosen by the

proponents of the new police methods.

It is thus necessary to examine their main argument: [that these methods will
bring such great advantages to the battle against narcotics that they will
compensate for the losses in law and order/ [bold face].

Now something about the conditions for this battle.

Number of Addicts

According to 0N0 (Narcotics Abuse Commission), there are 10,000 to 14,000
people who are "heavily addicted to narcotics.” The number of "occasional
users"--present as well as rehabilitated-can. according to the same source,

be estimated at a few hundred thousand.

S3
uther esperts mention higher numbers. Nils Bejerot, for example, maintains
that we have more than 20,000 heavy users.

Be that as it may. In this situation the exceptions are of less interest. A
realistic compromise points to the involvement of 20,000 heavy users and
approximately ten times as many occasional users.

Together, these consume (in 1 year, for the whole country, in round figures)
tens of kilos of opiates (heroin. etc.), hundreds of kilos of stimulants
(amphetamines, etc.), and thousands of kilos of cannabis (hash. etc.).

Counted in money, it is a market with a turnover of some hundred million
kronor a year, or about as such as the cost of society's total effort in

fighting the problem—-polica control, customs surveillance and care of drug
addicts.

Number of Policemen

In 1981 there were barely 600 policeman working with narcotics criminality,
evenly distributed across the country according to statistical criteria.
Subtracting a quarter of the men, who are on leave of absence, ill, taking
classes or on vacation, a force of 300 remains.

The majority is behind their desks, busy investigating the 60,000 narcotics

crimes reported in 1981 or questioning the 13,000 suspects who ended up with
them during the same year.

A nathematical equation:

For each narcotics officer there are approximately 60 heavy users and approx-
imately 600 occasional users. Por each narcotics officer in the field, there
are 200 heavy users and 2,000 occasional ones.

The Market

So much for the conditions of the project. what structure is demanded of the
narcotics market for it to become effective? "hat kind of technology is
needed?

Esbjorn Esbjornson has the answer. as is the highest narcotics officer in the
country and the man who initiated and carried through the police strategy used
in this field. It is he who has chaired the different teams that developed the
proposals for the new police methods, and it is he who has tried to sell them

in the mass media. He is a man who ought to know what he is talking about.
At least if one looks at the purely formal.

According to Esbjornson, the Swedish narcotics market has a hierarchical
pyramid structure that is highly organised and closed to the surrounding world.
At the top are the drug kinds, surrounded by their courts. Below them are

different layers of distributors and salesmen. At the bottom are the cus-
tomers, the users.
The dope is pumped through big pipelines that branch out into a network that
supports the base of the pyranid. Prom there comes return flow of capital that
accmlates toward the top of the pyramid and finances new purchases. An

econonical circulation with a turnover of aaounts in the billions, yielding
enormous profits.

with the help of a group of dependable police reporters who year after year
have been given unliaited space in the country's largest media, Bebjornson and
his co-workers have taught us that we can strangle the supply of narcotics by
turning off the faucets at the top of the pyrsnid. By catching a "narcotics

king," "crushing a drug syndicate.” we can remove those means considered to be
the necessary condition for the abuse.

This is sheer nonsense.

The King

Let us look first at the picture of the dope king.

Using the nass media's own terminology, the police have put approxintely one
dope king a nonth "out of action" during the 15 years the fight against nar-
cotics has been underway. A closer examination of the reality behind the

headlines shows that the average dope king has amazingly nuch in co-aon with the
the average basic user.

An absolute majority of then are Swedish citizens. with little or no education,
their own addiction and a criminal record.

Exchange the word Swedish for Greek, Turkish, Yugoslav.. .and here you have the
average foreign dope king; a person who would make you note depressed than
frightened and who, in normal cases, would not be able to nansge an ice cream

stand without the business folding. Not a millionaire in a striped suit with
restaurants, buildings and a Swiss bank account.

Firs: Structure

The firm structure of the narcotics narket'! The inevitable need for capital
and connections in order to reach the higher levels?

Amounts in the 10,000-kronor range are perfectly sufficient for a person to
establish himself as a wholesaler. One'a own experiences as a user or connec-
tions with such people are sufficient for learning the means and the channels
that make it possible to move up. There are no watertight doors in the nar-
cotics aarket; people can nove readily between the different levels.

There are innumerable «maples of "small narcotics abusers" who have suddenly
appeared with personally financed kilo lots. After a short period of
euphoria. when the money is gone or the police have stepped in one naturally
returns to one's earlier existence.

It is possible that "Sivan and Sune"-to quote Bsbjornson hiuelf—cannot tell
"hash from canel shit." But they learn. In about a quarter of an hour.

55
Are narcotics difficult to obtain?

Amphetamines can be produced in one's own kitchen with normal distilling
abilities and ingredients available in a drugstore. Within an hour's travel
from Sweden one can get wholesale lots of heroin with the connections and the

capital mentioned earlier. Cannabis can be bought by "Sivan and Suns" and as
long as the money lasts.

A Hundred Grams

Esbjornson speaks ironically about the hecto lots of heroin that are smuggled
in in vaginas, rectums, car tires and double-bottomed suitcases. But he
carefully avoids mentioning that 100 grams of high quality heroin is equivalent
to 3,000 doses, a year's need for 30 exceptionally intensive heroin users. and
that the purchase price for such a lot is around 100,000 kronor, and the
street price is more than 2 million kronor.

And he is very careful not to mention that all available experience. among
other things his own confiscation statistics and his own work results. show
that it is lots of that size and smaller that essentially support the heavy
users in this country.

The narcotics market is in reality a very flattened “pyramid" where people
move up and down in and in and out of the structure. where the organization is
dissoluble, the availability relatively high and the unconnunicativeness
proportionately low. where the individuals are easily dispemable and the
narcotics king is of no more importance to the structure as a whole than the
pure user and where the addicting drugs seep through the structure in a very
finely branched distribution system.

The Lever of Belief

It is a structure that contains one unavoidable part, if one looks at the

abuse itself: namely, the 20,000 heavy narcotics users. Moreover it contains
one essential component. if one looks at the economics of the same market: the
200,000 occasional users who feed the blackest part of the market with capital.

With this description of the problem. it is simple enough to understand why
Esbjornson and his friends-in-purpose insist on presenting the narcotics
market as they do. They have to, if their resources, their strategies and
their technological demands are not to stand out in all their absurd idiocy.

Unfortunately, one is at the same time pursuing a policy that is not without
consequences.

In the first place. it is an obstacle for seriously intended and effective
measures against a considerable social problal. And it will remain an obstacle
as long as enough people believe in Esbjornson's and the others’ promises and

assurances .

In the second place, it brings great risks to the policemen who are to be used
in the battle: lowered credibility, wasted resources, corrupt legal practice
and plain corruption.

56
Iapossib le Task

In the third place—and now I have returned to what this debate is actually
about-wit brings a serious hollowing out of law and order, without giving us

anything in return. Bsbjorneon'a task is impossible, irrespective of nut
technology and new methods.

Please get Esbjornson's article of 17 Harsh and reread it. It mainly contains
half a dozen police station stories. an assurance that we must count on the
good intentions of the police and a concluding statement that man is even
more awful than Eabjornson believes.

Totally apart from the fact that it does not have to be like that because
Esbjornson thinks it is, this is not what the question is about. Instead. it
is a question of ordinary problem insight and couson sense, qualities that in
this case can be used with advantage to produce a society with a lessened
need for drugs and to give us functional care of those who are already users.

We already have enough police knowledge. It is only to return to the old-

fashioned, strict and legal methods that were practiced before the agent and
the cops-end—robber romanticism was allowed to take over reality.

9863
C80: 5300/2173

57
MAXIMUM SENTENCES SEEN FOR AMPHETAHINE SHUGGLERS
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADBT in Swedish 17 May 82 p 6
[Article by Sune Olsson]

[Text] Two big drug dealers from the early 1970's are
back in custody. _They will be tried Monday [17 May] for
deals involving at least 40 kg of amphetamines, and public
prosecutor Bo Josephson is asking the court to adjudicate
10 million kronor in compensation for the profits on their
businesses. The men risk 16 years' imprisonment.

Behind the action against the men lies a complicated and difficult investiga-
tion which also includes an extensive alibi check in Spain. The prosecutor
and the narcotics police investigator, Criminal Inspector Bengt Hidlund, to-
gether with the Spanish criminal investigation police, carried out a big in-
vestigation, which broke down the alibi offered by one of the men. A Spanish
examining magistrate, a Spanish hotel-owner, and a Spanish journalist also
participated in the investigation.

Early in the 1970's the two men got long terms for serious narcotics offenses,
one of them near the maximum term. That means that they are in the immediate
risk zone under the new system of penalties that was introduced when intern-
ment as a penalty was abolished a year or so ago. At that time special rules
were introduced for persistent offenders, where the importance of protecting
society is regarded as taking precedence over the rehabilitation aspects.

In the present case the rules mean that if the aen's guilt is considered
proved the court can sentence them to up to 16 years' in prison. Public pros-
ecutor Josephson says that he will demand the maximum penalty in court.

The unmasking has its origin in the story of the Netherlands truck driver who
was seized in Skins in February when he was about to deliver a truck tire
packed with 42 kg of amphetamine. The man, who was later sentenced to 9 years
in prison, confessed that on 11 November of last year he had also transported a
spare tire filled with at least an equal amount of narcotics and delivered it
in Skane.

58
Not a Member of the Ring

The police's problem, however, was that the truck driver was not really a mem-
ber of the ring. He received the tire and contents prepaid from members of the
league that were unknown to him down on the continent. He found out where he
was to deliver the tire in Sweden, but he did not know the Swedish recipients.

How the police got on the track of the two men now involved is not reported.
They have been in custody for weeks while the investigation was being conducted
on a large scale both in Sweden and in Spain. In Sweden the police found in a
safe deposit box belonging to one of the men gold, jewels, and loose precious
stones worth nearly 200,000 kronor altogether. In 1981 the man had only

32,000 kronor in officially declared income, but he declares a capital of
300,000 kronor in round numbers.

The man was released after his previous imprisonment in 1977 and at that time
had debts from earlier narcotics deals of several hundred thousand kronor. He
paid off these. too. In a bank account that is now empty, a relatively short
time ago the man had nearly a quarter of a million [kronor]. And that account

showed plenty of large deposits and withdrawals, the largest in the 100,000
kronor class.

Both Deny Guilt

1n the other man's safe deposit box the police found only the equivalent of
50,000 kronor. But they also found a receipt for payments in Portugal made in
Swedish kronor. Two items were involved, amounting together to 50,000 kronor.
The man admits that much, and several deposits cannot be proved although there
are suspicions. But that is also the only admission. Both deny that they
have dealt in narcotics.

The man with the declared capital accompanied his denial with an alibi. He

says that at the time of the narcotics shipment in November, which the prose-
cutor blames prﬂmarily on him, he was not in Skine but in Spain. where he was
held because of a traffic accident. It was a collision that occurredon8 No-

vember, and because the Swede did not have a green card the automobile was
held.

Afterwards the man tells how he took care of the affair in Spain with the help
of a woman. a receptionist at a hotel, as interpreter. He reports an interro—
gation by the Guardia Civil [Civil Guard], a meeting with the other party, and
a settlement on 17 November in Barcelona. But also an appearance before the
examining magistrate in Santa Colomne, who decided on 19 November that the
automobile should be released. Thus the man could not have received any ship-
ment of drugs in Skine.

Prosecutor Josephson and Criminal Inspector Widlund, who speak fluent Spanish,
established together with the Spanish criminal investigation police:

Never Saw the Man

The examining magistrate, who was shown a photo of the Swede, declares that he
has never never seen the Swede before. From the court proceedings it appears
that the traffic accident did take place, that the Swede was summoned to a

59
hearing on 16 November, but that he did not appear at the hearing. He showed
up in January 1982. But then the other party came forward and declared that
he had been paid by the Swede and had no further claim.

The other party, a Spanish journalist, was also contacted during the investi-
gation. Be confirmed the collision on 8 November and stated that he had been
offered on the spot and had accepted 150,000 pesetas in compensation. The
Swede had been very insistent on an immediate settlement. Since that time
the journalist had not seen the Swede.

Afterwards the Swedish investigators and the Spanish criminalists visited the
hotel. It was learned that the director and his wife had owned the hotel for
5 years. On the other hand the female receptionist that the Swede had spoken
of did not exist. The hotel director backed that up with his payrolls, etc.

The whole Spanish investigation is now available in the form of copies of the
proceedings, attested by Spanish authorities.

8815
C50: 5300/2300

60
BRIEFS

NAROOTICS SEIZBD—-Sevsnty kilograms of base morphine and 258 kilograms of
hashish from foreign countries have been seized in Van since the beginning
of the year. Van Governor nehcet Bren has said that nine persons were
arrested in connection with the seized narcotics. [Text] [TA021660
Ankara Domestic Service in Turkish 2100 GMT 1 Jun 82]

BASE MORPHINE SBIZED-—Diysrbskir (HHA)-Polloving the "lightning triangle"
operation carried out in the Diyarbakir, Bakksri and Van Provinces, 59
kilos of base norphine, worth 300 million liras in foreign nsrkets, has
been seized and 16 persons have been detained. It has been learnt that
these 16 persons belong to an international network engaged in narcotics
snuggling to Europe and the United States through the Greek Cypriot sector
of Cyprus. A high-ranking official has stated that the nanes of the
nenbers of this network will be disclosed in the next fen deys. [NC081621
Istanbul HURRIYET in Turkish 6 Jun 82 p 3 NC]

CSO: 5300/5613

61
LENIENT SENTENCE FOR HEAD OF DRUG-SWGGLING RING

London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 15 May 82 p 3

[Article by in Henry]
[Text]

AHMET BEKIR. 43. head

of a huge _ drug-
smug [in ring, smaled at
the ld alley yesterday
as the judge told him that
because of his ill health.
his 12-year jail sentence
would run concurrently
with a “year sentence
imposed in January, also
for drug smuggling.

Judge Usnenmu. 0C. said
he was showing "some dearee
o! leniency " in ordering a con-
current sentence because of
serious injuries Belur received
in a car crash in Turltey while
on one of his smuggling runs.

Beltir. who used his North
London pickle factorv as a
hoot {or his drugs dealings.
was one of seven gang mem-
bers tailed for their part in
sutuagllnﬁI heroin into Britain
to cars ough Dover.

Three men were each Jailed
[or nine years. two for six years
and one (or four years.

The judge told them all that
the greedy people involved in
drug smuggling. played tor high
stakes and ad to receive
deterrent penalties.

Overseas fortune

In fact. leltir. who lived. in
a council ﬂat at Portland Rise.
Tinshury Park'is believed to
have amassed a personal for-
tune in Canadian and American
hanks as well as having invested
in the property market.

- His gang handled upwards of
£38 million worth of heroin
hefore customs oBcers hrolte his
'n. A ﬂeet of cars. he
in: Rolls-notices. Jaguars
and'ilem brought In an este'
mated £30 million worth at
heroin within a year. At least
11 trips were made heiore the
gang was smashed.
His sentence in January was
for conspiracy to smuggle
heroin through ﬂeathrow.

Jailed for nine years were Sedit Sonntez, 22, clothing shop owner, of Riga
House, Shandy Street, Stepney; Bekir's brother, Puat Bekir, 26, clerk of
Antill Road, South Tottenhant; and Rita: Halluma, 27, sausage maker. of Otway

Court, Granville Road. Finsbury Park.

Jailed for six years were Ibrahim Must7fa, 36, lorry driver, of Horle Walk.
Lilford Road. Canberwell; and Sedat Katatepe, 22, cafe worker, of Thoreshy

House. Clissold Road, Stoke Newington.

Hilnte Mustakalli, 25, factory worker, of Gabriel Street, Forest Hill, was
jailed for four years.

C50: 5320/ 30

62
BRIEFS

A

AIRPORT SPOT FINES PLANNED-0n-the-spot fines for travellers caught with
small amounts of cannabis at sea and airports are being planned by the
Custom and the Bone Office in an experimental ache-e. Preliminary tests
are expected to begin at Heathrou by early next year, and will be adopted
at other ports if successful. The scheme will avoid costly court
appearances for travellers and busy custom investigators and police. It
is believed that a 25 pounds' fine for possession of up to 10 grams of
cannabis has been discussed but final figures have yet to be agreed. The
scheme will involve travellers both arriving and departing from Heathrow
and include internal and overseas travel. If pos zession is denied then
existing laws will cone into operation and travel.ers will make a court
appearance. Lawyers believe that it will only need a change in Custons

regulations to bring the scheme into being. [By John Weeks] [Text]
[London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 28 May 82 p 11]

680: 5320/30 END

63