FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10577
10 June 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 26/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

Jns publications contain informtion primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also tron news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by ms. Processing indicators such as [text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforntion was
processed. hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was smarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGl‘l' LAWS AND REGULNI‘IONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP 0P
”\TKRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE OXLY.
NORWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Daucs

(P000 26/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA

AIBTRALIA

BURMA

Governlent Seeks Creation of National Crises Conission

(Greg 'Durnbull; 1m: SYINEY mmuc HERALD. 29 Apr 82)..... 1
Royal (bl-ission on Drug Trade Gets Access to Tax Piles

(Ted Knee; m3 AISTMLIAN, 15 Apr 82)...................... 2
Police Plan New Measures To Counter Dray: Trafficking

(‘l‘ed Knee: 1m: WEEKEND AUSTRALIAN, 10-11 Apr 82)........... 6
Federal Police Join Hith main To Fight Drug Trade

(Ted Inez; ma Awmmm, 29 Her 82)...................... S
Couission (I'd To Probe Hugs: and Drug, Am Connections

(Ted “ea; “In AUSTRALIAN, 21 Mr m)eoooooessoeeoososooseo 6
Jail Tern Given in Separate Heroin Smuggling Cases

(1113 "EST AUSTRALIAN, 17 Apr 82)eooeoeooosssssseeoesooooooo 8
Briefs

Heroin (barges in Perth 10

Bail in Sydley Heroin Case 10
Dangers of Harmful Drugs Viewed _

(Editorial; 1111-: WORKING PEOPLE'S MILY, 5 May 82).......... ll
Briefs

Poppy Substitution ngrss 13

- a - [III - WW - 138 POUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“(NC KONG

Heroin

FOR OFFICIAL USE (“LY

Base Seized Aboard Singaporean Vessel
(sou-m GIINA HORIING PST, 17, 18 May 82)................

Crevnen Detained. by Tony Levis
Crewlnen Released

Bill Seeks To close Loopholes in Existing 0mg Laws

(SOUTH OIINA NOMING PST, 29 Apr 82).....................

Record Anount of Heroin Base Seized at Drug Lboratory

(Poul Barm. Halter (Items; 8001}! (HINA MINING POST,

25 Apr 82).................................................

Drug Seizures Soar After Bumper Golden Triangle Crop

(SOU‘ﬂl CHINA MINING PCST, 8 May 82).......................

More Young People naming to Harihuma Sucking

(To-y lewis; soum GIINA “DRYING INST, 19 Apr 82).........

Teenage Drug Addicts ﬁbre Involved in Triad Activities

Small,

(SOU’M GINA MINING POST, 21 Apr 82)......................

Independent Drug Rings uplacing Large Syndicates
($0011! GIHIA mmmc Posr, 26 Apr 82)..

1H0 Jailed 10 Years for SChEIB To Ship Heroin to Canada

Police

8 rie Ea

IN DONBS IA

8 tie Es

HALKYS 1A

Brieﬁs

(SOU‘IH GINA FDRNINC Pw‘l‘, 2 May 82).......................

Smash Drug Factory, Seize 18.2 kg of Heroin
(SOU'DI GIINA WMING POST,6May 82)........... ..... .......

Opium From Yunnan
Heroin Base Haul
1w Thais Jailed

Italian Hanan Sentenced

New Form of Drug Abtse

~b-

FOR OFFICIAL [BB OﬂLY

14

l6

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

2b
24
210

26

27
FOR OFFICIAL [BE GILY

PAKISTAN

Haroon Calls for Elimination of Trade
(BlSINESS RECORIER, 17 Hay 82)............................. 28

Briefs
Opium Seized Prom Cargo
Big Heroin Haul
(mam Seized in Dadu
Burned Cloth as Heroin

3888

PHI LIPPINBS

Govern-ant Must Crack Down on Drug Abuse
(Eddie R. Gandionco; VISAYIN HERALD, 12 Apr 82).......... 32

Heroin Suppliers Arrested
(nivina c. Paredes; PﬂILIPPINBS DAILY EXPRESS,
12 my 82)....0000000000000 .000totoooaooocooooiooocuocl 33

Harihuma Uprooted on Central Luzon
(BULLETIN mm, 10 May 82)... 3a

SINGAPORE
Briefs
Extradition of Detainee 35
THAILAND
'POSI' Assesses Operations Against Shan Amy
(Pwr’ 16w &)OOOIOOOOOOOOOOODOOIOCIIOOOOOOOOOOOQO... 36
'POS‘I' Editorial an Prisoner Exchange
(Editorial; NET, 1 May 82). 38
Antidrug Team leaves for Singapore Talks
(Voice of Free Asia, 28 Apr 89).. (.0
Police Seize Banned Gtenicals
(POST. 19 Apr 82).. 101
Briefs
Pradnuap on Antidrug Cooperation 102
".5. Drug Grant 42
Harihuana Confiscated 1.2
Raid on Drug Factory ’03
Thai-PRC Liaison 63
Frenchman Sentenced for Ileroin 1.3
- c -

FOR OFFICIAL {BE (“LY
Harihumm Haul ln Knissin
Horphine Seized in Songkhls
Female Prisoners Released
Other Cmficts blessed

Raw Opium Seized

Heavy Sentences Handed Down
lhdercover ‘l‘ean Arrests Smpects
Exchange Program Hith m
Heroin Seized in (him: Mai
Opium Seized on Bus

Heroin Arrests in 6:13:13 Hui
Arrests for Opiu- Possession
Bmgkok Heroin Seized

Lao Hrrihusna Seized

CANADA

Briefs
Toronto Police-an Arrested
Drug—Snowing Raids
Jail for Heroin Trafficking

IA'l'IN AHERIQ
BAHAMAS
Briefs

Harihusns Boat
Sail for 13 Colonbisns

BARBAM

Editorial Calls for Free kin for Police in “or on Drugs
(Editorial; 1H3 NATION, 28 Apr 82)......................

Briefs
Interpol lbnbership

COLOMBIA

Briefs
Cocaine Laboratory Discovered

JAHAI CA

Editorial Discusses litres: of Illegal Airstrips for Drugs
(Bditoria1;'lHE DAILY CLEANER. lo Hay 82)................

.. d -
FOR OFFICIAL ISE (“LY
Pressure in 0.8. Affecting Ganja Trade in Jamaica
(Lloyd "11118831113 SWDAY GBMBR, 16 Hay ﬂ)............

Ham»

Opiu- Producer, Accoaplioe Captured by Federal Judicial Police
(BL mmmzo. 21 Mr 82)....aooooooooooopoooooocoo-oeso-

mtails on International Cocaine Ring Probe hported
(£1 HANANA. 28 Mar 82, 21 Apr 82)

Further Arrests. Disclosures
(barges Denied

TRINIDAD AND “AGO

Briefs
Harihuana letation

SUB-SAHARA Am CA

Custom Officers Seize 250kgs of Alphetanines
(“a Kmyate; L'BSSOR’ 27-28 hr 82)...........o.....uo..

SEYGiELUS
Briefs
Dagga Snuggler
Cocaine lbalers
Dagga (barges Withdrawn
Dagga maler
$01111! AFRICA

Cmtroversial Drugs Pill Banned in South Africa
(Keith Ahendroth; THE CITIZEN, 18 May 82)...............

Briefs
Hmdrax Possession Arrests

WEST EUROPE

DEN MARK

luport Suggests Continued Hard Drugs Problem in Prisons
(Vag: Petersen; AKTUBLT, 30 Apr 82)..

POI OFFICIAL I.“ ONLY

55

62

65

67
67
67
67

68

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l’ollcu Discuwr (Anny, Behind Olrlstlmlu 'l‘mll’lrkinr.
(Anders Hiig; BERLINCSKE TIIBNIE, 6 May 82)...............

CEBEG

Briefs
Zsirisn Students Sentenced

TURKEY

'HURRIYET' on Narcotics Smggling
(BURRIYBT, 2‘ May 82)..................'.................

[111180 KINGmH
Briefs
Police Win Cannabis Appeal

Cricket Bats Hid Heroin
Custom Seize Heroin

MMMMY
m SEEKS CREATION OF NATIONAL MES MISSION

Sydney TEE SYDNEY MRNIRG mm in English 29 Apr 82 p 1

[Article by Greg Turnbttn]

[Text 1

7 CANBERRA. -— Im'
ingiy sophisticatcd forms at
crime 1:: behind plant to loan
g, National Crimes Commis-
sion. involving Federal at!
State police and with the poor.
as of a Royal Commission. the
Prime Ministet. M: Flam.
told Parliunent ymday.
- Mr From aid the Attorney
Genet-ll. Squat Dunk. 1nd
othet nu'm'sters wen examining
the pouipility of establishing such
a mm

"1 m the lime tau cope

Senator Evans aid.

Ship _ Pump and Doekm‘
Union. and tho me

533%.?
'§z§%%§
3:2“ 5

5
a
S
R
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070023-4

ROYAL COIMISSION 0N DRUG TRADE GETS ACCESS TO TAX FILES

Canberra THE AUSTRALIAN in English 15 Apr 82 p 1

[Article by Ted Knez]

[Text]

A SIGNIFICANT m:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070023-4
Mthouah royal conumsslons
woum he subml to stem.
Mr Howard sud mepuons
wouldbemsdesozhu:

ODuclosuru shouuhetnlor-
mau'on loundtnwxwes could
be male to the Oovomor-Gen-
ullcrlnnpsncounpmvided
no person or company «I
“Wm“ r
O o tyo pawns or
could mm
momltmtoﬂmuontromux
records as passed on no A
mmtmmlsm:
om Inlet-Inna: could I!
moan-nu with s recom-
mdouontomhelt on“:
madam?“
POLICE PLAN NEH MEASURES TO COUNTER DRUG TRAFFICKIEG

Canberra THE WEEKEND AUSTRALIAN in English 10-11 Apr 82 p 9

[Article by Ted Knez]

[Text]

mn'ccmcs policem-
nmﬂysdudhemlnmm
otSkxormore. ' - '
Théuﬂﬂnntnsuuubyuu

the Vbunn: wan Chan».
wmhwmm
‘o Auwutum Thanumout:
mmdmmem
maumm-
FEDERAL POLICE JOIN WITH THAIS '10 FIGHT DRUG TRADE

Cuban-a 1‘82 AUSTRALIAN in English 29 Na: 82 p 1

(Article by Ted Knez]

[Text]

C80:

5

FEDERAL Police hr
Australia and Thai!
police will immediately
step up joint anti-drug
intelligence operations
as growers in South-‘
East Asia's mtorious
Golden

gage t;
2:35:32
3? “
5‘ :5
2 if}

E
.‘E

5300/7553

'm- Mun. ( (tom
Hons Kong otter touring the
ammunwa that:

0 m 1m had tailed to
ﬁnd the " lemma"
usedbyKhun wwulw
tun horotn {or western coun-
MlndudIMAum-IIII;
.hlch In? e! "3:32;?
~ 0 corru "
moo: The-l ﬂatmates en-
med In the battle mm

*%:

o Thrall Wang’s;
m o e C
odomnhntouommnbyhm
tum had tattered e
muck:
QMAmuhuupenmIM
hemttomumdtohelpm
upemwheggmmtem-
o. m'Aum-dnn mm

Pellet mace In

would be“?! h!

MINI-“Inc other.
Mr Norman also MM

ohIpam‘It 0! chants and In

Item end Allov-
ln; tomove lteelyhom
ptodu centre: In the

north 0! mm to port; In
thosouth.

Another problem was the
setback to the Thu Govern-
ment's "cl-mum

stand ot «alum poppy
plantstlou end renown:
mammalian)“.

Mr Newman “Id Thal tu-
thou-1th: toldhimthnttomd-
late opIum ctIon oIto-

Ion: tune to
mheﬂtuueropollheooﬂeolor
um'lrmm .
ewltvulmpomnlloe
Ammmmmmu-
altyudmjeculnmw-
one: to help In the
mhultutlon

:g
I
MISSION OK'D m PMBE MGM! M DWG. ARMS COMONS

Canberra THE AUSTRALIAN in English 21 Apr 82 p 1

[Article by Ted Knox)

[Text]

THEpowers 'oltheroyal
commissionlnlotheurm
drugs syndlme were wi-
dened dramatically last
night. when it was given
authority .to Investigate-
clain‘u of heroin and arms-
tramckhg by the Mann
Hand merchant banking
9WD
' 11:. mm. M:
Jmucesuvmhuuaom
mtuwmmmmnn
M’s Alleged Involmny
mmcMmdmmm
that l government minister

mu :11 «rue: Narcotics
mmvnuwbn. '
iiééiééééfgézééé
ﬁg ﬁgHag .
EEH§§§§g§E 5 §§§§ 3g

.§§§§ 81§§§9§§ssee
JAIL TERMS GIVEN IN SEPARATE HEROIN SHMGGLING CASES
Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in English 17 Apr 82 p 20

[Text] A former social worker who becane a drug addict was gaoled for four
years yesterday for importing heroin.

Patricia Heister (28) had accepted an offer by a Thai in Bangkok to take a
quantity of heroin into Australia. the Supreme Court was told.

She was to receive $5000 and heroin for her own use, and then return to
Thailand with an estinated $150,000 proceeds fron the heroin sale.

But Miss Heiater was arrested at Perth Airport.

Yesterday. Miss Heister. a prisoner at Bandyup. pleaded guilty to inporting
66 grans of heroin last December.

The court heard that she had graduated with honours in social studies from
the University of Sydney and was then enployed as a social worker at a
drug referral centre.

Working with drug addicts and prisoners had been difficult and denanding
and she finally left after becoming addicted to heroin.

She had been taking heroin for four years and at one stage her addiction
was costing $600 a week.

Mr Justice Brinsden said that the offence was very serious and would
nornally call for a heavy penalty. However. character references spoke
very highly of Miss Heister.

She had been in custody since her arrest in Decenber. and had broken free
of her addiction to heroin.

Inporting

A Trigg nan involved in inporting a quantity of heroin into Australia was
also sealed for four years yesterday.
Paul Anthony Kent (26), of Chrysoston Street, Trigg. pleaded guilty to being
knowingly concerned in the importation of 27 grams of the drug last October.

The court was told that earlier this year Raymond John Cuminghan (26), of
Shenton Park, was gaoled for four years, with a one-year minim for

carrying the heroin.

When arrested at Perth Airport Cunningham had implicated Kent.

cso: 5300/7554
BRIEFS

HBROIN CHARGES IN PBRIH—-Two sen and a woman appeared in the East Perth
Court yesterday on heroin inportation charges. Richard John Madden (29),
of Boonda Road, Harriewood. NSH, was charged with i-porting and possessing
heroin at Perth Airport on April 10. Peter Bonhala (26). of no fixed
address, was charged with importing and possessing heroin at Perth on
April 10. And June Elizabeth Lopez (20), of Three Spring Road. North Curl
Curl, “SW. was charged with possessing heroin on April 11 at Perth.
Magistrate H. McGuire relanded the three to appear in the East Perth Court
on April 20. No pleas were entered. [Text] [Perth THE BEST AUSTRALIAN
in English 13 Apr 82 p 32]

BAIL IN SYDNEY HEROIN CASE-Sydney-A tax consultant and two unemployed sen
were granted a total of $360,000 bail yesterday on charges involving heroin.
In the Central Court. Parahoud Aniouni (31), unemployed, of Auburn. was
charged with possessing 353 grams of heroin with a street value of $300,000.
Ali Oygur (36), tax consultant. of Guildford. and Snad Sahyoun (25). un-
employed. of Harris Park. were charged with supplying and possessing heroin.
The charges were adjourned until Hay 7. [Text] [Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN
in English 15 Apr 82 p 18]

680: 5300/7556

10
' DDlCl‘ ION to o 'um and its deriva-
A tives can take very quickly. In

some cases, it is said. it takes only
one dose to awaken the terrible craving for
the drug in a curious youth and the process
leading to addiction sets in immediately.
Marijuana, also known as ‘pot' or 'grass'
by the users. is less dan rous, but is medi-
cally classiﬁed as a M drug. All
dangerous drugs give the user a euphoric
lil‘t. which is followed by a letdown and a
craving for more. The addict lapses into
spells of depressive mood. becomes edgy
and loses weight. His usefullnees as a
human being gradually decreases until he
becomes a total burden to. his immediate
surrounding. He will lie, cheat, steal, rob
or even kill to support his habit.

The fourth mlon of the First Pylthu
Hluttaw held in October 1975 passed a
resolution calling for a national eampai
to combat the drug menace throughout t
country. The Party Chairman has spoken
on a number of occasions on the dangers of
harmful drugs and warned that dangerous
drugscouldmaimentire nations. Astrategy
for the national eampai against drug
abuse was laid down an pursued under
the leadership ofut‘l‘iie Blurma Socialist Pro}
gramme cose supemsion o
the People's uncils.

11
As it was felt from the beginning that
the problem must be tackled at its source,
the Taunadaw, 351%” and law enforce-
ment organs sta troyin o urn po y
plantations and mum gels; At [the
same time the Ta w troops intercepted
mule trains of the rebels carrying opium
alonguthe smugglers‘ trails and destro a
aunt of reﬁneries where opium was sing
processed into much more potent derivatives.
Huge arsenals of arms and ammunition
were also seized from the rebels. The State
simultaneously distributed mds of other
cash crops as well as livestock to the former
opium owers to enable them to start new
ways 0 livelihood.

The gains so far achieved in the drug
abuse control campaign must be consolidat-
ed and fresh victories must be scored until
themenace is totally and completer removed
from the whole country. For tlus purpose
the Organs of State Power and mass and
class organizations must make sustained
eﬂ'orts to win the co-operation of the people
as widely as possible in the campaign. The
people must be made to understand that
the State hasinstituted rewards for seizure
of narcotic drugs and that they could tip all
on thedrug smugglers and dope pushers and
claim the rewards for themselves and save
the country from the danger of drugs at the
BRIEFS

POPPY SUBSTITUTION PROGRAM-1he progran to replace poppies with other crops
has been carried out in Kutkai Township every year. For the 1982-83 season.
the plan is to cover 100 acres in the Ta-Io-nye village tract in the township.
The manager of the Township Agriculture Corporation, U Saw Jackson, and

rural manager in charge 11 Khaung bang on 11 Hay presented U Shea Hm,
chairman of the Te-no-nye village trsct Par-land Supervisory Committee.

with 8,800 kyat in funds. 100 bags of "pale" fertilizer, 30 bags of "T—super"
fertilizer. 20 bags of potash and 100 hoes for the inplenentstion of the
plan. [Text] [BK281658 Rangoon BOTATAUNG in Burnese 19 Hay 82 p a]

C80: 5300/5761

13
BENIN BASE $21253 ABOARD SINGAPORE”: V3553.

“m“ Detaincd

“mm mm“ a“ mm mm mm mm mm
3? www.mmmmﬁi
Ema “memwww mm . wﬁmampg

Bong Kong SOUTH CHINA momma POST in English 17 ms 32 pp 1, 36
"do"
oh,
nu-
m
an;
WI
a
the
la: m
and
SW

[Article by TOM? Wis]
C
I
E.»
Th
53

[Text]
hat

M m

mm“
mqum

my”

Crewnen Released

Hang Kong scum CHINA PDRNING POST in English 18 May 82 p 17

w.”
Hm

(Excerpt: 1

MM

mm:

raw

WWW M

3

”Wm."

“mmmmw

.mn

a...

m.
an: mmf

Mum.»

mmmﬁ
WWW

m..wmm%

Polo-h Sud-r a u!-
are. an. m

1.“qu

the an no.

'12“

m

on hand Hon
M

ISiupnI "
w ad
Iain-ate

uh
ho-

RECORD AMOUNT OF HBROIN BASE SEIZBD AI DRUG LABORATORY

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 25 Apr 82 pp 1, 7

[Article by Paul Baran and Walter Cheung]

“W.

mm
my?

w». m

"at“

w Wm“
mmmwy mm.

m
é

pony 0! cute--

M
amt

u m an.

lumtailonﬁihy
WM

’kagdmsw.
eh u loud in a n» i-
WANG!-

men-mm. shot

a mm mm “Mm “m.
3%.“.me 3m E“
“£1?“me E; m?
WWW- raw?“ mum“ WWW. WWW mm. M Maw“
WWW. mm “mm WWW “www.mm I“. w “WWW
ﬁWﬁZMWUW. WWWWWW
. w ”my. g m mm mm.“ m; mm

[Textlw

Wand
Ina

u.

«uw

5320/9128

C30:
DRUG SEIZURES SOAR AFTER BUMPER GOLDEN TRIANGLE CROP
Bong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 8 May 82 p 8

{Text} m by cu.

loan was in lb: put
four month almdytoul
$4 wotthucseiud
in wholedlmyut-
following glitksecond
hummus Gokleu
Tris-dc.

Sofa. laud”
mmdmmem

d: . . .
.5 £.%°°£ 0.3

“We do lend IO Ii! 3

micadauhnulih lb.
whoa-of ms.“ "Hod-o
II
The ' afoot-who“
adj

W .
from SII walnut.
basil.

“m [hey GI" h could it

[“373“de Mtnyuwaattpwplt

new a (to m {tom place: otbot lb"
CW'WeM

5320/9129

NW!-wm
alumna-nu”

numb.

tug;

”loam o! the In"
mmmmm
«0050.91:me
MI W can be
nil this 5 being
." M: la”

is

is
5
§
E

E
é.
'20“ YOUNG PEOPLE TURNING TO MARIEUANA SIDKING

lions Kong SOUTH CHINA mmmtc POST in English 19 Apr 82 p 16

[Article by Tony Lot-11a]

[Text]

CSO

Marijuana smoking an
rs to he on the increase
in Houlnong. ' '

' large hauls of
cam and cannabis
resin were seized in the
past three moths indieat:
in; that there is a growing
demand for the drug.

The amounts salted —
l6.$ k; at amhis and 9.3.
not anaahia resin — were
several times greater thaothe
totalhaullastyeat-dJO
of cannabis and mo It;
eaaaahisresln.

“We are very mud
ahootiacreaaed WMB
W x". “t" rs?“
into " as" per-
ioteodeot $732 Kant-lau'of
the the Customs lovestiptioa
Bureau.

He said he was equally
concerned about increased

mun-tempt“

Ha said that draatralliolt-
ers appeared to he man to
bigger hatehes_ to sappl
Houston‘s ammonia

“I believe that moreyouna
people here are no- tam
Mfullnl.

"I also believe it is distrib-

uted III has. niahteluha and
discos.” Supt Mat said.
_ Hesaidthatinpastyears
it was main mm
from ahrud w’ho toot the
the

5320/9128

No:- local teenagers
aeesnedtohe‘ ’ ingin.

fThiaooa hethe-neaaoa
hahutd__tha greater demand
{ammuana here.‘hasaid.
_ Mat disclosed that
his toetsarenoulteepinaa
close watch on aiahtsnots
thammk

He said suspected distrib-
ators would alto he watched.

Marmot;
lotelltoeaoe‘ said
the prueat market lot a
“stick of marijuana" (Ll
pan) is szoo
Marijuana grows aban-
daatly in Asia.

“We have aimed marijua-
na coming from the Philip-
m‘l‘hailand. India and

l
a
E
2'

areas south of Manila.

People have trial to hrta;
in otsrljuana in food was.
labe-hotuxned sutteaaes.
hody cavities. hollowed-out
Mniture and in dolls.

Sauna aod air crew}
have also been ned as court-

as.
Several senior F"
anti-mm officer! .
visited "onion. to ltatae
aiththe'u'loealoouttetnans.

19

said they were very

‘ that atari' was
aatanaafrotnthe 'lippinea.
Efforts are continuing in
the Woes to stamp out

the illoul growing of the

“ll.

.. hiuasttiwkbulol‘
nanaaaa seiaad last year
was natl‘ai'l'altairyort.

'The ﬁnest seizureaofar
thtsyear-aalokanaluedat
Sl.6atillioa.ooooealediaear
silencers itaported l‘rout
Maolla.

Mus oﬂloers broke
onsa tho sllenoera when no
onecaaietoelaunthetnlroa
theaamhayatllai‘l’alt.

anaadootor.who
aorta in the field ol‘ drug
salsa-aid insreoent m
t ttaaay youngsters itt
ntarijaaaaisnothartnful.

He amgvaerdhat
ao med y tuoa
of: knew of in m”
an. nari‘ntana is harn-

Tha tnain active ' '-
at in tnari' ha is m-
THC.aola in fat but not ia
rater.
disposal . a" .

s t ts water
haaad. w THC is i .

ed.itaooaraalatesiathe y
—inthebraiaaadtharapro-

-ductneor:a-.

“THC has a half-lite o!
liveda What tht means is
that of it is retained altar
frvedaya. -

"Thiny per cent is still to
the body after one week. and
admirable amounts are
present alter a ml: to the

humanoroduetivaorgauia
powerful.

It reduces the male sea
hormone. west-woos. si
ailieantlyinregalarusars. t
reduces sperm count and
spermtaooihty. -

lomitaﬂaetaonh-
tloo eyelet and causes nea-
atraal " hasaid.

The onthehralaia
altailartothatolaeatalatoal-
atioa.

Haaaid that driving ahil-,
ity ls severely aﬂaotad by
mannaaatatoalatioa.

Stud- tnade ia Masa-
m showed that 11 par
oaatofdtivetsrasnonalolal‘or
fatal aoeldtnts we “no"
oatnari' “them

Ia ' out". it was asti-
outed that helm l5 and
20 per at ol‘ oar aoeadents
la the state were quad
by sodium-intoxicated
hives-a

more taraadhaovaearoiao-
geasthantohaooosotoka.

Hunaa laa; timae ea-
paad to natijaaaa laoha
thou more eaaeeroas
clung. than aloa'llar thine
apoaadtotohaooosatohe.

Astud oltuptn'
tractshaas thug»,

jaaaa smote fmto
I7 utnea_ the amount or oh-
maued bye slutihr
ainoaatoltohaooosmohatha
doetoradded.
TERM“ DRUG ADDICTS man INVOLVED IN TRIAD ACTIVITIES

lions Kong scum cum mama POST in august: 21 Apr 82 p 5

[Text]

C50

An increasing numb" of tempt drug
addicts are also involved in triad activities. a
wpmuteodent at the Society for the Aid and
Renauliution of Drug AM. Mr Janna
Chen. said yesterday.

In the wire-giving ceremony [or the cod-
ety‘s toga doign competition. Mr Chic- said
Is ofthc )5 testing: addict: admittedtoStiet
Kvm Ch- lul ya! had both ctutuul and
triad mutations.

Onlyomottheaddimhdoulytriod
connections. uid no other criminal involve-
mt.

Mr Chico cried the Government to clamp
dawn on and stint» in th: ﬁﬂll mint
nip.

“militant: an only kip the addict:
I.“ recipe-indium iftbacaddtcttdomt
Mate from triad activities. sooner or
bwmyvinbebdcltontmoadnm.“
I: said.

An 1m matter of school clildm
mbeingloredbytriuktomm
tnfftcitm.

Runny. SARDA launched 1 pilot

5320/9128

prom to Mme IN «racy of tum
dilation 1nd self-help mining in the reh-
biiitltiott and rcitttqntiou of mated addicts.

The project is a half-way rehabilitation
program ultidt aim to Mp “dict: reint¢~
ml: into the continuity. ‘

It m dividing forum patient: ' at
Shah Kn Chm into {our distrim. according
to when they live.

.mdddimm humaniti-
volnlarmng {mt ameliorate:
addicts and midi-g («.mploym.

Group W utd counselling is pro- .

videdby ' Inadvolunury-ortm
Mr mmhiliutiu that could
not helppddim adjust to count! life in the
Willy.
“Onlywitlthobdpudmmtof
tldrpunaad tho unanimity willtky but
no delorminatin to any any trait drug
tormi'buid.
Althouhhsmmotthtm‘ K:
' ”mm at
SMALL, INDE?BNDENT DRUG RINGS REPLACING LAxGE SYNDICAiES

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA HDRNING POST in English 24 Apr 82 p 6

[Text]

A new kind of «in. ﬁn; is
Waning w my fdlov-
E‘ syndia P, on

[a m I
a [gamma 3.me
said many.

Sum Peta Mon'

said null. W m
racket: Mn 3 a. up to
cmuy.,e|cb uyia; and
mandarin; it: on be:-

M.
S Ha; utter a was
“3:0“ on the htuu‘s

has: operation. Supt Mu
In!) doom

themselves.

The at and in for
Malian ﬁnance;
II ‘0 MP ”I“
out} [om :- iw

«he: '
m M
W C in of mm mm-
KM—Irilg 0!). who in “0:23.10an “and.
”add no! why. also re- Minna
canleye-n
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500070023-4

POLICE SMASH DRUG FACTORY, 351215 18.2 KG 0? HEROIN

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA bDRNING POST in English 6 May 82 p 16

mam

m

.m»~* h

[Text]

Ezmm
m a aunt
A W m.“

wwwmmx~.m

2:
m
w

Au

“w

w

Mu

a .
3%.“me um

&

w.
.www

m.

5320/9128

C50:

23

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070023-4
BRIEFS

OPIUH P'Rou Yum—Five kilos of high grade opiun, believed to have come from
Yunnan in China, were seized by Custer-s Investigation Bureau officers yester-
day in a Pongkok flat. Pour kilos of prepared and dehydrated opium were also
seized in the Dundas Street flat, which police believe was used as an opim
storage centre. A middle-aged couple was arrested after the seizure and were
last night being detained for further inquiries. Five other people found in
the flat were also arrested and later released on police bail. The value of
the opium is about $320,000 on the retail market. The CIB chief , Superinten-
dent Mak Kam-lau. said the very fine grade of opim seized had not been seen
in the market for many years. He added the opiun appeared to be a fresh ship-
ment. [Text] [Hong Kong SOUTI! CHINA WRIING POST in Enclish 14 May 82 p 12]

hBROIN BASE BAUEr-Drug traffickers threw two bags of heroin base out of their
Laichikok flat and flushed more down a toilet as firemen were breaking open
the door in a pre-dawn police swoop yesterday. Officers later arrested six
people and seized five kilos of heroin base which, if converted into No 3
heroin,would be worth $2.5 million. The heroin was believed to have been in-
ported into ﬂongkong, within 24 hours of the police raid, by couriers who hid
the drug inside boxes containing Chinese scroll paintings. Dozens of paint-
ings were found in the premises at Ching Lai Court, Block 8, 10th floor, 264
Lai King Hill Road. The raid followed an intensive two-month investigation by
police drug officers. The operation involved about 20 detectives \dio took up
position more than eight hours before the raid. Officers cordoned off the
Hone Ownership Scheme building as fire-en used axes to force entry about 4 an.
As the operation got underway, officers saw two bags being thrown from a win-
(law. They found a quantity of heroin base on the toilet floor and also dis-
covered drugs paraphernalia in the flat. Police said the gang of six, aged
between 17 and .10, did not resist arrest. No charges had been preferred
against the six up to last night. [Text] [Hong Kong SOUTH came HORNIM POST
in English 19 May 82 p 21]

Two Th'lus JAILm-wo Thai nationals were yesterday sent to prison for con-
spiring to smuggle dangerous drugs into Hongkong. Surasak Ananchaipatthana
(44) was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment and Kaineng See-low (32) to

12 years after a jury of four teen and three wonen found then guilty of con-
spiracy to traffic in dangerous drugs and possessing 3,135.4 grass of a mixture
of esters of uorphine for unlawful trafficking. A woman, Gian Lau-ha (32), the
wife of Surasak's brother, was found not guilty. The courthesrd that the two

26
Thais, who had arrived from Bangkok earlier, called at Chan's hone in Teui
Ping Road estate, Kowloon, on August 20. Together they went to the airport
cargo terminal and collected a crate eaid to contain samples of tractor parts.
Kaimeng had sent the crate from Bangkok before coming to ﬂongkong. Police ar-
rested the defendants and found in the crate packets of dangerous drugs con-
cealed ineide the hub of a wheel. The drugs were estimated to be worth be-
tween $500,000 and $1 million. Passing sentence, Mr Justice Barnes said the
drugs were very cleverly concealed and it had taken the police a long time to

get them out of the wheel. [Excerpts] [llong Kong SOUTH CHINA mum; P08? in
English 12 May 82 p 17]

C80: 5320/91 30

25
BRI BPS

ITALIAN "OMAN SENTENCBD--Denpasar, 25 Hay (ANTARA)--A young Italian woman
was sentenced to 7 months in jail with reduction for the time spent under
detention and a fine of RP 500,000, or an extra 3 months in prison if not
paid for having been in possession of ganja [drugs] illegally Monday.

Hrs Maria Rosaria Criscuolo. 24, was passed the sentence by the district
court here chaired by Judge I Nengah Hedastra for possession of 1.00 grames
of marijuana which she hid in a seam of her blouse. The public prosecution
had demanded a jail term of 1 year against her subtracted with the time
spent under detention and a fine of RP 200,000. what brought about the
sentence was that as an alien who visited Indonesia for five times already
she should have known that the possession and trafficking of ganja was
illegal in this comtry, it was pointed out by the judge. Hrs Crisctolo
had been held under detention since 3 February before the court gave her
the sentence. [Text] [BK281458 Jakarta ANTARA in English 0656 GMT 25 May 82]

630: 5300/5761

26
BRIEFS

NEW FORM OF DRUG ABUSE-The Association Against Drug Abuse, Penadan. has
expressed concern over a new type of dadah [drug] know as (pr-lydrug)

used by dadah dependents. (Polydrug), according to the Ministry of Health.
is found to contain 5 percent heroin and morphine and other constituents.
including antibiotics and painkillers. It is more harmful than the usual
dadah and can cause death. Penadan, in its latest bulletin BERITA PM.
says dependents are resorting to (polydrus) because of the short supply

of other dadah in the narket. It has urged the authorities to act strictly
against the traffickers and users of this drug. [Text] [39811058 Xuala
Luwur Domestic Service in English 1130 GMT 25 May 82]

(30: 5300/5761

27
HAROON CALLS FOR ELIMINATION OF TRADE

wmnmmwﬁww m. . mu“ :1...» mmmww Maw... m
Mmmﬁwm mm “mm“ mzmwwm : m mm”.
mmﬂmhmm mmm mam Wm mm: “jam
4 mmmmmmwmmmmmm "Warm. .3 ”a”? :3
m mmmmmammmmmwmn mmmmmm m? zuwmwmmm mmmwmm
m
m mmwwwmw #23:. E 2.. awjmﬁﬁm 3 :3
m Wm” Mama: ”mm m mmwm mm WW Mmmawrwmmm .m “am
m “WWW mammwmwmmmmwwmwmwmvwmwmummwwmmm
m m“ mmwu m» :wwmwmwammwmmmmwmmamﬂnmm mm“ M W
s A a m. 5%..wa r"
m mmW mm ﬁmmim ”MW mamammmmmw mm“

[Text ]

28
ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070023-4

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109:

swam “if“

“MEN?

”Wmmwmmmmm

MM. mmmm

mi N

WWW? mmmam um

mm m

mama:

m m
Hwy

m3mmw:

“.mmww m2
”mm mm
ﬁww ;«m .mm

-ummmeme ”mm

mmmmmm

muuwmmwm
MM“
mm m MWMWW

mm mm Mm
“Muhammad m: M

5300/5759

C80:

29

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070023-4
BRIEFS

OPIUH ssizm PROM Chm-me Custom Drug Enforcenent Cell has suspected the
involvenent of some dismissed PIA elployees in passing the ”unnanifested "
packages with the collaboration of some notorious drug smugglers. A reliable
sources said the suspicion was based on the seizure of “forged” PIA Airway
bills on which three wooden boxes were brought inside the international hangar
by some “PIA staff" in a clandestine manner showing their origin from Japan and
Nairobi as destination. Their exanination yielded 144 kilos of raw opius. The
evidence collected so far also suggested involvenent of the owner of a 3-star
hotel. The dew-ants revealed shipment of three similar boxes on March 23.
1982 showing them to have been 'over-carried" tron New York to Karachi and
shifted on Pit-711 flight to Cairo again on a fictitious airways bill declaring
the origin to be Tokyo via Karachi to Cairo. no sale intonation was passed
on to Cairo where these boxes were intercepted and 144 kilogram of raw opitm
recovered. Customs Drug Moron-lent Cell is continuing the probe. No arrest
was, however, reported. [Karachi DAWN in English 16 hey 82 p 101

516 HERON MOP-W001“. May 11: Customs officers, on Sunday night. seized
heroine valued at street price of one million pounds from a business premises
in Birmingham. A senior representative of the company involved was helping
the Customs officers with inquiries. One Mr Adan Tariq of Wedly Road, Soili-
hull, was charged. Custom officers declined to reveal further details of the
case. [Karachi DAWN in English 12 May 82 p S]

was 53123!) IN DADU--DADU, Hay ll: Bxeise Sub-Inspector, Mr Narar isobar-ad,
raided a truck (4014-2411) on Sunday night and recovered abOut l3 naunds of char-
as worth Rs 13 crores and arrested truck driver Hustaqeen Shah. According to
details the Excise 5.1. was tipped that a truck loaded with charas had left
Peshawar for Karachi. Soon after the infornation the police started cordoning
the road and as soon as the truck reached Hundar Octroi Post police tried to
stop it, but it sped away. Police van chased it and overtook it at Khudaabad
on Indus Highway where it collided with a standing truck. The driver Muste-
qeem Shah was badly injured in the collision. Police seized the truck and rr
covered charas from its cabin. [Karachi OM in English 12 May 82 p 6]
BURNED CLOTH AS HEROIN-Peshawar, Hay 16--Not to speak of food, even narcotics
are being adulterated by smugglers to multiply their profits easily. Heroin
experts in the pay of smugglers, according to reliable sources have discovered
that the famous Shalwar—Qaneez suiting popularly known as Kay Tee (KI) when
burnt up after being treated with certain chemicals, yields powderidentical

in colour with refined heroin. "hen nixed with pure heroin nobody can distin-
guish between Kay Tee and heroin because the adulteration does not impair the
intoxicating agent in heroin. [Text] [Karachi DAWN in English 17 May 82 p b]

650: 5300/5759

31
GOVERNMENT MUST CRACK DOWN ON DRUG ABUSE
Cebu City VISAYAN HERALD in English 12 Apr 82 p 7
[Article by Eddie R. Gandionco]

I'Dext] I an disturbed by news stroies published in the local dailies for the
past weeks on surveillance made by cam agents on different schools, colleges
and universities. That there is a rise in dangerous drugs traffic despite the
signing into law by President Marcos of a stronger anti-drug abuse law.

I have observed and it has been my experience that no matter how strong the law
is against criminality and vices, such efficaciousness is often negated by
laxity and cosplacency in its implementation.

men there is the mholy drug arrests but less convictions. me offenders al-
ways IIanaged to go scot-freo only to cousit the same crine again. And this is
true with other criminal cases.

Then, there is th eunholy alliance between a few law enforcers, and drug push-
ers. Although a few of these unprincipled scoundrels exist among our law en-
forcers, their operations should not be taken for granted since it is the lives
of our youth that are at stake. mostly in high school.

However, studies being made by psychologists, psychiatrists. etc., etc. on the
drug problem revealed that youngsters who fall prey to drug pushsrs are usually
those that come foo broken homes where relationships are strained. Moreover,
the studies also shaved that many addicts exist among rich families where non-
ey, rather than parental care, is given more importance.

These are the factors that must be considered by the government in its sus-
tained drive against drug abuse. There are many other factors which I believe
are known to the authorities. without considering these factors, no matter
how sustained is the dangerous drug drive. it will fail. Needless to say. the
government or the PC/INP should beef up their anti-narcotics units in support
of its sustained campaign against the drug menace.

CSO: 5300/5751'

32
PIEROIN SUPPLIERS ARRESTED

Manila PHILIPPINES DAILY EXPRESS in English 12 May 82 p 2

[Article by Divina C. Parades]

[Text]

MFMIII-ZRS ul Ilu- ("nu-.Ialmlmy
:\ nl i-Natmlic. ||uil II'ANI H
ym-Icnlny vauglll Im- mum-ml
Ilrmm (“milieu who. “my \‘lid.
\w-IIIII k'ml In Ilw hmlmg u" a
llmlgkung-l‘awl IIIII}: wmlwah-
II|I|‘I:IIl_Ilt: in Hm I mmlny

lllr mum-I: wow uk‘nIIl'icd :u.
Knnwn S. (.mru. .H. l-naiumunmn.
ul IKII I.Ill :m' .‘\I.. I'nvw ('ily.
:mll Maul! ll Sullltlgu. .H.\‘III[\III)’(‘.
ul ‘.L\'l I'nlayrn ‘I.. "may ('ily.

Rruu—rml IIIIIII Ilu' Iwn we": IR
gum“ nl' Ilnnwn hen-in I Impmcmd
heroin) pmulcu \mrIII “8.000. WIS"
m null. mu- .-|.‘- Ialvlwr 'mlul. ‘ix live
ml .l.‘ :mnmmmmn. III) ullmk nl
Iivc "MM ummumIinn .qu a ||¢Ck nf
In‘min pmulcn.

llll- ('ANl' m'llh ram-In IIn- umn‘ru
.allrl mrv «mu-ml I [‘IW'IIl-hlyt‘l In
pmrhuu- \null Ila-tr“ nl hum" lwmin
|~ “l'l'l .Iml In! Ilmn In Ilu' :mn'ﬁ hide-
nul m \I.Ik:al|

lln- run-m l-mu u.“ .l lx'rluurd I‘m
ulm .Irwv-l Iu I'm-pruh- \uIII Ilw ('ANI'
:qvnh I III“ .J‘IIII' him mlh I"
run-Ix M In- u lu-I- ' In! “I'I'I: A \rliﬂ
u-I '|'III-ll|u~\" Iru- llllll'll In I'all‘h III!
mun-ch .m-I : n-Iln lI-u'u‘ luvmus
m II “II-- n.“ III-' “N . ml mauw mp-
|-l -l "w tun'lq'J “hi-II n-runmlh ha
I num- n m "Hugh-II".

 

 
 
 

 

   

 

M‘lellmi In Mai
Mum, lmmn Irmln n n
nwl Irrzuur it is clwm-u
I‘ll“ I'm-in «hid: um: I'!
Ill-um III-mill may I:- I“
In H.000 pa rum llm‘c
Ir Intrn Ivy Ilnc mcIlu-l
dug-m."

nun-n lmuin mum-I
IIIInI h- Innmrd iuu'clr : 5
num In" and mm"! mm
«M. Illix In-r ul Imoin
l'um "mink-mg and "I
\I'II.,

"I“ Inmm leuin mu
hun- Iw a «min "Mmin"
pond! unmul III: ﬂrhlly
and No III-l Play «1.. Mal-I

AI'TI‘R Ilr Iwmg‘v‘!
Iorlnl "Main" min um
men" tin: In ndunr To
In Inmn Irwin. 11»: wt
IM I AM" nmrc h (‘Inr
('IIy.

The out day. he mm
and add if hr meld I:
"Ir (‘ANII mum uln-
mall-y Int-«ed Mud" and
nium

llw mum-mu! lm-il
lumnl in Gan-h" leIIdII-I
wrn- Imam! In hit my

[ﬁning mInmnIuvn.
a! Illal Ihc hmvm Incl-III
3 «mln "LI-unpulnr". -
ulmewapcd In "mutual
MARIHUANA UPROO‘I’ED ON CENTRAL DOW

Manila BULLETIN TODAY in English 10 May 82 p 40

[Text]

C

S

0:

5300/5753

A joint teant ol
National Bureau of In-
vestigation and the Phi-
lippine Air Force up-
rooted 4.700 marijuana
plants worth more than
95 million in Benguet
province over the
weekend.

. Director Jolly R.
Bugan'n o! the NB! said
that the operation was
conducted through ver~
tleal approach wlth the
use 0! PAP helicopters
since the plantation.
which is located along a
creek between rnoun~
tains was tumble by
land transportation.

Bagarln said the
plants. which were more
than ﬁve feet tall. were
ripe for harvest and they

34

were knoon in that area
as "miracle variety” be.
cause at ﬁve feet the
plants have already

“mm
is Io-

woda “MM-Lid

ai.tio‘l‘ohonoan 03°38
thehoondary otKihun-
pn and Baton. Beo-

pet.
The alleged cultiva-
tor: of the uprooted

.planta managed to

eaeapeprea even
before the helicopters
landed at a clearing
nearest the plantation
site.

They were ldentiﬂed

«Jain. 28. mdBttl-
notan Bantaean. 30.
bothnativeeotthearea.
BRIEFS

EXTRADITION 0F DETAINEE--Singapore, 26 Hay (AFP)--New Zealand has started
legal proceedings here to extradite one of its nationals wanted in connec-
tion with a drug charge. the STRAITS TIMES reported today, quoting a New
Zealand High Gounission spokesman. Andrew Te Kanawa Parata, who appeared
before a Singapore court on Monday. has been remanded in custody pending the
hearing of his case next Monday, the report said. Parsta. 35. a resident

of Bangkok. is charged with importing 68.2 kilos of cannabis into New Zealand
in December 1980. According to the High Col-ission spokesman. Parata was
out of the country when the charges were made against him. Parata, who
hails from Auckland. was arrested by Singapore police on 13 Hay and charged
with possession of 0.48 gram of cmnabis. Be pleaded guilty and was fined
1.00 dollars (0.8.3190). [Text] [“28le8 Bong Kong APP in English 0735 GMT
26 May 82]

080: 5300/5761

35
'POST' ASSESSES OPERATIWS AGAINST SEAN ARMY
“160709 Bangkok POST in English 16 May 82 p 1
[Article by the Chongkhadikit]

[Text] Opium warlord Khun Sa's Shan United Army [SUA] has been decimated
by casualties and deaertions which have reduced its strength fron 3.000
to 1.1.00 men under arms, authoritative military sources said yesterday.

In a financial "assault" on Khm Sa, the government has frozen all of his
assets. including bank accounts in Bangkok and Gliang liai.

A crack Thai regiment has been sent into a jungle valley bounded by Ian
liuai Mae Kham, Ban Hunt Mae Yuak and Ban Thoet Thai (formerly 3m Hin
1‘aek) in Mae Chan District, Chiang Rai. as part of a fourpronged strategy
against the SUA.

Their brief is to search for and identify SUA rel-manta in Thai territory.
provide security, deter any reprisal attacks and prevent [Chm Sa's return
to Thailand.

Meanwhile, plans are being laid for operations against other alien armies
trafficking in narcotics or occupying Thai territory close to the border
with Burma.

Burmese cooperation may be obtained for future campaigns in the wake of the
government's demonstration of its determination to get rid of the drug-
dealing ethnic minority armies which are regarded as insurgents by Rangoon.

The capture of Khun Sa's stronghold at Ban Iiin Taek during a 10-day "opim
war" in Januar, this year seriously curtailed the SUA'a involvement in the
narcotics trade.

The successful operation meant that Khm Sa (alias Chang Si-fu) was mable
to pay his troops and many of them deserted the SIM, according to intelli-

gence reports.

According to one report, accomts seized during the Ban Hin Taek operation
showed that Khun Sa's monthly expenses. most of which went to paying his
men, were about 23 million baht (U.".$l million). It is also known that
Khm Sa reaped nearly 14 million baht ($600,000) a month from the supply
to the Hong Kong market with jade smuggled out of Burma.

Thai forces have been positioned at some border areas where Khm Sa may

try to retaliate or make a show of strength but it is believed that he has
been incapacitated, particularly with the takeover of last week of the newest
stronghold at Ban Lao Lu, a hilltop base ab0ut 7 kilometres from Ban Hin ‘l‘aek.

The military's determination to crush any incursion has been demonstrated
by the deployment of heavy artillery 105m howi tzers in Ban ‘lhoet Thai.
Hith an effective range of at least 11 kilometres the guns are capable of
providing artillery cover to an area stretching from the border to Ban Lao
Lu and across a valley overlooked by Ban Hae Khan and Ban Mae Yuak.

After having been run out of Ban Kin Tack, Khm Sa remained in Burma until
he was told by "some persons connected with some politicians" that he could
return to Thailand safely, according to intelligence reports reaching Bangkok.

This led to his decision to send an SUA detachment to Ban Lao Lu, which is

close to the Burmese border. They built barracks to accomdate 500 to 800
men and dug a network of tunnels for protection from air raids and in which
to store narcotics.

The Thai assault on the base last Sunday can after it was detected in
aerial reconnaissance missions.

When three companies of Thai forces cowrising rangers, border patrol
police and regular troops stormed the base they found a house used by

Khm Sa'a chief-of-staff. Oriang Si-Gman.

They also found about 10 kilograms of raw and cooked opium and the remains

of what appeared to be a heroin refinery which the SUA had apparently
destroyed before fleeing into Burma.

CSO: 5300/5757

37
'POST' EDITORIAL ON PRISWER EXGIANGB
BKOlOHZ Bangkok POST in English 1 May 82 p 1.
(Editorial: "Prisoner Exchange a Tricky Issue"

[Text] The government will soon once again be asked to decide whether to
sign diplomatic agreemnts with some foreign countries on exchanging
prisoners. A comittee assigned last year to restudy the problem, headed
by the chief justice of the appeals court. Sandoen Kraichit, reportedly has
concluded that under certain conditions such treaties might be signed.

The backgromd to all of this is. basically. drugs. Specifically, it is
heroin. Since Thailand passed its tough mti-drug legislation in 1978,

a large number of foreigners have found themselves on the hard end of Thai
justice. some of them for very long term of imprisonment indeed. The recent
sentencing of French national Yves Lobozec to a prison term of 33 years

for possession of almost 3 kilograules of heroin is not an untypical sentence.
At last count, there were 653 foreigners in Thai jails. and most of them

are locked up on drug charges.

At one time. and it was not so long ago, Thailand was one of the major
conduits for heroin and opium shipments destined for Europe and America.
One of the criticisms made in the early 1970's was that Thai laws were not
strict enough to deter either the big-time or the small-time narcotics
exporters. This criticism was a major factor in motivating the governmnt
into writing harsh penalties into the anti-narcotic law.

There is no dotbt in anyone's mind that the harsh penalties have cut down
on drug smuggling. There is no doubt that every convicted drug offender
in Thai prisons today knew of the harsh laws when he decided to tﬁe the
"million dollar gaublc." as heroin smuggling is popularly known. We have
supported the writing of the tough laws and we have supported the use of
these laws to deter drug smuggling.

Now, however, comes a new thinking that somehow the drug smugglers are the
victims. Some foreign governments and their embassies here feel that Thai
jails are somhow mworthy of the convicted felon. They now are arguing
that the humane thing to do is to send the prisoners home to their 01m
comtries. There, if the terms of proposed treaties are enforced, these
drug offenders and other felons would be eligible for parole under the lava

38
of their own country, not mder Thai law. In short. these convicted
criminals could well be—-and in many cases certainlywill be—back on the
street many. many years before their jail sentences are up.

When the idea of a prisoner exchange was first brought to the Thai Foreign
Ministry, the answer was that ‘Ihailand would consider it, but that drug
offenders would have to be excluded. That being unacceptable to the foreign
missions concerned. negotiations have proceeded to the point where only
antique smugglers and those foreigners convicted of lese najeste and
endangering national security, peace and order would be excludedndrug
offenders. under current proposals, are definitely included.

The government will eventually decide on prisoner exchange after careful
deliberation. It will be criticised whichever way it decides, of course.
In the meantime, we hope that the thought of lengthy prison sentences
continue to deter those who would use 1hailand to buy and sell drugs that
kill.

C80: 5300/5757

39
mrmnuc mu LEAVES son smemna mus
“2907108 Bangkok Voice of Free Asia in Thai 1000 err 28 Apr 82

[Text] Deputy Prine Minister Gen Prachuap Suntharangkm, in his capacity
as chairman of the Narcotics Control Board, accowanied by Secretary General
of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board Pol Maj Gen Phao Sarasin,
National Security Council Secretary General Sqn Ldr Prasong Smsiri and

their party, left at 1100 today for Singapore for talks on cooperation in
combating narcotics trafficking.

General Prachuap snid before his departure that the visit is nde following
the invitation from Singaporean Home Affairs Minister Gina Sian Chin.

His mission will seek cooperation in efforts to prevent and suppress narcotics
trafficking and to stem the flow of acetic snhydride, which is used in
producing heroin fron opiun. Ihe deputy prime ninister said Thailand
considers the chemical illegal and is trying to stop its flow. Most acetic
anhydride is produced in Gernany and Japan and arrives in Thailand through
Singapore and Malaysia, which do not treat the chenical as illegal. Since
Thailand's crackdown on acetic anhydride, opiu has been snuggled into
Malaysia for processing because acetic anhydride is still available there.
He expressed his belief that there are heroin processing factories in
Malaysia now. Previously he had planned to also visit Malaysia, but this
plan has been delayed because Malaysia is still busy with the elections.

General Prachuap's visit to Singapore follwed his recent visit to Burns
for talks on the narcotics problen. During his current trip to Singapore,
General Prachuap and his party will also observe nedical treatnent aid
rehabilitation for drug addicts in Singapore. The deputy prine minister
and his party are scheduled to return fron Singapore this Saturday [1 May]
and will arrive at Bangkok Airport at 1350 hours.

CSO: 5300/5758

100
POLICE SBIZB BANNED GEMICALS
M90560 Bangkok POST in English 19 Apr 82 p 3

[Text] Six people have been arrested in a series of raids during which
narcotics officials and police seized more than 3,000 litres of chemicals
used to refine heroin. The chemicals. seized in the north, have been valued
at more that 5 million baht. The seized chemicals include 730 litres of
aceticsnhydride (a major ingredient in the heroin refining process). 1.025
litres of ether. 80 litres of chloroform. 1.250 litres of alcohol and carbon
powder. Police said the arrest of the six people, who included a Chinese
Haw man and a woman. had smashed a major racket in smuggling the chemicals
from Bangkok to the north, where their possession is an offence in provinces
adjoining the Burmese border. The arrests began on Friday night when

Office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCE) officials md Guimg Dao
District police stopped a truck in Gaiang Dao District, Chimg Mai Province.
A search of the truck, which was heading for Fang District. revealed 612
kilograms of chemicals. including 198 litres of acetic anhydride and its
substitutes. Police arrested the truck's driver mda passenger, Jang Thi
Rob. A Guineas Haw, Jang Thi Koh (alias Thikoh See Jang or Noi Duangdi)

is the alleged operator of a heroin refinery in Burma opposte Has Ai District.
Oliang Mai Province. The refinery is said to be controlled by fugitive
drug kingpin Lao Su (alias Hmkho Sae Han) who we under a death sentence
when he escaped from custody mder suspicious circumstances in Bmgkok

5 years ago.

The truck was traced to the Chiang Mai Thai Transport Company and a joint
wm—miang Hai police raid on its Chiang Mai Huang District warehouse on
Saturday led to the discovery of a huge cache of chemicals. Police said
the chemicals included 550 litres of acetic anhydride, 1,025 litres of
ether. 1,250 litres of alcohol, 40 litres of chloroform and a large amomt
of carbon powder.

The team then raided the company's office on Charong Huang Road where they
arrested its camer, Prawit maroenphanit. his daughter. Mrs Oraphin and
Prawit's driver. Empty barrels of banned chemicals were found on the
premises. police said. (”CB officials in Bangkok were alerted of the raids
and yesterday went to the Gliang Mai Thai Transport Comnny's office in
l'ntlusnwm where Prawit's son, Prayot. was arrested after a search allegedly
revealed doctnents connected with shipping banned chemicals to the north.
ONCB agents said Prayoj, who they said they long suspected of involvement
in drug and chemicals smuggling, was arrested in relation to narcotics
offences in Chiang Mai 5 years ago but was not convicted because of lack

of evidence.

C80: 5300/5757
61
BRIEFS

PRACHUAP ON ANTIDRUG OOOPBMTIWuSingapore has agreed to tighten control
on chenicals used to refine heroin which have been regularly smggled into
Thailand. This was stated by Deputy Prime Minister Gen Prachusp
Smtharangkm at Don Huang Airport after his return from Singapore on
Saturday. General Prachuap visited Singapore late last nonth to discuss
with Singapore authorities narcotic drug problems in this region. Wile
in Singapore. General Prachuap himself worked on drug addicts rehabilitation
method and the country's camaiyn against drugs. The deputy prime minister
said that Singapore authorities also praised Thailand for its successful
military canaign against the Shan rebels of drug kingpin mun Sa. [Text]
[BKDNBOI Bangkok Domestic Service in English 0000 GMT 3 May 82]

0.8. DRUG cam-4m 0.8. Government has given a 10 million baht grant to
support a drug abuse preventive education and intonation program which is
being carried out by the Bangkok metropolitan Administration. Director of
the drug abuse prevention and treatment division Khachit Chdmncha says
that the aid has been given under an agreement between the Thai and 0.8.
Governments signed in 1978. The director says that the money will be used
in publicity campaigns to instill drug abuse awareness among youths aid
the general public throughout Bangkok. He adds that under the program
three more drug treatmnt clinics will be opened at different public health
centers in Bangkok. This will bring to 17 the nusber of such clinics in
the city. [Text] [Bangkok Domestic Service in English 0000 GMT 8 Hay 82]

MARIIIUANA CONFISCATED--'lhree million baht worth of marijuana sticks neatly
packed in 17 gunny sacks and 10 large bags were confiscated last night by
customs officials from a fishing vessel anchored at the coastal village

of Cha-am in Phetchaburi Province, customs officials reported this morning.
The confiscated marijuana, believed destined for a foreign comtry, was
seized from the Pai Ngan 2 fishing vessel at 10:10 pm while it was anchored
near Khlong Che-an bench, they said. Customs officials said none of the
traffickers were aboard the fishing trawler during the raid. The seizure
was made after customs officials received a tip-off and rushed three boats
to the scene to make the raid. But the drug smugglers had apparently fled
the scene before the raid, they added. The vessel was brought from Phet

B Uri to Bangkok this morning. [Text] “th0646 Bangkok "081.0 in English
13 May 82‘ p 3]

42
RAII) 0N DRUG l-‘MmeY--(Jn|ang ﬂab-One Ilmong hilltrlhc guard was klllcd and
another was arrested during a pre-dawn raid on a mobile heroin refinery
located in a valley in Samoeng District. A border patrol police force
seized nearly 30 kilograms of morphine from the refinery after a fierce
gun battle with some 25 Bmongs guarding it. The clash at the refinery—
allegedly operated by a Chinese Haw-care shortly before dawn yesterday. ~
Host of the Hmong guards managed to retreat into the jungle after a 20-minute
firefight. One Hmong was later fomd dead and another was arrested when
the 50-man police force moved in to search the refinery. Eleven blocks

of morphine bearing the infamous 999 brand together with 20 kilogrammes of
morphine base powder were found at the site. Also discovered were a
morphine pressing machine, four drum of chemicals. believed to be acetic
anhydride, and heroin processing equipment including stoves and pans. The
drugs and the pressing machine were seized as evidence and the police force
burnt down the refinery before returning to Sameng District. The arrested
Hmong. who was not identified, was detained at Samoeng police station for
questioning. Meanwhile the cabinet will be asked today to extend the control
of two chemicals. used in the refining of heroin, from three provinces to
13. The chemicals are ether and chloroform which cannot be legally bought
or transported without official pernission in the northern provinces of
Oniang Mai. (111mg Rai and Han. However, if the cabinet approves a Gouerce
Ministry proposal today, the sale and transport of these chemicals will
also be subject to controls in the provinces of Phrae, Phayao, Lamphm,

Mae Hong Son, Narathiwat, Satm Pattani, Yala and Songkhla. [Text]

[Bangkok POST in English lo May 82 p 5]

THAI-PRC LIAISON—Thailand and west Germany have agreed to exchange narcotics
liaison officers for the first time in an attempt to stop the flow of
illicit drugs from Thailand to West Germany and other European countries,

a police source said yesterday. Senior Thai police aid the two visiting
senior German policemen, Eric Straas and Manfred Bolte of the West German
Federal Police's Criminal Bureau of Narcotics yesterday discussed coopera-
tion between the two countries to stem the drug traffic. According to an
initial agreement, West Germany will station narcotics agents at its ewassy
in Bangkok and Thailand will send police officers to be based in West Germany,
said the source. Foreign narcotics officers already stationed here are

from the 0.5., Canada, Australia. New Zealand, France and the Netherlands.
[Bangkok POST in English 22 Apr 82 p 5]

FRENGIHAN SENTENCE-2D FOR HERON—A 63-year-old French shoemaker was sentenced
to 33-year imprisonment by the criminal court yesterday. He was fomd

guilty of attempting to smuggle nearly 3 kilograms of heroin out of Thailand
earlier this year. Yvesle Boaec was initially given a life sentence by the
court. but the sentence was counuted one-third after he had pleaded guilty.
However. Bozec reportedly denied the charge when he was arrested by the
police at Don Huang Airport on 16 January, with 2.9Io0 kilograms of heroin
hidden in a spray can, while about to board a plane for Geneva. [Text]
[Bangkok NATION news: in English 27 Apr 82 p 3]

43
MARIJUANA IIAUL 1N KALASIN-—Kalasin-Police yesterday seized 2 tons of dry
marijuana and arrested a man during a raid on a house in Muang District here.
The marijuana and equipment found in the raid were estimated to be worth
aromd 1.2 million baht, police said. The suspect, identified as analoem
Suradet, 46, was arrested on a charge of illegal possession of marijuana.
Police said parts of the marijuana were already packed in bags and were
believed to be prepared to be smuggled out of the country. [Bangkok NATION
REVIEW in English 12 Apr 82 p 3]

MRPHINB SEIZED IN SONGtHlAuSongkhla—Thirty-four kilograms of morphine
base was found yesterday in a Mercedes Benz car impounded at a cmtoms office
in Sadao District since May 2, customs officials reported. The drug, in 28
blocks bearing the 999 trademark. were found under the rear seat and in a
secret compartment beneath the floor of the car. Customs officials seized the
car from a rmber plantation in Khong Ngae. Talbon Pangla of Sadao District
on the suspicion that the car was smuggled in from Malaysia and might have
been carrying contraband. After nothing illegal was found, the car was towed
to the customs office. Customs officials yesterday received an anonymous
call revealing the presence of the drugs which was found after a thorough
search. The haul. one of the largest made in the south, was later handed

to narcotics police in ﬂat Yai. [Text] [81(281658 Bangkok THE BANGKOK POST
in English 21 May 82 p 1]

FEMALE PRISONERS RELEASED—More than 400 women, including two foreigners

who served jail terms on narcotics charges, were released yesterday fromKhlong
Prem prison at Lard Yao. A large number of those freed had been serving sen-
tences for drug offences. A 67-year-old woman, Somphon ﬂinlat, who had been
in jail for three years for possessing drugs, seemed to be in a daze as

she took her first unsteady steps out of prison. The two foreign women re-
leased were Yip Shaw-man, 36, of Hong Kong, and Margaret Vyskocil, 33, of
Austria. Yip Shaw-nan who had served eight years of a 52-year sentence for a
heroin of fence, said she would return to Hong Kong within two days. Margaret
Vyskocil was arrested with her husband in (ﬁtting Mai on her first visit to
Thailand and charged with possessing 300 granules of heroin. She served more
than four years of a six year and eight months sentence. The tall, Amtrian
brunette who had worked as a secretary in Vienna before her arrest in Thai-
land said she didn't have any plans regarding her future. According to a
senior prison official, there are still more than 1,1)0 women in lthlong Prem.
Thirty-eight of these are foreigners serving jail term on narcotics charges.
[BK281458 Bangkok THE BANGKOK POST in English 23 May 82 p 3]

OTHER CONVICTS RELEASED--Bangkok, 22 May (AFP)--A total of 15 Western pri-
soners were released here today under a royal amnesty that will lean freedom
for about 10,000 prisoners throughout the comtry. The first Westerners to
walk out of their cells under an amnesty occasioned by the current bicenten-
nial of Bangkok and the ruling Chakkri Dynasty comrised four Britons, three
Heat Germans, one Swiss, one Canadian, two Americans, one Amtrian, one
Spaniard and two Israelis. Thev had been iailed at "Khlong Prem," in the

northern outskirts of Bangkok, for periods ranging fron 18 months to seven
years. Most were serving drug sentences. They expressed mined views ﬁout
life behind bars. Mark Kissinger, of Los Angeles, California, described pri-
son conditions as "terrible," saying he had been "treated like an animal."

Mr Kissinger. lolo. had been sentenced to eight years for conspiracy to export
heroin out of Thailand to the United States. But Brian Hayward, who would

(.1.
was from northern England. maintained that prison conditions
32:: azzorclnft E[life 38—year-old engineer had been inside for one year on
charges related to travellers' cheques. Questioned about severe bruiseswe -
on his face. he said they had been sustained in a game of rugby. Otherc st
cmers released today included: -Hichael “Ferris. Alan Clark and Joe arter
of Britain (Ferris, of Kent, had served three quarters of his four-year sen-
tence for possession of three grammes of heroin. The other two declined any
comment). --H.ilos Blaha, 1.0, of Vancouver, Canada who had served five years
of a seven-year sentence for charges related to possession of 19 grams d
of heroin.--Jose Marco. 33. of Valencia, Spain, who had served three yearsfan
six months of a five-year sentence after being arrested with 220 grammes o
heroin,--Bliazer Pinter. 28, and Benjamin Aitha, 32, of Haifa, Israel, also55
had been arrested in connection with 1.5 kilograms of heroin and serve 82]
months of an eigit-year sentence. (”(281458 Hong Kong APP in English 22 Hay

RAH OPIUM SEIZED—-Hat Yai--Police yesterday seized about 7 million baht
of raw-opium and arrested the driver of a pick-up truck in which the drugs
were fomd. Acting on a tip-off that the opium would be smuggled from
Nakhon Si mammal-at to Hal: Yai, a tea- of local crime suppression division
police set up a check-point at the car ferry landing in Songkhla Town where
they intercepted a red pick-up truck. The driver, Surasit Sukrat, 30,

was detained at the local CSD headquarters after police noticed that his
vehicle had two fuel tanks, one for LPG gas and the other for petrol.
Police later discovered about 70 kilogramnea of rat opium, neatly packed
in 34 plastic bags, hidden inside the LPG gas tank on the truck's roof.
[Bangkok POST in English 11 Apr 82 p 2]

HEAVY SENTENCES HANDED DOWN—111s criminal court yesterday (23 April) handed
down heavy jail sentences against three women and two men after finding them
guilty of drug offenses. The five were arrested in a raid at New Peng
Chinng Restaurant after selling heroin to undercover narcotics agents. The
agents seized more than 7 kilogram of top grade No 4 heroin. Son Sae Kow,
the alleged owner of the drugs, was found guilty of possessing drugs with
intent to sell and selling drugs and was sentenced to life imrisonment.
The other four-Man Prasoetsuk, Mrs Hong Yaovapreuk, Mrs Amornsri
Prathuangsak and Ms Prapasi Hachara-u-were found guilty of conspiring to
sell drugs and supporting their sale and were originally sentenced to serve
33 years and lo months in jail but this was reduced to 22 years, 2 months
and 20 days because their testimony was considered helpful. The arrests
were the result of a 6-month surveillance operation momted by a joint team
of crime suppression division police and officials of the Office of the

Narcotics Control Board with the cooperation of the U.S. Drug Enforcement
Administration. [Bangkok POST in English 24 Apr 82 p 3]

UNDERCOVER TEAM ARRESTS SUSPECl'S—Chiang Hai--An undercover provincial
narcotics police team yesterday arrested three men after seizing 2.1 kilo-
grunmes of heroin with a street value of almost one million baht. The three
men. all residents of Chiang Rai Province. were arrested at 3 Huang District
coffee shop after the heroin was delivered to a group of policemen posing
as drug dealers. Police said the arrest came after they learned that the
three were in possession or a large mum of heroin. They said they set
up the trap after contacting the trio by telegram and asking them to bring
the heroin to Chiang Mai for delivery. The gang named the "Pan Cafe" on
Mani Noparut as a rendezvous. After agreeing on a wholesale price for the

145
Khwanthongdoem, 25, and Saengmuang Uppasakaeo, 35. Police said the heroin,
packed in six paper boxes, had a street value of about 900,000 baht. [Text]
[Bangkok P08? in English 25 Apr 82 p 3]

countries, including the United States. Canada, Australia, New Zealand,
Switzerland, the Netherlands, France, England, Italy. Hong Kong. Malaysia
and Singapore. [Bangkok POST in English 9 May 82 p 2]

HEROIN SEIZED 1N CHIANG MAP-Chimg Nab—Provincial drug suppression police
arrested five people and seized 7 kilogram-es of first-grade No 6 heroin

in the twon centre here yesterday. The arrests were made after a 3-month
joint investigation between Songkhla and 01ng Mai narcotics police.

Police identified the suspects as Sonchat Glantilna, 32, Souphong Sae Hang,
23, Hoenping Sae L1. 28. Hrs Wanida Chaifang and her younger brother
Prayun, 23. Seized during the arrests yesterday were 20 packages of "double

OPIUH 881230 0" BUS—Lawhm—-Police yesterday seized 10.2 kilograms of
raw opiun on a bus travelling from Gtiang Mai, and arrested one passenger,
police reported. The seizure was made after police, acting on a tip-off,
set up a roadblock in front of Lamphun police headquarters and searched

n Bangkok-bound tour bus. Police said the opium was [and in five packages
in a traveiiing bag. and that a tag identified the bag as the property of
passenger Bmsi Somchun, 27. a resident of Phayao Province. Bunsi, who
denied ownership of the opiun, was detained on a charge of. possession of
drugs. [Text] [Bangkok POST in English 21 Kay 82 p 3]

they seized about 9 kilograms of opium and held two Fang District residents
identified as Nopphandon Haosuriyakan, 32, and Athon Kamkion. 25. After
questioning the two, police went to the Si Lanna Hotel on 'l'hawl Uthit Road
where they seized more raw opium and made another three arrests. The three
were identified by police as Mrs Bmwing Hongson, 35, Silachon Yonying,

30, and Saming China, 25, all of Huang District. Each of the five has been
charged with having possessed opium with intent to sell. [Text] [BKlloO6lo6
Bangkok POST in English 13 May 82 p 5]

ARRESTS FOR OPIUM POSSESSIw—A Malaysian woman and a Singaporean man were
arrested yesterday evening and charged with possession of 3.7 kilograms of
cooked opium with intent to smuggle it out of the comtry. The opim was
found hidden in a can of shrimp in the possession of Miss Chia Hee Lan, 26,
of Kuala Luupur and Chand Eng Bong, 32, of Singapore, customs officials
alleged. Both were about to leave Bangkok for Singapore on a Singapore
airlines flight. Becoming suspicious of their behaviour, customs officials
on duty at Don Huang Airport searched their belongings and found the drugs,
officials said. lmigration records revealed that Hiss Lan had been to
Bangkok several times before. Both were initially charged with illegal
possession of opium with intent to sell and attempted smuggling. They were
later handed over to crime suppression police for further questioning.
[Text] [BK160646 Bangkok POST in English 14 May 82 p 5]

BANGKOK HBROIN SEIZED—-Police yesterday arrested four people, including a
woman. and seized 14 kilogranlnes of No I. first grade heroin in the car
part of the Washington Theatre in Sukhumvit. Crime suppression division
police alleged that the four were menbers of an international syndicate
responsible for smuggling drugs abroad via southern Thailand. The haul
was one of the biggest uncovered by police in Bangkok metropolis this

year and officials said it would have sold for at least 3 million baht

at local prices and 30 times that amount if it had reached foreign markets.
The four suspects, all of whom denied any knowledge of the drugs. were
identified as Bunsup Charoendet, 65, a lawyer from Chumhon, Sanoe
Charunwong, 42, also from Chumphon. Mrs Channong Thongin, 36, and Manat
Triphunwet. owner of the Top Music Shop in Bangkok's Pratunam area. The
drugs were packed in 28 plastic bags bearing the golden triangle's double
U Globe brand and the haul weighed a total of 16 kilogrammes. All four
suspects denied charges of possessing the drugs with intent to sell and were
detained at the crime suppression division headquarters for further
questioning. [81(190546 Bangkok POST in English 13 Apr 82 p 21

LAO HARIHUANA SEIZEDnNakhon Phenom-Huge amounts of marijuana seized in this
northeastern province recently were believed to have been grown in Laos.
provincial police Superintendent Pol Col Prachit Saengsubin said yesterday.
Pol Col Prachit said that in the past two months police had seized between
three to four tons of dried marijuana which was thought to have been grown
in Laos and then smuggled across the border. He said the marijuana was cul-
tivated by Thais, who preferred to grow it in Laos because of a suppression
campaign against the drug in this province. He said the Thais involved in
the racket also believed that Laos had no laws against growing marijuana.
Col Prachit said it was difficult to prevent the smuggling of marijuana into
the province because of its 23-kilonetre-long border with Laos. [Text]
[BK281458 Bangkok THE BANGKOK POST in English 21. May 82 p 2]

CSO: 5300/5765
107
BRIEFS

TORONTO POLICEHAN ARRESTED—Toronto (CP)--A 22-year-old Pbtropolitan Toronto
policeman was arrested Saturday and charged with five drug offences following
a six-week investigation. Brent Parkes, a member of the force for 16 months,
resigned after his arrest. 1b is the third city policeman charged with
drug-related offences in the past two days. although police said his arrest
is unrelated to the other two. A total of 12 charges, mostly trafficking
and possession, have been laid against Parkes and four other men after under-
cover police purchased about $16,200 worth of hashiah and benzedrine, said
police. Charged with Parkes are Chris Gerard Bates, 21, Michael Kevin
Phinprize, 16, Mark Ian Hainprize, 22, and Steven Paul Power, 21. All will
appear in court Monday for a bail hearing. The other two policemen have been
suspended from duty after being charged with conspiracy to inort narcotics
with three other Toronto men. Constable Delbert Rochester, 21, a nine-year
medaer of the department and Constable Owen Clue-bars, 36, who had six years
service, are charged with two counts each. Durrell Poster, 35, Benjamin
Hohn, 26, Alphonse Samuel Blake, 21, are charged with one count each. [Text]
[Ottawa THE CITIZEN in English 29 Mar 82 p 5]

DRUG-SWWLING RAIDS--Ha1ifax (CP)--Halifax police said Friday they have
arrested two Nova Scotia men in connection with an international drug

smuggling operation. The department said in a release that an unspecified
nudier of people are being charged with a variety of offences, including

iworting narcotics, trafficking and possession of a prohibited weapon. The
arrests were made Thursday, about an hour after the Los Angeles County

Sheriff's Department in California arrested Delbert Hillia- bhister of
Halifax, son of one of the men arrested in Halifax, at Los Angeles Inter-

national Airport. [Text] Windsor THE SATURDAY HINDSOR STAR in English
10 Apr 82 p A6]

JAIL FOR HEROIN TRAFFICKING--A get-tough policy with drug traffickers con-
tinued in B.C. Supreme Court Friday when Allan Lin, 28, was given 11 years
in prison and Philip Yu, 30, eight years, for conspiring in Vancouver to
traffic in heroin in Hong Kong. The two men were convicted by a jury of
conspiring to sell one pound of the drug for $14,000 to two policemen acting
as customers. Justice S. Martin Toy was told the deal was never completed
but Yu had provided a ample of heroin to the two policemen. Justice Toy
said the two men were motivated by a desire for profit and said the destruc-
tive effect of the sale of the narcotic comelled him to sentence To to eight

years although he had no previous record. He gave bin 11 years. [Text]
[Vancouver THE HBBKEND SUN in English 17 Apr 82 p A16]

(:80: 5320/29
48
BRIEFS

William 3031548183!!!“ Coloubiana were arrested 'rueaday along with their
lSO-toot boat loaded with between 200 and 300 bags of marijuana oft Dog Cay
in the Cay Sal area. Defence force Contender wristophar Dalton announced
this afternoon. At a press conference at the Defence ministry, cadr Belton
said that the arrest occurred at 6:30 pa Tuesday by the Defence torce supply
dip Port Nontaou under the coauand of Lieutenant Couandar ldwin hunroe. Lt
one: Munroe said today that the Panamanian registered "Alcora', was chased
for about 20 ainutea and warning shots had to be tired to bring it to a stop.
He said that several Cigarette speed boats tried to get in between the Port
Montana and the Aloora in an atteapt to take the an of! but were thwarted by
several bursts of warning shots tron the Pt Montagu. lie said that the It
llontaqu had to anchor a cigarette to catch up the hlcora and upon return, the
Cigarette. which was found moccupied with one woaan's shoe aboard, had div
appeared. (asunder nonroa also said that he saw thousands of crawfiah traps
set by poachers in the Cay Sal area. ‘rhexhlcora, Pt Montana and the captured
boat were brought into the Prince George bar! this afternoon and the drugs
mloaded onto trudta and taken away by police [Nassau m TRIBUNE in mlish
29 Apr 82 p 1]

BAIL FOR 13 mum-June“ Colotiaians were ordered to pay a total of
855.000 in bail yesterday afternoon when they appeared before Acting aegis-
trate Alva Stewart Coakley charged with possession of 918 bales of aarijuana.
The 13 accused pleaded not guilty to charges of possession of dangerous drugs
and with intent to supply. They were charged with having 918 bales of aeri-
junna at Dog locks on April 27. The non and a lSO—foot carrier "Alcora." were
arrested by Defence Force Herines aboard the supply ship Port hontagu. They
were each granted cash hails of $35,000 after Acting hagistrate Coaltley recon-
aidered their bail, which she had first set at $50,000 cash each. Their
attorney Godfrey Finder had insisted that "too high a bail is equivalent to

no hail at all." lie also said his clients. who were "only poor iishernen."
were "shocked to even be here, in a strange country and to be hit with $50,000!
Do you know how nany pesos that is?" Pinder asked. Prosecutor Conrad Sweeting
told the court that this was one of "the largest drug hauls the Bahnas has
had in this type of aaterial" and that the carrier "was also the largest drug
boat ever brought into the harbour." he added that he had been "handed down
strict rules on how the latter should be dealt with." [text] [Basaau m

mm in English 1 May 82 pl]

080: 5300/7555
69
BARBADOS hae hoon trylng to convince lteell.
egalnot ol the eel
that It does not have a drug problem.

Perhapo we ahoold come around to the truth
and do aonetﬂu about It helm we ﬁnd outaelvee
confronted by a hog-tar that will deem no. of

As oegagoaa ehroery21.aoonlorpollco -
ﬂdal waa quoted ea aeyln thet “unto: Me In
the society" were getting the way of cm
Barbadoe Police Force on It ettenpted to get to
root of the dug peohlen hero.

The otatodln :
‘ﬂhewpoﬂcomaddod um aluminum m:-
ﬂchng wee booed-g none and Ice proﬁtable
even -

whenever they wentod to down a par
tlcelar "openlng" there women one eonlor
peraon in eoclety to cane trouble."

Following thla atateleent. the ‘Oppoaltlon
De-ocratlc Lehoor Party called a Government to
aecutele who were thou "unit: people". We hve
heerdoothlngalnce'theotatelentoftheaonlu
pollce ofﬁcer.

”2e gage: alphtdhe e ablation of the
arelndeodgettln'lnthewayoftﬂn'o.
3 in not onllhe ceelno unhlln

where 4mm often driveo people to Ignore the

hrmnftomdm the eoclity. le

pa powth drug nae our eedety

— and In pertlcnlar nerlieana — Indicated that

there la a fundamental problen lacing low on-

omen.

Wehoveeeenanlncroeeelnpoeeltloalordm
nbtodoffenceuwohaveaoeeaelnaoaaoln
, vidlenceatthoalrandeeapctnwehevohedanln-

tenelﬂcetlu of public ewareeoea and pohllc educa-
tloeoethe dangueddrenyettheetatlatlcaehew
in continuing pattern of lncroaeln' eﬂoncoa.
In 1910. fat Manon. Bubadaa had only {our
cases of pom bah; brought bofm tin can.
fatpouaaaioaafnariiuana.

Bylo‘l‘llhathadincnaaadtosmandlaatyaar
— onlyfmhcludlu”_uodcd::x‘f.
inana .not an

Wohavomnaiotdruhanla polcouul
DefemFotcapetaonmlhthaM Skhut
ma.aawe|laalnlloamabnry.8t.‘l'hnaa.Wahavo
seen marijuana caning [autumn-yuan“
inﬂdmmmnhtohdbdeam
hiddonincarvinst.andmhicocau.

All of that example. tall the
porcentincroaaahdmgoﬂaaeaah dam
thopaatyur.Mmthaathat.thayullualhata
canceriaoatingaway aubontyfahﬂcalauwo

In

ty.

Evenwithouttloﬂamthmhnﬂl ch
thathdicatalhowmdmyhpoalh
MPooplebwlLudmtalﬂuabodlL

Clearly tho WW3! la Illa Gmnnm'a
(ado Mina ammonium
Depart-ant thatcyallat Policaﬂroa.

Whammyhomndna‘lsgnwayofm
a ducal-nil! 0.1M Imbadaalt
alumna vaaaubuaaﬂactcalﬁ
u-yifpdiea-ooandcmdndahﬂndthtpao-
pkaninpodhﬂhanhthahwt.

"auda- dﬂcuaayathuhamkof
«Micaela humithonthoufotwhon
Woo-Ia mbthowtha
cannu-yhafmadlm.. .

Mbanahmdaacaduﬂoautnahawm
drapm Ho-laﬂyﬂmocachod
Macaw-wk tubal-08am“.
MammWCMdymh
0“W l“id-clan drug-adding

on.“ war-
dual-admin.

51
BRIEFS

INTERPOL MEMBERSHIP-Ame Royal Barbados Police Force is now a lember of INTER-
POL. As a result. the newly formed Undercover Drug Squad is now better able
to deal with drug trafficking in the island. This was stated yesterday by re-
tiring Police Canissioner Aviston Preecod, after he accompanied Attorney Gen-
eral Louie Tull on a tour of a section of the District “A“ Police Station.
Prescod said the drug squad of five overseas-trained members of the force,
headed by Superintendent Winfield mine, was now better able to deal with
drugs and how they were distributed on the island. [Bridgetown m NATION in

English 28 Apr 82 p 1]

C80: 5300/7552

52
BRIEFS

OOCAINE LABORA‘DORY DISCOVERED—Villavicencio-—Today the police anti-narcotics
group dealt a new Mon to the international drug trafficking gangs which
operate in the eastern plains area. The authorities discovered s Index-n
cocaine processing laboratory worth note than 25 million pesos. At less:
five people who are involved in the illegal activity are being sought.
[PA271932 Bogota Cadena Radial Super in Spanish 2330 GMT 26 May 82]

080: 5300/2174

53
EDITORIAL DISCUSSBS THREAT OF ILLEGAL AIRS‘I'RIPS FOR DRUGS

Kingston THE DAILY CLEANER in English 4 May 82 p 8

[Editorial:

[Text]

C50:

5300/7556

"Illegal Airstrips"]

We understand from the Ministry.
0! National Security that legisla-
tion is now heing drafted to
strengthen the government's hand
in dealing with the widespread
establish-sent oi illegal airstrip:
throughout lanaica. As far back
as l9” the forum Deputy Prime
liinister Mr. Patterson
announced that legislation would
he drafted to deal with this
Iltm. .

0n Septernher ll of that year
though there was no legislation.
the Police were ahle to move in
on the Georges Valley airstrip
owned by the Coptic: on their
logo: estate in St. Elizabeth and
a plane was seized. Then on Sep~
tenher 15 there was a joint
attach on the plane and on the
security guards guarding it front
the air and by land. and the

plane escaped. Thereafter the
[DP deuolirhed the airstrip. or so
it was reported.

In larch lSBl. after the new
governntent had taken over. the
present Minister hit. Spaulding
declared that the strips would he
eliminated. We know that legisla-
tion tales rnuch 'tiIe. her it in
now over a year and it in title
that the legislation he enacted. _

In the rneantirne our special
reporterhas shown that the strips

s... nineties ow mm.

54

being reiurhished rotne are dis
carded. others being built near to
then. and none are being built
which are longer than the airstrip
at Tinson Pen and arecapahle of
taking DOS or DC-6 planes. Our
reporters saw several airstrips in
St. jarnes. in Wesrnsoreland.
Hanover. St. Elizabeth. Claren-
don. St. Catherine. and their cow
ditinn and the expertise in build.

‘ ' inguhent. suggest that the ganja

hussne. continues to he very big
busine- indeed. While it is not
being clairned that all these strips
areownedhypeoplcwho are in
the ganja trade. what is being
said is that in ntany cases they are
huilt and rented to persons who
use the. illegally.

in addition to facilitating the
ganja trade it is reported. that sev-
eral strips'are used to hring in
consarner goods. thus avoiding

. the custorns.

We agree with hIr. Spaulding
whenhesaidlastyearthat these
stripe are a danger to the national
security oi the country. We hope
that Mr. Spaulding's government
will give hint the‘lullest support.
and that the Ganja lohhy which
has been so powerful in recent
years will not he allowed to
rtypie the eilotts to eliminate the '

' m
PRESSURE I." 0.5. AFFECTING GANJA TRADE IN JAMAICA
Kingston THE SUNDAY CLEANER in English 16 May 82 pp 9, 19
[Article by Lloyd Williams]

[Excerpts] Escalation by United States drug enforcement authorities in South
Florida of their war against marijuana (ganja), cocaine and other drugs, is
reported to have caused a lull'in the ganja traffic from Jamaica.

At the same time, however. sources here say the highly-organised ganja traffic
out of Jamaica is becoming even more devious.

Says Con Dacherty, a [1.5. Drug Enforcement Administration Public Information
officer in Miami:

"Overall, the Task Force which becmae operational about a month ago has shown
a drop in the sightings of both suspect (Marijuana) vessels and aircraft. There
has been a definite lull in overall drug traffic coming from the Caribbean.
This is largely due to the new men and equipment in place now.

"The smugglers are quite concerned and they have adopted a kind of wait-and-
see attitude and they are being very wary right now. The Task Force is very
definitely having an effect on the traffic."

The Task Force he refers to was announced by 0.5. President Ronald Reagan on
January 28. Its members are Vice President George Bush, the Secretaries of
State, Defence, Transportation, Treasury, and Health and Human Services, the
Attorney-General of the United States and Presidential Counselor Ed Hesse.

Ganja Traffic

The new men and equipment have been in operation some six weeks now, putting
pressure on the ganja traffic and the movements of other drugs into South
Florida from Colombia. Bolivia, Peru and Jamaica.

Dominant Ganja Parish
The parish of St. Ann on Jamaica's northcoast was for years the dominant ganja

parish. The news now is that it has lost its pride of place. "Right new St.
Ann get a lick with ganja," moaned a farmer of the illegal herb in the ganja

55
heartland of St. Ann a few days ago. "The whole situation is now in a jal.
The stuff is really not moving. Everything is on a standstill."

Farmer c, as he shall be known, estimates that the ganja market in St. Ann has
been cut bacliz by about 752. "I don't know if in the future it will change but
right now, a lot of the youth th- s suffer because it (ganja) is the only
resource for them. There is no employment right now." Why is this?

"Lots of people say is the change of Government (here). They claim that Reagan
don't want it in his country and our people in Jamaica can't support the market
alone. The stuff have to move before we can feel good, so the majority of
farmers back out of (ganja) farming. It don't lake sense to plant it and-it
don't sell. Lt's money-asking and once a man can't find bread from it, him
have to leave it out."

Farmer c said he used to sell the "Collie" variety of ganja for U.S.$loO per lb
weight, or U.S. $60,000 for 1,000 lb. but the price in St. Ann has now fallen
to US$1,000 for 100 lb. Similarly, Sinsenilla used to fetch US$100 to US$150
per 1b. but the price was now down to US$60 per 1b.

Farmers Quit

He said that around two years ago there were more than 50 ganja farners in his
area. Now there are only about 10. “The rest kinda draw out because then not
getting no sale. You really have to beg a nan (a ganja dealer) now to buy fron
you. You really have to run him down, and though you have to beg hin, you

have to give him for little and nothing." Host ganja farmers or dealers he
knows have herb stored.

And there is another side to it. "Uhen the man them (ganja buyers) cone froa
foreign, then don't want to leggo the whole of the noney either. Sole say they
prefer to give us half till they go and come again." And whenever the plane
men come they want the cream of the crop only-~Sinsemilla.

Drought

Another St. Ann ganja farmer says also that ganja farming in St. Ann had been
affected by drought. He did not plant his current crop until January and
since about two weeks ago, it had not rained in his area.

But there is another story. That story is that the St. Ann ganja trade is
experiencing something more than the pressures of the South Florida Task Force.
It is being blackballed by Anerican ganja pilots because some of their ntmters
have been ripped off in phony ganja deals, robbed at gunpoint, set up and in
some cases with some of their US. based Jamaican colleagues have become aiss-
ing-— pe manent 1y .

Hhen reports of the deaths of some of those white American nales surfaced they
were discounted widely. No, informed sources said. The nulber of bodies
found--none--did not square off with the nunbers reported missing. Now that
St. Ann is being blackballed by American ganja plane pilots the truth is being
made known.

56
So more and more the ganja traffic is being diverted to St. Mary, St. Catherine
and Clarendon and to the Hestern Parishes-—St. Elizabeth, Hestnoreland Hanover
and St. Janes.

Blackballed

At the same tine however, the affects of the Task Force pressure are being felt
to varying degrees in all the parishes. And, according to one source:

The farners that nake out best now are the ones that have the contacts."

'Bush League'

But if some ganja traffickers have been put outof circulation by the "Bush
League" as the MIAMI HERALD recently called the Task Force, the agent's efforts
at suppressing the traffic has led the resourceful along the other ganja
traffickers to become nore wily.

The ganja industry is highstakes business. Official estimates in the U.S.A.
puts the annual gross value of the illegal drug business in South Florida at
more than USS? billion. So while there is a aarket, there is a way. Even

a single—engine plane-load of ganja can fetch thousands of dollars in the USA.
For a start the fee to a ganja plane pilot, such as sane of those frustrated
daredevil ex-Vietnan flyers to ferry a nulti-ton load of ganja fron Janaica
can be as high as US$150,000. With the focus of the Task Force's attention
now on South Florida, the ganja plane pilots are going further up the Atlantic
Coast--to Georgia, the Carolinas and Virginia.

And that's not all. To out—fox the radar, what sole astute ganja-plane pilots
do is to fly so close to the large scheduled jetliners going into the States,
that their presence merge with that of the bigger planes and appear as just one
blip on the radar screen.

Daredevil Flyers

They are also flying out larger loads fron Janaica and at the same time killing
two other birds. First, some now fly in once a nonth instead of the five

tines a month they used to. At the sane tine they save on fuel and their fees
have increased. Increasingly too they are using larger aircraft. Sons air-
strips are being lengthened.

In Janaica the Task Force drive is also having its repercussions. For a start
some middlemen ganja dealers are reported to be in a financial bind. To ensure
a steady supply of ganja, some middlemen-ganja dealers had advanced farners
cash for fertilizers, subsistence and transportation among other things. Some
buy boat engines to ensure the delivery of their supplies but a problem arises
as the crop is reaped but there are few orders for it. It is not unusual these
days for ganja dealers from as far as Hontego Bay to travel to Kingston and do
the round of night clubs and hotels. seeking buyers for the herb.

And with the decline of the role of the niddlenen, some American buyers are
asking their contacts with the farmers the-selves. Atthe sane tine. some of

57
the big buyers who used to fly hahave stopped. The mini-league, nore adventur-
ous types tend to form the majority now.

'Safe' Air Strips

Although nany a ganja air trip has been put out of circulation or the objects
of police surveillance and stakeouts nuneroua "safé'strips are still in busi-
ness. Usually| they are in the niddle of nowhere-far from the public's eye-
sight—-sone on private property and sale on govern-ant lands.

But of late their isolation is proving a problel for sole of the ganja pilots
who use these airstrips, especially in Manchester and St. Elizabeth. Some
pilots who cone in earlier than arranged or later, for whatever reason have.
been held up for landing, by "pirates" who rob then of their noney. "
Recently, an aircraft with people on legitimate business. landed at an airstrip
in St. Elizabeth.

0n aiighting, the airplane's occupants were surrounded by a group of armed
"pirates" demanding money. Luckily for the plane's occupants, a police party
had the airstrip staked out and it was only their quick showing that saved the
occupants. who could not convince the "pirates" they were not on a ganja mis-
sion and were not loaded with noney.

(Incidentally the incidence of airplanes being stolen in the USA and ocean-
going boats being stolen here and in the USA for ganja runs, is reported to
be increasing.)

These hold-ups have in part, resulted in sons of the new or refurbished air-
strips coming into operation.

The landing fee at these safe airstrips used to be around "$512,000 a tine.
The word now is that it is 0.8. $20,000. For those who need it, refuelling
is always available as these airstrip operators and their associates can pro—
vide any amount of aviation fuel that is required, day or night.

of late many of the ganja plane pilots fly into one of Jamaica's two inter-
national airports legally, obeying all the civil aviation requirements. They
check into a hotel, make their contacts, arrange their ganja deals, and visit
by car, the airstrips of their choice, to familiarize the-selves with the
terrain. If he is at Hontego Bay's Sangster International Airport for in—
stance, there are three nearby airstrips he can use: one at Flower Hill, one
at Spot Valley and the other at Barret Hall. "hen the deal is set the pilots
file required flight plans for their overseas journeys, but take off to a pre-
deternined airstrip, sonetines taking on scores of bags of compressed ganja
in 15 to 20 minutes. often without even cutting their engines.

Police Can't Destroy

If their radio contacts warn then of any suspicious presence before they load,
they return promptly to their airports, say "engine trouble" had caused them
to return, then hide their tile for a safe pick-up. For a pilot in Kingston.
at either the Nor-an Henley International Airport or the Tinson Pen Aerodrone,
there are several airstrips in nearby St. Catherine that are available to then.
These airstrips are all known to the police, but there is nothing the police.-
can do about then. th2 There is nothing in the law which authorizes the
pol ice to destroy them. All the police can do is to keep the airstrips under
surveillance, or stake them outif they have cause to be suspicious.

But policemen must sleep sometimes and these airstrip operators are invaraibly
very well-connected and informed. Besides, most of these airstrips are so
located that lookouts can always give timely warning of an approaching police
party. The police do not have airplanes, and by the time a JD? helicopter is
airborne the bird will have flown with its multi-ton load of ganja.

Illegal Loading

But there is even a safer way used frequently. The ganja plane is sometimes
loaded right at the Manley International. Sangster International or Tinson
Pen Aerodrome from a plane which has picked up the ganja from an airstrip.

At one of the international airports the following incident occurred one night
recently: the police got wind that an illegal-loading operation was taking
place. A police party was rushed to the airport. of course the police could
not go onto the runway until they got clearance from the control tower. When
did clearance cone? After the plane had left. of course. Control Tower was
apologetic, but who woudn't be?

There have been many a statelent from many a quarter about legislation to curb
the illegal use of airstrips.

Eve rybody Speaks

January 6, 1970: The Hon. Cleve Lewis, Minister of Commnication and Works,

met with owners of or representatives of 37 airstrips to seek their views and
advice on the best means of achieving security (of airstrips) in the national
interest.-

September 17, 1980: The Hon. P.J. Patterson, Acting Prime Minister: New strate-
gies are being devised to cope with this problem (illegal airstrips) which con-
stitutes a serious threat to the security of our nation. Legislation is cur-
rently being prepared to control and monitor the construction and development
of privately-owned airstrips and to govern the use of such airstrips."

September 30. 1980: The Hon Carlyle Dunkley, Acting Minister of National
Sccuri ty: the Government view with deep concern the number of illegal air-
strips which have been built in certain parts of the country, and the illegal
entry and landing of aircraft on these strips as well as other aerodromes

around the island.

March 17, 1981: The Minister of National Security, the lion. Winston Spaulding:
"During the last few years, a number of airstrips have been built and strangely
allowed to flourish throughout the island and have facilitated various kinds
of crininal activities, involving firearms, ammunition, drugs, currency and
the illegal transportation of persons into and out of the island...among

other things...legis1ation is being formulated and every legitimate power

and authority will be used to deal with this situation. .."

Everybody says something but nobody does anything.
cso: 5300/7555 59
OPIUH PRODUCER, ACCOMPLICE CAPTURED BY FEDERAL JUDICIAL POLICE
Ciudad Juarez BL FRONTBRIZO in Spanish 21 Apr 82 Sec 3 p 2

[Text] Yesterday. the Federal Judicial Police dealt a successful blow to those
trafficking in drugs. They seized a million pesos worth of opium from Alfonso
Paredes Ochoa, an elusive and active grower and even processor.

They caught him at the Hotel Avenida, located at 16 de Septiembre and Emilia
Calvillo. with his accomplice, Angel Rios Bands, as they were preparing to
deliver those drugs to a Yankee purchaser. The operation whereby this Paredes
was caught began several weeks ago, under the direction of Comdr Octavio

Bsquinca.

"We knew that he was carrying shipments, and quite often. He was moving about
with a small amount, and therefore we allowed him to operate on several occa-
stions. We were waiting for the time when the amount that he carried was a
considerable one. And that happened on Sunday. He arrived and called his
buyer by telephone. But hours elapsed and the latter did not come. Fearing
that he would escape, we seized him and his accomplice. Paredes claimed that
he was growing and processing; we do not know whether that is true, or whether
he had a laboratory or not. Hence he is being interrogated. He has already
shown us the site near Basaseachi where he was plantins,but not the processing
plant." Commander Esquinca said: "That concerns us as much as or more than
his capture, as well as the opium which we seized from him. which was worth a

million pesos."

60
The individual on the. right is Alfonso Parades Ochoa, who claims that he planted
puppies and convarLcd them into opium; on the left is his accompi ice. named
Angel Rios Banda.
DETAILS ON INTERNATIONAL COCAINE RING PROBE REPORTED

Further Arrests, Disclosures

Nuevo Laredo EL MANANA in Spanish 28 Mar 82 Sec D p 4

[Text] After experts from the Attorney Ceneral's office made tests using the
pertinent chemical reagants, the drugs seized from the Colombian traffickers were
described as testing positively and of a high degree of purity. At the same
time. the Federal Public Ministry agent, Ramon Calzada vejar, announced that all
this is "just one step" and that they would provide further information on Mon-
day.

The investigation is being intensified and police forces from Mexico, the United
States and Colombia are working jointly to break up this international ring in
its entirety. one in which prominent persons from Laredo, Texas, as well as Huevo
Laredo, are implicated, along with customs officials.

This sensational case. which began in Monterrey with the arrest of the Colombians
Orlando Granados Barrera and Hugo Luis Hoyos Fernandez. the Laredo residents
Jacqueline Jacaman Canavati and her uncle, Alfredo Jacaman Botarsi, as well as
the Spaniard Maritza Perez Huerta, culminated in Nuevo Laredo with the capture
of other Colombians, Hernando Echeverri Molina, Diego Alfredo Diaz Vinasco and
Carlos Rivero Betancourt, the Laredo resident Carlos Emilio Jacaman Saenz, alias
"El Cocoy," and the Nuevo Laredo residents Alma Gloria Roldan Robles and customs
guard Corporal Reynaldo Hernandez Pedraza. It is known that more individuals
have been arrested, regarded as ringleaders of the international drug traffic,
who are very well known here and elsewhere, but whose' names have not been given
"so as not to interfere with the investigation."

It was learned that PJF agents are conducting their interrogations of those under
arrest in hotel roons which they rented officially, so that the lawyers would
not attempt to file appeals for protection in their behalf, hence leaving them
to work in peace until the case has been totally clarified.

It was also reported that Marcos Salazar, known as the "Caterpillar," is not
being held.

The detection of two rival rings of Colombian drug traffickers. one with head-

quarters in San Antonio, Texas, and the other in Miami, Florida, which were
vying for the supremacy of the drug market in various states of the American

62
Union, has given reason to assume that the deco-posed corpse found here on the

grounds of the El Progresso communal farm on 26 January belongs to one of their
members. '

It was never identified after the rejection of the possibility that the corpse
was that of the priest, Simon Thomas Flores, who disappeared in Laredo, Texas,
on 6 January, and who was found 36 days later in Atlanta, Georgia, where he
contacted Father Patricio in Corpus Christi by telephone, telling him that he
would later "given him further explanation of his absence."

In the investigations conducted by the local police jointly with those of the
neighboring town, it was established that the decomposed body found here was
that of a South American. because the shoes and clothes were made in a South
American country.

Now with the discovery of two rival Colombian trafficking rings that were using
the port of Nuevo Laredo to made transactions and take all kinds of drugs into
the United States illegally, it has been established that the decomposed corpse
could be that of one of the victims of that battle, and the claim is being made
that they were using Room 214 of the El Rio Hotel, because of the keys to that
room found on the deceased.

Apart from the investigation being continued by the Federal Judicial Police
concerning the drug traffic, it was announced that the questioning of the
Colombians would be extended in order to ascertain the identity of the dead man.

Charges Denied
Nuevo Laredo EL MANANA in Spanish 21 Apr 82 Sec 3 p 6

[Text] Confrontations and other procedures are being carried out in the third
district court in connection with the ring of Colombian drug traffickers who
were captured in Monterrey and Nuevo Laredo with a moderate amount sf cocaine,
several of whom received their release under the reservations of the law.

It was reported in that judicial department that the accused persisted in
denying their initial statements, which they claimed had been forced from then
with the use of pressure and torture, and even went so far as to deny that the
drugs seized by the Federal Police belonged to them.

In the confrontation held between the Colombian Hernando Echeverri Molina and
Reynaldo Hernandez Pedraza, both agreed that they had never had any dealings,
and had never seen each other until that time. Hernandez Pedraza is one of
those who obtained his release under legal reservations, claiming from the
outset that he is totally dissociated from these activities.

In custody are the Laredo resident Carlos Emilio Jacaman Saenz, alias "El
Cocoy," his girlfriend Alma Gloria Roldan Robles, Armando Gerardo Santos Garcia
and the Colombians Orlando Granada Barrera. Hugo Luis Hoyos Fernandez, Diego
Alonso Diaz Vinazco and Carlos Alberto Rivera Betancourt, including Echeverri
Molina. The clearing up of the pertinent proceedings is taking place so that
the judge hearing this case may hand down a verdict at the proper time.

2909
(30: 6330/81

63
BRIEFS

MARIHUMIA NATION-4‘10 gardeners—one from Libertville, Hayaro, and the
other from Ghana Village, Cichenwere arrested by Police who have issued a
warrant for the arrest of a third man after destroying 100,000 fully-grown
marijuana trees, seedlings and eight camps in the Charuna Forest, Biche, on
Wednesday. The party. headed by Detective Insp. Rudolph Steele, moved into

the forested area with a party of Eastern Division Police and came upon the

huge plantation. The raiding party was briefed by Acting Supt. Aldwyn Aguillera
who deployed policemen from Sangre Grande, niche, Rio Claro and Hayaro Stations
for the exercise which started from early morning until late evening. The seed-
lings and trees, when processed, could easily fetch over a lillion dollars on
the local market, a senior police officer said yesterday. Also found in one of
the caps were eight rounds of shotgun cartridges. [Text] [Port—of-Spain
TRINIDAD GUARDIAN in English 8 May 82 p 3]

C50: 5300/7555

64
CUSTOMS OFFICERS SEIZE ZSOKGS 0F AHPHETAHINBS
Bamako L'ESSOR in French 27-28 Mar 82 p 5

[firticle by M. Kouyate: "A Catch worth 50 Million Malian Francs in Customs
Nets" _/

L Text_/ In the fight against drugs. started some time ago in our country.
there is a succession of confiscations. though they are nothing alike. either
in volume or in the way they are made. The latest seizure performed by the
Bamako-Senou Airport Customs Brigade must surely beat all records: five big
suitcases stuffed full of amphetamines (about 10.000 20-tablet tubes). weigh-
ing 230 kilograms net and worth 50 million Malian francs. This is a new
height in drug snuggling. and in the present case. it was certainly a daring
effort. with the "dream \Ierchants'I Just bringing their goods in on an inter-
national flight (RK 48 on Monday 22 March) from Abidjan.

At any rate. such a poker play raises two questions: were the smugglers-in
league with airport employees? Or did they just decide. sore simply. to use
the usual bribery channels? The fact remains that upon arrival of Monday's
Air-Africa flight. five perfectly ordinary-looking suitcases attracted the
attention of the customs officers. who. after the usual discreet waiting
period in such situations. opened them. and found their suspicions confirmed.

And there was nothing left to do except find the owners. Then it was that
Lt Mody Sy. chief of the airport Customs Brigade. had an idea of praiseworthy
astuteness: on the basis of the widely held opinion that all customs offic-

ers are corrupt or corruptihle. he craftily put out the word that he would
be inclined to "negotiate" with the smugglers.

11u\lazq)wnrked like a charm. and during their meeting. the smugglers offered
lJu.«unn4mn officer 2 million in exchange for his collaboration. Thereupon.
there was nothing sore to it. even though.with belated distrust on the part
of the smugglers. who were therefore hesitant about going to the airport.

Lt Mody Sy had to raise the stakes a little to finally persuade them.

But those are only minor aspects of a matter which may still hold some big

surprises in store. particularly the existence of complicity Vin high places."
which the results of the inquiries now being made will probably reveal.

6S
In the nountiac.atug hats-off salute is due the airport Customs. which has
just proven that the corps is not all "rotten," and that the fight agninet
drugs is a highly Ioral undertaking that cannot adult of selfish private
interests. '

12149
cs0: 5300/5734

66
BRIEIS

DAGGA sweeter-morons»); 19-year-old Tanzanian dress designer, Anthony Na-
mata, has been sentenced to three years in prison for snuggling dagga into the
Seychelles. He was also fined 5 000 rupees (R850) in what it called “one of
the worst drug smuggling cases the country has ever known.” He was found at
the airport with 620 grams of dagga concelaed in his hand-luggage. Nanata's
lawyer said he had been asked to carry the sealed packets by a Dar es Salaam
curio dealer. [Text] Johannesburg nu: CITIZEN in Biglish 26 May 82 p 4]

OOCMNE M-Two Blacks appeared in a Johannesburg District Court yester-
day on charges of dealing in cocaine. Piraino Moises Zandnela (41), of Meadow-
lands, and Sun mote (62) of Soweto, were not asked to plead, and have been
remanded to July 30. [Text] (Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in uglish 22 Kay 82

p9]

DAGGA cannons HITHDRAWN-wharges were yesterday withdrawn against three men
who were to have stood trial in the Regional Court on charges of sswgling
dagga out of South Africa in surf boards. men the case against Hr Benry
Clarke (30) of Johannesburg, Hr Gert Muller (35), of Perndale, and Hr Trevor
Lamlnechts (36), of Glenwood, Durban, was called, the Prosecutor, Mr A Holla-
hon interned the Magistrate, Mr H Aucup, that the Senior State Prosecutor was
provisionally withdrawing charges. [Text] [Johannesburg T83 CITIZEN in English
27 may 82 p 3]

DAGGA Danae-d 24-year—old Johannesburg man was yetersday jailed for an ef-
fective nine nonths after she admitted dealing in 50 little bags containing
950 grass of dagga. hiss Jylian Hanna wulfsohn was granted bail of Rl 000
pending appeal against sentence. After she pleaded guilty a statenent was
handed in setting out the background to the crime. It said she was arrested
minutes after a deal to sell the dagga was concluded at a block of flats in
Norwood. A psychiatrist's report said she suffered from a feeling of isola-
tion and insecurity. Sentencing her to 16 nonths' imprisonment, nine condi-
tionally suspended, the magistrate, Mr I! Coetzee, said the psychiatric report
was without substance. People should renexber it was not the right of every
first offender to receive a suspended sentence, he said. [Text] (Johannesburg
THE CITIZEN in English 27 May 82 p ll]

C50: 5300/5763

67
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070023-4

CONTROVERSIAL DRUGS HIM BANNED I}! SOUTH AFRICA

Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in English 18 Kay 82 p 10
[Arttch by Knith Abcudroch]

”Storm.
[Text] 11!! Publication. WM. I the

Nl-Il‘billll‘ “I. 30th no In
W Wot: WWW

mum-5W
Get-u an 0. kah‘;
M-Oﬂh'm ”mania-m n

5

$3
I
E
3

'3!
g?
1
i
E
E

5' {:33-
a 4
a" ﬁg?!
:5? 505
si§§-_!i3§:£

§
5
5
E:
g?

3;;
$3
51
1

ES

5
g
E
g

g

5

é
a?
'3 n

E
g
g?!
gig
W
as:

I
3
3'
f
5'
E
a
E
a

53%
E E
3:5
ﬁéééi
:2;
:23

9.
E
E
a

-3 cso: 5300/5750

I

n

I 68

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600070023-4
BRIEFS

MANDRAX POSSESSION AMSTS-oCape Town—Drug Squad detectives have arreeted three
"en in Gruay Park and seized Kendra: tablete north about m-Iillion on the black
.eerket. The arrests were in a dry cleaning shop at 6 an on Friday. Police with-
held confirmation until yeeterday because of continuing investigations. Ebre
than 100 000 tablets were eeiaed. The value variee on the black narket according
to demand, but no a tablet in an average price. At tines it reaches R17.

Hendrax ie usually snuggled into the country from India. where it is readily avail-
able at about one cent a tablet. he arreeted nen are aged ‘1, 36 and 36.-8ape.
[Text] [Johanneeburg TEE CITIZEN in English 18 Hay 82 p 15]

050: 5300/5750

69
REPORT SUGGESTS CONTINUED HARD DRUGS PROBLEM IN PRISONS
Copenhagen AKIUELT in Danish 30 Apr 82 p 3
[Article by Vagn Petersen]

[Text] Narcotics abuse in Danish prisons is spreading. Some 60 percent of
all prisoners in the state prisons in Vridsloselille and Nyborg are or have
been addicted to hard narcotics--heroin and the like.

This was documented by sociologist Ole Bjnar Andersen in a report on narco-
tics in prisons which he prepared for the criminal policy research group of
the Justice Ministry.

Ole Ejnar Andersen's report is based on studies among the 300 inmates of the
state prisons in Vridsloselllle and Nyborg. And the main purpose of his in-
vestigation was to look into the extent to which inmates made their narco-
tics debut-ogot their first "fix"--inside prison.

Ole Ejnar Andersen's study is based on talks with a quarter of the inmates in

the two maximum-security prisons. The talks showed that the greater part--
six out of lO inmates--had been drug addicts before they served their first

prison terms--and hard drug addicts at that.

The study also documents that there is a connection between the first prison
term and the first "fix."

From 6 to 7 percent of the Danish inmates at Vridsloselille or Nyborg were
swept into the hell of narcotics for the first time during a stay in a prison

or detention center.

And as many as 10 percent of the drug addicts in the two state prisons became
addicted to hard drugs during a prison term.

An earlier study from Copenhagen prisons showed that around 2 percent of all
drug addicts had started their addiction while serving a jail sentence.

Although the Directorate for Criminal Custody says there is "good correlation"
between the Copenhagen study and Ole Bjnar Andersen's study, it is a fact

70
that the amber of first-tine drug users in the prison system is rising to a
disturbing extent.

Thus it is not without reason that Criminal Custody is following developments
in drug addiction very closely. ﬂue problem has a "very high priority" and
they have already introduced a under of restrictions to Unit the smuggling
of hard drugs into maxim-security prisons.

In addition funds have been set aside to hire special treauaent personnel who
can help the imprisoned drug addicts.

Even though Ole Bjnar Andersen's study does not suggest there is any real
group pressure tron other jailed drug addicts that leads to spreading the
"narcotics contagion," Criminal Custody is trying to divide prisons up into
smaller units so narcotics gangsters can be isolated in the prisons and so
their scope can be restricted.

6578
C50: 5300/2290

71
POLICE DISCOVER GANG BEHIND CHRISTIARIA TRAFFICKING
Copenhagen BSRLINGSKE TIDBNDB in Danish 6 May 82 p 5
[Article by Anders Uiig]

[Text] Narcotics police and the riot patrol have uncovered a gang that was
one of Christiania's main hashish suppliers. They confiscated 30 kg of the
substance, but gang members have confessed to several hashish smuggling inci-
dents when batches of 20-30 kg were brought in from Holland.

Riot patrol raids in the free city showed long ago that there was extensive
trafficking in hashish. But they seldom managed to seize more than a few
hundred grams in the area--divided up among a number of pushers or buyers.

A month ago the riot patrol and the narcotics division formed a joint invest-

tigation group for the purpose of checking the big flow of supplies reaching
Christiania's always well-supplied hashish market via unknown channels.

Criminal police superintendent Bent Hansen: "Gradually the investigation
concentrated on certain people living outside Christiania who could be sus-
pected of delivering the drugs. On Tuesday we moved in when a Dutch car came
to a street in Norrebro. He had followed the car from Rodbyhavn and moved

in when the driver, a young Dutchman from Amsterdam, made contact with the
Danish buyers. At the same time we made arrests at apartments in several
parts of the city, so seven people were arrested in all. Three have been re-
leased while four ranging in age from 24 to 26 have been jailed for 4 weeks.
The case shows that hashish is brought into Christiania in small batches from
satellite stockpiles around the city, as we had suspected."

In metal boxes bolted to the bottom of the car and sprayed with paint, the
police found 30 kilograms of hashish. It is known that the smuggler was to
get 23,000 kroner per kg and that the "wholesalers" in Christiania were to
pay 26,000 kroner per kg to the middlemen outside while the drug is sold to
addicts for 40-50 kroner per gram.

6578
C80: 5300/2290
BRIEFS

ZAIRIMI STUDENTS SENTENCE—M university students (one the son of the Zairisn
niniater of agriculture and the other the son of a diploeat) were sentenced
yesterday in Athens to a total of 30 years ilprisonnent and a fine of 3 nillion
drachnas each. On 12 October 1981 they had attenpted to snuggle into the
country 77 1/2 kilos of hashish hidden in 6 pieces of luggage. They are Bends
Kamitatu, 26, the son of the Zairian minister of agriculture—as was stated

in court—and Niseke Lifetu, a student, the son of a diplonat. Another
Zairian student, Halubdala Zapa, 22. who was also being tried, was found not
guilty. The accused had argued that the lo pieces of luggage belonged to a
certain Greek and they vere only doing bin a favor by carrying the bags. They
were supposed to deliver the. to a vonsn at the exit of the airport and did
not knee that they were carrying hashish. The court did not believe then. of
course, and sentenced each to 15 years in jail. It also ordered that they be
expelled tron Greece upon completion of their sentence. [Excerpts] [Athens
AKROPOLIS in Greek 11 May 82 p 3]

C80: 5300/ 5606

73
'HURRIYET' 0N NARCOTICS SHUGGLING
"0281101 Istanbul HURRIerin Turkish 26 May 82 pp 1, ll

(Excerpts! Ankara, (llURRIYET)--l’n the last 5 months 560 narcotics smugglers
have fallen into the trap of the police. Three hundred twenty-eight kilos of
hashish. 32 kilos of heroin, 63 kilos of opium and 12 kilos of base morphine
have been seized.

It has been established that base morphine and opium arrives in Turkey from

the "golden triangle," that is from Laos, Burma and Thailand, and from the
"golden crescent," that is from Pakistan, Afghanistan and India. Acid hydrate
which is used to convert base morphine into heroin is smuggled into Turkey from
the Middle East. Generally. these substances are forwarded to Europe from our
country which is used as transit.

As hashish processed in Turkey is not much favored, the smugglers prefer to
smuggle into Turkey through Iakenderun the kind of hashish known as "the
yellow girl of Beiruit" from Lebanon and than smuggle it out to Europe.

Meanwhile, according to reports, the smugglers prefer to use women for smuggling
purposes as they are less frequenlty searched than men. Homen place the hashish
round their bellies, pretending they are pregnant. Again, according to recent-

ly prepared reports, in recent years, 284 smugglers of foreign origin have been

caught possessing 884 kilos of heroin.

The security forces which have launched a campaign against the mafia of white
poison, have established that the smugglers use these provinces as their
centers: Gaziantep, Adana, Konya. Edirne, Istanbul. Ankara, Kayaeri, Icel,
Diyarbakir, Hardin and “stay. An extensive campaign is being conducted in
these provinces against narcotice smugglers.

The price of narcotics in Europe is prohibitive. These substances are very
cheaply obtained in the golden triangle and the golden crescent countries.
heroin costs 62 million liras per kilo and hashish 3 million liras. In Turkey
heroin costs only one million lirss per kilo while hashish costs only 120,000
liras.

090: 5300/5405

76
ing the conviction of an 18-year-old youth found with five milligrams of
cannabis resin. Peregrine Boyeson, leather cutter, of wothorpe, Stanford.
Lincs. was fined 25 pounds and ordered to pay 150 pounds' costs at Cambridge
Crown Court in January, 1979. The Law Lords, rejecting the Court of Appeal
ruling that there was no offence unless the drug was present in a quantity

High Court case. Then the judges said it was the mere possession of a con-
trolled drug that Parliament had mde punishable. The Law Lords also
rejected the Court of Appeal's criticism of the police in bringing the

prosecution. When they allowed Boyeson's appeal in July, 1980, the Court of
Appeal described the prosecution over such a small quantity as "offensive."

During the case the five nilligrams of cannabis involved were said to be the
equivalent of five grains of salt. The judges were told that the normal

amount of a reefer cigarette was between 50 and 100 milligrams. [By Terence

cricket bats from Pakistan were seized by Customs and Excise officers at a
warehouse in Canning Town. Seven people were last night helping police with
inquiries. [Text] [london THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 5 May 82 p 17]

representative of the company involved was helping with inquiries yesterday.
Earlicr. Hr Adam Tariq, of Hedly Road, Solihull, was charged and will appear

beforc Solihull magistrates today. Custom officers declined to reveal
further details. [Text] [London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 10 May 82 p 2]

C80: 5320/ 28 END

75