POI OFHOAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10661
15 July 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

[FOUO 31/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR omcm. US! ONLY
more

3m publications contain information primrily tron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also tron news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nstion was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or naees preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. Times within itees are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGlﬂATIONS GOVERNING WISHIP OP
MTERHLS REPRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRE
15 C.

HORLWIDE REPORT
NAnconcs AND Dmsenous Danes

(rooo 31/32)

CONTENTS

nan
AUSTRALIA
Containing Fsctors in Netimsl, Royal Grins Oouissims
noted

(MAW, 1814082, WWW,

19 m 82) OOOOOOOOOOCDO...OIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOIO....0.

Minister for Nationel Gaussian. by Peter Terry
Doubts on Effectiveness

Three Given Jeil Terms in Heroin Importing Csse
(m ":3? AUSW’ 19 w 82)....000000000000000000

Police Gresham on Truckers Results in s Drug Heal
(Max JOUUO'D) THE AUSTRALIAN, 213 m ) eeeeeeeeseeeee

Omission users of Hagen Drug Links to 'r Politicians
(m Murdoch; m AGE, 27 m 82 eeessseeeeeeeesee

Briefs
Freed Drug Offender
Jail for Physicist:
Heroin, 091m in Condo-s
Dealer Escapes Jail Tern
Heroin Charges
Harihuans Growers

KONG KOlIG
Briefs

Shipboard Opin- Ilsa].
'Golden Crescent' Esroin
Dru; Distribution Center

—s- [m-W-1381

MONGALUSEONLV
”ONION-11820103

THAILAID

PANAMA

(1003 Chief: Drug Use In , Cites Foreigners Held
(31A)! RAT, 20 W 82 eeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeaeeeeeeoeeee-

Vice-Causal Trafficking Case hanined
(Viviana UM”, mm mu.)eeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeee

Ponching Procedures Reviewed

Foreign Ministry Spokes-an Contents, Suwanit Khongsiri
Interview

0008 Chief Gel-ants

Malaysia Pledges Cooperation in Drug Weeion
(“Km PM, 20 Jun 82) eeeeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeees

0MB: Legal Drugs Abused, Prevention Funds lacking
(“0 SW’ 9 m 82) 00....00.0...OOOOOOOOOOOCOOOIOOOOO

Use of Amhatanines Encouraged by Advertising in Rural Areas
(DAG 3n“, 9 m 82)sessseseeseaseeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeees

Phuket mit- Suspects Boiled Oct. Police Cover Up
(mTIcﬁm, 26 m 82) OOOOOOOOOICOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO...

Briefs
Heroin Pound in Wreckage
Bangkok Interpol Heating
m Drug Assistance
Opium Snuggled Frat Laos
Hanan Drug Trafficker Arrested
Heroin Seized in Bangkok, Chiang Mai
Chiang Mai Heroin
Police Officer Arrested
Chiang Mai Raids
Bangkok Drug Progran
Raw Opium Pound

Malay-Thai Drug Control
Crop Replacalent Program

LATIN AMERICA

Briefs
Marihuana Plantation Discovered

Briefs
Large Cocaine Seizure

ub-

"WWONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080035-0

NEAREASTANDNQTHURICA

IRAII
Briefs
Heroin Discovered in lured
Heroin Discovered in Heshhed
Lorestsn Contraband Confisoeted
Mashhad Drug Svoop
narcotics Discoveries
Narcotics Penalties Statistics
WET m
BBIBIUH
Briefs
Heroin Seizure
NEWS
Briefs
Police Smash Heroin Route
TURKEY

Shift in Narcotics Route rted
(mm, 21‘ m 82 eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeee

MWMMY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080035-0

Perth 1112 was: mum: in Bnglieh 19 Hey 82 p 31

[Text] there wee eone doubt about whether a notional crinea co-ieeion would be ef~

fectiva in conhating. orgenieed cri. in Auetralia. the Minieter for Police, hr ﬂee-
eall, eaid yeaterdey.

Kr llaeeell raid that he had not dienieeed the idea but there were a lot of queetim
thet had to be anewared.

A crieee co-ieeion would have to be aupported by en inveetigetory teen.

If the teen case from the Federal Police. it would lend to increaeing their involve-
ment in general law enforcement. which wee unacceptable to "A.

If the co-ieaion eat up ite on talk force. thie could add to the problen of dupli-
cation of police work.

A third poeeibility of aeconding nen froe different forcee could have an inpact
on cxieting nubere and lead to a lack of continuity.

Hr ﬂaaeell aeid that he had diacueeed the propoeal with the federal Kinieter for Ad-
einietrative Servicee. Hr Keenan, who wee in Perth on Monday.

He would raiae the ieaue again et the police einietera' conference in Queeneland
on Iridey.

Ila wee aleo hoping to get agree-ant froe the conference on eitting the new police
college at the HA lnetitute of Technology.

HA was the only 8teta that had nade a realietic offer for relocating the college
fro. ite preeent eite in Sydney.

Sane ninietere had indicated that they did not want the college to be integrated
with an educational facility but the "A Government would arrenge for other lend if
it were neceeaary.

Hr llaeaell eaid that other ieeuee to be diecuaeed at the conference included a ne-
tional road aafety cawaign and firearee eanagenent.

080: 3300/7562
mcmuurmmmommermwr
Pozwmmmrmm in Inglieh unsytzpu

[Text] Sydney: ‘l'hree people were eentenced in the Dietrict Crininel Court yeeter-
dey to e totel of 36 yeere for conepirin: to inport heroin vith en eetineted etreet
velne of 31.1 lillion.

Pete: Moher (‘2), lebonrer. of Cronulle, Jute llorence Knox (40), unenployed, of
Perrenette. end Glen licherde (26). cerpenter. of Aacklend. lew leelend. were con-

victed of conepirin; to imrt heroin into Auetrelie between depteder 1 end De.
ceder 12,1900.

A fourth en, Eric laneld O'Connor (37), eeeietent neneur. of Cerineheh. wee eer-
lier found not guilty of the eene cherae.

Evidence wee given during the triel thet lnon. ecting ee e courier. hed inorted
790; of heroin with e 95 per cent purity.

‘l'our

Knox hed trevelled to Bendtoh on e group tour end had returned to Anetrelie with
the heroin conceeled in e pentie girdle end bre.

At Sydney Airport ehe wee followed by nedere of the toner crine intelligence unit
to her hone et Petr-eta.

0n the evening of Deceder 12 ehe wee followed to the lrnington Hotel. Perr-ette.
where ehe net Moher end ave hie the heroin.

Shortly efterwerde Mcher end Iicherde were erreeted onteide the hotel efter e
ehort cer cheee end fond to he in poeeeeeion of the heroin.

Surveillence
Know end O'Connor were both erreeted leter thet nidlt.

The court wee told the erreete were the cullinetion of neerly threo mnthe' eurveil-
lence of the conepiretore by the torner unit.
Peeeing eentence. Judge torringtou eeid thet the erreet bed brought to en end e II-
jor euterpriee in heroin trefficking in IS".

Inleher wee the principei in the operetioe end licherde wee hie eeeietent. he eeid.
rulcher wee eentenced to 18 yeere' herd lebout end with e nou-perole period of nine
yeere. box wee eeuteaced to eight yoere' no]. with e uon-perole period of three
yeere. Both eenteoue dete fro- m 12. 1900.

licherde wee eentenced to 10 yeere' herd lebour with e non-perole period to expire
on Herch 3. 1986.

080: 5300/7562
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080035-0

POLICECWCIITIU.‘ RESULTS nummncm
Canberra ran AUSTIALIAH in English 2b ﬂay 02 p 2
[Article by an: quop]

[Text] APOLICE mehdwnon M In "50 1|“

my conunudun m
-maorumm{ 1.0!me

mama! m _ m.
m baa Mm Ink 01%
“mm. m {and to n In;
the m Mn: m. mummmw
mlncdby mum-1. cum 0! m m
the own balm W. In the m
“Mayhem Mm.

cs0: 5300/7562

5

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080035-0
W3!“ M O! W new um 1’0 1'0? M11161“!
Helbounemmuln‘liehvlayﬂsz
[Article by Lindsay ihsrdoch]

[rm] 8ydnay.-llr hank loan. the co-fonndor of the failed luaan hand bani, had
acted for nunerous politicians. a solicitor told a loyal Co-ission yesterday.

I: John Lawrence Aston, who was paid a retainer by the bank until it collapsed in
1979, said that he once all people he recopised as politicians at a party at
the Sydney hone of Mr loan.

H: Aston told )1: Justice Stewart at the loyal Co-ission into drug trafficking that
Mr luaan told hin that he acted for sole n-hers of Sydney's inner-city ALP branches
and neny senior politicians.

u: Aston eeid m: u: lugan. who co-itted suicide in early 1900. m a mm: for
anonynity and privacy because clients oftn did not want to be seen near the bank's
offices.

hr Aston said that Mr lugen told his that his clients included heade of State in
Singapore, the Philippines and Malaysia. eenior co-erciel intereete in long long.
Pen An end lannecott Copper.

Hr Cedric Ranpeon QC. counsel assietin; the co-ieeion, asked Mr Ashton during yes-
terday's hearing why a briefcase for luaen land would be left at Hr Aetcn’e office.

I: Kenton told the Main on Tuesday that a forest director of the bank. Mr
George Shut. had told investigators that he collected $260,000 in two bage fro: the
office on 26 larch 1979.

)h’ Aston said in evidence that only one be; wss collected and he did not know what
it contained.

Kr Aston said yesterday that he did not find it surprising, considering the people
Mr luaen acted for. that It lumen would use hie office as a conduit pipe to his own.

Asked by Kr Justice Stewart why Mr lupn would have disclosed infornation about
clients to his. Hr Aston replied: "I was ostensibly under retainer to the bank and
I believe that this is the sort of base intonation he thought I should be were of".
Hr Aeton wee not aelned yeeterday to nane any politiciene. he will be called later
thie year to give further evidence.

Hr ﬂeweon yeeterdcy produced a letter which he eaid Hr Shaw wrote to the other
founder of the ﬂugen hand bank. Hr Hicheel land. in 1979.

The letter etarted: "Dear Hike. He have received on behalf of our friendly eolici-
tor John A.. 8260.000. plue a relocation fee." It eaid half of the amt wee to
be collected by a wonen in Singepore and the other half by a nan in Ger-any.

Earlier. Hr Ie-peon had told the co-ieeion that a Hr Chui, who eupplied Auetrelian
drug couriere with heroin. eventually collected the equivalent of $260,000.

Dir Aeton told Mr ﬂaweon that he did not know any eolicitor in Sydney with the Chrie-
tien name John and eurnaee etarting with A.

Mr aaqeon told yeeterdey'a co-ieeion that the telephone nuﬂere of ﬁt Aeton and
hie for-er nanaging law clerk. Mr Brian wuu... Alexander, were found in the
dieriee of three people connected with Terrance John Clarke. who ie eerving a life
eentence in en Englieh jail for hie part 1! the eurder of his for-er druge eyndicate
partner. Chrietopher Hartin Johnetone.

Hr Aeton eaid he did not know why the nuebere were'in the dieriee of Douglae Hileon.
a drug courier who wee ehot dead end buried with hie wife at Rye, Hiee Alieon Dine,

one of Clarke'e for-er girl friende and liiee Karen Soich. a eolicitor and Clarke'e
de facto wife.

Hr Aeton eaid it wee quite come for cliente to give telephone nl-ber of eolici-
tore to other people.

Mr Stewart: ”The upehot of it ie that a lot of people connected with Clarke had
your telephone nubere?”

Kr Aeton: ”Yea."

Mr Aeton aid Mr Alexander. who dieappeared in December laet year, flew to England in
Deceder 1979 after Clarke wee arreeted in London.

Hr Anton eaid that Mr Ian Strethdee. a Sydney barrieter, who went ﬂr Alexender. la-
ter told hie that Mr Alexander decided not to eee Clarke in jail beceuee the inter-
view would be videotaped and a prieon officer would be preeent.

Hr Aeton eaid that two for-er Narcotice Agente, Richard Spencer and Payne Brindle.
who were charged with Alexander with conepiracy, paid for the trip overeeae.

he eaid he had received cowlainte fro- barrietere, who had been engaged by Mr Alex-
ander to appear for cliente. that they had not been paid.

Hr Aeton eaid the feee for two unpaid couneel totalled about $56,000.

He eaid Mr Alexander told hie that a client who wee appearing before the Uoodwerd
Royal Co-ieeion into drug trafficking. wee bringing to the court each day 8600

to pay the couneel. But he eaid he later diecovered that the pay-eat had not been
nede.
The brother of ”hr Aeie". Chrietopher Hertin Johnetone told the heerins thet he
pleyed equeeh with end not Clerke eewerel tinee in Sydney.

Stephen Brien Johnetone. 29 eeid thet he did not know hie brother, whoee hendleee
corpee wee found in e weter-filled querry in Lenceehire, Bnglend. in October 1979.
hed been involved in en internetionel drug eyndicete.

Hr Johnetone eeid thet hie brother. whoe he celled ﬁertin. often eeid when he eeked
how he nede hie eoney: "look, Juet don't eek.’

Hr Johnetone eeid thet in October 1977, e een he now knowe ee Clarke give his
$10,000 in e brown peper be; for the eele of e lounge euite which Hertin hed er-

renged to import from 8138190“.

hr Johnstone eeid thet he hed eeneged e coepeny which inorted fro. South-ﬂeet Aeie
to Auttrelie goode euch ee pottery end fieh food.

The conpeny, Behep. wee put in the hende of receivere end eenesere in 1980. It
hed been eet up in 1977 et the inetisetion of Chrietopher Hertin Johnetone.

Berlier yeeterdey. hr Aeton eeid thet Detective Sergeent Jech Lucee, e New South
Helee polioeeen with whom he hed been friende for 15 yeere. wee e led»:- of the
Bell teeh force which inveetigeter ‘en ellesed leek fro. the office of the now die-
bended Nercotice Bureeu.

The teek force. heeded hy the deputy couieeioner of the Victorie Police, Hr Rod
Hell. cherged Alexander, Brindle end Spencer. who were leter ecquitted efter

e co-ittel heering.

Mr Aeton eeid thet two other officere of the tee]: force interviewed hie.

The coinieeion continue todey.

CSO: 5300/7562
any:

mm Dunc arm-Sydney.-An eccoqlice in Auetrelie'e biggeet drug eeuggling
ettenpt wee releeeed iron e New South "eleo prieon in April etter e requeet Iron
the Iederel Govern-mt. The Attorney-Genera. Senetor Dureck. eeked for the re-
leeee fron herrine jeil of Kemeth Derley. 31. who hed been erreeted with Hurny
Stewert Riley, who hed orgenieed en uneucceeeful operetion to eeuggle en eetineted
$66 nillion worth of cennebie into Auetrelie eboerd the yecht Anon in 1978. hr
Derley. for-erly e co! eelm. wee eentenced to eight yeere end eix nonthe in
prieon in Pebruery 1979 for hie pert in the ette-pt. he wee releeeed on 15 April.
neving eerved three yeere of hie eentence. The US" Depertnent of Corrective Bery-
icee hee confined thet it releeeed hr Derley efter e requeet free the Pederel Gov-
ernment. Kr Derley'e non-perole period of two yeere end 10 Ionthe ended lete leet
yeer. A epokeenen for Senetor Dureck refueed to eey why Hr Derley'e releeee hed
been ordered. lie eeid the reeeone for Ur Derley'e releeee on perole were e netter
of privecy. [Text] [helbouzne TI! AG! in lnglieh 17 Key 82 p 31

JATI. Ion PHYSIcm—sydney.—A judge eentenced e doctor to 13 yeere' jeil yeeterdey
for conepiring to eupply eddictive druge end eeid he wee like e "epider in the web".
1n Sydney Dietrict Crininel Court, Judge Herd eeid the eurgery of Dr John Alemder
Killer (3qu becene e ”druggiet'e kitchen". Judge Herd eentenced Colee to 13

yeere' jeil. with e non-perole period of eix yeere, for heving conepired to eupply
druge of eddiction. Colee, bl. wee eleo eentenced to three yeere‘ jeil—to be
eerved concurrently-Jot heving eupplied nethedone on 9 Septeder 1980. he wee ec-
quitted of e third cherge of heving eupplied nethedone in Sydney in 1981. A Jury
on Tueedey night convicted Colee on the tiret two chergee efter e 38-dey triel. The
jury hed been told thet he supplied preecriptione for drug eddicte to uee theuelvee
or to sell. They were worth up to 8160 e preecription. the jury heerd. Colee. oi
Ceetle Bill. prectieed et the Yegoone hedice Centre on the hue lighwey et Yegoone,
e eouth-weetern euhurb. The judge told Colee thet he wee inetnnentel in noting
possible the ectivitiee of nercotice ueere end puhere. "I - eetiefied you were
eleo instrumental in drewing into thet eouthern eree of Sydney yomg people tron
e11 over Sydney for the purpoee of purcheeing theee druge et high coet.” Judge Herd
told Colee. [Bxcerpte] [Helbourne Tl! A63 in lnglieh 20 Hey 82 p 5]

“mm, OPIUH In th 27-yeer-o1d woeen regurgiteted 16 condone conteining
heroin end en edditionel one conteining opiun in hoepitel eiter being erreeted while
trying to enter the country. it wee elleged in the St Jenee Court of Petty Seeeione
yeeterdey. Before the court wee Cheryl Ann Cole-en. of Pecific Perede. Lennon heed,
RSV. who wee charged under the Cueto- Act with poeeeeeing and importing a quantity
of heroin. No pleae wee taken. A Co-owealth Crown Solicitor, Mr David Staehli.
told the court that Cole-an arrived at Sydney Airport on a Britieb Airwaya flight
at 6.30 an on Thuraday. She wee detained and a eearch revealed 10 grana of heroin
concealed in her body. Hr Staehli eaid. Coleman wee taken to Sydney Boepitel. where
a further 170 grane of the drnga. worth lore than 850.000. were cbtained fron her
yeeterday norning, he eaid. Kr Kevin Jonae. SI. renendad Coleman to appear in the
St Janna Court on Bonday and refund bail. {Text} [Sydney Tl! SW! nomnc HERALD
in lnglieh 22 May 82 p b]

DEALER ESCAPBS JAIL TERM-4 Supra-a Court judge eaid yesterday that he would not
gaol a heroin dealer who had been caught on hie way to a drug delivery. Hr Juetice
Hichhaa eeid he wee eatiefied that waiter Jech A-ou: (27). of Devon load. Swen-
bourne. wee a dietributor in a very eull way. "A 82000 fine ie eufficiently large
to be leeeon to you and to other enall~tina dietributora." the judge told A-oun.

lie warned tnet heroin daelere ehould not aeeune that they would get away with a fine
in the future. A-oun wee etopped in hie car in Manning lam~ Septaaber by two drug-
equad detectivea acting on a tip-off. Three paper folde containing powdered heroin
were found nearby in a aatchbox he had thrown out of the window. A-oun adaitted
that the papera contained three gram of heroin for which he had paid 8600. He had
intended to uee eona hinaalf. give eone to hie girl friend. and to eell eone to a
contact to help defray hie coete. A Supra-e Court jury convicted hie on May ll. of
being in poeeeaeion of heroin with intent to eell or eupply it ot othare. Yeeter-
day. Kr Juetice Hiekhen eaid he accepted that A-cun had been dealing in e anall
way to keep up hie own euppliee. Be eaid that A-aoun would alnoet certainly end up
in prieon if he did not dieeociete hiuelf free the drug ecana. [Text] [Perth THE
"281‘ AUSTRALIAN in Bnglieh 26 May 82 p ll]

HERO!" CHARGES—Melbourne: An out-of eaeeione court wee held yeeterday to reaend

a St Kilde nan on heroin chargee. Jereny John lnighte (23). of St Kilda. will appear
today at the Prahran nagietretee court on chargae of poaeeeeing heroin. trafficking
heroin. poaeaeeing a prohibited inport and eelling heroin. Bail wee refueed. A
20-year-old-wonan wee releaeed on her own undertaking after being charged with pre-
paring end aanufacturing heroin. She ia echedulad to appear at Prahran nagietratee
court on July 22. The arreete cane after a raid on a boarding houee in Grey Street.
St Kilda. by uniforn police on Saturday night. [Text] [Sydney ran SYN!!! mmnzc
arm.» in Engliah 25 May 82 p ll]

NARIHUANA GROW—A North Coeet farner wee yaeterday eantenced to five yeare'

jail for growing Indian help to a value of 8500.000 which a ayndicate ueed to aupply
to Wollongong over a two-year period. Judge Gee. in the wollongong Dietrict Court.
inpoeed the eantence on Edward Robert Swan. 36. farner. of Dalewinton via Semen.
who pleaded guilty to cultivating cannabie and aupplying Indian heap between Sep-
tenbar 19. 1979 and April leet year. The judge wee told that narihuana grown on
Swan'e property wee brought to Wollongong by horee float and dietributad to a net-
work of eellere. The judge eeid the growing area wee alwaye linited to the eire of
a houeehold block of land. Judge Gee aeid that the key peeple involved in the or-
ganieation. thoea who were at the hub of the wheel of thie enterpriee. were not be-
fore hia. Three other nan ware aleo given jail term yeetarday. They were: John
Dula Jovar. 21. of Hollongong. Judge Gee eeid Jover had been picturaequely terned

10
no the "eynd1cete'e etorenen end pecker.” Jove: vee eentenced to three yeere' jetl
on one cherge of eupplying the drug end 12 mthe on e stiller eecond charge. the
eentencee to be concurrent. irony Robert Schubeck. 21. one-played. of Wollongong.

wee eentenced to four yeere' jell for applying Indun heap durtng the period Decon-
ber, 1979 to April leet yeer. Hark loneld Pickford. 19. one-played, of Derreck

Iletghte. m gelled {or three yeere for eupplying the dun. [Text] [Perth m “81'
AUSTRALIAN 1n M1011 26 Hey 02 p 22]

C80: 5300/7563

11
cannon» 0PM Mayor the firet tine in any yeere. cuetole officere yeeterdey
mrcieed their diecretion to detein e conteiner veeeel et the Kwei Chung Conteiner
Terninel to eeerch for druge. The Blireheth heereh wee prevented fron leeving Bong-
kong for Jepen et 6 en on e eiped werrent pernitting cuto- officere to detein the
veeeel for 12 houre under Section 52 of the Dengernu Druge Ordinence to conduct

en inteneive eeerch. lerlier. cueto- officere hed eeieed 30.5 kg of rew opiu-
found conceeled in the pilot'e cehin of the conteiner veeeel. which errived fron
hrechi vie Bonny. Peneng end Singepore on ite wey to Jepen. [Text] [Kong Kong
mammmo P081 inhnglieh 6 Jun 82 p 13)

'00“)!!! macaw anoru-cmo- officere yeeterdey erreeted e 30-yur-old bueineee-
on when druge worth $960,000 were found conceeled in e felee-botton trevelling heg
he wee cerrying when erriving fr": xerechi yeeterdey norning. Yeeterdey'e eeieure
coneieted of one kg of lo lo heroin end one kg of heroin beee. believed to be fron
the ”Golden Creecent”-the hordere of Pehieten. Afghenieten end Iren. The druge
there ere ueuelly enuggled to Europe end then to the United Stetee. however. the
heroin beee eeieed wee the eecond node in llonghong eince July 1980 when enother
Pehieteni wee erreeted with helf e hilogren. It in believed thet the erreeted een
wee bringing the druge into ﬂondxong ee "eenplee" ee there ie e ”bx-per crop" in the
Golden Creecent thie yeer end ite pricee ere cheeper then thoee fron the "Golden
‘l'riengle" in Aeie by between 10 to.1$ per cent. The erreeted Pehieteni wee leet
night being deteined for queetioning end he in expected to eppeer in Sen Po Kong
Court todey on e cherge of poeeeeeing dengeroue drug for unlewful trefficking.
[Tent] [nonglong mmmncron innnglieh OJun 82 p l]

DRUG 0181313011!!! “Milo-Police yeeterdey reided e euepected drug pecheging end
dietribution centre in Henchei end eeired 1.6 kg of heroin worth nore then $260,000
on the reteil nerket. Officere frne Henchei'e bengerom Drug Bqued heeded by De-
t.ctive Inepector Andrew Pelner conducted the reid. following two weehe of inveeti-
getione into the ectivitiee end eurveillence of en elleged drug dietribution eyndi-
cete. They firet leid en enbueh on the third floor corridor of the bong 8eng nong
Building et 118 Uenchei Ioed end et 1.15 on. erreeted e ”weer-old nen ee he cene
out of e flet. bet Inep Pellet end hie officere. ohteining the key to the flet
fron the non. eeerched it end found ebout 1.6 kg of lo 3 heroin. A ”weer-old nen
end hie 19-yeer-old girlfriend who were in the flet during the reid were erreeted.
According to police recorde. enother flet ".n the use building wee reided in Decen-
ber. ‘l'he flet. eleo euepected to be e drug dietribution centre. yielded e 1erge
quentity of lo 3 heroin. The flet reided yeeterdey wee believed to be one of the
nein dietribution centree on the Ielend. [luerpte] [long long soon cam mac
PosrincngliehSJunOZpI]

680: 5320/9131
12
ouca CHIEF: nauc usn arsmc. crras mnmms mo
Bangkok sum 1m in run 20 Key 82 pp 1, 12

{Text} Narcotic druga are apreading nore rapidly than ever even though heavily
auppreaoed. The Secretary of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCE)
points out that Thailand is near the points of production of narcotica. It ia
a couple: buaineea and the profita are huge.

Police Maj Gen Phao Saraain. ONCB Secretary, haa diacloaed to Sian Rat that at
this time addictive drugs are atill epraading rapidly through Thailand. Although
the govern-eat takes reaolute neaaures to halt than it cannot abate the problen.
"0n the contrary. the trend is constantly higher."

"All this is becauae Thailand is in a region where narcotica are aecretly pro-
duced and sold." The ONCE Secretary pointed out that narcotica yield huge re-
turna to operators. "For this reason they have intricate nethode. hard to
suppress and defend against."

"Even the government has linited manpower and noney-power. It cannot control
narcotica or aolve the narcotica problel once and for all. but only bit by bit."

Gen Phao aaid further that for the reasons nentioned above the ONCE haa eatab-
liahed a Narcotics Control Foundation to aeek financial help from private
sources. The foundation is not a govern-ant unit and therefore it can nova lore
easily in every area.

Gen Phao disclosed to Sien Eat the reeulta of narcotica arrests in 1981. The
largeat number of seizures involved narijuana, with 7,802 caaea and 8,172 peraona
charged. Host of these caaea occurred in the Central region, with seizures
totalling 63.076.332.67 grate. ﬂoat of the accused were from that region and
were charged with using narcotica. Sole were charged with poaeeaaion, eale.
transportation and production of marijuana.

Next in order of frequency were heroin caaea with 7.802 [sic] and 8.172 persona
[sic] arrested. Government seizures came to 323,336.89 grana. Host of the
accused were charged with poaeeeeing heroin. followed by cases of sale. trans-
port and production. Charges of tranaport and/or eanufacture of heroin were
brought against 49 persons. Host of these caaea too occurred in the Central
region.
Next most frequent were opiul srrests. l,Olb cases in all. with 1,262 persons
charged and 616.457.6b grams seized. Possession was egein the most cannon
offense, followed by sale end trsnsport. Host of these ceses occurred up-country.

The ONCB Secretory edded thet there were still other narcotics csses involving

nitregyns specioss. snphete-ines. Iorphine. etc, but fewer then the three
kinds reported above.

The foreign nstionels most often srrested in nsrcotics ceses were Leo. Next
csne Anericsns, Heleysiens, Frenchmen, Bur-see. Itelions. Britons, Hons Konsere
end Jspsneee. Besides these there were still eeny others. but those lost often

arrested in heroin csses, the gravest of ell. were Bur-see, closely followed by
Americsns.

9943
CSO: 5300/5775
VICE-CONSUL TRAFFICKING CASE EXAMINED
Pouching Proceduree Reviewed
Bangkok SIAM HA1 in Thai 22 May 82 pp 19-20

The caee of a Thai vice-consul arreated and charged with dealing in narcotice
in America in currently being talked about everywhere-one may almoet eey. all
over the world--but the talk can't keep up with the unfolding of the caae. It
appeare that hidden hande have eent heroin in a diplonatic pouch to Mr Prok
Aaranant. the Thai ambeeeador to the United 8tatee. Thie ie a riddle. It
eeeme to be a matter of no little intereet how large a link thia gang may be
in the international narcotice traffic.

It ie not an ahocking a atory about Thai national character that aoaeona hae
travelled acroee a border with narcotice, becauee narcotice arreete are in the
newe frequently. But the recent arreet of the Thai vice-coneul in Chicago
eeeae to be a eerioue matter indeed, becauee apart free the poaition and dutiae
of the accueed, which reflect poorly on the nation. the caee aleo involvee
ueing diploaatic privilege aa a device for making narcotice ahipnenta.

Only a week or an after the lb April inetellation by the Foreign hinietry.
around the and of April. an urgent telex came from the narcotice control unit
in America to ite Thai counterpart. advieing that preparatione were being aade
to arreet Hr Sihadet Chindawonge. a civil aervent of the fourth rank. who held
the poeition of vice-coneul at Chicago. on chargee of eelling heroin.

Only a few days after that. on 30 April, newe of Mr Sihadet'e arreet by 0.8.
narcotice officere apread around the world, detailing the eeizure of 3 kg of
heroin 76 percent pure and valued at $20 million, or about $60 million baht, and
confirning that thie nerchandiee had been traneported in the diplomatic pouch
of the Foreign Hiniatry iteelf.

Later. during the eearch of an apartment in Chicago where Mr Sihadat had atayed,
a cache wae found containing 5 lbe of fourth-grade heroin worth 300 million baht.
together with four pietole that were preeumed to be contraband.

The report aent by 0.8. narcotice officiale to the Thai aide indicatee that
Hr Sihadet uae erreeted after the arreet of another Thai with 1 lb of heroin.
on 7 April in Baltimore. The auepect implicated Hr Sihadet, who wee then placed
under surveillance. Police dogs were used to sniff the diplomatic pouch
arriving at Chicago's O'llare Airport on 210 April, and later it was found that
Mr Sihedet had consigned heroin to a hen in a restaurant. very near the con-
sulate. Also, two nore Thai were in the net and were eventually arrested.

After he had been questioned, Hr Sihsdet's charges were increased by police in
Chicago and Baltimore. These charges were: using his consular position to
help bring narcotics into the 0.8. and sell them during the period from March
until 30 April, end possessing a large quantity of heroin with intent to sell
it. The charges also specified that this heroin was brought in to the u.s. in
the diplomatic pouch.

high-level Thai narcotics officials disclosed to 81am Kai that from coordination
with narcotics units all over the world. it has been found that the figures

on narcotics exported from Thailand are very high. because Thailand is full of
sources and the market price of heroin abroad is extremely high. For example.
in America the price of a kilogram reaches 32 nillion at the least. The big
foreign esrkete are the 0.8.. Europe and Song Kong, and in the 0.5. especially
the cities of Chicago. Los Angeles and New York.

Although this case is the first case of Thai diplomatic personnel being arrested
on charges of narcotics trafficking. there have been previous arrests of diplo-
matic officials on charges of smuggling contraband by relying on diplomatic
privileges, and it is believed that there are many more cases in which arrests
could not be eade because of diplonatic i-unity.

Police Col Sonphol Sutthimsi. Deputy Director of Emigration, told Siam Mai that
diplonstic privileges are used regularly both by Thai and foreign diplomats to
smuggle goods. but that this has not been investigated thoroughly because of
lack of evidence that would reveal the situation clearly. If an error were
made, it would become a violation of diplomatic sovereignty. "Especially in
narcotics. where the profits are tempting. they run a lot of risks."

"As for the Vice-Consul's case. we had clues for a long time that the pouch was
being used to export narcotics. We were looking for proof. The 0.8. side was
looking too and they happened to find it first. The story spread around the
world. The Americans notified us just a few days before they nsde the arrest.
Some people who have given interviews have said that the Anericans informed us
long ago and were giving us data all along. The truth is that our side learned
the story only a few days before." this high official said.

Siam hai'e sources. speaking of the progress of the case, say that the point
presently being considered is the stage of placing objects in the diplomatic
pouch. This inquiry divides into two questions: was something placed secretly
in the pouch, or was the pouch secretly switched on route? These questions are
part of the search for gangs which regularly traffic in heroin between Thailand
and Aserica. If there was no switching of pouches, then there nest be some
connection within the Foreign Ministry itself . since every time the pouch is
filled its contents must be inspected by the staff, who need to know just what
goes into each pouch.

16
"what must be further investigated now," said the source mentioned above, "is
the fact that the pouch containing the heroin was addressed to Ambassador Prok

Amaransnt in Washington. This is a very strange thing. People believe it must
certainly have some connection with this case."

Once this story had spread, all the high officials of the Foreign Ministry went
out and gave interviews. which were criticized for their trying to brush the
blame off themselves. They also formed a committee of inquiry chaired by Mr
Chawan Chawanich. the Second Deputy Foreign Minister, which has not yet reported
on its progress. But it is believed that no matter what happens. there must be

some reform in the regulations, especially as regards the diplomatic pouch and
the staff which has the duty of inspecting pouching.

Foreign Ministry Spokesman Comments

Bangkok SU ANAKHOT in Thai 16-22 May 82 pp 11-12

[Interview with Suwsnit Khongsiri. age 39, Deputy Chief of the Public Informa-
tion Department of the Foreign Ministry, given at the Ministry in Bangkok 11
May 82, concerning the well-known case of Mr Sihadet Chindawongs. Vice-Consul
of Thailand in Chicago. who has been arrested on charges of narcotics traffick-
ing; date and place not specified]

[Text] Suwsnit has worked in the Foreign Ministry for 16 years, beginning in
the Policy and Planning Division. He was head of the International Trade
Division. then head of the Southeast Asia Division in the Political Department.
before going as Counselor to the Thai Royal Embassy in Peking. He has held
his present position since last October.

Question: The case of the Thai vice-consul arrested in Chicago has damaged the

reputation of the Foreign Ministry. As deputy spokesman for the Ministry. how
would you repair it?

Answer: The Foreign Ministry has relieved Mr Sihadet of his duties. Because
the information supplied to us by the 0.3. and used as the basis for charges
against him points to his guilt. the Ministry has put him on leave and has
established a committee to investigate the facts. Because this case came to
light in the U.S., we must await the American deliberations as well.

Question: Who is the head of this committee?

Answer: Someone highly placed, but the details cannot yet be told. since the
committee is operating at a high level.

Question: How much opportunity is there to smuggle narcotics in diplomatic
pouches?

Answer: There should be none. because we have procedures for putting things
into the diplomatic pouch and sealing it. procedures which officials must per-
form strictly according to the rules. If mistakes have been made we must
tighten up still more, because this is a grave matter. This government attaches
importance to the suppression of traffic in narcotics. The Foreign Ministry is

17
a part of this effort. If diplomatic pouches of the ministry are being used to
sell narcotics. this is an offense which we must prosecute severely. At the
same time. we have procedures in place concerning use of the pouch to send
“.43th documents to units abroad. which necessarily includes secret docu-
ments. Therefore we must consider how we need to improve the system we already
have.

Question: And have any improvements been instituted yet?

Answer: Improvements must depend on the fact-finding co-ittee. because we
nuat first find the facts.

Question: Just lately, since the case of Mr Sihadet. there has also been a
shipment of smuggled narcotics addressed to Mr Frok Ameranent. Thailand's
ambassador in Hashington.

Answer: Let me deny this story. When it came out in one newspaper we checked
to see if a report had come in on it. There was none. He asked Mr Prok
directly and he told us that no such thing as that newspaper printed had
happened. I have already informed the paper of this. Let me deny that story.

Question: But the story came from sources inside the Foreign Ministry itself.

Answer: I asked them who their sources were, because I am deputy spokesman for
the ministry and my chief is spokesman, and they didn't ask me about it. And
my job in the government is to answer reporters' questions. I asked them who
their sources were because they ought to ask the persons responsible for provid-
ing news. They told me they trusted their sources and were not willing to
disclose them. I have already denied this story.

Question: From the viewpoint of the Foreign Ministry, when something like this
comes up is there some response or not?

Answer: Indeed there is. air. Last Thursday (6 Hey) there was a statement

of the facts. The deputy minister. who was in charge of the ministry while
the minister and the premier were visiting Europe, explained the matter. There
was no cover-up.

Question: But no facts were stated about the fundamental story: whether
narcotics had been snuggled in the diplomatic pouch or not. There was also an
unacceptable total contradiction between the Ministry and the new: media.

Answer: The main thing is that a member of the Foreign Ministry was arrested
and charged and the 0.8. gave us reasonable grounds for believing the charges.
Accordingly. we did believe them. He relieved Mr Sihadet and set up a fact-
finding cornittee. At the same time we must also wait for the results of the
u.s. investigations because that is a way of getting facts. Meanwhile. when
a case like this comes up, you want our statements right away. But that is
often impossible because the matters are still under investigation.

Question: Do we have the right to bring Hr Sihadet back to be investigated in
Thailand?

18
Answer: Re are now investigating the facts. But at present Mr Sihadet is
wanted on charges of heroin trafficking not only in Chicago but also in Balti-
more. Since Mr Sihadet is now in custody o‘ the Chicago police. his case must
first be prosecuted there. After that he is wanted in Baltimore. He must wait
for the results of these investigations because as of now we still have no
evidence whatever that Mr Sihadet carried heroin out of the country. He did not
arrest him here. He must wait for the 0.8. prosecutions.

Question: Hhila the 0.5. is investigating over there. police and alnistry
officials here will have to cooperate to find the people who collaborated in
this business. inids and outside the Foreign Ministry.

Answer: He are presently investigating. This action is certainly against Thai
law. It is absolutely forbidden. It violates Thai government policy. violates
everything. But there must be sufficient grounds to sake an arrest.

Question: From the ‘iewpoint of the country as a whole. how will the high
administrators in the Foreign Ministry handle a case like this?

Answer: I believe we will have to try to conduct our investigation smoothly.
Cases like these come up not only in the Foreign Ministry. They come up in
every ministry and in every country, because narcotics traffic is the most
profitable of all businesses. But all this is just part of something that
happens all over the world. Whether it's selling narcotics or selling sex or
selling children, there are these problems. To be human is to have problems.

Question: Hhat we meant to say is this: such cases damage the image of
Thailand very much. what sense of responsibility should those who hold high
political posts in the Foreign Ministry show?

Answer: If actions like these harm the country's image. then it's being harmed
all the tine. Even when a mail truck emits black smoke. it damages the image of
Bangkok. There are many things that perturb images.

ONCB Chief Comments
Bangkok SIAM RAT in Thai 26 May 82 pp 1-2

[Text] The Narcotics Control Board (NCB) is preparing new measures to use in
guarding against narcotics traffic which depends on govern-ant loopholes as its
tools. since the arrest of a Thai vice-consul in the U.S. and an investigation
which discovered narcotics sent to the Thai ambassador to the 0.8. as addressee.

Police Major Gen Phao Sarasin. Secretary to the NCB, advised Siam Rat that the
case of Mr Sihadet Chindawongs, Vice-Consul of Thailand in Chicago, reflected
extremely improper conduct. As for the case now being investigated. in which
a parcel of narcotics addressed to Ambassador Frok Amaranant was sent through
the mail. u.s. authorities well understand that the Thai Embassy was not in-
volved. They look rather to the "ignornace of the sender." who may have
thought that addressing the parcel in this way would perhaps avoid scrutiny of
it by the police.

19
In any event, Gen Phao said that Mr Sihadet's group and those who nailed these
narcotics to Ambassador Prok are separate groups.

The reporter asked whether these problems show that state officials are turning
their hands to wrongdoing or helping others in it. He received the answer that
there are those who "think only of Ioney“ and do not think of morals.

The MC! Secretary, speaking about counter-aessurea, said that the NOD is trying
to assist the Foreign Ministry by every means. but lust concede that good and
had civil servants are nixed together. Mhen bad ones are found they must be
punished. whereas present law still has many loopholes through which narcotics
dealers can escape. These loopholes take tins to close, and even if they are
constantly being closed, it is always too late. Moreover, Thai legal penalties
for narcotics offenses are still very light. There should be penalties for
narcotics dealers and manufacturers of not less than 10 years iaprisonssnt.

In any case, Gen Phao said, the MOB is now looking for neaaures to tighten up
defenses against use of government channels for narcotics traffic. by means
best left undisclosed.

0n the Foreign Ministry aide, Mr Chet Sucharitkul announces that the narcotics
arrest of Mr Sihadet was the result of inforlation provided to v.5. authorities
by the Ministry itself. At first this news was not to have been disclosed. but
after the 0.5. announcement the Thai side had to asks its statement too. Un-
fortunately such disclosures will make it harder to capture others who had a
part in this affair.

Mr Chet insisted that the narcotics which were seized from Mr Sihadet were not
placed in the Foreign Ministry pouch but were nerely found by the police in
Mr Sihadet' s apartnent .

9963
C80: 5300/5775

20
MALAYSIA moors COOPBIATION IN DRUG SUPPRESSION
MOObSS “ﬁnk mm POST in hgnsh 20 Jul 82 p 2

[Bxcerpt] Phattheya—llelaysia yesterday pledged full cooperation with Thai-
land to prevent and mprsss the smuggling into this country of acetic nnhydride,
a nejor cowonent in the refining of morphine into herein.

has pledge was among egresunts reached by ASBAN police chiefs during the
first day of their two-day ASEMAPOI. meeting at a Phatthsya hotel.

Other topics discussed yeeterday included extradition and handing over of.
crininals to requesting countries through Interpol and other channels.

Thailand's police chief, can Surephol Chunlsphran. who was selected chairmen
of the meeting, said Thailand had sought cooperation tron Malaysia-we major
ilporter of acetic snhydride tron Japan for industry—in taking measures to
prevent the smuggling of this chemical into the country.

Inspector-general of the loyal Malaysia Police, Tan Sri Mohamed Haniff Bin Our.
replied that his comtry had already responded to 'ihailmzd'e request by in-
posing strict measures governing the wt and trading of acetic anhydride
in Malaysia's 13 states. including four states close to the Thai border.

He said the buying and selling of the chenical in Malaysia had been eede lore
difficult by regulations stating that importers of acetic enhydride nuet ob-
tain licenses from the Health Ministry and traders can only sell the chemical
in "compomded" torn and not in its pure state. This latter regulation, he

explained, had been introduced to prevent the me of the chemical for illegal

purposes .

Tan Sri ﬂaniff said there was evidence to show that such measures had resulted
in less acetic anhydride using snuggled into Thailand via Malaysia. lie added
that since these regulations were introduced, the price or the chemical when
illegally sold in the mai-Burmeae border area had increased from 5,000 to
8,000 baht per litre ad from 1.000 to 3.000 baht per litre in the ‘l'hai-
Heleysin border area.

The Malaysian police chief said that with 65,000 defined drug addicts in his
comtry, his government was aware of drug problem and concerned by them. he
pointed out that Malaysia had strong mti-drug lots and inposed the death

penalty on those convicted of possession of ‘1’. than 100 grass of heroin.
080: 5300/5804

21
ONCE: LEGAL DRUGS ABUSBD, PREVENTION FUNDS WING
Bangkok DAD SIAM in Thai 9 Apr 82 pp 3. 12

[Text] Hr Likhit Thoedsathirasak. Undersecretary of the Narcotics Control
Board (“03) discloses that most of the Thai population has insufficient
knowledge of proper drug use. For example. they tend to buy drugs without
having prescriptions for them, and if they know that taking a certain drug
improves their health they take it constantly, although some kinds of drugs
when taken in large quantities may cause illness. Some drug will be pre-
scribed for a single period only. but people who see that it helped them when
they used it snce keep on buying it and using it until finally they become ad-
dicted to it. One may say that an important cause of the narcotics problem,
apart from the environmental conditions that induce it, is mistaken belief
about drug use. He mast hurry to bring basic drug knowledge to the public as
fast as possible, so that they will know the elements of using drugs correctly.

Nowadays those who try to solve the problem of drug addiction don't get very
good results. It is a difficult thing to do because even if an addict receives
treatment he is apt to go back and becone addicted again. lie has not been
fully cured. Particularly if he returns to his original environment he will
have easy opportunities to become readdicted. To cure an addict one must de-
pend on the addict's own courage. lie must really be determined enough. Thus
it is necessary to emphasize prevention. so that the number of addicts will not
increase. This too means trying to convey knowledge of the proper use of drugs.

Yet the government's budget for prevention at this time is very saall. and to
rely on it alone is not enough. He must therefore ask the cooperation of pri-
vate organizations, that they toc take a hand in this matter. An international
anti-drug federation is now being organized in every country to set policy

and coordinate work in solving the drug problem.

9943
C80: 5300/5775

22
USB 01' WMINES ENCOURAG- BY ADVERTISING IN RURAL AREAS
Bangkok DAD SIAM in Thai 9 Apr 82 pp 3. 12

[Text] At present "horse medicines" (amphetamines) are still spreading in

the Northeast by way of peddlers who follow movie trucks and advertise to rural
people to use the drugs. Therefore we would like to remind the public not to
trust these advertisements.

According to reports of the spread of amphetamines in the Northeast. it
appears that for the most part the vendors look for opportunities to profit
from rural people by advertising the drugs to those who do heavy work, whose
bodies are weary and aching. They do not call the drugs amphetamines right
out. they call them strength boosters or "teasing medicine." Host rural
people believe the ads. Thinking the drugs have good properties. they want
to try them. Drugs that stimulate: the nervous system at first cause one to
feel fresh and cured of all one'- symptoms. but when taken over long periods
they become addictive. As soon a. one feels a little achy one last have more
medicine. Once addiction has set 11 it can be very dangerous to the body.

Advertising dangerous drugs in this way is extremely selfish. It is happening
even in some factories and sometimes, as when exams are near, there is adver-
tising among students. Therefore we wish to warn the. public not to put con-
fidence in drug advertisements, because these drugs are dangerous and may
even be lethal.

9963
CSO: 5300/5775

23
lem OPIUH SUSPECTS MILE!) OUT. POLICE 00‘!!! UP
Bangkok NANCE)“ in Thai 26 Play 82 pp 1-2

[Text] Phuket police seized eore than 10 kg of opium in a godown. together
with the younger brother of the president of the provincial assembly and two
cohorts. then covered the story up.

News reports from Phuket disclosed to mucuou at 3:00 pe on 17 Hey that Police
Lt Gen Suphai Liewchaloe-wongs, officer in charge of Phuhet province, together
with a force of police officers from Kathu District. arrested Mr Suthep ‘l'antiwit,
assistant aanagsr of the ‘l'antikowit Conpeny and younger brother of Mr Banlue
rantiwit. president of the Phukst provincial assembly, with Mr Khan Lilekorn

and Mr Dan Rewaret. with 10.5 kg of raw opin- valued at 75.000 baht, at the
Sadlek godown in Village 5. lathu sub-district. The police brought charges of
possession of narcotics for purposes of sale, although the three suswcts

denied the charges.

We are informed that later Hr Chuyin ‘l'antiwit brought bail for all three sen in
the anount of 200,000 baht each.

ﬂoreover, it appears that the police are trying to Cover this latter up con-
pletely and are not willing to let it be known beyond themselves.

At 1:20 pl on 25 May HATICIDN placed a call to Police Gen Supchai and were in-
formed he was away at a provincial Iseting. so we asked for Police Lt Gen Hitri
Sornthsn, deputy officer in charge. and received a denial that he knew the
details of this matter. Be told us to ask again for Can Supchai, the arresting
officer.

At 3:30 pa we again placed a call to Gen Supchei and spoke to the duty officer.
who asked who was on the line and then said he would go to call Gen Supchai.
But when he returned he said that Gen Supchai had just hurried off to a nesting
at provincial headquarters.

He placed a call to Katha district station to ask Police Lt Gen Sathaphorn
Amnreks about the progress of the case and were told he was in and would cone
to the phone, but then the officer who had answered the phone said that Can
Sathaphorn too had gone to a seating.
HATICHON has been told by a source at the Phukct provincial offices that the
police are trying to cover up this case because the people involved have
standing and wide influence in the province. lrrcgulsrities any have
occurred in the handling of this case.

9963
680: 5300/5775
mm

HEIDI! MIND IN "REGIME—Police on Thuredey [3 June] eeired 76 hge of heroin
beee—worth a eetineted IO nillion baht on the local nerhetufron the wreckage
of a pickup truck which craehed in Ayutthaya Province lore than a nonth ego.
Crine Suppreeeion Divieion [68D] officera deecribed the heul ae their tuna:
heroin eeirure thie year. The heroin wae eeired fron e llite‘biehi pickup
truck which wee towed to a hiuxwey police cmd at Pretmen Phra-in after
cruhing on the Aeian him in bag Pe-in Dietrict. Ayuttheye. on April I).
They eeid no one had celled to clai- the vehicle. which hed Bangkok nuﬁer
platee. At the tine of the craeh the vehicle we being driven by ite owner.
Sonchit Rattanuong, who died of injuriee while being tehen to Phdphon
hoepitel. CSD Deputy Camden Pol Col Seleng Dmnag and Pol Col Chalor
Koetthea learned recently froe infornente that the truck eetched the deecription
of e vehcile euepected of bringing druge to bengkoh fro. the north. Police
loet track of the truck in April after it left aaiang lei‘e Ilei 8ei Dietrict.
which adjoine the border with Bur-e. CSD police believe that Somhit we a
courier hired to deliver the drnge to en unknown deetination in Dangkok. They
eeid it wee poeeible thet he had becone involved in drug-running ehortly be-
fore the craeh heceuee hie nae did not appear in their file. The eeized
heroin baae wee taken to CS!) headquertere at San Tot. [bendtoh want POST

inhgliehSJmanDK]

mm IBITEDPOI. ”TING—A eenior Interpol officer eeid yeeterdey thet there
were linke in my comtriee between internetionel drug trafficking operetione
and currency counterfeiting gauge. Deputy Secretary Cenerel of the Parie-
beeed Internetionel criainel Police Omnieation (ICPO) Bey-and Kendall eeid
there wee evidence that euch criednel groupe were aupporting eech other in

the United Stetee. Europe ad throudtout the Aeien region. hr Kendall. a
Driton. reted narcotice an the biggeet crine in the region. lie eeid currency
counterfeiting wee e coetly, eophieticeted wine which cowlinented drug traf-
ficking. he eeid counterfeit dollere peeeed in the 0.8. cane neinly fron
Latin Anerican comtriee. thoee circulated in Europe can eeinly fron Italy
end their eource in Aeie wee uaually Singapore and hang long. In eone caeee,
fake my, eeinly 0.8. dollare, which are populer world-wide, wee paid to
treffichere of illicit druge while one gange nede counterfeit notee to earn
noney to run their narcotice eyndicetee, Kendall eeid. The iaeue wee reieed
yeeterdey during the eecond day of the 7th Aeien legionel Interpol conference
being held et the bait Theni hotel. The faur-day neeting. hoeted by Theilend'e
police depart-eat. ie being attended by 76 delegetee free 26 countriee.

26
0n cooperation of international narcotics swprnssion. Hr Kendall said that
the exchange of intonation concerning the activities and identities of inter-
national drugs traffickers via Interpol channels was nore rapid and effective.
Lists of nanss and nowants of najor drugs traffickers were circulated enong
ned>er comtries nd resulted in none drug seizures that a few years ago.
[Smgkok BANGOR POST in English 16 Jm 82 p 3 II]

PRC DRUG ASSISTMCB-the Beet Ger-an dessedor to Thailud. Dr Johann Chris-
tian lankes. told Deputy Prine ninister Gen Prechuap Sutharmgkm during a
recent nesting that his govern-at will provide Thailand with two drug exports
to help suppress narcotics trafficking in the country. Ila said that Best
Gernany had hidxly praised Thailnd for its effort to crack down on drug tref-
tickers. including nun 8e. and that his comtry will continue supporting
Thailand's canpsign against narcotics trafficking in the comtry. [Bangkok
Donastic Service in hglieh 0000 (It! 17 Jm 82 ll]

OPIU'H mm mm LAOS—long lhai-A an was wouded and another arrested
with 20 kilogr-a of rat opiu in The Do District here. police reported.
The two non were identified by police as Puok Kanthewi, 46. ad his son, Lap,
25. Acting on a tip-off that a delivery of r. opiun iron The Do District
was to be nada to Bangkok. a group of police-an led by Pol Lt-col Honthian
Klupthong. deputy superintendent attached to long lhai police sub-division.
went to the place and spotted the two saving a nunber of packages of opiu.
Puck ignored the surrender den-1d and fired at the police. Police returned
fire injuring Not. He was later sent to a hospital. both confessed that
they snuggled the opiu in iron Laos and were about to take it to Bangkok.
They were charged with possessing the drugs with intent to sell. [Text]
[M20365 Dandrok BANGKOK POST in English 26 Jm 82 p 5 It]

MAN DRUG Mucus: MZSTEDnPolice yoeterday arrested a woman at the car
park of the President Hotel and seized 2.5 kilogram of lo 4 heroin worth
$00,000 baht. According to narcotics suppression police, Pb Kopkeao
Phothiwanakun was arrested as she took out six packages of heroin bearing

the bowls Lion Brand fron her Datsun station wagon. Hrs Kopkeeo. 38. reported-
ly told police that she had bouwt the drugs in northern Thailand and had

cons to the President hotel's car park to sell then to an Anerican non for

one nillion bdrt. She was detained at Lunhini police station and charged

with possessing drugs with intent to sell. [Tent] [Bangkok smack POST

in English 27 Jul 82 p 2 BR]

“1'.th 8312!!) III DANGCOK, CHIN“: MAI—Police arrested nine persons on charges
of possessing heroin with intent to sell and ssiaed seven kilograms of heroin
in two separate incidents yesterday. The first arrest was node in Bandwk at
e hotel coffeeshop in Phre Khanong arns. Police said a police teen iron the
Crine Suppression Division arrested three Chinese Buso-Chiangning See Chu.
29; aiiuyi See amen. 22; and Chi-1g Baa Ti, 25.-while they were naeting in
a hotel coffeeshop in Phra nuanong aromd 10 p.n. yesterday. Police alleged
that 3.5 kilograms of 1m» Lions Brand No 6 heroin was found hidden in a
cardboard box carried into the coiteeshop by the suspect Chisngaing. Police
claimed that the three smpecta had confessed that they were hired by an un-
identified an in Has Oran District of atiang Hal to deliver the heroin to

e cutouer at the hotel. The three were being held on charges of possessing
heroin with intent to sell. In another incident. a narcotics suppression

27
police teen in Chng Mei erreeted eix euepecte efter receiving e tip-off thet
e quentity of heroin would be teken into the province. The euepecte were
erreeted when the police teen etopped end eeerched their pick-Q truck in
Teﬂon Khi Lek of Ike Teeng Dietrict. Police cleined thet the eeerch pro-
duced lO peckegee of No lo heroin weighing 3.5 kilogr-e end velued locelly

et ebout 750.000 bdut hidden in the truck. All the empecte were being held

et ﬂee Teeng police etetion on chergee of poeeeeeing heroin with intent to eell.
[Text] [Bangkok motor POST in lnglieh 30 Jun 82 p 5 IX]

CHIARG HA1 mom—coin; Nei—Pive nen. including two Chineee line were yee-
terdey erreeted et e houee in thing Dietrict here while allegedly delivering
2.8 kilogre-ee of No I. firet grede heroin. The Howe, Leoweng See Heng end
Chongwoo See Yag, both fro. Orieng Rei, left Peng et ebout 8 e.n. end er-
rived et Home No 60 on Denerekot Roed in Hueng Dietrict leter in the morn-
ing. After the two eon entered the houee. police eeid thet they en the have
hand over eight peckegee of No Io firet grede heroin to two other een who were
identified ee Senen Khongdet end Preyut Kirikee. All four were erreeted

elong with the owner of the houee. Chunk Uengcheroen. The five eon cherged of
poeeeeeing the drugs with intent to eell ad were leet night deteined et

Chimg Mei police etetion for further interrogetion. [mm326 Bengkok BANGKOK
POST in Bnglieh 16 Jul 82 p 2]

POLICE omczn AmsnD—Acting on e tipoff. Orin Suppreeeion Divieiontcsol
police kept wetch on Police Herrent Officer Selet Kazan, fron Pheng-nge'e
Tum Pe Dietrict police etetion in the eouth. upon hie errivel in Bengkok by
trein. It wee elleged thet Senet hed brouﬂt heroin fron the eouth to deliver
to hie cliente in Bengkok. After leerning thet the exchenge would teke pleoe
er. the Si Krung hotel neer 22d July Circle. police kept wetch end obeerved e
eeeting between Sent end three Bangkok reeidente in e red Toyote liftbeck
eeden. The lengkok reeidente were identified ee Senruei Hongchei. 26. Kitti
Lohekm 21, end Photchenen Bkkun 35. The police teen eeerched the cer end I
found 21 pleetic bege. with the brende bottle 0 Globee end Red Lion. which
conteined 7.35 kge of No 6 top grede heroin. The four sen ere being held

et CSD heedquertere on initiel chergee of poeeeeeing druge with intent to eell.
[310506102 Bangkok BANG!“ POST in Englieh 18 Jun 82 p 2]

CHUNG MI mos-Joli“ erreeted eix people end confieceted 6.3 kge of heroin
in two eeperete reide in Chieng Mei Province yeeterdey [20 Jun]. police eeid.
In one reid. e nercotice euppreeeion unit ecting on e tip intercepted two cere
et Tedaon Cheng Phuek in hang Dietrict et the ”men: Sing intereection end
found 1.5 kge of heroin hidden in one of the cere. The three een end one
woeen riding in the cere were erreeted end were leter identified ee then Ruekel.
Hre Oeeng Seibmrueng, 48. end her two eone Seeen ad Sodhit. In the other
reid. enother nercotice ewpreeeion unit wee eent to Peng Dietrict to inter-
cept the trenefer of druge from Ben Yeng et Teﬂon Seneei. They etopped e
motorcycle end uncovered 2.8 kge of heroin. No in riding on the motorcycle
were erreeted. They were identified ee Buecheng See Liew, 20. end Le Bunei.
66. [BKZSOM2 Bugkok BANGKOK POST in hglieh 21 Jun 82 p 3]

28
BANGKOK DRUG PROM-More than 1,000 drug addicts sought treataent at ll.
clinics operated by the Bangkok Metropolitan Health Departunt (mm) in just
one single day. a recent survey showed. A total of 15.700 addicts-98 percent
of whon are addicted to heroin—ere receiving treatmnt at the clinics. Pur-
ther statistical breakdowns showed that 92 percent are male. 70 percent are
between 20 and 29 years old and 51 percent are manployed. The Office of
Narcotics Control Board lut nonth estiaeted that there wereno fewer than
100,000 addicts throughout Thailmd. Sons of then are being helped by the
sum programs. To alleviate the growing drug problen in Thailand the BM!!!)
drug abuse prevention and treatnent prograaaae was estﬁliehed in 1978, with
assistance from the United States. The progr-a is aind at creating a
greater public awareness about the extent of the problea as well as providing
treat-ant for addicts. [Excerpt] [“250ka bandtok BARR“ POST in English
22 Jun 82 p 5]

RA“ OPIUM POUND—There was a report fro- boei Province that authorities had
uncovered 9 kg of raw opiun. 7b Alt-67 rounds. 208 M-16 rounds. 2 M-79 rounds.
a bag of sticky rice and a bag of salt at an abandoned cars: of col-mist
terrorists in Na Kano District. Loei Province. It is believed they belonged
to the Hang tribssnen who fled a suppression drive by governannt forces under
the "Pha-nang Kriangkrei" operation plan. (“250462 Bangkok Doaestic Service
in Thai 22 Jm 82]

MALAY-THAI DRUG CONTROL-~At 1100 yesterday Malaysian Deputy Prilae Minister Datuk
Muss Hita- paid a courtesy call on Deputy Priee Minister Gen Prachuap Sm-
tharandun at Govern-ant house. The two sen exchanged views on cooperation
between Thailand and Malaysia on narcotics suppression and the results of
operations. The Malaysian deputy priaa minister, who is chairnsn of Malaysia's
narcotics suppression program, expressed satisfaction over the successes
obtained by the two countries in joint narcotics suppression and noted that
the amount of narcotics smuggled into their countries has declined consider-
ably. He said this reflects better cooperation between the Thai and Malay-
sian officials in charge of suppression. The deputy prins ainisters ex-
changed views on this matter at length. The Malaysian deputy priae minister
also presented a gift to the. Thai deputy prime minister. Also present at the
aseting were the secretary general of the Office of the Narcotics Control
Board. the secretary general of the National Security Council and the director
general of the Central Intelligence Department. [Text] [mmu Bangkok

Voce of Free Asia in'l'hai 1000 GMT 22 Jtn 82]

CROP REPLACEMENT PROGRAM—Yesterday Police Maj Gen Phao Sarasin. secretary
general of the Narcotics Prevention and Suppression Board. accoqauied
Swedish Professor (Outer Alewich) and (Cornelia Vanda-ear). a Dutch national,
who are representatives of the III fmd for crop replacemt and highland
marketing, to call on Deputy Prim Minister Gen Prachuap Smtharanﬁun at
Governnent House. on usietnce to Thailand's crop replacenent prograa fron
19m-82 annotated to $2,573,210. The UN fund for crop replace-ant and hidtlmd
aarketing and the Thai Coveruent will jointly assess the effectiveness of
Thailand's prograa in the third year of the assistance in order to consider
possible additional assistance to the progress. The assess-ant process '111
take place froa 28 May-ll June. The two UN representatives will participate
in the essessnent process. [Text] [£10132 Bagkok Voice of Pres Asia in
Thai 1000 M 10 Jm 82]

080: 5300/5m5
29
BRIEFS

HARImJANA PLANTATION DISCOVERED—Tbs national guard has discovered a Isrihusns
plantation in Cspsti. narisn Provincs. Laovigildo chsrano, ownsr of ths
fax-n, and Ovidio Ssnto Vajsrsno. Hsrcsdas ﬂurars, Raul chsrano and

Pedro Recuaro stalls were taksn into custody. On instructions tron ths

high cousnd, tho notional guard is conducting an intsnsivs campaign against
nsrihusns cultivation. [PA262218 Pansn City LA REPUBLICA in Spanish

2" Jun 82 p 31 PA]

CSO: 5&0/2 326

30
BRIEFS

MIG! count! SEIZURE-4.3a. ll hay—The Peruvian police today discovered a
package in the local airport that contained 22 kilos of pure cocaine. valued
at $2 nillion. A police source reported that the shipnnt, the biggest drug
find in Peru. arrived fro. Argentina with a nulticsrgo comany label stating
that it contained chenical ponder. There was also a series of handwritten
letters in code. as added that the package did not have an addresses nor a
destination. and that it me not known which airline had transported the ship-
nent iron Buanos Aires to Lina. a prelininary investigation has established
that the shipnant was in Pan-a and His-i before nystsrioualy returning to this
capital. [Tent] [Bnenos hires LAT!!! in Spanish 12 lisy 82 2355} 8255

080: 5300/2323

31
“131's

32mm 018007339 IN “RAF-Due to the sleuthing efforts of the guerch corps
end the heedqusrters of the nobiliestion of the oppressed for codetin;
nsrcotics, 6 smulers were errested end lore then 13 kg of opium end heroin
were discovered. The nemes of the smugglers ere 'Ali (Sederion). Gholsm 'Ali
'Arefvend. Qarben 'Ali Zsrrebi, 'Ali Nuri, Jelel ll'enti. end Karin Keri-i.
After the investiution end discovery of the nsrcotice, the eccused were
sent to prison. [$300745 Tshrsn mm in Persien lb Jua 82 p lo 61']

anon: DISCOVER. IN MSW-During the lest 2 deye the heedquerters of
mhhed lslenic Revolution Co-ittee for combetina nsrcotics hes discovered
more then 2 kg of heroin end 1 It; opium held by nercotics deelere. There

were 7 suspects who were sent to the Islemic revolution court efter en
investigstion. This cos-ittse wee elso successful in discovering ‘8 different
kinds of guns, 967 roads of mition end s under of nsrseines in the border
regions of Serekhs. Quchsn end (Beg-ch). [$300912 ‘l'ehren Joanna-r3 88W
in Persien 15 Jun 82 p 6 or]

LORESTAN comma CONPISCATBD—‘l'he revolution guerds of Loresten seized
1,420 kg of opius elong with three firesru. 137 certridgee end sone snuggled
foreign cigerettes end luxury goods. Five persons were srrested in this
connection. [61061385 Tehren mum: in Persien 22 Jun 82 p la 61']

mm DRUG ﬂock-Brother gusrds of the Isle-1c Revolution Conittee of
(Khejeh lsbi') in mshhed recovered 150.5 kg of opiu end 15.5 kg of heroin
from s dun truck which wes cerryins limestone. Three of the violstors were
arrested but two others esceped. [Tehren mm'ar in Persien 22 Jun 82 p Io or]

NARCO'IICS DISCOVERIB-Jhrough the efforts of Islenic revolution suerd personnel
and personnel of sntidrug hssdqusrtsrs. e totel of 150 internstionel drug
traffickers heve been errested in the severel Irenisn cities end eround 6 tons
of drugs discovered. The discoveries included e totel of 5,936 kg of opium es
well so other drugs. [68070703 ‘l'ehren mm'xr in Pereien 27 Jun 82 p 2 GP]

32
NARCUIICS PWLTIBS STATISTICS-~According to the Central News Unit. the various
branches of the Central Islamic Revolution Antinarcotica Court [in Tehran]
reviewed the dossiers of 1.842 of the sccmed during Khordad [22 Hay-21 June 1982]
and issued the necessary verdicts. According to the verdict», 10 international
asugglers with long records were sentenced to death. 6 to life imprisonment,

31 to free 10 to 35 years imprison-ant, 259 from 1 to 10 years. and 1.292 were
sentenced to less than 1 yet. A nuber of prisoners serving less than 1 year
were sent to (28hursbsd) and Bshsr rehabilitation cups to enable then to give
up their addiction. Of these, 339 were released with reliable guarantors

and after being flogged. The dossiers of those sentenced to death were sent

to the Supreae Judicial Council for Confirlstion [ta'yeed]. [Text] [LD270360
Tehran Donestic Service in Persian 1030 GKI' 26 Jun 82]

C50: 5300/5632

33
mm mama—mm». 30119.. 3 Jul (Aim—P0110. here today ulud 1)
kilo. (66 pounds) of pm heroin—n «ti-ted mu: ulna of flu million
dollars—aboard n cargo plan. coda; from Ill unspeciﬁed Middle Eastern cam-

try. official. and. They and the drug vu ballmd to ban originated in
Pakistan. [Text] “0031655 Purl. m in English 1168 M 3 Jul 82]

080: 5300/2328
BRIEFS

POLICE SHASII mom mom-mum. June lb—‘rhe Austerden nercotics brizsde
hes smashed s nejor heroin line from Pakistan to the netherlenda with the er-
rest of four local ten and one woesn, police said today. Chief Inspector B.
de Koningh. heed of the brigsds. ssid 3.5 kilogre-es of Pakistani heroin
valued at 1.5 nillion guilders were seized in the recent operation. he said
the operetion had been nde possible because close cooperation with police

in belgiul end Dennerk. Success case when police reided a house in the Dutch
capital which is to have been used as a distribution centre. The four men
detained in the house were identified by their initials end eyes es J .H. (37),
P.P. (31). J.V. (310) end a. de l. (27), end JJi. (31, e wonen). H. de 1!. is
believed to be the ring leeder. The five ere alleged to have flown in the
heroin vie European airports with the heroin hidden in seell plestic bass
sown into their underwear. [Text] [The Hague MP M BULLETIN in English
15 Jun 82 p 2]

080: 5300/2329

35
SHIFT IN NARCOTICS ROUTE REPORTED
Istanbul HURRIYET in Turkish 24 May 82 pp 1, 13

[Text] Ankara, hurriyet. The narcotics traffic which had shifted its route
towards Syria and the Greek Cypriot sector of Cyprus following the 12 Septem-
ber 1980 operation has lately once again turned towards Turkey. Turkish
police however is giving no respite to merchants of the white posion who
dress of sweet profits and seek to once again draw the country into a spider's
web. In fact, 540 narcotics smugglers have fallen into police traps over the
past 5 months. The narcotics that have been captured are worth billions of
lirss and include 328 kilograms of hashish, 63 kilograas of opium and 12 kilo-
grams of base sorphine.

According to findings, base morphine and opiul are introduced into Turkey from
Laos. Burns and Thailand which constitute the region known as ”The Golden
Triangle" as well as from Pakistan. Afghanistan and India which sake up the
region known as "The Golden Crescent." The anhydrous acid that is used in

the conversion of base aorphine into heroin is introduced fros Middle Eastern
countries. In general, our country is used as a throughwsy in the transfer
of these substances to Europe. while initially the ssugglers had used the
highways for their activities, it has been observed that they have recently
changed tactics and turned towards the sealanes.

According to findings by the authorities, lost of the narcotics that enter
Turkey come from Iran, the neighbor across our Eastern Anatolian frontier.
These narcotic substances originate from "The Golden Triangle" and "The Gold-
en Crescent" and leave Turkey through a route across Erzurum, Ersincan, Sivas.
Yozgat, Ankara, Bolu, Sakarya, Tekirdag and Kirklareli. Occasionally, this
route is changed and the narcotic substances are sent to Herein by way of
Diyarbakir, Gasiantep and Adana. Fron Herein, the substances are sent to
Cyprus. Occasionally a second route branches out from Adana and the narcotic
substances are sent to Izmir by way of Herein. Konya, Denisli. Usak and
Manisa. Fro- Iznir the substances are sent out of the country by sea.

Through still another route, narcotic substances are brought fros Ankara
which is considered to be a transit center to Euros by way of Eakisehir and
Bilecik. The substances are then sent to Europe by sea transport from Hudanys
and Bandit-a.
Because Turkish manufactured hashish is unable to secure good markets, snug-
glers have been introducing Lebanese hashiah known as "Beirut Blonde" into
Turkey through Iskenderun. The bashish is later sent to Europe.

According to existing reports, the smugglers prefer to use women as carriers
of narcotics because lately, women have been subjected to fewer searches.
"omen have been frequently hiding hashiah near their abdominal regions to
portray themselves as being pregnant. According to the information provided
in a report, in recent years 286 narcotics smugglers of foreign nationality
have been captured on Turkish soil with 886 kilograms of narcotics.

Having declared war against the narcotics Mafia, security forces have defined
12 provinces that are important to the smugglers as operational centers. A
large scale struggle against smugglers of narcotic substances is underway in
the provinces of Gaziantep, Adana, Kenya, Izmir, Edirne, Istanbul, Ankara,
Kayseri, Icel, Diyarbakir, Hardin and “stay which have been defined as opera-
tional centers.

Narcotic substances are increasing in value with each passing day and are
being sold for extremely high prices in Europe. 0f the narcotic substances
that are obtained at very inexpensive prices from "The Golden Triangle" and
"The Golden Crescent," heroin is being sold at 63,000,000 liras per kilogram.
In Turkey a kilogram of heroin is being sold for 1,000,000 liras while the
small amount of hashish is being sold for 120,000 liras. In Europe, a kilo-
gram of hashieh sells for 3,000,000 liras. Because of our effective struggle
against narcotics smuggling Turkey has won praise from the entire world.
Statistics for narcotic substances captured in Turkey are provided in the
following table:

 

Year Type Cases Conviction! Kilograms Grass

1978 Hashish 1,302 2,293 2,792 529
Heroin 16 59 8 _ 518
Opium 12 60 l 623
Base Morphine 6 11 2 696
Total 1.332 2,663

1979 Hashish 1,296 2,678 3,265 592
Heroin 50 152 68 276
Opium 3 13 336 681
Base Morphine 6 29 - 13
Total 1,335 2.672

1980 Hashish 1,522 3,117 2,356 805
Heroin 78 266 118 681
Opium 6 16 28 63
Base Morphine 7 39 70 81
Total 1,613 3,616

1981 Haahish 1,510 3,321 3,172 603
Heroin 117 651 129 969
Opium 11 20 36 267
Base Morphine 10 36 62 112
Total 1,668 3.828

[Table continued on following page]

37
Year 2123, Caaea Convictiona Kilogzala Ora-a

 

1982 Hashieh 250 560 327 588
Heroin 29 84 32 390
Opium b 13 63 69
Base Morphine 2 8 12 636
Total 285 645

(First 5 nontha of 1982)

 

Key:

1. The narcotics route has shifted following operations by security
forces. Formerly. the heroin and haahiah entering from our aouth-
eastern provincea was aent to Europe through Istanbul. But now,
heroin and hashiah originating from the Middle East is being sent
to Europe through the ports of Syria and the Greek-Cypriot aector

of Cyprus.
2. Europe
3. Black Sea
4. USSR

5. Golden Triangle. (Laos, Bur-a. Thailand)
6. Golden Creacent. (Afghanistan. India, Pakistan)
7. Mediterranean

8. Cyprus
9. Lebanon
10. Syria

ll. Aegean