FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10184
14 December 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 57/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. .Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a gues-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lOlM
14 December 1981

WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(2000 57/81)
CONTENTS

ASIA

PAKISTAN

Association of Pakistani Social worker. Surveys Drug Abuae
(JANG’ 2 Nov 81)...oeeoeooooeeooooeeoao0000.0000.000.000.0000... 1-

Briefs
Drug Haul in Peshawar lo

Briefs
1V0 Jailed in Drug Case
Drug Arrest warrants

MU

LATIN “ERICA

BOLIVIA

Plan for Comrcial Use of Coca lhder Study
(EL DIAMO. 23 Oct 81)00.000.000.000...0.0.000...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 6

Increased Illegal Ttmaport of Coca to Santa Cruz hponed
(EL DIARIO’ 29 Oct 81)....0000000000000000000000.000000000000000 8

Relation Between Farm Policies, Coca Production Established
(Luis Antezana Erguata; PRESBIUCIA. 29 Oct 81)................... 10
BRAZIL

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Drug Ring Busted. 100 kg of Cocaine Seized
(Inm1 "etwlﬂ’ 27 "0v 81).DOOOOOIOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOCOOOOO.

New law on Narcotics Approved
(13W, 28 Nov 81)..coco-so.o.o....00....o.........s....o.....

Briefs
Antidrug Council Official
Antidmg International Canals:
Coca Plantations Curtailed

Extent of Drug Trafficking, Control Problem Discussed
(“Into Miltdi; 0 357m 8 SAD PA”. 25 at 81)...........

Traffickers Arrest in Rio with Drugs Valued at 500,000 Cruaeiros
(Jomu’ w BMSIL’ 27 Oct 81).OOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO00......

German Cursed With Trafficking Nine ‘lbns of lirihuana Arrested
(o cho’ 27 Oct 81)....0000000...0......OOUO‘COOOOOOOUOOCOOOC

Briefs
kaction to Trafficker's Escape
Gang Rivalry in Urubu
Cocaine Trafficker Arrested in Naples
'Provigil' Traffickers Arrested

OllLE
Peruvian Cocaine Traffickers Arrested in Aries
(noberto Lira Osorio; BI. $360310, 1 Nov 81)..................
History of Arrests. Drug Seizures in Arica mtailed
(Roberto Lira Osorio; EL ERCURIO, 210 Oct 81).................
Santiago Drug Market Confiscation Details Given
(BL meR10, 2‘ mt 81).OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOIOI.
Briefs
Police Conference on Drugs. Juveniles
COLOMBIA

Traffickers Killed in Vendetta. Cienaga Hilitariaed
(Rafael Saniento; BI. ESPBCTAmR. 29 Oct 81)...................

Briefs

Cocaine laboratory in ‘rolina
Drugs. Other Contraband Seized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080038-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECUADOR

Arrested Cocaine Traitickers Inplicete Peruvian. 0:
(BL mama. 7 ”V 81)eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeel

RXICO

Traffickers, Car mieves Arrested
(Alfredo Jieenez, Luis Sayre; BXCZLSIOR. Ila

PERU
Briefs
Drug Trefficker Arrested
NEAR EAST AND noun AFRICA
EGYPT
Briefs
Four Tons of Beshieh
IRAN
Briefs
morass: Opiu- llsul
Khomen Drug Arrests
Drug Seizures
Opiul Seizures
Torbst Opiue Discovery
Drug Hauls
Contraband Carpets, Opiu- Seizure
ISRAEL
Briefs
Russian Enigre Sentenced
Gaza Anti-Nercotice Gawain
SIB-SAHARA" AFRICA
IVORY COAST

International Drug “traffickers Arrested in Abidjan
(Disby Selif: PRA‘ERNITS mm. 12 Nov 81)..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080038-8
FOR OFl-‘IGAL USE ONLY

HAURITIIB

Briefs
Opim Seized

VEST EUROPE
MM!

Amninn Terrorist Group Tied to Seized Heroin
(8mm want. 28 Oct 81)....00000090000000000on.‘OOOOOOOOO

Police Catch Heroin Gang, by Class von Hofoten
Extensive Overtine Hark, by Hahn Benetton
Hinister of Justice (hunts, by Sune Olaf-on
Ontom Service Strengthened. by Elisabeth Crone

WITBD KINGDOM

Court Decisions in Camabis Smuggling Cue
(ms DAILY mm. 28 NW 81)....OOOOOQ0.00000000IOOOCOUOOOOO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

46

67

56
ASSOCIATION OF PAKISTAN! SOCIAL HORKERS SURVEYS DRUG ABUSE
Karachi JANG in Urdu 2 Nov 81 p 3
lArticle: "Drug Abuse-A Survey"!

[Text] The Social workers Association of Pakistan conducted a survey in August 1981
to assess the drug abuse by children below the age of 18 and coepiled the
following figures.

Teams composed of five members surveyed several urban and rural areas. This 3-nonth
survey brought to light the discouraging findings that among the children between
the ages of 5 and 18. 66.6 percent in cities and 59.3 percent in rural areas are
addicted to one or other kind of drug (combined percentage for both areas is

53 percent).

Areas Surveyed: Urban-~Karachi. Hyderabad. Hir Purkhas, Lahore, Rawalpindi.

Jhelun, Hazara, Kohat, Peshawar, Quetta. Rural--Hyderabad Division, Khairpur
Division, Thar Parker District. Bahalalpur Division, Multan Division, Lahore

Division. Hazara District. Swat. Hangu, Chakali, Pishin, and Nushki.

Kind of Drugs: Cigarette (inferior and superior quality), betel leaf with tobacco,
“ball" (a fine mixture of line stone powder, catechu. and tobacco). diazepan
tablets, "rocket" capsules, charas, country liquor. nethyl spirits, water pipe.
snuff. mandrake tablets, heap. opiul.

Results of survey: The subjects were divided into three categories. a) between
the ages of S and 12 years; b) between the ages of 13 and 15; and c) between the
ages of 15 and 18. According to this survey in the first (a) category 26 percent
rural and 18 percent urban children are using drugs. In b category. 70 percent
rural and 52 percent urban children are addicted. In t category, 81 percent rural
and 72 percent urban children are using drugs.

In terms of the occupation of subjects. the following table shows further breakr
down of these findings.
Urban (1} Suburban 512

i. In schools 11 7
ii. Employed 18 12
iii. Private business 15.6 21
iv. Unemployed 20 3.3

v. Agricultural labor - 16

Reasons for using drugs: Host of the surveyed children refrained from answering
the question as to why they used drugs. The following are based on the reasons
of those who did answer:

1. "Our peers and elders also use these things (especially cigarettes)."
2. Delinquency.

3. To relieve the tension and tiredness from hard work.

6. For fun.

5. Influence of friends.

How contraband drugs are obtained: Illegal drugs such as shares, hemp, opium,
c0untry liquor. "rocket," and mandrake tablets. can be procured from various
secret supply places in rural and urban areas. when the surveying teem tried to
use one of these supply stations. they learned that it was protected by the law-
cnforcement authorities of that area.

Some medical stores also supply sleep-inducing and other tablets to the young people.

harmful effects of drug abuse: Some children declared that they were suffering
from several ill effects but were unable to stop using drugs:

a. sleeplessness e. constipation
b. feeling of sluggishness f. dehydration
c. irritation g. muscular tension

d. mental laziness

Extreme seriousness: Some young men in Karachi, Lahore, and Pindi areas informed
the team that mandrake and diazepam tablets were slowly becoming very popular

among female students. A large number of these female students are using these
drugs on a regular basis. Students and economically dependent children use tuition
money to buy drugs. Some children resort to theft and other criminal acts on

a regular basis to support the habit.

Some of them use as many as 10 diazepam tablets at a time. The national committee
of the Social Workers Association of Pakistan would like to bring this sorry
situation to the attention of the public and request that steps be taken to save
these children who are our country's future. It requests that a cooperative
effort at national level be aimed against drug abuse. The Association appeals

to the parents not to neglect their children.
2323

Cigarette (superior)
Cigarette (inferior)
Tobacco/betel

"ball" (a fine mixture
of lime stone. cetechu
and tobacco)

Diazepan tablets
Rocket Caps

Charas

Country liquor

Methyl Spirits

Hater pipe

Snuff

"Gul"-dry snuff

Mandrake

Heap

Opium

7997
C30: 5300/4550
BRIEFS

DRUG ﬂAUL IN PESHAHAR--A truck carrying 10 million rupcca' uorth tn haahlsh was
seized on the Charsadda-Peahavar road by local police on 26 November. Truckdriver
Hall Mohammad was arrestes. [GP021920 Lahore JARS in Urdu 27 Nov 81 supplement

PB]

CSO: 5300/6567
BRIEFS

THO JAILED 1N DRUG CASE--Toronto--‘l\vo on who were anong a group of 25 arrested

in Toronto and Vancouver last October on charges of conspiracy and trafficking

in heroin and cocaine have been given prison term of 10 and seven years by an
Ontario Suprene Court judge. Giulio Loccisano, 31. of Giosa. Italy. received 10
years and Gioncondo Napoli of North York. seven years after pleading guilty
earlier this year to trafficking in heroin. The two an were charged with selling
two pounds of heroin to an undercover Royal Canadian Mounted Police officer. The
deal, which took place in a Toronto hotel room, was filsed by police. The film
was shown to Mr. Justice willian Parker during the two aan'e trial. [Text]
[Toronto THE GLOBE AND HAIL in English 7 Oct 81 p 5]

DRUG ARREST imam-4 major police drug roundup started at 6 a.n. today with
warrants issued for the arrest of 38 persons involved in 59 charges. The arrests
followed a five-nonth undercover operation carried out by a RCMP aeter working
within the city of Vancouver. RCMP S.Sgt. Ted Gangdal said today the investiga-
tion was aimd at the street level trafficker. lie said 70 purchases were made of
heroin. nethadone, norphine, dilaudid and percodan. he said evidence was obtained

against 1.0 persons. No of those have since died--one of a drug overdose and the
other as the result of a fire. The undercover operator posed as a heroin user,

said Gangdal. Purchases were ends on Granville and matings Streets. [Text]
[Vancouver THE VANOOUVER SUN in English 13 Rev 81 p A15]

C50: 5320/ 12
PLAN FOR CONGICIAL USE G‘ COCA UNDER 81130!
La Paz BL DIARIO in Spanish 23 Oct 81 p 5

West] In a press conference. the chairman of the National Council Against Narcotics
Trafficking. Colonel Rene Ocampo, has announced that the council is studying a plan
for industrializing coca production which may bring about the manufacturing of
medicinal products (vitamins and proteins) or of chewing gum.

The council chairman gave a detailed account of what is being done to wage more effec-
tively the fight against the narcotics traffic. Despite the limited extent of its
funds, the council has made arrangements to utilise its personnel on a round-the-
clock basis throughout our national territory.

Specifics

At the outset of his meeting with the press, Colonel Ocampo announced that last
Wednesday a Bolivian citizen naed Marcelo Ibanez appeared voluntarily before the
council to reveal thereto that he had decided to travel to Niaai and present himself
to 0.5. legal authorities and answer their questions regarding the narcotics traffic.

As he had done in an earlier case. Colonel Ocaapo stated that colivia's judicial
authorities have no charges pending against Ibane: and that the matter of the latter's
connection with the narcotics traffic will be handled in a special manner by the legal
authorities of the United States. a country that has asked him to appear.

Replying to questions the newsmen put to him regarding the number c. persons linked to
dupe traffic or cases involving that traffic, Ocaspo stated that after the Armed
i-‘nrces decided to engage in combating it, sane 500 cases have been prosecuted.

As a result of the investigations made and in keeping with the culprits' degree of
guilt. several were brought before the regular courts, others still remain in prison,
and an indeterminate number have been given back their freedom.

In another part of his statement, the director of the National Council Against Nar-
cotics Trafficking reported that in recent days approximately 20 kg of cocaine have
been confiscated in Santa Cruz and Cochabamba. “This fact,“ he added, 'shows that
the government will continue its relentless struggle against that offense.”
Budget

Upon being questioned about the funds for the council's tork and whether they are
enough for an effective campaign against the narcotics traffic, Colonel Ocanpo said

that although the council's budget is not large. no effort is spared to take care of
all needs and priorities.

He added that "at present we are operating with our resouroes, without seeking any
kind of help or cooperation, let alone fral international organizations or foreign

countries. However. if any institution or governmental agency wants to aid us, we
will welcome such help.“

Smuggling

Referring to illegal sales of coca, he indicated that they are still going on. albeit
on a smaller scale than formerly. and added that the Chapare area, for example, is a

highly troublesone one because, as a result of various factors, the contraband pro-
duced there cannot be controlled completely.

he mentioned that the smuggled coca is sold on the black aarket and oomnds very
profitable prices. He stated that the coca leaves can nor be purchased at the col-
lections points controlled by an office established for that purpose. There the

retailers can, with the proper authorisation, purchase the product in limited quan-
tities, and this has eliminated the niddlenen or wholesalers.”

9870
C50: 5300/2054
INCREAS- ILLEGAL TRANSPORT 0P COCA 1‘0 SANTA sz 82m
La Paz EL DIARIO in Spanish 29 Oct 81 p 5

l'l‘ext] During the past few days the National Bureau for Cmtrol of Hazardous Sub-
stances has detected a considerable amount of sluggling of coca produced in Chapare
province and is being sent to Santa Cruz department in order to make cocaine.

Word of this was given to BL DIARIO by the Bureau's head, Canmander Javier Guerrero,
when he reported the presence of narcotics dealers who have been cperating in the
Chapare and have used paths which were opened up by other persons who had engaged in
such operations on a large scale but whose factories were destroyed.

He pointed out that its topography sakes cmtrol measures in that area very difficult
and. besides, that the required means and personnel are lacking. because of financial
limitations that make it necessary to operate with mly the means currently
available and without being able to count on any type of support.

Commander Guerrero reiterated that at present the Chapare area is the one posing the
greatest problems, since. aside from the smuggling of coca. it has various groups of
narcotics dealers who process small quantities of cocaine in workshops that are moved
about.

He added that at various places the dealers use ditches and other installatims that
had been destroyed previously when the Armed Forces uncovered enormous cocaine
factories. He said that ”The terrain is too rough. and this makes it impossible for
our personnel to exercise a stricter control. Despite the financial limitations
under which we labor. we are making every possible effort.‘

..

Pe rpetrators

The head of the Bureau for Control of Hazardous Substances mentioned that the perpe-
trators are continuing to carry on intensively their operaticns throughout the country,
particularly in the districts comprising La Paz. Cochabnba and Santa Cruz, which are
regarded as the most problematicsl ones because of the existence of small factories
that still operate widely.

He announced that within the past few days 58 kilos of cocaine have been burned in
the city of Cochabamba, as well as 300 marihuana plants in Santa Cruz, and also 15

drums of confiscated coca, sulfuric acid. sodium carbonate. and other items used in
manufacturing the drug.
Upon being asked about the confiscatim of 1,000 kilos of cocaine Era February to
now, Conuander Javier Guerrero stated that that is the amount confiscated in all of

Bolivia and that most of it has been burned, there remaining in the bureau's ware-
houses only a minimal quantity.

Comander Guerrero pointed out further that the bureau which he heads plans to con-
tinue fighting the narcotics trade and that to do so it has ordered use of its staff
on an around—the-clock basis throughout air natim's territory.

Col lect ion Center

The National Council for Canbating the Narcotics Trade has initiated efforts to
have the Banco del Estado set up an office in Coripata, which lies in Nor Yungas
Province, as a means of facilitating installatim of a Coca Leaf Collection Center

there. a location regarded as one of the main places at production within the La
Paz department.

An important passage in the letter the council has written to the uanager of the Banco
del Estado states the following: "It is hereby requested that you consider, as an
extrenely urgent matter, establishing at Coripata. in the province at Nor Yungas, a
branch office of the Dance del Estado. an action that we regard as absolutely
essential for us to be able to set up a Collection 8nbcenter.‘

9870
C50: 5300/205‘
RELATION semen: PM!” POLICIES, COCA IRWIN ESTABLISH)

La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 29 Oct 81 p 3

[Article by Luis Antenna Ergueta: "Official Agrarian Policy and the Production of
Coca'l

[Text] 0n prior occasions we have referred to various agrarian policies of the
administrations that have been in paler during approximately the past 50 years and
we have confirmed that, unfortunately, as a result of antiprotectimist and free-
trade tendencies, the import of agricultural goods which impinges upon national pro-
duction has grown apace to such an extent that our country finds it necessary to
import greens, potatoes, and potato starch, fruits, and, of late, even peppers.

On the other hand, we have pointed out that owing to those policies, which are now in
effect more than ever before, the value of our foodstuffs imports has risen to over
200 million dollars and in the next 10 years that aswnt will double, thereby plunging
Bolivia into still greater dependence, with the further complicatim that mining will
no longer be able to provide foreign exchange to the importers as it has unfailingly
done hitherto. Nowadays even our production of beer is based on raw materials from
Chile, Germany, Peru and other countries, and it does not contribute any foreign
exchange for our government's coffers.

Coca Production

The agricultural policy of bringing in products and selling them (II the national market
at low prices has resulted in our country's farmers no longer supplying the market,
owing to a simple fact: they no longer derive any benefit from selling their predicts
at prices that entail losses, inasmuch as the imported products are much cheaper than
those grown in our country, not because production costs in themselves are lower but

because production is protected and subsidized by the countries from where those
imported foodstuffs cue.

Thus our country's farmers have becale caspletely discouraged and, since they cannot
produce foodstuffs profitably, they have to produce other its-s which will in fact
bring them sane gains.

This is what has brought into the picture the production of coca in the Yungas. In
other words, by means of certain policies it has adopted, the government itself
indirectly encourages the production of coca. We do not say that this problem is a
new one, inasmuch as it has been going on for quite sue tile.

10
if one visits the Yungas region, one can readily see that the farmers are not the
least bit interested in growing greens, potatoes or even fruit, because those crops
are no longer profitable. The situation has readied a point wherein the Yunga
farmers have been thrown into a grave crisis, with that richly endowed region in a
state of decay.

Inasuuch as the farmers must earn enough on which to live, what they have done, in
view of the agricultural policies of various administrations, is to devote themselves
to producing coca, which is the only thing that enables them to carry on and brings
returns for the Yungas region. an area that ultimately will have derived its livelihood
frat coca.

it thus turns out that it is the goverment itself that pralotes the production of
coca in the warm valleys of La Pa: and Cochabanba, because the farmers lack any other
means to earn a livelihood. Since foodstuffs continue to be brought in frat abroad.

coca production will continue increasing despite the good intentims of the
authorities.

Unavailing Curbs

The adoption of certain measures to curb coca production has been decided upon, but
evidently those measures are not giving positive results. Quite the contrary, the
plantings will increase and undoubtedly clandestine production of coca will take

place, due to the difficulties involved in exercising cmtrol over so wide a territory
as that of the Yungas. Moreover. if an attempt were made to limit the planting of
"domesticated' coca, it might cause an increase in the planting of 'wild' coca, which
is the kind that cocaine producers prefer. In addition, the wild coca, given its char-
acteristics, will grow in the fashicn that grass does and will not only thrive in areas
where it will grad naturally but will spread to other parts of the country and even

to foreign land.

Solutions

The only way to control coca production effectively is to provide econaic and financial
incentives to farmers located in the warm valleys. Besides, there out be agricul-
tural policies that will do away with the "Iuinifundioe' or mail farusteads, indi-
vidual production and primitive growing methods, and will, in additiau, promote national
production by means of subsidies that will constrain importation.

Once the farmers obtain worthwhile earnings from other crept. they autcmatically will
stop growing coca. Moreover. the farmers of the warm valleys will theulselves becaae
the opponents of production of that leaf.

However. as 1mg as the country's agricultural policies are not changed and the
methods that have ruined the country's farm production subsist, coca production will
continue to increase, with the natural consequences.

The problel's solution lies therefore in the government refraining frat pro-noting coca
production through the mistaken policies it is follaling.

9870
C50: 5300/2054
DRUG RING BUSTED, 100 [(0 OF COCAINE SEIZED
PY271b38 La Paz Radio lllinani Network in Spanish 1130 GMT 27 Nov 81

[Text] The National Antidrug Council carried out an operation which resulted
in the seizure of approximately 100 kg of cocaine on Hednesday night. This
information was disclosed by Council Chairlian Col Ilene Ocalpo.

Colonel Ocampo released this information to the press adding that today he will
meet with President ‘l‘orrelio Villa whom he will brief on the results of the ueetim
which he. Ocawo. attended in Brazil.

The chairman of the Antidrug Council reported that his organization is constantly
carrying out operations related to its specific functions. Es dded that one
such operation was carried out on Wednesday night.

[Begin Ocanpo recording] A great quantity of drugs. We believe that there were
more than 100 kg of cocaine. We hope to be able to unravel the ties among these
drug traffickers and to arrest every member of the ring. [End recording]

He also said that the noses of the persons arrested cannot be disclosed because
the investigations are continuing and raids and arrests are taking place.

[Begin Ocanpo recording] Judging by the anounts of drugs found to be in their
possession. I would any that these people are part of a foreign drug ring.
Il-an recording]

"compo indicated that Bolivians, as well as foreign citizens, are involved in
the uncovered drug ring. Asked if the anount of drugs seized during the latest
operation was the largest so far. Ocaqm said:

[Begin Ocanpo recording] Well, there have been operations where more drugs were
seized [passage indistinct]. [End recording]

The recent operation was carried out by officials of the Antidrug Council alone.
Colonel Ocsmpo said that during yet another operation carried out in Santa Cruz
.1 drug factory was raided.

[Begin Ocanpo recording] A very large factory located in an inaccessible place
which we managed to reach. There we had some problems because the drug traffickers
caught sense of our agents and beat them up. I have visited then in the hospital

12
and they are in a pretty bad shape. very bruised. [Passage indistinct] According
to the information supplied by these agents the drug traffickers were heavily
armed. There, we did not arrest anybody but we did find a very large factory.
[Bnd recording]

The chairman of the Antidrug Council also reported that in view of all these
developments the president of the nation has issued instructions to military
units to cooperate with the council in the attainment of its objectives.

[Begin Ocanpo recording] His excellency has issued orders that any military
unit, anywhere in Bolivia, should cooperate with us whenever we need it. [words
indistinct] [End recording]

Colonel Ocanpo was also asked about the actions which his council is undertaking
to arrest drug traffickers who are wanted by the courts.

[Begin Ocanpo recording] As you know two persons have already gone to the United
States to answer to the courts there. [Words indistinct] [End recording]

He also explained the progress of the coca farmers census underway in Bolivia:

[Begin Ocampo recording] The census is developing normally and we expect that
it will end on the scheduled date. [End recording]

650: 5300/2081

13
I'll-Jill La l'.w.. 28 Nov (l'l-llJL‘l) -- The Bolivian Coven-ant hee approved a new leu on
harm: in: which establishes utrlt'l rules i or the eerketin. and production of dangerous
drug-u .wltnmlvdges fort-lgn courts and aboliehee local i-unitiee. The new 1- eleo
establishes a state eonupoly for buying and selling coca leaves.

Ax [or foreign courts. the law establishes that any governent which finds thet its laws
have been violated will be entitled to request the extradition from bolivia of the cri-inels
who have been sentenced by the country's own courte.

By abolishing local inunities. the law establishes that any official uhoee behavior falls
under the terms of the nee law will be put at the diepoeal of the judicial branch as an
ordinary crininal. in this way. those officers the been. publicly involved with cocaine
taint-king while perfonuns govern-ental duties will be handed over to the courts.

The new law also empowers the Bolivian Govern-ent to esau-e control. to inspect end to
regulate the sowing, gnwlnx. marketing and storing carried out for the purpoee of
manufacturing or producing dangerous drugs.

"'Iu- Lw provides tor and punishes the illegal eenufecturin; and marketing, storing. use

.-r consumption or doom-roux drug»: and it concentrates the production of coca leavee in
[he di-parlm-uls of Cochhhhnbh and Lu l'ax. declaring as illegal ell coca plantations outside
lIu-iv «It‘lldrlm‘nts.

l'lu' luv establishes prison term: ranging iron 5 to is years and fines quoted in dollars
and ranging I'm- $6.000 to $60,000. according to each case.

It should he noted that Bolivia is the world's largeet producer of coca leaves. of basic
”mun-- paste and of cocaine hydrochloride. Thin furniehee the bolivien Covert-ant with
.. x-mlrls' lm'um- ni ulmut 51 billion. while 52 billion eore are lost because of muslin.

Muir-line. in Kllld it's vhlu'll m-rt- ntldu- during 1981 All! which have been M11315“! by 0.5.
lll:l|‘,-|‘Iilll"-. illnsr 52 hi lllull bring :Ilmu! $30 billion on the “.8. 1110.11 Ill’klt.

C80: 5300/ 2087

14
BRIEFS

ANTIDRUG COUNCIL OFFICIAL--Col Rene Demo, director of the National Anting
Council, yesterday left for Hashington where he will act with State Department
and DEA officials to discuss projects related to the diversification of crops
designed to replace coca plantations. [PY021247 Ls Pa: Radio Illiami Network
in Spanish 1130 GMT 1 Dec 81]

ANTIDRUG INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGN--Bolivia has made a wholehearted appeal to the
international community to promote a worldwide campaign to fight the production
and traffic of drugs, evils against which the Bolivian Government has declared
an all-out war. The appeal was aade by Bolivian Ambassador Fernando Ortiz Sans
at the 36th UN General Asseably session which was held recently in New York.
[Begin Ortiz San: recording] It must be understood, Mr President, that we have
not cone here to ask for help to solve a domestic probl- but to promote dare-
ness about a serious worldwide problea by making known what is happening in our
country and to propose to the United Nations a worldwide capaign which may

be instrumental in saving the unfortunate drug victims, in reducing the chances
of becoming addicted and in helping all governments to fight drug addiction, not
in rehabilitation clinics--the final stage, in which the huuulbeing has already
been destroyed--but at its origin, that is. the coca and poppy plantations and
related crops. [End recording] [Excerpts] [PY011720 La Par Radio Illinani
Network in Spanish 1130 GMT 1 Dec 81]

COCA PLANTATIONS CURTAILED--The National Antidrug Council has issued a warning
to all Bolivian coca farmers. The council has issued an official colaunique
pointing out that any expansion of their traditional coca plantations will be
considered illegal and punished drastically. The official conaunique stated that
in keeping with the new law on drug control and antidrug struggle any expansion
of coca plantations from their size at the time of the last census of coca
farmers which is being currently analysed, will be viewed as a criae. It
further added that any expansion of traditional coca plantations will be
drastically punished, with those responsible liable to prison sentences of

5 to 10 years and fines ranging froa 100,000 to 1,000,000 Bolivian pesos; and
that the state does not forfeit its right to confiscate the land of the farmer-
should it belong to hin--and assign it to the National Agrarian Reform Board

for further allocation. The communique resinded that transport of dangerous
drugs and coca leaves in quantities greater than those officially registered

for marketing and personal use by the receiving stations in La Pa: and
Cochahanha, is totally forbidden. The owners and drivers of vehicles involved
in this kind of transport who violate this law will be sentenced to prison

terns ranging from 3 to 8 years, their vehicles will be confiscated and they
will pay fines ranging from 20,000 to 500,000 Bolivian pesos. [Text]

[PY24l3lS La Paz Radio Illimani Network in Spanish 0100 GMT 24 Nov 81]

C80: 5300/2078

15
exTENT 0F DRUG TRAFFICKING. CONTROL PROBLEMS DISCUSSED
Sao Paulo 0 BSTADO DE SAD PAULO in Portuguese 25 Oct 81 p 136
[Article by Renato Lombardi]

[Text] 0n the corner of Rue Peixoto Gomide and Parque Trianon. in the area of

the Gardens in Sao Paulo. a young man. well dressed. briefcase in right hand. waits
impatiently, constantly consulting his watch. It is about 0900 hours. In the
movement of cars and pedestrians. a yellow Mercedes Benz sports car approaches, with
a brunette at the wheel. Two taps on the horn and the young man moves in the
direction of the car. enters and places the briefcase on the floor of the car.

After a few turns. the car stops a few meters from a traditional high school. As
the young man opens the briefcase. four armed men arrive. They are police officers.
in the false bottom of the briefcase they find almost 1/2 kilogram of cocaine.
brought in from bolivia for distribution to a group of men and women who frequent
certain nightclubs in the capital.

In another part of the city. Sao Miguel Paulista. a poor working-class neighborhood.
three young men are talking together by a pool table in s small bar. when a young
boy. barely more than 12 years old. approaches and offers to sell them marihuana.
"How much do you want? It's real cheap. and good stuff." Drugs are available on
nearly every street corner. except for cocaine. which is ”very expensive and used
only by the upper classes. not by working people." said a trafficker being held in
the DEIC [State Department of Criminal Investigation].

ﬂow to combat the traffickers? A recent study released by the Federal Police
revealed that from 800 kilograms to a ton of cocaine enters Brazil every year. for
domestic consusption. With each passing day the drug rings are better organised.
using planes and clandestine landing fields to transport the drugs. "bile the drug
dealers are finding ways to pass the drugs. the police are continuing to have prob-
lems combating this type of crine.‘ In Sao Paulo. 8-year-old boys are using
marihuana and sniffing glue. and under the influence of drugs they are committing
robberies and even murder.

The Narcotics Division is powerless to prevent the action of the traffickers. The
Civil Police have only 60 men in their specialized drug control section to conduct
investigations in the capital and in Greater Seo Paulo. High officials of the Civil
Police claim that the officers of the 50 districts in the capital and the 36 police
precincts in Greater Sao Paulo. as well as the Military Police. also conduct

l6
investigations into the traffic and use of narcotics. but these officers do this
type of work only when called upon or when they receive complaints. because their
time is taken up with another crime that is causing public concern: assault and
armed robbery in the streets. homes. offices and industries.

In the first half of this year. the D316 Narcotics Division seized 2.5 kg of
cocaine. 636 kg of marihuana. 28 microdots of LSD and 475 spray bottles of ether;
they arrested l5? people in the act and booked 6 individuals for investigation. ’ The
Drug Divison of the Federal Police in Sao Paulo arrest some traffickers. but the
feds are more concerned with what they call the "headmen." the exchange between
Sao Paulo and other states. the routes used to transport large quantitites of
cocaine and marihuana.

Ideally. Sao Paulo should have a Narcotrics Department with all means of combat
available to it: new cars. funds for investigators to pursue their work and better
means of communication. Today organized gangs can monitor all police movements

with electronic gear bought in any specialty store. Host arrests occur on the
fringes: small traffickers of marihuana or psychotropic drug‘addicts. Cocaine
addicts--individuals with a secure income. frequenters of fashionable clubs and
show business people--are difficult to arrest. The police claim it is impossible
to cover certain clubs and parties because they do not even receive dinner money.
a little over 100 cruzeiros. when they work outside regular hours.

An investigator who worked for some time with the DBIC Narcotics Division said
there are large numbers of cocaine addicts and dealers in Sao Paulo (although
fewer than in Rio de Janeiro). but is is difficult to catch them. "If you simply
compare the two cities. it would appear that everything is fine in Sao Paulo. no
problems, whereas in Rio there are artists. doctors. businessmen, prominent people
involved in cocaine traffic or abuse. But it is not true that Sao Paulo has "no
problems." The problem is the same. The police know where the traffickers and
addicts are. but it is difficult to go there. to get in. A police officer is
recognized a mile away. There is no organisation for this type of investigation."
“he is to blame for this lack of support? The men in charge of this type of
investigation say they do what they can. but they have problems. The police.
complain. among other things. that their cars break down and they are forced to
work with black and white vehicles. "The traffickers see us coming. We might as
well turn on the siren." said an investigator.

About 10 percent of the primary and secondary school students in the city of Sec
Paulo are addicts or have already tried drugs. according to Haj Bdson Ferrarini.
of the Sao Paulo Military Police. He puts volatile intoxicants (which includes
shoemaker's glue) and marihuana first on the list. because they are easily pur-
chased at prices within reach. A marihuana cigarette purchased near a school costs

from 200 to 300 cruzeiros.

As a result of the large number of addicts. school officials have been receiving
guidelines frompoliceexperts and many of them attend classes on drug prevention
at the Civil Police Academy. Teachers now observe their students and basically

follow these instructions:

a) Before taking any position. teachers must be certain of the symptoms and
causes to make a proper diagnosis of drug cases in the school; b) do not confuse

17
these symptoms with those of some illness or even the chracteristics of the age
group; c) if a drug abuse case is positively identified. ascertain. if possible. if
the student is an experimenter. a social user or a dependent; d) do not discuss it
with a student if he is under the influence of drugs. avoid emotional appeals and
do not expel the student unless he has been given every possible opportunity.
including recourse to clinical treatment; e) talk with the student's group or
friends to get as much helpful information as possible; f) maintain discretion is a
case occurs in the school, because the news will spread quickly and will sometimes
be distorted; g) if a teacher is questioned in class after a possible encounter with
a drugged student. he should say it is a medical problem. and if he is asked ques-
tions about drugs. he should respond if he is sure of the symptoms. causes and
type of drug.

Delinquent minors. interned in the units of the State Institution for Child
Welfare [FEBEH] in Sao Paulo for assault and murder. admit to being drug addicts.
and most of them are on drugs whentheycommit crimes. N.A.. aged 12. has killed
four people. two of them during robbery attempts. and says he cannot survive with~
out smoking marihuana every day. "Now I am here in FBBEH." he explains. "I ask

for a cigarette. but there are days when my mouth is dry. I begin to shake and I
smoke one cigarette after another to try to solve the problem."

in the House of Dentention in Sao Paulo the situation is different from that in

the FEBEH units. Despite supervision. merihuana comes into the prison and recently
there were several fatalities when two gangs fought over drug sales to the almost
7.000 inmates.

According to a police chief in Rio de Janeiro. not even the deaths discourage drug
trafficking and abuse. Several people have died at gatherings where there was
cocaine. The most recent case was millionsiress Denise Martins dos Santos. aged
21. victim of an overdose of cocaine taken by vein. Other drug victims: Ana
Lidia. aged 8. in Brasilia; Arscelli, aged 10. in Vitoria; and Vera Lucia Cardin.
in Curitiba. According to the police. the greatest number of drug-related deaths
in the country and in Latin America occur in Rio de Janairo. Claudia Lessin
Rodrigues was killed during a "cocaine session" in July 1977. Bar killer. Michel
Frank. is still at large in Switzerland. where he fled. Young people who have died
as a result of a cocaine overdose include Claudia Maria. in Petropolis; Maria

de Lourdes Portela. in Jacarepagua; Maria Isabel Comes. in Niteroi; and Gisela
Faber. in the Hotel Jomar in Botafogo.

Millionairess Gladir Maria Cato-Frets. mentioned in the society columns in Rio de
Juneiro. died in her apartment with a hypodermic syringe in her thigh. injecting
cocaine. According to the police findings. Felipe Aguiar de Oliveira. aged 20. a
surfer. jumped from the apartment of millionairess Denis Huniz Tagher after self-
ndninistering a dose of cocaine. In the last 2 months, traffickers were arrested

in Rio de Janeiro and the police seized checks and note books with the addresses
and telephone numbers of artists and entrepreneurs. all cocaine buyers.

Brazil is the point of contact and reexport of cocaine to the United States and
Europe. Clandestine laboratories to convert coca paste into cocaine hydrochlorate
have been uncovered in Rio de Janeiro. The fractionated drug was sold in Sao
Paulo and Rio. Coca paste enters across and extensive border--3.126 kilometers

18
with Bolivia and 7.765 kilometers with Peru and Colonbia. The traffickers who
operate on Brazilian and Bolivian territory generally use the routes tron Cocha-
banba and Santa Cruz de la Sierra to Corn-be. Camp Grande, Rio and Sao Paulo.

Those who come from Coloobis transport the cocaine via Leticia. Rio Branco and
Hanaus, the route also used for the United States. According to the Federal Police.
Rio de Janeiro State continues to receive practically all the coca paste; after it
is prepared in laboratories. it is distributed to the rest of the country and to the
United States.

6362
C50: 5300/20/08
TRAFFICKERS ARREST 1“ R10 WITH DRUGS VALUBD AI 500.000 CRUZEIIOS

Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 27 Oct 81 p 78

[Text] Retired Marine Sergeant Nileon Vieira dos Santos. aged 43. responsible for
supplying drugs to various points in Greater Rio de Janeiro, was arrested yesterday
at his home in Vigario Geral. After a 20-day vigil. police found 50 kilograms of
marihuana and Sb packets of cocaine, valued at 500,000 cruzeiros. at the house.

Arrested with Nilson were his wife, Francisco da Sousa Santos (they were both taken
to POLINTER [Interstate Police] in Niteroi) and his daughter, N.. aged lb. who was
taken to the Division for Protection and Aid to Minors. Another son. Nelson, aged

18, who is a paratrooper. arrived as the police were leaving. When he saw his
parents in handcuffs. he commented: 'ﬁhis had to end badly." He was not arrested.

Operation

After arresting several small traffickers and addicts in various parts of the city.
civil and federal police and agents of the P-2 (Military Police Secret Service)
learned that Sergeant Nilson was one of the major drug distributors in Greater Rio.
At that point they began to watch his house at 109 Rue Porto Principe in Vigario

Geral.

For about 20 days the agents took down the license numbers of cars parked in front
of the house. Finally. yesterday. they were sure this was really a drug sales
point. Posing as a buyer, a police officer drove up in his own car, knocked on the
door and was admitted by the sergeant.

Suspicious of the activity outside the house (he saw armed agents), Nilaon began
to question the police officer and tried to throw him off. but the officer spotted
two packets of cocaine and a small packet of marihuana behind the television set.
The sergeant then decided to admit he was an addict.

6362
050: 5300/2068

20
GERMAN CHARGED WITH TRAFFICKING NINE TONS OF HARIHUANA ARRESTED

Rio dc Janeiro 0 61.030 in Portuguese 27 Oct 81 p 8

[Text] Sao Paulo (0 GLOBO)-—The Foreign Section of the Federal Police reported
yesterday that on 22 October. in Sao Paulo. they arrested Karl-Heinz Wichnann.
German, aged 27 accused by his government of having sent over 9 tons of narihuana
from Jamaica to west Gert-any. Hichnann is being held under preventive detention.
decreed by Justice Minister Abi-Ackel. pending extradition to ﬂeet Germany.

 

Karl-Heinz Rode. "est German counaul general in Sao Paulo. reported that in January
of this year Nichnann shipped 9.2 tons of narihuana from Jamaica to the port of
Hamburg. The grass went as cargo on the ship "Caribe Express." of the Bapeg Lloyd

shipping company. The cargo was seized by West German police when the ship began
to unload in the free zone of Hamburg.

Hichmnn was arrested in Sao Paulo on 22 October. at the door to the office of
Attorney Nassig Bussaf. He is also suspected of dealing in cocaine. In the
Brooklin district. at the hone of hie secretary. Rosa “aria da Silva. with who- he
lives. police seized 115 grams of coca paste and a precieion scale. In addition.
the two passports found in his possession contain entry visas for Bolivia and
establish that he traveled the route Brazil°United States-Guatemala.

21
According to the west German consul general. Thomas Roesler. a cohort of Rich-sun,
is under arrest in Hal-burg. Roesler was to receive the 9.2 tons of nrihuana.
Police found a letter in his possession in which Hichmnn had given detailed
instructions as to how the narihuana was to be picked up from the ship, how it was

to he sold at a profit and where to forward part of the shipment.

Karl-Rein: Hichnann. who worked in West Germany as a customs dispatcher. had not
been seen in his country after the arrest of Thomas Roesler. According to the
Brazilian police, however. during this period he had not suspended his international
trafficking activities.

At his interrogation by the Federal Police. the German declared that he had traveled
to Bolivia as a tourist. “to adaire the scenery."

The Federal Police also booked for investigation a friend of Uichnann. Heat Ger-an

Hermann Hartwt Rubnch. aged 28. who confessed he was the true owner of the cocaine
found in the Brooklin house.

6362
C50: 5300/2068

22
BRIEFS

REACTION T0 TRAFFICKBR'S ESCAPE-A DPP [Federal Police] scarce said yesterday that
Gen Hoacir Coeiho's decision to proaote an investigation of the DP? in Rio. follow-
ing the escape of Trafficker "Osmany Rance. "is holding up the appointnent of a
replacement for Chief Roberto Porto." The sale source added that the director
general of the OP? is anxious to appoint a "hard nan." and had been forced to make a
survey of candidates in various states because he is having difficulty finding the
"ideal name." Yesterday the source said that Chief Robert Porto had asked to be
allowed to resign "at his own request." but General Coelho turned him down; "he was
very irritated. not only at the escape of the trafficker but at the breaches of
discipline that were occuring in the Rio region." Meanwhile. the version supplied
by the three prison guards of the escape of Hos-any Ramos was viewed with acne
scepticism. According to the guards. Hosnany had peruission to stay in the corridor
while they were watching television. lie slaned the door. locking than in. and
before they could open it he went down a long hall. opened the door to the street--
where two sentry guards were posted-and took off in a taxi. [Text] [Sao Paulo

0 ESTADO DE 5A0 PAULO in Portuguese 27 Oct 81 p 17] 6362

GANG RIVALRY IN URUBU--For some tine trafficker Ricardo Luis de Oliveira. aged 22.
has been fighting a real "war" with other traffickers for control of drug sales in
Horro do Urubu. in Cavalcante. driving hundreds of fanilies fro. their shanties.
Oliveira was arrested early yesterday morning in Nilopolis by a police teas from
the Third Operations Sector of the DRPA [Division of Automobile Thefts and Robber-
ies]. Ricardo stated that he had gone to that city to buy weapons and aaaunition
and to hire a "gang of young nan" to fight Nei Barbudo and Cerlinhos do Radio. his
enemies. who lead the rival gang. Ricardo. who lives on Rua Todos oe Santos in
Pilares. was booked for vagrancy in the DRPA. since Chief Juarez Lisbon did not
find any weapons or drugs in his possession. The gangster denied the allegations of
several Urubu residents that he is among those responsible for the violence that
has forced thee to seek refuge in a Catholic church every nightfall for several
days. According to Ricardo. "the coauotion is with the gang on the other side of
the hil." He denied nistreating any of the hill residents. In the DRPA. in addi-
tion to adnitting to two assaults. Ricardo related that the war on the hill is
caused by traffickers Nei and Carlinhoe do Radio. leaders of a ring that includes
gangnen Poca. Hininha. Regildo. Antonio Carla-Preta and Denice. He said they are
the ones who are terrorizing the hill. atteapting to take over his aaribuana and
cocaine sales point on Rua Piquiri. The rival gang wants it because the action is
better. with net receipts between 10,000 and 15.000 cruseiros. [Text] [Rio de
Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 10 Oct 81 p 121 6362

23
COCAINE TRAFFICKER ARRESTﬂl IN NAPLES--Day before yesterday in Naples [Italy].
police specialists in drug conbat arrested Nilda Nelci. aged 28. a native of Rio
de Janeiro. and traffickcr Vicenzo Tronbino on charges of transporting cocaine
manufactured in Bolivia for distribution to Italian addicts. According to the
local authorities, the Brazilian was serving as a "courier." Seven other individ-
uals were subsequently arrested on suspicion of belonging to a ring that organized
traffic between South America and Italy. At the end of a series of arrests. the
police had seized a total of 3.5 kilograms of pure cocaine. valued at about
$600.000. or approxiuately 67.2 eillion cruseiroe. [Text] [Sao Paulo 0 BSTADO DE
5A0 PAULD in Portuguese 24 Oct 81 p 17] 6362

'PROVIGIL' TRAPPICKERS ARRESTED--Sao Jose do Rio Preto. Sao Paulo (O GL030)-
Federal Police yesterday arrested three drug traffickers who operated in Sao Jose
do Rio Preto and Catanduva. and seized 2.600 tablets of the drug Provigil. acquired
in Paraguay. At the police precinct. the arrested--Carlos Robert Santana. Jose
Ferreira Silva Filho and Adair Horgilli--confessed that they had been selling Pro-
vigil for several eonths. They said they paid 600 cruzeiros for each tin of 200
tablets in Paraguay. and subsequently sold each tablet for 200 to as much as 500
cruzeiros. According to the Federal Police precinct. Provigil is comparable to
cocaine. procaine. and tetracaine. [Text] [Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese

1 Oct 81 p 6] 6362

C50: 5300/2048

24
PERUVIAN COCAINE TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED IN ARICA
Santiago EL HERCURIO in Spanish 1 Nov 81 p c 5
[Article by Roberto Lira Osorio]

[Text] Arica--Hambers of this town's Customs Service Group 0.8. 7 have arrested
four Peruvian citizens, one of them a woman. and seized 2 kilos of cocaine.

The arrests were made in broad daylight in the lrazil Park after two of the suspects
offered their goods and then went to the O'Biggina Street Terminal for Peruvian

buses arriving in Baquedano where their accomplices were waiting.

With the capture of these people. the first Drug and Narcotics Control Section
[580008] of the Customs Service Group 0.5. 7 has completed its 10th case of cocaine
trafficking seizing nearly 26 kilos of cocaine.

First Arrests

The first two traffickers were arrested on Friday at about 1300 hours. They were
identified as Tomas Caljaro Vilcanqui. a 31-year-old married merchant. and his wife
Antonia Chambilla Colque. 27. also a serchant. both residents of Teena.

According to information obtained by this newspaper. the 530003 staff had previous
information about cocaine trafficking being carried out by Peruvian nationals and
this is why. on Friday morning. they were watching the terminal waiting for the
suspects.

After arriving in Arica. Caljaro Vilcanqui and his wife Chambilla Colque walked
around the streets looking for buyers.

wherever they went. they were kept under police surveillance.

[n the Brazil Park. they made contact with a man whom they assumed to be a buyer
and offered him their goods without realizing that they were surrounded by agents

of the 0.3. 7 group.

when they thought that the deal was close. they started to leave but were arrested
by the police.

Tomas Caljaro tried to resist but was immediately subdued and taken to the police
station.

25
Accunpllces

Later. special agents of the 0.5. 7 went to the Peruvian bus terminal where
accomplices of the couple were waiting. These acconplices were :90 brothers.

Fabiah Mauani Hancheca. 26. single. and Gu-ercindo Haleni Hanehaco. 26. a nerchnnt,
both residents of Tacna.

8796
C50: 5300/2059

26
HISTORY OF ARRESTS, DRUG SBIZURBS IN ARICA DETAILED
Santiago EL HERCURIO in Spanish 26 Oct 81 p C 11

[Article by Roberto Lira Osorio]

[Texr] To infiltrate the underworld of the cocaine traffic is generally dangerous,
not only for those who engage in that traffic. but also for those who have the
responsibility of preventing it. The amount of money involved, as well as the
interests which go beyond a country's borders. has caused nany deaths. Nevertheless,
in spite of Open or concealed threats, the cenpsign against the manufacture,
possession and sale of this alkaloid drug is achieving gradual success. Brigade

03-7 has arrested 39 traffickers and seized more than 800 kgs of this drug in Aries
in the last 5 years, but the organisers and financiers of the trade continue to
operate with impunity in the shadows.

According to 08-7 reports, powerful business-en and isportant citizens of Arica.
who are devoted workers in social and even public development. are the real "brains"
and instigators of this activity.

This is what the most responsible local chiefs of this brigade of carahineros are
saying. They have asple files with all the records of these citizens. whom they

are used to seeing driving modern automobiles or passing the time in expensive
recreation places.

In spite of the secrecy with which such information is nanaged. some names are known
to a large section of the population.

The nsnes of "Yayo Pritis" and "Chino Choy" circulate on another, allost legendary
level. Both of then won judgments against the 0.8. Govern-ant for kidnaping,
forcing payment to them of an impressive indelnisation of several thousand dollars.

Today. according to rusor--nohody can confirn it with any certainty--the first-
mentioned is living somewhere in Colo-bis.

A few years ago, when they dominated the coca traffic. there were 30 other sinor
gang leaders involved directly or indirectly in the lucrative business with then.

Previous Activities

Today the 05-7 has on record in Arica 1,758 narcotics traffickers, 95 addicts, 268
"mules” (persons who transport the drug), 36 financiers. 666 suppliers. 109 chemists

27
and 582 other "participants“ (persons linked to the traffic in various ways). There

have also been 22 deaths of persons belonging to this milieu. In spite of the fact

that this activity gets aost of its income tron overseas sales, Chile is also an
important market, according to 08-7 officials.

They asserted that Arica is the source of supply for Iany prominent figures in the
file, radio, theater and television world, as 9.11 as for Islbers of the press.

8735
C80: 5300/2053

28
SANTIAGO DRUG MARKET CONPISCATION DETAILS GIVEN
Santiago EL HERCURIO in Spanish 26 Oct 81 p 0-11

[Text] The police have emphasized that actually Arica is no more than a corridor
used by the international gangs. "No 'pichicata' (one of the many names given to
cocaine) is Iade hare now-not on the industrial level. If anyone is doing it. it
is for his own use, but not for sale. They know it is very dangerous.

"The biggest laboratories are now in Puno, Juli, Junin, Pachipacura and Puerto
Maldonado in Peru and in other areas along the shores of Lake Titicaca in Bolivia.
The ocaine base. washed, unrefined and very sinilar to the purified product, is
hrs ht down through Tacna and into Arica under cover. Pros there it goes to the
big international markets."

08-7 agents indicated that there are entire Peruvian families working in this
business. "They hire their 'nulea' and sand the shipments. Those in charge of
transporting it come down fron the altiplano only on Hondays--not on any other day
of the week. It appears to be a kind of superstition.”

Commenting on the recent discovery of cocaine base on the yacht Brin, registered
under the 0.8. flag, which was anchored in the bay. they explained that this was
not by any means the biggest shipment seized. According to statistics, Arica has
the highest index of confiscation:

1977: 6 traffickers arrested; 16,6b0 kga seized. 1978:' 6 traffickers arrested;
13,050 kgs seized. 1979: 6 traffickers arrested; 23,050 kga seized; 1980: 2
traffickers arrested; 4.500 kgs seized. 1981: 21 traffickers arrested; 24,129

kgs seized (in only 10 aonths).

Not included in these statistics is the confiscation of 45.9 kgs at Arturo Merino
Benitez airport in Santiago this year, thanks to an investigation begun in Arica.
Arrested on that occasion was an important gang trafficking with New York. The
drug was passed from Peru by a Pull Bus Norts driver in hand-ads earthenware
pottery fron CIHA-Chile.

The”Brin’

Referring to the yacht'Erin:'Os-7 officials commented that this use one of the
traffickers' worst-planned operations. First, they said, the boat was slow, and

29
rapid deployment vehicles are needed to transport the drugs; second, it remained too
long in port (40 days); and, finally, the arrangements for ship-ant were not the
nost original.

Agents discovered that part of the cocaine (lo kgs) was delivered in the Nautical
Sports Club to crew neubers James Edwards Cernsck and K1- Jensen by a Peruvian
contact who had previously served tine in Arica. On being interrogated, he told
the agents all they wanted to know. as well as giving further information which led
to the breakup of an important network that began its first operations in this part
of the continent.

8735
C80: 5300/2053
BRIZPS

POLICE CONFERENCE ON DRUGS, JUVENILBS--Dsliberntions of the Second Congress of
Uniformed Police. held in the Diego Portales building. concluded with speeches on
drugs by Peru and Paraguay and on juveniles by Brazil and Uruguay. The Peruvian
representatives gave a scholarly presentation on the various methods used to
manufacture and transport cocaine hydrochloride by various clandestine organizations
which have been discovered in Peru. The presentation was supported by photographs.
The uniformed police of Brazil discussed the existing legislation on juveniles.

In its most novel articles. Brazilian law gives juvenile judges the authority to
rule "at their own discretion" concerning aid to and protection of the child in an
illegal situation. Today's program included a greeting tron President Augusto
Pinochet at 1000 hours in the Palacio da la Honada. and closure of the program at
1900 hours at the Diego Portales building with a concluding state-ant. [Text]
[Santiago LA TERCERA DE LA HORA in Spanish 23 Oct 81 p 63] 8735

080: 5300/2053

31
TRAFFIQERS KILLED IN VBNDBTTA, cnmaca HILITARIZBD
Bogota EL ESPECTADOR in Spanish 29 Oct 81 p 27-A
[Article by Rafael Sarniento: "Seven Killed in Traffickers‘ Vendetta"]

[Text] Barranquilla. 25 0ctober-In what apparently was a conflict between rival
gangs engaged in drug trafficking and land piracy. seven civilians and a police
officer were killed. while a second police officer and three innocent persons
received gunshot wounds, in Cienaga (Magdalena) and Canarones (Guajira).

According to the police. in the neighboring Magdalene town of Cienaga, b0 ainutes
from Barranquilla, five civilians, including the joint aanager (a wonan) of a
cafe,anda police officer. were shot dead late this afternoon by the occupants of
a camper that was parked for a few minutes opposite the site of the lasaacre and
then disappeared to an unknown destination.

According to acne eye witnesses. there were six or seven persons in the calper.

The victiaa are: Jose Rafael Osorio, Gustavo Sanchez, Rodrigo Aristirabal and
Estela N., and 34-year-old police officer Jose Pontalvo Cantillo who tried to
intervene in the affair in order to prevent the occupants of the Toyota fro-
acconplishing their objective.

Cienaga Hilitarized

After the bloody incidents that occurred this afternoon in the town of Cienaga, the
authorities decided to blockade the town in order to prevent the murderers in the
red Toyota fron escaping. Police sources announced that the town was nilitarired
and that the assassins were being sought throughout the town.

The some sources said that "it is a question of a cruel war between traffickers.
They are gangs that continue to kill each other. but who lanentably annihilate
innocent people like officer Fontalvo Cantillo who was on duty and the young lady
of the cafe where the shooting took place."

According to another source, in Cienaga there has been an escalation of criminal

deeds by persons engaged in drug trafficking. There have been frequent conflicts
between rival gangs. and now that "the business" has turned out badly, because

32
there is little exportation of nrihuana and money is becoaing scarce, the con-
flicts are becoming extrenely alerting.

Two Dead in Cmrones

The Riohacha police confirmed by telephone that two persona engaged in land piracy
were killed in the Guajiran town of Canal-ones. after shooting at a police patrol
and wounding police officer Evelio Carreno.

The two outlaws killed were Manuel Elias Toro Quintana and Bdilberto Molina Correa.
The police said that the dead persons "were accused of various attacks on buses and
private cars in operations that they were carrying out with other pale on the nain
Caribbean highway."

The two individuals were killed when they attacked a patrol that was asking routine
rounds.

8255
cs0: 5300/2067

33
BRIEFS

COCAINE LABORATORY IN TOLIHA-A modern laboratory to process cocaine was found

by members of the Tolima Police Department in building No 4-46 Seventh Street,

in the town of Chaparral. During the police operation Gilberto Oliveros Gonza-
lez and Jose Neftali Zapata were arrested and placed at the disposition of the
circuit penal judge of the above-mentioned town. The following was confiscated
from the laboratory: a package of benzoate of sodium, an arroba [about 25 pounds]
of coca leaves, raw material for the manufacture of alkaloid, three scales, acids,
acetone, 60 cocaine capsules, a 38 revolver and other articles used in the illi-
cit activity. [Text] [Bogota BL ESPECTADOR in Spanish 29 Oct 81 p 27-A] 8255

DRUGS, OTHER CONTRABAND SEIZED--In a successful operation carried out on the
Atlantic coast in the last few hours, National Customs confiscated 14 tons of
maribuana, several kilos of cocaine, and merchandise valued at more than 10 mil-
lion pesos, when several vessels that were used for the transportation of czatra-
hand merchandise were stopped. The biggest confiscations occurred in "La Gaira"
near Santa Marta and Riohacha. where an BOO-ton vessel that was transporting
about 8 tons of marihuana, presumably heading for the United States, was seized.
Another blow was dealt the drug traffickers by the Riohachs customs authorities
when they discovered a cargo of 6 tons of marihuana that was being transported

in a truck that was also stopped. In the same city 616 bundles of foreign cigar-
ettes that were smuggled into the country were seized. They were being trans-
ported in various trucks for distribution. In Barranquilla a motor ship with
merchandise priced at half a million pesos was stopped. Five pounds of pure
cocaine were also confiscated in this same city. In Cartagena and Santa Marta
merchandise. compounds in particular, valued at about 2 million pesos, was
seized. Also seized was a cargo ship that was attempting to take a cargo of con-
traband merchandise worth millions innathe country through the Gulf of Uraba.
This vessel was seized by the "Nito Restrepo" Coast Guard that operates in that
area of the Caribbean. The vessel and its crew were brought to Cartagena,

uhero they will await judicial disposition of the case. [Text] [Bogota

EL SIGLO in Spanish 29 Oct 81 p 2] 8255

cso: 5300/2067

36
ARRESTED COCAINE TRAFFICKERS IMPLICATE PHIUVIANS, COIMBIAN
Quito EL COMERCIO in Spanish 7 Nov 81 p 12

[Text] Three other "interaedisries" in drug trafficking were arrested by agents of

Int :p01 in Pichincha. Those held were surprised with about 1 million sucres and
3,000 grants of cocaine paste.

un 29 October. Julio Leonardo Rosales Calva, 21 years old, Segundo Lorenzo Castillo

Castillo and Luis Ahad Cmbicos, 30 years old. all from Loja, were arrested in this
province.

One thousand nine hundred and forty grams of cocaine paste. separated into four
packets, were found in the hands of the Lujanos. hidden in compartments of a 1981
yellow Toyota Stout 2000 station wagon, property of Julio Rosales Calva. In
addition. 6100.154 sucres were found in another "hiding place."

On being questioned, they advised that they were contracted by Peruvian drug
traffickers, one of whom known as "El Chano," to serve as intermediaries in these
illegal activities with the Colombian drug trafficker known as "81 Chucho,"
foreigners who operate secretely from their countries.

Those arrested tried to bribe the agents with 300,000 sucres in an atteapt to obtain
their freedom.

The prisoners. along with the respective report and the evidence were freed and
were placed under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Allotments of the Judicial Office
of Pichincha.

The Lojn nntive. Francisco Gregorio Halls Chamba. 20 years old, was arrested by
agents of lnterpol in Pichincha. while he was carrying 630,000 sucres hidden in a
secret compartment of a red 1981 Scottsdale station wagon, which had compartments
constructed specifically for the illegal drug trade. The brothers Bernan and Oswaldo
(:mproverde of Loja Province are being sought in this case.

Those arrested with the evidence were placed under the Jurisdiction of the Bureau
of Allotments of the Judicial Office of Pichincha.

35
Ila

 

Drug traffickers captured with cocaine paste and
thousands of sucres destined for illicit drug

trafficking

36
TRAFFICKBRS, CAR THIEVES ARRESTED
Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 16 Nov 81 p 34-A
[Article by Alfredo Jimenez and Luis Segura]

[Text] One of the most active rings of car thieves and drug traffickers, from which
the police recovered 18 late-model vehicles, 150 [as published] toxic pills and
cocaine worth 600,000 pesos. was captured by agents of the Investigations Division.

The ring consists of six Mexicans and one American who for several years engaged in
the theft of automobiles, falsification of documents and drug trafficking.

Fernando Ramon Correa Espindola, Jose Castiglioni Rojas. Jose Luis Fernandez Rubin,
Manuel Sanchez Garcia. Carlos Avila Avila, Juan da la Vega Cruz and Wayne Adana

were members of this ring which operated in the United States and the Federal
District.

The seven prisoners had engaged in operations with stolen cars worth a little over
15 million pesos and generated additional incone free the sale of drugs.

In the home of one of the prisoners. in the Avante district, the police found equip-
ment for the packaging and labeling of prohibited machines.

As for cocaine. American Wayne Adams explained that he bought the drug from a
Peruvian whom he had met in Denver. Colorado. On that occasion. he said, "He
reached an agreement on the delivery of the merchandise."

The drug arrived in Peru. and Adams tried to send it into the United States; how-
ever. he finally decided to sell it in Mexico to Correa Espindola.

During questioning, Correa Espindola admitted he had bought the 18 vehicles from
a man named Hugo Ivan Espinosa de los Monteros y Dominguez for 50,000 pesos apiece.

Later, in complicity with other members of the ring, he printed phony bills of
sale and Federal Automobile Registry cards and sold them to Jose Smeke for 5.000
pesos apiece.

Smoke died 2 months ago: it was he who provided buyers in sales of stolen vehicles.

37
Nlnc or the vehicles were sold to Castiglioni Rojas and the rest to various buyers
with false documentation. For his part. Avila Avila was responsible for transport-
ing the vehicles once the deal had been completed.

Col Francisco Sahagun Baca, chief of the DIPD [Federal District Police Intelligence
Department] said investigations were conducted into car thefts after a series of
reports by owners.

The police chief added that during this investigation the complicity of Fernandez
Rubia, residing at Calls 61 No 8, in the Avante district was uncovered. In that
house. the police discovered machinery, containers and labels to prepare bottles
of amphetamines and toxic pills. 150.000 of which were found in containers and
almost ready for distribution.

The stolen cars. all Lenaron, Dodge Dart, LTD and Mustang models, were sold to
financial adviser Manuel Sanchez Garcia, who is in prison with his accoaplices.

The automobiles. pills. drug and prisoners will be turned over to the proper
authorities.

8la3
CSO: 5300/2075

38
BRIEFS

DRUC TRAFFICKER ARRESTED--The Tingo Maria civilian guard arrested Arturo
Iparraguirrc Trujillo who was found transporting 50 kg of cocaine base paste

in his pickup to Uchiza from where it was to be anuggled out for sale abroad.
[Lima EXPRESO in Spanish 29 Oct 81 p 35 PY]

CSO: 5300/2079

39
BRIEFS

Four Tons of Heshishu-cuiro. 27 Oct (AFB—Egyptian border guards have seized four
tons of hashish worth an estimated 10 aillion Egyptian pounds (12 million dollars)
as smugglers were trying to land it on the Mediterranean coast. it was reported
here today. But unlike previous landings the traffickers chose the north eastern
coast near the border with Libya. where the desert terrain and high cliffs hid
their vessels. the papers said. At Cairo Airport custous officers stopped a
Syrian national said to have about 15 kilos [33 pounds] of drugs worth sons
600,000 pounds hidden in e suitcase, the newspaper Ab-JMURIYAB reported. [Tut]
[NC271003 Paris APP in English 0947 GMT 27 Oct 81]

C80: 5300/5006
BRIEFS

KHORASAN OPIUH HAUL-~Personne1 of Hashhad's district five police station have
discovered 525 grams of opium following a search of a house in the Azad Shshr
District. They have arrested a couple for possession of the drug. In an
armed clash between nntidrug squad personnel and smugglers in (Shallough)
village near Ssrakhas, 100 kg of opium and a large quantity of illegal arms
were discovered yesterday. [CF291766 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian

1430 GMT 29 Nov 81 CF]

KHORASAN DRUG ARRESTS-—Rcvolution guards in Torbat Jam have arrested on individual
and confiscated 10 kg of opium. in Mashhad, revolution guards have arrested

on individual for possession of 70 grams of heroin. In the same city police have
arrested six traffickers who had a total of 61.95 grams of opium in their
possession. [GP301640 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 30 Nov 81 GP]

DRUG SEIZURES-According to a central news unit report, the Public Relations
Department of the anti-drug court announced: The officials of the central
headquarters of the anti-drug squad and the officials of the Islamic revolution
committees and the police have discovered 41 kg and 92 g of opium, 6.665 kg of
heroin, 4.196 kg of hashish. 3.668 kg of opium residue and 107 g of burnt opiu-
in Tehran from 23 October to 21 November. [Text] [LDZ60806 Tehran Domestic
Service in Persian 1430 GMT 25 Nov 81]

OPIUH SEIZURES-During an armed clash between brother guards and the merchants
of death in the (Kalaksor) pass in Jiroft, 172 kg of opium was captured from the
smugglers. One of the smugglers was injured and arrested along vith two others.
Also. 3,800 grams of (?Afghan) opium was discovered and confiscated from a '
smuggler by officers of the Jushan gendermerie post. [Text] [L0022310 Tehran
Domestic Service in Persian 1030 GMT 2 Dec 81]

THREAT OPIUH DISCOVERY-—Personnel of the Torbat Jam gendarmerie have discovered

15 grams of opium and 50 grams of heroin in a house and arrested the owner.
ICF02192] Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 2 Dec 81]

41
DRUG hAULS--Tehran. 23 Nov (PARS NEHS AGENCY)--(?During the period of Nov 16—21.
the gendaruerie officers have seized some 505 kgs of opium, throughout the
country. according to the gender-erie force of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
According to the report 193 peeple have been arrested in the sale period for
(?drug) smuggling. [Text] [LDOéObOO Tehran PARS in English 1702 GMT 23 Nov 81 Lb]

CONTRABAND CARPETS, OPIUH SEIZURE-~Tehran. 25 Nov (PARS NEHS AGENCY)-0ver the
last two days, the officers of the anti-narcotics HQ discovered 600 valuable
carpets and 358 kilos of Afghan's opiun [word indistinct] of international
smugglers in Tehran and a village in the suburbs of Tehran and arrested

17 smugglers in connection with this felony. Colonel Hansur Bakhtegan. the
head of the anti-narcotics section of the police departuent said to PARS that
the officers have been working on this case for two Ionths and investigations
led to a breakthrough in this case. About the value of these rugs. the
colonel said that except for one carpet, which was very old and thus exorbitantly
expensive. the rest. on the whole were valued at more than one billion rials
(approximately 12.5 million dollars). He added that the smugglers aimed at
taking these out of the country to Southeast Asian countries via Bender Lengeh
in the south of Iran. The head of the police. Colonel Ibrahim Hejazi, viewed
the contraband carpets and opium in the anti-narcotics office of the police
headquarters and highly praised the cooperation of the various officers who

were involved in this breakthrough. [Text] [LD270420 Tehran PARS in English
1115 cur 26 Nov 81 Lb]

CSO: 5300/5327

62
BRIEFS

RUSSIAN EH16“ SENTENCEDuThe district court in Tel Aviv the day before yesterday
passed a seven-and-a-half year priaon sentence for conviction of drug trafficking
on a Jew who recently emigrated from the Soviet Union. The court's decision said
that the accused was the ringleader of a drug trafficking network chose Iabership
consisted of recent enigrea. A very large amount of drugs was discovered in their
possession. [Text] [Jerusalem AL-QUDS in Arabic 29 Oct 81 p lo]

CAZA ANTI-NARCOTICS CAMPAIGN-~‘lhe Gaza police have undertaken an intensive campaign
against individuals who take drugs and who traffic in then. may were able to
detain an 18 year old man from nun Yunis for posseaaion of 350 grain of hashish and
four individuals for taking hashiah. 'lhey also detained three individuals in Rafah
who had in their poaaeaaion 150 grana of hashiah. In al-Burayj canp the police
arrested three individuals for taking haahiah. lhey were all put in jail to await
their trials. [Text] [Jerusalen AL-QUDs in Arabic 28 Oct 81 9 lo]

CSO: 5300/4704

103
INTERNATIONAL DRUG TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED IN ABIDJAN
Abidjan PRATERNITE HATIN in French 12 Nov 81 p 6
[Article by Diaby Salif]

[Text] The war conducted by the state secretariate services for internal security
against drug traffickers has been marked by the arrest of Daouda ﬂamed Haiga. a
Malian citizen, the 36-year-old man who headed the Ghana-Ivory Coast-France network.
Obviously, he is an important personage in the drug traffic and he has been de-
nounced by many of his accomplices arrested in Abidjan, Paris and Bordeaux.

For 6 years. this clever individual, who resided in Kumssi in Ghana, succeeded in
avoidingthe traps set by police and customs agents vhen shipping large quantities
of drugs to Europe.

Hamed Helga fell into the hands of police on 30 October together with his wife Mama
Alassane and his driver Kudufia Hawuko Isaac. They had arrived from Ghana the
day before in a Simca Break belonging to ﬂamed.

The investigation conducted by the police directorate for narcotics and drugs showed
that the trafficker often used ambulances in order to elude police surveillance.

He could thus cross the Ghana-Ivory Coast border with marihuans bags without awaken-
ing police suspicions.

For his compatriots residing in Treichville, ﬂamed Naiga was only a respectable
businessman dealing in cloth, radios and kitchen utensils. In the beginning, when
he would arrive in Abidjan. he would reside in Treichville at his compatriot's
Abdoulaye Hsiga's house. But relations between the two men deteriorated when
Abdoulaye learned that ﬂamed conducted illegal traffic between Ghana and Ivory Coast.

Abdoulaye recalls: “ﬂamed had arrived from Ghana 3 months ago. he had parked an
ambulance in front of my house in Treichville, 24th Avenue. 66th Street. According
to him, it was an ambulance belonging to the Aboisso hospital. The vehicle was
full of bags, which seemed strange. "Having noticed this, I asked ﬂamed never to
set foot in my house again. However. he did come back to see me accompanied by a
European. It was at the end of August. He was never able to convince me to parti-
cipate in his activities...."

46
ﬂamed Maiga has refused to reveal to police the identity of the European man men-
tioned by Abdoulaye. It is believed that he may be a drug trafficker operating
out of France.

It should be noted that traffickers have been arrested by French police in Paris and
Bordeaux. Last October about 200 kga of marihuana were seized, which had been
shipped from Abidjan through the network of Daouda ﬂamed Haiga.

International drug trafficker ﬂamed Maiga. his wife and his driver will be tried in
Abidjan for having violated drug legislation.

 

Fig 1 Fig 2 Fig 3

l. Duouda ﬂamed Maiga, born in 1965 in Bohondo, Bouren area in Mali, father of
7 children: an important personage in the drug traffic between Africa and

Europe.

2. Hana Alassane Helga. 22 (wife of ﬂamed Maiga), resident of Kunaai, Ghana.

3. Kudufia Mawuko Isaac. born in 1946 in Suhum. Ghana, driver of Daouda ﬁnned
Maiga.
BRIEFS

OPIUH SBIZED--A 21-year old Mauritian student use errested yesterday at about 1900
hours shortly after his Air Mauritius planed landed on a flight fro. Indie for
possession of ll 3/6 kilos of rev opiu. The opiu- vss found concealed in one of
his suitcases which hsd s false bottom Police ere investigating the csse and the
suspect is held at the main prison. [Port Louis 1.! M01101!!! in French 1 Oct 81

p ll

(:80: 5300/5613

56
ARMENIAN TERRORIST GROUP TIED T0 SEIZED HEROIN

Police Catch Heroin Gang
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish 28 Oct 81 p 6

IArticles by Claes von Hofsten: "Leaks Led to Heroin Gang")

chxtl It was because of leaks, or "squealing." as it is called in criminal cir-
cles. swung other things. that the police were able to catch the big heroin gang in
Stockholm over the weekend. On Tuesday. the Sollentuna district court called for
the arrest of the shoemaker Kework Vartanian. who was suspected of being the gang's
leader.

Rework Vartanian claims that he is innocent. but that does not worry the investiga-
tive team. The team believes that it obtained enough material to obtain a con-
viction during the period when it was keeping the gang under observation. Part of
that material consists of inside information from the drug organisation Rework
Vartanian is suspected of having led for several years.

According to Public Prosecutor Jerry Hartinger, who is in charge of the preliminary
investigation. this man does not look like the repacious drug dealers the police
usually find at the top of these criminal gangs. Rework Vertaniaa worked as a
shoemaker and lived an apparently simple life devoid of luxury.

"The work of a shoemaker served as a perfect disguise." Jerry Hartiager says.

Following the Trail of the Honey

During the raid over the weekend, about half a million kroner in cash were found
in tho gang's possession in addition to 5 kilograas of heroin. The investigative
team believes that that amount is relatively small when one thinks of the presumed
dimensions of the gang's drug operations.

Against that background. the team members have begun to suspect that the money was
being invested in the Armenian liberation struggle instead of a life of luxury.
Most of the 24 people arrested in the raid are of Armenian origin.

"The investigation will continue to follow the trail of the money." Jerry Martingcr
does not want to say any more than that about the financial aspects of the gang's
activities. The county narcotics team received its first tips to the effect that
Rework Vartanian was involved in drug dealings a few years ago. Their suspecions
were strengthened by additional tips which came in later.

47
Some of those tips came spontaneously from members of the drug gang or from people
who were close to it. The police confirm that they received so-called inside tips
but they do not want to comment on this in any detail out of consideration for the
safety of the individuals providing the information.

However. SVENSKA DACBLADET has learned that. according to those tips, Rework Var-
tnnian himself has said that he dealt in narcotics and that he brought in very large
amounts of money in that way. It is even said that he had over 1 million kronor in
his possession On occasion.

Although Kework Vartanian tried not to handle narcotics himself, there are witnesses
who state that he actually sometimes sold drugs himself. None of the narcotics
which were found over the weekend were directly connected with his, however.

loaded Submachine Guns

When he was arrested in Sollentuna, the police took great precautions. They were
armed with loaded submachine guns. among other things. but they never used them.
Just as the police were ready to move in or him. he dashed out of his apartment
with a comrade. jumped into an automobile and drove off abruptly.

The car had only traveled a short distance when it had to stop because the police
had blocked the road with a number of automobiles. The police were afraid he would

be armed, but he was not. The arrest was undramatic. In all, two pistols were
confiscated from members of the gang.

Flowers from the Chief

On Tuesday, National Police Chief Holger Romander sent a telegram and flowers to
the county narcotics team congratulating them on the result of their efforts.

At present, Armenia is an area which is divided up between Turkey and theSoviet
Union. That area is half as large as Sweden. Armenia last existed as an inde-
pendent state more than 600 years ago.

Many groups are fighting to free Armenia again. Ihe methods used in that struggle
have often included bombings and other terrorist actions.

Four militant organizations are known. During the last 5 years. those four organi-
zntions have taken the responsibility for more than 130 murders and bombings in a
number of West European countries and the Middle East.

Turkish interests have been those organizations' particular target. Most recently
one of those organizations. the Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia, occupied
the Turkish Consulate General in Paris a month ago. A consulate guard was killed
in that action.

Some of the pictures which are published in SVENSKA DAGBLADET today were taken by
the Filmsiussen motion picture company, which has been following the Huddinge
policc's narcotics investigation for several months.

58
I-‘ilnsiussen consists of 7 young moviemakers, including the journalist Staffan
Hildebrand. In two months, TV 1 Fakta will show a documentary film on the work of
the narcotics police.

Extensive Overtime Bork
Stockholm SVENSKA DACBLADET in Swedish 28 Oct 81 p 6
[Article by Hakan Bergstrom: "Narcotics Investigation Which Runs into 0vertime"]

[Text] "On Saturday and Sunday I did 33 hours of overtime, and I was still one of
the ones who worked the least." Police Inspector Kjell Martensson, the chief of
the county narcotics team in Huddinge. was smarizing the efforts of the past
weekend, when 5 ki lograns of heroin were confiscated and 25 people were arrested in
the Stockholm area.

The big narcotics case was handled by the county narcotics team in Huddinge. The
team consists of 20 men, all of whom do at least 350 hours of overtime work every
year. That is the maximum amount of overtime work for which an individual can be
paid.

The prosecuting attorney who is working on the case which is now of current
interest--Jerry Martingernhas brought a bed in and set it up in his office, by
the way. He has been living there for the last few days.

The priorities setup of the Huddinge county narcotics team is rock-hard.

"We hear from the police districts out in the county several times a month asking
for help with big drug cases. We wish we could take care of all of them, but it is

just impossible," Kjell Hartensson says.
When Things Get Hot

Instead. they pay attention to those cases in which the tips are all moving in the
sane direction and those circumstances where things seem to be getting extremely

hot. Perhaps a couple of policemen in the group initiate observation of the suspect,
.md in that way the case gradually grows.

When the county narcotics team moved in over the weekend, 16 of the team's detectives
-..~-:'c involved. An additional 9 men had been borrowed from the Solna, Sollentuna and
‘-“:1by pulicc districts.

lnvcstigat ions take a long time. In the most recent case, the investigation was
started in early sunmer. Nevertheless, it was a quick-moving case.

"Sometimes we get onto a false scent, but there are so many narcotics in circulation
that it is rather surprising if we do not find anything when we get started on a
case," Kjell Hartensson says.

I-‘nrmeriy, the team did not have any equipment of its own. It was obliged to borrow
cameras and binoculars from the police district. But now the situation is improving.

49
"At present. the question as to whether we should be moved into Stockholm is also
being discussed. 0n the condition that we would get to work in the same way as we
are doing now. that could be advantageous," Kjell Hartensson believes.

But that is a condition which is important for the county narcotics team. The team
has a great amount of freedom in doing its work in Huddinge.

"I am afraid we would be subjected to a cumbersome burden of bureaucracy in Stock-
holm," Martensson adds.

Inspiration

The average narcotics investigator in Huddinge is in the 25 to 30-year-old range.
a few are around 40 and only one is over 50.

“It is a hard job, but the people who work here have an unprecedented amount of
inspiration, and consequently there are not many who leave," says Kjell Martensson.

Since the county narcotics team was located in Huddinge 3 years ago, the nucleus of
the team. consisting of about 15 policemen. has been with the team all the time.

Minister of Justice Comments
Stockholm SVENSKA DACBLADET in Swedish 28 Oct 81 p 6

[Article by Sane Olofson: "Minister of Justic%,in the Fight against Dope--He Pro-
mises Increased Resources"] ‘.f

[Textl One of the chief missions of the Swedish police is the fight against nar-
cotics. For that reason, the Narcotics Police are going to get increased resources.
That is what Minister of Justice Carl-Axel Petri has told SVENSKA DAGBLADET.

"Narcotics constitute a breeding grOund for serious crime and they are destroying
our young people," the minister says. "He have tried again and again to change the
priorities assigned to our financial resources. so that narcotics can be combated.

"The budget is being worked on right now, but I think I already can promise better
technical equipment and perhaps more employees." he said.

The administration of the National Police has asked for 15 new Narcotics Police
positions. They probably would be taken from other places in the police organiza-
tion.

"I believe that international investigative activities have to be improved,"
Minister Pctri says. "We already have a man in Thailand who is doing a very fine
job of charting the route followed by narcotics on their way to Sweden. And we
also have a man in The hague and one in Copenhagen. Now we are investigating the
possibility of placing policemen in North Africa and possibly in South America.
We are doing all that in an effort to get to the big dagg dealers.“

50
At prvsent. there are 352 policemen who are working exclusively in the struggle
against drugs. Nevertheless, drug abuse and drug addiction are increasing.

"Three hundred fifth-two policemen constitute a pretty good resource by comparison
with the requirements of other departments." says Tommy Lindstrom, the head of the
National Criminal Police. who, among other things. is in charge of the operational
portion of the struggle against narcotics. "For example. only 120 men are engaged
in fighting the widespread criminal activity of an economic nature." he says. "But
the Narcotics Police's resources are clearly insufficient in proportion to what is
needed and the demands of the public," Lindstrom says. “During the past year. the
National Police's narcotics work has tripled. The field is enormous. Narcotics
are spreading out over the entire country. "Amphetamines produce more dangerous
addicts. Drug abusers are becoming more violent and want to go out into the streets.
I am also concerned about the so-called jet-set drug, cocaine, which is thought to

produce creativity and broad-mindedness, but which quickly brings those who use it
under addiction."

Minister of Justice Carl—Axel Petri praised the efforts of the Huddinge police in
the following terms:

"Those fellows have done a fantastically fine piece of work. They apparently are
motivated by a commitment which compels them to get concrete results. I am proud
of their efforts."

Customs Service Strengthened
Stockholm SVENSKA DACBLADET in Swedish 28 Oct 81 p 6

[Article by Elisabeth Crona: "Strengthen the Customs Service--Ue Have to Be Able
to Afford lt"]

[Text] "we should strengthen the customs service, increase the number of checks
made at certain airports. increase the border guard at Relsingborg and get more
dogs for detecting drugs."

rhe foregoing are measures in the fight against narcotics which Aka Pettersson,
state secretary in the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs, particularly wants
to see included in the coming budget. "These are the most urgent steps which need
to be taken. and they are steps we have to be able to afford, even during a period
”r crisis." he told SVENSKA DACBLADET.

Like nmny others. Ako Pettersson sat and watched the direct telecast of the next-
to-largcst confiscation of dope in the Nordic countries.

"I was happy on that occasion—-enormously happy!" he said. "It resulted from the
fact lhnL the police are using an entirely different system in their fight against
dope. that narcotics divisions have been organized and that the public is providing
tips more frequently."

”Why was it 2 years after the first tip that the raid took place?" he was asked.

51
"The ndvursaries we have to deal with are well organized internationally," he
replied. "They have an extensive arsenal of weapons, including legal advisers.
But it obviously was also a question of resources."

Ake Pettersson does not think increased police resources are the only key to the
solving of du:nroblem. He mentions a number of different organizations which are
taking part in the fight against drugs, including the Ministry of Health and Social
Affairs, the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Trade, because:

The punishment for serious drug crimes was increased in the beginning of July. Now
sentences for drug crimes are also to be in accordance with the degree of ruthless-
ness involved. Not merely grams and kilograms are to be taken into consideration.
Anyone who sells narcotics in a schoolyard or a pimp who makes a prostitute a drug
addict now will receive a more severe sentence.

The police are to continue their so-called annoying activities directed against
small-scale misusers of drugs to prevent them from becoming addicted.

The Copenhagen Problem

It is being observed more and more that drugs are an international problem. Last
week Karin Seder discussed the problem of dope with Kurt Haldheim, the secretary
general of the UN. in January, the Nordic ministers are to meet ot discuss the
Copenhagen problem, among other things. Copenhagen has a steady supply of narcotics.

The proposal for the care of adult addicts is being discussed in the Riksdag com—
mittee just now.

A report is being prepared in the government offices at present which aims at
setting up stricter regulations concerning passes and increasing the difficulty of
smuggling dope into prisons.

Students Will Look For Facts

The Ministry of Health and Social Affairs is getting the second part of its drug
campaign started now. Students 7 years of age and older are to visit offices

engaged in social work. hospitals and the police headquarters in their own neigh-
borhoods to chart the drug situation in order to increase consciousness and strength-
en public attitudes against drugs. "Our brochure containing facts on hashish caused
a turn-around in its abuse," Ake Pettersson claims. "In the Defense Research In-
stitute's compulsory military service examination in the spring, we observed a
decline in the use of hashish for the first time.

"But now, in the fall. there are signs that it is increasing again," he says. "He
will respond to that first with medical arguments--specifically, that hashish is a
poison which can cause young people to remain socially immature-and then with
cultural attitudes--to provide a positive approach to the idea of being free from
drugs.

"If we are not successful on attitudes, our police work will not be successful,"
he says.

52
"Movies which Clarify"

Ake Petterssen has it in for aovie distributors who provide movies which glorify
hashish. Three such films are being shown in Stockholm at present.

"I hope a stricter application of the censorship rules can change that practice,"
he says.

"Crime on an international scale and the fact that narcotics come from other coun-
tries nake it necessary for us to have a tightly regulated inigration program."

he went on to say. "That program is criticized by many people, but we must retain
it."

9266
C50: 5300/2071

53
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-R0982-00850R000400080038-8

COURT DECISIONS IN CANNABIS SH‘UGGLING CASE

London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in halish 28 Nov 81 p 3

[Text]

AN American yuhtsmn .
' equated lut week of
involvemt in t!» blues!
and»: mutant opera-
tion in imam. we: wer-
day ordered to 1y .000
towards ht: d can costs. .

But this cook! be Mutedjo
010.000 if Custom and Excuse
hand over to the Deal Aid
Fund the $5.000 ltbey mm

3.
9
3
g
g?

“castaway. ho
K
treads? ”SW

into thinking the an unmet
hull was stronger than it was.

He ordered Prenun to pav
the full taxed can of his
defence. at £35,000. whetever

C50: 5320/13

gig; ,
gig?
' a
E:
:2
é:
8.3

i
:-
§
1
E

E3"
E?

E
E
S
E

5i;
2%
3?
55?

is;
z .
I
E
§

‘ jury Whig mﬂwn

Mun. 30. an Oxlord (“chute
and 30an British Intelli-
gencu eat. an on] elm;-
‘ling l to” of hubln
mums. valued at more than
£20 million. on to a mole
Seem Island.

,.I;

rm other men who‘ve"
found (cm! on Hood” in the
same we were sentenced to

rise. term 0! up to “x yeus.
.larb. who was jailed on two
909sz charge. has a timber
um next year «mm to
allow duo alum in nu

E

m0

5!.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080038-8