FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10458

14 April 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 17/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

I-‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Dauss

(POUO 17/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA

AUSTRALIA

Briefs
Thai Heroin Traffickers

BANGLADESH

Briefs
Chi ttangong Opium Seizure

BURMA

Opium Seizure in Katha Reported
(mxm mm “Ezm, 18 Feb 82) CUOOOOOOIOOOOOOOIOOIOI.

Briefs
Opium Seized on Train
Acres of Opium Fields Destroyed
COLOMBIA

Recruitment of Indians for Drug Production
(EL TIWO, 21‘ Feb 82) OOOOIoooocceoone-eo0000000000000.

MEXICO
Briefs
Harihuana Seizure
Pure Heroin Seized
Italian LSD Peddlers Arrested
PERU

PAP Leaders Deny Drug Trafficking Involvement
(EL CMCIO, 1-8 Feb 82) OOOIOOCOIIOOOOC00.0.0.0....0...

Bri efs

PIP Cocaine Seizure
PAP Joins Fight Against Drug ‘I'rafficldng

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

IRAN
Briefs
Zahedan Drug Seizure
Poppy Cultivation Ban
Opium, Heroin Discovered
Taibad Seizures
Narcotics Seized
SLR-SAHARA}! AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA

Opium Dealer Sentenced to Seven Years
(Sandra Lieberum; THE CITIZDI, 23 Mar 82) .............

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VEST EIROPE

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Briefs
Fewer Drug-Related Deaths
Frankfurt Dealer Sentenced
German Addicts in Amsterdam

GREECE

Briefs
Narcotics Center Discovered

NETHERLANDS

Three Police Commissioners on Drug Problem, Remedies
(J. Valken, et a1. Interview; ELSEVIERS MAGAZINE,

2? Feb 82) 0900000ooI-oooooooooolllooootooootoo-anonoil

Briefs
More Narcotics Experts Abroad

NORWAY

Justice Minister Expresses Alarm Over Narcotics Increase
(Thorleif Andreassen; AFTENPOSTEN, 20 Mar 82) ..........

SWITZERLAND

Heroin Dealer Sentenced to Twelve Years
("BUB mom ZEITUNO, 18 Feb 82) oeooe-ooeoooooooooooa

TURKEY

Briefs
Opium Seized

ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

THAI HEROIN TRAFFICKERS--Three men fron Thailand have appeared in the Hel-
bourne magistrate's court charged over the seizure in the city of heroin
valued at more than $1 million, around u.s. $1.05 million. Detective Inspec-
tor (McDonald) on the Victoria police told the court that the three men had
arrived in Australia on 9 March with the sole intention of selling heroin.
More than 700 grams of heroin has been seized by police and all three men

have been remanded in custody. [Text] [BK020252 Melbourne Overseas Service
in English 0500 GMT 31 Mar 821

080: 5300/5692
BRIEFS

CHITTANCONG OPIUH SEIZURE--Dacca, 3 March (APP)--Custous officials in the port
city of Chittangong have discovered 17.2 kilograms (38 lbs) of opium, valued at
more than 600,000 dollars, in a cargo ship, it was reported here today. Reports
said the ship belonging to Bangladesh's national flag carrier “shipping corpor-
ation" was also carrying huge quantities of unauthorised electronic goods and
cosmetics worth thousands of dollars. According to the reports, the same ship
was detained in a port in the United States on 8 November when 0.5. customs
officials found more than 9.5 kilos (21 pounds) of hashish and 26 kilos (58
pounds) of opium. The ship, "Banglar Maya," sailed to Chittagong on Monday

from New York after calling at Karachi in Oakistan and Tuiticorin in India,

customs officials were quoted as saying. [Text] [3K050745 Hong Kong APP in
English 1631 GMT 3 Mar 82]

C80: 5300/5697
0P1!” SEIZURE 1N KATHA REPORTED

BKOSO745 Rangoon LOKTHA PYEITHU NEZIN in Burmese 18 Feb 82 p 5]

[Text] Under the Katha Township opium suppression campaign, Katha Township
people's council, Kyandaw ward people's council and armed forces members at
about midnight on 31 January laid in wait near Kyandaw Village. They later
arrested Sal Nan together with 72 packages of opium, each weighing 1 viss
[3.6 pounds], and 1 packet of opium weighing half a visa. The other gang
members transporting the opium fled. Later, following a testimony given by
Sal Nan, 12 more packages of opium, each weighing 1 vise, were uncovered
buried underground near a haystack near Kyandaw Creek.

 

[Photo caption] Sai Nan seen together with 85 packages of opium.

C80: 5300/5695
BRIEFS

OPIUM SEIZED 0N TRAIN--Lashio railways police on 15 February boarded the
Lashio-Mandalay train No 132 at Hsipaw Station and searched the bedroll of

Na Chan Han of No a Aryondaw Hard, Lashio. The search uncovered two packages
of raw opium weighing 2 viss. Hsipaw people's police station has filed charges
against Ha Chan Han. [BK050745 Rangoon MYANMA ALIN in Burmese 24 Feb 82 p 5]

ACRES OF OPIUM FIELDS DESTROYED--Since 19 December 1981. under the program of
the Central Narcotic Control Board, members of the armed forces, the people's
police force, security teams and the local people destroyed a total of 10,539
acres of opium fields in the Shan state under the leadership of the party and
the councils. of these, 3.099 acres were in the Eastern Shan state, 726 acres
in the Southern Shan state and 6,716 in the Northern Shan state. Members of
the armed forces, the local people's police force and the working people are
continuing to destroy the remaining opium fields. [Text] [BK271034 Rangoon
Domestic Service in Burmese 1330 GMT 25 Mar 82]

(35°: 5300/5692
BRIEFS

MOMS OPIUH ARRESTs--Hadraa, March ll--‘rvo air-en have been arrested on a
charge of possessing 23 kg of opium worth 46,000. The police said that the
airmen were picked up by the Air Force Security Police at I.A.F. Taubaran
on Saturday night and the contraband seized. They were handed over to the
Narcotics Intelligence Bureau who arrested then and had then remnded to
custody. [Text] [Madras Tun HINDU in English 12 Mar 82 p 12]

cso: 5300/7023
BRIEFS

ASEAN NARCOTICS CONTROL MEETING ENDS--Jakarta, 28 Mar (AFP)--De1egates from
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) have ended a 3-day meeting
during which they discussed narcotics control, drug abuse. population matters
and education. The meeting was chaired by Indonesia's Abubukaran Saleh who
said it was a success. He added that the results would be submitted to
ASEAN's standing committee in Singapore for final approval. [Text] [BK020252
Hong Kong APP in English 0348 GMT 28 Mar 82]

cso: 5300/5692
BRIEFS

PESSIHISH ABOUT OPIUH R-UCTION—The minister for administrative services,

Mr Newman, says he is pessimistic about the early success of programs in
reducing opium production in Northern Thailand. Hr Newman, the minister
responsible for drug control in Australia, was speaking after a tour of a
village in the opium-growing region of Thailand near the Burmese border. He
said efforts were continuing to introduce substitute cash crops like coffee
to the region but significant successes must be many years away. Hr Neman
says cmmuunications in the area are very difficult and it is almost impossible
to catch the opium buyers who traditionally are the cash source of the village

people. [Text] [BK270929 Melbourne Overseas Service in English 0830 GHT
27 Mar 82]

cso: 5300/5692
RECRUITMENT 0F INDIANS FOR DRUG PRODUCTION
Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 24 Feb 82 p 9A

[Text] Indian communities of the country announced here yesterday in a mes-
sage sent to the Peace Commission, that in the last few months the msfia and
the guerrillas have united in a "war of extermination."

The former governor of the Jambalo reservation, Emilio Ejuegis, informed EL
TIEMPO that the gangs of narcotics traffickers are arming the Indians in a
"war which has no end."

He indicated that the gang members encourage the Indians with money to sow
coca in different areas in the country thus abandoning the traditional crops
such as corn and cassava.

He explained that on the Jambalo reservation the Indians had coca for per-
sonal use, but in the last few months they have set it all up as a business,
supported economically by the gangs.

He denounced also the landlords for promoting the coca business. Thia,in the
long run,will create an Indian society which will be continually breaking
the law by possessing coca crops or money.

The gangs have gradually convinced the Indians that planting coca is economi-
cally more fruitful than planting corn or cassava, or even engaging in cattle
raising.

The Indian chief likewise advised that the guerrillas are making the land-
owners eliminate the Indians with their pillaging in important areas of Cauca.

He suggested that a means of pacifying these regions is for the government
to grant lands to the Indiana to farm with traditional craps.

The document notes that “today, for us, violence has acquired new forms and
dimensions. However, for the Indians it means a new episode of the war which
for centuries they have had to contend with."

They have also noted that with the passage of time, the different tribes
that exist in the country, have been dying out little by little.
They maintain that the action of the landowners. day by day, has been putting
the Indians in the category of rustic, ignorant people, incapable of managing
on their own, or simply savages.

hey declared that in recent years "a psychological and juridical war is being
waged against the country's indian communities," especially the Paez.

He revealed that in the last few weeks, 19 of these Indians have died in the
Jambalo reservation due to the war unleashed by the landowners.

They maintained that there are several indians detained in the prisons of
Jambulo, Santander, and the Third Brigade, accused of being invaders or
guerrillas. They explained likewise that another form of the war of exter-
mination against the Paez has been the economic boycott carried out against
them, especially on the landowners' haciendas.

in the document they denounce the "infiltration of the Indian communities by
Catholic missionaries from the Convention of Missions and of the Summer
Institute of Linguistics."

The note says "we understand that the search for peace cannot be reduced to
a pact between chiefs in arms nor to a mere 'eease—fire' rather it should be
based on an effort of questioning and collective analysis which leads to
changes which make it possible to live in this country."

The note concludes: "in this respect there already exists in Congress a docu-
ment which summarizes the thought of the Indian authorities of Genoa, Narino
and Putumayo. who were then undertaking a march by Indian governors from the
great Cumba1,0n the southern frontier, to Bogota."
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA SEIZURE-~Pedera1 Judicial Police agents have uncovered and seized 2
and a half tons of narihuana in Bejucos and Paredon del Guayabal, Tejupilco
municipality, Mexico State, where narihuana distribution and storage centers
were operating. Moises Ocampo Vazquez. Raul Gaona Nunez. Luis Lopez Benitez
and Santos Hernandez Arce were arrested and brought before the Toluca district
judge. In preliminary statements, the accused said they had been selling
narihuana wholesale in the State of Mexico and in the Federal District for
more than a year. [Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 5 Mar 82 p 31—A]

PURE HBROIN SBIZBD—-Hernosillo, Sonora, b Hsr--The Federal Judicial Police
today arrested Norberto Contreras Moreno from whom they seized pure heroin
valued at 10 million pesos in the black market. The arrest was made in the

town of Benjamin Hill. The drug came from Puebla State and was to be taken
to Los Angeles, California. Pederal agent Ernesto Avila Triana showed three
bags, one of which contained the heroin concentrate which. according to
Contreras Moreno, was going to be nixed with other drugs before it was sold.
[Mexico City EXCBLSIOR in Spanish 5 Mar 82 p 31-A]

ITALIAN LSD PEDDLBRS ARRESTED-~Hexico. DP, 31 Mar (NOTIHEX)--Italian citizens
Rentato Ferrari and Cavaliere Gianluka were arrested in Mexico City by federal
agents. Ferrari and Gianluka had obtained 540 doses of LSD in San Francisco.

California, and were trying to peddle them in this ci
ty when the were
arrested. [FL011705 Hesico City NOTIMEX in Spanish 0220 GMT 1 Air 82]

C80: 5300/2250

10
PAP LEADERS DENY DRUG TRAFFICKING INVOLVEMENT
Lima EL COHERCIO in Spanish 18 Feb 82 p A-é
[Article: "PAP Leaders Deny Links With the Drug Traffic")

[Text] Armando Villanueva and Fernando Leon de Vivero, leaders of the APRA
[American Revolutionary Popular Alliance], stated yesterday that the
accusations of an alleged link between the APRA and narcotics trafficking
and the Langberg case were a government plot designed to do damage and to
caver up its loss of prestige which, in their view, the government party is
suffering from, due to its policies.

Nevertheless, Leon de Vivero admitted that he was a friend of the
controversial Langberg and that he had visited him several times. He also
admitted that his friend Jorge Idiaquez and the Hanco Capac construction firm
bought the Villa Mercedes and that the persons allegedly linked to the
narcotics traffic must make a report to the Department of Discipline.

At a press conference held at the APRA office or Alfonso Ugarte Avenue,
basically called to deny the charges against the APRA and some 01 its leaders
which the magazine CARETAS made, Villanueva del Campo said that he firmly
rejected all the charges, in the name of his party.

He maintained that the campaign had no other purpose than to interfere in
some way withtheuweting scheduled for tomorrow by that section of the APRA
and to distract public attention "from the disastrous policy of the govern-
ment."

Villanueva del Campo added that the aim of the government is to conceal "the
turnover of the oil enterprises to the multinational companies, the increases
in food prices, and the failure of the call for consultations."

He said that there is government involvement in all this, because when the

magazine CARETAS brought out a similar report on Langberg in October 1980,

the government never took action to ensure that the appropriate authorities
would begin legal action in the case.

"I ask: why was the government silent then, and furthermore I call on it

to answer. This shows that there is complicity of silence," Villanueva del
Campo stated emphatically.

11
He recalled that something similar happened with the government under Manuel
Odria, remembering that in February 1950, accusations were also made against
Victor Raul llaya de la Torre as an alleged narcotics trafficker.

He said that everything was done to prevent Haya de la Torre from receiving
a visa to leave the Colombian Embassy, where he had taken refuge. "However,
later he was absolved of the charge by The Hague Tribunal , the same body which
was originally against him as a result of obvious interference," he stated.

He then denied that the controversial Carlos Langberg was a member of the
APRA. However, he observed that it makes him think a great deal that the
press says nothing abOut the friendship between Andres Townsend Ezcurra and
his brother-in-law, Francisco Diez Canseco, and Langberg.

"We do not consider friendship a crime, and I can say that I met Langberg at
the time of the death of Haya de la Torre. 0n the other hand Townsend had
kmwn Langberg for some time before that," he indicated.

lle rejected that story that Langberg paid for Haya de la Torre's medical
treatment in the United States, stating that the first of the two trips Hays
de la Torre paid for himself, "and the second trip was financed by members
of the APRA and Venezuelan friends."

Regarding the payment of services to the Houston clinic where Hays de la
Torre was treated, he said that party member Luis Pinillos took care of them
in large part and that the rest came as a contribution from the mass of
APRA members .

He also rejected the view expressed by the former presidential candidate that
Langberg himself financed his campaign in the 1980 elections, spending
milliOns of sols, noting that "that is completely false, and if someone
insists on saying that. I challenge h m to prove it in court."

Nevertheless, he agreed that support from Lang‘oerg came through a group of
Mexican technicians who were specialists in broadcasting.

Leon de Vivero

when Leon de Vivero was asked about his friendship with Langberg. he replied,
"Yes. I know him, and I'm not afraid of saying that. It's not a crime to
know him."

He said that in effect he had made several visits to Langberg, although it
was for the purpose of correcting "or providing orientation to publications
which made reference to the APRA, as indeed I did with other newspapers."

He pointed out immediately afterwards that he had not been subjected to
party discipline because of the accusation in CARB‘I‘AS. However, he stated
that at his request there is an investigation underway by the Department
of Discipline.

12
"c said that for that purpose the alleged accused, Jibaja. Idiaquez, Lopez
Silva, and he himself would have occasion to present a report to the
Department of Discipline. "However, investigating does not mean finding
someone guilty. nor can it affect the rights of an individual, requiring an
innocent man to prove his innocence," he said.

Regarding the building known as the Villa Mercedes. which belonged to the late

Haya de la Torre, he said that a one-fifth share in that residence was
purchased by Idiaquez, "who made a list to cancel the joint purchase."

5170
cso: 5300/2247

13
BRIEFS

PIP COCAINE SBIZURE--The PIP [Peruvian Investigative Police] detachment at
the airport yesterday stopped the shipment of 33 kg of cocaine valued at

150 million sols which two Peruvians were attempting to take to Bogota. This
happened at 2:00 pm, when all the passengers from a commercial jet of
Venezuelan registrati'n had already presented their passports to the
immigration authorities. Two of the passengers were acting strangely, as a
result of which the PIP became suspicious and asked them to come to their
offices at the airport. When their suitcases were opened, no less than 33 kg
of cocaine were found, wrapped in various plastic-covered packages,
distributed among their personal effects. During the interrogation to which
they were subjected separately both individuals appeared to be confused and
were unable to bring out any ready justification for the drugs which they
were taking to Colombia. In fact it is believed that the two people arrested
identified themselves with false personal documents. One said he was Luis
Antonio Castillo Guzman (52), a painter; the second said he was Pedro Daniel
Flores Herrera (60). [Text] [Lima EL COHERCIO in Spanish 20 Feb 82 p A-lO]
5170

FAP JOINS FIGHT AGAINST DRUG TRAPPICKING—-Hith the logistical support of the
Peruvian Air Force [PAP] the Peruvian Investigative Police [PIP] will
intensify and extend to the,critica1 zones or centers of high production of
coca leaf a broad campaign to combat narcotics trafficking in our country.
As announced by Region IV of the PIP, headquartered in Cuzco, during a

study of the situation it has been determined that the zone is highly
important for coca leaf production. It has also been established that the
area around Cachipucara. Puno, is critical for chlorhydrate of cocaine
laboratories and it is the supply center for the areas hounded by Cuzco, Puno,
Arequipa. Ayacucho, and Tacna, with ramifications in such foreign countries
as Bolivia, Chile, and Argentina, as well as across the Atlantic Ocean in
Europe. The chief of PIP Region IV. Gen Rolando Llanos Oliveros, said that
the request for PAP logistical support called for aerial reconnaissance of
the regions involved, in addition to redoubling vigilance and the establish-
ment of fixed and mobile investigations, using communications equipment with
special frequencies. He said that the PIP is preparing and developing the
"COca 1" operations plan and that during a recent operation an international
band of drug traffickers was captured which, in less than 6 months, had sold
more than 600 kg of PEG. The traffickers had established their operations
router in a recently established village, "£1 Alto de los Incas," in Cuzco,
where the PIP found 3 tons of coca leaves in the process of laceration, in
addition to other substances and laboratory equipment. In this place were
arrested Ascencio Quiape Aquino (35); Filomena Salas. also known as Rosa Villa
(43); and Teofilo Escobede Ramos (53), who confessed their involvement with
the traffic. In Line personnel from PIP Region IV in coordination with
personnel from DINTID [Directorate for the Investigation of the International
Traffic in Drugs] located and captured their contacts and distributors at
the international level, identified as Justo Perez (41) and Rosendo Salazar
(50). who have coufessed their mode of operations and connections. giving
the names and addresses of their contacts in Venezuela and Mexico. [Text]
[Lima EXPRESO in Spanish 18 Feb 82 p 7] 5170

C50: 5300/2237

15
BRIEFS

ZAHBDAN DRUG SEIZURE-The antidrug squad of the Zahedan Revolution Guards has
recovered 6 kg hashish and 1 kg of opium from two persons. [GP050418 Tehran
JOMHURI-YE ESLAHI in Persian 17 Mar 82 p 6]

POPPY CULTIVATION BAN-~The Pars governor general has issued a circular asking
people to cooperate in uprooting the canker of addiction from the country by
destroying all poppy plants or to informing the nearest gendarmerie so that
they can take the necessary steps. [05051844 Shiraz Domestic Service in Per-
sian 1500 GMT 5 Apr 82]

OPIUH, HEROTN DISCOVERED--IRNA reports that 341.5 kg of opium were seized from
several smugglers during the past"2 weeks thanks to the relentless persistence
of our brothers at the antinarcotics headquarters of the Islamic Revolution
Guards Corps of Esfahan and with cooperation of the guards corps and gender-
merie personnel of Iranshahr. The offenders have been arrested. Yesterday
the antinarcotics officers at the Nosratabsd Post, which is part of the
gendarmerie company in Zahedan, discovered 6 kg of heroin in 2 cars. The of-
fenders were arrested and handed over to the relevant authorities. [LDO70220
Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 6 Apr 82]

TAIBAD SEIZURBS-So far since the beginning of the new year [21 Mar 81],
officials of the Gendarmerie Regiment of the township of Tsibad have seized more
than 760 kilograms of opium, heroin, and hashish from more than 266 smugglers.
In a short interview with IRNA on this subject. the commander of the Gendarmerie
Regiment of Taibad said that of these smugglers 205 were Iranian and 61, Afghans.
He added that in this connection 27 firearms and 193 cartridges were seized from
lmauthorlzed gun-carriers as well as 1,630,200 foreign cigarettes, 6,932 kilo-
grams of tea, and 18.953 kilograms of smuggled cloth. Also at this time, the
unauthorized export of more than 30 million rials worth of spare parts for auto-
mobiles was interdicted. The commander of the Gendarmerie Regiment of Taibad
also pointed out that of the narcotics seized, 718.25 kilograms was opium,

31.68 kilograms was heroin, and the rest was hashish. [Text] [Tehran SOBH—B
AZADEGAN in Persian 11 Mar 82 p ll]

16
NARCOTICS SEIZED—-Shemiran. KEYHAN reporter. More than #6 kg of heroin and
upium have been seized in Sahneh, Bonah, 'Ajabshir, and Tehran. Mr Rsfi'ipur,
public relations officer of the Islamic Republic Publis Prosecutor's Office
announced: "Through their efforts and persistence, the brothers of the Central
Antinarcotics headquarters have arresced several groups of international
smugglers with police records and seized 23.61 kg of heroin and 4.3a kg of
opium. And one of the police stations in Tehran has feund 2.14 kg of hashish."
He added: "The brothers active in the Central Comittee of Sahneh in the
province of Bakhtatan last month seized 10.93 kg of opium, 30 grams of burnt
opium, and 4 firearms. Meanwhile. brothers of the active narcotics struggle

of the Revolution Guards of 'Ajabshir have arrested 25 smugglers and seized
5.27 kg of opium, 2.68 kg of heroin, and 3.71 kg of burnt opium. The anti—
narcotics brothers of the Revolution Guards of Bohnab have arrested 15 sellers
and smugglers and seized 2.51 kg of opium, .90 kg of heroin, and 2.23 kg of
burnt opium." He requested the public to send written notification to this
office if they have any information about sellers or smugglers of narcotics.

or contact them on telephone numbers 27-85-33 or 27-85-36. [Text] [Tehran
KEYHAN in Persian 16 Mar 82 p 2]

cso: 5300/ 5381

l?
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050034-4

OPIUH DEALER SENTENCE!) T0 SEVEN YEARS

Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in English 23 Her 82 p 11

[Article by Sandra Lieberum]

[Text] A HILLBROW red-

C50:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600050034-4

dent was yesterday
jailed forsevenyean
for illegally dealing
In R110 000 worth of

opium which he
brought to South
Africa after visitin‘
relationslnYuaosla-

via.

“uany llves could
have been destroyed by
this dune". Madeira"
Mr I! P Pdnsloo said.

Save Lennon (as) a
father of three who has
been in South Alt-lea
since 1907. pleaded
[ullty lo the Johannes-
bur. Magistrate's
Court yesterday to ll-
legally deallnt in a peo-
hibited dependence pro-
dudna dmes — 560.5 d
0‘ mud mm on
January 7.

The opium. which the
lnvesdaatina omar
Warrant omcae. H Cdu
Hooy. testiﬁed. sold for
about 3200/]. W
found In the mum's
at at a business h“:
Wynbnra when
worked as an moo a
month mechanic.

Levltou said when
he came from. Yum
via. moot people had
opium.

A friend mud bus
to brine some to South
Africa. The friend said
he would “sell It to the

5300/5691

mwnltwonld

beleeal.
MmavlslteoYuo-

slavlabakvonnturned
BRIEFS

FEVER DRUG-RELATED DEATHS--According to a Federal Government report to the Bundestag
interior committee. drug-related deaths have steadily declined in recent years.

623 deaths were recorded in 1979, 496 in 1980 and 360 last year. It is estimated
that hard drug consumers have declined from 50,000 in 1980 to 45,000 last year, while
the incidence of drug offenses dropped by 0.8 percent. The trend on the German

drug scene thus displays some satisfactory aspects. According to the government
this is due in large measure to the efforts of the security agencies. It remains

to be seen, though, whether a real turnaround is in progress. Last year some

6.7 tons of marijuana products, mainly hashish, were confiscated, double the 1980
volume. As for heroin, the most dangerous of all narcotics, 93 kg were seized in
1981 compared with 267 kg in 1980. It is reported that, at least temporarily,
little heroin was available on the market. The reason: The need for Turkish citi-
zens to have visas to enter Germany and considerable efforts by the Turkish author-
ities. The fight against narcotics snuggling is encouraged by training and equip-
ment aid to foreign police and customs agencies. A treaty with Turkey is to be
followed by agreements with other countries in Asia and the Mediterranean region.
lTextl [Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEHEINE in German 12 Mar 82 p §/ 11698

FRANKFURT DEALER SBNTENCED--Drug dealer Joseph Amiel, 50, of Israeli origin and
known by the alias "Big Joe" went on trial and Frankfurt and was sentenced to

9 years' detention on the first day. The defendant had pleaded guilty. "I did not
haVe the faintest idea of what narcotics mean in terms of crime and misery; now I
know what I have done," he said. The restaurant owner from Tel Aviv was the founder
and leader of a ring of heroin traders, dealing in drugs from April 1974 to March
1975 in Frankfurt, Amsterdam and London. In Frankfurt in 1976 nine members of the
grOup received prison sentences of up to 9% years; "Big Joe" had escaped from the
remand prison Dieburg shortly before the trial began. He and his family found re-
fuge in Argentina, but his children's governess "denounced" him to the police, and
he was sentenced to 5 years for passport offenses. Immediately after finishing his
sentence which he described in Frankfurt as "torture," he was extradited to Germany
last autumn. Defense counsel regretted that it was not possible to credit Amiel'a
5 years jail in Argentina to the Frankfurt penalty. However, in view of the com-
prehensive confession counsel hoped that Amiel might be pardoned in 3-4 years. en-
abling him to return to Israel and his family. llea§7 LPrankfurt/Hain FRANKFURTER
sacrum: in German 12 Mar 82 p 17 11593

19
GERMAN ADDICTS IN AHSTERDAH--Hore than 700 German drug addicts, permanent residents
in Amsterdam, are causing increasing concern to the city and the German assistance
association there. The association reported last Friday that the Dutch Government
had expressed a wish for the Federal Republic to help pay for the care given these
people (although, according to international agreements, the "host country"--howevet
involuntarily--has responsibility for them). "If no decision is taken within the
foreseeable future, we will have to close down," said a spokesman of the association.
About 70 percent of the German addicts have yet another handicap: They have criminal
records, are subject to supervision as parolees, should have to go to prison in the
FRG to serve their sentences or go on trial there. Almost 30 percent have escaped
from a treatment facility or therapeutic community. That is why not all dare go to
the assistance association, and its five staff members must actually take to the
streets to find those most in need. Among the l,500-2,000 aliens on the Amsterdam
drug scene, the largest contingent is provided by German women. Not a few of these
girls--and even young men-~earn their keep by prostitution. Hardly a day passes
without the association and a parallel Church organization treating some 20 addicts
in the building at Prinsengracht 148. The helpers there have just over half the
money at their disposal that would be available to them in Germany. It is not

known yet whether the influx of aliens will diminish consequent upon the recently
issued request by the Dutch authorities to physicians to prescribe the much coveted
methadone only to natiVe addicts. Quite a few Germans have by now been "fully in-
Logrnted,” speak Dutch with an Amsterdam accent. Heroin is on sale all over the
country, and judges are usually fairly easy-going. Every year 10-20 young Germans
die of an overdose in Amsterdam hotels and rooming houses. [Texg7 lPrankfurt/Main
FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE in German 13 Mar 82 p 1/ 11698
BRIEFS

NARCO'I‘ICS CENTER DISCOVERED--The Piraievs police have found a new narcotics
center at the house of Lemonia Kourpali, at Zainis Street.
of hashish and heroin were found and confiscated.

use as well as 15 (romidon) pills were also found.
the following people were also arrested: Matthaios Iliyas, age 31;

Irini Sandik, age 24. Another four persons are wanted by the police.
[Text] [NC012119 Athens Domestic Service in Creek 1130 cm 1 Apr 82 NC]

Small quantities
Many syringes ready for
In addition to Kourpali,

CSO: 5300/5380

21
THREE POLICE CWISSIONERS ON DRUG PROBLEM, REDEDIES
Amsterdam ELSE'v'IERS MAGAZINE in Dutch 27 Feb 82 pp 44-50

[Group interview with J. Valken, C.N. Peﬁster,and A. Vermeﬁ by Coen van Marten
and Jan Heinemans]

[Excerpts] Petty crime and hard drugs. How safe are our big
cities? The investigation--is it real investigation or just
registration of crime? Do policemen in troublesome cities
have a right to higher pay? And what are the police unions
up tos-you hardly ever used to hear of them, but nowadays
they clamorously make known their dissatisfactions. "hat

is wrong with the policemen's training--are they put out on
the street too young? And what must we do about the new
police law? These are subjects that came up'for discussion
in a frank round-table talk that ELSEVIERS had with the "big
three": the chief police commissioners of Amsterdam, The

Hague, and Rotterdam: J. Valken, Dr C.N. Peﬁster,and A.
Vcrmcij .

That is shown by the more intensive police presence in the most dangerous square
kilometer of the Amsterdam inner city. What is happening on the Seawall also
shows that an unimaginably high percentage of petty crime has to do directly
with drug problems. In spite of all the methadone treatments and welfare work-
ers, heroin use and with it (consequently) crime are increasing hand over fist.
Discussion of the drug problem goes more and more in the direction of supplying
pure heroin gratis, through socialized medicine, to registered (Netherlands)
junkies. The big three all seem to be proponents of that. '

Valkon: That would deal a death-blow-to the drug traffic, but to me registra-
tion and supervision are absolute conditions, and meanwhile it is iaportant for
something to be done about the problem of the drug user.

Pcﬁstcr: I find it primarily a medical question. You have a right to expect
it of the physicians involved that they will act conscientiously; i.c., not be
more suppliers, but also always keep an eye on the user's interests, and in any
case always offer him the opportunity to kick the habit.

Vermeﬁ: It is important to keep talking with the addict, and registered sup-
ply offers optimal opportunities for that.

22
Valken: We are dealing here with an incalculable problem. In Amsterdam there
are 3.000 registered addicts, but in reality there are several times that many
--ovcr 10,000.

Venncﬁ: And think of the amount of stealing and robbing all those people have
to do to get their daily dose of 300 units. They are bringing grief on them~
selves. those around them, and society.

Whenever a kilogram of heroin is seized, ecstatic press releases are handed out.
But even record seizures are small potatoes viewed against the background of the
immense turnover in this "white circuit." Those arrested turn out without ex-
ception to be naive or accidentally caught couriers or users who are trying to
finance their own consumption this way--small fish. The big bosses, who alone
can operate in this racket with investments of millions, go free. Investigators
knew their names but fail in every effort to provide proof. The detective
agencies have made Minister of Justice De Ruiter aware of this "knowledge." For
that reason the minister proposes to the Second Chamber to proceed to a jurid-
ical innovation. in the Netherlands the concept of conspiracy exists solely

in connection with crimes against the state and the Royal House. In all other
crimes, before anyone can be considered suspect-~let alone guilty--at least a
start must have been made in committing the act. This fact is regarded as one
of the foundations of legal security. Hence De Ruiter's proposal to introduce

the conspiracy concept into the opium law as well may be characterized as
startling.

Peﬁster (like a minister of justice at heart): 1 do not believe you can sup-
press the drug traffic by juridical measures. It is a djﬁtT-Li°n of the possi-

bilities open to the police and the courts; you would be stupidly creating a
new crime.

Valken (does see something in De Ruiter's plans): It is not a salvation, of
course, but perhaps it is one of the ways to reach a solution. We must follow
various paths: free drug dispensing, but also more possibilities of repression.
The narcotics squads are powerless, and with the normal orthodox methods of de-
tection you have not the ghost of a chance of catching the big boys.

Peﬁster: i an allergic to that call for overhauling the law. As soon as a
little offshoot of the RAF [Red Army Faction (Baader-Meinhof Group)] is traced
here, everybody begins to shout for a conspiracy law. Then you are dealing
with the quality of the constitutional state. I do not underestimate the drug
problem, but the public essentially does. The fate of the tens of thousands

of addicts leaves the public completely cold. They do not talk about a problem
until their purse is snatched.

VermcU: Tell that to the members of an addict's family!

PeUster: i would be glad to. i feel that the police must not react strongly
to a thing that society does not really consider a problem. The state is not
a teacher of morals.
Vermeﬁ: I consider the sufferings of the junkies and those around them so
frightful that as far as I am concerned the state had better be a teacher of
morals on this point.

Valken: For the police the drug problem is important in any case because there
are definite connections between drugs and crime.

Pcﬁster: Yes, but it is an illusion to think that you can do anything about it
by broadening your powers.

Vermcﬂ: But just listen a moment: that proposal to embellish the opium law
with a conspiracy clause is a direct result of a request by the detection agen-
cies. They are sure that in that way they can eliminate the big scoundrels.

In the United States the drug problem is considerably greater than here. Our
future? The concept of conspiracy does not exist there, but the methods of de-
tcction in the new world differ greatly from those in the Netherlands. The use
of police infiltrants furnished the subject for the film "Prince of the City."
The evening before this discussion Chief Commissioner Peﬁsterwatched it spell-
bound. Strengthened in his conviction that the infiltration practice portrayed
must lead to corruption, he left the theater. The big three are unanimous in
the opinion that the American method must not be introduced into the Netherlands.
A thing that would be legally impossible, for that matter.

Vermcﬁ: In investigation everything is allowed as long as an investigator can
tell his chief everything (and he must do that) and as long as his boss can tell
the public prosecutor everything.

PeUster: You must never get on the slope; if you do you will slide impercepti-
bly toward a dangerous borderline. When you cross that border you make your-
self guilty of the offense of provocation.

Vermeﬁ: in investigation the supporting role of the chief is very important.
Also, investigation is not only a matter of knowledge. but also a matter of ac-
quaintances. I do not care for American undercover practices. The criterion
is that the initiative comes from the opposing party. Then there is no ques-
tion of provocation. Foreigners try to urge the American system upon us, but

I say no case rather than a rotten case.

Chief Commissioner Valken grins by way of confirmation when ELSEVIERS suggests
that officials of the DEA (the American Drugs Enforcement Agency), who are
fairly active here in the Netherlands, too, would be glad to cooperate with the
Netherlands police in their American style.

8815
680: 5300/2245
BRIEFS

MORE MRCOTICS EXPERTS ABRmDnThe Hague, March 15--The government has
decided to establish 'opiun posts' in Peru (Lian), Turkey (Ankara) and

the Netherlands Antilles as part of its efforts to counter illegal heroin
shipments to the Netherlands. The government said in a letter to parliament
that these posts were a 'fast, safe and efficient' means to fight such
shipments. The need of more similar posts--Holland already has narcotics
officers in South East Asiauwould be discussed on the basis of experiences,

the government said. [Text] [The Hague ANP NEWS BULLETIN in English
16 Mar 82 p 5]

C50: 5300/2248
JUSTICE MINISTER EXPRESSES ALARM OVER NARCOTICS INCREASE
Oslo AFTENPOSTEN in Norwegian 20 Mar 82 p 3
[Article by Thorleif Andreassen]

[Text] The number of drug abusers in Norway is increasing rapidly. Younger
and younger people are being recruited to drug circles. In addition to
cannabis. which is most widespread, and to some extent amphetamines, heroin

is becoming the predominant drug in Oslo. Drug circles have become tougher.
Smuggling methods are more sophisticated. "Dealers" and users often are armed.
"The situation is alarming." This is the conclusion of both Justice Minister
Hons Rokkc and head of the narcotics section in Oslo, police inspector Arne
Huuse. "The authorities must permit us to use more active methods of investi-
gation, including bugging devices," Huuse said. "The government has promised
an active campaign against narcotics. we will fulfil this promise!" Hone
Rokke said.

The justice minister pointed out that the report on drug abuse presented last
summer by the Conservative Party contained the most important aspects of the
strategy that would be used in the campaign against drug abuse. The main
points of this plan are preventive work, forms of treatment, and punishment.

"1 am especially interested in making cooperation between the various ministries
involved in solving the problem more efficient. Several ministries are in-
volved in their own aspect of the drug problem, but we are lacking effective
coordination in this area. The various agencies individually are devoting

much attention to the drug problem. "hat is lacking is an element of coordina-
tion. This will be corrected," Mona Rokke announced.

The justice minister has much sympathy with Huuse's proposal that narcotics
police he allowed to use bugging devices in their investigations. She pointed
out that this was an effective means of combstting drug sales.

Arne Huuse's summary of the narcotics situation in Oslo in recent years is that
the situation has worsened. The heroin supply in Oslo and surrounding areas
is_well organized. Quantities sufficient to meet the demand seem to be avail-
able at all times. This is also true of the cannabis supply.

26
There. is reason to believe that large quantities of heroin snuggled into Norway
are hidden in the vagina or rectum of the smuggler. It is also cannon for the
smuggler to pack the drug in condoms and swallow then. In recent years the
price of heroin has dropped. Police fear that this could help create new
groups of users.

The situation also is characterized by a rapidly increasing number of foreigners
involved in narcotics crimes. This is especially true of persons involved in
importing and marketing drugs at a high level. The more systanatic and pro-
fessional import of heroin is managed by foreigners, especially by 'mrks and
Pakistanis. Organized cannabis smuggling also is dominated more and more by
foreigners.

Arne Huuse stressed that in Norway cannabis was sold in the greatest quantity.
lie reacts strongly against those who take lightly the danger of this drug.
"Young people are recruited to drug circles through the use of cannabis and,
unfortunately, drug abusers are becoming younger and younger," he said.

"My impression today is that we do not have the situation under control to the
extent we would like. The spread of narcotics is increasing. More resources
must he. used to decrease the availability of drugs. It is most profitable for
society to invest in preventive measures. Here the returns are greatest. The
risk of being caught smuggling and selling drugs must increase and the punish-
ment should become harsher. There must be no limit to police effectiveness

in bringing narcotics crimes to light," Arne huuse said.

9336
CSO: 5300/2239

27
HERDIN DEALER SBNTENCED TO THELVB YEARS
Zurich NEUE ZUERCHER ZEITUNG in Ger-an 18 Feb 82 pp 27-28

(Article: "From the High Court; Unrestrained Heroin Trade; Twelve Years
in Prison for Drug Pusher"]

[Text] In the most serious drug case which has ever been tried in the
canton of Zurich, the second criminal division of the high court made
known its decision on Tuesday after deliberating for more than 4 hours.
Upholding the sentence of the Zurich district court imposed last November.
the high court condemned 24-year-old Ayman Bazarto, a Syrian citizen. to
serve 12 years in prison and to pay a fine of 20,000 francs; after serving
his term, he is to be deported from the country for 15 years; in addition,
he is required to pay the Zurich treasury 80,000 francs of his illegal
earnings. The 40,000 francs confiscated when the accused was arrested
are to help to pay the Zurich local government, as well as to cover the
expenses of the investigation and the court costs.

Stretched with Powdered sugar

The defendant confessed to having brought into Switzerland between Dace-bar
1978 and his arrest in February 1980 a total of 2,875 grams of pure heroin
(partly through middlemen). With the aid of an accomplice, he stretched
the quantity to be sold by one third by adding powdered sugar and thus put
into circulation about 3,750 grams of (no longer coapletely pure) heroin.
The sales figures for this illegal business with the narcotic amounted to
at least 620.000 francs. After subtracting the cost of purchasing the
heroin and his operating expenses, Ayman Basarto had at least 160,000
francs left in personal clear profit from his shady dealings, which he

had been able to carry on only slightly over a year.

In order to imagine the quantities of heroin sold in this case, one must
remember that a gran is sufficient for 23 shots, that can injections are
enough to lead to addiction with all its consequences-—physical and emotional
harm, inability to work and thus lower social position, in many cases crimes
to acquire the drug, suffering, destruction all the way to death itself.

The health of thousands of people may be jeopardisad by the heroin inported
into Switzerland by Bazarto. According to a ruling of the federal court,

the sale of 15 grams of heroin constitutes a serious case, since it can ruin

the health of 35 people.
The defendant was born in Damascus. For political reasons his family
resettled in Beirut, where Ayman Bazarto attended elementary and high
school subsequently registered at the Arab university. Bararto does not
appear to have pursued any academic studies, since he devoted himself
instead to selling cars and machines, at first between Tunis and Lebanon;
later he transferred his activities to Europe.

In December 1978 he and his brother joined with other accomplices in
smuggling heroin from Lebanon to Switzerland and selling it here.
Originally he took part in the movement of the goods; shortly thereafter,
he made an agreement with his suppliers which obligated them to deliver
the heroin to Zurich in return for a higher price. The drugs arrived

at short intervals in quantities of 200, 250, and finally 900 grams.

By adding powdered sugar, Bazarto was able to increase his profits
Substantially. The defendant and his accomplices were not only
uninhibited drug dealers; they also cheated their customers.

Inevitable large profits

The defendant, who had appealed the sentence of the lower court, whereupon
the state prosecutor announced his own counter-appeal, wished to be
punished more leniently. He had known, he stated before the high court,
that drug traffic was illegal, but he had been unaware of the dangerous
characteristics of heroin. The intelligent and not uneducated defendant

was instructed by the head of the court that today "the whole world" knows
about heroin.

Other explanations by the accused sounded incredible and failed to
exonerate him; they had to be dismissed as mere excuses. The defendant
claimed to have turned to the trade to help his brother, who, unlike
himself, was an addict. Baaarto stated he had not acted out of greed-
the large profits were simply unavoidable.

The rug Mafia in the Background

Finally the accused maintained that he had been compelled to continue his
trafficking because of threats made by his suppliers. The later had
known that he was using a false passport, and he had been afraid of being
charged. Even if pressure had been put on him in the manner that Mafia
people apply it to one another, it certainly could not have been because
of a forged passport.

To reveal to the court the unscrupulousness of his partners in Lebanon,

he related an incident that happened in a Beirut playground in February
1981. A little brother of the defendant's was shot at and injured in

the playground; later the family received telephone calls threatening
further reprisals if Ayaan should reveal the names of his suppliers

during the investigation of his case in Switzerland. To describe the
state of affairs, the defendant's sister and father came to Zurich for the
trial. The trouble was that, when the defendant‘s little brother was shot
at and the nenancing calls were made, Bazarto had already been in prison
for over a year and no one in Lebanon could know whether he had betrayed
the names.

29
The court rejected a defence notion. to have the defendant mined by a
psychiatrist; ita reaaon: ever aince Bazarto had. been caught in the act
of selling heroin in Zurich and arreated, neither the investigation not
any appearances in court had cauaed any doubts to ariae aa to hia sanity.
however, the judges did take into conaideration that Baaarto was a young
man who had ‘not been in a poaition to realize the full enormity of the
consequences of his deapicalbe trade in the vay that an experienced adult
vould have. Although they indicated aynpathy for the prosecution, which
demanded a 15-year prison aentence, they did not change the 12 yeara

that the lower court had regarded as appropriate.

9873
CSO: 5300/2218
BRIEFS

OPlUH SEIZED-—Police arrested 12 persons and seized 65 kg of pure opium in
lskcnderun. The 12 were getting ready to smuggle the opium they had obtained
from another country into a third country. [TA070739 Ankara Domestic Service

in Turkish 1600 GMT 6 Apt 82]

C80: 5300/5382 END

31