FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10011
25 September 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 44/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
AUSTRALIA

WORLDWIDE REPORT

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Daues

(FOUO 44/81)

CONTENTS

ASIA

Victoria, "A Legislation Takes New Tack on Drug Offenses
(vat-10m sources, 5’ 7 m 81)00...0.000.00...OOOIIIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

1V0 ihroin Smugglers Get ZO-Year Jail Sentences

Briefs

INDIA

Proposals in Victoria, by Barbara Pih
Doctors' Protest
Heat Australia Draft

(“in SYN“ mRNING HERALD, 8 Aug 81)....000000000000.000.00.000

NSW-'Hr Asia' Link

Minister Addresses (bnference of Poppy Growers
(m3 TIM OF INDIA, 25 Aug m)OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Briefs

PAKIS TAN

Brie fs

'Narcotics King' Arrested
Iblhi Opium Seizure

Pethidine Recovered

Police Seize Drugs

Vendor Seized Hith Narcotics
Hyderabad Drug Ilse

900 Am" A I l 'CI‘ “NI V

[III - ww - 138 P0001

OW

10
10
10
10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHILIPPINES
Briefs
mrihuma Plants Seized
Heroin Connections Ihcovered
LATIN AMERICA
BAHAMAS

Drugs Worth $5 Million, No Han Seized at Sea
(m3 ms“, 13 Aug 81).....0.0.00.0.0...OOIOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOCOOO

BERMUDA

Briefs
Jail in Cocaine Case

BRAZIL

International Harihuana Traffic Ring Disbanded
(Variom sources, various dates).................................

Paraguayan Source
mpoaitions Taken
More Harihuana Uncovered

Hashish Trafficker Arrested in Rio (bnfesses
(0 61180. 11 Aug 81, 0 BSTADO IE 5A0 PAUID, 14 Aug 81)...........

'Very Important People'
Notebooks Seized

Briefs
Drug Trafficking (barge Denied
Cocaine Bust

GiILE

Briefs
Drug Traffickers

NE‘IHBRLANIS ANTILLES

Cocaine, Heroin, Harihuana Smuggling Activities
(Joop Spanjersberg; HE'r VRIJB VOIK. 25 Jul 81)..................

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11
11

12

11a

19

210
210

25

26
PERU

Briefs
Drug Traffickers Arrested

TRINIDAD AND IJBAGO

Six, Including mree Venezuelans, In (butt on Drug (barges
(TRINIDAD MIA“. 20, 18 Ana 81)...0..OOOOOOOOOOOIOIDOIOOOOOIO

Venezuelans Cursed
Drug Cases Postponed

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
ISRAEL
Briefs
Heroin Seizures
Tel Aviv Heroin Seizure

Hero in Se ized
He rain Se izure

SIB-SAHARA" AFRICA
LIBERIA

Briefs
Harih uana Des croyed

WEST EURWB

AUSTRIA

Study on Drug Addiction in lower Austria
(DIE Pmsn, 27 Aug 81).00.000000000000000.000IOOIOOIDIOOOOOIOIOO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SWITZERLAND

1N0 Hundred Kilogram of Hashish Seized in Zurich
(“BUB ZIJERGER Elma, 27 Aug 81)...00.0.0000...000.0000.00...

Heroin Snuggler Sentenced to Ten Years
(“Elm ZIIEMER ZBIMG’ 22 Aug 81)0'00.00000000000000.000000...

TURKEY

mo Iranians Arrested in Istanbul for Opium Smuggling
(HILLIYET, 29 Aug 81, GINAYDIN, 29 Aug 81).....................

Hanna? Report
'GINAYDIH' Report

1w Greeks Arrested in Istanbul, Heroin Seized
(Ram ozturk; GmAYmN’ 2 Sep 81)0000000..0.00.00.00.0000000

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VICTORIA, WA LEGISLATIOR TAKES NEH TACK 0N DRUG OPYBNSES
Proposals in Victoria

Melbourne THE AGE in English 5 Aug 81 p 5

[Article by Barbara Fih]

[Text] The State Government is considering using money confiscated from drug
offenders to finance drug rehabilitation programmes.

The Minister for Health, Hr Borthwick, said yesterday that in the next session
of Parliament the Government would introduce legislation to freeze the assets
of drug traffickers.

'Hhe courts will have the power to appoint a trustee to administer the assets
from the time the person is being charged, to the trial. If the person is found
guilty, then we have the power to hold the assets," he said.

Mr Borthwick said the confiscated assets would be put into a drug rehabilitation
and research fund to assist new and existing drug programmes.

"He currently have 38 drug rehabilitation agencies in Victoria and are putting up
$8 million at the moment. But we will progressively have to give more funding
to drug treatment and rehabilitation," he said.

The State Government announced last March that it might consider legislation to
allow confiscation of profits from illegal drug trading, after an Opposition pri-
vate member's bill which was introduced earlier this year.

The director of the Australian Institute of Criminology, Mr William Clifford,
said he doubted that the new legislation would work. "It is one thing to legis-
late to get illegally attained assets, it is another to put it inu10perat10n."
he said.

Profits

"They will need a fairly hefty machinery to make it work. By definition, drug
traffickers conceal what they make and it will be difficult to trace the profits.
"With our present standard of policing and criminal justice, the vast amount of
police work is on drug users and not criminals. Now the Government is proposing
legislation for the big traffickers and corporate crime, and must get the police
force advanced enough to handle them."

Mr Clifford said a survey done by the institute in 1977 has showed that 91.8
percent of drug prosecutions in Australa were users and possessers and only
5.3 percent were traffickers-~nost of whom were from the middle range, not the
big boys."

The legislation foreshadowed yesterday provides for changes to three acts of
Parliament dealing with drug abuse.

The proposed legislation will require doctors and pharmaciststo notify the Health
Commission it they believe a patient is a drug addict.

The medical director of the Buoyancy Foundation, Dr John Poolman, said yesterday
that he would "be opposed to giving the name of any drug abuser I treat. It is
difficult enough to persuade drug users to seek help, but once you start regis-
tering their names it will make them afraid to seek help. Drug users should be
treated as sick people, not criminals," he said.

Mr Borthwick said that under_the new Drug Poisons and Control Substances Act,
it would be an offence to offer or supply a drug of dependence napatients other
than for medical treatment.

"The doctor will require a permit from the commission to supply a drug of addic-
tion to drug dependent patients." he said.

The Victorian medical secretary of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Bill
Ryall, said yesterday: "He welcome any legislation which will clarify the doctor's
role to prescribing addictive drugs.

"The important thing is that the Minister is seeking to give doctors statutory
protection when reporting cases of drug addiction."

The acts to be changed are:

-the Poisons Act, which will provide heavy increases in penalties for traffick-
ing and using narcotics, and barbiturates, controls on glue sniffing and abuse of
cough mixtures, and give the courts greater powers in investigating and dealing
with drug offenders.

--the Medical Practitioners Act, which will give the medical board increased
powers to deal with doctors abusing or illicitly prescribing drugs.

--the Alcohol and Drug Dependent Persons Act which will give the courts power to
require a person to undergo treatment at a drug assessment or rehabilitation

centre.
The inreased penalties for drug offences include:

I --Trafficking in drugs of dependence such as morphine, opium and its deriva-
tives--25 years' jail and/or a $200,000 fine. The present penalty is 15 years'
jail and/or a $100,000 fine.

--Un1awful possession of drugs of dependence--two years' jail and/or a $5000
fine (up from 12 months' jail and/or a $500 fine).

--Trafficking cannabis-10 years' jail and/or a $50,000 fine (trafficking in
plant) 15 years' jail and/or a $100,000 fine (trafficking in resin). The
present penalty for cannabis trafficking is 10 years' jail and/or a $6000 fine.

--Trafficking in hallucinogenic drugs 10 years' jail and/or a $50,000 fine.
The present penalty is 10 years' jail and/or a $6000 fine.

Offences

The proposed legislation will also provide for three new offences. These are
trafficking and possession of restricted substances and forging and uttering pre-
scriptions and obtaining prescriptions for restricted substances by false pre-
tences. Bach offence carries a penalty of two years' jail and/or a $5000 fine.

Hr Borthwick said that under the new set there would be a crack-down on suppliers
of glue and other volatile substances. Penalties will be up to two years' jail
and/or a fine of $5000.

The head of Victoria's detectives, Assistant Commissioner (crime), Mr Paul
Delianis, said the proposed anti-drug legislation would hit the traffickers
where it hurt most.

Hr Delianis said the narcotics business involved huge sums of money and the new
legislation would mean that drug criminals would face longer jail terms, and
lose their profits. "If you can take away what they have gained and dish out a
decent jail sentence, it will have a deterrent effect on others," he said.

Doctors' Protest
Canberra THE AUSTRALIAN in English 7 Aug 81 p 2

[Text] Doctors say they will be forced to inform on patients under the Victorian
Government's hard-hitting new drug legislation.

The General Practitioners Society, the Australian Medical Association and the
Doctors Reform Society fear that the patient-doctor relationship will be destroyed
if the legislation to be introduced in Parliament's spring session, is passed.

A proposed amendment to the Medical Practitioners Act requires doctors to notify
the Victorian Health Commission if they have reason to believe a patient is a
drug addict.
The president oi the Gen.
eral Practitioners Society.
Dr‘Tom Pietzsch. said he
was concerned that the leg-
islation would require doc-
tors to act as policemen in
reporting drug-dependant
patients.

"The traditional role of the
medical practitioner as a
healer will be destroyed and
the intimate patient-doctor
relationship Jeopardised if
patients realise that their
doctor mil be required by
law to report on them." he
said

"While we are keenly
aware oi the ever-growing
problem oi drug abuse in
this country. this is not
going to be solved by in-
creasing penalties and more
stringent government con-
trols."

The president oi the
AMA's Victorian branch. Dr
J. F. MacDonald. said ad-
dicts might not seek medical
treatment ii they thought

they would end up on a
police iile.

"ii conﬁdentiality is bro-
ken you will iind patients no
longer trusting doctors." he
:31 .

Dr MacDonald said the
AMA would discuss the
proposals with the State
Minister for Health. Mr Bor-
thu1cit. next week. -

The president oi the Doc-
tors Reiorm Society. Dr An-
drew Reishauge. said
restrictions on prescribing
drugs were welcome but the
reporting oi patients was at
very dubious value.

He said it would be an in-
iringement oi the patient's
privacy.

A spokesman ior Mr Bor-
thwicit said police would not
have access to Health Com-
mission tiles on drug addicts.

He said the reports would
be used by the commission
to ireep' track oi addicts'
movements so they can be
identiﬁed and rehabilitated.

West Australia Draft

Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in English 5 Aug 81 pp 1. 10

[Excerpt]

announced details 0

' ' ' rationand
ﬂieWAandVlctorlantohelpintherehabill-growing,pnpa .
Governments yesterday tation o; to. addicts. wholesaling.

ubctul'ing
aides for Victoriaaleo announc- Peovle man

“Nth. min": in drug .d propoeaia to: editor or preparing camabia 0‘:
8351.. and "antenna. pension tor people con- opium will be subject
vieted oi drug dealing, W penalties — lines

31”.“
convict my .he introduced 09 “9 to .
mzm$‘"w mmi- In tha'n‘anxt session or amt/or“: ”8&3;
ncture sup 7 or I.“ Parilat'nenttluetoIn!“I “M,” u- u, 10 M
M g“ uéuw‘fgdh is; "n mouth. not?“ cannabis.
"" °° ’“ m 11:. WA provision! on
ﬁ’ﬁﬁ'iuﬁﬁﬁngﬁhmn contented .n safaris-:3 examﬁuﬁuuuiormdm
snte‘ Parliament yeeten oi the m oiienoee “m“ ‘0 u-a _
day. Bill. . ticking. the Bill gives the
In both sum in!“ m mu: to:- Police magnet“ power to
trade
trees:

InWAde-ug dealers

videtorthe humming“; gets the dru
Mirna“ mﬁmtmamse- and aeiae a“
Wﬁmmlmu° nectedthecowrnmenta
TheVictoriaa Govern intentlon’oiuckilng the drugdealing.

mm - Manama
Mt .‘E‘ﬂﬂam-m-
3:3 vast-Q 2 at 3.
.33 N33. n3. 2. o
.88 so.

.58 a... 33638 9.
3:3 .532 on 55:
cit—693.. 033..- Y:
233923 33526
3 332: 35‘ on
90:. .3103. .

033

>33 9. 0:08». .8
5. 5“

o V3335: on 3:...
are: oq 02:3.

0 95—... fl... 5‘
CIA-RDP82-00850R000400050061-5

2007/02/09:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

TWO HEROIN SMUGGLERS GET ZO-YEAR JAIL SENTENCES

Sydney THE SYDNEY HORNIM: HERALD in English 8 Aug 81 p 15

“mm WWW» mummmm mwmmm
WWW WWW WWWW WWWWWWW WWWWW W

mm» m M m...» .m
MWWW WMWWWMWWW MWWWWWWWWWWWW

WWWW WWW WWWWWW WWWWWWWWWWWW
WWWW WWWWW WWWWWWWWWWW WWWWW

mm » mam.
mama WWW”. .mmmawmymu WWW.

mwu

WWWWW WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW.

[Text]

5300/7583

CSO:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050081-5
BRIEFS

NSU-‘HR ASIA' LINK--Sydney--A NSW detective has begun investigations in Britain
into possible connections between the disappearance of Griffith anti-drug cru—
sader Donald Hackay and the "Mr Asia" drug ring. The policeman, Det-Sgt Joe
Parrington. has flown to London to continue inquiries into the four-year-old
Mackay mystery. NS" (:13 detectives said yesterday that net-Sgt Parrington was
working with the Lancashire police. Suggestions made during the "Mr Asia"
trial in Lancashire indicated a link between the drug ring and Mr Hockey‘s dis-
appearance. The Victorian Police Assistant Comissioner, Hr John Ball, told an
inquest in Melbourne earlier this year that he thought there were connections
between the drug syndicate. the failed Nugsn hand Bank and Mr Hackay's disappear-
ance. When the "Mr Asia" trial ended last month the NS“ Premier, Hr “ran, said
that the police would f 1y to Britain to continue investigations into the Hacksy
mystery. Det-Sgt Parrington, who headed the Hockey investigation,‘ will try to
interview members of the "Mr Asia" syndicate who were sealed after the trial.
The syndicate's boss, New Zealander Alexander Jules Sinclair, and others were

found guilty of murdering one of their colleagues, Christopher Martin Johnstone,
who was known as "Mr Asia." [Text] [Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in English

6 Aug 81 p 23]

050: 5300/ 7583
MINISTER “DRESSES CONFERENCE CF POPPY cmns
may THE TIMES OP INDIA in onglish 25 Aug 81 p 13

[Text] Indore, August 24--Nsarly 3,000 tonnes of opium worth Rs. 90,crores, which
are lying unsold, would be exported through the $11: at reduced rates, the Union
minister of state for finance, Hr. Savai singh Sisodia, announced on Saturday.

Addressing a conference of poppy cultivators at Nemch he said psttas would be
given to 200,000 poppy cultivators in Madhya Pradeeh, Otter Pradesh and Rajasthan
for the 1981-82 season despite the glut in the market. Nearly 10,000 cultivators
attended the conference.

Mr. Sisodia praised the cultivators of Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan for increasing
the per hectare yield to «.337 kgs and 45.238 kgs respectively.

He suggested that the facilities given to the tea, coffee and jute cultivators
should be given to poppy cultivators also.

The minister said the state CID had been asked to investigate the recent theft of
morphine fro. the Neenuch alkaloid factory. Referring to another scandal involv- -
ing soee officers who were using defective weights Hr. sisodia said the CB! had
been asked to investigate.

C90: 5300/7019
38198

'NWIGS KING‘ mum-m, August 13 (min—Tho wtoriom "narcotics king“ of
Pain, W Jain: Raii Alia satm, was My dottinod under the Maharash-
tn prevention of dangerous activities of tit-lords, bootloqqon and drugs ordi-
nance of 1981. With thin attention, the amber of people hold undo: the ondinanco
in the city has you Q to tight. [that] (May was rates OF INDIA in 31911811

14 Aug 81 p 20]

on!!! 01’qu Slum-Detectives of the exile bunch of Dolhi Police caught I nan
fra- Baniny at Vijay Ghat, actuarial of m Bahama: Shutzi, on Ihuroday night
with about two kg of opium, reports ”I. Doputy ennui-niche: of poiico' (crisis)
R s Sahayo aid on Friday that tho opiun had been brought for disposal in the
Capital. [Text] [New Delhi PATRIOT in Englilh 22 Aug 81 p 8]

C50: 5300/ 7018
BRIEFS

PETHIDINE RECOVERED-~The excise and taxation office (west) arrested three persons
from two different places of the city and recovered from their possession 7,000
ampules of pethidine worth Rs 1.005.000 packed in cartons and 12 maunds of high

quality chares. This is the biggest haul of pethidine in exise history. [GF131317
Karachi DAUN in English 11 Sep 81 p 4]

POLICE SEIZE DRUGS--Karachi police seized 10 kg of hashish and 1.000 vials of
pethadine worth over 20 million rupees at two places on Friar Road and Nazimabad
on 10 September. The narcotics were bound for overseas markets. Police also

arrested three persons whose names have not been disclosed. [6P122007 Karachi
HASHRIQ in Urdu 11 Sep 81 p 6]

VENDOR SEIZED WITH NARCOTICS--SDM Lisqust Abad, Hr Iftikhsr Alan accompanied by the
local magistrate raided the premises of notorious narcotic dealer, Salif-ur-Rahman
on Allama Rashid Turebi Road in North Nasim Abad and seized 250 bottles of liquor,
15 crates containing 150 tanks of alcohol, 46 dozens of pathetdine, 2 gross
syringes, large quantites of smuggled opium and tablets of mandrake. The owner of
the premises, Saif—ur-Rshnan escaped. but the manager. Badshah Khan, as wellas
others present there, were taken into custody.- A loaded revolver in possession of

Badshah Khan, was also seized. Alcohol was being smuggled by a doctor while nar-
cotics were obtained from Peshawar. The police is in search of others indicted

of this crise. [Text] [Rawalpindi TAHEBR in Urdu 1 Aug 81 p 5] 9779

HYDERABAD DRUG USB-The use of drugs are on the increase in the district, perti-
cularly in Hyderabad city, and is now spreading fast among the new generation.
Narcotics like Cheras, Opium, Bhsng (Hemp, ﬂashish, Rockee capsules and locally
made liquor and other harmful intoxicants are on wide sale. This has resulted in
social crimes and criminal acts such as robberies, theft, kidnapping, murder and
what not. It is reported that underground distilleries are running in and around
Ryderabed. sole of the drugs are reportedly smuggled from the Punjab. the NWT?
and the Tribal areas. [Text] [Karachi HDﬁNING “BUS in English 20 Aug 81 p 3]

CSQ: 5300/5652
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA PLANTS SEIZED--Cebu City, Aug. 7-—PC operatives pulled Wednesday their
biggest haul of narijuans plants in a week in Argao, Cebu, bringing to over PS
million the total value of the prohibited plants they have uprooted in three raids.
Lt. Lanio Hares, of the Cebu PC amend, said the latest raid was conducted on a
Bureau of Forest Developnent reforestation area in barangay Cansuje, Argao. The up-
rooted marijuana seedlings in the latest raid were worth sore than P3.5 nillion,
Here; said. No arrest were made, however, he said. Here: said Wednesday's haul
was the third in one week. The first was on Aug. 1 in barrio Ubaub and the second
in barsngay Butong, he said. He said that as in the latest haul, the plants were
discovered in BPD reforestation areas. Authorities are now looking for the owners
of the plantations, he said. (PHA) [Text] [Manila PHILIPPINES DAILY EXPRESS in
English 8 Aug 81 p 3]

H2801“ chECTIONS UNCOVERBD—The PC said yesterday it has found, after successive
raids in Metro Manila and Cebu, proof of big-time trafficking of heroin from Manila
to Hawaii and possibly the 0.8. mainland by a gang of Anericans and Filipinos. The
Manila-Hawaii route, which also uses Cebu as an alternate base, was discovered by
PC anti-narcotics agents after the arrest of two Americans and their six Filipino
associates on drug charges. Heroin is a highly-potent narcotic that causes takers
to have hallucinations. It is banned, because of its addictive properties and
sonetimes lethal effects. It is usually passed on to users in powder for- for easy
sniffing and sizing with liquids taken intravenously. Lt. Col. Jewel Canson of the
PC anti-narcotics units also reported the seizure in the past few days of millions
of pesos worth of heroin believed bound for Honolulu and $36,300 in cash used by
the gang. Canson said two raids were carried out at the Tradewinds Hotel in Hakati
and one at the Cebu City residence of Steven Balarana, 30, a businessman reportedly
with a drugs case. Held last Aug. 15 at the hotel were two Anericans--Glenn K.
Koeneg, 20 and Thanas R. Doherty, 28--and five Filipinos, four of whom were identi-
fied as Andrew Steven Parco, Cesar Banares, Javi P. Rubio and Roberto Cervantes.
Seized fron than were assorted heroin containers, drug kits and $17,000 in 100-
dollar bills. Three days later, cm teams iron Manila swooped down on Balsm's
house in Sto. Nina Village in Cebu City, and confiscated more heroin, drug tools,
and $19,300. Balsrana also yielded an unlicensed cal. 25 pistol and various let-
ters and documents indicating the gang's contacts in Hawaii and the 0.8. nainland.
Canson said the documents were now being analyzed and verified to establish the
group's operations and their contacts. After his arrest, Balsrana was taken to the
CAN“ rehabilitation center in Taguig, Metro manila, for treatnsnt.

C50: 5300/ 6964-8
11
FIVE MILLION dollars
worth of assorted herd drugs
were seized by the Ethernet
Defence Foree during a
routine petrol In the leery
Isl-ode eree Tuesday night.

‘l’vo melee - en Amricen
end a Cuben‘Amerlcen -
here been taken into police
mody.

“It It the biggest heal that
we have made of these type
of drugs.“ n Delenee Force
spokeernen said.

[0138 lnnm. under the
command ot Lt Jackson
hitch“. apprehended the
.mhed speed hoet 3:30
Tneedey night between the
Berry ldende and knell
Recon. ‘me suspected drug

runner-a put up no reshtenee.
0n bond the unmarked
speed boet was found “a
mo of netted rubetenae
suspected of being qnuhrdee.
speed. end perhepe mine,"
upohenteneeid.

The Delenee Force
epoheeuee valued the cargo
otdrnptt” million.

0. picture by Frnnhlyn
Reuben shove Criminal
lnvutlntlon Officers
"will. box- ol qnnnlttdee
jut e portion 0! the $5
million worth of herd dross
seized by the Dnhenne
Defence Force during 1
routine petrol in the Berry
lelende em Tuesday night.
The cerao Ibo conteined
other dwindndhueoeeine.

BRIEFS

JAIL IN COCAINE CASE-«A brilliant student whose mind was "blown by drugs" was
jailed for three years yesterday for importing cocaine and cannabis into
Bermuda. Derek Sims, 22, of Sun Valley, Warwick, admitted importing cocaine,
with an estimated street value of $17,300, and cannabis worth $2,175 on June 21.
[Excerpt] [Hamilton THE ROYAL GAZEITE in English 13 Aug 81 p 5]

C90: 5300/7582

14
INTERNATIONAL HARIHUANA TRAFFIC RING DISBANDED
Paraguayan Source
Rio de Janeiro JORNAL D0 BRASIL in Portuguese 7 Aug 81 p 20

[Text] The drug ring led by millionaire Luis Newton Galeano ("Juca"), arrested by
Federal Police, supplied 15 tons of marihuana a year, or 10 million cruzeiros' worth
per month, to the Brazilian Iarket. The drug, obtained mainly in the Paraguayan cities
of Capitao Bado and Pedro Juan Caballo, was transported in trucks, concealed under
loads of wood, or on three planes.

Divulging details of the arrests, Police Chief Inacio Carlos Dias Lopes said one of
the pilots involved was Uel Sousa, of Brasilia, an employee of the Superintentency
for Development of the Central "est, who disappeared with a Bonanza plane, registra-
tion PT-CHE. Among the 28 persons indicted for criminal association in Sapucaia do
Sul, Rio Grande do Sul, were three police officers of the Second Police Precinct in
Santos, Sao Paulo. The three men-Nelio Assis Lima ("Kojak"), Tadeu de Campos and
Ademar Guerra-accepted a bribe of 1 million cruzeiros from Luis Newton Galeano.

The international marihuana traffic ring was set up in Parana and Santa Catarina by
Juca Galeano in late 1978, when he came out of prison in Porto Alegre. Now aged
30, and with several convictions, he is known as "The Man "ith the White Ghost."
The owner of a white Volkswagen, he stole several cars of the same make and color,
transferring his own license plate to them and selling them in Paraguay.

Judge Francisco Barbosa froze Caleano's bank accounts, including those opened under
false names as Luis Hassa, Isidro Duo and Luis Carlos Goncalves Filho. These
accounts, added to the value of the property of the group, which was seized and
impounded, amount to almost 300 million cruzeiros.

A 396-hectare estate in Guarapuava, Parana, with 200 head of cattle, was also
discovered and legally impounded, as were five 20-hectare farms on which the marihuana
was hidden: one in Sao Jose dos Pinhais, Parana; the Melodic Farm, in Biguacu,

Santa Catarina; two in Camburiu, Santa Catarina; and the fifth in Jordao, Santa
Catarina. Also impounded were 5 houses and an apartment in Porto Alegre; a launch;

5 trucks, lS automobiles, including a Volkswagen, a Passat and a Brasilia; 5 vans;

and 50 million cruzeiros in dollars, guaranis and cruzeiros.
Depositions Taken
Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 9 Aug 81 p 8

[Text] Porto Alegre (0 GLOBO)-—Tomorrow Judge Luis Francisco Correa Barbosa, of
uSapucaia do Sul, will hear the statement of Luis Newton Galeano, leader of the drug
ring disbanded last week in the south. Yesterday morning the judge continued hearing
the depositions of the six principal members of the ring. All of then denied any
involvement whatever in drug trafficking, despite an abundance of evidence.

From Friday until early yesterday morning, the court heard Manoel Teixeira Pilho and
his wife Rosa de Laurdes Nunes, Joao Carlos Falleiro, Ivo Kerber, Cleusa Maribel
Teixeira Dorneles and Vera Regina Hays. According to Judge Correa Barboaa. the
first three are the highest-ranking members of Caleano's ring. They denied even
knowing Galeano, although photographs taken with him are included in the Za-volume
brief, 14 volumes of which comprise material evidence.

Even Hanoel Teixeira Filho, who led the Federal Police to the ringleader, now says
he has never seen Caleano. Rosa de Lourdes, Hanoel's wife, also denies knowing
Galeano, although she was arrested with a group of narihuana addicts in the ring-
leader's apartment in Porto Alegre.

Police Action

The "Galeano 0rganization,‘ as it is called by the Rio Grande do Sul police. began
to fall apart last year, when Manoel Teixeira was arrested after an exchange of
fire with the Sapucaia do Sul police. He was responsible for transporting the

16
uarihuana to the south of the country. He was replaced by Aparicio Cordeiro Leite,
who died in an accident in Tijueas (Santa Catarina). On that occasion the police
discovered 680 kg of marihuana concealed under a load of lumber.

The Caleano ring sold about 1,000 kg of narihuana a year in the southern region. The
drug was brought in from the Paraguayan cities of Capitao Bado and Pedro Juan Caballero.
Covering six Brazilian states, in addition to Brasilia, Luis Newton Galeano managed

to accumulate a fortune now estimated at 300 million cruzeiros from farms with landing
strips used by planes transporting the weed. His property and bank accounts in his
name (50 million cruzeiros) were impounded by order of the court.

The trial, which involves about 50 people, "is very complicated," according to Clecy
Fogliatto, defense attorney for Luis Roberto Galeano (the ringleader's brother),
ring member Felicio da Costa Maye and his wife, Vera Regina. Fogliatto is very well

known in police circles and recently became engaged to prison inmate Enio Gilberto
Amador dos Reis.

More Marihuana Uncovered
Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE 5A0 PAULO in Portuguese 1 Aug 81 p 18

[Text] Yesterday in Sapucaia do Sul, in the metropolitan region of Porto Alegre,
Luis Newton Galeano, leader of a marihuana trafficking ring that operated in several
states, was interrogated in a court session that lasted for 7 hours. Despite the
lengthy interrogation, the trafficker responded to all questions with: "No state-
ment.“ Judge Luis Francisco Barbosa, the presiding judge, revealed testimony obtained
from statements that had not yet been publicly released by the Federal Police, such
as the discovery that one of the nation's most important distributors is the physical
education instructor at Mackenzie, identified only as 2e Augusto. The judge also
reported that new arrests had been made and that the Federal Police are continuing
their investigation throughout the country, including 13 municipios of Sao Paulo
State.

In the inquiry conducted by the Federal Police, who are still holding Galeano, the
trafficker gave a detailed description of the operation of his group, which was formed
in late 1978. He named such individuals as supplier Joao Morel, Paraguayan, and his
distributors in Espirito Santo, Rio, Sao Paulo, Parana, Santa Catarina and Rio

Grande do Sul. He identified photos of some of them, or supplied names and telephone
numbers.

Yesterday he w0uld say only that he was in no condition to testify because he was
under psychological pressure. As he explained to the judge, this pressure consisted
in being put in solitary confinement in the Federal Police installations and in not
being permitted to "be with his family." Judge Barbosa cited 57 names, mosc of them
supplied to the police by Galeano himself. They include the Indonesian Sioe Lan, of
Brasilia: Antonio Damasio Wolff, a voting member of the Parana Labor Court, who was
called a "retired bandit"; attorney Sergio Barreto Silva, of Itajai (Santa Catarina),
who was hired to register Caleano's vehicles in his own name; and attorney Euro
Saiomeo, who was paid to take a car from See Leopoldo to Porto Alegre for the gang.

At the end of the interrogation, Caleano and his two attorneys requested that he be
transferred to the Central Prison in Porto Alegre. The request was denied by

Judge Barbosa, who argued that if he were transferred he w0uld be murdered for
informing on his companions.

l7
Also yesterday, the judge received a telegram froa Santos Police Chief Antonio

Carlos de Castro Miranda, requesting copies of relevant documents for us in proceedings
against police officers Nereu Assis Lima ("Kojac"), Edir Ademar Guerra and Tadeu
Campos, charged with facilitating the nsrihuana traffic. According to statements by

Galeao, confirmed by his wife, Eliane Gilgen, the three were paid not to interfere
with the traffickers in Santos.

War on Drug Traffic

Brazil will become a part of the international drug traffic enforcement policy
coordinated by the United Nations and implemented by the United States, according to
a plan aimed at isolating Latin America from the major routes, mainly for cocaine
and narihuana traffic. As the Justice Ministry declared in Brasilia, Brazil's size
and location make this country a primary site in the barrier to be erected against
the exportation¢>fcocaine from Bolivia and Peru, the major producers.

6362
C80: 5300/2426

18
HASHISH TRAFFICKER ARRESTED IN RIO CONFESSES

Very Important People'

Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 11 Aug 81 p 11

[Text] Roberto Claudio Silva, an engineer with the Rio de Janeiro DER [Highway
Department] who was arrested with almost a kilogram of cocaine and implicated in
hashish traffic in Europe, admitted yesterday to Judge Mario Perreira of the 28th
Criminal Court that he was in fact a trafficker, "but not for profit, only to help
out friends-very prominent people-snd support their habit."

Until yesterday he had refused to talk and would not give a statement to the police,
reserving his deposition for the judge. In his statement, he made a point of '
describing himself as a cocaine addict. The other four involved in the case denied
they were drug traffickers or even users, much less addicts.

One of them is physician Jairo Cabral, who is responsible for discharging patients
from the Hospital do Fondao. He was arrested with drugs in his possession and is
being held in the special detention center at Panto Zero. The others are bank
employee Lidia Queiros; French national Jean Pierre, a travel agent; and photographer
Aderi Costa, all single. The public prosecutor's office requested that they be
placed under preventive arrest, but the judge denied the request.

Drugs On Time

The engineer was arrested last month in his apartment, in the company of the
physician. He told Judge Mario Perreira that he received orders for cocaine "from
important people who did not want to be seen." He gave a check to a trafficker called
Henrique, who supplied the drug.

In the interrogation, which lasted over a hour, a very nervous Roberto Claudio
insisted that he made no profit on the cocaine. He said he took the checks from the
clients and delivered then to the trafficker. He admitted that he kept part of the
cocaine in payment.

"When Henrique delivered the drug to me it had already been divided into packets,
which I distributed to friends who had placed orders with me. I kept one packet for
my own use." At one point, the judge asked how the engineer could say he did not
make a profit if he bought the cocaine for 1.800 cruzeiros per gram and sold it for
2,600 cruzeiros.

l9
Roberto Claudio said: "Both the first amount and the second were collected by the
supplier, who kept all the profits." He explained "Those who didn't have the money
at the time were charged more." Then the judge ordered it entered into the record
that the engineer also sold drugs on time.

Hashish Traffic

The judge asked why Roberto Claudio had traveled to India in 1973. The engineer
replied: "I was fed up with my job and decided to travel." When the judge asked
if he knew it was easy to buy hashish in that region, the engineer said he “was
in no way involved in that incident."

The incident to which the engineer referred is mentioned in the dossier in the
possession of the Federal Police, containing INTERPOL information implicating
Roberto Claudio in the unsuccessful shipment of a lot of hashish, which was seized
by the Greek police in 1973.

According to the Federal Police dossier, Roberto Claudio traveled with a Belgian
national named Mark. They separated in India and the Belgian was given the task
of forwarding a trunk of Persian carpets, containing 25 kg of hashish, to Roberto
Claudio in Rio de Janeiro, through a contact in the Brazilian Embassy in Brussles.

The Belgian traveled by rented car to Turkey, while Roberto Claudio returned to
Brazil. when Mark crossed the border he was arrested by the Greek police. who had
been alerted to the shipment by INTERPOL.

Roberto Claudio said he was implicated by the Belgian, but he did not explain why
he had sent letters to Mark complaining about the delayed shipment--unaware at that
time that Mark had been arrested in Europe. The letters were intercepted in Zurich,
where the Belgian maintained residence.

This incident is not actually a part of the present trial, which is still in closed
court in the 28th Criminal Jurisidction, but the details of the engineer's involve-
ment in international traffic were obtained 10 days ago by the public prosecutor
from the Federal Police. -

George Tavares, attorney for the engineer, announced that he was going to request
a medical examination for his client before Thursday (the period for presentation
of prior defense), to determine if Roberto Claudio is really a cocaine addict, and
the degree and type of his addiction.

Negatives

Photographer Aderi Luis da Costa denied he was a trafficker, addict or user. He

is being represented by attorney Harcio Connicci, who believes his client's defense
is "the easiest of all." Aderi was involved in the case by a movie actor who was
arrested in the engineer's apartment on the day the latter was arrested in flagrante.
The actor said he was an addict and was trying to buy cocaine "to use at a part at
Aderi's house." The photographer had admitted only that he has been a friend of the
engineer for 2 years.

20
Contradicting the interview given the week before to a journalist friend, which was
published in a Rio newspaper, in which she admitted using drugs, bank employee
Lidia Cristina Queiros Esteves yesterday denied before the judge that she used
narcotics of any kind. She annoyed the judge by claiming: "I only know about LSD
because it is mentioned in a song."

Jean—Pierre Maurice lg Haitre, a French citizen who is a travel agent in Rio, also
denied taking part in drug traffic or using drugs. He was also in Roberto Claudio's
apartment at the time the latter was arrested. According to police, a memorandum
book in his possession "indicated that he was involved in drug traffic."

Physician Jairo Luciano Cabral was arrested with the engineer. In two interviews
with 0 GLOBO while interned in Ponto Zero, he confessed he was a cocaine addict,
but yesterday before the judge he denied he was a drug addict or even used drugs.
He said he was only in the habit of smoking marihuana. During the trial, it was
placed on record the police had found a 16-gram packet of marihuana in his home.

The photographer Aderi
and bank employee Lidia
denied they were addicts.

Jean—Pierre: a name
in a notebook

 

21
Notebooks Seized

Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE SAD PAULO in Portuguese 16 Aug 81 p 16

[Text] Although over 200 pages had been ripped out, the two notebooks seized from
engineer Claudio Silva da Silveira ("Padi")-arrested for drug trafficking in Rio-
listed several names of individuals who use cocaine and bought it from him. Among
the names are prominent individuals in Rio politics, society and artistic circles.
Police of the Narcotics Division will be questioned by public prosecutor Rafael
Cezario as to the possibility of identifying the individuals named.

The prosecutor has been informed that "the police conducted their investigation for
60 days; during that period they kept a watch on the engineer's hone and hence are
in a position to identify many of the individuals mentioned only by one name or by
nickname in the notebooks."

According to the police, although several pages had been removed from the notebooks
(both the one bound in black and the one bound in white), ‘hmny important people
were listed and they are all certainly cocaine users.“

Although he feels the police are willing to tell "the whole story of drug traffic

in Ric's southern zone" at the trial, the prosecutor would also like a clarification
of the circumstances under which the pages were removed from the notebooks, even
though the remaining pages bear the "stamp of the Narcotics Division," which the
police consider “an absolute proof of [their] honesty."

"If it were a question of suppressing information, it would have been easier not

to turn the notebooks over to the court, but we turned over what we collected and

we can guarantee that there is considerable material for investigation there, enough
to identify prominent people," the police say.

0f the four seized notebooks, two belong to engineer Roberto Silva da Silveira, one
to physician Jairo Luciano Cabral and one to travel agent Jean Pierre Le ﬂaitre.
The three men are charged with trafficking in narcotics and forming a ring (Law .
6,368, Articles 12 and 16), along with photographer Aderi Luis da Costa and bank
employee Lidia Cristina Queiroz Esteves. Except for Padi, they all deny they

are either traffickers or addicts, but a close examination of the notebooks links
the five together and also indicates that they are at least close friends.

According to the police, the figures listed in the black notebook (the most important
one) refer to the quantity of cocaine, in grams. The notations include: Didu, 1.3;
Isabel, 1.0; Didi, 1.3; Caetano, 5.0; Jorge, 0.5; Didu, 10.0; Isabel, +1.0; Nalds,
1.0; Pedrinho, 500; Lucas, 500; Joao Lemos, 5.0 + 2.0; "Speak to Ivone's friend

Ivan; Antonio, Monday, 20,000 cruzeiros; Cora-Edgar de Carvalho--uilma—-Ivan; Halter,
at DER, 5.0 (engineer Padi works at the DER [Highway Department]); Didi, 6.0 + 6.0.

This notebook has many pages of entries and even specific reminders. For example,

it lists the telephone number for TV-Globo: "Call Vidal, prompter, 488 (probably

the extension); “Coracao Alado" (Toto or Hashington), telephone 286-7722. There is
also a reminder to "pick up at 1100 hours," and a reminder to call “0 DIA, Jose Maria."
The list continues: Dinho, 90.0 (ask Gustavo for Dinho's address); Isabel, 1.0;
Tatiana, 5.0 + 5.0; Didia, 1.0 + 1.0; Vassalo, 6.0; Nelson, 100; Dinho, 90.0. The
names Herbert, Iaabe1, Lidia (probably the bank employee), Ruth, Jacqueline, Ricardo

and Suzana appear with a reference in parentheses ("Tutu"), which in Rio slang means
'hnney."

Jean Pierre-~who denies he is an addict-is listed with 5.0 after his name; Joao

Lemos, 2.0; Didi, 1.3. On 13 Hay there is a reference: "I gave 5.0 to him once or
twice." On 20_May the same phrase appears again. Hands, 2.0; Wanda, +1.0 Joao Lemos,
2.0; Joao Lemos, +2; "Call Neuza (the money didn't come)"; Rita; Jairo (the physician);
Sueli (son's name); Evan; Rosaria; Vania; Augusto; David; Cecilia; Ana Lucia;

Antonio Dia; Odete; Vania, 2.0.

Also listed: Sam, 57.00; PI-23.00: Supri, 2.0; Caco-twice--BANERJ, 20.0 (bank
employee Lidia works at BANBRJ [State Bank of Rio de Janeiro]); Joao Lemos, 2.0;
Rosaria, 0-5; Ivan, 2.5; Ivan, +10.0; Wanda. 2.0; Ivan (will be at Belas Artes from
1200 hours to 1500 hours); Didinho, 1.0; Nelson restaurant, 1.0; Orlando, 2.0; Blpis,
8.0; Novaes, 5.0; Wanda, 2.0; Lucas, 1.0.

On 21 October, the sum of 914,500 cruzeiros is noted, with the reminder "Antonio
owes 16,500." The last name is Silva Donato, 12.50.

In the white notebook, which has 38 pages, is the following notation: "Aderi, 100;
me, 57; Jairo, 83," evidence of the connection among the three. since "Aderi" is
the photographer, "Jairo" is the doctor and the 'hn" is the engineer, since the

notebook belongs to him. This notebook also lists 0dile's telephone number:
256-8915.

Both the notebook of travel agent Jean Pierre Le Haitre and Jairo's notebook list
Lidia's telephone number, which also appears in Padi's two notebooks. The five
accused know each other well, since their names appear in all the notebooks.

6362
C80: 5300/2426

23
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFICKING CHARGE DENIED-—Brssilia--ITAMARATY yesterday stood up to defend
diplonat Maria Celina Azevedo Rodrigues, who has been accused of international
drug trafficking. by issuing an official statement that "there are no charges
against her at this point." The name of the diplomat. who is currently second
secretary of the Brazilian Embassy in Colombia. was brought up when the federal
police received information from Interpol to the effect that an engineer, Roberto
Claudio Silva, could be involved in international drug trafficking and that he
has been using the Brazilian diplomatic pouch with the help'of Brazilian official
Maria Celina Azevedo Rodriguez. [Sao Paulo FOLHA DE 8A0 PAULO in Portuguese

1 Aug 81 p 10]

COCAINE BUST-~H0usebreaker and drug trafficker Flavio Mesquite Hotta ("Flavinho")
aged 43, was arrested yesterday at the home of his mother, Doralice Mesquite Hotta
aged 66, of Rua Bartolomeu, Vigario Geral. He was carrying 50 of the 400 grams of.
cocaine that he had received on Friday. Detectives Icara Silva and Cesar Barros of
SORFA (Operations Sector, Automobile Theft and Robbery), entered the home with a,
search and seizure warrant issued by Police Chief Eduardo Batist, of the Fourth
SORFA. They waited there until Flavinho arrived. When the trafficker entered his
mother's house, he was carrying a packet of 10 grams of cocaine in his pocket.

In a bedroom, police found another packet containing 60 grams of the narcotic.
Flavinho was booked for possession in the Automobile Theft and Robbery Division.
[Text] [Rio de Janeiro 0 61030 in Portuguese 13 Aug 81 p 13] 6362

CSO: 5300/2426

24
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFICKERS—It has been reported that the police have arrested six drug
traffickers. They are: (Eduardo Eduardo Eastman); (Jorge Chavez Ica); (Jorge
Barrera Vea): (Sergio Vega Santa-aria); (Gloria Caeaa Rabuso); and (Angela
Tuekinan). These persons were alao in charge of a Iarihuana plantation located
in the Angaroa region of Eaater Island. [Santiago Chile Doneatic Service in
Spanish 0000 err 17 Sep 81] '

C80: 5300/2556

25
GOCAINE. HEROIN. “ROMA WING ACTIVITIES
Rotterdam HEP VRIJE VOLK in hitch 25 Jul 81 p 16

[Report on interview with drug trafficked: at the Seaview Restamnt in Bonaire's
capital. Kralendijk, by Joop Spandersberg: "Antilles Paradise for Drug Snugglers --
With a Little Guts. It Is Possihle To Earn Gold Here": date of interview not given]

[Text] me Netherlands Antilles rm a function as point of con-
tact in cocaine. heroin and nariduana uuggling. The role of the
islands in the 111te Caribbean drug traffic is steadily increas-
ing in scope -- increasingly larger amounts of cocaine (from
Brazil and Peru) and marijuana (primarily rm- Colonbia -- which.
for a modern smuggler in the Antilles. is "next door") reach des-
tinations in Europe and the United States via secret routes which
run through. among other places. the Antilles.

One of our reporters spent 2 weeks in the Antilles. In Bonsire,
he came in contact with one of the big boys in the Antinean snugb
gling trade -- a. world in which numerous tens of thousands of
guilders are involved every year.

The interview took place on the terrace or the Seaviet. wrestau-
rant. located on the unpretentious sea boulevard of Bonaire's ca-
pital, Kralendijk. stopping place for pleasure seeking sailors.

adventurers and smugglers -- both the sin-ewd and the unsuccessful.

"That is no longer a big secret, is it: a Ditch-an with a little guts can earn
gold here. That is simply a fact. Do you want me to give you nice round figures?
One million Antillean guildere for a single crossing -- that is no less than 1.5
million Dutch guilders. But the Dutch-en do have to risk their beautiful white
skin for that loot. Bottomless misery if they loose -- really true. you know --
but a. divine existence as a gentleman with independent means if they succeed."

His name is none of my business. "Just call no Roy." An interview was possible
only on condition of strict anonymity. His further civil status must equally re-

main in Antilleen obscurity. And there is absolutely no question of taking a pic-
ture -- when I asked about it. he answered with scornﬂll laughter.

"You better not come up with that bullshit." he gloated after a short silence.

"Bonaire is a village. nan. Eight thousand people live on this island. With a
little more information they would be able to simply pick me out. Then I would be

26
branded for my whole life. Among the people as a drug trafficker and along the
boys in the business as a big mouth. Do you really think that I would climb onto
that scaffold for you?"

In the Caribbean. smuggling is a lucrative but deadly dangerous occupation. Hith
the Netherlands Antilles as the most important "way station." the contraband (co-
caine. marijuana. heroin. liquor. weapons). which yields millions of guilders. goes
to consumers all over the Hestern hemisphere.

Shrewd

Latest development: the Colo-bian marijuana. growing region of La (Indira. which
borders on Venezuela. was so successful in serving its clients via the Antilles
that Jamaican marijuana is now also partially being channeled to North Anerica via
Aruba and Curacao. Another spicy detail: cocaine from Peru. which is good for a
yearly production of 200 tons. is flown to the Antilles and to Europe by couriers
on our own m: [Royal Dutch Airlines]. The comers. who are rich in practical ex-
perience. have developed various shrewd smuggling techniques.

They often go in pairs: one with a small quantity of bad "coke" and the other with
the pure cocaine shipnent. The "mall" man then allows himself to be caught to
divert attention from the big one.

Roy looks like an average tourist -- Jeans. a shirt with open collar which gives
free play to a small silver chain with a leopard tooth. and a large anount of nosey
chest hair. According to insiders. he is a beastly brutal daredevil who succeeded
cum laude in the business. not in the least because he is in the enjoyable posi-
tion of having "a little comaon sense."

The beginning of the interview was a period of testing. He first talked about the
Dutch plan to station a few narcotics detectives in the Antilles and in Colombia.
For mam years. our Justice Department has had its own two agents in Bangkok. who --
as it is generally thought -- have been operating very effectively. partly due to
cooperation with the very aggressive infiltrators of the American DEA [Drugs mfor-
cenent Administration] and the Thai narcotics brigade.

Bloodhounds

Roy is confident that the ”white bloodhounds" from the Netherlands. who can also
rely on friendly help from the DEA in the Antilles. will not create a. greater
threat than the current one. He expects that small saugglers. such as the “riders."
who collect hard to conceal articles such as liquor and weapons from Venezuela.

will become the victims.

[Question] You said that a Dutchman can earn gold here. Tell ne something about
that. '

[Answer] There are boys here in the Antilles who went across only once. To
Venezuela or Colombia. They cane back safely and henceforth can spend the rest of
their life sitting on their botton. Recently. a boy here in Bonaire was offered a.
fantastic deal. A single trip to Colombia -- this could earn him 1 million guil-
ders. He said "yes" and he made it. Now he is a big shot here.

27
Yes. he received the money. cash in hand. Counted out piece by piece. Now he has
built a. house here. He has 800,000 guilders left over and they are in the bank.

He receives 10 percent interest yearly. Too crazy, nan. if you think about it. He
went to school for h years or so. but he had guts and thus he was saart enolgh.

[Question] What are the dangers?

[Answer] It is donned dangerous. naturally. Here in Bonaire. nothing is going on.
There is one police boat; that is not the prohlen. The real dangers cone from
the Venezuelan and Colombian coast guard. The Venezuelans can come as close as
1.5 mile from the coast here. Under normal circumstances. the sea border between
two countries lies precisely midway, but not here. The Venezuelan coast guard
ferns a veritable ring around Bonaire. which is nearly inpassible. Only if you are
fast enowh.

Nearly autonatically, "Roy" passed his right hand over a frosty refrigerated bottle
-- brewed in Curacao -- of Amstel Pils. The only mtch pleasure the Antilleans
still idly give in to. "And then there are your Neptunes. those fat ﬂying ma-
chines fron the Dutch navy. They patrol virtually constantly over the sea. and
when they discover a non-identifiable ship. then the trouble starts. The only way
to escape then is by sinking your ship immediately. Those things happen. Before
such an unwieldy Neptune has ads at large circle and returned. the ship has disap-
peared. In such cases, these boys on board always manage to save thenselves."

Cocaine. heroin and marijuana are usually the aonopoly of the big boys in the
nervous Antillean drug world. Because of the heavy prison sentences. heroin is

the least pepular. Liquor and weapons are the crumbs which fall off the table for
the small boys. In the Antilles. the "fetching" of radios and television sets is
also among the Jobs assigned to those who are still wet behind the ears. The usual-
ly young "riders" load a couple hundred radios and television sets in a high-speed
boat in Caracas. and risk the crossing.

Those who are caught with such innocent stuff as radios and television sets --
referred to as peanuts in the snuggling trade -- will spend an average of i to 2
years in the pen. The profits in this branch of "snall pirating" are not earth-
shaking -- 10,000 or 20.000 guilders per crossing. As far as liquor is concerned:
Curacao and the remainder of the Caribbean area show a preference for Black Label
whiskey. Sometimes 30 guilders profit is made per bottle snuggled in.

Roy: "That Black Label is not original. It is stuff that is bottled in Venezuela
and provided with a false label. There is also a profitable larket for weapons

here. There are relatively few weapons among the people here. and then it becomes
appealing to own a gun. And through snuggling. it is always possible to get one."

[Question] who are the principals and how often do things go wrong now for the
smugglers?

[Answer] Do you think that I an crazy? I obviously don't know any principals. 1
never even heard of that word. [And then even lore testilya) Naturally. enough
goes wrong in this business. There are boys who go once and cone back fine. Then
they'll try it once lore. If that goes well. they'll go a third time. They want
even more money. and the fourth or the fifth tine the game is up. But I also know
bOys. who have a high-speed boat lying openly in the harbor of Curacao. and whom

28
everybody knows to be smugglers. But they simply cannot be caught. They can never
find anything on them.

[Question] what is your attitude toward this smuggling business? Do you think of
it as a sport?

[Answer] Yes, I think that it is a sport. But then one with damned high stakes.

If you get caught in Venezuela with cocaine or heroin. you could easily go to Jail
for 15 years. And there go the best years of your life then. No sun, no luxury,

no women. And when you are finally released. nobody knows you and you don't have

a cent.

No, if you really want to do it well -- then once. and never again. That is "the"
way. That way you assess your own life at its true value. I think.

[Question] And how about that Dutchman who can come and earn gold here?

[Answer] If he wants to do it all by himself and wants to lake the risk of being
caught as small as possible. then he will have to bring $80,000 to $100,000 with
him. And then buy a high-speed boat with two supercharged diesel inboard motors.
each with 500 horsepower. But that is the minimum. It would be preferable to get
two 700 horsepower motors. That would provide an optimal feeling of safety.

[Question] And then you cannot be passed by any ship?
[Answer] You better believe it!
Small Airplanes

According to our man in Bonaire, marijuana smugglers have lately been making in-
crasing use of small airplanes. This new development is due to the American coast
guard which, in cooperation with the authorities in the big supplier, Colombia,
have virtually hermetically closed the sea border. Small private planes now ﬂy
low under the Florida radar control. to Aruba to fill up. and from there to the
Colombian marijuana region of La GuaJira, whose "business center" is the harbor
city of Puerto Estella.

Sometimes. these operations stumble in Aruba if the papers do not correspond and
it turns out the pilot cannot provide a flight plan. A few years ago following
his umpteenth tri to the Antilles described as a working visit, CDA Christian
Democratic Appeal member of parliament Van Zeil disclosed another ingeneom snugb
gling trick. .

A stock car race track in Aruba was being used as a landing and departure strip
for small business planes which flew drugs, brought in by ship. to North America.
Such a race track is also available in Curacao, along the thinly populsud coastal
area and near the richly scenic Saint Joris Bay.

To get some official and supplementary information on the wild west type smuggling
activities. we turned to the police in Curacao, the mother island of our West. Po-
lice expert Deputy Inspector H. N. Coaster seemed the ideal man to'clear up the
remaining foggy areas smounding the smuggling trade. all the more so as he had
also served as a policeman in Aruba.

29
Taciturn

Coaster, however. maintained a charming taciturnity. He claimed to know little
and cautiously referred to his Minister of Justice Cross and to the local newspa-
pers. from which "also next to nothing" can be gleaned concerning the Antillean
snuggling trade. He does not have any files. And as far as the policing of the

Antillean coast is concerned. that is the business of ”the gentlemen of the customs
service."

As far as the smugglers are concerned. the Antilles are Just like a piece of cheese
with holes in it, I suggested. This was going a bit too far for the deputy inspec-
tor. He then said with sons emphasis: ”He really do take action. At the airport.
we are now working with a narcotics dog. I can't recall right now what its name is.
But it is a. mighty fantastic aninel. very suitable. Re catches a great deal, espe-
cially that which arrives on the XL}! from Peru. And he is being closely gimdud

by us here. so that his opponents do not get a chance to get to him."

Horries enough then. Coaster agreed with a sigh ”There is a great deal of snug-
gling here, yes. I can confirm that."

8'463
cso: 5300/2101

30
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED-The police have reported that two Colombian drug
traffickers were arrested on 22 August 1981. The two traffickers, (Fernando Aranda
Zapata) and (Jaine Rodriguez Medina), are said to be linked to the terrorists that
are operating in Peru. Sophisticated weapons and ammunition vere found in their
possession. [PYOb1417 Lina Radio Union in Spanish 1130 GMT 2 Sep 81]

C80: 5300/2450

31
SIX, INCLUDING THREE VENEZUELANS, IN COURT 0N DRUG CHARGES

Venezuelans Charged

Port-of-Spain TRINIDAD GUARDIAN in English 20 Aug 81 p 3

[Text] A submission that the Police exceeded their authority and competence in
arresting six persons, including three Venezuelans, over the weekend at a city
hotel was yesterday over-ruled when the six appeared before Magistrate Pat
Jaggessar in the Port of Spain Fifth Court on narcotics charges.

The submission was made by counsel for the defence, Mr. Theodore Guerra.

Appearing on charges of being in possession of marijuana, cocaine and hashish
were Armando Jose Sanchez Quintero, Maure Prissilio Rodriguez, Linio Antonio
Hernandez, all Venezuelans, Calvin O'Brien of Sydenhan Avenue, St. Ann's,Jennifer
Rowe, of Hillary Street, Diego Martin, and Gabriel Hong, of Fairfax Lane. Belmont.

They are charged with being in possession of marijuana, cocaine and hashish last
Friday night at Queen's Park hotel, Queen's Park west, Port-of-Spain.

Mr. Jaggeasar ruled yesterday that the Police were right when they arrested the

defendants. No evidence was taken yesterday because a Spanish interpreter was
absent. The cases have been postponed to tomorrow.

Drug Cases Postponed

Port-of-Spain TRINIDAD GUARDIAN in English 18 Aug 81 p 3

[Text] ngghydhndx:::L m— Tiaras nihhe
,chdng er: Vauamﬁnn h. h pinata d
I b d:;:. d .D‘ a an??J::
W —--- -/"" "’ ”.‘Eﬁwu. ma
0 ash-he-nun' Anon-Inns ' h
pun-humps}: mm m
an nuimhuﬂn~ lama lair! .
Anmnb ﬂunluht aﬂ.hunonlandluﬂ
mxmﬁ - .amnﬁﬁ,
A”"1ist '3 Julius a. ﬁgueVaumlumswue
m’ .E'Ehm 'd ' mm“ and-b
Fiﬂilx la::i'. yellnhy traumas-durum
Egizgg «lt-hgdkgﬂlnununuun:
Mr.ﬂaund()1m» discount» . . w
m a. Pun4l$pun
mum: aoocmcunz'

33
BRIEFS

HEROIN SEIZURES--In three operations last week the police managed to seize 1.686
grams of heroin. worth 10 million shekels on the market. A couple returning from
a cruise were arrested in Haifa Port with 1,125 grams of heroin. The person
financing the deal. who was waiting for them outside. was also arrested. Last
Thursday an Austrian was arrested at Ben-Gurion Airport. He was carrying a bag
with false sides containing 400 grams of heroin. A few days earlier a drug
dealer in Tel Aviv was detained with 86 grams of the white drug. [Jerusalem
Domestic Service in Hebrew 1700 GMT 9 Aug 81]

TEL AVIV HEROIN SEIZURE--Close to 1 kg of heroin was seized this afternoon by
members of the Tel Aviv district drug squad detectives at Ben-Curios Airport.
The drug was discovered in a handbag that belonged to a 68-year-old man who is
well known to the police as a drug dealer. The heroin had been hidden inside
the man's slippers. [TA261660 Tel Aviv 10? Radio in Hebrew 1510 GMT 26 Aug 81]

HEROIN SEIZED--Yesterday Israeli police found 0.5 kg of heroin. worth about 5
million shekels in the streets, in the baggage of a traveller who had arrived
at Haifa port on board a ship. The man was met by a friend, who was also arrested.
The police spokesman said that the heroin had been intended for one of the largest
drug smuggling gangs in the country. [Jerusalem POST in English 7 Aug 81 p 2]

HEROIN SEIZURE--Pure heroin weighing about 10 grams and worth tens of thousands
of shekels was seized and three suspects were picked up by the Tel Aviv police
in a raid into a house in Tel Aviv. Large quantities of heroin have been seized
in recent weeks in the Tel Aviv region. [TA302024 Tel Aviv HA'ARIV in Hebrew
30 Aug 81 p 9]

C50: 5300/4757

36
BRIEFS

HAlelANA Dismay-Defence authoritiea in Monrovia yesterday destroyed over
$100,000 worth of marijuana which arrived in the country early this week on
board a Nigerian Airways aircraft. The drugs which were concealed in two large
auitcaaea were diacovered by the Joint Security Forces at the Roberta Inter-

national Airport on arrival into the country. According to the Joint Security
Forces Grief, Colonel Daniel Doe, no one clained ownership of the drug when it

arrived aboard the aircraft at the an. [Text] [lbnrovia run SUNDAY PEOPLE in
English 16 Aug 81 p 8]

080: SIN/6966

35
STUDY ON DRUG ADDICTION IN LOVER AUSTRIA
Vienna DIE PRESS! in German 27 Aug 81 p 9
[Article: "The Lower Austria Drug Scene: One Out of 9 Young People Bndangered"]

[Text] Vienna--A1most 12 percent of all young people in lower Austria are
threatened by drugs. This is the alarming conclusion of a study entitled "Youth
Endangered by Drugs" which was presented yesterday (Wednesday) by Landesrat
[Provincial Councilor] Liese Prokop at a press conference. This investigation,
conducted by sociologist Dr Erich Brunmayr last June, using 1,300 young subjects,
was the second of a total of four studies which are to be used as the basis of

a new youth law.

lower Austria is being called the center of the Austrian drug scene; especially
the area served by the Southern Railway, that to the north of Vienna and, to a
lesser extent, the Sankt Poelten region show a significantly disproportionate
number of people endangered by drugs.

There is a number of reasons for drug addiction in yOung people, but the basic
cause is always found to be in a lack of family structure. Structural changes in
industrial regions and the continuously increasing commuter traffic in the
direction of Vienna during the last 20 years have led to a "destabilization

of family life,“ according to Brunmayr. This development. he claims, has

been compensated by an increasing "use potential," which increases the individual's
dissatisfaction with his productivity. Landesrat Prokop confirms Brunmayr's
theories: in the Hostviertel region for instance, family ties and regional
feelings of belonging are still strong; young people are active in various
organizations; and there is a significantly belowbaverage incidence of drug

addiction in the area.

Says Liese Prokop, who is not very impressed with drug counseling centers:
'Young people must have access to positive, unstructured life styles." An
effective counterattack against drugs, she feels, could be based on self-generated

youth activity centers.

9273
cso: 5300/2438

36
BRIEFS

LARGE CANNABIS SEIZURE—Bacares, South-west ﬁance, 17 Sep (AFP)--Prench custons
officials seized 1050 kilograms (close to half-a-ton) of cannabis and 15 litres
of cannabis oil from a British-registered yacht, the Scaldis-V, when it anchored
here today. Seven people--six British nationals and a Horoccan--have been
detained for questioning. Customs pen becane suspicious of the yacht because of
its strange manoeuvrings off-shore and its age and dilapidated state. They
went on board as soon as it entered the port here. They found the cannabis
hidden in three places. The Moroccan-bought drug was believed destined for the
Paris market. [Excerpt] [1401711028 Paris APP in English 1330 CHI 17 Sep 81]

050: 5300/2455

37
THO HUNDRED KILOGRAMS 0P HASHISH SBIZED IN ZURICH
Zurich NEUE ZUERCHER ZBITUNG in German 27 Aug 81 p 25

[Article: "Two Hundred Kilograms of Hashish Seized--Three Swiss Citizens
Arrested"]

[Text] Last Monday morning, customs authorities and police succeeded in seizing
the largest amount of drugs to date at the Zurich airport. Six airfreight packages,
declared to contain "oriental merchandise," contained a total of 200 kilograms of
hashish, worth more than 1 million Swiss francs, in the form of compressed slabs.
As a result of police surveillance three Swiss citizens, aged 27-33, were arrested
at the freight terminal while attempting to collect the shipment.

The airfreight packages had been dispatched from Beirut and were addressed to a
fictitious address in Zurich. Customs inspectors became aware of the shipment only
when attempts were made to notify the addressee, who could not be found; whereupon
the police was notified. About 0900 hours on Monday three laborers appeared at the
freight terminal to collect the shipment. "hen they attempted to offload the
drugs, the police intervened. It should be noted that the three Swiss citizens
tried to collect the shipment with a counterfeit freight document.

The local magistrate placed the three arrested individuals in detention pending
trial, where they gave partially conflicting statements. In any case it appears
likely that the drugs (good quality hashish) were intended for the local market.

In connection with this extraordinary drug seizure at the Zurich airport the
magistrate stated that in his opinion a large part of drug imports into Switzerland
enters the country by airfreight. It appears possible that Monday's seizure led to
the discovery of a so-called "drug connection." None of the three arrested Swiss
citizens had a previous police record.

9273
680: 5300/2539

38
H3801“ SHUGGLER SENTENCED TO TEN YEARS
Zurich NEUE ZUERCHER ZEITUNG in German 22 Aug 81 p 32
[Article by pz.: "Long Prison Term for Drug Courier"]

[Text] In the Buelach District Court a Chinese couple had to defend itself
against the charge of smuggling a sizable amount of heroin into Switzerland. The
prosecutor asked for a sentence of 10 years in the penitentiary for the 28-year-old
defendant and 8 years in the penitentiary for his wife of the same age. Whereas
the husband admitted his guilt from the beginning, his wife denied any complicity
because she did not know that the narcotics had been hidden in her suitcase.

The court convicted the defendant of violating the narcotics law and sentenced
him to 9 years in the penitentiary: in'addition he was expelled from the country
for 15 years. In the woman's case, the court felt that the presented evidence
was insufficient and she was pronounced not guilty as charged.

In Prepared Suitcases

On 10 Hay 1981. customs agents checked both suitcases of the Chinese couple that
had arrived at the Kloten Airport in a plane originating in Penang and Singapore.
They discovered slightly more than b.5 kilograms of heroin; the suitcases had been
prepared for smuggling; the "stuff" had been hidden carefully. Although a sub-
sequent investigation revealed that the heroin was not of the best quality, the
amount confiscated was worth millions of Swiss francs. It is difficult to imagine
how much damage such a quantity could have done.

The man was the main defendant. The investigation and court proceedings ran into
problems because the accused spoke only Chinese. To be sure, the language diffi-
culties could be overcome with the assistance of a translator, but neither the
defendant nor the defense attorney and not even the judge succeeded in establish-
ing a reliable picture of the defendant's lifestyle, mentality and manner of think-

ing.
Risky European Trip

Consequently one will have to rely on the defendant and his wife, who in contrast
to her husband speaks English fluently. and what they are saying about the
external circumstances of the incident. The defendant's family in Malaysia

39
belongs to the Chinese class which is often very successful in commerce. The
defendant's father owned an animal feed business, but it was going downhill. When
the son took over the business from his father, who is said to be a terrible alco-
holic, he had to declare bankruptcy. Subsequently he took s job as a truchdriver,
but his income was so low that he had difficulties paying the debts that had
accumulated. Supposedly his creditors pressured and threatened him, and finally
they offered him an opportunity to make money by transporting drugs to Europe.

Upon delivery of the heroin, which he has to take from Zurich to Paris and then to
Amsterdam, he would have received 10,000 Dutch guilder. Presumably the perpetrator
was not fully aware of the illegality of his actions; he had never seen the stuff
himself, because the heroin had already been placed in the suitcases when they were
handed to him by his supplier. He had not been abroad before and he seemed rather
naive and not very intelligent, and he was apparently tempted by the opportunity
to make a lot of money with little effort. Furthermore, the undertaking provided
him with an opportunity to take his wife to Europe, a trip that she had been dream-
ing about for a long time.

Evidence not Foolproof

It could not be proven that the woman had knowledge of her husband's unsavory
business. he had told her that he had won the money for the European trip by
betting on horses; in spite of a few contradictions the court had to believe her
when she said that she thought his version was the truth and that she had not
known anything about the real source of the finances for the undertaking. The
evidence pointing to her complicity was insufficient for a conviction, it was
definitely not foolproof. For her husband, however, the story which seems quite
commonplace is turning out badly. The long-term stay in a Swiss penitentiary will
be very hard on him who, to date, does not understand a single word in any of the

customary Western languages.

8991
080: 5300/2434
'rwo IRANIANS ARREST“ IN ISTANBUL FOR OPID‘M SMUGGLING

'HILLIYBT' Report
Istanbul MILLIYEI' in Turkish 29 Aug 81 p 4

[Text] In an operation which they named the Plorya Campground Operation, Narcotic
Branch detectives apprehended three narcotics snugglers, two of whon were
Iranians—including a former agent of SAVAK, the secret police organization in

Iran during the time of the Shah--and one was a Turk, and seized 3.95 kilos of
opium.

Narcotics Branch detectives in Istanbul deternimd that Davud Nurradeh, an agent
of SAVAK--the secret police organization during the period of the Shah--snd
Naser-Bek Hohanadi brought opiun with tha when they fled Iran.

Determining that the two Iranians were staying in the Plorya Campgrounds, Narcotics
Branch detectives donned hippy garb and entered into negotiations with the
Iranians. The two Iranians and their partner in crime, Hduset Veli Tan, in whose
house the opium was hidden, were arrested while selling the opiun to the detectives.

Police indicated that Mehnet Veli Tan, the partner in crina of the two Iranians,

was the owner of a leather apparel shop in the city of Salzburg in Austria and
had cone to Istanbul 15 days earlier.

First Seizure in 5 Years

Narcotics Branch detectives who seized 3.95 kilos of opium said that it was the
first tine in the last 5 years that they had encountered Opium snuggling.

SAVAK Agent

At the Narcotics Branch, Dawd Nuraadeh, the opium snuggling SAVAK agent said
that after Khoneyni cane to power there was nothing else he could do, he fled
to Turkey with the opium in order to save his life.

101
Narcotics Branch detectives apprehended three persons, of whom two were Iranians——
one of whom was a SAVAK agent—-and one Turkish. They were arrested in possession
of 3.95 kilos of opium at a campground where they had established their headquarters

'GUNAYDIN' Report

Istanbul GUNAYDIN in Turkish 29 Aug 81 pp 1, 4

[Text] Two Iranians, including s policeman were apprehended in Istanbul in possession
of 4 kilos of opium. In addition to the two Iranian smugglers, Narcotics Branch
officials took into custody four Turks on charges of aiding the aforementioned.

During interrogation, Iranian policeman Davud Nurzadeh and his friend, Nacer
Nurambedi [sic] said that they had hidden the opium--the raw material for heroin
and morphine--in the home of a Turk by the name of Mehmet Veli Tank [sic].
Following this statement, Veli Tank and three friends were apprehended.

Authorities said that the opium, originating in Iran, had been brought to Istanbul
in order that it might be introduced into Europe.

42
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050061-5

 

Iranian smuggler policeman Davud Nurzadeh

CSO: 5300/5597

43

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400050061-5
THO GREEKS ARRESTED IN ISTANBUL, HEROIN SEIZED
lnstanbul GUNAYDIN in Turkish 2 Sep 81 p 1

[Article by Ramazan Ozturk]

[Text] At Yesilkoy Airport yesterday morning, approximately 1 kilo of pure heroin
was seized following a search of the persons and the luggage of two Greek travelers
preparing to fly to Athens. The Greeks, Sarasitis Georgios and Svootgria

Dimitris [sic], said "We brought the heroin in Istanbul for 4 million lira. We

were going to sell the heroin on the European market for 30 million and make a
big profit.

 

The two Creeks, Sarasitis Georgioa and Svootgris Dimitris [sic] said: 'ﬂe took
the risk because there was a lot of profit. We were unlucky; we were caught."

CSO: 5300/5597
END

44