FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10609
24 JUNE 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FO'JO 28/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
m

JPRS publications contain intonation priurily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also free nevs agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and laterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion nark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iteu originate vith the source. Tiles within itas are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.3. Govern-ent.

COPYRIGl'l' LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OP
mmms REPRODUCBD HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HORLDHIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND Daueenous Danes

(F000 28/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA
BANGLAIBSH

Briefs
Ban on Foreign Drugs

INDIA

Briefs
Haehiah annular Convicted
Opium Production Control
Delhi Heroin Haul
MALAYSIA

Police Antinarcotico Branch Expanded in Sarawak
(Em m, 22 m 82) OIOOOIOOOOCOOOOOOOIOIO...

PAKISTAN
western Countries Criticized for Their 'Hunger for
Narcotics'
(Mimi-.181; mm, 19“” 82) OOOOCOOODOOOOOO00.0.00...

0.8. Ambassador Disagrees With 'DAW' View
(mm, 23 "w 82) .00...O0.00.00...COIOOOOQOIOOOOCCOOI

Death Penalty for Trafficking Supported
(Editorial; WIN “m, 19 m 82) ooooooe-oeeooooue

Punjab Efforts at Crackdown on Narcotics Landed
(Editorial; 118 PAKISTAN Tm, 17 ”-82, oooeoooo-oe

-a- [III-WW-138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Briefs
Heroin Seized
Move To and Menace
Pakistan Called 'Drug Center'

PHILIPPINES

mm on huge Launched
(Bum mm, 2 Jm‘ 82) UGO-00.0.0000....O'OOI'IOOOOOO

Briefs
Harihuana Convoy Seized

THAILAND

Deputy Minister's Aide Implicated in Rug Case
(NATION REVIEW, 8 Jun 82, Bangkok Domestic Service,

8 Jul‘ 82) 00......00000000000..OO...OOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOIO...

Warrant Issued
Report on Uarrant Denied

Aftermath of 9 May Anti-Sua Raid Discussed
(Semsuk Kasitpradit; THE 1“le REVIEW, 25 Hay 82)....ao

Editorial Discusses Need To Combat Pro-Khun SA Influences
(Editorial; THIN THAI, 11le 82) eooeoeooeeooaoooeoosooe

Addict Treatment Statistics Income Reported
(mo SIAM, 13 May 823

.OOOOOOOOOOICODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOJOOOCO

Police Major Implicated in Marihuana Theft
(MTICHW’ 17W82) 0.000.000.00000IOOOOOOOOIOOOOOIOOO.

Lao Opium Traffickers Arrested in Loei
(mo SI“, 18 W 82) 0.0.00...OO...OIOOOOOOOOIOOOIOOO...

Briefs
Opium Seized in Chiang Mai

CANADA

Briefs
Hashish Trafficking Charge

FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LATIN AMERICA

BOLIVIA

Paper Calls for Economic Aid to Coca Eradication Efforts
(Editorial; men, 13 “By 82) eeoeeoeeeee-eee-o'eeo

Anti Council Reports Limited Means, lquipent
WA, 16"” 82) 00.00.000.000000000000ooeooeeeoo

Briefs
Coca Census
Crop Reduction Plan
Higher Coca Price Demands
Gone: Sues u.s. hbessador

MEXICO

National Campaign Coordinator Reports on Results in States
(EL WWI“, 6, 10 m 82) Ooceeeeoeaeseeooeaveeocue.

Reduction of 90 Percent Claimed
Editorial CowIent

Moving Van Used To Slip Karihuana
(BI! WA, 7, 12m 82) 0.000.900.0000...0.0.0...0.0.

Sapient to Border Seized
rtraffickers JaiT- 3d

Briefs
Zonal Campaign Results

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

Harihuana Raids Stalled then Helicopter Unavailable
(MIND 00m, 26 ”w 82) ......'.................

NEAR EAST AND 1mm AFRICA

mm
Briefs

'mree Ih'ug Seizures
Powdered Opium

MMWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN
Briefs
Opium, Heroin Seizures
Plan To Combat mugs
ISRAEL
Mg Use Data Said Inaccurate
(Charles Hoffman; m JERUSALB! POST, 16 m 82) . .. . . . .
Briefs
Cannabis Farm Raid
SUB-SAHARA]! AFRICA
IVORY COAST
Briefs
Arrest of Mg 'h-affickers
SEYCHELLE
Somali Ikug Smuggler Gets Eight Years in Jail
(NATIM, 3Jun 82) COOOOOO0.0..O...OOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOO'OI
TANZANIA

Official Seeks Vigilance Against Drug Smugglers at Exit
Points
(DAILY m, ‘1 Jun 82) eeoeeoeeeococoa-oeceooooooeoooooe

”OFFICIALUSEONLY
BRIEFS

BAN 0N FOREIGN DRUGS--Dacca, 1 Jun (APP)--The military regime of Lt Gen Brshad
has deciced to stop some multinational pharmaceutical companies from marketing
their products in Bangladesh, the daily BANGLADESH TIMES reported. The daily
said a decision has also been taken to prohibit manufacture and sale of over
1.750 items of pharmaceutical products in the country. The decisions were
taken after consideration of the recommendation of the eightdmember expert com-
mittee on drugs constituted about a month ago. The committee which submitted
its reports to government recently evaluated different aspects of about 4,170
items of registered drugs currently available in the market. The committee
followed guidelines that not more than 2&8 basic drugs are essential, the paper
said. adding that although the prohibited drugs numbering over 1,740 would be
allowed to be sold till December 31, some of the dangerous drugs would be
banned with immediate effect. A decision has also been taken to the effect
that no foreign product will be allowed to be manufactured under license in
any factory if the same or similar products are available or manufactured in
Bangladesh. The measure. according to experts, would save the government a

lot of money annually by stopping import of or manufacture of unnecessary drugs.
[Hong Kong APP in English 0029 GMT 1 Jun 82 BK]

CSO: 5300/2312
BRIEFS

mama WI! cowrcrev-wieloml Chief Metropolitan Magistrate .1 :4 Mali):
on Friday sentenud an ex-aruy officer to three years rigorous inprisonnent
and a fine of Rs 30,000 under the Customs Act and the Dangerous Drugs Act as

a sequel to seizure of 415 lbs of hashish at Montreal, Canada in 1975, reports
PM. Mr Mali): discharged the other five co-accused of ex-Capt Hamid Ansari of
Horadabad including a Canadian for lack of evidence. The hashish concealed in
wooden furniture had been discovered by the Canadian Royal Mounted Police on
10 May, 1975 at Montreal. They had arrested six persons there for the snug-
gling dnarge and eat-Capt Ansari and others were charged by Customs in New Del-
hi. [New Delhi tumor in English 15 May 82 p 10]

OPIUM PMDUCI'ION mNrROIr-JAIPUR, Hay 10--According to a Narcotics Department
source, the Centre will gradually reduce the production of opium in the coun-
try. This is being brought through a phased programme and also for making
the issue of licence to the cultivator: nore strict. As compared to the pre-
vious year, 314 opium cultivators were not given licences this year which re-
duced opium output in about 72 hectares. During the current year only those
cultivators who could produce 25 kg of opium per hectare got the licence. the
source said. Next year the target will be raised to 30 kg per hectare. This
is expected to reduce the production and denand for opius. In Rajasthan opi-
um is cultivated in Kota, Chittorgarh, Bhilwara and Jalore districts. [Had-
ras THE HINDU in English 19 Hay 82 p 9]

DELHI HBROIN HAUL-4BR DELHI, May l8--'1‘he Narcotics Cell of the C81 today
sade the biggest haul of contraband heroin worth millions of dollars in the
international drug market. According to C81, the heroin weighing 2,535 9!-
worth Rs. 2.50.000 in the Indian market was seized from an Indian as he went
to deliver it to acne drug peddlers Iran abroad in South Delhi. [Madras THE
HINDU in English 19 May 82 p 10]

C50: 5300/7032

WESTERN COUNTRIES CRITICIZED FOR THEIR 'HUNGER FOR NARCO¢ICS'

Karachi DAHN in English 19 May 82 p 7

[Bdltorialz

[Text]

"Narcotics Control"!

ACCORDING to esti-
mates. which is the best that
one can do when dealing with
somethin like narcotics pro.
duction. ‘ tan's opium out-.
put has dropped to 1012150
tom from the mm
tons it had touched a few years
ago. There could be antanber
ol reasons for this. though the
Government‘s ei‘lorts to curb
production and the hop im-
posed on poppy cultivanon in
I979 no doubt had much to do
with it. However much the
Western countries. p06“:
larly the United States. may
want it. though. opium cultiva-
tion is not something which
can simply he wished away in
this country. It is certainly to
be desired and our Govern-
ment should 'malte efforts to-
wards this end. except for
some production for medldnll
reasons. But attempts by some
Western countries. directly or
obliquely. to saddle Pakistan
and other such countries solely
with the responsibility for the
West‘s hunger lot narcotics
shows u sad ignorance of the
realities. In fact. it iathe other
way round. Garrently it is the
West's unrestrained hunger
lor narcotics which have in-
duced poor tanner: . in

Pakistan and other a
countries to grow h
quantitiesolpoppy.
Again, it should be l
phasised that Pakistan.
other such cosmtries. slit
try to curb the illicit trad
narcotics. but at the santet
there is no question of sec
in; the entire blame for
drugs that do reach Em
and the United States. It is
duty of the countries of
West to curb the growl!
addiction in their citiz
primarily through social
forms which help remove
reasons why their people a
refuge in drugs. and by th:
hahilitatioo ot those who
already addicted. tr there
high enough denund. not
price is right. narcotia wi
supplied]! Pakistan man
to stop all but legal pro
tion. which it has been in
hard to do. another eot
will be the source. whethen
lingly or unwillingly. It in
some. for the sake of l
ment. that no supplies
coming from anywhere.
people in the' West. given
phe'sent tﬁaeontent. will «
the some other synthetic
to seek escape in. LSD i
such an ancient phenom
Mu

'an mow mo 0! wan
mﬂmpmyoammw
aﬁamdoaqumImaynb
mmngm‘mwn wow:
ownuaaquyaaqlod‘aunoo
'iuymﬁ coaq

£31118qu
m m pox“ an Kan W
Wmungsokm‘pdooo
m ’IIM “In an (an ‘nnnn

mpoonwalmsgmm'pomao
m an an a m sv '35:.

1M mum mum u! on
~go‘unoﬁsg‘ddodazqapun

pnqaudum‘manno
'MM

30
0.8. mm DISAGRBES mm 'DMlN' VIE!
Karachi mum in English 23 May 82 p 11

[Letters to tho Editor:

[Text]

C80:

You: «aim: of May l9 ("Nudi-
‘an annual") «new youth; an“
alumnus ol narcotia goblet!» in
Patina. Same "duped yum: amn-
Iion i~ a Wu luv an My:
public noiin. il should be debated
by all unmncd In Pallaun andab-
mad. Numb trauma to lam a
mint mm: ductilciviliulion;m
leaa alum-m pcrl-ap. than it:
spa-m a! nuclear war.

Willi: I believe than your «ﬂuvial
has made a real a‘llllllihulilll to public
umlanmlinp ul Ike in» involvul.
then- km: palm ‘aI ywrlmunanol
Iliia subject which I would lite to lake
an milky an comm! on: Ilia!
some Woven cannula an attempt-
iq lo ﬁddle «has villi some re-

‘ ’ily luv this patient. Th'. '-
mm

Aa ynu expiu'lly win. m on:
can be absolved ol wintry. On
It'- 'anuc. any kind 0! an advewial
mum ‘al a I’ll m cﬂecliv: ant-1.
Th'a 'nnola Wan-m math-talcum
imwadea-uem'uiw
mum". Pakinan inn: ianunc (mm
It: “hm lot mantis." which is
”in. space but. You: W
lam lus lung hum plumcd ”Elm“

Imuin mu»: ptulllcnl. Tluiland and

5300/ 5771

“Narcotics Control " ]

Mahysia have avidly lm
Whal I «walled h a mulls-(weld
unintuitive inch-ml allot! ll
Mucous control In which all play Iheit
pm. We mine and Willie
with the wit that Palialan lane-
in opia- nonﬁction control. 11:, an
autumn-Mlle U.S. andoalm
M be: in cnnltoll'l‘ addiclion
and mm on Incl: bane mud.
The U3. hmmmv 8| hil-
Iion annually in umhllil‘ Ilia:
Wu: arc behingolhculolhc
lane 0! w million 3 yew. Thc (3m-
emmenu ol Pukhun and the United
Sales at: beginning to volt jointly
and “Madly Ill lhe develop-
tncnl of mm we hope will adv-
ance our nan-ion objecliva.

We know um MIC m 'a
out ol 1h: m. Dam and w-
ply anal he laclled durum-u
and hmdnatim. We do. harem.
fecl lllal arc can achieve tapid malt
vaulting WI. and at: bclievc you:
w alonld be heVuI In mobilis-
in‘ lhc lllelllion «l with
6m. '

RONALD l. SPIERS
Mattias AM
Namalnd
DEATH PENALTY FOR TRAFFICKING SJPPORTED
Karachi mRNIm NEWS in English 19 May 82 p 4

[Bditcrialx "Death to Drug Traffickers']

[Text] Inaugurating a week-long course on Sunday in Islamabad, for social
workers on Rehabilitation of Drug Addicts, the Interior Hinister Hr Hahmood
Haroon emphasised thatouraim should be total elimination and eradication of
trade in narcotics and its use by the citizens. Quite rightly he said that
drug traffickers should be shown no mercy. As a guideline to the participants
in the course he reminded them that in most cases the drug addicts were unwit-
ting victims of the unscrupulous drug traffickers and were, therefore. to be
treated not as culprits or social outcasts but as human beings needing

sympathy .

Trafficking in drugs is carried on clandestinely and the clients for the dope
are enlisted in a similar runner. This multiplies the difficulties of curbing
the trade or forewarning the young or the uneducated unsuspecting victims of
the danger in becoming a drug addict. There is also the factor that the drug
addicts becane highly secretive about the whole thing for fear of being cut
off from the supply in case the gang dealing in the stuff is busted. It is
these advantages that help the drug traffickers and make the task of law-en-
forcing agencies so difficult.

Slowly and surreptitiously the drug addiction has made serious inroads into
Pakistan also where the victims mostly happen to belong to the lower class of
people the student ccsmtunity and, in some cases, to ladies in the upper class.
It is a new danger facing Pakistan. The most disturbing part of the set-up is
the fact that certain areas in the northern part of the country, which are be-
yond the pale of norral laws grow poppy crop which brings high profits to the
growers. The easy availability of the stuff and a most lucrative market for
it in European and American countries has proved to be a great temptation for
the traffickers. In the last one or two years huge consignments of charas,
heroin and opium amounting to billions of rupees in the foreign markets have
been caught in Pakistan. But one can never be sure that the seized consign-
ments formed the total traffic.

To check the cultivation of poppy in the northern areas, Pakistan is working
on a concrete plan, in association with certain UN agencies, to induce the
cultivators of poppy to switch over to other crops. These efforts, initiated
under a definite programme, have been fruitful in that the poppy crop has been
reduced to a 100 tons now which two years ago was as high as 800 tons. But to
limit the output to the desired level, the crop-substitution project will have
to be combined with the development of a socio-economic infrastructure in the
"target area“. This is expensive and time-consisting. But the Phase II of the

project which covers the period 1981 to 1984 may prove helpful in achieving
the intended goals.

It would be some time yet before the cultivation of poppy crop can be brought
under complete control. In the meantime the traffic in the drug is continu-
ing unabated, and this poses a problem for Pakistan as well as the Western
countries. The nature of the crime and the character of the people indulging
in it make it imperative that methods to curb these criminals should be equal-
ly harsh [word illegible] determined. Drug addiction is nothing short of a
slow and lingering death for the victim while for the family of the addict it
is the most excrucilating] agony to see one of the dear ones being slowly
[desltroyed in soul and body. Enticing somebody into the use of drug is indeed
worse than killing him. A killer camits murder in a fit of passion but a drug
trafficker sends his victims to his doom in a cool and calculated manner and
is, therefore, much more dangerous for human society than an ordinary murderer.
These fiendish people deserve no mercy. Perhaps it were these considerations
that prompted the international Islamic conference, held at Medina in March
last, to recommend death punishment for drug smugglers and pedlars. We hope
Pakistan and other Muslim countries will adopt the recommendation without
delay.

CSO: 5300/5771
PUNJAB EFFORTS A? CRACKDOHN ON NARCOTICS LAUDED

Lahore THE PAKISTAN TIMES in English 17 May 82 p 4

(Editorial:

[Text]

'Q‘eckdown Against: Nercotice']

eociel elemente Involved
in the illicit treﬂickiu of
intoxicents and nercotice.
Drawn from the Punieb
police. the Pakistan Nam
tics Control Board and the
Excise Department. the
task force will operate In
Lahore. Multen. Faiealabed
end Mlanweli under the
guidence of DIG crimes.
Puniab. It will collect in-
formation ebout the illegal
cultivation. ,
sole and use of nereoﬂa.
conduct reids to en
trafﬁckers and register
cases against them under
the Drum Act. The can
naizn comes in the welte ol
an elaborate prevention
of records about sentie-
glers of narcotice in the
countrv end In aimed at
eliminating the crime from
our midet.

Pakieten le eiznetorv to
two conventione oi I96!
end 197! egalnet non-medi-
cel use of narcotic drun
end mbetencee. The Pekie
ten Nercotlee Control
Board hee been coordlneto
in: the eﬂorte mede in the

if

g?

1%
if

“E:
E33
3
5%;
E
g

gEE
3:;
éiie
.8. E

E

gag;
-gig
E

3*:
é
E

BRIEFS

HEROIN sum-mm. Nay 19--Custcns nobile squad recovered 41 kilo gr-
of heroin powder worth Rs. 410 million from a notoroar on Svabi mpi Road yes-
terday. According to details the mobile customs squad recovered 41 kilograms
of heroin powder hidden in various parts of the car. The powder was being
snuggled to Quetta. The customs squad also arrested one person Arif ullah of
Tehk kal Bale Peshawar. The investigations are in progress. [Lahore m PAK-
ISTAN TIMES in English 20 Hay 82 p 5]

W8 '10 EN!) mes-~15mm, May l9--‘!he provincial Governments have recent-
ly been asked to give their expert opinion on how to discourage narcotics
trade in Pakistan, it is reliably learnt. ‘me Pakistan Narcotics Control
Board has forwarded to the provincial Governments a draft ordinance on narcot-
ics, for their contents. The PICS high-ups believe the new ordinance will
help eliminate the drug trafficking more effectively. [Karachi DAWN in Eng-
lish 20 May 82 p 10)

PAKISTAN CALLED 'DRUG CENTERu-XABUL, May 19 (Bakhtar)-Pakistan, especially
during the reign of the present military Govermuent. has bech a big export
centre of narcotics like opium and heroin. Monthly Jeddo Jahd, printed in the
Federal Republic of Germany, in its recent issue, writes: "During the last
five years of military rule in Pakistan. the export of narcotic drugs has in-
creased several times. The investigations by international agencies has pr
proved that the top-ranking members of the military junta are also involved
in the production and smuggling of the narcotic drugs." The monthly, quoting
the reports of famous Alberican colunist Jack Anderson, and the published
reports of the investigators of the International Narcotics Control Board.
writes that the Pakistan International Airlines is acting as the carrier for
the narcotic drugs. [Kabul mm. NEH 7mm in English 19 May 82 p 1]

C80 : 5300/5771

11
DRIVE W DRUGS mum
Manila BULLETIN TODAY in English 2 Jun 82 p 8

[Text] A campaign to prevent and control the drug abuse mug students in
the Ilocos region was launched recently by the regional peace and order can-
paign comittee.

The campaign code-named "Operation Big Brother“ seeks to gain the full cooper-
ation of the public and private sector “through a unified and sustained infor-
uation and education camign.”

The regional director of Napoleon Archinides Piga said, the cnpaign is non-
punitive. It is rather a compassionate and persuasive approach to complement
the revitalized Dangerous Drugs Act of 1982. It is focused snore on the stu-
dents since it is the students who are easy prey of drug pushers and peddlers."

The sin of the canpaign is to establish a sister-brother relations between the
parents and teachers.

"81 Director Oscar de Leon said, Operation Big Brother also seeks to strengthen
the character and moral fiber of the youth especially the students so that they
can withstand the teaptations of drugs.

C80: 5300/ $779

12
BRIEFS

MARIHUANA OONVOY SEIZED—No truckloads of narijuana plants valued at P6
million have been seized by govern-ant agents in two plantations in the
nountain slopes in Denguet. N31 Director Jolly Bugarin said yesterday. He
said the plantations were found this week in reaote towns of Rib-ngan and
Bakun. A total of 5,150 full grown marijuana plants were uprooted and four
sacks of dried narijuans leaves were seized by the raiding teen. But he said

the eultivators eluded arrest and were the object of a manhunt. They are
Inggo Sagayo, 32, of barmgay Iagleg. Kibungan; and Sulnan mains, 28. or‘
Beyeng, Baku. According to Bugsrin. the shrubs were planted in the clear-
ings along the mountain slopes in barangays Legleg and Beyeng. lie said the
plantation had been under surveillance for about a math following infom-
tion received by the N31 on the plantations. The first raid was made Thurs-
day at begleg where 3,030 plants were discovered along with three sacks of
dried marijuana leaves in a nipa hut. No days later. the raiders swooped
down in Beyeng plantation and uprooted 2,120 plants and found one each of
mrijuana leaves also in a nipa but nearby. The seizure was the biggest uade
by the NM the past few days. Last week, 1131 agents and an air force team
raided another plantation in Mt. Baguid-big, Benguet and confiscated 10,700

plants worth some P3.5 Iillion. [Text] [mails PHILIPPINES SUNDAY EXPRESS
in English 30 May 82 p 2]

cso: 5300/5773

13
DEPUTY HINISTER'S AIDE IMPLICATED IN DRUG CASE

Warrant Iseued

31(080307 Bangkok mm mm in English 8 Jun 82 p 6

[Text] The police depart-ant has issued s warrant for the arrest of Deputy Interior

Minister lenyst lsnthatthm's close side who has been charged with involve-mt in the
seizure of about 30 nillion baht worth of sarijuna. Police Director General Pol Gen
Suraphon armlaphra- said yesterday that police were yesterday tracking down on Hithun

‘l‘hsphhieu.

Interior Hiniater Sitthi (:11th said yesterday that he had set up a omittee to
investigate into the alleged iwlicstions of Hithm in the drug trafficking.

The order to (on the investigating co-ittee cue on Friday after opposition leader
Seask Sunthonwet said during the no-confidence debate last week that custoes officials had
uncovered clues to incrininate lsnyst's close side. Saul: cleised that police found that
s co-unicstions radio set equipped on a fishing trawler which ferried the drug belonged
to Banyst'a close side. Vithun allegedly borrowed the consultations equip-ant from the
Civil Aviation Departesnt ior'use in the affairs of the Interior Ministry.

Sitthi said yesterday that the emittes was set up to find out how the radio equip-em:
had fallen into the buds of the drug traffickers. The co-ittee which eonriaes three
members was set up at the taco-endstion oi’ Benyst. he said.

Denys: said that the alleged involv-snt would never pro-pt his to resign. "I have

never clung to ey seat. but if 1 a to resign. I would have sound justifications." he
said. lie declined to count over the radio equip-ant found in the fishing trawler. but
said it was his assistant secretary. Inauai Swsnhhiri. to oversee the’ borrowing of
co—unicstions equip-ent iron other gavel-meat sceneies. lie said that the co-unicstions
equip-ant used in the interior ninistry wsa eonslly borrowed fro- the police department.
and not the Civil Aviation Depart-ant.

Hithun was seconded fro- the Psrli-snt to the office of the interior undersecretary of
state st the order of Banyst, he said. Is said that he assigned Uithun to coordinate
with the Peru-ant. "he has prepared docunents about notions involving the Interior
hinistry for us to study." he said.
Report on warrant Denied

“080669 Bangkok Domestic Service in Thai 0530 GMT 8 Jun 82

[Text] In connection with the report which cited the police chief an aaying that a

warrant has been ieaued for the arreet of Hithun naphhieu. an aide of the deputy
interior ninieter. Police he) Gen Ophat Rattanaain, co-ander of the epecial branch. haa

disclosed that he consulted the police chief on the eatter. The police chief interned
hi. that he never interned neveeen that a warrant haa been iaaued for the arreet of
withun. he only eaid that an imutiution ia underway. The public in hereby informed.

CSO: 5300/2312
APTBBHATB OP 9 MAY ANTI-SBA RAID DISCUSSED

Bangkok THE NATION REVIEW in English 25 May 82 p 5

[Article by Sermuk Kasitpradit]

an.“ wwwmm Emmy“ mam...“ mmmm m
mmhmwmmm ”mum. mmm-.m.. m .ﬁmw
m mm... .wwm mm .mmmwmmm “mum...
. ”mm... a. .MM. , .mmwwmwm ”mm...
M. Tu -mmm. . . Ema ”mwmw

mTMMM. “WWI“ WWW mMMMo-WMMMMW mwmmmmnmmmwmcmu
mmmmmmmmmﬁ imam .3...“ m. m

w a ”mam mmnmm mm mm Wmmm-mm .. -mpmm
WM... muMamwmwmmm. “w ommmm .emaw mmwmmmmm

n n m .. m a
mm. .m... www.mmmmm .u .m.........mm
Mm mmmmo Mmommwd beMWMm u m m Mmmw WWW. Mm
mum“. yum m.
ammm. m .m..mm “mmmmﬁm “mum
53.33...» mmmmmm .33“ mm. mm“.
”mm d” .0... Wm
mmmmm: MMWWWMM .mm MWMMMH mm” "MWwWM WWWMWW

....W mfxww. mm rw ..

2 m... 2.. max” is Emma...m..
mmmmuma «am a mum m». m mmww. m m
Mwm mmmm mammmwruamwmuWWW

16
heroin reﬁneries which dotted the
Thahllurmese borders.

Some local villagers may still
defend Khun 5a and deny
that Bean Hin Tack was the centre
of drug-trafﬁcking but evidence

from various sources pointed to
that fact. Most structures are con-
crete-made and there is even a
self-generating power station here.

its ame villae insucha
remote area 40 etres frotn
the main road that could prove it-
aelfsoseifau scient.

A local administ ti official
said the the runs}; " tions
mi shave forced Khun and his
t' t-hand men to flee Bean Hist

Tack butitmldtthavenotcut
off use heroin connection b any
sinificant way.
pavement in Ban olt de~

line‘s-ﬁercest after tlteoperatgnsthat
at lent three heroin refineries in
the area were destroyed durinathe
operations and a large number of
bay used to contain heroin were
found but local official sources said
they weren't quite sure how much
herein was found. In fact. they
doubted that any a ‘t of
refined na‘Eotice wa ound in the
village“

no it more concerned
about his own (image in th‘empets-
bah

o
.000

We were very, very seated when
the Jan 21 Wtationa broke out,”
he recalled. e never expected ‘5
to erupt ust like that. l myself lie
to live th‘relatives at Baan Huay
Pun thinking that the notation

."We muted back
in during Jan -29 but we were
'°"’ i." °°““t"w'l'é?.2“8n3§
ouses
mmed hanyees after that. a lot of
out belon ' gs tdgtoperty '3
gene or v dung
ransacked. l alt'i‘st mm hundreds
of thousands of cash tn self. We

were speechless and cou 't my
anythin .."anoldv$?stsaid.

A C Haw an
interpreter that he had lost a

3'
ti f id and other
3&3 o “the ﬂitting wu on.

CSO: 5300/5776

3.
s-
E
8
3
5

totheatea

e scmetines felt

Bean Thetd Thai village com-
mittee dd: “We know that we are
aliens making liv in Thailand.
We are grate i to h itali-
.We Insowwehave notﬁtsto
Md anything frorn Thailand.
But the operations were tough. We
ltnew it w the ever actions
in the vﬂlage 's difficult to
f the scenes...“
major change at Bun Thetd
Thain thghdegin system here.
nee ' se-langua
was taught. Now. That authoring
have moved in to make sure that
Thai is aim? of the curriculum.
Ban Thai. inman ways
isn't too different frun Mae galon
the mats area of the remnants

the further 93rd Nationalist Chheae
Dividers to the

andThallsla tonlyfour on
r eelt.Tlnt practicall mean-
glass'l’heirdailylifeup rewas
never depfndent on That Ian qe
before," each? Chanthom en's;
song. a u ernale eacherw
had beg: Il‘tgte for three years
'said: “Children here
t to feel part oftheThai

laine
:3?-
societyyf‘l‘beirdteamistogettheir

17

further education in Taiwan. What
they teach here at Bean Hin Taelt
is also based-on the Taiwanese
pattern. The school was set it in
973 but it was not until i 79
that “hymn” ”1313168 “Tut's"
sent in i- eteac ets. at
ain't prove to {5% very effective
t t.’

By A this at. die said
a: least Johanna til... Bean Hin
Tacit, having finished the seconda
schooling. would be flying to T -
wan And that's the first batch
from here to Taiwan. She wouldn't
say who is sponsoring the children's
further educatiort abroad. '

The school now however has
been transferred to the rovirtcial
education body under Chung Ral
follow!!! the major operations
against latnSa.OnMay lO.a .
vetnment course would officially
lnaufuratcd for the first time.

“ hope the situation win im-
prove from now on." the Thai
teacher said. About l2 more That.
language teachers will be drawn
from Mae Chan district adm
ttation and the curriculum Will
follow that set by the Education
Ministry.

Apart from the schooling sys-
tem, the government has also set
down a long-term plan to develop
tBhaoatls‘.‘l'hertduult‘has to rages from

o rat na.

Anwgfllchlwmrvpe‘y has found
that800housesinsix villagcsin
the area were affected in the ope-
:tions' . Fourteen cars were demag-

“Our main purpose is to encou.
rue proper Wilma] develop-
ment to replace opium and to
create better understanding here,”
one official said. adding:

”Our devclo t plan won't be
devoted enclu ‘ely only to Dan
[in Taelt. It WI.“ cover the whole
of the border areas with Baan Hin
Tacit serving as the focal t."

The master plan c for the
building of roads and other ltlnds of
infmtrueture and to ensure econo-
mic stability for the local Valuers.
Substitute crops' to phue out
opium_wiltlhe be aertnnlrnﬁrtant ele
ment in ov an wluch‘
would involve almost all t
rvemment mum, “includ

e ' "mmm'
tion M reform, livestock hue.
bandry.

:5

E
tgs

ascertain y

htitial grind when wotlt h.
begin earnest to offer the local
people what has been prortused.
EDITORIAL DISCUSSES NEED TO COMBAT PRO-KHUN SA INFLUENCES
Chiang Mai THIN Tan! in Thai 14 May 82 p 3
IEditorial: I'lnfluential Groups“!

lTextl The return of the forces of Khun 8a, or Chang Si Pu, has cost the life
of one more Thai. The news report stated that he was a thahan phran irregular.

The return of these forces shows that the expulsion of these narcotics traffickers,
who are known throughout the world, did not achieve any results. A news report
has stated that they have set up a camp with 140 covered buildings. This

construction required the use of much manpower and took much time. officials
did not know the reason for this until the clash when the officials who attacked

this group were able to seize the buildings.

It is thought that if Khun Sa had not shot an official because of mistakenly
thinking that they had come to suppress him. these people would still be living
there comfortably. They h vs acted as if this Thai territory belongs to them
just as they did at Ban Hin Taek in Mae Chan District, Chiang Rai Province.
Many past government closed their eyes to th m and allowed them to become
bolder. They greatly increased their strengt in both manpower and weapons

and continually engaged in narcotics trafficking even though the entire world
knew. '

Concerning the return of these forces. a government spokesman stated that

an influential group is supporting them. This group told Khun Sa that he could
return and that government officials would not do anything. Unfortunately.

the government spokesman did not say who this influential group was. But it

is believed that the government is not sitting by idly and that it is taking
swift action against this influential group. It will not be a threat to the

state.

Thais have long wondered why past governments have neglected to carry out

their duty. Some governments have allowed evil groups to enter the country.

That is, they allowed the 93rd KHT Division to come in and settle down firmly

in Thailand at Doi Mae Salong in Mae Chan District, Chiang Rai Province, and

at Than Ngop in Chiang Dao District, Chiang Mai Province. The government allowed

18
this even though it knew that this was an evil group that was involved in

the narcotics trade. The claim that this was done in order to have then serve
as a defense line against the conmunists is not reasonable. National defense

is the duty of Thais. It is not necessary to bring in foreigners to do this

and then give them land on which Thais, the owners of the country, cannot

step foot on. Besides this, this group has always been involved in the drug
trade. while they say that they are no longer involved in this trade. narcotics
suppression officials do not believe them. And nothing can be done because
high-ranking people have cited national security reasons to protect this evil
group.

Thailand belongs to the Thai people. People cannot turn over territory easily.
Once such groups are here. it is difficult to get rid of then. For example, the
KMT soldiers have raised families here but they still consider themselves

to be Chinese. They only say that they want to change their nationality and
become Thai citizens. If these people are allowed to become Thai citizens,

this will show their power even more and Thais will become second-class citizens

even though they are the owners of the country. This matter should be considered
carefully.

1194}
C80: 5300/5764

19
ADDICT TREATMENT STATISTICS, INCOME REPORTED
Bangkok 0A0 SIAM in Thai 13 May 82 pp 3, 10
(Article: "More Than 100,000 Thai Addicts Are Unemployed“!

[Text] The office of the Narcotics Control Board has reported that, in 1980,

a total of 11,831 drug addicts went to state and private drug rehabilitation
centers for treatment. It is estimated that there are 8-12 times as many addicts
who are not undergoing treatment. Thus, it is estimated that there are presently
at least 100,000 addicts in Thailand.

These data were gathered in 1979 and 1980 from people who voluntarily went

to public and private rehabilitation centers for treatment. The data were

reported to the ONCE. In 1979, 1,578 addicts voluntarily went to 28 rehabilitation
centers for treatment. In 1980. 11,83? addicts went to 39 rehabilitation centers
for treatment.

As for the types of drugs used, more than 80 percent of those who came for
treatment used No 4 heroin. In particular. No 4 heroin was used the most by
those in Bangkok and in the south.

Opium was the drug preferred by those in the north and northeast. And the
thing worth noting is that the use of amphetamines, or I'horse medicine,” is
on the rise in the northeast.

Besides this, it was learned that 96 percent of those who came for treatment
were Thais and that 95.8 percent were men. Only 4.2 percent were women. The
statistics were similar for both years. Most addicts were in the 21-25 age
group. This was the same in every region.

Host of those who came for treatment did not have an income. It is understood
that the addicts rely on their parents, relatives or others to pay for the
drugs.

A researcher said that this report shows the spread of drug abuse in Thailand
by relying only on data obtained from addicts who voluntarily came for treatment.
If the number of addicts who have not come for treatment is to be estimated,

Lhis must be done tentatively and it will take a long time. However, those
concerned estimate that the number of addicts who have not gone for treatment

is 8-12 times as large. If this is true. it means that there are at least
100,000 addicts in Thailand.

11943 20
C80: 5300/5769
POLICE MAJOR IMPLICATED IN HARIHUANA THEFT
Bangkok NATICHON in Thai 17 May 82 pp 1, 12

[Article: 'The Chief Inspector At the Provincial Police Station In Pak Thong
Chai District Has Quickly Transferred. Marihuana "salad” Is Evidence']

[Text] It has been proposed that the chief inspector at the Nakhon Ratchasima
provincial police station in Pak Thong Chai District be transferred to the
Commissioner's Office of the Provincial 1. He was implicated in the mysterious
disappearance of 53 bags of marihuana. The owner of the narihuana has been
arrested. Preparations are being made to get rid of some corrupt policemen.

A HATICHON reporter in Nakhon Ratchasima Province has reported that he was
informed by a news source in the Commissioner's office of the Provincial 2

that, at present, Police Lieutenant General Rut Kantharat, the Commissioner

of the Commissioner's Office of the Provincial 2, has proposed to Police General
Suraphon Chulaphrahom, the director-general of the Police Department, that
Police Major Subancha Kamonket, the chief inspector at the provincial police
station in Pak Thong Chai District, be transferred to the Police Department.
However, the report stated that Police General Suraphon will instead transfer
this man to the government reserves of the Commissioner's Office of the Provincial
1. This has resulted because an investigation showed that he was involved

in the theft of 53 bags of marihuana that had been seized as evidence. Grass
was stuffed in the bags and the marihuana was taken and sold. This happened
after police officials seized 61 bags of marihuana weighing 1,200 kilograms.

The news report stated that, concerning this matter, at present, high-ranking
police officers of the Commissioner's Office of the Provincial 2 are quickly
conducting an investigation. when the investigation has been completed, it

is expected that several other policemen will face both disciplinary and criminal
punishment. On 14 Hay, officials arrested Mr Bun, or Lek, the owner of the
marihuana even though he was not implicated in the investigation report.

The same reporter reported that on 4 February, Police Lieutenant Colonel Bunni
Chitkaeo, a T.L. inspector, arrested Mr Subin Duangchai and seized his lO-wheeled
truck. license No Loei 70-0157, together with the marihuana. He turned the

man and evidence over to Police Sub-Lieutenant chaiprakon Phanthong, the officer
on duty at the provincial police station in Pak Thong chai District, at 1100
hours on 5 February for further handling of the case. The case was investigated

and the file was sent to the court. The court tried the case and sentenced
Hr Subin to 3 years in prison.

However, during that period, a large quantity of the marihuana that had been
seized disappeared. Police Lieutenant General Narong Hahanon, the deputy director-
general of the Police Department, ordered Police Major General Niyom Kanehanawat,
the deputy commander of C.K., to go and conduct an investigation. He discovered
that the 53 bags of marihuana had really disappeared. Following this, Police
Lieutenant General Rut put Police Major General Thawatchai Phithak, the deputy
commissioner of the provincial 2, in charge of a team of high-ranking police
officers from the Commissioners' Office of the Provincial 2 and from the Nakhon
Ratchasima provincial police precinct. The team's task was to conduct an

investigation and hand out both disciplinary and criminal punishment to those
who are guilty of wrongdoing.

11943
CSO: 5300/5764

22
LAO OPIUM TRAPPICKB'RS ARRESTED IN [031
Bangkok DAO SIAM in Thai 18 May 82 pp 1, 2
[Article: "Two Lao Men with Opium Valued At 10 Million Cross Into Thailand'l

[Text] Two Lao men who had crossed over into Thailand to sell opiun were arrested.
The trail led to merchants in Bangkok. The deputy provincial governor and

police officials devised a plan and arrested them together with evidence weighing
15 kilograms. They found two large baskets that had been smuggled into the
country and that contained narcotics.

A DAO SIAM reporter in Loei has reported that Mr Mangkon Krongsuwan, the deputy
governor of Loei Province. and a group of policemen including Police Major
Kaeo Thicharoen, the chief inspector at the provincial police station in Chiang
Khan District, Police Major Prasit sirikla, an inspector, Police Captain Pramot
Yieuthat, the deputy inspector at the Loei provincial police station in Muang
District, several other police officers and officials from the Mekong River
Operations Unit joined together to make a plan to arrest drug dealers from

Laos who were going to ship narcotics to Thai dealers in an area north of

Ban Phabaen in Buhom Commune, Chiang Khan District. loei Province. An agent

had reported that this would definitely take place.

Then at 1700 hours on 17 May, all the officials went and surrounded this area,
which is near the Mekong River on the Thai side. They saw two Lao men row

a boat across and dock along the bank. when the two Lao men saw the plainclothes
officials, they called out “are you ready?" When our officials replied 'yes,"
the two Lao men hurried up to then. The officials then seized them without any
resistance. They also seized the evidence that the two were carrying and the
bags. There were a total of 16 bags of opium weighing 15 kilograms.

From the investigation, the two Lao men were identified as Mr Somyot, age

40, and Mr Nak, age 38. They lived in Pak Mi Village in Sanakham District,
Vientiane Province, Laos. It was learned that they had arranged to meet merchants
whom they were in frequent contact with. Later, ssrchants from Bangkok were

to come and take all the drugs to Bangkok.

23
however. after the cowletion of the investigation, the officials placed the
two Lao suspects under arrest on charges of entering the country illegally
and of having narcotics in their possession. As for the value of the narcotics

that were seized. on foreign narkets the drugs would have been worth tens
of million: of baht.

11943
C802 5300/5764

21:
BRIEFS

0P1!!! SBIZBD IN CHIANG HAP-At 1200 hours on 12 May 1982, Police Captain Chirawat
Luongsuphawibun, a police official with the Sam Yot Suppression Division who

had gone to Chiang Mai Province on official business, learned that ,drug traffickers
were going to meet at the Saen Suk bungalow on Chottana Road in Chang Phuok
Commune, Huang District,Chiang Mai Province. He thus joined a group disguised

as merchants and made contact to purchase drugs. They met five drug dealers:

Mr nopphaphon Phaosurikan, age 32, who lives at No 96, Hahachai Comne, Huang
District, Samut Sakhon Province; Hr Aphorn Ankrom, age 25, who lives at No

193, Village 1, Khi Dek Comne, Mae Rim District, Chiang Mai Province; Mrs
Bunrim Ongsong, age 35, who lives at No 6, Village 3, Ban Bao Consume, Mae

Taeng District, Chiang Mai Province; Mr Sailing Chinna, age 25, who lives at

No 95, Village 1, Khi Lek Con-une, Mae Rim District, Chiang Mai Province:

and Mr Silachon Yonbua, age 30, who lives at No 25, Village 1, Khi Lek Conune,
Mae Rim District, Chiang Mai Province. After they agreed to purchase 12 kilograms
at a price of 15,000 baht per kilogram for a total of 180,000 baht, the five
drug dealers brought the 12 kilograms of cooked opium and gave it to Police
Captain Chirawat and the other officers. They iuediately revealed that they
were police officers and arrested the group and seized the evidence. They

were turned over to Police Captain Sainan Chantharasak, the officer on duty

at the Chiang Mai provincal police station in the district, for further investiga-
tion. [Text] [Bangkok PuYA KHRUT in Thai 13 Hay 82.p 16] 11943

C80: 5 300/5764

25
BRIEFS

HASHISB TRAFFICKIRG CHARGE-A Halkley Road Inn, arrested after what Ottawa
police say is the biggest drug bust in the force's history. hes been

renunded in custody to await a Tuesday bail hearing. Ronald Karl Howell,
25. appeared in court Friday, charged with possession of a narcotic for the

purpose of trafficking. Police node the arrest Thursday. about 12 hours
after seizing hashish with an estinted street value of $1 nillion. Staff

Insp. John koonbie said the hashieh was found in a parked car in Ottawa's
south end by the city's morality division at 8 p.n. Wednesday. Its value
was put at about $1 nillion. Police say the investigation is continuing
and would not release any other details. [Text] [Ottawa THE WEEKEND CITIZEN

in English 22 my 32 p 1.2]

CSO: 5320/32

26
PAPER CALLS FOR tcnsuutc AID TO COCA BRADICATIOI BIPORIS
Ls Pa: PRESENCIA in Spanish 13 May 82 p 3

[Editorial: "Eradication of Coca Plantations")

[Text] There are noral questions and the latter of international prestige
that force us to take measures to wipe out and. insofar as possible, prevent
the manufacture of cocaine in our country. It is our own obligation but one
matched by its overriding importance to countries whose inhabitants have an
alarmingly high rate of use of the drug.

An analysis of causes resulting in a proliferation of laboratories in Bolivia
leads us to two conclusions. First of all, the situation is due to the fact
that it was possible to obtain the raw material with relative ease and at a
price advantageous to drug traffickers, meaning that it is a tempting operation
despite the risks run. Second. because of the aforementioned fact, it is
necessary to eradicate the manufacturing process in its early stages: where
the raw material is produced and freely narketed. Consequently. the most re-
cent provisions have provided for and. to some extent. resulted in actions
aimed at restricting growing areas to a limit in keeping with legitimate needs
for coca and control of its marketing. If neaaures are not taken during the
stages preceding manufacture, later control would be extremely difficult, as
experience has shown.

Hhat has happened in recent weeks in the Yapacani areas, where coca plantations

are now being destroyed. gives us the first indications of what must be done
and the possibilities of turning good intentions into practical applications.

There. peasants have agreed that coca plantations are to be eliminated, but th
they have asked for compensation. especially in the way of education, health,
technical assistance to improve other products and improvements in means of
communication. The solution has been relatively easy because there are no
large plantations in the area. a total of about 100 hectares with very few
peasants having over 1 hectare. In most cases. they had only part of a hectare
and said themselves that they only met the needs of farmhands who chew coca.

In other areas, however. there will undoubtedly be greater resistance because
coca is sore widely grown and is an essential means of income for peasants.
In the case of Yapacani. compensation will not be particularly onerous and to
a good extent, corresponds to plans vhich the government already anticipated

carrying out within the near future as part of its policy of development and
of improving living conditions.

0n the other hand. in Yungas and Chapare. the two major coca growing regions.
it will be necessary to think about such lore costly plans dealing with much
greater areas, plans to be carried out in medium-range terms. He do not be-
lieve, especially in view of Bolivia's current economic situation. that plans
for compensation and crop substitution can be carried out. There are social
reasons and questions of justice that prevent one fro: sinply resorting to the
job of destroying coca plantations and leaving the peasants to fend for then-

selves. As painful and alarming as this lay be, it is a fact that cannot be
ignored;

It is essential to have econonic aid and technical assistance. either from
interested governments or international organizations. It is urgent that they
all be convinced of this. If we do not have such support, the current situation
could still be partially alleviated by the good will of national authorities,
but we could not go very far and we night therefore risk criticism.

It is fitting to point this out in order to avoid problels that might later
arise.

11,66b
650: 5300/2302

28
ANTIDRUG councn. REPORTS LIMITED HEARS, SWIM!“

La Pas PRBSNCIA in Spanish 16 May 82 p 10

[Tart] Bolivia is fighting a lopsided battle against drug trafficking, using
limited resources and obsolete weapons preventing action fra being successful
in eradicating the evil.

Newsnen invited to cover intonation on the development of antidrug actions
saw the limited means used in such operations and observed the precarious condi-

tions for the physical safety of law enforce-ent officers and for the movement,
transportation and food of police forces.

Last weekend. the National Council for the Fight Against Drug Trafficking began
the second phase of the plan to fight the illegal production of coca and co-
caine. The operation was designed to discover and distantle factories. labora-
tories and storage facilities in the vast Clupare region.

Members of the press. who accospanied the cousission headed by Col Raul Gonza-
lez Ferry. director of the council, were able to see that these operations are
carried out under conditions disadvantageous for police. The lack of good

means of co-aunication and transportation enables drug traffickers to use nore

sophisticated leans. which often wreck plans aiaed at discovering or arresting
then.

Newsnen were able to witness such operations. The police are taken in trucks
starting out early in the norning. without even backpacks in which to carry‘
their energency food supply, gun, ammunition and dry rations. In operations
carried out a few days ago, the press was told that police officials and offi-
cers stayed in the zones in question, living off water and bananas. They had
to carry their weapons in one hand and flashlights in the other.

Cocaine Seized

Operations in the second phase included the areas of Bterana. lsiboro and
San Isidro. where 13 factories were discovered and dis-antled. Three labora-

tories were destroyed on Sends Victoria, each having two wells. In Bterazala.
there were three factories with three wells; on Sends Bayer, two factories with
two wells each; in San Isidro, two factories with a total of four wells; in
lsiboro, two factories with three double wells; and in Lauquena. one factory
with two wells.

29
The amount of the drug seized was 8 kilograms 100 grams. The report states

that in Chimore, 6 kilograms of cocaine sulfate were confiscated; in Lauquena,
Villa Tunari and Sends Victoria, 500 grams in each; 3,350 grams in Sends; and
250 grams near Villa Tunari.

During the operations, 28 persons were arrested and are under investigation
to determine their degree of guilt. Council authorities seized 40 drums of
coca and burned over 100 drums of coca being ground in the discovered plants.

These operations were carried out by personnel from the Directorate for the
Control of Dangerous Substances. with trained officers.

Council officials have repeated that the means and resources available for
this task are extremely limited compared with those used by traffickers. The

operations were headed by Col Raul Gonzalez Perry and Col Carlos Zapata,
director of the Directorate for the Control of Dangerous Substances.

11.466
C80: 5300/2302
BRIEFS

COCA CENSUS—The Hilitary Geographic Institute (INSCBOHIL). has announced that
it has concluded the census of coca in the country and that the information
has been turned over to the National Colputer Center (CENACO) for processing.
INSBGBQIIL completed the census as the result of an agreuent signed with the
National Directorate for the Control of Dangerous Substances within the frene-
work of the general plan being carried out by the govern-ant for the replace-
ment of these crops with other products. Gen Bernan Alfaro Cortes, director
of INSCBNIL. stated that "based on preliminary data. one can conclude that
in recent years. coca plantations have increased 300 percent." However, he
gave no figures. [hiring the survey. infernal interviews were conducted with
peasants concerning substitutes for the crops. 0pinions_were gathered on the
plan and on the effects it will have on the econoey and agricultural work in
the sector. Incone would drop substantially because. it was explained, "there
is no fans product that can replace the yield of coca. Furthermore, any other
crop requires work that is difficult for stall farmers." [Text] [La Paz
PRESENCIA in Spanish 16 May 82 p 10] 11,466

CROP REDUCTION Pun--00chabasba, 25 Hay (BOY)-It will inevitably be necessary
to resort to a 5-year plan to reduce coca plantations if countries in the
international con-unity which are affected by cocaine do not lend adequate
and systenatic aid to the prograa. This is the salient conclusion of the
docuent signed here by nubers of the National Council for the Fight Against
Drug Trafficking and far-n leaders fras Chapare. The docunent eephasiaes that
at the conclusion of the 5-year plan to reduce coca crops. "production and leg
legal demand will be balanced." Chapare far-era who have coca crops have
pledged to lend all respective cooperation for the government's sin of reduc-
ing crops of the plant used to sake cocaine. ramers in the tropical region
of Cochabanba also believe that the goverment Inst undertake vast new pro-
grans for other types of products to replace coca and basic local construction
in order to note it possible to pronote plantations of citrus fruits, bananas,
soybean crops. rice and other products. [Tent] [La Paz EOY in Spanish 2

26 May 82 p 5] 11.466

HIGHER 000A PRICE DMSnCochab-ba (H0!)--Peasants and settlers in Chapare
are urging the government to authorize a' price increase for coca in order to
help then user the high cost of living. "which nainly affects peasants," they
say. Representatives of the far-ere are now in La Pa: for the purpose of per-
suading the goverment organizations involved to grant the authorization

31
resulting in such a price increase for the product used to make cocaine. Cur-
rcnt price for the product in Chapars, as set by the government, is 6,000
pesos per load (two drums. 50 pounds each), which farmers want raised to 8.000.
Agricultural leaders have reported that coca crops require care and the util-
ization of fertilizer and other products which are purchased on the local mar-
ket at high prices. They say that production "is no longer profitable" and
that they "cannot even support their families." Officials from the National
Council for the Fight Against Drug Trafficking have held meetings with Chapare
peasants and settlers but were unable to agree on prices "and consequently, it
was decided to go to La Paz to higher levels.” it was stated here. In a report
on the conclusions of the meetings. coca producers said they resolutely sup-
ported execution of the different phases of the 5—year plan to reduce coca
crops. However. they say that the government should adjust the price of the
product "in order to partially alleviate the economic problems of families
living in Chapare." [Text] [La Paz BOY in Spanish 25 May 82 p 5] 11,464

GOMEZ SUSS U.S. AMBASSADORr-La Paz. 19 Hay (LATIN-REUTBR)--Fornsr Interior
Minister Luis Arce Gomez has filed a lawsuit against 0.8. Ambassador Edwin Corr.
who had accused him of engaging in drug trafficking, demanding that the U.S.
diplomat supply proof of his charge. In a brief submitted to the court, Arce
Gomez said Corr's diplomatic immunity does not excuse him from submitting proof
of his accusation. According to Arce Gomez' witness, Jaime Ponce Caballero,
Corr supposedly accused Arce Gomez publicly of drug trafficking. The former
minister said the diplomat should either prove this or retract his accusation
publicly. According to the U.S. television program "60 minutes," the text of
which was published by a local paper yesterday, Arce Gomez and other Bolivian
officers have also been accused by the 0.3. Drug Enforcement Agency of partici-

pating in cocaine trafficking. [Text] [PY192335 Buenos Aires LATIN in Spanish
2038 cm 19 May 82]

C50; 5300/2312

32
NATIONAL CAMPAIGR COORDINATOR REPORTS 0“ RESULTS IN STATES

Reduction of 90 Percent Claimed
Hermosillo EL MARCIA]. in Spanish 6 May 82 pp 1, 8

[Text] Samuel Alba Leyva, second assistant prosecutor of justice in the nation and
national coordinator of the permanent campaign against drugs, claimed that, thanks
to the constant action of forces from the Office of the Attorney General of the
Republic and the National Army, drug production has declined 90 percent in the
country. The judicial official arrived in this town yesterday to evaluate the
results of the action taken by the federal police authorities in their battle

against the production of poppies and marihuana, which he described as 'hsgnificent,"
stating that last month alone, in the Sahuaripa and Cmpas area, 33.10 hectares of
poppies which already had a height of 60 centimeters were destroyed.

He said: "A fundamental goal of the government of the republic is to keep up the
campaign constantly and intensively, because we know that if we let down slightly
the drug production could resume and then our effort would be relatively fruitless."

In addition to reviewing the work done against drug production, it is the purpose
of Alba beyva's tour through the northwestern part of the country to make a detailed
reconnaissance of the possible areas where poppies and marihuana may be grown, so
as to concentrate there a certain number of fumigating airplanes and helicopters
with the goal of not leaving a single plantation undestroyed.

With regard to the escape of drug traffickers from Sinaloa to other states in the
northern section of the country, specifically into the mountains of Sonora, Chihua-
hua and Durango, Alba beyva gave assurance that 60 percent of the personnel working
in the caspaign have been concentrated in those locations, and that the action of
the Attorney General’s office will reach them wherever they go.

He added that, with the discovery of that illegal activity and the termination of
it at its base, Sonora has natually ceased to be a state for drug "traffic" and
this is why there are few .drug seizures and drug trafficker captures, although

the latter are seeking substitutes such as South American cocaine and other psycho-
tropic substances.

He reiterated the fact that the campaign has brought magnificent results all over

the country, which has merited for the Hexican Government recognition from the
United Nations and other world agencies. -

33
With regard to the disappearance of fixed checkpoints set up by the Federal
Judicial Police on highways, the second assistant general prosecutor of justice
said that this has happened because they are easily evaded by the drug traffickers,
who have information on the sites where they are established. However, they have

been replaced by the "mobile units" since these have been proven far more effective
owing to the suddenness of their action.

Moreover, Raul Calvillo, director of drug control for the Office of the Attorney
General of the Republic, claimed that few plantations have actually been destroyed

in Sonora, because they are usually located on the border with chihuahua, and
belong to that jurisdction.

He stressed that poppy and marihuana production has declined considerably on the
national level, and hence the success of the campaign has prompted those engaged
in this unlawful activity to seek new cultivation techniques, so as to evade the
action of the police and National Army.

He disclosed that one of those systems is to reduce the growing areas because,
whereas in 1976 areas of up to 2,500 square meters were discovered, at present
they do not exceed 650 square meters.

Finally, he noted that the antidrug campaign is focused on the destruction of
the plantations before they produce seed, so as to prevent the latter from being
used and planted again.

The judicial authorities have visited Tijuana, Mexicali, San Luis-Rio Colorado,
Ensenada, La Pa: and Hermosillo. Yesterday afternoon they returned to Mexico
City.

Editorial Cement
Hermosillo BL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 10 May 82 Sec D p 4

[Text] According to the assessment made by the assistant prosecutor of justice of
the nation and national coordinator of the antidrug campaign, Samuel Alba Leyva,

drug production has declined by 90 percent in the country and has nearly disappear-
ed fron the state of Sonora.

The results of the campaign, which the Attorney General's Office and the Army are
keeping up constantly. were described as "magnificent."

And. in fact, they are. The battle to curb the growing of poppies or narihuana is
one with special features. Drug addiction, although it has declined worldwide,
still reaches stratospheric numbers, represented by hundreds of millions of
dollars. The American addicts consume about 4.5 metric tons of heroin alone. per
year. which. when converted into dollars, are many millions for the poor growers
and far more for the drug traffickers.

The charm of drugs does notlieonly in the paradise promised to those who escape

reality, but also in the large profits produced for those engaged in the dirty
business.

31;
As the assistant prosecutor remarked, the campaign to control drugs must be
intensive and constant. "If we let down slightly, the drug production could
resume and then our effort would be relatively fruitless."

And it has been in many places, because there is no other crop which can compete
with drugs in monetary terms. In Thailand, Burma, Turkey, Colombia. Bolivia and
many places vigorous campaigns have been undertaken to detect and put an end to
the poppy and marihuana plantations. In Mexico, the antidrug operation has been
under way for several years. Hundreds of small plots. scattered over the most
rugged mountain terrain, have to be discovered. The 2, 4-D. used to defoliate the
poppy plants before the harvest.is an expensive herbicide and has to be sprinkled
by fumigating helicopters or planes. The forces participating in the campaign

often have to withstand shootouts with the growers or trafficers. The risks are
real and numerous.

Unfortunately, the method of merely destroying the crops is not the most effective
one for drug control. However, it is the one that has the most national and inter-
national backing. The UN Fund for Control of Drug Abuse and the United States
Government are devoting large sums for programs to eradicate plantations. But
the problem is that other fields appear again and the radical solution is never
forthcoming. The method should be one of replacing crops, not only destroying

the drug crops, but also teaching the farmers to plant other income-producing
products.

In any event. the results achieved here in Mexico have been "magnificent." Those
responsible for the control have done a stupendous job, which is worthy of praise.

2909
C50: 5330/82

35
MOVING VAN USED TO SHIP HARIHUANA

Shipment to Border Seized

Nuevo Laredo EL MANANA in Spanish 7 May 82 Sec 3 p 6

[Text] Marihuana worth 2 million pesos on the black market was seized by Federal
Judicial Police forces who. at the same time, captured the drivers of the moving
truck in which it was being carried to the Ciudad Mier border, namely, Angel
Medina Galeana and Jose Luis Andrade Rodriguez, the guide Gustavo Dominguez Jaime,
and the one to whom they were taking it in that town, Adolfo Rios Moreno.

The 1972 model Dodge moving van with Federal Public Service licence plates H-4881,
with the trade name Victoria Furniture and Moving. was intercepted by the Federal
Police on the Monterrey-Miguel Aleman highway, in the vicinity of Ciudad Mier,

and in it they discovered 63 cardboard boxes containing marihuana weighing 465
kilograms, concealed in special compartments.

Angel Medina Galeana and Jose Luis Andrade Rodriguez stated that they were coming
from Papanoa, a site in the state of Guerrero, from which they were transporting
the marihuana to Ciudad Mier, for which trip they would each earn 5,000 pesos;

adding that an individual named Gustavo Dominguez Jaime was the person who had
been guiding them from that location.

Dominguez Jaime was arrested and confessed that, riding in a 1976 Ford Maverick
car with Nuevo Leon license plates RNV 561, he was guiding the drivers of the
truck in which the marihuana was being carried, and that it was to be offered for
sale to Adolfo Rios Moreno. who was also arrested.

Yesterday, the case was still in the hands of Comdr Siordia who, in turn, will
turn it over to the agency of the Federal Public Ministry headed by Calzada Vejar.

Moreover, the Federal Judicial Police headquarters denied that forces from that
entity had made a raid a few days ago at the Quinta Hotel located in Mina,
between Juarez and Matamoros, with a tip that armed individuals had gone to that
location, and that they had searched all the rooms seeking traffickers in human
beings as well as drugs.
[Text] Angel Medina Galeana, Jose Luis Andrade Rodriguez, Gustavo Dominguez Jaine
and Adolfo Rios Horeno were ordered officially ilprisoned as individuals guilty

of a crime against health in the degrees of marihuana possession, transportation
and trafficking.

Medina Galeana and Andrade Rodriguez were driving a moving type van and were inter-
cepted by Federal Judicial Police forces on the Monterrey-Miguel Aleman highway,

in the vicinity of Ciudad ﬂier, and in it they had very carefully concealed in
special compartments 63 boxes containing marihuana which weighed 465 kilograms.

The police succeeded in arresting Gustavo Dominguez Jaime who, in a 1975 Ford
Maverick car with Nuevo Leon license plates ENV-Skl, had been guiding them from
a site known as Papanoa in the state of Guerrero, to Ciudad Hier, where they were
to sell the marihuana to Adolfo Rios Moreno, who is also under arrest.

The drugs in question. valued at 2 million pesos on the black market, were to be
taken to the United States across the Rio Grande, as they themselves admitted.
The moving van driver stated that they had been hired in Papanoa, Guerrero, by
some individuals who offered them the sum of 5,000 pesos, and that Dominguez
Jaime had been guiding them from the site, so that they could deliver it to Rios
Moreno in Ciudad ﬂier.

The evidence against them is overwhelming, and served as the basis for the order
of official imprisonment issued by the third district judge.

37
Angel Medina Galanea and Jose Luis Andrade Rodriguez, drivers of the moving van type
truck in which the Federal Police found 465 kilograms of marihuana; Gustavo Dominguez
Jaime, who was guiding them in a 1975 Ford Maverick with Nuevo Leon license plates

from Papanoa in the state of Guerrero to Ciudad ﬂier, where they intended to sell
it to Adolfo Rios Moreno.

2909
C80: 5330
rney General of the Republic is

inst the drug traffic indefatigably, and during April

d holding for trial 73 persons who were in some

way connected with the activities proscribed by law. This statement was aade

by Hector Ayiles Castillo, coordinator of Zone 06 in the pernanent campaign
hicles used for engaging in

against drug trafficking, who noted that five ve
their activit He also said that seizures were made

of 989 kilograms and b 785 grams of seed of the same

grass and 1 kilogram and 380 grams of poppy seed. In addition, 61 grams of

opiun gun were seized. Commenting on the destruction of plantations, Aviles
Castill r an expanse of 160,530 square

0 remarked that 737 poppy plantations ove
meters, 25 narihuana plantations covering 1,620 square neters and 11 mixed
plantations on 3,000 square neters had been funigated mechanically. he added
that,

e Condor, 1,202 poppy plantations,
plantations

distributed over 532,633,15,290 and 250 square
meters, respectively,
Aviles Castillo stated

were destroyed annually. After providing the statistics,
that the work done by the personnel from the Office of
the Attorney General of
which had reached

LONAL CAMPAIGN RESULIS-
continuing the battle aga
it succeeded in arresting an

ice had been confiscated.
12 grams of narihuana.

the Republic included the location of a narihuana scedbed
a height of 50 centimeters, and which was razed
[Text] {Culiacan EL SOL DE SlNALOA in Spanish

39
§._.
THREE DRUG SBIZURBs-During March. the border guard forces foiled three attempts
to snuggle a total of 6 tons of drugs valued at some ‘0 million pounds. Informa-
tion obtained by Brig Gen Ushbi Ibrahim Muhammad Habib, com-ander of the border
guard intelligence service. confirmed that drug smugglers had prepared a series
of plans to land shipments of drugs in three batches using snall floats to carry

times and in various places. Border guard commander Maj Gen 'Ali Paruq el-Sahn
gave the order to prepare the necessary plans and stake-outs to pursue the
smugglers east of the Sidi Barrani area over various roads and trails and open
terrain through the desert and along the seacoast. The first smuggling opera-
tion took place on 7 March when the forces, along with an intelligence and
security group, succeeded in seizing 26 packages of drugs weighing a total of 1
ton in the al-Ha'adiyah area east of Abu Qabr. The smugglers escaped after
releasing the shipment. The second operation occurred on 13 March when the
forces were able to seize 5 containers of hashish powder in the al-Anfushi
area of Alexandria. The powder. which was to be processed locally after the
addition of henna, weighed 1 ton. The forces apprehended four suspects. The
last operation occurred on 18 March when the forces succeeded in seizing a
Toyota vehicle driven by the snugglere. who were able to escape. The seizure
followed a 3-day chase that included an exchange of fire with the smugglers
south of the city of Bahij in the Hestern Desert. Sone 2 tons of drugs were
discovered. [Text] [Cairo AL-JUHHURIYAH in Arabic 20 Mar 82 pp 1. 7] 8591

POHDERED OPIUH-Yesterday, 60 containers of powdered hashish weighing one-half
ton and a sack of opium were seized in the al-‘Ajami area of Alexandria. The
drugs were valued at 15 nillion pounds. Haj Gen Paruq al-Sahn. commander of
the border guard forces, forned the plan to seize the drugs in cooperation with
the Narcotics Department in Alexandria. Maj Gen Samih al-Tuhami. chief of
staff of the border guard forces, supervised the execution of the plan. The
investigation was conducted by Muhammad al-Tawari, first deputy prosecutor of
Alexandria. [Text] [Cairo AL-JUHHURIYAH in Arabic 20 Mar 82 pp 1, 7] 8591

C80: 5300/5015
BRIBPS

OPIIM. HERO!“ SEIZURE-"According to a report. by the Central News Unit, 11
bags of opium, weighing a total of 80 kg, together with one 65- 601: hand-
gun were seized from a smuggler by the personnel of the headquarters for

fight against narcotics in Quchan. The aforesaid snuggler togedzer with 11
others slmgglers were arrested in the Quchan region and handed over to judi-
cial authorites. Also a quantity of 36 kg of opiun were seized from a smuggler
by the headquarters for fight against narcotics and the strike squad of the
Islamic revolution connittee in Tahoe. The snuggler was handed over to
judicial authorities. The public relations office of the central headquarters
for fight against narcotics of the Islanic revolution cousittee in Mashhad
has also announced that in the past 2 days the guards from this headquarters
have nanaged to seize more than 2 kg of heroin and 1 kg of opium from net-
cotics distributors. [Text] [1.0150018 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian
1630 GMT 1!. Jun 82]

PLAN TO COMBAT DRUGSnTehran, 2 Jun (IRNA)-The latest developnents in the
werfronts and social and political issues of the country were discussed in

the cabinet nesting this turning charied by Prine Minister Husavi. In the
nesting Interior Minister Nateq~nuri presented a plan to oosbat drug snuggling
and narcotics use. which was approved. During the session the cabinet approved
allocation of some 635 nillion rials for various cultural and athletic projects.
Donations and gifts including jewelry and gold, given by the people fro. var-
ious cities. were given to the government authorities after the cabinet aes-
aion. That included sons 5 nillion rials in cash donated by the people of

Neyshabur, Khorasan Province. [Text] [1.3022106 Tehran mm in English 1920
cm 2 Jun 82]

cso: 5300/5616
DRUG USE DATA SAID INACCURATB
Jerusalem m JERUSALEM P081 in English 16 May 82 p 3
[Article by Charles ﬂoffmn: "Reports of Pupila' Drug Use 'Dietorted"']

[Text] A sociologist who conducted a «embolism easy
oldmuaeamonghighaehoolmilstoohthepohce.
thenewstnediaandtheEducation Miaietrytotaalt
yesterday for distorting the extent oldru; use in this age

noun.

Prof. Yehudit Shuval conducted the study together
wih Dr. Rahel Ya'aveu_ in I979 for the ministry. She
told mlm Poet that “the extraordinarily Nah
ﬁgures quoted by the police and conveyed by the media
in a sensational ntanaer are not. to the heat of my
knowledz. based on any systematic match.”

She an that the ministry ﬁgures released in rebuttal
to the police claim distort the ﬁndi ol‘ the ms
study. The ministry stressed that only .3 per cent of
education Ministry {voila front padee eaten to I! ever
useddrup..hlla $~peroeatof Isinlahoor
Ministry vocational aehoola “it so. study covered
only aolt drug uee. mainly huhieh.

Puhllciting the avenge l‘or all undetstatea the
extent of the peohlern. she said. ministry statement

outﬁtted one of the atudy‘s «in finding — that drug
weandespometodruprheavhhapJ-‘ormplap
thesaidthuinthelhhuadguperoeatotweatioa

5;-
z
i
E
i

parties.
val said that while the rates of aoll drug Inc found
inherstudy wereloweonparedtoothermerneonn—
tries. “they do not hello the serioueneaa ol’ the problem.
The ﬁndings should arouse aarlotta public concern. but
not hysteria. which will not oootrihtee to a constructive
tolution to the problem.”

She added thatdmuemtoundauoogyouagpao-
photollaociduoupeandplaoaeotresldeoegaadtea-
ded to occta anon. tAhoaewfzeady dlaplaylna
a. Menu“ "INN"... “I. “nu," ”

young poopleveteexposedtott'athanactmy
used than. aha aaid.

cs0: 5300/6716
1:3
BRIEFS

CANNABIS FARM RAIDnArraba (ItiI)--Police yesterday raided a far] near here and
arrested 12 sen for growing, smoking and dealing in cannabis. The arrests
followed a long police surveillance of the suspects. lost of whon would visit
the far- late at nidat. At the fern, owned by suspect Ilan Raul, police
seized cannabis plants and inplenents used in sacking marijuana. Rnel was
remanded into custody for 10 days by the Acre Hagistrates Court. Nine others,
iron the villages of Arrahe, Sakhnin and Deir hanna, were rasnded for periods
of from 10 to 15 days, and two suspects were released after questioning.

Police say charges will soon be preferred against all the detainees. [Text]
[Jerusalem THE JERUSALEM POST in English 17 May 82 p 3]

C50: 5300/ 6716
BRIEFS

ARREST 0P DRUG mnrcmsuA drug traffic between the Ivory Coast and France
through a group of Senegalese was discovered this week by the custons officers
of Parie-Boiasy airport following the seizure of 28.9 kg of cannabis, it was
learned Saturday from a French police source. No Senegalese, Mouhanedou Diop.
39 years old. end PAPA SECK. 33 years old, transported tron Abidjan tvo suit-
cases full of drugs. "hen arrested in Roissy. they inplicated three of their
compatriots residing in France: Papa Tall, 27 years old, presented by then as
a silent partner. Aeadou Fall. 30 years old, and Ibrahi- Diallo. 37 years old.
who served. they said, as retailers. The five use were presented on Eriday to
the Public Prosecutor's Depath of Bobogny (Parisian suburb). [Text]
[Brazzaville BULLETIN QUOTIDIEN DB L'ACI in French 26 May 82 p A 5]

cs0: 5300/5785

145
SMLI DRUG SHJWLBR GETS BIGlT YEARS Ill JAIL

Victoria RATIO“ 1:: English 3 Jun 82 p 7

[Test]

A SOMALI driver
tenced to eight years in jail
and a R 10,000 line on Tuesday
lor illegally importing demo
nous drugs. and to six years
in jail. to run concurrently..lor
illegal possnsion.

Despite -an appeal lor le-
niency by 27-year-old Abdica-
lasm Ali Mohamoud and his
lawyer Mr Bernard Georges.
who said the accused had a
young wile ind three small
children in Somalia depending
on him tor a living. Chief Jua-
tice Seaton said oraveiy. any-
one who traliics In drugs in
Seychelles should not be sur-
prised that his sentence is
harsh".

Mohamoud. who was em-
ployed in Tanzania. was ar-
rested at Seychelles interna-
tional Airport on March 14.
this year when a customs oili-
cer lound over seven kilos oi
cannabis hidden in several
large "Alrlcsle" collee tins he
was W»

The we. made up or
dried. onrshed leaves. out

stems. seedsand ﬂowering
parts.washlddenln plastic

 

was sen- undeTThin :4;er collee

powder. Several other tins had
only coliee in them.

The customs oliioer claimed
In court. to Mohemoud's de-
nial later. that the accused
had told him he was bringing
the coiiee lor friends in Sey-
chellee.

Mahamoad. who pleaded
not guilty. testiﬁed that he did
not know that the tins con-
tained drugs as he had been
asked to carry them to Say-
chelles by a businessman. Mo-
hamed Hassan Jame. who was
to meet him here.

Police waited in vain at the
airport here tor Jame to turn
up on the day he was sup-
posed to arrive.

Now-«moss

The lactthd Mahmoud
had noctheriuggage. not
eventoiistarticiee.only US
SiOOandnodeiinite place
tostay deepltearrlvinghere
ioraweekormoreaisoheip-
«tumours-things. to
sweyJudge seaton's verdict
againsthim.

M

Mr Seaton also iound it
strange that Mohammad.
knowing his luggage would be
searched here. having already
visited Seychelles twice be-
iore, made no alternpt to
check it the tins he was cany-
ing did indeed contain just
collee.

"That the accused exhibit-
ed no curioaity with regard toI

incredible."
the Chief Justice said.

Mr Seaton added that the
young customs oilicer who
discovered the drugs. Nicho-
las Bradbum. should be com-
mended.

il Mohamoud does not pay
his line he wiii have to serve
another six months in lall.
Despite the total oi 14 years
imprisonment imposed by the
Ohiei Justice the two terms
OFFICIAL SEEKS VIGIIANCB AGAINST DING swecms A'l' EXIT POINTS

Dar ee Selena DAILY NEWS in Bagueh It Jun 82 p 3

[Tad THEI-Dimtotuol Cr'uninel In-

380:

veeti‘htlou. Ndugu Joeeph
“memo. hue eppeeledto
cuetotm end eecurity ofﬁctele
et exit pointe to be non
vigilent e einet drug
unmlere he pointed
out. hed devieed newer
methode of hauling denueroue
th out o! the country.
mu Lame told the

Daily etn ln Der ee Selena
yeeteedey thet drug eddlcden
wee not e eeetoue emblem tn
the country. eddin; that title
hed neulted in limited
”1:“ uelnet dru trel-
llc a; et elrpotte end ee
no

lnte.
"l'hle le not e heelthy
eltuetiee. Dunc comet enclel
suede. en we would not like
to eee they ere eeoetted to
othee ceuntrlee heut Ten.
ﬁle". he pointed out.

l-le wee out-eating oh

thet two Tenudene

were etteeted with euh-
mtld cemented I In
( l a Seychelee -
teenet Much
«d Ieet mouth.

Mandi to the Seychellee
mad del - Nation -
one of the utlptite. Anthony

Nemete um. wee leet mouth
ceught with 020 (tennee o!
the eolt d worth Mt
l2.SeOI- (93. tupeeet et
street ptieee. The due; wee
miffed in (m. m. ”a.“ of
Onto detergent. .
The newepepet eleo eeod
one A. Moheneoud e Somell
citieen“ Ilvln. .ln Tenunie.

5300/5783

8W9 ‘Ele'd' W‘i'h‘u'le
eeven hilwnq 0! cm.
nebt'e In in «(fee the
peet name oﬂlciele et the
eetue elm" on hutch N.

The peper eeld Nenete
pleeded “nu-Ll?“ to el an.
petulant pueeeee on cl
dumue dtup end wee an.
teuced In three ere in.
52723:.“ 3: ‘33

~( . mpeee e
Court Judge on Rey 30.

Pdlute to pey the the
mile: to en aat" ete
non trim. W
edded.

Seychellee Chiel Juetlce
leeleﬁeten wee Wthe to
peee gen-It on more
eerioue ceee d Mneud
leet weeh.

Neale hed told the amt
thet he wee the eee d the
Beecutive Dime! o! the
A'eeocletloet tgld‘l‘eeeeIISe bl;

eyete, ugu oee
gluten. end thet he eerue! e
livlu ee e thee dee .
We. end ee e he
noveli‘

ﬁle l'ewyee. Mt. Bevin
Allecel. pleeded {or km

tout the court

heceuee hle nun ﬂeet ha
been eehed to the two
eeeled cue mm

ee Seleen eutle’

Wide ‘t'eW
. Allen: eeld.

thet the
neat hed edeeeete lewe
eeelut drug eluding. 1he
Ieete eee'eeeelee 0! d2:
without velld document. .
etltuted I: m. he eeld.
““ mwm... ”i
pave e peeeeee ...
think thet le why we wete net
583.113" .m'mm
no
to W wlth a”, he ..
.plelned.
Ndugu [nu-u aid hle

deeertaeut wee ewete ‘thet
even y nucleee hed
deed! thele tealce end
thet use of dune mud the
ettﬂ Into powdc end heeled
it in coffee tine.

"We heve tellehle In.
bet-aloe on thle“ hut. ee l
eeld. mlulte get ewey‘ with It
heceuee o! the “meet lexity
et our unit piece", he eeld.