FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10270
21 January 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIORS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS l

21 J31

WORLDWIDE REPORT

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS -
(Pouo 4/82)

CONTENTS
ASIA
HONG KONG
Briefs
Drug Manufacturing Ring Smashed
INDIA

Delhi Response To Concern Over Drug Abuse Scored
(Editorial; THE HINDU, 5 Dec 81).

Trading in Illicit Opium Reported
(THE HUSLIH, 11 Dec 81)

Briefs
Opium Clut

MALAYS 1A

Briefs
Drug Seizure in Penang

PAKISTAN

Survey Reveals Addiction Mainly a Male Problem
(BUSINESS RECORDER, 12 Dec 81)................ ......

Commentary on Fight Against thrcotics
(Ghulam Husain Qamar Baloch; DAWN, 27 Dec 81)............

Three Visitors From Berlin Held for Smuggling Heroin
(Abdul Haheed Husaini; JANG, 7 Nov 81)...................
SINGAPORE

Stiffer Penalties for Drug Offenses Urged
(mg "OHING PmPLE's DAILY, 10 he m)OCOOIOOOOOUOOOOUOOICOO.

MILAND

Obstacles Confronting Drive Against Golden hisngle lbrcotics
Noted
(SIAM RAT SAPPADA MW. 23 Aug 81)..........................

Raw Opium Seized in (hieng m1
(“HAN SI“. 17 m8 81)0.....0000...ID...OOOIOOOCOIODOOOOOIOOO

Efforts 1b Arrest Khun Sn Analyzed
(Suﬁ “I SAPPAM “1mm, 16 Aug u)0.000IICOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOIOO

LATIN AMERICA

BAHAMAS

Police Say Anguilla Cay Used as Drug Transit Point
(Anthony Forbes; m3 TRIBUNE, 20 Nov 81)......................

Briefs
Fine of Colombians
Treasury Cay Arrests
ERMUDA

Antiguan Sentenced to 5 Years in lhrijuana Smuggling
(THE ROYAL GAZETTE, 26 Nov 81)................................

Briefs
Review of Drug Lav

COIDHB IA

Briefs
Drug Confiscation

NEAR EAST AND NOR‘IH AFRICA
EYGPT

Hash ish Smuggling Operations on Coast
(Jalal m1; AL-JUKIURIYAH, 22 Oct 81)cocoooooseoo'oeeooooooo

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GREECE

Drug Traffickers Arrested, ”Others Sought
(AKRDPOLIS, 20 Nov 81).

Drug Iraffickers, Users Arrested. Minus Leader
(1 KAmIHERINI, 15 Dec 81)..........................

Briefs
Portuguese Drug Traffickers Arrested

Piraeus Drug Net Dismntled
Police Disrupt International Drug Ring

NE'mERLANDS
Briefs
llashish Seizure in Rotterdam
TURKEY
Antidrug Operations Net Record Haul in 1981

(Ethan Akylldiz; SILLIYET, 9 Jan 82).. ..... .........

UNITED KINGWH

International Drug Smuggling Gang Dhmbers Sentenced
(THE DAILY TELEGRAPH. 17 me 81).............. ......
FOR OI-“-{'IAI. USE ONLY

Turkish Gang Smggled Drugs in Tolbscone
(m DAD-DY TELEGRAPH, 24 me 81)000.00.00.000.000.000.0000...

Briefs
Jail for Cannabis Smuggling

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

DRUG MANUFACTURING RING SHASHED-Hong Kong, 29 Dec--Police believe they have smashed
a drug manufacturing and distribution ring in Hong Kong following a massive series
of raids that began on Sunday night. A police spokesman said today the 22-hour
operation involving about 250 policemen ended last night. They raided 39 premises
and seized 11.6 kilos (25 pounds) of heroin and heroin base with a street value

of three million HR dollars (540,000 US). Twelve people, including three women,
were detained for questioning, he added. Police believe the heroin base was
brought in from Thailand by a local source. They said the drug ring was not con-
nected with the one reported to be operating a major heroin smuggling network be-
tween Hong Kong and Europe. Reports from Paris on Sunday said French detectives
arrested nine Chinese in the French capital on Christmas Day who were delivering
10 kilos (22 pounds) of heroin.-NABIReuter [Text] [Rangoon THE WORKING PEOPLE'S
DAILY in English 30 Dec 81 p 5]

C50: 5300/4915
"Drug Abuse"]

a. “mgmwmm ““me mm amm
m “ mm w w mm mm a:
m...“ mmMuanmwammamWwwm WWWMWWWWW

Wmmmw Wm,
“mam mummwm

5300/7015

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020039-2

DELHI RESPONSE IO CONCERN OVER DRW ABUSE SCORE)

Madras THE HINDU In English 5 Dec 81 p 8

[Bdltorialz

CSO:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020039-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020039-2

TRADING IN ILLICIT OPIUH REPORTED

Islamabad THE HUSLIH in English 11 Dec 81 p 5

[Text ]

CSO:

$1"qu Der. 10:50::th
“"13: ““3?“ “t...”
up 0 V out

outta um“: 80m Ain't
notorbut ‘Golln ‘l' '. m
bad «I! mu ‘1 Noah-
outcnt I. tn to human the
an; to ct: In M- an the

«It.

With hdhb Noah-n In
(mt. tho “M” ouﬂot
though Tm and 3m ht
become the m mo to
MIMIIHIOIh-otot Want.

The nu mac us may
dtcmnd by nomda dam
hm dun you. day- {an the
"3?." saga 0! Megan
a plant. m m
wen W6 In NH with
cut-hand own.

. “.33' m: “a:
m D"

cits-tot to DM has. tht um
and d t p m but

human: I) ttulpott Mt
walnut. and h mm promo
them the may M: which
will buy "toll Mt amt”. can u

ol'llehl.

Some win thb tuba an
tow M own m can
1‘ . Santa mm. (M out
be! t 'Kmvt' uh MN.-
lutd. m an to when Into-
duotd b opium cummbn by tho
smut to bit; then and. qotttgol.

Evelina ”It. cannot: Ill
but May of We of the trbo nd
'mluwhed it: the
m Ito I t a.

'8 not health; I gamma
but... forth "but

It Mug“ by

MW ulna W
.Bumao bode nth it
imp-ht. to and It “quay.

Theta

5300/4591.

Mntwptumo
had a M M M tout
out an onpnwuhw
vh- tutu-mum

"anaemia/Mm

To graham Mn of
Mogul. tumult.
hdmo M cannula It-I

unobt- b. to t
omit-V. . “

lath hut vat on
It?! Udtd turd“
u maul. :-
ddlln c ya! mm
M! M” ' '
which ll
nmﬁ'lat. / a“. ht ,

beam“:
I‘ I

adhuvbtulm '
buxom-ml: u
thou-tote”
wak'u7 h ,m A
mumouﬁem '

WWW-wbvlut
todo'tththolut as?
any of 150 toll. Itch II

Er

ﬁg.

3
53%;?

s

E 5;?
aim

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROPBZ-00850R000500020039-2
BRIEFS

OPIUH CLUT--The total stocks of 2,526 tonnes of opium at 90 degree consistency
were laying at the two government opium factories in the country as on 31 Octo-
ber last according to official findings, reports PTI. .Out of these 1,506 tonnes
were laying at the Ghazipur factory in Uttar Pradesh and 1,022 tonnes at the
Noemuch factory in Hadhya Pradesh. The reason for such large accumulated stocks
is stated to be that world production and supply had far exceeded the demand for
nplnlvs. Consequently the prices of these raw materials had steeply fallen in
thv lntcrnational market. India had not carried out any experiment on new tech-
niques of extracting morphine directly from the poppy capsules. [Text] [New
Delhi PATRIOT in English 6 Dec 81 p 5]
BRIEFS

DRUG SEIZURE IN PENANG-Penang, 2 Dec-A synd‘-ate with international connections
is believed to have been snuggling drugs through the Penang Port. This came to
light following the arrest of a suspected courier and the seizure of more than six
kilos of ganja (cannabis) is a police ambush at the wharf here last night. Two
other suspects on a scrambler and scooter escaped. Sources said the sack of drug.
worth about 10.000 Malaysian dollars (about 6,1000 US dollars) was thrown away

by the detained suspect who was riding pillion on the scranbler. The drug was be-
lieved to have been smuggled in aboard a ship from Indonesia. The suspect had
fallen and hit his head on a culvert in his bid to escape. He has been warded at

the Pensng General Hospital. NAB/APP [Text] [Rangoon THE WORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY
in English 4 Dec 81 p 6]

C80: 5300/4914
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020039-2

SURVEY REVEALS ADDICTION HAINLY A HALE PROBLDl

Karachi BUSINESS RECORDER in English 12 Dec 81 p 3

[Text]

Drug addiction among females
i‘ comparatively lows, it not me.
in Pakistan. It is uninly a malo
problem. mowing lo a survey
nnicd out by tho drug “diam
umt ol Civil Hospital Karachi.

In Pakistan tho ratio of male
and female addicts was an lea
than 100:1 as computed to 4:1 in
Watch cotmgtiu. 'This militate
n y cltntal manna
both at vote and state how:-
tals u «I as tepom {tom simi-
ht centres establishd 'II Hyde!-
ahad. Laban. Mm.

According to the survey drug
addiction among («male tn low
moo-economic coup is remind
to opium Thou belonging to
thc upper-width clan m
addict“ to manuilian. Addic-
tion to add-um usually maps;
alter that: (up an m1:
the physicianstonliovo the sym-
ptom of anxiety and W.

[has turvcy also revealed' that
and» m the univemtiu who on:
and data freely with “Km
am with to aMtclm.
The group of addicts _at the lug--
chi Univemty comm a stunti-

CSO: 5300/4593

cam humus o! f .

madam smoke ho '

maﬁa. nlllnwol can”
“0"“ |

(«and in Saul Mandi m

mm is a what vocal“ in a

«man at the campus wombat.

l: med Ihll tho maﬁa of
{ma min- in Karachi Unint-
uty blew up “buy it Jann-

tbo body tym ' rhk uf
Marja; a we» child. mmtaly
mull! -a ma

addict—"I. ‘ ‘ 4N.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2001102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020039-2
COMMENTARY 0N FIGHT AGAINST WICS

Karachi DAWN in 319118): 27 Dec 81 p 9

[Article by Ghulan Husain Quinn:- Baloch]

[Text]

CSO:

A RIGOROUs campalgu

to uproot the use 0!
narcotics has been launched
in Pakislan. Consequently
the production. possession.
processing and manufac-
turing of all Intoxlcant
drugs. and poppy cultiva-

llon are belng stopped.

fin-ever. the woman against
druggaddlaioa I'oulo aucteed only
If t annually. Iaoily and indi-
viduala are mph.- Involved In lbc
aduuliva and orianbllllalioo pm.
its 1180 aim. add!“ u not only
«I he outed lull in to be rulm-
nl to Illa aou'My m a ullweluan!
and aell-rcspealln‘ Iodlvldual.

In compliance am the convent-
lon on narcollc «Iron 1961 and the
ulnveullnn on mulmlvuplr aub-
ounces nm. the GUICI'DI‘DCM is
slowing produuioo and consumpt-
Ioo of opium amt lot madlal
and aaculillr puuvoaca An ordi-
nance no womalulad early .io
mo which pmhllmao ma ma and
produalon 01 all nanouc drugs.

A com o laalalollon to
am variooa uncu- ol the woolen
Illl he coloncd in lb. near fu-

5300/4592

um. and. Drug Allan Cooml
_ hemaary laaa an gradually oa- (ONFDAO) no Islamabad for a.)
m. extended lo nomad aroaaaoo Ialllloooollanaadauacaloaxoaad
much ul llw mopy summon baa cam on allnlnaoa no”! cultiva-
beco molrolled. uon limb coo automation.

nu nummum on and m Tho Min- Ncmuu (have!
on and Ila alledlllﬂed “end” lo loam IMO!) III] inﬂow! Ill.
aunt In the lomolatlon or a nul- groan-a In mum can too
Mudplmary manna no ollul- Ballad Hallow Doulopuaal Pro-
nala poppy cultivation, develop mu (UKDI'). ThapmJaa do!
lroauaanl and niabllltallon noda- ol ltﬂlllln Moo auu-ot land to
live: lor drug dependent persona ladlllala m'ltlvalioo ot a I'ldo ran-
Io Manly allowed urban and rural a- clan crop: in aka 0! my.

saddles. Tho locus or attention m on use due. an «vandal

mumbmebNWﬂaode .
tho replacemanl of POD!!! treo tar- .“ m up 339‘: gum
mm "mm lemma, Imam nods. my

Treatment cactus also but hm- du all lacuna arodaclloa o!
pnorlty. ﬂue Palliann Naomi: m other “no colon. To aaalat
control Board is making amon- Ian-min mom. lta no!
menu In keep a alga.» all and; crops on use Mama: at. ha-
amu ln m an arc howo‘lool Whtbouoa._
mm :lllcn culllmion or poppy. mlaloo o1 dean valor and
In aﬂoﬂa haw maceaalully bron- diam“ of m 0! avatar
gm down nu. production of oplaoa mmmlaalloa momma human:
in the moon; lrom 8.000 mam: own at u» on!
loan in I'm-18 lo 86 Iona In INIHl. thAO/URDJJPM OM
Wﬁ'ﬂm‘” It!“ dl ' the Tao mama ' Mmﬂe

0 way en n. poo Illa la
::g\‘a_llon.“anghll has bun nag 3!
mi n anecua In 9am Ammunatlam

of [he notorlooa "aoldca lrlanala" not «Event woo-calm alum-

11- Oovamm of Path: on an amndal lambda: and Ill-
Dambar 3. m1 alum! an ant acaaa who! and untold Inmaaa
aunt with the Dallod Radon hp! la walla wolactloa.‘
THREE VISITORS FROM BERLIN HELD FOR SHMGGLING HEROIN
Karachi JANG in Urdu 7 Nov 81 p 12
[Article by Abdul Hahecd Husnlnll

[Text] Karachi. 6 Nov a young blonde 14-year-old German woman. who came to Pakistan
as a tourist, was sitting with her head bowed in the custody of Pakistani customs
officials. She was perhaps cursing the moment when, for the sake of her Iranian lov-
cr. Reza Taqwi, she decided to participate in the smuggling of heroin worth 40 mil-
lion rupees from Pakistan to Germany. Currently. Erika Josette, her boyfriend. Rezs
Taqwi, and their accomplice, Reza Hubssher Ferd, are in the custody of customs offi-
cials who are interrogating them. Erika Josette and Bess Mubsaher Fard were arrested
27 October at Karachi airport as they were attempting to smuggle out heroin in two
suitcases. Reza Taqwi was arrested in Lahore as he was trying to escape to India.
The airport deputy collector of customs, while giving the details of the case today,
indicated to the reporter of JANG that Miss Josette and keen Taqwi, after having ar—
rived in Karachi, checked into the Gulf Hotel and contacted a man by tie name of
Rashid. Rashid handed them two suitcases, the secret compartments of which contained
more than 4 kilograms of heroin. Another accomplice of the accused, Reza Mubasher,
arrived in Karachi from Berlin by another flight. After a stay of 5 days he was giv»
cn custody of the suitcases and was promised 10,000 German marks in Berlin for his
trouble. In the meantime, Reza Taqwi did some shopping for carpets. On 27 October
the Cerman girl and Reza Huhaaher Fard took the heroin to the airport hidden in the
suitcases. which they checked in. Meanwhile, the customs officials had already re-
ceived a tip about it. Reza Taqwi fled from the airport as soon as he heard about
the arrest of his companions. Mr Kazmi pointed out that Interpol has also been in-
formed about this case.

when the correspondent of JANG interviewed Reza Taqwi at the airport, he began to cry.
In broken English he said that he is a well-to-do carpet dealer in Berlin. His fam-
ily is also well-to-do. He is not really into the smuggling of drugs. He has not
really been involved in this. The customs officials say that he tried to bribe them
in Lahore with 15,000 Deutachemarks. Accused Reza Mubasher also looked very perplex-
ed and said that he did not know that heroin was hidden in the suitcases. He was

told that the suitcases contained gold powder and since there were no restrictions

on the movement of gold powder in Iran and EurOpe, he would have no problems. As op-
posed to her companions, Miss Josette looked very composed. She indicated that she
had separated from her parents at the age of 13. She completed high school in Berlin.
She met Reza Taqwi last year in the restaurant where she worked and fell in love with
him. She could not legally marry him because he already has a German wife and two
children. So far Rcza Taqwi has been supporting her. Miss Josette further indicated
that she is absolutely not addicted to drugs. However, she smokes two to three ciga—
rettes a day. Her smoking has increased since her arrest. But Mushtaq Kazmi contra-
dicted this baby-faced. attractive young woman. He said that she has been constantly
asking for liquor. If you look at her eyes, he added, you will see for yourself that
she is addicted to drugs. Miss Josette said that she is very fond of Iranian food
and Eastern music. Generally she likes to wear Shalvar and Kurta. Tears welled up
in her eyes when the JANG correspondent asked her about her parents. She said that
she also has a younger sister whom she misses a lot. When told she may be imprisoned
for smuggling, she cried out, "For God's sake, don't say that." In the View of cus-
toms officials, her equanimity was remarkable. They thought that either she was will-

nng to endure anything as a result of her love for Reza Taqwi or, after her separa-
tion from her parents she had been involved with groups who made her a pro.

Miss Josette said that she was in love with her lover and could not hear even a mo-
ment's separation from him. When asked why she was returning to Berlin with the other
accused leaving Rcza Taqwi behind, she responded that she had come to Pakistan on a
pleasure trip--to soak up some sun and to bathe in the ocean. But the men here fol-
lowed her so much that she became disgusted. Often a policeman had to chase the peo-
ple who were following her. She got tired of being cooped up inside a hotel room all

the time. Reza Taqwi asked her to go on to Berlin and said he would arrive there in
a day or two after completing the purchase 'f carpets.

Mr Hushtaq Kazmi indicated that the accused have been remanded up to 10 November and
during this period they will be interrogated and thereafter they will be sent to pris-
on. and the legal proceedings againsc them will begin in court. He said that there
are plenty of witnesses against them. The accused came to Karachi on a return ticket
from Berlin but they destroyed that ticket and purchased a new one for Karachi. Paris,
hanover and Berlin. The accused did not go to Berlin directly because police there
have trained dogs that can detect drugs while such is not the situation in Paris,

 

i859
ISO:
STIFFER PENALTIES FOR DRUG OFFENSES URGED

Rangoon THE WORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 10 Dec 81 p 7

striations. s Dec—Assam drug aspects
have urged the ﬁve rnernhermstbns the
South-East Asian Won to introduce

[Text]

C80:

Arguing that drug traf-
ficking and drug abuse
poses a threat to national
security. stability and re-
silience, they called for
mandat preventive de-
tention 0 drug trafﬁckers.
manuhuurers and lim-
ciers.

The a was contain-
ed in a joint Press release
issued at the end of the
sixth meeting of ASEAN
(dlrug experts here yester-

sy.

Singapore and Malaysia
already have provisions in
their laws to detain drug
traffickers and abusers
without trial and the chair-
man of the six-day rneete
ing. lgoh Geolt Eh. Dgec-
tor n the Sin en-
'21! Nmmﬁm v_vss
t ay re as ng
lndonesiap‘rnd the i-
lippines had indicated that
they would make laws
providing for preventive
detention.

The Thai experts to the
meeting will present the
recommendation to their
Government.

ASBAN amntries have
also been urged to adopt

5300/6913

thedrugrnensos.

measures to deny travel
documents to illicit drug
trafﬁckers. manufacturers
and linutciers. Singapore

and Malaysia almdy have
:hil’lilstenl sgrcemertt on
Poh also told the Strait:
Tiara that an ASEAN nar-
cotics dealt would he set up
in the ASEAN secrets.
riat headquarters in Djs-

karts tn about nine
months.

It would be
for collecting data'and in-

formation on drug activi-
tien which would then be
shsred with ASEAN
laysis. the Philippines.
Sr re and'l‘hailand.

there should be ntsaimurn
use of the ma- media to
win public «Inert for the
h ht against drug pro.

ASEAN countries were
further urged to exercise
tighter control on the int-
port . distribution and eat-
port of chemicals used 5“
the manufacture ot heroin
and to introduce
penalties for in!!!“

10

tragicking in these chemi-
cs .

The confereme tackled
{our main upects of the
dnlg problem: law en-
forcement and l 'slation,
treatment and r ilits-
tion. preventive education
and informstioh and train-'
in; and research.

Three ASEAN drug
mew“ handling: identi-

one yun
merited. Pk.

Thailand opened a train-
ing centre int middle
management-level drug
enforcers last year.

The other projects are
the setting up of a mini
centre for information
preventive education by
the Philippines and a
centre for treatment and
rehabilitation to he set up
by Malaysia.

h “(Rn rum and reha-

mts. the experts agreed
community psmei -

tion and the social' reset:-

tegrstioo of such

and former d

should heat

Meanwhile. a report to

the revealed that
Mrmﬁve drug. shu-
sets in Singapore have cri-

lilte theﬁ and gambling
and two out of every three
are promote " or
m “3%.
NABIAPP
OBSTACLES CONFRONTING DRIVE AGAINﬁT GOLDEN TRIANGLE NARCUTICS NOTED
Bangkok SIAM RNP SAPPADA WICHAN in'Phai 23 Aug 81 pp 18-22
[Articlez "The Golden Triangle, a Story That Never Ages"]

[Text] The upper norl.hern region of'rhailand forms part of the area
known as the "Golden Prianq.le. " It is one of the world‘s important
places for growing peppy and produ(_5ng narcotics and heroin
refineries are located in the Thai border a1ea. The border,
extending from Chianq Rai Province 1.0 Ranong Province, is 2, 202
kilometers long. The mountain terrain and convenient communications
routes facilitate the secret product5.ou of narcotics, and large
quantities of narcotics are tran3p01ted into'rhailand from abroad
along the Thai-Burmese border. Another problem is that large
numbers of Thai hiJJ. tr5besmen grow poppy to make a living, and
minority groups in Burmc who are oncm5.es of the government use

the drugs as a tool to get. money and purchase weapons to fight the
government. 1hus, there is a serious drug situation in the Thai-
Burmese border area cvn1.c)ning both drug production and trade

and drug add5.ction among the people. This is considered to be a
serious problem t.hat cteates an obstacle for national development
in the manpower, social, economic and national security spheres.

Border Problems

There,have been problems along the Thai— —Burmese border for more than
30 years. Both countries are trying to cooperate with each other
and not interfere in each other' 3 affairs. Burma has a problem with
communist party terrorism in the northeast and a problem with
minority groups along the border. Tha51.and too has a problem with
communist terrorism. 1‘he problems are rather serious because they
can easily lead to misunderstandings. Three factors are involved.
[The first is that] the two countries do not have a clearly
demarcated border and the maps made by England are still used.
Thailand and Burma have never had a chance to reach an agreement.
Concerni.ng the important border problems, there are three places
concerning whi.ch agreements must be reached, these three being the
Mae Sai river area. Lhe n05 Lang area and the Chan river mouth area
in Ranong Province.
The second factor concerns the understanding of both sides and the
control of the border. Even though border points have been
stipulated, there are still problems in some places because the
people cannot read the maps. This cannot be ignored. And when the
border has been clearly demarcated, it must be controlled using
ground patrols, and border crossings must be controlled. At
present, this is done at only two or three places since the
terrain is composed of complex mountain ranges. Furthermore, there
is still the problem of the minority groups along the border who
are resisting the Burmese government. Thus, it is almost impossible
to control the border here.

The their factor is that there are people who try to get the
officials and people to engage in illegal activities. And among
the people are many people who are involved in illegal activities.
These people are Thai citizens and they use Thailand to carry on
smuggling and other illegal activities.

The political situation in Burma -- in which Burma has used

military forces to Suppress the armed minority groups, including
those of Burmese and Chinese nationality, in the Hah, Kachin,

Kayah, Karen, Mon and other small states, and forced them to retreat
into Thailand, where they can escape the danger and rest their
forces, in order to gather forces, weapons and war materials for
continuing operations in accord with each group's ideals -- is one
thing that has promoted an increase in drug production and
trafficking and in the smuggling of military weapons, timber and

ore in the border area.

Even In 10-15 Years, Not All [Drug Trafficking] will Have Been
Suppressed

Ten years from now, opium will still be being transported in the
three Burmese states where the most poppy is grown, and the central
Burmese government will still not be able to control things here,
eSpecially in the wah, Khokhang and Shan states. There are three
ways to ship narcotics out of Burma. The first is to refine the
Opium and turn it into heroin at one of the 10 to 20 refineries in
the border area. The locations of these refineries are constantly
moved about in Mae Hong Son, Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai provinces.
The three groups that are engaged in such production are Khun Sa's
group, the Payachau group and Lao Su's group. Thus, the drugs must
pass through Thailand because there are roads and markets and there

are network contacts reaching from the north to Bangkok and the
south.

The second way is to tranSport the drugs through Burmese waters and
the Andaman Sea to the south and to Malaysia following various
islets. From Malaysia, the drugs can be shipped to Singapore,
Indonesia or Europe. This is considered to be a new route for

12
smuggling drugs past Thailand. It takes more time and involves
greater obstacles in loading but there are no blockades. While
transport is said to be easy. things become more difficult when
the drugs reach the centers in Phukhet and Ranong provinces since
more drug searches are made.

The Third way is to ship it by way of Bangladesh. Opiumis shipped
through here because. at present, the drug trade is very active in
Southwest Asia. That is. in Pakistan and Afganistan more smuggling
is taking place because of the political turmoil. The police do not
have time to carry on drug suppression activities. This has

enabled traffickers to engage in trafficking with the Middle East.
Almost 90 percent of the drugs entering Europe come from the Middle
East. The other 10 percent come from Asia. Thus. European interest
is focused more on the Middle East than on the Golden Triangle.

As for the narcotics from the Golden Triangle that reach foreign
markets, most is sent to America and Australia. The best raw
opium and heroin in the world comes from the Shan state in Burma.
It is then transported to the Thai-Burmese border, a distance of
only 150 kilometers from northern Chiang Mai.

Police Major General Chawalit Yotmani, the deputy secretary-general
of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCB). suppression
sector, stated that it will probably take several more years before
the’Golden Triangle problem, especially in Burma. can be solved.
Another thing that is worrisome is that the comunist Party in
Burma is supporting and encouraging the minority groups to engage
in trafficking and seek profits, just as the communist terrorists
have done in southern Thailand along the Thai-Malaysian border.
This is a very worrisome matter. In particular, the Mac chaem river
basin area has begun to play a role. The communist terrorists have
begun to provide support in order to connect Burma and Thailand.
This is a security matter that does not concern the narcotics
trade.

Even though Burma is receiving help from the United Nations in order
to solve the crop growing problem in accord with the project to
eradicate the poppy fields of the minority groups, they are doing
things differently from Thailand. which has geared things toward
development. Burma always says that it destroys tens of thousands
of rai of peppy each year without giving any thought to security

or to humanitarian concerns as does Thailand. "I think it will take
Burma a long time to complete things. Because if the minority
groups do not agree, the Burmese government does not have the

sense to go in and provide them with help. Thus, I think that this
problem will result in Opium entering Thailand for at least another
10 to 15 years until some better trade replaces narcotics."

13
island of Taiwan. One element of the Koumintang forces, or the
Chinese nationalist troops of the 93rd Division, that was operating

when the Korean War ended. the Burmese government appealed to the
United Nations and, in the end, those soldiers who volunteered

to go were moved to Taiwan in two phase . During the first phase,

the second phase in 1961. The remaining soldiers did not wish to

quarters at Chiang Lap. They Split into two roups and retreated
into Thailand together with their families. Edna group] formed
the 3rd Battalion and established its headquarters at Tham Ngop

in Bong Tam Commune, Fang District, Chiang Mai Province, with
General L1 Choen Pang the commander. The other group formed itself

refugees. When General Kriangsak chamanan was prime minister. he

gave permission for them to become Thai citizens and have Thai
identification cards.

14
However, both of these Chinese battalions had very large numbers of
peOple. Some groups are still living in the Shan State along the
roads past Mong Tang Yang. Mong Nai, Mong Chiang Kham, Mong Kung,
Mong Sing and Mong Luang. Another road passes Chiang Tung, Mong
Phong and Mae Salong. some of these former KHT soldiers have
joined the Ho Chinese and the Rah and Shan groups. Some groups

are still making a living as armed soldiers and take part in
producing and transporting narcotics just as before.

But some groups are indirectly working as ”mercenaries” for the
Thai government by opposing and blocking an increase in the
influence of the communist terrorists in the northern region of
Thailand. Examples are the nationalist Chinese soldiers who moved
to Doi Yao and Doi Phanun in Chiang Khong and to Doi Luang in
Chiang Saen District, Chiang Rai Province.

Khun 5a Must Be Captured

Narcotics have been talked about often. This is a very dangerous
group. The well-known leader of this minority group that controls
the most drug refineries is Chang Si Pu. or "Khun Sa" as he is
better known among the Shans. He is the fifth most important heroin
trafficker in the world. He has still managed to avoid being
caught by the Thai authorities. The Police Department issued a
warrant for his arrest on 17 July 1980 and at present there is a
reward of 500,000 baht for his arrest. The statute of limitations
for this warrent is 20 years. Squadron Leader Prasong Sunsiri, the
secretary—general of the National Security Council, announced that
"we must capture him."

The members of Khun Sa's group are Ho Chinese who make their living
by producing and selling narcotics. There are at least 15 refineries
that refine heroin from raw Opium. At present. they are still in
Operation in the mountain areas along the Thai-Burmese border

since neither the Thai government nor the Burmese government can
control this area. Also, it is safe here and economically this is
suitable. It is easy to tranSport chemicals from Thailand in order
to produce heroin. These chemicals are brought from Bangkok by
animal or on root. If the refineries are located deep in ide Burma,
transportation costs will be high too.

In the narcotics trade, the refineries are the element that can make
the most money. Previously Thai officials thought that the Burmese
minority groups that were engaged in the drug trade were buffers
against the Burmese Communist Party. But now the Thai government

realizes that these groups are criminal narcotics organizations that

15
should no lOnger be allowed to exist. Khun Sa's group buys large
quantities Of raw opium from the Burmese Communist Party. This
provides the BC? with money with which to fight the Burmese
government in the Shan State and cross over into Thailand. They
have expanded their secure base areas and control the border area
from the northern part of Chiang Rai to Mae Hong Son. Khun Sa's
group is the group with the greatest power. controlling 70 percent
Of the drug trade. It recently tranSported a shipment of Opium

to the border, where there are seven more large drug refineries.

This group has eliminated the small narcotics production groups
and is trying hard to take control of the entire border and gain
complete control Of the narcotics trade. It has remained
indifferent to the Thai government's order to drive the armed
Burmese minority groups out of Thailand. It constantly moves its
forces and drug refineries back and forth between Thailand and
Burma. When Burmese troops make a sweep. they cease producing
heroin, destroy the narcotics and chemicals and flee into ThaiIand.
When Burma withdraws its forces, this group returns to Burma

and reSumes producing heroin as before.

Thailand and the Narcotics Problem

Previously, the government allOwed opium to be consumed openly.
There were Special places. called opium dens, for those who wanted
tL smoke opium. The state made money by collecting taxes from the
opium dens and from the Opium tax. Most of the opium that was
consumed was Opium that came from Turkey and that was mixed with
Thai Opium. This was because Turkish Opium contained 14 percent
morphine while Thai Opium contained only 7 percent morphine. When
Filed Marshal Sarit Tanarat took control of the government, he
immediately outlawed Opium in 1959. The problem that arose was
that heroin, in the form Of purple flakes, spread in place of
opium. The quality was poor. It was sniffed only since if injested

the person would die because the heroin contrained arsenic, a
poison.

Even though suppression went so far as to execute narcotics
producers and pushers, this substance that was produced from
Opium using chemical methods and that had a stronger effect than
opium spread among the peOple who were addicted to Opium since
it was easier to consume and it was easier to avoid the law. The
production of heroin originated in Hong Kong. Heroin was then
sent to Thailand, being encountered for the first time around
January 1959. Then, Hong Kong chemists were sent over to produce
heroin and they reached the Golden Triangle area. There. they
established refineries to produce heroin from Opium. The heroin
was then sent to Thailand and smuggled to the world markets.

16
At the same time, hill tribe refugees from Burma and Laos moved
into the mountain areas of northern Thailand and begun to gr0w
peppy, which was an economic crap for them. This made Thailand a
part of the Golden Triangle and the fifth largest producer of
opium in the world. This year, Thailand will produce 48.57 tons
of Opium, an increase of 213.56 percent over last year. This is
abOut the same amount as that of 1976/1977. when 45 tons were
produced. The greatest amoung, 71 tone, was produced in 1977/1978.
Opium production for the entire Golden Triangle area will reach
GOO-1,000 tons.

The drug problem that is creating dangers for Thailand is
becoming even more alarming. Statistics show that the number of
drug addicts is increasingat a rate of 6,000 people each year.
Formerly, most addicts were addults but now most are youths
between the ages of 14 and 25. Concerning the economic problems,
each drug addict must Spend about 50 baht per day to buy drugs.
This means that for 100,000 addicts, this amounts to 5 million
baht per day or about 150 million baht per month. At present. there
are 500,000 addicts and in Bangkok there are at least 300,000
addicts. This is more than 1 percent of the entire population of
the country.

The governments of Thailand and Burma have signed an agreement 0n
drug suppression. Burma will not allow any opium from Burma to be
sent into Thailand while Thailand will prevent the chemical acetic
anhaydride. which is used in production, from reaching the northern
border and prevent any secret heroin production. Thus the Thai
government announced that eight provinces [in the north] are to be
chemical-free areas. Also, four southern provinces along the
Thai-Malaysian border are to be chemical-free toosince chemicals
are smuggled into Thailand from Malaysia.

The ONCB, in cooperation with the Region 3 border patrol police.
implemented resolute measures with regard to the Thai hill tribes.
It strictly prohibited them from planting poppy in Huang, Chiang
Dao. San Patong, Nae Chaem. Fang. Chom Thong and Mae Rim districts
in Chiang Mai Province and [asked them] to grow economic crops in
accord with the Thai-United Nations crop substitution program. Also,
it ordered the Thai hill tribes to destroy all existing poppy
plants. However. suppression activities were not able to be
carried out in accord with this order. This stemmed from the fact
that the hill tribes claimed that the prOgram sent crop seed too
late and in insufficient quantities to support them. with opium.
they did not have to look for markets; the merchants contacted them
in their villages and prices continually increased. Another factor
behind the failure [of this program] is that the Ho Chinese
investors who gave financial support were the cogs and middlemen

in the narcotics trade in the tribal villages.

17
The Real Character of Thailand and Burma

Police Major General Phairot Putsayanawin, the commander of the
Border Patrol Police, stated that some people have asked whether
or not the narcotics suppression activities that are carried on
daily in the border areas have achieved any results. His reply

is that, concerning the work done in Thailand, valuable results
have been achieved. We have seized much opium, heroin and morphine
and many heroin refineries since we began in 1972. This is the
reason that the amount of drugs and the number of refineries have
decreased. In particular, it can almost be said that there are no
refineries in Thailand. As far as is known, there are activities in
Pang District. As for Burma, there are certainly [refineries]

there and we know where they are. We would like to take forces in
and destroy them if we could.

As for cooperating with Burma in destroying the refineries in the
border areas, this was once done in the Huai Padam area in Huang
District, Mae Hong Son Province. Police paratroopers from the Air
Control and Support Division were used in cooperation with Region 3
border patrol police with the support of forward Supreme Command
Headquarters. But that time, because of the weather and terrain,

it was difficult to determine where the border was. The Thai
helicopter crossed the border and dropped the paratroopers deep in

Burmese teriitory where Burmese troops had already seized a
refinery.

The Burmese sent forces to encircle and capture the Thai units and
the helicopter. The Thais realized that they had actually crossed
the border and, therefore, they felt that matters should be
discussed since this was a joint Operation. Perhaps the Burmese
feared that the Thais woulo attack the morphine refinery that they
had already seized. In any event, they charged that Thailand

had sent forces to transport the narcotics from that refinery.

"Also. some Thais actually believed the prepaganda of the Burmese
and they repeated this against us. This hurt us quite a bit. By
the time Burma released the men and helicopter, we had experienced
several days of fear. This is an example of loose cooperation, and
it shows the real character of the other side. This is a lesson
that must be remembered for a long time," stated Police Major
General Phairot.

New Measures -- Seize Property

At present, there are five laws concerning narcotics. These are the
1979 Statute on Narcotics, the 1976 Statute on Drug Suppression,
the 1975 Statute on Substances That Affect the Mind and Nervous

System, the 1929 Statute on Opium,and Revolutionary Council Notice
No 37 of 1958.

18
'rhe 5tatute on Narcotics designated five types of drugs as
controlled substances. The first type is heroin, which is the
strongest narcotic. It is forbidden to produce, import or export
distribute or possess this drug or possess it with the intent to
sell. The second type includes morphine, cocaine and opium. The
third type includes drugs that have been mixed with type two
drugs. The fourth types includes acetic anhydride and acetin
chloride, which are chemicals used in producing heroin. The fifth
type are drugs such as marihuana and "kra thom" [a shrub of the
madder family] that are not included in types one through four.

But the existing laws still have lOOpholes concerning the
suppression of drug traffickers or the main people behind the
drug trade. Thus, a subcommittee has been formed to revise those
statutes that are not clear and that lack important measures so
that they contain clear provisions and measures that will help

to improve suppression activities. A new measure that is expected
to be included in the new law concerns the arrest of drug
ringleaders, their accomplices and those who have supported
illegal activities involving narcotics and the seizure or
sequestering of the property of suspects in drug cases involving
production,import, export and possession of narcotics for sale or
distribution. This will be done in order to allow the courts to
order property confiscated and to promote cooperation between

drug suppression officials and those involved in sending drug
addicts for rehabilitation.

Produce and Sell It

There are many peOple who wonder why Thailand does not grow poppy
and sell the opium itself. Mr Aran Suwannabuppha, the director of
the Narcotic Plants Control Division, stated that, in reality,
this would be very difficult because only a few countries have-
received permission to grow poppy and sell opium. At present,
there are only seven such countries. In accord with the agreement
made with the United Nations in 1930, the United Nations has

been involved in opium suppression since the Shanghai conference.
The countries that have been given permission to grow poppy are
Turkey. India, Yugloslavia, Russia, Greece. Bulgaria and Iran.
These countries are divided into two groups, the countries that
have a tradition of growing poppy and the countries that have only
recently started growing poppy for research purposes.

The United Nations, which supports this cultivation, allows opium
cultivation only by older people who may grow Opium so that they
can make a living, or sell it. As for those countries that only
recently became involved in poppy cultivation, they cannot produce
opium for the purpose of selling it because thesaleof opium is
regulated by a commission. However, in short, more opium is
produced than is needed. Thailand does not yet seem to have any

19
hope concerning this matter. "We must see if we can turn this
problem to benefit for the country. If this is possible. perhaps
we will have to continue to live with this problem."

At present. in producing opium in Turkey. where the opium produced
is raw opium or Opium that has not been cut, they collect and

dry the opium and then put it in a machine that produces pure
morphine, which can be sold to make medicine. At present, they
have 65,000 tons in SCOCK. In India, approximately 3 million
peOple grow poppy. They have about 10,000 tons in stock which they
cannot sell now since there is too much Opium in stock in the
various countries that produce drugs. Thus. legal opium is priced
at less than $50 per kilogram. For example, in India. the
stipulated selling price 15 350 per kilogram but even so they
cannot sell all of it. Conversely, market prices continue to
increase daily.

The Gap Between Production and Suppression

The minority problem is a political problem. The government wants
to arrest those peOple such as Khun Sa and Lao Su who are engaged
in production but they have not been able to do so. Concerning

Mr Phunsiri Chanyasak, or Mr Tong, who was arrested by the Lao
government, if [Thailand] asks that he be extradited, Laos will
certainly refuse to extradite him. Laos is producing greater
quantities [of opium] and the Opium and heroin trade is expanding.
There are many dishonest Thai officials, but it is difficult to
prove that they have done anything wrong.

As for exchanging information, it is possible to prevent chemicals
such as acetic anhydride from being used to produce heroin from
morphine by not allowing them to reach the refineries or by
establishing additional chemical-free provinces. But in some
places the border patrol police have a strength of only two or
three men in the village. If the caravan or the forces escorting
the opium have 20 to 60 armed men, there is no way to block or
arrest them. Also, there is no demarcation line along the border
or a definite border line. And the influence of the villagers who
will not cooperate or who are part of the drug trade further
increases the difficulties in suppressing [narcotics].

Concerning suppression work in production areas both in and outside
the country, the kamnan or village headman, who live in the area
where poppy is grown, should COOperate in reducing cultivation and
in preventing people from coming to purchase Opium at the place of
production. Most transportation routes follow the mountain ridges
and [the drugs are transported] on foot. Or they are tranSported by
truck, boat or small aircraft, being hidden in every way possible
in order to avoid capture. There must be [good] and accurate
information and efficiency [in obtaining] information must be

increased. Also, checkpoints must be set up in order to intercept
the drugs.

20
In the long—term program, things should be arranged for the hill
tribes to live tagether in the same area in order to facilitate
control, to promote the cultivation of substitute crops and to
eliminate the influence of those minorities, both within and
outside the country, that have influence over the hill tribes in
Thailand. This refers to the Khun Sa and the Ho Chinese groups in
particular. To do this, the military units must carry out their
tasks resolutely and Seriously. Also, artifical rain can be used

to help destroy the p0ppy that the hill tribes have planted so that
there will not be a direct psych010gical effect.

The chance of those minority forces that are opposing the Burmese
government forming their own independent government is remote

or nonexistent. This is because the minority groups are Split, they
lack unity and ideals and their forces arenot strong enough. But
the activities of these minority groups, especially the narcotics
trade in the Thai-Burmese border area, have a political effect on
Thailand and violate 'l‘ha iland's sovereignty. It is Khun Sa's

group that is most heavily involved in the drug trade. But it
appears that minority groups are still paid to serve as guards

for road construction, even though the Third Army Area now has a

pol icy of not usmg minority groups in guarding road construction.

But as is well knewn, in the Thai—Burmese border area. the policies
of the Thai and Burmese governments concerning actions to be

taken that are in accord with agreements that have passed border
committees, from high-level to provincial and district committees,
are difficult to implement. This is because this area lies mostly
.yithin the sphere of influence of the minority groups. Thus, the
operations of these drug groups in the Golden Triangle will
continue to expand.

Opium Production in the Golden Triangle

Country 1974 ( tons) 1979 (tons)
Burma 430-500 200—350
Laos 1 35-150 70- 80
Thailand 135-150 30- 50

Statistics on Arrests Throughout the Country (January-April 1980)

Type of Narcotic Number of Cases Number of Amoum: of Drug
s uSpects (grams )
Opium 336 393 114,034
Morphine 6 9 7,931
Heroin 2.432 2,541 49,601
Amphetamines 424 423 20,804
Marihuana 4.253 4,763 44,775,785
Madder 11 '7 1 29 19 ,308

21
statistics on Arrests Throughout the Country From 1964 Through 1979

Year Type of Narcotic (Ki109rams) Number of Suspects
Opium Morphine Heroin

1964 4,017 122 67 13,894
1965 5,929 147 51 11,478
1966 2,827 176 37 8,767
1967 4,588 255 226 9.280
1968 6,153 174 406 6,608
1969 3,078 36 53 5,236
1970 285 21 154 5,788
1971 1,327 19 61 5,440
1972 6,156 271 129 9,074
197J 14,186 708 155 9,473
1974 2,473 82 202 10,169
1975 1,793 43 116 9,799
1976 7,710 289 642 11,603
1977 1,646 184 427 15,859
1978 855 162 668 25,916
1979 739 153 399 27,988
11943

CSO: 5300/4513

22
RAN OPIUM SEIZED IN CHIANG MAI
Bangkok TAWAN 31AM in Thai 17 Aug 81 pp 7, 12
[Articles "Police Seize Raw Opium In the Middle of the City']

[Text] Chiang Mai: At approximately 1600 hours on 8 August, Police
Captain Phayung Chinachit, the head of the police narcotics

control unit, learned that raw Opium was to be transported along
the Super Highway in front of the Wattanothat Phayap School. He
therefore took a force to set up a road block. At the time
mentioned above, a middle-aged man and woman on a Vespa, license
No CM 63063, drove up and were stopped. A search was conducted and
a bag containing 6 kilograms of raw opium valued at approximately
100,000 baht was found in a basket on the front of the vehicle.

The suspects, who were later identified as Mr Thanwi Samrit, age
56, who lives at 234/4 Wualai Road. Hai Ya Commune, and Mrs Somkhit
Chainarin, age 52, who lives at 57 Hualai Road. Soi 1, Hai Ya
Commune, Huang District, were turned over to Police Lt Niphon
Narumitmongkhon, the officer on duty at the Chiang Mai

provincial police station in Huang District. In proceeding with
the case, the charges were that they had narcotics in their
possession with an intent to sell.

Both suspects refused to testify in detail, saying only that they
were taking the raw Opium to the airport. They did not say who
they were taking it to. The authorities have placed them in
custody for further handling of the case.

11943
CEO: 5300/4513

23
EFFORTS TO ARREST KHUN SA ANALYZBD
Bangkok SIAM RAT SAPPADA HICHAN 16 Aug 81 pp 7-9
[Articles "In Arresting Khun Sa. Do Not Forget the Thai Officials"]

EText] Khun Sa, alias Chang Si Pu. Kuan Kha Y0 and Mr Chan
Changtrakun. is an internationally important figure in the
production and sale of narcotics. On 17 July last year, the
government entrusted the Police Department with the task of
issuing a warrant for his arrest on charges that he has supported
and controlled the sale of narcotics and military weapons. He has
formed an armed force. which is called the Shan State Army, with
a strength of approximately 3,000 to 4,000 men.

Recently, General Prachuap Suntharangkun, the deputy prime minister.
issued an announcement that a reward of 500,000 baht will be paid
to anyone who provides the authorities with information leading to
the capture, either dead or alive, of Khun Sa.

"We know that this reward is small when compared with the great
sum of money,tnouqht to be 10 million baht. that Khun Sa has made
from selling narcotics. And we know that it is difficult to take
forces in to capture him because he constantly moves back and forth
across the Thai-Burmese border. which is a jungle area. Even

Lao Su lives in one place in the Doi Klang area. A soldier once
made contact in order to gain information but on his way back he
was shot while travelling in the mountains. However, this reward
is meant to tempt the soldiers of Khun Sa, who receive only 400
baht a month. Five hundred thousand baht is a large sum for them
for capturing Khun 3a and turning him over to us. The authorities
will distribute leaflets throughout the Golden Triangle area"
stated Police Major General Phao Sarasin, the secretary-general of
the Narcotics Control Board (ONCB).

Khun 5a is a Ho Chinese of Burmese nationality. He has established
a base in Mae Chan District in Chiang Rai Province and is beginning
to expand his area of influence into Fang and Mae Ai districts in
Chiang Mai Province. It is believed that this is a minority group
that is constantly causing problems and difficulties for the

26
Thai and Burmese governments since the terrain in this area is
composed of jungles and mountains and there are convenient
communications routes. These things have lead to the secret
production and transport of large quantities of narcotics. This
group is an enemy of the Burmese government. It has used narcotics
as a tool to get money and buy weapons to fight the government. In
particular. Khun 5a°s [group] is the group with the greatest
influence. It controls more than 70 percent of all narcotics
production and cooperates with the 93rd KMT Division. whose
headquarters is located on Mae Salong mountain in Mae Chan
District, Chiang Rai Province. General Li E Thien is now the
commander; he replaced General Tuan, who died.

Squadron Leader Prasong Sunsiri, the secretary-general of the
National-Security Council, revealed that the Thai government has
ordered the expulsion of all armed Burmese minority groups from
Thailand. Previously, Thai officials felt that, even though these
armed minority groups were engaged in the narcotics trade, they
served as a buffer against the Burmese Communist Party (BCP) along
the border. Now, however, the Thai government feels that these
groups are criminal narcotics organizations that should not be
allowed to stay.

But there is one group that has not been willing to obey this order
to withdraw its forces and that is the Shan State Army. It is being
obstinate and has expanded its control all along the border from
its secure base area in northern Chiang Rai Province to Mae Hong
Son. The SSA has formed a large force and is the most influential
organization in the narcotics trade in the Golden Triangle. It
purchases large quantities of raw opium from the BCP in order to
increase its strength. It uses the money to fight the Burmese
government in the Shah State and trespasses across the Thai border.

Even though most of the forces of the SSA are in Burma. most of the
operations against Burma are initiated from secure camps in Thailand
and this is a challenge to the Thai government. The government has,
therefore, ordered the Police Department to arrest this "heroin
kingpin." The statute of limitations is 20 years. The air force has
dropped bombs to destroy the area along the border where the

drugs of the SSA are kept. During the period when General Prem
Tinsulanon, the prime minister, Visited Burma. there were
discussions concerning controlling narcotics.

A news source stated that Khun Sa's [group] is just a group of
bandits who are posing as the liberators of the Shan people. But

in reality they are No Chinese and not Burmese as they claim. Khun
5a himself has presently set himself up as an "influential person."
He collects taxes, at a very high rate, from the opium producers

in order to purchase weapons and this has helped his forces to

the point where they are presently the strongest force. He also
makes a profit from the narcotics produced at 15 refineries along

25
Burmese border. Neither Thai nor Burmese narcotics suppression
units can control this area. When the Burmese government carries
on suppression activities, the producers flee into Thailand. After
the Burmese soldiers withdraw, they return to Burma.

”The flee back and forth across the border into Thailand and Burma.
At present. we are not certain of the whereabouts of Khun Sa,"
stated this news source.

The border between Thailand and Burma, running from Chiang Rai
Province to Ranong Province, is 2,202 kilometers long. Concerning
the present situation in only the northern region of Thailand,
[part of which] is in the Golden Triangle area, poppy growing
during the 1980/1981 growing season increased 213.56 percent. In
Chianq Mai alone, where the most was grown, there was an increase
of 300 percent and the area planted [in poppy] reached 37,661.46
rai. The yield per rai increased from 0.53 to 1.29. This is very
alarming since it means that the smuggling of narcotics will
increase and that these narcotics will be smuggled to world markets
through Thailand.

'rhat is the situation concerning the drug problem in the north and
in the Golden Triangle. As for Laos, more heroin is being

produced and trafficking is increasing. The Lao government arrested
Mr Phunsiri Chanyasak, a "heroin kingpin" who fled from Thailand,
for being an important producer in Vientiane and savannakhet who
smuggles heroin into the northeast of Thailand. where previously
there was only an opium problem. As for Burma, last year
production fell greatly because of the heavy rains.

Officials of the ONCB have revealed that only 60 tons of Opium
were smuggled in [last year], but this year it is expected that
about 200 tons will be smuggled in from Burma. And in northern
Thailand, about 50 tons will be produced. This is enough to
satisfy the needs of the world market for several more years.

Based on surveys conducted by the ONCB and by northern border
patrol police in 12 northern provinces of Thailand, the amount of
Opium produced this year is 48.57 tons, which has now been
processed into heroin. A worrisome thing is the route used to
smugq1c drugs from the north to Bangkok or the south for shipment
to world markets. A normal thing is that, in the Kanchanaburi area,
more hill tribesmen from the north have begun to migrate to the
area around the Chedi 5am Ong checkpoint, and Ho Chinese, who
prefer the cold weather in the north, are moving down. This has
led peOple to believe that there may be a drug transport route
through Burmese territorial waters and the Andaman Sea to Kaeng
Island and from there to Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia or Europe.

Even though this route ma pose difficulties for transporting drugs,
there is no interdiction y suppression units as there is along

the northern rOute.

26
Regardless of how great a reward the governmentoffersfbr the
arrest of Khun Sa, Lao Lu or Mr Phunsiri Chanyasak or of whether
it can punish them according to the law, one importantﬂthingis to
prevent drug suppression officials. of all sectors and ranks, from
becoming involved in and making profits from supporting the
production and distribution of drugs. Those who do should be
severely punished. Some influential persons, politicians and
high-ranking soldiers still support the narcotics trade. This
constantly affects the position and duties of the lower ranking
pe0ple in the suppression units. Also, wealthy merchants have
great financial influence and can bend things their way. This is
a problem for suppression activities and some peOple have been
framed.

11043
ado: 5100/4513

27
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020039-2

POLICE SAY ANGUILLA CAY USE) AS DRUG TRANSIT POM

Nassau THE TRIBUNE in English 20 Nov 81 p 1

[Article by Anthony Forbes]

[Text] Till-1 ANGUILLA CAY area
will have to be constantly
trolled hy the Bahamas
fence Force following the
third drug aerwre there in lea
than a month. Defence Force
Commander William Swinley
said today.

“It would aeern to me that
we would he in constant patrol
around Anguilla Cay."
Commodore Swinley said as
he watched two Defence Force
boats with over 200 has of
marijuana and [our men arrive at

- the Prince Georae wha'L

HNBS Fort Monmu.
captained hy It Commander
lidwin Munroe, and the "NBS
lixumn, under the command of
Lt Bachelctte LaFleur. steamed
alongside Prince George Wharf
at llziS am today and were
met by (.‘mdr Swinley. Senior
Commando: Leon Smith and
Commander Amos Rolle.

This is the third-time that
drug and men love been
brought in by the Defence
Force {rem the Anguilla (fay
area within the past month.

Cay Sal. which with Anguilla
Cay is located on the perimeter
of the western Bahamas. is
where the previous two drug
seizures were made at the end
of October.

Commander Swinley said

CSO: 5300/7520

Anguilla Cay i:
transit point
who do not h
far into Baham

“it iaanear
to the coast c

ComnInderr:
Arms and I
also seized l
Force and l
morning.
Two auto:
two piston w
the raid. whie‘
and ended I
men were am

Ca .
Eeience
estimated the
our 200 ha
which were t

On the f
operation a
on the cay an
aeen runnina
TM foilowin
came out of
taken into cu

Five Crirn
Department
the dock an
and the men

Fort Mon

Force cargo
W in t
fatiauu. mi
of nuns Ex

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020039-2
BRIEFS

 

FINE 0F COWBIANSnM Colombians arrested on Anguilla Cay on November 17 along
with 251 bags of marijuana, firearms and ammunition, were given fines totalling
$8000 while the other two men charged along with them were disniesed by mgistrate
Joseph Alfred Wednesday afternoon. Nanuel Antonio Quintanilla, 34, pleaded guilty
to possession of dangerous drugs with intent to supply. On November 17 he was ac-
cused of being found in possession of 251 bags of marijuana. Attorney Godfrey
Finder, representing all four defendants, said that Quintanilla, who had not worked
for six months had been approached somewhere in Miami, where all defendants live,
and had been asked to go on a boat to fish. He said that his client did not know
what he was getting into until he arrived at Anguilla Cay. Magistrate Alfred said
that the charge must be viewed with the “gravest severity“ but since it was his
first offence he would fine him $5000 or one year's imprisonment. Parid Janett,
41, pleaded guilty to all charges of possession of firearms and amunition. They
had been accused of being found in possession of one .44 Luger magnum calibre, one
.30 calibre, two .38 revolvers, and 290 live rounds of .30 bullets. twelve live
rounds of .308 bullets and one .9 m bullet. Lawyer Pinder said that Janett had
been out of work for eight months. He also had been approached in Miami to go on
a fishing trip. Jamett was fined $3000 or one year‘s imprisonment. Prosecutor
stubbs said that at 10.30 an on Tuesday November 17 numbers of the Defence Force
aboard the mass manna had observed some men seated on a nmber of bags on Anguilla
Cay. When they landed on the cay they saw three men fleeing from what later was
found to be 251 bags of marijuana, firearms and amnition. They searched the cay
and caught all four defendants. Tomas Francisco, 27, and Armando Navarre, 24, both
of whom pleaded not guilty to all charges, were dismissed. [Nassau THE TRIBUNE in

English 20 Nov 81 p l]

TREASURE CAY ARRES‘ISu'Pwo men. one American and one Dominican both residing in
Florida, were granted bail totalling $40,000 when they appeared before Magistrate
George van Sertima today accused of being found in possession of 329 bales of mari—
Juana with intent to supply. Represented by attorney Godfrey Finder were Jose
Santiago, 29, an engineer, and Elliot Weir, 40, a local Florida businessman. Ac-
cording to a CID Spokesman on November 27 a Dc 6 airplane landed at Treasure Cay
Airport and later two foreigners were apprehended by police officers at Treasure
Cay. The Defence Force boat, Fort Montagu, under the con-sand of Lieuteth Edwin
Munroe, picked up the 329 bales along with the two foreigners in police custody
and brought them to Nassau. Attorney Pinder said that the defendants were not
found in the vicinity of the drugs other than any other individuals standing near-
by. He said that the man were there for l'vacation purposes.” Magistrate van
Sertima set cash bail in the sum of $20,000 each. The case has been adjourned.

Our picture shows police officers from the police barracks unloading the bales free
the Fort Montagu this morning at the Prince George Wharf. (Photo: FRANKIE ROBIN-
SON) (Nassau THE TRIBUNE in English 2 Dec 81 p 1]

(250: 5300/7520

29
AMIGO“ 5mm '10 5 YEARS IN MARIJUANA SHOGGLING

Hamilton THE ROYAL mam in English 26 Nov 81 p 2

[Text]

A 31-year-old Anticuan
wee unteneed to an em
in prieon eddy a a

Supreme .ourt jury (out:
him guilt ol’bainx in‘pmei
eiun of wyuuunde of cannabis

wit h intent to aupply.

The seven-woman and
five-man jury teached a
unlnimtmn verdict in leea
than one hour of deliber-
tltinnn. it Ibo found -
Mid St: Clair St. Luca gui ty
0! importing the eannehie.
at; Lucelhed dan't'ad bath

maimed to we -
en piece on July 12 at the

airg‘ort. . .
he Chief Juattce the
Hon. Jamea R. Aatwood aen-
tenced St. Luce to five yaare
on each of the two counte. to
he served mneurrently‘.‘a

St. Luce was appre dad
by Police anon after hie new
a in Bermuda on July I2
from Jamaica when a Cue-
tntnn Ofﬁcer became aue-
rit-iouu «hunt the wai ht of
mngodnune St. Luce ad in
hiar.l emcee-km. . .

m tnepectmn It waa ra-
veaed that 20 nounda of
cennahul with a street value
of 860.0!!! wan concealed in
the druma.

In athletnente made to P0-
lice and Cuatoma Officers.
St. Luce did not deny that
the cannahie wan found in
the drums. But he denied

that he knew it wee there.

"The Cummhna to show
that St. Luce knew there

were drup in the drunﬁ,"
aaid Cmm proeecutor 2.
[an Kawaley. He added that
there were incumatetenciee in
St . Luce'a atatementa.

0n the one hand St. Luce
eeid that the drum were hue
and that he enteetetned with
them all over the world. But
later St. Luce said that he
houth the drone from a
raetel‘nrian in Jamaica only
daye before being arreated.

Mr. Kawale aaid’ﬁt
seemed atmoae t t anyone
would aell drume‘containing.
$59.11)!) in dmae for two.

in-hia summation. Mr.
Aetnmod eaid he noted that
before anything waa eua-
pected._ St. Luce acid the
druma were hie. and thathe
had taken them with him all
over. the world —.irnplying
that hem? had them in hit
pone-lawn oraome time.

But when auapiciona were
amuaed. St. Luce eaid he
had uet bought them. and
elao e herd of hearing.

”Now that there ie acme-

thing poem'hl ha in . he
becomes hazd ormrihg."
eatd Mr. Aettvnod.

St. Luce admitted one
mum conviction for pee-
eeaaton of cennobia in Alto
tixua leat yeer. He waa than
ﬁned emu

Hut nriaon term wee to run
from yeeterday. the time
epenl in JD“ wince July hav-
tnx been taken into ncmunt.
Burrs

REVIEW 0? DRUG INF-Cabinet has given the go-ahead to Minister of Health and Social
Services, Dr. the non. Clarence James, to instruct the advisory Board on the Misuse
of Drugs to review the Misuse of Drugs Act 1972, with a View to making rscounenda-
tions that would lead to a closer control of drugs. Particular euphasis will be
given to consideration of mounds which might lead to the successful apprehension

in conjunction with the Ministers of Hone Affairs and Education, along with the co-
ordinator of Addiction Services. The Ministry has had gazetted seven nominations
to the Advisory Board, replacing members who have resigned. The expansion of mu-
bers on the Board will assist in making it representative of a wider cross-section
of the community. New members are: Mr. Vaughn Kosher: Mr. Robert Rego: Senior
Medical officer, Dr. John Canm Principal or Purvis School, Mr. Donald Dane; Dept.
of Education Attendance officer, Mr. Ariston Nrbert: Specialist Officer Nursing
at the Prison Par-n, Mr. Keith Watson: Hr. wwdru Robinson, Director of Community
Services. They will join present numbers: Det. Inspector George Rose, Mr. Roder-
ick Pearnan (Chairman); Dr. Ronald Lighthourne: Md. Larry love; Mr. William
Francis: Ms. Lynanne Sharpe: and Mrs. Lynn Winfield. [Banilton me now. GAZB'i'rB
in English 24 Nov 81 p 3]

C90: 5300/7520

31
BRIEFS

DRUG CONFISCATIONnQuideuOt'ficial spokesmen have reported that (Joaquin Emilio
Tania Echeverri) and (Manuel Alberto Delgado) were arrested for possession of
some 4,450 lbs of marijuana. valued at one million pesos, which were confiscated.
They were arrested by the national police in the municipality of Acandi in the
Choco Department. [PAO62332 Bogota Radio Santa Fe in Spanish 1730 GMT 5 Jan 82]

(:50: 5300/2119

32
HASHISH SHUCGLING OPERATIONS ON COAST
Cairo AL-JUHHURIYAH in Arabic 22 Oct 81 p 7
[Article by Jamal Kauai]

[Text] Within just 3 days last month, the border patrol seized two drug smuggling
operations at Abi Qayr and sl-Hamam. The seizure totaled 21 tons, this being greater
than the total drugs seized during all of 1979.

Added to the total drugs seized during the summer months, this amount reached 50 tons.
This exceeds the total drugs seized during the past 2 years. The matter has become

a conspicuous phenomenon, even to the border patrol. The smugglers‘ activities have
increased tremendously during this year. Smuggling methods have become varied, and
the trade itself has come to include new faces other than those traditional faces of

big smugglers whose descriptions and moves are recorded by the border intelligence.

These Are The Reasons

The reasons are known; this is what Maj Gen Fsruq al-Sahn, chief of the border guard,
confirms. The coasts of Egypt became longer after liberation of North Sinai: they
now extend 1100 kms. from al-‘Arish to al-Sslun. The growth of the [hashish] crop
has doubled in Lebanon. Turkey and Cyprus. In the smugglers' opinion, Egypt is the
largest market in the area. and the transfer of the "merchandise" to it does not cost

much .

Moreover, there are new faces in the game. In the largest smuggling operation seized
during this year on the northern coast north of the delta, the faces were new and

none of then had been arrested smuggling drugs.

Smuggling Organizations

The border gusrd's eyes surveillance does not miss any smuggling operation, even if

it were in the “initial" phase. Therefore, as Haj Gen al-Sahn said, the big smugglers
formed organizations among themselves aimed at reducing losses in the event they were
caught and putting large amounts [of the drug] in various places at one time.

New Technologies

Methods of smuggling have changed, and so have the smuggling technologies. All this
has been taking place while the border guard watched.

33
Colonel thbi Ibrahim Habib said: "We witnessed this year several distortion opera-
tions from the big smugglers' side. Their new methods are evident to us. For ex-
ample:

- The use of major banks along the Mediterranean Sea, such as Juma'ah Bank, to tug
the drugs from the sea to agricultural lands in order to escape being tracked by
patrols.

- The exploitation of Dumyat and Rashid harbors to let out motorized fishing boats
carrying drugs, or to which drugs were attached at the bottom, as was the case when
we seized the outboard "al-Jamil" in the Dumyat Harbor, which had 2 tons of drugs
underneath it.

- The unloading of merchandise in isolated islands and places where the water is low,
where we were able to seize 2 additional tons in one of the Bardawil Lake‘s islands.
- The use of the "preservation" techniques; i.e., putting the drugs in nylon bags
and tying them to weights inside inner tubes under water, until they can retrieve
the drugs when control quiets down.

- The provision of drug control offices with information, or imaginary agreements
among the smugglers to cover the real operations.

- The frequent appearance of smugglers along the coast dressed as shepherds no that
the guard members would get used to them, and so that they could gather as much in-
formation as possible about the type of guard and the patrols' hours."

Colonel Hahbi exposed the secrets of the two operations at Abi Qayr and al-Hamam,
the largest operations that Egypt witnessed in years.

The al-Hamam operation began when an anonymous report was received about unloading
drugs in Sidi al-Baranl in order to keep the border guard busy. 0n the eve of the
same day. 9 tons were unloaded in al-Hamam area west of Alexandria.

The intelligence agency and the border guard, of course, knew the game from its start.
So, when the amount was confiscated, the large smuggler was caught unawares.

The Abi Qayr smuggler, noticing that the border guards were busy with the al-Hamam
operation, left for Cairo and retlrned on that same day. One day later, he unloaded
12 tons but was surprised by bord-- intelligence traps awaiting his arrival. He then
went on nl-Haj [pilgrimage] in a new attempt at camouflage.

Drugs for Vacationists

Strange phenomena in the world of smuggling are not over this year. For example, the
smugglers and big merchants attempted to display their merchandise this summer in the
nummcr resorts, taking advantage of their being overcrowded. Thirteen tons [of hash-
ish] were seized from amongst the vacationists in al-‘Ajami and Ra's al-Barr.

Furthermore. the big merchants and smugglers escaped being caught. They have not
been arrested yet, although their operations had been seized. The reason is that
legal procedures for arrest must follow, requiring the registration of an official
report for each suspect smuggler before he can be arrested, renewing this report un-
til the smuggler is caught redhanded. causing the failure of any operation in which
big smugglers participate. This is why they [big smugglers] resort to using smaller
merchants and carriers for camouflage. Twelve carriers have actually been arrested
in Operation Honeymoon at al-‘Ajami. and four others were arrested on an armed motor
boat north of Sinai.

-1
Twenty Eight Operations

Talking about motor Imam, Col Wahbi said that the border intelligence's role is not
limited to seizing drugs that are thrown in the sea or are unloaded. This year, 28
smuggling operations via armed motor boats were seized after their crews clashed with
the border patrolman. These boats were seized en route to the ports of Cyprus and

Italy. Each boat had 4 tons [of hashish] on it, and one of then threw 6 tons over-
board as soon as the clash began.

Exciting news in this strange world are never over; a world in which a heated conflict
is (in—going between the Egyptian border guard and the poison sougglers who want to

destroy the minds and the health of the Egyptian people. But they fall at the end.
because all eyes are watching to every move they make.

,.
‘1’.”

(250: 3300/5003

35
BRIEFS

NARCOTICS ARRESTS, HAUL--According to the central news unit, the public relations

office of the police of the Islamic Republic of Iran announced: The antinarcotics
squad of the police arrested 27 offenders during the month of Azar [22 November

to 21 December]. They seized 30.124 kg of heroin. more than 304 kg of opium.

and 1.7 kg of opium dross from these offenders. [Text] [LD310847 Tehran Domestic
Service in Persian 1630 GMT 30 Dec 81]

OPIUM CULTIVATION BANNED--In his exalted name. Since the victorious establish-
ment of the Islamic Republic of Iran under the leadership of Imam Khomeyni,
officials of the country have endeavored to uproot home—wrecking and destructive
narcotics, the source of all evil. This was done with such succeas‘and brilliant
deeds that amazed even the international traffickers. The Shiraz Islamic prose-
cutor warns all farmers and landlords that should they attempt to cultivate
opium poppies they will be dealt with decisively according to Shari'a law. All
military and security forces are requested to identify violators and report them
to the Islamic Revolution Courts of the country without fail. [Text] [GF031810
Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1500 GMT 3 Jan 82]

KHORASAN DRUG HAUL--Personne1 of the Torbat Jam gendarmerie have seized a total
or 270 grams of opium and 0.7 grams of heroin from a number of individuals over
the past few days. Three drug traffickers convicted of selling 42.96 kg of
opium were executed in Birjand last night. [CF061350 Mashhad Domestic Service
In Persian 1430 GMT 5 Jan 82]

NARCOTlCS HAUL-—According to the central news unit, the public relations office
of the antlnarcotics squad of the Islamic Revolution Court has announced that
following the continuous efforts of the central headquarters of the antinarcotics
squad in Qom. 21 kg of opium. 6 kg of heroin, 4 kg of hashish, 6.7 kg of opium
dress and 700 gr of opium residue were discovered. These items were handed over
to the storehouse of the antinarcotics squad of the Islamic Revolution Court

in the central province. [LD070220 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1430

GMT 6 Jan 82]

CSO: 5300/5343
BR IEFS

HEROIN SEIZED--Last night heroin weighing more than 800 gm was seized from a 45-year
old resident of Tel Aviv who had arrived in Israel on a flightfrom Greece. The
man is known to the police as a criminal. He left Israel 5 days ago and was
captured after detective and intelligence operations. [Text] [TA190757 Tel Aviv
HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 18 Dec 81 p 2]

650: 5300/6709

37
BRIEFS

ESPERANZ DRUG CASE-—Slx crew all of them foreign nationals of the drug-smuggling
vessel "Esperanz" apprehended last month with five and a half tons of cannabis
resin off Kitl were yesterday sentenced to four years imprisonment by the

Larnnca Assize Court. The vessel had a crew of nine, 3 Greek captain and eight
seamen of whom two Egyptians, four Turks, and two Lebanese. All nine and two
Lebanese arrested in leassol suspected as liaisons were originally charged.
However. the captain of the vessel, one crew and one of the two Lebanese
arrested in Limassol were released and only eight were committed to the

Assize Court which yesterday pronounced sentence on seven of them. The eighth,
the second of the two Lebanese arrested in Limassol, was acquitted. The seven
crewmen sentenced yesterday were: Sittah Abu al-Sa'ud al-Zayid of Egypt,

Ouzoun Hassan, Karsaka Hairttin, Arif Tak and Arslam Salih of Turkey, and

Joseph Zahia One: and Joseph Ehurkan of Lebanon. They were on four charges:
possession of 5,350 kilos of cannabis resin without permit, intending to supply
it to other persons without permit, possession of a pistol without permit and
possession of 54 rounds of ammunition without permit. The president of the
Assize Court Mr Y. Papadhopoulos summing up the case said the courts have to impose
heavy sentences as deterrent for protection not only the Cypriot public but
mankind in general. The narcotics, the pistol and the ammunition were ordered to
he confiscated. [Text] [NC150829 Nicosia CYPRUS HAIL in English 15 Jan 82 p 1]

RECORD DRUG HAUL-vLarnaca (Cyprus). 12 Dec-Eleven men appeared in a Cyprus court
Pr1day after police seized five-and-a—half tons of cannabis resin from a Lebanese-
owned cargo ship in the country's biggest drug haul. The men, including Barbarigos
Ioannis, the 35-year-old Greek captain of the cargo vessel Esperanto, were remanded
in custody for eight days without being charged. The Esperants was stopped by
Cypriot gunboats off the coast of Cyprus and escorted to Larnaca port after the
authorities were tipped off by the international police organization, Interpol,
police said. An officer of the Cyprus Criminal Investigation Division (CID),
Michael Karsiskakis, said the ship had been on its way to Italy from Tripoli in
Lebanon. He said the cannabis would be worth millions of dollars on the atreets.--
NAB/Reuter. [Text] [Rangoon THE WORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 13 Dec 81 p 5]

C80: 5300/6916

38
DRUG TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED, OTHERS SOUGHT
Athens AKROPOLIS in Greek 20 Nov 81 p 3

[Text] After a dramatic chase, automobile crashes in the "Dukes" style, together

with an engagement between police and criminals. another gang of narcotics dealers
has been put out of action by the Piraeus General Security. The criminals' head-

quarters was located in the Agia Varvara area but they had extended their activi-

ties up to Aigaleo and Korydallo.

The gang was made up of the following: Georgios Vartelatos alias "Glaros," 22
years old; N. Batis, 24 years old; Vas. Demos, 23 years old; Evan. Trepeklis, 31
years old; I. Poulos, 20 years old; Evan. Alexandrou alias “Borantia,” 29 years
old; and Petros Petrokostas, 24 years old. The first three escaped and are now
being sought.

A total of 15 "kapitzedes" (high quality hashish), the remainder of a large amount
procured by "Borantis" from an unknown narcotics wholesale dealer, was found in
the possession of the criminals and confiscated. Also confiscated was Vartelatos'
vehicle, a Ford Escort, used to transport the merchandise, as well as a total of
34,000 drachmas, the day's take. Confiscated from Demos was a four-leaf cigarette
paper envelope used by the gang. Finally. a small amount of "founda" was confis-
cated from Batis.

The first information coming to the Piraeus General Security mentioned that
"Glaros" and his gang were handling and trafficking in hashish. Narcotics Perse-
cution Service men set up a 25-hour surveillance of "Glaros" and his gang which
distributed narcotics to their customers using their Ford Escort and motorcycles.
when not used for transporting narcotics, the Ford Escort was converted into a
rolling den for the personal enjoyment of the gang.

The police realized that the criminals being followed were very experienced in
narcotics trafficking and that it was very difficult to catch them in the act.

In the afternoon of 16 November, while the police were following the Ford Escort,
the passengers, Glaros, Demos. Batis. Trepeklis and Poulos realized they were
being followed and tried to flee by putting on a burst of speed. The police,
together with two service vehicles. followed them and after a dramatic chase suc—
ceeded in cornering and stopping the Ford Escort.

39
The three "jackals" of the A313 Varvara gang
who escaped (left to right): G. Varelatos
alias "Glatos," N. Batis and V. Demos.

40
DRUG TRAFFICKERS, USERS ARRESTED, MINUS LEADER
Athens I KATHIHBRINI in Greek 15 Dec 81 p 2

[Text] Fifteen persons, among them a high school teacher, were arrested by the
Piraieus police for possession, use and traffic of drugs.

The arrested are Styl. Marsvelias, 22, student, Margaret Karuana [phonetic],
23, an Australian citizen, Khar.Kh31tet88. 25, student, A1. Dikaios, 20, model,
St. Koutsouvelis, 39, bus driver, K. A., 29, high school teacher, H.E., 18,
high school student, T.A., 20, law student, Ron. Skopelitis, 26, unemployed,
Sot. Kapsilis, 29, tradesmen, Janice McKay [phonetic]. 22, from Scotland,
Ioannis Boukouvalas, 26, truck driver, Pan. Stavrelis. 20, Ioannis Gerakis. 22

and And. Khiou, 20, unemployed.
The leader of the gang, Loukss Stellea, is still at large.

Stellas had opened a den in the apartment of his girlfriend, Margaret Karuana, at
55 Riancourt Street, where he received his customers.

Five hundred grams of hashish powder, 150 grams of hashish in packets. 120,000

drachmas from hashish sales and Turkish currency the gang brought back from trips
to Turkey where the hashish was purchased were found in the apartment.

Haravelins was found to he in possession of 50 grams of hashish in packets. and
one packet was discovered in Khniretss' car. The high school teacher, who is
employed by the American College. was charged with possession of two packets

of hashish.

Additionally, an undetermined amount of hashish was found in Gerakis‘ car.

All those arrested were taken to the Athens attorney general's office and
investigation into the case has opened.

080: 5300/5354

41
BRIEFS

PORTUGUESE DRUG TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED--Customs officers in Volos have arrested two
sisters Maria and Isabella Andre from Portugal for transporting in their automo-
bile 97 kilograas of hashish in block form and 8 kilograms of hashish in pulp
form. The two sisters had reached Volos from Syria. [Text] [Athena RIZOSPASTIS

in Creek 19 Nov 81 p 11] S671

PIRAEUS DRUG NET DISHANTLED--A gang of narcotics pushers which probably distrib-
uted the "goods" to students has been put out of action in Piraeus. The gang was
made up of Sp. Kontis, 26 years old; Giannis Kontogenrgaas alias "Xifias," 23
years old; Angelos Bangos, 23 years old; Al. Petrou, ;2 years old; as well as the
narcotics addicts D. Anninos, 25 years old; Th. Karamanlakis, 21 years old; H.
Ambatzis, 24 years old; and K. Marounglianis, 21 years old. As became known,
Kontis brought half a kilogram of hashish and half a kilogram of heroin from Is-
tanbul in his automobile and sold it quickly at a high price. Another four per-
sons involved in this case are still being sought. [Text] [Athens RIZOSPASTIS

in Greek 24 Nov 81 p 11] 5671

 

POLICE DISRUPT INTERNATIONAL DRUG RING-—Piraievs police on Friday night disrupted
an international drugs ring comprised of a British woman, her German boyfriend and
a Greek girl from Athens. They were identified as Christine Pitcher, 36, Rene Horst
Bchrcns, 37, and Ycoryia Paskhalidhou, 19. When arresting police raided their
hotel in the Athens District of Plaka, they found 11 grams of heroin. They also
arrested two girls who went to get their dose from the heroin peddlers. The
"customers" were identified as Austrian citizen Sabina Helher, 23. and local girl
Yeoryia Sorou, 27. from the Island of Aiyina. The preliminary inquiry revealed

that the British girl made many trips to Turkey and brought back heroin exclusively

for distribution. On her last trip, she was alleged to have brought back only 50
grams of heroin, as Turks had stolen money from her suitcase which she would have

used to purchase larger quantities. The drugs gang was charged yesterday with the
possession, use and sale of hard drugs. [Text] [N6121836 Athens News in English

12 Jan 82 p A]

C80: 5300/5346

42
BRIEFS

HASBISH SEIZURE IN RommAW-Mtterdan, S Deer-Custom and police officers seized
several tons of hashish fron the Lebanese coastal vessel Semi in the port here yes-
terday. Pour members of the ship's crew, three Lebanese and one Sudanese, were at-
rested. Police were still unloading the substance last night and said it might be
a record seizure. Part of the hashish was hidden under a false floor, and some of

it--in water-proof sacks-was in the water and gasoline tanks.-NAB/AFP [Text]
[Rangoon THE HORRING PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 7 Dec 81 p 7]

680: 5300/ (0916

43
ANTIDRUG OPERATIONS NET RECORD HAUL IN 1981
N6120852 Istanbul HILLIYET in Turkish 9 Jan 82 p 9
[Report by Erhan Akyildiz]

[Excerpts] It has been reported that teams from the narcotics branch of the
Istanbul Security Directorate seized 44 kilograms of heroin in 1981 worth an
estimated 150 million liras on the local market and about 450 million liras
abroad. This was achieved through successful antinarcotic operations in
Istanbul and its suburbs.

During the same year. the narcotics branch teams seized 460 kilograms of hashish
worth about 70 million liras at home and 180 million liras abroad. They also
seized 4 kilograms of raw opium originating from Iran. It has been stated that
a kilogram of unprocessed opium costs about 500,000 liras.

It has also been reported that 420 people have been detained, 75 percent of whom
were later arrested on the grounds they were found to be guilty. Due to
continuous antinarcotics operations and stringent controls carried out in
Istanbul and its suburbs in 1981. the quantity of narcotics seized increased

100 percent compared with the previous year. while the quantity of heroin seized
in Istanbul and its suburbs was 24.5 kilograms in 1980, this quantity rose

to 44 kilograms in 1981. The quantity of hashish rose from 284.5 kilograms in
1980 to 460 kilograms in 1981.

According to information obtained from the evaluation of the results of these
operations. the narcotics are being smuggled into Turkey from the east-Iran.

The narcotic traffic destined for Europe after transiting Turkey pursued two
main routes until the beginning of 1981. The first route was: the Iranian
border-Van-Diyarbaklr-Halatya-Ankara-Ismit-Afyon-Izmir-Europe. As a result

of stringent controls carried out in 1981, the narcotics traffic moved toward

the south. As a result of the antinarcotic operations carried out in 1981. the
narcotics traffic began to follow two new routes. The first route is: the Iranian
border-Halatya-Gaziantep-Aleppo~Beirut-Turkish sector of Cyprus-northern Italy-
Europe. The second route is: the Iranian border-Halatya-Gatiantep-Aleppo-Beirut-
Turkish sector of Cyprus-Britain-Holland-other Baltic countries.
The HILLIYET news center reports that two Jordanians, Husayn Muhammad Sharaf
and Ali Husayn Sharif, who wanted to enter Turkey through Cilvegozu, were caught

by customs officers with 37.6 kilograms of hashish in their car. Both Jordanians
were arrested after the initial interrogations.

Reports from Izmir say that a worker, Ahmet Romutan. coming to Izmir, Turkey, for

the new year holidays, was caught along with four of his friends for possessing
1.3 kilograms of hashish.

CSO: 5300/5330

65
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600020039-2

INTERNATIONAL DRUG SHUGGLING GANG MEMBERS SENTENCE!)

london '1'!!! DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 17 Dec 81 p 3

[Text]

W0 British drug-smugglers arrested in
Iran were hauled before a ﬁring squad
three times, but each time the guards ﬁred

blanks.

The story of the mock executions emerged yester-
day at Birmingham Crown Court. where Ransom
Warner. 27, and Srttm Mame. 34. were jatled

for 10 and eight years

respecttvely.

They were members of an
international sang which
stnuuled canal»: and
hereto by road from a
frontier town In lran to
Britan.

Seven then were jailed inter-
day tor struggling two
women tenet suspended sen-
teams.

They were arrested during a
police drugs squad lovesugatsno
known as Operattoo Gordon. tn
whldt 27 teen and women were
held in the West Mldlaads.

Since April. .Vlr Jusrtcr.
“team Baowx has Irv-resided
over 4 mm of "gels and
passed «entenees totalhoa more
than I30 years.

False compartment

.Vlr Batatt Em Cox. QC..
prosecutina. and the druu
were nsuallv smuled Into
antain in caravanettes. lined
with a petrol tank contents“ a
lalse compartment.

CSO: 5320/15

He described how the van:
were driven throuah Turkey.
temed from larmr to Vemce or
Naples and then driven mouth
Italy. Austrta. Getaway and
Belmtn.

We fresh drivers would take
orer. annually in Italy. with nassr
ports which would not reveal
that the my had been near the
drgtaonrodnctna nations of the
Middle East. so as not to arouse
the suspicions of cosmos oI-
etals.

The mulers houzht their
drugs trout one main dealer
who lived in )tashad. near
Iran's harder wrth Pakistan.
and lollowlna the revehttlon to
Iran some of the return Jour-
Iteys were haurdous

Sawnenahot

Once the smugglers were
ﬁred upon by revnhsttona
anards as they smashed throu
a eheqpolnt.

And after Whelan. oﬁ no
settled address. andMarttn. ot
Wiuin Tower. Btmtnnharn.
had been arrested in Teheran

1.6

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500020039-2
TURKISH GANG SMUGGLED DRUGS IN TOMBSTONE
London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 21. Dec 81 p 2

[Text] Three Turkish Cypriot nowhere of n drugs gang who used tombstones in "a
clever but macabre" way to snuggle 2 million pounde' worth of heroin, were jailed

at the Old Bailey yesterday.

They hid the drug in two hollow gravestoneo because they thought Custom officers
would not disturb a memorial to the deed.

Aysan Ziynettin. 38, was jailed for 12 years, Abdurrhnnn Helmet, 37, for 11 years.

and Kalil Muse, No. for five years.

The two stones. hearing ﬁctit-
ious names. dates and photo-
graphs of the " dear departed."
arm-ed tron puts-Each con--
tained £1 rni lion worth of
heroin.

The ﬁrst got through. but the
gang was trapped when the
second arrived. in October ISO.

‘ Dangerous conspiracy '

uynettln. a plasterer. ol
(ireert Lanes. Stoke Ncwiortoo:
Mehtnct a machine operator of
Schhon Street. Isliagtoa. and
Musa. a rallwav worker of
Moray Road. i'ioihury Park.
were convicted of conspiring to
smuggle drags.

Judge ﬁlidiael Argyle. QC.
said: “This was aa cxtrentelv
«nous conspiracy of the moat
dangerous kind”

Mr Alastair Hill. prosecuting.
said that two white tombstones
tor nonetlstent loco. arrived
in England by ferry at Felix-
(ton-e. Secret compartments
had been built unto them in-
erus.

The Int waslsent to an
address In South London and
m. consignment distributed on

the streets. The second. in a
wooden crate. aroused the ma;
pidon ol‘ a Pelintowe Cotton;
nan.

Poor quality

lie was til .idooa hoeauae oh
the poor qua ity of the lump-
tioo. and. lcuod that. the stone
waa iopoided.

Mr hates Weren't. a moron.
was called in. and found the
htetoln alter chipoiaa away the
3 one. - h

Mrmeawo-colom
ded toundthoaooncoo
Ill nawarahooaaincnal

_ «Wood Green. alter
mmtheholnw 2--

Then 1‘ Operation Tom "
mag into action.

Customs outer: kept watch
at two sombrely r drened
" mourners" collected the stone
{torn-tho warehouse)“ put it
in the )ootot Iota: car.

M chad throat:
to “were homo io Fm
Park. and recovered the stone:
from the hack garden.

Judno Arnie contended the

mathematical '
awaken. “tho:

l'l‘ the Why.

107
Mr Janis Wn'gh’. a stonemaéoo._dgnmstrating
h

ow he feund heroin smuggloa‘jn a gravestone

after he had been called in by a (WW‘ officer
BRIEFS

JAIL FOR CANNABIS SHUGGLING--Jeffery Litwin, 60, the owner of a number of haulage
companies based in East London, was jailed for six years yesterday at Croydon

Crown Court after being found guilty of conspiracy to snuggle drugs into Britain.
Customs men at Dover told the court that 15 out of cannabis was found in a double
compartment fuel tank of a lor'ry belonging to Litwin. A further load of cannabis
of the same weight was found in another of his lorries in Vienna. The total haul
had a street value of 3 million pounds and Customs men said it was the biggest

drug haul ever seized at Dover. Both lorries had come tron Pakistan. [Text]
[London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 12 Dec 81 p 3]

cso: 5320/15 3"”

49