FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRSlJ10533

20 May 1962

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 23/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

“WISEONLY
JP” publications contain intorution primarily fro- foreign
nevspapero, periodicals and books, but also frou news agency
transmission and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro. English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was sunnarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. “rises within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Covert-eat.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHIP OP
HMMLS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHDMTION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDHIIE REPORT
NARconcs AND Dmeaaous Danes

(rooo 23/321

Comams

ASIA
AIBTMLIA

Victorian Orin (Jo-hum "111 than: a: Drug hem
(Bill Bimbeuer; m3 M8. 26 hr 82).....................

Commission Bears New Ditch-mo a: Rum-and Drug Links
(ma 8!!!!“ will)“: nmn, 25 It: 82. m3 "381'
Awmum’ 26 hr u).OOOOOOOOUOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0000...

Police Involve-ant
Opposition merges

Netion'o Biggest Drug Bust New No m of hellish
(“a M33133 “mm, 25 hr &)eotoooooooooeooeoo

Briefs _
Legalized (hanebic Opposition
m1 (boperetion Proposal
NZ Hinioter co Canberra on Drug:
Bank bported in Drug Trafficking

INDIA

Heroin laboratories Uncovered in Varanasi
(mmA mmY, w Apr a)OO'OOCUOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0...

Briefs
Delhi llcroin Seizure
Bereilly Drug Arrest.
ﬂuhish 8.1331011; Arrested
Pola- lleroin Haul

-a- [III-W-l38POC

MOWL‘SIONLY
ova! voeeuuo- -~-. -.‘—.

MALAYSIA

Briefs
Trafficker Sentenced to math
Heroin Seizure in Peteling Jaye

'lllAILAND

llilltribe Role in narcotics Traffic bported
(alﬂiylwt 'mb1e.; 8m m. 25 Rb n)ooueoeoooeeeeeoeeoe

Nuﬂer of Addicts Risen. )bet Live in Bangkok
(m'ncnou, lo Her 82)

Difficulties of Narcotics Suppmeion, Opiu Estimate loted
(Quiymt Yonbiel; 81AM RAT, 3 hr 82)....................

mai Kinsey Says anildren. narcotics Sold to lhlnyeie
(mnmm. 20 m 82)....oo.eeeeooooeeeoooeeeeoeoooecocoon.

Briefs
narcotics Producing (he-icele soiled

um “RICA
COLOI‘BIA
Briefs
Five Drug Trefiickere Arrested
JAMAICA

Illegal Air Strip Back in Operation, Paper's (heck Shawn
(M muY ”mm 20 Apr &)OOO.VO.00003000000000000090000

BXICO

Brie fa
Large Harihuma Seizure

TRIRI DAD AND “AGO

Police (b-iuioner Decrien Growing Use of Dray
(mlmn “mm, 19 ”r ”)OOIOOCOOOOOQOOO000.000.0000...

memmouu

PSI:

13

17

18

22

23

2b

25

26

27
NEAR EAST AND norm AFRICA

IRA“
Briefs
'nehrsn Dru: Seizure
Am, Trenoeiver Discoveries
Provincial Drug Haul:
Haleyer (lain- Seizure
Ind-Drug lbs-urea
Rehnvand Narcotics Seized
' Pe-le Smasler Arrested
Ksrsj Opiu Seizure
hyyebst Drug Find
SAUDI ARABIA
Heavier Penalties ﬁor Drug Susanna. Pushing Proposed
(AL-HY”, 16 Eb ”)0.0.0.0.0000000000000009000.0.0.0...
SIB-8mm AFRICA
80011! AFRICA
Sentencing for Drugs 'Appslling' Says Professor
(Marilyn Cohen; m3 cram, 6 May 82).
Nation Logging in Battle Against Drug Abuse Says De nimds
(““1” When; m: cm“. smu)OOOOQOOOOODOOOOOOCI
VEST EUROPE
FRANCE
New Heroin Variety, 'mwing, ' New Paris Market Bporoed
(m. 8 a, &)OOOOOOIOOOOOIOOIOOQCOOIOOOOCOO'COOOOOCOOO.
GREECE

Traffickers in Indian ﬂeshieh Arrested in Adz-u
(TA “BA, 12 Apr a)...tooeeosooeeeeeeeoeeeeeeoseeeeeeoeee

PR6 Police Offer Trained Dogs
(TA NBA. 1 Apr ”)0...OOOOCOOOOOOOCOOOIO...OOOOOOOOOIOOO.

“WISE“?
DU” v.0nsuou watt 9....-

NB'IHBRLMIB

Justice lunisur lbjccu 81d)": Sent-um for Mr.
(m ““1831”. 23 hr n).0OOIOIOOOOOOOOOOOOt000......O 56

Poltcc, Dealer. mucus Dung Scone, Buford-It
(Pie: nuns. lee. Salaam; VIIJ “mm.

27 “r ”)0000000000000000000too.00loooooooooooooyooooooioo $8

WI‘BD KING”!

Briefs .
Heroin 8.1331“ in Bat. 65

"Will“?
CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060046-0

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09:

VIC'IORIAN CRIB! 600418810“ WILL rows 0N DRUG xssuas

Emmymw mm mm mm .Wmmgm A”
mmwmmmmwww £me --

mwmww gamma? “Rim: am” mm

mm” mm 3 mm mm www.mmmmmm

mm“ mm W?“ .M yaw
m

“mm m
2:
WWW“ www.m“ﬁw mwmm “Wu mmmww mm “mum

[Text ]

Helboum THE AGE in malts): 24 In: 82 p 15

[Article by 8111 Bimbauor]

5300/7549

CSO:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500060045-0
Police Involvenenc

OOWISSION HEARS NEW DISCLOSURBS Oil mum-m MIG LIES

“My...” mum Wwwmw .mm maﬁa ”aw .mmﬂwmun mum Wm. m.

mug: mm“ “mm

WWW Mam“ T w my” 3m. mm mi
mm; mm mmwmw WWWMWM mummmmmumm ”WWW“ hm“.

Mmmm MM“ WWW.“ Mm mu Jaw 3....
mm .m.% Lam mmwmumm mm“ mmm

.Mmm “WWW. WWW WWW MW “mam mum
”mm“ memwmwwn Wm: mmmmm

”they ms SYMEY mama HERALD in “311.1! 25 Mar 82 p 2

[Text]
mm mm. m... Em my.“ w
wmmmwmf .

RATION'S BIGGEST DRUG BUST NETS an MS a? HASHISH

Canberra ma AUSTRALIAN in English 25 lie: 82 p 1

[Article by Pie Culling]

[Text]

CSO:

IN A dramatic French melon-type swoop.
Federal Police have seized h'a'shlsh worth between
580 million and $110 mllllonzintbe =nation’ 3 biggest

drug haul.

Mlormeeolheeushwere' becomieerolmddle
Eaetloodsudteehoerde'eupl erdvedli'omlmeillee
namhlehwuw us.-

The coniainerwee-conelen Nitheehlwine
minnowreceived”directionstwin"am mmwrepreeeoi
meownerihe'iitmtobe .

But. elier Ii. wounded 2i h:‘elnr' Termlnel.

mm: neelecied oeee'vee'eldeye or polleewero
celiedtoexemlneihm

Theilnuwo lddondllnlhntcerlbmln
mum-drown" lullol conielnineheehieh-
Momminwhlchcenbe '
aOlocicerloneintheconielnei-Jtcwelneclheelileliweiehin:
'heggemolhuhbhhueeueet elm-Romance.“
leuni iiimeeneidered'lop

Policeeaidiheybelieveiheconieine'rwunoi notcolleciedheeeuee

o( e dowmenulion problem in
either cum requirements , ”mm m nude “ lent

or.the ehi canpeny'e ;
own bill-oi In: greenh muons.” -
The "5.31““ eeded v
De Wile,
Phil oi the Pederel Police

_ln Mm. is oonunulne in;
“elbourneendsydney. -
The seizure m Announced ,
in Genbem by the Minister
[or 308m end Consumer
mm Mr Moore. end the
WM Mlnleler lot Admin-

. in re Services. Mr Thanh

5300/7549

in when we

“The ~ vanilla eireedy
provided under ee'euon 33:
range m m or two
wommpiyw
our“ Marcella.

mm ol name or 25

yeereor for “tracking in
mile.
- There is further Non
for immune e ti! or lilo
imprisonment m
uriouem‘
ingestion. They pointed out that partial measures were more likely to result
in corruption of. the system: of control. resulting in incur-outable problem
for the police. The emission-are agreed there was a need for wider and more
informed debate on alcohol and drug abuse, which was the stated air. of the
Mann diecueeion paper. They recorded appreciation of APADD's action in
sponsoring a significant contribution to that debate. [Brisbane m Ownin-
HAIL in English 24 Mar 82 p 22]

would neke euro Australia continued to provide cqnipaent and training progrele.
”Our assessment of the narcotics proble- ie that the Thais are continuing to
make detenined efforts to seek out and destroy the organisations which unu-
tacture the narcotics,” Mr W said. ”However, in ill-ediate tone, the
potential supplies available in the region still are of concern." [Brisbane
THE COURIER-Inn. in English 27 Mar 82 p 13]
BANK REPORTED IN DRUG TRAFFICKING-June leader of the federal opposition,

Hr Hayden. has tabled documents showing reports that the failed Nugan-Band
Bank was engaged in trafficking heroin and money in and out of Australia.

he files are from the Australian Narcotics Bureau and the Department of
Business and Consumer Affairs. 'lhey are dated from Hay 1977 to August 1978.

Mr Hayden tried to table some of the documents yesterday with certain names
deleted because he said their publication could lead to deaths. Prime
minister Fraser then insisted the names be included but did not insist on
that condition today. The reports contain references which named the late
hank Nugan and Michael Band, whose whereabouts are unknown, as bigger than
anything seen in Australia's heroin game. The reports also refer to the
illegal movement of Australian currency to' areas in Southeast Asia by the
Nugan-Hand Bank Linited and involvement in a syndicate which exported an

estimated $3,000 million worth of heroin from Bangkok. Hr Haydn said that
a Royal Conission on Drugs. which is in session, is prevented from fully

investigating the illegal activities of Nugan-Band. [Text] [3951037
Melbourne Overseas Service in English 0830 GMT 25 hr 82]

680: 5300/5731
llOUT l5 years ago the inter-
national tippie community dia-
. covered their tool-m among
Varanasi“: “on ad eadhns.
But with the coming of' the hippies a new
drug has been added to the holy city's
peychotropiephartnacopoeta- heroithtvu
eelely betievetl that heroin m an illegelly
imported item until last month when in one
weak two laboratories reﬁning heroin from
no opium were unearthed in thecity. tbenh
to an informer‘s tipoﬂ’. They were the tint
such labs to be discovered in India.
The raid on the lat heroin lab on
March I9 by the Central Bureau of Investi-

gation (can narcotics wing had virtually
goneunnotioed.Sobadtheea:ond.hvedays

taterbytheVanmeicitypoiice.Tberwo
incident: Were being vievsrd in isolation. Not

one but dieeovered. Verana'ei his IOn'g
been known at a centre ofdntg untheking
(mom moat. May t-IS. t98l).

The cat narcotics department enalyeis
was probably correct wnen they said. “No
«united peddling of drugs has come to
oornotieesol‘ar."btuitvaan '
ponibility and that were factor: that

pointed towards it. Said l’map Kenn:
Srisnstava. deputy mmt of police.
Varanasi. “Since November to bee tented
smattquntitiee ofberetnandntotpbiaeand
have apprehended to drug paddlers.”

They would poetibly have Intended in
apprehending many more had they knonn
what to loot for. Said a police ofﬁcial. ”Our
problem is that we are really not trained to
identify drugs. even it we were confronted

with the drug: it one! be mm to tell

the dill‘ereoce between heroin and gtueoae.
What iareqeited iaacuebeotneindnig
detection." ‘

so much as by design but more so bonnet
oi the lad: «cooperation. Neither of the
two enforcement agencies knetr nhat. the

First Seizure: The prelude to the diecovery of the lobe m arreet o! the
"Poaei brothere" by the French drug enforeelnnt agency. The arreet of Postal
Belay, 23, and Lionel Bourderioux, 24, two French-en nc Orly Airport in Porto
on April 22, 1981 with 210 gram of heroin end their etbeeqnent interrogation
led then to reveal their Vereneai contact known ea Pcui. Poxi turned out to
be Bheruv Roth Chetterjee, 28, the che-iet end his younger brother Ran Babe,
19, who hed sold the heroin. OBI inveatiaetiona led the. to the null alleya
of Varanasi. They gathered that the (matterjee brothera were about to nke

a contact.

0n the efternoon of March 19 they bed ehadoved the two Ibo were to pnaa 250
gram ot heroin to a foreign buyer ea “10 for n lerger ehiptlent. The
foreign contact did not nterialiee and the GI officials loved in. The (Bl
officials were eurpriaed when Bhertw Roth confeaaed during interrogation, "I
have been selling it for two yeara end I nke heroin on order only fro- e lab
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060046-0

at say house." The sccidentsl confession led to the recov
According to (81 officisls, the two brothers also confess
the heroin they had in their possession fro- snother lab
to identify. Local police believe thst the epic base is
mzlwr, 80 kilometres any, where opium is cultivated ls

"admoncundndfnnm- . ‘ .
phinedcpendingwtkwlytmdiu; mm
tommmkbnwmpﬂmﬂ Shun. w

essilybecstﬂveoniuimeuoholper ”hm
mmmﬁoswdmsmsmsil “a,“ n. no 1
pﬁoeosussueetsisMA-siadms Maﬁa
lo IOtineuheloulpuch-ptiatlum m gym
pawlteuhinguls'ﬁsslullsm oohsil
nethlo. .. H.-. _
SecestdmN:Fom bpshuthe _,,,.~'a
mdiscomcd Mthetoinlsbbysoddm (Sc-meow“
Sub-Inspect“ D.P.Shukls.ststioso&e¢ol our informin- h
Simpolicepouwsslippedol’thsldn’ Doubly.”‘l'htV
mud-ghoswedumsmnnﬂny which.”
colony and moved in. Little did he km 112m;
(hsthewould end upwithsl'sﬂ-dsdpd Isl). (odes Incidental
In the early hours of Much 24 be My“!
camtl’ndwpltumu.n.sodhiswifelm d3, Tho l9.l NI
2". unseat“. The saith led to MC“
. «assumed
the moves, of 39 yams of . .
hob ssd the sill. of I. utmpaﬂd
sum scent of equip. onlysnsna TI
meal. Said Shukla. “We fousd mm
ammamwiuh l0 bottlesof some m

scent snhydrite. the crucial

cso : 5300/ 5730

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500060046-0
BRIEFS

owu HERODI SEIZURE-mu: 750 gram of heroin valued at Rs 10 lakhs in the
incarnations! narket was seized by the Central district police special staff
following the arrest of (maranjit alias Charlie, a resident of lnderpurl on
1hursdey. During his interrogation, the suspect, a Delhi Dniversity graduate,
reportedly told the police that he as being supplied the drug by a Daisey
based an and was selling it neatly to foreigners in Delhi. ‘Ihe police said
that the identity of his Satay contact has been established. ‘Ihe narcotics
wing of the Central bureau of Investigations has also been inforned of the
suspect'a arrest. [Tent] [New Delhi PATRIUI in English 10 Apr 82 p 10]

BAREILLY DRUG ARRES‘rs-«aareilly, April 10 (mp-'11:. local police claimed to
have enshed an international gang of dopa-peddlers following the arrest of
two nebers of the gang here yesterday. According to the police contraband
opium, norphine and heroin vorth Ila six lathe, stockpiled in a local nanu-
fecturing unit were also recovered following a clue given by the arrested
persons. [Tart] [New Delhi PATRIOT in English 11 Apr 82 p 6]

must: SHIIGGLERS mam-sonny, April 20 (PH)-Boi>ay custo- busted a
conspiracy to smggle a large «wantity of hashish out of India Iith the
arrest of a businessman, Satye Prakash Dehl last week. The accused who as
produced before a netropolitan ngistrate was rennded to jail custody till
29 April. The custom officials told the court that the conspiracy cans to
light in a follow-up action taken by the Boabay Custom after the recent
seizure of 10 Inge of hashish valued at Rs 90,000 at Pala- Airport, Delhi.
The hashiah was concealed in an marked suitcase and destined for Geneva
vie Frankfurt. Two foreign nationals have already been arrested in this
connection. lhe custo- said enquiries nae in this connection revealed that
an elaborate conspiracy involving sone Indiana and foreigners had been
hatched to single large quantities of hashish out of India. It vas also
revealed that Setye Behl end his associates supplied the hashish seized at
the Palan Airport and to the foreign nationals in Betsy and had arranged '

for its s-aggling out of India, the court was inforled. [Text] [New Delhi
PATRIOT in English 21 Apr 82 p 4]
mun HERO!!! Win-Custom authorities at Delhi airport seized 123 gas of
contraband heroin worth millions of dollars fro. two Canadian passport-
holdersuaoland Joseph Mbin and Oviln Prancois Riendeau-oon Sunday, reports
PM. Additionnl chief Metropolitan Magistrate JJi. Halik on Thursday rennded
then to judicial custody till 26 April. Reports said Atbin was found carry-
ing a packet inside his right leg socks. On further search nore packets
containing heroin were recovered lie was then forced to defecate and six
packets of heroin contained in random nllegedly fell out of his rectnn.

He allegedly told the custom sen that Ovih had asked him to carry the
heroin delivered st Boway, for «rich as assured 5,000 as dollars as paynent
and air fair and other expenses. [Text] [New Delhi “'1'le' in English

23 Apr 82 p l]

cs0: 5300/7030
BRIEFS

TRAFFICKER SENTENCE!) 1‘0 DEAN-Rush Ln-pur, ‘i‘hurs-—A businessman was
sentenced to death by the high court here today for trafficking in 656.9 gas
of heroin. Ng Teng Song. 59, was found guilty of codtting the offence in
borong Bandar 22 at 7:105 pa on 23 lurch last year. Mr Justice 3.1.11. Lee, in
passing sentence, said: "The accused trafficked in hunan nisery, degradation
and destruction simply for financial gain. and as the evidence revealed, he
stood to profit by something in the order of 31-1/2 nillion if he had not
been caught. I would be failing in ly duty if I did not pass a sentence
which expresses the public horror and condemtion of what the accused and
others have done." [Excerpt] [3K070559 Kuala Luapur NEH STRAITS Inns

in English 30 Apr 82 p 7]

HEROIN SEIZURE IN PETALING JAYk-Klang, Erin-Selmgor police seised 2,670
gra-es (about 5 pounds) of heroin in Petaling Jaya yesterday. They also
detained a 32-year-old suspect and a 17-year-old girl. The drugs seized could
provide sore than 500,000 ”shots." Police believe the nan is a local and
international trafficker. Selnagor CID Chief Acp Iliuh Soon Koch said the
anti-drug section fron the Petaling Jaya police got their break on Wednesday
when they checked the 32-year-old suspect who was walking in the 882 area at
3:45 pa and found three small packets of heroin on bin. Subsequent investi-
gations aimed that he had international connections and was a wanted trafficker.
Yesterday, a police party led by Asp Chan (hang Hun raided a house in Section
17 and seized the 2,1070 gran-es of the drug in plastic bags. The raiding '
party also detained a girl in the house for questioning. Acp Niuh coupli-
eented the PJ police on their success. [Text] (“070559 Kuala Lnur NEH
STRAITS TIMES in English 1 May 82 p 8]

cso: 5300/5733 '

12
IIILLTRIBB ROLE IN WICS TRAFFIC REPORTED

Bangkok SIM RA? in Thai 25 Feb 82 p 5

[Article by Chaiyawat Yonbies: "the Probles From the Mountains“!
[Text] Opium, Who Is Clever In Thailand?

Looked at on a nap, in the west, the area stretching tron the north to chunphon
[in the south] is an area filled with high nountains, or the Mt Heru of India.
Concerning this area, when this writer studied geography in secondary school

20 years ago, the instructor nade us learn that this is an area known as the
”wrinkle of the world.“

The high mountains where the weather is cool and refreshing and where the
air is so pure that doctors in for-er tines sent people with tuberculosis
to these mountains for treatment are locatad'in the north fro- Chiang Rai,
Chiang Kai and Nan south to Talc since this is the area in Thailand that is
farthest from the equator.

This high northern area is the the home of other groups that we call hill
tribes, or hill Thais as they are now referred to. These people are of Sine-
Tibetan and Austonesian origins. These people are divided into various tribal
groups that have chosen to live at various elevations in the mountains. from
the ﬂaw, who prefer to live above 5,000 feet above sea level to the Khanu
and Karens, who live at elevations below 2,000 test.

All of these hill tribe groups live in areas that are suited to the cultivation
of poppy. however, of the approxinately' 20 tribal groups that live in the
mountains of Thailand, only six are involved with opiu- in sole way, either

in cultivating {poppies}, investing [in poppy cultivation], hiring the-selves
out or puxchaisng and selling lopiunl. The six groups are the thong, or use,
Lisu. Lahu, Akha, Yao, Karen and Raw Chinese.

of these six groups, in actuality, the three inortant groups that pose a
serious problem for government officials in suppressing narcotics today are
the Hmong, or “so. Karen and Raw (:hinese groups.
These days, it is the ﬂea who cultivate poppy and sell opiu. The Karens hire
themselves out and grow poppies for the ﬂea. And it is the ﬂaw Chinese who
transport the opium to the heroin refineries, whether the refineries of the
IKhun Sa Company Ltd“ or some other company, or to the middlemen.

The ﬂeas are good fighters who have had much combat experience, especially
in fighting the Chinese during the time the ﬂeas still lived in southern Yunnan

and fought to live their lives freely. ﬂany were killed. Il'he-l‘lsos want to
be called Hmongs because this means ”free people.“

This long history of the ﬂea has resulted in their social life in the mountains
changing to the point where the Mess have become the chief poppy growers.
But one thing that has not changed is the ﬂeos' love of living in the mountains.

And it is the very remoteness of these mountains that has been an important
factor that has led various Thai governmenﬁ to stipulate border security
policies and implement various things for the ﬂeos. Because the ﬂsos are experts
at mountain count and they will fight for those on their side.

Another important thing that poses a problem in the mountains is that the
ﬂea believe in the saying that the "water belongs to the fish. the sky to
the birds and the mountains to the ﬂeas.”

Such a belief makes it difficult for the ﬂeos to accept the fact that the

vast area in the mountains that they have cleared for shifting cultivation.

to the point where the river headwaters are almost dry during the dry season,‘
does not belong to the ﬂeas alone but is the joint treasure of Thais throughout
the country.

It is thought that there are presently about 50.000 tribesmen in Thailand.
But this figure may easily increase because ﬂeo families like to have many
children just as the other hill tribes do. On the average, each family has
8-10 members. with some families having as many as 15.

ﬂost of the ﬂeas now living in Thailand migrated from Laos. Some came from
Burma. Those who live in the north are related to the white ﬂea in the southern
part of china. ﬂany migrated to Tang ,Kiea and northern Laos during the last
century. Also, since Laos became ca-unist, ﬂeos have been murdered on a mass
scale and so more and more ﬂeas from Laos have come and joined those in Thailand.

The Lisa are another tribe; they prefer to call themselves Lieu. ﬂost of them
live in Mae Hong Son. However, they are not a very large group. Almost all
of them came from Burma; a few came from China.

The Yao are a group that is as old as the ﬂea. Their native homes are in Kweichaw,
Hunan and Kwangsi in China. After being greatly persecuted by the Chinese.

they migrated to Vietnam. Laos, Burma and Thailand. But most of those who

live in Thailand migrated from ﬂuang Sing and Huang Luong Nam Tha in Hua Phan
Thang He in Laos. They are spread over various areas in miang ﬂai, chiang

Rai. ﬂae hang Son, Nan and Lampang.

16
The Yao will love you if you refer to them by the name “Mien” since this means
“human" and they refer to themselves by this name.

Fortunately for solving the opium problem in the north, the Yao have played

the smallest part in causing this problem. The word 'fortunately' was used
because there is a saying that, while the Yao firmly believe in spirits just
as the other hill tribes do, they are not afraid of spirits because they beliew
that no matter how much influence the spirits have, they are more clever than
the spirits.

Thus, Yao intermidiaries [spirit doctors] play the role of liars who fool
the spirits. whoever is good at fooling the spirits is "popular" among the
Yao .

what the Yao really believe in is the same as what present-day Thais believe
in and that is the "person with money.“

In Yao society, a wealthy person has great advantages and these advantages
pass over into the next life too.

Because every Yao wants to gain the advantage over other Yaos in the next
life, a spirit position in the next life can be purchased by making merit
with large sums of money.

It is this belief that has exerted pressure on the race to have a more secure
economic position than any of the other hill tribes in hill tribe society,
with the exception of the new Chinese.

The Lahu are another hill tribe group that grows some poppy. However, they
do not grow much. The tribesmen from this group who live in Thailand belong
to several subgroups such as the Black Lahu, the Red Lahu, the Chi Lahu and
the Chele Lahu. They migrated from Burma and Laos. It is estimated that they
number about 14,000 to 16,000. Most are Red Lahu.

It is believed that the word 'Lahu." as this group is called, comes from the
Shan word meaning “hunter" since this group is more skilled at hunting than

are the other hill tribe groups.

The Ikha are a hill tribe group that originally lived in China. They migrated
to Thailand almost 60 years ago. However, there are very few of them. Present
figures are uncertain but it is estimated that they number approximately
6,000 to 73000.

As for the Karens, it is thought that this is the largest hill tribe group

in Thailand. They migrated from eastern Tibet and settled down in China 3,000
years ago. They were later driven out, and so they withdrew southwards into
Burma and Thailand. As for the Karens in Thailand, the main reason that they
came here was because they had political problems with Burma and Burma drove
them out.
‘l‘hc Karena live everywhere. even in the plains, tron Chiang Rai to Prachuap
Khirikhan. But the largest nusber live in Chiang nai. As for those in the

north only. it is estiaated that alaost 200.000 Karena live in the area reaching
Ema the foothills to the mountain peaks.

The Karena are faraers who settle down and grow crops here and there. And

it is because of their skills as cultivators that sou Karens have hired theaselves
out to grow pOppies for other hill tribe groups, particularly the ueos since

the heos are not skilled at growing poppies and [when they do] more poppies

die than do those that survive to blossom and produce sap that can be sold.

At f irst, the Karena who went to work were paid for their work in cash. But
whether they were tricked or senething, in sore recent times, the Karens who
grow poppy for the Moos have been paid in opium for their own use. 01:, when -
they are paid in cash, they take this money and buy opiun tro- their eaployers.
And there has begun to be a problem with their growing poppies.

None of the five hill tribe groups discussed above is as iaportsnt as the
final group, that is, the ﬂaw Chinese.

11943
C80: 5300/5712
NUMBER OF ADDICTS RISES, HOST LIVE IN BANGKOK
Bangkok HATICBON in Thai 4 Her 82 p 3
[Article: "host Heroin Addicts Live in Bangkok']

[Textl It has been revealed that the number of addicts who have come for rehabili-
tation has increased 36.79 percent over last year.

Mr Pricha Champarat, the chief of the Drug Addict Control Division, and Mr
Chuchat Phunsiri, the director of the Rehabilitation Division of the Office

of the Naroctics control Board. revealed on 3 March that the number of addicts
who came to the ONCB rehabilitation clinics for treatment during the period
October 1980 to September 1981 reached 43,469. or these, 41,465, or 95 percent.

were men; 2,004, or 4.18 percent, were women. This is an increase of 36.79
percent over last year.

Mr Pricha stated that 66.13 percent of these addicts live in Bangkok. 23 percent
live in the Central Region, 5.17 percent live in the north, 3.9 percent live

in the northeast and 1.2 percnet live in the south. Host, 90.37 percent, are
addicted to heroin; 4.95 percent are addicted to opium.host become addicted -
because of a desire to try the drugs and because they were induced by friends.
Most of the addicts are between the ages of 20 to 24, with 81.11 percent being
below age 35. Also, 54.54 percent had jobs, 24.17 percent were unemployed,

16.42 percent were temporarily employed and 4.87 percent were students. Most
have monthly incomes of between 1.500 to 1,900 baht.

Hr Pricha stated that he is very concerned about controlling drug addiction-
among youths, especially among those who are not in school, since there are
no institutes that they can contact or receive help from. Such youths often
induce those who are in school to become addicted too. Besides this, another
important problem is that various sectors often feel that narcotics control'
is the concern of the ONCE. Actually, it is the concern of all sectors. In
particular, parents have an important role. Also important are recreation,
sports and physical exercise, which are hobbies that youths can engage in

in order to keep them busy.

”Concerning rehabilitation, the worrisome problem is that 90 percent or more
of those who come for rehabilitation fail to complete the process as stipulated.
Concerning this matter. the ONCE is in the process of promulgating a law that will

require them to complete the treatment. It a person fails to complete the process:
he will be liable for punishment." stated Mr Pricha.

11943
C80: 5300/5712 17
DIPPICULTIE OP NARCO’HCS SUPPRESSIQO, 091011 3811““ W
Bangkok $1M RA? in Thai 3 Mar 82 p 5
[Article by Chaiyawat Yonbism: "the Problem In the uountains']

[Text] Substitute Crops

It is estimated that. at present. about 100-150 tons of opitn are secretely
produced each year in Thailand. While the production of sees opiua can be
overlooked in order to maintain social contact between the goverment and
the hill tibes that are still addicted to opiul. this large figure on the
asount of opium produced leads us to believe that part of this opiu- leaks
out from the hill tribe villages in the form of goods that are sold.

The ONCB is still having problems in making surveys in order to destroy all
the poppy fields, or to leave only enough for hill tribe consuption. This
problem is a latter of the hill tribes 'taking advantage' and of liqlementing]
the policy of providing money to replace poppy cultivation. But this policy

has not worked. It has not stopped the hill tribes from cultivating poppy
eech year.

The interesting thing is that government officials in several sectors, especially
the watershed Management Division of the Forestry Department, have really

tried to change the hill tribes’ preference for growing poppy and get them

to grow substitute crops instead,even though such crops require a heavier
investnsnt and a greater effort in finding markets than does opium.

Thus. we have seen cold-weather flowers for sale on the streets of Bangkok

at rather high prices. And vegetables that are difficult to grow in the plains
are on sale. In not too long. arobika coffee will be available for Thai coffee
connoisseurs. It is better tasting and fresher than isported coffee.

The barren sountains are being afforested with fast-growing varieties of trees
such as "two and three leaf" pine trees. or 'kia' pine trees, tall varieties
such as eucalyptus trees and even teak, which sill be the Iain variety of

tree in the sountains in the distant future.

18
The substitute crops program, which includes forestry too, is receiving much
attention from foreign countries, both from the standpoint of providing additional
financial support and tree seedlings and of making investsents in the future.

At the very least, two companies in Australia and Holland have shown an interest
in planting areas in pine trees in order to have timber to produce paper and

to have wood to make furniture. The feasibility of this is presently under

study in the northern mountain areas of Thailand.

Besides this, the hill tribes should be developed so that they are aware of the
rules of the main society which they have joined. They must be provided education
at various levels and given training and demonstrations in growing crops must

be given.

The problems concerning these things rest with these people. Because it is

very difficult to find good officials who have widespread knowledge in order

to have them develop the hill tribesmen, who have languages and customs that

are different from those of the people in the plains. And those officials

who are working here are responsible for a wide area, there is a lack of equipment
and there is no coordination of activities in the airconditioned offices of

the departments and divisions, which frequently talk in generalities and send

out regulations for carrying out the work in the barren areas of these officials.

A Great Loss of horale

Carrying on development work in order to control the poppy cultivation of

the hill tribes is not something that can be done for just 1 or 2 years. Rather,
plans that give attention to the future must be made, with the goal being

to control the poppy cultivation of the hill tribes, either through power

or through kindness.

The most important thing is to keep additional Thai land from being planted

in poppies by hill tribe groups that have recently entered the country. The
problem is that Thai officials cannot monitor such groups that enter the country
since the area is so remote.

Also, it is essential to have close coordination between the neighboring
countries where poppies are grown. In particular, this is closely related

to the national security policies. which frequently conflict concerning matters
in the northern mountains.

In particular, in Burma, the Burmese government probably cannot fully suppress
poppy cultivation.

The spread of poppies, from the standpoint of cultivation by the hill tribes
and from the standpoint of trade in order to find a way to get [the opium]
to the outside world, is thus something that Thailand cannot stop in Thailand.
It is said that Burma has an impressive policy against poppy cultivation and
that Burma 'suppresses' this more firmly than Thailand when it has a chance.

That is, the Burmese cut down the poppies and burn the fields without paying
any compensation. whoever protests too much may get hurt or even be killed.

Poppy suppression officials in Thailand have said that Burma's hatred stems
from the vengefulness of the leaders of Burma.

That is, President Ne win hinted that narcotics traffickers hoped to gain
influence over him and so they tricked his son into becoming addicted to opium

and heroin. even now, it is not known whether he has been completely rehabilitated
or not.

Opium is money, as has been repeated many times. Thus, suppression work must
give attention to the importance of this aspect too. Because, it once turned
out that an official who was formerly very capable in narcotics suppression
became involved in the narcotics trade himself and has become a narcotics
godfater. And he has used his financial influence gained from tne narcotics
trade to escape. To date, he has not been caught. Concerning this sensational
case, the people in Chiang Mai still talk about this and they are sure that
he will not be caught.

The narcotics suppression system of the government officials relies on 'informadenf
that is, information that is purchased from "secret agents.” Officials admit

that sometimes they encounter cases of 'double agents' who provide them with
incorrect information since the narcotics traffickers can pay them more.

Thus, financial expenditures in this matter are very great. In particular,
rewards have been set at up to 45 percent of the value of the narcotics seized
based on standards set by officials.

officials have stated that, each month in the north, at least five to six
people working as secret agents or who have been agents for government officials
in seizing narcotics are killed for the reward.

The matter of secret agents is another important problem in the mountains.
Agents must constantly be replaced and switched. when a person has accomplished
his mission and received his reward, if he wants to stay alive, he must quickly
leave the area. And he must stay away for many years. In some cases, the agent
cannot return even after 10 years because of the large reward, which means

that he was an informant in a major narcotics suppression case. In such cases,
the agents must flee abroad.

All of this is only a short summary of what is happening in the intricate

mountains in the north. There are things that are still problems and things
that are not problems.

20
I spent several days at Rue! 'rhung Cho and Chang Khien, which 1: one of hundreds
of points in the north where the problems met be solved, problem that are
different from those in the plains of milend.

11943
CSO: 5300/5712

21
THAI EMBASSY SAYS calm. WICS SOLD TO WYSIA
Bangkok MATICHON in Thai 20 liar 82 pp 1, 12
(Article: ”Hundreds of Thai Children Kidnapped and Sold to Malaysia'l

[Text] It has been revealed that hundreds of Thai children have been kidnapped
and sold to Malaysia. The esbassy is concerned and has had to send them back.
It has been revealed that narcotics have been snuggled across the border using
various tricks.

On 19 March, a high-ranking official free the Thai eebassy in Malaysia talked
with HATICHON about the reports that Thai children have been kidnapped fro-
Thailand and sold in ualaysia. He said that this is a problee that is occurring
very frequently at present. To date. the siesssy has received reports fro-
Malaysian officials concerning several hundred cases and it has had to take
responsibility for sending these children back so that the public welfare
service in the southern provinces can look after then. -

A news report stated that the kidnapping and sale of children can be divided
into two types. The first is that children are kidnapped fro. their parents
and sold to Malaysians of Chinese descent who do not have any children. The
selling price is approxilately $1,000 to $2.000 (Malaysian or 9.000 to 18,000
baht. The price of younger children is higher than that for older children.
Sonetines, the buyers contact and buy free the parents directly without the
consent of the provincial public welfare service. When such children are
discovered by checkpoint officials. they are sent back to Thailand.

This high-ranking official also revealed that the snuggling of narcotics free
Thailand into Malaysia is on the rise and various tricks are used. For example,
the body of a child was stolen from the Yala provincial hospital, and narcotics
were placed in the stomach. The corpse was then carried across the border.

But Malaysian officials arrested the ltraffickerl. Besides this, narcotics

have been snuggled across by hiding then among other goods in trucks. Malaysian
officials use dogs to search for drugs. But somtines the drugs go undetected. For
exasple. if the drugs are packed with fresh fish, the dogs cannot distinguish the
smell. In addition to this. narihuana is brought in on fishing boats.

11943
C50: 5300/5712

22
BRIBPS

NARCO'I'ICS PWCING CIIDIICALS Skunk-Officials ft“ the Office of the Narcotics
Control Board (ones) have revealed that at approxieately 1100 hours on ll larch.
ONCE officials and custom officials tron Chiang Dao District, Chiang llai
Province, searched two vehicles, a black Dodge with license No Sit-6145. Bangkok.
and a red Hitsubishi with license no 8-0944, chiang Mai, and found 172 liters

of cheaicale used to produce No 4 heroin. 'l'he chemicals were valued at 900,000
baht. Pros the investigation, the three suspects were identified as Master
Sergeant Thongsuk Bunprasoet. age so, who is assigned to the Research and
Production Division, Defense anery Deparuent, Sergeant ‘i‘hongkha- Yotsaban,

a driver who is assigned to the Research and Production Division, and Mr Pricha
Roengyang, age 37, who lives at 87 village 8 in Sung Co-une, Pang District,
Chiang Mai Province. All three confessed that they were taking these che-icals
to a heroin refinery at 001 Lang, which is the base of the 93rd m Division.
l‘l‘extl [Bangkok MATICHON in Thai 18 liar 82 p 1] 11943

CSO: 5300/5712

23
FIVE owe monks ARRESTED—Santa Marta—Five (1m traffichta were
arrantad and 3 tons of prmad urihuana var. aaiud today by narcotics
agents in Cioaaga. The traffickers are (Rafael his his). 0111901
Rodriguez), (Hun.- “has his). (Hector Amrita Patina) and (1.1.11.
Pulol Lao). An outboard Iotor boat and moral moan. van also uiud.
[PA290803 Bogota Cadona Radial Supot in Spanish 2330 G!!! 27 Apr 82 PA]

080: 5300/2285

26
mmsmvmmom,nm'smsm
mgummmrmmmgimzomazpi

[Text] St. Gooxqo'o Volley Aintrip in St. Elizabeth in hock in bnoinooo.
'l'hio illogoi oitottip m the ooone of o drontic ooizm of e ganjo piano
troomderopoiieogurdwichmtinodontm londondthooirinnid-

Sopuwer 1980. [photoo not W]

meGovornmtofthodoyonnonncodthottho dutripmucurodbytho
Police end the m, end thot on enginootinq unit at the 0.0.9. had etortod
demolition of tho oitotzip on Septdaor 17. 1980.

But these phomnpho “that tho otrip m bed: in m loot nook.

Friday. April 16, e m to- out thzoo vehicles ported by tho oido of
the strip which hod only one end mum (ooo pic ot batten) . The reot of
the strip. sane 4000 foot long. we in porfoct condition.

Hiddiopicohowonootthuevehiciudiuppooringcnthemdtoftho
plane carrying the m ton. ‘l'ho other two oioo disputed.

111. top pic shows a mute: of dru- vhich veto vith the vehicles. Did the

drum contnin wand ganja? And why did tho Miod people disperse in
their vehicloo. it thoir busineeo woo legiti-oto?

CSO : 5300/ 7548
BRIEFS
LARGE WA Slum—Police «ind 15 kiloo of utihuono tro- tvo brothers.

Banjo-in and Victoriauo tom Lopes. who totem: with Couroo Castillo Cotton,

11» “noted. wore «11in; tho urihum in 1mm. [tut] [Hoxico City
21631510! in Spanish 2 Apt 82 9 10-0] 9015

CSO: 5300/2277

'26
POLICE moussxom m m 088 0! ms
Port-of-Spain mum comm in Bulls): 19 Apr 82 p 1
[Tent] There are no gl-our boys in tho trinidad and Iobago Police Service.

This point was Qhasised yesterday by Police Oo-issioner Randolph We
as he spoke about the growing threat of the illegal cocaine trade, its effects
and efforts being eade to ooebat the general cries wave.

Hr. Burroughs. who said he was speaking also as a father, strongly advised
young people to steer clear tro- aotivitieo relating to drug dunes which has
a dangerous by productncrise.

Answering critics who changed that he was only concerned with the establish-
nont of varioue squeak-flying, tactical, etc. etc. he said yesterday:

“Sc-e people say that those squads give a glnour boy bags. I want the pub-
lic to know that this is not the case at all. There are absolutely no glalour
boys in the Police Service.

Gauging rises

"the criainal elenenttoday is nothingcuparedwiththspast era. Asthe
country became more affluent tho lawless elnent has changed with the tines
and has boot-e very sophisticated.

'"ro eeet these people on equal terns-mot just equal but one stop ahead-we
have to deal with th- as the sitmtion d-ando. Hence the formation of these
squads. heavy aphasia is being placed on drug related activities as it has
been shown that nost of these oneness are tied up with the general cries
scene.‘

Co-issioner wroughe explained that in order to satiety their cravings for
hard tings, money for which cannot be easily found, persons resorted to hold-
ups md other criminal acts to get the funds.

On the prevalent use of cocaine Hr. Burroughs said people were oupletely
ignoring its dangerous consequences—even death when taken in large quanti-
ties. he said:

27
"Long ago um and onlyby muddle and up”: clan, looking kicks, but
Myttumumosmmmmdumwuummln
comm.

Winmlmotoocnnommmdmuuuudtomqmal
cru- picture and one cannot did” both I: hung mam been“ may
no tutor-"laud.”

Hr. Who'- concom m mud following the most of .1: mm 3am:-
day by panama tro- eho ﬂying and WM: Squads, bonded by Wt.
Mom Com: and mdolph Macho.

They are ahargcd with being in mansion of a 1:393 mount of mine.

Another «91. to the drug-c213. M. Mr. Burroughs said. an it.
trafficking.

"A. taruvohmooouno umWhm. Item‘s-ably tmhtin
Andean 3:435:20. so than me be a mucking "mic. It is ecu-on m1-
canthatpeophimlwdintheilliottmumdonotttopatmthm
tomothatthedzugqoueothonrkot.

(:80 x 5300/ 7548

28
BRIEFS

TERRA)! DRUG SEIZURE—The Tehran entidrug squad has seized 20.885 kg of opius

and 2.766 kg of heroin fron a nwer of uugglere. [GPIlO635 Tehran mm
in Persian 28 Apr 82 p 9 GP]

anus, TWBNER DISOOWRIBS—Quchan antidr'ug squad personnel arrested
'Ali llassn Asadeh for possession of two tranceivere with a range of

12 kilometers. Pol-e Dokhtar revolution gmrds in six niesions arrested
eight hypocrites and discovered due following am: 1“ various types of
light weapons, 13,632 rounds of a-mition. 1‘ Kalashnikov nagasines.

13 0-3 esgasines and a quantity of canping equipent. [6P100955 Tehran
Joml-Yt ssuuu in Persian 1 May 82 p s or]

PROVINCIAL DRUG HAULS-Alansdan: Mayer antidrug squad personnel have dis-
covered 28 rolls of opiu in the possession of a local resident,

'Ali Hahn-ad Hues-vand. who use arrested for possession. Yaeuj: brother
net-hers of the antidrug headquarters in Gachsaran discovered and destroyed

1 hectare [2.5 acres] of opiun poppies last week. Kinab: Islenic revolution-
gunrd corps personnel discovered 218 rolls of pure opiun and a .22 Colt in the
house of 'Ahbas Soleynani in the village of lheraji Rudan. Tehran: in the
Iranian nonth beginning on 21 lurch, drug squad-personnel in the citiee of
Tehran, Quchan. 'l'orbat Heydari-ye and Sarah have discovered s total of

114.6 kg of opiu and 11.7 kg of heroin in the possession of several
narcotics gangs. [cn00955 Tehran JOHIIURI-YB ssuun in Persian 1 May 82

p 5 CF]

"MAYER OPIUH SEIZURE-dieters of lielayer Islanic Revolution Guard Corps have
seized 8.760 kg of opiu free two persons. [Tehran mm in Persian
3 Hey 82 p 2 GP]

ANTI-DRUG muses-An connection with the execution of. 15 international drug
snugglers, the Central News Unit reports that the public relations office of
the [elastic public prosecutor's office, on behalf of Iehran's drug squad, has
issued a statenent. saying: As our Muslin codatante are fighting on various
fronts in defense of their Islaeic hoeeland, this office. in order to save
yomg people free the frightening trap of addiction. has also risen to fight
death dealers and, having identified tho, condoms then to death in accordance
with the verdicts issued by the Islamic Revolution Antidrug Courts. [Text]
[LD061318 Tehran Doneetic Service in Persian 10!) our 5 my 82]

28
WVAND WTICS sum—me public relations officer of the Anti-Drug
Court told the mm correspondent that a hand of anglers was arrested
in Nahavand district last week and 7.538 kg of rolled opiun was recovered
froa then. [M71516 Tehran mm in Persian lo Apr 82 p 2]

PBHALB smears ARRESTED—A feasle passenger on route to the United States
was arrested when 1.520 kg of opiua was recovered froa her baggage at
Tehran's Hehrahahad Airport. She denied all knowledge of the contents of
the package. which she said had been given to her by sons friends for their
relatives in the mited States. [61'171516 Tehran mm in Persian lo Apr 82

921

Mm 0P1!!! SEIZURE-During the past nonth officials of the Anti-Drug Squad
of Karsj district recovered 3.155 kg of opiun froa traffickers, who were

later handed over to the authorities. [61171516 Tehran rum in Persian
lo Apr 82 p 2]

TAan DRUG PINE-According to a report fron lbshhad, Tayyehat officials
arrested a smggler with 3.3 kg of heroin on his person. He was later handed

over to the authorities. [67021216 Tehran JOIIIDRI-TE ISLAM! in Persian
22 Apr 82 p 5]

080: 5300/5396
EBAVIER PENALTIES FOR om smocmc. PU” PROPOSED

Riyadh AL-RlYAD in Arabic 16 Peh 82 pp H
[Articlez "Report Based on Sylposiu Dealing With Drugs and Alcohol")

[Test] The world today is engaged in a desperate struggle
with drugs and alcohol. which have cone to pose an enornous
danger to the security and safety of societies. This danger
also threatens to turn these societies into ruins after
breaking fanily unity. dispersing family ushers and destroy-
ing all values and ideals that fight such nelignant epid-ics
and diseases.

The discussions in today's synpoait. deal with drugs and

alcohol and their social, econolic and health effects and.
consequently. their effect on society. we will deal in this eye-
posiun with the scans of protection and cure and will outline

the harmful effects of drugs so that we can fight thee and wipe
th. out.

Participating with us in this synposit- are Dr Ila-ed al-Suqayr,
undersecretary in the Ministry of Health; ﬁnned al-Rushwadi,
undersecretary in the Ministry of Finance and National Economy
for custons affairs; and Lt Gen Yahya nl-Ha'lni, assistant
director general of security for operational affairs. They
represent the government agencies concerned with drug control
and with curtailing the dangers of drugs and preventing than
free infiltrating society. AL-RHAD is represented at the
synposiun by colleagues Huh-ad al-Jahlan, the deputy chief
editor, and editorial managers hesir al-Qar'awi, Sultan al-Bezi'i.
Sulaynan el-‘Usayli and nueayn 'Ali Busayn.

The synposius started with a question addressed to Dr Ila-ad
sl-Suqeyr on the her-fol effects of drugs and alcohol to health
and on the extent to which drugs affect those who use then.

Dr al-Suqeyr: In ny opinion. alcohol mat he added to drugs to unite the

picture sore couplets. There is no doubt that in recent years, a big increase
has been noticed in the amber of people using these prohibited substances

31
(drugs and alcohol). There are, in fact, numerous reasons for this increase.
During the debate and dialogue, the dangers of using these prohibited substances
and their effect on users will become clear. As you know. these substances are
proscribed and they have been proscribed by our Islamic religion simply because
they affect the personal behavior and mental capabilities of those using them-
effects that become obvious when the substances are used for a long time by
persons addicted to them. The effects of these substances are of two kinds:
immediate and long-range. As for the immediate effects, the excessive use of
these substances becomes evident in the conduct and behavior of the user.

These effects appear in various forms, all of which result in family disinte-
gration and in the user's failure to perform his work and his duties. be they
religious, family or social. Other effects are seen in social problems and
family quarrels and the third kind is seen in accidents and crimes.

in fact, drug addiction and alcoholism occur as a result of the progress and
development being experienced by the country. But it is certain that the use
of these prohibited substances is one of the cusses of the problems arising in
the security and health sectors. The real problems are numerous and. in my
opinion. we can discuss each point separately so that the symposium will be
positive and so that the reader can benefit from it. For these reasons, it is
my opinion that we can discuss these points in detail, trying at the same

thee to underline to the ordinary citizen the dangers that these substances
harbor for him, his family and his society. we can then discuss the means or
methods that help combat and control drugs and alcohol. I cannot say that a
final end can be put to drug and alcohol addiction. But at least their dangers
can be reduced and the spread and proliferation of drug and alcohol use can be
prevented. This is a prelude.

AL-RIYAD: Lt Gen Yahya al-Ha'lami, what. in your opinion, is the motive for
drug and alcohol use and how can they be eliminated?

Lieutenant General al-Ha'lami: The motive for drug and alcohol use starts
with the youth's awareness of his identity. "hen a youth becomes aware of his
identity, he begins to rebel against the authority that his parents use to
protect him. This rebellion is encouraged by the youth's older peers who, for
example, may convince him to smoke a cigarette. when the youth smokes the
cigarette. he feels that he has rebelled against society and against family
rules and has, consequently, proven his identity and his manliness. whereas
the fact is quite the opposite. when the youth rebels against the family, he
submits to the will of a number of his peers who, naturally, are not concerned
with his interest. Thus, by rebelling against the good elements in society,
the youth succumbs to the bad and evil elements.

The second point is that some people have the illusion that drug use helps in
many ways. Some students. for example, believe that drug use helps them keep
awake and continue studying for a longer time. I don't exactly know the
scientific effect of these drugs. Perhaps others are more knowledgeable in
this regard. But the tangible reality is that students who use such pills to
stay awake longer to continue their studies lose the most important element.
namely. comprehension. When a student uses such pills. he loses his mental
concentration and can no longer absorb what he is studying. even if he remains
awake all night long. The next morning, the student feels tired and dizzy.
Naturally, this condition affects his answers and his ability to express the
answers he wants.

32
There are other reasons that bring people to use drugs and pills. Some drivers,
for example, want to make more money by making several trips a day on the

Mejaz highway between Mecca and Jiddah, on the Jiddah-al-Ta'if highway or to
the eastern province. To stay awake to be able to make more money, the driver
uses pills to help him do so and to remain alert. ﬂhat happens is quite the
opposite. Even though the driver's eyes may remain open, he becomes absent-
minded and hazy. Consequently, he gets into and causes others to have serious
accidents. I believe, God be thanked, that most drivers have become aware of
this fact and have reduced their drug use.

A fourth reason for the use of drugs by some people is that they imagine that
drugs given them physical strength or, to be clearer and more precise. make
them more potent sexually, whereas what I have read and studied about drugs
and alcohol says the opposite. The effect of drugs and alcohol on sex is
negative, not positive. But it is possible that because the individual under
the influence of drugs or alcohol cannot feel the harm or the effects, he
imagines that he is (stronger). 0n the contrary, drugs and alcohol lead to
negative results insofar as this aspect is concerned, both in the short run
and in the long run.

Drug pushing is, naturally, motivated by one thing, namely, the desire for
illicit profit. Some pushers don't even use the drugs that they try to push
or smuggle and from which they make big profits. This is one of the motiva-
tions that I can recall at present. In any case, some of the other brothers
may have further explanations regarding this point.

AL-RIYAD: Hr ﬂamed al-Rushwadi, by virtue of your position, what are the
means of controlling this phenomenon or this sickness?

Al-Rushwadi: In fact, I started working in this agency in 1393 of the Bijra.
In the early phase, the customs agency did not, naturally, encounter the pro-
blem of drug smuggling. The agency’s role or message was primarily to collect
money, i.e., collect customs fees. It seems to me that with the large number
of foreigners coming into the country, a number estimated at thousands coming
in daily through the air, sea and land points of entry, not to mention those
coming in seasonally. such as peOple who come in during the pilgrimage season
and who, as all know, exceed hundreds of thousands. as shown by the statistics
published by the Ministry of Interior [we find that if we consider any airport,
such as Jiddah, Riyadh or Dhahran airports, we find that the newcomers exceed
hundreds of thousands daily. With the increasingtnmmers of incoming foreigners,
whether by air or by land, we have actually begun to face, if we may use the
expression, a drug invasion-if we use the phrase in the broad sense and in-
clude alcohol.

With the large number of incoming people and in evidence of the statistics we
have on the drug volume. including pills, hashish and alcohol, we find that
all the smugglers are non-Saudis and that Saudi smugglers are nonexistent.

AL—RIYAD: Is the Saudi smuggler nonexistent or is the percentage of Saudi
smugglers small?

33
Al-Rushwadi: Compared to others, I can say that the Saudi smugglers do not
number more than 10 percent, according to the statistics we have, excluding
pushers. who are in a different category. We are talking of smugglers.

The customs agency is directly responsible for combatting smugglers. Our
society is, as you know, a conservative and closely-knit Muslim society. We
didn't know all this [drug use]. If we took any village or city in the past.
we would have found that such substances did not exist. Moreover, we did not
even know about them. But a large number of the incoming foreigners use these
drugs in their countries. The motive for drug smuggling may be a material
motive, as proven by the figures and investigations, or it may be aimed at
invading our society and attempting to undermine it by smuggling drugs into it,
pushing these drugs and spreading their use among the youth, the drivers and
all social classes to cause the disintegration of the society. The methods of
smuggling are varied and countless. This makes me want to try to give some
examples of the ways to which smugglers have resorted to smuggle in their drugs.
But God be thanked, and with the care of the Compassionate and the Merciful,
with the encouragement and support of the state and with the cooperation of all
the state agencies, the authorities concerned have been able to catch and
apprehend the culprits. For example, we have seized hashish in drums, in

the trunks, back seats and right rear doors of cars, in hollowed places in the
front of cars, under car (ashtrays), in cardboard boxes, in figurines, in car
air conditioners, in ventilation ducts and under car hoods. All these attempts
have been foiled by the customs agencies. Most of the attempts have been made
by land. Re have also discovered drugs hidden in various other places in
vehicles. We have discovered pills and morphine injections in vegetable cans
and confectionery boxes, in vehicle gas tanks, in bandkerchiefs tied to baskets
installed on the right and left sides of truck cabs and in a secret compartment
in a parrot cage. We have found alcohol hidden in places hollowed out in lumber
shipments. Re have discovered other examples of smuggling attempts, such as
passports and residence cards hidden in secret compartments of briefcases and
in shoes. He have discovered attempts to smuggle drugs in spare car tires,
between the car battery and body, in the radio of a car coming from New York,
in hollowed-out places in car floors, on top of cement for camouflage [as
published] in iron pipes next to the containers, in pipes attached to the car
roof and filled with hashish, in high heels, between layers of plywood, in
refrigerators, in nylon, in a pillow, in censers, in secret cassette compart-
ments, in a bag full of food, in dining table legs, in the front and rear
shock absorbers of a car and in a telephone apparatus covered with marble.

He wanted to cite these cases because they are unusual. As for the ordinary
cases, they are countless. He seize quantities of drugs daily, but not neces-
sarily commercial quantities. For example, when a customs official took out a
cigarette from a cigarette pack, he found it filled with hashish. We have found
drugs in a secret compartment of a gas tank, in a can hidden inside another
can hidden in a cardboard box within yet another cardboard box and covered
with roses for camouflage, in an air conditioner's fan, in a postal parcel, in
the walls of a small ice box carried by a passenger, in cushions, in sofas,

in books, in concrete, in gypsum and in gypsum blocks.

There are countless examples and we have discovered all of them easily. We
know that it is not possible to cite all of them. However, customs officials,
with the encouragement of the government and with the cooperation of the state
agencies operating at the entry points, have been able, God be thanked, to

34
discover these snuggling attempts by land, sea and air and to foil the smug-
glers.

Us Have Ability to Discover Criminals

AL-RIYAD: How have these quantities, small as they are, been discovered, since
their being such small quantities may cause customs officials to overlook them?

Al-Rushwadi: Inspection, of course. We know that every passenger and every

vehicle has to be inspected completely. We are very careful to do this and
we cannot be lax in this regard.

AL-RIYAD: Is this the result of precision, of the inspection method or of
something else?

Al-Rushwadi: We expect anything. Anticipation, caution and precision enable
us to discover the drugs. A keen eye, in addition to experience, also helps

us. We have the ability to discover any quantity, regardless of how small and
how well hidden it is.

AL-RIYAD: You have cited the example of the cigarette pack. I don't think
that anyone arriving, whether by land, sea or air, expects to be checked so
thoroughly. How was the pack discovered?

Al-Rushwadi: The appearance of the criminal, to start with. What we mean is
that we now have the experience and the ability. Lieutenant General Yahya no
doubt has his experience in the field of crime. We have a proverb that says,
"he who eats raw meat will have a stomachache," which means that we can die-
cover him easily. Let me give you this example. I was once on a night inspec-
tion tour in Halat 'Amnar. A person was coming into the country by car. The
car stopped and the officer looked it over carefully. The officer then approach-
ed the shift supervisor and told him: Leave this car to me, please. The

shift supervisor then came to me and said: Please, come and hear what this
officer wants. I said to the officer: What do you want? lie answered: This
passenger's movement is not normal. I suspect him. So they inspected the
passenger thoroughly. What was the result?

They found that the walking stick he was holding was filled with hashish.
Naturally, experience is one way to discover smugglers.

It is my belief, and perhaps the brothers agree with me, that any smuggler and
any person engaged in abnormal activity will inevitably display, regardless
of how strong his self-control is, abnormal behavior or movements. The hiding
places in cars have become known to us. He exchange information and we photo-
graph them and send the photographs to all customs offices. They know the

places and when the passenger displays any abnormal behavior, they search him.
Sometimes, smugglers smuggle hashish with children.

Al-Ha'lami: The truth is that I didn't want brother Hanad to expose the means.
However, I believe that he has not mentioned most of the means with which drugs
can be discovered because these are numerous. There are scientific means and
material means and various other elements, in addition to inspection and care-
ful observation. It serves no interest to explain them here. But I would like
to say that no metter how clever the smuggler is and no matter how strongly he
believes that he can smuggle in his own way, the customs men, with the experience
they have gained, are cleverer than he is. In addition to intelligence, there
is experience. All the tricks that the smuggler can imagine have been encounter-
ed by the customs officers. What has not been encountered by one officer has
been encountered by another. As brother named has already pointed out, there

is an exchange of information. I believe that in some training courses, the
customs officers are familiarized with the places. objects or methods that
smugglers use in their activity. In addition to the information received at
times about major smugglers and the surveillance to which they are subjected
inside and outside the kingdom, without their being aware of it, there are the
elements of natural intelligence and sensitivity. All these are factors that
act in unison to uncover and arrest the smuggler.

Al—Rushwadi: For example, I will tell you that when any case is discovered in
any customs office, be it a border custom office. port or airport customs -
office, and a smuggler is apprehended, the office takes mediate steps. send-
ing a cable or a telex on the details of the case. whether it should be made
known to all the kingdom's land, sea and air customs offices, the smuggler's
name, the method of smuggling used. the quantity seized and the name of the
officer making the seizure. There is a law and there are regulations that re-
quire the customs director to send within hours the details of a smuggling
attempt to all customs offices. The General Customs Directorate is given a
copy so that it can initiate procedures for conferring the rewards about which
we will speak later.

Dangers of Drugs to Users

AL-RIYAD: The fact is that we wish to complete the scientific discussion of
drugs. Could Dr ﬂamed define the extent of the danger of the various kinds
of drugs?

Dr al-Suqayr: I believe that this is an important point that can explain some
of the motivations noted by Lieutenant General Yahya.

Scientifically, drugs and alcoholic beverages are divided into groups. The
effects produced by these groups explain why people use them.

The first group is called the depressants or sedatives, which include opim

in its crude form, morphine and cocaine, all of which are extracted from the
poppy plant. These substances are actually used as pain killers and morphine
in still used legally and scientifically for this purpose. But for addicts,
the purpose is different because morphine not only kills pain but generates a
feeling of rest and relaxation through which a person forgets his pains and

his problems. Included in this group of depressants are ordinary sedatives and
sleeping pills. For example, valium and liberium are among the drugs that we
say help to create a feeling of tranquillity. Sleeping pills are included in
this group. There are various pills prescribed by doctors. But these pills
may be used to excess. This is what is happening now. we hear that everybody
is using valiun to excess. For example, many businessmen and high-ranking
officials consider valius something that helps then to act wisely, calmly and
with self-control. This group of drugs has its effects, neaning that they may
at the outset suppress pain. relax a person and calm his emotions. But with
time and increased dosage. the drugs produce a different effect, i.e., they
act as depressants, producing effects ranging from slulber to unconsciousness.

Other Types: St inulsnts

The other type of drugs is quite. the opposite; they are called stimulants.
There are various kinds of stimulants, including the cocaine shrub, which grows
in South Africa. Cocaine is extracted from the shrub and is used as a stimu-
lant. We add to this the pills that drivers use to gain strength and mergy,
as well as diet pills that stimlate the body and weaken the appetite. Many
people use these pills, which are fundamentally stimlants. But people imagine
that the pills reduce weight by weakening the appetite. They are stimulants
and a person using them feels tense, depending on the dosage used. This type
of drug also includes the so-called halucinogens (S.V.) which, God be thanked,
we don't have. Few people use then here. These pills are used in the United
States and other places. But naturally, there is a danger of these pills com-
ing into our country in the future.

The fourth type includes hashish and marijuana. about which the brothers have
talked. This is another type of drug. People use these drugs in imitation of
others, as a result of what they hear about their being sexual stimulants or
for relaxation and forgetting their problals. Then there is al-qat, which is
a different type of drug even though it contains sane of the ingredients of
hashish. The last type is alcoholic drinks, the sixth type of drug. In many
cases, two types of drugs are taken together, as when a person takes a de-
pressant and a stimulant at the same time. In such cases. the effect is un-
controllable. Hhat we nean is that a person nay, for example, take a stimu-
lant and then feel tense. So he looks for something else, imagining that
using two drugs will produce the effects he wants. Or a person may take a
sedative and an alcoholic drink with it. This is very dangerous. This is why,
when a doctor prescribes a drug, he writes on the prescription instructions
stating what not to take with the drug. One night as]: what are the results of
using stimulants and depressants together.

The result is that the user behaves in a manner that he could not imagine be-
cause the interaction and effects of these substances differ from person to
person. They also differ in the sane person, depending on whether the drugs
are taken on a full stomach or not and on the person's psychological condition.'

Statistics on Addiction and Addicts

Dr ﬂamed al-Suqayr, undersecretary in the Ministry of Health, adds: There is
a statistical figure on those admitted to al-Ta'if hospital. It is a simple
figure but it underlines to us the dangers we are facing and the problems we
are experiencing. The latest statistical figure presented to the ministry

fron the mental diseases hospital in al-Ta'if, namely, the Shahhar Hospital.

37
on the emergency cases admitted to the hospital involve not addicts who stay
home and spare others their evils, which most addicts do, but addicts who got
into traffic accidents while under the influence of drugs and had to he admitted
to the hospital for emergency care. I noticed in the statistical figure the
presence of an important category (a category of particular interest to brother
Lieutenant General Yahya), namely, the victims of alcohol and drug accidents.
Last year, 1,941 of these cases were admitted to Shahhar Hospital, 163 of which
were alcohol and drug cases, representing nearly seven percent of the cases
admitted to the mental diseases hospital. These are cases suffering from
mental instability and abnormality. 0f the total number, 115 were Saudis. As
for age, most of the cases, both Saudis and non-Saudis, ranged in age from 20
to 60 years. This period in a man's life is the period of vitality and youth.
A total of 110 were between the ages of 20 and 60. Naturally, the percentages
for other age groups are smaller. It was also found that the largest percen—
tage consisted of drivers, who comprised 24 percent of the cases, and of unem-
ployed, who formed the second largest percentage. The third largest group came
from among unskilled workers. ‘

Students Are Very Few
AL-RIYAD: "hat about students?

Al-Suqayr: There were only two students in the entire group. Skilled workers
comprised nearly 5 percent of the group, unskilled workers nearly 18 percent
and people engaged in private business 13 percent. The highest percentages
were comprised of drivers and the unemployedJ

Institution to Treat Addicts

AL-RIYAD: Has the Ministry of Health thought of establishing an institution
to treat these cases, especially since they have begun to increase, whereas
they were nonexistent or existed in very small numbers in the past?

Dr al-Suqayr: I agree with you that this is a normal and fundamental step that
should have been taken some time ago. But we are now in the process of imple-
menting it and, God willing, an institution will be opened very shortly to
treat addicts.

In fact, it is my opinion that it is difficult to treat addicts. He must put
an addict in an institution [Rehabilitation Center] that is not a hospital so
that he does not feel that he is a patient, but at the same time we must not
isolate him. Actually, the word institution is a very reasonable expression.
He should call this place a convalescent home. This is the name generally
agreed on, considering that the patient is moving from one phase to another to
restore normalcy to his life. To create this climate for the addict, we are
now taking positive steps to establish a project in Riyadh. This project
should become a reality in the near future, even if we have to rent a place for
the purpose. In every mental institutions being set up by the ministry, an
addiction section will be set up. whether it is in the Riyadh Medical Complex,
in the mental institution in al-Ta'if, which new has 300 beds excluding the 500
beds being added at present, in the Abha hospital or in other hospitals.
Every hospital will have a special section for addicts. In al-Ta'if, we have
rented a home and turned it into a convalescent home. This home is detached
from the hospital. bec.ase it serves a phase that follows the initial treatment
phase. We have faced problems as a result of the location of the home and the
disapproval ofthe neighborhood's residents. The way people feel about these
nental convalescent homes is also a problem, considering that people feel about
convalescents in mental homes the way they used to feel about convalescents in
tuberculosis aanitariuns. It is difficult to persuade neighboring residents.
However. we have overcome this problem. A sanitarium [Rehabilitation Center]
will be founded very shortly. The ministry is interested in this point and
will include it in its future projects.

AL-Riyad: How can a patient go to a sanitarium when he lacks the personal de-
sire and motive to try to overcome this sickness?

Al-Rushwadi: The nethod of treatment is based on treating the patient by giving
him gradually reduced doses of the drug. I believe that this is the principle
here. I acknowledge that there are those who will ask: now is it we give the
addict what he buys from the market when we should be preventing him from taking
drugs? Our answer is: It is better for the addict to get the drug in gradual-
ly reduced doses at the sanitariun [Rehabilitation Center] than to be denied it
all at once. Naturally. this is an issue that requires courage and a decision
by authorities other than the Ministry of Health. "hat we mean is that this
decision is not a nedical decision but one that depends on other agencies that
can give the go-ahead signal first.

Dr al-Suqayr: I believe that sanitariums founded initially will be of two kinds:
Those treating recidivist addicts already treated and released. as shown by the
records. and those treating others who have not been arrested previously and
who cone for treatment voluntarily to get rid of their addiction. The proposed
sanitariun or convalescent home is completely different from previous mental
hospitals. At the outset. we may be scientifically compelled to administer to
the addicts some drugs that they cannot give up abruptly. But the emphasis
will be on the social and religious aspects and on persuading the addict.

This means that a number of discussions must be held on the issue and on the
effects of drugs as that certain specialists. sociologists and clergy-en can

be persuaded to inculcate this spirit.

It is my opinion that a drug addict is willing to give up eating and drinking,
to abandon his family, to steal and to commit crime. This is what is happening
in some countries. In many countries, addicts hold up people at gunpoint in
the middle of the street and demand money to buy the dose of drug they need.
These people are sick. How can such a person be treated? The problem must be
approached scientifically and such an approach is available at addiction treat-
ment centers.

Role of Security Agencies
AL-RIYAD: This question is addressed to Lt Gen Yahya al-Ha'lami: What is the

security agencies' role in keeping away the ghost of fear from the addict so
that he will cone forward for treatment, considering that the addict is afraid

39
to acknowledge his addiction for fear of the punishment that follows the
treatment? Hhat is your opinion on this?

Al—ha‘lami: I would like to explain this point. I can say that insofar as the
security policy is concerned, if an addict applies for treatment at official
sanitarim or specialized hospitals of the Ministry of Health. then the se-
curity men will pursue him no further. 0n the contrary. we encourage treatment
because the purpose is to combat drugs and to protect the citizen and the
society and its members against drugs. I believe that whoever submits to
treatment voluntarily responds to our goals. Consequently, we must open the
opportunity to such an addict and must not pursue him. I believe that this
policy is applied but I doubt that there are those who try to get treatment

for the sake of treatment. "hat addicts want is to get at the treatment centers
the drugs they can or cannot buy outside by pretending to seek treatment. In
such a case. of course, the addict is cheating. This fact must be taken into
consideration and evaluated. As for the person who actually comes for treat-
ment, 1 say frankly that he is a victim and we met reexamine the issue on the
basis that he is an innocent victim. It is true that the addict has made a
mistake and emitted a crime against himself. But in fact, he is the victim.
The true criminal is the smuggler and the pusher who has introduced this disease
into the country. They are the real criminals who must be punished most severe-
ly. As for the addict. he has conitted a mistake and a misdeameanor and
deserves to be punished. But the punishment must be gentle and designed to
make him feel that his action is wrong. Heanwhile. the emphasis insofar as the
addict is concerned should be more on treatment than on punishent.

Dr al-Suqayr: I would like to underline a point in order to eliminate some of
the fears to which the brother lieutenant general has referred. Nobody can
come to the hospital from the street and say "I am an addict” and be given a
drug. There are scientific tests that can prove whether a person is an addict
or not. Besides, a person seeking treatment for addiction not submit to a
medical examination and to a period of mental and behavioral observation when
the reaction of the addict becomes scientifically evident to the sanitarium
[Rehabilitation Center]. No one can deceive the sanitarim. The applicant

may resort to some tricks and abnormal movements. But the scientific tests.
such as blood pressure. tests on the pupil of the eye and the pulse, can expose
the tricks. It is well known that when a person becomes addicted to a drug,
the effect of the drug becomes obvious within a certain period. If he stops
taking the drug. the effect disappears after a time. For example, if a person
is a diabetic and takes insulin. he develops certain characteristics. If he
takes insulin in still bigger doses. other characteristics develop. If the
sugar rate rises in the diabetic's blood, he might become unconscious. However,
there are scientific tests that demonstrate everything. It is difficult to
trust an addict's word. he may say: I have come for some morphine. We cannot

say. here, take it and let him deceive us. because he may then make a tour of
all the sanitariums [Rehabilitation Centers] and get all he wants. No, this
cannot be done.

Penalty for Smuggling and Pursuit of Smugglers

AL-RIYAD: Hr ﬂamed al-Rushwadi, you have referred to some statistics on drug
seizures made at the points of entry. I believe that the issue does not end
with discovering the smuggler or the criminal. what are the penalties for
smuggling and pushing?

40
Al-Rushudi: First, it is my opinion that we must focus on the causes of the
problem. But if we agree that the danger comes from abroad and not from
within-and I don't say this out of bias or out of partiality to the Saudi
citizen because the figures, facts and statistics are indisputable [sentence
as published]. As I have already said, our society is a conservative Islamic
society and these diseases ahve been brought into it either for the purpose of
destroying this society and its beliefs and of fighting society or for the pur-
pose of profit. This is indisputable and both possibilities are likely. Per-
haps the investigations conducted by the agencies concerned can shed light on
this issue. The fact is that the customs agency has its role and then comes
the role of the security agencies concerned.

The role of the customs agency at the land, sea and air points of entry is to
inspect all passengers, means of transportation and goods to look for prohibited
or banned substances, whether banned for social reasons. traditions, economic
reasons, political reasons or health reasons.

In the customs agency, we carry out the inspection as a customs agency to make
sure that no alcohol, pills, drugs, weapons or anti-religious materials, such
as sex films and lewd magazines-all of which are banned-enter the country. He
then come to another type of substance, namely, goods permitted to enter the
country only in accordance with advance import permits, i.e., with the approval
of the authorities concerned. For example, the Ministry of health is concerned
with medicines and the customs agency may not clear any medicines without the
approval of the Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Agriculture's approval is
needed for vegetables and fruits. The Ministry of Information is concerned
with books and magazines and the Religious Interpretation and Propagation
Authority is concerned with religious books and Koranic books. Each ministry
has its special representatives. The customs agency conducts its inspections
to look for any of these banned materials. If something is discovered, then
the action depends on the material discovered. If it is something banned, then
we tell the passenger bringing it: Go and get a permit from the pertinent
authority. If the material is prohibited, whether for religious or health
reasons--such as magazines which cause no physical harm, them the agnecy con-
ducts its investigation with the passenger concerned, writes a report on the
case signed by the passenger and confiscates the material. In the case of
hashish, for example, the customs agency conducts an initial investigation with
the smuggler and a report is written in the presence of representatives of the
Drug Control Agency. Customs them hands over the smuggler and the hashish
seized to the Drug Control Agency and levies on the smuggler a fine, depending
on the quantity of hashish seized. Thecurrent fine is 1,000 riyals per kilo-
gram of hashish, according to the customs regulations. I hope that the fine
will be doubled, God willing. This fine is awarded to the customs officer or
officers seizing the smuggled hashish, be they 1 or 10 officers, as an incen-
tive. I am not exaggerating when I say that millions of riyals have been paid
as incentive. If the smuggler cannot pay the fine, the state, represented in
the customs agnecy, makes the payment to whoever makes the seizure, be he a
customs officer, a drug control officer, a health official, a person working

in AL-RIYAD or anybody. Such a person is paid the reward from a special
account in the customs agency treasury if the smuggler cannot pay the fine.
There are special committees to handle smuggling cases, to make speedy decisions
on such cases and to avoid the transfer of smugglers from province to province.

41
There are 11 such co—ittees in the various provinces of the kingdol. These
co-Iitteee are found in the Hestern Province. the Southern Province, a1-
Hathbara. Juan, helat 'A-Iar. al-hdithah, al-Ruqa'i, al-lhafaji, al-Da-al
and Riyadh. All of these cousittees try ssugglers. issue sentences and hand
over enugglers to the drug control agencies. Then cones the role of the drug
control agencies in punishing the nuggler.

The enuggler nay use a truck to snuggle drugs. alcohol. pills or hashish vlaued
at more than 1,000 riyals, perhaps 300.000 riyals or even 1 nillion riyals.
which has .prened. In such cases. the snuggled goods and the vehicle are
confiscated and the snuggler has to pay the fine for the-eauggled drugs.

Eighty percent of the value of the angled goods is paid as an incentive to
the officer making the seizure.

AL-RIYAD: What about the value of the goods? [As published]

Al-Rushuedi: Eighty percent of the value of the goods goes to the officer
making the seirure, in cash. As for the vehicles, they enter the state
treasury. As for goods. I have given you two exslples involving cars belong-
ing to Geraan citizens that were confiscated by the custoss authorities in
al-nadithah. Their value anounted to 600,000 riyale. '

AL-RIYAD: The value of the goods or of the two cars? .

AL-RUSIIIDI: Thirty percent of the value of the two cars plus the value of the
goods they carried amounted to l nillion riyele. The cars and goods were con-
fiscated and the reward, wanting to 30 percent of the value of the two core
and 80 percent of the value of the goods. was paid to nearly 12 officers who
made the seizure. “hoover makes a drug seizure. even if he is not a Saudi or
a state employee. gets to collect the reward. The penalty according to the
custoea lav is strict. Per-nit no to say that there is no law as strict as our
law. and I an not exaggerating when I say this. Under our law. you confiscate
the snuggler's vehicle and his goods and you fine his. The latter does not end
there because we then hand over the esuggler to the drug control agencies to
receive his punishment. This punisI-snt in actuality should not be hindered.

AL-RIYAD: Despite the confiscation, the fines, the....?

Al-Rushvedi: Yes. because this punish-ant has not been adequate. We still
find smuggling at the borders. m a vehicle is confiscated, the case is
Isde known to hundreds of drivers (nearly 250-!” drivers) and the nerve reaches
all the neighboring countries and even Europe. It is ay opinion that the
penalties applied by the custons agency according to its lav. by the Ministry
of Interior—imprisonment and other punish-ant about which I cannot talk he-e
cause it is not within my Jurisdiction—are not adequate. This is why I
believe, and I an not speaking in the nails of the custom agency here but
speaking personally as a citizen [sentence as published]. I believe, and
perhaps so does brother Yahya. that the uuggler and the pusher are the reel
criainels. I an no religious authority on this issue but I have discussed
the natter with a Shari'e professor at In Huha—ed ibn Ss'ud University and
he belieVes that these people spread corruption on earth and nust. therefore,
be sentenced to death. In my opinion, this is the solution for the snuggler
and the pusher. As for the user, he is a victin. This is what I believe as
far as penalties are concerned.

AL—RIYAD: Re have heard so far about the financial and customs penalties. He
would like to hear fron Lt Gen Yahya al-Ha'lani about the security penalties.

Al-Ha'lani: The truth is that the penalty currently applied insofar as drug
use is concerned is the penalty of a prison tern of up to 2 years.

AL-RIYAD: As a mini-us or a eaci-n?

Al-Ma'lani: The truth is that the law sought a 2-year prison tern and then an
explanation was received fro. the Council of Ministers stating that this is the
naxinlna. There is still a question pending as to whether a shorter tern can be
applied. "hat happens at present is that the 2-year tern is applied to a user.

AL-RIYAD: Even to s hashish user?

Al-Ma'lani: Ryan to the user of a single drug pill. One individual was caught
with a single pill on his person, and God knows how it got to be on his, and

he was still sentenced to a 2-year tern on a decision by the minister of inter-
ior in accordance with the Council of Hinisters decree that sets the penalty.
Naturally, there is an inclination to lake the penalty flexible, taking into
consideration the quantity seized with a user. the individual's circustances
and other factors so that (the principle) of punish-ant lay be applied accord-
ingly within the context of Public Safety at large. The principle of punish-
nent is established by law. Every culprit nust receive a punish-ant fitting
him personally, regardless of the limit set. I say that the present penalty
for a user is a 2-year prison tern, for a pusher a 5-year tern and for a
snuggler up to 15 years in jail. Regrettably, smuggling continues despite this
long inprisouent. Inagine a person who is jailed for 15 years and whose pro-
perty is confiscated, thus being first denied his noney, which is the source
of his intone and, second, being isolated from society, from his country and
his homeland, for 15 years, and yet you find more snugglers and sore pushers.
Here, I add ny voice to brother Banad's about considering a stricter punish-
ment for pushers and for seugglers, especially because the smuggler brings in
large quantities. Seugglers are often people with ﬂoral and financial in-

f luence who exploit others below then to do the snuggling. If we reach the
big heads, they must be given stricter punishment because they are truly people
who spread corruption on earth. I as not giving a legal [religious] interpre-
tation here but just stating my opinion. These are the people who spread
corruption on earth because there is nobody lore corrupting than those who
poison society, destroy the citizen and defy Islan, religion, the state and
everything and ruin the mental capabilities of the innocent Muslin citizens.

Drug Rings and Their Dena Abroad
AL-RIYAD: Lieutenant General Yahya, regarding the arrest of pushers and
snugglers, has this activity been linked to certain rings or groups or is the

majority of the arrests confined to individuals? Generally, what is the role
of the public security organs in enlightenim the citizens as to the use of

43
drugs? It is possible that a person may start fooling with drugs abroad as a
gene and then bring than into the country with his and change fron one person
into a different person and turn into a drug pusher when he realizes the
benefit? that is public security’s role in fighting the spread of drugs through
education? Have any rings with big internal and external connections actually
been discovered? The second thing is: “at is the role of enlightening the
citizen as to their [drug rings] dangers? The newspapers and information

aedia often discuss their dangers but I don't believe that such action has
taken place at any tine insofar as drugs are concerned [as published].

Al-Ha'lani: It is true that drug use begins at the outset as a pastine and
then turns into a habit and then .a sickness. Drug use begins as a pastiae and
a gene and then becoaes a habit that develops until the drugs becone indispen-
sable and the user turns into an addict, as they say. Drug use then because a
disease. This is insofar as use is concerned. As for snuggling and pushing,
there is no doubt that they are linked to certain rings. There are big heads
and international gangs outside the kingdon engaged in drug mggling and push-
ing. He cooperate and exchange infornation with Interpol and with all of the
drug control agencies in the world. Anybody we catch here gets his punishment,
of course. Those arrested abroad are also punished. but it seen to he that
the aethods of investigation and trial and the laws abroad provide strong pro-
tection to the Iain figures behind the snuggling and pushing operations con-
sidering that these figures are not directly engaged in the activity but ex-
ploit others to carry it out. The middleman is the one who always suffers.

As for the min figures. they do not get caught because they rennin behind the
scenes. financing the trial defense or other expenses needed for the person
arrested and for his fanily. we here are fire and strict in our sentences and
no other considerations influence us. Anybody caught snuggling is punished
regardless of who he is. Nobody escapes this punislnent. Even users are
punished. He now have in jail pushers and smugglers when nobody would have
expected to be involved in this work. In any case, this is what has happened.
These people were caught redhanded and they—users. pushers and snugglersware
now serving their tern in jail.

AL-RIYAD: The point we refer to concerns publicizing the punishaent in the
newspapers, as is done in cases of counterfeiting. Why isn't this done?

Al-Ha'lani: I believe that the cries of snuggling and pushing drugs is lore
serious and inportant than the crime of forgery and counterfeiting. There-
fore, I an inclined to support publication of the penalties and of the nanes
and photographs of saugglers and pushers to revile than on the one hand and to
protect the citizens and enlighten then as to these people's crises on the
other hand. As to what is being currently done for the purpose of enlighten-
ment. I believe that efforts are currently mdemy to draw up a couplets plan
for enlighten-cut as to the dangers of alcohol and drugs. The Ministry of
Interior is engaged in these efforts. His Highness Prince Ahead held a seet-
ing with the public security nan and a coll-ittee has been for-ed to fornulate
a general enlightenment, plan covering the health, social and econonic dangers
of drugs. I believe that the ministry will shortly begin carrying out its
plan in the various information Iedia. I would like to note that Ab-RIYAD has
taken the initiative by holding this synposiun as a forerunner of the plan
being currently prepared.

lob
kamination of Baployee Before Appointment

AL-Riyad: Dr named, to what is it possible to coordinate between the Ministry
of Health and all other establisl-ents. be they goveruent agencies. private
companies or organizations or any other organizations, to make it impossible
for a person to be employed until he undergoes complete tests. whether blood

tests or otherwise, to uncover the early signs of addiction and, consequently.
to contain them?

Dr al-Suqayr: I agree with you. This is very important in fighting this
disease. There must be coordination with the circles concerned. Various
circles must participate even in the cornittee formed to draw up the enlighten-
ment plan concerning drug dangers and control. This is fundamental. Various
circles must participate in the enlightement effort so that we can influence
the citizen and may make him aware of the dangers of drugs to his person and

to his family.

Statistical Figures on Drugs

AL-RIYAD: The press is always interested in statistics. We want Lt Gen Yahya
al-Ha'lami and Mr Bamad al-Rushudi to give us the statistics on the largest

quantity of drugs or of banned substances seized inside the kingdom or at the
kingdaa's points of entry.

Al-Rushudi: The truth is that I did try to get this figure but there was not
enough time. Frankly, I can say that pills ahve probably been seized in the
millions, meaning that the total in 2 or 3 years amounts to millions. The
quantities of hashieh seized probably amount to hundreds of kilograms. As for
alcohol, the quantities amount to tens of thousands of bottles. These are so
snall figures. In a period of 2-3 years, the quantities of alcohol seized
amounted to thousands. not hundreds, of bottles, of hashieh to hundreds of
kilograms and of pills to millions. not to mention other seized nteriels,
such as forged work permits, forged passports and other forged doculents. We
have accurate statistics prepared by the customs offices operating at the
points of entry but I have not had enough time to gather them. So I am giving
you approximate figures.

Smuggling Plans: Their Timing and Seasons

AL-RIYAD: Are there certain areas where and certain times when smugglers
become active?

Al-Rushudi: Yes. Being in the customs agency, I can speak for the smuggling.
As for drug pushing. Lieutenant General Yahya can answer that.

As far as snuggling is concerned, I can say that no less than 90 percent of
the people engaged are non-Saudis. Permit me not to mention specific
nationalities. however, these people come from various countries. As for the
various types of smuggling, most of the hashieh is smuggled by land. Alcohol
is the substance smuggled in the biggest quantities, mostly by way of the
ports. Pills are smuggled by way of the airports. especially Jiddah. Natur-
ally, we have certain nationalities and specific countries. meaning that we

65
can now tell certain nationalities that smuggle this or that kind of drug from
this or that country. The customs agency has developed such a keen eye and
gained such experience that we can now tell that such and such countries
specialize in hashish. this and that country specialize in alcohol and that and
the other country specialize in magazines and films, for example. This is
insofar as the points of entry are concerned.

As for the seasons, the smuggling of alcohol becomes active prior to the new
year because the country is full of foreigners, as you know. Before Christmas
and the new year. alcohol smuggling usually becomes active. Bashish and pill
smuggling also becomes active at certain times. The smugglers try as hard as
they can during the pilgrimage seasons because of the large numbers of pilgrims
coming into the country. But the quantities seized indicate the sincere desire
and efforts exerted to combat drug smuggling. There are nuerous factors that
help us discover smuggled drugs.

AL-RIYAD: Are there certain groups, such as professional merchants. workers
or specific classes. who smuggle these substances?

Al-Rushwadi: Saudis rarely smuggle alcohol. Host alcohol smugglers are workers.
clerks, engineers or technicians. Host hashiah smugglers are drivers. (As

soon as the consignment arrives, the smugglers-dust of them foreigners--
disguise as businessmen) [as published]. Pills are smuggled by ordinary people.
Hashish is smuggled in small quantities not exceeding 5 kilograms per shipment.
Heroin and cocaine are also smuggled.

Pine for Smuggling Drugs
AL-RIYAD: What is the fine for [smuggling] drugs?

Al-Rushudi: In accordance with the customs law. we now levy a fine of 1,000
riyals per kilogram of hashish. The law says that a smuggler may not be re-
leased from jail until he pays the fine. even if he is sentenced by the Minis-
try of Interior or by the provincial governments. Usually, no provincial
government in the kingdom releases a smuggler. even if he has fully served

his term, without the approval of the customs, meaning unless the customs agency
is notified that the smuggler has paid the fine or that he is unable to pay it.
Another system is applied for alcohol where a fine of 1,000 riyals is levied
for every 12 bottles. The fine for pills ranges from one quarter riyal to 2
riyals per pill. All these fines are awarded to the officers making the
seizures, regardless of the sum involved. I would be revealing no secret when
I say that 3 months ago we paid nearly 1.1 million riyals to no more than 10
employees of one of the state agencies. Moreover, there are other fines that
I need not mention. There are fines even for pornographic magazines and films
and for weapons. 0n the instructions of his Excellency Muha-ad Abs al-Khayl.
the customs agency has a secret fund with a good sun of money from which to pay
any customs officer who seizes any kind of prohibited or banned substances.
The reward for such an officer ranges from 1,000 to 20,000 riyals paid from
the secret fund. This is in addition to the regular fine that the officer
collects as an earned right. Nobody can deny the officer this right. If the
smuggler cannot pay the fine, the customs agency pays it to the officer from
its own treasury. This secret fund is confined to the customs officers. what
prevents paying a drug control officer, a public security officer or any other

46
official playing a role in the seizure of drugs a reward from this secret fund?
As for the regular reward, it is not restricted to anybody and may be paid to
any citizen or any person, even if he is not a citizen. Anybody who provides
the customs agency with information on drugs gets paid 50 percent of the fine.
This means that if the fine is 1 million riyals, the informer gets paid $00,000
riyals. Any worker, employee or person who seizes drugs or informs on drugs is
paid a reward. Therefore, these are facts for which I must praise the minister

of interior and the deputy minister of interior. As I have already pointed out,
the minister of finance gives the customs officers rewards from the secret fund.
The minister of interior and deputy minister of interior have also given in-
centive rewards to whomever has participated [in exposing] or informing on drug
activities, including non-Saudis. This means that the door is open for anybody
who provides information, leads to or seizes drugs.

Entrapment of Citizens

AL-RIYAD: We have an observation to make to Lieutenant General al-Ha'lami.

At times, drugs are planted on drivers or passengers, while they are traveling
on the highways, without their knowledge. what is the position of thepub11c
security organs in such cases, especially when the person planting the drugs
is not in the kingdom and when he plants the drugs for smuggling or trading?

Al-Ha'lami: Contacts can be made by the criminal police with the country con-
cerned and direct contacts can be made between countries. But naturally, a
person with whom the drugs are sent will deny and will not acknowledge or con-
fess. He cannot conduct an investigation in another country. If necessary,

we ask the authorities of the country concerned to question theperson alleged
to have done the planting. I have a simple answer regarding the statistics
that you have asked for. I have no statistical figure at present on the number
of people arrested or on the quantities seized with them. Even if such a
figure were available, it would have to go through certain steps before it was
made public. Any statistics have to be published as part of an official state-
ment. I can refer you to the statistical booklet issued by the Ministry of
Interior where you can find the statistics on past years, as well as to the
general statistics published by the Ministry of Finance where you can find the
information you want for past'years, for last-year and even for the current
year.

Coordination Between Security Agencies to Combat Smuggling

AL-RIYAD: Hr ﬂamed, how is coordination established between you and other
countries, especially the Gulf states and neighboring countries, at the coun—
try's points of entry to combat the entry of drugs and alcohol to the area
generally, considering that some international firms or rings have turned
toward exploiting the area's conditions and to attempting to entrap its citi-
zens?

Al-Rushwadi: As you have noted, the truth is that there are attempts to ex-
ploit the facilities and the large number of foreign workers in the Gulf
states. As we said at the outset of the discussion, there is no doubt that
certain groups infiltrate for a certain purpose. Let me stress again that I

47
believe that this purpose is to fight this society and our creed with these
methods and through the dissemination of this destruction. This is my viewb
point, and I may be right or I may be wrong. But this is what I believe as a
result of my experience in this field. There may be other reasons (material
incentives). It is possible that there are individuals who monopolize and
direct this smuggling activity. As for coordination and cooperation, they are
actually good. There are contacts and exchanges of information. I hope that
the [Gulf] Cooperation Council and the new treaty concluded will produce better
results. God willing. The kingdom is. naturally. a member of the Customs-
COoperation Council in Brussels, which includes more than 80 countries that
exchange information on smugglers. This is very good, I may even say excel-
lent, cooperation with the security agencies concerned of the Ministry of
Interior. The border guards are, as you know, one of the agencies controlled
by the Ministry of Interior. This agency is concerned with the borders and it
is its responsibility to arrest whoever swerves from the (normal routes) and
to arrest smugglers and hand them over to the customs agency to be tried and
fined according to the customs law and to have their goods confiscated. Such
persons are then handed back to the border guards to be tried for violating
the regular routes. The guard than hands them over to the drug control
agencies for punishment.

The coordination is very good. We receive full cooperation from the agencies
of the Ministry of Interior in particular because they are concerned with the
security aspect. There is also cooperation, coordination and information ex-
change insofar as the treatment of drug addiction is concerned. What I mean
is that I am very pleased with this coordination and cooperation. I must say
that insofar as the security agencies are concerned, beginning with brother

Lt Gen 'Abdallah Al al-Shaykh and Yahya al-Ha'lami and ending with all the
brothers whose responsibility and duty it is to also fight drugs, we receive
cooperation not only from the director of drug control but also from the people
on top, and unparalleled cooperation at that. But I hope and wish that stricter
punishment will be meted out to deter whoever may think of smuggling.

8494
CSO: 5300/4713
SAYS PROFESSOR

'APPALLING'

SENTENCING FOR DRUGS

“a w _»m In m.w _.mud
:3 “MW Em“ Mmﬁ mm m,

WmeWWMM Mmﬁ ﬁmmmmww mwmm
“E“ .mmm Em mummhw

MT? “wrm m.“

w.w~_mm “a mﬂmummmmw... m .mmuw

mm~ummu_ me..wmn MmmammwmwT

my .. mm” W “mm gm»

m
M_

Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in English 6 May 82 p 12

[Article by Marilyn Cohen]

(Text)

5300/5736

C50:

49
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060046-0

NATION LAC-GINO IN BATTLE AGAINST DRUG ARISE SAYS IE MIRANDA

Johannesburg '1'!!! CITIZEN in English 5 Hey 82 p 12

[Article by Marilyn Cohen]

$.22 E mm E E E.

mmum%

g“ n—mwu-m— mum“ w“_: i“ memmummmh
Mu d he: a :nb
a. . E m.E .7 1 E

f E E1“? E

sacrum-nun: linema—
:‘mm

[Text]

5300/5735

C80:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060046-0
NEH HEIDI}! VARIETY, 'DUHPM,‘ m PARIS m amour!)
“0080952 Paris APP in English 0822 Gltl‘ 8 Hay 82

[Text] Paris, 8 Hey (AFP)-Strest prices for heroin have slmed by he'lf in
parts of Paris and French police suspect an organisation of south east Asian
refugees of "duping" huge quantities of the drug fra the "golden triangle"
to seize control of the French harkst.

Police said drug pushers fro. south east Asia have been found offering the -
gran of heroin at less than 600 francs (about 100 dollars) while the usual rate
is between 800 and 1,000 francs.

Also. a new variety of heroin, slightly pink in colour and granulated in tex-
ture has appeared on the narket. Police said the “pink" heroin was seized last
week from a group of Laotian and Canbodian refugees. The variety was first
heard of last year in Valaysia but had never before been found in France.

Police said the drug was still being analysed but it appeared to he ends up
of 90 percent pure heroin sinilar to the "snow" once produced by the so-called
"French connection" network in Marseilles, southern France, and later in
Sicily.

Since the beginning of this year a new heroin aarket has grown up in a south
eastern district of Paris where an esti-ated 15,000 refugees fro- bodia,
Vietnam and Laos ahve been resettled.

Until recently the sale of heroin was concentrated in the i-igrant neighbour-
hood of north east Paris where sost of the traffic is controlled by north
Africans.

For the first tine, police said there was proof that Asian traffickers were
no longer confining themselves to snuggling the epic production of the so-
called "golden triangle"-the world' s biggest opiu growing area at the
junction of the Bursese, Thai and Laotian borders.

French police said they could not say with certainty whether heroin fro. the
golden triangle was flooding the French Iarkets and causing prices to fall.

But whereas heroin from Thailand was fornerly only found in sasll quantities
generally snuggled in by European tourists, they said Paris had now become a

51
regular staging post for "suitcase" smugglers fros Singapore and long Kong
transiting through Ansterdan or Lisbon.

Those who cue through Lisbon were generally Asians free the Portuguese
colony of hscso. police said.

Hovever, France did not appear to have been affected by the arrival in Europe
of huge quantities of Pakistani heroin destined ninly for Britain, French

police said .

In Paris, the last najor police swoop involving south east Asian heroin use
on Christmas Eve when police seized 10 kilogrna (22 lbs) of the drug and
arrested 9 Bong Kong Chinese.

Medical experts here confirs that the number of drug addicts increased last
year by 6.“ percent. They said addicts in the trench capital apparently had
no problem procuring their "fix."

With the fall in the price of heroin, experts feared that the amber of addicts
would increase further. Heroin already accounts for 35 percent of the 12,000
drug arrests last year. The year before they accounted for only 16 percent.

With prospects of an abundant opiu harvest in the south east Asian poppy
fields police have been preparing for the past 6 nonths for an upsurge in
drug trafficking. Efforts are being made to train "special squads" of police-
men of south east Asian origin to ”infiltrate" the networks. But a police
officer said that east of the non could no longer speak their anther tongue.

C80: 5300/2286

52
mmmmmmmmmm
AthenstANEAinGreeklZAprBlp?

[Text] A five-ne‘er gang of narcotics traffickers had "connected" Sepolia
with way! The gang wee busted by Athens Suburbs' Security and two-and-one-
half kilos of hashish were seized. there nay have been opiu- in the heshish
since the hashieh was very potent.

The gang's busting began with intonation obtained by the director of Athens
Suburba' Security, 8. Veeilakie, and the chief or the Service for Prosecution
of Public Crime, G. Kartsonakie. According to the intonation, large quanti-
ties of baked hashish free India were circulating on all the narcbtics ”ear-
kets" (Rypseli, Pengrati, Flake, Peristeri, Sepolia, Liosia, Agia Vervara,
Aigaleo, Glyfada, Kala-ski, karkheia, etc.), as well as in provincial towns.
According to the sane intonation, the hashish was brought tron Ila-bay by a
gang which used suitcases with false bottoue to carry it!

The gang began to be diseantled last Pridey, 9 April. Athens Suburbs' Securi-
ty police arrested: Ioannis Georg. Kyriekou, 30, uneqloyed; Konetendinos Sp.
Athanasiou or Athanasopoulos, 25, street-vendor; Nikolaos Dion. Theodoritsie,
26, sailor; Georgios Ron. Beliouliee, 29, taxi driver; end Bvangelos 1hr.
Koudardas, 30, une-ployed.

B. Kornbardas, known as "Tsifis," is said to be the leader of the gang. At
his house (9 Pories, Sepolia) in a special hiding place, two-and-one-half
kilos of the finest quality hashieh (called "lash-it”) were found. This was
the renainder of a quantity of hashieh which he is accused of bringing into
the country about one sonth ago tree m in a suitcase with a false botton.
In addition, a checkbook with deposits totalling 800,000 dracluae wee found
in his house and confiscated. It wee seised because it is believed that this
noney cones fro- narcotics trafficking.

"Trifis" ie an international narcotics trafficker; in 1978 he was arrested
at the airport in Beirut with four kilos of ”Boubsri" heehish. lie has nade
trips to Bonbay where he bought hashish iron Indian narcotics dealers.
Athena Suburbs' Security has notified Interpol.

Ae the Gender-cry announced, on each of hie tripe, hang. lot-bard” brought,

in addition to the haehieh, quantities of epit- and heroin allegedly for his
own use.

53
his cousin, Georgios Beliouliu, is reported to he Wordss‘ direct collabo-
rator; he troveled around in mm' tau to “.11 the huhhh. G. Beliou-
liss is sccused of using the other crusted persons to sell the hsshish in the
"markets" in Athens and the suburbs. Quantities of hashish in special packag-
ing for selling were found in the possession of G. Beliouliss end the others.

Athens Suburbs' Security is continuing investigations to find out in which

Greek cities the gang sold hashish, end slso to identify the connections which
it had with narcotics trnffickers abroad, and it 0111 notify Interpol.

9247
cso: 5300/5393

56
m; POLICE OFFER ramp noes
Athens'rAminGreeklAprOZpl

[Text) “No to three dogs specislly treined to find nsrcotics ere being offer-
ed, on e triel basis, by the Gem police to the Greek services for pursuit
of nsrcotics. The dogs will he ecconpenied by e Ger-sn policasn and will be
instelled teqorerily st the Bytes Gerdens, which is one of the entry ”guns”
for nercotics into Greece.

This propossl vss ends by two senior Ger-en officers rho have been in Athens
since 30 March, as TA m exclusively reported. The Ger-ens, who direct the
largest services tor pursuit of public crine end nercotics in their country.
had e second neeting with their Greek collesgues on 31 March.

The Screens, with the euthorizetisn of their services, seid thst the Ger-en
police ere eager both to cooperste note. closely end to equip the correspon-
ding Greek police services with treined dogs end speciel uchines to find
nsrcotics, such ss nechines for telephotogrsphy. for photogrsphing end trens-
nitting fingerprints, etc. The Ger-en police think it is especielly inortent
to cowletsly equip the Greek police and to give officers the best trsining in
pursuit of nercotics. since our country is s crossrosds for the mvsnent of
lsrge quentities of nercotics tron Turkey end Iiiddle Bestern countries to
centre]. Btu-ope.

9267
080: 5300/5393

55
JUSTICE MINISTER REJECTS mam 8m FOR 0M8
Rotterdam NRC amusw in Dutch 23 liar 82 p 2

[Text] The Hague, 23 March-mister be Ruiter (jmtice) is
of the opinion that higher penalties for heroin dealing do
not offer any solution to the question of coﬁatting
addiction. "The legal sexism penalties offer sufficient
opportunities." De Ruiter told the Second Che-bar yesterday.

But the sinister is trying to station police-en in Pakistan and Turkey. 0n
1 April this year, a police-an is to be stationed on Curacao, aiter detective

operations have already begun in Peru, Thailand and Halayeia.

Minister Gardeniers (public health) nade it know during the discussion of
rendering assistance to drug addicts that fanily doctors could play a bigger
role in assisting addicts. Thus she took exception to the Staatstoesicht's -
[National Oversight Board] so-called nethadone letter to the Ministry of
Public Health in which the three chief inspectors aade stiff demands on public
health with respect to the actions of f-ily doctors. Ilelp should only he
given in cooperation with other aid workers, and nethadone should only be
able to be prescribed in a liquid torn.

Minister Gardeniers said yesterday that the letter ”was absolutely necessary"
last year. "because otherwise the case would have gotten out of hand." she
reported that the appearance of nethadone on the black nrket had a close
relationship with "fanin doctors' overestinatee" of what they could do to
help with the problea.

In the special co-ittee nesting held yesterday. Itiniater Gardeniers announced

that the Ansterdan iasily doctors' association. along with the national
governnent and the nunicipality, were taking a look at just which addicts
could be treated by the iaaily doctor. Gardeniers said that perhaps that

could be done all over the country.

All of the Chasber Delegations that were involved in the discusisns: CDA
[Christian Desocratic Appeal]. PvdA [Labor Party], 0'66 [Desperate of 1966].
M [People's Party for Freedom and D-oerecy]. P8P [Political Party of the
Radicals]. so? [Political Refer-ed Party}. on [Refereed Political. Union]
'and RF? Im: 'Reforned Political Federation] passed a resolution urging

56
further ecientific teeeerch becauae ao yet little ie Imam about addiction.

Another notion awpotted by all delegation calla for the govern-tot to take
the initiative to cooperate with the micipalitiea in undying that
difficultiaa are to be overcone in projects for the social recovery of
addicts and for-er addicta.

69400
CSO: 5300/ 2265

57
POLICE, DEALERS DISCUSS om scm, m
Auterd- 731.) mm in Dutch 27 la: 82 pp 3, 8

[The laat ofaseriea of eixarticlea innlJllbmbyPietPiryne and
[tees Schaepan on ”Addiction in the letharlande." the nnee of the dealere
have been changed in this article.]

[Text] Big noney is earned in heroin dealing. Dealere
are eager to take on the inage of a sort of Robin Rood (they
clain they would give you the shirt off their backs) but an
annual incone of 700,000 guildere clear in no exception.

And the chance of capture? That in not too bad._ Ira tine
to tine. onall dealers are erreeted, but the reel big shots.
the eo-called kilo nan. scarcely run any riah. You have to be
crazy if you go out and rob a jeweler any nore, they say at
narcotica brigade, for ill-fighting drug dealim. the luv

(and the secret services. and extra rightwing organiza-
tione) get in your way.

Cluef Inspector a. A. Janeen of the narcotics brigade says resinsdly, "It
you ring the doorbell and say, 'Iotterd- municipal Polios.‘ you hear the
toilets flushing.1'hera£ors. the thin to do ia to break down the door ad
get in i-adiately with everythin. That ia how bad it is."

Omission“ J. A. hlaauw of the central intelligence unit agreea with hin:

"As a rule. then you still 'find the etutt all over the floor. The powders.

the gran scales; oonetines pistols, the honey. It ia a well-know picture.
everything is in the trash can or in the garden. Naturally, it does not belong
to anyone."

Chief Inspector Jansen: "It takes tine to build a caae againat drug dealing.
You cannot oinply break in embers."

Blaaw and Jamen are getting tired of the toodwell-known accusation. which
was aade once again by the proainent state—an H. Dreas, 8r.. at the beginning
of this year in the mums mm: "He read tron ties to tine that a big
package of drugs ha been seized. ao cone effort ha been aada. however.
drugs alvsya becone available on the narket again and you bear little ﬂout
anything being done against the dsalare. They nuat not be hard beings to find.
The addicta always know how to find thn. "by not the police?"

58

FOR OHICIAL 033 ONLY
The problu is that the police do know how to find the dealers. but frequently
cannot prove anything about thn.

Co-issioner llaauw: "ﬂhen I read that the production in the Golden Triangle
this year is 600 tons of opim. I face that with fear and truhling. That
will unite 60 tons of heroin. enough to poison all of Btu-ope. And still that
stuff is going to have to find a narket.”

Jansen: What we are now seizing is practically exclmively Turkish and
Pakistani. Every ‘rurk who cones free the eastern part of Turkey can asks
contacts there and bring soeething in with his. When you look at the traffic
on the roadsnthey all go on vacation once a year. one twice—then naturally
it looks like a line of ants going and caning. Only 10 percent of then. or
even 1 percent. anong all of tha. who say: '1'. going to earn a little on
the side. ”

Blasuw continues this litany: "Naturally. our borders are hardly borders any
sore. Belgiul. we do not even have to talk about that. ‘rhat is open. The
Gernan border. too. does not mean very nuch. And then the Dutch harbors;
30.000 ships per year. It is looking for a needle in a haystack.” Just after
that, he continues: "People often act as though there were seasons. as there
is on the earket on Wall Street. who sets ths course. That is a fable. the
trade is not in one man's hands. In 1977, we once seized a big package of

126 kilograms. That did not have any effect at all on the price. It is
estimated that we seize 10 percent; that is a high estinate. If you sake an
estinate of Rotterda, there are about 2.000 addicts there. who use an average
of half a an per day. Then you cause out with 365 kilogr-e per year.
Jensen's yield is 20 to 25 kilogram per year. nationwide. the percentage
that is intercepted is even lower."

The Rotterdan narcotics brigade nunbers 20 nan. nationwide. there are not as
any as 100 policemen directly involved in investigating narcotics. according
to Blasw's and Jensen's estimates.

Blasw: "To put it in fire brigade terns. you are busy keeping the surrounding
properties wet. and the rest is donned to burn up. You have to be crazy to
attack a jeweler. while, if you are talking about heroin, you can usually put
the goods in your inside pocket. and than you have a fortune in your pocket."
Those who are caught are primarily the snall dealers: the visible part of the
drug trade: addicts who sell dope in order to pay for their own use. and
often a rather luxurious life. Jansen: "that is true, that we are only
interfering with the easll fry. But if you add up all of those snall fry.
than you cone up with sales of just say 500 kilogr-s of heroin per year.

The local trade, 2!. hours a day. that goes on all year long. and you can
exercise a real influence there, such more than on the organisations that
operate fron abroad."

Flower Power

Sender is an Aneterd- dealer. he explains. "Look. every user is a dealer in
principle. Because. I nest people who use, too. If I can lake saething out
of that. I will not leave it alone.”

.59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
And he tells the story of his life.

The first tine he used was during the tins of flower power and the hippies,
the callouanese of the scene. And then. in the early 1970's. the beginning of
his career as a dealer: "Why do you take that up? frequently it is an acci-
dent. Earlier. I had done all of the usual: cars. checks. I had gone down
twice for that. you cannot keep that up for long. I had a few clients.
Anericans. to whon I sold speed once a nonth. I earned enough by that to live
on. But all at once they did not cone back. Then I began to sell pep to
foreigners. Slowly but surely I expanded. The first years it wss poverty.
but I was reasonably satisfied. When you begin. your contacts are nothing
special. It takes a while before you get a name. a reputation. People do not
accept you right sway; it is important that you deliver quality.”

Like other dealers to when we talk, sander sketches a picture of himself as s
kind of Robin Hood of the scene. "I do not steal: I do not take advantage of
anyone. I have weeks that I do make sonething; I live in relative luxury, but
I treat the people like people and I do not pretend to myself that I a better
than anyone else. I always hove to raind ayeelf of that song by Bob Dylan:
'If you live outside the law, you have to be honest.”

He is reticent about his actual earnings.

"Profit? Oh. I give so nuch away. I have to earn 1.500 guilders per week for
say own horse. And for buys, I have to have 2,000 guilders per week." Later
in the talk, Sender says he sells about 15 grans of speed s day for 75 guilders
per gran. ("That is expensive. but I do not cut it, I only deliver quelity.")
That is a turnover of 1,125 guilders per day. That is really a nodeet .ount
in that ailieu. Thst is because Sender does not sell any heroin. In that
line. you earn nore. but the risks are higher there. A snell heroin dealer we
spoke to is less reticent ebout his turnover end profit.

"I sell a good 50 gr-s per day. That is a turnover of about 10.000 guilders.
then, but a disturbingly lerge pert of that goes heck out. If the dealer
takes a shot. then he puts out a little for everyone. I an satisfied if I get
to keep a quarter of that 10,000 as profit." That, then, is an annual incoae
of 750,000 guildars clear, including 2 nonths' vacation end 5 days off.

th should addicts who do not have enough noney for their own habit have to
run so many risks by breaking into autos and prostituting the-selves if the
noney is to be had sinply by raking it in? Sander provides the explanation:
"Not everyone is cut out for dealing. For sample. you first and foremost
have to be cspeble of keeping noney aside for your buys. That is sonething
99 out of 100 addicts cannot do. As a dealer. you have to have a certain
nentslity. you are a sort of gardener." And he reveals the golden rules he
has established for hinself: "You cannot be too obvious. you cannot be singled
out es a crook: no flashy clothes. no gold rings with jewels. And besides
thet. you nust not create a circle of parasites around you, people who say
you are reslly too such. Look, the temptation is there. The dealer is God.
People who have s bag of stuff handy can do alnost anything they want, because
people who need the stuff will do just anything for it if need be. Besides
that I do not deal st hone. Noml people are visited perhsps three tines e

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
day; a dealer is visited 20 tines. ‘l'hat stands out; that is too much; you
will get locked up for that for sure. The neighbors do not like that.
Special circuatances, foreign deals. I do not go in for then. You have to
be able to be satisfied. I have seen than, those dealers who had to have
everything. Ilow they are locked up. I learned from then; that way I can
avoid 90 percent of the danger. There will always be an ole-ant of chance.
Sinply bad luck. That is a lO-percsnt chance. It is a kind of gane of chess.
I always try to be one, aenetiaes two loves ahead. I keep asking ayself why
people get locked up. Usually it ie greed. You have these saall heroin
dealers who eell for sonebody else: that is a frightful picture, the sets-
aorphosie froa bootlickere to nacho aen. Really, there are very few people
who can keep on doing that work, they always nese it up theuelves. I have
been doing it for 6 years now and I have worked my way up in that tins so

that now I get ny dope practically first hand. For there is always a problem
how any people are there in between. and how nuch do they cut?

Super Deluxe

The connection, that is vitally inportant to the dealer. Sander: ”You never
turn then in, that in cutting your own throat. Your connection, that deter-
nines whether you get dope, and what kind of dope your get."

Robert, a niddle-sized heroin dealer, confine Sander's story: "It took no
quite a while before I nade contact with serioue Iurke. Nice I have gotten
a kilogrsn directly fren Turkey. That was super deluxe. then I could just see
how auch is stolen by the niddlenen. That dope fron Turkey was really 80
percent pure. while what we get here lay be 50 percent. Every possible thing
is nixed with it: Hanitol, a baby laxative. Nor-ally you cannot get that in
big quantities. so a trade has grown up in it. There is a shop in Ansterdan
where you can get a kilogran of it for 800 guilders. I an glad that now I
have a good direct contact, because if you sell garbage, they cons looking
for you for it."

Robert gives some insight into the price structure in the drug sector: "If I
go to a Turk, I pay, let us say, 60,000 guilders for a kilogram of heroin; for
100 gr-s you pay 9,000 guilders and for 10 grane 1,500 guilders." A user who
buys by the gran pays 200 guilders.

The note a gran seller can buy at s tine. the higher his profits, then. When
buying by the kilogran (which in quite an exception for a snall dealer) the
profit would be 160,000 guilders. In the event of buying 100 grams (purchase
price 9.000 guildere, sales 20.000 guilders) the profit is 11,000 guilders.

Robert: "The closer you are to the source. the less risk you run. If I buy
100 grass froa soaeone. then that person only has to deal with one person.
with so. But if I sell in packs of one gran, then I have to deal with 100
people. Besides that, a junkie who betrays us can pick right up with the
next guy to buy a small bag, but if you buy by the pound and you betray sons
one, then you will never get in again. Then you are out of your source of
intone.

6].-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
There are an estisated 20.000 heroin addicts in the latherlands. It is
generally “ll-0d that an addict uses an average of half a_ gran per day. and
that is a vary conservative estinata. If we accept those figures and those
quantities. 10 kilogr-s of heroin are used per day in the Netherlands.
Annually that is 3.650 kilogr-a.

Once again: that is an extra-sly conservative astinate.

In the long run. nearly all heroin is sold by the gran: nost junkies are not
able to buy it wholesale. That brings the total annual turnover in the
Netherlands to 730 aillion guildera. At the kilogr- price. that sane quantity
of heroin represents not quite 220 nillion guildera. That saans that the
niddlenen earn lore than 500 guildera per year.

By conparison, Lucas bola has annual sales of 821 nillion guildera, but in
that branch the profit nargins are certainly appreciably snaller.

Co-isaioner Blaauw because a little discouraged by that. "Ghee you see how
auch noney changes hands in Rotterdas alone for heroin. that cones dam to
nearly a quarter of the whole police budget. You can figure out what you are
up against. 0:, as the professor says. taporary displaceaent of capital."
Blaauw says. in a way that shows that he has already said it several tines
before: "It is like napping with the spigot open."

Chief Inspector Jansen: "And then we cannot even pay overtine. because of the
retrenclnent. I an not saying that we will be corrupt tomorrow. but a detec-
tive who just steps inside sonwhera ad finds 200.000 guildera in cash, or
who catches a big. fat 60.000 guilder Hercedee...not one tins, but every tine
you go after a syndicate. Then you are in noney up to your ears. That is not
just in drugs. but in gabling, too. as well as in the case of the big pinps.
There you open a suitcase and the money falls out. Then I think it is asking
a little too such to say: You lust collbat these problems, but do not ask us
for any noney to do it with.” A

Co-issioner Blaauw curbs his chief inspector a little: "when we say 'ra-
tranchnent.’ our incones have to decline; I do not want to make the impression
that the danger of corruption is increased by that at all; that is prinarily
a question of aantality. After all. our salary has never been coaparable with
what goes on in the crininal world. But things really are different from what
they were 25 years ago. Then. too. as a policusn you had an outstandingly
poor salary, but than there was no question of hmdreds of thousands of
guildera. It once happened that when I was a young policaan, in South
Rotterd- we caught a guy for stealing sue copper. 0n the way to the station,
that nan said to us: 'If you let us go. there are 25 guildera in it for the
two of you.‘ Just joking. than. we said: "that would have to be at least

100,000 guildera.‘ I would never dare to say that any note. for I an afraid
that the next day the internal affairs unit [Rijksrecherche] would cone to
the door and say: 'You salted for 100.000 guildera!m

Jensen: "Let us put it this way: you becosa vulnerable."

-62.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] Do the narcotics fighters never feel that they are heat policasen
on service bicycles who are chasing bankrobbers in a Porsche?

Cos-issioner Blaauw: "Certainly, but I an convinced that in the city you get
through faster on a bicycle than in a Porsche. But seriously now, it is not
simple. He work on two fronts: on the level of the local dealers, but also
on the level of the kilo men, the international events. Rotterdan undoubtedly
functions as a distribution center, among other things, it is a transshipnent
port for Washington.

On the local level, you can exert a direct influence, such sore than on the
organizations that operate from abroad. We try to sake the retail trade as
difficult as possible: a policy of discouragenent. Closing the cafes where
heroin is traded, that hurts. I often cospare it to a sweet potato stand.

If you have a sweet potato stand next to a junior high school, then you can be
sure that 80 percent of the children will be eating sweet potatoes. If you
move it three kilometers further up, then you only have the ones who really
like then. You have to suppress the availability of the junk. Then let

those who really need it hunt all over the city to find something, but not to
be approached themselves here on the Kruiskade by people offering, 'Buy snak‘I'"

And the wholesalers, the kilo nan? Blaaw has outspoken ideas about them. Be
rejects infiltration of trade routes: "In order to infiltrate, you have to
take on the color of the environaent. You cannot do that without breaking

the law, and then you are an imitation criminal. In Belgian, they say: 'You
cannot play the whore and rennin a virgin."I Neither does Blssuw expect much
good to tone iron the Netherlands penal system: “When it finally cones to ‘a
verdict, and they are sentenced to 6 or 7 years, you can still ask yourself
how nuch of that will rennin." Blaauw asks for increasing the suin- penalty
for dealing free 12 years to life, but even note, he would like to see the
dealers attacked financially. ”You must make it absolutely unattractive even
to sell one gran of heroin. A guy who does 1 to 3 years in the jug and thinks.
'Hhen I get out, at least I have a few hundred thousand guilders laid away,‘
that is what you have to prevent. Make it unattractive, then. 0n the one
hand, by making the chance of arrest, and on the other by cleaning out the
people you arrest so frightfully that the next day they have to run around
passing the hat."

The couissioner would like to see a reverse burden of proof in cases of denou-
strsble dealing in drugs: that is, that the criminal himself would have to
prove that he had earned his possessions legally. Blaauw: 'Hhen you catch a
guy with a few kilograms of heroin. and later at his home you find a few

hundred thousand guilders, then I say that he earned that noney through the
drug trade. And if you roll up an organization and you have evidence against

the top man, then he would have to prove the same thing, even if he did not

have even one gran of heroin in his pocket. Quite a few people raise their
eyebrows when I announce this positior but I would like to point out that

taxes do just this. Al Capone was finally pulled in because of taxes."

Finally. Omissioner Blaauw would like to see the principle of universality
incorporated into the law, too: "If a Belgian in Belgian sets up a heroin
deal for the Netherlands, the Dutch authorities cannot do anything to him,

53.,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
even when he is in our country. On the basis of the universality principle.
it would have to because possible for a ﬂeet Osman who set up a deal in Turkey
for snuggling drugs into France to he prosecuted in the Netherlands if he case
into the country. How we cannot do anything to a Turkish dealer who cases
into the country to reconnoiter the what."

Gerard, a Rotterdam dealer: "All those police. all those jails. really: that
lust cost millions. "hat I do not understand is why they do not sake it all
legal. Free handouts. The people are glad to see as as a dealer. that is
not what I - talking about. Let us put it this way: I find it to be a fine
line of work. but then again. I have to deel in order to pay for ny own habit.
I smoke heroin, and that way you me a lot, about 1.000 guilders' worth a day.
If I did not have to pay for that. I would rather work in a cefe. I have
papers for that. ﬂy own cafe. why. I could earn ny keep very well on that.
And possibly in the guiding world, I can always sake a little soney there."

COPYRIGEI': 1982 VII/3V Ruthlsdpsrs

6960
CSO: 5300/ 2263

641-

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
alum
HEIDI! mm) m BATS—Won, 6 my (AID—Pour kiloe of heroin were
seized by custom and exciee officere et e mnehouee in Beet landoo, police
announced here today. The drug were tomd hidden inside e coneipnent of

cricket hate tron Pekieten. Seven people were tonight helping police with
inquiries. [Text] [30040229 Perie APP in Englieh 2139 GK! 4 Key 82]

080: 5300/5732 END

65