FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1014O
25 November 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 54/8 I)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(rouo 54/81)

Coureurs

ASIA
BRUNEI

Magistrate Describes Brunei's Drug Penalties
(BOMBO BULwTIN’ 26 sep 81)...0..0...00.000.000.00...000......

BURMA

Briefs
Opium Seizure in Katha

INDIA

Calcutta Police Fail To Pursue 'ﬂashish Trail'
(me "mm, 6 Oct 81)....00......QQOOOOOOOOOCOOUICCOUOOOOOOOCO

INMESIA

Nation Defined as thjor Tranait Point
(mg "om“c Pamm's MLY' 24 mt 81).IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOO

MALAYS IA

Five Pounds of Heroin Seized at Party Terminal
(m STRAITS “ms, 2 Oct 81)....OOIOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOCOOOOO

PAKISTAN

Opium Seizure in Baluchistan Reported
(Tilt HORKING PEOPLE'S MILY, 24 Oct 81).......................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Briefs
Hashiah Seized in Islamabad
Excise Team Attacked

PHI LIP? IRES

Drug Traffic Bared in Manila
(Jae lb Vera; BULLETIN WHY, 30 Oct 81)....aassoooaesoeosoeno

Briefs
Gm, Drug Snugglar Arrested

EAST BURN!

CZEQIOS LOVAKIA

Briefs
Narcotics Laboratory Discovered

LATIN ”ERICA
AgGENfl'INA

Briefs
Drug Consumers Arrested

BOLIVIA

Paper on Intidrug Efforts
(BL DIARIO, 27 Oct 81)....0.soassoaooosoooaoaaaaooessences-sees

Briefs
Minister Heads Antidrug Council
Cocaine Burned

GIILB

Cocaine Trafficking Since 1970 Viewed
(Ivan Fredes, Andrea Orzegov; ERCILLA, 110 Oct 81).............
no“ DURAS

Tons of Harihuena Seized Near Swan Island
(Nelson Fernandez: LA P-ISA, 12 Sep 81)........................

Brie fa
Marihuana Plantation Discovered

MEXICO

Briefa
International. Drug Traffickera Arrested

PANAMA

Brie fa
Trefficker' a Arrest

PARAGUAY

Brie fa
Morph ine Peddlers Arree ted

PERU

Briefs
Drug Ring Broken

VDIBZUELA

Brie fa
Drug Arrest

NEAR EAST MD NOR‘M AFRICA
AFGIANISTAN

Finnish Expert Appointed to UN Drug Effort in Country
(“mecm 8%“, 2'. Oct 81)aooooeeanooae-noeaneeoaeeoeoooaooo

EGYPT

Opiu- Smuggling Attempt Foiled
(AL-MIRA“, 19 Oct 81)...noeaaeeeoeeeeaoeveaaeaaaeaeeoeaeeoeooao.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN
Briefs
Treffickers Executed 31
Drug Case Statistics 31
ISRAEL
Briefs
Hashish Found 32
SUB-SAHARA}! AFRICA
NIGER
Drug Abuse Statistics, Prevention Memures Noted
(Binta Mme; smbunw. 19 Oct 81)....OIOOOOOOOUOOOOOOIUIUO 33
SOUTH AFRICA
Hmdrax Dealers Use New lbute Into Country
(Bmielis Jsroschek; RAND DAILY HAIL, 29 Oct 81).................. 35
Mandrsx Courier hthods , Techniques Are Described
(Bueua Jarmchek; RAND DAILY MIL. 29 0c: 81)esseooseoooosososs 36
"381' EUROPE
NETHERIANDS
Briefs
Heroin Confis catcd 38
NORHAY
Government Steps Up Drug Enforoenent Effort in North Sea
('l‘horleif Andresssen; AFTENPNTEN. 1) Oct 81).. .. . ........ . ..... 39
Police Hake Arrests for Drug Abuse in North See 011 Field
(mslmmmr’ 19 mt 81)....0.00..I...OOOOOOOOOIOOOIOOOOOOOOO “1

Brie fs

Hungarians Snuggled in “which 42
MAGISTRATE DESCRIBES BRUNEI'S DRUG PENALTIES

CSO:

KUALA neurt'. .“
.\ 26-s'rartold tally club.
“will Rut-hing ha‘ been
sentenced to M yeen in
.t Btunei pttton lor po-~
\(Nu-n ol rattnahn ~—
and net. with that ten-
Ience he should rount
ltttnnell lucky. the made-I
tntr told him.

Magistrate Mr Kong
Sane Kwone preu’ded
over the lS-day that ol
Lu Tong Kui. who plea-
ded. not - guilty to in»
porttng cannabis.

In his verdict. thema-
g'utt'ate eonelnded the
«(ion ll“ W
in wet in noeaeuion o!
cannabis but had tailed
to prove he was import-
tng tt. .

'lle therelore lound Lu
guilty ol the minced

chat 0! nonunion 0!
1.6909 grants ol eanna~

9.

helore tuning sen-
tente. Mr duetm.
rd in detail Brunch en-
ti-drug laws and other
lacton that
mutt consider when lit-
ing penalties.

The Minute 0! Drug!
Enacttnent ol 1978, he
satd. hat the toeiat oh.
jet-live ol preventing
"the gmth ol drug
abate and in particular,
thedangetotta drug trade.

'“l'he enactment re-
eoenim and treats drug
ahtne at a crime. ;

5300/8307

tnagittratet.

anei'e late '28..“
ttuxtrnttm tentenre loo
pouenion ol dangerous
drug: at to mm in jail
pl!“ 3 820.0“) line. but
such a still tentenee la
eon-idend tuitahle only
lor the trout ollendert.

The sentence loe Gm
ollenden it lelt to the
trunnion ol the utilit-
trate. although the mi.
nimunt toe teeond olleno
den it ﬁxed at Me
year: «33,000. -

He then dimmed the
importance ol the ant-
ount ol drug: teéeed llI
determining sentences. ;

anet'e law ueatatho
nooeuion t: me 0‘ 0:5
dangerous no at on»
ly teprehenihfe - her;
ion in eoneidered equine
lent to man-hie. ;

But in tralliehing eat-
ea the drug: are treated
dillerently. with two
grant: ol heroin. threeol
morphine. l3 ol canna-
Ne and 100 ol opttttu
eoneidered oatmelent.

The gteater the ant-
ount ol dtnge in a end
the heavier the penalty.
ehould he. Mr Kengtatd.

Another lutor to whet
into eonttderation it the.
prevalence ol dntg ab-
oee and the magutrate
aid the nttnther ol drugv
ea-et tried in helejt Dir,

ttiet room haa Enema
ed lv thie year. .
' In I 79 then teen:
two. Ian year none and
to la: thla year then!
have already been nine.
with root involving Map
layeiana. . -
The ntagitttate tatd
get-mating mutt taheall
thete lat-tors into con-9
tlderetion and aitn Ila
well to balance the in-'
meat: ol‘ the nohlleand
the met with thoee ol’
the muted. ,
.In the enee ol Lt; hot.
no“. he artldmgive-
! to D :
{anon thnt he new
lint ollendee and had'
in eutody einee:
Jammy 2L.
“11': unmet: ttold
vaa ne yon
um. mt?” '
“may. if; m't't‘t'ctmm‘
e a tr '
wh' carrie- a ma:
tnnnt aentenoe ol .20.
vent: pltu “0.000 plot
to mot. ol the total. ,
Seeendlyg he

Minn —- it he had.
been charged with lt‘b
porting the entire ant-'
ount. he would [nee a:
buxom

“lid". the'btoteett-I
tlon failed to prove he
had been itnnortine the
drug. lot which the ma-
:unwnt tentence it 30
tom plm 850.000.

Mr Kong taid W-
lon ol 169.69 gram of
eannahie tree a veey aer-
totte ollencn hut not to

d at to warrant the-
tnulntut penalty he
could lay down -

He therelore tenteneed
Lnlto 3} you in jail,
dating ltnnt May [9
when the llidt Court el.

ltotn a dlllerent and»:
trate.

When hit one ﬁrst;
came to trial on March.
2. Lu pleeded guilty to
the diam ol importing
cannahn and magistrate
Tuan Syed Ahmad ldid
ave hun_the maximum
sentence to hie met.
ﬁve wen nlut 320.000.

Lu, however, appeal-
untenee.
which was duen'hed at
one 0! the atilleel anti-
drug peneltlee ln recent

yean
Mr Justin O'Connoe
allowed the appeal on
technical mode and
ordeted the rate he te-
tried helote a dillerent
nucleate. _

ed agllntt the

~—~,
BRIHS

OPIUH SEIZURE IN KATHAwA police squad headed by subinspectors U Maung Ko and U Khin
Naung of Katha Township police station No 1 on 19 October raided the residence of
Dan Khan Mar Gwe, 76, in Kysngav “fads-u Kmpintha village tract, Katha, and found

5 vies [18 pounds] of raw opiua. worth 20.000 kyat, hidden under the stove. Dav

Khan Mar Owe has been charged under Section 6.b of the Narcotics Drug Lav. [3K130548
Rangoon WANNA ALIN in Burmese 30 Oct 81 p lo]

050: 5300/6552

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02I09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070055-0

NATION DEFINED AS MAJOR TRANSIT POINT

Rangoon THE WORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 26 Oct 81 p 5

[Text]

CSO:

Dxnulm. 23 Oct—In-
donee'u hubceneetabliaho
edit: intesmtioml semi-
mnu a major trend!
many in the named:
tnﬂie to the United States
and Aumlia. Deputy
Attorney-General Dunk
Malia aid hen.

[a the country inc".
the dmg Heaths into
«and mdally u
evident from the number
of .motded ataxia
oﬁencet which hujump-
ed ftom' : 9 in 1978 to
669 in 19 he told a
mailing of law etudente
here Wednesday.

Dunk Malia. who is in
chute of intelligence at
the Attomey-Geoenl’e
05cc. aid the Govern-
ment he: not yet succ-
eeded in smashing new!»
tic maﬁa in the country.
but it now stepping up
the thﬁlitiet of the agencies
concerned—cutouts. the

5300/6909

police magma

tompewiththeu

Henid it 1m

P0355” “guilt”
W

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02JOS: CIA-RDP82-00850R0004000700554)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070055-0

FIVE POUNDS 0? wow SEIZED AT PERRY TERHINAL

Kuala Lumpur NB! STRAITS TIMES in English 2 Oct: 81 p 1

[Text]

CSC:

5300/8308

PENANG. Thuro. —
Cuotomo officers trout
tho provcntive hunch
laat night ocixcd ohout
ilvc poundo of heroin
which can ho con-
vortod into at ioaot
homo-million ohoto.

Thoy aloo dototnod
em m — om hotvooa
20 “30— Iron: Pooang.
Kodah and Peron A car
on aioo ociood

akin; at a Prooo
c orohco horo today.
SouoerototahtDtroctor
0! custom Ahmad Ah-
dttllah odd tho Wit
woo found to o hrictcaoo
Iathohootoiacorota
roadhloch outoldo tho
Iorry tormihai at Bat-
torworth.

A toaht iron tho pro-
vchtIvc branch. iod by
hoator Cuotomo Otiioor
Pahoruddid llohauod
Baair. had oot up tho
roadhioct about 7 pm tor
combo chocho.

”tact: Ahmad uid
a 1 m. a car rogu-
torod In M drovo out
iron tho iorry tomlhal
tovordo tho roadhioch.

Tho olftcoro unwod
tho drtvor to otop and or-
dorod tho occupahto out.
A Wh chock at tho
car van mado.

Tho, lound oovorai
hop and o hriotcuo in
the hoot o! tho car. loci!
Ahmad oaid.

‘I'ho tlvc Inoh voro
thou ordorod to idohtity
thoir mum and toopoo
thoht.

Emil: Ahmad oaid ooo
oi the non tdohttliod tho

Moloaoo oo hto ond
vao told to opoh it.
Aitor OPOIIIII‘
hriotcooo. ho roh u
with it. Tho otficcro 3
ohaao tad alts ahout
yardo. tho than I
cum .
“Tho “acorn choc.
tho hrtoicaoc m tot
{our poctoto contain
hot'olh.‘ ho addod.
M Ahmad oaid
low-up ihvootigoth
won Way.
Proust at tho 1
torohco woro tho hoo
tho provontivo hral
m tuiatnah Ali
W W W.
motor at Mono (
nativo) both Rodd
Intact

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00050R000400070055-0
OPIUM SEIZURE IN BALUCBISTAN REPORTED

Rangoon THE NORKINC PEOPLE'S DAILY 1n Engllsh 26 Oct 81 p 7

[Text]

CSO:

5300/6909

Imam. 3: 0a -
Pakistani cum m
seized (nomad-Mm
ofconlnbod oplm'u (tom
8 truck in warm”
Ptovince, bodai Af-
ghanimp. and In an
intmuoml dung ting in

WA!"- «pond.

he" may.

The opium valued at
not: than six millloo
dollauiatlninwioml
lattes. '- hlddoo in
ounce-Id WW"
in the truck‘s; oﬁlfal
news agency at

Two pcnou, Malia

'61: and ddver. '6!

mated.

_ In Kathi d» Nora
ms Depmmcm
mm m M

:53 mwayin nix dani-
Mama. The gang-

of loom rupee.
than! 10.000 dollars) was

an m—NABIA r9.
BRIEFS

HASHISH 53128!) IN ISLAMABAD—-Islamabad, Nov 5: Pakistan Narcotics Control Board
today seized over 20 kilogram of hashish, worth millions of rupees fron a local
packages firm at Islamabad. According to details, Hr Iftikhar Ahmed Khan, Direc-
tor Enforcement. Pakistan Narcotics Control Board. was tiped that two Italian
nationals had booked a consign-en: through a local packages firm to Italy, and a
special raiding party consisting of Hr Ihsan Ahmed, Malik Riaz Ahmed and Raja
Tariq Nawaz. was organised. A raid was conducted at the packages firm, which re-
sulted in the recovery of the hashish concealed in five wooden boxes. The accu-
sed have been identified as Mario Praziofio and Carlo Alberto. Meanwhile the au-
thorities of the PNCB contacted the Interpol in Rome and conveyed the passport
numbers, addresses and other details of the accused. A case against both the
accused has been registered and further investigation is in progress. [Text]
[Karachi MORNING NEWS in English 6 Nov 81 p 1]

EXCISE TEAM ATTACKED—-Sone drug pedlars attacked an excise team and snatched away
their man arrested during a raid in Nazinabad on Friday night. The Excise party
had raided the den, arrested one person and seized two kilos of charas. When the
alleged ring leader of the pedlars Saifullsh, knew about the incident he along
with his accomplices confronted the party and got the arrested nan released.
[Text] [Karachi DAWN in English 8 Nov 81 p 8]

C80: 5300/4551
DRUG TRAFFIC BARKD IN MANILA
Manila BULLETIN TODAY in English 30 Oct 81 pp 1, 17

[Article by Jose De Vera]

[Text] Brig. Gen. Bienvenido L. Felix, chief of the Constabulary anti-

narocitcs unit (CANU), pinpointed Manila yesterday as the illegal drug connec-
tion between Bangkok and Australia, New Zealsnd. liong Kong, United States, and
between Malaysia and Canada.

Felix said that the Philippines, next to Thailand, is Japan's biggest marijuana
supplier.

Felix made the revelations in a paper on the drugs problea in the Philippines
which he read before the first meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian
National Police (Aseanapol) at Camp Creme.

The conference was attended by the national police chiefs and deputies of the
five Asean countries--Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philip-
pines.

Felix reported that more than 30 foreigners have been arrested in Manila since
1972 in possession of heroin, hashish. and marijuana.

He said national law enforcement agencies have succeeded in minimizing to the
lowest level heroin addiction among Filipinos.

He said the Philippine (Lug traffic extends from street pushing to activities of
foreign-based organized crime groups and involves pharmaceutical drugs as well.

According to the CANU chief, with Metro Manila as its center, the Philippine drug
trade has three principal elements--as a source, as an importation and trans-
shipment area, and as a major distribution center.

Marijuana. Felix told the conference, remains as the favorite drug of Philippine
drug users.

He said the situation is compounded by easily obtainable cough preparations,
tranquilizers which are not included in the list of dangerous drugs, and cer-
tain volatile solvents which are inhaled by users.
Illicit cultivation of marijuana has relained geographically widespread but
is prevalent in the mountainous areas of Luzon. he said.

The incidence of cultivation, Felix aaid, rose from 177 marijuana plantations
in 1979 to 292 in 1980. Forty-one out of 77 Philippine provinces reportedly
have plantations.

CSO: 5300/4909
BRIEFS

GWDRUG SWGGLER ARRESTED—An ettenpt to snuggle guns and drugs into the country
has been foiled. General Rabian Ver, arsed forces chief of staff, announced yester-
day the arrest of a suspected courier of e l’ilipino U.s.-besed terrorist group car-
rying S f irearn, 3,000 rounds of a-Iunition and assorted drugs, including heroin.
The suspect was identified as (Arturo Espiritu Parvis), a Filipino-ham American
from Ilocos Sur, who was arrested Friday nornins after he arrived at the Manila
international airport on PAL Flight 107 from San Francisco, California. Presi-
dential security comsnd agents, aviation security con-and and the Bureau of Customs
found 4 handguns, l shotgun, 3,000 bullets, 200 capsules of heroin, one-eighth of

a kilo of powdered heroin and one half pound of ssrijuana hidden inside a Caupbell
soup box filled with chocolate and candies. [Text] ”1080246 lhnila Par Past Broad-
casting Cospany in English 2330 m 7 Nov 81]

cs0: 5300/4555

10
BRIEFS

NARCOI'ICS LABORATORY DISCOVERED-4 clandeotlno laboratory for production of
narcotics was discovered in the apartment of 26-year-old Harte P. in Prague-

Vinohrady. Her 30-year old unemployed conpanlon Jan H. was alao arrested.
[Prague ZBmDELSKE NOVINY in Czech 9 Nov 81 p 2]

C50: 5300/ 3002

11
BRIEFS

DRUG CONSUMERS ARRESTED—During an anti-drug operation carried out by the Drug
Departaent of the Buenoa Airea Police Force the following peraona were arrested:
Juan Jose Coatillo. Victor Daniel Albornoz. Rafael Carlos Benitez and Carlos
Alberto Delfino who were caught with 5 gm of cocaine hydrochloride, 60 no of
marihuana and 22 pilla of murax. [PYOb1333 Bucnoa Airea CRONICA in Spanish
2 Nov 81 p 8]

cso: 5400/2061
PAPER 0“ ANTIDRUG EFFORTS
PY052156 La Paz EL DIARIO in Spanish 27 Oct 81 p 5

[Excerpts] Officials of the Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Department have reported
that it would be inadvisable to release the list of persons arrested for drug
trafficking over the past few weeks. This would hamper investigations since the
peddlers do not operate alone but together with other persons (pushers. accomplices
and accessories).

The sources also confirmed that approximately 20 kg of cocaine have been seized
in Santa Cruz and Cochabamba as a result of various operations. This drug is
currently under guard at the headquarters of the Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs
Department.

The cocaine seized in these two departments was confiscated from persons engaged
in petty drug trafficking because, thanks to the actions undertaken by the armed
forces and the Dangerous Drugs Department. large-scale trafficking has disappeared.

The Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Department, whose actions have been coordinated
with those of the National Antidrug Council ever since the armed forces undertook
the commitment to struggle against this crime, has handled approximately 600 cases.

The persons charged with drug trafficking are subjected to severe questioning
designed to precisely establish their degree of guilt. The report added that as
a result of these investigations several persons have been arraigned before the
courts, others are still being held but most have been released since their guilt

could not be proven.

050: 5600/2061

13
BRIEFS

NINISTER BEADS ANTIDRUG COUNCIL-The interior minister has temporarily been put

in charge of the presidency of the National Council for Struggle Against Drug
Trafficking. President Torrelio Villa has delegated this post to the minister
because of the president's heavy load of administrative work. Minister Romulo
Mercado Garnica gave this explanation yesterday afternoon shortly after a meeting
with President Torrelio. The measure was decided on during the last cabinet seating
which was held on Tuesday. Minister Mercado Garnica referred to the decision and
said: [Begin recording] I would only like to tell you that the decision has been
given the wrong interpretation. You know very well that the Council for Struggle
Against Drug Trafficking was created through a government decree. It now happens
that the president. who is also the president of the council. is overloaded with
work and has delegated to the interior minister the task of president of the Council
for Struggle Against Drug Trafficking because of that heavy workload. [End
recording] Colonel Mercado Garnica also reported the approval of a measure through
which the National Investigation Agency [Direccion de Investigacion National-

DIN] will be directly responsible to the Interior Ministry. [Excerpts] [PY051513
La Paz Radio Illimani Network in Spanish 1130 GMT 5 Nov 81]

COCAINE RURNED--Interior Ninistry officials and officials from the DangerOus Drug

Department supervised the burning of 58 kg of cocaine and 300 marijuana plants.
The officials said that the cocaine, which was confiscated in several operations.

was worth $29 million. [La Paz Radio Illimani Network in Spanish 1700 GMT 28 Oct 81]

cso: 5400/2061

1:.
COCAINE TRAFFICKING SINCE 1970 VIEHBD
Santiago BRCILLA in Spanish 16 Oct 81 pp 12-13
[Article by Ivan Predes and Andrea Orsegow: "Passenger in Transit"]

[Text] An elegant, imposing yacht with a California registration cane to rest
on the peaceful, warm waters of Arica on 26 July. The occupants of the "Erin”:
Aaerican James Edward Cernack, 30, and Dane Kim Jeff Jensen, 26, soon established
friendly contact with the authorities and inhabitants of the northern city.

During their two-nonth stay at the port, awaiting - so they claimed - the start
of the windsurfing championship that was to be held and in which they were going
to compete, they becane such good friends with the people of Arica that even the
officials of the Yacht Club had lunch with them. however, the romanticism soon
gave way to suspicion.

Strange excursions on the high seas in the early hours of the morning caused police
to keep the yacht under close surveillance. With confidential investigative infor-
nation, maritime authorities issued a search warrant for the vessel when it was

ready to set sail for Tahiti. The truth came to light. Discovered under the deck
of the "Erin" on 28 September were 22 kilograms of cocaine, 98-percent pure, worth
$1 aillion in the United States, three firearms and over 500 bullets and different

calibre shells. It was the biggest anount of the white powder found in Chile in
the last 10 years.

Was Interpol (international police) correct in once again placing our country at
the head of that illegal trade, as it did in 1910?

There was a time when it was easier (around 1973) because there were fewer persons
to fight the trafficking and they were not specialists, but what is happening now
is not a “boon." The traffickers always maintained a certain level of activity but
there was less investigation. Finding a little more or a little less cocaine does
not mean any increase or decrease in the illegal activity, one investigative source
told ERCILLA, but his first words strike a chord.

Naturally. when one reviews history, the statistics clearly show that the "old days
were better“ for the traffickers who went through our national territory. In

1970, Chile led in the number of arrests, with 33.3 percent, followed by the United
States with 32.5 percent. With regard to seizures. the United States had the
largest total: £6.l percent of the figure. While our country was close behind
with 32.6 percent, it registered the largest seizures with respect to the quality
of the drug. The figure was high, compared with the present, when one considers
that up to 1979, the State Defense Council - which since 1973 has taken part,

as stipulated by law, in all infractions involving alcohol and all trials concern-
ing the processing or trafficking of narcotics - had sustained penal action in
no less than 300 cases, while to date, it has no more than 65 before it.

Furthermore, while investigations show that the amount of kilograms of cocaine -
combining cocaine sulfate and cocaine hydrochloride (different stages of process-
ing) - has gradually increased in the last 3 years (nearly 16.5 kilograms in 1979;
22.6 in 1980; and nearly 28 kilograms so far this year), it would be false to
claim, as was done at the beginning of the past decade, that over half of the
illegal production of cocaine passes through Chile.

Only a Corridor

There are a few constants. Since the 1940's, when the country entered the cocaine
trafficking network, it was not more than an unwitting victim of the nations that
produced and consumed the highly-sought "white goddess." There are few cocaine
addicts in Chile, according to Mauricio Plisfisch, president of the State Defense
Council. That is not true in the United States, which has the largest number of
consumers in the world. This explains why the national territory is involved in
the hidden cocaine web.

Peru and Bolivia are the only ones possessing the plant and Chile shares borders
with both. What better "wild card" could there be for smuggling the drug to the
United States and, on a smaller scale, to Europe and a amber of Asian regions

From the standpoint of distances, it is perhaps not very logical, but it throws
people off the track and provides ports which, in the case of Bolivia, do not exist.
That is why the northern Arica -- the area and port closest to the coca planta-
tions -- wins the prize for the largest number of Chilean criminals tempted by the
lucrative "exportation" of the product.

They get so rich that they cannot even say how large their fortune is. And no
wonder: If processing a kilogram .of cocaine hydrochloride costs about $100, due
to the great demand, it sells for nearly $100,000. whence the once prolific
appearance of laboratories in different areas of the country, which now continue
to be raided, but whichyear after year decrease in number because of the more
organized police work.

Logically enough, such "purchasing power" does not exist in Chile, meaning that

its role is reduced to that of a corridor for the dazzling "snow" (so named because
of the cold effect it produces in the nasal passages when inhaled). The words of
the investigative official consulted are pertinent:

"This is a crime that does not affect the Chilean citizenry -- there are very few
consumers -- but rather, the Americans. The police could lose prestige if they do
not manage to arrest the traffickers and they are caught in another country. Now
then, if the conditions for the trafficking exist, the risk for the persons involved
would be much smaller because the price of cocaine would also go down, which might
in turn induce Chileans to become consumers. In that sense, such trafficking could
mean a problem for the country."

16
Plisfisch makes these statements, but practically guarantees that there will be no
such danger. However, he points out others already undermining Chilean young
people.

"Since the passage of Law 17,93b up to the present time, it can be maintained that
illegal cocaine hydrochloride trafficking in the direction of other countries has

for the most part been contained. With respect to the processing here, it has
nearly been eradicated through the raiding of laboratories and the arrest of those
involved, most of whom are in prison. This success is confirmed by the number of
trials pending and guaranteed by the creation of specialised police services and
the concern of the judicial branch.“

"Latent Evil"

However, there are still drawbacks. 0n the one hand, he observes that what is on
the increase is the trafficking and consumption of marihuana and LSD among Chilean
young people. (In the course "The Adolescent and Drug Dependency" being given in
the country until 23 October, it was revealed that 23 percent of all young people
admitted to the University Psychiatric Clinic are there for drug addiction.) With
respect to cocaine, Plisfisch says the same thing as other investigative sources:

"If you are not careful, trafficking may increase and it is a latent evil because
we are right alongside the great producer: Bolivia."

Nor must one lose sight of what the chairman of the U.S. house of Representatives
Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, Lester Wolff, said at the World Confer-
ence on Drugs held in Chile in August 1977:

Two Constants

"Traffickera operate with sophisticated methods, backed by huge amounts of money.
They have become their own supergovarnment."

Without a doubt, these organizations do not act haphazardly. They trick whomever
they want however they want. The very investigative source consulted by BRCILLA
admits that there are many problems in investigations because they "are people of
intelligence with heavy economic resources and very well-organized rings." One
example is that as their routes are discovered, they change them.

The official reveals that in the beginning, the route was Chile-United States;
then Chile-Rio de Janeiro-Hadrid-United States; then Chile-Buenos Aires-Hilan-
United States; and now, because of the seizure of the "Erin," the current alterna-
tive would appear to be Chile-Tshiti-Australia-United States.

Two constant Chile and the United States, for an elusive, latent evil that has
little possibility of flourishing here, for the time being at least.

11,464
CSO: 5300/2041

17
BRIE?

PLANE. MICKERS IN CUSTODY—No narcotics were found aboard the 0.8. plane that
was detained in Tortuguero and the two foreigners traveling in the aircraft were
turned over to 1-igrstion officials. (Bobby Carlton Bryant) and (Robert Hitchell
Fullerton) were adnitted narcotics traffickers and had replaced the plane's 0.8.
registration nu-bere with a Colombian registration nutter. Mechanics of the air
section found tenants of cocaine and a few marijuana seeds and leaves in the cabin.
Both (Bryant) and (Fullerton) rented the plane free a comsny that renders services
to narcotics traffickers. (Bobby Carlton Bryant) and (Bobert hitchell Fullerton)
were arrested in Tortuguero when their plane had nechanical troubles and had to make
an emergency landing. (Byrent) and (Fullerton) were traveling in a light plane with
Colombian registration HUMP. which, it was proved, was false and had been pasted
on top of the legitinate registration. Both stated they were on their way from
Colombia to Houston, Texas. but when they noticed one engine was not working prop-
erly, they had to land in Tortuguero. The plane is really registered in the United
States under the number N783A and belongs to the (Sulakes) aviation cospsny. a
well-known coapeny which rents planes to narcotics traffickers. (Bobby Carlton
Bryant) and (Robert Mitchell Fullerton) were turned over to the inigration author-
ities. [Text] [PA072127 San Jose Radio REID-l in Spanish 1730 (if! 7 ﬂow 81]

(ISO: 5300/ 2063

18
BRIEFS

comma TRAPPICRBRS 831230—15» Ecuadoreans arrested with 20,000 graas of cocaine.
Member: of the National Police of Loja arrested the following citizens: 26-year
old Simon Rengel Jimenez, and 28-year old Alberto Rojas Chanba when they were
caught at illicit trafficking of drugs. Twenty-seven packets of cocaine paste,
weighing approximately 20,000 grams, were confiscated fron then. They were trans-
porting the drug in a light truck, a Nissan Junior, 2,000, with License plates
P-72316. the property of Rengel Jimenez. Tron the confession of one of those
arrested, it was ascertained that Rodrigo Delgado. a Colmbian, proposed to Simon
Rengel Jimenez that they transport a shipment of cocaine paste from Sororangs. in
the province of Loja, to Tulcan for a big on of Ioney. After completing the
negotiation. Rengel Jimenez contacted Rodrigo Delgado on Monday. 12 October. fro-
whon he received 27 packets of cocaine paste. whichwere hidden in secret cowart-
nents of the light truck. They agreed to deliver the drug the following day in
Tulcan, where Delgado would be waiting. In his confession Rengel Jimenez indicated
that Alberto Rojas Chanba and Plaberto Torres Cueva had nothing to do with this
snuggling, inasmuch as they were only travelling in the truck as passengers. It
was explained that Torres Cueva escaped when they were intercepted by the police;
the Interpol police are therefore continuing their search. As for the arrested
persons: Rengel end Rojas Che-be were placed at the disposition of the district
attorney of the Court of Loja for Jungsnt and sanction for the trafficking of
drugs. The 20,000 grams of cocaine are in the police station storeroon. awaiting
suitable means of destruction. The Nissan Junior truck was confiscated. [Text]
[Quito 21. OOHBRCIO in Spanish 20 Oct 81 p R 10] 8255

080: 5300/ 2055

19
MS 0? NARIHUANA SBIZBD NEAR SHAN ISLAND

San Pedro Sula LA WSA in Spanish 12 Sep 81 pp 6-5

[Article by Nelson Fernandez]

[Text] The biggest seizure of narihusna yet ends by the authorities in territorial
waters of the central anerican countries was lads last Rednesday when a patrol boat
from the Honduran naval base seized a fishing boat with United States flag and crew.
carrying nine tones of the drug valued at 10.!)0.000 lswiras.

The aarihuans. grown in Colo-bis. was being transported tree this South Aaerican
country towards a place in the state of Florida. but apparently the captain went

off course. entered Honduran waters and was seiaed 11 miles south of the Cisne Islands.
in the Atlantic Ocean.

The crew was coqosed of Jesus Eugenio Sslgsdo. 19 years old. caning from the resid-
ing Cayo Bueso (the only one who speaks Spanish with a Cuban accent); Jams Mike
Owens. 28. born in New Jersey. and Ray Weatherinton. Sb native of Ilia-i and captain
of the boat.

The naae of the boat is "Captain K.C." with registry nuabar 59611 and belonging
to St. Augustine Trawlers of St. Augustine. in the state of Florida.

After the capture. the boat was towed to the dock of the Puerto Cartel naval base.
where the 1.80 bales containing the drug were aoved to two of the base warehouses.

Yesterday. in the presence of the inspector general of narcotics. authorities of

the naval base. the justice of the peace for criminal activity. Higuel Angel Landsverde
Cerna inspected the drug to assess the fine and initiate the legal proceedings which

in general terms will close with the burning of the sarihusna and the sentencing

by the court of those inplicated.

One of the defendants. young Jesus Eugenio Salgado. stated that he resides in Cayo
Bueso. Florida. where his wife. Teresa Salgado and his son. hardly four months old.
are staying.

Questioned on the matter. he said that it is the first tile that he and his friends
are involved in aarihuana smuggling. adding that he knows absolutely nothing absut
the owners of the drug. nor who put it in the boat. nor the people who were going
to receive it.

20
He said "He ude contact by telephone and loaded the narihuana on the high seas;

from thereon I don't renenber anything. Re are dying of hmgsr and they grabbed us
to do this and just look at us now..."

Asked where the marihuana came Eran. he replied that they got it on the high seas.
150 niles south of the coast of Aruba. where armed men intercepted them in three
vessels and loaded the drug aboard. ordering them to bring it "to a point in the

Gulf of Mexico. although we do not know who was going to pick it up nor anything
about it..."

When questioned about how they penetrated Honduran territorial waters. he explained
that "we thought that we were in international waters; the captain said so and did
not explain how it was that we were not...." Salgado related that they were seated
in the vessel when they heard the siren of the Honduran coast guard. Then they stopped.

Athough the man being questioned said he knew nothing of this. authorities of the

naval base maintained that the crew members of the fishing vessel had received an
offer of payment for the transport of the drug the sun of 50.000 leapiras annually.

9678
CSO: 5300/2009

21
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA PLANTATION DISOOVERED--A nerihuena plantation was discovered and confiscated
by agents of the Treasury and of FUSE? in the town of Sacaguato, jurisdiction of
Sabanagrande in this department. when the plantation of grass was discovered, 791
plants were confiscated located on land owned by one of the teen implicated and situated
on the outskirts of the town. This did not originally arouse suspicion. Santos
Macatio Rania Barahona and Santos Antonio Avila Avila, originally free that cat-unity
were accused of the crine and in accordance with the police report are engaged in
agriculture. [Excerpt] [San Pedro Sula LA PBENSA in Spanish 18 Sep 81 p 2] 9678

C80: 5300/2009

22
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000400070055—0
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070055-0
STATINTEL
BRIEFS
TRAFFICKER'S ARREST--Cicoletta Samaria Sorencia. who was caught with 12 packages;df

cocaine at the Gen Onar Torrijos Herrera international airport at noon on Saturday,

was placed at the disposition of Isaac Chang Vega, assistant prosecutor. [Panama
City LA REPUBLICA in Spanish 20 Oct 81 p 10 PA]

CSO: 5300/2063

24
BRIEFS

MORPHINB PEDDLERS ARRESTED—Through thorough investigations nenbero of the Interior
Ministry's Narcotics and Dangeroua Drug- Departnent were able to arrest l00-year-old
Paraguayan Raul Alejandro Suarez who van found with 2 gran of morphine. Through
Suarez' atatenente the dopartnent was able to arrest Argentine citizens Carlos
(bar Ferreira Holeda, 20 years old, and Enrique hilio Salgado, 23 years old, who

are also charged with morphine trafficking. [Aatmcion ABC COLOR in Spanish 21 Oct 81
p 25]

C80: 5400/ 2061

25
BRIEFS

DRUG RING BROK£N~-Cajanarca-Manbera of the first rural detect-ant of the 6th
Cajsnarcs Precinct of the Civil Guards have inflicted a severe blow to drug
trafficking by seizing 5 kg of cocaine base and 10 million soles in cash. The
sinister drug ring operated from a place called 31 Escalon in the village of
Huatanal, Cospan District (Csjanarca). The police raid, carried out after preli-
minary investigation had been conducted by the Civil Guards, resulted in the arrest
of five persons who were caught red-handed. The arrested peddlers, who are currently
being held at the Cajanarca police station, are: Juan Francisco Rodriguez Aguirre,
A7, and his children Luz Irene Rodriguez Sanchez. 23, and Santos Cesar Rodriguez
Sanchez. 21; and also Cesar Augusto Arangoitia Hendiata. 27. from Lina; and‘
ﬁumberto Alcantara Ramirez, 26, from Laredo Trujillo. Chanists Santos Pita Huanan
and Juan Alva Alfaro are still at large and being sought by the police. [Excerpt]
[”102059 Lina EXPRESO in Spanish 29 Oct 81 p 17]

C80: 5300/2060

26
BRIEFS

DRUG ARREST--Police last night captured (Giovanni Rodriguez Hilano), a drug

traf f icker who has been active in Vargas. The authorities confiscated a package
of drugs containing 11 measures [codos] of cocaine and 30 marijuana joints. The
drug trafficker will be turned over to the Interpol section of the judicial police.
The drug trafficker, who resides in Maracaibo. reportedly makes frequent trips to
Caracas to sell the drugs. which he brings frol- Colombia. [PAl21723 Caracas Radio
Continente in Spanish 2100 GMT 11 Nov 81]

C80: 5300/ 2060

27
FINNISH EXPERT APPOIM'ED 1‘0 UN 0306 moat II coon-rs!
Helsinki BBLSINGIN SAM? in Finish 26 Oct 81 p 9

[Text] Professional interest as well as a love of adventure and challenge have led
the Central Crisinal Police criainal investigator Rieto Veijalainen to a unique
position on the battle-ridden Afthanistan.

Veijalainen is the first Finn ever to have been chosen to serve as s specialist for
the UN narcotics department, mom.

One of the reasons why a Finn has been chosen to this extraordinary position is
Finland's non-political reputation. as cooperative develop-ant agencies regard
Pinland as one of the nost favored sources of recruits.

Risto Veijalainen. 43, is the reason why the Pin chosen for this post was
Veijalainen. He is generally considered to be Finland's leading expert on inter-
national narcotics questions.

Veijalainen's background includes a long career with the police, Candidate of
Jurisprudence degree, foreign language skills, faeilisrity with the workings of
Interpol, a long career as the chief of the Central Crininsl Police narcotics
division, the uneasy post of the chief investigator in the Salora case, and a
character that does not give in easily in criminal investigations.

Faking concern, Veijalsinen's coworkers at the Central Criminal Police are now
collecting a "neaoriel fund for colleague Veijalainen, for nobody can possibly stay
alive chasing drug criminals. and. to top it all. in a crises-beriddled country."

Veijalainen's official title in Afghanistan is "crilinal investigation advisor" in
the narcotics division of the interior ainistry in the country's capital Kabul.

Afghanistan Top Producer of Opiu-

Veijalainen's job description includes supervision of the police drug investigation
and the UN project's nillion earl: budget. coordination of the cooperation between
the Custom and the Narcotics Police and organising of the training of the narcotics
police. The actual chasing of the drug cri-inals in the Afghanistan sountains is
not part of Veijalainen's job as the UN advisor.

28
Risto Veijalainen made already last May a preliminary visit to Afghanistan on a
two-week jaunt as a UN consultant.

"Afghanistan has traditionally been among the biggest producers of opium. In 1979,
the officially confirmed amount of confiscated raw opium was 30 tons. The actual
amount going to the European markets in the peak years has been estimated to have
been as high as over 500 tons," Veijalainen said.

According to Veijalainen. Afghanistan's domestic drug problems are minor despite
the tons of opium produced. The local farmers look on poppy growing roughly the same
as the Finnish taxpayers look on cheating on taxes.

Together wtih Pakistan and Iran, Afghanistan is now on the top of the list of most
important producers of opium for the Heat Bruopean drug markets. According to
Veijalainen, the heroin and opium traffic is now crossing over from the Golden
Triangle of Aaia-Thailand. Laos and Burma-to the near East.

The Afghan police claim that the drugs move from Pakistan through Afghanistan into
Europe. With its freely available hashish. the capital, Kabul, was in the early
1970's the Mecca of the hippie movement.

world Narcotics Situation Getting Horse

The UN yearly report describes the world's overall narcotics situation as worse
than ever before.

"The drugs cause most damage in the Hestern countries. That is why the UN has
started its narcotics control project which will provide the farmers with farming
alternatives. So far, the UN narcotics project has provided for the building of
modern quarters for narcotics investigation in 10 Afghanistan towns."

"Although only a minor number of drug offenses are discovered by the police, it is,
however, certain that international drug trafficking is directed by certain criminal

organizations with their organized leagues. Although we don't have in Finland a
drug problem of international magnitude. our narcotics investigation is high-class."

"It is quite different to be a narcotics investigator in a producing country than in
a country where drugs are not grown," Veijalainen pointed out.

According to the Foreign Ministry, there are no Finns in Afghanistan at present.
Western journalists have long been denied visas to Afghanistan, where even now
battles continue between the government and guerillas.

However, the turbulence of the Afghanistan situation does not scare Veijalainen, who
will spend the first week of November in Vienna at the UK before continuing to his
final destination.

Officially, Veijalainen's post in Afghanistan has been budgeted only until the end
of the year, but in the event that additional time can be arranged. Risto Veijalainen
wants to consider returning to the country.

Veijalainen has known to expect the UN position for about a year, but the Afghanistan
government and the UN have only now been able to arrange the final papers necessary
for travel.

29
9571

C80: 5300/2040
OPIUH SMUGGLING ATTEMPT FOILED
Cairo AL-AﬂRAH in Arabic 19 Oct 81 p 19

[Text] Security forces in the Ministry of Interior foiled a new attempt to smuggle
a large shipment of raw opium valued at half a million pounds. The smugglers had
hidden the opium inside secret hollow spaces within some woodwork arriving in pack-
ages aboard a plane arriving from Karachi. Pakistan.

Information and investigations had determined the return of certain drug smugglers
and their sides to their activities, and that they had agreed on a new plan to bring
large drug shipments from abroad, after several other operations failed. the last
one being the arrest of a foreign diplomat and an Egyptian smuggler at Cairo airport.

In implementing the research plan supervised by Maj Gen Sami As'ad, the director of
drug administration. to observe the smugglers' moves, it was noticed that a group of
smugglers and their sides had traveled abroad to bring in large shipments of drugs.
In order to further distort the facts. the smugglers moved among several countries,
finally landing in Karachi. where they had sent several packages containing woodwork.

Through the investigations received by Maj Gen Hamduh Salim Zaki, narcotics agent,
Colonel Muhammad 'Abbas Hansur, operations manager, and Colonel Sayyid Ghayth, an
agreement was reached with the Port Security and Customs Authorities to foil that
operation and uncover the plan. as it was learned that the smugglers had resorted to
a new, original method of hiding the drugs in secret hollow spaces inside the wood-
work and had sent it by installments, some of which arrived addressed to fictitious
persons. The smugglers made sure that all these packages would be transitted from
Cairo to Nairobi to ensure that they were not opened and that they were stored at
the airport until one of the smugglers could claim them without being discovered.

Col Ahmad Nadda. chief of the narcotics section at the airport, was disguised as
one of the freight workers in order to observe the planes arriving from Karachi and
the passengers' lounge for the probability of having someone claim these packages.
A group of security officers. headed by Majors 'lmad Raahid, Shafiq al-‘Ushri, and‘
Tariq Abu Zayd. opened all the packages containing woodwork, where they found ship-
ments of raw opium valued at half a million pounds.

9‘55
C50: 5300/5002
BRIEFS

TRAFFICXERS EXECUTED-—Tehran, 2 Nov (APP)--Three people accused of drug
trafficking and of being "corrupted on earth" were executed today in the
northeastern city of Ardabil, the ETTELA'AT newspaper said today. The
Ardabil Revolutionary Court also handed 14 people charged with drug traffick-
ing and consumption and opening gambling dens sentences of one to 10 years

in prison and 70 lashes of the whip. In the southern city of Kazerun. a man
accused of adultery was executed. Three other men were sentenced to 1.0. 50
and 60 lashes for having "led astray" young girls. the newspaper said. The
KEYHAN newspaper, meanwhile. announced the arrest in Tehran of a former number
of the shah's secret police. Savak. The report said Nur lbhamad Parzin had
served in Savak for 17 years and was a menber of the Bahai religious sect.
Several documents seized in his hone pointed to the sect's collaboration with
the former regime. the newspaper said. Hr Parain, who admitted being a Bahai,
was jailed in Evin prison. it said. Elsewhere. 10 "active elements" had
synpathizers of the outlawed people's Hojahedin group were executed in the
eastern city of Mashhad, Iranian television reported today. The left-wing
dissidents were convicted by revolutionary guards of "armed uprising against
the Islamic revolution." the report said. No date was given for their
executions. [Text] [NC021807 Paris APP in English 1741 GMT 2 Nov 81]

DRUG CASE STATISTICS--Tehran, 3 Nov (AFP)--A total of 659 drug dealers were
executed in Iran between the appointment of Sadeq Khalkhali as head of the
Revolutionary Narcotics Court on June 10. 1980. and the present day. the revolu-
tionary court announced today. Quoted by the ETTELA'AT newspaper. the court
said also that during this time 45 traffickers were sentenced to life in prison.
6,700 to jail terms of three months to 10 years. 21 had their possessions
confiscated, 21 were fined and 5.489 were released on bail. Ayatollah Khalkhali
resigned as narcotics president on Decenber 7 last year. [Text]

[N6031722 Paris APP in English 1705 M 3 Nov 81]

C80: 5300/5320

31
BRIEFS

HASRISII POW-Some 50 tires and four sacks containing 2.7 tons of heshish
were cast on the bar coast near Haifa in the last 26 hours. This is reported
by the ITIM correspondent in Haifa. A coast guard helicopter and boat on

1 Novenber attempted to find more of the drug. The containers held

9,660 sole-shaped packages of hashish weighing 250 grams each. The police
investigators believe that the drugs were drawn to the coast from the snuggling
route running between Turkey and Lebanon, en route to Egypt. [TA010608

Tel Aviv [TIM in Hebrew 1505 GMT 1 Nov 81 TA]

cso: 5300/1. 703

32
DRUG ABUSE STATISTICS, PREVBH'ION MEASURES mm
Niamey SARI-IL “£300 in French 80 280. 19 Oct 81 p 1!:
[Article by Binta Hahamane: "Stop the Scourge"]

[Text] Drug use is now a universal phenomenon despite the police force's many traps
for saugglers, clients and other users. Here in Niger, the ever-vigilant police
force supplies untiring efforts to prevent drugs froa being brought in.

Mr Allagouns Adanou, the police comisssioner. explains to us what the police do to
prevent drugs from entering Niger. "The police and custom work together at border
stations. when customs seizes a quantity of drugs, they inevitably turn it over to
the police, who handle the matter on a penal leve."

To prevent the sale and use of drugs, the force conducts "police actions" in two ways.
First, during police operations, they may "stmble" upon someone who has some tablets
on his and is therefore a user. ﬁre police ask him for his supplier's whereabouts

so that they can trace the network; or, then, based on information from other people.
Sanarians. for example, the police are “given tips." If the police are sufficiently
well informed, they lay hands on the person who is using or selling. But how are
drugs reaching Niger? The policy commissioner explains: "Several methods are used
to bring drugs into Niger; they are transported by auto, on donkey or camel backs,

in canoes. on foot...but less and less often by autonobile, due to very stringent
controls on vehicles.“

Amphetamine tablets. red capsules (called "Roka's" by users), hashish, and certain
pharmaceutical preparations are the drugs which exist in Niger.

At police headquarters, in 1981. 22 persons were implicated in drug matters. Their
ages ranged from 15 to 60 years. "In a single case," states teh cousissioner, you
sometimes find several categories of drugs. But very often, people are note or less
specialized. Sane take only hashish, others emphetsnine sulfate tablets, or "Roka's."
According to police headquarters statistics, about 1,250 amhetamine tablets, 630 red
capsules, 13 packages of hashish, and miscellaneous pharmaceutical tablets have been

seized.

The Police Conduct Their Inquiry and Send It on to the Courts who Impose The Penalty

About 10 years ago, drugs and narcotics in general worried the country. The peasant
wants to work, and due to eadtsusted soils and to sridity, and even to the structures

33
for marketing and establishing food crops. he has to work very hard to produce.

For this reason. the peasant uses "hana-kwsna" which is a drug. a narcotic. This
was practically a crisis in the country at the time. Everyone remembers that
"hana-kwana” was the most widespread narcotic and when evening came, was sold with
great fanfare in the village square "in sight of and with the knowledge of" the
customs authorities. At that time people did not perceive the danger of narcotics.
Today drug use has taken hold in the cities. due to the rural exodus and the problems
posed by large cities. At the same time, the narcotics used are diversified.

He asked Chief Justice Houssa Yacouba to tell us how many drug cases they had to
judge during the past 2 years.

"In 1980," he stated, "there were 59 narcotic cases with an average of 5 persons
involved per case. both users and sellers. From January to October 1981, 71 cases
were handled. The classes involved are basically part of the rural exodus; second.
you also find students, particularly during exams at the end of the trimester or
semester. depending on the grade the student is in, and also at the end of the year."

But there are also minors involved. But they use harmful substances instead, such as
"parfum." a wild plant which is called "touri foumbo" in Zarma. which, when used in

a certain manner. produces the same effects as drugs. There are also solutions used
to seal inner tubes; the solutions are used by minors. In fact. it is because they
are not financially capable of purchasing narcotics and do not know the channels
through which they can obtain them that these young people use harmful substances.

According to the chief justice. there are also adults who. when they are desperate
for sulfates or hashish. use "parfum." for example. However, Mr Houssa Yacouba does
not think that the narcotics problem is the only one affecting minors in particular.
There is. he added, juvenile delinquency which we should worry about. but with regard
to certain offenses such as aggravated theft. vagrsncy, etc.

Ordinance Number 74-30 of 8 November 1974 and its enactment Number 77-108 of 8
December 1977 provide for penalties for this offense.

Vreviously. it was the very old 1926 French code which was applied in Niger. But it
was the enactment of 26 January 1926 on the legal practice of pharmacology that was
applied. Faced with the urgency of the problem. administrative and legislative
authorities felt it necessary to update the old code. In other words. at present the
legislation regarding the struggle against drug abuse is very recent.

In the case of a repeat offense. narcotics and poisonous substance offenses do not
differ at all from repeat offenses for any other infractions. In clear terms. a
repeat offender cannot be sentenced to a term less than twice as long as the first
term he has incurred. Example: If a delinquent has been sentenced to 3 or 6 years
in prison. 3 or 4 years ago, and he appears in court. he cannot be sentenced to less
than 6 or 8 years.

Finally. it is to be noted that the court must order the confiscation of the product

seized for delivery to the ONPPC [National Office of Pharmaceutical and Chemical
Products] which will be able to use it.

9693
050: 5300/5603

35
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070055-0

HANDMX DEALERS USE NEW ROUTE INTO COUNTRY

Johannesburg BAND DULY MIL in English 29 Oct 81 p 1

[Article by Emlelia Jaroschek]

[Text]

mwmmmﬂﬂmwwmmu wwim. Mum m mammammﬂm WNW .wmmw

immm “my“ “ mmmmmm “Wm“ WWW “Wm

3: " mmmmw mmmm ﬂ.
WE mmmmm- “Waxy
mhmmwmmm immwm mwmwm Mm

mm,
“E
m

E.“ Aim

{Wu
Z“:

w
m
Wm
.m
Mm
u
mm"

SOUTBAFRICA'smm

5300/5607

080:

35

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070055-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070055-0

mum COURIER METHODS, TECHNIQUES ARE ESCRIBBD

Johannesburg RAND DAILY HAIL in English 29 Oct 81 p 8

[Article by Enigma Jaroschek': "the Secret Hays of the Hand:

[Tut]

WY. a courier
place: a ctrefully

mﬁpnd puree! node: a
bac alley dustbin In
Johannesburg.

U
mm

E
5.:
£5

E
3
a

:3
25
E §
5 €

:3
ii
3

3
=2
5
is
2?
ié

Esgé

gigs
38%
gig
.EE

g3
3;

36

Cracked

wilt! NW

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070055-0
NANDRAX CASE . . . Johannesburg Drug Squad dctoctlvu montly ulzod those 7 350

 

Imam: tablets. worth about R70 000. before they reached the buyers.

at. much an run
to mono eta or
I: another take a.
With the .

1 have also been
y to South Una and

I to the mom
1:“ 01’ air to collect
uncut.
lwmeumq‘ I”?! m
"at to South (to;
m ant. coutu-
Dub Iotth truly
m wind by moms
April this you. M
w 1nd colour“ Iomlﬂ
ted.

re talcum to "ml
method 0! mp-
mporud m South
L some obviat- an.
found tn INN "och.
n and ma cu puts.
South um the av

00/5607

Wlmhm
Htlwmmatthcmurﬂ’
uoodaLPuyml-hmdo-
paltuinlms—amnt.
uwuwtdmmmmnm

”Emwrmwm
to to
hr mung:

Policc Iavnuuuou have
Ibo-u In! ain‘t mum 0!
tam have M has Ml
"on M" —- paid lot am they
an (I: the m

Oahu m continua; to
run and" M" “P“.
m yolk. mu.

in load myth":
1m Capo Tm Dat-

37

New routes

The modal-In u
rudy to supply. a
BRIEFS

HEROIN CONPISCATBD-The Hague, 17 Nov (APP)-Sone 21 kilograms (66 pounds) of
heroin, worth 21 million florins ($5.1 million), were confiscated end 17 people
arrested yesterday after police discovered SOO-gren (one-pound) pockets of the
drug hidden in boxes of frozen shrimp. police said today. Police followed the
people who picked up the shrimp. which arrived in msterd- Airport aboard a
regularly-scheduled airline from Pakistan. The operation led them to a house in
The Hague, where 12 people were arrested. The five others were detained after
they were found in hotels in the Dutch capital. police seid. [Text] [NCl709ll
Paris APP in English 0826 GMT 17 Nov 81]

CSO: 5300/2065

38
GOVERNMENT STEPS UP DRUG ENFORCEMENT BPTURT IN NORTH SEA
Oslo AFTENPOSTEN in Norwegian 30 Oct 81 p 3

[Article by Thorleif Andreassen]

[Text] The government is going to put in effect more stringent enforcement measures
to prevent the abuse of narcotics on the oil platforms in the North Sea. Carl
Wendt, chief of police in Stavanger, will head up a committee which will undertake
an accelerated critical review of the existing enforcement measures and practices.
The committee will then make proposals for new, effective measures. The government
hopes that the new measures will be ready for the coming year. Probably, some of

a long list of measures which will be put into effect will include greater use of
dogs, better technical equipment and more frequent spot checks by the police.

Hons Rokke, the minister of justice, points out to APTENPOSTEN that the narcotics
problem on the platforms is particularly serious because it involves not only the
Stavanger area but can spread to future petroleum activity in the north if effective
countermeasures are not put into effect now.

The minister of justice emphasizes the problem that many of the workers on the oil
platforms are not Norwegian citizens. These people are brought directly to the
platforms, for example, from England, without first going through the Norwegian
securety process. She is advocating, in regard to this, uniform enforcement measures
for all workers on Norwegian oil platforms, irrespective of from where they come.

The Nendt committee will examine very minutely the enforcement routines before it sub-
mits its report to the ministry of justice, which will constantly be kept informed

in regard to the progress of the comnittee's work. An important aspect is to
delineate the extent of the problem of narcotics in the North Sea.

The purpose in naming the Hendt committee is, among other things, to obtain an
evaluation of both the narcotics problem in the Stavanger area and the problems in
connection with the oil platforms. The last question will have priority so that the
necessary preliminary rules can be put into effect in a comparatively short time.

The working committee will have representatives from the employees and employers in
petroleum industry. In addition, people from the social departments in Stavanger
will participate.

"It is obvious that the availability of narcotics in Stavanger has increased in
connection with the increased petroleum activity. Experience shows that greater

39
availability leads to greater use. One does not have to be full of fantasies to
imagine what dangers narcotics has for safety in the North Sea," Mona Rokke
emphasized.

The Phillips oil company has requested permission to require from the police testi-
monials in regard to the people who are sent out to the oil platforms. The ministry
of justice is now evaluating that request. It is not known for the time being to
what extent the ministry of justice will grant this request. "It is obvious that

one has to be careful in adopting orders which may be like restrictions on the
individual's right to work. On the other hand, I believe there is wide understanding
for the fact that conditions in the North Sea have such a special characters and
where accidents can have such catastrophic consequences, that one can anticipate
agreement on special measures," Mona Rokke said.

She reainded us that both the employers and employees will be represented on the
working committee which will be lead by Police Chief Hendt. "We will take a posi-
tion in regard to the proposal from Phillips after we have heard from both the
employers and employees in the North Sea," she said.

It was on the night of 13 October that the police moved against some 20 petroleum
workers at the Ekofisk field and in the Stavanger area. The background to this
extensive police action was first and foremost the safety risk which the abuse of
narcotics represents. Only a moment's carelessness and inattention can lead to a
catastrophe on an oil installation. Hence, there is an absolute prohibition against
the use of alcohol on board. The narcotics police in Stavanger have noted that
individuals in the narcotic milieu in the city easily get jobs out in the North Sea
To prevent this leading to an accident because of narcotics misuse, the ministry of
justice is now giving top priority to the task of finding effective measures.

6893
680: 5300/2066
POLICE MAKE ARRESTS FOR DRUG ABUSE IN NORTH SEA OIL FIELD
Oslo ARBEIDERBLADET in Norwegian 19 Oct 81 p 2

[Text] On Saturday night the Stavanger police arrested two men at the Valhalla
field in the North Sea. The narcotics campaign of the Stavanger police is thereby
being extended to several oil-drilling platforms. and all together five people have
been arrested.

Officer First Class A. Endresplass of the Stavanger police department has informed
the Norsk Telegrambyra that the events at the Valhalla field on Saturday night
confirms the suspicions which the police have had that the misuse of narcotics in
the North Sea is not just confined to the Ekofisk field.

"The two men arrested at the Valhalla field were apprehended for using narcotics.
One was fined and released, but the other man is still in jail," Endreaplass says.

The police have previously arrested three people at the Ekofisk field. The third,
a foreign citizen, was arrested Friday and taken to Stavanger on Saturday.

He is under suspicion of bringing in 56 grams of hashish. The stuff was then sold
to a person at Ekofisk for 2700 kroner. The hashish was brought to Bkofisk via the
heliocopter base at Forua.

According to Officer Endresplass, the police will continue their anti-narcotics
campaign at the oilfields in the North Sea. The stuff which has come in will now
be examined more carefully, and police action will most likely be also expanded to
include other platforms besides Ekofisk and Valhalla.

That which the police know the least about is. according to Endresplass, the supply
route for the narcotics used in the North Sea.

"He know that the people who use the stuff take along enough for their stay at the
field. We also know that the petroleum workers from the Stavanger area who use
narcotics get it locally. Sons of it is also brought in from abroad. In other words,
there are many supply routes." Endresplaaa says.

He does not believe there is any direct connection between the increase in the use
of narcotics in Rogaland and the expansion of petroleum activity. "Hy impression
is that the misuse of narcotics in the North Sea and in the Stavanger area are in
step with the situation elsewhere in the country."

6893
080: 5300/20‘6 bl
BRIEFS

HUNGARIANS SHUGGLED IN HASRISh--Oslow, 19 0ct--Too Bungsrian citizens living in
Norway, were sentenced by the circuit court of Oslo on Friday to 5 and 1/2 years'
imprisonment for snuggling in and selling 27 kilograms of hashish. The judgment was
in accord with the counsel's plea for the prosecution, district attorney Lars Frnsdal.
The two Hungarians denied being guilty when they sade their statements at the
beginning of the trial on Hednesday. The hashish was purchased Eran a Danish
citizen in Copenhagen. and the two maintained that they had been in contact with

him only in connection with the sale of a motor vehicle and the purchase of a vaca-
tion cottage. The circuit court esphasized strongly that a very large quantity of
narcotics was involved which could be distributed to a large nuaber of people and
that the profit motive was a decisive factor. The hashish was snuggled into

Norway on several trips up to the spring of 1980. The two paid 690,000 kroner for
the stuff, according to notebooks found in the possession of the Danish supplier.
The stuff has here an estimated street value of 2.7 aillion kroner in retail sale

at 100 kroner a gram. [Text] [Oslo ARBBIDERBLADET in Norwegian 19 Oct 81 p 2] 6983

C80: 5300/20G4 END

42