FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10482

27 April 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUC 19/82]

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPIS publications contain informtion primrily fro- foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also tron news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Heterials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and eaterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or folloving the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original intonation was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the inforo
nation was sunsrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar nsnes rendered phonetically or translitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by e ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes vithin the body of. an
itee originate with the source. ‘i'ines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. vievs or attitudes of the 11.8. Goverment.

COPYRIG‘! LAVS AND REGULATIONS WIRING WISHIP 0?
MATERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0? “IS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE DULY.
HORLIMIIE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(£000 19/82)

CONTENTS

AUSTRALIA

Conniesion on My Told More Narcotics Police Needed
(Aileen 381173113 A03, 18 Feb 82) aoeeoeseeeseoooooeeoe

Melbourne on Aid to Thai mug Suppression Efforts
(Melbourne Overseas Service, 29 Mar 82) ................

Mg Conviction ix: Thailand Raises Legal meetions
(Garry Sturgess; THE AGE, 20 Feb 82) ...................

Support for Phone Tapping by Federal Government in M:
Cases
(THE "EST AUSMAN, 2? Feb 82) aeseeeaeeaeoeoeooaaaeoa

Alleged Indian Hemp Grower Makes Court Appearmce
(THE SIDE! MORNING HERALD, 26 Feb 82) .................

Briefs
Heroin Import Charge

BAMLADBSH

Briefs
Opium anglers Arrested

IRDIA
Briefs
Palan Heroin Arrest

'Notorious' Rareotice amuler
Hizoram Mg Connection

-a- [In-ww-iasr:

MOMMUSEONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALAYSIA
Briefs
Drug Trafficking Syndicates
Kedah mug Syndicates kashed
PAKISTAN
Briefs
‘h'afticker Cheated by Supplier
Charas Snuggling Bid Foiled
Charas Seized
PHILIPPINBS
Briefs
Harihuana Finances Communist Arns Purchases
Cavits Narcotics Campaign
SRI LANKA
Briefs
Ganja Plantation Destroyed
THAILAND

Heroin Trafficking Patterns Described
(Jonh “8113 8mm: m, 29w82) OOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOO.

Australia Nay Base More Drug Agents in Bangkok
(BANGKOK msT, 26“” 82) .0....000OOODOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOO.

Praeong Wants More Developnent, less Suppression of Hill
Tribe Poppy Growers
(SIM RAT, 9 “8r 82) 0.0.0.0....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOO

Crop Substitution Chief Cements on Programs
(Narong Susannapien Interview; HATICHON, 22 Feb 82) ....

SUA, Ethnic Minority Traffickers Relationships Noted
(SIM m, 20 “81‘ 82) 0.000.00000000....oeoseolsotoooese

SUA Forces Flee Burmese Attacks, Return to Thailand
(sun ”I. 8 Mar 82)....COOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00.0.00...

Post-Raid “Cations uf 30A Described
(31“ “I 8mm mm, mmBz) O'COOOO900000000...

Controversy Continues Over RTA Relations With m 93rd Division
("ATICW, 7 "a, 82) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOO.

ab-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(hinese Has Villages Growing Poppy in (him: Bsi
(mum, 8 m 82) .0...OOOOOOCOOIOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0...

m Illusion 'Prsﬂ‘icking, Military Activities lobed
(81“ w 8mm “cm, 21 Rb 82) OCCUOCOCQCOOOOOCOO.

Briers
Iii-ouch narcotics Official Visits

GARADA

Prosecutor Gites Various Home Used To ﬁnale Banish
(Tim Yum m, lomsz) .OOOOC'OOOOIOOO00.0.00...

m To Pursue mug Profits in new Tack Agdnst Illegal Trade
(m Ms “D m, 17 w 82) .ooeesesoeoseseoeosessoc

LATIN ”(RICA
M3360

Traffickers Captured Huh Heroin Pros Omrrsro
(31. mo 13 m m, 26 Mar 82) eeeoeeeeieeeoeooe

MKASTANDMMICA

Briefs
auras Ssuggler's Execution
ﬂashish, Opium Seized

UNITED ARAB MATES

Briers
Hashish hem Psldstsn

sun-sum ARIGA

Briefs
Harihuans hatﬂckers Arrested

cc-

mandamus!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WWW

Paper Sue Law Against Heap Raising Would Be Futile
(Editorial; mm TIME, 3 m 82) IIOOOOOOOOOCIOO

Briefs
Police Earning on Killer Heroin

cusses

Briefs
Portuguese Snuggler Arrested \g

Poll on Attitudes of Youth Toward m'ugs Reported
(Pia Bauer; Mus m, 31 m 82) eseoeesaoeooeoo-e

Second Poll Oonfims Decline of Youth Interest in huge
(was mm, 1 Apr 82) O...0.0.0.0...9.0.0.0....OIOOC

Police Conducting Offensive Against Ihlarna Province Irugs
(Mutts ”lam; moms m, 11 Apr 82) eoeeeeoeeeee

Briefs
Cannabis-hugging Gang Broken

TURKEY

Briefs
Morphine Base Seized

UNITED KING”

Seizure of Convicted Traffickers' Assets Urged
(Stanley Goldsmith; THE DAILY TELHIRAPH, 27 Mar 82).....

University Laboratory Used as Student's Mg Factory
(0011" Randal-13m my mm, 27 m 82) secs-ea.

Drugs uad Detectives cleared of mugs-Related Offenses
Stanley Goldsuith; THE DAILY THEM, 6 Mar 82) .....

Briefs
Jail for Cannabis smugglers
Heroin Supplier Jailed
Customs mug Seizures
Heroin Seized
Cannabis Seized
Arabs Jailed for Drug Snuggling

-d-

luminous
MISSION OF DRUGS TOLD mar NARCO‘IICS POLICI serum

Melbourne m A63 in English 18 Feb 82 p 15

[Article by Aileen Berry]

[Text] Sydney-«ore Federal police narcotics officers should be posted to
the world's nain drug centres. the loyal Goa-ission on drug trafficking was
told yesterday.

Detective Station Sergeant Brian Bennett of the Federal Police Sydney drug
unit said that drug liaison officers based in Kuala Luapur and Bangkok
travelled frequently throughout South-Best Asia to cope with the huge voluee

of work.

In his three-year tere in Kuala Luupur, he said he had visited Singapore
about 30 tines on various narcotics investigations. men he started there

in January 1978, he was responsible for liaison throughout Malaysia. Singa-
pore, Indonesia and the Philippines. Indonesia was later dropped. but
Brunei included. "I feel the net has got to be spread a little bit." he
said. "It's just impossible."

Sergeant Bemett told the Royal Conissioner, Kr Justice Stewart, that the

placements would need to be dealt with on a Governeent policy level. given
present Public Service staff ceilings.

He said the optimum locations would be Bong Kong. India and the eastern
mditerrsnsan. A strong Federal Police presence in Bong Kong would deal
with other types of illegal activities as well. he said. while the officer

based in India would cover Afghanistan and the recent upsurge of Pakistani
opius on the world drug markets.

The eastern hditerranesn posting would take in Lebanon. mrkey and Iran-
where hashish frequently originated.

Sergeant Bennett said that, while posted in Kuala Lunpur. he dealt with
officers of the US Drug Enforceasnt Agency and Singapore's Central Narcotics

Bureau. Ila asid he had becone familiar with the new and activities of
several eenbers of the 'Hr Asia' international heroin syndicate, although he
did not believe he had set any of then.
The joint Federal-State Royal Comission was set up last year to investigate
the 'Hr Asia' syndicate. with particular reference to its head, Terrence
John Clark. also known as Alexander James Sinclair. Clark is serving a life
sentence in England for the murder of his drug partner, Christopher Martin
Johnstone. known as 'Hr Asia' , in October 1979. Clark is also wanted in

Australia in connection with the mrders of New Zealand drug couriers,
Douglas and Isabel Wilson at Rye. on the Mornington Peninsula. in May 1979.

Sergeant Bennett said he had first heard of Douglas Wilson in 1972 when
Wilson was suspected of trafficking in LSD in New Zealand. "It was not
until the Press reported the finding of the Wilsons' bodies in Dblbourne

and said that he had served two years that I realised it was probably the
same fellow," he said.

Yesterday's hearing later turned to the subject of "petty jealousles"
between State and Federal law enforcement bodies-a recurring theme in its
public hearings. Questioned by counsel assisting the Royal Co-ission,

Mr Don Grieve. Sergeant Bennett admitted his cos-eats could make his
unpopular, but agreed that these jealousies haapered the flow of inferna-
tion between the various police forces.

He said the situation had improved considerably over the past few years and
he was optiniatic that the Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence, which

was established recently, would help overcom the lack of co-operation
between State and Federal bodies.

He agreed with Mr Justice Stewart that as well as jealousy there could be
distrust between the forces. based on a lack of knowledge. lie also agreed
that this distrust detracted from the efficiency of the forces.

'lhe Royal Comission. which adjourned into private session to hear more

sensitive evidence on Sergeant Bennett's term in Kuala Lunpur, will resune
in public this morning.
mm ON AID 1’0 m1 DRUG SMSIN 3mm
BK291‘07 lblbourne Overseas Service in English 1110 an 29 liar 82
[Free the "Australian Insight" progran]

[Excerpt] This is "Australian Insidxt" and I an (Judith linckay). The Austra-
lian Government is looking at ways of providing further assistance to Thailand
in the figut to stop the distribution of dams, such as opiue, fro. the so-
called Golden Triangle region. This announcement follows a visit to Thailand
by the Australian minister for administrative services. Mr New-an. As poli-
tical correspondent (Bill Nicholl) reports fro- Canberra:

The Australian Governant has for the past 10 years or aore been providing
help to Thai authorities ainad at preventing the growth and distribution of
narcotics from within Thailand. Host help so far has been in the fora of an
Amtralian overseas aid progran designed to get rural calamities in Thailand's
north to substitute cash crops. like coffee. for traditional crops. like
opium. So far Australia has provided just under A62 million. that's around
0.8.52.2 aillion, for work in developing substitute crops.

'lhe earliest prograa was a university-based project which researched possible
crop alternatives. But this has since given way to what is called an agricul-
tural extension progran designed to actually get alternative crops growing and
then sold in the marketplace.

According to officials in Canberra, this work will take years to have any
real inact on the fer-era who rely on opiun for their income. One official
believes it could take 20 years or note before any tangible results are seen.
In the nsantin. ante and nore snhasia is being placed on inproving the
effectivenessmf police narcotic agents in Thailand.

Sons 10 nations are providing help to Thai police involved in this work.
Australia is one of then. Since 1977, we have had. what officials in Canberra
like to call, a drug liaison presence in Thailand. At present there are two
full tine Amtrelisn police officers stationed in Bangkok to liaise with

Thai narcotic agents. In addition, Amtralia has. in the last year or so.
contributed equip-ant worth $250,000 to the Thai police to help in their anti-
drug caupeign. This includes sons 18 notor vehicles. plus col-unicetions and
surveillance equipaent.
Thai police have also been brought to Australia for training. including two
senior officers—one from the Bangkok metropolitan police and the other from

the border patrol police—the group responsible for the recent paramilitary-
style clash with opiun warlord nun 8a.

Judging by reports of the just coepleted visit to Thailand of the Australian
minister for administrative services, Mr Newnn, the Amtralian police effort
in Thailand is to be further upgraded. There is talk of providing another
full tins liaison officer and also providing an Australian expert to help

set up a conuterized drug intelligence operation in Thailand.

Hr "even is reported to have asde these consents while in Kong Kong after his
visit to Thailand. Details of such an offer fron Australia to the Thai Govern-
ment are. at this stage, still sketchy. Radio Australia has not as yet been
able to confirm then throudl hr Newman's office. and the Australian federal
police say that they are unsure of exactly what their minister nay have of-
fered to the Thai authorities. About all apolice spokes-an was prepared to
concede when I spoke to hin a short tine ago, was that Australian authorities
are aware of the need for close cooperation with Thai officials since Thailand
lust, out of necessity, be in the forefront of drug prevention.

(:80: 5300/5 718
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500050068-8

DRUG CONVICTION Ill THAILAND RAISES LEGAL QUESTIONS

Melbourne THE AG! in English 20 Feb 82 p 15

[Article by Gary Sturgeos]

1".1111 II... I

“Mmmmmmw 2. MM. 3mm Mg;

an mm$ Wmmw M
WMMMMMM Mm. MM 2% MMMMWWMW 3M mem
WWW;

ma. ”mm-W. mum. WW3 WMMmWMmm MW

WmMMMMmM: Mm“ mm MMMM mm “MN
m: M Wm“ .mmmwﬁ maﬁa uqu mm mmm ummuh mwmm
WW My MMMMMMWMMEM M- .me MM”

unWMm

mm wmhmemtm&w

mm .um m
mmmmnm u m m m vmm 3mm
Mm Mmmm meuMmmwm mmm .

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00880R000800050088-0
ft m h with;
about and oedvmu than
under hm" at. noon

vol
Dcspl may ml
33% dawn I 3.30. 010.

notdldlhlmkwadnﬂoan-
monwullh one“.

“No «ﬂown Intonation m
not molvod tron the Narcotics
Bureau Ind this mvﬂy hallw-

ﬂcldn‘. -.

“But I did naive am MM
"palace o! the untouunm el-
has at a W‘ﬂmd’W'
I co-opcn " r Mm

cow-rd cold. "

So while Ammo adds
um «cued In a mm o! co-
1?“. mm "" "mu... 3::

o w
an Ammumumwon
India; «0,6000% by do-
!wll to wrong conclusion;

C50: 5300/ 75100
[Text] The Federel

Govern-

ment le etudyi udyinfe
rose] to give Sate pol
iorcee powers to up

telephone mnvemtiom
in move: to combet il-
iegei drug milicitin‘.

Current! only the Aue.

treiien rlty lntelll

enie'etion end

the iedere lice ere em-
powered to

nterce tele
Rhone cells. ' Pi

A810 requiree e we:-
rent born the Attorney-
Generel end tederel
police Inveetigeton have
to get e werrent irotn e

IN"-

The iv‘ederei Atto

Genet-e1. Senator Dun
conlirrned yeeierdey lhet

the Government wee
cereiuil -exernining the
propoee.

eHowever no decision in
peeled Before the m
ereim iew reiorrn commit
eionr'eaorte on the lane
late t _

Welcomed

in

the WA Minnm ioc
Police Mr- l-ioeeeleei
|comed the move. .1

lie eeid he could not eee
why the Lillie oi so “9'
set et t ice inter-
ting to hone mile
wen the ice indec-
ceee to ell other eopliiui
ceted electronic eurvell.
ience equipment.

SUPPORT FOR PHONE TAPPING BY FEDERAL 00me IN DRUG CASES
Perch THE "381‘ AUSTRALIAN in English 27 Feb 82 p 3

‘l‘ele one. interception
he need only in

der proper controle.

The WA police would
lureeo ' beebie to inter.
not 0"talk in ceeee of
drug Melting. extor-

~tion. terror-inn end kid-

nepping, he slid.

The WA. Government
celled lat Ap til for
police power: to pulp tele-
phonee.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007(02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060058-8

ALLEGED INDIAN HEM? GROVE]! MAKES COURT APPEARANCE

Sydney THE SYDREY MORNING HERALD in English 26 Fab 82 p 9

[Text]

CSO:

A 38-year-old man had
Indian hemp with a meet
valna. o! Slo million on the

y be owned near lnvet-
ell, police alleged in Camal
Conn yatctday.

w Met. a roomy W.
of Una: Whitelaw Road. Vta 3m-

ta. modeled aims“ to Drug

mad detectives on Toad-y atm-
noon.

Mat appeared Mots Mr C.
Brian. 65M. W VI“! W0"-
ing ladiatt hemp to ba cultivated
on a may. and vita cultivating.
manly and Mg Indian

hem

1% police mt“. Sergeant
Bennett. all that at 5 pm on
Today. polite [tom lawn“ and
Tuna-oak tarot lo a I!
Binpra and loud two acres Ip-
dian lump plants. ranging l|
heighl lrotn u to 2 mum.

“Police also (not! ximata-
Iyltalfatoanaotl iaalaemp
drying out ia a wool shad.“ Set-
gleam Bennett aid.

Sergcaat Dem-at eatimatcd tho
meet value cl .4: India. lump on
the my at no million.

He said one man waa arrested at

the pmcn and chug: with cul-
tivating supplyingt om

meant Bennett aaid titer
aunenderd himadf to.tha Drug
smut. alum he waa mmvicwcd
and all y made a lull admis-
sion aimed raootd 0! mm-
Vlc'.

The court am told police went
to a home allure Puke: occasiono
ally lived and tound mains o!
unﬁ'ruliaol hempiuuantaaahaat. he

er alt-gall it avaa t
remain oi was worth 0! Indian

5300/7541

waa amped to J!” Indian

He and his lent deal“
ing Illa dmg. and did not ob
had mutual tit: dmg.

Mr We» granted Pasta!
sumo hall out the oondltioa he
amend" the title Gouda o! the

may. upon to polio: daily.
and ”modernism

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050058-8
BRI BPS

mom IMPORT Mb-sydney--Police yesterday arrested four people and
seized an estinated $300,000 worth of heroin following a raid on a house at
Gosford on the central NS" coast. A nan and his 18-year-old daughter fron
Werner Vale on the outskirts of Gostord were both charged with imrting
heroin. he nan, 65, was also charged with possessing heroin and his
daughter with using the drug. A 25-year-old sen from the Entrance and a
23-year—old wonan fro- Canton Beach were charged with adninistering heroin,

possessing asphetaeines and possessing Indian hsnp. [Text] [Melbourne ‘1'!!!
AGE in English 18 Feb 82 p 5]

080: 5300/ 7560
BRIEFS

OPIUH SKUGGLERS ARRESTED—Huge quantitiea of snuggled liquor and narcotica.
including opium and worth taka one lakh. were seized yesterday. Four
peraona were arreated from different areaa of the city in this connection.
The peremel of Decca'CO-ieeioner'a office of Narcotica and Liquor
Department seized lol bottlea of liquor, 91 cane of beer. 12 eeere of

opium and 11 aeera of ganja. [Text] [Decca m NIH NATION in Ingliah

20 Mar 82 p 8]

cs0: 5300/7026

10
BRIEFS

PALAH mm ARREST-“About 170 grams of high-grade heroin valued at Rs 3.5
lakhs was seized by the Pala- police when they arrested Judy Gaylefehn. a
US national on Sunday. Police said that the suspect, was to board a
Lufthansa flight for her journey to the US. was nabbed soon after she
reported at the search and frisking counter at the airport. She had report-
edly concealed the heroin in her bra. According to UNI. DPC '1' R lather
said the wonsn, herself a drug addict. was in possession of two passports
with different cases. She was also carrying 6000 US dollars. She had
arrived in India on 6 March and had received the heroin fron one Raj Ruler
on paynent of 3000 US dollars. The wonan was contacted by three persons.
including two Anericans. outside the Anerican Express Building soon after
her arrival. They took her to an hotel at Paherganj when 168 grans of
heroin was delivered to her three days later. It is suspected that the
persons who had contacted her in Delhi had links with an international
snuggling syndicate. Efforts are underway to track then down. [Text]
[New Delhi PATRIOT in English 23 Her 82 p 1]

'NOTORIOUS' NARCOTICS SHUGGLER-Jl'he nest notorious narcotics mggler of
the Capital, Balran Kishan, twice detained under the National Security

Act by the Delhi Police. was arrested by the special staff of the West
District police on Sunday fro. Rajouri Garden following recovery of more
than 5 kilos of charas from his possession. Earlier. Balrea who, according
to police was wanted in about 50 cases of charss and opium snuggling. had
been released fron “SA detention—once. after the order was quashed by the
advisory board of the Delhi High Court. and on another occasion. sources
say. because the Delhi Adninistration had ordered his release on the grounds
that the detention order contained sons 'loopholes'. [Text] [New Delhi
PATRIOT in mglish 30 Mar 82 p 10]

HIDORAH DRUG CONNECTION—New Delhi. 9 Apr (AIM—Police in nizoran today spoke
of the possibility of an international syndicate of narcotics snugglers oper-
ating in the tiny northeastern state on the border with Burns. Reports fron
Aiml. capital of Minoran. quoted police officials as saying that they sus-
pected the possibility in the wake of the recovery of 200 kg of contraband drugs
fron a private house in that city last mesday. Deputy (Brief of Hisoran

Police Babar said a vigorous hunt was on to snash the racket. It was not

known whether any one had been taken into custody in connection with the sei-
sure of the drugs. [Text] [Hong Kong A" in English 1709 M 9 Apr 82 BK]

cs0: 5300/5713
11
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFICKING SYNDICATBS—Pour international drug trafficking syndicates
have been identified follouing joint investigations by drug enforce-ant agen-
cies of Thailand and Halaysia. Nenty seven other big tine traffickers have
also been positively identified. The Malaysian crininal investigation depart-
nent and Thailand's Office of llarcotics Control Board are taking action agains”.
then. The Malaysian CID director said this at a news conference in Penang
today. He added. the 0863 had also disrupted the activities of poppy growers
in the Golden Tringlearea and eliainatad nany clandestine heroin laboratories.
With these successes. the illegal flow of drugs into the country and Thailand
had been reduced. [Koala Lupur International Service in hglish 0&0 err

ll Apr 82 BK]

man DRUG SYNDICATBS SMASHBD-Jhe police in Alor Setar in the northern state
of Kodah in peninsular Malaysia have slashed five well-organised drug traf-
ficking syndicates and arrested 13 persons. The Kedah chief police officer
told a news conference today that apart fron seizing a large quantity of
assorted Dadah, about 660 people had also been detained on suspicion of being
Dadah dependents and puehers since the beginning of this year. The police's
success was due largely to public cooperation. lhe officer disclosed that
various types of Dadah were snuggled into the country froa across the border
by the traffickers using fast cars, aotorcyclea and, on a fat occasions. by
boats and by rail. [Text] (Koala Lupur International Service in hgliah 0&0
GMT 12 Apr 82 BK]

CSO: SM/57l3

12
BRIEFS

WHORE! canm BY SUPPLIBRnOna narcotic pedlar in Lyari area in
Karachi wa'e cheated of la 1.500 which he paid to a bogue eupplier of the
narcotice. He had refused to lodge the coqlaint with police. According

to details in recent caqeign against the narcotice done in the area police
almoet aealed all the dena which created a "ahortage" of the "etuff" and

as a reeult a nutter of cheatera have entered the field who collect the
money fron pedlare on the falae proniae to aupply them with the required

goods. In ita caqaign the police have so far recovered 310 kiloa of haraa,
one kilo heroin. eight kilo bhang, two kilo opium and 265 bottlee of liquor,

it also arreated 26 auppliera and pedlara of narcotics during the caapaign.
Keanwhile it ie learnt that known emulate of narcotice and auppliera of

mendrix in Lyari area following the police caqaign have proniaed to
collect substantial au- for the rehabilitation of the addicts. But they

have put a condition that police ehould atop its interference and allow
them to carry out the rehabilitation work thanelvea. It in not known

whether the police have accepted their often—PH. [Text] [Karachi
BUSINESS RECORDER in Englieh 30 Her 82 p 3]

Cl-ERAS 940661.116 BID POIW-PBSHMAR, April l--1‘he Pakiatan Custom. and the
Harden police today foiled an atteapt to muggle 220 kilograna of charaa and
50 kilograna of opiun to Europe via Karachi. The narcotica would have fetched
over Re 50 lakh in the foreign narket. 'l‘he contraband gooda were hauled out
of a car on Sewabi 'noapi Road. All the three occupante of the car. including
its driver, were arreated. [Karachi Dam in English 2 Apr 82 p 7)

CHARAS scram-423mm, April S--‘1‘he W6 Police seized 587 kilogram

of charaa tron a Karachi-bound truck near Najibullah in Abbottabad diatrict on
Sunday. According to the diatrict authoritiea, the charae which wee being
anuggled from Sara, for Karachi. waa concealed in aecret cavitiea of the
truck. The value of the charae ia eatinated at he 1.12 crore. The contraband
item and the truck were taken into cuetody by the police and the cleaner and
driver of the truck were arreeted. The 88?, Abbottabad. hae announced caah
award and one atep promotion for the police officera who foiled the uuggling
attempt. [Karachi DAWN in Engliah 6 Apr 82 p 12)

C80: 5300/ 5706

13
same

MARIJUANA nuances consumer ms WES-m governnent has uncovered
several private houses being used as aruoriee by terrorists operating in the
South. The ar-ories were discovered during a house-to-house search in two
barsngays in Zanboanga City. Government operatives seized assorted high-pow-
ered guns and bullets cleverly hidden in several houses. Also confiscated
were nunitions supplies, including bayonets with scabbards, modern transceiv-
ers. sagasine pouches. boxes of assorted medicines. firearm belts and hol-
sters. ‘Ihe searchers were nade in barangsys Sta. Barbara and Baliwasan Grands
last Wednesday, military field couanders said in a declassified report yes-
terday. Among the high-powered guns saiud were n16 rifles or arsalites,

H562 baby arealites, carbines, caliber .45 revolvers. and an rifles. thonp-
son sub-achineguns, all fully loaded with bullets. Government troopers have
earlier discovered two gun factories in two resote barangays at the outskirts
of Cebu City. Operatives captured two suspected rebels in that raid. The
two broke down during investigation and adnitted the factories have been pro-
ducing guns to be sold to terrorists. According to reports. the New People's
Any, the nilitary are of the Oosuunist Party of the Philippines. has resorted
to marijuana farming to finance their buying of guns and other munitions sup-
plies. [Manila PHILIPPINES my EXPRESS in English 28 liar 82 p l]

CAVITB WARMICS CAMPAIGN--A stepped-up drive against drug addiction has
been launched by police authorities here in the wake of some reports that
drug pushers have been operating with impunity in this city even in public
places. Lt. Col. Jose V. Martin. newly-installed city police chief said
the no non—sense drive against drug pushers and users will so on without
letup until these nensces to the society are all locked up in jail.
Earlier. police operatives arrested five drug users in a series of raids
conducted in several parts of the city. In order to keep track of the
activities of suspected drug pushers in the city. several police teens
were organized by Colonel Martin who will also be assisted by the constabu-

lary antinsrcotics unit (CANU). [Test] [Hsnils BULLETIN TODAY in English
I. Apr 82 p 18]

(:80: 5300/5711.
BRIEFS

GARJA MARTA?!“ DESTROY-«On a tip-off. Sub-Inept. M. K. “jean with
seven other Police officers detected recently tvo ecreo of senile in a

chem at nephew. Tmulvth. 1n the Renew-ya Ponce era. [Text]
[Coludm m ISLAND in munch 25 Her 82 p 2]

C80: 5300/ 5716
HEROIN TRAFFICKING PATTERNS DESCRIBED

Bangkok BANGKOK POST in English 29 Mar 82 p it

[Article by John Hail:

[Text]

none none
111E battle for the Golden ‘l‘rianue'e
bet-oer hereeat haa moved out o! the
Jungle and Into the ahadovy world of
International drug ayndltatu. Chlneae
mm and mall-try atone.
glare honing to MC one bl; note.

At stake to an eatltnated 8 tone at
pure heroin nov beginning to trickle
down the lltlctt distribution network
to lame and America.

Drugexoerteeayaotonaotheroin
to more than enough to aunt: all the
world't addltte tor a year.

Detoite an unprecedented mllltary
oantoalcn hy Thailand to root out
onto:- warlord KhonSa inuhittlw
stelalrnearthetrl-borderjunctionol
Thailand. home and Lane. nareouu
eeoerta hetieee thle year‘s opin- crop
in the Gotden Mule will prove even
richer than laet year‘a nlaaatve han-
vent

To prevent the raw opium tron
helnc retlned into deadly heroin. the
Thai Government and the US Dru
Intorcement “maturation (nu)
ate ulna atter the cooked eheattate
who operate In oecret junta laborato-
rieein the Golden‘I‘riaute.

That entorcenent oitlelala eay the
chemicals neceaaary tor the retlntm
emeae are now strictly conu'olled. M
a rmlt. shortages oi reﬁned heroin
have owned tn Minot and other
tranuhlotnent points.

Ironically. vhlle the nﬂce oi raw
ooiura In the Golden ‘l‘tlaute hae
olumted due to the hopper hat~
veal. police intelligence reports tut»

ate the price at heroin la W
allover Southeast Mia.

Nam-(lea agenta belleve the his
drug dea:eraare hoardlm hue noctta

CSO: 5300/5711

'Dtenreetorieeot heroiahae
:oneuntotoercenttlnce melt-ant.“
audits?“ headotuﬂonc W
Monteheeetlntlonl WW

oar nutttadone clinica We have
daily attendance oi about ”Oil ad-

anltlne In the aetanre ot it kilo-
momentum.

ﬂammtmonedbythe
dlacovery oi an illicit laboratory ht
MMWrttuherolabue-
ahtghty concentrated hceh wade
preterred by annulus — Into at

CIINIIMIMCNWWV

heroln.

According to Tong. amber tine
heroin tormerty wae inhaled by ad-
dlculoarltualxnmaa“caada¢the
dragon" or ”playlnc the vino.” Int
now It generally it injected became
vaoetuaeredonothavethettneoedte
ortvoeytonnokeltlnllenkonc‘e
teen-hahlah-rleeetnne.

7m aald the recent trad of lo-
jecttngmmbertleeelaeaoeelatlyu
aeronaheoauaethedmleadﬂterated
toabwtnoereentoorltywlthoattetn
andothernoretoeteaddttteee.

Accordlnetomrteandreceelee.
heperllwoiheroineeldontheatleete
ot New Ym and other m in
titles averagba about moment.

16

"Into the Shadowy Horld of the Heroin Snuggler"]

MW Wand eethtcnt-
ate wildly. "on: Ron. agents
report the current atreet utoe o! a
"tlx‘oinu-berthuehcotntattl‘m
tabom no haht). with dtatrtbntlon
handled by lion. Keefe triada. or
aecretaoctettee.

letoort and export to handled by
”Nicene ranelne tron! tonlttntlllton
dollar ooerationa each at the eoa-lled
“Chlneee Cmeetioo.” believed to be
tunnelling southeaet Man herein to
Amaterdam. to malt-tine and often
ehortllved oaeodattoaeot two or three
courieretrytmtoatrtkeltrteh.

“lyrically the unall-ttlte courier
will matte t Ml trio and than
he'llcetgreedyandtryltul."m
aald. ”It he maltealtenouh tlateehnl
beahle toaltord oohlreoiherootniera
to do the dtrty m - anally neonle
whoaredeepln debt. ‘l'hal'ehwaonte
otthedryu ayndieateegetetarted.”

'l'he nae a hertldertnc
array ot rneee to tranaehlo the dun
thmhlloncliooaandontonurlteta
tn the Weat.

Mont Cuetom eearehea lodleate
that hollowed out nachlnery part- are
novatnon‘ the loot popular leana oi
ahloolne and alr ltelchttn. lane
amnteotdooelnandontotthe
colony.

Other htdlnc plaeea lanttlar to Coa-
tonu agenta are canned tooda. turnio
ture and taleobottomed IIIM

for ataeller amounts. coorlera are
reeortinl to cooceallnc heroin in hody
cavitiee.

An amendment Introduced In eariy
March to Daueroua
Drug hill penult- mt doe
tore to conduct body eaarehe oi alrllne
”new without tear ot helm med
ttnodn‘aaretoond. — UPI
wsrmu m: use not: onus acms m swam
Bangkok BANGKOK POST 1n Bngllah 26 liar 82 p 5
[Text]

AUSTRALIA may coaeldet lncecaelng the nan-hot ot

ageata haeed at in Bangkok Enhaeay. the

Anatralian Fadecal Government'e blinletet tor Admlaie»
trative Senlcee. Mt Kevin Newman. eald yoetetday.

Ir Newman. who'ee
poctfollo coveea 'edaal
narcotlce atlalte. told a
Preae conletence at the
emhaay that the peat-
hlllty ot lacreelng the
Illllbﬂ’ ol Aaatrallen
drug egente in Thailand
woeld he eaandned by
hie department alter he
retuﬂtetomettdia.

Ir Newman aaid then
won ”ehoot three” Mae
trailen Federal Police
nacotlca agente haeed in
Bangkok.

'l‘hle competea with
the United Statee which
hae et leeat ﬂ Dun In-
teccement Admlnlatra-
lion agenta in Thailand.
hood in hoth Bangkok
andChiaagIlal.

In a hooh on Anetta»
lia'e illicit drug wohlem.
Olefin lchoy (euthot
ot “The Politico ot lien
oin In South-Beet Aala").
claimed that ‘l'halvhaeed
drug eyndlcatea had
ewitched to Anetralla an
e atacltet hecattee oi the
aucceae ol the DIA'e
opetellon ‘

In a written etatement
handed out mettle).
It: Newman eeld ‘l'hai-
lend wa counted at one
at the toonlline areae in
Analnlla’a hetlle egalnet
druge.

5300/5711

'l‘huoite'e mm
'Chlaaglai .

3681’

"Vearedetemtlnedto
make ante the front line
le manned to the heat at
our ahlllty.” he aid in
theetatement.

ante arriving in law
lteh on Nonday tor a ela-
dey obit. It Newman
hae attended the ”CAP
meet and held tellta on
ieeeee Involving both
drege end Attettaliane
eel-vine untencea In
Thai jaila tot dmg ol-
lencea.

l: New-tea goeet
Chi-m lei today when:
he will have a helicopter
tour otccop uhatltutlon
prolecta and opium
growing arena and will
alao vleit the Thai-Ana-
ualia Wald Bank Land
Development Project.

In reepatee to a quee-
lien. Ir Newman ruled
out any poeelhlllly of
Aaettallen Involvement
in drug euppceeeion cam-
pelgna inch ae the re-

cent epetetlon agal
m .'

. .Muld 15“.“!

department planned to
(lathe: eaantlne the old
which Anau'eIla pcovldee
to Thailand to help drug
eeppteedon ettocta and

eeld apecial attention
would he glven to ttein
ing pcogcaanmea otleted
to‘l'hal police.

'l'hei police have el~
read, a e enti-
na'coticetrainlnglnm
trelle and m Newman

17

reload the poadhlllty ot
tutti“ couceee being

whlch Anetrelle had
given Thailand lot nan
uppteadon wocit
had mlncluded vehiclea
and tedloe. Anetralia
alao helped Thailand
tuhtthehemlnpcohleat
hy euppotllu ctop eah
etltntion and upland
tehahllitatlonptoiecte.

N: Newman eald
peleoeel' eachengee and
repetrlatlone had not
been mentioned in talhe
he hae held alnce hle
anivaL.

But he aid that the
enhlect ot remleeloae
had atieea and he
had been told that
pcteonece who maintain
a recoed at good conduct
could expect to have
thelt eentencee reduced
hyuptotwo-lhltde.

Nr Newman told on
thie hale e ptleoaecaen»
tenced to at peace tall
who had a tecotd ol
good condtm might ea-
pecttoeervehetweenala
teeightyeara.

lle eald an Aoetrellan
who hcohe the law in
1'hailand had to he pee-
paced to run the toll
gaunt ot the Thai legal

am: or: cull

'..‘ MOM
wet-lee”
what. applied tor
paaperta that the penal-

tlee tor dnigollencea in
acme lotelgn coontrlee
werehanh.heaald.
PMSONG WANTS noes DEVEWMBNT. LESS SUPPRESSIGI 0? BILL TRIBE POPPY GWRS
Bangkok SIAM RAT in Thai 9 Her 82 p 5

[Article: 'fncrease Hill Tribe Development to Stop Poppy cultiation Instead
of Suppressing [the Growersl'l

ITextl Squadron Leader Prason Sunsiri, the secretary-general of the National
Security Council, was interviewed by a reporter on the subject of implementing
a suppression policy to keep the hill tribes from growing poppies in Thailand.
He said that we must develop their villages and areas more because developoent
will bring benefits in the long term and will bring greater results than

using weapons to suppress then. He must provide jobs for then by having them
abandon poppy cultivation and instead turn to growing substitute crops. Correct
village order must be established and we must given them a feeling of love

for the land that they are living in. When we have developed things in this
way, they will be Thais and we will not have any conflicts.

The Secretary-general of the National Security Council also stated that,
besides this, language and culture are being used to assimilate them. However,
this will take a long time: it is not a simple matter to reach this goal.
And the officials who work with the hill tribes will reach the goals too.

Squadron leader Prason said that, at present, the officials who have gone

to work in the mountains have encountered many obstacles. For example, there
is a duplication of operations. Concerning this, an attempt will be made

to reduce the conflicts. At present, there is no work coordination. He must
correct this by discussing things.together in order to solve this problem.

Squadron Leader Prasong Sunsiri also said that we realize the necessity of
having the hill tribes stop growing poppies. But when they stop growing poppies,
what will they do to make a living? We must implement a crop substitution

and animal husbandry program so that they will be able to make a living.

Many of these villages earn an income from growing substitute crops but

there are many others secretely growing [poppies]. Speaking honestly, they
consume the opium that they produce and so even if they did not grow poppies,
they would have to use part of their income to purchase opium for consunption.
Their traditions have been preserved a long time among the elderly. is must

18
allow them to continue to do so. He must concentrate more on the younger
generation. The way to get them to stop growing poppies is to give them the
feeling that they can survive. As for the opium, they can use some of it

as a medicine because they live far from medical facilities. when they are
sick, they can use the opium to treat themselves. He must show sane sympathy
for them, said Squadron Leader Prasong in conclusion.

11943
C50: 5 300/5690

19
CROP SUBSTITUTIO" CHIS! COIMENTS 08 PROGNAHS
Bangkok HATICHOH in Thai 22 Feb 82 p 3

[Interview with Mr Narong Suwannapiel, the chief of the crop substitution
program and the head of the Northern Narcotics Control Board Coordination
Center,by a HATICHOR reporter between 18-20 February in Chiang Mai Province]

[Text] 0n 18-20 february, the office of the Narcotics Control
Board took a group of reporters to see the crop substitution
program at the Royal Headquarters Develop-ent Project

Center at Thung Cho in Chiang Mai Province. On this occasion, a
MATICHON reporter interviewed Hr sarong Suwannapiem.

[Question] I would like to ask about the main tasks that the center is responsible
for. What are its main tasks and is it involved in suppression operations too?

[Answer] As for my responsibilities at present, I now wear two hats. First,
I am the chief of the United Nations Thai Crop Substitution and Highlands
Market Program, that is. the opium crop substitution program. This program
is concerned with development totally.

Second, I have been entrusted with the task of watching over things at the
Northern Narcotics Control Board Coordination Center. The center is responsible
for 17 provinces. The center is responsible for carrying out tasks in three
spheres: First, we coordinate suppression activities. we do not make arrests

or make inspections concerning narcotics. It is our duty to coordinate activities
concerning information that has been given out. If it is asked who is directly
responsible for suppression activities in the field of the Narcotics Control
Board in the north, we have a special narcotics control unit but it is not
subordinate to the center. It receives its orders directly from thecentrallboard].
This unit is fully responsible for gathering information and carrying on
suppression operations just as in Bangkok.

This second aspect concerns coordinating activities in the field of narcotics
control, disseminating information to various groups concerning the dangers

of drugs and taking part in giving lectures at the training seminars that
the various units have arranged jointly with the central ONCB. Third. we

20
coordinate activities concerning the rehabilitation of drug addicts. we view
this from the standpoint of a rehabilitation institute.

There is a northern rehabilitation center located at Kilometer 27 halfway
between Chiang Mai and Fang. It is subordinate to the Ministry of Public
Health. With 100 beds, it is able to receive up to 100 addicts.

[Question] Concerning the problems that we are presently experiencing in
the three fields of activity that you mentioned, how are things?

[Answer] First, we are the coordinators in these three spheres and do not
use people to carry out things. He have only five people while our area of
responsibility covers 17 provinces. The work in each province is different
depending on the narcotics problems that have arisen in each province, and
the severity of the problems is different in each province. With our present
strength of only five men. we cannot keep up with the problems that arise

in all 17 provinces. Thus, from the standpoint of actual operations, we are
trying to work in Chiang Mai Province more than in other provinces because
the work is different everywhere here and Chiang Mai is a large province.
Also, there is more work for us to do here.

IQuestion] Are you giving more attention to things here because this is a
large production area? '

[Answerl 0h! with the number of men that we have, we are doing as much as
possible. If we had 20 or 100 people, we could do much more. We are not depressed
by the fact that we have only this many men, which is one of our limitations.

[Question] Coordinating activities also refers to gathering information,
doesn't it?

[Answer] Yes. We gather various types of data and information. Even though

we cannot obtain all the information that we should at present, 1 am concentrating
on the drug addiction problem in the 17 northern provinces. "hat is the problem
llkP in Chiang Mai? As for the percentages concerning the addicts who are
addicted to opium, heroin, amphetamines and so on in these provinces, if

'e do not understand and know about the people's addiction problems, the

measures taken to solve the problems will be useless; we will not know what

to correct. But we are trying to send our officials to all the provinces

in order to learn about these problems. We want to know what percentage of

the people in Chiang Mai, Chiang Rai, Phayao and Lamphun are addicted. If

we can obtain such data first, we will be able to coordinate the tasks and
make plans with each of the provinces.

lQuestion] Concerning the various data, does the control sector make it easy
for you to collect the data?

[Answer] As for the control sector, I think it is very easy to collect the
data because this does not pose any danger. There is no reason for them to
conceal things from us. The things that they would want to conceal from us
because of a lack of trust have more to do with suppression operations. Concerning
the information that they obtain, if they think that they can handle things
themselves, they do not like to disseminate this information to us out of

fear that we will go double check it or something. But from our standpoint,

we do not need to do that: when we get information, we evaluate it. If we

can collect much information. this center will become a narcotics information
center.

[Question] As for what has been done up to now, do we have any data on the

movements of the various groups engaged in the narcotics trade in Chiang
Mai ?

[Answer] Concerning this, it is my understanding that both the police and
the suppression sector of the ORCB have to date gathered much data on this.
But our center does not have such data because it is not our duty to go into
things that deeply. I cannot answer you if you ask how many cases there are
in Chiang Mai or how many suspects there are. Such matters are secret, top
secret. Normally, they do not disseminate such information to those who do
not have a need to know since these are very important secrets.

[Question] Concerning the policy of controlling certain things such as halting
the flow of chemicals [into the areal, has this had any effect on our control
plans and how have things been coordinated?

[Answer] We have to look at the matter of supply and demand. As for cutting
supply, this can be done from the very beginning so that there is no opium.
This means growing substitute crops, which cuts supply at the very beginning
so that there is no supply. As for the existing supply, we will try to reduce
it by growing substitute crops. This is cutting supply at the source. As

for cutting supply in later stages, this refers to suppression activities

to intercept the opium and keep it from coming down from the mountains or

to intercepting the merchants and making it difficult for them to reach the
mountains. The forms of such suppression activities are a matter of cutting

supply.

As for the chemicals that we want to intercept, chemicals that are used to
produce heroin and morphine. this is directly related to the matter of supply.

If we can intercept these types of chemicals and keep them from reaching
the narcotics producers, they will not be able to produce narcotics.

If opium stays in the mountains and is not brought down [into the plains]

and if it is not refined into some other substance, it is of very little
significance by itself and is of almost no value. The hill tribes may keep

it and smoke it themselves or use it as a medicine. But it will stay in the
mountains unless someone goes and gets it. Thus. announcing various chemical-free
zones as we have done, setting up interception points and obtaining information
in order to seize such chemicals has a very great and direct effect on cutting
supply in the mountains and preventing the opium from being refined into

other substances and reaching the users.

22
[Question] of the 17 northern provinces, which province has the greatest
problems?

[Answer] That is difficult to say. Let's say that at present, officials are
facing the most serious problems in Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai provinces.
However, the situation [in these provinces] is rather different. Chiang Rai
borders both Laos and Burma. There is a serious problem of cross-border smuggling.
Intercepting the chemicals and keeping them from entering the border area

here and keeping the chemicals produced abroad from entering teh country

are very serious problems. This is because the border is very very long and
peOple can cross at many places without our knowing. It is thought that

this is the starting point for the transport [of narcotics]. But as for the
situation after Khun Sa was suppressed, security problems have arisen. Besides
the narcotics problem, security problems have arisen in Chiang Rai. Looking

at this, things will probably get worse for Chiang Rai now because the Khun

Sa affair was not just a matter of narcotics but was also a matter of security
and sovereignty.

As for Chiang Mai, it can be thought of as a center or as a transit zone

for shipping [narcotics] to other regions and even to foreign countries.
Furthermore, it is a junction [for goods] coming from Chiang Rai and is like
a trading center. As for the situation at present, officials have thrown
most of their forces into Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai.

[Question] Concerning the cultivation of substitute crops, at present, how
much has poppy cultivation declined among the hill tribes?

[Answer] Concerning this, things have evolved and it can be seen that in

1973 when the United Nations helped carry out a poppy survey in Thailand,

it was learned that poppies were being cultivated here and the yield reached
approximately 114 tons that year. Then in 1975-1976, the Public Welfare Department
conducted a poppy cultivation survey and found that approximately 62,000

rai were cultivated in poppy. If we estimate roughly that l rai can produce
about 1 kilogram [of opium], then the yield is approximately 60,000 kilograms

or more than 60 tons. The latest survey conducted in 1979-1980 showed that

the area planted in poppy has declined to about 37,000 rai. As for the 1980-1981
:urvey that is now being conducted, the results are not yet in. He do not

know whether the area has decreased further or increased. I understand that

we will know the results by May or June.

[Question] This matter also involves our neighbors since some [of the narcotics]
come in from abroad. Will this bias our data? I am referring to heroin.

[Answer] No. Looking at the matter of self-consumptionor of using [the opium]
as a medicine, we estimate that these 37,000 rai do not produce more than

40 tons. There are approximately 300,000 hill tribesmen throughout the country.
Based on the figures collected by the northern drug rehabilitation center,
approximately 12 percent of the hill tribesmen are addicts, which amounts

to tens of thousands of people. These tens of thousands of people consume

23
approximately 50 tons of the amount they have produced. Thus, as for the
opium that is refined into the morphine and heroin that intoxicates people
here and abroad, only a very small percent of this is produced in Thailand.
Most of this opium comes from our neighbors.

Actually, our problem is much slaller than that of our neighbors. Here, because
the domestic supply is small, if we can intercept the opium coming in from
abroad, [the problem] will decline even more.

[Question] Concerning this problem, is this because Burma is not carrying
on suppression operations like us, while at the same time, they do not think

tht we are carrying on suppression operations seriously? And aren't there
high-ranking people involved?

[Answer] The reason that we mentioned Burma is that we have very little information
on Laos under its present system of government. As for Burma, speaking frankly,
they have carried on stronger and more resolute suppression operations than

we have. They have taken much stronger action than we have in cutting down

the poppy plants. They destroy tens of thousands of rai of poppy plants every

year because they have a strong policy. They have implemented a crop substitution

policy too. But their leading measures are suppression measures and they
destroy whatever they can.

As for Burma's problems, we have to sympathize with them because most of
the poppy growing area is located in minority group zones where the minority
groups are fighting against them. The government is not able to enter these

areas. If it sends people into these areas, it means that they must fight

the minortity groups. And so they cannot suppress the cultivation of poppies

or the production of morphine in their area. After these narcotics are produced,
they do not go anywhere else but all flow into Thailand. But actually, they
have made a great effort.

[Question] What is their view of Thailand? Is a real effort being made?

[Answer] It is difficult to say how they view Thailand because if we ask

them, they will not tell us. But I think that, at least, based on what we

did with Khun Se, concerning our seriousness and resoluteness. Burma now
feels that we will not permit this. This was not simply a matter of narcotics.
It was also a matter of the country's security. But we still dared to take
action. I think that Burma will understand us better.

[Question] Now that Khun Sa has been suppressed, what do you think the possibili-
ties are for solving the narcotics suppression problem in our country?

[Answer] I think that there will be a long slow down or halt in supply. But
how long this will last I cannot say. At present, they have virtually ceased
production and other activities. It is true that they may have raw materials
but they cannot get chemicals and their equipment has probably been destroyed.
Thus, at present they probably cannot do what they had intended to do. It

may be several years; I cannot say. I am sure that there will be a great
slow down in production.

He don't know how long it will take them to recover. They may go and coordinate
activities with someone else. We don't know.

[Question] Where is Lao Su now?
[Question] I do not have any information on this.

[Question] Concerning Police Colonel Niran withayawuthikun, there have been
reports that he has joined Khun Sa. Is this true?

[Snswer] I do not know where he is. There is still a warrant out for his
arrest. Whoever knows his whereabouts can go capture him.

[Question] There have been charges that certain ups are involved in the drug
trade.

[Answer] I don't known anything about this. This is a matter that is beyond
my knowledge. Such a matter as this is a secret matter. I have no knowledge
about such matters.

[Question] Concerning the cultivation of substitute crops, has the government
provided a sufficient budget for this?

[Answer] We are reSponsible for carrying on activities in approximately 51
villages. Our primary budget from the U.N. is enough to carry out our tasks

each year. But concerning the other areas and other units, their budgets

are too small for them to be able to achieve results like our program, which
receives help from the United Nations. This is because the other units are
allocated a very small budget as compared with ours and they do not receive

any support from abroad. Thus, few results~can be achieved from these activities.
Because if we plant only 10 or 20 rai while the hill tribes need hundreds

and thousands of rai under cultivation, this cannot satisfy the demand or
"olve the problems.

[Question] One of the sectors that you are refering to is the Forestry Department,
isn't it?

[Answer] The Forestry Department is one element. It does not have a budget
for the cultivation of substitute crops. It receives money for afforestation
work and the administrative budgets in its units are very small. The same
thing 18 true for the Department of Public welfare. It receives very little
money for work concerning the cultivation of substitute crops, even less
than the Forestry Department. what people expect to see happen in this area
cannt happen quickly. If the hill tribes wanted loo-rai and we could give
them all the necessary help, the results could be achieved quickly.

119113
650: 5300/ 5679
50A. ETHNIC MINORITY TRAPPICKBRS RELATIONSHIPS NOTED
Bangkok SIAM MA! in Thai 20 Mar 82 pp 23, 24
[Article: I'lthun Sa, Cha~8rh and A Di, a Mountain TOp War'l

[Text] The imposing 'Doi Lang“ mountain range runs peacefully along the Thai-
Burmese border, running from Hong Yawn in Burma to as far as nae Chan District
in Chiang Rai Province, Mae Ai District in Chiang Mai and some areas of Pang
District, [Chiang Mai Province] in Thailand. These high peaks covered with
dense green forests are an ideal hiding place for the heroin refineries of
the various ethnic minority groups, refineries that bring such great

' profitsthatthese groups have fought and died for them.

It is on 001 Lang that Lao Su, an international heroin kingpin who on 25 October
1977 fled and amazingly escaped execution by the Thai government, has built
a strong heroin refinery.

Officials who have worked in this area have stated that, in addition to Lao Su,
many other groups have built heroin refineries in these mountains too. The
most prominent groups here are the LﬂLA (Lahu National Liberation Army) and
Khun Sa's group.

From reports by officials, it has been learned that the important area of

Doi Lang, which is the location of many refineries, is located mostly in

Mae Ai District in Chiang Mai Province. The group with great influence in

this area is the LNLA. This is the armed force of the Lahu hill tribe. It

is led by Cha-erh, who is an international narcotics trafficker. Because

he has forces that are armed with modern and powerful weapons, he has widespread
influence. Even Lao Su has to pay protection money to the LNLA of Cha-erh
regularly. It is the great profits, comparable in size to these mountains
themselves, that have tempted various groups to come here and occupy the

area.

Then at the beginning of last December, another armed Lahu group led by A
8i carried on activities quietly in this area. People were sent to contact
Police Major General Phairot Putsayanawin, the commander of the Region 3
Border Patrol Police, Chiang Mai province. They offered to go capture Lao
Su in exchange for the 300,000 baht reward that has been offered for the
capture of Lao Su.
A few days later, the quiet of Doi Lang was shattered with the sounds of
various types of weapons. The heroin refinery of Lao Su. which was under
the protection of Cha-erh, or the LNLA, was heavily attacked by forces of
A Bi. More than 10 of Lao Su's men were killed. Lao Su and some of his men
barely managed to escape.

The forces of A Bi quickly seized the refinery. Much raw opium that was being
readied to produce heroin and the supplies and equipment~at the refinery

were seized. As for the supplies and equipment, A Bi later left them near

the camp of the Thai border patrol police in order to show that he had successfully
attacked Lao Su's forces. But A Bi kept the raw opium. Thai officials found

out about this later.

The news of this small war was reported to Supreme command Headquarters in
detail. A news source in the Region 3 Border Patrol Police division has revealed
that this case has led to Police Major General Phairot Putsayanawin, the
commander of the Region 3 border patrol police, being severely reprimanded

by General Saiyut Koetphon since Supreme Command headquarter's intelligence

has confirmed that the forces of A Bi belong to the united front of the White
Flag Burmese Communist Party, Chinese faction.

Supreme Command Headquarters does not want Thai officials to contact or get
involved with this communist united front out of fear that it will grow larger
and pose a danger to Thailand's security in the future. The border patrol

police insist that it was A Bi who made contact; the Thai side did not get
involved at all.

Concerning the background of A Bi's group, a high-level intelligence official
"~‘d that "wt learned about A Bi‘s forces only a few years ago. He has always
carried on activities quietly. At present, we still know very little about
him. we only know that he has relations with the Burmese communists. This
group does not have a histroy of being involved with drugs. It does not have
even one heroin refinery. As for weapons, it is understood that this group

is being supported by the Burmese Communist Party.‘ He also said that the
Thai side, especially Supreme Command Headquarters, is watching the movements
of A Bi closely.

After heavily attacking Lao Su. the forces of A Bi began to expand their
influence greatly. Instead of paying protection money to the LNLA of Cha-erh,
Lao Su had to switch and instead pay A Bi in exchange for being allowed to
carry on his operations in safety. Thus, Lao Su built a new herion refinery
under the protection of A Bi. This made Cha-erh very unhappy since this had
formerly been his area. At the beginning of March. Thai officials received

a new report that said that Cha-erh's group has joined with Khun Sa's group
in order to prepare for a new war against A Bi and completely eliminate A
Bi's influence in the Doi Lang area.

'Cha-erh and Khun Sa have a common interest and a common enemy and so they
have joined together. They both hope to return and have influence in the

27
Doi Lang area," said the same intelligence source. This means that there

is a great possibility of a war for influence over the mountain area between

Khun Saand Cha-erh on one side and A 8i, whose forces are expanding, on

the other. As for Khun Sa, after the Thais launched the attack against Ban

Hin Taek, his forces were very weak but he was by no means I'done for;" Doi

Lang is a new spot where Khun Se is making preparations to restore [his insluence].

However, all of this is being watched very closely by Thai officials. Finally,
concerning who will have influence over Doi Lang in the end, particularly

A Bi's group whose background is quickly being studied, we will probably

have to wait and see how the government decides to handle this problem and
what methods it uses. we must see whether it launches a military operation
against Doi Lang as it did at Ban Kin Taek or whether it has learned the
lesson that such a method does not bring any results at all.

 

Photocaption: cha-erh (far right) at a meeting with KMT soldiers at Doi Lang,

a meeting arranged by Mr Aram Yiemarun, the deputy governor of Chiang Mai
province.

11943
CSO: 5300/5690

28
SUA FORCES [-1.33 ms: AﬂAC‘S, "TURN ‘10 THAMND

Benghok SIAM BAT in The! 8 Mar 82 pp 1-12

lhrticle: “Khun 8a'e Porcee Flee Bur-eee Troope and Return to Thailand']

[Text] The torcee of Khan Se are fleeing into Thailand after being heavily
attacked by Bur-eee troope along the border.

A report fro. the Chiang Rai Couleeioner'e office or the Provincial 3 etatee
that approximately 120 eoldiere of Khun Se with 50 nulee the tang] re-entered
Thailand from Bum at the end of laet eonth. 'l‘hey entered the country near

Doi Putao Beneeneaieei in Pompha Cm, Chiang Seen Dietrict, Chiang Rai
Province.

This police report aleo stated. that theee forcee have etopped and reeted
at an Akha hill tribe village at Doi Sango in Chiang Seen Dietrict. Their

goal is to proceed on to nong ha in Burea. but they nay not be able to proceed
any farther.

The report eaid that the Burneee have established death eguade in order to
completely euppreee the forcee of Khan Sa. Approximately 200 een have been
stationed along the Thai-Bureau border.

Mr Sakda Aphong, the governor of Chiang Rai Province, hae confireed a report
from the province's operation center in Phan Dietrict. He eaid that terrorists
have made preparatione and are haraeeing Thai officials again and that a
eajor operation will be launched in April. The plan is to burn down Hat Bong
Phakchit in order to exert preeeure on [government] eoldiere to leave their
baeee. The province hae eede preparatione to counter this.

11943
CSO: 5300/5690

29
POST-RAID wCATIONS 0? 80A DESCRIBED
Bangkok SIAM RAT SAPPADA HICHAN in Thai 14 Mar 02 pp 4, 5
[Article: "The Shell of War Is Still In the Air; Khun 8a Is Still Active'l

[Text] since the Sua, or shan United Aray, of international heroin kingpin
Khun sa, which had a secure base at Ben Bin Teak, was heavily attacked and
dispersed by ground forces in coordination with air forces in January, the
resaining SUA forces have had to look for a 'new secure base' along the Thai-
Burnese border. These forces have not been slashed completely.

As for the losses suffered by the sun in the “Ban Hin Task" operation, only
the soldiers guarding ”Chang Si Chuan," or Chao Pa ban, and the soldiers
guarding the position were lost. As for the cossittee-level units, including
Khun Sa, the leader of the sun, and Chang Si Chuan, the secretary-general
who has been in countless battles, these all escaped and gathered the forces
together again. also, most of the ﬂaw Chinese bases are still in existence
and were not affected by this operation.

The main headquarters in Burns is the sieu Lasang camp, which is only 4 kilometers
west of Ban Mae "oh. This has again become an assembly point for Khun Sa.

Thus, Ban nae Moh, where Khun Sa is staying according to initial reports,

has become a lively place once again since sun forces of more than 3,000

men have cose from their base in The Yang District in Rasieu Province, Burma,

to provide support. The aim in gathering these forces together is to show

their influence over the other minority groups by attacking [these groups).
expanding their influence and [setting up] secure bases.

A news source has stated that Khun Sa's lain base casps this time are at

Doi Lang in Chiang Mai Province and at a base casp of the Ha National Army
near Mon Yawn opposite Pang District in Chiang Mai Province, which is the
route used to go from Chiang Rai Province’to nae Hong Son Province. if Khun
5a is able to establish new base canps at these two locations, it is believed
that this will lead to closer coordination of activities between the SUA

and the Shan States Army, whioh is led by Khun Saeng. khun Saeng is tLe uncle
of Khun Sa. he has about 3,000 arsed soldiers.
These movements of Khun Sa have caused great worry for the Region 5 border
patrol police and the Commissioner's Office of the Provincial 3 because the
smell of war has again arisen in the Golden Triangle area along the Thai-
Burmese border, a place where the state power of Thailand does not yet reach,
which has given rise to many free forces and narcotics trafficking. And the
SUA has announced that it will definitely wipe out the Ha National Army.

The reason is that this group has worked for the Americans and for the narcotics
suppression units by providing information for the attack on Ban Hin Thek.

And it has refused to join the SUA in liberating the shans. Thus, this is

in retaliation for old debts.

The leader of the Ha National Army is Pha Pokang Su. He considers himself
to be a Shan, and he established a Shan army. He fought against Burma until
he was wounded. He then joined forces with Ang Sieng Chu and Sieng Su and
the Maha Sang and Lo Hu Chu groups.

The thing that is worth noting is that the Haha Sang and Lahu groups at Doi Lang,
which are the targets of attack by the SUA this time, are groups that have
turned and joined the Burmese Communist Party. In particular, the Lahu group
moved its forces and attacked Lao Su, who was living under the protection

of Cha-erh. Lao Su'n group was dispersed and two of his heroin refineries

were burned down. This has led people to suspect that the SUA is considering
joining the ”united front" of the Burmese Communist Party after having already
purchased narcotics. Because it is well known that the area that they will

live in 15 a zone of influence where the Burmese Communist Party wants to

expand its influence.

Pha Pokang Su is the leader of the Ha National Army. He is a person who firmly
intends to liberate the Shan State from Burma. His army has fought fiercely
against the Burmese government but he does not have adequate forces. He once
seized Hong Tang Yan. the center of the narcotics trade, but he was later
driven out by the Burmese. He is opposed to communism and to the Burmese
Communist Party, which has 30,000 armed troops and which is the largest group.
If the SUA can destro" Pha Pokang Su's forces, this will mean the elimination
of another “enemy“ of the communist party.

The Golden Triangle is an area where the power of the state cannot reach

and administer things efficiently. This is because this is a border area

where three countries. Thailand. Burma and Laos, converge. In addition, the
terrain here is composed of jungles and mountains. Thus, it is difficult

to send in forces to provide support or carry on suppression operations.

Even aircraft cannot harm the free forces that live in this border area and
use it as a hideout. Dropping bombs cannot succeed because the mountain ridges
provide good shelter. The borders between the countries are not as clearly
demarcated as they should be. The rivers change course depending on the season.

Even though it is not the policy of these minority groups to use weapons
against the Thai government. there is clear evidence that the Chinese that

31
have entered and settled down in Thailand are involved in selling opium in
order to obtain money with which to purchase weapons and establish forces

to protect the shipment of raw opium to the heroin refineries located along

the Thai-Burmese border, where there is no state power. Same hill tribes

have been induced to take up arms against the government. The great profits

from the narcotics trade have created loopholes and led to corruption. Governmen
officials have been bribed, and they are an 'element' of the narcotics trade

that helps these minority groups smuggle narcotics out of the Golden Triangle
to world markets.

Reports of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board state that the number
of hill tribessen who are involved in the opium trade in the golden Triangle
area along the Thai border reaches 245,000 men. There are Ihong, Yao, Lahu,
Lisu, Akha and Karen tribesmen and new Chinese. of this number, the tribe
with the largest number is the Karen tribe with 150,000. Next come the Hmongs
with approximately 50,000. The Haw Chinese are the smallest group with
approximately 1,500 men, but they are the ones who control the economy and

who can generate profits of 30-100 percent of the price of the goods by trading
with the hill tribes.

However, these figures are not completely reliable because the hill tribes
live dispersed here and there. Villages have not been established and there
are no administrative regulations. The National Security Council has stated
that this figure represents only about 30 percent of the total number of
hill tribesmen who live here. As for the other 70 percent, officials have
not been able to go and conduct a complete survey. Thus, it is thought that
there are about 1 million hill tribesmen in the Thai-Burmese border area.

For all of these minority groups, poppy is the primary crop in earning a
living. The lack of state power and the implementation of unclear policies
have ensured that the disorder in the struggle for opium profits will continue.
The golden Triangle is threatened by a war between forces that are vying

for influence. And the sound of guns and explosives from suppression operations
will continue unabated.

1194]
C80: 5300/5690

32
CONTROVERSY CONTINUES OVER RTA RELATIONS WITH m 93R!) DIVISIW
Bangkok HATICHOH in Thai 7 Her 82 pp 5, 6
lArticle: “The Collapse of Headquarters 04 Because of Opium")

[Text] “Recently, General Saiyut Koetphon, the Supreme Commander, established

a headquarters for the security of and the improvement of the living conditions

of the people living along the Thai-Burmese border in the three provinces

of Chiang Mai. Chiang aai and Has Hong Son. This new headquarters is responsible
for 12 border villages. Among these villages are Santikhiri Village (Ooi

Hae Salong) and Dan Thoet Thai (Ban Hin Taek),' said Colonel Somaak sisuphandit

to HATICI-ION.

The name of this new headquarters is the Northern Border Development and
Defense Center. It is directly subordinate to Supreme Command Headquarters
and the Hinistry of interior. It has been divided into two sections in accord
with the responsibilities: The Border Development Center, which is engaged
in development activities, and the Border Defense Center, which coordinates
suppression activities.

This amounts to the Northern Border Development and Defense Center replacing
Headquarters 04.

Colonel Somsak also stated that Headquarters 04 was established in accord
with a cabinet resolution in 1970 in order to control the 93rd Division,
disarm the Haw Chinese soldiers and conduct surveys and compile biographical
records. When the military tasks were completed. matters were to be turned
over to the Hinistry of Interior. At present, things are in the stage outlined
by the 1970 resolution. Thus, the name of Headquarters 04 will be changed

in accord with the responsibilities.

The 93rd KHT Division was a force of the nationalist Chinese who opposed

the expansion of communist influence. lts headquarters was located in Yunnan
Province [in China]. when Hao Tse-tung seized control of China, the nationalist
Chinese soldiers had to withdraw to Taiwan, where they built a country. The

93rd Division was the only force that did not get away in time. The larger

part of this force withdrew and fled south, seizing control of Burmese territory
at Dan Tha Khi Lek. The Burmese government appealed to the United Nations

33
and in the end the United States and Thailand provided help by having the
93rd Division settle down along the border from Chiang Rai to Mae Hong Son.
The aim was to have this force serve as a buffer against the expansion of

camaunist power. It was also to gather information and cause disturbances
in China.

In one period, the Thai government arranged to send soldiers of the 93rd
Division to Taiwan if they wanted to go. But most are still living in the
border area. There are two main headquarters. The one at Than Ngop in Pang
District, Chiang Mai Province, is the headquarters of the 3rd Army under

the command of General Li. The one at Doi Nae Salong, which has now changed
its name to Santikhiri Village, in has Chan District, Chiang Rai Province,

is the home of the 5th Army of General Li Ui Thien, who took over from General
Tuan Si Hon, who died in 1980.

A high-level military news source has told MATICHDN SUTSAPDA that the 93rd
Division was given both money and weapons by the CIA in order to harass the

, Chinese conmmnist government. But the financial support gradually declined
and so the 93rd Division turned to earning money by selling opium and illegal
goods in order to support the army. It governed itself and the state power

of Thailand had no meaning in the zone of influence of the 93rd Division.

And so the Thai government had to pass a resolution establishing forward
Headquarters 04.

The same news source said that the relations of the 93rd Division with high-
ranking Thai military officials went very deep. The high-ranking military
officers of the 93rd Division had comfortable houses in the plains and were
given Thai citizenship in accord with the law. And the 93rd Division trusted
General Kriangsak Chamanan so much that [it built] a guest house called
'Chamanan House' at Doi Mae Salong.

”Before you enter the village, you will see a sign that clearly expresses
[the group's] loyalty to General Kriangsak," said this news source.

During the time General Kriangsak was chairman of the joint chiefs of staff,
he was in charge of forward Supreme Command Headquarters. It was to look
after the 93rd Division. Several occupational development plans were made.
But both domestic and foreign news reports have made serious attacks, saying
that General Kriangsak is one general who is known to be involved in the
narcotics trade of the 93rd Division.

Another military news source stated that the 93rd Division serves as a narcotics
distributor. It purchases narcotics from international narcotics traffickers.
Even Lo sing Han and Lao Su are regular customers of the 93rd Division. And

this division is still involved in the narcotics trade today. Then in the
middle of last year, General Pram Tinsulanon, the prime minister, announced

at a cabinet meeting that government officials were forbidden from helping

the 93rd Division and Khun Sa because they were engaged in the narcotics

trade. In addition, a resolution was passed entrusting the Ministry of Interior
and the Ministry of Defense with the task of solving the problem quickly.

3h
BeSldes this, some military officials of forward Headquarters 04 have been
involved in the narcotics trade too. This has stimulated General From to
find a way to solve this problem. Also, there have been reports that part

of the income of one opposition political party comes for! the 93rd Division,
said this military news source to HATICHON SUTSAPDA.

At present, the ﬂaw Chinese at Santikhiri Village are openly earning a living
by growing cold-weather fruits,and the item that has made the village well
known is tea, which is first sent to Chiang Mai Province before being sent

on to Hong Kong and Taiwan. The tea from Santikhiri is not sold in Thailand.
At most. [a person] can buy a small quantity when he visits Santikhiri.

Colonel Somsak talked about the plans of the Northern Border Development
and Defense Center. After the government suppressed Khun Sa at Ban "in Taek,
that entire remote border area became unsafe and foreign forces may enter
again. Thus, there must be forces to defend the border. military forces,
local border patrol police and thahan phran irregulars are being used to
provide protection. As for the development plans, the Ministry of Interior
will establish special Self—Defense and Development Volunteers villages.

At present. the details are being worked out.

This is the second step in the struggle by General Prem'a government to defeat
the drug trade in the Golden Triangle using clever stratagens. The problem

is whether the people who carry out the operations are strong enough to withstand
the temptations of the ”black-hearted lords." Even a police colonel who was

a superintendent with the Commissioner's Office of the Provincial 3 became

a slave.

11943
CSO: 5300/5690

35
CHINESE HAW VILLAGBS GROWING POPPY IN CHIANG RA!
Bangkok HATICHON in Thai 8 Mar 82 pp 1, 12

[Article: “Two Chinese Haw Villages Discovered Following In the Footsteps
of 'Khun Sa"]

[Text] Two Chinese Haw villages in the Thai-Burmese border area in nae Suai

and Wiang Chai districts, Chiang Rai Province, with a population of over

1,000 people have been discovered to be carrying on activities that probably
violate Thai laws. It is suspected that they are growing poppies and producing
heroin. They have set up a zone of influence and have resolutely prohibited
outsiders from interfering. This may be another serious problem for the government
just like Khun Sa.

A MATICHON reporter has reported from Chiang Rai that, at present, in Tha
Ko Commune in Nae Suai District. Chiang Rai Province, which borders Phrao
District in Chiang Mai Province to the north of Khun Nan Khan, about 1,000
Haw Chinese have seized the area and built houses. This village does not
even have an official name.

The reporter reported that, from following the reports, it has been learned
that these Haw Chinese entered and settled down in this area in 1978. More

have been arriving all the time. At this village, extraordinary safety measures
have been .mplenented in the village and surrounding area. For example, there
are large village rice granariee similar to the rice banks of the government
development villages. This village is trying to keep other villagers not
concerned out of the area.

The report stated that this Haw Chinese village is engaged in several suspicious
activities. For example, they may be trying to establish an expanded zone

of influence just like Ban Hin Taek in the past. And besides the fact that

they are felling trees nearby, they may also be growing poppy and producing
heroin. Neighboring villagers have confirmed that behind this village next

to Ban Mae Tam, at least 100 rai are planted in poppies.

At the same time, in Hiang Chai District in Chiang Rai Province, there is
another village of the same type at Ban Mae Bong in Pasang Commune, Hiang Chai
District. As at the other village, over 1,000 Haw Chinese have built houses there.
"It is possible that these Haw Chinese are part of the same young military
forces that came to live in Thailand during the period when the government's
policy helped this group to come in and settle down and establish villages
and zones of influence. This will be another problem for the government in
the future when it becomes necessary to expel this group,“ stated the em
news source.

1194 3
C50: 5300/5690

37
m DIVISION TRAFFICKING, MILITARY ACTIVITIES MED
Bangkok SIAH RAT SAPPADA HICHAN in Thai 21 Peb 82 pp 18-22
(Article: I'The 93rd Division, an Independent State In Thailand'l

[Excerpts] arter General Prem Tinsulanon, the prime minister, sent border
patrol forces to attack Ban Hin Task in Has xham cum-una. Has Chan District,
Chiang Rai Province, which was a narcotics production center and a place
where the armed forces of Khun 5a, or Chang Si Pu, an international narcotics
trafficker.uere gathered. he announced that he would resolutely suppress

and eliminate the other narcotics production centers and the armed forces

of the other groups that have entered and carried on operations in Thailand
just as was done [in the case of Khun 8a]. He said that there would be no
exceptions. This is to be done because it is believed that this poses a danger
to the nation's security and it is a violation of the country's sovereignty.

Because of this, people in general have become interested and wonder who

is to be the target of the government's next suppression campaign since there
are other minority groups with their own armed forces that have settled down

in Thailand and make a living in the narcotics trade. Khun Sa's was certainly
not the only such group. There are several other such groups and some of

them are larger than Khun Sa's group.

One such groug is the 93 KHT Division that is now living in several localities in
thsnorthern provinces of Thailand. But their most important position, or

the location of their main force, is at no: Mae Salong in Mae Chan District.
Chiang Rai Province, which is only about 13 kilometers from Dan Hin Taek.

Almost 3,000 people live here. Almost 2,500 people live in Ban Nonguk in

Chinag Dao District and in Ben Thangop in Pang District, Chiang Mai Province.
when other members of this group are added in, the total number is about

10,000. And this does not include those living here and there in small groups.

The Actions of the 93rd KMT Divison That Challenge the Law

The actions of the KHT forces that have been summarized can be divided as
follows:

38
1. They have engaged in the narcotics trade. That is, they have transported
opium from the shan State in Burma into Thailand or Laos in order to sell

it to the dealers who come to the border area in order to purchase it. And

they hire themselves out as guards to escort the opium caravans for the dealers.
Concerning this, the dealers have great trust in them because the KIT forces
have greater forces and more weapons than the other minority groups.

Later on, when the government made a greater effort to suppress the opium

trade, the KHT forces found a new way to make money by building refineries

to produce heroin or morphine. They built these refineries in the Thai-Burmese
border area. They did this because they felt that such activities would be
easier to defend against government suppression drives than the opium trade.
This can be seen from the fact that border patrol police carried on a suppression
operation against a heroin refinery at Doi Huai Hak in Mae Chan District,

Chiang Rai Province, near the Burmese border in August 1981. During this
operation, there was a clash with KHT soldiers of the 93rd Division who were
guarding the refinery. But there have been reports that this was an opium
refinery of Khun Sa since it was located far away near Ban Bin Taek. Concerning
this refinery, it is said that there were many more KHT soldiers there than
forces of Khun Sa. But government officials showed little interest in this

and, for this reason. some people have suspected that the KMT soldiers of

the 93rd Division have played a part in suppressing Khan Sa, who is a competitor
in narcotics trading and production.

2. Concerning the smuggling of weapons and ammunition into Thailand, with
the trading point located at Ban Houei Say in Laos, which is opposite Chiang
Khong District In Chiang Rai Province, besides engaging in this constantly
in order to increase their own strength. [the KHT forces] have sold weapons
to the minority groups in Burma. It is said that the number of weapons that
the border patrol police seized at Ban Bin Taek is very small as compared
with the number of weapons in the possession of the KB? forces at Doi Mae
Salong or Ban Tham Ngop.

3. They have aided the minority groups in Burma in carrying out hostile acts
against the Burmese government. That is, they have sold weapons, or exchanged
weapons,for opium because some Burmese states are important poppy cultivation
ﬁreas. The KMT forces have thus relied on these minority groups, who are
enemies of Burma, to produce opium and supply it to their narocotics refineries.

It is believed that Burma is well aware of this. When Thailand suppressed
Khun Sa, who is the leader of the SUA or national liberation forces of the
Shane, Burma was probably very pleased by this because this Shan national
liberation group does not have any great power to protect it. But concerning
the KHT forces, if they did not have a strong ally, they would certainly

not have been able to survive to the present.

4. They have smuggled foreigners into the country. Most of these foreigners
are Chinese from the southern part of china who are dissatisfied with the
communist system of government or Chinese from Burma, which includes those
known as ﬂaw Chinese. Concerning this, it is understood that they have engaged
in this because these people are relatives or they have wanted these Chinese
to serve in their military forces or wanted to make a profit from their labor.
But in practice, after bringing these people in, the first thing done is

that the KHT forces select the young men to serve as soldiers. As for the
elderly, the women and the children, they allow them to stay in safe areas
such as in the headquarters area or in the jungle nearby for 6 months to

a year or even longer depending on the situation. After that they send them

to live in nearby Haw Chinese refugee villages, having them live with Haw
Chinese families that came before them. They then try to contact the Thai
officials concerned with overseeing [the refugees] in order to obtain documents
showing that they are refugees. Concerning this illegal smuggling of people
into the country, they smuggle in groups ranging in size from 10 to more

than 1,000 people. For example, Supreme Command Headquarters received a report
in 1964 that stated that KHT soldiers had smuggled approximately 1,800 Haw
Chinese and their families into Thailand in the area of Ban Bang Run in Mae
Chan District, Chiang Rai Province. This group came from nong Kwan in Burma.

As for the routes regularly used by the KHT forces to smuggle people into

the country, actually, they use the same routes used to transport opium. For
example, there is the route from Yunnan Province [in China] which runs through
the northern part of the shan State in Burma and then into Thailand in the
area of Napiengluang, Tham Ngok and The Ton in Pang district, Chiang Mai
Province, or in the area of Doi Tung in Mae Sai District and Doi Hae Salong

in Mae Chan District, Chiang Rai Province. otherwise, they leave the Shan
State, travel through the Lao province of Hua Khong and enter Thailand near
Ban Hat Pai in Hieng Commune, Chiang Khong District.

More Dangerous Than Khun Sa

Concerning the violation of Thai laws by the KMT forces, besides what has
been metnioned already, there are many other things too. For example, they
have set up schools to provide military training and primary and secondary
schools to teach Chinese. These schools accept hill tribe children and the
children of the Chinese in Thailand. There are such schools in the area of
the 3rd Army Headquarters at Ban Tham Ngok in Pongtan Coummne, Pang District,
Chiang Mai Province, and at the Doi Mae Salong headquarters in Pasang Commune,
Mae Chan District, Chiang Rai Province. As for the school at Doi Mae Salong,
besides teaching Chinese, it also provides funds for [students] to study

in Taiwan. Thus, this school is so popular that people go out of their way
to send their children to study at Doi nae Salong.

Concerning the schools of the KHT forces, later on after the KHT forces were given
the status of refugees and allowed to build homes here, two schools were

built: the Santikhiri school at Doi Has Salong, which took its name from

the name of the village, and the Santiwana school at San Tham Ngok in Chiang

Mai Province. As for those schools that had been teaching Chinese, they were
allowed to register as private schools.

ho
Another matter concerns the establishment of tax collection points, such

as that at Ban Nonguk in Chiang Dao District, which is the refugee village

of the 3rd kl? Army. It seems that KMT soldiers set up an illegal tax collection
point at Kingphawok about 1 kilometer inside the border with Burma. At this

tax collection point, there were two storehouses. when merchants from Burma
came to buy goods in Thailand, the KHT soldiers forced them to purchase goods
only from them. And they collected a tax of 4 percent on the goods sold.

If a merchant went and purchased goods in Huang District, chiang Mai province.
and returned with these goods past this checkpoint, he had to pay a tax of

10 percent and there was no guarantee of his safety.

The matter of KM? soldiers setting up a tax collection point in Chiang Dao
District is well known among the villagers because, along this route, another
illegal tax collection point has been set up by the Free Mussuh. There have
been reports that the disputes between the KMT soldiers and the Free Hussuh
over collecting these taxes in Thailand have led to violent disputes to the
point where weapons have been used to settle the matter. But the important
thing is that there have been reports that Burmese troops from the Pong Pakhaem

camp once travelled, in uniform and with weapons, to the illegal tax collection
point of the KHT soldiers. held discussions and then left.

The establishment of an illegal tax collection point by KHT soldiers, or

the refugee KMT soldiers' cooperative store as it is called, at Ban Nonguk

has caused trouble for the local people and for the buses. This is because

the vehicles have had to stOp picking up passengers and they have lost income.
And people who made a living bringing in and selling goods have been affected
because the KMT soldiers have resolutely prohibited them from bringing in
goods. They have complained about this and appealed to high-ranking officials
of Supreme Command Headquarters, asking that it provide help and solve this
problem. They have complained that the government has treated the legal residenu:
of the country unjustly, making them pay taxes to the government, which uses
the taxes of the people to help the KMT soldiers and Haw Chinese by providing
houses and jobs for them and even increasing their well-being by improving
sanitation. For example, water pipes several kilometers in length have been
laid for the KHT soldiers at Ban Nonguk so they will have water for consumption.
But the Thai people who live near San Nonguk lack water and live a marginal
«(istence. They must struggle to support themselves while the government

docs not give any attention to them at all.

Some people have charged that some government officials such as border patrol
policemen and officials from Headquarters 04 have benefited from the establishment
of this illegal tax collection point of the KMT soldiers. It is said that

this tax collection point makes an income of 30,000 to 40,000 baht per month.

Supreme Command Headquarters Requested That They Be Given Refugee Status
Even though the KMT forces entered Thailand in 1961 and have been living

here ever since, action, or stipulating a policy of action, on the matter
of these KMT soldiers was taken only in 1970 after long negotiations between

111
the then chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, Air Chief Marshal Thawee
Chunlasap, and the Chinese ambassador to Thailand, negotiations that began

in 1967. And the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff had to travel to Taiwan
to negotiate with officials of the Republic of China in 1970.

But the result of these negotiations was that some elements of the Km forces
were not willing to return to Taiwan, particularly General Li Hon Pan, the

contending general of the 3rd Army. and General Tuan Si Hon, the comanding
general of the 5th Army.

The reason that neither of these two Chinese generals wanted to return to
Taiwan was that, first, neither one had any interests or relations in Taiwan.
Second, they could not abandon the soldiers whom they had been with for so
long, many of whom were relatives. And third. returning to Taiwan night have
been dangerous since during the war with the Chinese cmnists, they had
killed many comunists and many of the relatives of these people were living
in Taiwan. They might have carried a grudge and tried to ham then.

Thus, they proposed to Air Chief Harshal Thawee Chunlasap, the chairman of

the joint chiefs of staff, that they be allowed to stay in Thailand as refugees.
It was up to the government to grant them alien status or some other status

in the future. As for the men in their comand and their families, it depended
on whether the government felt that it was proper to let all of them or some
elements stay or whether they would not be allowed to enter as refugees.

All of then would have to obey all orders and all Thai laws and not do anything
contrary to Thai customs.

After that, Supreme Comand headquarters proposed to the cabinet, through
the National Security Council, that:

The KNT forces of the 3rd and 5th armies and their families should be given
permission to live in Thailand with the status of ”refugees,“ with most of

then being allowed to remain in the areas where they had been living. One

force was to go live in the Doi Luang and Doi Phamon area in Chiang Rai Province.
These people were to be allowed to live and work in areas stipulated by the
govern-ant and projects that would enable these people to become ordinary
citizens were to be implemented step by step.

After this had been done, the position was to be that there were no longer
any armed KHT soldiers in Thailand.

The cabinet at that time issued a resolution approving this proposal on

6 October 1970. Supreme Comnd Headquarters acted in accord with this resolution
by establishing the Headquarters for the Movement of Refugee KHT Forces,

or Headquarters 04.

As for General Li Hon Pan and General Tuan Si Hon, they were given alien
cards and were allowed to enter the country legally. They later changed their
citizenship and becane Thai citizens. But unfortunately, General man died.
General Lui s Thien took over and beans the leader of the refugee m forces
at Doi nae Salong. His Thai name is Hr Arun Charoenthangchanya.

Is There Really an Arsed Force?

As for the present situation of the m forces at Doi Mae Salong and Ben

Than Ngok, a tourist who goes there will be allowed to see only what resembles
an ordinary village. That is, he will see fields planted in tea or cold-weather
fruits. But in fact, this is only one aspect because, in reality. on one

side of Doi Nae Salong and Than Ngok, there is still a headquarters, or military
forces. Secause if they were really engaged only in growing tea and cold-weather
fruits, they would certainly not have enough to live on. 'l'hus, trading in

Opium, or producing narcotics, and trading in snuggled goods such as jade

is still the pain occupation of the m soldiers, an occupation that they
certainly cannot give up. This can be seen from the fact that when the border
patrol police attacked and destroyed the heroin refinery at Doi huai ﬂak,

which was said to belong to Khun Sa. there were m soldiers guarding the
refinery and they opposed the operation of the officials. Besides this. sale
101? soldiers have been employed to guard road construction and some even

fought against the conunist terrorists at khao Kho. Even at sone of the

places where the m forces live. there are bunkers and armed soldiers on
guard.

A reporter for the newspaper THE NATION who recently went to cover the suppression
of Khun Sa at am Hin Tack and who by chance went to Doi nae Salong in order

to see the "Kriangsak House” that the Ian soldiers had built as a nenorial

and guest house related that when he raised his camera to take a picture

of this house, an armed man in uniform signaled him not to take the picture.

But when the man saw that the reporter was going to go ahead and take the

picture, he took his rifle and acted as if he was going to ail it at the

reporter. But what is certain is that he was a Chinese soldier since he could

not speak Thai and his facial features were Chinese.

Concerning the matter of the "Kriangsak House" at Doi use Salong. General
V'iangsak Chananan, the former prine sinister and presently an MP frola Roi

't Province, told a reporter that this is not his house. Rather, the m
soldiers of the 93rd Division built it as a neuorial or in nssory of the
work that he had done that concerned the 93rd Division and that had given
them a chance to live in Thailand as refugees. with almost all of them now
having become ‘l'hai citizens. He stayed at this house only once. But by Chance.
this house was built while General Kriangsak was prime minister and so some
people have made various criticisms. Besides this,it seems that both the

m forces and Headquarters 04 are still trying to keep people from visiting
this house and this sakes people even more suspicious since the m soldiers
of the 93rd Division have long been known for their involvement in the opium
and narcotics trade and it seems that they are even more well known than
Khun Sa since the KM? forces were once an army. Concerning the narcotics
trade. it is well known that this trade can generate huge incomes nuch faster
O! .

than other professions. with the exception of politics for sane politicians.
In particular, if a politician or powerful person can protect and support
the narcotics trade and keep it fro. being suppressed, he will have a chance

to become very wealthy.

General Pres: 'l'insulanon stated that he would resolutely suppress the narcotics
trade and the foreign armed forces that have entered Thailand.

Khun 8a was not suppressed because of pressure fro- any great power. This
was his [Pres’sl own decision after everything had been prepared. And this
was not done just to "scare“ then, or scathing else of this nature.

The thing that everyone is now watching and wondering about is: when will .
the government be ready to suppress and elisinate the other narcotics traders

or other armed forces that are living in Thailand?

(J's-t
‘65
Oh
\U

5679
BRIEFS

FFINCB NARCOTICS OFFICIAL VISITS-Ban3kok, 2 Apr (AF?)-The chief of the
French central narcotics bureau, Jacques Pranquet, today cospleted a week.
long visit to Thailand, which use part of an international caspaign against
drug trafficking. France is the only European country which is supplied
mostly with heroin free the "golden triangle" of Burns, Laos and Thailand.
Mr Tranquet said he was impressed at the efforts being aada in northern
Thailand to encourage the hilltrihee to cultivate coffee, vegetables and
fruit instead of opiulo-a Iulti-nillion dollar campaign financed with help
froa the United States, Rest Gernany, the Netherlands and Australia. During
hie visit. Hr Franquet net the head of the Thai narcotica control board,
General Phao Saraein, and Thai police chiefs. He also traveled to the north
of the country where he saw the effects of a Thai drive in January on the
principal heroin producer of the golden triangle, Khun Sa. French narcotica
officials said that in the last few aonthe there had been a reduction in

the seizures of drugs from Thailand and no arrests of French drug addicts in
Thailand. Hr Franquet emphasized that whole aectore of the drug trade
totally escaped the police. About 60 tons of heroin reach the world narketa
each year and only around one ton is seized. [Text] [Hons Kong AF? in
English 1333 Cut 2 Apr 82 BX)

050: 5300/5710

1:5
PNSECU'IOR CITES VARIOUS EARS USED 1'0 W M88181!

Vancouver m VANCOUVER SUN in English 10 MI: 82 p A16

[Text]

Vlcmnu (C?) - Cm mum
Gem mm told I EC. Supreme
Court jury funny that 10 person:
and "mu m. champagne

Waodm no no annul-
Wham.

[sedan-1d out!“ the Mm
umwmmmmm
olthclowmmwlm-
mummmn.c..mm.l.
WMMOCLMM.

mmncmummm
pom»,
mama.

lacdooaldumhmnoum. liq-
mum'umhammpm
municlmarrhdlnabulud
mm on no “rpm: (non mum to
SokauuMWkam-h

gnommwmmmhm

mwummmm

aim at. In lot nut boa!" hula

hi: um and 001. all art

vmmMmd-mm
3:0». «I! inﬂammable-o

lmg'uﬂhmwct
due. to . gum

huhish nu “new
Rag: which nu mud hNoﬂl

mmvumwum
mmwmﬂlmu
maummmm
tom to clamp. maul-dual
RC}? 10 PURSUE DRUG PROFITS I“ m TACK AGAINST ILLEGAL TRADE

um .ac.w mm. H.uw
”my w ”WWW.“ gm“ ”W $3.”
mag.“ “mmmmmmwmﬁmm

WWW 3W. WWWWM WWWWWW m Wmmw ”my.” m
- WWWm meW. mm

mm.
‘

TRAFFICKBRS CAPTURED HIT“ “BEGIN PROM GUERRBRD
Nuevo Laredo 8L DIARIO DB NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 26 Mar 82 Sec C p 5

[Text] Federal Judicial Police agents seized 150 grams of pure heroin worth

several thousand pesos. and also succeeded in capturing the members of the
trafficking ring.

The federal agents under the command of group chief Jose Manuel Fernandez
Castaneda learned from investigations which had been conducted that several
individuals were engaged in a large-scale heroin sale operation.

The investigations led to the arrest of two presumed suspects, who gave their
names as Roman Perez Jets and Cleotilde Roman Salgado; and upon being questioned
closely they turned over the 150 grams of pure heroin to the authorities.

During the interrogation. Claotilde Roman Salgado claimed that the drug had
been brought to this border port from Iguala, Guerrero. and that they intended
to put it on the black market among addicts with money.

She gave the name of another subject who, upon being arrested, claimed that his
name was Candide Salgado Dias. He admitted to being the owner of the heroin.
and said that it had been procured in the settlement of Tlacotepec, Guerrero.

Candide Salgado said that the drug had been provided to him by Roman Perez Jets
‘and another individual named Rodrigo Guzman Barragan; and the latter was arrest-
ed in the aforementioned Guerrero settlement.

It was also learned that a group of federal agents from this town left for
Chilpancingo, where the subjects in custody claimed there were two laboratory
workers responsible for processing the drug.

To date, it is not known whether the two chemists have been captured. and
whether they have more heroin which has already been processed in their
possession.

This has been a tremendous blow to the drug traffic dealt by the Federal Judi-
cial Police. and it is anticipated that this ring will supply information on
other individuals who are engaged in poisoning the youth.

1:8
‘ Perez Jarn was arrested by Cloctilde Roman Salgedo was also caught

rut Judicial Police agents wi:h by federal agents anc placed at the dis-

130 grams of pure heroin worth posal of the acting Federal Public Minis!
r32 thousand pesos in his Agency for her presumed guilt of :ommitt-
:ssion. ing crimes against health.

idu Salgadn Diaz. whvn quesiinnod by the federal police, claimed to be the
- u” the 133 grams of pure herein seized from Roman Perez and Clcotildc

:, at the same time identifying two iaborn:ory workers in Chilpancingo who
Jrronrly being snugh: by the federdi jurisdiction's authorities.

3333/73
BRIEFS

sum W's EXECUTION—me Shiraz Islanic Court has convicted one person
for possessing 2,136 kg of opium which he had concealed in an oil tanker. lie
was denounced for "corruption on earth" and was sentenced to he executed.

His tanker was also confiscated. [CF171759 Shiraz Doneatic Service in Persian
1530 GMT 17 Apr 82]

HASRISH. OPIUH Stub-According to a central news unit report the public rela-
tions departnent of the Islamic Revolution Court of Tehran fighting against
narcotics announced: The hardworking and vigilant brothers fron the central
headquarters of the antidrug squad succeeded in seizing 1,231 kilograss of
hashish fron a snuggling band in Gilsn. The officials of the sntidrug squads
in Bandar 'Abbas, Pass, Yazd, Estahhanat and (Bskhtarsn) seized 169 kilogram
of opiun from a nutter of snugglers. The snugglers were arrested and were
sent together with the seized naterial to the Islamic Revolution Court of
Tehran. [Text] [10190216 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 M 18 Apr 82]

C80: 5300/5390

50
BRIEFS

HASHISH FRO“ PAKISTAN--A Ian has been sentenced by Abu Dhabi Court to three
years' ilprieonnent followed by deportation for trying to male beehish into
the country. According to the prosecution, the accused, Nobel-ad Asghar
Rehnattellah. was found carrying 12 kilogram of hashish hidden in vegetables
which he had brought with him on-a flight fron Lahore. Re is alleged to have
confessed his crime. He said he had paid Rs 3,000 for buying the heshish.
[Text] [Dubeyy KHALBBJ TIMES in English 31 Her 82 p 3]

080: 5300/ 4716

51
HARIHUANA TRAFFICKZRS ARRESTED—Drugs are gaining ground and illicit production
is increasing. The market seems to be flourishing. Recently the public security
services seized Site Basile. seller and calmer-er of Indian hemp and two of his
associates, Handat Kasouanga and Kspsye lsntoukoudjika, both of Zairisn nation-
slity. According to Lt Ngouele Hassals Dieudonne, in charge of social protec-
tion at the CUSP [expansion unknown], the three defendants were surprised and
caught in the act of taking drugs at home. During a search the police dis-
covered a large quantity of Indian help wrapped in small packets, commonly
called "bunches." Site (55 years old) who is a smoker and seller of Indian
heap. gets supplies from businessmen from H'namou Island and Pool Region. When
interrogated. Sita acknovledged the facts. "I have smoked heap. he confessed.
since an early age and I supply fishermen and traffickers who need it." It
should be borne in mind that Sits had been previouly arrested for the same
reason, and gave the excuse that he was selling hemp to feed his family. To
put an end to this shameful traffic and to help him to meet the needs of his
family. the suniclpelity had hired his st the highways department. But for
personal reasons, Sits deserted the department to resume his hemp trade. The
three defendants are waiting only to he sent to prison. [Text] [Brazzaville
HUETI in French No 54‘. 2 Mar 82 p 6]

C80: 5300/5716
underlined, once more. through Minister- of Justice Ole Espersen's doubts regard-
ing the right position on the issue of hemp cultivation in this country.

There have, through several years. been rumors that there was a considerable pro-
duction of hashish in Denmark en the basis of home-grown hemp. Already in 1978,
four persons were fined and sentenced to imprisonment by the court at Ihksleov
for cultivation of hemp in that the court established that the claim on the part
of the persons charged that the crop was to be used as fodder for goats, for

rug weaving or as binder in paints. had not been substantiated. Inst sumer,

Ole Espersen started an investigation in all of the police districts of the

among others, Inge Krogh (Christian People’s Party). Nothing has come out of
that yet. However, in concert with the Judicial Committee of the Folketing. the
minister decided, last ihursdsy, that he would let the size or the crop of the
war form the basis for an evaluation whether an outright ban on hemp growing
ought to be imposed. So far. he has not found such intervention necessary.

This decision tits naturally into the chain of vacillating positions which have
been characteristic of the treatment of the drug problem. It ought to be clear
that intervention in respect of hemp cultivation cannot be justified by the sins
of the crop. If it is possible to establish that hemp gmwn in this country is
being misused for production of hashish, the prohibition under the present
legislation against production, traffic in, and possession of euphoriants must,

A ban on the cultivation of hemp is illusory because it is impossible to check
whether such a ban is being complied with. Hemp is used widely both as an

53
ornamental plant and for fodder. Seeds are sold in large quantities, not least to
hunters who sow these seeds in game fields as fodder and cover especially for
pheasants, and there does not seem much sense in preventing this practice.
Methylated spirits may be pix-chased freely, but it is illegal to remove the
densturante. People are allowed to make fruit wines for their on consumption
but not to distill them. Many other examples of a similar mture m be men-
tioned, and they indicate that it ought to be possible to introduce similar pro-
visions, as far as the use and misuse of hemp are concerned. As hashish is al-

ready included in the legislation. intervention must be regarded as superﬂuous,
whether the crop becomes his or well.

7262
080: 5300/2255

51:
SS
BRIEFS

PORTUGUESE 9mm ARRESTED—No kilos of hsshish of excellent qusiity. vslued
st 500,000 drschns. vets confiscsted by the police sntinsrcotics squad of

the Pirsievs police directorste. The hsshish yes in the possession of Portu-
guese seem (Konsegs ﬂannel Antonius). aged 31. He m stunted in Pirsievs
by s security police ne‘er to who. he use trying to sell the heshish. vhich
he had brought from Bothy, where the chip on which he vss working hes ssiled

from s few days ago. [Text] [NC152126 Athens Doustic Service in Greeek 11:!)
GMT 15 Apr 82]

(:80: 5300/5389

56
POLL 0N ATTITUDE 0F YOUTH WARD 1)le REPORT”
Stockholm 0m 1“!!le in Swedish 31 HI: 82 p 28
[Article by Pia tstmer]

[hcerpts] The number of students who drink alcohol has declined. The group
of heavy drinkers has also shrunk markedly.

That is confirmed by a nationwide study of student use of alcohol. narcotics.
and tobacco that was carried out by the Board of Education (50). In all, about
18,000 students nationwide took part in the anonymous poll.

A similar nationwide study last year also showed that students were drinking
less than before, but the 80 did not dare publish those results.

School adviser Lars Nyren explains: "He were afraid that the decline was only

a chance occurrence. But this year's figures give us reason to believe that
the trend is continuing."

The 80 report confirms that narcotics use by schoolchildren has not changed.
About 9 percent of the boys and girls in the ninth grade say that they have
taken drugs at some time. and 2 percent say that they still do.

On the other hand, the report shows that the attitude of the students toward
narcotics has changed.

Smoking More

Lars Nyren says: "A few years ago. I» or 5 percent reported that they wanted to
start taking drugs. Today. according to the survey. only 3 or In percent want

to H

Tobacco use by schoolchildren has not declined-«mite the contrary. In the
sixth and ninth grades, smokers number from 2 to 3 percent more than before,
and the girls top the list.

The shift in student attitudes toward alcohol and narcotics is attributed pri-

marily to the schools by Lars Nyren. Much more attention is paid to those mat-
ters now than was the case in the early 1970's.

57
But according to the so report, parents should not take the credit for the new
positive figures.

Lars Nyren says: "If anything, the report shows that parents have increased
their 'bootlegging' for their children by a few percentage points."

On Friday evenings, 0111 and Per, who are both 15 years old, take a turn around
the small city of Orrefors in Smaland. They are looking for a place that is
"PF” (parent free). If they are successful, there will be a party-with beer
and chatter as its main ingredients. It sometimes happens that the community's
quiet neighborhoods do not remain quiet after 2000 hours.

Ulli and Per protest: "Some drink more. They get loud and may stagger a little
and bump into a piece of crystal. But they don't destroy things on purpose.
They don't get mad and use knives, the way they do in Stockholm."

Never Narcotics

At Ulli's and Per's school in Hadesjo in the municipality of Nybro, a great
deal of instruction time has been devoted to "ANT" (alcohol, narcotics, and
tobacco) matters.

"The biology teacher has told us about all the junk that gets caught in your
lungs when you smoke. We also found out that the brain's nerve cells are dan-
aged when people-~especislly young people-~drink liquor."

During a recent special-subject week at the school that was devoted to drugs,
a former drug addict was invited to speak. He described his former dope hell
so graphica11y that the cheeks of his young listeners still flush with agita-

tion.
0111 and Per promise: "Dope? Never!"

The current 80 report indicates that there are still more girls than boys who
drink and smoke. The scene outside the Hadesjo school does not contradict
the survey's findings.

In the smokers' circle, three girls but only one boy are sitting and smoking.
th?

011i hazards a guess: "Probably because the guys are less grownup than we girls

at this age. We go out and have fun and meet older friends, and we take after
them."

11798
CSO: 5300/2257

58
saconn you. 0mm noun or room manner In owes
Stockholm moms mm in Swedish 1 Apr 82 p 6

[Text] Only 1 day after the Board of Education announced the results of its
survey of young people's drinking habits (showing that consunption is decreas-
int). SIFO [Swedish Institute for Public Opinion Polls] is able to report on a
public opinion poll that shows the ease trend.

The attitude toward drugs is beconing increasingly negative anong both young
people and parents.

The poll was conducted at the request of Action Against Drugs--a canpaigning
organisation in which several governnsnt agencies participate. The questions
asked were the ease as those asked in a similar poll 2 years ago.

of the young people between 12 and 15 years of age. 51 percent say they have
drunk alcohol. Two years ago. the figure was 68 percent.

The sane young people were also asked how they thought their parents would re—
act if the son or daughter drank alcohol, and 83 percent answered that their
parents would "strongly disapprove." In the previous poll, the corresponding
figure was 68 percent.

In all, Just over 1,600 young people between the ages of 12 and 25 were inter-
viewed on their attitudes toward alcohol and cannabis. The trend is conplately
obvious in all age groups: more and sore are beconing increasingly negative in
their attitude toward drugs. The clearest change, however, is occurring in
the lower age groups.

11798
080: 5300/2257

59
POLICE CONDUCTING OfFENSIV! AGAINST DALARNA PROVINCE DRUGS
Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 6 Apr 82 p 5
[Article by Matte Dahlstrom]

[Text] Hora, Saturday--Hidespread concealed drug abuse in southern and northern
Dalarna Province was uncovered during the 1980-1981 police offensive against
dope.

Drug abusers in Borlange and Hora are at least three times as numerous as was
previously recognized on the basis of surveys by the National Council for Crime
Prevention (BRA). This is shown by an investigation by the narcotics squad that
was completed on Saturday.

"white-collar abusers" is the name given by police to the solid citizens between
30 and 60 years of age who abuse cannabis and have managed to conceal that abuse
until “We

Physicians who uncritically prescribe habit-forming drugs for drug abusers by
telephone have also been discovered.

Reports to the narcotics squad about the disappearance of narcotic preparations
from the hospitals are being investigated.

All of this is shown in the recent survey of narcotics abuse in Borlange and
ﬂora that was conducted by detective inspectors Stanley Akerlind of Borlange
and Leif Haas of Mora.

Investigation

They claim that it was the stepped—up police drive against drug offenses in
Dalarna that uncovered the widespread concealed drug abuse.

Detective Superintendent Sune Bodeby. head of the Dalarna Narcotics Squad. says:
"That account is correct."

In 1980 and 1981. the narcotics squad engaged in a major offensive against drug
offenses in Borlange and More.

60
Its efforts led to the assumption that the BRA's figures were totally mislead-
ing, and this has been confirmed by the new survey.

According to the BRA report, there were a total of 197 known drug abusers among
Borlange's 66,000 inhabitants in 1979. The investigation file now lists 635.

Akerlind and Haas estimated the actual number of abusers in Borlange at 1,025,
consisting of 25 addicts. 300 who use drugs extensively, and about 700 who
abuse cannabis with some regularity.

That is six times more than the BRA figure for Borlange.

Seven Hectograms

During 1981. just over 79 people were prosecuted for drug offenses in Borlange.
According to the survey. they handled nearly 7 hectograms of cannabis a week.

During 1981. 55 people were arrested and 27 held for trial, while 13 kilograms
of cannabis and b hectograms of amphetamines were confiscated. The turnover
was estimated at 865,275 kronor.

Now a big new narcotics tangle has come to light with the seizure of 1.7 kilo-
grams of amphetamines having a sales value of 1.5 million kronor. The dope was
found in an apartment in Borlange.

The authors of the report note that Borlange has a large transient population
and, relatively speaking. little informal social control.

Hora is the district in Dalarna where drug abuse is best charted. 'It has
35.000 inhabitants and is the provincial center for northern Dalarna. The pop-
ulation is stable, and there is a high degree of informal social control.

Commitment

A big police effort went into combating drug abuse in Hora during 1980. The
authors of the report point out that other community organisations and the pub-
lic in general committed themselves to the campaign.

The BRA report indicated a total of 70 narcotics abusers--all hashish users-~in
ﬂora in 1979. During the 1980-1981 police offensive, the police registered 219
abusers, and it was discovered that a full 196 of them had been abusing drugs
as early as 1979--in other words, when the BRA was making its survey.

This means, according to the Akerling-Naas report, that the BRA missed two-
thirds of those making up the true total.

According to the new study, this is how dope arrived in what had been a gener-
ally dope-free Hora-Orsa area.

Ten young abusers made up the first homogeneous group. They had started by

sniffing glue. One of them had contacts in Stockholm and learned to smoke
hashish there.

61
He took his knowledge back to Hora. Cannabis very quickly becane the nost con-
non drug of abuse anong the young people. As soon as cannabis was introduced
into the gang. the latter's homogeneous core split up. and abuse spread into
wider and wider circles.

Study Grant

The cannabis was bought with study grant money, and some of it was resold to
other young people, in nest cases to finance the seller's own habit.

Narcotics abuse brought the new abusers into contact with dope addicts who were
already known to the police and who also abused stimulants of the central nerv-
ous system, opiates. and hallucinogens.

The young people were offered amphetamines, but did not accept then. In the
summer of 1980. they were offered LSD. That drug was then accepted by 12 young
people: 8 boys and 6 girls. One developed a severe psychosis and received
treatment at a mental hospital.

The abuse of LSD continued as long as the drug was obtainable. even though none
of the young people had a positive experience with it.

During that time. the previously unknown drug Psylocybin also existed in Nora
and was used within a very linited circle of abusers grouped around a person
who had previously been convicted of serious narcotics offenses.

About 30 drug abusers in Hora were prosecuted during that first police drive.

City Children

The second police offensive began at the start of 1981. About 35 young people
were prosecuted. The abuse originated with young people from big cities who
had been placed in Mora-Ores by the social welfare authorities-for the precise
purpose of weaning them away from drugs. Akerling and Naas write that those
young people from the city had a decisive influence in spreading narcotics
abuse in that snall locality in the police district.

the young people were able to produce the drug mescsline by growing cactus.
Five of then had also abused amphetamines.

0f the 219 known drug abusers in Hora, 41 are wonen--that is, about 19 percent.
There is reason to assume that the number of unknown drug abusers is higher

anong the girls than among the boys, according to Akerlind and Haas. The boys
try to protect their girl friends during the drug investigations.

Boy Friends

Several cases have been discovered where girls who previously had not used
drugs very quickly established a drug habit at the same level-~from the stand—
point of the drug used and the nethod of use--as their older boy friends who
were drug abusers.

62
The authors of the report write that such behavior does not follow the tradi-
tional pattern of progress by drug abusers in more ordinary gang circles.

During the first police drive, only four of the young people were unemployed,
Most of them were students or had jobs. Six have relapsed into drug abuse,

and four told the police that they had continued their drug abuse in the insti-
tutions.

Host of the young people who were sent to prison have been hired in relief work,
found some other job, or managed to return to their studies after serving their
sentence.

The authors of the report go on to say that in both More and Borlange, the in-
vestigation has turned up tips indicating that cannabis abuse is occurring
among people who are well established in the con-unity.

The age of those "white-collar abusers" can be estimated at between 30 and 60.

Akerlind and Haas write that from the standpoint of their position as opinion
molders and standard setters, those people are probably a factor to be reckoned
with.

widespread abuse of habitvforming sleeping pills and tranquillizers has also
been uncovered. Fran conversations with abusers and as a result of tips re-
ceived, it is well known which physicians prescribe sleeping pills and tran-
quillizers in an uncritical manner.

Physicians

According to the abusers themselves, prescriptions are often issued over the
telephone by physicians in another locality.

The police investigation also reveals that according to information received,
it appears that the preparations in question are also disappearing from our
hospitals.

From several places in northern Dalarns, including Sarna, Alvdalen, and even
places farther north, citizens have reported seeing low-flying private planes.
The More detective force's narcotics officers have received several such re-
ports over a long period of time.

People suspect that drugs are being dropped from the planes and picked up by
couriers. But police investigations have not turned up anything.

Detective Inspector Leif Naas points out that reports of "ghost flights" in
northern Dalarna are an indication of the people's thorough commitment to the
drive against drugs.

11798
cso: 5300/2258
BRIEFS

CANNABIS-SHUGGLING GANG BROK£N--Heloingbors (TT)--Police in Norway, Denmark,
and Sweden have jointly broken up a cannabis—ouuggling gong. Two Norwegian
women were arrested in Nelsingborg for trying to snuggle in a kilograms of con-
nabis. And a man is sitting in jail in Norway on the one behind the smuggling
operation. He is also suspected of having persuaded other: to smuggle narcot-

ics in through Helsingborg. In all, about 10 kilograms are involved. [Text]
[Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 2 Apr 82 no page number given] 11798

cso: 5300/2257

6h
BRI RPS

MORPHINE BASE SEED—Ankara, 21 Apr (APP)--Horphine haaa with a market value
of 30 Iillion dollars was seized by police in Hidyat, in Turkey's eastern
Hardin Province, official aourcea said here today. 1hr“ Ian and one volan
were arrested when they tried to sell the narcotic to a policem. Narcotics
officials said the four had brought the morphine haae from Syria and were
planning to forward it to Marseilles, France. They said the drug baae had

originated in Asia's "Golden Triangle"-Laoa. Bum and Thailand. [Text]
[N0212251 Paris APP in English 1903 CHI 21 Apr 82]

cso: 5300/5391

65
SEIZURE 0F CONVICT- TRAPPICKBRS' ASSETS 0862])

London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 27 Ha: 82 p 9

[Article by Stanley Goldsmith]

[Text]

INTERNATIONAL mea-

sures to halt the. illicit
drugs trade by seizing the
assets of convicted trailie-
lters are being urged by

senior police and Customs
ollicers

The proceeds nt drugs trailic-
-lting should be taken trunnsuch
preiiouslv sale havens as nun!-
brred Suiss bank accounts. it
“as agreed at a threeday eon-
ierence in Lancashire which
ended yesterday.

Specific pledges of coopera-
tion were made by lnterpol and
law enlorcement representa-
fives from Britain. Europe and
America. who will report back
to their Governments.

The move. to be raised-at the
Home Oﬂlce and Ministerial
level in Britain within three
weeks. is aimed at preventing
the handing-on of funds to new
nangs once a drugs syndicate is
“busted." said Mr Kenneth
Oslord. Chiet Constable of
Merseyside. who chaired the
conirrence at Button. near
Preston.

CSO: 5320/26

£25m boast

International interest In the
measure was sparltedo
last y‘ears “.hand less «MEI:z
trial at Lancaster when a “If!
in,“ up. but

on s are bellevul to have he-
Iuaiaed largely intact.

De.t Supt. l‘-av Rimmer.
derity head at Lancashire

D. who cracked the gang
and solved the murder at one
of its leaders. Christopher
Martin .lubnmune. said that
Alexander James Sinclair. 35.
said In E. the ruthless master-
mind behind the syndicate. has
failed to complv with an order
to pav tl million towards
roscriitinn costs. although he
as boasted of possessing £25
million. lie is serving a lite sen-
tence [or murder.

Mr Oxford said: “it is now
tor the politicians to learns the
appropriate legislation. it
would be .1 crucial step Forward
it such evil people can be
deprived. oi their ill-netten
gains. which run into millions of
pounds in cash. real estate.
yachts. motor ears and race
horses.”

ﬂ-n¢~-‘f\d

Guam t-r-as-I -hcm ﬂush-l

na-«en-r
UNIVERSITY MBORA'IORY USED AS STUDENTS DRUG FACTORY

London THE DAILY TBLBGRAPB in English 27 lb: 82 p 3

[Article by Colin Randall]

[Text]

'A RESEARCH STUDENT who used his
university laboratory to produce thou-
sands of doses of a rare hallucinatory drug.

was jailed for four
years yesterday.

Judge Manx Dyan de-
scribed Pit-rite Buss», 25.
as an “arrogant. self-
centred man." who saw
himself as a leader.

He rrcruiIedJicuIenanIs to

help him anid tried to
"dazzle the In? with" a
bogus scicnIiIIc elence

lurker was convicted aI Brig.
Iol Croun court at producing
up Io 24 grammes of Bromo
:1." known in users as
”scri‘l‘lll). tranquility and

. pear!“ in '1“ laboratory at
“mu Univmily.

llI- mu also {ound guillv III'

unlnvlully supplunu H.000
Iablris. .

‘Ncnrly dled’

Barker's "mnrkellng man-
urr .-I Met \IMMOID'HIUII 25.
Min ablamcd II law and Fnalisll
degree at Sussex. was ililed Ior
Ihm- mm In" being can

run-II III supplying 10.300
llmmo S'l'l’ luhlels.

CSO: 5320/26

cancel
mm
Iiﬁr c
Iﬂlkiﬂ

Pml
Mr 0'
all 91
Inken
univer
IIIaIerl
DRUGS SQUAD DBTECTIVES CLEARBD OP DRUGS-RELATED OFFENSES '

London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 6 Hat 82 p 9

[Article by Stanley Golds-1th]

[Text]

FIVE drag: out detec-
' tives who ave been
on suspension lor 28
months were acquitted of
grdgmlated offences yw
alter a ﬁvemeelt

trial.’ at Yorlt Crown Court.

Thev ell hope to resume their
amen with Humbertido
ice otter internal dleclpliaarv
on next week. They had
been chareed with “with!
drone and aidhu end abetting
tae possession o! drone.

It was alleaed that thcv sup-
olird on inform with heroin.
LS!) and cocaine lronI oolke
Item to that thev muld errett
and convict anyone who boeaht
the drnls iron him.

But after 2': hours of
deliberation: the jun at nine
homo and three the: rejected

the evidence of the inlornier
and chief prosecution witness.
Thorn“ new.” .a Ciao.
wexion heroin addict

Donunore has been convicted
so time: on I wide range of
odences. the ﬁrst when he was
12. and was debhed e " iier end
sac-Inger” byd el eoce eoeoeel

on was t Id
liner m’Bcnnct-r. oQ thlﬂttd‘ll
Ihcv disbelleved Duosrnore'e
story. the Crown case was loot

Bond of (chomp

Outside the court. the
ollicers huucd and based their
wivct. most of whom wept with
relief Some of the delendantt
drank Chan ampeane from a
bank on the lawns leeldu the
con

lthbellevedtoheoneol
the!” wig: ol turpent-
e n reooe emu o
am who

were t on
wilted.

A “cannon bond of leilow-
chip and belief in the end
result” helped entrain then:
elm com“
November 1919.“ Dallas:
mam 100.44. the rector
accused cacer. ,

n: m :2 mm
w t rupee
now to a r before Mr avid
"all. hie! Constable ol’
llumberﬂde. next week.

Some o! the defendants said
they lelt bitter about the length
of their. suspe spénslons.'and nod
reacrvnt on: agoet re urn II
the dnm need. hot oil wlw

tome polleewer
BRIEFS

JAIL FOR CANNABIS SWGGLERS-Ihree men who organised a drug-smggling opera-
tion involving one-and-a-half tons of cannabis, worth are than 2 million
pounds, were each jailed for six years yesterday and each fined 15,000 pounds
at Nottingham Crown Court. Hichael Quinlan, 107, of Hansfield Road, Redhill,
Nottingham, was said to have been the group's banker; Charles Wright, 36, of
Noodchurch Road. Bestwood, Nottingham was the contact nan in the Middle
East, and Graham Searle, 100, of Church Crescent, Dayhrook, Nottingham,
organised the purchase of tractors which were taken to the Middle East in
lorries. The vehicles returned with cannabis hidden in spare fuel tanks.

Mr Ian Alexander, prosecuting, said that "right was able to pay cash for his
59,000-pound hone. Drugs squad officers swooped when cannabis worth more than
500,000 pounds was found concealed in a lorry at Dover Docks in March last
year. [Text] [Iondon THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 0 Mar 82 p 9]

HEROIN SUPPLIER JAILED--An international drugs ring was uncovered following
the London arrest of Ismet Aden, a car mechanic, Wood Green Crown Court
heard yesterday. Aden, 40, of Harold Road, South ‘rottenham, was jailed for
nine years for possessing heroin worth more than 1,300,000 pounds with intent
to supply others. Hr Andrew Yell, a Customs officer, told Judge Alan Coult-
hard that after the discovery of the drug in Aden's car outside a West London
hotel last June, seizures of heroin worth 16 million pounds had taken place
in Italy, Austria, Holland, Dennrk and Greece. The international operations
had so far resulted in 12 arrests. Hr Tia Davies, prosecuting, referred to
heroin as the drug the Chinese called "grey death" which killed by "emaciation.
madness or poisoning." Adem's younger brother, Kanal Barsdan, 20, of Newbury

Avenue. Enfield, was convicted of possessing half a kilo of heroin and jailed
for six months. [Text] [London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 17 Mar 82 p 9]

CUSTOHS DRUG SEIZURES—-Customs officers found drugs valued at 57 million
pounds in 2,574 seizures, according to the annual report of the Commissioners
of Custom G Excise for the year ended March 31, I981. Customs continued
their policy of striking at organisers and financers of drugs as well as
couriers resulting in the smashing of several large snuggling groups and

jail terns of three years or more for 1105 people. [By John Weeks] [Excerpt]
llandon THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 19 Mar 82 p 13]
HEROIN Slum—Five nen were helping Custom inquiries after heroin, valued
at about 250,000 pounds, was seized at Birmingham airport yesterday. The
heroin was found on a passenger arriving from hankfurt. [Text] [landon
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 22 Her 82 p l] g

CANNABIS SEIZED—-Detectives were questioning l7 suspects last night concern-
ing a multi-nillion pound drug ring after cannabis worth 30,000 pounds was

seized at Heathrow. The ring was centred on Burnley, Lance, where police
believe the arrival of about 3 million pounds' worth of cannabis and cocaine

was masterminded since 1979. Yesterday's sweep, code-named Operation
Butcher. was directed by bet. Supt Anthony Hill, deputy co-ordinator of No. 5

Regional Crime Squad. The arrests were made by officers from No. 5 Regional
Crime Squad, based at Ratfield, Herts, regional crine squad officers from
other areas, custom investigators and local police. Some 220 lb of herbal
cannabis, worth about 30,000 pounds. was seized from two men when they
arrived at Heathrow on Flight M056 from Johannesburg. The cannabis was in
suitcases and the aircraft had stopped at Nairobi en route. The arrests were
made in Kent, Lancashire and London. During the inquiries, which started in
October, the investigating team has also come across armed robberies thought
to be linked with their operation. Regional crime squad officers from ﬂat-
field and Reading, Berks.. Swanley and Ayleshan, Kent, as well as Newcastle

upon Tyne joined forces for the operation. [Text] [London THE DAILY
TELEGRAPH in English 25 Mar 82 p 10]

ARABS JAILED FOR DRUG SWGGLING-London, 22 Apr (AFP)--Thtee Arabs, including
a man who claimed to belong to Kuwait's ruling family and a police captain,
were jailed here Wednesday after being found guilty of struggling cannabis
worth 300,000 sterling ($550,000) into Britain. The gang's alleged ringlead-
er, Anwar Fahas al-Sabah, 29, who told police he was related to Kuwait's
ruling family, was sentenced to six years iwrisonaent. The police captain,
Muhamd 'al-Khazzan, S3, was given three years. The third nan, Riyad Husayn
'Ali, 21, was jailed for two years. The court was told that the men had
snuggled the drug into Britain fro. Kuwait hidden in luxury cars. [Text]
"10220901. Paris AP in English 0648 GMT 22 Apr 82]

080: 5300/2276 END