FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10545

27 May 1982

_ Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 24/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non:

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also frol- news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those iron Bnglish-language sources '
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and.
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and nsterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by ”as. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itea, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation as smrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or naaes preceded by a ques-
tion nsrk and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
ice. originate with the source. lines within its-s are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the {1.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WISHIP 0?
”TERMS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATIOR
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND Dmeeaous DRUGS

* (P000 24/82)
CONTENTS
ASIA
AUSTRALIA
Briefs

Drug Syndicate Slashed
HONG KWG

International Controls on Drug Buprenorphine Feared
(Paul Saran; SOUTH CHIRAHORNIN POST, 28 Mar 82) .....

Thai Alleged Traffioker Extredited to Netherlands
(Sarah Monks; SOUTH CHINA mum POST, 14; Apr 82).....

Police Raid Ih‘ug Factory, Seized Heroin, Heroin Base
(South China Morning Post, 15 Apr 82) .................

Briers
Mg Seizure Figures
Hacao mug Problem
INDONESIA
Briefs
Poppy Seeds Confiscated
Narcotics Arrests
Horphine Arrest
NEH ZEALAND

Auckland Airport Cannabis Haul One of Ler est Ever
(mmmn m, 17w82 OOCCOOOIOOIOOOOOOOI

-s.- [III-WW-1382

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR omml. USE ONLY

PAKISTAN
Briefs
hatch Narcotics Official Arrives
Cairo-Bound Opium Seized
Heroin Seizure
Units for Narcotics Control
PHILIPPINES

Large Harihuans Haul Reported

(mumnﬁ m! m, 18 Apr 82) OOOOOOOOOIOOO...

Addictive Cough Syrups Beclassified
(mum DAILY W, 30 ‘pl‘ 82) eseeseOeeoessses

Briefs
More Drugs Reclassified ‘
comm
Briefs
International mug Shiment Confiscated
Blow To Mg Trafficking
Harihuans Seizure
Llanos Orientales Coca Destroyed
GUIANA '
Briefs
Anti-mug Moves
JAMAICA

MEXICO

Paper Questions Use of Two Unregistered Airstrips
(mmam’ 2h Am 82) .OOOIIOOCCUICOCOOOOOOOOIO

mug-Connected Prison Officials Returned From 0.8.
(nmciaco 01113135; EL 801: IE 3min», 7 Apr 82) secs...

mug Ringleader Identified Accomplices Captured
(BL MAN" 15 Apr 82 O.........C..........'...........

Former mug Ringleader Killed by Police
(BI, mumm, 16 ‘pr 82) 0......OOOOOOIOIOOOOOOOIOOOIO

Accused Cocaine Traffickers Claim Innocence Torture
(stmmommvonnzno, lAprBZS

-b-

summons
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080058-7

’ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MEXICO

Briefs
Sonora Plantations Sought
huge in Prison
Heroin Trafficker Sentenced
Colombian Trafficker Freed
n'ug Destruction Described
mitigating Helicopter Attacked
Mgs, traffickers Seized
Harihuana, Poppy Plante Destroyed
Antidrug Campaign Results

Briefs '
Heroin Seizure in Tmebat
Opiun Seizure in Tehran
Mg: Discovered

Opium Seizune

SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Harihuana Consumption in Bangui Decried
(J.P.D.P. Yangon; mm: AFBICAINB, 16 Feb t

MALI

Briefs
Large 'Drug Bust

SOUTH AFRICA

Businessman Accused of Aiding International Sun: 2
(Sandra Lieberum; ‘l‘ﬂB CHIN, 12 Hay 82 .

WT EUROPE

GREECE

Narcotics Traffickers Arrested in Salonica
. (mm, 23 Apr 82)

MOWMONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00060R000500060068-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Briefs .
Narcotics Traffickers Apprehended

Two Arrested Hith Heroin
Nigerians Narcotics Traffickers Arrested

NETHERLANIB

Hashish Smuggling Operation Broken Up
(m mJB V0“, 26 m 82) eeoeeeeeeeoeeseoeeo..oogooo.

NORWAY

Ministry Stepping Up Efforts To Keep Rugs From Prisons
(Thorleif Andreassen; AFTENPOSTBN, 21 Apr 82) ..........

SUEDE?!

Paper Questions tether 'Nafia-Style' Gang Behind mugs
(Claes Lofgren; 7 WAR, 2 Apr 82) .....................

Briefs
Narcotics Prime Statistics Released

TURKEY

Briefs
Heroin Smuggling

a MOMMUSEONLY
BRIEFS

DRUG SYNDICATE SHASﬂBD—The Australian federal police believe they have
broken a drug syndicate which was attenting to establish a narcotics
retailing network in Australia and New Zealsnd. They have elusrgsd four
people with drug-related offenses after seizing a quantity of heroin from
the boot of a taxi in the Sydney suburb of Double Bay. The arrest marks
the end of a coutined Australian and New Zealand police operation which
began in New Zealsnd 13 months ago. “as four people charged were appearing
in court in Sydney on 11 Hay. [Text] [M14066 Melbourne Overseas Service
in English 0830 GMT 11 Hay 82]

080: 5300/5738
INTERNATIONAL CONTROLS ON DRUG BUPRENORPHINE Fm

llong Kong sour" CHINA MORNING P05? in English 28 Hair 82 p 1

[Article by Paul Saran]

[Excerpts]

The Government is

bein utgcd by the.

manu scum of I (In;
which could «vain'

nise Humbug? Wu:

WWW
Mullﬁtuwcumbu
NWM'NU

mmummw'

and to baci- or noth-

MW

'9. who and.

. a! ' ovih
mu 0!
m In 7 until“!
mam.

W
cord Nov Yuk am
m tron-u! no

m.
THAI ALLEGED TMPFICKBR mmnsn ‘10 NEWS

llong Kong SOUTH CHINA maumc P08? in English 14 Apr 82 p 1

[Article by Sarah Hanks]

[Text]

A Mi angina quid in Holland on
dugs dunes Ian Kai ‘hk «an pow
moans” m-unuumnml
marathon v icl invoked that man

ulndilioa .
m Tahiti-l.

11.: um. V din
Danay_Caud()0).b nun-India.
unﬂalng WNW

‘ Matti-u! I attach.
madden. WM

Mb!“

“Egan-rut "I" ”h
Jam

emits Sumo. 1h. -
Mum Kano [M II: Hm Municipal
Police. the Namath.

Ouch «thunk had a‘ I
«rum! to: Voochl’u mat on I:

Manama alum“
than"! Wall-b
cadmium“:
It milky! MM! LII My
uluvd hit mm dm ﬂu! qtndilion

would set of audition
Wore Mr PM. O‘Donnell

Tho me aid on documents pm-
and as c: “a. including}: {orda- up
not for Vans-hrs must. not w duly
«thousand —ud mym.
h “fro 30:1:ng Von-chi?» turgid
amp! was onus c I c u
Jemima-0m” in 0mm Rood am
will; u maul menu Io mi: ny-

ln Fanny. (m a thin! at of
anamo- by. which new. «I
MW. and!“ rum by My LC.
W-IWc-ma Camohumdnd.
POLICE RAID DRUG FACTORY, $8122 WIN: WIN BASE

nong Kong scum cam momma 9081' in mgnsh 15 Apr 82 p 19

Wm: M mm m arm may“
W5. AWN mam WNW mwmmmm
“Wax“; -mmmu m... mwmm
w mum ”mum “mm ”mam
mm. mm .. w .mmmtmmwmmﬂmm m
M u WWW. ““2

m
ﬂaw“

WW» Wm.“ mu WWW mm
ﬁmmum "a
mum.” WWW?“ mmmwww m.»

[Text]
BRIEPS

DRUG SBIZUR: FIGURESnmstons officers last year seized 190 kg of narcotics,
worth about $60 million in the streets, and arrested 750 people. This was
disclosed yesterday by Mr x.s. Tong. head of the Customs Investigation Bureau,
who noted that drug traffickers are now employing ”ever more ingenious and
sophisticated" ways. He said he was concerned to see the reappearance of high
quality No 4 heroin last year and the influx of drugs from the buaper harvests
in the Golden Triangle. The Commissioner, Mr Douglas Jordan, added that be-
cause of the increasing caplexity and voluee of its work, the custone service
underwent a reorganisation. Manpower has increased by 454 to its present level
of 2,158 and there is expected to be a comparable upgrading of its resources.
such as metal detectors and X-ray machines. He pointed out that trade facil-
itation re-ains an important function of the serivce. Thousands of aircraft
and vessels and about nine million passengers--plus millions of postal pack-
ages, thousands of containers of aanufactured products and raw materials-all
cane into and out of aongkong last year. [Text] [Bong Kong scum cam man-
ING POST in English 13 Apr 82 p 16]

Macao DRUG mom-«scan, Apr 2--The police are concerned about a so per cent
increase in the number of drugs cases brought before the courst last year.
officials free the Security Police said since Hacau is so close to Hongkong
and China, traffickers can ship dangerous drugs into the territory in saall
packets through various channels, making it hard for the police to detect.
Police sources also said that most of the drugs, mainly heroin, cane fron bang-
kok through nongkong, although sous opim was brought in from China. Host of
the arrested traffickers are “small fry” and all the ringleaders escaped be-
fore police raids-which an officer fro- the Intelligence Division said indi-
cated that they had good inforuation on police operations. Last year, 35 peo-
ple appeared before the courts on drugs charges, 15 more than in 1980. There
are believed to be 5.000 drug addicts in Macaw-70 per cent of the. middle aged
or elderly. Police are worried about the increasing nuaber of juveniles who
are turning to drugs and the Deputy Director of the Hacau Judiciary Police. Dr
Silva de Noronha, said one of their main aims is to stop the drugs reaching

the schools.--Our Own Correspondent. [Text] [Bong Kong sou'm cunla 140mm
POST in English 3 Apr 82 p 7]

C50: 5320/9126
BRIEFS

POPPY s-s COMSCAm—About one kilo of poppy seeds were found by a customs
official at Polonia Airport in Medan in the handbag of a woaan of Indian na-
tionality named PK (56 years old), bearing Indian passport Nude: 3.9106578.
PK was a passenger on an HAS [Malaysian Airways Systen] flight fron Kuala
Lunpur to Eden, which landed on Sunday norning, «'0 April, at Polonia Airport.
PK told the custons official that she had bought the poppy seeds in Malaysia
at the request of her son in Medan. K said that the seeds were to be used
to flavor food and also for medicine when he was sick. However, she did not
state who her son was and what disease he was suffering from. According to
her, the poppy seeds can be purchased freely in Halaysia. PK ha been turned
over to the Second Precinct Police and is currently being interrogated.
[Text] [Jakarta KOHPAS in Indonesian 6 Apr 82 p 12] 5170

NARCOTICS ARRES'IS—Seasrang, 210 lurch—No suspected narcotics traffickers, w
(55 years old) and his son, m (37 years old), who were arrested by police of-
ficers fron Police Region Ix in central Java in February, 1982, will be turned
over to the state prosecutor in the near future. Police officers seized from
the two suspects a half kilo of narcotics valued at lip 100 aillion. The
narcotics were hidden in a pile of bones in the store belonging to the sus-
pects in the Tanah Has district of Senrang. A source in the Research Section
Of Police Region Ix confirned that up to the present the two accused have still
not admitted that they had the narcotics. According to their statement, the
narcotics had been entrusted to then by a wonn they did not know and were to
be distributed in the Cilacap area. According to laboratory tests the nar-
cotics are indeed a prohibited substance. Pron the tine the two smpects were
arrested they have been held by the police. ’lhe chief of Police Region Ix,
Police rhjor General Hontolalu, speaking before a plenary session of the Pro-
vincial Council recently, admitted that the city of Semarang and Central Java
in general have becone an area of narcotics trafficking. 1he narcotics are
distributed by an organized syndicate which is well-established and difficult
to break up. According to the Research Section of Police Region Ix, there is
a considerable possibility that the narcotics trafficking is being carried on
by a syndicate which is directed frol Jakarta. For angle, the two suspects
up to the present have "kept their nouths shut." 'nze two suspects have been
involved on two previous occasions in narcotics trafficking in Central Java,
according to an inforned source. In the view of this source the consumers they
have targeted are teen—age children. ['Dext] [Jakarta SIM HARAPAN in
Indonesian 25 hr 82 pp 1, 12]
mRPHINI-Z ARREST-"Medan, “ARIA“ “HUM AB-An attth by “KT (37 years old), a
Malaysian citizen of Chinese descent, to snuggle one kilo of morphine through
Polonia Airport in mdan was broken up on lbnday [15 March] by security and
customs officials. MT, who arrived at Polonia Airport in Medan on an HAS
[Malaysian Airways System] flight from Penang, attracted the attention of the
customs official by his movements and particularly when he declined to allow
the customs officer to examine the package which he was carrying under his
arm. Because of his suspicious activity HR“! was taken to an examination roan
and searched. There it was learned that the package which he had under his
arm contained morphine crystals described on a written slip in the package

as nethynedi exyanphetanine morphine [as published]. Security officials then
Bent “KT to the Second Precinct Police Station in Hedan for further interro-
gation. During the preliminary interrogation at Polonia Airport in lbdan NKT
admitted that he had received the package fron a person named ATU at Dayan Lepas
Airport in Pemng when he was about to depart for Medan. According to the in-
structions which he received from ATU, it was stated that the package would be
picked up by a person who would be standing with his are: folded as a signal.
NKT said he was willing to carry the package because he had once been helped
by ATU when he had lost heavily betting on horse in Panang. At the tine A'l'U
gave hin 2,000 Malaysian dollars. Police authorities in the Second Precinct
of Medan contacted by “ARIA“ “HUM on Tuesday [16 March] state that at present
NKT is being interrogated in detail by the police to learn the history behind
the prohibited goods and to whom it was to be given. [Text] [Jakarta HARIAN
UHUH AB in Indonesian 20 Ibr 82 p 2] 5170
AUCKLAND AIRPORT CANNABIS HAUL ONE 0? LARGEST EVER
Auckland THE NEW mm W in mglish l7 liar 82 p 1

[Text] Custome officers have seized about 160 kilograms of cannabis-«me of
the biggest hauls ever made in New Zealand at Auckland International Airport.

The narcotic, which had an estimated street value of up to $650,000, was dis-
covered in 12 suitcases in a cargo shed in late January.

M. D. B. Gillam, the chief customs officer for investigations in Auckland,
said yesterday that during a routine search one of the deparmnt's drug dogs
had detected the cannabis scent, stood on its hind legs and began barking--
just as it was trained to do.

Customs officers found the cannabis tightly packed in suitcases which had been
stored on pallets about seven metres above the floor.

Mr Gillan said the drug had been imported from "the Rest" and had been at the
airport for a few days.

'Ihe discovery led to an extensive investigation by customs and police-officers.

Mr Gillam said he had not commented on the seizure before yesterday because of
the “sensitivity of inquiries which extended overseas."

Three men have been arrested in connection with the discovery of the cannabis.
They have appeared in the Auckland District Court and have been reuanded to ap-
pear at a later date.

--In May, 1977, police seized 200 kilogram of cannabis in Gisborne, valued at
$500,000. In Septesber, 1978, a man was jailed for five years for his part in
a cannabis-growing operation in which the potential value of the crop was esti-
mated at $1.2 million.

CSO: 5320/9127
BRIEFS

wrcu NARCO‘I'ICS OFFICIAL ARRNBS-dalanhad, April 27-41.:- De Boer, a senior
Dutch Criminal Service official has arrived here to discuss measures with the
local authorities to stop drug trafficking, it was learnt here today. lie net
the diaimn of Pakistan Narcotics Control Board, liaraj Hussein and decided a
nutter of steps to be taken to curb international narcotics smggling. [Text]
[Islambad m unstm in English 28 Apr 82 p 3]

CAIRO-BOUND OPIUH SBIZED—Cuetoms drug enforcement cell has intercepted a
consignment proceeding to Cairo on a "dummy airway bill" containing

11.1. kilograns of opium worth RSone million. The consignment was booked via
ang Kong—Cairo-Paris-Nairobi with fake numbers. It was declared to -
contain "aircraft parts." Following seizure of this consignment, the customs
established contact with Interpol which led to the seizure of a similar
consignment at Cairo with same quantity of opium. [Excerpt] [0P141557
Karachi DAHN in mglish 11 May 82 [no page givenll

HEROIN SEIZURE—Peshawar, Hay ll—Pakistan customs intelligence today seized
162 kilograns'of heroin, valued in Pakistan at 1.62 billion. and Rs 20 billion
in foreign narkets. The heroin was being carried in a micro bus No TR? 1219
to Karachi for onward transmission to Europe. The trap was laid near Ladir
town, a short distance from Kohat, at 2 p.n. today. The haul is stated to

be the biggest so far in the history of narcotics in this part of the world.
[Excerpts] [CF151931 Karachi DAHN in English 12 May 82 P 12 GP]

UNITS FOR NARCOTICS CON'I‘ROL--Pakietan Narcotics Control Board has set up

task force mits to control the mggling of drugs within the country.

These units. which consist of police personnel from the four provinces,

will work to control illegal trafficking of drugs at national and inter-
national level. [Text] [Karachi Donestic Service in Urdu 0600 CRT 11 May 8;]

080: 5300/5739
LARGE MARIIIUANA HAUL REPORTED

Manila PHILIPPINES DAILY EXPRESS in English 18 Apr 82 p 2

[Text]

CAMP DANGWA. Le ‘l'tinidad. Bonnet. April
.I 7-Mote then 86 000 metﬁum plents nd eevetel
kilos of dried menjuene leaves worth tniliione of
peeoeweteconfiscetedlneeetiee ofreide
conducted jolnilye by the Bonnet 'C/INP.
National intelligence end Seou'tity Agency. end the.
Finenee Minisiev lntelllnenoe luteeu thh_ welt h,

Kibunpn. Bengaet. some 90 kddtitetoa lion"

Baguio.

Col. Rogelio Antone. new PCIINP
cotnmender. nidthet llidililbllinbl’dl in the
em to let.

The raids wete conducted in tevetel plentetione
looeied along the benlt of" ,
Kibungen.

~-~ ..

conﬁscated yestetdey.Aaietie. said.
O 0
THERAIDING teenulied tobutn oneltemoet
of the prohibited plenteJhe e’e'ld. as then were not
enoudt pottentobehgtheeniothemaintoed.
which is about low to live houn hilte elong
mountain mils.

CSO: 5300/5737

elliOBeklielun.‘

A total of 16,300 meditate ple'nte «it
conﬁscated on Aptil 8 end 9 while the net weir

mm “Id the mpected cement. :vtt
mam, wound. mutated. °"

CONBTAIULARY. Anti-Nemiiee Unit
heedqttertett h Cemp Came ordend yesterday ell
CANUMope mine to watch out for unidentiﬁed
etnte'd men noun; es CANU undeteover agent;

The directive pente followinze tepott thetseven
unidentiﬁed evened tnie'n identifying thetntelves as
CANU egntx. .conftonted e group of youngsters
and with drewn ll'eenne searched them bodily
without ny mieeion oedete. ‘

In. Gen. Bienvenido Felix CANU
mud". aid thb it"juet one incident where‘
.CANU opentivee ere olemed for btusque actions

lln oondticting eeetehee on innoont younpten.

LAST HONDAY. in “encode. ‘l'etlec. seven
men identifying. themselves at CANU egents.

-eoooetedeyoupoi‘yongmenendwontenone

etetion vegon foe Salient! Mon of dried

- Mane loevee.

. The nine men. tepotteiiy led by e certain
Captein Sentoe. eloo mected ihet the younpten
vote dtug annulus.

10
ADDICTIVE‘. COUCH SYRUPS RECLASSIPID

Hunt in PHILIPPINES DAILY EXPRESS in English 30 Apr 82 p 8

[Text]

A TﬁCIiNlCAL advisory
committee formed by 'l‘ieallh
Minister Jesus Azurin ha asked for
the reclasail‘ication of

ephedrine-containing cough ryrttpa
from over-thecounter drop to

prescription drug.

The committee porition.
contained in a propoeed
administrative order. afﬁrmed a
previous order of the Food and Dru
Administration cltiei‘ Arsenic Regala
whichdelisted the [our cough eyrupt
as over-thecounter drop. citing their
”addictive effect” on the users.

The committee also cited reports
of the Constabulary Anti-Narcotics
Unit that the ephedrine substances
were unnecessary to the ayrup's
therapeutic effect.

Tit! FDA reclaseiiication order

was hated by .Reyala_ on
recommendation of Drip Gen.
Biennnido Felix. CANU chief. who
said that Hyiorin and other cough

preparations, being told over the
counter in Metro Manila drugstores,

are heinguaed hydro; addicts because"

of the drop' no content.

The Won't Phannacoloay
Book said an overdose of ephedrine
may cause euphoria. confurion. and
hallucinations.

The Dru: Aseociation of the

Philippines. however. acid the US
FDA.ntpported by various researcher
abroad. has established the safety for
over-titeoounter tree of ephedrine

“8‘
one

I THE FDA also said the prevalence
of ephedrine addiction is low (there
are only 17 known cater worldwide)
and that there is no assurance that
the thug will only be dispensed with

through a doctor's prescription when
mlareiaed. -

The Dangerous Drugs "Board
(DD!) her reported that cough
ayrupa topped last year's list of
frequently-ahead forms of drop.
accountingfor 85 percent of addiction
case: while marijuana wee second
with 82 percent.

Of the 15 cough preparation
mentioned it the 003 report.
Corex-Dwasfottndtohetherncat
Mdelyabwed,rnrrnherin¢776casea;
followed by Hycodin, $37eaeea.1‘he
listalsoinciuded Euronexwithdo
caeeeandﬂyoodinﬁlSasee.

Corex-D. Hycodin. Hyiorin, ad
Euronert were arnon; the ﬁx
over-thocounter thugs reciaraitied by

theFDAmouuaiptiondrmme
other two are bun-D and CED

WWW!
BRIEFS

MORE DRUGS REmSSIFIBD-Jmty-one other cough preparations being sold as over-
the-counter (OTC) drugs any be reclassified as preparation drugs, Health Minister
Jesus Azurin disclosed yesterday. These preparations, Asurin said, were found to
contain ephedrine, a stimlant that can be addictive if taken in large doses.

The names of these drugs were not available as of press tine. In a report of the
dangerous drugs board, a total of 3,658 persons were adnitted last year in five
drug rehabilitation centers for having been dependent on cough syrups. The drugs
widely abused were Corex D, Hercodol, Ornacol, Peracon, Bndotussin, 'rrecodine,
Respillin, Tussionesc, Robitussin, Bydodin, ﬁylorin, Buronex, Ronilar, Benadryl and
Tuseran. Earlier, six cough preparations were identified to contain ephedrine.
They were Lotus D, CED cough syrup, Gore: D, Hycodin, and Euronen. They were due
for reclassification last Decelter but the order uas postponed for June by Azurin
to accomdate requests of various drug colpanies. Drug coupsnies in a meeting
with the Hill technical couittee on drugs the other day opposed the proposed
reclassification of cough syrups fron arc to prescription drugs, saying that the
cough syrups are only addictive if taken in large quantities. Murin said the
Hon will "keep an open mind" on the issue of reclassification, considering the
therapeutic effects these drugs have and the ill effects they my have on illegal
users, especially children. lie said the cosnittee will review the contentions of
the drug coqanies and the Drug Association of the Philippines (on) and look at
the regulations of other countries on drugs containing ephedrine. [Text]

[Manila smarts romr in English 1 my 82 pp 1, 13]

(:50: 5300/5743-

12
mars

INTERNATIONAL 0806 SHIPMENT MSCAm-Jhia turning agents fron the attorney
general's narcotics squad confiscated 5,000 kg of uthalqualone [netacualone]
at Eldorado international airport, arresting 20 persona. The drugs are worth
10 billion pesos on the 11.3. Iarket. The cache of drugs was found on Avianca
flight 011 and was being shipped free Frankfurt, m. to Cali. It was an-
nounced that other persons implicated in the drug traffic are presently being
arrested in Cali, hdellin and Frankfurt. [PA1623M Bogota Cadena Radial

Super in Spanish 1730 an. 16 May 82]

now 10 DRUG TRAFFICKING-~A major blow was struck against drug trafficking
in this country when narcotics police seized several tons of narihuana

and discovered cocaine processing laboratories. The policenen conducted
operations in the regions of Cauca, Cuajira, and Caqueta departments and the
Vaupes administrative division. The narcotics brigade found two large
cocaine plantations in Bolivar, Cause. In another operation. the police
found sodium permanganate, acetone, acid and large quantities of polyethylene
bags used to pack the drug. Further-ore, a man identified as (Jose Lisandro)
was captured in Florencia, Caqueta, carrying 500 gm of cocaine. Finally,
narcotics groups seized 11 tons of narihuana ready for export in Villaneuva,
Guajira. This shipment was valued at 30 million pesos. [PA150426 Bogota
Cndena Radial Super in Spanish 2330 GMT 6 May 82 PA]

MARIHUANA SEIZURE-~Bogota--The antinarcotics police today confiscated

66 tons of mrihuana, the final destination of which was the United States.
he confiscation occurred in the jurisdiction of Pajaro municipality in

La Guaj ira Department.‘ [PAl60210 Bogota Domestic Service in Spanish

2330 cm 110 May 82 PA]

LLANOS cumulus COCA nasraomurhe police dealt one of its sharpest blows
to traffickers and producers of cocaine who operate in the Llanos Orientalea
when it destroyed crops of coca leaves over an area of sore than 35 hectares

and confiscated 3,000 pounds of the leaves. Likewise. during the course of
the action, whose center of operations was set up in a place known as 81
Retorno in the San Jose jurisdiction. laboratory equip-est was confiscated
and 15 persons, whose nanes were withheld. were captured. [Text] [Bogota
EL TEMPO in Spanish 22 Apr 82 p 3-A] 9908

080: 5300/ 2287

13
BRIEFS

ANTI-DRUG MOVES-Jones personnel have been strengthened st Tillehri Interna-
tional Airport and other ports of entry into Guyana and on the borders in
order to eradicate snuggling. trafficking in nrijusne sud other illegsl
trade. This ass disclosed by Police Codesioner Lloyd Barker at a press
conference at Police headquarters yesterday. Cos-issioner Barker, sccoqanied
by senior officers, disclosed that the Force us allost at full strength. He
admitted that there use an increase in serious crines, especially those
counted by and bandits, but declared that there as a reduction in the
choke end rob type of offences. lower, the police were now adopting tactics
to enable then to reduce the incidence of serious crimes. Talking about
passports, the Couliuioner said very soon were of the public who wished
passports would be able to get than within two weeks. A new shipment of
passports, which by virtue of its design would reduce the incidence of pass-

port forgery hsd srrived in the country. [kcerpts] [Georgetown GUYANA
cnkomcu: in English 24 Apr 82 p 16]

080: 5300/7551
$0 for What

are they used?
DRUG-CONNECTED PRISON OPTICIALS RETURNED FROM 0.3.

Culiacan EL SOL DE SINALOA in Spanish 7 Apr 82 p S
ﬁrticle by Francisco Omslag?

[Text] Mexico City, 6 April (DEM)--The technical and administrative deputy direc-
tors of the northern prison. members of the international drug ring who, together
with the drug trafficker Victor Hugo Sanchez Baca, left for the United States in
connection with a cocaine shipment and were arrested in Miami by FBI agents, will
arrive in this city, where they will be placed at the disposal of the district

prosecutor, while the "narco" will be turned over to the Office of the Attorney
General of the Republic.

Antonio Labastida Diaz and Carlos Calero are now flying to Mexico City; and it is

claimed that other prison officials will be arrested once those under arrest have
been interrogated.

Plorentino Venture, agent in command of the Interpol group in Mexico, began
questioning those held in Miami with the cocaine shipment which was intended to

be distributed in this city, in particular among perforners and among prominent
members of society.

Implicated in the cocaine business is the former director of the northern prison,
Edgar 0. Santin Esquivel, who allowed Victor to leave accompanied by the two
deputy directors, for the sum of 150,000 pesos, under the condition that once the
drug connection had been made and it was brought into the country, he would return
to the prison and continue serving a long sentence; because in 1979 Victor had
been found with 9 kilograms of cocaine in his possession.

Condr Ventura, who has been in this city since last Sunday, questioned the inter-
national drug trafficker, Victor, when the FBI agents put him in the hands of
Federal Security Police agents who, in turn, sent him to the authorities of the
Office of the Attorney General of the Republic, where another action has already
been taken against him for escape and drug trafficking. Victor's statements
implicate the director of the northern prison, as well as Antonio Labastida Diaz
and Carlos Calero, technical and administrative deputy director of the prison.
respectively. when Edgar 0. Santin Esquivel was its director. Today, they will
be placed at the disposal of the General Office of Preliminary Investigations of
the District Prosecutor's Department, to be remanded to a judge of the court of
equity for whatever crimes may result, apart from that of the prisoner's escape.

16
There is fear among the present and forner officials of the northern prison that
those in custody my disclose the names of the rest of those inplicated in the

purchase of cocaine in Miami, a ship-eat which. according to the first investiga-
tions. exceeds 20 kilogram of the pure drug. '

2909
cso: 5330/80

17
DRUG RINGLEADBR IDENTIFIED BY ACCOMPLICES CAPTURED
Nuevo Laredo BL MANARA in Spanish 15 Apr 82 Sec D p 6

[Text] Another leader of the ring of drug traffickers has been captured by the
Federal Judicial Police, namely, Gilberto Jimenez Harroquin, who was identified
by his accomplices. Raul Sanchez Car-one, Salvador Hernandez Hernandez and Ramiro
Torres Cantu, as one of the heads of the ring recently broken up, which had
ramifications in Beynosa and Piedraa Negras, Coahuila.

The investigations are continuing, because it is presumed that there are more
accomplices who are hiding out.

Those under arrest will be turned over to the Federal Public Ministry, along with
the shipment of 58 joints of marihuana and l kilogram and 600 grams of the same
grass which were seized from them.

Three others involved are Jose Garcia Garcia. Asuncion Moreno Torres and Encarna-
cion Ortiz Ceballoa, who were arrested while aboard an Anahuac bus with 750 graha
of marihuana in their possession.

This new blow at the drug traffic demonstrates the domestic consumption of the
drugs as well as their surreptitious export to the neighboring country.

The individuals in custody (all young) admitted that they had been engaged in
marihuana trafficking for some time, and gave the names and addresses of customers
and suppliers.

with these lists available, the Federal Judicial agents expect to make more
«1 rrests .

18
Gilberto Jimenez Harroquin is mother one of the ringleader-s of the group of
marihuana traffickers being held by the Federal Judicial Police.

2909
cso: 5330/78

19
FORMER DRUG RINGLEADBR KILLED BY POLICE
Ciudad Juarez EL FRONTERIZO in Spanish 16 Apr 82 pp 1, 7

[Text] Enrique Jorquera Lugo,'the inveterate trafficker and perpetrator of several
homicides and daring escapes from various prisons, is dead.

The individual who gained notoriety as a criminal, who was said to have headed
various gangs for a long time and who, with Carmelo Aviles Labra, was a lord and
master of the drug business on the border and over an extensive region of Sonora,
was shot to death yesterday morning by State Judicial Police agents from Parral,
Chihuahua.

He met the end that everyone was expecting: a bullet in the head as he attempted to
escape from the agents under orders from Comdr Juan Jose Gonzalez Graze who were
taking him from Parral to the El Refugio airport where, a few hours earlier, -
Jorquera Lugo and Jesus Jose Seens, his right-hand man in the drug traffic, had
tried to steal a small plane. They were already inside the aircraft. They wanted
to steal it in order to use it to make shipments from Parral and Guadalupe and
Calvo to the border.

"He knew beforehand what they intended to do; so, we went and stopped them. He
held them in Parral for several hours, but since it was necessary to complete the
investigation of that bold attempt to seize the aircraft, and since Jesus Jose was
wounded, because he had been in a battle with other traffickers 3 or 6 days before
and they had shot him in the leg, we took only Jorquera. He handcuffed him, but
in front. He put him in the front seat of a car. and we headed for the airfield
known as E1 Refugio. No one took the precaution of searching Enrique; and hence
we did not know that he was carrying two 65-caliber pistols. one in his belt and
one placed in his left boot. 0n the road. he stooped down and, without our notic-
ing it. took one of the two weapons out of the boot. He tried to fire at the
driver, when one of our men behind in the same car disarmed him. He hit Jorquera,
who attempted to disarm that officer. It was then that the shot was fired which
he received in his head from back to front. This happened at 1030 hours yesterday.“

The incident was ismediately reported to the state general prosecutor of justice.
Jorquera was the sane individual who escaped twice from what was then the municipal
prison in Ciudad Juarez. On one occasion, he managed to convince the director of
the prison to take him to the general hospital to be treated for severe pain that
he claimed to have in his stomach. When two guards were taking him. including an
agent named Rosario Sandoval, both being Jorquera'a accomplices, they intercepted
the car near 16 de Septiembere and Las Americas Streets.

20
They tied Ssndoval's hands, and proceeded to throw him in the direction of Valle
dc Juarez; and Enrique disappeared after that date.

They recaptured him and, after he had spent a short tine in the same prison, he
himself plotted this clever scans of making another escape. They procured an
official letter from the second district court, and to date it has been iupossible
to find out how they could have obtained it.

Two individuals Here disguised as radio patrolnen. They painted a car to look like
a patrol car, and those two false agents in the car, which was also camouflaged,
appeared at the usrden's office, asked for Jorquers Lugo and renoved his, supposedly
to take him to the district court, and he was never seen again.

2909
650: 5330/78

21
ACCUSED COCAINB TRAFFICKBRS GLAD! INNOCENCE, TORTURE
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 1 Apr 82 Sec C p 5

[Text] Torture was the word heard most often yesterday in the state's third district
court during the preliminary statments made by the 11 persons who were held for

trial by the federal prosecutor as individuals presumed guilty of crimes against
health in the degree of cocaine trafficking.

At 1145 hours yesterday, under heavy police guard, the presumed cocaine traffickers
were reaoved from the La Lona prison to appear before the federal judge. Ricardo
Rodriguez Villarreal. on which occasion they made their prelininary statements.

Those presumed guilty in this case are the Colonbians Orlando Granados, Hugo Luis
Hoyos. Diego Alonso Diaz Vinazco, Carlos Alberto Rivero Betancourt and Hernando
Echeverri Molina, as well as the Americans Alfredo Jackaman Botarse and Carlos Bailio
Jackanan, and the Nuevo Laredo residents Reynaldo Hernandez Pedraaa, Armando Santos
Garcia, Mario Vedia Flores and Alan Gloria Roldan Robles.

As this morning newspaper reported on the basis of information supplied by the
Federal Judicial Police. on 18 March the Colombians liugo Luis Hoyos and retired
Army lieutenant Orlando Granados were arrested in the city of Monterrey, and iden-
tified as "mules," because they had been carrying the cocaine from Coloﬂaia.

In their preliminary statementaythese individuals denied all the charges made by
the prosecutor, claiming that they had arrived in this country as tourists. and did
not know any of the other persons who were arrested in connection with this inves-
tigation.

They said that, through the use of torture, they were forced to sign prefabricated
statements regarding charges from which they were dissociated.

The prosecutor, assigned to the third district court, Marcelino Garcia Rizo, showed
the judicial and court authorities the envelopes containing the cocaine which the
aforementioned persons had brought from Colombia.

Their fellow defendants, Diego Alonso Dias Vinasco, Carlos Alberto Rivero Betan-
court and Hernando Bcheverri Holina,a1so denied having made any statements in the
federal prosecutor's office. and said that they had been beaten, without identi-
fying their assailants.

22
'l Ihni't Know the Colombians': Jackaman

Alfredo Jackaman Botarse, who was held for trial by the federal prosector for his
presumed guilt in committing crimes against health in the degree of cocaine
transportation, denied the charges made by the prosecutor, and claimed that he

had never had any connection with the Colombians Hugo Luis Hoyos and Orlando
Granados.

‘ He asserted that he was arrested on 23 March, when his niece, Jacqueline Jackaman,
called him on the telephone from the city of Monterrey, notifying him that she had
a serious problem which required his presence in that city.

The accused Jackaman stated: "When I arrived in Monterrey, the DPS [Federal Security
Office] agents arrested me and took me to Laredo. where they tortured me to make
me sign some statements which they claimed I had made."

Also in his preliminary statement, he denied knowing the Colombians who were
arrested by the police and who were found with several grams of pure cocaine in
their possession.

Moreover, he said that he had been forced to call his son, Carlos Emilio "Cocoy"
Jackaman Scene, to be arrested by the authorities, and at the same time. according
to the individual making the statement, he was a witness to the torture to which
the latter was subjected.

All Beaten

The accused who were taken to the federal court for the preliminary statements
based their defense mainly on the claim that they had been tortured during the
questioning to which they were subjected by the police.

To attest to their story, the persons making the statements showed the court
personnel bruises and blows all over their bodies, but claimed that they did not
know what objects had been used to cause them.

Despite all these tricks used by the presumed drug traffickers, they will certainly
spend many years in jail because, according to reports, the beatings that they
showed might very well have been self-inflicted during their stay in the La Loma
prison. so as to base their defense on them.

Armando Santos Implicated

After a series of captures made by federal agents in this port, it was learned that
the customs guard members Reynaldo Hernandez Pedrasa and Armando Santos Garcia had
also been arrested.

The first-mentioned denied to the federal prosecutor from the outset that he had

participated in the cocaine trafficking, confirming everything that he had said
in the preliminary statement which he made in the court.

23
Hernandez Pedraza also stated that he had no knowledge of the charges made against

him by the Colombian, Hernando Echeverri Molina, for the simple reason that he did
not know the latter.

Hernandez Pedraza also declared, as a defense, to the court, that he had not left

his work for any reason. which he could prove with the service roster of the
customs guard commander's office.

For his part, Armando Santos, when making his statement regarding his presumed

guilt of committing crimes against health in the degree of cocaine transportation.
claimed that he had not been arrested, because he appeared voluntarily in the
Federal Judicial Police office upon learning what had happened to Hernandez Pedrasa.

He declared that he had gone to the city of Monterrey to take the Colombians there,
at the order of an individual named Juan Traces Gaytan; but claimed that he did
not know that they were drug traffickers.

When the court personnel were asked about the possible legal status of the two'
customs guards. they reported that it was quite likely that an order for the
release of Hernandez Pedraza would be issued by Friday at the latest, provided no
further information appeared during the course of the proceedings.

72 Hours

Jaime Manuel Barberena3ssid that the legal decision regarding all those implicated
in this matter would be announced within the legal period, once the entire case
has been studied and the liability of those implicated is determined.

It was claimed that those with the least chance of being released in this case are
the Colombians, because the amount of drugs seized by the authorities from the
federal jurisdiction exists as very reliable evidence.

2909
080: 5330/78
BRIEFS

SONORA PLANTAIIONS SOUGHT-Aaron Juarez Jimenez, regional coordinator of the perma-
nent campaign against drug trafficking. stated that, on 28 April, with the use of
seven Federal Judicial Police helicopters. reconnaissance would begin in the
Sonora mountains for the purpose of locating and destroying any kind of drug plan-
cations. He announced that these operations are based on the discoveries made by
two PJF helicopters which recently spotted nine drug plantations in the mountainous
area of the state, which used to be regarded as a state "for passage" to the United
States. Juarez Jimenez, who arrived yesterday from Tijuana. Baja California, to
oversee and observe the work of the Federal Judicial Police, said that, in compari-
son with previous years, the drug traffic has declined in Baja California and
Sonora by about 70 percent. He added that this is due to the close watch kept by
this police entity, which receives assistance from the Army (Canador [Harihuana-
Poppy] Plan), as well as from the state and municipal police. In conclusion, he
noted that. just as they have done up until now, the Federal Judicial Police will
keep constant vigilance in both the urban and rural areas, thereby preventing the
drug addiction from proliferating and, as it always has, harming the youth. [Text]
[Hermosillo BL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 16 Apr 82 Sec A p 5] 2909

DRUGS IN PRISON--when Hector Garcia Trevino was interviewed, in his capacity as
warden, he said that, despite the constant watch kept by the guards at the La Loma
prison in the vicinity of the jail. the drug trafficking inside the latter has
proven impossible to eradicate. He noted that the location of the prison aids the
drug suppliers greatly, because they can easily reach its vicinity and leave strange
packages most of which are filled with drugs. Garcia Trevino remarked: "As head of
this prison. I an more afraid that they will bring in weapons. throwing them over
the fence." He also said that, on Mondays and Hednesdays of each week. the guard
personnel makes a roundup inside the jail in search of drugs and weapons, and any
inmate who is caught with any compronising item in his possession is immediately
turned over to the federal autho;ities. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DB NUBVO
LAREDO in Spanish 14 Apr 82 Sec C p 3) 2909

HHROIN TRAPPICKER SENTENCED—-Seven years in prison as an individual guilty of a
crime against health is the sentence just issued to Carlos Jasso Trevino, alias
"El Tierras," This subject was captured inside a bar known as El Sagitario, with
an ounce of heroin and some "out" that he was attempting to sell in that location
when he was caught by Federal Judicial Police members. The person with whom he
intended to make the sale managed to escape. In his confession, "Bl Tierras"
said that he had purchased the heroin from someone residing in the neighboring
Inwn ul Inrudo, Texas, that he was engaged in distributing drugs and that every-
thing had been prepared for carrying out the transaction when he was discovered

by the Federal Police. Yesterday, the third district judge issued a sentence
against this individual who, in addition. has an extensive record of criminal
activities. "81 Tierras" killed an old woman who lived at the intersection of
Hadero Street and San Antonio Avenue, who was beaten to death to force her to

tell where she kept her money. Following his release after many years of imprison-
ment, the ex-convict, with others, attempted to steal the safe from the Heniu
lumber yard, and were loading it into a truck when they were caught. [Text]

[Nuevo Laredo EL NANARA in Spanish is Apr 82 Sec D p 4] 2909

COLOMBIAN TRAFFICKBR FREED—-Hexico City, 1 April (02H)--The czar of the Colom-
bian drug traffic, identified as the leading smuggler of arms to the Central and
South American guerrillas, Jaime Guillot Lara, was released because when the
Colombian Government requested his extradition it did not submit the necessary
documentation for his deportation. The fifth district judge, Roberto Gomez
Arguello, said that the Colombian would remain at the disposal of the Secretariat
of Government, which will decide on the site at which he will be deported. Guil-
lot Lara was arrested fortuitously in Mexico by Interpol for a violation of the
general population law. since his legal stay in the country was not accredited.
For this reason, he was sent to the northern prison, where he remained in provi-
sional custody while the propriety of his extradition to Colombia, requested by
that country, was being established; because he is accused of being an arms
smuggler and one of the heads of the main drug trafficking rings. However, dur-
ing his 2-month stay in the aforementioned prison, the Colombian Embassy in Mexico
did not submit the pertinent documentation for his extradition to that country;
which is why the judge decided to release him. According to the communique from
the Colombian authorities, Guillot Lara is wanted by several police departments,
mainly those of the United States, and others in Central and South America, where
he is allegedly engaged in these illegal activities. [Text] [Ciudad Juarez EL
PROHTBRIZO in Spanish 2 Apr 82 Sec 3 p 2] 2909

DRUG DESTRUCTION DBSCRIBED—-A total of 55.8 percent of the intensive reconnais—
sance of the 111,000 square kilometers comprising Zone 06 of the permanent cam—
paign against drug trafficking has been completed, with a careful search of
62,167 square kilometers on which only 196 plantations, consisting mainly of
poppies, were found and fumigated. The report was provided to BL SOL DE SINALOA
by Hector Aviles Castillo, head of the coordinating entity, who noted that 377
hours of flying time were logged by the ten 206 and the five 212 aircraft, as
well as the small airplane at the office's disposal. He explained that the muni-
cipalities of Mazatlan and Choir, and the vicinity of Guacbochi and El Zorrillo,
which are quite remote mountain areas, have been completely searched, adding
that the little which was found attests to the effectiveness of the campaign.
when asked why the operation was not conpleted within the estimated period of
time, he said that there were several reasons, chiefly bad weather conditions,
compounded by mechanical failures and human problems which necessitated extend-
ing the activity. He said that, if there are no unforeseen obstacles, this
intensive phase will be ended in another 10 days, and hence it will be possible
to make the evaluation needed to determine the degree of eradication that has
been achieved. [Text] [Culiacan EL 80L DE SINALOA in Spanish 6 Apr 82 pp 1, 6]
2909

26
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060058-7

FEMIGATIXG HELICOPTER ATTACKED-Hhile a helicopter from the Office of the Attorney
General of the Republic was engaged in fumigating operations in the mountains

in the vicinity of the settlement of San Antonio, in this municipality of Culiacan,
it was attacked by unidentified persons, who shot at the machine, fortunately not
hitting any of the passengers. However. a bullet from a firearm entered one of
the windows and was lodged in a seat. In making the foregoing report, the coor-
dinator for Zone 06 of the permanent campaign against drug trafficking, Hector
Aviles Castillo. noted that the shooting was apparently done with a 30 H1 or 30-
06 caliber rifle, when the 206 helicopter was funigsting a nixed plantation over
an area of 200 square meters. and it is presumed that the person or persons respon-
sible for guarding it did the shooting. He explained that the incident occurred
last Saturday. and that when the report was received in the main operations

office in this town a request was made for the cooperation of the Army, through
the personnel of Task Force Condor, to comb the area in search of the person or
persons responsible. [Text] [Culiacan EL SOL DE SINALOA in Spanish 13 Apr 82

p 8] 2909

DRUGS, TRAFFICKERS SEIZED--Hexico City, 27 Apr (NOTIHEx)--The Federal
Judicial Police [PJF] has reported that federal agents seized 1 kg of pure
heroin and 1.5 kg of pure cocaine today in La Paz, Baja California Sur.

Jose Jimenez Regalado and Rafael Vega Pico, of Guadalajara, Jalisco, were on
their way to the United States to sell the drug. In addition, the PJP
arrested Belizeans (Arvy Eustafe Lock), (Virgil Ting). (Hilda Greet) and
(Ruben Alexander) in San Luis Rio Colorado, Sonora. They were carrying

30 kg of marihuana. [PL280058 Mexico City NOTTHEX in Spanish 2310 GMT
27 Apr 82 FL]

MARIHUANA, POPPY PLANTS DESTROYED-—Hapastepec, Chiapas, 30 Apr (NOTIHEX)--
Federal police and army units today destroyed 21,000 marihuana and poppy
plants, local authorities report. Ricardo Azmora Apan, coordinator of the
standing campaign against drug production, said federal officials had
discovered the plants here and arrested several peasants. he said the
plants had been discovered in a 1,200 meter-square area. [FL031923

Mexico City norm in Spanish 0321 car 1 May 82 FL]

ANTIDRUG CAMPAIGN RBSULTS-Faderal Judicial Police forces arrested and held for
trial 93 individuals for crimes against health in their various degrees, as part
of the campaign against drug trafficking established by the Office of the Attorney
General of the Republic. in the area of Zone 06, which includes the state of
Sinaloa and the border areas of Chihuahua and Durango. Seized from these persons
were 12 vehicles which they were using to engage in their activities, as well as
three small aircraft, 10 long-barreled and 12 short-barreled weapons and 159
useful cartridges, all of which was turned over to the first district judge so _
that the guilt of those charged could be determined on the basis of this evidence.
As for the confiscations of drugs, it was reported by the coordinating entity

that 205 kilograms and 996 grams of marihuana were seized, as well as l kilogram
and 626 grams of seed of the same grass; and 371 grams of poppy seed were also
confiscated. A total of 954 grams of opium gum was seized, as well as 206 grams
of heroin and 250 grams of cocaine, the latter being drugs which had not been
seized for some time. With regard to the fumigation carried out during March,

it was said that 1,510 poppy plantations were razed over a total area of 65$,b70
square meters, as were 119 nsrihuana and 39 mixed plantations. Insofar as manual
destruction is concerned, the coordinating entity reported that 1,983 poppy plan-
tations, 157 marihuana plantations and two mixed plantations were destroyed;
thereby continuing the attack on the illegal activity. [Text] [Culiacan EL SOL

DE SINALOA in Spanish 9 Apr 82 p 8] 2909

C80: 5330/79-80 27
BRIEFS

HEROIN SEIZURE IN TAYYEBAT—Jmmml-YB ESLAHI'S correspondent reports from
Mashhad that the police cot-sander of Tayyebat along with personnel of the anti-
drug squad in the area seized 6.56 kg of heroin fron several individuals.
[GP121348 Tehran JGIHIJRI-YB BSLAHI in Persian 26 Apr 82 p lo]

oPlUH SEIZURE IN TERM—Henna of the Islanic Revolution Conittee of district
1!. along with personnel of police station No 8 of Tehran arrested 1 smugglers
with previous long records and seized 5 kg of opim fro. these individuals.
[CF121348 Tehran JOIﬂIIRI-YB 38W! in Persian 26 Apr 82 p 2]

DRUGS DISCOVERED-~According to a report by the Central News Unit, the public
relations department of the Isle-1c Revolution Court in charge of fighting
against narcotics in Tehran announced: As a result of the endeavors of
brothers from the antidrug squads in Tehran, Quchan and Torbat-e Beydariyyeh.
114.3 kg of opiu 11.7 kg of pure heroin, 30.2 kg of opium residue and 300 kg
of hashish which was hidden in 20 cheese boxes were discovered with a number
of smugglers. The offenders were handed over to the judicial authorities.
[Text] [Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 27 Apr 82 1.0]

OPIUH SEIZURE—According to an mm report fron Ker-Ian, the antinarcotic group

of Hahan's Islamic Revolution Guards Corps clashed with several narcotics,snusgler's
were handed over to the Islamic revolution public prosecutor's office in Kenna.
[Text] [1.0131100 Tehran Donestic Service in Persian 0730 MT 13 Kay 82]

CSO: 5300/5397

28
MRIJUANA CONSMTION IN MI D3031“)
Bangui mas APRICAINB in trench No 655, 16 Feb 82 p 4
[Article by J.P.D.P. Yangon: "new, A Social Scourge"]

[Excerpts] Taking drugs has becone (to-on practice. on
young take then, and adults do as well. Many products are
used as drugs: narcotics, pharuceutical products, etc....
A young high school student concerned about the proble-
shares his reflections about the heap seekers in Bangui in
the following article which we publish for our readers.

Gszna lou, Kouni-‘i‘chava

Amng narcotics, Indian help is the one that is nest comI-ed in our country,
where it goes by the bizarre na-a "Kit-Nair," ”Gar-lou” product, "Kouni-
Tchawa," etc.

‘lhis product, called "dungui" in our national language, cones to :9 iron
neighboring countries where it is already in wide use. Most of its victins
are in the 16 to 18 age group, although sons are younger. But ”ﬁangui's"
devotees belong to all social classes; they are set apart free other groups

by virtue of their dependence upon this product and because of their lazy.
wandering ninds. They do not concern thenselves with the danger which is ruin-

ing their health .

The poor beings purport to be in revolt against the value system of a society
where good sense reign. 'ro flee repression, these "noncivics" bend together
in groups of dropouts S kilo-stars fro- the city lilits.

This corner of the capital appears to be teeming with dealers of all kinds of
Products, to which only connoisseurs are able to have access.

Alone in the World
But it is easy to locate a help snoker in a group of people. His eyes are red

and swollen; he staggers and doses off as he walks. 8e soliloquires. In
short, he looks just like a drunk. Under the drug's influence, he has the

29
Inpresslon of being the only person in the world. Other reactions recorded
tron persons like this are sudden laughter followed by crying.

111a Alibi

when you ask a help sinker in a state where is is still able to reason why he

takes pleasure in this toxic product, his answer is that haw gives his
strength and energy.

Many people put forth as an alibi the pleasure they derive in comuning help,
which nakes then forget some of their worries. Of course it has been proven

that hem resolves none of the problems found on earth. 0n the contrary, it
adds to then.

Actually, to satisfy the need for hemp, people sacrifice other very vital
needs, for help snokers become slaves end let thenselves go coqletely. One
can see the. sleeping in front of stores and in the marketplaces.

Five kilometers outside the city linits, the delinquents have forned into
bands of wrongdoers who attack peaceful citizens and take their possession
away fro. then. These possession are then sold very cheaply in order to get
money for henp, or for substitute products if hemp cannot be obtained. Let
us not forget, other substances such as "velox glue," "koya," or aninal
nivaquine are anong the products they use.

‘lhe consequences? Of course, the habitual henp user is physically thin and

is powerless to sake the decisions of worthy, self-willed man. ‘nle drugged
body vents "more," "More," as they say. Before very long, the organs give
out, and sonetines a brutal death ensues. let us not seek remedies elsewhere.
They do not exist anyplace. ‘lhe only way to cure the evil is in public aware-
ness canpaigns about the evil effects of hemp.

Radio, the press, and television of course have an important role to play, but
whoever approaches a help smoker should help hin with advice. ‘nlus can an in-
dividual contribute to our country's development by battling this scourge
which. slowly and surely, is wreaking havoc in our country.

9927
080: 5300/5700

30
BRIEFS

LARGE DRUG BUST-4n a few weeks the African officials of Interpol will neet in
Yaounde (Cameroon) to discuss the fight against drugs and juvenile delinquency.
Our country, which will be participating in the neeting, will certainly speak
about its own pioneer activities in this area. For some tine, our police serv-
ices have been conducting a relentless struggle against traffickers and con-
sumers of drugs. Also, the Crininal Investigation Squad has just "grabbed"
three persons (two adults and a teenager) at Badalabougou and Daoudabougou.

In the possession of these foolish persons was found 308,000 tablets of narco-
tics with a value of about 30 nillion Malian francs, enough to put half the
population of Baaako out of their right mind for a short time. The narcotics
ranged fro. mhetanines to ephedrine. and included phamcia and drastin.

The latter, known in drug circles as "5 nimtes,” is cal-nonly used by peasants,
who pay 100 Halian francs per tablet. The amphetamines, or "Voice of the Revo-
lution." sold at 300 Malian francs per unit, do not appeal to the followers

of Morpheus, the god of sleep. They are popular with young people and
chauffeurs. As for phamcin, referred to by the Barbara word "coubleni,"

it is distributed in the form of a capsule, one end of which is red. Thus.

the drug traffickers are developing a terminology to distinguish their aer-
chandise. If we don't take care, our languages may disappear in favor of this

gibberish. [By ms. Yattsra] [Text] [Banks L'BSSOR in French 6-7 liar 82 p 8]
9920

C80: 5300/5708

31
nusmzssml accuszo or none mum SIIJGGLBRS
Johannesburg m cum. in Bnglish 12 May 82 p 13
[Article by Sandra Lichen-1

[Test] A Durban business-n unlawfully changed RS9 000 worth of foreign currency
in Johannesburg to pay suppliers in rands for dagga for internatioml smgglera,
it as stated in the Johannesburg Regional Court yesterday.

The businessman, Hr Eduard Holhuter (32) of Husgrovo Road, Durban, pleaded guilty
to contravening currency control regulations by selling foreign currency to an
unauthorised buyer and a concern in Jeppe Street, Johannesburg.

Mr 6. Lots, counsel for Holhuter, the owner of Hoodburn Shopfitters in Durban,
told the court his client uas guilty of "a technicality." There use no danger
to the economic interests of SA.

Holhuter had not realised that he went to trouble for nothing. "He could have
gone to any authorised dealer and freely negotiated the nney within 30 days of
it coming into the country."

when Holhuter received the noney from a Canadian, Mr Bob Beck, rho fled South
Africa while on bail, he was under the iwression that Beck had contravened
currency laws when he brought his noney into South Africa.

The amount involved in the case, 359 000 was only a 0.11 amount of the total
involved. Other illegal foreign currency exchanges took place in the Durban
mgisterial district.

The Ingistrate declared that 836 000 inch the police had recovered as forfeited
to the State.

050 : 5300/ 57104

32
NARCOTICS TRAFFICKBRS AnRZSTED IN SALONICA
Athens ELEVTHBROTYPIA in Greek 23 Apr 82 p 2

[Text] Sslonica. 23 Apr-0ne of the biggest narcotics traffickers in Salonice
was arrested day before yesterday in the evening by agents of the drug en-
forcement department of the Salonica Security. His supplier was arrested at
the sane time; he is the "tool” of one of the biggest narcotics traffickers
in Turkey. At the time of the arrest. 8.5 kilos of good quality hashish in
powder form were also seized.

This successful arrest took place after 3 months of surveillance and 15 days
of closely "tailing" 36-year-old Dimitris Hagiopoulos, unenployed, who had
been arrested repeatedly in the past for narcotics offenses.

The evening of day before yesterday. police noticed some suspicious movements:
Hagiopoulos, together with his supplier, Sotiris Voulgaridis. 30. a resident
of Aigeiro in Komotini. drove to a lonely spot behindthenightclub "Xineronata"
in Meteors of Salonica. At that point. Hagiopoulos let V0u1garidis out and
then continued toward Filyro, where he disappeared into a thickly wooded area.

Two hours later, he returned to the same spot, but when Voulgaridis was enter-
ing the car, police arrested them. In the ensuing search, 8.5 kilos of hash-
ish were found in the car. At Hagiopoulos' house, at 59 Grigoriou Koloniari
Street in Xirokrini, police found approximately 70,000 drachnas, which were
seized because they came from the sale of a small quantity of hashish.

During the preliminary investigation, Hagiopoulos claimed that the hashish
had been given to him on the night of Easter Sunday by Saban Sait, 47, a Hus-
lim from a Xanthi village. outside the Karastasou barracks. He even affirmed
that he did not pay for it and intended to sell it to help his wife, who has
been jailed since last year after being sentenced to 5 years and 3 months for
narcotics use and trafficking. He termed the Muslim's offering a "friendly
act," since they had spent time together in the Konotini jail for narcotics

offenses.

However, police have a different view. A superior police officer told us
that "the fact that another person was arrested with him, who is originally

from and resides in Komotini clearly shows that we are confronted with a seri-
ous matter of trafficking in the "white death" from Turkey to Salonica, with

Hagiopoulos the final recipient."

33

BRIEFS

NARCOTICS TRAFFICKERS APPREHENDED--Large quantities of heroin, worth many
millions, were confiscated on Sunday night in a central hotel, Electra Pallas,

Aristoteles Square, of Thessaloniki by the police. Information sources say
that the perpetrators had in their possession 3.5 kilos of heroin and 8,000,000
drachmas and that they seen to be responsible for the recent deaths of several
in Thessaloniki and Athens. [Text] [NCl82126 Athens NEWS in English 18 May
82 p 5]

Two ARRESTED WITH mom-M youngsters. Yiennis N. Athanasakis, 22 years old,
and Dhimitrios Y. Petridhis. 21. years old, were arrested by the police on
Sunday because they had stall quantities of heroin in their possession. [Text]
[NC182126 Athens NEWS in English 18 May 82 p S]

NIGERIAN NARCOTICS rearrrcxans annssran-rhe largest quantity of marijuana
ever brought into Greece was found hidden in the legs of twelve small tables.
Two Nigerians were able to put into legs 12.5 kilos of narcotics, estinated
to cost 3 nillion drachnaa. The perpetrators were: Keneth Divakaran, 32
years old and Kinsley Thenelou, 26 years old from Lagos, Nigeria, who were
arrested by the police a few hours after the arrival in Thessaloniki, where

they were to sell the narcotic. [Text] [NClSleol Athens NEWS in English
5 Hay 82 p 5 NC]

cso: 5300/5399

35
HASHISH SHUGGLING OPERATIONJBDKBN UP
Rotterdam BET VRIJE VOLK in Dutch 26 Mar 82 p 13

[Text] Rotterdam/Antwerp—A vacant residence on Sophiastrsat
in the Jaffa district of htterdaII/Kralingen proves to have
been the headquarters iron which Sjefke F. (38)-the Zeew
”hash czar" of the l970s--ran a big hashish route to France.
The hashish was hidthn in crates of deep-frozen shrim.

Sjefke was arrested last week in Belgium after the State Police in Puurs had
discovered 2.600 kilogram of hashish in a truck originating in the Nether-
lands full of Pakistani shriq). Later, in the freezer warehome of a Dutch
firm in Antwerp, another 60 kilogram of. hashish were found mixed with shrinp.

Sjefke F., who is originally tron Hulst, ran the hashish shrimp into France
together with day laborer George ILFrancisco (28), fro- Capelle aan den Ijssel.
who was also arrested. and the Hague resident Hendrik van 1!. (36), the director
of a cleaning firm. Known Belgian drug dealer Francois C. (38) of Borgerhout
was involved in the case as well.

The Rotterdam police. along with the Belgian State Police, are still searching
for the Pakistanis who had established the hashish route along with Sjefke F.
In the past, Pakistanis were also snuggled into England from the Jaffa area of
Rotterdam Pakistanis have been found to have been assuring an increasingly
large role in the past years in haehish and heroin dealing in the Netherlands.

'lhe State Police had gotten onto the track of the hashish shrim after a tip
that recently trucks had been constantly arriving in the middle of the night
in the Moorstraat at Puurs near Imtwerp, and leaving a few hours later.

Smuggling Buddy

It was fomd iron the investigation that Sjef‘ae F., after having things rather
quiet around hin for years, had sought to contact his old smggling buddy
Francois c.

In the 1960's, this pair played a major role in the snuggling of alcohol and
cigarettes between the Netherlands and Belgian in Zeeuwen and Flanders.
In the 1970's, Sjefke I“. transferred his activities to the are lucrative trade
in hashish. In 1976—a special detective test had by then been on Sjefke's
trail for a long tin—he was arrested on the Haringvliet Bridge when he was
driving a truck carrying 2,500 kilograms of haahsih. In court, Sjefke testified

that he had thoudlt he was carrying cigarettes, and to the ire of the police.
he was set free.

In 1977, Sjefke was. however, sentenced to 4 years, after the police had inter-
cepted 4,500 kilogram of haehish which F. had snuggled in his ship Latvia out
of Harokko into Zeeland, in a spectacular action. ‘Ihe police estimted at the

tile that F. had already imported tens of thousands of kilogram of hashish via
the helmd Stream.

After sitting out his sentence, Sjefke P. now appears to have jllped back into

wholesale hashiah trading. 'lhe btterdan resident from heland finances his
deals with comterfeit dollars, of which he still has large meters, according
to the Beglian State Police.

69100
050: 3105/2268

37
MINISTRY STEPPING UP EFFORTS 1'0 Km DRUGS FROM PRISONS
Oslo AFTENPOSTEN in Norwegian 21 Apr 82 p 3
[Article by Thorleif Andreassen]

[Text] The Justice and Police Ministry is beginning a Iajor offensive against
the use and sale of narcotics in prisons. A search team is already at work in .
Ostland prisons looking for drugs. The team consists of three officers and a
dog that is trained to find narcotics. Several other neasures will also be
taken to rid the prisons of drugs.

The use and sale of drugs in prisons is an extra-sly serious problen. Drug
abuse at penal institutes is so alarling that new. untraditionsl countermeasures
are required. The establish-eat of so-called contract sections is one of the
new measures. Extra strict supervision will be used in these sections. Innates
who ask to be transferred there to escape drugs Inst sign a statenent indicating
that they are willing to undergo frequent urine analysis, for exanple. If the
innates continue to use narcotics they will be returned to the ordinary sections.

Preparatory work has proceeded to the extent that contract sections soon will
be established at Ullersno Prison, Oslo District Prison, Bergen District Prison's
Osteroy section, and at Trondhein District Prison.

Visiting roons with glass partitions are being constructed at Oslo District
Prison, Ullersno Prison. and Bergen District Prison. This type of visiting
roon is already in use at Kristiansand District Prison. Snug;ling nethods that
have been used are sophisticated, but the Justice and Police Ministry believes
these glass partitions and other leasures will prevent snuggling.

Many innates are in prison precisely because they have been involved in drugs.
This results in a high concentration of drug abusers and narcotics dealers in
prisons.

9336
CSO: 5300/2280
PAPER QUESTIONS UNETNER 'MFlAfSTYLE' GANG BEHIND DRUGS
Stockholm 7 OMAR in Swedish 2 Apr 82 pp iO--li
[Article by Claes Lofgren: "Mafia-Run Dope-Sweden a llyth?"]

[Text] lie is 310 years old and has a foreign name. before it was considered
ripe for publication in the press he was called alternately "the torpedo" and
“the restaurant man.” Right now he is charged in Stockholm District Court
with having smuggled in 6 kilograms of heroin.

In the wake of the investigation of the 3h-year old man rumors circulated about
corrupt connections with attorneys. police and threats against the witnesses.
At the same time the police Ofenow demanding permission to use concealed micro-

phones. paid squealers and their own mafia infiltrators in the fight against
the dope rings. -

is Sweden about to become a battlefield for foreign crime syndicates? Are
more and more youths going down the dope sink? Is the calamity founded on the
rule of law collapsing under the pressure from the dope mafia?

Few crines have given rise to so many reports. so much statistics and so many
opinions as the drug criminality. The figures fran the national police admin-
istration are unambiguousnthe number of known dope violations increases just
like the seizures. The report on the extent of narcotics abuse-~Uilo--whlch was
worked out a few years ago is Just as unanblguous in its conclusion:

"The narcotics use in the youth groups during the i970's has not become worse.
instead it seems today that a smaller number of younger teenagers are experi-
menting with hash smoking and/or other drugs than at the beginning of the
l9?0‘s..."

The citation is from UNO's partial report. which cane last fall.

Less than 0.2 Percent

Previously UNO has established that in Sweden there is a total of at the most
110,000 and at the least l0.000 heavy narcotics abusers. This is less than 0.2

percent of the Swedes. At least 900 were less than 20 years old, and the average
age was 27. Three' out of four abusers were men.

39
IOKRBOTTENS
I 4 95

vismeomus
Lin

nus Um
‘ mum 1 11 '

 

The number of reported narcotics violations continues to increase. The pre-

liminary figure for 1981 is 75.885. an Increase of a good 25 percent compared
to I980. [Legend to figure continued on following page.}

no_
The counties shown on the map above illustrate well the big dark number with
respect to narcotics violations. Is the criminality worse in Norrbotten

County than in Stockholm County? That is doubtful; the statistics reflect

not only the crimes but also the efforts by police. If one looks at last year's
figures month for month, there is. for instance. a marked increase in October--
at that time the national police administration started an offensive against
street trade and dope. The fact that the figures are so high for Gavleborg
County is due to the fact that the police succeeded in uncovering two rings
with more than 100 persons involved. frequently several crimes are registered
for each person suspected. A hash street seller may possibly admit transfer

in 20 cases. and 20 reported crimes are then registered.

The UNO report from last fall shows not only that there are a smaller number of
dope debutantes but also that they start at a higher age.

Orvar Olsson is secretary in UNO:

"In the mass media the picture is often given of an epidemic abuse spreading
as an epidemic over the country. This is qualified nonsense."

Henrik Thain, researcher in the Crime Prevention Council (Bra). agrees:

"The number of heavy abusers in Greater Stockholm has decreased since the end

of the l960's. 0n the other hand. out in the countryside the number has doubled.
I personally believe that the increase took place since I967 and that the stag-
nation is now a fact also out in the countryside."

In UNO's latest report a quite fresh investigation by snro [Swedish Institute
for Opinion Polls] was reported. It shots that 220.000 youths under 25 years
of age had tried narcotics at some time-~the greats majority of them hash.

According to earlier UNO figures only 0.3 percent of all youth develop
heavy abuse. Then why do not all youth who smoke hash become narcotics addicts?

Three out of Four are Boys

Not especially surprising UNO takes up some typical features of the young
narcotics addict:

In three cases out of four a boy grown up in a multi-family house in a big city
suburb.

The school reports are just as bad as the prospects for getting a job.
Frequently the home has only one parent.
Abuse of alcohol by the parent(s) is common.

The chi id lacks support from hane.

lil
"The Picture of the Abuse Spreading as an Epidemic is Qualified Nonsense"

The number of reported drug violations increased by 163 percent from 1979 to
1980"er approximately 22,000 to close to 60.000. The drug seizures by
police and customs are also increasing. How does that tie in with UNO's result?

In its latest annual situation report on the crime development the Crime
Prevention Council says:

"The sinister figure in narcotics violations may be of such an extent that
there is adequate room for greater police efforts. which in turn sharply
increase the nunber of reported narcotics violations while there is not
necessarily any increase in the actual crime rate."

The increase in the reported drug violations therefore tellsmore about the
activities of police and customs than about the actual crime rate. Today
police have 39i narcotics police as compared to a few tens at the beginning

of the i970's. Both search methods and organization have been made more
effective. At the same time the prosecution rules for dope violations have
been changed so that having even small amounts of dope has becane a crime.
Furthermore. a change in the law one year ago caused the punishment for serious
narcotics violations to becone more severe.

A Different Picture from the National Police Administration's Group for Fighting
Narcotics Crime

The national police administration's group for fighting narcotics crimeuSpanark-
-descrlbes the situation as follows:

"Narcotics crime is well organized. It operates in protected environments
where foreign citizens are often 'involved. They live in completely different
cultural patterns with clan formations and family bonds which are almost im-
possible to penetrate."

But in October 1980 Stockholm municipality published a report about serious
narcotics crimes. which gives a somewhat different picture. The source is
sentences against persons sentenced to imprisonment for several years for
narcotics crimes i976--l980. The report states:

More than one-half of those sentenced are abusers themselves.

The profits from selling drugs finance etther their own abuse or expensive
habits. Seldom is any capital built up.

Any corrupt connection between the rings and professional grOups. such as
attorneys. prosecutors. judges. police or politicians was not found.

with a few exceptions the activity was taken care of by persons resident in
Sweden.

"But lngemar Rexednattorney and one of the investigators-do you believe that
all talk about mafia must be nonsense?"

1:2
"In the sense that there should be connections with. for instance. Chinese
triads or the Italian mafianyes. in the National Police Administration the
opposite is sometimes maintained. but if you push. for instance, office
manager Esbjorn Esbjornsson, he has very little concrete to come with."

"You say that with effective police and social control all rings are discovered
sooner or later. But according to police precisely the social control is
missing with regards to the foreign rings?"

"This has already been said about the aephetamine rings. In spite of this we
were successful in breaking them in the beginning and in the middle of the
'970Is.ii

”Is there still no risk that the dope rings will corrupt the legal apparatus?"

“No. the legal apparatus cannot be bought. The inadequate professional ethics
of individual attorneys and police do not change anything. The claims about
bought politicians are nothing but antidemocratic fascism."

"0n the other hand, our legal society is threatened if the proposal by the
Police Administration's Group for Fighting Narcotics Crime is carried through.
The reason for the demands is some generally small essays. If the politicians
make decisions on the basis of the material from the National Police Admin-
istration's Group for Fighting Narcotics Crime. I see a big danger. They
should obtain alternative information from criminologists and statisticians
before any decision is made.

Short Cut to the Punch Dream

The report also tries to explain why as many as 35-400 percent of those
sentenced were foreigners in spite of the fact that only is percent of Sweden's
population are foreign citizens or of foreign birth.

Selling dope can become a short cut to the punch dream when the new homeland
has not satisfied expectations of quick wealth.

Some cane frtzm comtries where the narcotics are produced and find it easy to
make sales contacts.

Statistically youth are over-represented in the imigrant groups.

However, the report believes that most immigrants are made scapegoats for the
mistakes of a few. A good no foreigners per year were sentenced for serious
narcotics crimes at the end of the i970's. The nunbers must be compared with
the i.i million imnigrantso-with or without Swedish citizenship-who live in
Sweden.

The police offensive against the street trade in narcotics in I98l has filled
every cell. the Swedish Criminal Care can locate. The attempts by the legal

113
apparatus at breaking drug crimes has forced the Criminal Care Administration

to buy up old alcoholics institutions. build new prisons and let prisoners
share cells.

Former uinister of justice Lennart Geijer's goal that at the most 300 persons
should sit in prison is far-off. Oh i 'April l981..lo,ll6 sat in institutions
and l5,‘05l could be found in free custody. A total registered of 10.6210 were
sentenced as narcotics addicts-an increase of 200 in the institutions and
more than i,000 in free custody as comared to 1980. The increase is also
explained by the fact that the Criminal Cane Administration counted their
narcotics addicts more accurately ln l981 than in previous years.

8958
C50: 53 00/2266
BRIEFS

NARCOTICS CRIHE STATISTICS RSLEASEDo-Last year 879.515 criees' were rePOI’ted
in Sweden. The statistic. which was picked out by the Central Statistical
Office. shows that men are mistreated more frequently than women. With regards

to possession of narcotics the aphasis by the pol ice on the street market
has resulted in a lurked increase in reported violations. During i98l

63,000 narcotics violations were registered. The strong increase since i980
thus continues. The police have concentrated on getting at the pushing of

dope on the streets and the possession of narcotics. The number of possessions
of narcotics amounted to 35.000 in 198l. which is an increase of '00 percent
cowared to l980. 0n the other hand. the number of conveyances decreased

from 28,500 in l980 to 26.100. in plain language: in mm there were almost
190 percent lore narcotics violations than the average for the period £975»
i980. [Excerpts] [Stockholm omsuu in 5mm. i Apr 82 p 13] 8958

C50: 5300/2266

1:5
BRIEFS

HEROIN SHUGGLW-‘l'he Istanbul Narcotics Bureau detectives have seized 5.5 l:-
of heroin worth 825 nilliOn lirs in foreign urketa. During the operation.
which lasted 2 and 1/2 months. llo persons have been detained. The heroin m
to be carried to Ger-any and from there to Holland and Belgian in a Hercedee
car registered in Germany. The incident has been counnieated to Interpol
and the names of the smugglers are being kept secret while the investigations
are continuing. [NCZOO600 Istanbul mlm in Turkish 17 May 82 pp 1-10]

C80: 5300/ 5601 H1)

146