FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10706

2 August 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 33/82)-

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

"m omcm. USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a'brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/101
2 August 1

WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DAueeaous Daues
(POUO 33/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA

BURMA

Central Comittee for Drug Abuse Control ﬂeets
(Till: HORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY. 20 Jun 82)

Brief 3
Teunggyi Heroin Seizure

IDNG KONG

Hholesele Price of Heroin Tunblee as Stocks Abound
(SOUTB mum momma POST. 30 Jun. 5 Jul. 82)

Heetern Markets Lost
'Dumping Price' Fixed

Bill Aims At Curbing Use of Ships for Drug Trafficking
(SOUTH CRINA PORNING POST. 1 Jul 82)

Ship Forfeiture Possible
Editorial Becks Legislation

Philippines Smuggling Hare Harihuana Into Bong Kong
'(SOU'I‘H CHINA WING POST. 5 Jul 82)..

INDIA
Briefs

UK National. Arrested
Chara: Seized

-a- [III-W-138E‘OI
FOR OPPICIAI. 03! m1

INDONESIA

Ir iefa
‘ llaahiah Ring Investigated

NEPAL

l-lard Drug Unera 0n Increaae
(ran RISING NEPAL. 9 Jul 82)

PAKISTAN

Br iefa
Narcotics Seized

PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

Spoken-nan Taken Iaaue Hith 0.8. Drug Report
(1mm. 2 Jul 82) Oeeeeeeeaaeeaeeeeoeeaaeaeeeeaeaeeeaeoae

PHILIPPINES

Army Deetroya BOP Opium Refineriea
(m HOPKINS PROPLB'S DAILY. 6 Jul 82) ...................

Editorial Condemns BC? Involve-cut in Opiua Production
(Editorial; I'll! WIRING PEOPLE'S DAILY. 7 Jul 82)

Editorial Examines Reasona for Harihuana Par-Iain;
(PHILIPPINES DAILY EXPRESS. 11 Jul 82)

Briefs
Large Narihuana Plantation Deatroyed in Paqansa

THAILAND

Interior Hinietry Aide Role in Harihuana Traffic Diecueaed
(SIM m. 26 Jun 82) easeeoeaeaoeueoeeeaeeeeoeaeeeaeaeeor

Two 1800 Officers Arreatad in lleroin laid in Chians Mai
(DAG SIM. 16 J“ 82) eeeeoaeeaaeoeaeeeaaeeeaeeeeeeaeeeaae

Columiat: Pocua of Heroin Traffic May he Roving South
“11cm". 27 my 82) ooaeveeeeeeaaeeeeeaeeeaeeeeooeoeeeee

ASEAN Chief Narcotics Officer [Ia-ed
(m mum: PEOPLE'S DAILY. 19 Jun 82)

-b-

FOR WPICIAI. 08! (”LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (ELY

CANADA

Police Think Drug Industry Oursella Huge Multinational

Ottawa

(THE warm» SUN. 12 Jun 82) ...................................

Police Raid Nets $1-Hillion in Heroin
(Margaret Munro; THE CITIZEN. 7 Jun 82) ........................

Drug Traffickera Given Jail Terle

(m mun SUN. 12 Jun 82) ...................................

Briefs \
Druge Seized
Drug Charges
Record PCP Seizure
EAST EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Briefs
Drug Smuggling Sentence Confirmed
LATIN AMERICA
BERMUDA

Six Men in Court Accused of Supplying Heroin. Cannabie
(THE ROYAL GAZETTE. 30 Jun 82)

Briefs
Jail For Cocaine Importing

COIDHB IA

MEXICO

Colonbian Attacks DEA. Extradition Treaty in Mexican Neoapaper Ad
(EXCELSIOR’ 20 Jun 82) eeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeooe0000.00.00.00.

New Developments in Colombian Heroin Trafficking Case

(BL MANANA. 12 Jun 82; BL DIARIO DB RUEVO LAREDO.
15 Jun 82) eoeeoeeeoeeeeeoeeedeleeeeeeoeee-Oleeeeeoeeeee

SIPOL Agent Inplicated
Five Freed. Ringleader Escapes

Drug-Related Shooting Occurs in Sonora
(BL IMPARCIAL. 20 Jun 82) rue-eeeeeeoo-Ieeeeeeaoeeooa-ee.

Confiscated Harihuana Burned, Campaign Continues
(BL BRAVO, 11 Jun 82) ...................................

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0ND!

29

31

32
32
32

33

35

36

45

b9
FOR OFFICIAL US! 0318

Antidrug Action in Sonora Reported
(3L WARCIAL. 15 Jun 82) assessesoseesaaaaeasasessaaaaooaa

Briefs
Pill Trafficker Held
Zonal Campaign Continues
Arty Antidrug Training
Trafficker Escapes
Drug Burning Planned

NEAR EAST AND N081“ AFRICA
EGYPT

Briefs
Haxton Forte

IRAN

Briefs
Narcotics Discoveries
Bakhtaran Seizure
Zahedan Drug Haul
Shiraz Drug Seizure
ﬂeroin Discovered
Narcotics Discovered
Opium Discovered in Zahadan
aornozsan Drug Haul

SUB-SAHARAH AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA

Briefs
Jail for Handrax Go-Betveen

ZAIRB

Increased Use of Hashiah, Rise in Crila Linked
(N'Zinga Naingi; BLIHA. 21 May 82) .........................

ZAMBIA

Lusaka Psychiatrist Says Nation Lacks Major Drug Abuse Problaa
(TIMES OF ZAMBIA. 20 Jun 82) ...............................

"EST EUROPE
GREECE

Narcotics Data for 1981 Given
TAR“, 10 J“ 82) 000......00....0.00.00.00.0000000000000

Survey on narcotics Use Among Youth
(To VI“. 11 Jun 82) .000000.0.00...OIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

ICELAND

Largest Marihuana Ship-en: Ever Confiscated
(NEWS FROM ICELAND. Jul 82)..

UNITED KINGDOH
Briefs

Heroin Charge
Cocaine Seized

POI! MICIAL USE (FLY
CENTRAL COWIHEE FOR DRUG ABUSE CONTROL HEETS

Rangoon THE HORKING PmPLE'S DAILY in English 20 Jun 82 p 1

[Text]

CSO:

mauve-Tho
Conan! Contain” for
Drug memm

alum 8dr '
hallofthc ' 3
“0:128:de '
a touchy”
mean; was
MbyChdmuof
the Canal Comm

(«Drug Alum Conuol
Mindanfotﬂm 8R2.-

fotSodnlWelhnandlor
mama:
. um
{8:93. I “I!
Mim’ (at we!
“ Albina U Min
.mndﬁacdnhm
and muti- of the
cock maniacs.

‘3'

5300/5812

China.» of the Cap
swunioo and Lite.
a Can-

Deﬁdoyw _-
be, Minion Coo-
nituc. Eduction Coun-
Meant-Maintain:-
mion and Education
Committee and Lu En-
{ommcmwh-
mined the drug than
3"“ "h.”‘af'am‘ °"‘
min; t : Ryan
from 1976 to 198: mg.-
thctwitlu "bmm
on. ‘ u o:
ﬁr”? m...“ '2
a t 0
work to: dip ﬁt: it
months at 1981-83.

ThCeuml Commit“:
ChlhmuMininuUBoNi
by-thoclnimenudm-

to mu; maﬁa!“ the
dawn tum
dun. u .1 an.

Thom that an:
antimony]; MAB
BRIEFS

TAUNGCY I Hanan! SEIZURE-At 1900 on 27 June. inspector U Ye Hyint, subinepectors
U Tin Hyint end U Sew "in Heuns, and other police personnel froe the Shen Stete
Narcotic Drugs Suppression Force stopped end searched on Teung Kysmggyi loed

a jeep with license plate No GA/6568 which had cone from Pheye Tenn; village,
Teunggyi Township. The search uncovered l kilogren of No lo heroin worth ebout
kyet100,000. Prom inforuetion supplied by the driver, Then "sung, of
Kyaunggyi-eu Her, Teunggyi. end two peseensers—Tenei. eliss Kysw Reins. end
his wife He'Phyu of Pheye Teung village-«yew Neing's residence wee searched
the acne night; The more kilogrene of heroin valued st kyet200,000 were found
during the eeerch. People's police force hsve filed charges under sections
6.3, 7.3 and 10.3 of the nercotic drugs law egeinet Then Heung, [yew “sing

and Ne Phyu, and four more persons connected with the cue. [3K160700 Rangoon
BOTA'I'AUNG in Burmese 7 Jul 82 p 6 8K]

650: 5300/5817

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090003-4

'Dulptng Price ' Fixed

lions Kong SOUTH CHI!“ HORNIRG POST 1!: English 5 Jul 82 p 15

WNW “mum” mm muwmm. Mwmmmmumu ‘:mwm Wmmw Wmmmw m.
“umwwmr mmmmwwg Mm mm Wmmk ﬁmwmww “mum” Www wwwwg WWMWM wwwwww
%§§%ﬁ £% wﬁ .agw

ﬁmﬁm?&w
mmmh mwuwwumw y WWW“? u
”mum” kmwmm WNWWW :w
mm“: m-" . mm.” WW 3%

m
:1 a.
a2“ ﬂiggama;

[Article by Sccphon Clark]

[Text]

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600090003-4


APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090003-4

Editorial Backs Legislation

Hong Kong SOUTH CHIM MORNING POST in English 1 Jul 82

"Closing Loopholes on Drug Carson"!

(Editorial:

[Text]

rm

wm

m «wum.u mu

mm “WWW

myuum
wwMurW

m manWWwwm n mm “wuummm~uu

wanna mummm~um:

“ﬂamwwnmum¢ﬂmw

Wm

WM

5320/9135

CSO:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP02-00060R000600090003-4
Hong Kong 501111! CHINA HORN!!!) POST in English 5 Jul 82 p 15

us,“
than on
1d:-

n on
com.
this
am:

b

illuminate:
I

nwmmw.

' MIDI

“on; lo

I
r!
an!»
autumn
m mph
mmmma
"ltluhcdlmd
‘ than
M
' With
~ I have
tad
ant-wt
an”
n’: °‘
all
mam
In!
t: drugs

111M. but
fulﬁlm—
mum 0'.
nd‘
lulu
pad!
cm
W
W
but”
do»
ale
"Wo all
“a
«album
we“
a
on V.
and .
‘Nm
Io ism
'9 to!
, 7.!
$11“.
A
W
.0
Ho-
‘I’ c
and u Mm
no my
Sup?
man
than]
the
mm

his
Kn
Im-
It.
in
cm ' -
Tm.
625 '
o! I
on
Manila mu
Ind
mu

Two nth no. a I’gljpbo
mud M .
[and .
on

too .

in

d a
W

"I

31 6

in “ski
Ta
«use

[Text]
BRIEFS

UK NATIONALS ARDESTED--About 25 kilograms of contraband charas from Pakistan
and Rs 5 lskhs in foreign currency were seized by the New Delhi police follow-
ing the arrest of two British nationals including a lawyer. The suspects

were identified as John H HacHillan. 32. and T Macdonsld 26. Both of then

are reported to be frequent visitors to Indie and Swat in the North Heat Fron-
tier Province of Pakistan. Several pictures showing the Pakistani cultivators
of charas weighing. processing and packing the contraband apart from two pass-
ports were also seized from the suspects who were staying in a hotel in the
New Delhi area. New Delhi district Deputy Police Con-iasioner R K Sharla

told newsnen on Thursday that the charas was worth Rs 50,000 in the Indian
aarket and its value was ten tines more in the international narkat. la said
that the two suspects were arrested following a tip off fro. the staff of

a hotel in Connaught Place that two gas cylinders with charas stuffed in than
were lying unclaimed in the premises. Hr Sharla said that police did not seize
the gas cylinders but kept watch on the hotel to nab anyone who came to claim
then. Phenolphthelein powder was put on the handles of the cylinders to catch
the smugglers red handed. he added. [Text] [New Delhi PATRIOT in English

18 Jun 82 p 10]

CHARAS SEIZED--NBW DELHI. June 21 (PTI)--Yet another international narcotics
ring has been busted by the Heat Delhi police. Two persons have been arrested
and about 02 kg. of Afghan charas brought from Pakistan seized. Deputy coa-
nissioner of police (west), Hr. Anod Kanth. said today that two persons iden-
tified as Narinder Kunar. 60. a wholesale dry fruit dealer and Islesh Dehl.
45. a cloth nerchant were caught near the children's traffic park on Sunday
with 32 kg of charas concealed in a suitcase and a bag. Police also found

10 kg charas in the house of Narinder lunar. Hr. Kanth said. Last week. the
west Delhi police had arrested three persons and seized about 40 kg of charas
23d a8:g of aorphine. [Text] [Bombay THE TIMES OF INDIA in English 18 Jun

p

CSO: 5300/7036
BRIEFS

NASHISII RING IMSTIGAIm--Banda Aceh. 12 Jul (ANIMAL-The sending of haehieh '
from Aceh to other areas through private agencies operating in the cargo
delivery service is now under the investigation of the Aceh police cal-and.
Police-en here began to pay attention to the hashlsh traffic in the province
following the confiscation of hashiah in the form of powder in the Polonia
airport. The drug was then to be sent to Jakarta through the cargo delivery
service. The manager of CV. TK [as received], who is responsible for the
trafficking of the drug, is now still being interrogated by policeaen here.
According to informtion received by mm, a Inn, known as 1.3.. who lives
Jalan Kreung here, [as printed] has sent a package to a person staying at a
hotel in Jakarta. But during the transit from a plane to another plane.
policemen checked the package which aroused auspicion and found the drug.
Hhen checking the address of 1.x. at Jalan Kreung. the policenen realised
the address was false. The policemen believed that such drug trafficking
had run for long. [Text] [31160700 Jakarta mm in English 0704 an

12 Jul 82 BK]

CSO: 5300/5817

10
HARD DRUG USERS 0N INCREASE
Kethmndu Till! RISING “I’M. in English 9 Jul 82 p 3

[Text] Kathnndu, July Bullepal today faces two very urgent and pressing
problens: the widespread abuse of hard drugs, mch ditterent tro-
Hashish. and mental-illness and its adequate care. reports 388.

In less than five years the under of Nepali hard drug users has mltiplied
thirty tines. There were approximately fifty such people in Kathaendu in
1978 and today it is estiuted to be about 1500. hepalis for who. life

without hard drugs is iwossible.

It is with this seriousness that tho-as Gafney, director of Social Services
Centre located at Pulchouk has launched a crusade against the drug abuse
in an appeal to all letters of the Rastriya Panchayat urging them to "look
for solutions on a wider, cumtry-vide scale" to coﬁat drug abuse among
“8”}.130

CSO: 5300/5820

11
BRIEFS

NARercs SEIZBD-msrcotics including heroin and liquor were seized during the
last 11 Ionths ending May 1982. by the Excise Police in Sind, it was officially
stated. The Excise Depart-en: claimed seizure of 8,788 has. of charss; 167 has.
of opium; 20 has of hashish oil; 22.910 capsules of lethadine; 2,000 tiles 0!
aorphine; four bottles of cocaine; 6.089 has. of wash; 20 working stills and
other exciseable item. [Text] [Karachi DARK in English 27 Jun 82 .p 8]

050: 5300/5811

12
590mm was 1330: mm 0.5. om: mar
M2122b mung mum in roam 1207 our 2 .m 32

[text] Deehtntton. July 1 (XIIIDA) - nae epoheenen of the Chinese albeeey 1a the United
Stetee todey node clertﬂceuono in reference to report. by the m marine end other
publication thet nethequelone angled into the Unites! Steteo fro- eone countrtee enegedly

origtnetu fro- Chine.

The spokes-en oetd: "Clxtne'e export of e certetn enount of nethequelone to e eele of e
medtctne through new]. trade chennele which-fully conform to international practice.
Chine hee nothing to do uheteoever vtth the dealing. of thou international drug trefﬂckere
who convert nethnquelcne 1nto quelude end then mule it into the United States. Chine“
lav cleerly ottnuletee the: ebuuve nee end trede of drugs ere prohibited. end it bee been
(truly observed. Any uwerrented eccueettono egetnet Chine in this reepect mt reeolutely

be rejected . "

(:50: 5300/2340

13
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500090003-4

All! DESTROYS BC? OPIUH l£?INEIIZS

mm grim
Wm to
out out and den m!
dwmmmm
Lamina-NAB

WWW/mum mmmwm m

m . mm. mm a xuu Wm
M w". my: ., mm. Mm

m wrwwmmum mm 2me
W “mm? m .m
n mm. mmmwm mm“ mm
W m £3 mm m, a
m. Mmmmmmwwmmmﬁﬁm
m m

5300/ 5818

C50:

1/:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600090003-4
15
EDITORIAL minus REASONS FOR mum PARKING
Manila PHILIPPINES DAILY EXPRESS in Engliah 11 Jul 82 p 6

[Text] The extent of narijuana addiction in the Philippinea haa reached alaning
proportions. Everyday. we read of raids on marijuana dene and far- and of young
boya end girle caught in the possession of or amoking marijuena.

Drug abuse has become a serious problen. and it seems that marijuana is the aaaieet
drug to eecure.

Soldiere and policenen have been apprehended and accueed of peddling marijuana to
the youths. Even a school teacher has reportedly been caught supplying marijuana
to echoolchildren.

Of 1,849 drug-related arrests in 1981. about 90.8 percent were marijuana-related
arrests. The Dangerous Drugs Board hae adnitted that marijuana ia the nost popu-
lar fora of drug abuse along Filipinos. DOB officials have also etrsssed that the
number of arrests of marijuana were is not an accurate indication of the growing
nudaer of marijuana addicte. that neans there are more. many, many more, addicts
and pushera who have not been arrested or even known.

Another indication of the popularity of marijuana anong drug addicts is the fact
that narijuana cultivation hae become natiomtide. In 1981. cultivation sites or
marijuana plantations were located in 50 provinces throughout the country. Nari-
juana was found to be cultivated in all 12 regions of the country. including the
National Capital Region itself. In six years. 995 cultivation sites have been die-
covered. or course. governnent authorities cannot account for the mknown sites.

Harijuana cultivation is most prevalent in Northern and Central Luzon. The richest
known source of marijuana in the Viasyas is the town of Argso in Cebu. It will be
noted that noet narijuana plantationa are either in the hinterlanda or the uplanda.

places which are unacceesible by motor vehicles.

All theee eeea surprieing and incredible. how can innocent farmers in the hinter-
lande and uplands know that marijuana cultivation in aore profitable than their
traditional crops? There aust be a big syndicate or s nunber of syndicatea sp-
proaching the farmers, giving than csah incentives and providing then with the
marijuana seedlings. The syndicate members may then return to the farmers to har-
vest the plants.

16
A suggestion has been made not to mention the price taga on all marijuana seizures.
Everytine narijuana plants or leaves are confiscated and annomced in the newspapers.

their cash values are nentioned. This is because there is a reward for nerijuana
seizures.

The reason behind the love not to cite cash values of seized Isrijuana is to dis-
courage people fron cultivating the plant. "hen the far-era realize the profite-
bility of urijuana. they will turn to narijuana planting. so the argment goes.

That nay be difficult to follow. Apparently. sore far-ere are turning to the cul-
tivation of eerijuana because they are being told there in are noney in it. Or
they are being paid more to plant it by a syndicate or syndicates.

Law enforcement agencies should look into the syndicate angle. It could involve
government officials and even lav enforcers the-selves.

CSO: 5300/5819

17
mars

use: mumm 9mm! pm In rmmncm Olivaa. PM, July 11--
lilitary oporativoo uprooted aoro than ’5 aillion worth of aarijuana planto in
barangay Babuyan Sur, Sta. Cruz, Zodialao. according to a. belated PC report here.
Report said that tho raid on the plantation vao conducted by the Woo PC
co-and headed by Col. Coiarino Toucan and Capt. Eduardo Orpilla, 123rd PC coa-
paoy co-onder in Candelaria, Mala. Orpilla eaid in hia report to Brig. Gan.
Vicente 3. lduordo. third PC rosional co-ador, that the plantation, which

wao located in the Zoliuloo mountain rangoo. woo aboudonod by ita ovnor ohortly
before the raid. [Toxt] [Manila wuzrm TODAY in English 12 Jul 82 p 13]

cso: 5300/5818

18
INTERIOR MINISTRY AIDE ROLE IN HARIHUANA TRAFFIC DISCUSSED
Bangkok SIAM HA1 in Thai 26 Jun 82 pp 12-15
(Article: "Banyat-Samak, an Operation to Control uarihuana']

lTextl Writing in the “Blue Corner" column in the DAILY MIRROR, Samak Sunthonwet,
the leader of the Thai Citizens Party, mentioned the matter in which an side

of the deputy minister of interior was implicated in a marihuana case. he

said that "I feel that what I said in parliament is enough to show that I

do not trust the deputy minister of interior.”

Digging a Hole For the Victim

After the no-confidence debate in the cabinet, which resulted in the minister
from the Democrat Party receiving the most votes of no confidence. Banyat
Banthatthan. the deputy minister of interior. left the building hastily.

what he said as he left was ambiguous but it indicated that he might resign.

And the questions of the mass media were all directed at whether the resignation
of this Democrat Party [member], if this does in fact occur, is the result

of his unhappiness about being '’stabbed in the back" by other political parties
in the government.

However, it seems that an effort was made to suppress one matter and keep

it from becoming a major affair at that time. This matter concerns the charge
by Mr Samak Sunthonwet. the leader of the Thai Citizens Party, that Mr Hithun
Thapkhlieo, an aide to the deputy minister of interior in the office of the
Secretary to the Minister, was involved in marihuana trafficking.

Members of the Democrat Party have warned Banyst that, if he hurries to resign.
it will be like falling into a hole dug by the opposition. By talking about
this "hole," what they really meant to say was that if the Democrat Party
leaves the government, the Thai citizens Party will immediately step in in

its place.

As for the attitude of Samak Sunthonwet. the leader of the Thai citizens

Party and the person who brOught up this matter in parliament and who has

tried to turn it into a major issue to the point where the deputy minister

of interior has had to consider his own position, Saaak has denied that the Thai

19
citizens Party wants to join a fourth Prem government. But, he is trying
to make a bigger issue of this marihuana case in the DAILY MIRROR and is
closely following the investigation of this case.

The EVents Leading Up to the Marihuana Case In the Phethcaburi-Prachuap Zone

Marihuana has been grown in Prachuap Khirihkan and Phetchaburi provinces

for a long time. Narcotics suppression officials in the Police Department
have stated that the cultivation and export of marihuana has been a thriving
business in this area ever since the time Colonel Narong Kittikhachon still
had power.

The area that the Office of the Narcotics Control Board suspects of being

a major producer of marihuana is the area from the Thai-Burmese border in
Prachuap Khirikhan Proivince to approximately 100 kilometers inside Burma.

A group of Mons was hired to look after and produce marihuana. The owners

of the land are important politicians who have had close relations with high-
ranking officers and politicians since the time of Colonel Narong Kittikhachon
and Major General Sutsai Hatsadin. And at present. they still have close
relations with military officers.

The influential people along the coast have a network that stretches all

the way from Prachinburi, Chonburi. Ssmut Prakan, Phetchaburi, Prachuap Khirikhan,
Chumphon, Nakhon Sithammarat and Surat Thani to Phukhet. They use the sea

to smuggle illegal goods out of and into the country. Marihuana is an important
item that is transported in these territorial waters. In particular, the

value of the marihuana that is produced in the Thai-Burmese border area earns
huge sums of money for the influential people who have invested capital in
carrying on such activities.

Marihuana and Hithun Thapkhlieo

Hithun Thapkhlieo was a Grade CS civil servant who worked for parliament.

Mr Banyat Banthatthan, the deputy minister of interior, filed a petition
requesting that he be sent to work temporarily as an aide at the Office of

the Secretary to the Minister. Later on. he was transferred permanently to

serve as a Ministry of Interior civil servant at the Central Division, Ministry
of Interior. He was temporarily transferred from the Central Division and

went to work for the deputy minister, a close associate. he did such an outstand~
ing job that Mr Banyat sent a memorandum to Mr Prathuang Kiratibut, the former
minister of interior. asking that he be given a two-step increase in salary.

Mr Hithun graduated the same year as Deputy Minister Banyat and he is the
younger brother of Police Lieutenant Colonel Thammanun Thapkhlieo.

withun Thapkhliso was involved in the case in which marihuana was seized

along the coast near San Nua Khlong Thien in Chaam Commie, Phetchaburi Province.
The events leading up to this are as follows: Four boats of the Customs Department
were sent to seize a boat that was suspect. The boat was a small fishing

20
boat known as a “squid boat." Twenty-eight bags of narihuana were found hidden

in the hold of this boat. At the same time, a Kentwood radio receiver-transmitter,
registration No SBT-ZSZS-W‘I/l.m found in a suitcase along with radio receiving-
transmitting equipment.

chaam police officials informed the Civil Air Center in order to check the
registration number of this radio equipment. Concerning this radio, it was
learned that Mr Withun Thapkhlieo. a Grade CS civil servant who is working
as an aide at the office of the Secretary to the Hinister, had borrowed this
radio. On the borrower's slip submitted on 14 April, he claimed that he was
taking it to transmit “speck” and that he would return it to the Air Center
on 22 May 1982.

Thus. because of this, Mr Hithun Thapkhlieo was connected with the matter of
theze bags of narihuana that were seized by Chaam police. And because Mr Hithun
is a close associate of Deputy Minister Banyat Banthatthan, the deputy minister
has been linked tothis marihuana case.

Banyat Banthatthan and the Influential Groups

Bantay Banthatthan, the young minister, has a modern and individualistic
way of thinking, and he is a very impressive speaker. he became the [deputy]
minister of interior because of the decline of the Democrat [Party]. Banyat
once served as the chairman of the board of the Kitthanawat Company, which
has business interests in the movie theater, hotel, mining and timber trade
spheres. The Kitthanawat Company is now headed by Mr Prawit Ninwatcharamani,
the man who took over from Mr Banyat as chairman of the board. He has been
chargedwduibeingone of the influential people in the ”Five Tigers“ group.

On 22 December 1979, Mr Banyat submitted his resignation as chairman of the
board and board member of the Kitthanawat Company. His reason was that he
did not have time to help administer the affairs of the company or attend
the board meetings. But Mr Banyat still has very close relations with the
Kitrhanawat Company and with Mr Prawit Ninwatcharatmani.

The Five Tigers group is well-known for the influence it wields. officials

have said that they use their power illegally and that theyhaveclose ties

with the various godfaters. Actually,the Five Tigers group has done things

that have greatly helped the people in Surat Thani Province. For example,

they have built things that have benefited tre public, they have donated

money and they have constantly helped the government. It has been the growth

of this group that has led others to watch them and feel that they have influence
and that has led people to feel that they are involved in illegal activities.

However, the relationship between Banyat Banthatthan and the Five Tigers

group and between the Five Tigers group and the eastern godfathers in Chonburi,
Phetchaburi and Prachuap Khirikhan are connections that have resulted in

the case of the 28 bags of marihuana being discussed even more. Hithun Thapkhlieo,
a close associate of Deputy Minister Banyat and the owner of the radio,

21
registration No 2525-44/7/1, that was the prime cause of the present problem,
has increased the severity of the problem by linking the matter to the deputy
minister of interior.

A columnist for SIAH RAT has even written a timely story, 'The Three Harihuana
Traffickers," during this period.

The harihuana Pipe Operation

Samak Sunthonwet has had many heated disputes with Banyat Banthatthan ever
since the time they were bOth members of the Democrat Party. They had a very
serious clash the time that Samak Sunthonwet instigated a no-confidance debate
in an attempt to get people to believe that this deputy minister had purchased
porcelain insulators at a price that was higher than normal. But Mr Banyat
responded calmly in parliament with the clever phrase the "big liar.“

And then during the recent no-confidence debate, Samak Sunthonwet was able

to create a great stir with data of the opposition that no one had anticipated,
that is, the seizure of the 28 bags of marihuana that was linked to the close
associate of the deputy minister of interior and the deputy minister himself.

Samak has made a rather great effort to build up the importance of this matter.
He is viewed as trying to oust Deputy Minister Banyat and become deputy minister
in his place. But this view may not be correct.

Samak Sunthonwet has a clear political plan. His political timing has always

been very precise and expedient.£ntering the cabinet at this time would certainly
not be good. Even before the no-confidence debate and up to the present.

there have constantly been reports that Samak Sunthonwet is trying to tighten

his relations with a military officer with a bright future} that is, General
Athit Kamlangek, the assistant comander in chief of the army. even though
efforts have been made to conceal this relationship, political observers

were able to see the connection between these groups clearly with the appearance
of the group known as the "Roi Kao Group“ on radio and television and in
political and business circles.

As for General Athit Kamlangek, his role has recently been increasing in
handling the political conflicts and in maintaining peace and security. and
the duties of this defender of the capital have reached a peak. One official
said that ”this is an ordinary matter if General Athit is to be chosen to
become the minister of some ministry. And it is normal for a soldier who
plans to get involved in politics in the future to have tohmvefirst served
as the minister in some ministry.”

The position in the Ministry of Interior and General Athit Kamlangek are
well suited to each other, just as the effort by Samak Sunthonwet to become
close to General Athit presents no problems.

22
however, this narihuana pipe operation points out sooe of the mistakes and
weaknesses of the present [deputy] minister of interior. These weaknesses
have been used to play a new political game. It more pressure is exerted

and things are intensified a little more in this matter, it is quite possible

that this case will become the fuse leading to changes in political positions
in the near future.

1 1943
5300/5807

23
THO ISOC OFFICERS ARRESTED IN “8801}! RAID IN cameo MI
Bangkok 0A0 SIAM in Thai 16 Jun 82 pp 1, 2

lArticle: ”150C Officers who Sold Heroin Arrested At the Home of a ﬂaw Chinese.
They were Known to Be International Traffickers'l

[Text] There was a sajor heroin raid in Chiang Mai. officials fro. the northern
narocitics suppression unit, in cooperation with police officials, conducted

an investigation and raided the home of five ringleaders. Two of than were

150C officials from Chinag Rai and two were Haw Chinese. During the search,

six large bags of heroin, each weighing 2.5 kilograms,were found. The value

in Thailand was 500,000 baht. The value abroad was 50 million baht. They confessed
that they had been engaged in the heroin trade for a long time.

Concerning the seizure of this heroin. a reporter for one SIAH reported that

at 1030 hours on 15 June, from an investigation conducted by officials of

thc northern Narcotics Suppression Unit, it had been learned that heroin would
be traded at the house at 1&0 Soi Phattana Chang Phuok in Huang District,
Chiang Mai Province. Thus, these officials joined together with Police Major
General Prakop Chuthesa, the assistant commissioner of the provincial 3, Lanpang
Province, Police Colonel Kasen Sukphong, the Chiang Mai police superintendent,
Police Lieutenant Colonel Ran Chanphen, the deputy police superintendent in
Chiang Mai, Police Captain Phayung Chinaohit, the officer on duty at the Chiang
Hai provincial police station in husng District and a group of officials and
went to search this house.

rive men who were engaged in a heroin transaction were found in the house.
The officials arrested all five without having to use force. The five were:
Mr Chusak aongcharoen, age 42. who was the owner of this house Hr Prayut
sikaco, age 32. and Mr Sanan Khongdet, age 41, whowere both 180C officials
in Chiang Rai and who lived at No 32 use Ngao coasune, wiang Pa Pao District,
Chiang Rai Province. The other two were both Haw Chinese identified as hr
Laohuang Saechang, who lives at 31 Uttaradit Road, Huang District, Chiang

Rai Province, and hr Chongu Saeyang, age 36, who lives at 52 Village 11, Pong
Pha Commune, Mae Sai District. Chiang Rai province.

2‘
Six large plastic bags filled with heroin were discovered. Each bag weighed

2.5 kilograms. The value in Thailand was 500,000 baht and about $0 million

baht abroad. Besides this. the officials seized a green Mitsubishi truck license
No N8225, Chiang Mai. which the suspects were using as a means of transportation.
This was seized as evidence. Then. the suspects and evidence were taken to

the chiang Hai provincial police station in Huang District for further investiga-
tion. It was learned that, on that day. Mr Chusak, Hr Prayut and Mr Sanan

had set a time for Mr Laohuang and Mr Chongu, the two new Chinese, to come

buy heroin at the hone of Mr Chusak. These men had been trading in drugs together
for so long that their naees were in the files on international narcotics
traffickers of international narcotics suppression officials. aut they nade

a mistake and were arrested by police officials this time. The police placed
them under arrest for further handling of the case.

1194]
5300/5807

25
COMMNIST: FOCUS OP HERO!" TRAFFIC MAY BE MOVING SW"!
Bangkok HATICHON in Thai 27 may 82 p 4

[HATICBON News Table column by “an Ordinary Reporter": 'The Heroin Refineries
Are Moving South“!

[Text] Opium weighing more than lo kilograms and valued at 75,000 baht has
been found at the godown of a leading citizen in Phukhet.

Because this opium case was linked to the family of a wealthy man who has
economic influence in the province, tne police did somestrange things and
granted some privileges concerning covering up the case.

The thing that is really worth discussing is not this leading citizen. when
news reports have identified as an influential person in the province. Rather,
it is the fact that this is a hotbed of opium and narcotics activities, a
hotbed that has moved form the north to the south of the country.

Previously, if opium and heroin were mentioned, people usually thought of
the “Golden Triangle,“ which is an area in the Thai-Burmese border area.

A report by the office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCE) states that the
Golden Triangle can produce at least 500 tons on opium a year to meet the
needs of the addicts and heroin refineries.

And along the Thai-Burmese border, there are approximately 13-15 heroin refineries
hidden in the high mountains and tropical evergreen forests.

Lo sing ﬂan, Lao Tuan Lao Li, Khun Se, or Chang Si Pu, and Lao Su are all
well~known 'narcotics kingpins" who live in the Golden Triangle in the northern
part of the country.

Police Major General Phao Sarasin, the secretary-general of the ONCB, has
confirmed that the heroin refineries of Lao Su produce the best heroin in
the world. That is. this heroin is 98 percent pure.

26
out recently, the north has lost its monopoly on heroin.

Lieutenant Commander Prasong Sursiri, the secretary-general of the National
Security Council, recently stated in a lecture that, there are now at least
three to five heroin refineries in the Thai-Malaysian border area.

The fact that police seized more than 10 kilograms of opium in the godown
of a wealthy man in Phukhet may add to the seriousness of the news that the
heroin market, both from the standpoint of production and distribution, has
moved to the south.

Narcotics traffickers have begun to use the Golden Triangle-Bangkok-Nalaysia-
Holland route in addition to the Golden Triangle-Bangkok-hong Kong-Holland
route.Thus, the Thai-Malaysian border area is not important only as a hiding
place of bandit terrorists and separatists. It is also a major headquarters
of narcotics traffickers.

More and more reports of heroin being placed in the corpses of babies have
begun to appear, and more reports of Malaysian police showing interest in
prostitutes and narcotics traffickers from Thailand have begun to appear
in the STRAITS TIMES.

The ONCB urgently held a meeting in ﬂat Yai, Songkhla Province, on the narcotics
problem.

As long as we have a political policy of supporting the minority groups that

grow poppies and produce heroin in order to use them as buffers, Thailand
and narcotics will continue to be viewed as synonymous.

11943
CSO: 5300/5807

27
ASEAN CHIEF NARCO‘I‘ICS OFFICER um

Rangoon THE “)an pmnz's DAILY in Bugltsh 19 Jun 82 p 6

[Tut]

Smcmu, x7 lunc—
Tluiland‘t Police Lieu-
mt-Colouel Chaknhep
Amubwwillbo appoint-
ed the Woo of
South-Em Anion Na.
6000' (ASEAN'o) 6m
uremia 0603:. the
3mm Tina (spend
POLICE THINK DRUG INDUSTRY OWSELLS HUGE HULTINATIONAL

Vancouver THE WEEKEND SUN in English 12 Jun 82 p A2

[Text]

IONTREAL (CP) - Canadian-

Paciﬁc Lid. nehuiupsaieaouiz
WHIMIJUI hailevaiha

drag induct: in laai year
mayhavaouuoidihahuamldaa-

"Noihiu is "all: «11th
though." inap. Dania Farrell.
direccor o! 30!? national and
iatanaiioul am investigation.
aidinaninmin.

‘1‘hay(drumuen)ohvm
don't «clan M merchandiaa to
thumbs-man."

Farrell animated that only he
imihmahd ”paranoia-b
mammmmm
imam by the ICIP. The
“valuadnamucau-ahhadhy
0a m iaatyaaana about
mm b! “Latina“,
oaiyueamwﬁatweaeiu."

Simple-am shows that ii
thaRCIPaaiaadiiveparcemonha
mdmﬁcumunhnd.
l e no my”;
ahautﬂOhillioohiﬂl-ahdihia
iinredoao’i "commuti-
ueaaaiaedhyvammwaad
winch! Mus.

mummy
iiryaaiaad WOW“
0 mm year.

Dam WW0!
the lamina] police said the annual
aaiaolillegaldmohmaaanyhiu
minimum

"m to reach that ﬂan.
mhanhdoawm
Mahatma. a

tame
amnaailahtnl. ix. ...

CSO: 5320/37

“But lo: ”in m. dealers have»
u't been selling real grams." he-
m "They've haeo aalliu ‘pointo
m'cnheamJoiamnnoihair
mom". which an actually
inim' am you whine! the

unmet
dia min as huaiheumeh. with
hmaa behind aera-

mmmmhatoﬂicmioan
am '

Out iha mu. W crime
haahaadranioihaimuandeuy
”aluminum

A mam holding

> umwmw dam in
‘a vmhouaa in Old llonireai iaai

mummhadhmhandledby
thalaﬂanaidsmhinnamhaad
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090003-4

GHANA POLICE RAID NETS $1-HILLION IN RBROIN

Ottawa 1113 CITIZER in English 7 Jun 82 p 1

[Ar ticle by mtgnret: manta]

[Text]

Police seized no estimated Sl-tnil-
lion worth of heroin from n down-
town Ottnwe comment Snturdn .
III the mood ntnjor heroin hon
the city in the out ti: months.

Ottawa RCMP 3:] con/inn
onted he]! a nd “hi quality
Middle East ” during an early
morning rnid at n Bell Street npnrt-
meat. - ' ‘

Imp. Lne Boivin. in theme of the
«am RCMP drug unit. said he
suspects Ottnvn‘ in the distribution
point for the on; entering
the oounuy front

“We heiieve that‘s what's hoop»;
inpittnkuniotolpeopievtthe
lot of connection. end money to
deal in announce this large.”

in Decenthet. the toned nude in
biggest-ever heroin but when it
netted ”million worth of the drug
nee: the Bron-
therine Street.

fronteventre
tonAvenueend

C50: 5320/37

Two Edmonton retidents were
chargednndtheeueisstillhefore

drugs. it's the'ylom addiction you
an get.” aid Boivin. ' .

He said the RCMP will keep th
heroin for use as evidence and the:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090003-4
DRUG TRAFFICKERS GIVEN JAIL TIM

Vancouver THE HEEKEND SUN in English 12 Jun 82 p A18

{Text}

Two members oi a drug inﬂicting
ring that took 18 months to break and
touched oi! the longest trial in B.c.
legal history were sentenced Friday to
jail terms in a federal nltentiary.

Armando Tontare li. d1, was sen-
tenced to six years and Claudio Dimat-
teo. at. to three years. Both were con-
t-icted oi conspiring totraiﬂc in heroin

Crown counsel Brian Purdy said both
men had PMW records (or drug of-
lences but were not deterred by prison
lrorn hleh-ievelherotn dunno, .

Justice Ray Paris said the evidence
didnotpaintesclearapictureoitha
men's involvement in the conspiracy as
itdldinthecasesolotheraceusedhut
added that ‘l‘ontarelli. assisted by
Dimatteo. was a collection tor the sale
oi heroin in menace lots. . __ ‘

He also took into consideration that
both men had been in custody over 20
months.

Lawyer Patrick Good. speaking ior
Tontarelli. described the Crown's case
against him as the slimmest oi circum-
stantial evidence and "suspicion on
suspicion." lie said Tontarelli had been
involved in one incident oi the sale of an
ounceoi heroin forum».

Good and Sidney Slntons. wh
tor Dimatteo. said they would
thcconvictions.

Simone told the judge that D
hadpiayed a minimal part int
spiracy and that he was inn
onlyonetransaction.

“He had a brief and periph
sociation in the conspiracy al
Simone said. tie also told the in:

Dimattao had been in custod:
months in Oaltslla and that N
in Dahlia was wonh doahle It
sideration .. .
A third men sentenced alter:
guilty beiore B.C. Supreme Ch
tice Allan lcEachet-n was sent:
twoyeanlessadayioraminol
the conspirecy. Dominic lop:
said. was an em

ey figures in the coceins eon
hotthejudgewastoldhehadn
ousconvictiona. . ..
One deiuidant. Carmelom
coped custody last Septemh
tried in absentia and senencedx

prison. .-.
Them millionconspirecn:

ed ldmonthsandiollowed ittlt

policenndercoverwork.
381315

DRUGS SBIZEDuHindeor-Jl'he Mounties have arrested lb people and seized
$1.7-nillion in cocaine. heroin and LSD in the biggest drug roundup in
Uindsor's history. A seven-nonth undercover operation focusing on what
is believed to be an international ring of traffickers dealt specifically
with the ring's upper echelon. an RCMP spokes-en said. More than 20
Mounties swooped down on homes in the Windsor area beginning Thursday
night. They expect lore arrests over the weekend. The drugs include half
a pound of high-grade heroin. several thousand units of 1.80 and several
ounces of cocaine. The drugs were headed for the Pindsor and Toronto
markets. We Americans and 12 Hindsor residents were arrested. [Text]
[Toronto m 6103! AND HAIL, "Em EDITION in English 5 Jun 82 p lo]

DRUG CHARGES—newkesbury (Special)--An mdercover drug investigation has
netted police $60,000 worth of drugs after a nuber of early-noraing raids
here. The operation. involving Ontario and Quebec provincial police and
the Hawkesbury force, resulted in the arrest of 13. including two Ottawa
men, on a variety of drug-related charges. [Text] [Ottawa m CITIZEN in
English 110 Jun 82 p 26]

RECORD PCP SEIZURE-~80? say a raid on e Coquitlae apartment house Saturday
night resulted in the largest eeisure ever in Canada of a drug co-only
known as "angel duet". Taken was an 1.6 kilogram of the drug
phencyclidine (PCP), with an estimated street value of more than $8.5
nillion. Coquitlan drug section head, Sgt. Janes Siapson, said the raid
also turned up a "laboratory" for the aanufacture of PCP or "angel dut"

in an apartment in Coquitlae. Both Maple Ridge and Coquitlaa RCMP took
part in the raid. Simeon said his coat estinate was "conservative" and
added. "It's unquestionably the largest seizure of PCP in Canada." lie said
PCP is a deadly drug. "It can cause violent behavior or death. But it
looks like we nipped this one in the bud." Sinpson said the investigation
is continuing. Charged in Coquitlan provincial court Hondsy with pos-
session of PCP for the purposes of trafficking ere Wayne Paul Lefreniere. 27.
and Delane Hopkins. 26, both of 705 North load. Coquitlse. and Dennis
Ray-0nd Dubroise, 27. and Raynond Dean Barrow. 20. both of 9264-12an St.,
Surrey. The three sales have been renendsd in custody. llopkine has been
released on her own recognizance. [Text] [Vancouver 1113 VANCOUVER SUI in
English 15 Jun 82 p A9]

(:80: 5320/36

32
BRIEFS

DRUG SHUGGLING SENTENCE CONFIRM ~Celje, lb Jun—The crininal bench of the
Celje district court has confirmed the sentence passed on Lebanese citizen

Alijas Esber. 28, who was sentenced to a 2 and 1/2 year prison tern for
snuggling drugs. Last December, 17.5 kilogram of hashish oil was found in
a secret cowartnent of his Mercedes automobile. ﬁsher sent his automobile
by ship Iron a Syrian port to Anterdan. while he travelled by air. ﬂow-

cver. the autombile was unloaded fro- the ship in the port of Koper and was
to be transported by road to Auterdan. In Celje, a thorough check of the

autouobile was nsde and the drug was found. [Belgrade POLITIKA in Serbo-
Croatian 15 Jun 82 p 9 AU]

CSO: 5300/2360

33
3. PER. 75 0333
2.: :3! 2.2.23:
9.8.32. 23 2.23.
92338.

: I 8 as o R
123:3 $2.33 :3
1.5. was... 8 83.! 93
.2633 .2 9.3.3313
Sa-w 8r OER. .388»
:8 32.. 9.. 5.58 a.
>3tooa no 9-5”. .5 s
38 995—: 8 an 9o
:3. ca .8. £2. 5 we?

until-D
BRIEFS

JAIL FOR COCA!!! lHPOhTIhG-«A 33‘year-old St George's Ian was jailed for
seven years yesterday for importing cocaine. Granville Gilbert, of Old
Heid'e Lane, adnitted possessing the drug, which had an estimated street
value of $28,000. It was found in a rolled-up sock in his holdall when he
returned froa a u.s. trip on January 5 last year. Tests revealed he had
11.19 grams of cocaine with 71 percent purity. Gilbert, when cautioned

at the airport, said: "that's what I get for doing favours for people."

He claimed he was bringing clothing into Bermuda for a friend. Mr John
Cooper, defence counsel, told the Supreme Court that Gilbert had only one
previous drugs offence for which he had received a ninimn fine. lie

argued that the figure quoted for the coeaine'a street value was misleadingly
high because it was based on the maxi-nu obtainable for individual enall
packets of the drug. Chief Justice the hon Sir Janea Aetwood told Gilbert
that if he was prepared to take the risks he also had to face the penalties.
He jailed Gilbert for seven years with tile spent in custody to be taken
int? account. [rue] [In-neon m now. mm in English 29 Jun 32

p 1

C80: 5300/7567

35
COLOMBIA“ ATTACKS DEA, EXTRADITION TBEAIY 1N HBXICAR NEWSPAPER AD
Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 20 Jun 82 p 36-h
[Advertisement]

[Text] "In no instance shall Colombia offer to extradite nationals

nor shall it allow the extradition of those charged with or found guilty
of political crimes." Last paragraph of Article I? of the current
Colombian Penal Code.

Law 27 of I980 or "How a father hands over his children so that his
neighbor can punish them."

Illegal

After reading the complete text of the aforementioned law and grasping
its meaning, it is impossible to draw a conclusion other than the one
noted above.

Law 27 of l980 repeals Law 66 of May I888, which was signed when Colombia
and the United States were countries in the process of economic and
industrial development, of ongoing changes and of internal organization.
The law's initial assertion seems sincere; it reads: ”with a view towards
facilitating the administration of justice and of punishing crimes

that may be committed htthe territories of the two nations and whose
perpetrators might attempt to avoid penalty by fleeing from one country
andseekingrefuge in the other." In contrast, Law 27 of 1980 speaks

of effective cooperation between the two States.

Referring to the crimes that can give rise to extradition, the last
paragraph of Article 2, Section 4, Subsection 2 says: "(Extraditionl

shall also be granted in the case of an association to commit a crime,

as provided for in Colombian legislation, and in the case of conspiracy,
as provided for in the United States of America." This gives the impression
that Colombia will always be the State petitioned to extradite. The crimes
that are grounds for extradition should be the same in both legal codes.
Article |30 of the Colombian Penal Code includes conspiracy as a crime,
describes it and sets forth the corresponding penalties. Thus, there

is no reason to combine, for the purposes of legal sanctions, association
to cummit a crime and conspiracy or "suspicious intent."

36
Hhereas we have to ascertain the crime, they need only think that s
Colombian is a potential enemy conspiring against their indomitable
sovereignty, their uncompromising ethics and their "noble“ principles
of disinterested aid to all the countries of the Americas.

Neither politicians nor military personnel are safe from extradition.
Initially, Article a of Law 27 of 1980 is very clear; whereas it does
not permit extradition in its first two subsections, its third and
last one empowers the Executive Branch expressly to decide in this
regard.

For its part, Article 8, faithful to Article 17 of the Colombian Penal
Code, states: "In no instance shall Colombia offer to extradite nationals,"
but right after this it cynically empowers the BxeCutive Branch of

the State being petitioned to decide on the matter and, furthermore,

makes it subject to the provisions of Law 27 of I980.

Provisional Detention

Continuing with the by now traditional 0.8. line of reasoning, Article II
notes that in the event of an "emergency," either of the contracting
parties can request through diplomatic channels the provisional detention
of an individual who has been indicted or convicted. As a requirement
for a 60-day provisional detention it stipulates a statement of intent

to submit an extradition request.

As the text says, there is indeed an emergency, and it has to do with
0.8. economic wealth and its imperialist designs, backed by a financial
power that is now coming to an end. At this moment, more than 6 million
hectares of the formerly untouchable territory of the United States

of America, top quality lands, have been purchased by foreign investors.
The Arab funds alone invested in the purchase of stock in Gringo multi-
nationals total more than $200 billion, the monstruous dividends on
which mean that America is no longer for the Americans but for the
Arabs.

In its struggle to avoid an imminent fall, this Anglo-Saxon empire
that is now under the yoke of petrodollars allows vulgar trade with
the East while continually hunting down Colombians with $500 dollars
in their pockets and calling them traffickers, smugglers or criminals.

The logical conclusion is that the historical circumstances surrounding
the Treaty of 1888 no longer obtain in 1980 and that the new treaty
completely repeals the former one. The big fish is eating the little
fish, and one of our countries is bigger across-the-bosrd than the
other (I get the impression that we are the little fish).

Article 18 of Law 27 of I980 grants right of way through our country

to the personnel in charge of pursuing those who can be extradited.
The expenditures arising from this entire process were covered by the

37
government that requested the extradition under the 1888 Treaty. In
contrast, Law 27 of 1980 has transferred these outlays to the Colombian
Government, pardon me, the government being petitioned.

From any angle, there is no reason for the extradition of nationals

and there is even less reason for a treaty with a country with which

we do not even have a border and whose customs are not at all similar.
There is a common anthropological denominator to iman rights and the
abstract concept of mankind. There is no such thing as mankind; there
are men, and they cannot be separated from their families, their customs
or the circumstances and environments in which they grew up and in
which, like true Colombians, they hope to die.

of the 300 million people in Latin America we are the only ones who
can be extradited from our own country to the United States of America.

The DEA (Drug Enforcement Administration)

The DEA was founded in I972 by Mr Richard Nixon, in ongoing collsboration
with Mr Bush, who is today vice president, and with Mr Haig, who is
today secretary of state.

The DEA, America's national and international narcotics squad and the
hub of the shady tentacles that Mr Nixon gallantly manipulated, jolted
the ”dash rights provisions in the United States until the day of
Nixon's fall, triggered by his private spy network that was caught
"red-handed" in the famous and fateful Hatergate hotel in Washington D.C.

Today, the DEA is once again operating without restrictions throughout
Latin America, except in Cuba. We Colombian citizens are its main

target, and therefore they have engineered this diabolical extradition
treaty, which we extraditable Colombians are telling our fellow countrymen
about thanks to our democracy and freedom of speech.

Conspiracy

with the triumph of divorced California actor Ronald Reagan, the old
triumvirate was reorganized, and a major antidrug, anti-Latin campaign
was immediately ordered. Hr Bush sent the DEA, CIA and FBI into Florida
and Colombia. Nr Naig ordered Immigration, the Army, Navy, Air Force
and others to intercept boats and planes coming from Colombia. The

DEA coerced the government of the Bahamas into passing a law under
which a Colombian must obtain a visa in Miami, Florida before he can
travel to the islands.

The massive arrests of Colombians in the United States stem from a

law signed by Nixon in I972, the so-called conspiracy law, which he
enforced for the first time again drug dealers. The legal concept

of conspiracy was thought up by the U.S. Congress in l9bh to detain
large numbers of Japanese. More than two Japanese together represented

38
a conspiracy agaainst the United States and they were placed in concentration
camps in California.

Hundreds of Colombians were detained in I972 and I973 by the newly
reconditioned DEA under the flimsy and vague charge of conspiracy to
import narcotics into the United States.

Our major crime was being Colombians. Coincidentally, many of us wound
up being close friends with the convicted Watergate burglars. Gordon
Liddy and his entourage arrived at the federal prison in Danbury, Connec-
ticut some months before our happy return to Colombia in I975.

Bail

The DEA wants to perpetuate the drug-related legal industry, which

has provided thousands of jobs in courts and prisons. It wants to
develop publicity “or it and create the need for major Federal Government
outlays to finance these kinds of anti-Latin campaigns and to give

more political, police and infiltration power to its sponsors. In

the United States, where Americans hold up 5,000 banks a year, the
average bail for the holdup men is $30,000, whereas the bail for drug-
related crimes, which do not involve violence or robbery or require
weapons. is SI to $20 million, especially if you are a Colombian.

The release of a Colombian costs millions of dollars, with the permission
of the DEA's legal industry, and thus proceeds of more than SI billion
a year fuel this repressive organization, financed by the sale of Colombians.

DEA: Advertising Inc.

The DEA has put on television series so that we can see how our countrymen
are persecuted with the most marvelous equipment in the world, so that
we become psychologically controlled through employer-police signals

and so that we continue adopting the by now hereditary attitude of
admitting guilt in front of a TV judge, who tells us that the forces

of the DEA, led by Mr Bush, are going to go after all Latins, especially
Colombians. Educational films show Cobra helicopters and AUACS planes
deployed; the announcement is made that the CIA is domestic and inter-
national, while Ilmaigration, which has been an eternal problem for
Colombians, is let loose, in addition to the IRS, Customs, the Air

Force and the entire apparatus of repression, for the sole purpose

of kicking Latin Americans out of their incorruptible environment.

As we sit watching the TV in amazement, we absorb and process mentally
all of these dramatic anti-Latin scenes that they are bent on showing
us, not just on local television but in Colombia's leading newspapers
too. This abusive proliferation of propaganda in the few mass media
that exist is a violation of our privacy and a criminal attempt to

set the government, the military and the common people of Colombia
against each other.

39
Seizures

Forty percent of the drugs confiscated in the United States are said
to disappear sooner or later, and there are doubts that the other 60
percent is really destroyed. Seventy percent of the money confiscated
in drug busts disappears, and the remaining 30 percent apparently goes
to a little subsidiary called the IRS. The allegation is that DEA
agents and former agents in Florida are the ones who have profited

the most, which has made the FBI in Hashington D.C. very jealous.

it was already tired of guarding old, has-been politicians and buildings
and had never even had the opportunity to exchange Mashington winters
for the beaches, sun, sea, dollars, fast action and fun in Florida,
including permission to hunt down Colombians.

There are close to 3 million Latins living in the southern part of
Florida alone, and the drug industry is worth $5 billion a year, which
makes it as big as or perhaps bigger than tourism.

Health

A person owes it to himself to get into and maintain the best possible
physical condition. A sound mind in a sound body. Our health Ministry
is engaged in a brilliant campaign. "Don't Smoke," say large-lettered
signs in many spots. The venerable Customs Bureau is also watching

out for the health of our people. "Don't buy smuggled cigarettes,”

it says in its ads. Our Customs Bureau is losing billions of pesos
because of the Marlboros that are smuggled in tax-free.

i don't think that Mr Marlboro has any excuses for his ongoing defrauding

of or conspiracy against Colombian Customs. "hat is more, Mr Marlboro

can advertise his product publicly. and he cannot be reprimanded.

In contrast, they can annoy Colombian television viewers with advertisements
of deceptive rustic elegance that openly encourage smuggling. Mr Marlboro
says that dynamic men smoke Marlboros. As a simple country boy, I

think that smoking is harmful, expensive and a sign of weakness. 1

don't know of any good athletes who smoke cigarettes. It would be
interesting to see under which of the 35 crimes stipulated in the extradition
treaty our venerable Customs Bureau could succeed in requesting the
extradition of Mr Marlboro to Colombia for having associated to commit

a crime or for conspiracy against Colombia or whether the Health Ministry
could do likewise for reasons of public health.

Budget

we Colombian citizens realise that 0.5. economic aid to us depends
on the degree to which Colombia cooperates with the DEA. He realize
that Colombia has to contribute between 5 and 7 billion pesos this
year to the battle against drug trafficking.

Planes, helicopters, boats, cars, motorcycles and the latest communication

equipment are all part of a narcotics squad that is ready to move out
in minutes and with all of the latitude it needs.

40
Those of us who stingily pay taxes to the National Tax Administration
wonder whether these big-spending programs to protect American interests
at our expense were not something that our grandfathers officially
bequeathed us. This tactical antinarcotics force should be under GOES,
CAES [Economic and Social Advisory Committee] or any other similar
group, combating extortion and kidnaping.

with these tremendous human and material resources, kidnaped hostages
could be rescued almost without fail. My grandfather would gladly
support such a cause. He would pay our taxes and even good salaries.
Let's vote for a country with a sophisticated and modern antikidnaping
police squad that can partly guarantee our tattered freedom. -

Borders

He Latins cannot talk about borders at present without mentioning the
Falkland Islands, which unquestionably belong to the Argentines, who

in their battle with the British have summoned up the courage to confront
both them and their American allies. Unfortunately, all Latin American
borders are controlled by the DEA, citing the blatant excuse of drug
traffic. It also has an alarming control over our border ports, setting
us at odds with our own true brothers, with whom we do indeed have

true affinities, common customs and longstanding and unforgettable
Bolivarian legacies.

Under the psychosis of drugs, the red tape for crossing borders has
tripled, border personnel have expanded and tactics similar to or copied
right from the DEA have been adopted. The result has been a rebirth

of mutual dislike and a falling off of dialogue and trade anong our
countries and of the trust that we owe each other as Latin brothers.

with its Cuban, Puerto Rican, Dominican and Colombian agents, the DEA
does not show an Anglo-Saxon face in our lands; instead. it sets Latin
against Latin. Thus, our borders become unfriendly, mistrustful and cold.

Let's vote to have our borders return to Latin hands and customs, to
have a rebirth of brotherhood, to have the DEA and its vile agents
go back to where they came from, to have a resurgence of tourism, to
have honest tourists come and to have the welcome tourist industry
flourish on our borders.

He should also point out that the DEA knew of the invasion of the Falklands
IS days in advance.

Speaking of borders, the DEA, supported by its far-flung judicial branch,
recognizes ZOO-mile territorial waters for the United States but only

I2 miles for other countries. The United States did not sign the recent
Law of the Sea Treaty, which was recently signed by 135 countries,
including Colombia.

bl
Tourism

Colombia "the Beautiful" is unknown to foreign tourism, those years

when the attractive and hospitable Cartagena Yacht Club gave us a warm
welcome and when there was an international lifestyle based on a floating
tourist community that was the pride of the Caribbean. Today, because

of the DEA, the scene is very different. Tourists no longer flock

here; they are afraid of the DEA and its new students. The steady

flow of planes bringing in tourists from neighboring countries has

been practically shut off, which has directly benefited the cities

of Cartagena, Barranquilla and Santa Marta, whose main source of foreign
exchange is tourism.

Handatory visas to enter Colombia and other tactics sponsored by the
DEA are completely antitourist, antirecreation and, worst of all, anti-
Latin.

Colombian citizens and foreigners wanting to enter or leave the country

are now subject to longer delays and further requirements. Every Colombian
is seen as suspicious, and that is only half of it, because when a
Colombian citizen arrives at his destination, he is unquestionably
discriminated against and perhaps even mistreated, under the well-known
pretext of drugs. Blunt, arrogant procedures, as well as the prompt
summoning of the DEA or Interpol, have become routine, according to

these people themselves.

Our tourist industry has come to a terrible standstill because of the
antitourist barriers set up by the DEA at our airports and harbors.

We are calling for unfettered tourism, without unjust surveillance

or nightmares of red tape, without strip searches or baggage seizures,
withOut foreign pressures on our hotels and without continual violations
of our privacy.

Aviation

The DEA has tacit, uncontrolled autonomy with regard to Colombia's
system of aviation, and it is a fact that this malevolent outside agency
illegally patrols cur coasts. Sophisticated planes and helicopters

with that unmistakable "N" painted on the side make daily surveillance
flights over our towns and regions, probing our past, present and future
and reporting the information to the central computers in Bogota.

The infrastructure and bylaws of the Administrative Department of Civil
Aviation have been imposed by the DEA to hamper our aeronautical progress.
Absurd formalities such as a special narcotics certificate accompanied

by a certificate of good conduct issued by the Brigade, are legal require-
ments today to import, purchase, register or sell any aircraft bearing

the Colombian flag.

The directive stipulating that any Colombian company that sells more
than half of its stock will have its operations and routes license
automatically canceled, is tantamount to making it impossible for new
companies to be formed and new stockholders to be consolidated.

62
A flight plan is not mandatory in the United States and Venezuela,

but it is in Colombia, and 08 hours notice must be given for any overseas
flight, for which clearance is continually denied until a cable of
approval is forthcoming from the country of destination.

Col Delarmino Pinilla was suddenly fired several years ago. Rumor has

it that his forced retirement was triggered by his order banning the use

of the letter "C" (government) on the planes ouned by the Summer Linguistics
Institute.

The status of aircraft seized by the Colombian authorities is uncertain,
inasmuch as a federal judge cannot take custody of an aircraft to auction
it off and thus shore up his office's battered budget so as to render
better service to Colombia's system of justice. It is incredible that
these aircraft, which are a potential direct source of jobs and progress,
can be handed over to inexperienced individuals who pile them up like
garbage at various isolated spots, where the elements wear avay the
fuselage and the avionics, which required a great deal of money and

long years of research to develop as a major solution to the transportation
problem.

After the incident involving the Colombian airline Tampa some months

ago, its license to fly into Miami was suspended at the request of

the DEA, through the American Embassy, to the Administrative Department
of Civil Aviation. This was a flagrant violation of the most elementary
norms of sovereignty, inasmuch as no attention at all was paid to the
standard formalities that should have been undertaken with our government
so as to preserve its autonomy and authority.

Our conclusion, then, is that Colombia has no need for outside infiltrators
who damage its fledgling airline industry. Our successin this field
depends on the freedom ue have, on eliminating the inane obstacles

erected by the DEA and on mandatory but streamlined documentation and
operational formalities.

Bribery: Article 17¢ of the Colombian Penal Code

The DEA has brought corruption into Colombia by bribing government
officials and civilians into committing acts of espionage in our country.
Blackmail. sham and lies are some of the other tactics it uses to deceive
naive Colombians and to undertake campaigns against the property and
businesses of alleged traffickers. The forging of police records,

the twisting of information, the manipulation of journalists, harassment
and intrigue are standard procedure for the DEA and its associates

and collaborators.

Following up fraudulent leads provided by the DEA, machine-gun toting
agents break into our houses and terrorize the Colombian people in
spectacular raids worthy of a Hollywood film, accompanied by the quick
apprentices from the Attorney General's Office and employing tactics

63
that reflect the new iron-fisted school of former CIA head and now

vice president George Bush. Thousands of Colombians have become paid
informers of the DEA. Bribing employees at airports, hotels and businesses
and even within a family is ismoral and unacceptable and damages our
customs, our personal relations and our businesses.

Epilogue

Those of us who are subject to extradition would like to speak out

against the absurd and unconstitutional extradition treaty that was
initially signed by Dr Virgilio Barco, who was our ambassador in Washington
0.0. in I979. The social conditions that it has created have led us

to the conclusion that this irresponsible and decidedly servile individual
has compromised his people. He demand that all foreign investigators

be banned from prying into our homes and traditions. we also demand

that the DEA withdraw from our territory and our borders, that they

stop bribing our government leaders, that the Colombian police begin
protecting us and our children and that they stop bribing our army.

we also want an end to their advertising machine and to their discrediting
of Colombia. It would be very nice of Hr Marlboro if he ordered his
agents to comply with the Republic of Colombia's import laws.

Lot's vote for the candidate who revokes the extradition treaty. The
DEA is anti-Latin; let’s vote for its happy return to Hashington.

Let's vote for the candidate who works hard to build a new Colombia,

who fights for a new aviation system, so that flying is not banned,

so that we can fly together. Let's vote for the man who believes in

the common folk. Let's cast a firm vote for the candidate who is concerned
about Colombians living abroad, for the man who will open up our borders,
for the man who really believes that our police and military forces

are capable of controlling any domestic or international disturbance.
Let's vote to have narcotics and their users studied by universities,
physicians and scientists so that we develop a more realistic and more
humane approachtolthe phenomenon of drugs. The police, the courts

and jails are of little or no use in solving the drug problem in our
country in this century.

Hho is stronger: Hercules or Socrates? Let's use our health and our
nationalism to help our fellow men.

The phenomenon of drugs requires thinkers, not nitwits. It does not
threaten our sovereignty or our domestic industries. Let's vote

for a Great and Free Colombia like the one that we inherited from our
Liberator, Simon Bolivar.

Carlos Enrique Lehder Rivas

cc No I9,082,128, Bogota
Bogota, Sunday 23 May I982

87b3
C50: 5300/2339

66
NEH DEVELOPMENTS Iﬂ COLOMBIAN “230!“ TRAFFICKING CASE
SIPOL Agent Iaplicated
Nuevo Laredo EL HANANA in Spanish 12 Jun 82 Sec 8 p 5

[Text] A great shock was caused in all circles by the arrest of the agent of the
Police Investigation Section [SIPOL], Oriel nenavides, made by Federal Judicial
Police forces, who identified him as the one who gave a timely tip to the arls
and drug traffickers that they were being pursued. ‘

The Federal Judicial Police succeeded in arresting Juan Gaytan. alias "Juan Trocaa,"

and a woaan named Olga Pena.

It was learned that when Gayten and the lady were questioned, they confessed that
the secret police agent had warned them that the federal police were after then,
to arrest then. and that they concealed the ship-ant.

The capture of these individuals took place shortly after noon last Thursday. and
it was learned that the federal police were searching various houses looking for

area and drugs.

At the PJP headquarters. it was announced that the case had been turned over to
the agency of the Federal Public Ministry headed by Marcelino Garcia Riro. who
will be required to couplets the pertinent investigation, eventually submitting

it to the district court.

There has been great speculation about this case, agreeing that drugs and arns
are involved, although the authorities who are knowledgeable on this subject have

node no official report.

Finally. it was learned that the arrest of "Juan Traces" was also based on a
warrant for his capture issued by the third district judge in connection with
the arrest of the heroin trafficking ring of Colombian origian, which gave rise
to the capture of soae Laredans with the surname Jacaaen Canavati, and cuatona
officials. including Gerardo Armando Santos. The latter identified Juan Gaytan
as the one who ordered him to let the Colombians pass, to prevent their being
arrested on the guard section of kilo-etc: 26, so that they could later be
taken illegally into the United States.

65
Five Freed, Ringleader Escapes

Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 15 Jun 82 p 3

[Text] Yesterday afternoon, five individuals captured last Thursday by federal
agents who had been informed that they were participating in the drug traffic
were released under the legal reservations for lack of evidence with which to
try them for crimes against health.

They are Olga Gaytan de Pena. Juan Gaytan Martinez, alias "El Troquitas," Romeo
hinojosa, Gilberto de la Rosa and the for-er agent of the Police Investigation
Section. Oziel Bensvides Cantu.

According to a report fron the agency of the Federal Public Ministry. headed by
Ramon Guillermo Calzada Vejar,they were freed because. when they were captured no
drugs were found in their possession, inasmuch as the ringleader. Valentin Omar

Pena, managed to leave the town, entering the United States with a considerable
amount of heroin.

As this morning paper reported. on Thursday of last week the Federal Judicial Police
agents failed completely in capturing Valentin Omar Pena, owing to the participa-
tion of the treacherous secret service agent, Oziel Benavides. who was responsible
[or warning the trafficker of the police action.

In this regard, the prosecutor, Calzada Vejar, reported that, last week, federal
agents had managed to learn that a drug deal was being planned in Juan Gaytan'a
residence, whereupon they set up constant surveillance at the trafficker's home.

Upon learning of the federal police activity. Oziel Benavidea warned Olga Gaytan
do Pena about what was happening, advising that her husband, Valentin. flee as
soon as possible with the shipment, because the police were on his trail.

Omar Pena attained his goal. evading the vigilance. and taking with him a consider-
able drug shipment that he brought into the United States.

Subsequently arrested were Gilberto de la Rosa. Romeo hinojosa. Juan Gaytan Marti-
nez, his sister Olga Gaytan and the secret service agent, Oziel Bensvides. who
were released under the legal reservations since there were no drugs in their
possession and no participation by them in trafficking could be proven.

Explanation From Former Agent Oziel nenavides Cantu

Once the release of Oziel Benavides under the legal reservations was ordered by the
agency of the Federal Public Ministry headed by Ramon Guillermo Calzada Vejar,

the former appeared in this editorial office to deny having had any connection

with Juan Gaytan Martinez, Romeo Hinojosa, Gilberto de la Rosa or Olga Gaytan

de Pena.

Bonavides Cantu said: "It was proven that I had nothing to do with them," claiming
that he had actually been summoned by the federal police for questioning, but

that he was able to prove with a police record that he had never teen implicated
with individuals engaged in drug trafficking.

£6
The former SIPOL agent declared: "They asked me many questions. but I was well
treated. and yesterday morning they told me, 'You can go, there has been no

crime.

He stressed that he has been disciplined in his job and has never been connected

with persons engaged in drug trafficking. Oziel Benavides commented: "In the
event that I am summoned again by the Federal Judicial Police, 1 am quite willing

to cooperate."

 

Fnrmvt secret service agent Oziel Benavides Cantu appeared in this editorial office
to claim that he has never had any connection with drug traffickers, backed by
the release under legal reservations ordered for him yesterday afternoon by the

federal prosecutor, Ramon Guillermo Calzada Vejar.
DRUG-RELATED SHOOTING OCCURS IN SONORA
Hermosillo EL MARCIAL in Spanish 20 Jun 82 Sec A p 3

{Text} Santa Ana, Sonora,l9 June (PH)-Yesterday morning, for reasons apparently
linked with the drug traffic two unidentified men shot Jesus Sepulveda Duarte.
known as "81 5011110," in this town. During the shoot-out, a child whose name

was not given. but who is presumed to be the son of Sepulveda Duarte, was abducted.

The police authorities have maintained absolute silence regarding the case. Never-
theless, it was learned from sources close to the State Judicial Police that one
of the attackers is knovm as "Raul," a native of Guadalajara. who managed to

flee along with his companion.

Apparently, "Raul"and the other individual had problems with "31 3011110" involving
drug trafficking, and they decided to kill him by shooting his as he was driving
a pickup truck which he owned, in an incident that occurred at 1000 hours yester-

day.

The child was found unharmed hours later. on a firing practice field by police
forces, while Sepulveda Duarte was sent to the Health Center to receive medical
treatment. The condition of his health has not been disclosed thus far.

State Judicial Police sources claimed that from the questioning to which Sepulveda
Duarte will be subjected it is expected to obtain the necessary information with

which to locate the attackers.

2909
CSO: 5330/86

68
CONPISCATED HARIHUANA BURNED, CAMPAIGN CONTINUES

h. Hetemoros EL BRAVO in Spanish 11 Jun 82 Sec A p 10

[Text] At noon yesterday, in the presence of a representative of the agent of the
Federal Public Ministry and of Dr Gilberto Yarritu Saab. director of the Health
Center, 12 bags filled with nerihuana which were seized a week ago by the Federal
Judicial Police commander, Benito Estrada Villagonaz. and his agents. were incine-
rated.

The burning of the drugs took place at 1300 hours on Thursday, in a back yard of
the Health Center building.

The 12 bags, allegedly weighing about half a ton of narihuana, were reduced to
ashes in a few minutes, after having been impregnated with fuel to make them
burn quickly.

The burning of this valuable drug shipment was carried out suddenly, to prevent an
attack by the drug traffickers affected by this blow dealt then by the federal
authorities.

At the incineration of the drugs, Alfredo Olivares Osuna, agent of the Federal
Public Ministry. was represented by Felix Moreno. Other persons also witnessed
the burning of the narihuana,which took about 15 minutes.

These drugs were the ones seized at dawn last Saturday on the banks of the Rio
Bravo at the La Brigade communal farm by Federal Judicial Police Coadr Benito
Estrada Villagomer and his agents, after intensive investigations carried out
for several days previously concerning the drug traffic.

Investigations to Combat the Drug Traffic Continue

Moreover. at the Federal Judicial Police Commander's Office. it was announced that
the investigations aimed at identifying the owners of these drugs are being
continued. and also that a constant effort is being made to attach the drug
trafficking through this region.

Every day, the Federal Judicial Police agents tour the area, as well as the banks
of the Rio Bravo, in search of the criminals who are continually taking across the
river to the United States valuable shipments of marihuana and other drugs.

69
The instructions that have been received from the Office of the Attorney General
of the Republic and the director of the Federal Judicial Police, Gen Raul
Hendiolea Cerecero, are to the effect that the drug traffic in to be conheted

insofar as possible, according to the announcenent mde by the local office of
the commander of the Federal Judicial Police.

2909
C80: 5330/86

50
ANTIDRUG ACTION IN SONORA REPORTED
Hermosillo EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 15 Jun 82 Sec A p 7

[Text] Every day, a large nuaber of individuals, nost of whoa cone fro. the south-
ern part of the country, in an attempt to take drugs into the United States. are
arrested in our state by federal agents stationed in different aotorcycle squads
or checkpoints located in gaps and on highways leading to the border towns.

The foregoing state-eat was made by the Federal Judicial Police connander, Rodolfo
Moises Calvo, after he reported the arrest of two individuals who were placed at
the disposal of the agent of the Federal Public Hinistry. Pablo Ernesto Avila
Triana, yesterday, upon being captured separately on two "Three Gold Stars" buses
at the Las Viboras checkpoint. located 12 kilo-eters south of the town.

Francisco Avalos Sanchez, arrested with 36 kilograas of narihuana, and Manuel
Castillo Flores, with 3 kilograas of the sane drug, stated that they were attempt-
ing to sell the narihuana in Tijuana. Baja California, where they were to receive

their pay at the sane tine.

Owing to the close vigilance and the seizures made by these federal authorities,
the price of drugs in the United States, the leading drug consuner in the world.
has risen considerably; something which might represent an attraction, but notso
the penalty iaposed for crinas against health.

In this regard, the agent of the federal Public Ministry, Pablo Ernesto Avila
Triana, said that this crime is one of those aost heavily penalized by the laws.
and that this agency. at the order of the Office of the Attorney General of the
Republic. is currently acting with a "hard hand" against drug traffickers. He
went on to say that an exanple of this is the canpaign undertaken against the
drug traffic. in which lost of the plantations of all types of drugs in the
country have been successfully destroyed.

2909
C80: 5330/86

51
mars

PILL TWICKBR mil—Inasmuch as the federal prosecutor nanaged to gather suffi—
cient evidence against a preeuned reseller of toxic pills. he was reasnded yester-
day to the Federal Court, where his legal status will be decided by toeorrow. Is
is Mario Alberto Vsrals Rubia. a resident of 215 Bolivar, who was captured by
Federal Judicial Police agents last week with over 5.000 toxic pills in his
possession. Arrested together with the aforenentioned individual was Baldeear
Zapata Chaps. who obtained his releaae fron the prosecutor's office because of
lack of evidence for trying hin. According to statensnts nsde by Mario Alberto
Varela to the federal prosecutor, he was engaged in the purchase and sale of toxic
pills among the addicts residing near his hone. to whoa he was selling the pills
for 20-140 pesos apiece. Be clained to have purchased the stinulante in the city
of Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, froa soneone naned Deon, who stole the. froe various
drugstores in that city, where it was reported that the federal police instructed
the Monterrey police to capture hie. By tonnrrow, the legal status of the subject
under street will be decided in the Third District Court, headed by Ricardo Rodriguez
Villarreal, in which the presuned reseller of pills reportedly denied all the
charges eade by the agent of the Federal Public Ministry. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo 31.
DIARIO DE NUEVO LARSDO in Spanish lo Jun 82 p 6) 2909

ZONAL CAMPAIGR CONTINUES-dug Gen Gustavo Grejalee Velasquez. consnder of the
Ninth Military Zone, stated yesterday tlut all Arny units are continuing the
pereanent csnpaign to eradicate the drug traffic and banditry iron the state. lie
said: "we are carrying out the CAMDOR [natihuana-poppy] plan by neane of constant
tours of all corners of the state." he also said that the Any forces are engaged
in a permanent canpaign against gunnen in the state, in coordination with the
members of the various police corps. In this regard. he noted that the use of guns
is very deeply entrenched in the state. near the northern border with the United
States. because nost people who travel in those areas can easily acquire weapons
which enter the state without any great problen. The Ninth nilitary Zone cot-sander
also said that the main purpose of the Dbl-3 plan is to protect the disaster areas
and restore then to noteslity. Once the situation is under control. the general
said that it would he turned over to the competent authorities to begin the
rebuilding of those areas. In cases such as that caused by the Chichonal eruption.
the situation is different, because the Amy is dutybound to provide constant aid.
He also stated that the canpaign against the drug traffic will continue pereanently,
in an stteept to elieinate that serious social problen fron the state. [Text]
[Culiacan El. 801. DE SIM in Spanish 13 Jun 82 p 8] 2909

52
ARMY ANTIDREG TRAINING--Gen Alejandro Sanchez, of the staff, told EL DIARIO about
the constant battle being waged against the drug traffic in rural and urban areas
by the Mexican Army. They are constantly learning more about this. At the present
time, in cooperation with the Masonic Lodge, courses are being given to new members
of the Aray on the nature of drugs and how to detect then, as well as the locations
suited for growing marihuans and poppies. There are also karate courses. Currently,
at the headquarters in this town. there are pots containing small sarihuana and
poppy plants, so that the new members will be up to date on the nature of these
injurious plants, and thus be able to recognize them anywhere in the country. On
land, sea and air, the drug traffic is being combated in Mexico. Many plantations
are being destroyed, in most instances with the use of helicopters and forces
touring the mountains to find the plantations. [Text] [Piedras Regras EL DIARIO

DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 1 Jun 82 Sec 3 p 8] 2909

TRAFFICKBR ESCAPES--Valentin Pena succeeded in evading the action of justice by
jusping over fences and sneaking between houses when the federal police went after
him at a house located in San Antonio between lndependencia and Arteaga Streets.
Valentin and his wife, Olga. were identified as the owners of tha Napoles Cafe.
The woman is being held and aention has also been aade of a Gilberto de la Ross.
The Federal Judicial Police and the agency of the Federal Public Ministry as well
continued to be very close-mouthed about this cause, in which Juan Gaytan, alias
"Juan Reese," and Oziel Bensvides Salinas, an agent of the Police Investigation
Section, have also been arrested. Yesterday, the chief of that section, J. Trinidad
Gonzalez, said that Benavides Salinas had ended his affiliation with that entity
about 3 days earlier. It is presumed that the investigative authorities are
remaining silent about this case in the hope of capturing other ringleaders of

the drug and narcotics traffic and those smuggling arms who have been operating

on the border. It is quite possible that, by Monday, those in custody will be
placed at the disposal of the district cOurt, where the respective proceedings
will continue. The arrest of "Juan Rocas," Olga Pena and Oriel Benavides Salinas
bears out the assumption that there are very iaportsnt people behind then. [Text]
[Nuevo Laredo EL MANANA in Spanish 13 Jun 82 Sec D p 6] 2909

DRUG BURNING PLANRBD--About 800 kilograms of various drugs (marihuana, "peyote."
and toxic pills) which were seized when found in different operations during the
permanent campaign against drug trafficking undertaken by the Office of the
Attorney General of the Republic will be burned on Tuesday, 22 June, on the grounds
of the Fourth Military Zone. The agent of the Federal Public Ministry, Pablo
Ernesto Avila Triana, reported that this will be the second tine so far this year
that drugs are burned. The last "burning." consisting of a ton of aarihuana, took
place last February. Scheduled to attend this event are the regional coordinator
of the permanent campaign against drug trafficking, Aaron Juarez Jimenez; the
attorney general of Justice in the state, Francisco Acuna Griego; the district
judge. Pedro F. Reyes Colin; the Federal Public Ministry agent, Pablo Ernesto Avila
Triana; the Federal Judicial Police commander. Rodolfo Moises Calvo; the commander
of the Fourth Military Zone. Juan Manuel Madrigal Magallon; and the director of

the health Center, Dr Hector Francisco Romero Gutierrez. Avila Trisna said that
the seizures of nearly 800 kilograms of narihuana were ends in different towns and
roads in the state by forces of the Fourth Military Zone, and with the Canador Plan,
by Federal Judicial Police agents. [Text] [Heracsillo EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 19
Jun 82 Sec A p 10] 2909

CSO: 5330/86-87

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

HAX'I’ON Pom-4:1; Gen Hahir Ilasan. head of the Anti-Drug Office in Cairo. as
able to arrest a "drug dealer" whose use is Senir Bayyuni. 32. when he tried
to sell a huge quantity of "Haxton Forte" liquid to one of his agents at a
casino in the Sahil district. The quantity amunted to about 16 thousand
[cubic] centineters and was worth about 32 thousand pounds. The true dealer
admitted that he had turned to dealing in the Haxton Forte liquid after hash-

ish disappeared from the market. The prosecutor ordered hin held in custody.
[Text] [Cairo UK‘I'UBAR in Arabic No 298. 11 Jul 82 p 6]

5300/5020

54

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BR! US

NARmTICS DIswVERIIu‘Ihrough the continuous efforts of the antidrug
squad of Qatvin. 2.25 kg of opiu and one Halters revolver were discovered
free one individual. With the efforts of the Rudsar police force. 1666
rolls of opiun weighing 9.7 kg was confiscated fron another individual.
[0P080863 Tehran ETTELA'A‘I in Persian 13 Jul 82 p la]

BAKHTARAN SEIZURE-Guerds of Central Co-ittee of the Islanic revolution
of lakhtaran discovered and confiscated 1.300 kg of opiu fron three
traffickers. mm reported from Bakhtarsn that this is the second 1.300-kg
opiun ship-ent discovered in the province. [6P150637 Tehran EITELA'AT

in Persian 21 Jul 82 p 4]

ZMEDMI onus HAIL-The officials of the Antisnuggling Departnent of the
Sisten Va Baluchestsn gendarnerie recovered 2 kg heroin, 126 kg hashish,
1,000 packets of Winston cigarettes, a video recorder and 1,563 kg of
foreign tea. during the past week. [GPl71627 Tehran EmLA'A‘l' in Persian

29 Jul 82]

SHIRAZ DRUG SEIZURE-JIM antidrug svuad of the local police department
arrested two Afghan nationals on charges of possessing 1.8 kg of heroin.
Their names are Khek Hal, son of Col khan and Delaver Dalir. son of Shir

Avaz. [6P171I027 Tehran m'h‘l‘ in Persian 29 Jul 82]

HEROIN DIsmWREb-Kernanﬁ‘lhe Revolution Guard of (Kooh-Shahri Keshniran)
in Jiroft discovered 6.75 kg heroin in the possession of eight Afghans.
1he criminals discovered with the narcotics were sent to the Islanic
revolution court of Jiroft. [Cl-‘181929 Tehran JOIﬂiURI-YE BSLMI in Persian

8 Jul 82]

NARGTI‘ICS DISOOVERED—-‘rabris—The headquarters for conhating narcotics of
Tahriz discovered 1.659 kg heroin. 3.156 kg opiua, and 16.2 kg burned oph-
lest nonth. The crininals were sent to the Islamic revolution prosecutor's
office. [GP181931 Tehran JOHKURI-Y! BSLAKI in Persian 8 Jul 82]

OPIUH DISCOVERED IN ZABEDAN—During the last 3 days the headquarters for
contacting narcotics of Sisten Va Baluchestsn Province. discovered 187 kg
opiua and three gms. In these operations five smugglers were arrested.

55
(:oloncl Razavi, the police chief of this province, said: No days ago they
discovered that a band of smugglers hsd snuggled a large amount of narcotics
and hidden it in Zahedan Heights. After investigation, police fomd their
hiding place and arrested five of the smugglers. The police are still
looking for the rest of the smugglers. [GF181956 Tehran Jamal-YE ESLAHI
in Persian 8 Jul 82]

HORHOZCAN DRUG RAUL-41w antidrug squad of the “or-ozgsn Province ennomced
that during the past month it has recovered 9.3 kg heroin. 8.1 kg opim
and 37 drug traffickers have been arrested. Two vehicles used by the.
have also been confiscated. [GP181926 Bender 'Abbes Domestic Service in
Persian 1330 GMT 18 Jul 82]

(30: 5300/5634

56-57
BRIBPS

JAIL FOR mm GO-Bmm-oape Tour-A other of eight who acted as e
go-betveen in e tundra: deal held her heed end subbed efter being jailed
for five years by a Cape Town ngistrate yesterday. I'arieda Sinclair (33)
of Bridgeto‘m as told by the ugietrete that he had no discretionary
powers over the sentence. "If the court hed discretion, a large pert of the
sentence would heve been suspended," the ugistrete, Kr RA. Doreen, said.
The court heerd thet Sincleir needed money because her husbend did not
support their eight children. The yomest is one yeer old. She agreed to
carry loo undrex teblets fro- e "Ierchent” to e "pusher" at the Capetonien
Hotel on Novedaer 26 lost year.--Sape [Text] [Johamesburg Til! CITIZEN in
English 15 Jul 82 p lo]

CSO: 5300/5821

58
INCREASED USE OF MSHISB, RISE I“ CRIN! LINKED
Kinshasa am in French 21 May 82 p 3

[Article by I'Zinga Nsingi: ”Use of hashish and the Increase in Crins in
Kinshasa"]

[Text] Murders, arned robbery and terrorisn in certain parts of the unlighted
areas of the capital illustrate the obvious resurgence of crime in Kinshasa.
The Kinshasa population can only count on the city authorities for its pro-
tection. but this is only possible if overall and sustained actions are mder-
taken to get the better of these robbers and bandits who seen to be increas-
ingly well organised. But who are these toughs and how do they cone to emit
such reprehensible actions?

These bad eggs. very young in most cases, are often our neighborhood children
who are unnployed and suffering fron a lack of training; and there are also
sone arny desertsrs. At first glance it night be thought that the reason for
their action is the presued failure of their life, worsened by their too
precarious socioecononic circumstances. But that cannot justify this conduct.
which goes so far as to inpaverish the poorest, shed innocent blood and do
grave danage to peaceful citizens. '

In fact, the use of hashish by nunerous young Kinshasans has a great part in
the increase of cries in Kinshasa. The latter is not the only consequences of
this use of hashish. Hore than 60 percent of the young Kinshasans confined to
the Neuropsychopathological Center (CNPP) is there because of the bad effects
of hashish use. And onerous witnesses have told us that the current gangs of
toughs who terrorize the unlighted areas of Kinshasa are young people who have
nade up their ninds to do this after taking hashish together. Pro- it they
derive the courage and the strength to unit their crises. These young people.
whose age varies between 15 and 25 years, have recently been organised into
gangs of 10 to 50 persons for carrying out arned robberies and all the other
crines constantly perpetrated lately in Kinshasa.

It is very regrettable to note that the use of hashish no longer really seem
to be forbidden in Kinshasa society. Young people have their suppliers who are
known in certain areas of their sons. Sons streets are said to be constantly
polluted by hashish snoke. Kany police and soldiers who are not housed in
camps openly and publicly snoke hashish. It appears that other drugs. such as

59
15!), whose effects are note to be feared, are already in circulation in the
capital.

The Kinshasa politics-administrative and nilitary authorities should strictly
curb this plague. whose effects on youth are Hell known. Because in addition
to the crines they coundt. these young people who use hashish and other drugs
are, without knowing it, seriously danaging their own health.

9772
C80: 5300/5778
LUSAKA PSYCHIATRIST SAYS mum LACKS HMO! DRUG ABUSE PROM

Lusaka TIMES 01’ ZAMBIA in English 28 Jun 82 p 1

[Excerpt] ZAMBIA does not have a major drug-.abuse problem.
a survey conducted by prominent Lusnlra psydriatrist.
Professor Allan Hawonh has discovered.

II the NM! NM tried but a m type. of
Mme am. PM «no (m M) u
Hewlhbondthuoﬂlylhm “surmount".
W “In M W W8 mac-3mm“
(indodineonmpehkmen m.
suchucodoh Nathan. M 1. M on an
m.mmmm mummw in
command: during "muﬂ"—mm
WWW. lithe ”g“,
quadrant». “WWW

hudiOoamedtMm- «emu-ammo.
man-$.53" um theWofnodems‘l‘:
M "in Marin you-emit
nomindbeacnhennnber ncrbeenfomnueemuhw
merely that W! qualifyforhiﬂucdmdon.-
hymn!“ 'm "We um v little at

n m will“ cloud err-udder
WMMmelsewbercwem also. Much more
mwmmmm mum‘oumw'h
”0.9mm“ "'5' the marine we have sufﬁ-
kﬂ- dentinfoanuoummble us

“WWW- to develop educational mare.
cod m beaug of Ms which will d’ueorm
emu alcohol. cue-bu or mpeoplefromukin; '
other ”demand! madman”

‘ "mm?” ' k'

cem-

end humumdm Dnn mg
calm. Whilemypeouemyget

Pro! Hannah and a small away With it, a definite pro-
amber of M drunk pomon of those who experi-
ucobolmdenoudumbh meadmdmpruinw
ummmmm mules which nigh hue
“Wm" ”mm m. a.

r

Others used seven! dlfko alcohol us m m drug

am - .
over Mal-Mu.
BRIEFS

LIHASSOL OPIUH SBIZUR£--According to what we have learned from Greek-Cypriot
sources. a Linassol police coastal patrol b at interdicted a Turkish notorboat
yesterday afternoon in the waters off Agrotur. Aacertaining during a search
that it was carrying core than a ton of opium POPVY. the boat was taken under
tow and iapounded at Li-assol. The 6-nenber crew. consisting of a Turkish-
born captain. 2 other Turks. 3 Egyptians and 1 Lebanese. was arrested and sent
to the Linassol Central Jail. The boat was towed into Linaasol'a old harbor

area where its opium cargo was seized. [Text] [Nicosia HALKIR 8381 in Turkish
5 Jul 82 p 1]

C50: 5300/5‘35

62
BRIEFS

DRUG SMJGCLERS ARRESTED-—Iuebingen, 13 Jul (DPA)--The police in Tuebingen
have smashed a ring of narcotic dealers who used pensioners as crossborder

couriers. The police arrested four men and three women when of the gang,
which has at least 10 nerbera. The police say that they are smpected of

snuggling about 1 ton of cannabis and 800 grams of cocaine into the Federal
Republic since 1978. The gang is said to have sold drugs for DH million [as

printed] in recent years at a considerable profit. Cannabis bought in
Holland was given to pensioners acting as couriers, who smuggled it across
the border. [Text] [LDl30146 Hamburg DPA in German 1622 GMT 12 Jul 82 Lb]

HEROLN SEIZED--l-‘rankfurt, 12 Jul (DPA)—Last week authorities seized some
32 kilograms of heroin worth at least 0316.5 million at Frankfurt's Rhine-Main

Airport. Arrest warrants were issued for a Pakistani businessman and a
Tanzanian family of three. [Handmrg DPA in German 1635 G41“ 12 Jul 82 L0]

CSO: 5300/2346

63
NAROOTICS DATA FOR 1981 GIVEN
Athens TA NBA in Greek 10 Jun 82 p 6

[Excerpts] Youths 15-30 years of age comprise the najority of those arrested by
police for trafficking in and using narcotics. The fact as well as the findings
that the use of narcotics is increasingly spreading among youths is derived from
the "Report on the Activity of the Cities Police" for 1981.

The Chief of Police, Hr. Nitsos. in presenting the report to the news-en stated.
"We nust emphasize the increase of preaeditated honicides, robberies, and narcotics
which top the list of crines." He added that narcotics are rampant and several
deaths of youths aredueto heroin overdoses.

In the chapter of the report under the heading "The Slow Death at Greece's Thresh-
old." it is reported that "drugs have by now entered our lives" and it is under-
lined "that now and then the police bulletin makes reference to drug use by stu-
dents. a fact uhich has created problems not only for the police and the respons-
ible ministries, but for the parents as well who by now see fro. very near the
great danger which threatens their children."

The data presented give the following picture between 1971 [sic] and 1980 in the
areas of the Cities Police: crimes for 1981: 336. for 1980: 370. a decrease of
9.18 percent.

Present during yesterday's presentation of the "Report on the Activity of the Cities
Police" to the news-en, were the deputy chiefs of police of Athens and Piraeus,
Messrs. Sifakis and Sanbanis. the Chief of Athens' Traffic Department. Mr. Hatsangaa,
and other high-ranking officers.

9731
CSO:5300/5620

66
SURVEY ON NARCOTICS USE AMONG YOUTH
Athens T0 VIHA in Greek 11 Jun 82 p 1

[Text] The average age of drug addicts in Greece took a julp downward in the last
15 years. FrOm an average age of 50 in 1965, today it has reached 18-20, a fact
which justifies the cries of despair heard fron all sides for the hard price that
youth is paying for the goods of the consumer society.

A recent survey among 400 boys and 500 girls of adolescent age revealed that 1.5
percent of the boys and 2.00 percent of the girls declared that they use drugs.

At a slightly higher age, among university students, the results of a study by last
year medical students, revealed that among 220 of their colleagues. 10.‘ percent

of then used drugs at least once. The same informed the researchers that they know
146 adolescents (15-20 years of age) who have become drug users. Of the letter, 68
percent are university students; 35 percent high school students and 17 percent non-
students. The drug they prefer or find with greater ease is hashish. Of these, 76
percent stated that they use hashish while a considerably high percentage (12 per-
cent), in relation to the probable consequences, uses heroin. These data are con-
firned by the Gendarmerie which has ascertained that the majority of the youths ar-
rested for narcotics offenses snake hashish.

It is significant to note that, of those who use drugs, only 5 percent wants free
trade for hashish and even a smaller percentage, two percent, demanded full free-
dom in the use of all narcotics. This evidence makes the need for the founding of
drug rehabilitation centers iaperative in view of the fact that-~at least in theory-
the overwhelming majority of young drug addicts, shows with its answer to the above
question that they are perfectly conscious of the damage engendered by drugs. Paral-
lelly. the founding of counseling centers for adolescent drug addicts which was pro-
posed during the recent Pediatric Conference of Khalkidiki will contribute in the
timely prevention of the progress towards hard drugs (heroin, cocaine, etc.).

In the area for the prevention of the spread of narcotics, there is another element--
the asst ilportant perhaps, but also the least known. The principal centers for

drug trafficking are the discoteques, the bars, the stores with electronic gases

and, naturally, the places where youths are together daily and for many hours: the
high schools and junior high schools.

9731
cs0: 5300/5420

65
LARGEST MARIWJANA SHIPMENT EVER CONPISCA‘IED

Reykjavik NEWS FROM ICELAND in English Jul 82 p 3

[Text]

CSI):

Wee Iceland the envieioned
market (or ind kiioe o! mari-
juana? 0r juet e traneehipoent
point? Or nae thin airfreight
uppeecd to ‘dieappear' in tran-
ait in New York? Pollock: a
prone contemce called by

Reykjavik police authoritlee in a

InidJone. each queedona uede
banner heedlinee. Bot herring
eouelockyhrenktheodde'ere

that the Jamaican connection

would rennin a myetery.

Adetailedatnteaentofdevel-

ounentainthehaﬂllnccaaevea
ieeoedto themndedm

enlediaphowepherevere
.ivenaehaacetetakepictnree

(our chipping cratee; iatereet-
ildydheyvereetnckedinanch
anythettheaddreaeee'aaene
mhiotkedtroenviev.

A criminal court judge ae-

Wmdnuceeeaheeeir'

Fridjooeeoo. commented to the
m “fame was ecu-inn:

with no. ao'it can very nn!a’~‘ '

tuaatr thet thie negotiation
mdiacloeedinthenedia...“
ap’eeeletm m.”‘nw~lw
mmwapreeestorythet
appeared theday hefonwhere
:ziinghy the police m in-

5300/23 35

Actonpenyimlirldideeeonat
thencdiacoalerencevereWil-
lien Iloller. top aide to the
Mtgvﬂschlefolpolicetlriat-
inn aleaon.headoithe
to-eoMendArnolnor

low.

At the end of April. icelandie
authorities received word. it u
cﬂldal at the US. when. that
{oar crat- containiu eho-plue
mode of ntarlinane. addreaaed
to a cartnin Reykjavik content
had been intercepted in New
York. While American dm in.
veaticatere hed no cleee in the

cane. they imported that a
traaeehipnieotiroatlcelendwae

Regular police. marina plain
clothee and travelling in an un-
marked car. trailed the vehicle

v

that moved the cretee. alone
with routine (remit. iron Kenn-
vih Airnort tn Icelandnlr'a ware-
hoeee. in Reykjavik There. ia-

gnarde were peeled
BRIEFS

HEROIN cmcs—uo Dutch nen. Eel-an Cornelia Jacobus. 29. and Ploen

Gersldus, 36, were remanded in custody for a week at Uxbridge yesterday
charged with attempting to import A million pounds' worth of heroin at

Heathrov on June 16. [Text] [London THE DAILY TZLIGKAIH in English
19 Jun 82 p 2]

COCAINE SEIZBD--Cocsine valued at street prices at 170,000 pounds was
seized with firearms, ammunition and a printing press for forged United
States dollars during a weekend house raid. Police also recovered credit

cards and chequebooks. Ivan Peterson, 27, of lergholt Crescent, Stoke
Newington. was charged yesterday with possessing cocaine, a firearm and

ammunition and with having implements for forgery. In addition he was
accused of conspiracy to defraud banks. [Text] [London THE DAILY IELEGRAPH
in English 21 Jun 82 p 8]

cso: 5320/ 35 m

67