FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10333
18 February 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 9/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 8E RESTRICTED FOR OFEICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(F000 9/ 82)

CONTENTS

ASIA
INDONESIA

Marihuana Counerce in Aceh
(mo, 28 NOV 81)aeeoeee oeoeoeeeeeeeoeeeeeeoee-eeeeoeueeco

INDONESIA
Briefs
Narcotics Rehabilitation Center
Marihuana Seized in 1981
[ADS

Illegal Export of Heroin Gives Regine Hard Currency
(Bertil Lintner: INPOMATION, 17 Nov 81)....................

NEW ZEALAND

Nation's Largest Opium Haul on Record Hidden Under House
(THE NEW ZEALAND HERALD, 17 Dec 81).........................

PAKISTAN
Briefs
Harsh Punishment for Trafficking
Heroin Seized at Karachi Airport
PHILIPPINES

Briefs
Antidruge Campaign

-a- [III-WW-l38!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
THAIIAND

Drug Laws Called Ineffective: Kingpins Escape Prosecution
(SIAM RAT SAPPADA WICBAN, 20 Dec 81).......................

Incentives for Tribesmen To Plant Poppies Noted
(Wannawithit; SIAM RAT, 14 Dec 81).........................

VIETNAM

Curing Drug Addicts in Ho Chi Hinh City
(Truong Thin: VIB‘INAH COURIER, Nov 81).....................

LATIN AMERICA

ARGENTINA

Briefs
Drug Traffic Discovered

BERMUDA

Narcotics Squad on Trail of Drug Shipment From London
(THE ROYAL GAZETTE, 24 Dec 81).............................

BOLIVIA

Briefs
Cocaine Produced in 1982
Minister on Cocaine. Terrorism

BRAZIL

Colombian Mafia Using Indians To Work Coca Plantations
(Jose Meirelles Passos; ISTOB. 13 Jan 82). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

Greatest Seizure of Cocaine Made in Sao Paulo
(0 GIOBO. 20 Jan 82).......................................

Major Marihuana Ring Linked with Organized Crime in South
(JORNAL DO BRASIL, 26 Dec 81)..............................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Two Foreigners Arrested With LSD in Bahia
(O ESTADO DB SAD PAUUD, 19 Jan 82)..........................

Briefs
Addiction Rise in Bauru
French Arrest Trafficking Suspect

COLOMBIA

CUBA

PERU

EGYPT

Three Arrested in Bogota for Cocaine Trafficking
(EL TIM) 8 J” 82)UIO....0.00.00.00.00.00...O'COOOOOOIIO.

Foreign Ministry Issues Statement on Drugs
(PRBm' 28 am a)OIOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOIOIICOIOOOODIQQOOIO

Increased Drug Consumption in Line Investigated
(BL MIC, 30 Dec 81)coco-eeeoeaaoeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeesno

Justice Minister Condemns Foreign Innates' Hunger Strike
(BL COMBRCIO, 5 Jan 82).....................................

Briefs
PIP Narcotics' Operations

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

Large Cocaine Haul Made at Airport
(ALPAKHBAR, 4 Dec 81)........................................

Big Cache of Drugs, Valuables Unearthed in aI-Ma'adi
(ALPAKHBAR, 12 Dec 81).......................................

Big Drug Transaction Thwarted
(All-ABM“; 26 Dec 81)....eeooeeeeoooooooIeOeoeoeeeeeeeeseoeeo

Irmense Volume of Drugs. Pills Seized
(Husayn Ghanim: ALPAHRAM, 27 Dec 81).........................

Massive Narcotics Stash Unearthed
(Husayn Ghanim: ALPAHRAM. 30 Dec 81).........................

Big North Coast Drug Haul Described
(Paruq al-Shadhili. Hunir al-Masiri: ALPAKHBAR' 12 Dec El)...

you orn‘cm. use ONLY
PUK urn-Ham. UDI'. UNI-l

IRAN

Hundreds of Kilograns of Heroin, Opium Reported Seized
(KBYHAN' 17 Jan 82)OOOOOICOOOOOOOOQOIOIIOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOCOO

Briefs
Tehran Narcotics Haul
Pars Drug Seizure

Kashan Drug Seizure
Khoranabad Drug Seizure

Mashhad, Zahedan Heroin Hauls

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

Largest Drug Raid in Country's History Detailed
(Hahir al-Kiyali; AL-KHALIJ, 22 Dec 81).....................

WEST EUROPE

DENMARK

Police Drug Patrol Chief: Christiania To Have Long Impact
(Anders W119; BBRLINGSKB TIDBNDE, 3 Dec 81).................

Greenland Youth Hard Hit by Drugs in Copenhagen 'Free City'
(Kirsten Sorrig; BBRLINGSKB TIDBNDB. 21 Jan 82).............

Briefs
International Hashizh Smuggling Gang Broken
Christiania Drug Seizures
Drug Trading
Drug Raid in Christiania

DENMARK/GREENLMm

Briefs
Hashish. Marihuana Trafficking

FRANCE
Briefs
Customs 'Snash' Smuggling Network
Hashish Seized at Orly Airport
Israeli Heroin Dealers Arrested
GREECE

Athens, Piraeus Drug Ring Members Arrested
(TO VIMA, 12 Jan 82)........................................
Major Drug Dealer Sought
(n N”, 11"." ”)00000000I00.00.00.0000000000ICOIOOOOIOOO

NORWAY

Barsheet-Bver Sentence Handed Down in Heroin Case
(ARBEIDBRBIADE, 5 Dec 81).................................

Briefs
'Crisis Phones' for Abusers

SWEDEN

Customs Official Says Agency Unable To Control Drugs Plow
(Sune Olot'eon: SVBNSKA DAGBLADET, 28 Dec 81)..............

Briefs

Custans 'Druge Funds Increased
Treatment Centers' Ponds Increased

Panily Snuggled He. Sin Prou Turkey

TURKEY

Armenian Terrorists Allegedly Shift to Gold Smuggling
(Mehnet Balikcioglu: TBRCUHAN, I7. 21 Jan 82).............

Istanbul Operation
Anatolia Operation
HARIHUANA COMMERCE IN ACEH
Jakarta TEMPO in Indonesian 28 Nov 81 p 66

[Excerpts] Narcotics activity has intensified, particularly in large cities like
Jakarta and Surabaya. In those two locations, police have seized 7 kilograms of
dry marihuana. Police in Aceh, the source of illegal drugs, have had difficulty
in eliminating marihuana, because it is hidden by being grown with other crops.

Police successes this month, which did not come easily, indicated the difficulty
in breaking the narcotics ring in Indonesia. Police Major Sumarsono, commander
of the Surabaya Detective Unit, acknowledge4 the difficulty in dealing with the
network. "Although the suspects readily admitted their guilt, they did not di-
vulge the names of others," he noted. All five narcotics suspects arrested in
Surabaya this year have remained silent about accomplices.

All narcotics traffickers in large cities use a closed network. "Their organiza-
tion is really strong, and closed," said Hindarto, chief of the Metropolitan
Jakarta Detective Unit. Narcotics abuse is highest in the Jakarta area, account-
ing for 1,358 of the 2,877 cases throughout Indonesia for the period 1974-1980.
The primary drug in those cases is marihuana.

Narcotics traffickers shrewdly grow marihuana on farms in Southeast Aceh for
distribution throughout Indonesia, and abroad. Lieutenant Colonel Sudarmadji.
chief of detectives for Banda Aceh, said that the marihuana is harvested by peo-
ple in Rikib Gaib and Terangan Regencies, which border on North Sumatra.

Marihuana is then transported to Kutacane. and then to Medan. If they fear police
interception, they use an alternate route, involving 5 days journey by foot.
Marihuana goes from Blang Pidie in South Aceh to Sibolga or Banda Aceh for fur-

ther distribution.

The routes are changed constantly. If the traffickers are worried, they send
marihuana in relays, under various disguises. Some people are specially paid to
bring marihuauu on long journeys thrOugh the hills to North Sumatra. Lepers,

who are not under suspicion, and are feared, are paid to bring marihuana through
areas under police supervision. Sudarmadji, himself. once arrested a leper bring-
ing many kilograms of marihuana for smuggling to Malaysia via small islands in
Aceh.
The potential profits for illegal narihuanu commerce are breathtaking. A kilogram
of dry narihuana is worth 3,000 rupiahs in Aceh, but the price leaps to 75,000
Tuvlahs in Medan, and 100,000 rupiahs and up in Jakarta, and more, abroad. Because
of that, Aceh is known to Interpol as a prime center for narcotics activity in the
scuthern area, like the Golden Triangle in Thailand.

Eradicating that traffic, according to Sudarnadji, is difficult, because the loca-
tions are hard to reach, requiring a journey of several days by foot. Marihuana
plots are dispersed, and grown in tobacco fields. making them hard to detect.
Sudarnadji, himself. once burned a marihuana plot of 3 hectares. "That was one
of dozens in the area," he said.

Sudarmadji proposes a large-scale eradication operation, with sufficient personnel
and funds. In addition, the local population must be educated not to grow illegal
crops again.

The Aceh Police Regional Command does not have sufficient means for such a task.
Only a few men in the command are narcotics personnel, according to a source.

"They have not been given the skills or training to carry out their work," he
noted.

9197
050: 5300/8313
BRIEFS

NARCOTICS REHABILITATION CENTER--Police Lieutenant Colonel. Hrs Hurni Tukinan,
chief of the Metropolitan Jakarta Police Regional Command's Pamardi Siwi Section,
said that the number of narcotics victims being treated at the anardi Siwi Reha-
bilitation Center is declining. The colonel told a group from Commission III
(Law) on Wednesday morning that narcotics addiction generally stems from family
problems. The Commission III party, headed by N. Agus Djamili, sought information
on juvenile delinquency and drug abuse encountered by the police. "Pamardi Siwi,"
begun in 1974, is handled directly by the Police Regional Command, with support
from the regional government. Sixty youths are currently in custody, including
some who were arrested, and others committed by their parents. Parents who commit
their children are charged 4,000 rupiahs per month. Pamardi Siwi functions in-
clude running the Rehabilitation Center, and responsibility for the protection,
supervision and well-being of juveniles. Lieutenant Colonel Murni Tukinan said
the decline in narcotics abuse is due to a reduction in heroin smuggling. Now,
juveniles use illegal drugs in combination with alcohol, which can result in in-
ternal damage, and marihuana use is increasing. [Excerpts] [Jakarta SINAR
HARAPAN in Indonesian 26 Nov 81 p 2] 9197

MARIHUANA SEIZED IN l981--Djakarta. 10 Jan--Indonasian police have seized 2.2 tons
of marijuana in 1981, a 168.8-per-cent increase over 1980's figure of 1.3 tons.
plice said Saturday. Marijuana was previously grown only in the strong Muslim pro-
Vince of Aceh. in northern Sumatra, 1.100 miles northwest of Djakarta, but the cul-
tivation of the hemp plant has spread to several other provinces throughout Sumat-

ra and Java, police said.-NAB/UPI [Text] [Rangoon TNE HORKING PEDPLB's DAILY in
English 12 Jan 82 p 7]
ILLEGAL EXPORT 0P HBROIN GIVES REGIME HARD CURBENCY
Copenhagen INFORMATION in Danish 17 Nov 81 p 6
[Article by Bertil Lintner]

[Text] A relief map of Laos hangs on the wall of the newly opened Museum of the
Revolution in Vientiane. Blinking lights and small symbols indicate where the
country's different resources are found. Gold. silver, precious stones, coal.
minerals, coffee. water power, and timber. But with the exception of water power,
timber, and perhaps coffee, there is nothing of value to be exploited in Laos.
Actual geological investigations have never been undertaken, and most of the
resources exist only on the map in Vientiane.

0n the other hand, opium is the only profitable product which Laos traditionally

has had to offer. The situation of the mountain farmers is not much different than
in other places in the Golden Triangle in Thailand and Burma. But Laos has never
been shy abOut opium. The big opium dealers have not been guerrilla leaders like
Khun Sa, but highly placed people in the Laotian administration. In colonial times
the business was conducted by the French state monopoly, Regie d l'Opium, and the
tax on opium was one of the most stable sources of income for the central government.

The governments of independent Laos did not abandon the opium policy of the French.
For example, the previous finance minister, Sisouk na Champassak, during a BBC
interview in 1970 said that, "the only export we can develop is opium, and there-
fore we should increase its production and export."

During the war in Indochina, the opium of the mountain tribes was purchased by
rightist elements in the government and by Corsican syndicate. At that time the
cigarette factory number 555 housed one of the largest heroin laboratories in Laos.
"The opium king" was none other than the country's military commander-in-chief,
General Duane Rattikone. The CIA aided willingly by flying the opium from the
mountains to heroin laboratories in the lowlands. The purpose was to secure politi-
cal support from the Laotian rightists and the mountain people, the Hmnong, who
were the basic element in the CIA's 'secret army' in Laos. That is now history and
generally known.

No Reports

But what has happened since the Pathet Lao-liberation movement assumed power in
1975? According to the official position, opium is now produced only for medical
use--for the country's own needs and for export to pharmaceutical industries in the
Soviet Union, Vietnam and Bulgaria.
An investigation of Laos' current opium problem is hampered by the fact that the
country's government has consistently refused to send reports to the International
Narcotics Control Board (INCB) in Vienna, a UN entity which has the responsibility
of checking up on narcotics traffic in the countries which have signed the United
Nations' Convention on Narcotics. Laos has done so, and the refusal of the

Laotian Government to provide information is itself a vioJation of the conventions
which it has signed.

Sameu Houtharay worked during the years 1975-79 as under-secretary of the ministry
of education, which handled contacts with the UN regarding this question. Today,

he is a refugee in Thailand and highly critical of the government which he himself
helped create in 1975. His testimony raises the first suspicion that the official
statements from Vientiane are not in agreement with reality.

"Every year we received a request from the INCB to send in reports on the cultivation
of opium. But I had clear directives from above not to answer the UN letters. With
a laugh, they ended up in the wastebasket."

Traffic Continues

The international narcotics police in Bangkok, which includes representatives from
nine countries, Interpol and the United Nations' Narcotics Office are convinced
that the illegal opium commerce in Laos has not ceased. A European narcotics agent,
with Bangkok as his base of operations, said to INFORMATION:

"No one believes that all that opium which is produced in Laos is for medicinal use.
We know that heroin is regularly smuggled over the Mekong River to Nong Khai and
from there to the south in trucks disguised as timber transports. Heroin, in can-
trast to opium and morphine, has no medical value whatever. It is pure heroin number
3 or 4 which comes out of Laos.

'1he Laotian authorities were invited to a meeting on narcotics at Chiang Mai in
November 1980. But they were not interested in coming'whenonly the rich have some
narcotic problems.‘ As you see, they are very cooperative...."

Some members of the police furthermore maintain that new heroin laboratories have
been established in the BGL brewery in Vientiane and in a detergent factory by the
eight kilometer marker on the road to Tha Deua, from where the ferry goes to Nong
Khai in Thailand.

The director of the two state-owned enterprises is Iem Norasing and is a well-known
businessman in Vientiane. The fact that Norasing can afford, in an ostensibly socialis
state, to drive around in an imported Ford Mustang perhaps says something about his
position in the Laotian hierarchy. He works directly under the ministry of trade

and indusrry and according to refugee sources in Thailand, has very good relations
with minister-president Kaysone Phomvihance.

Good contacts with the country's most important leaders made it possible for Norasing
to obtain at the end of 1977 a license from the ministry of trade and industry to
import acetic anhydride, the most important of the chemicals used to convert opium
into heroin. A former official in that ministry, who was questioned by the inter-
national narcotics police, stated that in October of the same year he was personally
responsible for the delivery of I. (mm of opium to Numalug'u "down-gum luvluly."
The raw material was taken by two trucks from one of the ministry's warehouses on
the orders of Haisouk Saysompang, who was at that time chief of the ministry's
section for "cooperative goods." It is not at all surprising that the raw opium

came directly from the ministry. The former top official Sameu Hotharay explains
why:

"The opium of the mountain tribes is picked up by the Laotian air force at cultivation
points in San Neua, Phon Saly and so forth. It is flown south via Xieng thunag and
Luang to Vientiane's airport, Hattey. It is not clear exactly what happens to the
opium then. Only very highly placed people in the government know. Those of us on a
somewhat lower level were told that it was a ‘party matter' and that it would be best
if we did not ask too many questions."

Other Laotian sources and reliable Western narcotics police sources state that opium
and heroin are flown on to the border villages of Paksane, Thakhek, Savannakhet and
Pakse in southern Laos. They are smuggled from there into Thailand with timber
transports. A lieutenant in local narcotics police in Udorn Thani--the regional
center for northeastern Thailand--confirms this information in an interview.

"Laotian narcotics--opium, heroin and marijuana itself--are smuggled over the border
in several places. It is shipped to Udorn Thani, where it is repacked in suller
containers for further distribution and sale."

More Being; Intercepted

Confiscations of Laotian narcotics in Thailand has increased significantly in recent
years. On 20 October 1980 an automobile was involved in an accident in the vicinity
of the ferry slip in Nong Khai. The car had just come over from Vientiane, and
after the accident it was discovered that it had 8 kilograms of pure heroin number 5.
packed in small bags stamped with the cannon trademark, "Double UD Globe Brand."

0n 1 May this year 1.6 kilograms of heroin were confiscated outside St. John's

School in Bangkok. The intermediary dealers stated during the police hearing that
the narcotic came from Laos. In August the police in Loei caught three Laotians
red-handed with 17.8 kilograms of raw opium by the Mekong River. It was, according
to the arrested, not the first time that they had smuggled a large quantity of narcotics
into Thailand from Laos.

Something which causes a high degree of concern among the narcotics police in Bangkok
is that Laos has been for several years a haven for Poonsiri Chanyasak, a notorious
top man in the narcotics world of The Golden Triangle. Poonsiri operated from
Thailand during the 1960's and 1970's and built up his heroin empire around the
Honey night club in Bangkok. Connections extended to the illegal markets in Hong
Kong, the Philippines, Laos, South Vietnam, the United States and Western Europe.

Poonsiri was arrested in March 1974 when the police moved against his haunts in
Bangkok. Four Hong Kong 'business connections' were sentenced to long prison terms.
But Poonsiri disappeared from the police custody under mysterious circumstances, in
which fantastic bribery sums were involved.
Narcorics Dealer Exposed

Poonsir; disappeared without a trade, and only last year was it revealed that he was
in Laos. He had, under the pseudonym Thao Sethahirath, opened an export-import firm
on Rue Sethathirath in central Vientiane. The firm is called Rasita Imports Ltd.,
and is involved officially in selling tractors, bulldozers, and highway machinery.
On his business card Poonsiri is represented as a 'governnent supplier'. At the
time of theexpose,he had already visited Hong Kong several times, supplied with a
Laotian diplomatic passport. But it was quickly pointed out that Poonsiri no longer
dealt in narcotics. The assurances were not particularly convincing, especially
when Poonsiri's chief assistant was identified as the well-known director and
businessman Iem Norasing.

A number of Poonsiri's henchmen from the time in Thailand have been arrested during

the years Poonsiri was 'missing,‘ that is, safe in Laos. All had heroin in their
possession.

As the old records were dug up and the puzzle put together, it became more and more
difficult to maintain the facade that Poonsiri was only a law-abiding importer of
tractors. Something had to be done. He was arrested by the Laotian authorities

in January of this year, and charged with trying to bribe Laotian civil servants and
smuggling in goods from Thailand--a strange charge in a country where bribery is a
general practice and under normal circumstances never leads to prosecution. Nor
was narcotics mentioned in connection with the case. Poonsiri has not yet appeared
in court 10 months after the arrest. His firm continues to function without

restrictions, and his assistant Norasing is still a free man. Critics say the
arrest was a sham.

Strong Indications

It is naturally impossible to show that the narcotics traffic from Laos is organized
by the country's government. But the evidence is strong, and it is maintained without
doubt that Laos' narcotics industry functions with government approval. That is not
in the least surprising. Poverty-striken Laos suffers from an acute shortage of
foreign hard currency.

The Pathet-Lao government has only accepted the bitter reality which Sisouk
Champassak pointed out 11 years ago. Nothing has changed in principle in Laos.
Vientianne's old opium barons have only been exchanged for new ones.

6893
C50: 5300/2100
NATION'S LARGEST OPIUM HAUL ON RECORD HIDDEN UNDER 30083

Auckland THE New ZEALAND HERALD in English 17 Dec 81 p 4

 

m MWmeMw Mm mwmmm:m

 

ﬂewmm w

m..mmmu mwm mmmwnmwmmm
mmmmmzm .M m r:
m $me ”mm.
WWMMWW a mmmmmmmnwm
mmwmmmmwmmmmwm
“mam “mmmmmm
m

m

5320/9116

C80:
BRIES

HARSH PUNISHMENT FOR TRAFFICKING-A new law providing ”very harsh punishments" to:
those involved in the smuggling of narcotics is on the anvil. The draft of the
proposed law has been approved by Pakistan Narcotics control Board (PFCB) and the
Pakistan Customs. Mr G. Ashraf Jahangir, Member (Customs), Central Board of Revenue
(can) said in Karachi. Referring to recent Customs seizures of norcotics including
heroin from various parts of the country. he said some were of more than 200 kilos
of heroin adding that it speaks of the seriousness of the problem. Asked about the
reasons of smuggling of Pakistani currency, he said this was due to the fact that
the Pakistani rupee fetched good price abroad and was in great demand, until re-
cently. Following a number of steps taken by the Pakistan Government. he said.

the exchange rate of Pakistani rupee which was 45 dirhams to Rs 100 had come down
to 35 dirhams to Rs 100 recently. The decision to accept duty in foreign exchange
for accompanied baggage of returning passengers from abroad had also helped in
bringing down the demand of Pakistani rupees abroad. [karachi DAWN in English

29 Jan 82 p 16]

HEROIN SEIZED AT KARACHI AIRPORT-—Sind Crime Branch made a seizure of 14 kilograss
of heroin worth over Rs. 15 million (Rs. 150 million street value) at the Karachi
Airport on Saturday night. Two persons--Ahaad. a resident of Bahadurabad and career
Abdul Qadeer, a residentof Orangi Township--were arrested. A police party led by
SP Sardar Abdul Aziz in a lightning raid at the airport intercepted a Suzuki van
driven by accused Ahmad and recovered six kilograms of the fine quality heroin while
on the way to the airport. The grilling of the accused led to the arrest of career
Abdul Qadeer who was sitting in the airport restaurant with four kilograms of heroin.
He was actually waiting for the remaining quantity and a "signal" from the Masters.
He had a ticket for Amsterdam and was to board a PIA flight scheduled to leave at
2.30 a.a. on Sunday morning. Accused Qadeer led the police party to his Orangi
Township house from where another four kilos of heroin was recovered. Intensive
questioning of accused is on to establish their contacts within and outside Pakis-
tan and the details of the Operation. [Text] [Karachi DAHN in English 1 Feb 82 p 3]

cso: 5300/5630
BRIEFS

ANTIDRUGS CAMPAIGN-The Education Ministry has launched a nationwide intensified
school-based and community-oriented drug abuse prevention and control program.
Education Minister Onofre Corpuz said the program was prompted by the alarming
rise in cases of drug abuse in schools and connunitiea. The progran will stress
preventive education and information. The Dangerous Drugs Board and UNESCO are
supporting the program. According to the education minister, the program will
concentrate on the southern Tagalog region, near netro Manila, in the north Bicol
region, and in the central Visayas area. [Text] [EKOBOlZ6 Manila Far East
Broadcasting Colpany in English 2330 GMT 7 Feb 82]

C80: 5300/5629

10
GANJA PLANTS SBIZED—Officials of the Excise Department at Hanbantola seized 150,000
nature ganja plants following a raid on a 15-acre plantation in Sellakataragana.
They also recovered 225 gallons of illicitly distilled liquor. Five sen arrested

in this connection were produced before the Be-bantota Magistrate, Mr Lyril Hunukun-
burs. who remanded then till January 29. The raid was conducted by a teen of

excise men. headed by Excise Inspector Anton Seneviratne, OIC, Hanbantota. The
Assistant Comisaioner of Excise (Southern Division) Mr H. Weber is directing
investigations. [Text] [Colombo DAILY ms in English 25 Jan 82 p 1]

080: 5300/4921

11
BRIEFS

DRUG SEIZURB-Taiven narcotics agents have seized cone 4 pounds of heroin from

-elnugglere in the past weekend. The heroin has a street value of 253,000 0.8.
dollars. It was discovered from the luggage of a Chinese couple from Halnysie.
[0H06l307 Taipe International Service in Englieh 0100 GMT 3 Feb 82]

080: 5300/2159

12
DRUG LAWS CALLED INEPPECTIVE: KINGPINS ESCAPE PROSECUTION
Bangkok SIAH RAT SAPPADA HICHAN in Thai 20 Dec 81 pp 7-9
lArticle: "The Heroin Kingpins, Influence Above the Law“]

[Text] Concerning narcotics suppression, every government up to the present
has proclaimed that this is an important policy for really suppression the
drug trade. Drug laws have been revised to increase penalities ranging all
the way to death for drug producers. Drugs have been burned for all to see.
Plans for destroying the poppy fields of the hill tribes have been made

in order to create drug free zones in the north in the Golden Triangle area.
But all of these things are a deception. How many heroin kingpins have been
arrested and punished in accord with the laws. Usually, they are able to
escape through some loophone in the justice system, either during the investigation
after arrest, after being accused, during court deliberations or after being
sent to prison. The heroin kingpins are the root of the drug problem.

“Lao Su,” an internationl drug trafficker and producer, was once arrested
but he escaped from prison just several days before he was to be executed

as ordered by the Revolutionary Council. He faked illness and then escaped
from his hospital room. He has returned to producing narcotics and exporting
them abroad as usual at Doi Lang near the Thai-Burmese border. And he has
strong armed forces for protection. He was under arrest between 14 July

and 20 August 1977. He was arrested along with Mr Lao Pan. They had 122
grams of heroin, 22 grams of morphine and 14 kilograms of cooked opium on
them. Only Hr Pan was executed.

In order to arrest a heroin kingpin, the narcotics suppression units must
spend a long time investigating their activities. But after making an arrest,
instead of these people being justly punished in accord with the law, after
passing through the various stages of prosecution, only the “small fry"

are left to be punished. The kingpins always escape the hand of the law.

As for the influential drug trafficking groups along the border, such as
the 93rd Division and Khun Sa's group, it can almost be said that no one
dares touch them.

Police Major General Phao Sarasin, the secretary-general of the Office of
the Narcotis Control Board (ONCBL often claims that the current laws do

13
not really provide support for arresting the major drug traffickers. The
present legal system is based on having clear evidence, that is, the criminals
must [be caught withl the evidence in their possession before they can be
punished. But these capitalists never handle the drugs themselves. The only
evidence that can be found is circumstantial evidence that depends on the

time in which the investigation is made. These capitalists thus have a great
chance to escape punishment. Thus, the laws must be revised so that broader
arrests can be made. It looks as if the main issue has been lost sight of.

In this situation, narcotics control units once carried on operations and.
scored a victory. They were able to make arrests, with those arrested being
among the most wanted traffickers in the world, without any evidence {in
their possession]. This was the case of Hr Rubengkia and Mr Udom Atsawaitthiwathrn,
who were arrested on ll July 1973. [Officials seized]2.5 tons of heroin

and 76 kilograms of morphine in the Roi To area near the border between

Surat Thani and Chumphon provinces. Article 17 was used and they were held

for trial by the court. The lower court, the appellate court and the Supreme

Court all sentenced each man to 40 years in prison, relying on the evidence
obtained from the investigation. There is no need to have a law for jailing
suspects as called for by Police Major General Phao. The only thing necessary

is to make use of the aims of the existing laws. If this is done it will

be possible to prosecute drug traffickers. It is not necessary to revise

the laws as has been called for.

It is at the prosecution and trial stage that the “heroin kingpins" are

most able to escape. In some cases, they have mysteriously disappeared at

the Supreme Court stage and final verdicts have nerver been reached. Concerning
these cases, there is only great mystery and suspicion. For example, there

is the case of Mr Phunsiri, or Tong, Chanyasak, who was arrested on 9 March 1974
along with five Hong Kong chemists. This was the first time in 10 years

that a refinery had been seized in the Lat Phrao area of Bangkok. Mr Phunsiri,
one of the top traffickers in the world. escaped to Laos. He set up a refinery
and is presently sending drugs into the northeastern region of Thailand.

Mr Phunsiri and the files on hinlwereturned over to the public prosecutor.
But the public prosecutor in that period, when Mr Charun Isaraphakdi was
the director-general of the Department of Public Prosecution, refused to
prosecute the case. saying that there was not enough evidence. But when
the Police Department protested, they ordered that the case be prosecuted.
But in the meantime, Mr Phunsiri fled and he has not yet been recaptured.
From an investigation, it has been learned that Mr Phunsiri is still in
Vientiane and that he regularly travels back and forth between Nong Khai
and Vietiane. As for the five Hong Kong chemists, the court sentenced them
to 58 years 6 months in prison.

Another case of a heroin kingpin who is one of the leading traffickers in
the world is the case of Mr Sukri Sukonphirom, or Suichiwan Saehoi. He was
arrested on 22 March 1975 together with 25 kilograms of heroin. The suspect
confessed and his case was sent to the public prosecutor, who ordered that
a new investigation be conducted and that he be allowed to post bail. It
turned out that Mr Suichiwan, who was involved with Mr Rubengkia in the
drug trade, was sentened to 28 years in prison. However, he had fled while
out on bail.

That is not all. There is also the case of Mr Pakyoklin, a heroin kingpin.
Narcotics suppression units had to arrest him two times. This man. a Haw
Chinese, was an international trafficker who regularly shipped [drugs] between
Laos, Thailand and France. He was first arrested on 24 Hay 1976 along with
four others. He had hidden 5 kilograms of heroin in a golf bag that was

to be sent to Australia. When his case was turned over to the public prosecutor,
the prosecutor refused to prosecute him, saying that there was not enough
evidence. But when the Police Department objected, the public prosecutor
ordered him prosecuted. But Mr Pakyoklin quickly escaped, leaving behind

his accomplices, including Mr Luang Huamkhaem, a citizen of Hong Kong, and

his assistants. They were sentenced to 20 years in prison. After his arrest
the second time, he was sentenced to 46 years 8 months in prison.

The public prosecutor is not the only obstacle in suppressing narcotics.

At the trial stage, cases have “vanished" and the suspects have fled. Based
on investigations, one such ca.a is that of Mr Ari Chunyaphadikun, Mr Racha
Saelim and their accomplices. They were arrested on 30-31 December 1976

with 20 kilograms of heroin. This was a very important case. Mr Ari was
considered to be one of the most wanted heroin kingpins in the world because
he was an international drug trafficker. He operated in the south, in Bangkok
and in Laos. He was one of the first peOple to hide drugs in double-bottom
suitcases. The court sentenced his accomplices to 40 years in prison. Hr

Ari was sentenced to 80 years in prison. But it turned out that Mr Ari posted
bail while the case was in the appellate court and he fled. The case that

was sent to the Supreme Court has never been decided.

Even though a case may pass the prosecution and trial stages and the person
is sentenced to prison, heroin kingpins can still make a mockery of the
government's drug suppression policies at all stages and in various ways.
For example, there is the case of Mr Siri Sirikun, one of the leading heroin
kingpins in the world. He was arrested along with two other people on 5
October 1976. Also seized were 9 kilograms of heroin. The court sentenced
him to 33 years 4 months in prison. While the case was being appealed, he
posted bail by forging a court seal and fled from Bang Khwang Prison, going
to Pinang Island in Malaysia. He sold chemicals and smuggled drugs into

the south until he was finally arrested by Malaysian officials and extradicted
back to Thailand, where he was again imprisoned.

As for this arrest of Mr Siri Sirikun, this did not result from investigations
by Thai officials. Narcotics suppression officials themselves are afriad

of the political and financial influence of the heroin kingpins and if they
are arrested, they are immediately released through some loophole in the
justice system. Thus, officials aim at arresting only the small fry. Even

so, they too escape from jail. For example, there is the case of Mr Buntha
Sombanya and Mr Sanguan Banchakhan, who were important transporters for

the ﬂaw Chinese and who transported drugs from the north to Bangkok. They

were able to escape from jail and escape the suppression Division. They have never
been recapture .

15
Malaysia helped capture Mr siri because Thailand once captured Hr Tanhokkhun, or
Hokkhun, Saetang, a Halaysian Chinese who was wanted very much by Malaysian
officials. He was an international trafficker. Thai officials arrested

him at Soi Thong Lo, Sukhumwit Road, on 1 December 1977. The court senteneced
him to 48 years in prison. It has been learned that he died in prison and

did not have a chance to again engage in heroin trafficking in Malaysia.

There is only one heroin kingpin who has not escaped and that is Mr Changcheng-
ching, or Bunlong, Saechang. He was arrested together with his accomplices

and wassentenced to 20 years in prison in accord with Article 27. however,

he may receive a pardon on the occasion of the 200-year Rattanakosin celebrations.

Thailand's 1919 Narcotics Act is thought to be the only law in the world

that stipulates the death penalty for drug producers and for those who import
or export drugs. If the intention is to sell drugs or if a person has more
than 20 grams in his possession, which is considered as possession with
intent to sell, the penality is death also.

However, stipulating suchstiffpenalties in the laws is more of a scare
tactic. Therehave been many times when the narcotics suppression units have
encountered problems concerning great political and financial influence,
influence which has been used to escape from places used to punish people
in accord with the law. In particular,cnncerning the international drug
traffickers who are wanted throughout the world, it can be said that they
escape every time using various secret and mysterious methods.

Thus, the government's burning of narcotics and its destruction of poppy

plants. the "heart" of the hill tribes, is just an act to fool people throughout
the world. The hope is that foreign governments will think that Thailand

is sincere about suppressing narcotics and that they will provide more money.
But in reality, the main purpose of this great act is to have the United

Nations and the United States "see" and this will not have any effect on

the influence of the narcotics traffickers.

11943
CSO: 5300/4591

16
INCENTIVES FOR TRIBESHEN TO PLANT POPPIBS NOTED
Bangkok SIAM RAT in Thai 14 Dec 81 p 3
[Monday Conversation column by Wannawithit: 'Rectitude or Survival']

[Text] Between the 'rectitude" of one group and the "survival" of the whole,
which is the more important?

If this question were asked of people around the world, regardless of whether
theywere illegals in some country or civilized people in a penthouse, lost
poeple would choose ”survival.”

An event that is taking place in the intricate mountains in the northern

part of Thailand has played a part in generating this question. while learning
about this event will not give anyone any pleasure, I feel that it is necessary
to discuss this. It is my hope that after hearing about this, some people

will have some views on this question.

I had business which took me to the north for several days last week. Chiang
Mai was the first province that I stopped in. The weather was cold and there
was a breeze. This made the city and the people seem cool and tranquil like
the weather -- the cool breezes and warn rays of the sun admidst all the
pretty flowers helped create the exquisite atmosphere. Thus, the lives of
all the people in the city seemed peaceful and happy.

But while peace was spreading eveiywhere in the plains there. in many places
in the mountains, things were going up in flames.

And these flames were burning brightly, fueled by the question of, if it
is no longer possible to survive, what form will man's struggle for the
last minute of life take?

There will be a major drive to destroy the poppy fields in the mountains,
a drive that will last from this month to February.

“Opium“ is the basis for many types of well-known drugs such as heroin,

white heroin. amphetamines, stimulants and so on. Everything derived from

opium is important. Therefore, if we are to suppress narcotics. we must
suppress opium. This has been known for a long time and is generally understood.

17
The United Nations has established a large annual budget (which can be used
freely) for this. The narcotics control boards in some countries have received

large amounts of money (both from their government and from the United Nations)
for the same reason.

But even so, the amount of opium in the world has not decreased as intended.
And in many countries it is still easy to buy and sell drugs.

”Thailand” is one country that has been cited as being a fertile country
and an important producer (of narcotics). In the past when the leaders of
the country began to 'emerge' and go visit other countries, our country
began to engage in "narcotics suppression“ activities.

As more and more suppression activities were carried on, some powerful people
became richer and richer and more and more problems were created for the
people, who sympathized [with the officials] about what to do in order to
solve the problem of hill tribes making a living by growing poppy. There
were also more and more rumors and actions to the effect that some powerful
people who did not come from wealthy backgrounds were becoming more and

more wealthy and powerful because of their incomes from opium and other
narcotics (which they either sold themselves or, faking ignorance. let others
sell).

Since these powerful and clever people were able to carry on dishonest activities
by concealing the evidence, to halt the spread of narcotics, the United

Nations had no other choice but to "pour money” into the countries to establish
"narcotics control offices" and to devise various methods to suppress opium.

As for Thailand. the problem of stopping the hill tribes from growing poppy
is a matter of national security since the hill tribes whom the government
has nearsightedly suppressed and whom the communist bandits have won over
Ito their side] are enemies of the government.

Many government soldiers will die in this struggle before someone finds

a way to suppress this, a way that is less violent and that is more a political
victory, by creating a feeling between the I‘hill tribes“ and ”ourselves"

in order to create good mutual relations.

"The program to provide support so the hill tribes grow substitute crops”
is one such policy that has forced scholars (both Thai and foreign) and
government units concerned to climb one dusty mountain after another all
year.

Certainly, a report that this program is making progress or has achieved
success wOuld be good news since this is the only thing that will point

to a future for the people carrying on such activities and that will lead
to high budgets (both from the government and from the United Nations) each
year.

18
But the poppies havu not been reduced, narcotics have not been eliminated
and the evil people are becoming richer and more powerful each day.

A minor detail from this poppy eradication plan provides good confirmation
of this. If this program has really achieved results, why is it necessary
to destroy only a few selected poppy fields, fields totalling only about
500 rai, in about 10 villages on three or four mountains?

I have visited some of these villages, both during this trip and several
previous times, and talked to the hill tribesmen who own the poppy fields.
Most are Meo (who prefer the name Hmong), Liso and Mussah. I asked them

why they did not stop growing poppy and almost all of them said that “if
we stop growing poppies, how can we make a living?”

The hill tribesmen know the narcotics control board officials, the agricultural
officials and the officials from the Public Welfare Department, and these
officials have familiarized the hill tribes with the various crop substitution

programs. But nothing is as important for the lives of the hill tribes as
poppy cultivation.

The lack of expertise, the lack of markets and even the limitations of the
land are things that hinder the cultivation of substitute crops and make
it difficult to achieve success in this. The picture that the people in
Bangkok or United Nations' officials in New York get from a few test plots
or from reports by various echelon people involved in carrying on the work
is almost totally the reverse of what is really happening on the mountains.
Because what happens there is that, when the ”various officials" leave,
everything stops.

Some people take the seedlings and seed left by the officials and plant
them and the crops do grow. But what are the hill tribesmen to do then if
the officials do not return to the villages —- and it takes several days
to travel from one village to the next.

Rice is an essential item but in some places in the mountains there are
obstacles to growing rice. The rice may not come up becasue the elevation

is too high. For this reason, the hill tribes have had to use goods that
can be battered or sold easily. And so, in the end, it is always opium that
is traded or sold.

Sometimes, just one bag of opium that is brought down and exchanged for

rice belonging to the Karens, who live at lower elevations, can be traded

for a tang [one tang equals 20 liters] of rice. But if they bring potatoes,
which the entire family must help carry down the mountain. they cannot exchange
them for rice. And so, what must be their thoughts and feelings as they

return to their homes on the mountain?

Thus, opium has always been a tool of convenience for the hill tribes. This

is because, besides the fact that the hill tribes are skilled cultivators
and the weather in the mountains supports this cultivation, opium has never

19
involved any marketing problems. It can always be sold or traded for rice
or consumer goods.

Because such is the case, what crops can be grown in place of opium? This
should be considered.

When "officials“ come to their villages, the hill tribes are glad to listen,
watch and follow the orders of the officials during that period in accord
with the duties of good citizens (they are told that it is [their duty]) .
Some of. them are criticized for still growing poppies. These people either
deny this or run away. The rest who stay listen and work, and the people
who accompanied the officials take pictures and movies. The tribesmen wait
until they leave and then begin to sow seed in the poppy fields again.

Yes, ”if we don't grow poppy, how can we make a living." This was said by
a hill tribesman. But the following are the words of a [plains] Thai such
cs myself: while government officials believe eradication of the poppies
is the heart of narcotics suppression, the hill tribes probably believe
that making it difficult to sell opium or not having buyers is the heart
t ' waking the hill tribes give up poppy cultivation.

Ono old Meo tribesman, speaking through an interpreter, told me the last

t. 2we met that ”there have been reports that they will come burn the poppy
fields soon. But we don't know when they will come. I am afraid, afraid
that they will kill and set off explosions. I remember the time when l was
living on Kho Mountain. They [cannunists] came and said that soldiers were
going to come and set off explosions and that I had to choose whether I

was going to join them or be killed. That time, I was lucky enough to
get away in time. I feel the same way this time -- unhappy. If the poppies
are cut down, the opium sap will be lost because the poppies are almost
ready to be cut. If we can get [the opium] before they come. we should have
enough to exist on. We will have to wait and see."

Concerning the things that I saw and heard and that I have discussed here,
It must be repeated that none of this was meant to oppose or object to the
government's destruction of the poppy fields. I just want to make people
notice that while one government unit is deciding to do something, another
government unit concerned is making preparations to "counteract” this and
so what will the effect be?

I sympathize with the government officials who have no choice about these
actions. It is like being concerned about the lives of several hundred other
people who are living on top of those mountains, people who have no other
choice either.

Am I being too presumptious if my worries stretch as far as being concerned
for the nation's security with respect to the ethnic minority problem? These
people are being forced into a situation in which they must oppose the actions
of government officials. This is similar to what has happened in the past.

20
I would like to stop here by summarizing what was said above. Between the
"rectitude" of one group and the ”survival" of another group, which do you
think is more inportant?

11943
CSO : 5 300/4591

21
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02I09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030042-7

CURING DRUG ADDICTS IN 80 CHI MIN}! CITY

Hanoi VIETNAM comm in English No 11, Nov 81 pp 13-14

[Article by Dr. Tnaong Thin]

['I'oxt]

T Blnh 'l‘rieu New Youth
A School. s centre {or the

curlng of dru addicts in
Ho Chi Minh City. vgve have car-
ried out investigations on 2.500
attents. and obtained the follow-
ng results: 98.: of the sddlcis
are young pcop e, but some 0!
them took to drugs 45 'ears ago,
and others. at the age 0 u or I .
and their arms. are pocked wit
injectton marks. Some addicts have
made use of opium and morphine.
others._of LSD. marijuana. heroin
sedatives or other stlmulants.

Thesesddicts ususlly contracted
such soclal diseases as sy hills
27.: x) T.B ( .7x. malaria 301)
ypothrepsia o l. urulent sca-
bies (61%). ost o
committed delinquencies or crimes
(theft: tooX bsnditry: f0 x. mur-

derzs . dru traffickn : qo ,
prostlttﬁlonzlgx of the8 female
addicts).

How can we solve the problem
of dru addiction in the social and
medics field? This was one of
the primsry oncerns of the author-
itles in Ho hi Minh City. short-
? ai‘ter liberation. -The main

“Menu is how to cure all the
hundre thousand addicts tn the
etty in a short time. Even if all of
them are gathered for treatment.

can cured at the most. Thus
twenty years would be needed. so
disease would never dlas ar if
we relied only on therapy. o solve
the problem. we hsve divided

'the' -addlcts into two categorles:

most of them are treated at home.
the others are taken in_ for

them haVe.

ever‘eyear. five thousand people-

22

treatment.

Those belon in;
category are ad lcis
so corrupted as tol:
society and can still \
the are handles
ad ietton. .Accountt
they are' cured t
homes by social met!

The second eategi
corrupt addicts. wlt
co tracti socialdit
pe verted ife harmft
security and easlly i'
nal practices. They
tox of'the addlcis ll
concentrated for le
and' reform.

The addicts in the
(about 10,000) are ct
.ty. whte those bel
second categor (abs
wthered toget er 1

inety per cent o!
trested by social I
thctr disease cured

reeeivin smaller
doses o drugs I:
recovery.

These methods pr:
tive thanlts to t
measures:

\

t. The revolutions
cut all sources of dr
the quantity consun
reduced.

2. The sutltorltie:
itants tn the elty edt
and step up the ne
ment. so the drug sc

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030042-7
are out of their element and con-
sequently reduce the use of drugs.

3. The economic difficulties in
post-war days have lowered the
iving standard of the people and
compelled the addicts to curtail
the consumption of drugs,

4. Tlte drug addicts do not like
to be “hospitalized“ for a lon -
term transformation and ma c

strenuous elforts to cure them-_
selves. -

The results of the drug reduc-‘
tion method are most heartening.
The basic investigations made in
the five inner districts of. Ho Chi
Minh City by the dru curing
centre have revealed t at there
remain only 629 drug addicts in
Pb wards of 83.70 inhabitants.

us the mm or of addicts for
the whole city is now about 000
(or t.o X) corn nred with un-

dreds o thousan s of addicts before
liberation. '

With regard to the inveterate
addicts who are'ususlly corrupt.
we concentrate them for a long

reatment and transformation. After
being weaned from drugsI they

are enabled by means of stud and
work to become useful to t‘em-

selves. to their families and socie-
ty. In this respect we have achiev-

ed two important rcsults in ther-'

spy and education.

Formerly in Southern Vietnam
and other countries the following

methods were used to cure drug
addiction:

1. Method of substitution: the ad-
dicts 'talte Methadone, a l ht drug
to replace opium or morp inc.

1. Method of dose reduction:
the addicts use opium in a smaller
and smaller dose together with
another sedative or anodyne.-

3. Sleep cur‘: the addict is given
an artificial sleep of 3-7 days by
swallowin a strong dose . of
sleeping 'p lls. '

a. Method of violent cure: the
addict is confined. in a room and
prevented from ustnﬁ drugs: he is
eft to torture 'himae by violent-
convulslons and his craving for
drugs vanishes gradually.

5. Electroshoeitz' electricit is
used to eliminate the convu alons
of the addict. '

6. Psychosurgery of the frontal

23

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007(02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600030042-7

lobe-of' the
the region
ives the se
rug addict

Those‘ c
lime-consult
slvc. and ;
and harmfu
addicts.

We' are
method rect
service. Itnc
Binh Trieu.
curing drug
Minh City.

Almop't a
nam use o
phine, ‘an
drugs only:

Asfar as ii
is are cones

accordi it
steal me let

I. lncreas
patient fidgt
slons; some
insomnia, hi
lately: hi
increases; 1

profusely ar
genitals are

1.- lnereas
the tient
and is face
ration is h
rush of hlc
nose. are I"!
and sometlrr
and ears biel

Increaat
dant secreti-
tears, mucus
e ulatlon o
( n women).

4. Reducti
it causes dyt
cretion of a
complaints. d

5. Wcahne
function: the
liquids; he
fears cold at
memory. The
dant discharg
of semen. lcu
ear busting, :

According
cine. the intet
the organ em
cause of the l
diction. This i

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030042-7
a: quad ace-u.- C- crud cult-G. it 10"

3:3 3:... 09:58 3.32:. a?»
0 2363-20 39:309.

Ha 293-18. 925 328.8 .-
9» «3:2 3 90 £038.55 9..
=5 2. 3 2.35.5 :5 «5.8.99 On
to... — 5.. 062. 363.5! 5&2.
333—. :5 £2.33: on E
53.23: 232.23 .3 «.5239.
Eu 9: do .B 3.5» ca 5.35?
8..» 2:— 32— 2:00. gens-233
_. «.2335.— 2. . o 398:3
.35: on 9.. 08-3. .

wax—2. =31 3.3%...“ 52:8.
2.» ave—.27

I 0:33. «5:353 .2. v3.
3ch 36.2.2. 8 .399; :5
3.5.2. :3 33... 525:. o..
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFIC DISCOVERED-Buenos Aires, 2 Feb (AF?)-A drug traffickers' ring
which supplied drugs to personalities of Argentine artistic circles has been
discovered by the police. This ring also planned to distribute drugs during the
world soccer cup tournament in Europe. About 10 persons have been arrested in
this connection and some of them have already been questioned by a judge. The
police explained that this ring had international connections and that one of the
persons arrested is a drug trafficker who passed himself off as s descendent of
the tin tycoon [antenor] (Patino), using a Bolivian identity card. This drug
trafficker had set up a clandestine laboratory in the town of Del Viso, 40 km
northwest of Buenos Aires, where a considerable amount of processed drugs has
been seized together with equipment to transform the so-called cocaine base,
which came from Bolivia. into cocaine hydrochloride. According to the police.the
organization's objective was to distribute during the world soccer cup competi-
tion. [Excerpts] [PY050010 Paris APP in Spanish 0262 GMT 3 Feb 82]

650: 5300/2161

25
WICS SQUAD 0N TRAIL 0? DRUG SHIPMENT Pm INDON
Hamilton m ROYAL mm in Btglish 24 Dec 81 p 1

(Text) The Narcotics Iuportation Squad, a team of policemen and Customs officers,
intercepted 135 grams of herein at the General Post Office nearly two weeks ago.
'me heroin, o! 60 percent purity, has a street value of $150,000 said the Police
Conuissioner, Mr. Frederick Bean.

0n Hmday or this week, the drug squad seized a large quantity of hashish of good
potency, Mr. Bean added.

"We are eagerly pursuing inquiries ,' he went on. The local Police Iorce has been
in touch with Interpol and Scotland Yard. According to Insp. George Rose, head of
the Bermuda Police Narcotics Division, the drugs, part of the same consignment,
came from tendon.

"Bermuda was the final destination,“ he said. Where's no doubt about that."

The person to when the parcels were addressed has been ruled out as a suspect, he
added.

Insp. Rose said he believed that the heroin began its journey in Amsterdam. he
called the heroin a major shipment.

"A good seizure has been nade,‘ he said. "That amount of the drug has been taken
of: the street.“

In other Police news, Mr. Bean reported a handbag snatching which took place on
December 18. A man riding along Blackvatch Pass had her bag, containing $43 in
cash snatched by a dark-skinned eale riding an auxiliary cycle.

A video recorder, valued at $1,000, was stolen from the Atlantic Room or the South--
ampton Princess Hotel.

The 16 cases of breaking and entering yielded thieves $1,510 in cash and $4,945 in
property, the most outstanding iteea taken being jewellery valued at $2,000 tron a
Warwick house.

The 18 thefts reported to Police last week netted $5,813 in cash and $406 in
property.

Included in the cash tally is that which was taken from an unattended vehicle.

C90: 5300/7524 26
BRIEFS

COCAINB pnopucsoxn 1982-La Pan, 1 Feb (AIP)-The weekly magazine INFORMACION
POLITICA Y BCONOMICA (IPE), directed by journalist Gonzalo Lopez Munoz, reported
here today that in 1982 Bolivia will produce 200,000 kilos of cocaine worth $1
billion. IPE believes that the mafia. which can give a luxury car as a gift as
though it were a bouquet of roses. will earmark 5 percent of the above $1 billion
for public relations expenses. IPE points out that almost 550 kilos of cocaine
will be produced daily and that a true fight against drug trafficking must include
not only repression of the mafia but also investigations into the dubious sources
of the fortunes of first and second level officials. Lope: Munoz says: Bolivia
will avoid the risk of disappearing as a state or of being a country dominated

by drug traffickers only if it fights corruption. [Text] [PY031507 Paris AF?
in Spanish 2242 GMT 1 Feb 82]

MINISTER 0N COCAINE, TBRRORISM—-The interior minister, Col Romulo Mercado. has
termed as simple speculation the reports that assert that the illegal export of
cocaine will net more than $1 billion this year. In statements to the press, he
said, basing his remarks on the progress of the campaign for the erradication of
drug trafficking that is being undertaken by the supreme government he believes
any type of opinion given on cocaine is baseless. He also termed as untrue the
press reports asserting that the country would produce 200,000 kg of cocaine this
year and he asked the press to take into account the efforts the government is
making to make a success of the campaign of repression against drug trafficking.
During the course of his statements, the interior minister asserted that there
are no delays in the Judicial system, because all the necessary steps have been
taken through the justice under secretariat to prevent delays. Within this con-
text, he explained that this problem has now been looked into by his office for
a months now and denied the rumor that there are delays in the judicial system.
Finally. he reported that the state's intelligence services are seeking leads
that can lead to the perpetrators of the terrorist attacks that caused concern
amongst the population some weeks ago. [Text] [PY031813 La Pa: Radio Illimani
Network in Spanish 1100 GMT 3 Feb 82]

080: 5300/2161

27
COLOMBIAN MAFIA USING INDIANS T0 UDRK COCA PLANTATIONS
Sao Paulo ISTOE in Portuguese 13 Jan 82 pp 32.33.34.37

(Article by Jose Heirelles Passoa: ”The Cocaine Indians: How the Mafia Turned
the Upper Rio Negro into a Production Center?

[Text] It is still early morning and while the first morning light begins to
drive away the darkness. the persistent drone of an airplane engine being warmed
up on the red dirt runway filled with puddles of water, can already be heard.

Some sleepy men, securing their belongings. smoke cigarettes while waiting for the
time to leave for the jungle. where they administer large coca plantations and
laboratories which produce pure cocaine. It is Monday at Mitu. a Colombian town,
which is a true ”cocaine storehouse" lost in the Amazon jungle, fewer than 200
kilometers from the border with Brazil.

Later on the movement of aircraft here will be more intensive. While other Mafia
overseers leave for work and armed dealers arrive with briefcases filled with
dollars, strong young men will unload jars of chemical products and load boxes
containing small bags filled with white and refined powder. which the Colo-bisn
Mafia will send to the United States and Europe. Two or three of those light
airplanes should take off empty. with only a pilot. Their destinations are

small improvised landing strips near the border with Brazil. Their mission will
be to collect packages with products. which could be included in the lists of
Brazilian exports since the second half of last year: coca leaves and coca paste.
in addition to pure cocaine made in Brazil, carefully grown and prepared effi-
ciently by Amazon Indians. At the other end of Mitu. three blocks from the
modest airport. there can be heard the intermittent drone of outboard motors.
Boats leave the docks, stirring the waters of the calm Uaupes River. filled with
supplies and gallons of fuel, taking Indians for another week of work in the
cocaine clearings and camouflaged laboratories in the forest.

Among them are hundreds of Brazilian Indians. One of them, Uanano Tomas Paiva,
57 years-of-age. has become a living legend among his people. A thrifty man.
he has saved enough to have his own land, going from a laborer to landowner,

an independent grower, a supplier for the Mafia. Owner of two prosperous coca
plantations on the Colombian side. Tones managed to have good schools for his
nine children-tbe two oldest are in the university in Bogota-~and then he
accumulated an abundant sum in banks in Colombia: A fortune equivalent to 50
million cruzeiros!

28
"I spent almost all my life in the Amazon Region and the only thing I acquired
was a knowledge of religion," says Tomas, with.a look of defiance in his eyes.
"The FUNAI [National Indian Foundation] teaches us to live like the whites but
it does not create or obtain jobs for us," declares Tomas, a heavy gold ring
shining on his finger and a watch on his wrist. '1hat is why," he continues,
"I cansto Colombia and settled. I even went as far as to obtain a Colombian
identification card." And despite having had misunderstandings with the Mafia,
which according to him led him to rid himself of his two coca plantations last
year—-"They began to put pressure on me, they drove me out of the business"-
Tomas Paiva does not think of leaving Hitu. Be is now planting coffee and is
preparing to install the first gasoline station in the city with a potential
of 200 boats per day as customers, boats which almost clog the Uaupes River in
that region.

Hitu, as can be seen, is the Eldorado of the Brazilian Indians living in the
upper Rio Negro, region of the Western Amazon Region, where hunting and fishing
is poor, agriculture yields practically nothing, malnutrition and tuberculosis
are chronic and there are no jobs. It was 2 years ago that the Brazilian Indians
began to go to Colombia, where today they earn an average of 2,800 cruzeiros per
day (actual minimum wage established by the Mafia) plus meals, caring for the
fields of coca and producing cocaine.

"A11 everyone talks about here is coca. They see friends and relatives who
return from over there bringing new clothing, radios, tape recorders, watches,
and American outboard motors...Then, they follow the same road," relates Armando
de Lima, a Tariano Indian who lives in a village in Jauarete on the Brazilian side
of the border, 1,100 kilometers west of Hanaua. "Every day two or three loaded
boats depart from here, going up the Uaupes River to Mitu and Hirafloes." says
Armando. The only reason he has not yet taken that road is because he obtained a
job as a carpenter at the PUNAI station, and because he feels frightened by the
stories of violence told by his friends, who have recently arrived from Mitu.

The differences among some 223 Mafia chiefs who control the narcotics trade in the
country resulted in the murder of 52 people between October and December of last
year. for example. There are other no less surprising cases such as that of the
upsurge of the guerrilla groups of the 19 April Movement, H—l9. They have been
moving from the southern part of Colombia, their base, to the region of the
Uaupes River to the west, taking over land so as to also plant coca and produce
cocaine which they trade for weapons in the underground market of Mia-i in the
United States. The confrontation between the guerrillas and the Mafia appears
inevitable there. The climate, as can be seen, is not attractive. However,
there is money in circulation and the expectation of a life of ease, and it is
there that the Brazilian Indians are going, revealing an unsuspected practical
sense.

After an "apprenticeship" in the plantations and laboratories between Hiraflores
and Mitu. many decided--others were encouraged--to return to the Brazilian Amazon
Region.bringing many coca seeds and starting up extensive coca fields along the
Papuri. Tiquie, Aiari and Acana Rivers in the Upper Rio Negro Region. In that
area of the tropical rain forest, there are now large coca fields and crude
laboratories in 13 towns.* The entire production is exported to Colo-bis in boats,

29
which cross the border and unload their merchandise near the narrow landing strips,
as is revealed by Desano Tomas Caicedo, better known in the region as Tonazito.
famous for being the first--and only-Colombian Indian to obtain a pilot's
license. "The transporting of coca hers is a profitable work," says the Indian-
pilot. "It pays up to $5,000 per month. The only thing is that whoever gets into
the business can never neave. If someone talks about getting out...bang! says
Tomazito, putting his finger to his head, imitating the sound of a revolver shot.

Tomazito also reveals that he recently transported several Brazilian Indians.
who paid $0,000 cruzeiros for a 40-minute flight between the border and Hitu
without complaint. "Host of them," says the pilot, "go to enter into contracts
for supplies of coca. taking samples of their crop with them." The quality of
those samples, let it be said, is undeniable, as can be confirmed by the Manuas
Federal Police themselves, who collected many leaves in the Brazilian plantations
and sent them to the Drug Enforcement Agency. an agency of the 0.5. Government,
which is fighting the drug traffic everywhere in the world. And the praise there
was emphatic: Brazilian coca, also known as Ipadu, is of the highest quality.

The samples were collected during the so-called "Operation Ipadu." which the
Federal Police carried out together with the PUNAI in the upper Rio Negro after a
surprising story reached the regional FUNAI representative in Hanaus, Kazuto
Kavamoto, around the end of June 1981. The story, written by Jose Ribamar Caldas
Filho, a native of Haranhao, 28 years-of-age and chief of the Jauarete Indian
Station, had its origins in "Radio Cipio" a word-of-mouth news system used by the
Indians in the Jungle, which gave him the first indications.

Ribamar discover other indications by accident. Once. for example, Brcilia
Araujo, a Tatiana Indian woman. who is a health inspector for FUNAI. went to
attend to a patient in Ituim, on the Papuri River, and became lost in the jungle.
Seeking to find her way again. she came upon a vast coca plantation cultivated
by Catarino Brasil, a Piratapuia Indian 36 years-of-sge, who decided to engage
in the drug traffic because his mandioca fields did not even yield enough for
the sustenance of his own family. Days later. Ribamar discovered another
trafficker: the Tukano Indian, Alfredo da Silva, chief of the Indian community
of Helo Granco, who was not frightened by the warning of the Indian agent.

"Since the government has not helped me up to now," argued the Indian, "I decided
to enter that business.“

The planting of coca. after all, is not much work and the results are quick:
Each hectare of coca yields the raw material sufficient for the preparation of a
kilo of cocaine every two months. The grower who harvests the coca and prepares
the paste can earn up to 2.5 million cruzeiros with that material. There are
reports that the Indians are now receiving weapons from the Mafia for defending
themselves frOm the police.

The Federal Police, however, are poorly prepared to fight the drug traffic in
Kansas. Things are even worse in the upper Rio Negro. PUNAI has only the hard-
working Jose Ribamar, responsible from Jauarete of watching over the lives of
4,500 Indians scattered in 75 towns near the 1,645-kilometer border. It is obvious
that he does not have more than rare contacts with that scattered population,

30
particularly since all his equipment, a single boat. is almost always being used
for transporting sick Indians.

There is also an additional difficulty. The coca, the Ipadu, is part of the
culture of the Upper Rio Negro Indians. It cannot, therefore, be forbidden that
the Indians grow Ipadu. It can be forbidden that they sell the coca to the
whites-~a measure already taken by FUNAI-—, the first, however, to recognize
that there is no way to insure camplianca with that measure.

The Silesian missions, which have been in the regions since 1916. continue
believing they can catechize the Indians and abolish their old custOms, including
the Ipadu. They have not succeeded, as is confirmed by the story of Pedro de
Jesus, a Tarian Indian of 37 years-of-age. The Silesians sent him to Belem to
study music; piano, to be exact. Afterward Pedro showed the intention of studying
medicine, but the Silesians placed him in a seminary. When he declared his lack
of priestly vocation, he was removed from the school and lost his scholarship.

He then returned to Jauarete, where he married and had three children and went
to work for the Colombian Mafia. "I lived here 30 years and nothing changes,"
he recalls. "There was never any employment until the business of coca. I
work with hundreds of Brazilian for a ranch.owner who owns six hectares of coca
near Mitu. There my wife and children receive, as I do, three full meals oer
day." To be able to eat "and to be able to buy clothing and shoes for the entire
family," that is enough for Pedro. "It happens that they civilized us but they
did not provide us with the means for obtaining a better life. Now, we have
found the way." says this Indian of courteous manners and easy speech. As

far as he is concerned, the police have only one way to put an end to the coca
plantations: "Drop bambs on the jungle and kill everybody."

"The Mafia is Swallowing up the Indian Lands"

Monsignor Belarmino Correa Yepes, the bishop of Mitu, Colombia, has been
responsible for lb years for the four large religious missions located in the
Amazon jungle along the Papuri River. which separates Brazil from Colombia.
Resigned. Monsignor Belarmino restricts himself today to counseling the Indians
not to sell land on which they grow coca to the whites, people of the Mafia.

"It is preferrable that the whites come here only to look for the drug than

that they settle here with their criminal bands." he says. In a letter to FUNAI
last November the monsignor warned about the activities of Brazilian Indians
engaged in the drug traffic. In the episcopal palace in Mitu, a simple wooden
building, the monsignor spoke to ISTOE:

ISTOE: Have you any idea of how many Indians work for the Mafia?
Monsignor: I can assure you that there are already almost 1,000 Indians. Nearly

60 percent of them have plots planted in coca here in the Mitux Region, and
the rest work on contract.

31
ISTOE: Do you believe it is possible to make the Indians desist from that type
of activity?

Monsignor: No longer. As they make money with coca, they abandon everything.
fishing, livestock. the growing of cocoa...In Hitu, for example, for over two
years there cannot be found even one grain of mandioca flour because the Indians
no longer produce it. They would rather buy canned sardines in the stores than
fish.

ISTOB: How far in the process do the Indians go?

Monsignor: Ah. my son, here every Indian is a chemist! Not only do they know
how to prepare the paste But the crystalized powder, pure cocaine. They are
getting rich; they buy outboard motors, fiberglass hosts. sound systems...That
region of the Amazon is very poor and the Indians discovered a gold nine. Brazil
will also have no other choice but to let the Indians produce cocoa. Either it
allows it, maintaining a control over the situation. maintaining a watch over it.
or the days of violence we are witnessing here in Colombia will also appear over
there. Little by little the Mafia is swallowing up the Indian territory.

Fooling Hunger and "Tripping"

The Amazon Region Indians.traditionally use coca powder in two ways for different
purposes. In daily use they maintain a cud of it in their mouth, making a paste

which little by little erases hunger. thirst and weariness. 0n special_oocasions
tribal rituals. as they are used to saying, they becoae "wise" for some instants.

* Coca fields: 1) Santa Cruz de Inambu; 2) Pari-Cachoeira; 3) Cubate; b)
Haua-Cachoeira; 5) Aracu-Cachoeira; 6) Jurupari-Cachoeira; 7) Siu-Si; 8) Hatapi-
Cachoeira; 9) Uapui-Cachoeira; 10) Ucuqui; ll) Ituim; 12) Sao Joao; l3) Melo
Franco. Paste is made in Santa Cruz do Inanbu, Pari-Cachoeira and Uapui-Cachoeira.
There are laboratories producing cocaine in the last two communities.

[Cachoeira means "waterfa11"].

8908
680: 5300/2136

32
GREATEST SEIZURE 0P COCAINE MADE IN SAD PAULO
_ Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 20 Jan 82 p 5

[Text] Sao Paulo (O GL030)--After two months of investigations. Sao Paulo DOPS
[Department of Political and Social Order] police yesterday made the largest
seizure of cocaine made up to now in Brazil, 78 kilos, and they arrested three

traffickers belonging to a gang which operated in the Hanaus-Sao Paulo-Miami route.
The gang is the same one discovered recently in Hana“ as it was preparing to
place several cocaine refineries in the Amazon capital in operation.

The 78 kilos were seized in two operations in a place located on the Galdinos
Highway in Cotia, where the police arrested a real estate agent and another two
individuals whose names are being kept secret. The capture in the act took

place 15 January, when the first shipment of an kilos of pure, unrefined cocaine
was seized. x

I

J

The second shipment, 21.2 kilos, was found next by Comissioner Josicir Once in the

interior of a red pickup belonging to the real estate agent. The drug was con-
tained in nine plastic bags in a burlap sack. Yesterday other agents seized 16.8
kilos in a field near the home of the real estate agent.

According to Oomissioner Romeo Tuna, the agent arrested in Cotia is the

same one who is indicated as the owner of an airplane which crashed recently

in Hanaus with a load alleged to contain 600 kilos of cocaine. The airplane was
never found and the members of the gang, mostly Colombians, escaped one by one
from the Hanaus penitentiary.

Romeu Tums said that investigations began when the Sao Paulo DOPS received a
tip about a shipment of 100 kilos from Hanaus to Sao Paulo. The idea of

the traffickers. according to the commissioner, was to establish refineries

in Sao Paulo, which would become a central point for drug traffic. The reason
for this was that in Colombia and Bolivia, where the raw bulk of the coca used
by the gang originated, sales of ether, acetone and alcohol, are closely watched
by the police. These are essential products for the processing of cocaine.

8908
050: 5300/2136

33
MAJOR HARIHUANA RIM: LINKE) HITH ORGANIZED CRIME IN SOUTH
Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 26 Dec 81 p 16

[Text] Porto Alegre--'l‘he judge of Sapucaia do Sul, BC [Rio Grande do Sul], Luis
Francisco Barbosa, convicted 17 members of the largest ring of drug traffickers op-
crating in the South of the country, led by Luis Newton Galiano. Altogether, their
sentences add up to 177 years and 4 months. Luis, better known as Juca Galiano,
was sentenced to 27 years and his possessions, valued at 1 billion cruzeiros, were
confiscated.

In convicting this ring, the court broke up one of the largest organizations in-
volved in marihuana traffic in Brazil, which operated in 9 states, 93 Brazilian
cities and 5 South American countries and had connections in Australia-.. In report-
ing the convictions, Judge Luis Barbosa asserted this proves there is organized
crime in Brazil.

' Impunity'

"Advised by lawyers, the group specialized in development and maintenance--taking
continued advantage of our inefficiency--of corruption that paved the way to impu-
nity," says the judge. He adds that the legal proceedings, whose documents fill
68 volumes, sentence to prison men and women who accmulated an immense fortune by
means of marihuana.

The investigations were begun almost 2 years ago by the Narcotics Comission,

which successively arrested a number of traffickers in various drugs. Thoae arrest-
ed include Edio Cardoso de Padua, right-hand man of Juca Galiano, son of the elder
Galiano, who, until a few years ago, headed the nation's largest ring of narcotics
traffickers (mainly amphetamines, produced freely in Uruguay and Argentina).

The group led by Juca Galiano distributed annually 15 tons of marihuana in the
Brazilian market, worth 10 million cruzeiros per month-The- marihuana came mainly
from the Paraguayan cities of Capitan Bado and Pedro Juan Caballero and was brought
into Brazil in trucks, covered by loads of lumber, or in three aircraft.

 

Juca Gallano, 30 years old, left a Porto Alegre jail in 1978 and set up the inter-
national marihuana ring in Parana and Santa Catarina. He is the defendant in sev-
eral lawsuits and is known as the "man of biege," because he had a white Volkswagen
and stole cars of the same color, putting his own license plate‘on them, to be sold
in Paraguay.

34
The court seized all property held in the name of Luis Newton Caliano, including a
396-hectare farm in Guarapuava (PR [Perena]); 200 head of cattle; five 20-hectare
estates where the marihuana was hid, one in Seo Jose dos Pinhais, Parana; Melodie
Estate in Biguacu, Santa Catarina; two in Camburiu, Santa Catarina; another in
Jordan, Santa Catarina; five houses and one apartment in Porto Alegre; a motor boat;
five trucks; 15 beige Passet and Brasilia automobiles; and five pickup trucks, be-
sides 50 million cruzeiros in dollars, guaranis and cruzeiros.

Police Involved

Luis Caliano was arrested 6 August by the Federal Police and, according to Federal
Police Deputy Inacio Carlos Dias Lopes, one of the pilots involved, Uei Sousa, an
employee of the Center-Nest Development Superintendency in Brasilia, disappeared
with the Bonanza aircraft PT-CHC. Among those involved in the marihuana traffic are
three policemen of the 2d DP [Police Precinct] in Santos (SP [Sao Paulo]). The
three--Nelio Assis Lima, known as Kojak; Tadeu de Campos; and Ademar Guerra--were
bribed with 1 million cruzeiros by Luis Galiano.

In all, the members of the group were sentenced to total prison terms of 117 years
and 4 months. In the sentencing, the judge asks that Luis Caliano be confined on
the island prison of Pedras Brancas, the only place he deems of maximum security,
along with the most dangerous members of the group. Galiano's wife, Blaine Gilgen,
received an 11-year sentence. His brother, Luis Roberto Caliano, was given 6 years.

The others convicted are: Adriano Carvalho, 8 years and 8 months; Sevaro Grimaldi,

8 years; Rosa de Lurdes Runes, 13 years; Atanagildo Joao Pereira, 9 years and 1
month; Cleuza Maribel Dornelles, 4 years; Lucindo Souza Nascimento, 5 years and 4
months; Felicio da Costa Haie, 4 years and 11 months; Vera Regina Haie, 4 years and
6 months; Joao Carlos Faleiro, 17 years and 3 months; Vanis Elisabeth Faleiro, 6
years and 7 months; Ivo Kerber, 6 years; Maria Odelia Heydt, 8 years; Jorge
Loumboroski, 6 years and 8 months; and Lauro Renato de Andrade, 6 years and 2 months.

0f the approximately 50 members of the ring, 23 have been sentenced. The others,
including the Sao Paulo policemen, are still awaiting sentencing.

8834
CSO: 5300/2129

35
TWO routcusss ARRESTED um LSD m mu
Sao Paulo 0 BSTADO DB SAO RAULO in Portuguese 19 Jan 82 p 16

[Text] Salvador--Federa1 police in Salvador yesterday took to court the inquiry
into the arrest of Uruguayan Gabriel Jose Depetit Bernerdes and East German Bettina
Brown, apprehended in Porto da Berra with 140 LSD tablets. The arrest occurred
last week and the DP? [Federal Police Department] has been keeping the case secret,
although it promises to publish an official note about the matter today. The
couple, according to Hans Grave, Bettina's lawyer (employed by the GDR consulate),
could be expelled from the country, but he will request the case be dismissed.

According to police information, Gabriel Depetit is the son of the Uruguayan
charge d'affaires in East Germany, stationed in Berlin, where Bettina Brown was
living. She, in turn, left her husband after meeting Gabriel and accompanied the
letter to Brazil. According to Grave, the DPP report to the court does not charge
Bettina with narcotics traffic, becssue her companion confessed that the drugs be-

longed to him.

According to reports, the two were arrested after being informed upon by Nicaraguan
Francisco Javier Ramirez Fernandez, who had taken them to a party. Francisco had
50 grams of marihuana and 20 LSD tablets when police arrived at the scene of the
party, but was released by police shortly thereafter. "hen Gabriel was arrested he
had 120 LSD tablets and 20 more were found in the German woman's purse. Gabriel
said he took 10 tablets because he is an addict.

The narcotics judge, who received the case yesterday, will hear testimony for the
prosecution today and will have until the end of the week to render his verdict.

The defendants are indicted under three articles of the Narcotics Law, one of which
has to do with trafficking,.and they could be sentenced for up to 15 years in prison
or expelled from the country. The case should be closed in 60 days.

Gabriel Depetit is 23 years old and is being held in the Salvador House of Deten-
tion. According to comments in police circles, he also confessed to having brought
the LSD with the intention of selling it to pay for the trip. Bettina, who worked
in an office in Berlin, is 33 years old. Gabriel's defense attorney, who yesterday
lodged a complaint in the Office of Larceny and Theft against Ramirez Fernandez
accusing him of having stolen his client's luggage, is Antonio Sergio Reis.

8834
CSO: 5300/2129

36
BRIEFS

ADDICTION RISE IN MURU--Dauru--Consuaption of narcotics in this city increased
during the last 5 years, it was reported yesterday by Edmundo Chaves, president of
the "Life Squad," an entity founded almost 10 years ago for the purpose of rehabili-
tating narcotics addicts. "In 1976 there were about 8,000 users or addicts of drugs
such as marihuana, cocaine and LSD. Today it is estimated that this number has in-
creased to 15,000 in a population of 350,000 inhabitants, although we do not have a
thorough survey because of the difficulties we face. The addict does not want to
expose himself and the trafficker, when arrested, denies any involvement." Cur-
rently the "Life Squad“ is trying to cure 50 addicts, most of whom are minors. Ac-
cording to Edmund Chaves, the entity is working with children as young as 12 years
of age, which proves that drug use is spreading at an alarming pace. These data
were confirmed by Jorge Hiyeshiro, police official, who said the number of addicts
arrested has increased considerably. ﬁe asserted that drugs are very accessible,
especially to young people. [Text] [Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 6 Jan 82

p 6] 8331.

FRENCH ARREST TRAFFICKING SUSPECT-~Although protesting his innocence, Brazilian
Rude de Andrade, just over 50, may be sentenced to 5 years imprisonment in France
for trafficking in cocaine. The trial will be held next month in Burg-En-Bresse

(a city on the Swiss border), where Andrade has been in custody since 28 November,
when he was arrested in the French section of the Geneva Fintrin airport. He had
just landed, coming from Brazil by way of Dakar. In his baggage customs police
found 900 grams of cocaine in small envelopes placed inside packages of coffee.

The value of these drugs was officially estimated at 1.2 million francs. Under
questioning, Rude de Andrade denied he had transported the drugs and is sticking to
this statement, the legitimacy of which his French lawyer, Jose Serfaty, is trying
to prove, based especially on his client's trustworthiness. According to Serfaty,
Andrade has no criminal background. Associated with the University of Sao Paulo,
he always lived on his salary as a public employee and, it appears, was never in-
volved in questionable practices. "During the last 6 years," the attorney stressed,
Andrade never left Brazil,"whichwould be unthinkable if he were really a drug traf-
ficker." [Excerpt] [Sao Paulo O ESTADO DB 8A0 PAUID in Portuguese 15 Jan 82 p 15]

8834

C80: 5300/2129

37
THREE ARRESTED IN BOGOTA FOR COCAINE TRAFFICKING
Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 8 Jan 82 p 3-A

[Text] F-Z of the General Staff, the supreme investigating organism of the

National Police, yesterday dealt its first blow of the year to a band of drug
traffickers who operate in the capital of the nation. They seized a shipment
of cocaine and arrested three persons as presumably responsible for the crime.

The operation was carried out at the Los Andes toll gate on the superhighway
Norte [North] when units of the Narcotics Group searched the bus, license plates
XA-3203, of the "Berlinas del Fonce" enterprise which serves the Cucuta line.

In the vehicle and in several suitcases the F-2 agents found 22 packages of
pure cocaine weighing 15 kilos and they arrested Carlos Julio Barbosa Lizcano,
Hector Hugo Suarez and the woman Maria Viviana Ramirez Sanchez.

The F-2 disclosed that the capture of
the valuable drug contraband was the
result of a roadblock operation carried
out by specialized personnel of the
National Police.

The prisoners, according to an official
source, refuse to say who are the true
owners of the cocaine and they allege
that they did not know what the suit-
cases contained.

Yesterday the F-2 of the General Staff
continued investigations to find out the
source of the drugs.

Cocaine traffickers:Carlos Julio Barbosa *
Lizcano, Maria Viviana Ramirez Sanchez and
Hector Hugo Suarez, are smugglers arrested

by F-2 of the General Staff while trans-
porting 15 kilos of cocaine in an inter—
departmental bus to Cucuta. +

 

9204
C50: 5300/2137

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CUBA

marten nmrsmv ISSUES smnmrr on muss
mama Havana mm in Spanish 1617 an 28 Jan 82

[Text] Msvana, 28 Jan (PL)--The Cuban Foreign Relations Ministry has rejected

the 0.8. effort to present Cuba as an accomplice in the international drug
traffic.

In a statement issues last night, the Foreign Relations Ministry declares that
Cuba has never given or sent arms to the Colonbian guerrillas.

Here is a text of the Cuban Foreign Relations Ministry statement:

The 0.8. State Department has just issued an official statement trying to link
Cuba with drug-traffickers to facilitate, allegedly, arms supplies to Latin
American guerrillas.

The State Department states: "Cuba facilitates the work of networks of
traffickers by allowing mother ships transporting marihuana to seek refuge
in Cuban waters while waiting for the arrival of transport boats from the
Bahamas and Florida." This is a lie that represents true infamy.

If there is drug-trafficking in America and if this is a profitable business,
it is because of the growing corruption in 0.8. society. This corruption
has resulted in a continuous increase in the number of drug addicts at all
levels of society and in an unstoppable consumption of drugs.

The links between the'bmfia," politics and the 0.5. authorities is daily
exposed by the yankee news media, films and novels. It was the 0.8. Senate,
and not an anti—imperialist center, which clearly established the agreements
made between the CIA and the mafia-«with the encouragement and support of
0.5. Government officials—-to organize the assassination of chiefs of state
of the region.

If there is drug traffic, it is because in countries such as Colombia, the
planting, production and international sale of drugs annually produces
millions of dollars, a good share of which goes into the pockets of well-known
civilian and military authorities in those countries.

39

FOR 0H1CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cuba is the only Latin American country that has been able to rid itself of
the spreading drug vice. Cuba is also free of the cultivation and sale of
drugs. No one would dare deny this fact.

No country of Latin America has fought harder, or with more energy and decisiVe-
ness than Cuba to prevent air and see traffic of drugs to the United States.

Proof of this is that dozens of 0.8. and Latin American drug-traffickers have
served time in Cuban prisons. Those who did not complete their time or who
are not still in prison, were released because Cuba acceded to do this due

to humanitarian requests from important u.s. and Latin American persons.

For this reason, we reject with indignation the ignoring of this fact and the
presenting of Cuba as an accomplice in the international traffic of drugs.

We also flatly reject the information that the State Department claims to have
according to which Hr Jaime Cuillot Lara "went to Cuba on two occasions since
October 1981 and on his second visit received $700,000 from the Cuban Government
to buy arms for the Colombian 19 April Movement. M 19, guerrillas." This is,

- absolutely, another lie. That person has never been in Cuba. He has not
received a single dollar from Cuba for any purpose.

We have stated that Cuba has never given or sent arms to the Colombian guerrillas
and we once again categorically reiterate this.

If the 0.5. Government persists in this type of charges or in similar hostile
actions against our country. Cuba will find itself forced to cease all the
cooperation that it maintains with the United States in the struggle against
the traffic of drugs.

The truth is that our country has been some sort of gendarme in the Caribbean
against an international drug traffic that does not affect Cuba at all and
we are in no sense obligated to cooperate with the arrogant government of a
country that maintains a criminal economic embargo against our fatherland,
that illegally occupies a part of our national territory and that maintains

a continuous policy of hostility. aggression and threats against our people.

[Signed] Ministry of Foreign Relations.

C80: 3010/746

40

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE‘ONLY
INCREASED DRUG CONSUMPTION IN LIMA INVESTIGAIBD
Lina EL COHERCIO in Spanish 30 Dec 81 p 0-3

[Text] There is need for greater police surveillance, parental
concern over what their children are doing in their free time and

understanding for those who have succumbed to this vice. These
and other ideas have been offered as possible solutions to the

problem of drug consumption in Hiraflores.

"Look. as soon as we see people getting together near a park.
we know that within a few minutes a 'group high' will get
started," Antonio Miranda told one of our reporters during a
survey conducted in the district.

Youths and adults of both sexes expressed their dissatisfaction with the increase
in drugaddiction.the solution to which is debatable. While some say that permanent

police operations are necessary. others claim that it is important to have dialogues
with minors and juveniles who are caught up in the vice.

The Hiraflores municipal authorities are carrying out preventive antidrug usage
campaigns to determine what actions should be taken to dissuade young people from
using cocaine and cocaine base paste.

The problem of drug usage in Hiraflores is increasing every day. according to the
conclusion reached by experts participating in the Seminar on Alcoholism and Drug
Addiction which was held last April.

The seminar. organized by the Municipality of Hiraflores. produced alarming
statistics on drug usage at the national level which indicated that about 200

billion soles are being spent on drug consumption.

"biﬁh. with a population of 5 million of which 3 million are young persons, has
consumed drugs this year worth 150 billion soles.

The experts point out that the drug usage problem in Hiraflores has particular
characteristics. because 80 percent of the cases reported are persons with high
incomes.

41
Psychiatrist Baltazar Caravedo Carranza. one of the experts participating in the
seminar. said that the lack of psychological support leads children and youths to
use drugs.

"Hiraflores was one of the leading drug supply centers. Thirty years ago there
were tobacco shops in which everything that could be smoked was sold, including
opium," our interviewee said.

In 1956. the National Council for the Repression of Drug Trafficking was established,

which was headquartered in the Ministry of Government, now Interior. to handle the
growing use of cocaine and opiun.

The first government of Manual Prado took steps to unify those government
organizations responsible for combating the use of drugs and to set up government
laboratories for the manufacture of cocaine for medical purposes.

Concurrently with these preventive campaigns in 1956. youths from 15 to 25 years of
age converted the Miguel Dasso gas station and Supermarket No 4. as well as the

surrounding area, into meeting places for drug consumption.

As the consuming population increased, cocaine and opium were replaced by marihuana,
which in turn lost popularity with the spread of cocaine and cocaine base'paste.

Difference

The inhalation of cocaine, which has always been dangerous, produces transitory
effects and clears the head of alcoholic intoxications. making the user more
talkative and happier than usual.

Cocaine base paste has two fatal components: kerosene and sulfuric acid. which
when consumed damage the liver and brain with no possibility of recovery.

The smoker begins to exhibit low intellectual capability. inability to concentrate
and mental aberrations of the hallucinatory kind which become worse with time.

Drug Addicts

It is estimated that there are 60,000 drug addicts in Lima, with Miraflores. San
Isidro and Pueblo Libre having the highest rates of consumption.

In the new towns, drug addiction centers are beginning to appear. both in the
northern cone and southern cone.

Dr Caravedo Carranza said that 55 percent of the studies of patients report an
initial organic lesion which appears with drug consumption.

'Twenty percent of the Yeruvian population is suffering from organic lesions of
the brain because of the carelessness at the time of childbirth or because during
the first year of life there are diseases which cause this kind of lesion." our
interviewee added.

42
0f every 100 deaths from birth to age 100. 50 are under 5 years of age. Of these
50, 60 are under 1 year old. The rest. who survive, have many lesions which are
not immediately manifest but which are triggered by the use of toxic materials. Dr
Caravedo Carranza said.

Indiscriminate Use

In Peru at present. the equivalent of 200 billion soles worth of drugs is consumed,
with Lima, Arequipa and Trujillo the principal distribution centers.

Gen Berly Baca, chief of the Drugs Section of the Peruvian Investigative Police
(PIP), said that this year 60 billion in cash has been confiscated. which. in the

opinion of Dr Caravedo Carranza. means expenditures of 10 times that amount in
consumption.

Negative Results Campaigns

In spite of the coordination of efforts between the municipality, police and
educational authorities in the development of preventive antidrug usage campaigns.

such campaigns, instead of turning consumers away from the vice. stimulate their
curiosity.

"I believe it necessary to educate the parents who are to blame for their children's

taking refuge in drugs. Family differences and tensions cause children and youth
to find evasive action necessary," Dr Caravedo Carranza said.

As the result of the information dissemination efforts of the Municipality of
Miraflores to prevent young people from using drugs, the experts have concluded
that parents are indifferent toward getting their children out of drugs and
rehabilitating them.

"The society in which we are living is motivated by preconceptions. thus parents

cannot face up to the problem of drug addiction. They prefer to cover up and
conceal this situation from themselves." Dr Caravedo Carranza concluded.

8143
050: 5300/2130

43
JUSTICE MINISTER CONDEMNS FOREIGN INMATES' BUNCH STRIKE
Lima EL COHERCIO in Spanish 5 Jan 82 p A40

[Excerpt] The group of foreign inmates who are engaging in a hunger strike at the
Lurigsncho Penitentiary “are not going to get anywhere," according to a statement
made yesterday by Dr Enrique Elias Laroza. minister of justice.

He emphasized, ”That action is only intended to pressure the judges; and. legally,
they have no right to go on a hunger strike. However, we are not going to take any
action against thee."

Eighteen inmates are involved. They are charged with drug trafficking and started
their fast before Christmas. They have demanded their release or transfer to
prisons in their respective countries. The strikers' spokesman is American
national Richard Mayer Stein. 36.

The strikers include nine Americans, three Canadians. two Frenchmen, one Greek. one
West German, one Chilean and one Argentine.

Stein said that the foreign inmates are demanding an end 'to alleged tortures and
greater speed in the judicial processes.

"There Are No Tortures"

In response to Stein's statement. the Minister of Justice categorically rejected
the inmates' deeands. "I should like to say that torture has no place in Peru's
legal proceedings" and that the prisoners are interrogated in the presence of a
district attorney.

He emphasized that in any event the crime of drug trafficking with which alnost all
of them are being charged "is extremely serious and has very heavy penalties."

Dr Elias Lerosa also said that mhange agreeeents which Peru has signed with the
United States and Canada apply only to convicted criminals. 0f the hunger-striking
inmates, only Stein has been sentenced. although he still has not paid the fine set
for him. namely $100,000, so that he can he transferred to a prison in his own

country.

Finally. the Hinister said, ”I hope the hunger strikers will stop their action. as
this will not produce positive results. What is more. I understand then from the
human standpoint; however, I am not going to interfere with the Judicial Police.

even though I know the inmates are in less than desirable prisons."

8163
cso: 5300/2130 44
BRIEFS

PIP NARCOTICS' OPERATIONs-Gen Berly Baca Valdivia, director of the Peruvian
investigative police narcotics departnent, yesterday reported that a total of
3.000 kg of cocaine paste and 100 kg of cocaine hydrochloride. which are valued
at $120 nillion intheinternationl market, were seized in 1981. He added that
100 foreigners and 2,000 Peruviana were detained on charges of involvement in
drug trafficking. [Lina EXPRBSO in Spanish 23 Dec 81 p 25 FY]

080: 5300/2160

45
LARGE COCAINB HAUL MADE M: M!
Cairo ILL-AKBAR in Arabic lo Dec 81 p 5

/_x_rticle: "Attenpt To Smggle_50,000 Pounds' worth of Cocaine through Pmle
Passenger in Airport Thwartedﬂ/

ling—l. Investigators at Cairo airport thwarted the first attespt to smggle quan-
tities of cocaine worth an estimated 50,000 pounds in the possession of a feuale
passenger conning from the Sudan.

Information reached Brig Gen Salai al-‘Avani, director of the criminal investigation
department, that a smuggler would sake an attewt to snuggle volumes of the nar-
cotic cocaine, using a female passenger arriving on a Sudanese airplane.

Col Ahmad Abu-al-‘Ala, head of the investigation department, set out a plan in
which Lt Col Shavqi Isna'il and Maj Nabil Abu Raydah took part, where passengers
on the Sudanese airplane vere monitored upon their arrival and suspicious persons
were identified. The female passenger was arrested when narcotics were discovered
in a plastic bag she was carrying by hand. During the investigation node by

Lt Col 'Ali ravzi, she said that a passenger at Khartom Airport had asked her to
take the bag because he had many suitcases with him and said that he would take it

from her at Cairo airport as soon as the plane arrived. however, she could not
make him out among the passengers and was surprised to see that the bag contained
quantities of the narcotic cocaine.

Haj Gen ’Ahd-al-mhsin Paraj, security director at the airport, decided to transfer

the passenger to the office of the prosecutor on the charge of bringing in narcot-
ice and- trying to snuggle then into the country.

11887 '__"_"' ' ——_"——

C80: 5300/ 5010

46
BIG CACHE 0? DRUGS, VARIABLES m I! AL-HA'ADI
Cairo AL-AKFIMR in Arabic 12 Dec 81 p 7

article: "S_eirure of 2 Million Ponnds‘ North of Opiu under a Dry Cleaner's Bed
in al-He'adiﬂ/

ling Yesterday al-Ma'edi investigators seized 70 kilograms of raw hashish and
32 kilograms of opiu- worth 2 million pounds under a dry-cleaner's bed in al-Ma-adi
that had been stored on behalf of a drug dealer in al-batiniyah.

The dealer had handed the narcotics over to the dry cleaner the evening he was er-
rested in an old car. lie gave his 100 pounds for storing it for hin, promising
him another 100 pounds when taking delivery of the packages in order to distribute
them on New Year's Bve. Al-Jsmaliyeh investigators also seized 20 kilograms of
silver and silver work that three person had been accused of stesling from seven
shops in Khan el-Khalili and al-Saghah. The value of the stolen objects cans to
50,000 pounds. In al-Zaytun, investigstors arrested a worker on the charge of
stealing fron 19 apartments in al-lleda'iq, al-Sharebiyah, al-Hayili, el-Zaviyeh
sl-llanre' and al-Zsytun.

The value of the thefts was estimated at 10,000 pounds. Nabawi Isma'il, the
deputy prime minister and minister of the interior. observed the materials seized.
praised the efforts of the officers who had taken part in the three cases, and de-
creed that 5,000 pounds were to be paid out to the officers taking part in the
three cases, that 5,000 pounds were to be disbursed to the officers taking part in
the narcotics case and that 1,000 pounds would be given to officers taking part in
the silver and residency [burglary] cases. The accused were transferred to the
relevant prosecutors' offices for investigation.

The instructions of Maj Gen Salah Amin, director of Cairo security, to Brig Gens
'Ahbas al-‘Asi, director of criminal investigation, and 'Abd-al-Hadi Kikhaymir,
head of the criminal investm to seize the drug hideouts in the capital
in order to eliminate the hashish and opium the dealers were bringing in to dis-
tribute over the holidays. Investigations by Cole Suleyman Hajdi, assistant in-
vestigation chief for the south, and Nabil al-‘Arabi, Z investigative tan in-
specter, revealed that a dry cleaner had recently taken up residence in the al-
Batiniyah area who had suspicious activities in the area. Lt Col Sebri Kamil.
Majs Sa'id Zaki, chief of investigation in the district, Rusayn al-Qsdi and 'Abd~
al-‘Asiz 'Uthnan, essistant investigator. and Capt Yssir Sultan attacked the dry

47
cleaner's home yesterday at dawn and unearthed 70 kilograms of hashish and 30
kilogram of opium hidden under his bed in the house. He was arrested and it was
determined that he was operating as a person storing materials for a narcotics
dealer in al-Batiniyah and that he had taken up residence in al-Ma'edi to escape

the notice of investigagion personnel. the value of the narcotics seized has been
estimated at /_illegibl_e_/ million pounds.

It was decided to give the people participating in this case a reward of 5,000
pounds.

In another area, al-Jamaliyah investigators arrested an unemployed person and two
mechanics on the charge of stealing 20 kilogram of silver and other silver wrought
objects from seven shops in Khan al-Khalili and al-Saghah with a value estimated

at 50,000 pounds. Taking part in the arrest of the accused and return of the

stolen goods wre Col Muhammad 'Abd-al-Nabi, inspector with the investigative force,
Lt Col 'Ala' Muqallad, and Majs Halmsd Ibrahim, chief of al-Jamaliyah investigation,
and 'Issm al-Kashif, assistant investigator. The three accused were handed over

to the office of the al-Jamaliyah prosecutor for investigation. In al-Zaytun, Col
'Isam Najm, Lt Col Sa'id 'Abd-al-Hadi, inspector with the investigative force, and
Gals Hazim al-Hamaqi and 'Abd-al-Hayy Isaa'il arrested an unemployed person on the
charge of burglarizing residences in the areas of al-llada'iq, al-Sharabiyah, al-
dsytun, al-Ha'ili and al-Zawiyah al-ilam-a'. The accused confessed to emitting

l9 burglaries of electrical appliances, fans. tape recorders and television sets.

The value of the stolen objects was estimated at 10,000 pounds. The accused was
handed over to the prosecutor's office for investigation.

11887
050: 5300/5010

48
BIG DRUG TRANSACTIW mam
Cairo AL-AIIMH in Arabic 26 Dec 81 p 1!.
lgrticle: "A 132,000-Pound Cash Deposit for a Narcotics transactionf_'7

lgexsl A narcotics dealer reached agreement on a hashish transaction and prepared
a deposit after exasdning a sale himself. Before proceeding to receive it, prior
to beginning carrying out the transaction, anti-narcotics personnel headed him off,
thwarting the operation before it began and seizing the three legther bags contain-
ing the deposit, which was seen to be 132,000 pounds. The tax lguthoritieg7 were
notified to take account of the illegal swindle.

At the outset, Cairo security department narcotics agencies received information
through their ongoing investigation on the circumstances of some big smugglers and
dealers in the al-Batiniyah area to the effect that they had prepared a plan to
snuggle large quantities of narcotics that they recently managed to bring in from
abroad to meet the deficit in the market and flood the country.

Investigations by Lt Col Hamdi al-Jazzar, inspector in the narcotics section, con-
firmed that some narcotics dealers headed by Musufa Dervish had reached agreement
to purchase a quantity of hashish from smgglers' stores in the Bilbays area, and
they collected large amounts of cash which they set aside as the price for the
purchase.

Last week some meetings among some snugglers in the Bilbays area and dealers in
al-Batiniyah were recorded in the suburbs of Hiliopolis. - A successful attenpt was
made to infiltrate them and learn about their movements, on the basis of a plan
supervised by Maj Gen Salah Amie, the security director, and Brig Gen 'Abbas al-
'Asi, the director of criminal investigation, and con-handed by Brig Gen Hahir
Hasan, the head of the narcotics section: Col 'Abd-al-Rahman Sa'udi, assistant
chief of the section, disguised himself in peasant garb, presented himself to s
narcotics dealer as a well-known dealer from Upper Egypt, and reached agreement
with him to buy part of the purchase that was to be provided for distribution on
the occasion of the holidays. The dealer offered the disguised officer a sale
of this transaction, informed him that he had readied a down payment for it, and
specified to him a time for handing over the quantity of narcotics in a deserted
location near the desert in Bilbays after it was handed over. The necessary
measures were made to take the smugglers on at any moment in the fear that they

49
might discover the identity of the officer and lure him in order to take revenge
against him. The area and the approaches to it were surrounded. However, the
dealer requested a postponement of the delivery time, then returned and made
another request for a postponement. when Lt Gen Hahir Hasan felt that he was pro-
crastinating, a force headed by Lt Col Tal'st Hansur and Capts Huhsin Shawqi and
'Asin al-Shadhili attacked the apartments of. the dealer Mustafa Dervish in
Heliopolis, of one of the major dealers in al-Batiniyah, Sayyid 'Abd-al-‘Aziz, and
of Shafiq lsma'il, nephews of the fewer. Three leather bags were seized in the

latter person's dwelling in al-Janaliyah inside which large bundles of Egyptian
money and a big block of hashish which was apparently from the share that his

brother had presented to the officer were concealed. That was recorded in the
investigations and seizures ledger.

11887
050: 5300/5010

50
DRBNSB VOLUME W DRUGS, PILLS 8312!!)
Cairo AL-AHRM in Arabic 27 Dec 81 p 10

[Zrticle by them Ghenim: “1 Million Patnds' Worth of Narcotics and Pills Seisedfj

Igorgl Yesterday at dawn Cairo investigative agencies managed to seize a new ship-
ment of narcotics that a woman had hidden in her home in el-Darraseh, and another
in a storage area in al-Jamaliyah, both being kept on behalf of big smgglers.

The narcotics and pills seized were valued at 1 million pounds. Information dis-
closed that some major saugglers and narcotics dealers in al-Jeaaliyah were carry-
ing out unusual activities on the occasion of the celebrations of Christ's birth-
day, New Year's and Christmas and that they had brought large shipments of; narcotics
prior to distributing them in conjunction with sass of their assistants.

In the light of this intonation, which was received by Col What-tad 'Abd'al-Nabi,
inspector in the investigation department, and Capt mhanmad Parahat, head of in-
vestigations in al-Darb al-Mnnar, Maj Gen Salah Ania, director of security, de-
manded that the investigation he continued and that it be determined what persons
were behind the activities of iaporting from abroad and what their identities were.

In accordance with directives from mhaamad ﬂabawi Isma'il, deputy prime minister
axd minister of the interior, orders were given to follow up on the storage areas
ald all possible snuggling routes and cleete the sudden strike that took place
2 weeks ago with the seizure of a storage area belonging to a major narcotics
dealer in al-Ha'adi.

A plan was set forth utder the supervision of Brig Gen 'Abbas el-‘Asi, director of
investigation, Brig Gen 'Abd-al-Hedi mkhaymir, head of investigation, std Col
Huhsmad al-Sayyid, assistant chief of investigation, whereby Lt Col 'Ala' Muqallad
and Capt 'Imad 'Abd-al-‘Al disguised themselves ard recorded meetings with some
dealers and smugglers by various technical means, reaching agreement on transfer-
ing large amounts that had been snuggled from their storage areas in desert areas
recently on behalf of the smuggler mutate Harzuq and putting them back in storage
in al-Darrassh std al-Jamsliyah. Surveillance over the area continued; at the
specified time yesterday at dawn a force attacked the dwelling of a married woman
named Khsyriyah 'Abd-al-‘Azis ‘Ali, 37, on Sikket al-Hardani Street; there, two
large sacks filled with packages of “fine dust" and "new year" brand hashish in
the form of tablets were seized. The acwsed woman confessed that they belonged

51
to the snuggle: Mustefa Harzuq and that he had reached agreement with her on storing
them on his account, prior to distributing the:- over the holidays, in exchange for
a sum of whey.

At the same tine, narcotics department agencies under the supervision of Brig Gen
Hahir Hassn, chief of the department, and Lt Col Budi al-Jszzar, managed to seize
other quantities of hashish packets in the residence of kids Ramadan Ahmad, known
as Nazajah, labelled "June" and "New Year;" she confessed to storing then for the
account of the children of Nasser.

All the quantities seized were appraised at 1 million pounds, and the prosecutor's
office ordered the accused to be jailed.

11887
CSO: 5300/5010

52
MSSIVB MMICS STASH Um

Cairo AL-AM in Arabic 30 Dec 81 p 10
lzrticle by Busayn Glunim: "Smuggling of Narcotics Horth 1.5 Hillion Pounds
Thwartedﬂl

lgexs/ Yesterday at dawn narcotics department agencies
partusnt thwarted the biggest of narcotics emggling operations, valued at 1.25
million pounds, at the approaches to Jabal 'Ateqeh on the Cairo-Sues desert road.
The narcotics had been hidden in flood control tunnels. After the area was sur-
rounded by large forces, large sacks filled with packets of hashish were seized
and a bedouin smuggler was art-gated. A narcotics dealer was also seized in she

act of distributing Len amount] estimated at a quarter of a million pounds [in

valugl.
ed to bring large annulus of

narcotics in via Jebal 'Ataqah in Sues and had reached agreement with some ac-
cosplices to store them in areas near Cairo so that it would subsequently be easy
hem prior to distributing then to dealers at different periods.

They settled on an approach Ito the hill] in the Kilo-ster 26 area, where packages
of mggled narcotics were hidden in sane tunnels that had been constructed to

drain off floods.

In the light of this infatuation, Maj Gen Salah Anin, the security director, pre-
pared s plan for surrounding this area with large forces because of the dangerous

nature of the mgglers. Numerous ambushes were also laid in the entrances and

approaches of the roads

Col 'Abd-al-Rahnan Se'udi, assistant
'ral'et nansur, after it was confirmed that they had been attempting to transfer

narcotics from the areas where they were being kept at
yesterday. One of the mgglers set up a tssporery dwe

'Abbes al-‘Asi, director of criminal investigations,

of the narcotics department, Lt Col Randi al-Jazzar,
'Asin al-Shedhili. The roads and approaches were sealed off and survey operations

were carried out over a broad area by metal stapes. A number of large sacks that

had been filled with packets of hashish and buried were unearthed, and a snuggle:
named 'Abdallah Mushrif Sa'id, a bedouin, was arrested. he confessed to storing
that for the account of his brother, who was s snuggler.

11887
CSO: 5300/5010 53
BIG MT}! COAST DRUG HAUL DBSCRIBID
Ceiro AL-m in Arabic 12 Dec 81 p 7

[Erticle by Paruq al-Shadhili and ggunir al-llasiri: “Seizure of 12 Tons of
Narcotics worth 1.0 Million Poundsﬂl

any Border Guard forces have succeeded in blocking three attewts to snuggle
narcotics into the country. The first attewt was at Sidi Ksrir in Alexandria,
the second was on the coast at Dmyat and the third was in Sinai. The forces nan-
aged to arrest 12 suspects, including five Turks. The narcotics seized, which
totalled 12 'tons, have been valued at 1.0 million pounds.

Information has been provided concerning smugglers' attenpts to bring quantities
of narcotics into new areas to make up for the failures they had encountered in
past months and the grievous losses incurred by the frustration of their activi-
ties. Infornation had reached Brig Gen Hahbi Ibrahim Kuhn-sad Rabib, director of
coastal intelligence, that smgglers' launches carrying narcotics were about to
arrive; the information was presented to Maj Gen All] 'Ali Peruq al-Sahn, cot-sander
of the Border Guard forces, and plans were set forth to seize than.

A Launch and Five Turks

The day before yesterday evening, passing in territorial waters before the coast
at Sidi Karir, Border [Query launches observed the _presence of a launch and rub-
ber dinghy. These were surrounded by Border Iguargl launches and were taken over,
and five persons who had Turkish citizenship and 277 packages of narcotics with an
estimated weight of 10 tons were arrested. They admitted that they had loaded
them on at the port of hipoli. The name of the launch was (Ike Irkawish) (two
friends). The five Turks were Minuet Rashid Maltah, Tahsin Sadiq Aslan, Thabit
Balal Tanaskan, Murjan 'Ali Heidi Juilisughli and Shabib 'Adil Balatsh.

The narcotics prosecutor's office has taken charge of the investigation under the
supervision of Counsellor mm al-llinnawi, the public lawyer.

A Second Attenpt at Days:

At the same time, smugglers made another attespt in the Jadlah Abu al-Rus area
east of Dmyat; they fled after being fired upon. The following evening the launch

54
came back, approaching the al-Karakah area east of Dunyat, but Border Guard and
Border Intelligence personnel did not permit the sugglers to carry out the
snuggling operation, and they jettisoned the launch's cargo and fled to the open
sea. Fifty-eight packages of narcotics were seized weighing 2,200 kilograms worth
7 million pounds. Six suspects were arrested-~8alah 'Ali Hasan Newer, Janel
Muhannad el-Dassuqi, Pmi Hukhtar, 'Ali al-‘rabi'i Badr, Salah m“: al-Dassuqi,

and Hansur Sabit Muhammad al-Nabbish. The office of the prosecutor has taken
charge of the investigation.

65 Kilogram of Opium in Sinai

Border Guard members also managed to seize a rubber dinghy along the coast north
of Baluzah in Sinai and seized 65 kilogram of opium worth lo million pounds along
with a suspect named Hassan al-Sayyid Sayyid al-Lauandi.

11887
080: 5300/5010

55
HUNDREDS OF KILOGRAHS 0F HEROIN, OPIUM REPORTED SBIZED
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 17 Jan 82 p 15

[Excerpt] Officers and officials of the Antinarcotics Department of the National
Police have seized 940 kilograms of heroin and 350 kilograms of opium from a band
of international smugglers.

Hojjatolealam Nateq-Nuri, minister of the interior, inspected the narcotics seized
and while thanking the officials of the Antinarcotics Department who had succeeded
in making this important haul, said: "If this seizure has been made under impos-
sible conditions and a task on the road of God fulfilled, it is because a hero was
come to life, a hero who is loved and honored by you and me."

According to this report, at 1100 hours yesterday morning during ceremonies attend-
ed by Brother Nateq-Nuri, minister of the interior, Col Seyyed Ibrahim Hejezi,
chief of the National Police and members of the Supervisory Council of Prisoners,
the minister of the interior and his associates inspected the narcotics which had
been seized.

At the beginning of these ceremonies, Col Bakhtegan, chief of the Antinarcotics
Department of the National Police pointed out, in particular, the details of
arresting the leader of a big international band of smugglers, named Haj Abdolghani
Zahi (also known as Allahdad), and that the narcotics were seized by Team Bight on
the northeastern border of the country.

Then regarding the reasons for the spread of narcotics and methods of combatting
this international plague. he stressed more control of the borders, the existence
of the Afghan refugees, unemployment is deprived provinces, the war imposed by
Iraq, and other matters with attention to how they could be combatted in the fight
against smuggling narcotics. He then asked the minister of the interior to issue
the necessary orders for appropriate housing for the Antinarcotics Department of
the National Police and more equipment for the personnel of this department.

CSO: 5300/5366

56
BRIEFS

TEERAN HARCOTICS HAUL-The antidrug squads of Tehran, Mashhad and Bender 'Abbas
have seized 1,711 kg of heroin, opiun and hashish from a number of international
drug smugglers during the past 2 months. [GF091210 Tehran KBYHAH in Persian 31 Jan
82 p 6]

PARS DRUG SEIZURE-~The Shiraz antidrug squad has seized 6.5 kg of heroin from two
Afghans. The Khoramabad Islamic Revolution Guard Corps has seized 6,240 kg of
opium from a number of persons. [GP091210 Tehran ETTELA'AT in Persian 31 Jan 82

p3]

KASHAH DRUG SBIZURB-The Kashan antidrug squad has seized 1.029 kg of heroin free a
number of persons. The Mashhad antidrug squad has seized 1.5 kg of opium from an
individual [62091210 Tehran ETTBLA'AT in Persian 31 Jan 82 p 11]

KHDRAMABAD DRUG SEIZURB--The Khoramabad antidrug squad has sezied 179.5 kg of
Afghan opium, 80 grams of heroin and 20 kg of hashish. The Ramadan antidrug squad
has seized 2.702 kg of narcotics from six persons. [GP091210 Tehran ETTELA'AT in
Persian 30 Jan 82 p 13]

MASHHAD, ZAHEIAN HEROIH HAULS--Mashhad: The Public Relations Office of the
Antinarcotics Headquarters of the Public Prosecutor's Office of the Islamic
Revolution [IR] in Mashhad, in a meeting with the Islamic Republic News
Agency in Mashhad announced that during the last few days, as a result of

the utmost efforts of this headquarters, a quantity of 300 kilograms of stick
opium, three G-3 rifles, three Brenn guns, 60 cartridges and 15 million rials
in cash were seized from a large group of narcotics traffickers in the
township of Sabzevar. According to this report, again the Revolution Guards
of the Antinarcotics Headquarters of the IR Public Prosecutor's Office of
Mashhad seized 7 kilograms of heroin from four persons by the names of
Mohammad Reza Mohammadi, son of Yusef; Hoseyn Abbasi, son of Col Mohammad;
'Ali Akbar Kalateh (known as Holva'yi), son of Gholam Hoseyn Varamzan;

and Ramazan Hojashteh. son of Hoseyn--a11 of whom were booked and turned over
to the IR Public Prosecutor's Office. Zahedan: Also, a quantity of 7.50 kilo-
grams of narcotics were seized by the Antinarcotics Headquarters of Zahedan
from two persons in this city. According to the report of the Islamic
Republic News Agency, the culprits were Shukufeh Puladi, child of Peridun,
who was arrested with 2.50 kilograms of opium; and 'Abdollah Barahavi, son of
Safar, who was arrested with 5 kilograms of hashish--both of whom were booked
and turned over to the IR Public Prosecutor's Office in Zahedan. [Text]
[Tehran ETTELA'AT in Persian 24 Jan 82 p A]

030: 5300/5363 57
LARGEST DRUG RAID IN COUNTRX'S HISTORY DETAILED
al-Shariqah AL-KHALIJ in Arabic 22 Dec 81 p 5

[Article by Hahir al-Kiyali: "Destruction of Largest Quantity of Drugs on State
Level in al-Shariqah"]

[Text] A large quantity of drugs was destroyed on the state level in al-Shariqah.
Destroyed were 200 kg of hashish, opium, hat and narcotic pills.

Also destroyed were about 30 crates of bottles and cans of alcoholic beverages of
various types. in addition to a large quantity of pornographic pictures, magazines

and other materials, including videotapes.

In addition to that, orders were issued to destroy other confiscated material such
as playing cards, clothing seized in morals cases and quantities of cigarettes,
in View of their immorality.

A number of books of witchcraft and magic seized in various cases were also
destroyed.

The committee supervising the destruction was headed by Hafiz Tahbub, head of the
district attorney's office in al-Shariqah, with 'Abd-al-Wehhab Mbdul and 'Abd-
al-Rahman Muhammad 'Ali as members.

At 10 am the aforementioned quantities were transported in two police cars from
the district attorney's headquarters to the industrial zone, where the alcoholic
beverages were entirely destroyed in an open area.

Pirst Lt 'Ali al-Mazruqi and lot Lt 'Ali Khalfan from al-Shsriqah police, Asad
'Abdallah and Amin Muhammad al-Qadi from the district attorney's office and a
number of policemen helped to carry out the order to destroy this material, under
the supervision of the head of the district attorney's office as chairman of the
committee overseeing the operation.

The conmuttee then transported the drugs to the factory of Patim in the industrial
zone, where the drugs were destroyed in one of the iron smelters used by the
factory.

The quantities destroyed had been seized in a number of cases in which the accused
had been sentenced to prison terms of varying lengths. The case of Muhammad Yamin
Qadr Khan (a Pakistani) and 'Ali Muhammad Sadiq (Iranian) took first place for
the quantity of hashiah seized in their possession on 26 March 1980. They had
brought it in through a drug dealer from Pakistan for dealers in al-Shariqah.
and 156 kg were seized.

On 29 March 1981, the civil court of al-Shariqah sentenced both of the accused
to 5 years in prison, after which they would be deported. The drugs were to be
confiscated and destroyed by the proper authorities. -

The accused appealed the decision, but on 22 April the appellate court upheld the
ruling.

On 1 December the Court of Cessation in Abu Dhabi supported the two previous
decisions, ruling as follows: The court has decided to reject the appeal and orders
the challengers to pay court costs.

The facts of this case are outlined here as they come out in the investigation and
as told to me by the accused. On 25 December 1979. al-Shariqah's police received
information that the two accused were dealing in drugs. The police drew up a

plan, and sent two detectives to make an agreement to have the two suspects procure
1,000 kg of narcotics at a price of b.000 dirhans per kilogram. Muhammad Yamin
asked for a delay to reach agreement with his friend 'Ali Muhammad.

The two accused then net with the detectives in a hotel in al-Shariqah to conclude
the deal. They promised to snuggle the desired quantity from Pakistan by a launch
operating by way of (Khorfkhan). It would be met by another launch to receive

the drugs on the high seas.

After the detectives had met with the accused several times in al-Shariqah and
Dubai, the two smugglers traveled to Pakistan in March to obtain the drugs. There
they met with a dealer named Lal Shirah and asked him to supply the desired
quantity. He told them that he already had 160 kg in Dubai which he could deliver
until the remaining quantity was available.

As soon as the two parties reached agreement, the dealer and the first accused left
Pakistan and went to Duabi to obtain the quantity there, and the dealer returned to
Pakistan immediately to inform the second accused of the completion of the transfer.
The second accused then returned to Dubai, and the two contacted the detectives

to turn over the portion which they had obtained. The date and place for the
delivery were set.

The rendezvous was a rental car lot in Dubai, from which the four men drove to the
industrial zone in al-Shariqah to complete the delivery. As soon as the operation
began, the police, who had surrounded the spot, caught the accused redhanded, and
under interrogation they acknowledged the facts related above.

7587
C80: 5300/6708

59
POLICE DRUG PATROL CHIEF: CHRISTIANIA TO HAVE LONG IMPACT
Copenhagen BERLINGSKB TIDENDB in Danish 3 Dec 81 p 2
[Article by Anders Wiig]

[Text] "A new generation of hard-core drug abusers is being created in Christiania.
When one talks out there about eliminating the hard-core drug addicts and dealers
in hard stuff in the area, it reflects a double standard of morality," says Police
Commissioner Ove Nielsen, chief of the drug patrol of Copenhagen's police.

The police commissioner refused to comment directly on the agreement of the minister
of justice, Ole Espersen, with the inhabitants of Christiania to restrict the

sale of hashish and the minister's rejection of the claim that Christiania is a

center for narcotics and crime. But Owe Nielsen and his assistants can subscribe
completely to the minister's view of the so-called free city as a center for the
hashish traffic. And like so many other people with extensive experience in combating
narcotics, the police commissioner sees a clear connection between the misuse of
hashish and the use of the so-called hard substances.

Hence, he describes the action of the inhabitants against hard substances as a double
standard.

He says, "We know that hashish smoking is a social phenomenon. Difficulties in making
contacts, inferiority complexes and other personal problems can lead children and
young people to groups of hashish addicts. And from that, many slip automatically

in the misuse of, for example, Pakistanian morphine pills, heroin and cocaine, which
we are also increasingly encountering in the more traditional hashish and narcotic
environments. I have not met among my colleagues, social workers and others with
experience in these matters, any one who challenges the argument that the narcotics
addict who resorts to injections began by smoking hashish. Thus, a new generation

of injection addicts is being created in Christiania."

In addition, hashish is dangerous enough in itself--among other reasons, because

the effects of intoxication last very long. In smoking hasFSsh, the accumulation of
the poisonous substance THC (tetrahydrocanabinal) takes plau- in the body system

in such a way part of the effects of a hashish binge can be maintained from one
weekend to the next.

60
On Tuesday evening the drug patrol made a raid in Christiania. In 20 minutes 17
people were arrested, and 50 grams of hashish worth 50 kroner a gram, were confiscated.
The arrested included three Norwegians, two Swedes, and two Finns. Six people were

on the wanted list, including three Norwegians and a Finn.

Bight juveniles were arrested at "The Mad House," among the- a 14-year old boy with
29 grams of hashish. He had run away from a refornntory.

Ove Nielsen: "It is normal at ‘The Mad House,‘ 'Valmuen' and the other joints out
there for us to encounter Iany school pupils sitting smoking hashish."

6893
080: 5300/2100

61
GREENLAND YOUTH HARD HIT BY DRUGS IN COPENHAGEN 'FREB CITY'
Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 21 Jan 82 p 1
[Article by Kirsten Sorrig]

[Text] Kofoeds School and the Greenland Children's Society are working to set
up a crisis center for Greenlanders. The crisis center will probably be ready
for use in 1982 and will be located in a Copenhagen institution formerly used for
a similar purpose.

"There is a great need for the crisis center. In the last few years there has
been an explosion in the number of young Greenlanders who are going under," said

principal Jens Aage Bjorkoe.

A few years ago 6 percent of the students at Kofoeds School were Greenlanders.
Today young Greenlanders make up 20 percent and they also represent the students
with the most problems.

"About 1 young Greenland man out of 20 in the ZO-ZO-year-old age group is a stu-
dent here now. The unfortunately high number reflects a collapse of the Green-
land culture and the rootlessness and identity crisis of the young people there.
Nearly all our Greenland students have suffered a serious defeat in their grow-
ing years or in the course of their studies. They have sunk to the bottom and
their future prospects are very poor unless they are resocialized into the Green-
land comunity," said principal Bjorkoe.

He estimated that Kofoeds School comes in contact with around 600 Greenlanders in
the course of a year and that most come from the hardest section of Christiania.
he has the impression that only a few of them are injecting narcotics but that
almost all of them have serious problems with other intoxicants such as hashish,
alcohol and various types of medicine.

6578
C50: 5300/2104

62
BRIEFS

INTERNATIONAL HASHISH SMUGGLING GANG BROlGN-dn a big new hashish case, four men,

25 to 28 years of age, were imprisoned yesterday after a closed court session in
Dommervagten. They were charged with smuggling hashish in from Morocco on several
occasions. On Monday the narcotics police moved in and confiscated about 10 kilograms
of hashish in anapartment in Auger, where three of the individuals charged were
arrested. The fourth was arrested while he was waiting for a- middleman dealer, but
was instead waylaid by the police. Bent Hansen, criminal police conissioner, says,
"The action was carried out after cooperation among the police and customs adminis-
trations of Germany, France and Denmark. Some evidence indicates that a portion

of the stuff was to be sold in Christiania." [Text] [Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDB
7 Dec 81 p 3] 6893

CHRISTIANIA DRUG SEIZURES--Criminal police comissioner Ove Nielsen says that police
drug patrols have since the beginning of the year confiscated narcotic substances

in Christiania worth about 7.1 million kroner, including hashish worth 6 million
kroner. The quantity of confiscated substances has just been totaled up for a meeting
today between riot patrol staff and the minister of justice, Ole Espersen. In all
1.8 grams of heroin, 2.8 kilogram of marijuana, 7.7 grams of raw opium, 7.3 grams of
amphetamines, 2.2 grams of hashish oil, 16 morphine tablets, 43 LSD pills, 36 grams
of psilocybin mushrooms-~they have the same effect as LSD—and almost 23 kilograms

of various cannabis products. There have been 910 arrests, of which 80 were people
under 18 years of age. There were among those arrested 57 foreigners who were
deported for violation of previous deportation orders. Another 125 were deported
because they were in possession of stuff. One hundred seventeen of the foreigners
were Swedes, of which 98 were in possession of stuff. In addition, Olve Nielsen

made known that a search of houses in Christiania is beginning, in order to uncover
the traffic in hard substances. Three men were arrested the other day in an apartment,
in which all the paraphernalia for dealing was found. One of those arrested was

in possession of 0.4 grams of heroin. [Text] [Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDBNDE in
Danish 8 Dec 81 p 8] 6893

63
DRUG TRADING-~"Hard narcotics continue to be traded daily within a rather closed
circle in Christiania. and Christianianites themselves estimate that 20 kilograms
of hashish, valued at 1 million kroner, are being sold daily." according to Tommy
Agerskov Thomsen, chairman of the Copenhagen Police Association. The association
chairman is "surprised, not shaken" about the justice minister's agreement with
Christianianites to limit the trade. He said in RADIOAVISEN this evening that
cocaine and LSD are being sold from a kind of satellite storage near Christiania.
But due to special working conditions, police have not been able to break this trade.
Some 47 policemen were assaulted in Christiania during the last 2 1/2 to 3 months.
Criminal commissioner Bent Hansen, assistant chief of narcotics police. told
BERLINGSKE: “He have not had any concrete evidence of hard drugs in Christiania
for some time. Recently we arrested some people in connection with the hashish
trade in Christiania and I personally asked these addicts: "Tell me the truth.
Are there hard drugs in Christiania or not?" One who is out there every day an—
swered: "Yes, of course, there are." The commissioner said the following about
the hashish trade in Christiania: "The extent of it is quite unacceptable and
society cannot continue to ignore it." [Text] [Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in
Danish 6 Dec 81 p 1] 8952

DRUC RAID 1N CHRISTIANIA--Eight were arrested when the riot patrol and license en-
forcement police raided "the free city“ Christiania about noon. The move was
directed against what police call “the illicit pubs" Hoodstock and Madhuset.
Throughout the raid, police were surrounded by 50 to 100 Christianianites who
loudly expressed their opinion about society in general and police in particular.
However, there was no violence. Among those arrested were 2 Swedes, one of them-
a girl-carrying 11,000 kroner she could not account for; a Norwegian with 10.5
grams of hashish in his possession and a formerly deported Finn. When police arrived
at Lotushuset, people there fled in panic, but a smaller amount of hashish was

found on the floor. About 40 persons tried to barricade themselves inside Hadhuset,
but opened up when police got reinforcements. At Madhuset, too. police found hash-
ish, both on people and in the middle of the floor. while making the drug raid,
license enforcement police also took an inventory of the liquor in stock at the two
Christiania pubs. [Text] [Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 18 Dec 81 pt II
p 1] 8952

CSO: 5300/2116

64
BRIEIS

HASBISH, MARIHUANA TRAFFICKING-Juice in Nuuk (Godthsb) are in the process of
winding up a his case that includes the sale of hsshish and mrijuens, home-
brewed alcohol and ration stamps for beer, wine and alcohol. So for two young
men have been detained in connection with the cue which came to the attention
of the police recently in the context of soles of hone-brewed alcohol in Nuuk.

A search of the homes of the two young men revealed e large stockpile of hashish

and marijuana. [Text] [Copenhagen nmumsxz mom): in Danish 14 Jan 82 p 2]
6578

C50: 5300/ 2160

65
BRIEFS

CUSTOMS 'SHASH' SMUGGLING NETHORK--Paris, 1 Feb (APP)-Prench customs smashed a
cannabis smuggling network over the weekend with the arrest of 11 South Americans
following a tipoff by the International Police Organisation "Interpol," police
announced here today. Dutch police advised Interpol of a shipment of 200 kilos

(440 lbs) worth one million francs (about $190,000) and French police traced the
consignment to an address just outside Paris. The cannabis was brought to France

by ship, and the idea was to sell a small amount in France, and have the rest taken
by two South Americans to the Netherlands. The arrest of the couple, Gustavo
Curiel--Guadalupe and Armantina Curiel-Gomez, both 25, who are naturalised Dutch
subjects--led to other members of the gang. One of them, a Spaniard, was found with
traces of cocaine in the double bottom of his suitcase. The others who were arrested
are Colombian and Venezuelan nationals. They have all been charged with drug
trafficking and jailed to await trial. [Text] [NC011913 Paris AP? in English

1506 GMT 1 Feb 82] -

HASHISH SEIZED AT ORLY AIRPORT-Paris, 25 Jan (APP)--Customs officers seized

8b kilos (184 lbs) of hashish in the luggage of three Zairian nationals on their
arrival Saturday at Lrly International Airport, police announced today. The drug
was hidden in the false bottoms of suitcases. The three, all residents of the Paris
region, had flown in from Lisbon. They will appear before a court later today.
Police named them as Dr Lumpungu Kalondji, 39, his wife Angeline, 25, and a friend
Buku Kinkela, whose name was not given. [Text] [NC251017 Paris AF? in English

0938 GMT 25 Jan 82]

ISRAELI HEROIN DEALERS ARRESTED—~Paris, 22 Jan (APP)-Five Israeli heroin dealers
who attempted to set up operations in France have been arrested by investigators

of the French Narcotics Bureau, authoritative sources said today. [Words
indistinct] was the first (?time a) group of Israelis,_(?directed) by Israeli drug
dealers in Los Angeles, California, had tried to set up a base in Paris. The group
had previously tried to operate out of Frankfurt, West Germany, but were driven out
by the mainly Turkish competition. Police were aware of the group for more than a
year but investivation of its activities was finally triggered by the arrest last
November in Israel of an American carrying 2.4 [words indistinct] of heroin. The
Israelis were arrested here while awaiting a shipment of (?Hiddle East heroin from
Amsterdam). [Text] [NC221910 Paris APP in English 1851 GMT 22 Jan 82]

080: 5300/2157

66
ATHENS, PIRLEUSMUORHGWW
AtheneTOVDﬂinGreeRIZJenBZpl

cerpt7 Two drug pushing genge (heroin and heehieh) were broloen up by the
eeueTolice which arrested 16 pereone. The two police "operatione' were oerried
out elnoet eiaulteneouela leet Fridey in Pleke and Lgie Barbara of iigeleo.

The boldness or the one gang dealing with heehieh exceede all linite einoe e
”tent“ which served ee e dietrihatiou...oenter wee eet up in the chnrclvard or
Agie Berbere, obviouela to avoid eroueing em euepicionei The police raid wee
leunched after new deye or eyetenetic eurveillenoe end reeulted in the erreet of
the gong leedere end their pusher: and in eeieing 15 'tehlete' or high quelity
heehieh weighing 120 green. Alec, in a hiding place et the Ketrenteoe lot on
Stediou Street, the police found edditionel heehieh following e diecloeure by
geng leader 1'. Xegorerie, 27, e deeler in old goode. Theee erreeted, including
Xegorarie, are A. Peerologoe, street peddler, ﬁ, Eh. Kieldaopouloe, etreet peddler,
23, the gypey wcnen E. Stolidou, V. hrpeli, Anth. Koteiee end the apeiee P.
lgyzie, ll. Hometiriotie end Khr. Andreou. Three nore pereone are being eought.

The “tent" in Agie Berbara wee being vieited deily to 'egente" of Xegorerie end
Peerologoe who apparently worked in the peat with G. Vartelatoe, eliee 'the
Seagull,“ e drug dealer new in Jeil eweiting trial. Pearologoe wee eupplied with
heehieh regularly from Selenice where the druge one free Turkey. Peerologoe end
Iagorerie torwerded part of the haehieh to other 'eelling pointe' ae well, while
Kiakhopouloe wee the geng'e ”terry," cerxying the etuﬂ' to other ereee.

The second geng wee internetionel, coepoeed of heroin nerchente, end wee active
priurily in Flake but it aware that ite network extended to other parte of
Athens end Pireeue. The geng was broken up by a police nercotice equed of the
Piraeus Security. In locatiru the gang, a decisive role wee pmed byintorntion
given to thepolice by a eteff neuter of the newspaper 1“. USA. In a hotel in Pleka,
the police erreeted e Oemn citieen, Berenot Beret, who wee the gang leader,
Britieh subject Chrietine Pitcher, Auetrien Sebib lleIcher, end two Greek women

(0. Peekhelidou end 6. Sorou). In the hotel where “the heedquertere or the white
deeth” wee set up the police eeized ll gram of heroin of excellent quelity,
syringes new for nee end eignii‘icent cm of money. The police also erreeted
Kethreen Bella, e New Zeelender nerried to 8. Georginu, a Greek citisen.

67
A Greek supplier of heroin played a key role in the discovery of the Ger-en and his
British oonpanion who pulled the strings in the gang and pushed the “merchandise.“
All those meted were also users. In Pitcher's room, under the wash basin, the
police found heroin wrapped in foil. In another moan the police found heroin and

syringes .

The police found out that the Ger-nan gang leader was stains in a boardinghouse

on Filellinon Street but left secretly when he learned that a tourist wonen, Rosa
Laibe, with when he had had an affair, had died from an overdose of barbiturates.
He abandoned at the boardinghouse two suitcases and other items but no narcotics.

7520
050: 5300/5357

68
MAJOR DRUG 03114311 30003:
Athens '1“ NBA in Greek 11 Jan 82 p l

ﬁat-M7 Lately the police have been eearching for a house painter tron
hexendroupolie who ie believed to be a nejor narcotics inorter from Turkey.

This enuggler loves lerge quantitiee of haehieh and heroin into bros, Thessaloniki,
Larisa and Athens. (hr Kavele cor-reepondent reports:

"The house painter and drug dealer who is being sought by the police supplied
heroin to Ath. Vouree, 26, who wee arreeted in Kaela and who ie now being interm-
geted, end Nikos Pepegeorgiou, 29, who was about to sell proceaaed haehieh to a
police firet lieutenant of the Athem Suburban Security and wee arreeted.

I'Yeeterdayy, the Kevela gender-wry, following e tip tron Athena, raided Pepegeorglou'e
house at ‘11; Hehedononakhon Street but found no other nercotice.

"The eearch extended from Bvroe to Athens in en effort to locate the house painter

who disappeared in nmndroupolie as soon as he heard about the arrest otithan.
Vourae in Kevale.

"It was learned that Athan. Vourae eold two large eparmente he had inherited from

his father and with the proceeds wee buying narcotics, epending 100,000 to 120,000
drecluee every 6 weeks." -

7520
050: 5300/5357

69
HARSNEST-BVER SENTENCE HANDED DONN IN NBKOIN CASE
Oslo ARBEIDERBLADED in Norwegian 5 Dec 81 p 9

[Text] Thirty—year old Beyhan Saat from Turkey was sentenced on Friday by the
Eidsivating circuit court in Oslo to 14 years inprisonnent for the smuggling of
2 kilograms of heroin and 6 kilograms of hashish and for partial sale of these
substances.

His accomplice. 28-year old halit Dogan, was sentenced to 11 years ilprisonment.
Dogan's 21-year old Norwegian wife was sentenced to 4 years imprison-eat as a
courier in bringing the narcotics into the country. The court, in iaposing the
sentence, took into consideration the fact that she had thought the narcotic was
hashish and not heroin.

The 4th individual implicated in the narcotics case, a 26-year old Turkish citizen,
was sentenced to 3 years inprisonnent for selling a portion of the narcotics.

The penalties meted out by the circuit court are the heaviest ever imposed for
narcotic violations in Norway. Unusually strict security measures were taken, with
more than 15 policemen in the courtrooa, when the sentences were imposed. Accord-
ing to what NTB (Norwegian Press Bureau) has learned. the reason was a tip that

the chief Turkish defendant wanted to flee and that preparations for flight had
been made both inside and outside the prison.

The prosecutor had called for sentences of 14, 12, 8 and 4 years respectively.
In the court's judgment. which was unanimous, strong language was used concerning
this narcotic case.

Many Dead

"The heroin was worth about 20 million kroner on the black market in Norway, and
would have resulted in the death of nany heroin users if all of it had been sold
before the police acted," it is stated.

The main figure in the Turkish heroin gang is a millionaire by the name of Bekhir
Taban. who was previously expelled from Norway, and is still free.

The court determined that the chief defendant, Beyhan Saat. has been the key

figure in this organized traffic in narcotics in Norway and also that Dogan has
had an important role.

70
"In regard to the 30—year old Saat, there are no mitigating circumstances to be
noted. Although strong proof was presented in regard to him, he denied any
connection with the smuggling of narcotics. He stands out as the most profes-
sional in the group." the judgment reads.

The court considered the fact that Balit “ogan pleaded guilty after his wife had
put the cards on the table as a mitigating circumstance, but held that he cynicall
exploited his wife in connection with the smuggling. At that time they were only
engaged.

"The woman stated that she thought she was only smuggling hashish, and this
explanation is the basis for her sentence being reduced from 8 to 3 years,
compared with the prosecutor's demand."

East To Fool

“She behaved in a self—sacrificing manner in her love affair and was cynically
exploited by her Turkish friend. She was unusually naive and easy to fool,"
the court said among other things.

0n the other hand, the court did not think that her friend, Dogan, believed that
"only” hashish was being smuggled. It was shown that he sold heroin when he
came to Norway and that he had no scruples.

There have been in this case, according to information NTB has learned. murder
threats against one or several of those implicated, and the defense attorney for
Hallit Dogan informed NTB that his client is really afraid to go back to Germany.

"This is blamed on the fact that the chief figure, Bekhir Taban. is still free.
Therefore, Dogan wishes to remain in Norway after his sentence is served."

The prosecutor, state attorney Anstein Gjengedal, in reply to an inquiry from
“TB, confirmed that there is very acute tension between the two leading figures,
began and Saat.

"There can be no question of letting them serve their sentences in the same
prison," Gjengedal said.

6893
080: 5300/2109

71
BRIEFS

'CRISIS PHONES' FOR ABUSERSuOslo, 27 Now-Crisis telephones will be set up in
individual mnicipalities as an element in combstting narcotics problems. The
minister of justice, Mona Rokke, informs HOYRES AVIS that it is a temporary trial
project with the state covering the expenses. The minister of justice also
reveals that the department is working on rules which will provide authority for
the compulsory treatment of addicts. An increase in the capacity for treatment
is also an objective. [Text] [Oslo DAGBLADET in Norwegian 27 Nov 81 p 9] 6893

(:80: 5300/2109
CUSTOMS OFFICIAL SAYS AGENCY UNABLE TO CONTROL DRUGS PLO"
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish 28 Dec 81 p 6
[Article by Sune Olofson]

[Text] Helsingborg--Bach year 14 million people, 900,000 cars, and
200,000 trucks pour across the border at Helsingborg, Helms, Trelleborg.
and Ystad. Only 50 customs officers have the task of inspecting this
enormous number of people and vehicles.

“At the same time. the government maintains that drugs must be stopped at
the border. That is an absurd task," district customs inspector Yngve Kahl
of the customs police said in Malmo.

“But there are no more than 50 of us actually out in the field at the
borders. The total number of personnel is greater, but many have other
duties, for example office work."

Customs officers compare Scania to an hourglass--96 percent of all drug
confiscations occur in Scanis. At the Helsingborg border crossing alone.
9 million people enter the country annually with 180 arrivals each day.

The personnel shortage is so severe that during half these arrivals at
Helsingborg the customs lines are unmanned.

Any drug smugglers arriving at such times walk right through.

Old Organization

In many ways, the Customs Department is a neglected and antiquated organiza-
.tion. Customs police in Malmo still use card files to register smugglers
and confiscations. Large boxes of cards are stacked in their offices. For

5 years customs officials have waited for a computer system.

Hhen trains from the continent arrive in Helsingborg during the summer,
seven trains daily. there are about 1,500 people on board. The trains are

73
so crowded with backpackers that their baggage falls out of the cars when
customs officials open the doors. '

Paradise for Smugglers

In 20 minutes, the time between Helsingor and Helsingborg, four customs
officers must inspect 14 cars, 1,500 passengers, and their luggage.

"This is a paradise for drug smugglers," customs officer Ronald Stahl said.
"Here in Helsingborg, not all customs officers have binoculars and the
plastic flashlights do not work. The automobile inspection hall has no
equipment for removing tires."

"I cannot understand how the customs authorities in Stockholm can accept this
situation. Our superiors seem to be completely uninterested. It does not
matter whether we work or not. No one higher up is looking for results.

The Customs Department seems to have given up."

The long Scanian coastline is guarded by a few customs officers in so-called
control groups. Small marinas, inlets, and islands must remain unwatched.

Spot Checks

The marina for small boats in Limhamn outside Halmo has space for 1,500 boats.
Customs officials know that there are many luxury yachts there. purchased
on the continent, that have not been cleared by customs.

In 15 minutes a fast boat can reach the channel just outside the drug center
Christiania. Customs authorities have sufficient resources only for spot
checks.

"we feel helpless. Customs officials must constantly try to keep up,"
said Kurt Hahlstedt, customs inspector and chief of the customs police in
Helsingborg.

Meanwhile, drug smugglers are entering through Helsingborg, Halmo, Ystad,
and Trelleborg. This year customs officers in Helsingborg have made

578 confiscations--83 kg cannabis, 20 g cocaine, 5.1 kg amphetamines,
220 g heroin, and 21 kg "pep pills."

"Every politicial must know that these are drops in an enormous sea of
narcotics," Kurt Hahlstedt said.

Astrid Hakansson is an examiner and customs inspector with the customs
police in Halmo.

7d
1982 Fateful Year

"Drug smugglers now are coming all the way from Lulea and Kiruna. They have
various professions--day care personnel, nurses, recreation leaders. SAS
employees, military personnel, doctors, and teachers."

"This coming year will be fateful. Drug abuse soon can become so widespread
that we will be forced to give up. He must do something dramatic now to
save our youth."

"The obvious thing to do is stop the narcotics at our borders-whefore they
reach the distributors."

9336
C80: 5300/2131

75
BRIEFS

CUSTOMS DRUGS FUNDS INCREASED--The Ministry of Trade will get a 73-million-kronor
increase in its budget. Sixty million of this will go to the customs system,
which will thus not have to cut down on its work. The minister of trade first of
all wants the customs to invest in the fight against narcotics, and proposes that
resources be made available for that purpose. Later in the spring the Ministry
of Trade will have a hand in the govermaent bill that will be presented on the
narcotics problem. It is conceivable that the customs service will get an extra
appropriation at that time. [Etcerpt] [Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish

12 Jan 82 p 4] 8815

TREATMENT CENTERS' FUNDS INCREASED-~About another 250 places will be arranged in
homes for narcotics addicts. There will then be a total of 1,990 places. At the
sane time it is estimated that Sweden has over 10,000 heavy users of narcotics.
For care of female drug abusers 1.1 million kronor is being allotted. The police
are reorganizing again this year to cabat economic crime and narcotics. The
police narcotics sections will get about another 15 positions. The state criminal
technological laboratory in Linkoping will get an extra 1.4 million kronor to buy
equipment for analysis of drugs. The prison system will get more dogs that can
smell out drugs in the prisons of the country. The customs service is also making
changes to reinforce the fight against narcotics. [Text] [Stockholm SVENSKA
DAGBIADET in Swedish 12 Jan 81 p 14] 8815

FAMILY SMUGGLED HEROIN FRCM 'i'URKEY--The Stockholm district court Tuesday [22 Decem-
ber 1981] sentenced the Turkish family that snuggled 5.5 kg of heroin from Turkey
into Sweden to a total of 29 years in prison. The family consists of papa, mama,
and two grown sans. A 28-year-old son was sentenced to 10 years in prison. A 40-
year-old son was sentenced to 9 years in prison and expulsion from Sweden. The
56-year-old father was sentenced to 5 years in prison. The 56—year-old mother
also got S years in prison. Both were also expelled from Sweden. me 28-year-
old son's not being expelled is due to his being a Swedish citizen. All four
members of the family were convicted of serious narcotics crimes. The family was
part of a ring that has been smuggling heroin into Sweden for the last 2 years.
The ring was exposed last spring. The family was delivering heroin from Turkey

to various receivers in Sweden. A total of some 10 persons were involved, including
a former member of the board of the Turkish national league in Sweden. All those
involved besides the family have been sentenced earlier to various severe penal-
ties. [Text] [Stockholm DAGENS NYTETER in Swedish 23 Dec 81 p ll] 8815

C50: 5300/2138
76
ARMENIAN TBRRORISTS ALLEGEDLY SHIFT TO GOLD SHUGGLING

Istanbul Operation

Istanbul TERCUMAN in Turkish 17 Jan 82 pp 1, 14
[Report by Mehmet Balikcioglu: 'The Great Gold 0peration"]

[Text] Ankara-It has been determined that Armenian terrorist organizations using
certain jewelers have smuggled large amounts of gold out of Turkey.

Because of the gold smuggling. initiated by the Armenians with the aim of obtaining
income for their organizations, all airports and border checkpoints have been
alerted.

Information has also been given to the concerned state organizations and the 'ﬁreat
gold operation" has been set in motion. Armenian terrorist organizations are said
to have previously smuggled heroin--in transit-~acrosa Turkey. However, as a re-
sult of the successful operations and tight controls by the Turkish police, they
are said to have given up this practice. In the "Gold operation,“ 200 million
liras worth of gold in ingot form were seized in Istanbul alone.

Tight Controls Prove a Barrier

The Armenian terrorist organizations in Europe shipped the narcotics which they
obtained from Far and Middle-Eastern countries in transit across Turkey. As a
result of successful operations carried out by the Turkish police organization
together with Interpol, the use of Turkey as a bridge in narcotics smuggling was
prevented. The security organization's determination, its pursuit of smugglers and
its arresting of some of them have prevented smuggling of narcotics, particularly
heroin, across Turkey by Armenian organizations.

Under Armenian Control

Following the 12 September Action, careful control of customs entry and exit points,
iarports and harbors made it impossible for the smugglers controlled by the Armenians
to operate. The Armenians, realizing that they would be unable to transport across
Turkey the narcotics which they obtained from the Middle and Far East, began to
shift to the sea lanes and began to use other countries as bridges.

77
Tactics Changes

The Armenian terrorists gave up narcotics smuggling in the face of dogged pursuit
by our police. Realizing that Turkish soil could not be an "entry point for nar-
cotics," they next tried to smuggle gold. The Armenians smuggled significant

amounts of gold out of the country obtaining financial support for their foul de-

signs. This activity of theirs soon came to the attention of the Turkish security
organizations.

The police, working day and night, discovered the jewelers whom the Armenians
controlled and initiated the "great gold operation."

The operation netted 200 million liras worth of 22 carat gold in ingot form. Upon
discovery of the gold smuggling by the murdering Armenians who martyred several of
our diplomats, an analysis of the situation was made and the way to intercept the
gold going to the murderers was determined. The work soon led to a successful con-
clusion. Another tactic of the gold smuggling murder organization ended in a fiasco.

Meanwhile, airports, border points as well as harbors, the customs and the coast
guard organizations were alerted.

Anatolia Operation

Istanbul TERCUMAN in Turkish 21 Jan 82 pp 1, 14
[Report by Hehmet Balikcioglu: 'The Gold Operation Shifts to Anatolia“]

[Text] Ankara--The "great gold operation" connected with the gold smuggling directed
by Armenian terrorist organizations is still under way. The operations were begun
following the discovery that Armenians had smuggled large quantities of gold out

of our country. After Istanbul, the opeations shifted to encompass all of Anatolia.
Two Greeks and four Israelis, the tools of the Armenians, were apprehended. Menn-
while, meausre were taken on trains leaving the country after it was learned that
gold was smuggled in particular by train. Professor Bedri Gursoy, in a statement

to our newspaper said "Gold is equivalent to foreign exchange. The state should
continue the measures it has taken."

In their statements, the apprehended Greek and two [sic] Israeli smugglers said
that they were carrying the gold in their possession to the town of Trieste. in
Italy. In recent days, the gold operation begun by security officials in Istanbul
has shifted to Anatolia. As a result of operations undertaken, approximately 50
million liras worth of additional illegal gold were seized.

when it became clear that the smrggling was directed by Armenian organizations, the
measures taken at airports and harbors as well as customs checkpoints, and on trains
leaving Turkey were intensified.

During the measures and operations which were carried out, the Greek nationals
Atanoguas Calavadis, and Aloksos Gitsijis and Israeli nationals Andirie Sunder.
Kessel Maylkun, Harbinea Sjov and Adlij Kivey were apprehended. The apprehended
Israeli and Greek smugglers said that they were transporting the illegal gold in
their possesion to the town of Trieste, in Italy, and that they did not know who
was to take delivery.
Authorities indicated that the gold snuggling was being carried out in the same
manner as heroin smuggling. They said "the women used by the smugglers place the

gold in bundles which they strap to their abdomens to give the impression that they
are pregnant."

cso: 4654/1513

79