FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10286
28 January 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli—
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020055-4

WORLDWIDE REPORT

NARCOTICS AND DALSEROUS DRUGS
(F000 5/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA
AISTRALIA

Testimony Continues in Trial of Police on mrijusns I
(THE REST AUSTRALIAN, 7 lbv 81)..............

Briefs
Jail for Heroin Smugglers
Anphe tsuine Trafficking

BURMA

BCP Reportedly Plunges Into Opium Business
(Knot Rusnrudi; NATION REVIEH, 14 Jan 82)...

Briefs
Opium Sales to PRC

HALAYS IA

Cabinet Committee Studying Control of Drug Abuse
(NEH STRAITS TIMES, 10 Dec 81).. ...... .......

Drug Arrests for tbveliaer 1981 Reported
(NW STRAITS TIMES, 16 Dec 81) ....... .. .... ..

Opium Processing Laboratory in Johore State
(NEH STRAITS TIES, 23 Nov 81)...............

Rohypml Used as Heroin Substitute
(NEH STRAITS TIMES, 11 Nov 81)...............

- s - [III

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020055-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020055-4

rvn Ul‘rLULhu uor. Unhl

NEPAL
Briefs
,‘. Hashish Processing Factory Baided
PAKISTAN
Narcotics Board To Keep Better lbcords
(DAMN, 30 Dec 81).................................
Briefs
Heroin Seized in Lahore
SINGAPORE
Call for Preventive Detention of Drug Offenders
(NEH STRAI'lS TIES, 9 Dec 81)
mAlLAND
RTC Control of KM Narcotics Amy Noted
(HATIGION. 8-110 Nov 81)...........................
ONCB Proposes Ibugher Narcotics Laws
(DAO SIAM, 19 Nov 81).............................
Northern Rehabilitation Unit Treats ’ihais, Tribeslnen
(SIAM NAT. 2!. Nov 81)
EAST EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Briefs
Pharmacy Burglary Reported
LATIN MERICA
BERWIM

Canadian Consudtant To Develop Anti-Drug Program
(THE ROYAL GAZETTE. 8 Dec 81)

Methadone Treatment Clinic at Hospital To Be Upgraded
(13E ROYAL mum. 10 Dec 81)

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020055-4
BOLIVIA

Clandestine (bca lbute Described
(Daniel Guerra Hercado; L08 mos, 4 Dec 81)................

Cocaine Missing Fran Bank Vault Reportedly Burned
(BL m, 29 ”V 81)00secacocoonosoaosossoooooatosses-assesto

Briefs

Induction of Coca Cultivation Announced
Cocaine Seized

Coca Leaves Seized
(bcaine Burned

BRAZIL

Reportap on South Antican Drug Conference Proceedings

(0 ESTA“) I! SAO PAUID, 22, 21 Nov 81, CORRBIO
BRAZILIENSB, 15 MV 81)aaoaasooooaooaaooooooo.oeaoaaaaaoaaaaoa

Traffic. Consulption on Increase
Brazilian Efforts
Conclusion of Conference

Provigil Smggled Pros Paraguay Proves Fatal
(JORNAL D0 BRASIL, 8 Nov 81)....

'lhree Youths Arrested With Drugs, Am, Grenades in R10
(30%]. m BmIL’ 10 NOV 81)soooooaosasosaosco000.000.00.000

First Big thrihuana (‘rop Fomd in Pbderal District Seized
(comm BRAZILIENSE, 11 Nov 81).............................

Briefs
lbndonia Trafficking Route
Induction in Border Trafficking
Musicians Arrested With Hashish
Police Discharged for Conlicity
Hsto GmsLo d) Sul Busts

COIDFBIA

nutty-Bight Tons of Harihuana Seized
(El. TIEHPO. 14 Nov 81).....

Presumd Trafficker Seized Hith Cash, Cocaine Seized
(EL ESPBCTADOR, 11 Nov 81).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI-‘FK’IM. llSl-Z ONLY

MEXICO

Reports on International Pill Trafficking Activity
(31. DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS, l, 3 Dec 81, BL BRAVO,

2 NC 81’00-00000so.OOIOIOOOOOOOOOIDCsIIoooooocslossOIso-oe-oo

Pills Seized, Laboratory Discomred
Gernan Ringleader Sought
Neuropsychiatrists Inplicated

Reports on Latin Anerican Drug (bntrol Seminar
(Varimn sources. 2, 8 Dec 81)................................

Health Secretary's Opening Statement
Ten-Nation Agreemnt

Sinaloa Antidrug Results Praised

Huber: of khrihuana Trafficking Ring Sentenced
(EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO, 4 Dec 81).

PERU

Briefs
Former General Gets Prison Sentence

S'l' HITS-NEVIS

Briefs
mrihuana Para Raid

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
IRAN

Governmnt Now [hing Oonfiscated Narcotic:
(EmM'AT. 9 Jan 82)00000000-0.000..ottosolsooosoeossoaoeeoo

Briefs
Shiraz Opium Discovery
Shiraz Heroin Seizure
Khorasan Drug Haul
Opiu- Seized in Birjan
Heroin Seized in mshhad
mman Opium llaul
Big Tehran Heroin Find

3-‘0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SUB-SAHARA}! AFRICA
IVORY COAST

Briefs
Drugs Crackdown

MAURITIUS

Briefs
Five Packages of Opium

ZIIBABPE

Young Drinkers wre Prone to Drug Abuse, Says Report
(Mike Overneyer; ‘mE HERALD, 8 Jan 82)..

WEST EUROPE

GREECE

Briefs
Narco tics Discovered

NORHAY

Justice Minis ter Pledges 'Narco tics-Free' Prisons
(motleif Andreassen; APTENPOSTEN, 31 Dec 81) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Briefs
Drugs Snuggled Into Prison
1981 Customs Drug Seizures
Official Pears ‘Narootics Flood‘
Rodd Drug Cases Increase

SWITZERLAND

B rie fs
Arres t o f Hashish Smugglers

TUMEY

Briefs
Poppy Cultivation Request

Hashish, Heroin Seized
Morphine Base Seizure

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TESTIMONY CONTINUES IN TRIAL OF POLICE 0N MARIJUANA CHARGE

Perth THE REST AUSTRALIAN in English 7 Nov 81 p lo

[Text] A witness told the District Court yesterday that
he was to have been paid $16,000 to "give a hand" in a canna-
bis Operation involving a big crop at a farm at: Jarrahdale.

eon Papas (as). motor
mechenlc. of M00.
eaid water We

netion that I man called

Charlie Nam had talked
timer“ 9: ”r..-
'a men

heiouje (atrium
Pe who ‘hee been
humanit mm

gran
proeecution. said had-
gone to the

fa eve
twoorthreedefg'ewhg
ttwaahottoiookeﬂer
water-ingolthepienta.

- Papal wee evi-
dence at the m {our
' detectivee and Mona La
Donna Peiham (31). of
sown. Street. High-
gate, who are themed
with conspiring to ob
tein «MINI with in-
tent to act! or enwiy.

The detectivee an bet-

at) t Kerri T.

e o '
:5 . Wu?" 9:.

e .n e
'tuﬂhe annulpgzhmem
won (32). of Greenwood;
and DctectiVe Dun Lew.
itzke (34). “Scarbor-
ough. .

The deﬁcttvee'are alao
charged with eomiri
tn pervert the court-e 0

notice and to en Iy
{turntable to Mine Pemprm.

The charm remit
irum e drug equal It:
on a HINII‘ M

Green . Heed. ,mOIun

:30: 5300/7521

Earthotl’erthien

Pepaa told the com
that he had

who was Peiham
'h the taannahtatt He
etaoamnne ora
ftruekandamenhodrive
thecannehta from Jar-

8

:5;
ii
ii
ff

5
g
2
55
35‘

5
£3
‘3

encianta verve refined

5°” : mam.

n o -
he“;y and {our ott’t’e‘r
people hag! been ole-
mined yeeterdey thet he

It wee unthinkable thet
ehe ehottld he held at the
Beat Perth lock-up for
the eix or aeven week: 01
the trial but to get to
Perth from Bandyup ahe
had to ,be up very early
every morning. '

By the time ehe got
back to Ban 0 at ht
the piece wei’ehput “a.“
m. ﬂamers"

v o
eet-e aaled or e lend-
wtch—on the m hack.
BRIEFS

JAIL FOR HEROIN SMUGGLERS-—A husband and wife were each sentenced to 13 years'
jail by a county court judge yesterday for conspiring to import heroin worth
$250,000. Judge Spence ordered Cary Stuart Carson, 29, and his wife, Lynda
Marie Horbatowska, 31, both of Avondale Road, Armadale, to serve a minimum of

10 years before parole. Carson had pleaded not guilty and Horbatowska guilty

to conspiring to import the heroin into Australia between 1 March and 6 July
1980. The Crown had alleged that the couple, both originally from England,

were members of a drug ring which was broken after a member became a police in-
former and taped conversations between them and David Joaeph Vincent of East

St Kllda, who was the alleged syndicate head. Mr Vincent was a defendant along
with the couple at a committal hearing in November last year but he failed to
appear on the last day of the hearing. Two other members of the drug ring were
arrested in Thailand and are awaiting trial in Bangkok. In a plea, Mr Tom Danos,
for Gary Carson, told Judge Spence that his client had married Horbatowska in
jail and that they now had a child. He said they had been used as pawns in the
operation and had gone along with the plan because they were afraid. Judge
Spence said it had been a "most serious conspiracy" involving the importation

of about 1-1/2 pounds of heroin. 'Wou were fairly confident it would succeed
and it nearly did." he said. [Text] [Melbourne THE AGE in English 7 Nov 81 p A]

AHPHBTAHINE TRAFFICKING--A man who was alleged to have been producing ampheta-
mines with a street value of about $400,000 in a Narre Warren house last year
appeared in Melbourne Magistrates Court yesterday. Wayne Adrian Lamport, 28,

a welder. of Leonard Avenue. Noble Park, appeared before Mr Kevin O'Connor, SH
charged with having conspired to traffic amphetamines and having manufactured,
possessed and sold amphetamines. Senior Detective Steven Berriman, of the Rus-
sell Street drug squad told the court that large amount of chemicals and equip—
ment used in the production of amphetamines had been discovered at Mr Lamport's
former address In Smmmerlea Road, Narre warren, during a raid on 7 November last
year. Mr Berrlman said it was alleged that drugs were made at the premises and
sent to South Australia. Hr Lamport was released on bail on his awn undertaking
with a surety of $50,000 and was remanded to appear again on 20 June next year.
He was ordered to report to Springvalue police three times a week and was told
not to apply for a passport. Mr Lamport said he would plead not guilty to the
charges. [Text] [Melbourne THE A68 in English 7 Nov 81 p 6]

C50: 5300/7521
DC? REPORTEDLY PLUNCES INTO OPIUH BUSINESS
3K140367 Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English 16 Jan 82 p 4
[By Hanat Ruamrudi]

[Text] The Burmese Communist Party [BCP], having suffered from curtailment of
assistance from China, has plunged head-long into the opium business in the "golden
triangle" in support of its own guerrilla warfare against the Burmese Government,
according to diplomatic sources monitoring the opium trade in the region.

The statement coincides with a recent interview purported to have been given by a
close side of "Khan Sa" alias Chang Si-fu, who carries a 500,000 baht on his head
[as published] for being a heroin kingpin. The aide was quoted by HATICHON DAILY
as claiming that the BOP had managed to persuade Muser, Shan and some left-leaning
Karen hill tribesmen to cultivate poppy fields on a large-scale in areas north of
Kok River in Doi Lang on the Burmese aide of the border, opposite Thailand's Amphoe
Mae A1 and Amphoe Pang.

whether Khun Sa's version of the BCP's activity in this regard was valid or not,

Western antinarcotics agents have confirmed that the Communist Party of Burma had
actually been involved heavily in the opium trade although Khun Sa's Shan United

Army (SUA) might have been given more publicity in this regard.

According to the statement given by Khan Sa's side, the Burmese Communists appear
to be moving towards expanding their influence in areas now considered under Sun's
control. The side reportedly said the Burmese Communists' major narcotic trade
routes are now clearly divided into two:

The first route was once controlled by the KHT [Kuo Min Tang] remnants in Del Lang
while the other is along Tongyi-chiang Tung down to the Thai border at Amphoe Hae
Sni of Chiang Rai Province. That mountain trek was once dominated by another
minority grOup known as "Tai Independent Army" (TIA). allegedly led by H. R. Pariwat
Kaacmsi. The group was wiped out by the Burmese Government troops about two years
ago when the Tachilek nrea came under heavy attacks by the Burmese Government
troops.

According to an account given by ana.her source, the Burmese Communists were active
throughout last year to gain a foothold in opium-infested areas under the control
of the Shen United Revolutionary Army (SURA) led by Hoh Heng. They also at the
same time tried to move down to the area of another tribe, the John, led by a
veteran, well-respected Muser leader. Abe.

"It was an attempt by the Burmese Communists to drive a wedge among the Musers.

The other group not under Abe is controlled by Ja—er...." said a Thai intelligence
source.

The Burmese Communists' strategy did work to a certain extent. The two Muser groups
were engaged in a series of battles which began in the first week of December. last
year. The sporadic battles are still raging today, according to some sources. The
clashes have started an exodus of refugees who fled across the border into several
districts (including Mae Al and Pang of Chiang Mai as well as Mae Chan of Chiang
Rai). The hilltribers, caught in the middle, were trying to avoid being killed.

The latest indications were that the clashes might end in favour of Ja—er's group
which is close to the Burmese Communists.

Or at lease, that's what the Sua's monitoring of the situation shows.

According to Khun sa's aide, quoted in the Hatichon interview, the Sura group, led
by Hoh Heng, who controls the poppy fields in the We state with trading connection
with HGT remnants (Chinese ﬂaws) in 001 Lang, Mae Ai Chiang Mai. might also have
joined hands, voluntarily or not, with the Burmese Communists.

Pierce fighting has broken out in the golden triangle recently. Thai intelligence
reports have confirmed, among rival gangs led by tribal warlords. Thai officials
have refused to comment on suggestions that the ongoing "opium war" might have
been instigated as part of a plan to get at heroin kingpin, Lao Su.

Thailand's leading drug-buster police Maj Gen Phao, asked by a WASHINGTON POST
correspondent recently, confirmed that three of Lao Su's four heroin refineries just
inside Burma were destroyed during an attack by "a tribeamen.

One intelligence report has it that Lao Su, who fled the Thai jail in 1977 by
bribing certain wardens, had also been under the protection of the Burmese Com-

munists, led by Ba Teng Tin.

This may well be Khun Sa's own version to put the blame on to the other side. But
there are strong indications that the various minority groups along the rugged
Thai-Burmese border have had to choose sides recently to survive. with the Burmese
Communists, reportedly having launched the latest move to gain control of new opium
fields near the Thai border with a well-armed force of about 20,000 the situation
along the Thai-Burmese border on the Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai fronts are becoming
increasingly vulnerable.

Sua itself claimed in the interview that it has no choice but to continue with
opium cultivation since it has to feed up to about two million minority people from
at least 10 groups under Sua's control.

There is no denying the fact that Sua is one of the major oplum growing groups in
the area and Khan 8a continues to be described as the "No l enemy“ of the U.S.
antinarcotits agents. But his aide told the Thai newspaper that it could not
switch to rice and other harmless crops because of the terrain and the need to
make enough income to feed the two million people in the area.

But then. the aide also claimed that Sua's ultimate aim has always been to wipe out
opium cultivation once and for a11--with conditions of course.

There is nothing new in Khnn Sa's offer--pay him enough and he will get rid of
opium growing in the whole of the golden triangle. His aide, in this particular
interview, was more specific: If foreign governments (the United States in par-
ticular) would come to a deal with Sue with sufficient financial aid, there will be
no poppy fields at all within six years.

the offer had been made secretly and openly before to the U.S. Government. It has
never been accepted. Thnt applies to another offer for the U.S. Government to buy
up all opium produced by Khun Sa's group.

Surely. the suspicion will continue: Who actually controls the golden triangle?

khen Foreign Minister Sitthi Sawerqila leads a team to visit Burma tomorrow, one
of the topics high on the agenda would he cooperation between Thai and Burnmse
Governments on antinarcotics campaign.

Although no major breakthrough is expected, Thai officials believe that the con-
tinuing discussions and exchange of intelligence among Thai and Burmese anti-drug
agencies would help to get a clearer picture.
BRIEFS

OPIUH SALES 'l'0 PRC-4110. Burma Comunist Party, which controls poppy cultivation along
the Sino-Burmese border, will deliver five tons of opium to the PRC authorities.

The narcotics are intended for medicinal use. However the Government in Rangoon
fears that the profits from the sale will he used to finance a cox-unis: insurrection
in Bum. [Text] [Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1093 16 Dec 81 p 73]
CABINET CWITTEE S11JDYIN CONTROL OF DRUG ABUSE

Kuala Immpur NEH STRAITS TIMES in English 10 Dec 8]. p 6

(Text]

FINANCE. Wed. —El lily

01.886”
below to

per cent oi the known

drug-"addicts n the country are men
Depyut Home Altair- Minister

Abdul Ra ltn re“.mbyy Chili eaid here today

Tho-e who are depen
dent coda-rm ”found“ the

:mm — an onativity

wblcbtbey elnor
der to nutatn their ex-
peneive habits. he added.

'l‘bie val revealed In

01er "art:om by
donoe Monitoring ye-
telll. be en“.
. ﬂail-Ila also aboved
that time wee a link be-
tween the Increaeing
number 0! drug depen
dent pereonetnaparticu-
lar area and an incroaee
In tho Incidence oi petty
crimes.

Inuit Abdulhlyhim
era. Ingatt open-
ing 0 atom-day vort-
ahop on "Op late Con
eumntion Paitcrna in
Aeia' organieed Jointly

(j the National Drug De-
ndence Honitorinl
and the Univer-

ll Balne We.
Transit route

Be aid that between
1.70 and zen (January to
Magnet) 13.100400 l to-
;relnuea oi opi
m. u kilogranunea oi
nerphineandﬂnsukll
ogranmea of heroin
verve OM

Drugaddlction hll ba-
coue a tea or eoolei

New In country

cauee Iatayeta Ie
being need as a traneit
Motto; Illegal lagel;:al‘ﬂ3ltn

om
”olden 153131.

lnciit Abdul Rabin
InldithabInetOomrnit-
tee. chaired by De
Prime Minieter Dat

Knee Hitaln. wu maln-
an Indeptlt atudy on

al activitlee relating to
abuee control. .
eobieetive oItheee
eilorta in to me auc-
eeea oi the present anu-

dru‘ raven-nee '
" ti: impending or-
anleattonal reatructur-
nx. which will be
unalieed eoen. we will
have let the atage (or a
real It In our "lent
ieea rive acatnet drug
Hammad and emu:-
M malt. w 0
out truly be regarded ae
being human "5mm.-
beeald.

M'ﬂﬂk Abdul Return
eaidawnunaryreportol
the deliberation. at true

would be pre-
eented at the at one
lien oi the nlted Na-
tione Communion on
NanootIcDru‘eIn Febru-
ary next, year. .
“need to death since
an momm-
Dru . (Amondmcut)
Act. which provide. for
"khan “Worm.
Inﬂuenza“. nu em
(and.

M 01 last month. 0.-
mn llama um. I»

human-pd
my" .01
M1 m and
mmwdhmnh-
«autumn-w.
omnuzuuum
mama»:
”Minimum
[our havo bun

and 14
gym»: "r

an”. tho amount 9!
mm

mouth.
Dunk kahuna «-

mmmw

on ammo!
the NI Government
m the may up at

updlapmyuoppoa

are non curyln‘ n
gum-ma
0'.

—All . M
«bums! to
an In sol-om b be
Mn N
m

all
Oman band 00!:
cunplolon on. |I‘
tor-“In nodal.
tho noon! lunl cl
III“.

In
undid and
“at nun
amwmu

5300/8314

éoJldbomodlor
«a.» In-

00 on»
u no!" «ring In.
ur-Mloual port

lute” all the
. lo ludvod III 003-
» a. “lunar:
been very dud"
Dally beam the
“End and won

”No.
[amprlce

land I lulu-w
“on M‘ received.
“0.3“ mm be-
M

,llovod It.

could «Ivor: to.

mmﬂh '

nceou to Intern»
Clonal alr 3nd neg
pub.

_ The recon good
Wot ypum
u the ‘ 0! on Tu-
all.“ In nulls; II
non worthwhile a
My prooouod and
nu oplnn [or pro.

Dal-l In W
to Menu! ”nibble
u n roll IVeI low
mm as: '

gen
beauty.

The ummlu m
an moaned um:
00 amount at mn-
bollg «counted and
mmaomrco
— a mu: m.

In ml: mom to
trace preocnoo
M“. they luv. to
coutly lllou-ltlod
luau
IPOH. Tues. —
“nohypnol.” the drug
recovered In come
tIoanthtlteu-reetol
twolwmuoptngm-

eta. la a popular
mum: ‘°’ "'°

0

RI: predomhanm

a Panther-VIII“

h rendtaneleephhu

t was previously
eleultled mad the
Pol-one but
becauuotvtde

It val ”family
:M'Mhml.”m also re;

by anneal-I. lave been-
known to be ”at a
heroin mbetIt
addtote. ae It'.
ttvely cheaper.

Apham

theptme the
only

edoctor‘a pre-

“ma about two

10

month man the drug

insulted aeadenger-
eta-emf. Tue means
thetdre‘lnl‘ bane of
edto be re.

corded end controlled.

A doctor eaId pa-
tIente uttering from
Insomnia ere eome
times preecrtbedm the

"haltceeuapec

the “RollypnoPM re-
on d to want

we

race bot-ea eltﬁouﬁ
the attempt was
‘nIppedIn the butt"
BRIEFS

HASHISH PROCESSING FACTORY RAIDﬂl--Katmandu. 15 Jan (AFP)--An American citizen who
allegedly run a clandestine hashish processing factory in Nepal for the past six years
has been arrested by police in Katnandu, it was reported here today. Police said

they arrested James Edward Goodman of Columbia after receiving a tip-off. His ar-
rest also led to the seizure of 22 kg (60 lbs) and a quantity of opium that had been
illegally imported to Nepal from Goodman's hone in India. They also held 10 Nepal-
ese citizens who had been working at the hashish factory and a man identified only

as Douglas Deys, a resident of Rest Bengal in India. Police said further details
would be released once investigations have been completed. [Text] [Hong Kong APP in
English 0333 GMT 14 Jan 82 BK]

080: 5300/4596

ll
VNARCCTICS BOARD TO KEEP BETTER RECORDS

Karachi DAWN in mglish 30 Dec 81 p 6

_['rextl Islamabad, Dec 29: The Pakistan Narcotics Control Board (PNCB) is busy re-
shaping its record of notorious narcotics smugglers in the country so as to locate
the main sources and other clandestine means for illegal drug exports, it is learnt.
The present record of narcotics smugglers has several loopholes. When reshaped.

it is said, it will help men, Customs and other vigilance wings to keep an eye on
the activities or such persons.

All functionaries of airlines and shipping companies in the country against whom
snuggling charges had been proved will also be enlisted.

The record to be set up on modern pattern, is likely to be computerised later on,
it is reported.

It would contain all necessary information about notorious smugglers, including
their various tactics.

The men high-ups responsible for the preparation of the record are understood to
have been recently given a detailed program in this context.

During the current year the’PNCB has seized opium 6915.00 kgs. morphine 213.00
(powder), 144 injections. heroin 171.760 kgs.. cannabis resin 31771.00. liquid
cannabis 277.00, mandrix 15.12.418 tablets and cocaine 11 phials.

'23:“: 5300/4595

12
BRIEFS

Hznom 5812.111 numb-labour, Dec. 21--'1he customs Authorities at the Lahore
Railway Station yesterday seized half kilogram of heroin worth about 123.50 lekh in
the international nrket, being snuggled to Indie. The culprit, Kiteyetulleh Khan
of Peshawar city. was trying to snuggle the contraband item in a false bottom of an
ettechi case. He was arrested and wee being interrogated. [Islamabad m MUSLIM
in English 22 Dec 81 p 6]

C80: 5300/4595

13

RTG CONTROL OF KMT NARCOTICS ARMY NOTED
Bangkok MATICEON in Thai 8—14 Nov 81 pp 33, 34
[Article: "Special Report']

[Excerpt] The Taiwan government sent General Liu Yien Ling,

an officer close to Chiang Kai-shek, to take command of the
Chinese KMT forces in the Shan State. Meanwhile, people from

Yunan Province [in China], who had joined their forces and weapons
to form a volunteer unit and who had fled from the communist
attacks, joined together again and formed a new force. They

formed themselves into five armies.

The Five Groups

Bach army had a strength of approximately 2,000 to 3,000 people.
The leaders were:

The commanding general of the lst Army was Honli Wui Ing. The
commanding general of the 2nd Army was General Phu Chung Yin.
The commanding general of the 3rd Army was General Li Hewin

Fan. The commanding general of the 4th Army was General Chang

Wun Choen. And the commanding general of the 5th Army was General
Tuan Si Hewin.

There was also an independentforce commanded by General Ma Chung
Ko that operated in the northern part of the Shan State.

_The Second Group

The Chinese KMT forces were stationed in Muong Chiang Lap from
1955 to 1960. The Taiwan government sent in one special combat
battalion. This unit was airlifted in from Taiwan and stationed
in Muong Chiang Lap. The Burmese government used military forces
to rid theShanState of Chinese KMT forces. There were several
violent clashes, and the KMT forces lost many soldiers in the
fighting.

15
In 1961, the United Nations called on Thailand and the United
States to cooperate in moving a second group of KMT soldiers,
composed of 4,500 people, back to Taiwan. Most of these soldiers
were from the lst, 2nd and 4th armies.

Into Thailand

As for the 3rd Army under General Li Hewin Fan and the 5th Army
under General Tuan Si Hewin, they did not want to return to
Taiwan nor did they wish to continue fighting the military forces
of the Burmese government. Therefore, they fled south and began
to enter the northern region of Thailand.

The 3rd Army chose to establish itself in the area of Doi Ang

Khang in Fang District, Chiang Mai Province. The 5th Army established
itself in the area of Ban Pa Sang in Mae Chan District. Chiang

Rai Province. They did not receive any more support from the

Taiwan government.

In 1963, the 3rd Army moved into the Ban Tham Ngop (Ban Kiu
Rho) area in Fang District, Chiang Mai Province. The 5th Army
moved into the area of Doi Mae Salong in Mae Chan District,
Chiang Rai Province. These two groups have continued to live
in these areas up to the present.

The Problems

In addition to the fact that Thailand's sovereignty was violated
by armed forces being brought in and stationed in Thailand,

the important problems that have arisen can be summarized as
follows:

The illegal entry into and exit from Thailand:

Since the various KMT forces were stationed in various locations
from the Thai border to the border between China and Burma,

these various units took turns going on operations and they
returned to bases in'Thailand. Also, people were sent back and
forth in order to coordinate operations among the various groups.

The smuggling of arms and military personnel in and out:

Because the various KMT units needed young men to serve in their
units, they usually took young Chinese men from Burma and gave
them training in order to station them with various units. Some
groups smuggled in men from Taiwan, among whom were commanders,
instructors and technical engineers.

As for weapons and ammunition, usually they purchased these

items from Laos and used them in their own units. Some groups
smuggled in military weapons from Taiwan.

16
The illegal trading:

After the 3rd and 5th armies ceased receiving support from the
Taiwan government, they had to find money in order to suppoprt
their forces. They did this by selling opium. They took opium
from the Kokang State and sold it in Thailand and Laos. And
they used their influence to set up illegal checkpoints and
collect taxes from other opium dealers. This was another source
of income.

Policies

The Thai government's policies in operations can be summarized
as follows:

a. Their armed forces had to leave the country. If they wanted
to stay,they had to surrender their weapons. live here with
the status of "refugees" and live in designated areas.

b. Force would not be used to drive them out except when necessary.

c. An attempt was made to discuss matters with the Taiwan governmen
in order to get Taiwan to take responsibility for seeing to

it that the KMT soldiers made a living without violating the

law and to get it to take back these soldiers in the end.

d. The deputy minister of defense and the army secretary were
entrusted with the task of carrying on discussions with the
Taiwan government until matters were concluded.

Implementation

2;
After the Thai government's failure to persuade thepThiwah government
to take responsibility for the KMT forces that had moved into
northernThailand, Supreme Command Headquarters submitted the
following proposals to the cabinet through the National Security
Council:

a. The Chinese KMT soldiers of the 3rd and 5th armies and their
families were to be allowed to live in Thailand with the status
of "refugees." They were to be allowed to continue living in
those places where they had been living, but some troops from
the 3rd and 5th armies were to be taken to establish a force
and stationed in the 001 Luang and 001 Phamon area in Chiang
Rai Province.

These people were to be allowed to live and work in the areas
stipulated by the government. a program was to be implemented
to enable these people to live as ordinary citizens and not
as soldiers. This was to be implemented in stages.

17
b. After the completion of the things mentioned above, it was
to be considered that there were no longer any armed Chinese
KMT soldiers in Thailand.

Cabinet Resolutions

The National Security Council discussed and approved these proposal
and submitted them to the cabinet. 0n 6 October 1970, the cabinet
issued a resolution of approval and allowed the implementation

of things in accord with the proposals of the National Security
Council. It stipulated the steps to be implemented and the responsi-
bilities of the various government sectors concerned as follows:

The survey step:

The number of people was to be determined, a list of the people
and weapons was to be compiled, the weapons were to be gathered
together and placed under control, personal histories and identi-
fication cards were to be made for the refugees and areas where
they could live and work were to be stipulated.

The Joint Operations Center, Supreme Command Headquarters, was
to be the main element responsible for carrying out the work.
Operations were to be coordinated with the Ministry of Interior,
the army, the 15°C and the government sectors concerned.

The transfer step:

Some elements of the 3rd and 5th armies and their families were
to be moved and villages were to be established in the Doi Luang
and Doi Phamon areas in Chiang Rai Province.

The Joint Operations Center, Supreme Command Headquarters, was
to be the main element responsible for carrying out the work.
Operations were to be coordinated with the Ministry of Interior,
the army, the 18°C and the government sectors concerned.

The establishment of villages:

The Ministry of Interior was to be the main element responsible for
village improvement, commencement of work, development and
administration. Operations were to be coordinated with the Joint
Operations Center, the army, the 18°C and the government sectors
concerned.

The transfer of these former Chinese KMT armies and their families
and the establishment of villages for them in the Doi Luang

and Doi Phamon areas in Chiang Rai Province was to be carried

out in the form of arranging places for refugees to live and

work and not [in the form of] using refugee forces to fight

or suppress the communist terrorists.

18
As [or the fact that these people might have to fight the communist
terrorists, they were to fight only to protect tnemselves, their
villages and their property. As for assitance to be given to

theSe refugees and their families, giving assistance only in

cases of actual need was to be discussed.

Headquarters 04

The JOC, or Joint Operations Center, Supreme Command Headquarters,
controlled the work of moving the refugees, tallying the number
of people and weapons, compiling lists of names and issuing
identification cards to the refugees and their families. In

1960, an administrative division called the "Administrative
Division for the Transfer of Refugee Chinese KMT Soldiers“
(abbreviated Headquarters 04) was established in Chiang Khong
District, Chiang Rai Province.

It was entrusted with the task of moving about 300 to 500 refugees
and familiy members from Ban Tham Ngop in Chiang Mai Province

to a new village in the Doi Phamon area in Ban Pha Tang, Chiang
Khong District, Chiang Rai Province,and of moving another 300

to 500 people from Doi Mae Salong to a new village in the Doi

Luang areain Ban Mae Ap, Chiang Saen District, Chiang Rai Province.

Fighting the Communist Terrorists

The transfer of these refugees began in 1960, and great resistance
was encountered from the communist terrorists in these areas.

At that time, the communist terrorists had designated the Doi
Luang area as operations Area 52 and the Doi Yao and Doi Phamon
areas as Operations ARea 24.

The administrative division requested permission from the supreme
commander to use the refugee forces to drive out the communists

in order to defend themselves [the refugees] and to make this

area as safe as possible for them to live. Between the years

1960 and 1973, they were giVen permission by the supreme commander
to use therefugee forces to carry on operations independently

and in coordination with government forces to drive out the
communist terrorists.

There were nine major clashes. The last operation, KFR 17, took
place in 1973. Eightyof the refugees were killed and 226 were
wounded (some were crippled) in the fighting.

The use of these refugee forces in nine operations made it possible
to greatly hinder the mass mobilization activities of the communist
terrorists in the Doi Luang area (Operations Area 52) and restrict

their freedom in obtaining supplies and increasing their forces

in the Doi Luang, Doi Yao and Doi Phamon areas.

19
At the end of 1973, the supreme commander issued an order to

stop using refugee forces in fighting the communist terrorists.
They could carry on military operations only to defend themselves
and their villages.

As for suppressing and eliminating the communist terrorists
in the Doi Luang, Doi—Yao and Doi Phamon areas, this task was
to be turned over to government forces. that is, the Region 3
ISOC.

Area Stipulations

The refugee KMT soldiers did not live only in Ban Tham Ngop
and Doi Mae Salong. They also lived in many places along the
northern Thai border in Mae Hong Son, Chiang Mai and Chiang
Rai provinces.

Headquarters 04 compiled detailed lists and reported matters

to the government. Then on 5 November 1972, the national security
director, General Praphat Charusathien, issued an order in
accord with the National Security Order. This can be summarized
as follows:

1. The director of Headquarters 04 was to take responsibility
from the Joint Operations Center, Supreme Command Headquarters,
for establishing villages, setting administrative regulations
and starting and developing occupations. His new position was
director for the control and development of refugee occupations
(Operations Center, Headquarters 04). An operations headquarters
was to be established in Muang District, Chiang Mai Province
(the operations division was established in Muang District

in Chiang Mai Province on 20 February 1973 and a forward operation
section was established in Muang District, Chiang Rai Province).
Later, the name of the operations division was changed to the

Social Development and Refugee Occupation Division (Headquarters 04).

2. Three areas where the refugees could live and workwere stipulated.
The three areas were:

Mae Hong Son Province, two locations: Ban Napabaek and Ban
Hua Lang.

Chiang Mai Province, eight locations: Ban Huang Haeng, Ban
Pieng Luang. Ban Kae Noi and San Muang Natai (Nong Uk) in Chiang
Dao District, Ban Tham Ngop (Ban Kiu Ko), Ban Sanma Kokwan

and Ban Luang in Fang District and Ban Huang Ngam in Mae Sai
District.

20
Chiang Rai Province, three locations: Doi Mae Salong in Mae
Chan District, Ban Mae Ap in Chiang Saen District and Ban Phatang
in Chiang Khong District.

3. The basic skills development program consisted of five programs:
The tea leaf industrial program (a 5-year program). the vegetable
seed production program (an experimental program carried on

on a year-to-year basis), the program to grow fruit in high

areas (a 5-year program), the animal husbandry program (a 3-year
program) and the cottage industries program. The Joint Operations
Center of Supreme Command Headquarters and the National Security
Command Headquarters were responsible for these programs.

In 1975, Headquarters 04 requested permission to add nmueprograms.
These consisted of the education program (Joint Operations

Center of Supreme Command Headquarters and National Security

Command Headquarters), the afforestation program for the preservation
of river headwaters and the family planning program.

Separation Into Different Groups

At present, the Chinese KMT soldiers who fled into Thailand
can be divided into three groups:

1. The KMT soldiers who came in small groups and who did not

form an armed force. They started entering Thailand in 1951.

The Ministry of Interior is responsible for them, and it has
entrusted the Public Welfare Department with the task of controllhg
them. They are "0 Chinese.

They have villages at Ban Mai Nong Bua, Ban Yang and Ban Hua
Fai in Fang District, Chiang Mai Province and in Ban Tham
and Ban Huai Khrai in Mae Chan District and in Ban Hua Wia
in Chiang Khong District, Chiang Rai Province.

2. The Chinese KMT soldiers who were armed forces, that is.
the 3rd Army of General Li and the 5th Army of General Tuan.
They entered [Thailand] at the end of 1961.

The Thai government has entrusted Supreme Command Headquarters,
:nat is, the Social Development and Refugee Occupations Division
(Headquarters 04), with the task of supervising this group

for a period. When the Ministry of Interior is ready to take
control, it will be given the task of supervising them.

The independent group of KMT soldiers who were not under
?~e control of any government sector. During the second wave
a: migration in 1965, they did not want to return to Taiwan.
They slipped away from their armies and fled from the sweeps
made by the forces of the Burmese government.
Some of these soldiers became Burmese government volunteers

(KKY or Ka Kwai Yay). Because the Burmese government did not
really trust them, it askea them to return their weapons and

so they fled with their weapons into Thailand. They have formed
various minority groups such as the Lo Sing Han group and the
Chang Si Fu (Khun Sa) group, for example.

Most of these groups carry on illegal activities. For example,
they traffic in opium, heroin and government military weapons.

11943
CSO: 5300/4586

22
ONCE PROPOSES TOUGHER NARCOTICS LAWS
Bangkok DAO SIAM in Thai 19 Nov 81 pp 3, 10

[Article: "Revise the Law to Increase Pennlities For Narcotics
Traffickers"]

[Text] The Office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCB) has
asked the legal advisory committee to discuss revising ONCB

laws concerning three important matters so that things go more
smoothly during operations and so that there are fewer loopholes.

Police Major General Phao Sarasin, the secretary-general of

the ONCB, has revealed that, concerning the changes in the laws
that will be discussed,the first point is to have a stipulation
that drug addicts must undergo rehabilitation to restore their
physical and mental capabilities. The second point concerns

the seizure of property belonging to narcotics traffickers after
the court has rendered a verdict. The traffickers will have

to explain how they obtained their property, and if they cannot
explain this, it will immediately be sequestered by the state.
As for the first point, the ONCB will be given the power to
imprison people for 2 years in cases in which it is believed
that these people are involved in thenarcotics trade but in
Wthh adequate evidence is lacking. However. there has been
much discussion about this because it is feared that this may
lead to people being framed.

The secretary-general of the ONCB further stated that, as for
nimself, he would like to have such laws put into effect by
establishing a committee to discuss things so that there is
Justice. He said that at present both Singapore and Malaysia
have such laws.

Hunterning the present problems, the secretary-general of the
ates said that there might be charges that the police do not
adv» enough evidence to arrest SUSpects on drug charges. At
pucsent, there are about 10 such cases. If there were a law such
this, this would greatly help narcotics suppression.

éégg3 5300/4586

23
NORTHERN REHABILITATION UNIT TREATS THAIS, TRIBBSMEN
Bangkok SIAM RAT in Thai 24 Nov 81 p 5

(Article: “Free Rehabilitation Services: The Northern Drug
Rehabilitation Center Has Been Expanded; It Treats Both Thais
and Hill Tribesmen']

[Text] The northern drug rehabilitation center has been expanded
so that it can treat all addicts. The addicts who come to this
center for treatment include both Thais from the plains and

Thai hill tribesmen. The narcotics used the most include opium
and powdered pain killing drugs.

Mr Amphan Hiranyachot, the deputy minister of public health

who last week went and inspected the northern drug rehabilitation
center, which is under the contol of the Department of Medical
Services, told a reporter that the northern drug rehabilitation
center, which started operations in 1975 with the cooperation

of the United States and the Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai
University, treated 6,978 peOple between October 1975 and September
1981. Of these people, 6,060 were male and 918 were female,

the rate being seven males to one female. Concerning those who
came to this center for treatment, besides Thai addicts from

the plains, hill tribesmen from various tribes such as the Karens,
Meo, Lahu, Lisu, Yao, lkaw and Lawa also came for treatment.

In particular, the tribe with the greatest number coming for
treatment was the Karen tribe, with 2,111 or 30,25 percent.

Second was the Lahu with 1,210 people, or 17.34 percent. As

for the plains Thais and others, there was a total of 1,438
people, or 20.61 percent.

The deputy minister of public health also stated that the most
commonly used narcotics include opium, opium mixed with powdered
pain killing drugs, powdered heroin, flaked heroin and marihuana.
Most addicts, that is, 75.6 percent, used opium mixed with pain
killing drugs. The diseases found most frequently among the
addicts were tuberculosis, both spots and cavaties, gallstones
in the bladder, lung infections, bronchitis, gastro-intestional
diseases. nutritional deficiencies, skin diseases and mental
disorders.

Mr Amphan Hiranyachot, the deputy minister of public health,

stated that in order to make it possible to carry on drug rehabilita-
tion work everywhere and in order to make things convenient

for the addicts who come for treatment, the northern drug rehabilita-
tion center, which is located in Mae Rim District in Chiang

Mai Province, has implemented a program to increase the number

of beds to 500. This rehabilitation center provides services
to the addicts completely free of charge.

11943
CSO: 5300/4586

25
BRIEFS
#HARHACY BURGLARY RBPORTED-An unidentified drug addict burglarized another Prague

gharnacy, this time in the Pankrac suburb, getting away with quantities of Alnagon,
tonadryl, Dixametazon and other drugs. [Prague ZEMEDELSKE NOVINY in Czech 6 Jan 82

P61

CSO: 5300/3005

26
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020055-4

CANADIAN CONSULTANT TO DEVELOP ANTI-DRUG PROGRAM

Hamilton Till-2 ROYAL GAZETTE in English 8 Dec 81 p 6

[Text]

050:

A Canadian consultant hae been
selected to hel combat drug ab-
use in Bermu 'a echoole. it wee
announced yeeterdey.

1‘ha.ep intment of Mr. Ed-

'ward H de Jean takee effect

from January 1 when he will help
deaign a programme to tackle be.
havuoural problems and drug mie~
uee among the laland'e echoolchll-
dren. He will be conaultant to the
Ministries of both Education and
Health and Social Semcee and
will-assist a small committee from
each Ministry in developing the

pmmme.

. new poet was announced by
Dr. the Hon. Clarence Jamee
Minister of Health and Socia
Services. in a Government policy

statement on drug abuaa in Sep-
tember '

.' Mr. de Jean received In. r'lmary

and eecondary education in anada.
where he graduamd from Quaen'e Unl-

5300/7522

27

vereity in Outer

' Mathematice. P2

. He alao hol
hool Assistant's
Quebec Teachin'

the poet of Adm
Centennial Regia
S‘uebec. Thla p

II? of all atI
‘ftrou la ehooting
he waa involved I
cun‘lculum atruc
liehment of crieia
- Mr. de 'Jean il

.muda ae he wee

aed Academ [:01
marriedtn {o
Bermuda. who

- teacher with the

tion. Their daugl
Jean ia guidance
lnetitute. Their
Canada. ‘

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020066-4
“Into

Text]

Government will Muwtd‘ﬂﬂ . 1-01er for the adt‘nini‘suuion of meth-
adnne dink: (at Main um! nut you no odme. then the mm: s not akin; met-
“cnmmodau mu «I [out tine- the num- gnggu much (unher thun the 9mm dyn-
be: of "mm, M‘, be!“ mat-d. it. and Mt, Bunch. Iddln‘: “lncteum;
The decisim w“ . the prom“ .mu't‘c by mm}: fourfold :-
ward VII Memmil Hmpiul _A minmnw “on." 'y m” e step ﬁn t ugh: d'm'
MV- MW 5“th h“ “‘9‘." ‘ The math-done cﬁnic pmenﬂy hu (out
ambu‘lip‘ paychnqm would or ﬁve patients. Mt. Dunch he uid tint
I 1982.}n than an a mnny n 300 hctoin men in

“'er Q m ch 5 A

u y n we y

admin u madman hem; new“.

mined the dime m mm. ”And you don't. hm m be m addict w

The plum met mth tempered opumum ‘need in“). became sometimes the addizu ,

[mm lawyct Mt kn Bunch. who hu ad I" 01' hide“ W gnu. ' Ml" nch M

van out n prove: manning funky Ml Scuddan and thu n rychiauiu hu
udl. oﬂm¢ {Mesa-t an mud it.
' ' ' 13. Ml that nmup pefore he could come to

than Immunuon 9 mol.

’ 1 mp." md

28
ZLANDBSTINE COCA ROUTE DESCRIBED
Cochabambs L08 TIEHPOS in Spanish A Dec 81 pp 5-12
[Article by Daniel Guerra Mercado: "The Two Roads of the Coca Leaf"]

[Excerpts] With the opportune measures that the present government has taken
regarding the battle against drug trafficking and with the installation of several
roadblocks with soldiers on the Villa TunerioCochabamba highway section, the coca
leaf has taken two routes: the legal one in which every farmer with the proper
documentation takes his products to sell in Sacaba, where a load of coca sells for
up to 6,000 pesos. In this area they are also allowed to carry 8 pounds of coca
per grower free of tax with the prior presentation of documents. Here too there
are some merchants who want to illegally transport a few more pounds. This action
is fiercely repressed by about 20 agents, who, armed to the teeth. cause wonen to
cry who have been surprised smuggling in, as I have said, a few pounds. To avoid
a negative reaction from ordinary transients and tourists against the posture of
the civil cops, they have introduced the use of cute hand purses like kits where
they keep their huge ".38 long."

0n the other coca route these fierce persons do not exist; this is the illegal

route, despite which there are no roadblocks, there are no customs posts, there is

no human control that can cut the human chain loaded with the blessed leaf that is
transported by two-legged beasts, who are called "chsacas" because of their resem~
blance, in the way they carry the coca drum, to the ants that attack the fruit
trees in Chapare. And althOugh, as we have said, there a. no roadblocks put up
by man, there certainly are natural stumbling blocks impossible to cross. Caravans
of men and women penetrate with their load through the Chimoranapacani highway
project road in the Rio Sacta — Puerto Grether section. All these human mules are
not from the area; they are people fron the valley and the mountains, who, notified
'that the coca merchants are paying the amount of 1,500 bolivars for a load of one
pack of coca weighing 50 pounds, from a vague location in the Ivirgarzans district

. to the environs of the Ichoa River, a tributary of the Ichilo river, following the
road that is going to serve as a base fer construction of the highway whose contract
has been objected to because indications of fraud were found, these people came to
transport and to earn the 1,500 pesos in 1 1/2 days of hauling their load. This

I journey lasts approximately for 24 hours of trekking. They cross the Sacra, labels
and Isarzama rivers and many streams that are minor tributaries of these river .

The very fact of carrying out this work outside the law causes these groups of 50

29
to 60 persons who daily complete their round trips to do so in the most laborious
ways. They do'Nﬂ-use canoes because they are afraid to be discovered. They travel
by night and by day through a road that because of haulage. rain and mud has been
changed in some stretches into genuine pools of mud, through which the "chsacas"
have to haul, entering in up to their legs. And their zeal to arrive at their
destination is such that they do not stop even for a minute to deviate from the
route by opening a new path, and in this way they follow their course like desperate
persons. It is said that they also urinate as they are walking. Each group has a
raft about 100 meters long, which they use to cross the rivers, the most dangerous
of which is the Zabala, which is hemmed in, in a terrace that is cut through by the
same river. The flow of crystalline waters is such that it becomes almost impossible
to cross the river, especially-if there are persons involved who have never done
this before.

Trying to investigate those who deliver all of this coca load is impossible; every-
one keeps an impenetrable silence and they do not trust anyone. They even keep
silent about the persons who die on this journey becaure of a bite from a ray fish
or a viper or who are simply swept away by the flow of the rivers. Many of these
porters who transport the coca leaf have made several trips and with their profits
have become businessmen of their own coca load. They buy it from the growers and
transport it to the destination, contracting other new carriers who come from the
interior.

This new coca route has also caused almost all these people to make their walk armed,
since they have to take care of themselves. The fact that at both extremes of the
road economic transactions are made has caused the appearance of criminals who are
fond of other people's property and along with them the unfailing sellers of other
people's property and together with them the unfailing sellers of beer. Any trans-
action of buying or selling coca is made at night. Thus, by day one sees the drying
of coca everywhere, and at night it is sold. And the moat paradoxical part is that
in the places of origin the coca costs up to 8,000 pesos for a load of 100 pounds;
before it was about 125 pounds. And in Sacaba, paying all the taxes, the coca costs
6,000 pesos. Therefore, it is easy to assume the purpose for which the coca travels
along the road to Puerto Grether; it travels to make rich those who use it. On the
other hand, through that other route of legality, where there are roadblocks with
their fierce watchmen. the coca travels to make poor the poor retail merchants who
sell it by fractions of a pound.

9545
cso: 5300/2096
COCAINE MISSING PROH BANK VAULT REPORTEDLY BURNED
Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish 29 Nov 81 p 9

[Text] Attorney Custodio Guerrero Torres, for-er public prosecutor of the party

and being talked about in the case of the disappearance of 15 kg of cocaine from the
vaults of the Central Bank, issued an explanation in which he states that the quantity
of "supposedly missing" drugs was burned on 27 October last year in a public action
in which narcocics officials were present from the Ministry of the Interior.

Guerrero's explanation points out textually that "as a result of a report made by
lawyers of the Central Bank before the Public Ministry that the drugs deposited in

the vaults was spoiling, I. the undersigned public prosecutor of the party for
criminal matters at that time, appeared in person at the Central Bank where 1 confirmed
irrefutably, with my own eyes, this fact, for which reason I took the liberty of
requiring the various judges involved in the legal proceedings to order that these
dangerous substances be burned innediately.

"Now," he adds, "I an wrongly charged with not having presented my evidence with the
pertinent action; this is completely false, since this document signed and sealed
by my authority was attached to the corresponding procedure, with subordinate
officials being responsible for the supposed disappearance. However, zeslous as
always as I was in my duties and as an experienced lawyer through my long career, I
have the corresponding copy of the document. which I will present when the appro-
nriate authority asks me to do so."

As is known, the nansger of the Central Bank, the lawyer Rodolfo Ameller. reported
yesterday that the drug (the 15 kg that had disappeared) is in the bank in a liquid
state and was not delivered when it was requested because of thoughtlessness by the
bank's legal adviser.

:54;

350: 5300/2096

31
BRIEFS

REDUCTION OF COCA CULTIVATION ANNOUNCED-4a Paz, lo Jan (APP)--Col Rene Ocalpo,
executive director of the National Antidrug Council. said here today that the imple-
mentation of a 10-year plan to drastically reduce coca growing in Bolivia will re-
quire an initial investment of $500 million. Colonel Ocanpo explained that the
program includes the adoption of Iodern industrial techniques applied to substitute
crops, as well as the introduction of almost 30,000 farmers to production techniques
similar to those of cooperatives. He said that each family which grows substitute
crops will receive approximately $17,000 per hectare. It is estimated that 150,000
hectares will be sown in'El Chapare, Cochabamba-in the central part of the country
-and 50,000 hectares in 10s Yungas, north of La.Paz. These two regions produce
almost the total amount of coca currently grown in the country. The director of

the National Antidrug Council believes that several friendly nations should become
interested in this plan since. he said, in the United States alone the number of
cocaine addicts increased by 1.2 million persons in 1981. [Text] [PY050160 Paris

AP? in Spanish 1535 GMT 6 Jan 82)

COCAINB SEIZED--0fficials of the narcotics division have seized 1.7 kg of cocaine
base during an inspection of the road linking Viacha and La Paz. [PY161326 La Paz
PRESENCE in Spanish 5 Jan 82 p 9]

COCA LEAVES SEIZED—-Narcotics officials have seized 341 kg of coca leaves which us
about to be transported to Potosi to be sold. Justina Flores Huallpa and Albertina
Hnmani Cuellar have been arrested. [PY161326 La Paz EL DIARIO in Spanish 30 Dec 81

p 3_]

COCAINB BURNBD-The director of the National Council for Control of Dangerous Sub-

stances, Javier Guerrero, has reported that 78.58 kg of cocaine have been burned in
Santa Cruz in compliance with a court order. [PY161326 La Paz EL DIARIO in Spanish

30 Dec 81 p S]

CSO: 5300/2123

32
REPORTACE 0N SOUTH AMERICAN DRUG CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS
Traffic, Consumption on Increase
Sao Paulo 0 BSTADO DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 22 Nov 81 p 30

[Text] Brasilia--Federa1 police have confiscated 230,000 kg of marihuana in Brazil
from January to August of this year, compared to only 88,503 kg during all of 1980.
The amount of cocaine confiscated this year is three times greater than last year.
That indicates that the consumption of marihuana, which had dropped last year while
the use of "heavy drugs" increased, has again increased in 1981 without any reduc-
tion in the rate of growth of the use of cocaine and LSD, among other drugs.

That statement is part of the Brazilian report to be presented during the Second
conference of the South American Agreement on Narcotics and Psychotropics being

held in Brasilia next Tuesday to Friday.

The statistics prepared by the federal police also indicate the arrest of 1,573
traffickers and 92S addicts during 1980 while in only the first 7 months of this
year, 1,317 traffickers and 661 addicts have been arrested.

"with regard to cocaine, in 1980 there was an increase in trafficking; the same

5thing occurring with LSD and the various psychotropics. There is no record of the

seizure of opium, morphine, heroine or diacetilmorphine, states the Brazilian
report, according to which "there was an appreciable decrease in the seizure of
marihuana, especially in 1980 (88,503,363 grams) although the first months of 1981

also showed that it is on the increase (229,254,790 grams)."

chports of that type, to which will be added the accomplishments in the "adminis-

trative area" (prevention and suppression of the traffic and illicit use of drugs,
rehabilitation of addicts) in the 10 countries of South America--Argentina, Boli-
via, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Bcuador, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela——will
give a fairly close general picture of the problem on the continent.

The initial information gathered by the Federal Narcotics Council of the Ministry
of Justice, established at the end of last year, indicates an increase in the traf-
fic and consumption of drugs throughout South America. The chairman of the con-
ference and secretary general of the Ministry of Justice, Arthur Castilho, points

out, however, that the figures only permit estimates since a real survey is im-
possible inasmuch as only seizures are recorded and never the actual consumption.

33
Arthur (Instllhu, who will head the Brazilian delegation to the conference, ex-
plained that the figures are an indirect way of measuring consumption, but esti-
mates of it cannot be absolutely reliable. In any case, he declared, it can be
asserted that the radius of consumption of cocaine has extended throughout Latin
America, where there are few cases of drugs such as opium and heroin, which are
extremely expensive and difficult to get since production is located in specific
regions of Asia.

It is cocaine, with its small volume for individual doses and its capability to
cause physical dependence, facilitating traffic and forcing its consumption des-
pite the high price, which today represents the great concern of the South American
countries.

Although the sources of production are in Bolivia and Peru, concern is restricted
not only to South America but also to Europe and the United States, which will send
observers to the conference and are prepared to work hard behind the scenes to
collaborate in attaining the two principal objectives of the conference: unifica-
tion of antidrug legislation throughout the South American continent and effective
collaboration agreements among the police organizations of the member countries.

Brazilian Efforts
Brasilia CORREIO BRAZILIENSE in Portuguese 15 Nov 81 p 11

[Text] The Brazilian representation to the meeting will show what has been done

in the country to combat narcotics traffic, highlighting the establishment of

the Federal Narcotics Council. the central organ of the Federal System for the
Prevention, Control and Suppression of Narcotics; the epidemiological survey that
was conducted to determine the problem of traffic and consumption tin the country;
and the contacts made with the United Nations Fund, which has already sent a
consultant for discussions with the Brazilian authorities for the purpose of
deve10ping pilot projects in the various regions. It is estimated that it will re-
quire a period of 2 years to conclude the studies being conducted in the school
network.

It is going to be pointed out also that in the field of preventive education,
efforts were made to implement the educational project for the first and second
grades, which was achieved with some success by the states of Rio de Janeiro and
Sao Paulo. It will also be mentioned that at the present time, eight projects are
being carried out in Sao Paulo: training of teachers and education specialists

on the multiple aspects of drugs (in-service training) through pamphlets and

radio projects; preparation of materials and training of educational biology
teachers; training of teachers of sciences in health programs; materials and guid-
ance for parents through schools; materials and guidance for teachers and counsel-
ors of moral and civic education; distribution of books on different aspects of
drug dependence and maintenance of exchange and cooperation with secretariats of
states, of the municipalities, technical and collegial agencies that deal with
matters pertaining to drugs and drug dependence. The report will also cite the
creation of various task forces to improve the policy of combating drugs as well
as the fact that special judges have been established to judge drug crimes, two
judgeships having been recently installed in Rio de Janeiro.

34
The meetings of the third conference, which will occur in the Foreign Ministry,
will he secret.

Conclusion of Conference
Sao Paulo O ESTADO DE 5A0 PAULO in Portuguese 21 Nov 81 p 16

{Text-I Brasilia-4m: Third Conference of the South American Agreement on Nar-
cottcs and Psychotropics was concluded in Brasilia yesterday with the verification
that there has been a significant increase in the consumption of marihuana, cocaine
and nandrix in the 10 aesber countries of the agreement and a disquieting increase
in the use of inhalants (oobbler's glue and similar substances) by minors, especia1~
ly in the 10-year—old group.

After lo days of discussion, the delegates of Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Colombia.
Ecuador. Peru, Uruguay, Paraguay, Venezuela and Bolivia concluded that the most
urgent requirements to reduce the use and undue traffic of drugs must be the
adaptation of the legislation of each country, unifying standards but respecting
the characteristics of each; the application of human resources to the areas of
prevention, treatment of addicts, and suppression of traffic; and increasing the
educational prevention programs and strengthening the national coordination organ-
izations.

The next meeting of the aember countries of the agreement will be held in Buenos
Aires in 1982. The Argentine capital is the headquarters city of the agreement and,
depending on negotiations, may become a center for research on the problem, with

a specialized hospital for the treatment of addicts. The discussion of the third
conference were secret.

8 7 l l
080: 5300/ 2084

3S
PROVIGIL SHUGGLED FROM PARAGUAY PROVBS FATAL
Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRAZIL in Portuguese 8 Nov 81 p 26

[Text] Beio Horizonte-—Thc director of the Federal Narcotics Council. Prof

Jose Elias Hurad. yesterday charged in this capital that the medication Provigil
manufactured by the Paraguayan Catedral Laboratory is entering the country clandes-
tinely via Foz do Iguscu and is being marketed in Brazil without Ministry of
Health registration.

He revealed that "three deaths caused by injection of the drug have already been
officially reported: two by cardiac arrest and the third by septicemia." He con-
siders that because of its chemical and pharmacological properties, Provigil causes
dependence of the amphetamine type.

Not Registered

Hurad said also that the drug marketed clandestinely in the country has not been
registered by the technical organs of the Ministry of Health and that units of
medication were recently seized at the Paraguayan border.

The basic substance of Provigil "is pitovalerone, chemically and pharmacologically
similar to a well-known anoxerigene (appetite suppressant), namely dietilpropione
(Aulemin, Moderex, Temiran), which has an addictive effect.

He pointed out that although the Paraguayan product comes in the form of pills,‘
often they are ground and dissolved in water to be injected in the veins.

Prof Jose Elias Hurad considers it surprising that the product is entering Brazil
when amphetamine-based medicines were taken off the pharmaceutical market many
years ago "or are rigidly controlled through special prescription."

"when the drug is injected. it initially produces a sensation of euphoria and
well-being, of being on top of the world; this feeling is sometimes accompanied
by agitation, anxiety and uneasiness. Later, in the seconeary phase, there is
depress ion accompanied by distress and a great feeling of emptiness. That some-
times leads the user to take another dose, entering into a vicidus cycle. There

are recorded cases of a person administering more than 10 injections in a single
night.

36
The director of the Federal Narcotics Council pointed out that the importers of

that drug—v"it would he better to call them traifickers"-—are liable to various
criminal charges.

"The first is violation of Article 366 of the Brazilian Penal Code, which prohibits
’the import or export of prohibited goods or the evasion of all or part of the pay-
ment of duties or taxes due.’ The other is to market drugs not licensed in

Brazil and, in addition, containing a substance that can cause physical and/or
psychological dependence," he explained.

He asks the authorities who operate on the Paraguayan border to be on guard

against that product "before it is disseminated among us, with its devastating wave
snuffing out young lives."

8711
080: 5300/2086

37
THREE YOUTHS ARRESTED um DRUGS, ARMS, GRENADBS IN RIO
Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 10 Nov 81 p 1!.

[Text] Grenades that not even the army uses, shotguns. a rifle, a large quantity
of amunkion, a tablet of pressed marihuana, 63 marihuana cigarettes, a plastic
bag with 100 grams of cocaine, 17 little paper wads of the drug, precision scales,
an electric guitar and a motorcycle helmet were apprehended yesterday along with
three minors (arrested) in the Metro do Encontro.

The minors were part of the group of trafficker Cicica and the material appre—
hended was considered -by Colonel Nilton Cerqueira, comander of the military
police, as "one of the most dangerous weapons [caches] rounded up since 1970 in

the possession of a single group in Rio." he reported that he is going to open a
military-police investigation to determine the diversion of the weapons and ammuni-
tion.

Numbers Game

Police from the 6th Military Police Battalion in Grajau had gone to the Morro do
Encontro, between Grajau and Jacarepagua to try to raid a numbers game joint.

when they arrived, they surrounded the store near Emilia Sampaio Street and arrest-
ed the three minors. One of them managed to flee.

It was 1000 hours when the police or the 6th Military Police Battalion received
an anonymus telephone call reporting that there was a numbers game joint: in the
Motto do Encontro. A member of P—Z (Secret Service) was sent to the site to con-
firm the truth of the accusation and proceeded to watch the activity on the hill
through binoculars.

He then saw a boy go down the hill and hide something in his trousers. He gave
the alarm and police from the 6th Military Police Battalion surrounded the area.

After being arrested, the boy said that he was a drug addict and volunteered to
take the military police to the place where he had bought the marihuana.

Before going to the site, the military police, commanded by Lieutenant Santopietro,
sent a policeman by taxi near the store, which was surrounded from behind. When
the police approached, the minors became suspicious and fled, but three were

apprehended.

38
When they entered the store, the police discovered that in addition to being a
place for the sale of drugs, it served as a hiding and storage place for trafficker
Cic ica's group.

Investigation

Colonel Cerqueira said: “Lieutenant Colonel Valence, of the Service for the Control
of the Importation, Manufacture and Traffic of Prohibited Material, was here today
(yesterday) and confirmed the nature of the weapons. General Muniz is also inter-
ested in the case and has already inforled the con-ander of the 1st Military Region
to open an investigation."

The minors arrested are A.C.D., 17 years of age; C.E.R., l7; and C.H.S., 15. The
police are investigating to determine if they are really minors, since none of then
carried identification documents. It is suspected also that a brother of A.C.D.,
who is serving in the army, may have a connection with the diversion of the wee—

pons.

The Material

The material apprehended in the possession of the minors is as follows: seven
defensive grenades that are exclusively army material; an F.0. rifle adapted to 28
caliber; a 7.65-caliber Browning pistol; a 22-caliber Urko shotgun used by bank
guards; three Colt 45 pistol clips; one 9 mm caliber Luger pistol clip; 75 65-ca11ber
cartridges; 55 9 mm caliber cartridges; six 7 mm caliber cartridges; 17 little

paper wads of cocaine valued at 1,000 cruzeiros each; a plastic bag containing 100
grams of pure cocaine; 63 marihuana cigarettes; a tablet of pressed marihuana;

two precision scales; one hypodermic syringe; one Gibson electric guitar; one motor-
cycle helmet; three screwdrivers; and two staplers; in addition to a large number

of sports lottery tickets.

8711
080: 5300/2084

39
FIRST BIG HARIHUANA CROP FOUND IN FEDERAL DISTRICT SEIZBD
Brasilia CORRBIO BRAZILIBNSE in Portuguese 11 Nov 81 p 11

[Text] In an operation involving a helicopter and several vehicles, 35 federal
pdlice agents headed by two division chiefs of the Narcotics Suppression Division
of that department yesterday morning surrounded a country house in the municipality
of Luziania, seizing a large clandestine crop of marihuana and catching the proper-
ty owner, Raimundo Orsano da Silva (52 years of age), red-handed. According to

the Federal Police Department, the operation is not going to stop there since
there are other large marihuana crops around the city.

Rsiaundo da Silva, married and the father of 12 children and better known as
"Ccarense," is a retired public employee from Novacap. After he was booked at the

Narcotics Suppression Department, he was transferred to the Luziania Department and
placed at the disposal of the judge of the third criminal court of that district,
Antonio Lenes de Araujo.

Raimundo explained to the federal pdlice that the marihuana was intended for the
Federal District market, the traffic of which was going to be intensified under

the Pilot Plan and Taguatinga. The federal police agents noted that the mari-
huana crop was almost ready for harvest. Some plants were more than 2 meters high.
According to estimates made at the site, after being prepared and pressed the grass
could have amounted to more than 150 kg.

This was the first case of discovery of a large clandestine marihuana crap in

the Federal District. Until then there had been only small plantings in vases

and flower beds of homes. The federal police are checking out reports of other
large marihuana crops around Brasilia.

Federal Police Into Action

Two nights ago, immediately after receiving information about the existence of
the marihuana crop in Raimundo Orsano da SiJJa's country property, the regional
superintendency of the federal police in Brasilia, through its head, Chief
Xavier, programmed a lightning operation. Exactly 35 agents and two chiefs were
put into action.

The police left at 0500 hours yesterday for the district of Luziania aboard one
helicopter and several vehicles. The encirclement was quick and efficient. Sev—
eral persons who lived in the country home, including the trafficker "Cearense,"
were caught by surprise.

#0
Armed with "HR" machineguns. large-caliber revolvers and a lot of ammunition, the
federal police surrounded the house. "Cearense" awoke to find the police team

ready for any situation. After the arrest of the proprietor and the holding of
several persons who are regarded as witnesses in the case, the federal police
spent more than 2 hours pulling up the marihuana plants.

The grass, the proprietor of the property and the witnesses were transported in
vehicles to the Narcotics Suppression Division. Yesterday, after submitting to a

corpus delicti hearing at the IMl, "Cearenae" was transferred to the Luziania
Department.

That operation is in addition to several others already carried out by the federal
police the major purpose of which has been to fight drug trafficking, beginning

with the known traffickers. By means of the cases already prepared and processed
in the Federal District, through the Narcotics Suppression Department, the federal

police "will continue constant efforts in pursuit of the criminals who are active
in drug trafficking."

41
42

" was going to supply the Pilot Plan and Taguatinga with his

a
O
u
0
ma
:IIC
Cfd
w:
u;
and
UL
UR
2E
C
O
H
.J
0.
(1
U
BRIEFS

RONDONIA TRAFFICKING ROUTE--Porto Velho--0ne kg of pure cocaine valued at 60 mil-
kion cruzeiros ad 1.500 grams of narihuana were seized by the federal police in
this capital last Friday night. Businessman Edjalna Eonanha Pereira had the
cocaine in his home, where police also found two German-made automatic pistols,
cameras. calculators, slide projectors, watches and gens. The marihuana was taken
froa Lucio Pessoa, a trafficker with a long police record. He was in the Son Tupi
night cluh preparing "little packets“ to sell to students. according to his testi-
mony. The federal police reported that Edjalna Pereira, owner of the "Guru Preto
Florestal" Commercial, Export and Import Limited. had cocaine that was 92 percent
pure. In his testimony, he said that the drug which came from Bolivar entered
Rondonia through Guajara Hiria, a Brazilian city on the Bolivian border. Edjalna
Roaanha Pereira confessed that he is part of a gang of cocaine traffickers that has
been operating in Rondonia for some time. He had been under surveillance by the
federal police for 6 months. The businessman said that his job in the gang was only
to take the merchandise to passengers who met his in the Belaonte Airport lobby and
generally were traveling to Sao Paulo. He named 15 other local merchants who, he
said, are also part of the traffic operation. He said he had proof against all

of then. [Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 16 Nov 81 p S] 8711

REDUCTION IN BORDER TRAFFICKING-~The division chief of the federal police in Ponta
Para, the Brazilian city on the Paraguayan border, said in Dourados yesterday that
this year there has been an 80 percent reduction in the trafficking of narcotics

and SO percent in that of contraband on the border with the Paraguayan city of

Pedro Juan Caballero compared to last year. Chief Newton Vieira Lina said also

that the rate of infractions at that border point is "much lower" than that through
other routes, such as Foz do Iguacu. Santos and Rio de Janeiro. The main reason for
rhe decrease in drug traffic, mainly narihuana, was the intensification of vigilance
along the international linkup highways, primarily BR-ﬁ63 (Douradns-Ponta Pora)
where a barrier was set up at which all vehicles that travel along the highway at
any hour of the day or night are inspected. At the same time, federal police mo-
bile teams cruise the highway, intercepting suspects. [Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE SAO
PAULO in Portuguese 17 Nov 81 p 20] 8711

MUSICIARS ARRESTED WITH HASHISﬂ--Roberto Bins Cartier, 23 years old, and Pedro de
Mendonca Lima, 30 years old, were arrested yesterday in apartment 504 of 86
Francisco Otaviano Street in Ipanena and booked for drug trafficking. Found in
their possession were three tabletsof hashish and 5 kg of marihuana in addition to

#3
paraphernalia used by drug sellers. Roberto is n drummer and Pedro is a guitarist
and they work as musicians in the Western Club located on Humaita Street which
belonged to Denise Martins, who died a short time ago as a result of an overdose of
cocaine. They were booked in the narcotics division for drug trafficking and organ-
izing a gang. The hashish bust is the second made by Rio police; according to the
police, that drug, which comes from Afghanistan, Morocco and Lebanon, is rejected

by consumers of Brazil, where the drugs that appear more frequently are marihusna,
cocaine and, on a smaller scale, LSD. The first hashish bust in Rio was made in 1977.
Found in the apartment where Roberto and Pedro were arrestedw-in addition to the
pressed marihuana, the hashish and wrapping material used by the traffickers--were
a scale to weigh the drug and a long list of names, which the police believe are
the customers of the two traffickers. Chief Valterson Botelho refused to give

any information about the two arrests. [Rio de Janeiro 0 JORNAL D0 BRASIL in
Portuguese 14 Nov 81 p 15] 8711

POLICE DISCHARGED FOR CWLICITY-Jorto Alegre--Six civil policemen were dismissed
from the public service for involvement in drug traffic, extortion and the killing
of marihuana trafficker Alvaro Birillo dos Santos, "Lula," who disappeared in

April 1977 and whose body reportedly was thrown into the Mampituba River in Santa
Catarina, according to the parallel trial that is under way in Porto Alegre district
court. At a regular meeting presided over by the chief of civil police, Luis
Carlos Carvalho da Rocha, the policemen: Claricio Frota Dornelles, Leal Lopes
Hachado, Joao Eugenio dos Santos, Arino Virgilio Isaac, Silvio Armando Kobieski
and Jorge Alberto da Silva, were dismissed by unanimous decision. The administra-
tive proceedings were forwarded to the state governor for approval. "Lula," who at
the time of his disappearance was considered one of the biggest marihuana traffick-
ers in Porto Alegre, was killed because he refused to raise the pay—off to the
policemen, who were then assigned to the narcotics division, in order to continue
his trade. He was arrested and ditd as a result of the torture he underwent. The
accused policemen are currently a-Iigned in the interior of the state. [Rio de
Janeiro 0 GLDBO in Portuguese 27 Nov 81 p 8] 8711

NATO GROSSO Do SUL BUSTS--Campo Grande--A total of 63 kg of cocaine, a ton of
marihuana, 15,000 pills, in addition to contraband valued at 186 million cruzeiros
was the result of the work of the federal police in Hato Grosso do Sul from January
to October, according to a report released by the Federal Police Department

(DFF). In the narcotics sector, 279 cases of trafficking in marihuana, cocaine,
hashish and pills were booked, resulting in the indictment of 379 traffickers.
That information "is part of a short report on the principal activities of the
Federal Police Department in Meta Grosso do Sul," which notes some difficulties in
increasing the number of actions, principally with reference to traffic and con-
traband: "The Federal Police Department,” states the note, "as a new agency, is
struggling with difficulties, mainly pertaining to personnel. but despite the
enormous needs, without mentioning the other areas of operation such as drugs and
narcotics, for example, if the department had a fund, and if part of the sums col-
lected in behalf of the federal government through the Police Finance Division
alone were diverted to that fund, we could supply all our material and financial
needs and would not have any budgetary restraints." [Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DE
BRASTL in Portuguese 14 Nov 81 p 15] 8711

C50: 5300/2086

44
THIRTY-EIGHT TONS OF MARIHUANA SBIZED
Bogota El. TIMO in Spanish ll» Nov 81 p lS-A

[Text] More than 38 tons of narihuana were seized in different operations
carried out by special antinarcotics units against groups of narcotics traffickers
in the la Guajira district, according to the P-2 of the staff.

The chief of this secret organization, Col Nacin Yanine Diaz, said that during
the raids, vehicles of different makes and styles, as well as weapons of various
calibers, were also seized.

In the town of Las Palms, in the jurisdiction of Tanarfazon, the municipality
of Riohacha, special antinarcotics agents of the second operational unit seized
857 packages of marihuana with a total weight of approximately 38,565 kilos.

In El Holino. the aunicipal jurisdiction of Riohacha, during operations carried
out by personnel of the same unit, 11 packages of narihuma were confiscated
with total weight of approximately 1950 kilos. which were being transported in
a pickup truck lib-5565.

In the town of El Roblazo. also in the jurisdiction of Riohacha, 80 packages
of marihuana were seized with an approximate weight of 3,600 kilos.

0n the hill called La Teta, near Riohacha, agents of the sane group seized 180
packages of nsrihuana. with a total weight of 6.000 kilos and a truck with
Venezuelan license plates DBP-123, two Toyota capers with license plates from
the same country, [AK-0210 and CBY-006. seven rifles of different calibers, six
catch 30 guns and three 22 caliber carbines.

Finally, in the rural zone of the micipality of Maicao, on the way to Riohacha,

in an abandoned house. 50 packages of narihuana were seized which weighed about
2,000 kilos.

9787
(ISO: 5300/2088

105
PRESMD TRAFFICKBR SEIZED WITH CASH, COCAINB SEIZ-
Bogota BL ESPBCTADOR in Spanish 11 Nov 81 p 20-A

[Text] Virgelina Rivera Leyton. coming from the United States. was arrested
at the Bldorado Airport after the amomt of $267,670 equivalent to about 15
million Coloubian pesos, was found in her possession.

The woman carried the money hidden in a sash that she had wrapped around her
waist. Officials of the Antinarcotics Group of Eldorado estimate that the
money was to be used for the purchase of cocaine.

The captured woman was placed under ordinance of the Superintendency of Exchange
Control, along with the large amount of money that was seized, which was sur-
rendered by means of an official document.

The apprehension of the woman was carried out by an official of the Customs
Guard when she was preparing to leave the airport building. as until that time,
she had not appeared to be suspicious. Upon being searched by an official of
Eldorado, the discovery of the millionaire sash was made.

A new seizure of equipment related to narcotics traffic was made by the Anti-
narcotics Group that operates in Bldorado where Customs, an organization that
is also a part of the same group, is exercising effective control over drug
traffickers and smugglers.

On this occasion, Pablo Vargas Vasquez and Jose Francisco Ros Carvalho were

captured. 2,700 grams of cocaine was found in their suitcases. The suitcases
were outfitted with a false bottom in which the drug was found hidden.

9787
680: 5300/2088

46
REPORTS ON INTERNATIONAL PILL TRAFFICKING ACTIVITY
Pills Seized, Laboratory Discovered
Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 1 Dec 81 pp 1, 2

[Text] Mexico City, 30 November (ANPB)-A large quantity of contraband consisting
of psychotropic chemical substances was discovered and seized by the Federal
Judicial Police, who succeeded in capturing two Mexicans and a German.

A total of 6,650 kilograms of metaqualone, the raw material used to manufacture
pills called Mandrax, were found in 100 drums which, according to the invoices,
contained a substance known as sulfaguanadine, which had been purchased by the
firm "American Medicinal Industry, Inc."

When the investigation was made, it was found that the German, Klaus Resting, had
cone to Mexico City in mid-October, and had set with his fellow countryman, Holger
Markman Mamero, and the drug trafficker, Manuel Lopez Lorena, alias "El Manolo",
the latter being the owner of the phantom company "American Medicinal Industry,
Inc."

The two Germans are partners in thewell knownfirm "Globe Chemical, Inc." which is
also under investigation.

when "Manolo" was arrested, he claimed to have purchased the drugs for $1 million,
in collusion with another trafficker among the most powerful in the Mexican Republic,
who answers to the name of Hector Godoy Calderon.

During the probe a laboratory was discovered in Tepic Nayarit, the site on which
1 million pills of a series of 10 million manufactured since 1979 and sold in both

the United States and our country were found.

Also arrested was Holger Mark-an, who represents the firm “Love Chemical, Inc."
in this town.

They had already made three trips, carrying with them several hundred kilograms of
the same drug, always using the same method: bringing in the drugs in drums which
carried labels of chemical substances permitted by the health code.

It is expected that Klaus Kesting will be captured by the German Interpol in the
city of Hamburg, as an individual guilty of crimes against health.

47
The investigation is still in progress, because the laboratory workers. "mules" and
distributors remain to be captured, as do the purchasers associated with this ring.

it is estimated that 775 million pesos were seized, since they expected to process
31 million pills from the 4,600 kilograms of metaqualone.

German Ringleader Sought
H. Matamoros EL BRAVO in Spanish 2 Dec 81 Sec A p 8

[Text] Mexico City. 1 December (EXCELSIOR)--The director of Mexican Interpol and
Federal Judicial Police contender, Florentine Venture Gutierrez, requested the
cooperation of German Interpol and other police agencies of that country in capturing
Klaus Kesting, identified as the leading supplier of drugs to the United States and
Mexico, who managed to evade arrest in our country on charges of comitting crimes
against health.

Klaus Kesting has been identified as the head of the international drug trafficking
ring operating in the United States, Germany and Mexico which has been bringing in
a chemical substance called metaqualone, the distribution of which is banned.

Ventura Gutierrez also reported that a search is now under way in our country for
another native drug trafficker who is a member of that ring and who, together with
the three persons already under arrest, intended to flood the drug market in Mexico
and the United States.

The drug which is made from the metaqualone (Mandrax pills) causes serious physical
effects but, despite this, it is in great demand among addicts, who pay as much as
$1.00 for each pill.

According to Venture, the economic power of these drug traffickers is inestimable,
enabling them to disguise their illegal activities and bring in the drugs.

Neuropsychiatrists Implicated
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 3 Dec 81 Sec A p 3

[Text] Mexico City, 2 December (om-~11“: PGR [Office of the Attorney General of
the Republiclis investigating the identity of alleged Mexican neuropsychiatrists
who are involved in the distribution of drugs, since it was learned that the drug
traffickers caught with a shipment of Maraquslone were using various prescriptions
in the name of physicians to "stake official" the distribution of the stimulant.

As had been reported. the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic, in cooper-
ation with the Federal Security Office [DPS], found considerable drug trafficking
aboard a ship of Swedish registry anchored in the port of Veracruz.

To conceal the evidence in the event that they should be detected by the police, the
well organized ring of drug traffickers was distributing the stimulants using a
doctor's prescription issued by a Mexican or American neuropsychiatric specialist
and. in this my, passing the sale off as "medical treatment for those with
illnesses of the nervous system."

48
Among the criminals arrested are Germans. Americans and Mexicans, who were operating
as distributors of phaaaceuticals from the Globe Chemical Company, Inc. laboratory
which makes sulfa drugs among other chemical products.

Agents from these entities are seeking the identity of the physicians specializing
in neuropsychiatry, because they are the only ones authorized to prescribe this
type of medication, with a prescription authorized and registered by the Mexican
health authorities and those of the United States.

Thus, the PGR and DFS have requested the cooperation of the medical and health

authorities, in order to learn the identity of the alleged neuropsychiatrists, or
whether false documents are being used in the name of non-existent specialists.

2909
C80: 5330/60

49
REPORTS ON LATIN AMERICAN DRUG CONTROL SEMINAR
Health Secretary's Opening Statement
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 2 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] Mexico City, 1 December (Informex)--"To battle against the drug traffic and
the illegal consumption of drugs is not only a governmental obligation, but also an
obligation of the individual toward his fellow men. The war against the unlawful
use of drugs is not only part of the long battle to preserve the physical and mental
health of our people, but also of the battle to make every human being consciously
a master of himself."

This statement was made today by Dr Mario Calles Lopez Negrete, secretary of health
and assistance, upon opening, on behalf of President Lopez Portillo, the seminar
for officials in charge of controlling drugs in Latin America.

The official added that all the governments in the world have intensified their
defense measures against this trade, the most criminal and irresponsible of all
that can be imagined.

The work being done by the Mexican Government in this area relates to a total concept
upheld by a coordinated effort in which the Secretariat of National Defense, the
Office of the Attorney General of the Republic and the Secretariat of Health and
Assistance, operating in the realm of their respective jurisdictions, are partici-

pating.
Ten~Nation Agreement

Nuevo Laredo EL HANANA in Spanish 8 Dec 81 Sec A p 5

[Text] Mexico City, 7 December (EXCELSIOR)—-Twenty Latin American nations participat-
ing in the seminar for officials in charge of controlling drugs agreed to declare
war on the international drug trafficking rings which are poisoning mankind, bribing
authorities, causing economic imbalance in entire nations and constantly evading

the vigilance established against them.

The representatives of 20 countries, as well as the observers from the United
Nations Organization, met for over 6 hours to make agreements on the tactics to

be used against the traffickers and toanalyzethe topic of preventive and repressive
action against the illegal trafficking of drugs.

50
Tndny, Monday. the officials meeting in two board rooms of the Secretariat of
Foreign Relations resumed the seminar activities, after having visited Sinaloa
'to witness tht operations.

Sinaloa Antidrug Results Praised

:Culiacan BL SOL DE SINALDA in Spanish 8 Dec 81 pp 1, 6

[Text] Surutato, Sinaloa, 7 December--Dr Bror Rexed, executive member of the United
Nations Fund for Control of the Use of Drugs. described the results of the campaign
against the growing and trafficking of drugs in the state as "highly satisfactory"
'and stressed that here in Sinaloa the drug traffic is being combated with sources
of employment and education.

This statement was made here, on the occasion of a visit paid by the UN official
to the Surutatosawmill, accompanied by officials representing 60 countries assigned
’to the United Nations.

Bror Rexed had laudatory comments for the policy being applied by the present
government administration from the standpoint of creating sources of jobs for the
communal farmers of the mountainous areas who had previously been forced to grow

and traffic in drugs, because "they had no other way of supporting their households.’

In this context, he cited the need, in combating the drug traffic. for providing
work, education and a social infrastructure for the farmers whom, he said, "we
cannot condemn, because we know that they had no- alternatives for their survival."

The high-ranking UN official also praised the close cooperation by the Office of
the Attorney General of the Republic in the construction phase of the campaign
against the drug traffic, and remarked: "This example should be imitated in all
the countries suffering from the problem of drug growing and trafficking." He
said that he would "even express this at the forthcoming UN congresses."

The visit by Bror ﬂexed and representatives of 40 nations to Sinaloa was based on the
proposals made to the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic during the
World Seminar on Control of the Use of Drugs, which was held recently in the
nation's capital.

The group arrived in Culiacan aboard the presidential plane "Quetzalcoatl" and,
from the Bachigualato federal airport, went to this small mountain village where,
in addition to the sawmill, it also visited the Justo Sierra Studies Center, and
received information concerning the other 10 sawmills that are in operation in
various sections of our state.

2909
C30: 5330/60

51
MEMBERS OF HARIHUANA TRAFFICKING RING SENTENCED

Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LABEDO in Spanish 4 Dec 81 Sec C p 3

[Text] Yesterday morning, Ricardo Rodriguez Villarreal, third district judge in this
town, handed down a sentence of official imprisonment for five individuals found
guilty of crimes against health in the degrees of marihuana possession and traffick-
ing.

In proceedings 196/981, initiated against Piliberto Rico Silva, Reynaldo Lopez Cerda.
Lisandro Garcia Ibarra, Uvaldo Garcia Martinez and Justo Isidro Jorge, the writ of
official imprisonment was established against them for the commission of crimes
against health.

These subjects were captured by Federal Judicial Police forces on 25 November,
following a series of investigations made to break up this ring of traffickers
who had been taking marihuana into the United States for sale on the black market
in the country to the north.

When they were captured, the drug traffickers had in their possession a suitcase
and a crate filled with marihuana. which they had purchased in the state of Oaxaca
and which was carried to this town by Uvaldo Garcia and Justo Isidro Jorge.

The site which the drug traffickers had been using as a storage place is located
at kilometer 12 of the National Highway, where the federal agents also seized two
pickup trucks that had been used for shipping the drugs.

Filiberto Rico Silva was also convicted of the crime of robbery abroad, because the
1970 model cut pickup truck that he had in his possession had been stolen in the
city of Houston, Texas.

2909
C30: 5330/60

52
BRIEFS

FORMER GENERAL GETS PRISON SBNTENCE--Frsnk Joseph Tweddle Grands, former general of
the Peruvian Air Force, has been sentenced to 15 years imprisonment, to pay a fine
of 20 million soles plus the highest salary he is entitled to receive for 6 months,
and disqualification for holding any governmental job for 5 years, for the crime of
trafficking in illegal drugs to the detriment of the state. This much-ballyhooed

chaired by Dr Jesus Hernani Marquez. The records of the trial were read and he

was found guilty due to the innumerable evidences that he is a transporter of drugs
abroad. 0n the day of his detention at the international airport, Twaddle was
about to leave for Miami aboard an airplane of Aero Peru, the company at which he
worked and was president of the board, with 5 kg of the highest quality cocaine
hydrochloride, according to results of later tests. [By Ravill] [Excerpt]
[PY081923 Lima EXPRBSO in Spanish 30 Dec 81 p 10]

050: 5300/2122

53
BRIEFS

MARIHUANA FARM RAID-—Thanks to the opportune presence of a British Naval Flotilla
headed by H.H.S. London, therecently strengthened special tactical unit of the
police force on Hednesday received expert assistance in wiping out yet another
pocket of Harihuana cultivation. The special unit was airlifted to a remote
corner of the Southeastern peninsular in a naval helicopter known as Assault
Troop Carrier. The airborne narihuana hunters swooped into an elevated out-crop
of illegal weed situated in the hills above Major's Bay at the southern pit of
the island of St Kitta. The search party closed in on an area of some 5,000 sq.
ft. where they operated and destroyed about 200 lbs of mature plants and 2,000

newly planted feedlings. No one was found in the area. [Text] [Basseterre
THE DEMOCRAT in English 28 Nov 81 p 12]

C80: 5300/7522

54
GOVERNMENT NW USING CONPISCATBD NARCUI‘ICS
Tehran E'l'I'BLA'AT in Persian 9 Jan 82 p 3

{Text/ ETTBLR'AT News Service. Thanks to the day-and-night efforts and valor of
the brothers of the strike groups of the Central Headquarters of the Islamic Revo-
lutionary Antinarcotics Prosecutor's Office in the period 23 September-21 December
1981, a total of two tons of various kinds of narcotics were seized and turned over
to the warehouse of the said office: and many smugglers were arrested in this
operation.

Regarding the method of seizing this haul and arresting the smugglers. an official
of this headquarters stated: I‘These narcotics were seized by the brothers in the
strike group from international smugglers in the cities of Mashhad and Tehran.”
Regarding the method of transporting these narcotics by the smugglers, the official
also stated: “Most of these narcotics are brought to Tehran through the desert

by bus and trailer-truck drivers. Host of the heroin shipments are brought to
Zahedan through the Iran-Pakistan border in the area of Ouetta and thence to
Hirjaveh. Mashhad and finally to Tehran.

The main manufacturers of these narcotics are a few persons in Tehran. Also, on the
Pakistan border in a little while ago about 109 million dollars worth of narcotics
were seized from two professional smugglers. When a large shipment of narcotics

is to be transported to Mashhad or Tehran. the smugglers usually employ special
tactics whereby three jeeps set out to transport the narcotics through bypasses and
secondary roads. The remarkable thing is that they use the car going in front to
carry a machinegun to guard against any kind of incident. The car in the middle
usually carries narcotics such as heroin, opium etc. and the third car carries fuel
and food for the smugglers. On this subject. the official added: “Traffickers in
this ruinous powder who transport and sell it with all hardship and arduousness
should realize that if they continue their misdeeds. they will not have any place
in this nation, and we will decisively fight them. Of course. some of them express
ropentence after they are arrested. and we discuss the problem with them and the
opportunities provided for them in prison--and with the help of God they will, God
willing, be rehabilitated and will quit their dirty business by their own volition."
In conclusion. this official said: 'Pormerly the narcotics discovered were
destroyed, and no beneficial use was made of them. and formerly even morphine for
medical and other purposes was imported from India. but now, happily, by turning
over the confiscated drugs to the competent authorities. we are no longer being
obliged to import morphine.” In closing, he announced figures for the drugs seized
in the three—month period of 23 September-21 December 1981. as follows:

55
--ueroin--42.82 kilograms;
--Hashish--29.62 kg:

-Butnt opium cake--S.66 kg;
--Unident1£ied substance--44 grass:
--Opiumr-l.878 kg;

--0p1un sap-~24 kg;

--Dross—-6.S kg;

--Snuff--12 kolograms.
BRIEFS

SMIRAZ OPIUM DISCOVERY-~According to our correspondent in Estahbanat. the Islamic
Revolution Guard Corps has discovered 6.5 kg of opium. The drugs were turned

over to the health department of this city. [GP111751 Shiraz Domestic Service
in Persian 1500 GMT 11 Jan 82 GP]

SHIRAZ HEROIN SBIZURE—-shiraz police personnel have seized 6.5 kg of pure heroin

from two bands of traffickers. [Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1500 GMT
11 Jan 82 GP]

KHORASAN DRUG HAUL-~Mashhad Islamic Revolution Guards have captured 800 grams

of heroin from an individual in the city. One kg of opium and another 50 grams
of heroin were discovered on other individuals. All offenders have been arrested.
[Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT ll'an 82 GF]

OPIUM SEIZBD IN BIRJAN--The Birjsn gendarmerie has seized 192 kg of opium from
two persons. The Mashhad Islamic Revolution Guards Corps have seized 2.5 kg of

opium juice from one person. [GF161657 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian
1430 GMT 16 Jan 82 CF]

HBROIN SEIZED IN MASHHAD--The Mashhad Islamic Guard Corps has seized 1 kg of
heroin from one person. [GF171648 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT
17 Jan 82 CF]

KHORASAN OPIUM HAUL--Members of Moshhad's Abkuh Islamic Revolution Committee. in
cooperation with brother members of the Torbat Heydariyeh Islamic Revolution
Committee, have arrested an important member of a narcotics gang. His name is
Chazi Soltani-Afghani, but he uses the alias Shah Zehi. They have also confiscated
119 kg of opium and 1.4 million rials in cash. In a related incident, members of
the Mashhad Ahkuh Islamic Revolution Committee captured three smugglers who were
carrying 10 kg of opium and 4 kg of heroin. In an armed clash with a group of
narcotics smugglers in Sarakhs. members of the Abkuh Factory's Islamic Revolution
Committee seized 40 kg of opium. The smugglers left the opium and escaped.
[GF191555 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 19 Jan 82 GP]

57
um TEMRAN HEROIN FIND-~5heniran. “-2th correspondent. A public relations official
of the Antinarcotics Prosecutor's Office has announced: "From October to December
this year, thanks to the efforts and persistence of the revolutionary guards of the
Central Antinarcotics Headquarters, the police. Gendarnerie. and comittees of the
Tehran area, 4.4‘9 kilograms of narcotics have been discovered in Tehran and vicin—
ity.‘ He added: “The stuff that was found there included 673 kilogram of heroin,
170 kilograms of hashish, 34 kilogram of opium burnt cake, 70 kilogram of uniden-
tified materials, 2.770 kilograms of opium, 23 kilograls of opium sap. 11 kilograms
of by-product and 740 kilograms of various substances. Also. sewers of this group
were arrested and their group was dispersed. All the goods discovered were turned
over to the storehouse of the Public Prosecutor's Office. Among the goods found
were more than 7,000 opium pipes, a quantity of liquor, a great amount of_galn§ling
eguipment, some sexy magazines. scales‘ syringes. weapons and swords.“ [Testy
{Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 9 Jan 82 p 3/

C80: 5300/5350

58
BRIEFS

DRUGS CRACKDOWN--Abidjan, December 31--The Ivory Coast is to step up its
campaign against the sale and use of drugs, official sources said here.
The most-used drug is cannabis, known by its local name of Guedji. Several
plantations have been destroyed recently in different parts of the country
but sizeahle quantities are still smuggled in from neighbouring states,
along with amphetamines and barbiturates which have gained ground on the
black market. (APP) [Text] [Paris AFRICA AFP in English 31 Dec 81 p 9]

680: 5300/5621

59
BRI BPS

FIVE PACKAGES 0F OPIUM--Thia week the vice squad headed by Chief Inspector
Ramjeeawon collaborated with postal officials in seizing five packages containing

opium addressed to fictional persons. Each weighed about 5 kilos. Officials had
waited for someone to pick up the packages and when this did not occur, they
seized them. Police are investigating the case. [Text] [Port Louis L'EXPRESS

in French 21 Dec 81 p 7]

C50: 5300/5619

60
YOUNG DRINKERS MORE PRONB T0 DRUG ABUSE, SAYS REPORT

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102l09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020055-4

Salisbury THE HERALD in English 8 Jan 82 p ll

[Article by Mike Overneyer]

[Text]

“YOIM peopl- who
drink alcohol are

ointloantly noon
llkcly to ouch ciga-
mttco. It they anokc.

they are more likely

to .noo marijuana

(«I-m). it any ....

dawn. thoy an mono
likely to nianaa other

illidtdraga.”

Thu. arc tho unans-
cl a neat atndy of
coho! um conducted by a
aimhahwoan clinical

ychoioglcl. Mr Albcrt

hwc. who inlet-
viewed 534m [peoplc
agod between to, and to

”rain Britain and sin-

tlr aiambwc lounii that
alcohol waa a commonly
hood beverage among
In thin a m
in limbo of.
Britain. “Moat
drink boar in the «slam

in who and hail wl
triads".

Drinhcgmocnourxd
greater n r y
mlrna thpa: on
:rooitoaya. Vory iowottho
young pccpla who woro
intorviowod were al-
coholioo — drinking
rogulorly til-at thhg in
memorizing.

Zimbabwe had at;-
nlﬂoantly more ahatainora
than the Britich. But Zim-
babwoana mourned
[motor amounta ot ab-
aoluto alcohol a day and
wen alao our-rcp-
{uantoa in ‘the higher;
W ca o‘om o
intoxication.

In Zlinbabwc
mono maoa com
m than fatal“. whtlo
in Britain con dif-
tcrvocoa of Clinton waa
no Meant. Yet. Brit-
iah m on otill drank much
more than thoi: tomato
countc

In both comma. If
Chambwo fond. cigarot-
Ztnﬁi‘m .m‘ “was

1
m cm

Ir W. and:
acid that tho World
lloaith nation aiao
neatly wed ooncorn
tthorapidh honoutnal-
:ohol uao and almoo in
m We rid cotntrioa.
Now ct alcohol
can warathonlht ha
mm to rapla "Eel:
ttrhanlaaticn and la-
auou-iaiioation. and tho
cornmlal accao. to al-

mm” ray-M
mororootntccncornand

alga has boon o in
a M inauaa
alcohol mo ago chino in
tho Third World, includin
Zimhahwo. for ac
reason:

61

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00050R000500020055-4

BRIEFS

NARCOTICS DISCOVERED—At noon today members of the Athens police department
for combating narcotics raided an apartment at 106 Spetsni Street, Kypseli
Quarter. where narcotics were being used. The apartment was leased by an
Italian woman who was arrested together with four men and one Greek woman.
During the police mid one of the men in the apartment pulled out a revolver
but he was neutralized in time. The police found a nutter of syringes and an

quantity of heroin. {Text} [NC181313 Athens Domestic Service in Creek
1230 GMT 18 Jan 82]

..\
CSO: 5300/5352

63
JUSTICE MINISTER PLEDGES 'NARmTICS-FREE' PRISONS
Oslo AFTENI’OSTEN in Norwegian 31 Dec 81 p 4
[Report of interview with None deke by Thorleif Andreassen]

[Text] The Ministry of Justice is stepping up the fight against
narcotics abuse. Beginning 1 January 1982 several new measures
will be introduced, including narcotics-free sections of prisons
with extra strict control measures. Inmates that wish to be
transferred to those sections must sign a statement that they
are willing to undergo, for example, frequent urine tests. If
the inmates are still using narcotics, they will be sent back to
ordinary sections. "The objective, of course, is that there
shall be no narcotics in any institutions, but unfortunately
that cannot be accomplished 'overnight,'" Mona deke, minister
of justice, states in an interview with AFTENPOSTEN.

Narcotics-free prison sections will first be established at the Ullersmo national
prison, Oslo district prison, and Trondheim district prison.

Minister of Justice deke points out that it is a big problem that a great many
are in prison precisely because they have been involved with narcotics. And that
means that there is a high concentration of drug abusers and narcotics dealers in
the prisons.

"The crafty methods of smuggling that are used do not make the situation any sim-
pler. For that reason we must think along new lines and make our efforts to com-
bat the abuse of narcotics in our prisons more effective," she emphasizes.

The minister of justice says that preparations are being made to build visiting
rooms with glass walls in the Kristiansand district prison, the Oslo district
prison, and the Ullersmo prison. It is hoped that this will be a measure that can
contribute to making it harder to smuggle drugs in and at the same time permit the
inmates to have visitors.

A special search patrol will also be set up with narcotics dogs. This patrol will
operate in East Norway. The search patrol will not be stationed in a particular
prison, but will operate as a mobile unit.

In Trondheim a day center will be established for those on trial release and per-
sons with suspended sentences. The center. which is expected to be put in

610
operation in March 1982, will be a leisure time and activity center combined with
hobby-like work activity. The object, according to the minister of justice, is

to awaken the clients' interest in training and to link the day center and school
work together.

Early next year work groups for drug abusers will also be established in Hedmark,
namely a forest group and a group that will work at shop tasks.

"The important thing about these last two measures is to try to create the condi-
tions for a lasting rehabilitation. These measures alone are not sufficient to
attain that goal, but they will be important elements of the offensive the govern-
ment is planning. The government will present a plan of action of its own in this
field," says Nona deke, and she continues, "At the same time that this work is
going on, it will also be necessary to provide means of giving useful experience
for later work.

"We know that a number of involved organizations and individuals are interested in
making an effort. And in my opinion it is necessary to get them engaged in the
work against narcotics abuse. At the very beginning of the year I will get in
touch with interested parties to see how we can get ordinary, resourceful people
into this work," says Mrs deke, who characterizes "personal contact" as a very
important part of the strategy for combatting the narcotics evil.

"Drug addicts and others that have problems need an adult they have confidence in
as an important fixed point," says Minister of Justice deke.

The concrete measures that will soon be taken will be paid for with the extra ap-
propriations that the Starting earmarked for combatting narcotics last November.
A total of 22 million kroner was appropriated at that time. The Ministry of
Justice will spend about 15 million kroner, while the remaining amount will be
used in part for an educational campaign led by the Ministry of Social Affairs.

8815
C80: 5300/2128

65
BRIEFS

DRUGS SMUGGLED INTO PRISON—-Use of narcotics has become an increasing problem in
the Bergen district prison. As a part of the work to prevent visitors from smug-
gling drugs in, TV surveillance of the street that leads into the prison has been
put into practice. To prevent visitors from coming in physical contact with the
inmates, a glass plate will be installed in the visiting room, and they will only
be able to talk with each other through a microphone, BERGENS TIDENDE reports.
[Text] [Oslo ARBEIDERBLADET in Norwegian 12 Dec 81 p 3] 8815

1981 CUSTOMS DRUG SEIZURES--In 1981 the customs service made 251 narcotics seiz-
ures as against 204 the year before. There was 67.3 kg of hashish and marihuana
seized against 55.4 kg the year before. Seizures of cocaine increased from 7.4 g
to 35 g. The customs came across only 4 g of amphetamines and similar substances
in 1980, but in 1981 268 g was confiscated in addition to 1,031 capsules and tab-
lets. On the other hand, heroin seizures show a decline, according to customs
director Jens Sterri. [Text] [Oslo AFTENPOSTEN in Norwegian 2 Jan 82 p 14] 8815

OFFICIAL FEARS 'NARCOTICS FLOOD'--"Ne are facing an extremely serious situation.
Not only were larger narcotics seizures made in 1981 than previously. There are
also more narcotics in circulation, and record opium crops are reported from the
east. Norway has gradually become a very attractive market for drug sharks,"
Torbjdrn Mork said at his press conference in Oslo Tuesday [5 January]. "Even
though the situation is bleak, in spite of everything it is less serious than in
our neighbor countries and a number of other western industrialized countries.
There is no simple solution to the narcotics problem. No statecan solveit alone,"
Mork said. In his opinion the greatest problem is reduce the demand. When it
comes to doctors' prescriptions of habit-forming drugs, the sharpened control has
led to more doctors than before renouncing the right to write out prescriptions
for such drugs. [Text] [0510 AFTENPOSTEN in Norwegian 6 Jan 82 p 21] 8815

some DRUG CASES lNCREASE-—In 1981 the police in Bodd recorded deaths from narcot-
ics abuse in the district for the first time. Two people died because of narcot-
ics, Chief of Police Rolf B. Negner stated at a press conference Monday [4 January].
While 200 grams of hash was confiscated in the whole of 1980, the amount confis-
cated increased in 1981 to 1.32 kg and the number of narcotics cases increased

from 25 to 50. There isa disturbing increase both in juvenile narcotics addic-
tion and in juvenile drunkenness in Bod¢ in the course of the last year. Both of
these phenomena have developed into a big problem, the chief of police said.

[Text] [0510 AFTENPOSTEN (NTB) in Norwegian 6 Jan 82 p 21] 8815

C80: 5300/2128

66
Near East to Europe. Simultaneously, according to the canton police, 320 kilograms
of the stuff was confiscated in a shed near Bergamo (Italy). Apparently the re-
mainder had already found its way across the border. The man from Tessin had been
using his truck to transport goods regularly from Lebanon to Europe. In the process
he met a few Italians for whom he transported the goods. The arrest of the truck
driver and the Italian took place within the framework of an investigation that had
been carried out jointly by Swiss and Italian police authorities. In connection
with this affair, two Lebanese and one Italian had alread been arrested in the fall,
and they were indicted for snuggling 2 tons of hashish. fText] [Zurich NEUE
mascara 21mm; in German 17 Dec 81 p 7] 8991

C50: 5300/2106

67
BRIEFS

POPPY CULTIVATION REQUEST-~Seydisehir, Konya (HURRIYET News Agency)-—The Seydisehir
Chamber of Agriculture has applied to the Ministry of Agriculture and Forests for
permission to cultivate opium in its district. The officials said that it would not
be fair to leave Seydisehir out of the area of permitted cultivation when the areas
of opium cultivation in Konya region had been increased two-fold. They said that
Seydisehir was a very suitable place for opium cultivation. [Text] [Istanbul
HURRIYET in Turkish 15 Jan 82 p 4]

HASHISH, HEROIN SEIZED--In an operation carried out in Diyarbakir by Security
Directorate narcotics teams disguised as buyers, 33 kilos of powder hashish and

1.188 kilos of pure heroin were seized. Hehmet Kizildemir. Ahmet Ar. Ismet Besir,
Cabbsr Armut and Abdurrezzak Isiktas were apprehended and taken into custody. Else-
where. Ruhi Imray, Abdullah Kurtyenez. Orhan Coskun. Hasan Degirmenci and Muhbir
Demir, charged with smoking and selling hashish in Koycegiz District of Hugla Pro-
vince. were apprehended together with 200 grams of powder hashish. [Text] [Istanbul
MILLIYET in Turkish 15 Jan 82 p 5]

HORPHINB BASE SEIZURE--Usak (AA)--In an operation carried out by personnel of the
ﬂask Security Directorate Narcotics Branch in the village of Kizlicasogut, 6 kilos
of morphine base with an approximate market value of 5 million lira were seized.
Seven members-~inc1uding one woman-of the team operating out of Usak and Konya
[provinces] were apprehended. The gang is said to have sent morphine base via the
Middle East to Europe. Ussk Security Director Lutfu Zafer Aras said that the 7 per—
sons who were apprehended were understood to be members of a large gang. [Text]
[Istanbul HILLIYBT in Turkish 1 Dec 81 p 9]

cso: 5300/53” END

68