FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10634
6 JULY 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 29/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[J are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
smtion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nausea preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. “lines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAVS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
“TERMS BEPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HORLINIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Daues

(2000 29/82)

Cameras

ASIA
MBTBALIA

mutate: Plains New Inmdgadon or Organized Orin
(m ml!!! lDRNINGlnALn, 10 any 82)

Ship Container Uses, by John Short
DISH Ina-mall “mu (hit, by lake Smkctee

00th Mod 1!) Ban Up on Anti-Giannini; Lila
(1‘1- aevat; ma ”ITALIAN, 11 lay ﬂ)....................

Court Help ofﬁchen 1b m on: Melbourne has Trade
(m; m. 12 my m)...Q.O0.0.0....OOODCOIOOOIOOOO‘0......

Room am in Drug ma Linked m '11: an" c.»
(13: 51mm mmucaemn, 12 May 82)...............

Official lbcomu Police Force. Narcotic- Bmau unity
(“I‘m new; mg m, 13a,82)DOODOOOOOOOODOCOOOOIOOOO

Officer an. cum Drug trafﬁcking 'Sugmg Post'
(m mzkmL’ 15 m &)DOODD0.0........'...I..I.I'..l

Briefs
ﬂﬂhhh Iqorur Immoned
01910.: in Drug (Macedon
inlay“. Nd:- Sydley Traifidmr
narcotics Agents for Owns“

- a - [III - WW - 138 POUC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CANADA

Winchor Heroin Seizure Called 'Iargest Drug 3-»: Eva!"
(ma HINIBOR STAR, 4 Jun 82, m3 SATURDAY mason STAR,

5 J!!! 82)00.00.0000...0.0.0.000...OOOOOOOQOOOOOOOOI0.00.0000 20

Heroin Worth $1.6 Million, by )hrty Benetuu, Eric

Mayne
Drug Trafficking aura”, by Grant Canton

—b-

MWLUEONLY
(hrbile Need for (be in Drug 8.3881133 Emotion
(m MB MD ml” 15mm).....0l00.00.00.000.000...

um ”ERICA
BOLIVIA

Strong majectione 1b Uee of Berbicidee hported
(PBSENCIA, 6. 13 Hey 82. us 118196, 16 by 82)........

mono-lea nequeet 8n
(hepm Pan-re Concerned
9mm Cells for Stop of Herbicide the
Herbicides Boned in ampere
(XLOEIA

Cocaine-Transporting Soldier Arrested
(Amulfo Sanchez; EL HERO, 12 thy 82)..................

Briefs
lbrihune, Cocaine Oonfieceted
Coceine Seizure, Arrests
JAIMICA

Briefs
Liaieon With Caym

IBXICO

Briefs
Heroin Drug Laboratory

NEAR MT A‘YD noun AFRICA
EGYPT

Smuggling Attewte Inverted by Border Guerd
(ll-m F8dlu11di;AL-mnﬂ, 26 m ”)000000000000oeoeo'o

Brie to
North Sinai Attenpt

”MUSE“?
I70! OFFICIAL USE MIX

Inn
New buuree Being Planned ‘11) Control Addiction
(Bojjet ol-Belan Beyyed Alt-ed Berger Interview;
W, 29 M a)...O...OO000......OOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
ISRAEL
Briefs
Large Drug Beid
SIB-8W AFRICA
SBYGBHSS
Beinﬁoroemnt of Drug Seerch Powers Sought
(NAnw, 9 J“ ”)0000000000.000.000.0000000000000I.0......
sou-m AFRICA
Briefs
Border Police Confiscat- Degge
Seeks of Degge
Degge Deeler'e Travels
Cocaine Seized
WEST EUROPE
MM
Owner of Pornography Shop Arrested in Large Drugs Cue
(Bgmmn 11mm. ‘Jm &)OOOCOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOO00......
Court kneels Treffidter Held in 0.8. Bed Pact With Denmark
(Bnmumn nmm. 11 Jm &)IOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOO
Briefs
LSD Again in Dennerk
alrietianie Drug ﬁgure Arrested
Snuggled-ﬂeehieh hon Nepal, Pakistan
)hthedon Progren Effectiveneee (hellenpd
GBBBQ

Details of Activities of Long-Tine Beroin Traffickere Provided
(n m, 18” a).O...I.O'COOCOOOOOIOOIOOODOOOOO0.0.0.0...

mmuseomv

35

Sﬁﬁﬁ

4‘0

106

107
1.7
b8
108

109
NOIIAY
Article Examines Drug the Statistics, Smuggling Petume
(MMT. 29 Iky 82)...........-”nun... eeeeoeeeeeeee
swam“
Gang Supplied ﬁnch of Awhete-inee Sold in west Sweden
(smsu mar. ” Apt &)OOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
TURKEY

Large-Scale mmiona Against Drug Snugglere hported
(HILLIYB‘I. 5 Kay 82. BUIRIYBT, various detes)..............

Revelations Promised

auhieh Smugglers lhcovered
Further gport, by Ugur Oebeci
Heroin Ring Broken Up

Briefs
Opiun thyed 'in Kaye

1mm!) KINGNH

Pmsecution Says Police-en Link Hm in Gaceine Ring
(Inn Henry; 1m: DAILY ELEM, lo Jun 82)

murmutmaomv

52

SS

56

62

63
MINISTER PUSHES NEH INVESTIGATION OF ORGANIZ- CRIME

Ship Container Uses

Sydney TBS SYDNEY MORNING NEPAL!) in thlish 10 ltay 82 p 12

[Article by John Short]

[Text]

CANBERRA — A new
Commomtealtlt-NSW police
task lonec into drug smug-
gling by using ship contain-
cts ts to be established. the
Minister for Administrative
Services. Mr Newman. att-
nouttced yesterday.

Mr Newman — who it
tespumihle tn: the Amtraliun
I'edetul I‘ttl'h‘t: — also “I. "III

theve um pint: lneie evidence.

thll politician: and respectable
tminewnett Were involved in the
importation of illicit dam.

The MinNev continue-l hi:
made an the NSW Cmnment
toe allowing the lattice Deputy
Police Cummis‘mner. Mr nitl
Allen. to tetite with an Initial
[tendon of Sl'l.ttntt aim being de-
moted [allowing adverse ﬁndings
unmet him by the Pnliee Tlihttttal.
heeded by .lmtlm Penman.

Mr Newman gave further detail!
M the stufﬁng ol the named
erltttee enmmksion. 3min. "III it
\muld he ntmle up M 3“ own in-
tettipnt-m. lttuyt-n and acetami-
In“ and \Vtttlld haw: polite mp-
mt.

honking on eommeteittl tele-
miutt yntetdtty. Mr Newman mid:
"We ate >etlitt: tttt unuther tzttlt
(one between the NSW Putin and
the AFP ttt lttul at the toll-lu-
er/whlrf 'teene hete in Sydney
a smut-nee it a very
my 0! ﬂinging druﬂ into the
u-tmtrt'.”

ll 5‘ ttttdemond that Mr New-
man and the NSW Police Minister.
hlr Andeﬂon. agreed to the enab-
It.~httt¢ttt ot the new tad levee —
including its mm; at tetetence.

memht-nhtp ml euntmt thmt
loin t W]?!
mumtmtmcttee —- t
week. .
It is expected that the t
extehlkhed at mittistetiel lute
he «Miemetl between the Pit
Mr Wren. and the Prime I
let. Mr Fmet. by letter this n

The eunhlishmettt of the
tut lune — in ndditittn to :
meeulth-Stnte police
lotee ttmv lmlln; at dm; trt
i _kinlittewithreeott
datiom «l two eulier Roy-l
minions into dl‘llp.

The Ink tome is to be h
un .«ittattt commission
the nsw Potke and it are;
k \talled equally by potee
each foeee.

The management committe-
lrollill. the opt-cation- at th
tuk lotee k expected to he

ol‘ dele tee til the Petite
“SW Per-:1: Commiuione
tewesetttntive ut the Ct
llatutt and un ofﬁcer of th
mier'l Depatttttcnt. lt wi
ehuited M the I'remm'a l
meat tepreuntutive.

On the question ol link I:
tttettnke‘l yin» and poli:
Mr Nemtmt said “not ..
tut we there politidu
mlved. I think the ninth (at
denee ll than there is end ill
liberal. lahoe ttt' Demo:
nhntem. then we hove pt
tet them out."

lie denied that the
mttttuettlth's action} in tttki
tion optima orpmml emit
ntlltieﬂly motivated. nylt
don‘t think that this thould l

itit-ttl. And that': why I that
mint belt-re that I dun‘t tttitt
enemy the should be attacking Mr
\Vran or the NSW Government. it
i‘ an Australian problem.“

In emu-er to a question on link.
between urnnisetl crime and r
spectable bitumen. he said:
"(it wttrte there are. and in this
cunntry their mine: keep cropping
up . . . they become so entrenched.
they have organiml tbetmelves to
that they are so well nlqnardcd
[mm the nu thing we have
been med to in this country.

“Here we are talking about
people who can command the best
nth-ice tic-um it nitle rrnpe of div
ciplim . . . lllll'! why you collie
hack tn the problems or the crimes
«minions . . . we need ion;-
Ierm coordinated ellnnt to get at
Ibetc people."

'lhe establishment ol the joint
task lorce on the me at containers
to import illicit drop [allow ea-
prcmiona of crmern by the Wood-
turd and Williams Royal Commit-
\utM.

'lbe Woodward Ravai Commis-

dun into thin trnliicltin:
reported in . I”
it had received “convin
dence. . .oltbetneof
tor smuggling drop int
lia.’

.'l'he Williams Royal Ct
into drugs — which re
December. l9” — a!
commission believer t
(containers) potential for
meant of importing illeu
a danger which must not
amulet].

ﬂee-tire tl their air:
en utter what one Ctuto
demibed as ‘the ect
itylor drug unu inc.”

Concern over the are e
en for smuggling drugs
raised in March lhie y
Federal Police and Curt
cera seized the largest .
ever detected in Australi
tt-nm oi bathiah with
value nl up to “20 r
lrnm a min container in 5

NSW Internal Affairs Unit

Sydney THE SYDNEY lDRNING HERALD in English 10 May 82 p 1

[Article by Mike Steketecl

[Excerpt]

The NSW Government is
planning to set up a “ﬂying
squad“ of oiliccrs within the
police force to infiltrate and
break no connection: between
organism! crime and police.

Mernhere of the squad. to be
known a: the Organiaed Crime
Task Force. will he placed tinder
cover ltl operational units. eon-
centreting particularly on those
which might be stueeptible to
corruption. web as gaming and
betting. licenu'np and section!
dealing. with \-i:e.

The mi. loree will co-
ordinate intelligence informe—
tinn and operational aaivilics to
enable police tn act more
enert-vely on organised crime
intelligence.

In other atepe there is to he a
major strengthening of the
internal Allain Bureau. which
inve‘tipatet complaint: agaimt
police. An mint-tit commissioner
(internal Amara) will be
appointed and will report
directly to the Government and
Parliament.

A “my body. the Police
Allegatiom Review Committee.

will inquire into at
people who have m
plaints against police
satisﬁed with the act

Steps are to he takt
a series of loopholes \
allowed oﬂ'k‘en'to. t
consequences 0 lll‘
by retiring. resigning a
sick leave.

The pachee of pro
before the (Sovernmen
the wake oi the Al
where the Gmernrnen
said action to dismiss
deputy commissioner t
in his being able to
loree with lull retire.
his.

The Premier. Mr
sttneted the Police .V
Andcnon. Ill clap a]

up with ways to tighte
rules dealing with lit!
to recommend meew
with corruption with.

He 'n unite-«toad I
Mr Andcrmn he want
that not only w:|\ wt
which would _t‘ttl tut t.-
stupiciort about pnli
tt-rtin‘ corrupt pnltcr

Mr Anderson. in
with the Police tiommhumer.
Mr Abbott. has drawn up detail-
ed ml: which. though they
i=3 yet to go to (41.5“ -—
t are expected to v to men
— ltlve been circulated within
the 0mm and have
«tread general sumvt.

The mutant: include a com-
ptcte mm"! of the operation
at the Internal Alt-in Bunch.
which often tut cane mule:
etitieittn tut being lucﬂeetive.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080008-0

GOVERNMENT ADVISED T0 EASE UP ON ANTI-CANNABIS LAWS

Canberra THE AUSTRALIAN in English 11 Hay 82 p 3

[Article by Tim Beast]

[Text]

PROFESSOR James (ira-
ham, who led a group oi ex-
peris which reported to the
British Government recently
on marijuana use. advised
Australian governments yes-
terday to ”lay oil" the drug.

"You hrvc to have a league
table [or the Inn-pose of
knowing which drugs are
most likely to do the most
damage." he said.

"From such a thli'. govern-
ments can then decide - lit
the limits oi money — which
drugs should be made as dit-
licult as possible to obtain.

“In that context. I would
say that cannabis (man-
iuana) is rather low on the
table. and governments
should lay oil in their eiiorts
to control its possession and
growth."

Prolessor Graham. a 68-
year-old Scot who works in
the Department oi Pharma-
cology at the Welsh National
School oi Medicine in car-
dill. is in Melbourne tor the
Nations! Health and Medical
Research Council's work-
shop on addictive behavior.

DANGEROUS

His list of drugs in degrees
ol danger. giving points ior
dangerousness out 0! :0. is;
heroin 20: LSD and other
hailuclnogens 11: alcohol
and tobacco lo-ls: certain
lranquilllsers 540; cannabis
5: and coliee (calleine) 2.

lie said benzodiasepine -
the basic ingredient oi tran-

quilllsers. including
- hsd recently gen
danger list irom thr
20 to 5-l0 out of 20 b
over-prescription b)
He said these dru
doing it lot brain a:
are far from respect
Protester Graha-
niany drugs and the
were subject to ch
lnsliion.

Protessor Grail:
spent the post 15 y
ciallslng in until
search. "i have sine
course. otherwise hi
know what i an
about? l have also
came and LSD imd
tori! conditions ior
reason.

"Why do they lus-
iibout cannabis wl
is so much booting
You can go into pul
sin and see then
{naming jars oi be
the hatch to school:

“And solvents ar
awiul problem. ‘l‘h
gettinl stoned on
ilng. They are get
brains dissolved by

He said all West
ties are now drug-d
to bring on sleep. It
relieve pain. etc.
“It taking drugs
modern life. you
identity the small
oi people who an
get into trouble."

He said the met
lem "ls drugging n
the drug" - the u
no addiction-prom
switch irom one (1

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500080008-0
9: =3 3 n23.

:9... :83 3 so 3:38 3
p: 3:03 .3853 2.322.
33:6. 2 3.1.3.2.? mo _
.5. 3.392% 5 .25.. :.
lacuna 323......- _3 .8...
in 9.3.5:. 2. .3?
5: v .3 9.2.82 F;
CWRT HEARS OF SCHEME TO TAKE OVER MELBOURNE DRUG TRADE

Melbourne THE AGE in English 12 May 82 p 5

[Text]

'A man told the Coroners Court
yesterday that two men were
ordered to he executed by a
drug syndicate which planned
to take control of drug distri-
bution in Melbourne 3 northern
suburbs

lie said that hit initiation into
Ito group was to have been the
execution at the two men or lace
death hrrnseli.

The man. Midtael Wayne Kil-
ner. said that Gary Wayne Jenn-
hp and Mas Wayne Kite
were ordered Iron a2 Preston ﬂat
at g nt aboutz am on in

um.

‘11. court had at heart!
that the body at Mr Jenn had
been loundmthebanitoithe
Marlbyrnoog River. in Keilor. lat~
er that morning. Mr Kite told the
court on Monday that he had been
litot In the back and and
had crawled to a nearby

Three men appeared at the in-
quest cha with the murder
or hit Jen n and the attempt-
ed murder Mr Kite. They are
hit! David amberlain. 2! o!
nude:- Street. Comma maWii-
ilam Nichol; 2i. of View Street.
Glenroy: and Peter James Sewelt.
as. oi itoy Street. G‘lenroy.

in a statement read to the
court. Mr Killer, 14 ot Minuet:
Avenue. Prawn. mid/1 believe
$126th Yea-'0 laud by

l r Sm iothought my-
self. Gerry Jenn n gs and Tom Kite
wanted to taite over his selling
operation oi dru in the north-
ern suburbs." said that Mr
Seweli' s group made between
noon and m a weak telling
dru s. mainly amphehrnlnaa.

r Kilner raid that Mr Sewell.

Mr Nichols and another man
known as Pod posited their wav
into the ﬂat I’riinred with Mr
Jennin a about midnight on
Thurs {the 11 Se bar.

ile as dtha aa produced a
lawn-oil porno action shotgun
which he printed at Mr Jenninas
and another man. Peter Desire.
who had come to My heroin {roan
Mr Jennlnes.

--- p-AA a-aa-rn

“i went into the idtehen and
e to Slob and Bruce Nichols
tithe lane they had for tak-
control oi the drug

distribution in the northern alth-
nrba. hv means at eliminating the
o plposlt on. The were talking
al-ut killing at the oppmirlnn
which was a eoruiderahle amount

. of people and included Gary Jen-

ninpt. Peter bake and Tom
Kite.“ Mr Kilner said.

lie said he was iven the op-
tion oi loin Mr and Mr
Nichols or be ng killed. “i ﬁnally
realised that it would hemy
chance to escape their clutches i
(agreed to go along with them.”

".“My I"initiation Into their grow
was to kill Gathiennings and
TomKitethatn t"MrKiiner_
aid in his eatement.

lie said he arranged to call Mr
Kite amohenmines at s street
cornea in Preaton “Slob told

to accent up the to meat
Tom Kite to ma e care we came
back. Podae toolt the pump- I
action shotgun with him." Mrl
ttlinar said they walked hack to-
thc ﬂat with Mr Kite.

lie said that Mr Jennings and
Mr Kite were taken iron the
net at gunpoint and driven away
in Hodge and Mr Nichole in Mr
Snell's car. i

Mr Kilner said that he later
left with Mr Seweil to soil amr
phctarnines to a man known as.-
Grot. 'We were there three-
quarters of an hour and then Slob
told me we had hattcrgo and
meet Bruce Nichols and Podge

Mr Kilner said he did not meet
theothertwomenbutlaithtr
Search and saved the night a:
his ﬂanree's parents‘ house. He
said‘that :23.” Jan lm'iii
noope to te r n nu a
Mr Kite. and told Mr Sewen'r
sister that “Slob had gone oil the
deg end and was running around

purnpactioo shotgun
abducting people.

The coroner. Mr Kevin Mason.
SM. adioureed the inquest to a
day' and venue to be ﬁxed tater.
WW HELD IN awe RAID LINKED ‘10 'HR ASIA' CASE

Sydney m smug! momma amp 1n mum: 12 May 82 p 12

[Text] A woman med In a C10“. Mr Hm Bradley. mud
raid on Monday night hy m In! to! was.
cmlpdiceisat dd- “mummy
hicndotawincipalhtheMr bauﬁgiynaumfg-

. M g C 3
Am case. it was claimed in m WNW-s 180.31: 5‘.“
ﬁlamCmofMyks- W.ndwddhwuefn
sions yesterday. to new 9 me [minim l!

Anna Looks Mien. a New munch“. M“

Mr Dudley W Ask" us
lemma-horn have». at Our- . W» m in . coo-
linuu'm.kchu~udmdnuh¢m Wampum
mmuﬁhmwmymwy wanna-m“:
m“ W“ "u‘l'a'sta't'é'fé

Ammmmemnmlw ' J“ '
mm. :4. maul mm. of m‘ ”m“

Kim Cm Abdul». Gum. Oahu-c Wind. the defence
Mdmmmnmum WMAntm-Mnm
Shad-.00 “Wag-cl. “mam-win“?—
ot ”meme am the young; brain; I IO?!" M.
“Ma: m. me N. am ...:.. m“ " ' .,.
mﬁmﬁgﬂ. y 'megem'u! 123;?
Show; '- chvud “a opo- :4.“ '
mm ml! had- 0 w- vii I: u
mwmmmum ”ﬁgmwgﬂﬁi
MN.MWII.IM m rm min on
pistol. . tally. -

N1L¢aNuhSN.an-dhﬂ mm
for all low M M then In ”mm“: [m ”"3:-
Modvnmﬂﬂavu- autumn" madnhwho

17.. mm volichot [or in

CSO : 5300/7559
OFFICIAL RECOUM‘S POLICE FORCE, NARCO‘I‘ICS BUREAU EMMY
Melbourne 'l'ilE AGE in English 13 May 82 p 3

(Article by- Aileen Berry]

C50: 5300/7559

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500080008-0

[Text]
SYDNEY. -— The tanner Cont- tuned. The contentl. which Mr a.
monwoelth Police Force and Bates said were later proved a.“
the now dlahended rodent Mu. mood Wlency and cor- Hem
Narcotic Bureau viewed one moth" In the humu- 15%:
another as enemies. former “The Millions) ounmtsion ”e. ‘
bumo' commissioner. Mr he": can mnelt‘kmoéa‘m “a
2 . . a mean a e-
llarvey Betee. cleaned yester ”on "I. I: about on . n
“y. . to he R l Com half“ "or Name!” “at"
to t we - l t corrupt " r tee r
mgmugdma trenching ol the eeid. y Wilson can.“ u“
Commonwealth police m. that a heroin a rate boa. wool
”they mede no secret ol the iect Terrence John ult. had a ment
— it's as shuttle as that.“ he weld. eenlomrL noaaotlcsagﬂloer on hie 32:!
noted r Justice ll! a t lenelend
sfm“ Mr nab?“ Tm... um police In taped intervlm in at
the narcotic: bureau had reci- 3“". W79 "ill the_olllcer me our
oroceted lice mum. “Certeln- "u crammed. cyml out ex- them
I in mepottemptx to denlmte com? who We: either the heed
‘ bureau they we" at the bureau in Sydney or his map
may” he aeld. wound in cornmand. me-
Mr 'Betes. who is now en as. Mr Beta aid that if he hell i:
elstant secretary in the recently ordered an investigation oi the “MW
revamped Department of Bust- claim he would have asked for it
one and Conatuner Imam, gave to be conducted by either the a?"
widenoe to the commiealon yet. New Zeelettd police {one or the he"
terdey on his decision In October Victori- vollee. 'Ccrtelgly not {an
1978 not to inetlute in inquiry Conmmweelth police. he tlvit
into allegations by heroin oouh- “40¢ the
lore Douglas and label Wilson The ai tlona could have de~ beta
oi high-level bureau corruption. scribed on three oilicere in the tion
"tn October mitt I we: aware Sydney to at the narcotics of u
through a number oi merhaniems humu. Mr Dale: said. "i had “5“
that there were rttempts helng known those three onloera for to ‘
mode to denigrate the narcotics some is years and hot! the ut- mat
bureau. Somewhe'e there one in meet teith in their htegrity.” he neet
my mind. ln moltlng the declelon. told. .1
thet mulch. l em saying Mr Batee ueve several reason: at
that recognition perhaps was not tor hie daemon not to invent a, . I
""‘W “M °"' "93 “ ﬂ 3 out explained that a cone - "'
tater stone" to we tlon Md been the tea thet “the W
A you leter he said. a new attentions may M
releeee containing, iniormetlon yet e lurther attempt similar to the
annulled to the «Julm‘l Ro lel um um made during Royal cm
W 0" l* ' Y Commission heerhteatodenlgrate
by the Commonwealth police. was the mm, bureau and m ooe- 11%
redone." a,“
OFFICER CALLS CAIRNS DRUG TWICKIN ’STWING P051."

Bxinblnc TH: COURIER-MAIL in English 15 May 82 p 4

for a multi-
cddicn, ﬂu

THE Coins district had he

million dollar 4

(Text)

532'
I‘D.

m4. «Mn. Alum

Com: drug aqua chic

managing

$0M yo:-

9 Bot. ton

I

so"?

.mwm“ wwmwwmm

'0 luv: w W
what. It mm About
Rout

m
m
at an noun um
and In
ch. we!»
put mm:
vs mm
BM
“0M:
mm"
ld um
mm!)

3%. mu. m: «mam

Emma
wmmmmmuwmmwwmmumww»www.mummmuamm m

t awn d H o h
mmmm mmmm-mmmmmmmmwmwm mam mm mm

mum 2? w “a mm» » . .u a
mmmwmw anxmmm m ”mm W WWW mm Mm
BRIEFS

HASHISH IMPORTER IMPRISONEDuIn the South Australian capital, Adelaide, a

nan described as a principal in a conspiracy to import more than $1 million
worth of hashish was sentenced to 1’4 years jail on 9 June. (Holt: Alden Klutz),
42, a company director of north Adelaide, nust serve at least 6 years. No
other men convicted were said to have been couriers in a network organized

to bring hashish into Australia from India on couercial flights by way

of New Zealand. They were sentenced to 8 years and 6 years but will have

most of their sentences remitted provided they enter into good behaviour

bonds. [Text] [31(110235 Melbourne Overseas Service in English 0830 GMT

9 Jun 82 BK]

DIPLOMAT IN DRUG mNNECl'ION—A 1hai diplomat based in Canberra has been
recalled to Thailand to face investigations related to drug running.

A spokesman for the Department of Foreign Affairs said in Canberra on

18 Jme that the junior diplonst has no connections with drug dealings in
Australia. he has been recalled following a drug related arrest in Gticago
some weeks ago. [Text] [31(250402 Melbourne Overseas Service in English
0830 GMT 18 Jun 82]

MALAYSIA NABS srmsv TRAFFIWR~In Malaysia, an Australian man is facing

a possible death sentence on a charge of trafficking in heroin. (Paul
White), 34, of Sydney, has been charged with three Malaysians on two

counts of trafficking in nore than 360 pounds of heroin in March this

year. The trial is due to begin in the Malaysian high court on 4 July.
[Excerpt] [81(250402 Melbourne Overseas Service in English 0830 GMT 24 Jun 82]

NARmTICS AGENTS FOR OVERSEAS—Australia's federal police chief Sir Colin
Hoods has called on the federal government to station more narcotic agents
in southeast to cut down the flow of drugs to Australia. Sir Colin, who is
attending a conference of Asian police chiefs in Bangkok, said the
stationing of nore Australian narcotics agents overseas was a key factor

in apprehending the big people in the drug trade. Sir Colin, speaking
outside the conference, said he had long been pressing for more narcotics
agents to be stationed in Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and Bong Kong and it
was tine the governnent nade up its mind on the latter. [Text] [unscaoo

Melbourne Overseas Service in English 0830 M 17 Jun 82]

030: 5300/5787
olgguaagwuogo€_ﬁﬁa
gangs 333.8 36.: 5a.. at: 08.
wamaguaggoBYSBﬁgwon.
iangawoéoggr

58 8.35 .353. 3. 85,8. mayo—R—
drug oblern seriously as to wipe it out
from t e whole country. In sate of public

nouncements promising to ve the drug
mm from the country and legishtions
designedtofollowu thesepromises,the
problem of drug action, its illicit trade
and abuse persisted rigt up to early sixties.
The Revolutionary uncil realized the
seriousnessol‘the'drug roblem and ap-

‘ tedacommrttceto wu acompre-

sive report on measures it ed for com-
bating the problem of uction. traf-
ﬁc, abuse and reha ”tation of ad-
dicts. On the recommendations of the com-
mittee opium dens were closed down all over
the country and a crop substitution pro-
gramme was .

Since then the anti-drug activities have
been pursued most vigorously with deter-
mination. The :2! serious nature of the
drive characteri by careful planning
w?" ' anym‘mcm“ °°“°°'“

e rman on more
than one occasion over the dangers of dru
abuse. The campailﬁt has been reinfo
with the passgilf of Narcotic Dru Law
in I974, the .ol‘ the First Pyithu luttaw
in I975 for a national campaign against the
problem and assistance extended by the

nited Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Con-
trol. Now the Tatmadaw, the People’s
Police Force and the peo le are participating
in the campaign, which gained momen-
tum over the years. We must consolidate
this gain and lend further impetus to the
campaign until ﬁnal victory is achieved
over the problem of narcotic drugs.

12
BRI BPS

DRUG RING mum-Nev Delhi, 17 Jun (AFN-mew Delhi police today claieed
to have busted an international narcotics ring with the arreat of two
Britons, identified as John Hacﬂillan, and T. MacDonald. The Preea Trust
of India (P‘I‘I) quoting police as eaying that none 25.5 kg of Pakistani-
originated "charae" (drug) and 460.000 rupeee (over $51,000) in foreign
currency were seized with the two men. Police also recovered aophieticated

electronic equipment for vacuum packing of drugs in gas cylinders. [31080300
hong Kong APP in English 1006 GIT 17 Jun 82]

OPIUK, cams SEIZB‘D—M kg of opiua and about the lane quantity of cheraa were
eeired by the cri- hranch when Herald Singh. a had character of Shahdare wee ar-
reated near the Baharpur chowlr on Thureday. lie has been charged under the opiun
and exciee acte. In another caee over two kg of opium wee eeized by the weat
diatrict epecial etaft following the arreet of Praeod Roar. 30 a graduate of
Heerut. [Text] [ﬂew Delhi PATRIOT in Englieh 29 Hay 82 p 7)

cso: 5300/7033

13
BRIEFS

AUSTRALIAN-INWBSIAN ANTIDRUG CAMPAIGN—The Australian federal police chief
told neuanen in Jakarta on 11 June that the police in Indonesia and Australia
would step up their cawaign against drug trafficking between the tvn
comtries. particularly between Bali and Australia. The antidrug caapaign

in Bali would be solely conducted by the Indonesian police with the Amtralian
police providing the necessary intonation. me Australian police chief
arrived in Indonesia on 6 June. Earlier, he visited Bali and Semarang.
(“180300 Jakarta Domestic Service in Indonesian 12006!“ 11 Jun 82]

(30: 5300/5787

14
BRIEFS

EAST MALAYSIA DRUG SUPPRESSIw—Hiri. 15 Juan-Police believe they have cut
off the drug swply line to northern Sarawak and Brmei with the recent
arrest of key suppliers. Fourth division police chief Swt Stephen Jinggut
said constant harrassunt of known drug haunts and the rehabilitation
programs for drug addicts had reduced the demand for drugs here. “No
couriers froa peninsular Malaysia were arrested shortly after police seized
250 grams of heroin here last month.- Supt Jinggut said the drug had been
kept by "rmners‘" for 2 weeks before they were romded up. ‘lhey could not
sell the stuff became of constant raids by police. Supt Jinggut said an
elderly man, believed to be the aain supplier of opius here and in Bintutu,
was also arrested in October last year when police seized 1.7 kilos of
prepared opius from a house in Krokop here. [31(180300 Lusla Lupur NB"
STRAITS TIMES in English 16 Jm 82 p 9]

[BATH SMBNCB FOR SMUGGLINGnPenmg. Malaysia, 17 Jun (AFP)—A 22-year-old
French secretary, Beatrice Saubin, was today sentenced to death by the high
court here for possession of half a million dollars worth of heroin. Miss
Samin was caught with 534 granules of heroin at Penang International Airport
on 27 January 193). Defence damsel K. Kunareandran said he would appeal
the conviction. A former secretary to an Arab tycoon, Miss Saubin was
charged with trafficking heroin pakced into four packets in a secret compart-
nent of a bag she was carrying when she checked in for a flight to Zurich.
She said she came to Penang as a tourist in November 1979 ad during her
stay at the Swiss hotel here she net a man known as Eddie Tan Kin 800.

"As I was planning to leave for Zurich, he advised use to change the suitcase
as it was spoilt. he took as to a place in Georgetown and told use to wait
in the car while he got the bag." [3K180300 Hong Kong AF? in English 0855 GMT
17 Jun 82]

ASEAN NARmTHS OFFIGR—Singapore. l7 Jm (AFN—Thailand's police Lt Ool
Chakthip Basebut will be appointed ASBAN'a first narcotics officer. The
paper said Lt Col (hithip will be based at the ASEAN Secretariat in Jakarta
and will coordinate the ASBAN efforts in law enforcement, prevention of drug
abuse and rehabilitation. The appointnent of ASEAN's first narcotics officer
was approved by the ASEAN Standing Comittee. ‘lhe ASEAN narcotics chief
will among other things, assist ASEAN drug experts in the inplenentation,
monitoring and evaluation of projects; serve as a clearing heuse for all
relevant information; liaise with various international bodies and agencies
in the anti-drug abuse effort; and convene neetings and provide secretariat
services at such meetings. [31(180330 Bong Kong AF? in English 0738 GMT

17 Jm 82)

15
Ill-1A1“ SENTENCE FOR TRAFFICKINWThe chief justice. Raja Tan Sri Azlan Shah,
says the death sentence should be iwosed for drug trafficking except in
exceptional cases. he adds that the sentence of death should be inposed

to show the gravity of the offense. emphasize public disapproval and to
serve as a warning to others and nost iaportant of all to protect the public.
he node the consent after dismissing an appeal against conviction of
sentence of three men and a woman who were sentenced to death for drug
trafficking. They have been fomd guilty by the high court in Kuala

Lmur in April 1980 for trafficking in 974 grams of heroin at a hotel

in Petaling Jaya. [31(2501002 Kuala Lupur Domestic Service in English

11:!) GMT 21 Jul 82]

CUSTOMS OFFICIALS 0N LABORATORIES-41" Star, North Malaysia. 20 Jun (APP)—
Halaysian cmtams sources here denied today that there were drug refining
laboratories on the halaysian side of the Malaysia-Thai border. The
Malaysian News Agency quoting the sources said that security fences along
the border patrolled by anti~snuggling units and the stationing of dog
units at border checkpoints had curtailed the snuggling of drugs into the
country. "The amount of drug smuggled into this comtry or the nunber of
drug smuggling activities have also not shown any increase for quite sou
time now," the sources told the agency. They were consenting on a local
daily front page report today fron Bangkok that heroin refiners in the
golden triangle have noved south and set up new refining labs along the
Malaysia-Thai border. The report also said "with the volume of morphine
moving south, analysts tend to believe that nest of the refining is taking
place south of the border in Malaysia itsulf." It added that this could
set off an unprecedented wave of drug snuggling into Malaysia. 1he report,
quoting Thai customs officials also said acetic anhydride and acetyl cloride
used in refining morphine base into heroin was being snuggled into Thailand
from Malaysia. The cutouts sources here told the news agency that there
was no record so far of acetic anhydride and acetyl cloride being smuggled
into Thailand from Malaysia. [Text] [810501002 Hong Kong AFP in English

11.31 our 20 Jun 82]

C80: 5300/5795

16
BRIEFS

BERGEN 83123!) IN PBSHAHARwPeshwar, 19 June—A local TV artist was arrested
by Peshawar airport custom. trying to board a PIA flight with a locked
attache case which, he said, belonged to an army colonel who had gone to
Karachi carrying its key in the pocket by nistake. The trick, however, did
not cork, and when the cmtona authorities forced open the attache case it
contained 10 kilogram of refined heroin. The contraband valued in inter-
national narket at R830 lakh was going to Karachi enronte to Europe. [Text]
[CF’ZZIMS Karachi DAWN in English 20 Jun 82 p 6]

(30: 5300/5794

17
BRIEFS

ASEAN MEETING ON JOINT AC’l‘Im-Jme five meaber states of the Maocistion of
Southeast Asian Nations may soon adopt canon legislative programs to
control the traffic in narcotics and dangerous drugs in the region. The
ASBAN lumakers, meeting in Baguio City, have noted the growing unsoe and
danger of addictive drugs and rem-landed that the ASEAN countries include
in the legislative program the following measures: First, cor-Ion legisla-
tion on penalties for illicit drug operations; second, facilities for the
rehabilitation of drug addicts and the training of personnel, and the detec-
tion of drug were and traffickers; third, international aid in rehabilita-
tion and training program; and fourth, appointment of ASBAN narcotics
officers and the establishment of an ASEAN mowers' narcotics desk in each
member oomtry. me ASEAN solons are now gathered in Baguio City for the
fifth working comittee meeting of the ASEAN Interparlianentary Organiza-
tion. [Text] [81(200123 Manila Far East Broadcasting Company in English
2330 cm: 19 Jun 82]

C80: 5300/5795

18
mm

W m 320011106 mm Dab-‘11” once peaceful and quiet h-Iet of m-
kudah. now overrun by horaee of hippiee, in feet beooaing a drug den. The ore,
Velaichenai police. has launched a drive to redee- the good one thie hamlet
had. Recently. a three-can equed of policemen tro- Valaichenai Police coneiet-
inq of Sub Inspector Noel Prancie. P.Ce it. We and Sarath larunaeena took
in to wetody two Germans. a lean and a man. Sigrid name had in her poeaea-
eion 585 grains of haehiah. while Kraner Joachi- had 568 qreine of ganja.

They were charged in court here and both of th- pleaded guilty end were eon-
tenced to pay finer of Rs 1,000 each. Since they were not able to pay the
fine. they were taken to the lattioaloa Prim. but after two daye, a local
friend paid the fine and they were releaeed. In addition to the zine. they
were given a suspended sentence. [CM m 1m in English 1 Jun 82 p 2]

C50: 5300/ 5732

19
WINDSOR HEROIN SEIZURE CALLED 'LARGES’I DRUG BUST EVER'

Heroin Worth $1.4 Million
Windsor THE WINDSOR STAR in English 4 Jun 82 pp Al-AZ

[Article by Marty Beneteau and Eric Kayne]

[Text]

RCMP ofﬁcers seized what was be- Fivo moo walkingfm tho
lined to beahoul SL4 million in lmoln Mom lo the Clown. Ind
and attested ﬁve men Thursday in the fully to I
la dmgbnueverinWindaot. bind the 14:89“ no

amamnﬂetomoeninphh Wu “was"

clotheuwoopeddomnoolvoatsman willo- coming Th e:-
easl-end shopping plan puking lot. clans mumbled quick
leaving shoppers bewildeted and ham -
amazed. . . _ mmmlum
ThemeslSwere pan uneven-month Mumﬁmﬁluﬁs
investigation into an inlemlional drug poim six unnamed an 09‘
ring.$omeol‘llloseanestedwereAmen- posted {my cot 'mhere.
camoudalleosllSmmmm media nude-Ina)
ex ledtobemdelodny. "crucial-c Mull
we “PJfMWQOO gatooin. with: pothole-an _ ,
anemone a l . mounoe. boundl‘ '“'
were seized unetpoﬁoeobuivedalm kimono-d “gm

actioninthewmloloolﬁdea ’ ' Math:
3W3! Plan. al Lam and mulch 0.750% ‘
rm .

. - - . Ml“ dm their our
The lmnsaollon. invoked llle sole of (It. mulled the all out (I
”spewed narooucs to .m mam M m and or
RCMP oﬂicet. said 53:. John ma. “:4“? m I In "I
chief oi the RCMP-Window Policcdm ‘ M olfaod .0

"me open-nor: am to a cum WW-

smlyhzefote 9 pm. me: police «:1:- Jm a loos M we on:
I l «sooty-momma on I cum. W
menhoonnndvereledlolhewkiu W modiﬁed I) list

lot. annulment ”Manly
'rheaclionoenlmdaroundthempeeu' OW!!!-

cats. parted only metres apart — one a NOWWII'M- _

maroon Dodge Monaco will: vs. II- 'We just waned to do n so

ccnce plate and lheothetu green Dodge no one no but." Pun aid

('hargcr. aim met the bulb lilo

Thclwodol’lhe Monocovmsniwduif buypukiulol.
lo indicale engine trouble. The maths
alsoopcn.
Drug Trafficking Charges

Windsor THE SATURDAY WINDSOR STAR in English 5 Jun 82 9 A3

[Article by Grant Cameron]

[Text]

A seven-monthjoint investigation by the RCMPundWindsor
PoliceDepurtntenthnsresultedinthearrestotl‘lpenoussiaee
Thursday undtheueimseol‘nboutﬂ .1ntillihinhltu'n.»

The LSDuuzdgiluudid W ndsor' history. cached

host. ingest n l s a ntnjor
drug "smelting annotation. which npputuntb served as u
cooduitfordnmdestinedlorV/induorund‘l‘m

Although thebustvilldryupthentnrletul‘orsosnethe.”
JothrsttoltheRCMPdmnsq usdsuidz'l'hsquustiunishow
deepistheooean" .lhopetltisdmgbostncesudeepistothe
ocean usit possiblycnn We havetontukethistrudensunntt-
ractiveuswecsnf‘

S; l. Pratt added that although about 20 RCMPund Windsor
policeol’liccrsworkcd indoeecooperutionwiththeUHS Drug
Enforcement Administration. they don' t know when the drugs
0. ginuted.

“Au. AREAS THAT can be looked at are being incited ut.‘
said an exhausted Pratt who said he had only 40 minutes sleep

Thursday it" .g‘ht.“Alluveltnouristhstuevedisruptedtheﬂov
ol‘drugs that noootol’Windsortootherpurtsol‘thecountry"
Hcsaidthep primeohiectiveorthehustnstofocusonthe
highechelontrslfsckersofheruinsnditnustorthisrsusodthut
an RCMPundercoverol’licerinﬂltrlted the
“Thiatype otartestistodisruptthenouctwhstsveraugto
wherever I! maﬁa." Sal. Pruttunid.
Although the official :nmtigution iscompleted.einht RCMP
ofﬁcerssreiollowingup lendsundmorunnestsute
WE’VEDONEALLwecnedo'suidSntPrutt‘lutue're
stillinvestinutionnlltheumtq In"
mummanRCMPMbm ‘
dishing suns. quickly undirnstedﬁveuuasused
men outside the]. quot Contrd hoard otOntsrio outlet Ill
EsstownShoppinn stLeononundTeeutnsehroua.
Therethe‘hnd tosellsqusntityoiherointoununder-
cmerltCM oﬂicer - ,
Thereverenoinjunee
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00350R000500080008-0

Smhtwmmmfmmw
Tunudmwmcitybtmmutbpha. .

'chwmwunMM'OwW'M
Mani-mummy.“

I'll m WASTE! “at up: an m the: No-
mha. mummmvamuum
Inmmdmwmmyam
nhhumﬂudthpil '

Abohlﬂl.mmmumdh
mamuuwmmﬂw

‘ mmmdmmuum
om. autumwumuuubm

mumsmwhm

- at in
”Wuwemwmwam
I08. -

W
George/hunt. .
”%§£%«WM¢umm»

CSO: 5320/33

22

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600080008-0
CERBILS TRAINED FOR USE IN DRUG SHUGGLINC DETECTIOD

Toronto THE GLOBE AND HAIL, WEEKEND EDITION in English 15 May 82 p 5

[Text]

W

mummmmww mm.“ WWW an”

a mmum mum
m MW “mam

mum”

WWW

Em
”mm.

m mmi

5320/33

C50:

23
STRONG OBJECTIONS TO USE OF BBBBICIDBS REBORTED
Agrononists Request Ban
La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 6 May 82 p 11

[Text] Cochabamba. 5 Hay--The College of Agrononists of Bolivia has asked
the minister of agriculture and caapesino affairs to order the suspension of
the use of herbicides in Chapare and other agricultural areas of the country.

The authorities of the National Antidrug Traffic Council at the present time
are using the herbicide 2-h-D to destroy illegal coca plantations in Chapare
and Yapacani. in the northern area of Santa Cruz Departnent.

However. Chapare farners have charged that those who are handling the
herbicides are not experts and that. consequently. incorrect use of chemical
products could cause the land to become unfit for production.

The College of Agronomists of Bolivia has taken interest in the subject. It
asked that a technical commission be created to investigate these charges.

The commission. according to that organization. should be made up of experts
of the Hinistry of Agriculture and the College of Agronomists. In the

meantime. the organisation has requested the Ministry of Agriculture to
suspend the use of herbicides.

Academy of Sciences

The Academy of Sciences of Bolivia. for its part. has expressed in La Paz its
concern about the use of herbicides and their possible effects on the yield of

agricultural production.

In a letter to the minister of agriculture and campesino affairs. the academy
states: "The National Academy of Sciences of Bolivia is concerned about the

possible effects. now not well known or studied. of the cheaicalsthatare be
being applied. and especially those phenomena that could affect. at short or
long term. the ecology of the contaminated regions."

The Academy of Science of Bolivia adds: "it is our basic purpose to see to
it that organizations with expertise in the field of agriculture and
plant pathology conduct a rigorous study and have control over the use of

24
these products, making sure that their harmful effects can be quickly
dissipated without greater dangers."

The academy also asks that the composition of the herbicide used be disclosed
to help technical institutions make a statement on the subject.

Chapare Farmers Concerned

La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 13 May 82 p 9

[Text] Cochabsnba, 12 May--Chapare farmers will ask the government to ban

the use of toxic herbicides in that area. as a measure for the preservation
of species and because of the danger it represents for agriculture.

The secretary general of the Federation of Chapsre Agricultural Workers,
Manuel Sanchez. told the press that a memorandum to that effect has been sent

to the Prefecture.

Several technical entities, said Sanchez. have made statements in this
connection and "we even have the backing of the archbishop, Monsignor Prata,"

who later.was backed by a group of clerics and experts who participated in a
symposium on ecology.

According to agricultural leaders of Chapare, the use of toxic herbicides is
dangerous for agriculture and even for people. because of the obvious residual
effects of their components. This concern was expressed to the prefect so
that he in turn may make it known to the Ministry of Agriculture and Campesino

Affairs.

The Presentation

The agricultural leaders said that some time ago they presented the position
of the Chapare farmers to the u.s. Ambassador. and demanded payment of

$100,000 per hectare of land occupied by coca plantations. Only when this
payment is made will the destruction of the coca plantations be allowed.

It was pointed out that in spite of alleged clarifications by government
authorities and specialized organizations, 2-4-0 herbicide is dangerous to the
land. making it useless for other crops.

Agricultural leaders said that farmers will be harmed by the use of these
herbicides, while the United States is not giving absolutely any cooperation,

which they called "clear injustice."

In addition, a group of priests and clerics expressed their public support
to the position taken by Archbishop Monsignor Prata against the use of this

herbicide.

The statement is signed by approximately 20 clerics. It states: ”We fully
support Monsignor Prata, our archbishop. when he says, speaking of the use of
herbicides, that we are trying to defend the greatest of human rights, the

25
right to life. and that if the United States or any other country wants to
protect itself from the scourge of drugs. they can do so without attacking
the rights of another country. and that the struggle against drug traffic is
to be carried out without affecting the rights of the people."

PRODENA Calls for Stop of Herbicide Use
La Pas PRESENCIA in Spanish 6 May 82 p 10

[Text] The Bolivian Association for the Protection of Nature (PRDDENA-
Bolivia). a nonprofit public organisation. yesterday asked the government to
abandon the use of herbicides in the destruction of coca plantations. because
of ”serious repercussions that this will have on our ecology. our settlers
and the fauna and flora of the region."

The National Council of the Fight Against Drug Trafficking is in charge of

the program of reducing coca plantations in the north of Santa Cruz Department.
It has used herbicide 2-4-0 often to eliminate grass from Santa Cruz cane ’
fields. according to the council.

However. PRODENA-Bolivia has alerted the government. the communications media
and public opinion about the "serious danger embodied in the use of this
herbicide for survival of wildlife."

In a comanique the organization points out: "The harmful action of these
toxic substances inevitably has to affect the life of domestic animals and
valuable fauna and flora of the region. and even implies the possibilities
that experiments are made with new preparations with still unknown effects."

The Council of the Fight Against Drug Trafficking reported that they have

used 2-6-0 herbicide experimentally to destroy illegal cocal plantations in
Yapacani. to find out whether this is more economical than annual or chemical

destruction. but that the experiment has already been concluded.

At any rate. PRODENA-Bolivis requests the authorities mainly responsible for
the program to "abandon this untried procedure in this plan to reduce areas
of coca cultivation. because of serious effects that this may have on our
ecolosy. our settlers and the regional fauna and flora."

Herbicides Banned in Chapare

Cochabsmba LDS TIBHPOS in Spanish 16 May 82 p 8

[Text] The minister of agriculture and campesino affairs. Col Carlos
Villarreal Nevis. has officially announced that herbicides will not be used
in the eradication of coca plantations in the Chapare area. but rather manual
and mechanical means.

In the past few days variOus local officials and professional and civic
organizations made statements against the use of herbicides in the extermina-
tion of coca plantations in the Chapsre area. in view of negative effects of

26
these cheuical coapounds. which sterilize productive land and cause biological
disorders among the inhabitants.

Cochabanba Archbishop Hsgr Genaro Prata said categorically that "herbicides
should not he used in the Chapare area because they constitute an attack on
human rights and the right of man to work."

The department prefect. Col Guido Sandoval Zaabrana. also cane out against
the use of herbicides pointing out that it is necessary to study new methods
for the eradication of coca plantations in the Chapare area.

For their part, Chapare farmers and the departments federation pointed out
that they “will not permit the use of herbicides, and said that the United

States cannot conduct more experiments in the country."

Minister of Agriculture and Campeaino Affairs Col Carlos Villarroel Navia.
understanding this situation and the many statements of opposition to the

use of herbicides. cane to an acceptable conclusion.

11635
cso: 5000/2123

27
oocam-mnsroxrmc SOLDIER ARRESTED
hogota 81. T1990 in Spanish 12 May 82 p 39A
[Article by Amulfo Sanchez]

[Text] A Military Institutes Brigade Lieutenant fell into the hands of the
police when he was transporting 155 kilos of cocaine in a private dup-truck.
The cocaine was ready to be sent abroad. The drug is worth about 200 nillion
pesos.

Detectives of the P-Z, who had strong suspicions regarding this individual.
stopped the truck on the Espinal-Natagaina highway and nude the two occupants,
the officer and Pastor Silva. suhuit to e thorough inspection.

Ridden along the tools of the old vehicle appeared a pouch containing alkaloid.
The soldier and his conpanion did not divluge its source. 0n the centrary, they at
first gave ev’asive answers, which increased the suspicions of the detectives.

It was ascertained that the dun-truck belongs to Cecilia Quiroga de Cortes. It
had been hired by the lieutenant to transport the drug to Medellin. From there
it was to be taken abroad, possibly to the United States.

Silva. who was driving the vehicle, is presumed to be an accomlice of the sol-
dier, whose name is being withheld by the authorities.

A spokesIIan of the antinarcotics squad of the Public Ministry said: "He saw
when the drug was dropped fro. a light aircraft and was picked up seconds later
by the occupants of the amp-truck." The saall aircraft then left quickly.
The civil aeronautics depart-est is trying to ascertain its place of departure.
The alkaloid that was seised 'is valued at note than 200 nillion pesos in
Colonbia.

8255
680: 5300/2307

28
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA, OOCAINB mNFISCATED—Santa Harts—Today, the police confiscated
15 tons of Iarihuana worth 25 nillion pesos in the municipality of Cienega.
Four men were arrested during this operation. Reports from Villavicencio
state that during mother police operation, 11 hectares of cocaine leaves
and equipment fron two laboratories used for the processing of the product
were also confiscated. [PA042331 Bogota Radio Cadena National in Spanish
1730 CHI 6 Jun 82]

(”GAINS SEIZURE. ARRES’I'S--Bogota, 12 J!!! (BPB)--Approxinate1y 100 kg of
cocaine destined for the United States and Europe have been seized in Bogota
by the secret police (P—Z). Ihe police said that the cocaine was 98 percent
pure, and that Carlos Alberto Harulanda and Jose Joaquin Rodriguez, who

were transporting the drug had been arrested. Another 120 kg of the drug
were seized in Bogota 6 days ago. According to the police, this shipmnt of
cocaine was bound for the same destinations. [PAlloOOll Madrid BFB in Spanish

0053 GMT 13 Jun 82]

C30: 5300/2319

29
BRIEFS

LIAISON um: CAYMAN-411a Ca-ander of the Jamaica coastguard, Peter Brady,

has said that the Grand Caylan provided the Janaica Defence Pores with an
"ideal base for ease of its operationa.‘ Referring in particular to anti-drug
smuggling activities and search and rescue operations, Col-lander Brady said
that such fmctions ften called for close liaison with the Canaan authorities
and involved access to Caymanian waters. There are only about 2.000 acres of
marijuana being cultivated in Janaica and marijuana farming is not as extensive
as the foreign news media describe it, Janaica's Prime Minister Bdware Seaga
has said. [Iondon CARIBBEAR t. ”351' 1110138 CWICLB in English No 1567,
Apr/Nay 82 p 25)

CSO : 5 300/7560
BRIEFS

HEROIN DRUG LABORAmRY--Durango. 16 Jun (NOTIHBDnA nakeahift clandestine
laboratory for the manufacture of heroin-based drugs has been discovered

at "La Villita" in the municipality of Santiago Papasquiaro. Federal
agents arrested Roberto Coronel Pereda, Beladio Poreda Torres, Maria do La

Luz Siqueiroa and Rita Honarez Felix, and confiscated a lag) of opiul
weighing 1 kg and 1 kg of poppy seed. [FL171026 Mexico City NOTIHEX

in Spanish 0350 GMT 17 Jun 82]

(:80: 5300/2318

31
SHUCOLING Am TRHARTBD BY BORDER GUARD
Cairo AL-ARRAH in Arabic 26 May 82 p 10

article by ﬂusayn Fathullah: "64 Tons of Drugs and 17 Kilns of Gold Seized:
56 Cars and 300 Persons Prevented fro. Slipping Across the Borderﬂ

0'er Sixty-four tons of narcotiCs, estimated to be worth 190 million
Egyptian pounds have been seized, including 60 tons seized in the northern
coastal area extending fron Danyetta to Ras Barani. The renaining anount was
seized fron would-be snugglers in northern Sinai.

Major General Faruz al-Sahn, director of‘the Border Corps, announced that in a
press conference held yesterday, on the occasion of celebrating Border Corps
day, 26 May, the day the Egyptian flag was raised over al-‘Arish in 1979, when
forward elenenta of the border forces entered the area, stretching from al-
'Arish to Ra's Mhsnad.

He said that narcotic snugglers have tried, ﬁring the last few days, to
exploit the Israeli withdrawal fro. Sinai to smggle large anounts of drugs.
However, precise infer-ation received by the. enabled then to foil all
attenpts and forced the snugglers to dump their drug cargoes into the sea. The
water washed 6 tons of drugs up onto the northern coast. An atteqt was also
foiled in the "Buhayj" area, east of Hatruh, when some smugglers succeeded in
bringing a quantity of drugs into the area, preparatory to snuggling then into
the country. The total aaount was seized the following night. Moreover, 4
tons of narcotics were seized at the coast at Shahr al-‘Asal, and 3.5 tons at
al-llaniunil.

Major Gen Paruq al-Sahn enphasised that seizures of such anounts of drugs had
never been announced before in just one year, since during the 70's, anounts
did not exceed 20 tons. he nade it clear that the absence of drugs from the
uarket was due to the volune of confiscation, intensified surveillance along
the coasts of Egypt, and the choice of quality personnel who have crowned
the border guards' mission in this area with success.

He added that 17 kilos of gold and an amount of snuggled currency was seized
in the liberated areas.
The director of the Border Corps said that as regards preventing smuggling
across our western border, 56 cars were seized attempting to penetrate the
border, as well as 300 infiltrators, and a large group of electrical
appliances, including 200 video sets, 35‘ color televisions and 609 recorders.
Large quantities of furniture were also seized, some in attempts to snuggle
these itens through Port Sa'id.

He referred to the Border Corps' activities in the fisheries area, preventing
violations of fishing laws along Egyptian coasts, patroling fishing areas of the
the Red Sea to prevent the use of explosives, carrying out rescue operations

for nissing persons, and-helping oil companies with the necessary security
measures for their personnel.

Maj Gen Faruq al-Sahn stressed that the Border Corps has developed under the
guidance of Lt Gen Muhammad 'Abd al-Halin Abu Ghaaullah, the minister of
defense and war production, and with the provision of six new coastal launches
last year, along with six other launches this year. They were built by one of
the national firms, whose technical capabilities are no less than launches
produced abroad. Moreover, the ports were supplied with coastal launches,

in order to patrol the waters and straits. The Border Corps was also

supplied with a number of helicopters to combat smuggling over land and water,
In addition to a large number of light pursuit vehicles.

7005
CSO: 5300/5017

33
BRIEFS

NORTH SINAI ATTEMPT--Border guard forces have seized 2 tons of narcotics on
the northern Sinai coast in the a1-‘Arish area. There was an attempt last
week, during which 2.5 tons of drugs were seized. The commander of the
border guard forces received information about a new smuggling attempt. At
dawn on 1 May, a ship loaded with narcotics approached close to the city of
Shaykh Zuwayd in an attempt to land the drugs on the coast. It was suprised
by fire from one of coastal intelligence's ambushes. The launch dumped its
cargo, estimated at 2 tons of narcotics, and fled out of territorial waters.
[Iexd7 [pairo AL-AKHBAR in Arabic 6 May 82 p I] 7005

080: 5300/5017

34
NEH BEASURBS BEING PIANNED T0 coma. ADDICTION
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 29 by 82 p 13

[Interview with Hojjat ol-Eslam Seyyed Ahmad Zargar, chief of the Islamic
Revolution Antinarcotics Court)

[Text] In an exclusive interview in Shemiran with a
KBYHAH correspondent, Hojjat ol-Eslam Seyyed Ahmad Zargsr,
chief of the Islamic Revolution Antinarcotics Court, said
a camp will be established soon in the southern Iranian
island of Khazku to accommodate addicts from Tehran and
the provinces. At the same time an antinarcotics bill
has been prepared and sent to the National Security Coun-
cil. He also said that in the past 16 months 20,000 per-
sons were arrested because of involvement in narcotics.

In answer to a question concerning the Antinarcotics Connittee which recently
began work under the supervision of the court, Hojjat ol-leam Zargar said:
In the name of God, the merciful and compassionate. He had a meeting with
the proper national authorities as we ll as the secretariat members of the
National Security Council regarding the fight against narcotics. The au-
thorities asked us to provide explanations on narcotics and addiction so
that they could bring the matter to the attention of the prim minister.
Also on 19 April a meeting took place with the participation of responsible
officials from the Police Department, Cendarmerie, Revolution Guards Corps,
the Central Connittee as well as the Ministries of Interior and Health and
Rehabilitation at which decisions were made concerning matters such as

border control, strengthening institutions involved in the antinarcotics
fight especially in cases involving budgetary support as well as possibil-
ities and construction of a suitable camp for addicts. He added: No propa-
ganda work has been undertaken against narcotics. We believe 90 percent of
our work depends on propaganda to show results. Those who are snugglers have
their ears to the ground to see what the court does but the radio does not
broadcast information about our work. Therefore, we are very displeased with
radio broadcasting authorities for not carrying news about us. We contacted
them several times and discussed the seriousness of the matter and decided on
expanding the propaganda. After that we met with proper authorities of the
National Security Council. After detailed discussions of various issues, it
was decided that a co-nittee composed of the Ministry of Interior, Health and

35
Rehabilitation, Guards Corps, the Central Committee, Police and Gendarmerie
should be formed to function under the supervision of the Antinarcotics Court
which wOuld be responsible for organizing it. It was also decided to prepare
and submit a bill concerning punishment of drug smgglers to the National
Security Council so that it could estimate the necessary budget and send

the document to the government for approval, thus making it possible for
Kharku Island to be used for treating addicts. It was said that if any
obstacles should arise during the course of the work, the office of the

prime minister would be ready to extend support and cooperation. He were
asked to provide then with regular progress reports. The instructions were
addressed to the prosecutor-general of the revolution who in turn ordered me
to act quickly on the matter and stressed that the prime minister's office
would give us support and cooperation. Following these developments, we

had a 2-hour meeting with the proper authorities on 10 ﬂy. The basic is-
sues discussed concerned the difficulties of brothers and the budget.

Another problem was that we might have the budget but because of difficulties
we might not be able to get the facilities. Gendarmerie officials also showed
a document concerning their request last year for facilities, with the Com-
merce Department noting that “Because of certain issues existing between

Iran and Japan, from the ecmomic standpoint we cannot supply facilities. We
hope to be able to find a solution.‘ After due consideration we provided for
the budget at this meeting and according to the minutes sent it to the proper
authorities and the National Security Council so that we may be able to start
the work once the budget is approved. The antinarcotics bill was also dis-
cussed and we asked brothers who previously had had responsibility in the
Antinarcotics Court, were closely familiar with the issues and had seen

smugglers from close what decrees were suitable. After several meetings a
bill was drawn up and sent to Mr lixsavi, prosecutor-general of the resolution

who also expressed his views on the docmnent. We sent the bill to the lla-
tional Security Council and on a preliminary basis carried out the work the
council had wanted us to do. We are awaiting a reply.

The KEYMN reporter asked: By propaganda through the public media do you mean
the press or radio-television?

llojjat ol-Eslam Zargar replied: I wish to thank those newspapers who are
closely cooperating with us. But the matter concerns the effect on smugglers
who do not get newspapers or even have access to television. They are oper-
ating in the countryside and listen to the radio. We would like to see some
propaganda carried at least by the Voice of the Islamic Republic. Of course
the television authorities have been less than gracious toward us but we hope
from now on we will be beneficiaries of their kindness. In this connection,

we have had long talks with responsible radio officials and a member of the
Supervisory Council.

Referring to other matters discussed in the Antinarcotics Committee, Hojjat
ol-Eslam Zsrgar said: Kharku Island was discussed in light of the fact I
myself had visited the place and the brothers too considered it suitable
since it is not a residential area but a once-inhabited island where the air
force had planned to set up facilities and had actually put up some facilities
which are now vacant. Unlike other inhabited islands it will not create
difficulties. It is a place where work must be done. We will utilize ad-
dicts in the develop-ant and improvement of the place. He will also send
there those who have records of having fallen to addiction several times.

Hojjat ol-Eslam Zargar said: God willing, when possible, we will coordin-
ate with all provinces so that addicts from throughout the country can be
sent there. Discussions have been held with all proper authorities, the
Higher Legislative Council and the prosecutor-general of the revolution.
They have agreed and promised their cooperation. Referring to the col-nit-
tee's programs for the new year, Hojjat ol-Eslsm Zargar said: Kharku Island
is one of our basic projects, one we strongly support. Another thing to
remember about drugs is that if there is no demand there is no supply. Un-
fortunately those wanting drugs turn into pushers because an addict will
look for the stuff as long as his living condition is good. When the money
runs out the addict becomes a pusher in order to be able to get his own
needs. If we can effectively put a stop to such demand, many problems
would be solved. To achieve this end a better control of borders by various
organs must be made possible. Of course a number of possibilities have been

created with satisfactory results. For example, 700 motor vehicles which
were given to the Gendarmerie have shown good result.

He was asked what are the addict care units operating under the direct super-

vision of the court insofar as links between users and smugglers is con-
cerned?

He replied: Addicts who intend to end the habit are sent to the Bahar Re-
habilitation Camp where they stay until they are totally cured. At present
there are 560 persons there. In the case of the Shurabad Camp we have prob-
lems concerning facilities but as a result of the 24-hour efforts of brothers
all needed facilities and a water well have been redied. Addicts are doing

agricultural work and 70 of them have been cured and have been released after
making a pledge.

He added: Shurabad can accounodate 2,000 persons and the plan is to set up
a detention center alongside the Qezelhesar Prison which will be under the
direct supervision of the court and will be built by the addicts. It is
merely gossip when they say addicts will die if they attempt to give up the
habit. Up to now we have cured 4,350 persons of the habit at the Bahar Re-
habilitation Camp and released them. Not one person has died and all of them

have returned to society as health citizens after leaving the camp.

Hojjat ol-leam Zargar said: As a result of concerted efforts Tehran area
addicts have been collected and we told brothers that for the time being the
addicts whose condition is not good should be taken in and sent to Shurabad
while those whose outward appearance does not show their addiction should
come to the court, discuss their problem and give a courageous pledge to kick
the habit so that they can be allowed to go free. The bringing in of addicts
in Tehran will continue on a regular basis. In recent days people have
continuously contacted us to say that the city has really been cleared of ad-
dicts and does not have the previous repulsive appearance. Referring to the
needs of dependents of imprisoned and executed smgglers, he said:

37
Investigative groups from the court are looking into this matter. They will
receive monthly payments from the prosecutor-genersl's office if they are
feund to be deserving of such help.

The supervisor of the Antinarcotics Court issued a serious warning to owners
of public places and houses where addicts congregate by saying: If addicts
are found in public gathering places and teahouses, because of written
pledges given by owners, such places will be shut down by recourse to legal
procedure and houses involved will be confiscated and licenses revoked.
Referring to coffeehouses he said that the record of these places are avail-
able in the coffeeshop control bureau if they are licensed. Written pledges
have been taken from them. Such places will be shut down for 15 days in case
of a first-time offense and 30 days in case of a second-time violation. In
case of a third-time offense the place will be shut down permanently. Insofar
as unlicensed coffeehouses are concerned, we have asked Tehran Municipality
to close them down, but we have not yet heard from them. He asked Tehran

Municipality to follow up this matter as quickly as possible so that our
problems in this particular case can be resolved.

Mo;jat ol-Eslam Zsrgar issued a warning to addicted employees of institutions
and ministries by saying: From the day of the announcement that addiction is
a crime they themselves should have given up the habit. Until now they have
benefited from Islamic forgiveness but from this date on they are being told

to give up the habit and responsible authorities must not allow them into
offices.

Referring to ending addiction in the provinces he said: The prosecutor of
the revolution is now paying the expenses of anti-addiction teams which are
operating in several provinces until such time as a budget can be set for them.

The supervisor of the court said: From late December 1980 when this court was
established 20,000 persons have been arrested for involvement in the buying
and selling of narcotics. Of these 7,563 have been released after the imple-

mentation of religious laws, imposition of fines and making pledges, 11,563
were convicted and 185 executed.

In conclusion Hojjat ol~Eslam larger, supervisor of the Islamic Revolution
Antinarcotics Court in the capital said: Smugglers are hereby warned to

abandon their dirty and devilish activities, not to create wretchedness for
themselves and to bear in mind that the curse of the families of these young
people will be on their head and that the strong hand of Islamic revolution-
ary courts will punish them and put an end to their disgraceful activities.

5856
CSO: 5300/5414
BRIEFS

use: DRUG ram-mar (ltin)--A force of 120 policemen, reinforced by bor-
der policeuen and Civil Guards, yesterday swept through 40 homes in the south-
ern region in a pre-dawn raid on suspected drug pedlars. Il'hirtyr-rive suspects
were arrested on the basis of intonation provided by a police plant, who
worked undercover anong drug sellers and users for eight months, police said.
One of those detained was a Ranle doctor, who allegedly sold prescriptions for
narcotics to all who were willing to pay, police said. A similar large-scale
roundup of drug sellers in the area six months ago left a vacuu in the ranks
of pushers. and yesterday's raid was designed to capture ‘the second genera-
tion" of drug pedlars who appeared to fill the gap, police said. rive of those
arrested were on the police “host-wanted“ list, and searches of their homes
turned up 100 grunts o! hashish. Adolan pills (methadone), traces of heroin and
quantities of other narcotics, police said. All of the suspects have already
been before a Rattle Magistrates Court for extension of their renands. after
police lack a special arrangement with the court to hear the cases early yes-
terday morning. [Jerusalem THE JERUSALEM POST in English 31 May 82 p 3]

C50: 5300/4718
REINFORCEMENT 0P DRUG 3m POWERS 8000!?
Victoria RATIO" in English 9 Jun 82 p 2

[Text] Ihe search power of la: enforce-ant officers looking for illegal drugs
could be extensively reinforced by the proposed Dangerous Drugs (Amendment)
Bill published recently.

This. if passed by the People's Asseﬁly. will allow any police, customs or
i-igration officer to stop, board and search any vehicle, ship or aircraft
in Seychelles, search anyone arriving in or leaving the country and anything
ilported or being exported, if the officer reuonably believes they contain
or are carrying illegal drugs or evidence, pertaining to drug offences.

Search Any Place; Anyone

Any of the 1s: enforcenent officers mentioned will also be able to enter and
search any place if he reasonably suspects it contains illegal drugs or evi-
dence.

He will also have the power to stop and search anyone, and that person's
property. if he reasonably suspects that person has in his custody illegal
drugs or evidence or if that person is in a ship. aircraft, vehicle or place
where such drugs or evidence have been fomd.

To enable a ship or aircraft to be searched, the Omissioner of Police will be
able to detain the ship for 12 hours or the aircraft for 6 hours.

However the responsible nihister, now the Minister for Youth and Defence, will
be able to detain the ship or aircraft for further periods of 12 or 6 hours
respectively.

Destroy

The Conicaioner will be able to authorise in writing any police-an to uproot.
seize, remve and destroy any plnt whose cultivation is illegal under the
Dangerous Drugs Act. These plants are opiu, cannabis and cocaine.

So as to search extensively and effectivley, a police, custom or i-Iigration

officer will be able to break open doors and use force to board ships, aircraft
or vehicles being searched according to the powers of the Act.

60
Similarly. the officer will be able to remove by force any person or thing who
or which obstructs any entry, search, inspection seizure, removal or detention
he has been alpowered to take.

Any fenale will have to be searched by another female.

No one will be searched in a public place if he objects to being searched
there.

To help police investigation further, any police, custom or immigration officer
will be able to arrest, without a warrant. anyone when he reasonably suspect:
of having cal-titted an offence under the Dangerous Drugs Act.—SAP

cs0: 5300/5792

101
BRIEFS

BORDER POLICE CONFISCATB MGGA—Port Elizabeth—About a aillion rands' worth

of dagga has been confiscated by the border police already this year. Ac—
cording to border police spokesman Major Warren Brown, the najority of the
dagga was grown in the Transkei and was distined for the black narket in Port
Elizabeth and Best London. Haj Brown said that aei>ers of the narcotics bureau
in East London and Queenstown had had outstanding success this year in street-
ing dagga smugglers at the border and since January 1 have confiscated 8,019 kg
of dagga with a total value of at least £801,900. Wars of narcotic bureau
at Queenstown have confiscated 3,065 kg of dagga while the narcotics bureau in
East London already have confiscated 10,551. kg in raids and roadblocks. Haj
Brown said that scores of dagga snugglers had been caudlt and charged. Most of
the dagga was confiscated in roadblocks on the roads leading to the honelands,
Transkei. and Cisltei. [Text] [Johannesburg 1'!!! CITIZEN in uglish 19 Jun 82

96]

SACKS OP DAGGA--Port Blizabeth--Police seized dagga valued at about 855,000
in two separate incidents in the tastern Cape. They found 37 bags of dagga
in a panel van searched at a road block near Port Elizabeth on Hednesday
night. The two occupants of the van escaped into the veld before the police
began their search. Dogs were later used in a futile hunt for the men.
Early yesterday two men were arrested in Queenstown after their car was
searched and 16 bags of dagga found. [Text] [Johannesburg Th8 CITIZEN in
English 18 Jun 82 p 3]

DAGGA man's mm-umra-a Johannesburg nan accused in the Oatata nur-
der trial involving the shooting of a Transkei nursing sister and a nan, told
the Suprene Court today he had travelled to 'rranakei to fetch dagga and de-
nied knowledge of any shooting incident. Hr Hdeliseni Bekuyise Ciya (30),
who has pleaded not guilty before Mr Justice J J Refer and an assessor to
murdering Mrs Florida 3 'retyana, (35) and Mr Htohobi Hsebe near Idutywa on
March 9, admitted he was an experienced dagga-dsaler. Be told the court that
he had been told by a conpanion that Transkei-gnown dagga was "genuine“ and
cheaper than that grown in Natal. Transkei dagga cost 3180 per bag while in
Natal it cost 8250. The trial continues today. [Text] [Johannesburg m cru-
zm in English 16 Jun 82 p 3]

42
COCAINS sum-Cocaine worth at least R69 000 was confiscated two weeks ago
in Cape Town. Police disclosed at the. weekend that it we the largest ship-
ment of cocaine ever to have been snuggled into South Africa. A White Durban
man, aged 28, and a White Fish Hoe): woman. (23) had already appeared in court.
They would appear again on June 18. A police team led by Captain Barry Uyten-
bogaardt, the chief of the local branch of the Narcotics Bureau led the night
swoop on a city hotel on June 2. Captain Jan Calitz, a police liason officer
for the western Cape, said that 424g of cocaine worth R69 000 had been seized,
but the street value would be considerably higher. This amount cocaine con-
fiscated was nearly three times as big as the total alount confiscated in 1981.
Police had confiscated 1569 of cocaine, valued at 831 000 early last year. Its
street value at the mment could be nearly 385 000, although in the United
States it could fetch R262 880. Capt Calitz told the Citizen yesterday that
the news of the arrests was withheld from the Press because of countrywide
investigations. He said cocaine was a matter of concern for the police and

he appealed to the public for assistance in fighting its illegal iuportation.
He also said that information given to the police would be treated confiden-
tially. [Text] [Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in English 14 Jun 28 p 3)

C50 : 5300/5786

43
own 0? MW?!" SHOP ARRESTED IN LARGB 13068 casr
Copenhagen BELINGSKR TIDBNDB in Danish 6 Jun 82 p 3

[Text] Merchant Svend Thevis, whose name has been lidted on a ntnber of
occasions with the seamier side of life in the Vesterbro section of Copen-
hagen, was imprisoned for lo weeks yesterday and placed in solitary confine-
ment. He appealed the verdict to the superior court.

Svend Thevis was brought to court on charges of three violations of the nar-
cotics laws concerning heroin and one charge of complicity in death threats.

The prosecutor, criminal comissioner Per Larsen, pointed out to Judge
Niels Viltoft that this was only a preliminary charge and that more arrests

could be expected in the case.

Svend Thevis called the police accusations "persecution and slander."
"I flatly deny all the accusations," he said.

Offshoot of Gang Case

Before the interrogation of Thevis began, Judge Viltoft closed the doors, at
the request of the police.

Thevis' lawyer, Jan Erik Kornerup Jensen, protested strongly: ”The public
has a right to know about matters that are totally unfounded.”

Merchant Svend Thevis was arrested in his apartment on Vester Sogade at
10:20 by a special group from the robbery division at police headquarters.

Thevis was having a meeting with a business contact when the police came.

In 1977 Svend Thevis was imprisoned for 2 months on charges of complicity
in the sale of 650 grams of heroin. The police had to drop the charge.

Thevis sued for 700,000 kroner in compensation, but the court awarded him
only 20,000. The new case against ‘l'hevis has nothing to do with the old

one.

66
The imprisonment of Thevis yesterday was an offshoot of a very extensive
case the police have been working on for more than a year. The major
figure here is Vesterbro gang leader Stig Innerich Poulsen, known to his
friends as ”Snot." He has been in jail since a July 1981 after the police
unraveled his entire narcotics and stolen property organization in a huge

raid.
Police Charges

Since that time, a special group from the robbery and stolen property
division has been digging into the affairs of "Snot" and his next in com-
mand, car painter Preben Brink. in this context, the police found an alleged
connection with Thevis and it is due to this that the charges were brought

against the merchant.
These are the police charges against Thevis:

l. Violation of paragraph 191 of the penal code (the "tough" narcotics
paragraph that can give up to 6 years in jail) by having been in possession
of 2 kg of heroin in April 1980 and of selling 1 kg. ("Snof' has a tape of
a telephone conversation between himself and Thevis in which this is dis-
cussed.

2. Under the same paragraph, he is charged with having sold 8h grams of
heroin in July 1981 to a woman whose name is known to the police.

3. Under paragraph 191 again he is charged with having sold 10 grams of
heroin in September 1981 to another named woman.

There is also a charge under paragraph 266 of the penal code for complicity
in making death threats. According to the charge, in September 1981,

Thevis sent one of his employees to see a named woman. The employee threat-
ened her with a knife to prevent her from “singing" when she had to give
evidence as a witness in a narcotics case.

6578
CSO: 5300/2311

45
COURT REVEALS MPICKR HELD IN U.S. HAD PACT WITH Damn
Copenhagen DNINGSKB TIDBNDE in Danish 11 Jun 82 p 6

[Text] The Danish goverment's widely-discussed agreement with the Sic-year-
old Swedish narcotics dealer Gosta Lennart Perneborg, who is in prison in
the United States, was approved by Copenhagen City Court on Thursday.

This means that the Swede, who has confessed to bringing 26 tons of mari-
juana into the United States, will be used as a witness in two Danish trials
involving a total of 2.5 tons of hashish and marijuana.

After a so-called procedural meeting on Thursday, the court said that the
Swede's statement would have decisive importance in the Danish cases which
are expected to come up in September.

The written agreement--a so-called plea agreement--was reached between
Ferneborg and the American Justice Department, the prosecuting authorities
in the state of New Jersey and the Danish goverment.

On behalf of the goverment, police judge Hichael Lyngbo of the narcotics
police-who had been given authorisation-osigned the agreement when he
interrogated the Swede in the United States on 20 Hay 1981. At the same
time, Perneborg's explanations of Danish and Swedish hashish cases were
recorded on video tape.

Ferneborg has promised to "give truthful testimony about his own and other
people's crininal narcotics activities.” If he meets these conditions, he
will be except from further legal proceedings in New Jersey, Demark and
"elsewhere."

If he does not live up to the agreement, he can be prosecuted.
During the court meeting Thursday, it was determined that when he is heard
he will be accorded the rights of an accused criminal in Denmark.

6578
080: 5300/ 2311.
BRIEFS

LSD AGAIN IN DEW-4.50 is once again on the illegal Danish market for
euphoric drugs. A 25-year-old Englishman was detained Monday by personnel
from the Copenhagen riot patrol and the police found nine LSD trips on him.
He explained that he had bought the drug in Christiania and after receiving
a warning, he was turned over to the Alien Supervisory Agency since he had
no permanent residence in Denmark. The LSD trips are on small sheets of
paper that resemble stamps and each trip can be torn off and eaten. After
consumption, the abuser can have unpleasant hallucinations, depending on his
mood when he started. LSD is prepared from an extract from the ergot fungus
to which is added a synthetic substance discovered by a Swiss professor
named Hoffmann. The hunediate effects of the drug last for 6 or 7 hours,
but the experiences--hallucinations--one has had during the "trip" can re-
turn with the same intensity--many years later. in the United States, sev-
eral patients who were used as guinea pigs or were treated with the drug
have sued public authorities because of the deep mental suffering caused by
the tests. One of the most well-knewn cases in Denmark occurred 12 years ago
when a man under the influence of LSD struck a nurse down right on the
street in Nykobing Sjaelland. [Text] [Copenhagen BERLINGSKB rxoznns in
Danish 9 Jun 82 p 3] 6578

CHRISTIANIA DRUG FIGURE ARRESTED-~Narcotics policemen believe they have got
one of the biggest men behind the hashish scene in Christiania, if not the
biggest one with the detention of a 28-year-old man. He is said to have
brought in hashish worth 10-12 million kroner. The police have had their
eye on the man for a long time, but he stayed "underground" for a year and
a half. The final charges against him have not yet been determined. The
man himself confessed yesterday in Copenhagen's magistrates' court that he
had smuggled in hashish worth around 1 million kroner. about 25 kg in 1978;
he pleaded innocent to the rest of the charges. The reason why the police
have been so interested in the man is that his name has been mentioned by
many people arrested in Christiania over a long period of time as a supplier
of hashish. The 28-year-old was jailed in solitary confinement for A weeks
as a preliminary measure. [Text] [Copenhagen BERLINGSKB TIDENDB in Danish

9 Jun 82 p 12] 6578

67
SMUGGL- HASHISH non NEPAL, PAKISTAN--‘l'he case of the yellow van that was
being sought by Interpol throughout northern Europe in January which was
being driven around with 380 kg of hashish concealed in a secret compart-
ment ended yesterday for two of those involved in court in Naestved. Here
31-year-old Ralph Alexander Sorensen and 35-year-old Niels Pelle Hansen
were sentenced to to years in jail each for trying to smuggle in the hashish.
It was noteworthy that the case against the two men referred to could be
judged on the basis of a clear confession. That happens very seldom in
narcotics cases. There were five people, two of the- women, in on the plot
which they estimated would give a profit of around 1 million kroner.
Sorensen and Hansen said during the trial that it was 66-year-old.Ole
Scheelstoft, whose case will come up before a nagistrate's court later, who
stood behind the whole project. He had planned, organized and financed the
whole thing. He got the idea when he saw the car at an exhibit and bought
it for money he had earned from smug ling in 2b kg of hashish from Nepal
and Pakistan. [By 1b Bichner-Larsen [Text] [Copenhagen smmcsxz
TIDENDB in Danish 10 Jun 82 p 12] 6578

Ht'l‘HADON PROGRAM BFPBCI'IVENBSS CHALLENGW-Over 80 million kroner a year is
spent on narcotics treatment in Demark and even so around 200 young people
die from drug abuse each year. A delegation from the Narconon organization,
headed by the leader of the Danish drug treatment program, Dennis Payall,
presented these figures to the Polketing Justice Connittee yesterday along
with a query as to why there was not a more reasonable correlation between
the large appropriations and the nunber of drug-related deaths. According
to the Narconon group, the artificial withdrawal substance, methadon, is
ineffective in treating drug addicts. But in spite of that, 16 tons of
methadon are used annually in Demark to treat Danish drug addicts. The
delegation also wanted a study made into who is responsible for the inade-
quate security measures in the prisons and referred to a statistic from the
Criminal Custody Division showing that every fifth innate in the Danish
prison system is a drug abuser. Some 70 percent of then return to jail as

dru addicts. [Text] [Copenhagen smmcsxs norm): in Danish 4 Jun 82
p i 6578

C80: 5300/2311

48
nnmamammmmmmm
Amumnmmmazps

ﬁat m«,18ﬂq,nuoumpondnt. 'Gonu-n, coup-mum. I
mmmI-mun,'bm...n5mmm.mn
mmunmm. 1-.rm,§,mumouccm1uu
'Kourkoo' and "bat-1" m in m mum hm»- or human, 2 I110. of mm,
nuan- narcotic 311111.2nn1vm, bun.“ ad-v («01951113. I’m-5y.”
hamlhdﬂnﬂnokndhnmmuthumuundtbpnammnm
emimmuomottbfmumt tb fir" moon“ nrchnt arm.

InnutiutdcahnMWtMMdWWhmo‘bnnMan-d
I

mmhmammmmm, “Marmara-amp“
Iuihi about 20 main-- tn- ﬁb amok-mush Dom.
at

urn-“d.
Tuto- on: ho unmade “or“ 1: Salad.

on
arm-Medication). bumuuuumnmnantmm
narcotic mm in “bu and Won.

49
ummeumrmmmthomnw-tbirm
mumnhuothpu,m,lqmmrmmm. Mute
mm uonrou, madmdurootie W, lap munc-
otrnre, MmeWemowmumdmuMi-hu.
mcnmm,mmmmao~ummmmm

inleofhoriovbahohduchnuodvithnhonhrhequutityotmntor
malnothuhioh.

marootinoonmlofnltha run-w, m,uiqouim. Tho
cutahomurvioodounothntbpommlitm,lldhtbnwottb

 

Lambms Taurus. According to the police, he is anon; me top, if not the number

one, narcotics dealers in the country. Pictured on the tid’lt are heroin, mney
and pistols.

 

Lambroo Team. arrested yesterday in Salonice

7520
(30: 5 300/5411

50
BRIEFS

PM 3mm SEIZW-Alenndroupolie. b Jun-«An Italian couple attelpted to
pace a total of 1,200 gram of heroin through the Kipoi cuetone office. The
heroin wan hidden ineide an inner tube that had been nounted on a car's front
left fender. The Italians are Arnando neto, 32 and hie 27-year old girlfriend
Cloredana Baroti, both leather clothing nerchanta who had entered the country
fron Trukey on 21 Hay and were returning last night. They had added perfune
to the heroin. worth 12 nillion dracluae, no that the trained doge ueed in
Italy would be unable to detect it. The couple m taken to the Evroe attorney
generel'e office. [Text] [Athena TA m in Greek 6 Jun 82 p 12]

080: 5300/ 51019

51
mum muss “06 US! STATISTICS, mun PAT!“

Oslo mama in Norwegian 29 Iley 82 p 7

[Text] Over 10,000 kilograns of cannabis. Over
200 kilograne of e-phetanines. Over 300 kilogrens
of heroin. These dis-a1 figures are the an- of the
drug consulption in horny since 1976. In all. nar-
cotics worth several billion kroner are involved.
An enount that increases daily. Norway has the
highest prices in the vorld for drugs. hen so, an
estineted 100.000 Norwegians are nixed up with ner-
cotics.

Norwegian custons agents and narcotics policenen are fighting drug snuggling
with their backs to the wall. Only 3-5 percent of the drugs snuggled into
the country are seised. The figure is about the sane for nost western

countries.

Horth Billions

In the period 1976-81, 536 kilograns of cannabis were confiscated. 0n the
basis of the confiscation percentage referred to above, the actual quantity

would be over 10 tons. Host of the cannabis, around 90 percent, is hashish,
the rest is nerijuana. Based on street prices, billions of kroner are in-

volved.

Cannabis is still the nost popular drug, but enphetanines, a hard drug, are
on the rise. Custons agents and police seised only 17 kilograms in the
last 6 years. The real figure is around 200 kilograms of the central ner-

vous syste- stimulant.

Insatiable Market in honey

Heroin consumption in this country seen to have been around 300 kilograms
in all since 1976. Other hard drugs such as norphine and cocaine are esti-
mated at double-digit levels in kilograms.

Even though the figures are large, the nerket in Norway is far fro- being
saturated. Denend for cannabis is great, greater than the supply. The

52
same is true of amphetamines which are now available in places where only
cannabis used to be sold. The drug is on the way to becoming as widely used
ss cannabis. In other words, we are talking of a definite hardening of the
scene.

Drug exports to Norway have risen substantially in recent years. A major
reason is this. The strongest buying public in the world can be found
here. Nowhere else are drug prices as high as they are here.

Fantastic Prices

A buyer on the street must now pay at least loo kroner for l gran of
hashish. 1n Dem-ark, the price for the suns amount is 25-35 kroner.

A gram of heroin now costs from 3500 to 6000 kroner in.Norway and the price
used to be all the way up to 10,900 kroner. In cowarison, a gran bought
in Amsterdam costs 800-900 kroner.

But the prices do not seem to be curbing abuse in this country. Narcotics
police feel they have a basis for estimating that at least 100,000 Norwe-
gians have had experience with narcotics. An estimated 2000 people go on
hard drugs, for era-ple heroin or amphetamines. A good many of these people
must have drugs worth between 2000 and £000 kroner a day. -

Nuitiply by Ten

The importation of drugs is giving police and custons agents lore problems
than they can deal with. That is something they have in col-on with all
the countries of .western Europe. Last year seizures were made in these
countries of Bl tons of cannabis, 866 kilograns of heroin, 261 kilograms of
cocaine and 35.5 kilograms of amphetamines. The real amounts can be more
than lo times that. The figures nay sen dry. But behind that lie incon-
ceivable hunan tragedies, suffering and degradation. Therefore the figures

are important.
Sources of Drugs Smuggled to Norway

The drugs used in Norway are purchased in Demark and the Netherlsnds and
to some extent in Sweden and England. They are produced in Lebanon, Turkey,
Pakistan, Morocco.

These are the main features on the supply line to our domestic narcotics
market.

The hashish smoked in this country is mainly bought in three sales loca-
tions in Europe. host of what; is brought in by so-called "anateurs," who
either use everything they buy or resell a small amount at a profit, is
purchased in Copenhagen. -

$3
Sharp increase

The so-called professionals, who are often not users themselves but who
sell drugs for profit, get their products in Amsterdam Users in Vestlandet
get hashish from England.

Hashish cones nostly from Lebanon and liorocco. Great emphasis is now being
placed on the production of this cannabis product. particularly in Lebanon.

There is relatively little marijuana in this country. 0f confiscated
cannabis products, only around 10 percent is marijuana. the rest is hashish.
The drug comes here most often from Nigeria and Gambia.

The "hot" new drug, snphetanines, usually get here from Ansterdan, Goteborg
and Stockholm. There are a nusber of amphetamine-producing laboratories in
the Netherlands. Nov Sweden and Belgium are following suit.

From Copenhagen

Almost all the heroin sold in Noruay comes from Pakistan and Turkey. The
drug comes either directly from those countries or via Amsterdam.

Host of the cocaine now sold in this country cones from Copenhagen. The
consumption of this so-called ”jet-set" drug is expected to increase dras-
tically in the years ahead. Cocaine costs a little less than heroin and
comes from Bolivia, Peru and Colombia.

6578
080: 5300/ 2310

54
GANG SUPPLIED NICE 01' mm SOLD m "381' SUD!!!
Stockholm SMSKA DAGBLADI'I' in Wish 30 Apr 82 p 6

[Text] Alphetsnines vortb about 10 nillion kronor on the
street have been confiscated in connection with a large
crine investigation in Goteborg.

Grand larceny and fraud are also included in the cries ring. which has branches
reaching into the greater part of western Sweden. ‘1"! reports.

At present 11 people have been arrested. At the lost. 23 have been captured
and 15 arrested. In addition to that several have been questioned. Several
of those under arrest are foreign citizens who have been living in Sweden under
false identities. Along those arrested are also persons from Delsland.

The confiscated narcotics. about 8 kilos. are very strong aromd 80-90 percent
pure.

Conpared to the state in which it is fond on the street. this represents
approximately 20 kilos or 80,000 doses, says district attorney Ann-Hsri Ros
in Goteborg, who heads the investigation.

where the anphetanines. vhich are of very high quality. cone fron, the in-
vestigators do not yet know. Neither is it clear how nuah has been nsde in
Goteborg and its surroundings. [Authorities] are. however. convinced that
the enterprise has been in effect for a long tins.

“There has been so Inch of the stuff in Goteborg that the prices have gone
down," says one of the investigators.

The captured persons were watched for about a year. During long periods of
tine the police narcotics spies followed then closely, shodoved cars, sat in
the sane bars. and so on.

Thefts for Millions

The first strike took place last January. Around 5 kilos of narcotics were
later found buried in the garden outside a hoes. Inside one of the nan was
asleep. a loaded revolver next to hin.

Larger amounts of cash. weapons. and a-unition were confiscated during the
investigation. as vell as stolen goods for a couple of hundred thousand kronor.
Altogether the police- believe that what is involved is thefts in the value of

at least 1 aillion kronor.

9843 55
CSO: 5300/2296
LARGE-SCALE OPERATIONS AGAINST DRUG SIUGGLIRS RIPOITID
Revelations Pronised
Istanbul HILLIYET in Turkish 5 May 82 p 12

[Text] Selcuk Ural, one of the seven defendants charged with possessing and
snuggling narcotic substances iron llasig to Istanbul, has written to the
Istanbul Martial Law Col-and stating that he "will nuke inportant revelations
concerning the issue of heroin and hashish [snuggling]." Selcuk Ural, Bitini
Veriopolos and Taylan Kasgan are the arrested defendants of the trial.

Selcuk Ural, 29, said in his letter that "the government earned 2.5 billion
Turkish liras when he captured some narcotics anugglers while serving in the
southern and southeastern provinces of Anatolia” and that “as he was about to
uncover a snuggling case involving 130 kilograns of hashish and 10 kilograns of
heroin, he was tricked by the heroin nerchant and his nen and was subsequently
arrested on charges of selling heroin." Ural added in his letter that he will
make inportant revelations to any official group that can be sent to him.

Ural, who sent the letter that while he was being held at the Kabakos Prison, is
currently under arrest in Istanbul. The letter has been placed in the trial file
at the 1st Criminal Court and appropriate action has been requested.

hashish Snugglers Uncovered

Istanbul RURRIYET in Turkish 7 May 82 pp 1,13

[Text] bodrun, Hugla-The Turkish police has struck a big blow against the
"Narcotics Mafia“ following large-scale countrywide operations launched on the
basis of the testimony of frognan Nah-at Ali Fills, a Greek citisen who was
captured snuggling hashish by swilling fron Bodrun to the Greek island of Kos.

Swift operations in various cities around the country have resulted in the capture
of 131 kilogra-s of hashish and 13 key nan working for the "Narcotics Mafia."

The leader of this organisation, Talip Kilic, is known to have escaped to Beirut
while two of his closest aides, Sani Eyupoglu and Hustafa Unsal. are among those

captured.

Meanwhile, finding inconsistencies in the testinony of the captured frognan,
political police have begun investigating the activities of ﬁshnet Ali rilis in
Turkey. Filir. who was caught with forged papers Identifying him as "Hahmet Hete,“

said in his testimony: "Hy purpose was to return to Greece and ask for asylum.
i agreed to get involved in the drug trade to solve my financial problems."

Acting on various tips, the Turgut leis Gendarme Command organised an extensive
operation along the coastal strip last April. At the end of the operation.
Nehmet Ali Filiz was caught swimming toward Kos in a frogman's suit. The
suspicious young man was later found to be carrying 10 kilograms of hashish.
After examining the hashish, which was placed in special bags, the narcotic
agents concluded that it originated from Lebanon and decided to go to the root of
the problem.

A special team of agents put together by the Hugla Security Directorate questioned
the mysterious frogman for 10 days. Filis initially made contradictory
statements, but he eventually confessed that he obtained the narcotic substances
he was carrying from istanbul. Acting on this statement, the special narcotics
team took the frogman with them to Istanbul and, with the help of the Istanbul
police, carried out an extensive operation.

In the first part of the operation, Hustafa Kaboglu of Kalkan Street in Uskudar
was taken under custody. During his questioning, hashish smuggler Kaboglu told
the police that the smuggled goods were hidden in buildings in Sakarya and
Silivri used as "pickup" points. The special team then moved on to Sakarya and
Silivri. After 2 days of work in these cities, the police captured 121 kilograms
of hashish.

'Codfsther' Escapes to Beirut, l3 Captured

working from two directions, the police used the testimony of Hustsfa Kaboglu
--known as the "second man"—-to trail "Godfather" Talip Kilic. After raids on
four separate locations, the "Godfather," known to have links with international
narcotics smuggling rings, was found to have escaped to Beirut.

Although Talip Kilic, known as "Godfather," escaped, his closes aides, Sami

Eyupogiu and Hustafa Unsal were captured. Ten other persons known to have direct

links with these two smugglers were also captured.

Meanwhile, Mehmet Ali Filiz said about his forged identity papers: "1 obtained

those papers from someone I do not know for 50,000 Turkish liras. I wanted to

remain anonymous." The mysterious frogman did not say anything else on this issue.
Further Report

Istanbul RURRIYET in Turkish 12 May 82 p 19

[Report by Ugur Cebeci]

[Text] Istanbul Narcotic Bureau agents, who have been striking blow after blow

against the "godfathers" of the narcotics world, have captured 5.5 kilograms of
heroin--worth 825 million Turkish liras on the foreign market-following a series

S7
ol operations that lasted 2% months. The operations also resulted in the arrest
of 16 persons.

The agents uncovered a large smuggling operation after watching a Mercedes car
with German number plates for 25 months in a narrow street in Gedikpasa. It
was learned that the smugglers wanted to buy 5.5 kilograms of heroin-worth

165 million Turkish liras on the European market and 825 million Turkish liras
on the American market-—for ll million Turkish liras in Istanbul. It was also
learned that a former official who occupied an important position in one of the
Southeastern provinces is among the smugglers who have been cooperating with
international narcotics networks and whose identities are kept secret by the
police.

ﬂow the Operation Began

While the operation in Cedikpasa-covered by a MURRIYBT correspondent-—was
under way, another operation in the same area was completing its 63d day. The
agents learned that a special pickup point was set up for a Mercedes car and
that a shipment of heroin sent from a Southeastern province would be bought by
a smuggler in Istanbul and loaded onto the Mercedes. After a long period of
waiting and trailing it was learned that the transfer of the heroin would take
place in front of a restaurant in lncirli. Having successfully completed the
operations in Cedikpasa and Akssray. the agents set up an ambush in Incirli.
The operation in Aksaray took place in one of the rooms of a luxury hotel on
Vatan Boulevard. The fatigue and the long waiting periods of the second
operation which began in Cedikpasa and came to a head in Merter did not wear
the police down.

Heroin In A Murat

The agents waiting in ambush in Incirli continued their vigil after the car
bringing the heroin approached the Mercedes. Hhile 5.5 kilograms of herein

was being unloaded from the Murat 131 and carried toward the Mercedes. the
smuggler in the Mercedes was preparing to pay the money. However, right at this
time the front yard of the restaurant was filled with Narcotic Bureau agents.
within moments, there was a large crowd of passers by and diners at the ambush
area.

It was learned that the police is continuing its investigation in connection with
the smuggling of the 5.5-kilogram shipment of heroin. It is reported that the
case has been reported to foreign countries concerned through the Interpol. It
has been determined that the heroin would first be taken to west Germany and that
part of it would later be sent to Holland and Belgium.

All Tips Evaluated

As a result of the careful evaluation by the Narcotic Bureau of all tips that
are received. last year large batches of heroin were captured in Istanbul which
has become a crossroads for narcotics smugglers. Thanks to swift work by the
Narcotic Bureau. which has launched a new operation almost every week since the
beginning of this year, only "aspirin powder" can now be sold in Sultanahmet
instead of heroin.

58
:nrcotic Bureau officials are keeping the identities of those captured secret.
Noting that the investigation of the case is still continuing, the officials
said that the smugglers are being followed at every step they take.

Heroin Ring Broken Up
Istanbul HURRIYET in Turkish 17 May 82 p 19

[Text] Following the capture of Hehmet Ali Filiz who was caught smuggling hashish
by swimming in a frogman's suit from Bodrum to the Greek island of Kos, the
lstanbul and Sakarya networks of the heroin mafia were broken up by an operation
called "Yellow Star."

Swift operations undertaken by the Narcotic Bureau agents of Istanbul and Mugla
re5ulted in the capture of 125 kilograms of hashish over 5 days. The "Godfather"
of the heroin mafia, Hehmet Isal, was also captured and the identity of another
"godfather" was determined. It was learned that seven persons were arrested
during the operation and that seven more are still being sought.

According to a statement by the Istanbul Narcotic Bureau, the operations took
place as follows:

Frogman Nehmet Ali Filiz confessed that he bought the hashish he was carrying
from Hustafa Kaboglu, an Uskudar lumber dealer. After being arrested by narcotic
agents from lstanbul and Mugia, Kaboglu said that he bought the hashish from
Hehmet Isal of Kilis. Known as one of the "godfathers" of the heroin mafia,
Hehmet lsal was captured following a number of swift operations. Under
questioning, Isal told the police that the hashish was bought from Talip Kilic
oi lskenderun and that it was later carried by truck to Istanbul. However, the
upvrntions in Iskenderun and Adana could not succeed in capturing Talip Kilic,
one of the leading "godfathers" of the heroin mafia. Kilic, for whom warrants
have been sent to all border exit points, is believed to have escaped to
Lebanon.

Heanwhile, a series of operations undertaken by narcotic agents succeeded in
breaking up the Sakarya and lstanbul networks of the heroin mafia. The
identities of three regional network leaders, who bought hashish from Hustafa
Kahonlu, were determined. Meanwhile, 119 kilograms and 888 grams of high-grade
hashlsh was discovered at the residence of Mustafa Kaboglu's sister in the
Cuvhasi village of Sakarya. Hustafa Kaboglu is currently under arrest. Sami
Kyupoglu. Serafettin Uc and Osman Soysal together with Hehmet Isal have also
been arrested on charges of smuggling heroin. It was determined that Recai
ﬂuneoren is the distribution manager of the network in Istanbul. Captured

in the aftermath of two separate operations, Recai Cungoren was found to have
5.6 kilograms of hashish in his residence. A distributor named Hasim Ozsenler
was also arrested during this operation.

Those Still At Large

Narcotic Bureau agents stated that in addition to Talip Kilic, "useyin Cecen,
nli-s known as Arap Husso, Hehmet Yagmur, Kernekli Hehmet, Faruk Kaymaz, Ali

59
Faymnz and Museyin Knymnz are being sought all over Turkey. The agents said
lhnt 125 kilograms and 294 grams of high-grade hashish that was captured is
worth around 200 million Turkish liras on the Turkish market, that it is worth
5 times as much on foreign markets and that members of the snuggling network
still at large are believed to have large amounts of heroin with them. Hehmet
1531 and the other defendants are expected to be turned over to courts today.
Meanwhile, batches of hashish and defendants captured in operations in Adapazari

were brought to Istanbul.

 

Uperntions in connection with the smuggling of narcotic substances by a fragman
Irum Hodrum to Greece have been completed. The Istanbul Narcotic Bureau has
captured 7 members of the lé-man smuggling network. The "Godfather" of the
network, Nehmet lsal (far right), together with Hustafa Kaboglu. Semi Eyupoglu,
Scrnfettin Uc, Osman Soysal, Recai Cungoren and Hasin Ozsenler have been
arrested. The operations resulted in the capture of 125 kilograms of hashish.
Thv invvstiuatlon of Nehmct All Filiz, who was caught smuggling hashlsh by
swimming underwater from Bodrum to Kos, is continuing. F111: was found to have

defected from Greece to Turkey.
BRIEFS

CPIUM DESTROYED IN KONYA--Ankara, 17 June (AA)--A Turkish narcotics task
force destroyed a large field of secretly grown opium poppies in central

Anatolia. A pars-military task force received a tip that some farmers had
c- .ivated opium fields in the village of Atakent, near Konya. Five farmers

are arrested on charges of violating a ban on growing illegal opium seeds
and destroyed 12,000 square meters (16,600 square yards) of opium flowers.
[Text] [TA17163S Ankara ANA'mLIA in English 1565 GMT 17 Jun 82]

C50: 5300/ 51018

62
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080008-0

PROSECUTION SAYS POLICEHAN LINK MAN IN COCAINE RING
London TBB DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 10 Jun 82 p 8

[Article by Ian Henry]

[Text]
LONDON-BASED police sergeant was .110 to m
the link man in a multi-million pound a a «mm by
- drugs smuggling operation at Heathruw, W"m”n
an Old Bailey jury was told yesterday. '3?“ “1, m
An ingenious system was used to mama large :0“: m g
quantiﬁes or. Scum American amine W as am an Med:
. canon no In:
“"’°"‘ 'u an, “mm m;
Coma l handles a n;
I took June. from the ro- wﬁm
min: b “110 °" '1” m it an n
pretext t at they and been 13 about I
miolnidé 34 u '8. ~ «8::
\V 0.8. . W .
as?» .15.? m ”3 £15.00: ELM." a
352% Wed ‘0 mmum
C M’- (
ﬂat I! too {If “E? km-
”33.3% ?mm:%lg LOIS ﬁat. Dun “An
Wing; name and agave». Oman mm:
' arousing suspicions. 80‘ “V l Joln’l
.Iom Bwnu. QC. MGM/u a, u.
Seven men went on trial Nathan. emu.
)cslcrday mum! of conspirltv 11.. trial um u)
no smuule an!!! and dull lolly. 1

)mngulinp
Some 0! the (an: have

nlrcad planed guilty. and
when, are avail! that A
number hm undo urea.
Mr Bio/old to” the in um
(15.000 was a "and! pr to
"’ " “we: “"3? :33
contain an
"inn Iii-5 pinion on the
street.

END
C80: 5320/30

63

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA~RDP82-00850R000500080008-0
rJyMJl and Husoyln Kaymaz are being sought all over Turkey. The agents said
that 125 kilograms and 29h grams of high-grade hashish that was captured is
uurth around 200 million Turkish liras on the Turkish market, that it is worth
5 times as much on foreign markets and that neubers of the snuggling network
still at large are believed to have large amounts of heroin with then. Mehmet
lsal and the other defendants are expected to he turned over to courts today.

Meanwhile, batches of hashish and defendants captured in operations in Adapazari
were brought to Istanbul.

 

Upcrntions in connection with the smuggling of narcotic substances by a frogman
irum Hodrum to Greece have been completed. The Istanbul Narcotic Bureau has
captured 7 members of the lb—man smuggling network. The "Godfather" oi the
network, Mchmet lsal (far right). together with Hustafa Kaboglu, Semi hyupoglu,
Serniottin Uc. Osman Soysnl. Recai Cungoren and Hasin Ozsenler have been
arrested. The operations resulted in the capture of 125 kilograms of hashish.