FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS. L/10563

3 June 1982

Worldwide Report

I NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 25/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

ﬂeadlines, editorial report", and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses ware not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(P000 25/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA
MLAYS IA

Germn Group Would Set Up Rehabilitation Center .
(m STRAITS TIES, 9”: 82)....000000000’COOOOOIOOIIO

Shortage of Morphine Processing Agent
(m sst TIES, 12M: &)OOODCOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOIIII

Selnngor Police Seine 5 Pounds of Heroin
(m STRAITS TIES, 1 my 82)....000000ooceoooooeoooooo

Frenchvonen Held on Trafficking (barge
(m STRAITS T1133. 7 m 82)...oooeiooeoeecoooooouoooo

PAKISTAN
Briefs
Hashish Smuggling Bid Foiled
(hares Seized
auras Seized Near Multan
SINGAPORE

Pact With Malaysia on Crossborder Pursuit
(NEH STRAITS TIES. 8Apr 82):........... ...... .......

NAILAND

mputy Prime Minister Mecueeee Antidrug Drive
(Prachunp Smtharangkm Interview; NA'nw KEVIN,

17 my ”)0000300coco-oaooaoceeooo-ooeoooooetlooooeooeoo

-n- [III-WW-138P

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\- IATIN mum

BOLIVIA

Coca Parners Claim (internment Authorised Planting:
(Pmma‘. a my &)oeuooocoooooeoooeoeooeooooseeoooooh

Research Entity Studies Legal Industralizadon of Coca
(PusmCIA' 1 my &)OOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOI.0..

Concern Over Use of Toadc Herbicides Noted
(PRESENCIA, 28 Apr 82, BL MARIO, ‘30 Apr 82)...........

INC Institute's Warning
Political leader Issues Protest
Narcotics Cmmcil Inform Public

Retired Army Officer Arrested Transporting Coca (hrgo
(BL mm, 18 “at 82)..oncoooooeootoeoooooeeoseoosooooo

merges of Armed Raids Against Coca Farmers Denied
(PRESENCIA, 29 Apr 82).................................

Briefs
'lbrrelio lauds Campaign
Large-Scale Crackdown

(”LOWIA

Life in Coca-Ibninated Puerto Ieguizsno Boonouy
(mrbel Sandovaloi El. 11.350, 12 Apr 82)..............

mam

Peaeral Official Claim 90 Percent Out in Drug Production.

Smuggling
(m. INPARCIAL. 1. May 82)

Harihuma Shipment Seized, Traffickers Arrested
(EL DIARIO ns PIEDMS NEGRAS, 13 Apr 82)..............

Briefs
Marihuana Supply Pound
'Evaluation Plan' lbsults

Arrest for Heroin Possession
Sonora Antidrug Campus:

MWLIBEONLY
NEAR EAST AND “om AFRICA

EGYPT
Security Pbrces Foil Several Drug-Snuggling (boredom
(Milli! al’m‘yn: MIR SA'AH, 31 “It 82)................ 31
mature Article on Opiu- Cultivation in Egypt
(.AB‘.‘ “hum; AL-‘HISMAR, 5 hr n)eeeoeoeoeeeeeeeooooo 371
SUB-SAHARA“ mum
msomo
Move '1!) Legalise D3333 Pails
(Hike Haddacor; SUNDAY MS. Zmy82)................. 105
SENEGAL
Briefs
Arres r. of Four Truffickers 46
$001)! AFRICA
Briefs
Opium Haul 1.7
Drugs Seized in 1981 47
Opium healer Gets Bail [.7
WEST 31mm“
GREECE
Briefs
Hui tinational Drug Traffickers Arrested 108
large Heroin Seizure 48
TURKEY

Overview of Sarcotics Direceorate Operations Provided
(MILLIYET. 28 Mar 82).................................... 69

mommomx
GEM GROUP WOULD SET UP REHABILITATION CENTER

Kuala Lunpur NEW STRAITS TIMES in English 9 Apr 82 p 19

[Text] ‘. .
mos. mm. - D ‘- W 9""
a... -. mo‘é- guru -
nun In tutlon for ' '0‘ "' '°°“ ""
.-‘ -". mum a (can; m

i
that;
hohllira’uon at all- W. W
mam—b

mm m “m'.
mwllmm'” H Madam-o
:- n M can- umgqu-aﬂm
whOanuydnaI-g m “I m
”Mum" and.-
mu'" alt glob Abdui
“Wh'm m..- w m u.
m onuluuon-u ‘ 0‘ pg.“
M mu, “.0 W
J m u 0. W) tn- Du-
mama» top a tenant and
PM“ ”I“... m M b-
d Muam- "It“! II .'I “I. a“
"ummnﬂ D. to had picked
Wallis

5
§
3

WW“.
opou-nlndodnou
won't-(mm
mur‘ “a. .‘la Imma- -
with m cm" I1.- ad

:93
ii
5
g
51

5
5
i
a
i
national

all
hcv‘ llalﬂﬂ-d

no.8um -

IItOI’

jinn

kn
our

4“!

FINA

lﬂﬂa

5300/8325

CSO:
mm

m

E

a

E...
:w

“ram“

h[I‘ve-tutu.”

mm. ..:

”mm__.m £»1 ﬁmm

:Wu

wﬂ
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070009-0

FRENCHHOHAN HELD ON TRAFFICKING CHARGE

[Text]

MmmﬂwMMMMMMMzagnngw
WMWMMWMMMWM MMWMMMMMM .MMMMM ME MMMWMMMM MWMMMMM M MMMMWMWMM
MMMMMMMMWMMM. MMMM .MMMMMM MMMMMMMMMMM MMMMMMMM MM MMMMMM

MMMM MMMMMMMMM mm Er MMMMMM MMMMMMMMM MMMMMM
MMMMM .MM. MMMMM . MMWMWMMMM MMMM MMMMMM MMM MMM
MMMMMM MM MMMMMM. MMMMMMMM. M. MMMMMMMMMMMM. MMMMMMMM M

5300/8325

CSO:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00050R000500070009-0
BRIEFS

HASllISII SHUGGLING BID POILED—Nev Delhi, April 16--A “est German and a Swiss
national has been arrested here for attempting to mggle 20 kilograms of
hashish worth eight million rupees (two nillion marks) to Europe earlier

this week, authorities disclosed Thursday. The two were detained at Delhi
Airport following a tip-off after Customs authorities intercepted their bag-
gage as it was being loaded into the plane. [Text] [Karachi DAWN in English
17 Apr 82 p 3]

CHARAS SEIZED--The Excise Police seized a car and recovered 107 kilogram of
charas valued at Rs #8 lakhs in Karachi on Monday. On a tip that one Tahir
Ali was selling charas to narcotic peddlars in city, the Excise police organ-
ised a raid when the accused was going to sell narcotic on Tariq Road and
recovered charas fron various hidden cavities of the car. The nan escaped,
but the car was seized.--PPI_ [Text] [Karachi DAHN in English 21 Apr 82 p 8]

cums SBIZED NEAR HDLTAN--The Custom: Intelligence has srrester-L here two
aenbers of an alleged international smugglers gang and seized fron than
charas worth about Rs. ten lakh. Truck driver Jan Hobs-ad and cleaner
Hidayatali Shah were taking the contraband from Bare (Tribal Area) to
Karachi (50) and were trapped on the way near mltan. Local lawyer and
social worker has been arrested here under Martial Law Regulations for
allegedly spreading hartedo against the Governnent. Four persona. identi-
fied as Narir, Khaleel. Hurtaza and Sharif. have been arrested here for
allegedly preparing packets of adulterated red chillies and dhania in the
factory. They allegedly used to nix a red coloured powder and Burada in
there couodities. [as published] Bight lakh tons of wheat will be pro-
cured at all one hundred and sixty procurenent centres in .all five dis-
tricts of Multan Division. Various comittees have been set up by the
Food Department to check the working at these centres. [Text] [Karachi
DAWN in English 16 May 82 p 11]

680: 5300/5749
Ignore
And
um
Johan
dated
0mm
mm:
on
happment

“meme mm
WW3 WWW

mmmdmm
Isl- IIIII and“?!
Iona-W"
M II:
III.
mun.
bl
Mind
“All
“mm
«Gall
8000‘
MO.“
MCI
mm
600m
h‘ﬂllh
Tea
WW
I m...“

mmummmmﬁ u

memuuwm » » ammm.
y.mmmmm “WWW WWW PM W W.
wwwmm mmmmm mum“ WW WWW

mum ”mam Wm ”mmwwm

.WWMMMMammW Mu mm? wmmmmm

mu “WWW; ”WWW mmmwmmm mmm

8326
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER DISCUSSES ANTIDIIIJG DRIVE

81(170258 Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English 17 May 82 p 5

|"F.xcerpts" from interview with Deputy Prime Hinister Prachu-sp Suntharsngkunl
Ilixccrpt] Question: How did the second offensive against the Shah rebels start?

Answer: Khun Se was still trying to make Thai territory his base for his logistical reason.
We found out that military-like barracks had been erected and decided to work out a plan

in the form of our own exercise to counter the move. In the future we will apply similar
pressure on all foreign arned elements on the border to prevent then from crossing the
border. After our last offensive in January. the rebels came back to build their strong-
holds nnd we had to novein todestroy them. when our aircraft flew over Bean Lao Lue
(eight kms northwest of Sen “in Tack). we were fired on. He detected about 60 Khun Sa

men and began repelling thu. He still did not find their presence in other parts of the
border. The rebels had no definite locations.

We took aerial pictures of the border areas every month. That was why we inediately
"potted the 100 houses erected. He will send in ground forces to confirm the type of
the houses which had the military appearance. Re have to find out first whether they

are just houses or whether they are other structures. We will certainly stage air attacks
as soon as we find out what they are.

Question: Is the offensive part of the Thai-Burmese cooperation plan?

Answer: He have made four points of principle of cooperation (with Bum). One is that
we will consistently suppress the drug traffickin movements. Secondly, we will exchange
intelligence reports. Thirdly. we will have discussions over important setters and
lastly. we will implement crop substitution programs.

Our war with Khun Se has not finished and we will continue our suppression until we could
drive them out of Thai territory. He regularly inform the Burmese Goveruent on what we
do and this is not a kind of request from Rangoon. But joint Operations with the Burmese
(internment have not been planned. It depends on where the Khun Sa's army happens to be.
If It is found on the Thai side, we would take action and if it is on the Burmese side
the Burmese would do it.
But if the rebels happen to be j-ust on the border. -a joint operation is then necessary.
hut we will have to wait until that tile cases. However, we will try to avoid it (joint
operations) because it has to be a large-scale operation.

Question: was the question of joint operation discussed during your last visit to Rangoon?

Answer: There is no problem even if it was not discussed. but the size of the Khun Sa's
Army does not sake it necessary for each joint operation. The rebels now nudaer no more
than 2,000. He captured sane very youm soldiers during our last operation.

Question: There has been concern that Khun Sa might have Joined hands with the Communist
Party of Burns (CPD).

Answer: we are not yet certain about such possibility. Contacts between than eight have
been established in the past. CPB night have sold opium to Khu- Sa or Khan 8a hisself
might have approached it for opium. But we can rule out the chance that they will unite
in a bid to liberate the country (Burns). I just amply can't imagine any activities of
Khun So that night resemble a war of liberation.

Question: Khun Se was said to have Iorcopiun-growing areas inside Bursa than inside Thailand.

Answer: Khun 5a and his see are not opiu- growers. He goes after others for opiue. He
maintains agents inside villager where opiu is grown to purchase it. He night even dia-
tributc opium seedlings too. Around 700 tons of opiuil is being grown in the Golden Triangle
this year. Fifty tons of than are grown in Thailand and Laos. Our country offers a such
hctter can-unication systems and that is why the drug traffic has been hectic.

Question: Is it true that CPD has begun refining heroin?

Answer: It is not only the Bur-see Co-uniots. Anyone can do it anywhere. There are
chemists who can produce heroin without having to use such knots-how. But the report that
CPI! has turned to opiu trading is so distant and we are not in a position to count on
that. But we have heard news that (23 has resorted to opiul tradim because of reduction
in aid (tree China). The ease thing (cut in aid) is also happening to the Co-nunist
Party of Thailand (CPT). They (Chinese) now consider gOVerunent-to-govertnent relations
note iaportant (than the party-tn-party relations).

Question: what kind of developsent play (as published] is going on at Bean Bin Tack?

Answer: The Interior Ministry and the Supreee Conand are doing the Job. He are trying to
urge foreign countries to take part in the development projects there.

Question: how valid is the report that Khun Sa tried to negotiate with Thai authorities
to return the body of Thaveep Kaentaptin. the news editor of HATIPEIH daily?

Answer: No..l01un Se wrote as a letter several loathe ago but there was nothing new in its
contents. Khun Se is in no position to sake any negotiations. He would be lead if we-
negotiated with him. He claimed in the latter that he had done nothing wrong and was

ui liing to cooperate with us to crack down on opiu trade.

Ile also asked for the captured area of the rebels to be returned saying he wanted it to
liberate the country. I don't want to get involved in bur-see politics.

The nursese Govern-ant appears appreciative of the present Thai policy because we keep
our words. The premier (PreIn) said we would supreae Khun Sa and we did it.

Question: Hurt- tlw ui‘fcnsin-n against Xhun Sn linked to visits to bum by Thai senior
authorities?

Answer: No they had nothing to do with the visits at all. We have to keep on suppressing
the rebels before they can recruit new nesbers. we will have constant surveillance and
eztroy all heroin ref lncriea we come across. There are now no aore heroin refineries
side Thai territory. But there are still soae inside Burma.

cation: Has Burma ever told us it is facing problala. for example the problem with the
uority groups?

swer: The luraese Governaent has never asked for cooperation (to fight the minority
oups) f roe us. He only discussed narcotics and that could be the first step of our

turn talks .

cation: "hat has beco-e of Lao Su. the her°1n kingpin who escaped during detention?

aver: Lao Su is just .. minor figure compared to Khun 5a. lie is only a henchlan for
.u Sn. The two may have had contacts.

nation: What kind of cooperation in anti-narcotics work was discussed during your
.s.t to Singapore?

newer: He talked about the so—called "preventive detention law" which enable authorities
n detain drug suspects without trial. There are about 3,500 people under detention

here and 650 of than are drug traffickers. But we still cannot have this kind of law
-re. The law imposes a aaxiaua prison tern of 10 years and n two years of detention.

Iothcr topic of discussion was on cheaicals used in refining heroin. He told Singapore
ithoritica we wan'. to have information on the aovement of these chemicals from Singapore

nd Malaysia into Thailand.

Jestion: Hill the preventive detention law be adopted in Thailand?

nswer: Re are studying the matter. But we don't think parliament will accept it.

aux tion: How good is our cooperation (in drug suppression) with Singapore and Malaysia?
nswer: Very good. But we have to go to halays'ia after the elections. I
ucstion: How would you describe the government's perforuance in fighting against narcotics?

nswer: Speaking on behalf of the govern-eat. I would say that we have aade treasndous
thichlaents. During the Sonya government we caught Lo using-hen. the heroin over-lord.
ut the present government is taking action against Khun Se and it is a very big task.

I: lost 17 lives in the fighting against Khun Sa in the first big offensive in February,
nd it simply showed how such sacrifice we are making to fight against drugs.

e have no policy of asking a false show out of the affair. He still don't understand
he motive of the people who lied to [thee Sa and urged him to return to the border.

e are considering improving the con-unicationa in the areas to pave the way for
eveiopaent. If we devalop the northern areas we will have the country's best tourist

pot there.

uvstion: how long did we know about the activities of Sihadet Chindewong (Thai vice
nnsul in Chicago) before he was arrested?

nswer: He had followed his for quite sone tiae. In fact. we wanted a bigger fish but
he news began to leak. so we decided to move and arrested hits.

:0: 5 300/2295
com Pmns cum covnmr mum) mums
La Paz masmcn 'in Spanish I. May 82 p a

[Text] Santa Cruz—3 Hay—The department of registry and control of coca
production and marketing. subordinate to the narcotics bureau, has authorized
coca planting in the northern part of Santa Cruz, and the governor's office
of Yapacani has levied a tax per arroba produced, according to docunents
given to this correspondent's office by the farners.

when the latest raids were made by nilitary troops in Ichilo Province as part
of a vast drug operation, assisted by the 0.3. Narcotics Bureau, the rural
producers who were seriously affected in their econay say that they do not
understand the severity with which the nilitary is acting inasnuch as the
Hinistry of Interior was aware of the plantings.

The farners showed authorizations of the second census of coca producers in
which parcel numbers and coca plot locations are consigned. This census was
taken at the beginning of the year.

The National Directorate for the Control of Dangerous Substances was the
organization which authorized the plantings, requiring, according to the
farners, an annual sun of 2,000 pesos for a parcel of 20 by 100 neters (two
lots).

The farmers say they are "disoriented and terribly affected inasnuch as coca
was their principal source of incone." They say that they-would have reduced
the plantings substantially if they had known they were illegal; the fact
that they had official authorization, they say, gives than the right to ask
the govern-ant and Narcotics Bureau, which directed the coca destruction
operations, for cowensstion for their losses and for an effective progran

to enable then to continue to live fro. agriculture.

Units of the seventh and eightharny divisions. with bases in Cochabad’a and
this district, mobilized approxilstely 1,000 troops to cover an area of 700
square kilometers between Puerto Grether and Puerto Rance in 31 ampere up
to Villa Busch in Yapacani. According to the official report, just during
the first week 160 factories of cocaine-base sulfate were destroyed, foreign
and doeestic money was confiscated and dozens of persons connected with coca
traffic and drug preparation were arrested.
Helicopters and navy launches were used for this operation. Although it has
not been possible to obtain precise infornation about this operation. the 0.8.
Enbassy in La he has denied that its staff supervised the raids and
destruction of factories and coca plantations.

The result of this project is the destruction of 180 hectares of coca
plantations through both manual loans and the use of herbicides. A rapid
depopulation is taking place betveen the Ichilo River and Yapacani through
the nassive exodus of the settlers whose only neena of incone was the leaves
of the coca plant.

Although the National Antidrug Struggle Omission has repeatedly said that
the coca plantations in Santa Ora-4 were illegal, this position is being
ignored. since, according to the area's far-lets. there are complete official
registries on coca producers and their contributions nade "religiously to
narcotics agents. the governor's office in Yapacani and control posts."

The farmers have begun to show provisional receipts, nany typewritten but with

stanps free the National Directorate for the Control of Dangerous Substances,
the Narcotics Bureau and the Office of Coca Control in Santa Cruz.

8568
C80: 5300/2289

11
RESEARCH ENTITY STUDIES LEGaL INDUSTRIALIZAIION 0P COCA
La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 1 May 82 p 11

[Text] The use of the coca leaf for medicinal purpoues and its industrial-
ization to obtain food concentrates were none of the conclusions reached from
a sociopsychiatric study on coca now being published by the Multidisciplinary
Society for Research in Native Medicine and Pharmacology [SMIMPA].

That institution explained its findings on 27 April, and it was then planned
that government officials will arrange an audiovisual presentation on that
aspect of coca.

SHIMPA expressed its opposition to the use of herbicides, of whatever type or
number, guaranteed or not by scientists, for the elimination of coca crops,
due to the inestimable ecological and genetic damage they cause, according to
that institution. In addition to their high cost-in the purchase price,
reparations for the danage caused, injury to health and damage to the
environment--the country's economic situation, according to the institution,
does not make it possible to incur those expenditures.

It advises that herbicides used in Vietnea, even though guaranteed. caused
incalculable damage which can only be termed as monstrous, since they not
only affected the environment but also the people.

The study now completed makes it possible to propose the legalization and
domestication of the natural extract of the coca leaf as a psychotropic,
antidepressive medicine. It says that throughout the world there is massive
consumption of drugs for psychiatric purposes and that these drugs are trying
to imitate the antidepressive effects of coca. It adds that, like every
synthetic product, the drug causes mental and physical damage known to health
specialists. The generic name of those drugs is amphetamines, and Bolivia
imports those products. ,

Among the contentions it makes is that the natural extract of coca, in
addition to not being harmful, as shown by the fact that the Aymara race has
been chewing the coca leaf for centuries, contains vitamins, minerals and
nutritional elements.

J

12 i
It also proposes the industrialization of the coca leaf and the production of
food concentrates, since its nutritional properties. as shown by a study made
by Harvard University. surpasses various South American cereals, sane 50
species, along which are pigueed, string beans, peanuts and others.

Bolivia, it concludes. is undergoing a serious crisis and, therefore, cannot
per-it the destruction of that worthy natarial which. it says, should be
considered as one of Bolivia's strategic naterials.

8568
080: 5300/2289
CONCERN OVER USE OF TOXIC BERBICIDBS NOTED
INC Institute's Warning
La Paz PRESENCE in Spanish 28 Apr 82 p 9

[Text] The National Settlement Institute [INC] has warned of the serious
danger involved in destroying coca plantings with toxic weedkillers. which
can destroy the usability of the land for the cultivation of other farm pro-
ducts.

At a press conference, the executive director of the INC, accompanied by various
technicians, announced the development of the programs being carried out in
various zones of the comtry.

Speaking of the situation created recently by the canpaip to eliminate coca
plantings in the Chapare zone, he said that the use of toxic herbicides to
eliminate the coca plants will destroy the land entirely and for a nulber

of years, since the organic utter, the chemical nutrients and microorganisms
which nitrogenize the earth will disappear. and the land could only be rehabil-
itated at the cost of vast investments. The use of toxic waedkillers will
convert the settlement zones into veritable wastelands. These zones formerly
suited to the cultivation of foodstuffs could only be rehabilitated by the
transfer of heme from other unaffected regime, which would mean the loading
and transportation of millions of metric tons of earth.

The INC tectnicians further revealed that even the pesticides used in farming
have serious effects on the land. but their toxicity is not by any means as
great as that of the substances used to eradicate coca plants.

Engineer Bernan Munoz Duran, director of the INC, said that the Chapare settlers
who were given land and established illegal coca plantings, and who are not
aware of the potential of the soil. have not been given technical aid for

the raising of other crops, nor have they been aided by other bodies special-
izing in this field. He said that the struggle for the production [sic] of
coca does not call for the institute to penalize the settler-farmer. in said
that land is reclaimed only when the settler has not put the land to use.
Moreover, engineer Huno'z Duran said that when toxic ueedkillers are used,

it is the duty of the Bolivian Institute of Farm technology to investigate the
case and to deal with the possible difficulties which may occur in Chapare.
both with regard to the settler-farmers and the peasants using land provided
by the agrarian reform and settlement programs.

'r

13
of earth to reestablish crop-growing areas necessary. In this connection,

it is pertinent to make it clear that on the basis of tests carried Out in
Peru in connection with the destruction of coca plantings. supported by the
written report of 0.5. scientist Fred H. Tschirley, 2-4-1) is rapidly destroyed
by the action of the microorganisms in the soil, such that its residue remains
for only 10 to 8 weeks.

Consequently. the crops planted after that period of time on the land where
coca plantings were destroyed will be capable of normal development.

lo. Also the fear that the use of 2-4-0 would damage nearby crops. such as
plantain or cassava, has been expressed. This fear also is without justifica-
tion. because of the carefully studied and responsible method elployed. in-
volving direct application mder low pressure to the basal portion of each
stem. as far as the corona of the root, which is located almost at ground
level. Consequently, application has been done plant by plant.

5. The fact that Z-A-D has been 'widely known and used in the department of
Santa Cruz for years precisely as a weedkiller for crops, including sugarcane.
among others, both by agroindustrial enterprises in the zone and by small
farmers, is ignored. Also. other similar weedkillers would be used. As use
has been made of this product year after year without detection of any harm
done either to crops or to individuals, there is no logical reason to suppose
that there will be any different results for the crops adjacent to the coca
plantings destroyed.

6. Guy limited use has been made of 2-6-D in destroying a part of the illegal
coca plantings in Yapacani. and this has been virtually coupleted. The purpose
of its use was to evaluate the efficiency and cost of using one method or
another, manual or chemical, for destroying illegal coca plantings. o

7. Both for the reasons mentioned. and the fact that the linited goal has
already been achieved. and due to a desire to offer the public and private
bodies which have made known their adverse criticisms of the use of weedkillers
in the destruction of coca plantings an opportunity to confirm or revise their
views in more objective circumstances. it is now being made known that there

is no further project for the use by the council of 2-4-1) or of any other
herbicide."

Political Leader Issues Protest
La Paz El. DIARIO in Spanish 30 Apr 82 p 5

[Text] Politician Enrique Acha Alvarez has expressed his disapproval of the
use of herbicides to destroy coca plantings in an open letter addressed to

the president of the republic. stating that in this way. "the criticism of

the conduct of the National Council to Eliminate Drug Trafficking is endorsed."

He said that "msekness and need must not be allowed to reduce us to this ex-
treme. Even in the eras when mankind was subjected to the greatest slavery.
the masters at least provided a morsel of bread and a little water. Never
has it been the case as it is now in Bolivia that the slave must invest his
strength and equipment in a blind obedience which humiliates and degrades
the nation."

llo
In conc lusion, he said that no soil studies have been carried out in the Chapare
zone so that the peasants could diversify farm production to replace the coca
crops. He stressed that the INC is ready to cooperate with the bodies involved
in making an economic-agricultural projection for Chapare, but that it has
neither the economic resources nor the other facilities needed to carry out

a task which has currently become urgent, in view of the fact that ecological
problems pertaining to the land have developed on a worldwide scale, and there
are few programs designed to deal with this situation.

Economic Project

Speaking of the so-called "Chimore" program the INC is carrying cut in the
Chapare zone, he said that the establistuent phase has been completed. Be
noted that the me plans to embark during this fiscal year on the economic-
agricultural consolidation program, with financing from international bodies
and the government bodies for support of such programs. He said that in the
first phase, the INC established the basic infrastructure in Chapare, beginning
with the building of schools, health stations, secondary roads. etc. He added
that the ma financed the first phase with a total credit allocation of $6.5
million. The program began in 1965. and at present 2,500 settlers have been
sent to Chapare and 5,000 have settled there spontaneously.

Narcotics Comcil Informs Public

La Paz BL nmuo in Spanish 30 Apr 82 p 3

[Text] In response to reports carried in the press as well as statements
issued by state and private bodies about the real scope of the use of weed-
killers to destroy coca plants in the Yapacani region, the National Council

to Eliminate Drug Trafficking has released a cmmique with the following text:

"I . Indiscriminate mention has been made of Agent Orange, Paraqmt and 2-4-1)
as the weedkiller used to destroy clandestine coca plantings. This confusion
reveals an obvious lack of information, since the first-mentioned is a de-
foliant, and its broad use in Vietnam earned it generalized criticism on the
international level, while the second substance is a weedkiller specifically
applied by serial spraying in Hexico in order to destroy marijuana planting.
Furthermore, it should be stressed that the council has never used nor will
it use either Agent Orange or Paraquat.

2. The above confusion seems to have seriOus emotional impact insofar as

the effects of any weedkiller are identified with the lethal and destructive
results on all types of vegetation caused by the defoliant Agent Orange. Al-
though legitimate, the concern expressed has no objective foundation in this
connection, since 2-4-0 (dichlorophenoxyacetic acid) is different in chemical
composition, a fact which can be established by any public or private body
interested in doing so. To this end, on written request, we will make available
.1 suitable quantity of this herbicide for the necessary analysis.

3. It has been said that 2-4-1) could produce the virtual destruction of the
soil since it would not dissolve in water and would cause the organic matter
to disappear, making vast investments and the movement of millions of tons

.7..-

15
Speaking of the processes being pursued to combat drug traffic, Ache said
that "the news reports tell us that our compatriots have paid the price of
their very lives. Tasks and conditions have been imposed behind the backs
of such a generous people as the Merican people, who must be ignorant that
we are being harassed and humiliated in this way. “or is it dignified for
the Bolivian military to persecute men who out of hunger and need engage in
the transportation of coca leaves."

He states esphatically that the most serious thing is that we are being used
as guinea pigs to demonstrate that the herbicides used in Vietnam have been
perfected.

Enrique Acha also criticized the economic measures promulgated by the govern-
ment harshly. In this connection he said that "no one can be maware that

an economic passage has been under study for 8 months, only to change it after
30 days and then to annouce that yet another amendment is being contewlated.
due to the inability to float the loan. It would seem that our lack of an
ocean has a negative effect even on achieving proper dollar flotation. and

we are being duped into an empty swimming pool for the second consecutive
time."

On the other hand. he also said that immorality has won general acceptance.

It is not found only in the most important offices nor is it a matter of partners
only. "Even cousin is set against cousin. and parents and children have even
developed enmity due to mutual accusations."

Finally, this open letter to President Torrelio said that "if y0u go ahead

with the plan to allow the high military comand to order changes in the assign-
ments of the present components of the regime you head, the national conscience.
that of your comrades and that of the generations to come will be obliged

to offer you their gratitude. If on the other hand egotism guides your actions
in this crucial hour. they will hold you responsible for what you did and

failed to do."

5157
cs0: 5300/2288

16
RETIRED am OFFICER ARRESTED msmnoc COCA CARGO
SantaCruznlﬂNDOinSpanish lhuar82pl

[Text] La Yap-17 Mar—A retired Bolivian arIIy colonel was arrested in
Caranavi, 180 l:- northeast of this capital; he was leading a convoy of trucks
loaded with coca leaves and cheaical elements for the nannfacture of cocaine
and pretending to be a ship-ant of material for a civilian action project of
the armed forces.

The local evening paper, JORNADA, stated in today's edition that Col Angel
Garcia Ricaldi was arrested at a ailitary post after the guard suspected that
the alleged shipment of construction lateriel. declared by the convoy's
leader, was concealing "so-ething strange," as seen in the "nervousness of
the drivers of the five trucks."

Col Garcia Ricaldi, wearing a lilitary uniforl and "armed with the necessary
documents," was accoupanying the convoy in a jeep and, in view of his rank,

had received preferential treatment at the control station, whose cal-lander,
an unidentified arny captain, had even invited the colonel to lunch.

Once the convoy's true shipment was discovered, Col Garcia Ricaldi, according
to the newspaper report, offered his captors a bribe, consisting of two of
the five trucks.

According to JORNADA's infomnt, Garcia kicaldi is being held by the military
police and will be given a dishonorable discharge "to set an exanple."

According to Iilitary regulations, an officer nay take voluntary retirement
but continues to belong to the military registry and say, at any tine, request
reinstatenent in active service. Garcia Ricaldi is nov in that situation as
a colonel retired from active service.

8568
050: 5300/2289

17
CHARGES 01' am BAIDS AGAINST 0004 PM” DENIED
La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 29 Apr 82 p 4

[Text] Santa Cruz-~28 Apr—Col Raul Gonzales, national director of the
Antidrug Struggle Council [cm]. gave his assurance that no and confrontations
have been reported in this city and that no casualties have resulted fro. the

operations the army has been carrying on s‘rce last Thursday in northern
Santa Cruz.

After returning from another expedition into Ichilo Province, Gonzales reported

that operations are continuing and denied reports by the local press that
almost 50 deaths had occurred .ong tho faresrs.

According to other reports put out by the my, the armed forces suffered
three deaths in this operation due to an accident on the Ichilo River when
a launch capsized, piloted by Lt Genera Patton Arancibia and containing one
NCO and one enlisted nan.

with regard to excesses col-itted against settlers in the Yapacani and Ichilo
area, Gonzales said he is inviting church representatives, especially San
Carlos priests, to participate in the operations to receive proof that reports
given by farners and settlers in this respect ”are somewhat exaggerated."

Ever since steps Vere taken to die-antle factories in El Chapare and Ichilo,
the area of influence of Puerto Grether, nunerous reports have been asde about
outrages, excesses of authority, illegal arrests and other abuses.

Based on a report by the Special Federation of Par-era of the North, the local
press says that 50 farners allegedly died in raids against drug traffickers,
that helicopters are being used to bash certain centers and highly toxic
herbicides are being used to destroy coca plantations.

Arrests

There is no precise figure on the number of arrests nade up to now either in
El Chapare or in the Yapecani area where troops of the seventh and eighth
any divisions, belonging to Cochab-ba and Santa Cruz, are advancing and

continuing to destroy plantations and sulfate factories, sulfate being used as
a base for cocaine.

18
cm officials say that this is the largest operation undertaken in the country
up to now and that the search will continue in the hope that more persons
connected with the illicit activity will be arrested.

According to nilitary sources, the drug traffickers in question have offered no
resistance up to now and have given up inediately upon being overtaken. Selle

have escaped to the woods, ”but it will be only a few days until their food
runs out."

On a nunber of occasions the fareers of this area have expressed concern over
the results of this search. Hany settlers, whose coca plants are being
destroyed, are leaving the area.

'Sepes' Released

Colonel Gonzales adnitted that it is a real prole to naintain those arrested.

since just to feed then neens taking provisions away fron the troops. The cm
has decided to release those who. attracted by the pay, arrived in El Chapsre
to work as "sepes."

These individuals (the "sepes"-a kind of ant) were assigned to carry bundles
-of coca front 31 Chapare to Yapecani via paths in the woods. The trip took
several days and was extra-sly dangerous due to gangs of "acrobata" who,

posing as narcotics agents, took possession of the coca and noney and even
killed those who protested.

It was announced that, once they have nede their first statements, the "sepes"
will be taken under guard to their place of origin and released with the

stipulation that they report to the police every few days as a neans of
control.

with Regard to Herbicides

Those in charge of this military action have stressed that bombs fron
helicopters are not being used to destroy coca plantations and factories.

Moreover, Gonzales said that the council has given its assurance that the land
where herbicides are being used to destroy coca plants will undergo no change
whatever, since the product, 2-101), has been tested scientifically. The 0.5.
Embassy guarantees that there is no danger if it is used according to the
advice given by scientist Fred B.Tschr1ey, who cue to Bolivia precisely to
give information on the use of herbicides.

8568
cso: 5300/2289

19
sums

TORRBLIO LAMBS CAMPAIGN-oPresident Celso Torrelio said yesterday that he has
received in Cochabamba infatuation about the "joint Operation" being carried
out by the army, air force and Bolivian navy to eradicate the drug traffic
"which has caused so much damage to the country's image." "I had pledged to
cleanse the image of the institution (the armed forces) and the Bolivian
people, and that is what I am doing through these operations which are being
carried out successfully," Torrelio said yesterday shortly after his return
from Cochabaaba. According to the information given to him by the military
and civilian leaders assigned that task, "to date we have destroyed a great
nany clandestine cocaine factories. The battle we are waging against drug
trafficking, which has done the country so much damage, is underway and will
continue with great energy," he said. "This sore, which has done so much
dansge to all Bolivian people, must end," he stressed. According to
information from the National Directorate for the Control of Dangerous
Substances, the operations in Cochabamba and Santa Cruz are, in fact, being
carried out by groups of the three branches of the armed services. The
activity will conclude with "strict control of the plantations" on which
certain experiments are being conducted to eradicate them. In some cases
herbicides are being used; in others, manual systems are being employed.
[Text] [La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 28 Apr 82 p 9] 8568

LARGE-SCALE CRACKDOHN-Ls Pet, 25 Apr CAFP)-Carlos 8011:, a former mayor of
the city of hontero--Santa Cruz Department-l,000 km east of here, is one of
the leading members of the international drug traffic ring and the owner of
three cocaine factories, it was disclosed here today. The disclosure was made
by a cocaine courier captured by the armed forces during a large scale opera-
tion launched in El Chapare (at the center of the country) and in Santa Cruz.
It was learned that the operation is being carried out under the guidance of
0.8. experts and with the participation of the Ustarez Regiment, the Special
Operations Center (paratroopers), the naval force and experts in narcotics.
Peasants of the areas in which the military dragnet operation is taking place
have charged that uniformed personnel had raped two girls in Cochabamba and
had taken their noney. Therefore, they have filed the appropriate charges
before the courts. [Text] [PYOh09S6 Paris AF? in Spanish 1452 GMT 25 Apr 82]

C80: 5300/2295

20
LIFE IN COCAPDOHINATBD PUERTO LEGUIZAMO ECONOMY
Bogota EL TIEHPO in Spanish 12 Apr 82 pp l-A, 3-A
[Article by Harbel Sandovalo; EL TIHEPO special envoy]

[Text] Puerto Leguizamo, Putumayo-In Leguizamo, the cocaine business is an
honorable profession, although almost everyone denies that he openly engages in
it. They say, "I do not have any but I know who can sell you 2 kilos of good
quality."

Three or 4 years ago the Huitotos, Inganos, Uinanes and Borss Indians raised the
small shrubs on their parcels of land for their own personal use. Now they are
wage earners in the coca business.

So are most of the settlers who live along the banks of the Putumayo, Caucaya
and Caqueta Rivers. They no longer plant yucca, corn or pineapples. They buy
these products from the settlers on the opposite side of the river, from the
Peruvians, or the Ecuadoreans.

The raising and processing of the "paste" requires personnel so people have
come from other places: Bogota, Tolima, Antioquia. Csldss. They are seen only
on Saturdays when they come down to town to drink until Sunday night when they
stagger drunkenly to their 40 or 60 HP canoes, to get back to work.

Juan Cortes is 86 years old and lives in Puerto Alegre, a half-hour from Leguiz-
amo. More than 50 years ago he stopped working for Cass Arsna and made a home
in these lands. Be cleared away a piece of the jungle where he planted corn,
bananas and pasture.

A long time ago he heard talk of the financial advantages of planting coca but
he decided to do so only 3 months ago when an emissary of one of the largest
cocaine traffickers of the region came to his farm to ask if he had seedlings
for sale. He had with him 200,000 pesos to buy seedlings.

Correa decided that he had to obtain the seedlings. So much money had never
before been offered to him. He spoke to an Indian in the area and ordered sev-
eral small plants from him. The Huitoto Indian asked 25,000 pesos for them so
Corres sold a young bull to obtain the money but the Inidan did not sell him
the plants.

21
Like Correa, many settlers attempt to get into the business. However, he says
that it is not profitable to process the coca. "A poor man can only make money
by raising and selling it."

Correa's 18-year old grandson said to him, "Grandfather, I'm going away to learn
[0 process coca.“ The boy worked for a year on coca farms and when he returned,
the old man, with his Indian craftiness, said to him, "I'm going to buy you 2
arrobaa of coca to see what you can make from it," and did so.

In Putumayo an arroba of coca costs between 300 and 400 pesos. In addition, 7
gallons of gasoline, 3 kilos of sulfuric salt and 2 tablespoonfuls of ammonia
are needed for each srroba.

In Leguizamo, a gallon of gasoline costs between 100 and 150 pesos, depending on
its availability. In Puerto Ospina or in La Chorrers it costs up to 500 pesos

a gallon. The sulfuric salt costs $00 pesos per kilo and, according to Correa,
they may charge up to 300 pesos for a tablespoonful of ammonia. However, lemon
juice can be used as a substitute for the ammonia.

First the coca leaves are spread out on a piece of plastic in the shade and cov-
ered with sulfuric salt; then they must be "turned over and over and over until
they are cooked." “hen the salt has burned the coca leaves they become black.
They they should be left for 26 hours in gasoline. Several coca men who were
consulted said, "Even petroleum can be used."

The mixture should then be washed with water. According to them, after the
leaves are washed two or three times, they are wrung out in a cloth and the
paste or urrefined cocaine remains in the cloth. This is the basic material
purchased by the large scale traffickers who continue processing it until they
obtain pure powder.

The "salesmen" carry samples of 60 or 50 grams in small bags in which, to out-
wnrd appearances, only a sort of thick, slightly dark sugar can be seen.

But Correa seems to be right. The only thing that is profitable for the poor
farmer is to grow it; processing it is too expensive. The 2 arrobas of coca
cost Correa 800 pesos. He also had to pay 1,400 pesos for 14 gallons of gaso-
line, 3.000 pesos for sulfuric salt and 1,200 pesos for the ammonia. His total

investment was 8,600 pesos.

On this occasion, he said, he obtained 25 grams which, sold at 500 pesos per
gram, amounted to 12,500 pesos. The profit was 3,900 pesos.

Perhaps this is why they prefer to just raise it. A worker earns 600 pesos a
day and has Saturdays and Sundays off. Half the day is spent in the planting
and half in harvesting the leaves.

At first, the work is hard. They must begin by clearing off the jungle-~10, 12,
15 hectares of trees must be cut down. Then the entire area must be burned to
clear away the underbush. In the jungle solid ground is 40 or 50 centimeters
down, the rest is rotting organic material.

22
Once the burning has-been completed, the little bushes, 20 or 25 centimeters
high, are planted in the ashes.

"After 6 months the first harvest is very small; that of the 15th month is larg-
er. If the first harvest produced half a pound of paste per hectare, the larger
harvest may produce 2 to 2 and a half kilos of paste per hectare," says one of
the planters.

A Town Hith a High Cost of Living

In the municipality of Leguiaano, a farmer can no longer find workers. Nor can
one find bananas, yucca, pineapples, oranges or any of the other foods which
were in abundant supply in the past.

Uith wages at 600 pesos a day. nobody wants to work for 200 pesos which is the
most that a person who is not engaged in raising coca can earn.

The men go down to the town with their pockets full of bills but there is noth-
ing they can buy. The women who live in Leguizamo must get to the markets be-
fore 0600 hours if they are to find food for the day. They cannot ask the price
of an item but must take it at once."

A bunch of bananas costs 500 pesos, a chicken costs 800, a brown sugar loaf 30.
A package of Pielroja cigarettes costs 50, a package of filter cigarettes 100
pesos, a soft drink 25, a gallon of gasoline 100 pesos (most people cook with
gasoline). a package of crackers 90 and a sack of potatoes 1,300 pesos.

That is because on the banks of the Putumayo River the raising of foodstuffs
has been abandoned. The few farmers who insist on raising foodstuffs manage to
harvest just enough for their own needs. For this reason, when large canoes
come from Puerto Asia loaded with foodstuffs. they are boarded quickly and many
ask, "what do you want for your entire cargo?" and without any more ado the
cargo belongs to the inquirer, because he can most certainly pay with cocaine
or currency.

Tired of the jungle by noon on Saturday, the men begin arriving to take over
the town for more than 24 hours. Then the peaceful houses, where every after-
noon the oid men sit to cool off and wait for nightfall, become bars.

A record player or even a victrola appears out of some corner playing Mexican
songs, boleros sung as duets by distorted voices. The men sit around the tables
and begin a memorable night of drinking liquor.

The singing and shouting of the drunkards are to be heard until Sunday morning.
At noon or at nightfall they begin to go back for another week of work.

The coca people here do not want currency for many things. All want large rec—
ord players, money for batteries and many cassettes. They also want a large
canoe with a 25, 60 or larger HP motor.

On Saturday evenings the town girls dress up and stand at the doors of the
town's two discothequea with "black lights." The youths who want a girlfriend

come to them.

23
0n week days there is nothing to do in Leguizamo. At 2000 hours half the popu-
lation goes to the theater at the base. They remain there until 2230 hours and
they barely reach hone before the electric lights are shut off.

These people have difficulty finding a late. "She already has a sea and he is

good looking," an Indian woman exclains proudly, pointing at her daughter who
is pregnant.

The Indian prostitutes who work in the redlight district demand that the men

pay only with 200 peso bills. They call the men "coffee pickers" perhaps be-
cause they think that the coffee far-er who cones there brings good luck and

money just as the coca picker does.

These men are the wage earners of the coca business. They are the ones who
raise it and see some of the money but perhaps do not know about the big busi-
ness in it which exists outside.

However, its use is beginning to increase along the people of Leguizano and vi-
cinity. More and more frequently they acquire l or 2 grass of "paste” to nix
with cigarettes. The Indians also continue to chew it."

Cocaine for chewing is prepared differently. The dry leaves are nixed with
ashes from Yarumo palms. "Otherwise it burns the mouth." This mixture is plac-
ed between the molars so as to consule it little by little throughout the day.

"One does not feel anything. One does not feel thirst, hunger, nor does one
get tired. Just joy!" said a toothless old nan with a tired voice VhQ repeated,
"One does not feel sorrow, nor poverty. nor anything."

Thus lives the wage earner of the cocaine business, sonetines using it. sole-
tines only processing it. These Ian and the women, when the fleeting bonanza
is over. will live with the nemory of the days when they had a lot of money in
their pockets, a motor, a canoe and the wish that conditions would always be
the same.

9204
cso: 5300/2278

26
FEDERAL OPPICIAL CLAIMS 90 PERCENT CUT IN DRUG PRODUCTION, SHUGGLING

Hermosillo BL IMPARCIAL in Spanish b May 82 Sec A p 5

[Text] The assistant general prosecutor of justice, Samuel Alba Leyva. who is
also the national coordinator of the campaign against drugs, stated here that
the production and smuggling of drugs in the Mexican Republic have declined
90 percent between 1976 and the present, as a result of the measures adopted

by the Federal Government to combat the sale and consumption of drugs in our
country.

The high-ranking official visited San Luis-Rio Colorado as part of a working
trip that he has been making on a national scale. in order to make an evalua-

tion of the efforts and the way in which the Federal Public Ministry agencies
are operating.

Upon being interviewed by EL IHPABCIAL, Alba Leyva said that there is under way
a plan to concentrate several air units belonging to the Office of the Attorney
General of the Republic in a single region or zone of the country, in order to

make intensive flights to detect drug plantations.

He added that the northwestern section, which includes the states of Baja
California Norte and Sur, and Sonora. has always had problems with drug produc-
tion and marketing; however, the Attorney General's Office is covering this
vast region, and has allocated a fleet of 12 helicopters and'six airplanes to
engage in air reconnaissance of the territorial area.

The Office of the Attorney General of the Republic has 80 aircraft to engage

in the detection of drug plantations. and the measures that have been instituted
by the Federal Government to combat this illegal activity have brought positive
results. In this respect. a deciding factor has been the bilateral agreement

on information concluded between Mexico and the United States, since large
seizures have been made, and individuals have been arrested.

In consenting on the foregoing, the federal official cited as an example the 30
hectares planted with poppies in Sahuaripa, noting that the villages had been
fumigsted on time because. fortunately, the plants were in flower and did not
have any fruit. He also mentioned the case of Mexicali, Baja California, where
1.5 kilograms of heroin and another kilogram of cocaine were seized.

ZS
Alba Leyva renarked that the exchange of infomtion with the United States has
enabled thee to obtain quick and accurate data on drug traffickers or on the

‘ground and air units used to ship drugs. He said: "we exchange that informa-
tion within a minus: interval of 10 minutes."

He added: "The agreement on exchanges of information has been cited as an eun-
ple to be initated by other countries. in the antidrug agency of the United
Nations Organization. owing precisely to the good results that we have achieved."

The official was escorted here by the Federal Public Ministry agent, Fernando
G. Hedina Castro, who explained the status of the office to his, explaining
that the latter has operated nomlly, and that the Attorney General's Office's

proposals regarding the professional training of agents have been reflected
positively when it was time for then to do their duty.

2909
cso: 5330/82

26
HARIEUANA sammrr SBIZED, mmcms ARRESTED
Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DB PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 13 Apr 82 Sec A p 2

[Text] The conander of the Federal Judicial Police in the northern zone, Mario
Espinoza, succeeded in capturing two individuals involved in narihuana trafficking
and in seizing a shipment of this grass which was intended for "retail" distribu-
tion among the addicts working at the Rio Escondido thermoelectric plant.

The capture was due to the forceful vigilance and the campaign that is being
carried out in the entire northern region, with surveillance and investigation
of various activities at different strategic points in the district.

One of those arrested answers to the name of Jose Vicente Ricardo Nsavsz Portillo,
who is widely known in this port. He was arrested with a large box in his possess-
ion containing msrihuana which was being carried from Torreon, Coshuila. In his
statements, he claimed to be working as a timekeeper at the Rio Escondido thermo-
electric plsnt. He said that he sold this Iarihuana in the form of joints to the
addicts who smoke the drug on that location.

An investigation is also being ads of Carlos Lara Ontiveros, because he was

caught on the Anahuac bus coming from ‘rorreon, Coahuila, with a suitcase filled
with marihuana on his seat. he was suspected and questioned. but the confidential-
ity of the case is being maintained, because there is a possibility that the
suitcase was not his property. hence, this individual was arrested only for

questioning, and he may go free this very week.

27
Jose Vicente Ricardo Neavez Portillo was arrested by the Federal Judicial Police
when he was caught with a shipment of urihuana in his possession intended for
distribution among addicts at the thermoelectric plant.

2909
C80: 5330/79

28
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA SUPPLY POUND—Mexico City, 17 April (MOW)--After an exhaustive
investigation, the Federal Judicial Police succeeded in confiscating nearly 3
tons of marihuana in this city and over ‘3 in the state of Veracruz. The official
report on the cooperation associated with the Office of the Attorney General of
the Republic stated that, at a school' of advanced studies Jose Manuel Honjarrez
Roman was arrested with a briefcase containing 360 ”grass" cigarettes, weighing
approximately 360 grams. The subject under arrest supplied sufficient inforns-
tion to enable the Federal Judicial forces to go to the town of San Gaspar, in
the state of Hexico, and discover a 2.5 ton shipment of packed marihusna. They
also found a 22 caliber machine gun. s 16 caliber rifle and a 16 caliber shotgun;
but, unfortunately, the drug traffickers who owned the shipment managed to flee
and have not been apprehended to date. Moreover, the Judicial Police assigned

to the base in Coatzacoalcos, Veracruz, discovered Ruben Garcia, Rosa Alicia
Morales and Micaela A. Gonzalez, at the Cans Verde farm, as they were loading

a 1978 pickup truck with license plates TIE-SO98, with marihuana. [Text] [Nuevo
Laredo BI. MARIO D3 NUBVO LABRDO in Spanish 18 Apr 82 Sec A p 3] 2909 '

'BVALUATION PLAN‘ RESULTS—Hector Aviles Castillo, coordinator for Zone 06 of
the permanent campaign against drug trafficking, described the ”Evaluation Plan"
carried out from 16 March to 13 April as excellent because, in addition to
affording exact information on the location of poppy and merihuana plantations,
it served to have them destroyed at the proper time and prevented their products
from being harvested. lie noted that the 800 hours of flight made by five 212
helicopters to reconnoiter the 111,338 square kilometers coaprising the zone,
enabled the ll 206 aircraft to fumigate 700 poppy plantations and about 50 of
marihuana. he stated that the outlay made for the aforementioned aircraft,

as well as for the two Cessna planes which were also active during the period
in question, amounted to over a million pesos; and Aviles Castillo considered
that amount small when the success attained is taken into account. The Zone 06
coordinator explained that it is extremely important to attack the problem
during the early months of the year, because weather conditions are favorable
for the development of the plants, and that this had been the intention before
carrying out the Evaluation Plan. [Text] [Culiacsn BL 80!. DE SINALOA in Spanish
23 Apr 82 pp 1, 3] 2909

ARREST FOR HERO!!! POSSESSIOII~Ieone1 Cisneros, aged 29, was sent to the county
jail after being arrested by police on charges of heroin possession. According

29
to the report. Cisneroa was in KcDonald'a restuarant when he was captured by
the police. who had a warrant for his arrest. The order, which had been issued
by the No 69 district court, was carried out without any resistance on the part
of the accused. Bail was set at $10,000 for the release of Leonel Cisneros.
[Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DB mum LAREDO in Spanish 21 Apr 82 Sec 3 p 8)

SONORA ANTIDRUG amass—m agent of the Federal Public Ministry, Pablo Ernes-
to Avila Triana. announced that during the past few days the peasant cnpsign
against drug trafficking run by the Office of the Attorney General of the Repub-
lic detected and eradicated 150 drug plantations in the Sonora mountains. He
said that, every day, seven helicopters, five small airplanes and several tank
trucks tour the state's aountains, carrying out reconnaissance on the terrain,
and detecting and eradicating the plantations of drugs of any type. He went on
to say that this action is being executed under orders from the regional coor-
dinator of this caqaign, Aaron Juarez Jimenez. He added that, at first. it
had been thought that Sonora was nerely a state used for "passage" to the United
States. a factor which 'the organized underworld used to advantage, covering the
nountains in the state with drug plantations, which will he externinated by
fumigation. He stressed that these chemical conpmnds do not contaminate or
upset the components of the soil in farm land at all. Avila Triana stated that,
although this type of action is carried out year after year, this is the first
time that the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic has decided to
send reconnaissance aircraft and fumigation helicopters which cone froe various
states, such as Chihuahua and Durango. [Text] [ﬁenosillo Bl. MARCIAL in
Spanish 24 Apr 82 Sec A p S] 2909

C80: 5330/ 81-82
SECURITY FORCES i’OIL SEVERAL DRUG-SMOMIW OPmATIONS
Cairo AKIIIR SA'AH in Arabic No 2475, 31 Mar 82 pp 16-17

[Article by Munir sl-Husayri: "Failure of Most Dangerous Smuggling Attempts:
now Smgglers Tried To Infiltrate Northern Coast and How Chase Took Place"]

[Text] With the start of the mggling season, smugglers have renewed their
desperate attenpta to penetrate the strong blockade iaposed by the border
guard all along the northern coast. Over the past 15 days, there were four
consecutive attempts to snuggle hashish and crude opium valued at 21 million
pounds.

An interesting week-long chase then began‘betveen the smugglers and the border
guard vehicles all over the desert paths and in bedouin came. The chase
then extended to Alexandria, until all of the smugglers, including 'Awad Abu
Dubun, the biggest smggler in the western desert, were apprehended.

mun SA‘AH publishes here exclusively the full details of this exciting chase
and of the attempts to which the emgglers resorted in the past 2 weeks after
changing their mggling methods.

With the start of the snuggling season. beginning at the outset of the current
month of March. the information acctnmlating before Brig Gen Hahbi Habib, the
border guards intelligence chief, indicated that despite the successive fail-
ures they had encountered throughout the past season, s-ngglers were preparing
to snuggle new shipaents of drugs, that they changed the methods that they had
followed in the past and that their nav asthod relied on quick operations
carried out at unexpected tiles.

Staff Maj Gen Psruq al-Sahn, the border guards cos-ander, inediately instnnad
Maj Gen Sanih al-‘Duhani. the chief of staff, to intensify the border watch, to
besiege smugglers all along the northern coast and to strike all of their
attempts.

Infomtion use accumulating rapidly on four planned snuggling attelpts in a
single month and in various and widely-spaced spots, beginning with al-‘l‘arh
beach near Rashid and ending in al-Sallm.

while the coast guard was making its preparations, the smugglers were able to
penetrate the blockade in a lightning quick operation near the town of Harsa

31
natruh, close to Sidi al-Barrani beach. But the attempt was quickly discovered.
By the time the coast guard trackers found al-jarrah, namely the tracks left on
the coast by the drug-laden rubber tires dragged on the coast after being taken
out of the water, the information acquired by Col 'Abd al-ﬂamid Sanjar, the
Alexandria intelligence director, confirmed that 'Awad Abu Dubun, the biggest
drug smuggler in the western desert, was behind this shipment. The smuggled
drugs totaled 2 tons valued at 10 million pounds. Brigadier General Hahbi in-

structed that a plan be drawn up to chase the smugglers, along with their ship-
ment. in the desert.

The bottleneck area. an area covering 70 kilometers between the coast and
al-Qattarah depression--this is the narrowest corridor in the desert which then
broadens and makes it almost impossible to engage in chase operations-was

sealed off. This is the method Montgomery followed when he sealed the area off
in the face of Ro-el's forces.

Intensive patrols then began to roam the corridor to seize the snagglers and
the drugs.

At the same time, other patrols proceeded to look for them. At the outset,
the tracks left behind on the sands by the smugglers and read by the trackers
indicated that the drugs had been transported by a Daihatsu car. accompanied
by a private car for guard purposes. The pursuit and chase of the smugglers
began. It was then found that the Daihatsu car had been replaced by two Toyo-
tas. and so the chase turned out to be against three cars instead of two--two
Toyotas carrying the drugs and a private car to guard the drug shipment. The
smugglers' care then turned to the mountain area--the same old area used by
smugglers of contraband from Libya.

The chase, relying on tracking marks and reading of the smgglers' movements
on the desert sands, continued.

It was then found that the smugglers had resorted to some caves and some
beduoin shacks in the area when their tracks began to disappear, to be re-
placed by the marks of sheep and goat grazing.

Then began another new day in this exciting chase and in the search for the
tracks of the smugglers in the desert.

The smugglers went into hiding near the edge of the corridor while waiting for
one of the patrols to move away so that they could infiltrate through this

area. In an instant, they were able to penetrate the corridor. But the attempt
was discovered soon afterward and one of the coast guard patrols hastened to
pursue the smugglers. Suddenly, the patrol found the three cars in front of

it after having discovered the path they had followed. The distance between the
coast guard patrol vehicle and the smgglers' cars began to diminish gradually.

Battle With Firearms

In a flash, the vehicle guarding the smgglers turned around and moved at ex-
tremely high speed in the direction of the coast guard patrol vehicle. At the

32
same moment, the patrol officer on a rifle aimed in the patro‘l's' direction.
In the same instant, a round was fired. Here, fate intervened to save the
coast guard officer's life. The bullet was a dud. Imaediately, the officer
instructed the patrol to open fire, which it did. The smggler and his assis-
tant were hit. The coast guard men then fired at the vehicle's tires and pro-
ceeded to chase the drug-carrying vehicles. This happened on the third day of
the chase. The light of dawn started to appear after the night's darkness.
The smuggler's vehicles were heading in the direction of Burj al-'Arab road
after being forced by the chase to change their original course, set for Wadi
aJ-Natrun. The smugglers had to get rid of their load before the break of
dawn so the load would not hamper their escape.

They began to drop their load in the middle of the road in front of the patrol
vehicle. The chase continued but the mgglers were able to reach the road
they wanted and to disappear, without their load. The patrol car turned
around, picked up the drugs from the road and returxed to the smgglers' guard
vehicle. What the patrol found there was a great b 3b of blood on the desert
sand and the tracks of a vehicle with a flat tire. The guard vehicle had
managed to reach a populated area and to escape. All that was left was a dud
bullet shell. which could have cost the life of one of the officers keeping a
watchful eye on Egypt's security.

Smugglers Trapped

Three full days had passed on this chase in the desert. Col 'Abd al-Hamid and
Majors Ahmad al—Badswi and Yusri al-Tuni then started to pursue the smgglers
to arrest them. Quick and careful investigations were conducted on the two
wounded smugglers, 'Awad Abu mbun and his brother Rahim, the two biggest
smgglers in the western desert. Information began to flow in rapidly indi—
cating that the two smugglers were hit and still bleeding and that they had
offered a physician 60,000 pounds to save them and to take out the four bullets
that had hit them in the legs. 'Awad, a 60-year-old man, had bled for 8 full
hours and was unconscious. The doctor told them that the only way to save
them was to have them admitted to a hospital. He then referred them to a
hospital in Alexandria.

The border guard officers verified the information, and one of the officers
proceeded immediately to the hospital concerned and waited for the people
visiting the wounded defendants to leave. Meanwhile, he was able to identify
all of the persons involved in the case. Whenever one of them left after
visiting the wounded, he was arrested. After all the individuals involved
had been arrested, the two wounded defendants were arrested.

The total number of defendants in the case was eight, including brothers
'Awad. Rahim and 'Abd al—Hawla Abu Dubun and 'Abd al—Hahid Karim Hafiz, who

had driven one of the drug vehicles.
Millionaire Shepherd
when prosecution attorneys mhamad al-Turrawi and Sa'id Shihatah, under the

supervision of Counselor Hahmd al—Hinnawi, the general drug prosecutor,
questioned the wounded 'Awad Abu Dubun and his brother Rahim at the hospital,

33
the two denied the charges and stated that they were herding sheep in the
desert when they were surprised by the coast guard vehicle opening fire on
them.

But who is shepherd 'Awad Abu Dubun? The coast guard investigation of the
records shows that he is the most dangerous smuggler in the western desert and
that his star began to rise in the sky of the poison trade after 1967 when
hashish and opium smuggling shifted to the northern coast and when most of the
snuggling operations conducted in this area came to be controlled by ‘Awad and
his brothers. As for the shepherd, he owns three Hercedes cars and 100 feddans
of the best farmland, cultivated with fruit and citrus trees, in al-Hatanir, in
addition to other large areas of land in Burj al-‘Arab and al—‘Ajami, an apart-
ment building in Alexandria and a villa in al-‘Ajami area. .

Second Attaapt in Rashid

A few days later, the second attempt took place. The information showed that
the attempt would take place near Rashid. It was already known that smgglers
begin their infiltration and swggling operations to the coast from sunset
until 0200. If not finished by then, they withdraw with their (boats) to inter-
national waters to await a new day.

This is because smugglers take into their account the time consumed by the
snuggling operations, beginning from the moment the rope is thrown to the
snugglers' workers on the beach to the moment of the smugglers' return to
international waters before the break of dawn.

But in this attempt, the smugglers changed their methods. A Turkish snuggling
boat carrying the smuggled shipment from Lebanon moved close to al-Hu'addiyah
beach at 0330. One of the sungglers descended to the water, holding in his
hand the end of the rope to which the drugs were tied, before exchange of the
all-clear signal between the smuggling boat and the Egyptian smgglers on

the beach so as to save time. But the attention of the coast guard observers
in the area was attracted by the movement of the shadows of persons in the
graveyard in the area. The coast guard moved quickly to the beach and opened
intense fire on the smugglers' boat, which dropped its load and fled at the
sound of the first bullet. The workers [on the beach] also fled. The coast
guard forces descended to the water and picked up the snuggled shipment, which
amounted to 1 ton of crude hashish valued at 5 million pounds. The coast guard
forces also noticed that the fleeing Egyptian smuggler's workers had prepared
a tractor to pull the rape to which the drug parcels were tied so as to drag
the drugs out of the water and to the beach instead of having this done
manually--a tiring and time-consuming process that usually requires nearly loo
men to perform. -

Using Passenger Boats
A few days later, the third attempt took place. This attempt was also differ-
ent in its method. This time, the smugglers resorted to using passenger boats

'coming from Lebanon. ' The mgglers board the boat carrying some small parcels
shaped like suitcases or snail parcels inside cases similar to passenger

34
suitcases. Upon entering territorial waters and before reaching the straits,
the passenger ship is met by a fishing boat. At a given prearranged signal,
the smuggler starts to throw the parcels overboard gradually and the fishing
boat, which is by now moving parallel to the passenger boat, picks up the
parcels.

When this information became available, a coast guard launch was awaiting the
passenger ship along with the fishing boat. Naturally, the fishing boat
assigned to the smuggling operation departed immediately and the coast guard
launch moved close to the passenger boat instead. The smggler on board had
no choice but to dump the parcels on the other side of the passenger boat to
get rid of them before the boat entered the port. The coast guard launch
picked up the drugs, which consisted of four small cans filled with crude
hashish valued at a quarter of a million pounds.

The coast guard forces then arrested the two smugglers who had traveled aboard
the passenger boat, namely, 'Ali Hafiz Huhamad and Hubalmnad al—Sayyid Mahmud.

Inside Abandoned Cave

Also, a few days later, the latest of these attempts took place. This time,
the information available to the coast guard agencies agreed with that of the
General Drug Control Agency. The investigations of Col Faruq Abu al-‘Ata, the
head of the General Drug Control Agency branch in Alexandria, indicated the
presence of a large shipment of hashish and opium in one of the unpopulated
islands in al-'Ajami Sea. The agency's units moved under the supervision of
Maj Gen Mamduh Salim, Drug Control Agency director, and Col Huhamad 'Abbas,
director of operations. Colonels Faruq Abu al-‘Ata, Hammad Yasin and al-Sayyid
Ghayth; Lieutenant Colonels Muhammad (Jamil) and Nut Hamidah; and Haj Tariq
isma'il proceeded to seize this shipment. At the same time, the border guard
forces were pursuing the shipment. This time, the information disclosed that
the smugglers would make their attempt in a totally new and different way.

The information also indicated that the Lebanese smugglers had agreed with

the Egyptian smgglers not to let the Turkish smuggling boat, specialized in
infiltrating to the Egyptian coast, come from the Lebanese coast to the terri-
torial waters, considering that one of these boats, totaling three altogether,
had been seized earlier. This is why the Egyptian smugglers this time used
Egyptian fishing boats or launches to meet the Turkish smuggling boat near the
territorial waters. There, the drugs are transferred to the Egyptian fishing
boats, which then smuggled them into the country gradually over interspersed
periods to avoid suspicion. It was not easy to keep watch on the Egyptian
fishing boats, especially since they were returning without any drugs. The
information then indicated that the Egyptian fishing boats were transferring
the drug shipment to a cave in one of three unpopulated islands in al-‘Ajami
Sea. When this information became available to the coast guard and to the
General Drug Control Agency and its branch in Alexandria, a joint force con-
ducted a comprehensive survey of the islands' waters and the drugs were found
in a cave in one of the islands. The cave had been covered by the smugglers
with seaweed and some rocks. The shipment consisted of 10 cans of crude hash—
ish powder and 38 kilograms of crude Turkish opium, which is considered

35
one of the purest kinds of opium in the world. The shipment's value was 5.5
million pounds.

Thus, with the start of the new snuggling season, the smugglers have failed to
transport their poisons to-the market, despite all their tricks to penetrate the
security men's blockade.

8494
cso: 5300/5016
FEATURE AMICIJ 0N OPIUH CULTIVATION IN mm
Cairo AL-WSAWAR in Arabic No 2995. 5 liar 82 pp 25-30

[Article by 'Asin Rashwan: "The Seriousness of Opium Cultivation in Upper
Egypt

[Text] Destruction is cultivated in Upper Egypt. Weapons, murder. and drugs.
Hundreds of feddans are cultivated by people without conscience. It is
possessed by people without conscience. as well. Many fingers point to promin-
ent individuals who are behind the cultivation of death. Certain names stand
out in the drug kingdor—a strange world, in which the plants are cultivated
by night and harvested in the early norning hours. when will this strange
world cone to an end?

There is one doninion in Egypt called the kingdo- of drug trafficking. But
there is also another kingdom, the kingdom of drug cultivation. which is no
less powerful or influential. It is a strange kingdom in which crops are
cultivated in broad daylight and harvested at the break of day in spite of all
the efforts of the police and anti-narcotics agents and the provisions of the
law, which call for 5 years to life in prison. However, this kingdom does
not openly declare itself , but operates Only in secrecy. It is a kingdom
which has its Ien and its servants. Indeed, many signs point to officials
who participate in it or operate clandestinely within it. This strange
kingdon is located in the governorate of Asyut—the same governorate that
produced the infamous "Upper Egypt line" that controlled the cultivation of
drugs in that area and was brought to an end by the police in the 1960's.

The "line" was a legend. But its end was not in itself the end of the
strange kingdom. It was the beginning of other efforts. The people of the
town of al-Chanayin, who became feaous for drug cultivation, relocated their
efforts to other areas within the same governorste.

Col husni al-Dab'. chief of crininal investigations in Asyut. had this to
say:

"The growing of poppieswthe opium plant—is centered in the areas of Abntb
and al-Fatah, particularly in the villages of East al-ﬂa'abidah, West
sl-Ha'abidah. Bani Mohamed, and East al-Butah in the district of Dsyrut;
al-Ma'abidah Island, al-llswatikah, and Taniyah Bani She'ir in the district of
Manfelut; al-Qasir and Dayr al-stir in the district of al-Qusiyeh;
al-Fawallah and al-Gharib in the district of Sahil Salim. which have the

37
fewest farm; and the villages of Best al-Kullabat and Heat Kullabat in the
district of al-Patah, which are famous for the cultivation of Indian heap.
These areas have a unique natural character in that they are surrounded by
Eastern Desert nountain ranges on one side and the Nile on the other. It
med to be difficult to reach these areas and the security forces suffered a
certain percentage of losses during their raids on the drug growing sites.
But the roads have been developed and it is now easy to reach these areas.

River transportation, however. is still not up to the standard necessary to
fight a problen such as this."

The chief of criminal investigations added: ”There is a strong connection

between drug growing. weapons, and crime. These three constitute the
“terrible triangle" in the governorate."

th Are Drugs Grown?

This is a strange question which arises at this point. According to Col Husni
al-Dab': “The spread of vengeance feuds in Upper Egypt generates an urgent
and continual need for funds and'weapons. They are seeking money to buy the
latest types of weapons so that they can deal with a dispute. 0n the other

hand, they need huge amounts of money to pay court costs and employ defense
lawyers because of crimes."

Shades of Night and Day

Despite the fact that drug cultivation is like any other type of cultivation
in some ways. it has certain principles and rules which make it different
free any other type of cultivation. In the village of Best al-Ha'abidah in
the vicinity of Abnub al- . which is ringed by mountains on three sides
and by the Nile on the fourth, I spoke to Shaykh 'Umar al-Khatteb, the village
newsmonger—about the way in which drugs are grown. Shaykh. 'Uaar said:

"The poppy seeds are very similar to onion seeds. They are black in color and
are no more than 1 millimeter in diameter. The cultivation begin in Septeﬂaer
and ends at the end of June. There are two ways of growing drugs:

1. Together in holes. This consists of putting the seeds in a hole and
covering them with soil.

2. In rows. In this nethod, the patch of ground is divided into several
snail patches and these are divided in turn into long rows. The seeds are
sewn in each row also in lengthwise fashion. Both nethods of drug cultivation

use the "separation" method. In other words, they are separated fro: other
plants.

"In sone cases, they grow the drug plants among other crops such as beans,
wheat. Egyptian clover, coriander, caraway, anise, safflower plants, Hyacynth
beans. and sunflowers. These plants provide a degree of camouflage. The
crops are fertilized 7 days after the seeds are planted. Each feddan requires
six bags of chemicals. The plants are irrigated every 10 days beginning when
the seeds are planted. After 60 days. the plants begin producing fruits. At
this tine they need six additional bags of fertilizer.
“Indian henp plants are grown in the sale way. The only difference is in the
color and size of the seeds. The hemp seed is 3 millimeters in size and is
greenish-white in color, siailer to the coriander seeds. The poppy seed is

predominantly black like that of the onion. for which reason it is called
the 'black soed.‘

"After cmletion of the 60-day period of growth, the poppy plants begin
putting out fruit. At this tine. the harvesting operation, which they call
"surgery." begin in order to obtain the crude opium. Shaving razors are used
for this operation. The rasor is divided into two sections and each section
is divided again into two halves. The pointed part is put in a pelI-leef
stall: and this is used as an instruaent for the surgery. The operation on
the leaves or the fruits begins at sunset so that the sun's rays will not
affect the silky liquid and asks it run out onto the ground. During this
operation. the nilky liquid flows out and is thick in comistency. During
the night hours. the white color turns to the color of tea with nilk. then
becoees light brown and then dark brown. In the first hours of morning, it
bees-es a thick. predoninantly black substance. and this is crude spins-or
the 'pure.’ as it is called."

Shaykh 'thaer Khatteb continued: "Most of the tine, they perforn the surgery

on the leaves after 60 days to obtain the greatest possible snout of crude
opiu- for personal use and also for sale so that noney obtained free sale of
the substance will help pay the cost of collecting the remaining yield from

the fruits. By the end of the ripening stage. the plant is 75 centiaeters tall.
There are different varieties of poppy plants including native, (Ineli),
Turkish, and Pakistani. The (Inali) type is the largest and safest. Its

area is short and its leaves grow broad like taato leaves and therefore it

is difficult to detect. However, it also produces the least crude opiu- of

all the varieties. The native variety is the nest productive but it has a

long sten like that of a cotton plant and is easy to detect. Therefore, this
variety is not safe.

"The crude opiua is also collected with razors and is put in china bowls. The
substance resulting from the cutting of the leaves of the poppy plant is called
'leaf opiue.‘

"Indian hemp is collected exactly like mallow. Then it is dried in the heat
of the sun until it resetles dry Iallow. It is then nixed with sugar and
boiled in clay containers. Next it is cut into snall shapes resembling beans.
These are called 'green beans.' There is another method in which dried

Indian hemp is nixed with a certain quantity of sugar and some other ingredients
such as frankincense and nutmeg. This is called 'tahbisheh.’ The industry of
extracting hashish in various grades fron Indian heap does not exist in Egypt.

"however, this industry is widespread in Lebanon. Turkey. Iran. Pakistan, end
Thailand. The dried Indian heap is placed in special devices to produce
various grades of crude hashish. The first process is called 'hubu' in Egypt.
It is the best grade of hashish. The second is called 'zayteh [oil] hashish'
and it is lower in quality. The third is 'ghtbarah‘ [powder]. The fourth

39
consists of the by products fro. the processing of the Indian heap plants and
is called 'khsltah' Iblend] because they add certain other ingredients to it

for conercial deception. including henna and nutmeg. This form is the worst
grade of hashish."

Four Hundred Equals a Quarter Million

While the police are able to seize certain areas, these areas are just the
visible part of hashish cultivation. The people of Abnub al-liaman assert that
there are vast areas that are not visible and are thus out of reach of the

police. These areas are steadily growing so that they will ultimately surpass
the areas held by the police.

One citizen of East ‘al-Ha'abidah said: "The dealers case from Alexandria.
Qina, Sawhsj, and even Cairo and al-l'ayyua to buy crude opiun froa East and
West al-lia'abidah and other cultivation areas. It is solstimes shipped by

certain growers who have great influence and the investigations people never
suspect that: at all."

Scattered co-ents by citizen here and there assert that sense individuals use
their "innunities" to transport huge quantities of drugs to other governorstas.

The price of a feddan of poppies approaches as high as 250,000 pounds while
the cost of growing this crop is no nore than 600 pounds! An ounce of crude
opiul costs 1,000 pounds. and one twenty-fourth of a feddan produces 10
ounces!

Lt Col 'Abd-al-Hun'in 'Abd-al-‘Al. head of the Anti-Narcotics Depertnent. said:
"The cost of drugs has risen in recent months following the seizure of scores
of tons of heshish and crude opium by border guard forces in cooperation with
police forces. The price of a qirsh of 'hubu' hashish hm risen to 60 pounds
as opposed to only 15 pounds a year ago."

First Lt Mahir Khalifah. chief of the el-Ha'abidah police station, said: "I
cane 3 Ionths ago and I knew that al-Ma'abidah was one of the citadels of drug
growing. I tried diligently to look around to identify the cultivation areas
and their owners so I would be able to inforn the crininal investigation de-
partnent in the province. I was startled on one occasion when a citizen
whispered in my ear: 'Ue are really tired of your pursuit and we are planning
to move the cultivation to Alexandria and al-Payyun where there are lore sites
and virgin areas in this field!”

But how do the caspaigns to seize these dangerous and destructive crops begin?

The campaign begins several hours before the ten move out when the security
forces obtain a warrant from the authorized public prosecutor. At 0600, the

ass begin to nove out for the drug strongholds specified in the investigations
departnent's investigations. The forces secure the area so that there will be
no resistance by the growers. After this, some meters of the public prosecu-
tor's office arrive and the routine examination is carried out in which the

personnel characterise the plants. their size. the nethod of cultivation, and

100
the stage of growth—with fruit, flowering, or not flowering. Next came the
measuring operations carried out by the accompanying agent along with a deter-
mination of the owner of the seized ground by either the accompanying admin-
istrative personnel, the operator of the machine that irrigates the agricul-
tural plot, or one of the neighbors. Then three plants or three fruits are
collected and sent to the chemical laboratory of the foremic medicine office
in the area. The reasining plants are collected to be sent to the agriculture
depart-ent's warehouses pending prosecution of the case.

The Penalty: Only 1 Pound

Despite the threat that drugs pose to the public health and the national
economy. the punishment began with a fine of only 1 pound in 1810. In 1926,
the crime becane a misdemeanor with a penalty of imprisonment or a fine or

both. The punishment was optional. When the danger of drugs was confirmed.
the legislators stiffened the punishment in the early 1940's to make the crine

a felony. Paragraph 8. Article 34 of Law 182 of 1960 and its anendnsnts.
which ended with Law 61 or 1977, stipulated: "Anyone who plants. exports,
imports, possesses, harvests. buys, sells, delivers. or transports narcotic
plants at any stage of growth or the seeds of such plants with the intent to
sell or deals in such plants in any form under any circmtances not permitted
by the law shall be punished by temporary or permanent hard labor." Here the

penalty ranges from 3 to 25 years and all the way to execution in instances of
importation.

However, possession of sons portions of the narcotic plants is exempt fron
punishment. In Schedule 6 attached to Law 182 of 1960, the law exempts
three parts of narcotic plants from the punishnent: fibers and stem of
Indian hemp because they contain a very small percentage of the narcotic
substance and it is impossible to separate it; seeds of the Indian hemp or
poppy plants which have been well roasted to guarantee that they cannot be
sprouted; collected poppy pods that are devoid of seeds.

Despite the fact that the penalty has been increased from a fine of 1 pound to
life in prison, there are certain proninent personalities, known by nane, who
are involved in the cultivation of narcotics. Many people in Abnub al-lienan
point to these individuals:

--Hustafa Gharur from East al-Kullabat in the district of al-Fatah who grows
no less than 15 feddans.

--Nadi 'Abbas Harsa from East al-Iia'abidah who specializes in the cultivation
of poppies. His father is a well-known drug dealer.

--Qatab al-Qaliyubi fron al-Sawalin al-Bahriyah. whose reputation is for crimes
of murder and the cultivation of drugs.

«Ahmad Khalifah Huhamnad from East al-Kullabat in the district of al-Fatah.

who has been arrested previously in connection with several cases. lie has
brazenly cultivated a tract of land on note than one occasion.

Ilowever, loopholes in the law have allowed many individuals to escape with a
not guilty verdict or reduced sentences.

lol
In 1980. not guilty verdicts were rendered in lore than 90 percent of the
cases in crininsl court.

According to nilni al-Sharif, a lawyer in the Court of Cessation, there are
several factors that contribute to verdicts of not guilty or ligatening of
sentences:

“Natural factors. such as the growing of the plants on tracts of land adja-
cent to the eastern or western desert which are not held by the agricultural
cooperatives and are not recorded in the land survey registers or the growing
of plants on islands located in the aiddle ofthe Nile or near the banks. All
of these lands are owned by the state. Tor maple. there is the island of
al-Iiarifah located across fron Bast sl-lla'abidah which has an area of 100
feddans. This is supposed to be state-owned land but it is cultivated entirely
in poppies and Indian help.

-Social factors: The nultiplicity of ferns in neighboring areas lakes each
individual both witness and accused. Thus the people refuse to testify against
one another because this will lead to the nurder of the witness on account of
the interaeshed social relations and the high return free the product.

--Arrest neasures: The records generally specify the names of juvenile
defendants without looking into the identity of the real offender. In one
case. the defendant confessed to owning the land and stated that his son had
grown the narcotics. It cans to light that the son was a juvenile and there-
fore the defendant escaped investigation and benefited frou the penalties and
aeaeures stipulated in Law 31 of 1976 concerning juveniles.

"Defects in the legislation: The legislators ends the crime of selling or
growing a procedural crine sore than an objective crime. This applies to

such acts as "picking and weighing out" and the nathod of obtaining inforastion
fro. witnesses in these cases, such as through the newsnonger and the head of
the village. In addition, the legislators stipulated in Article 42, Paragraph
A of law 182 of 1960 that the seized crops should be confiscated but did not
call for confiscation of the land as the basic means of carryina out the cries.

who Is Respomible?

It is certain that so long as these details are known. someone bears the
responsibility for the spread of such deadly crops as these. The accruing
finger points to some definite culprits:

-The local administration sectors in the governorate of Asyut. They have
failed to register the lands bordering the nountain chains as well as the
islands scattered about in the Nile. This naturally ashes these areas co-on
spoils for everyone who lets hi-aelf be enticed into growing these prohibited

plants .

~610sing the loophqu in the luv and s-phasising confiscation of seized land
on which narcotics are grown.

42.
“The Departnent of Agriculture. The agricultural specialists in the coopera-

tives are not carrying out their responsibilities by touring and nonitoring
the farms.

«As the citizens keep saying. the authorities must search for the real
criminal who renains under cover and out of reach—removed from any responsi-
bility.

The figures point to some strange facts:

"In 1973, the security forces seized 150 feddana in East sl-Ha'sbidah. In 1978
the seized area rose to ‘00 feddans!

--In the governorate of Asyut as a whole, the police forces seized $10.5 feddans

in 1976 with an estimated 1.25 nillion Indian hemp plants and around 500,000
peppy plants-

--In 1980, the area increased to 230 feddans with an eatinated 85,000 Indian
hemp plants and 5 nillion poppy plants.

--In 1981, the seized area reached 250 feddane with an estimated 38,000 Indian
heap plants and 6 nillion poppy plants.

who knows how easy plants will fall into the hands of the police forces this
year.

There is one final consent about this kingdoa that kills citizens and sows
death in the land of Egypt at a time when we are looking for every possible
inch to add to our agricultural land.

The cot-sent:

Hill the kingdoa of destruction continue to exist in the governorstes of Upper
Egypt? Will it continue to retain all control? Will those who raisin far
removed from responsibility continue to deal death and reap wealth without
any ham or national conscience?

Another co-ent:

with all the many details available, what else is needed to eliminate the
growing of drugs in the land of Egypt?

now an Opium Stronghold "as Stoned
At dawn. central security forces noved out in more than 12 trucks carrying

350 troops heavily armed with autoutic weapons and with anunition boxes at
their feet. They were led by 20 officers fro. the criminal investigations

department co-anded by Col Huani al-Deh'.
The detachment left the city of Asyut.

The road was winding, squeezed beam the Nile and the Eastern Desert mountain
ranges. The aspect was frightening. particularly in the terrible dun hours.
After 20 kilo-eters, the detachment arrives at the narcotics strongaold.
Al-Ha'abidah in Ahmb al-ualsn!

The forces spread out toward the sites of the poppy and Indian heap plantings.
Each group of troops is led by a special officer.

Near the al-Ha'abidah police station, Col Busni al-Dab' stood receiving radio
sessages fro. the groups raiding the most dangerous drug stronghold.

The reports case in one after another. "Half a feddan of poppies, sir!"

Another voice said. ”Three feddans of Indian heap. air!"

This continued until 1000 by which time the security forces had seized 28
pieces of land cultivated in narcotics!

Nor was this the last raid. The canpaign against the growing of poppies here
in Asyut will continue through the end of June when ﬁne narcotics harvest will
end.

On the other hand, deep in the nountaim, groups of people stand coqletely
ready to enter into fierce cod’at with the police forces when necessary!

Snuggling Across the horder: Pro- Drugs to Video Recorders to Grenades

No soldiers of the border guard, Privates Salli lasif and Sa'd Baayuni,
received a substantial financial award because on 16 Septaﬁer 1981 they aeirsd
9 tons of drugs on the northern coast. rirst Sgt HUM-Id 'Abd-al-aaaid also
received a financial award because be seized 12 tom of drugs in the area of
al-Kelakh east of Abu Qir.

A secret report to the col-ands: of the border forces revealed that his forces
seized 60,527 kilograns of hashish and 165 kilogram of opiu- during 1981.
This represents a total of 61 tons during a single year.

The report stated that the forces seized 235 dianonds, 176 emeralds, 15.2
kilogram of gold, 5 kilogram of silver. 1,907 bottles of whiskey. 9.585
cartons of cigarettes, 2109 cylinders of butane gas. 15,000 ball-point pens.
185 video tape players, 259 televisions. 3.623 gazelle horn pocket knives.
152 kilogram of ostrich feathers, 68 hand grenades. over 225,000 Egyptian
pounds. $38,000. and any other contraband item of various types.

Maj Gen A. ll. Paruq al-Sahn, conander of the border guard forces, said that
helicopter units work regularly with his forces to coIiaat snuggling and
infiltration and that the border guard has established an advanced fornetion

for search and rescue operations employing internationally used methods to
rescue lost individuals and accident victias in Egypt's deserts and along its
coastal borders.

8591
cs0: 5300/5013
44
Johannesbutg SUNDAY TIMES in English 2 my 82 p 21

MOVE TO LEGALIE MGGA FAILS

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070009-0

mm“: mum w- m.”
mm“; H. mm.” 9mm“; ”mm“

mm m mwmmm “mm WWW
“mm WWW. 3%?”

[Article by Mike 'daddacor]

[Text]

5300/ 5747

C80:
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500070009-0
BRIEFS

ARREST OF FOUR TRAFFICKERS-Units of the police brigade of Thiaroye recently
arrested and referred to the court four individuals who were engaged in drug
trafficking. After an investigation. the police were able to trace the net-
work. So it was that during an initial patrol carried out in Thiaroye, they
conducted a seizure of the drug and apprehended a Ian called Ibra Gueye for
possession of 5 kg on Indian heap. When interrogated. the possessor indicated
that this drug was sold to him by his usual supplier Antoine Diatta. At the
home of the latter in Diamagueune. a pistol of Italian manufacture was dis-
covered. Hhen interrogated in his turn, Antoine Diatta revealed having had
convoyed 15 bags of Indian hemp with a total weight of 500 kilograms on board
a canoe from Casamance to Hbao Where the undloading was to take place. He
stated that at the moment of conveying this product on board a clandestine
taxi, they were surprised by three customs officials and they abandoned the
product on the spot. The police were informed of the progress of this opera-
tion by their associates in the customs department who handed over to them

the 15 bags of drugs. The police then conducted another ambush at Thiaroye
station at the same place which made it possible to apprehend other associates
of the traffickers: Hohsmadou Diouf and Salif Lo. [Text] [Dakar LB SOLEIL

in Preach 12 May 82 p a]

C80: 5300/5755

46
BRIEFS

I HAW-Yesterda 's 0 ins: haul uncovered by police in the Cape was the
2:3; in South Africa this year. On March 22 a Hillbrov resident. Save Levkou
(36) was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment for illegally dealing in opium
worth R 110 000. In passing sentence Johannesburg magistrate... Mr H P Prinsloo,
said that "many lives could have been destroyed by this drug. Hr Levkou, a
father of three has been in the Republic since 1977. He had returned from a
visit to his family in Yugoslavia when he brought the opium in. In court
police testified that opiua sold for about R200 a gram. lie was arrested in
hillbrov and detectives searched his car and found the opium. The magistrate
told Levkou the crime was very serious--the ainima prescribed sentence being

' five years. Taking into account the large amount, 450.5 g involved and the
devastating effect it could have had if not found by the police, Hr Prinsloo
sentenced him to seven years. [Text] [Johannesburg TEE CITIZEN in English
11. May 82 p 3]

DRUGS SEIZED IN l981--The value and Ilsa of drugs seized by the police
increased sharply in 1981, the Minister of Law and Order, Mr Louis 1e Grange
said yesterday. Replying in writing to a question by Hr Pat Rogers (NRP, Ring
Uillian's Town), Hr Le Grange said the value of drugs confiscated last year
totalled R257,8-Iillion. This included R245,lo~nillion worth of dagga, nearly
a million tablets worth Rll,9-nillion, 1 kg of opium worth R400 000, 3 111
units of LSD vorth R31 000, 1563 of cocaine worth R31 200 and 5,5g of heroin
valued at R1 375. The drugs represented a sharp increase in both mass and

value, Hr Le Grange said. [Tent] [Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in English
15 May 82 p 4]

OPIUH DEALER GETS BAIL-cape Town-4 Heideveld nun who allegedly dealt in
opium and morphine valued at R70 000 was granted R2 000 bail yesterday by
a Cape Tovn mgistrate. Mr Alban Ellie (28), appeared with four others,
Miss Doreen Amtrong (31), also of Eeideveld, Mr David Julius (42), of
Elsies River, Mr Samuel Hakoena (21), of Soweto and Mr Leslie Raymond
Abraham (29) of Eldorado Rark, Johannesburg. They were not asked to plead
to allegations that in Cape Town on May 6 they dealt in opium and morphine
and no evidence was led. Their arrest and court appearance followed
intensive investigations by meters of the Narcotics Squad. Asked by the
magistrate if he could afford the bail, Kr Ellie said he could not. The
prosecutor, Mr S. shrock, told the court that the State would not agree to
the lowering of bail as the charges Hr Ellie faced were "very serious."

He said the estimted value of the drugs seized was R70 000. The hearing

was adjourned to June 4 and Mr Ellie ms remanded. [Text] [Johannesburg
ms CITIZEN in English 15 May 82 p 2]

107
mm

HULTINATIONAL DRUG mrcms ARRESTED—The Athens General Security has
arrested the members of a narcotics ring; two of the. are British, the other
is Austrian and the fourth is aGreek. They are Helnut lleider [phonetic], 31.
restaurant worker (Austrian), Alan Price, 22 (British). Charles Sines
[phonetic]. 26. (British). and Konstandinos Atahn. Tsolakis, 23. Hell-u:
Heider had traveled twice to Turkey and once to India within the last 6
mnths and had brought back hashish and heroin. Assisted by the two

British men, he was selling the narcotics on the street. The Britishers had
hired Tsolakis. who had been assigned the location of Pokionos Negri Avenue
and A-erikis Square, as well as Stergios G. Vardakss, 2’0, and Pan. Bvang.
Laabatos, 27. who were working in the Pleka district. The lest two have been
in jail for the last mnth on another narcotics charge. One hundred grams
of hashish and 5 gram of heroin were seized. as well as 100,000 drachnas
and 300 dollars. [Text] [Athens IA NE in Greek 6 May 82 p 14]

LARGE HEROIN SEIZURE-«Ankara. 6 Hayn‘mrkish police have uncovered a large
network of narcotics traffickers engaged in saving huge quantities of

heroin to Greece. Specifically, police arrested Helmet Ali, a 26~year old
fisher-an when he was carrying 10 kilos of heroin to Ros. He admitted that

he had made the trip quite often in the past. Helmet-Ali helped police arrest
8 neebers of the gang and seize 68 kilos of heroin in Istanbul and 69 in
Saparju [as published]. Finally, police also followed a bus on the Adana
line and seized another 68 kilos of heroin. The network of drug trafficers
was moving the heroin to Greece and thence to Europe. [Text] [Athens T0 VIM
in Greek 5 May 82 p 8]

650: 5300/ 51003

108
OVERVIEW OF NARCOTICS DIRECTORATE OPERATIONS PROVIDED
Istanbul MILLIYET in Turkish 28 Mar 82 p 13

['Text_7 In 1969. the Narcotics Division of the Istanbul
Directorate of Security was converted into a directorate.
In the course of the intervening 13 years. detectives from
this directorate have conducted operations that have un-
covered 1375 cases of narcotics smuggling and have resulted
in the capture of 2358 smugglers. The operations have '
resulted in the capture of 15.h61 kilograms of narcotics
with a total value reaching 20 billion Liras.

At first. narcotics operations had been attached as a
section to the Division of Security. In 1963. these
operations were affiliated with the Fiscal Police. In the
1960's the section fell into inadequacy when hashish =
smuggling became to be measured in terms of kilograms
instead of individual bricks. As a result. the Narcotics
Directorate was created in 1969 within the structure of
the Directorate of Security. Despite limited resources.
Turkish detectives have worked more effectively than
narcotics experts from other countries belonging to
INTERPOL and until today have captured narcotic substances
worth 20 billion liras.

Stating that the number of heroin addicts in Istanbul

between the years 1953 and 1958 was small enough to be
counted on fingers. officials have described as follows
the information obtained in connection with past and present

narcotics smuggling:

”Prior to 197“. narcotics smuggling involved hashish and

opium. Between 1953 and 1958 a decline in smuggling took
place because the laws were changed and the penalties were
increased. For this reason. this period is known in the
literature of narcotics as the period of stagnancy. A few
heroin addicts existed in Tophane during this period.
Istanbul's first heroin smuggling took place in 19?“.
There are no heroin production facilities in Istanbul or

69
in other provinces of Turkey. This substance is produced
in the Middle East and is sent to Europe and America
through Turkey. Hashish smuggling is the oldest form of
narcotics trafficking. Later. heroin which is an ex-
pensive and valuable substance brought about a decline in
hashish smuggling. The trafficking of narcotics in-
tensified following 1958 and the heroin period began in
19?“. Four smugglers were captured with 1.5 kilograms of
hezoig in connection with the first capture of heroin in
s an u .”

According to the available data. in the course of operations
conducted over 13 years. detectives from the Istanbul Nar-
cotics Directorate have seized 125 packets of heroin from
#1“ smugglers as the result of 1&3 operations. During

this period. 1179 cases of hashish smuggling were un-
covered and 182k smugglers were captured with 13.381
kilograms of hashish. Thirty other operations haye
resulted in the capture of 67 smugglers and 1723 kilo-
grams of opium while 53 smugglers and 230 kilograms

of base morphine were captured in 21 additional operations.

The #3 kilograms of heroin captured during 1981 represented
the largest amount of such captures for any year while
the 1.5 kilograms captured during 197k represented the
smallest amount. Narcotic substances amounting to a
total of 15.h61 kilograms have been transferred by the
Office of the Prosecutor to the General Directorate of
Medicinal Preparations which is attached to the Ministry
of Health and Social Assistance. The narcotic substances
are brought to Ankara where the hashish and the heroin
are destroyed by incineration is special kilns. The
captured opium. morphine. base morphine and cocaine are
sent to the narcotic substances factory at Bolvadin to

be utilized in the pharmaceutical industry.

In operations conducted until now. the first capture of

cocaine took place in Istanbul in 1978 when 35 grams of
the substance were captured from three addicts.

It is expected that the narcotics directorate which has
been operating as a separate section since 1969 will re-
ceive modern equipment in the days to come.

9h91
60: 5300/5386 sun