FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/IOBSLI
13 JULY 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 30/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original z~ut have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/

13 July

WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(P000 30/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA

KONG KONG

Leg-1 Protests Alter Dmgerous Dmgs mundane am
(sou'm GINA 101mm: POST. 17 Jun 82) .....

Downward Trend in Nutter of Addicn bversed in 1981
($0013 GINA mmmc POST. 15 .11: 82)

Police Make board 801 of 37.7 kg of Heroin nae
(ml-y Levis; SOUl'B GINA mmuc PST, 13 Jun 82).....

Briefs
Opium Possession Plea
aeroin Hidden in Radio

mnomsu

Sew Narcotics am: Appointed
(101958.21 Apr 82) ...........

Cmvicted Retain Snuggle: Appeals Jail Sentence
(K0195, ‘m&)eoossooessooes sssss spec-seoooosoeoe.

Suspected lbrphine Snuggle: sneezed
(KMAS, 27 “if 82)....00000000 sssssss sconce ..........
FOR OFFICIAL {BE (NIX

PAKISTAN
321.5
09111:: Seiad
Heroin in ‘Dalnto Saab
Heroin Soiud; Ono Amstod
Big Opiu- Baul hported
PHILIPPINES
Burt:
Mums Sit“ nodded
Drive Set on Cans Dope thors
hbel Manna Plantation
SKI [ANKA

Govornnnt Urpd To Go After Drug Kingpins
(Editorial; 133 ISLAND, 18 Jul 82)......................

Doterrent Pmishnnt for Narcotics Peddlers Approved
(3. c. P.“r‘; m 15%. 17 Jm 82)oooooooooooooouoooo

EAST BUMP!

cam Immune REPBLiC

Brief:
Addiction Anon; mum

MIDI MEGA
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0381A RICA

End)

PANAMA

Police Discover ETA Link With Drug “traffic
(LANAQON, 14 Jm 82)....0000l00000000OOOOOJOOOOOIOOOOOO

heulte of Innel Antidrug Cmeign Reported
(n soLmsmmA’ 16m”)......OO0.0000IOOOOOOOOOOOO

thrihune $111th From 0.8. to Piedree Nesta uncovered
(EL MARIO IE PIEDBAS NEGRAS, 9 Hey 82)

Official Claim Drug Traffic Decline in Piedrae Nesta
(El. D‘iAIIO IE PIEDRAS NEGRAS, 13 Hay 82)

Amheteninee Seized. Treffickers Adeit Pin Pushing
(BI. NANA, 2. 4 Jun 82) ........ . ..... . .....

but Arrests
befficking mecribed

Heroin Transaction lhverted, 'lhrec Arrested
(Bl. mmmm, 27m82)........ ..... ......... ..

Heroin Trefficker Arrested. Denies merges
.(n mmo m NU!” mm. 1‘ J‘ &)OODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Heroin, Heuhuene Traffic Probe Intensified in Valle
Ber-oeo
(EL sum. 15 my 82)eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeleeeeeeeeeeeeoeee

Herihuae trafficking Conviction Reversed by Court
(EL Iwm, 26 hr a)neeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeee

Plen ‘1!) Replace Drug Crope by Aiding Femre Inscribed
(8L 501. m SHALOA, 3 J‘n 82)....oeeeeeeeoeeeeooeoeeoeeo

Briefs
Pill Shipmt Seized
Hey Anddrug Mules
Function Helicopter Crashes
Heroin, hrlhuane Iraffickere Ought
Merihune Smugglers Escape
Plene Pound With Herihuene

Col Noriege Praised for ’Jer on Drug Traffic
(Editorial; IA ESTELLA n: PANAMA. 16 Jun 82)............

FOR-OFFICIAL USE ONLY

24

26

27

28

31

33

37
37
38
38
38
38

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEAR EAST AND NOR'E AFRICA

IRAN
Bdefs
Opium Seizure
Drug Seizures
Opium (bnﬂsceted
Drugs Seized
sun-5mm Arum
SENEGAL

Investigation bush Nmiaers of Drug Users, Sources
(Abus Mont; AMQUE mum,Jm 82). ..... ...........

Jihad Against Drugs Urged for ”111:. .
(Editoriel, hueour P niouf; AMQUE HEW, Jun 82)..

[SSE

larynx Supren Soviet Issues Decree on "11:! Help
(SOVE‘ISKAYA KIRGIZIYA, 11. May 82)

"251' BUMP}!
amen

InterpobSought Trefﬂcker Arrested
(um, 22 my 82):e-eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeceeeeeeeee

Piraeus Narcotics Gag {when Arrested
(moms, 25 any 82)..

West Gem Treffickers Arrested in Athens
(mucus, 27Ma)...’DOCOOOOOOOOIOOOOIO0.0.0.0000...

IGLAND
Supren Court Upholds Ban Against outivsting Hashish
(mmumn,9Jm 82).. ..... . .....
- d -

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

8888

41

55

66

47

48

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“NEWS

SUEMI

(bluntator Suggests Legal Mstdbution of Drugs
(A. de Swan; NRC HANEISBLAD. 3 Jun 82). 53

Parnmnt Votes Funds for Fighting Drugs
(Rm 0. Alfredsaon; SVENSKA DAQIAIBT, 21 my 82)......... 56

Study analyzes Youth Drug Problem
(Class bofgton; 7 mm, 21 May 28)........................ 58

Stockholm Couruy Ponce To Use Tougher bans in Drug War
(m: Johmson; SVENSKA DAGLAIBT, 26 May 82).............. 63

Briefs
Six Year: for Drug Violations 65

FOR 0W“. USE ONLY
LEGAL PROTZS‘I'S ALTER DANGEROUS DRUGS AMENDMENT BILL

Bong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 17 Jun 82 p 16

[Text]

mmmmm mmﬂmm swamﬁmmmmmmumma

a. ”max“ “mam“ .tmm mm:
5% mmmw mm.“ We i” 5%
“mm“ “mm“ Emma WWW. may“???

mg Mm. Mm if?
hm.“ gm?” mﬁm : mwmx ”maﬁa
mmmmmmm “WWW.“ Wm mmL mmwfuna “mud—m; mwuwmwﬁs

5320/9132

C50
3353:; 1:5

ngi?gsgiiﬁi
a: :‘s ‘i

$3.32 533’: EL 2;. 5%
W W... W... W .

WWWWWWWM ”WWW WWW; WWW.W WW WWW .3
..W W. WW ....WWWW -W WW. WWWW W.WWWW. WWWWW
at? mwdmwwm m WW... mum WWW
.nmmmmm awmh ”mm. .mn. mmmummkmm 3 mwuwm “hum.“

BRIEFS

0mm POSSESSION PLEA-~‘l'he partner in e fine of silk flower semaiecturers
hed opium worth $300,000 conceeled in his bedroom, the High Court wee told
yesterdey. Leung Kei-kin (25), e pertner in Alice Enterprise Co et Kai
Chung, pleeded guilty to possessing drugs for unlswful treffickins. Crown
counsel John Upchurch told the court that Alice Enterprises opereted in e
building in 1'ei Ling ‘rei Roed, Kuei Chung. Leung bed joined the tire es s
pertner in 1979 end lived on the factory praises where he hed e bedroon
edjoining the workshop eree. 0n Roveder 20, e police perry raided the
praises end in e werdrobe in the bedroom they found polythene peckets
conteining 0; kg of opium. [excerpts] [Hong Kong scum cam maxim: POST
in English 11 Jun 82 p 19]

mom 111mm 111 ”Dim-Custom officers errested three trensportetion workers
at Kei Tek eirport yesterdey end seized $100,000 worth of No 3 heroin
conceeled in e porteble redio bound for Peris. 'rwo peckets of heroin were
peeked in hleck pleetic sheeting end pested on the redio's two speakers.

The redio as shout to be taken to Austerden vie Peris where the heroin
price is three tines higher then in nongkong. "this is the first time we
heve seized drugs pested on the speekers of e portable radio," said the

heed of the Custom Inveetigetions Bureeu, Superintendent Mek Ken-lee.-

‘rhe radio worked nornIlly dun switched on end it one difficult to spot the
drugs even vixen the redio as opened for inspection. The three men, eged
between 19 end 21, were lest nigit being deteined et Custom‘ lieedquerters
for questioning. ‘rhey ere believed to he enters of s new syndicete which
snaggles drugs to Europe in still quentities. [Text] [Bong Kong SOUTH cam
mm 9051: in mush 14 Jun 82 p 16]

080: 5320/9132
NEH NARCOIICS CHIEF APPOINTED
Jakarta KOMPAS in Indonesian 21 Apr 82 p 3

(Article: ”Death Sentence Not Yet Approved in Narcotics Abuse"]

[Text] Jakarta, KOHPAS--Although the government has declared that the
narcotics danger is a threat to the nation which can destroy the younger
generation. the hope of our people, and Law No 9 of 1976 on narcotics pro-
vides the threat of a death penalty, up to the present judges have been
handing down light sentences.

The heaviesr sentence ever handed down is life imprisonment for Lin Ieng
Pheouw (who smuggled 2 kg of heroin), but on appeal the sentence was lessened
to 10 years in prison. This was stated by the chairman of the Narcotics
Section of the Coordinating Body for the Implementation of Presidential
Instruction No 6 of 1971 [BAKDLAK], Police Brig Gen Darmawan Sudarsono in
answering questions asked by KOHPAS.

Brigadier General Dermawan was appointed chairman of BAKOLAK and installed
in office last Friday [16 April], replacing the former incumbent, Police
Brig Gen Soekardjo Subadi. Darmawan thus holds two positions, as he is still
chief of the Police Headquarters Information Service.

According to Darmawan, the penalities laid down in the laws on narcotics
abuse in the five ASEAN countries are heavy enough, as they include the
death penalty.

However, only Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore, and the Philippines have handed
down death sentences. Indonesia has not yet sentenced anyone to death for

narcotics offenses.

To wipe out the narcotics syndicates, rapid and effective cooperation is
needed, both between government bodies within the ountry as well as with
foreign organizations, in view of the fact that narcotics crimes are not
limited by national boundaries, Darmawan said.

Cooperation with foreign countries may take the form of exchanges of information
or joint operations like that with the Dutch police at the time of the case

of snuggling of 5 kg of heroin at Halim Perdanakusuma airport in Jakarta,

he continued.
According to Darmawan, projects vital to Indonesia could be used for the
activity of international narcotics syndicates. This could involve coopera-
tion with foreign business contractors and with international class hotels.
For that reason the Indonesian Police have always focused their efforts on
guarding against the narcotics danger and other dangerous substances among
members of security units in vital projects. "This would be done in the hope
that officials of such bodies could take an active part in wiping out crime
in this area."

The success of law enforcement does not lie only in the arrest of lawbreakers
or in laying traps for then, but also in success in proving the cases in

court and in having a balanced verdict handed down. as well as in undertaking
preventive action, Darnawan said.

Among those who distribute narcotics there may be addicts. Therefore. they
too need treatment.

According to Darnawan, up to present there is no way of treating or reforming
addicts as a group. Up to the present various kinds of treatment have been
used. some of which are successful and others of which are less than success-
ful.

From the beginning of 1980 to the end of April 1981, the Sarcotics Section
of BAKOLAK has identified 336 narcotics addicts who have been brought before
the courts. Regarding treatment used with narcotics addicts, in general it
is the same as that used at Pamardi Siwi. involving the use of appropriate
medicines, the discipline of physical exercise, and psychotherapy.

5170
C50: 5300/8327
CONVICTED HEROIN SHUGGLER APPEALS JAIL SENTENCE
Jakarta KDHPAS in Indonesian A May 82 p 3
[Article: "Kasim Susanto, Involved in Smuggling heroin, Appeals Sentence"}

[Text] Jakarta. menus-xasin Susanto (47 years old). tried for involvement
in heroin smuggling, has appealed his sentence. He was originally found
guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment by the State Court of East Java.
Later, at the appeals level the Appeals Court in Jakarta reduced the sentence
to 20 years.

Kasim, alias Chia Kim Sui, alias Thio Kim Sui, alias Didi Kusmara, is a
businessman in the fish trade. He was born in Kuala Simpang (Aceh) and his
last residence was stated to be Cilincing, North Jakarta. The smuggling

of 5 kg of heroin in which he was involved took place on 2 May 1980 at

Halim Perdanakusuma airport. At the time a woman named Hrs Sri Rosalia Ctari
was about to depart for Amsterdam carrying the heroin. but the attempt was
foiled by a customs official. The plan to smuggle the heroin was finally
uncovered, and it is known that Kasim was the person who arranged everything
for Mrs Sri Rosalia.

At the court session it was stated that the heroin which was to be flown to
Amsterdam was the property of Alok, alias Theo Kim aok, who lived in Medan.
Kasim obtained authorization from Alok to find someone who would take the
heroin to Amsterdam. Because Kasim knew hrs Sri Rosalia, who was known to

be able to arrange many business transactions with the customs service. Kasim
asked hrs Sri Rosalia if she was prepared to do what Alok wanted. According
to Mrs Sri Rosalia she herself was prepared to respond to Kasim's request
because she wanted to uncover the narcotics syndicate. She also asked for

a letter of authorization from the customs service. She was appointed a
Customs Service informant.

Oddity

Dr Busono Sumardjo, who represented Kasim at the court session, said in his
presentation that in fact the smuggling of heroin in this case was not an
actual smuggling attempt. He said that it was only apparently so, as he
told the court that Mrs Sri Rosalia, in carrying out her "duty" of taking
prohibited goods to Amsterdam, also reported to the customs service and was
successful in obtaining an authorization. As Mrs Sri Rosalia only pretended
to be engaged in carrying heroin abroad, in fact the smuggling attempt which

was uncovered by the police was only an apparent act of smuggling. The
attorney said, it was not really a snuggling attempt.

However. the prosecuting attorney. Dr P Sitindjak, expressed the view that any
incident involving 5 kg of heroin which was to be carried to Amsterdam by

Mrs Sri Rosalia was truly a smuggling effort. The prosecuting attorney asked
for a sentence of death for the accused.

The bench of judges. which was presided over by Dr Sunu Wahadi. considered

that the attempt to smuggle heroin has been proved. The other accusation.

that Kasim was in possession of narcotics without authorization and that he
knew that another person (Hrs Sri Rosalia) would carry the narcotics and

did not report this fact to the authorities, the court considered had also
been proved.

On appeal the judges of the appeals court stated that the second charge
(possession of narcotics) and the thrid charge (knowing that another person
would carry the heroin) should have been the second and third subsidiary
charges under the first count and that the accused should not have been
charged under a single count. The court said that it was unusual that a
person committing a criminal act (involving heroin as stated above) should
then turn himself in to the authorities.

Defense attorney Busono Sumardjo yesterday [3 May] told KOHPAS that the
decision of the court was unsatisfactory. "Therefore, we are going to appeal
the decision."

5170
C50: 5300/8327
SUSPECTED MORPHINE SHUGGLER ARRESTED
Jakarta KONPAS in Indonesian 27 Apr 82 p 8
[Article: "Man Suspected of Directing Morphine Smuggling Arrested"]

[Excerpts] Medan, KOMPAS--A Malaysian citizen named THT [as printed]

(35 years of age) was arrested by the authorities at Polonia airport in Hedan
on Saturday 26 April at the time he was about to leave ﬁedan for Kuala Lumpur
on an MAS [Malaysian Airways System] aircraft. A KOMPAS source states that
THI is suspected of directing the smuggling of 16 packages of morphine (880
grams) by NRC (37 years old), a Malaysian citizen also of Chinese descent

who was arrested on 15 hatch 1982 at Polonia airport.

An official who did not wish to be identified stated that the arrest of Int
was based on information from NRC who is still under detention. The arrest
was made easier because the MAS aircraft was about one-half hour late in
taking off, for reasons that are not known. The delay made THT nervous. To
cover up his nervousness, he invited slumber of people he had known for a
time to have a drink in the small restaurant at the international terminal

of Polonia airport, including several journalists. It is not known whether

it was for purposes of decption. but TBT gave his calling card to a journalist.
On the card his name was written as Terry Teh, which was different from the
name on his passport and on the passenger manifest containing the names of the
50 passengers.

No other information has been obtained regarding THT, because he was
immediately taken away to the Police Regional Command [KODAK-II] for North
Sumatra.

On Thursday 22 April the chief of the Police Information Section for horth
Sumatra, Police Lt Col Dzahiry Daoed. stated that there were indications of
the activity of a narcotics smuggling syndicate in North Sumatra. He spoke
of the seizure of 16 kg of marijuana on 26 December 1981 which was scheduled
to be smuggled to Jakarta and 13 kg of marijuana seized on 15 April 1982
which was moving through Polonia airport. In addition there was also the
attempted smuggling of 16 packages of morphine. Dzahiry Daoed said that
there were many other, similar efforts made to smuggle narcotics from the
Regency of Tanah Karo and from Aceh which were broken up by the police.
Those involved were arrested.

10
In the case of the seizure of the 13 kg of marijuana on 15 April a KOHPAS

source stated that two members of the security unit at the domestic terminal
of Polonia airport in Medan are still being interrogated by the authorities.
The two men are suspected because the 13 kg of marijuana had previously been

exempted from inspection by then.

Discussing the smuggling of marijuana in North Sumatra, Dzahiry Daoed stated
that, compared with 1980 and 1981, smuggling of marijuana had declined. In
1980 there were 81 cases of smuggling involving 162 persons, and 659.9 kg
of marijuana were seized. In 1981 there were 38 cases involving 52 persons,
while 238.3 kg of marijuana were seized.

5170
C50: 5300/8327

11
BRIEFS

JAN-HAY mmc OFFENSES—Hora than 6,500 persons, including 36 foreigners, have
been charged in halaysian courts for drug offenses in the first 5 months of
this year. ninety-three of the accused were charged with trafficking in drug
which carries the death sentence. The director of the criminal investigation
department [CID] told nemen that 111 persons had been charged with possessing
more than 5 grams of drug and the rest for minor offenses. Among the foreigners
arrested were ll Thai nationals, 9 Australians, 8 Singaporeans and 2 French
citizens. With the arrest, note than 9.800 persons have been detained for

questioning. [Kuala Lunpur International Service in English 0800 cm 1 Jul 82
at]

NO momma“ 0F HERO!!! REFINERIES~Kuala Lunpur. 1 July (AFN-Malaysian
police have not received any information to indicate the presence of heroin
refining laboratories operating in the country. Federal police CID Director
Datuk Abdul Rat-an Ismail told the National News Agency Barnama today "I have
not received any report fron France about than obtaining any intelligence that
there are such laboratories in our area." he was comenting on a report in the
latest edition of Asiaveek that French narcotics agents believed that low-grade
No 3 heroin was originating from both sides of the Thai-Malaysia border. The
nagazine also reported a cement by the French special narcotics conissiou
chief, Francious Colconbet, that there was an increase of No 3 heroin fron
Malaysia. Datuk Abdul Rainan said that as far as Malaysian police know, they
had no intimation fron France that heroin seized in that country had originated
from halaysia. "Fran our records for this year, there were no Halaysian
arrested in France at all," he added. he said. however, that one Halaysian
use arrested in west Garlany and eight in Holland for drug activities. [Text]
[Kong Kong AF? in English 0636 cm" 1 Jul 82 BK]

C50: 5300/ $799

12
BRIEPS

- ice in their
OPIUH Slum—Rawalpindi 6 Jun (Staff Reporter) The Gujar Khan pol

rounds seized 6 kilos of’opius tron a person naned Kheir Zanen. The police have
registered a case against the accused on charge of possessing illegal drugs and
started an investigation. [Text] [Rawalpindi mm: in Urdu 7 Jun 82 p ]

OHATD SACKS—Peshawar. 21 Jun (ram CorrespondenO—Peshawar Customs
55:23 Enid No. 2 searched a truck. numbered P” 6617, on G. T. Road, Peshawar
and recovered 63 kilos of heroin concealed in a sack under a load of toaato
sacks. The heroin was being transported to Lahore for snuggling. One person
was arrested. According to an estimate, the heroin is valued at 1.2 aillion
rupees. [Text] [Rawalpindi um in Urdu 22 Jun 82 p 4]

anon: srrzzo: our m-Reroine worth lathe of rupees was seized from
Lohari Chow): on Tuesday. A narcotic snuggle: identified as Latif Humtu of.
J'hang was arrested. “me culprit had cancealed the heroine in fancy wooden
boxes which were being snuggled to Rolland in the name of Abdul Arie. a master
or international gang of snugglers involved in the narcotic smuggling. The er

cused confessed having snuggled two boxes or heroine previously with the same
modus operandi. [Text] [Lahore m PAKISTAN was in mglish 16 Jun 82 p 3]

BIG once not. m-sz, June 13—12:. mobile Customs squad No. 2.
Rawalpindi, in a raid conducted on Caspbellpur-Patehjang road have recovered
opiun and charas worth Rs. 2.00.000 valued at about Rs.200 million in inter
national market, tron a car. According to details, the Customs were tipped
that a Quetta bound car would be transporting the contraband items from Sakha-
kot via Campbellpur and tatehjang. Accordingly a raiding party. headed by Mr.
Mohamed Asa than Tareen, Inspector Customs. along with Hr. Inmil Bag. Ins-
pector, and other staff was formed. The raiding party blocked the Canbellpur-
Patehjang road near watershed and at about 1.30 p.a. the said car was seen
coming from the Camhellpur. The car (an: 3242) was ordered to stop but the
driver fled away. however, the Customs men chased the car and succeeded in
stoma? the car. On search 30 packets of opium and two packets of charas were
recovered from the car which were hidden under thebcnnet. Three persons.
Parnan Ali, driver of the car. and his two accasplices Huramil Shah and Bagh
Ali Shah were arrested in this connection. All the accused belong to harden.
The car. Toyota Corona. Mark ll, valued at Rs. one lakh has also been seized.
It may be mentioned here that when the documents of the car were searched it
was revealed that the car number was fictitious as its original registration
hunter was MRS 2423. A case against the accused has been registered by the Cus-

toms in police station Patehjang under a Bad order and Customs Act. [Karachi
W in English 19 Jun 82 p 4]
BRIEFS

HARIEJANA SITES BAIDED—BAGUIO CITY, June lé-Anti-narcotics operatives are
right now busy uprooting thousands of marijuana plants in the hinterland towns
of Bakun end libungan. Benguet. As of noon today. more than 10.000 fully grown
marijuana plants valued at more than 91 million were uprooted in three beran-
gays in Kibungan. The marijuana operation was launched yestereday from this
city with two helicopter flights bringing in the man to the plantation sites.
Before transferring to the adjacent town of Bakun. the operatives burned the
plants on the spot. Conducting the ongoing operations are members of Region I
CAN!) group headed by Haj. Percival Aldabs. the Baguio police anti-narcotics on-
it mder Sgt. Renato Manuals. with the coordination of the Benguet Pc-INP
consand. [Text] [Manila BULLETIN TODAY in English l5 Jun 82 p 36]

DRIVE SET ON CAMPUS DOPB msmsunce Hayor James 6. Barbara met school secur-
ity officers and law enforcement agents to discuss ways of combating the drug
abuse problen in and out of school campuses. it was learned yesterday. Barbers
said that with the opening of classes. drug pushers will again be visiting
schools to look for new victims. Under the plan. school security officers
will be used in enforcing drug laws inside schools. They will also disseminate
information on the ill effects of drugs. More than 70 school security officers
from various universities and colleges in the city attended a crash course

on drug abuse recently. The course was sponsored by the Manila drug abuse
prevention and control conittee. headed by Barbers. in coordination with

the dangerous drug: board. Barbers said the security officers will be the

lead team in fighting the menace inside campuses. Be disclosed that for the
month of May. 119 drug users and 19 pushers were nabbed by Manila policemen

at6t]ached to the committee. [Text] [Hanila BULLETIN TODAY in English 19 Jun 82
P

REBEL Maximum PLANTATIOR-cm ANOTHER encounter. government operatives uncov-
ered a marijuana plantation farmed by rebels in Ilocos Sur after a rebel over-
see: was subdued. The dissident. identified as Moreno Aciong. alisa Ks Angkay.
was killed when he shot it out with constabulary troopers. The marijuana

farts. with about 3.380 fully-grown plants. was found at barangay Tiagan. San
Emilio, town. near the place of the encounter. The plants were estimated

to cost about P300.000. Investigators surmised that Asiong was a member of

a group of rebels under Pr. Zacarias Agatep. a rebel leader operating in Abra

and nearby provinces. [Text] [Manila PHILIPPINES DAILY EXPRESS in English
19 Jun 82 p 6]

C80: 5300/5798
16
WWW-TOGOAFYERDRUGHNGPINS

Colombo m ISLAND in English 18 Jun- 82 p 6

[Bditoriah

[Tut]

"Narcotics: Catch the Sherks"l

Now the Comma uh: love has decided
to fommlae stringent lau‘l's‘o cum all mix; of am. mf-
Mhﬁ and time use.

The Wet of Sam Amadeus- dc

‘ Alvis had announced at Wednesday’s mm; following

the weld Cahinettnee that thyevmlene
”limiting mwmg‘ﬂleﬂmlnhb ed

“the: of fencoandhnd momma (’0:
button of dm; use pm anon: the undet~2 age

Dmgoonm! In sn halt: habeeomeannnotindmuy.
Theme 5 e Nacoﬂa Bum. a Narcotics Advisoty Council
and 3 who: Fathom of upem'and pond“: to counsel on
the oonttoi o omits.

( Mm!» {cation of Mammy
Bil maﬁa M the (Immune! effon. What does

we": t

meta authorities have to M foe that: mochmned
din; conuol 1’ How much of whet arm I'm
“'"“ " "°‘ mm "W." “m www.mz
nucotla an In 0 1 en

ﬁnch are mote conomed 3%! at the nu when
t

human“ the sham. Nab ' d m
n n and 4 ts fmbuguem hummus!

90cm areal well good bunhmue no(_the cork
who megivenSdL-‘hahedmmeaunnotpo t or

narcotid.

This stigma I; the remit of the mochinulons ofbi;
am who, on theNuootiaBumu': m Minion. hove
omnised dwgtgoddllm into a rude: ticket. It was not to

c Narcotic amen Itself leveled that they
mlook into the activities ofac odtdmun

Colombo scion: of the met ltaa elite. bllc
£1203 otlm such sun of Colombo mu-
mmwladymcntiomdinconnocuonwﬂhﬂmdmg.

ticket'l'hbbnotdldnwin monsoon! «society tittie-
tudguootofdmehndoe- sto mputomby
mmmmmeutnmuu

. Mm luppm themt‘tct? Don't the Home

l
m mmwm‘m‘ m “m ”m M"

Themateﬂ‘cothonyof
mutatingthotmpuuonofdmpisto clhttimuiLThhb
w the cndtdovn on «acetic: Md be
c «.mmﬂumnotaffotdtouvetlnlazm‘tu
donthotitb dumtdl-tinnnwhomuuduaod
obtuwhlctln tum mtttnlntlnocnmofthclt

Meal-yum

16
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080028-8

Dm PUNISW‘I FOR W108 PEDDLERS APPROVED

m. mmmmmm1WWmmwm “gm. wwwmm mmmmmmwmm
a a s In , . um
fmnmawm “mu-mum mmmmmmmmmumamwmwmww

«and:

a ,m 4. m mm m? m
Wmmvm“: mwgm ﬁn».
mm

1
to
an

t

.Um
Mn

man.

I mods

It.

3%“ 00 av

“Mummw H mm: «awn»
mnmmmmﬁmﬁm mmmw

”mm

Colonbo m ISLAND in English 17 Jun 82 pp 1.3
[Article by B. C. Penn]

[Text]

5300/5798

CSO:

l7

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00860R000500080020-8
BRIEFS

ADDICTION mom: CHILDREN-date GDR. like F96. is more and more confronted by a

wealthy eociety problem. namely drug addiction. Drug addiction is growing par-
ticularly anon: children of well-off 82D functionaries. The 19-year-old
daughter of the former deputy minister of university and technical school
affairs, Edith Oeeer, has died recently in East Berlin during the birth of

her first child because of misuse of drugs. Since hash or heroin are herd

to get, the Beat German youths follow recipes similar to thoee of drug addicts
in the West: They intensify the effects of psychoeenaory pharmaceutical drugs
through alcohol. The most popular drug is Pauetan. [Text] [Wllo0807 Halburg
DER SPIEGEL in German 11. Jun 82 p 14]

680: 5300/ 2320

18
BRIEFS

PINDLING ON MARIHUANA-—Young people are being asked to base their decision on
who to vote for on who will promise to legalise marijuana, Prime Minister Lyn-
den Pindling charged last night. Delivering the keynote address at the
'People's Conference' at the University of Wulff Road, Windsor Park, Mr Pind-
ling said: "The Progressive Liberal Party (PLP) will not leaglise the posses-
sion and use of even small amounts of marijuana." [Excerpt] [Nassau THE TRIB-
UNE in English 20 Apr 82 pp 1, 10]

SENTENCBS FOR 13 COLDMBIANS-—Thirteen Colombians were each fined $2,000 or
nine months in prison when they were found guilty of possession of 918 bales
of marijuana by Magistrate George van Sertima who said he found the story they
gave "absolutely ridiculous!" The Colombians. all found guilty on Thursday
afternoon, were each fined $500 or three months for possession of dangerous
drugs and $1,500 or six months for intending to supply. The thirteen accused
had pleaded not guilty to the charges and had been granted cash bails of
$35,000 each. They were represented by attorney Godfrey Finder. One of the
thirteen Colombians. Luis Felipe wilches, 34, had earlier told the court that
he had been hired by an American man called Ten in Colombia to "steer the
wheel to take a shipment of stones to Aruba.“ He told the court, through in-
terpreter Rosa Sweating, that they left for Aruba on April 16 arriving there
the following day where they spent the night in an Inn and then left again
the next day. [Excerpts] [Nassau THE TRIBUNE in English 24 May 82 p 10]

C50: 5300/7561

19
BRIEFS

CANNABIS. COCAINE CASE—-A 28-year old Harwick man was jailed for eight years
yesterday after being found guilty of importing cannabis and cocaine with a
total street value of some $81,000. Sinclair (Tony) Dean. of Camp Road, Har-
wick, had denied stashing the drugs in the back of two stereo speakers brought
into llermuda by Dawn Lemae Lube, 23, of Radnor Road, Shelly Bay. who also
pleaded not guilty to the charges. The eight-women, four-man jury failed to
reach a verdict on Lambs despite deliberating all afternoon. Lambe's friends
and relatives packed the courtroom hoping for a verdict each time the jury re-
turned but eventually Puisne Judge the Hon. Mr. Justice Melville ordered a re-
trial after the jury spokesman said its members could not reach a verdict.
Lam had claimed throughout. she knew nothing about the drugs hidden in the
speakers she brought back from a trip to New York. Handing out two sentences
of eight years and two of six years for the counts Bean faced. Mr. Justice
Melville said he was quite satisfied with the “guilty" verdict the jury re-
turned. "You took the chances and ran the risk to make big money and so it
should be no surprise to find the sentence is harsh." he added. [Hamilton
THE mam. GAZB‘l'l'E in English 15 May 82 p 1]

C80: 5300/7561

20
BRIEFS

FOREIGN MINISTRY AIDE FIRED--Bogota—-Investigstors from the attorney general's
office have arrested Joaquin Vengoechea Pineda, an administrative secretary at
the Foreign Ministry. on charges of trafficking in cocaine. The arrest came
after he was fired by Foreign Minister Carlos Lemos Simmonds, who is presently
in New York participating in the UN disarmament meeting. The foreign minister
had learned of a report issued by the attorney general's office stating that
Mexican police had discovered that Vengoechea Pineda was trying to introduce

9 kg of cocaine into Mexico. taking advantage of his diplomatic immunity.
However, the Foreign Ministry pointed out that Vengoechea was not traveling

to Mexico in an official capacity. It has also learned that Justice Minister
Fello Andrade Manrique has brought charges against Vengoechea Pineda for drug
trafficking. The judge in charge of the case will receive the necessary evi-
dence from the Colombian and Mexican attorney generals offices so he may issue
a warrant and proceed with sanctions. [Text] [PA252116 Bogota Emisoras
CARACOL Network in Spanish 1215 GMT 25 Jun 82]

bMRIHUANA SHIPMENT 00MFISCATED--Sants Marts--Anti—narcotics policemen
confiscated s a-ton shipment of pressed marihuana in a place known as
Los Alcatraces. The four men who were transporting it were arrested. They

were identified as (Marco Aurelio Ramirez Alvarez), (Jothairo Espino Giraldo]
(Jose Guillermo Moreno Castaneda), and (Francisco Hernandez Gomez).
IPA212323 Bogota Radio Cadena Nacional in Spanish 1730 GMT 21 Jun 82 PA]

CESAR DEPARTMENT MARINUANA SBIZURE—-Bogota, 23 Jun (LATIN-REUTER)--Police
have seized 110 tons of marihuana in Codazzi. Cesar Department. The sales
price of the marihuana would be more than $5 million in the United States,

where it was to have been shipped. [PA241827 Buenos Aires LATIN in Spanish
1665 GMT 23 Jun 82 PA]

(250: BMW/21.")

21
POLICE DISCOVER ETA LINK WITH DRUG TRAFFIC

PA2121101 San Jose LA RACION in Spanish 14 Jun 82 p 10A

next) Officiale of the Judicial Inveetigation Organization. 01.]. are inveetigeting the
uee oi Coeta Rican territory by the eeparatiet league Fatherland and Liberty Organization.
ETA. to periodically eeuggle eubetentiai nounte of cocaine iron South Anerica into Iliaei.
To date, the authoritiee have gathered etrong evidence that thin organization he- not only
engaged in drug trafficking. but has infiltrated public oftieee for etill undetenined
purpoaee.

The 01.! inveetigatora eaid they are about to exchange confidential infomtion with the
11.5. Drug Enforcement Meaty. nu. regarding the “We illegal cocaine trade. which uaee
Costa Rica as a bridge between South Aaerica and Hie-i. According to the invertigationa.
ehiplente of ac such ea 50 lbe of cocaine leave porte on the Pacific coat of South
herica every two weeks in large ehipe. However. the DM loeea track of these ehipe when
they are in Coete Ricen watere and the poeeibility in not ruled out that their cargo ie
eyetenetically traneierred to luxury yechte.

The cargo ie then taken to Puntarenaa. where ETA neubere are waiting to take it to Linen
by auto-obile. The inveetigatore euepect tht the cocaine ia loaded into Coeta Mean-flag
ehipe at thia Atlantic port to avoid prohlene. and that it ie then tekan to Mini.

The drug in eubeaquently cold and a eubetantial part of the proiite ia eent to Spain to
finance B'l‘A activitiee. Another part of the profite ie left in Latin herican citiee.

to aaintain a coetly apparatue which the terroriet organization uaee to conduct ite
aetivitiea. ‘Ihia apparatus includee toner activiete. nercenariee and local collaboratore
in each location.

Capture

The recent arreet of a Spanieh reeident here who ie accueed of involve-em in the mrder

of a young nale univereity student by the laat naae oi Montero in Le California dietrict.
provided n big lead for the OlJ'e inveetigatione. The Spaniard adeitted hie reeponeibility
in the eurder. attributing it to "eeotional and payehological" problem that he experienced
with the victia. The body of the university etudent wee found 3 daye after the murder.

he wee apparently anothered to death.

A aore exhauetive interrugatim revealed that the erreeted Spaniard had eecretly entered
Coota Rica a few nonthe earlier. lle even obtained a Coeta Rican paeeport illegally and
voted in the February elections. He alao narried an unidentified Ooeta Rican wonan. The
Spaniard was kept in ieolution for 15 daye and then traneferred to the national penitentiary
eyetea.

lie wee an ETA nilitnnt. but he wee forced to eeigrete to Latin herica after he becane
involved in the mrder of a Spanieh couple for reaeone of love. The orgmieation helped

22
Mn travel to Costa Rica and he was establishing contacts here when he became involved
in the fight with the university student. One of the illegal activities in which the
Spaniard participated here was the burglary of the bone of a lady called Urbina in liontea
de Oca [suburb of San Jose]. 'i'hia invididual is considered dangerous. he is charged

with several crises in Pena-a.

At the tine of his arrest he was carrying a .22-caliber pistol. which the authorities
said was not very dangerous. considering his reputation. however. a mbaaquant analysis
proved that each bullet contained small particles of quicksilver. which is highly

poisonous.

Ranifications

Apart from the Spaniard who was arrested. the OIJ has deternined that "the
organization" has widely grown throughout San Jose. However, the OIJ has
not revealed the identity or released a photograph of the Spaniard. The
organization receives assistance from native collaborators and foreign ner-
cenaries, such as the arrested Spaniard. It is headed by a foreign univer-
sity professor, who is under close surveillance.

The OlJ agents are conducting the investigation very quietly. It has been
learned, however, that a detailed report on the case may be released at any
moment. The possibility that the ETA has important connections with public
officials has not been discarded. Perhaps this allows the organization to
operate with ease and speed. Besides, it has substantial resources with
which to finance its activities. One of these sources is the cocaine traffic.

CSu: 5300/2322

23
RESULTS OF ZONAL ANTIDRUG CAMPAIGN REPORTED
Culiacan EL SOL DE SIRALDA in Spanish 16 May 82 p 5

[Text] The activities carried out by the Federal Judicial Police in the battle
against the drug traffic in the state have made it possible to seize, during
the past 15 days, drugs with a black market value of millions of pesos, as
well as to arrestseveral individuals engaged in the purchase and sale of drugs.

In making the foregoing statement. Hector Aviles Castillo. coordinator for Zone
06 of the permanent campaign against the drug traffic. explained that personnel
under orders from the second commander of the police entity. Manuel Espindola
Martinez, after several days of investigation, succeeded in capturing six
individuals who had been carrying out illegal activities.

First, an arrest was made of Pilar Galaviz Rivera, residing at an unnumbered
house on 11th Street. in the communal land development of the municipality of
Guasave, from whom 480 grams of a substance were confiscated. He claimed that
it was cut for heroin. which he had buried in the settlement of El Sauce, which

is part of the municipality of Badiraguato. .

An arrest was also made of Peliciano Pena Pena, who was arrested in Cosala as
he was attempting to find a purchaser for 250 grams of opium gum. which he had
obtained from a plantation that he himself cultivated and harvested in the
mountainous area of the state, according to Aviles Castillo.

The Zone 06 coordinator also noted that in the small market in the Tierra Blanca
development they arrested as a suspect Fidel Lopez Covarrubias. who had come to
this town from San Jose del Llano, Badiraguato. in an attempt to sell 30 grams

of opium gum, and upon being questioned, he claimed to have 560 grams of marihua-
on seed. which was seized by the police entity in the aforementioned individual's

residence.

Finally, he explained that, upon arriving at the Bachigualato federal airport
from San Certrudis, Durango. Jose Pedro Quinones Rios was arrested, carrying in
four plastic bags 183 grams of opium gum. as well as a 1 gram sample of heroin.
He had attempted to bribe the judicial agents. offering them 20,000 pesos if
they would let him enter freely with his shipment.

26
When taken to the Federal Judicial Police lockup, he disclosed that Pedro
Angulo Rodriguez and Fiero Lara Hera: were his supplier and purchaser, respec-
tively: whereupon those individuals were located and also arrested.

Aviles Castillo stated that, in addition to the afore-entioned drugs, s wrist
watch and a ring with a zodiac inscription of the sign Leo, items apparently

made of gold. were confiscated from Quinonez Rios, as well as 65,000 pesos in
cash. '

2909
C80: 5330/83

25
MARIHUANA SHIPMENT PRC)! U.S. 1‘0 PIEDMS NBCRAS DISCOVERED
l’icdras Negras EL DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 9 May 82 Sec 3 p 1

[Text] Yesterday, members of the Federal Judicial Police succeeded in arresting
two of the narihuana distributors in this border port, and it was also noted that
the situation has become reversed, for now the drug traffickers are engaged in
trafficking from the United States to this port. The capture was a complete
success, because they had been working on the surveillance operation for over a
month, and had learned about different contacts that the two distributors were
making. their different systems of operation and the places used for the marihuana
trafficking fron Eagle Pass, Texas, to Piedras Negras.

In reporting the foregoing to the newspaper EL DIARIO, the Federal Judicial Police
group chief, Comdr Mario Espinoza, stated that those in custody are Cesar Rodriguez
Rodriguez and Juan Antonio Vargas Aguilera, alias "El Casi," the latter being a
resident of the neighboring town and owner of the marihuana, which he supplied to
Rodriguez Rodriguez for distribution among all the addicts in Piedras Negras.

Vargas Aguilera was arrested in a 1976 Chevrolet Camaro. He told the authorities
that he had been operating in this way for approximately 3 months, bringing the
marihuana from Eagle Pass, Texas, and selling it for $10 per joint. It was claimed
that this is proof that the action taken has been very special, since the procedure
used involves regarding the Eagle Pass resident as an undesirable person in this
port; therefore, after he serves the sentence imposed upon hin, he will have to

be expelled fron the country as an undesirable person.

The shipment that both had in their possession was analyzed yesterday by members
of the public health entity, and it was found to be actually cannabis indica. The
marihuana and those under arrest were turned over to the federal prosecutor who,
in turn, after completing the pertinent investigation, will proceed to remand
them to the federal judge of the second district court.

For the present, the subjects in custody were held in the municipal crime preven-
tion jail, at the disposal of the agent of the Federal Public Ministry. They
will rennin there until they receive the writ of official imprisonment, and then
will be transferred to the rehabilitation center, that is, the lunicipal penal
institution.

Ono observes in this another blow against the drug traffic in a degree that has
been found to exist, because previously there were only indications, but on this
occasion it has been completely confirmed.

2909

080: 5330/83 26
OFFICIAL CLAIMS DRUG TRAFFIC DECLINE IN PIEDMS NEGRAS
Piodras Negras Bl. DIARIO DE PIEDMS NEGRAS in Spanish 13 May 82 5:; B p l

[TextP'He have noted a reduction in the drug trafficking in this port. The latest
arrests of those involved in this crime have related only to the seizure of stall

amounts which are far removed from the whole tons of narihuana that used to be
seized about 5 years ago or nore.

"This is due to a very obvious situation: the destruction of plantations by the
forceful campaign of the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic, and the
use of other systems which have totally eliminated the use of the highway for

transportation; something which is risky and definitely obsolete for the drug
traffickers."

The foregoing statement was nade yesterday to the newspaper BL DIARIO by the
Federal Public Hinistry agent, Javier Blizondo, who added that the crimes co-itted
most often in this area are: the one covered by Article 118, that is, the exploits-
tion of laborers, as well as traffic violations involving crashes and accidents.
There has also been a very sharp decline in the crime of arms trafficking, which
ranked nearly in first place during the 2-year period 1980-81.

"The dealing in drugs and narcotics is a situation that has taken different direc-
tions, as noted in the national press, wherein one reads, in fact. reports about

the capture of ships and airplanes engaged in drug trafficking, with the large
shipments carried on the highway; and it is intended to put a final end to that."

he added that there is the constant activity of the Federal Judicial Police, which
will result in the arrest of addicts and traffickers.

2909
C80: 5330/ 84

27
AHPHETAH'INES SBIZED, TRAFFICKBRS ADHIT PILL PUSBING

Four Arrests

Nuevo Laredo BL HANANA in Spanish 2 Jun 82 Sec 3 p 5

[Text] The Federal Judicial Police succeeded in confiscating a Ioderate quantity
of toxic pills and narihuana in two different cases, and those responsible are
being questioned in connection with the drug traffic on the border.

Mario Alberto Varela Rubio,a resident of No 215 Bolivar Street, was captured,
along with Baldenar Zapata Chaps, of 829 Gonzales, with a total of 5,000 toxic
pills of various brands.

Baldesar had been invited by Mario Alberto to take pills when they were caught

by the federal forces, and it was reported that both individuals were engaged
in trafficking among the addicts in the town.

They themselves later disclosed that they had been distributing the pills in the
downtown area and in certain schools.

Another arrest was that of Flora Bathela Ramos Pajardo and Feliciano Ruiz Cobos,
who were detained in the red-light district with two packages containing mari-
huana and 11 amphetamine pills.

These individuals were fully identified as those responsible for selling grass
and pills to the addicts in that area.

At the Federal Judicial Police guard station it was reported that those in
custody were being exhaustively questioned about the narihuana and anphetanine
pill trafficking in which they have been engaged for a long time.

Trafficking Described
Nuevo Laredo Bl. HANANA in Spanish lo Jun 82 Sec 8 p 5
[Text] Mario Alberto Varela Rubia confessed that, through an investment of 30,000

pesos, he had purchased the toxic pills that the Federal Judicial Police agents
found in his possession on the day of his arrest.

28
This individual made the foregoing confession to the agency of the Federal Public
Ministry. having been remanded to the third district judge on charges of a crime

against health in the degree of possession, trafficking and supplying of psycho-
tropic substances.

The federal police found in his possession 5,000 pills of various types which were
highly toxic and which can only be purchased with a doctor's prescription. He
claimed to have purchased them from someone residing in Monterrey, although they
were being sold for a higher price than in the drugstores, while he resold them

in this town among addicts at a price of between 20 and 60 pesos, depending on
the grade.

Mario Alberto was captured in his house at No 215 Bolivar Street. just as he was

selling pills to Baldemar Zapata Chapa. an individual who received his release
to the federal prosecutor under the legal reservations.

 

Mario Alberto Varela Rubio and Baldemar Zapata Chaps were captured by Federal
Judicial Police agents with 5,000 toxic pills in their possession.

2909
cso: 5330/83

29
HERO!“ TRANSACTION MARTED, THREE ARRESTED
Ciudad Juarez BL FRONTERIZO in Spanish 27 May 82 Sec A p 6

[Text] Yesterday, Federal Police agents succeeded in thwarting a transaction with
heroin about to be carried out by individuals fron Durango and an El Paso purchaser.

They seized the drugs, which are worth over $16,000 and, in addition, arrested the
leading trafficker and his two accomplices.

"He learned several days ago that Oscar Pineda Aguirre, aged 38, who resides at 106
5 de Febrero Street, was receiving ship-ents of that drug, which was being brought
iron the settlenent of Vicente Guerrero, Durango, by his 'mles" who were Jessu
Sesnez Galindo and Constantino Hares Zaaudio. "

Condr Octavio Esquina reported: "He started watching his, waiting for the right
tine to catch him, of course with the shipment.

"He received 2 ounces, and it was later discovered that they had been sold in that
location in Durango by Jesus Garcia, '31 Chuy,' for 300,000 pesos; and that Pineda
Aguirre intended to sell the heroin to the American from El Paso, Steve Nickelson.

"The delivery was to be made in a house located at Aluninio and Hospital Streets.
We waited for hours, and the buyer did not arrive. '

“We were afraid that they would escape from us," renarked Mr Bsquinca, ”and so we
nabbed them.

"All three who were captured have confessed and admitted the participation of each
one of them in that drug trafficking. Pineda Aguirre made the purchases from '2].
CM)" by telephone, and Hares Zanudio and Scene: Galindo went for the shipsents.

"For the 2 ounces, Oscar was to receive $16,000, which Nickelsen intended to triple
when he sold then retail."

2909
(:80: 5330/81.
HEROIN TRAFFICKER ARRESTED, DENIES CHARGES
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 16 Jan 82 See A p 8

[Text] An individual captured a few days ago by Federal Judicial Police agents as
he was engaged in a "deal" to sell heroin, upon making his preliminary statement
in the state's second district court yesterday morning. denied all the charges
and evidence that the federal prosecutor had submitted against his in that court,
claiming that he had been tortured to adnit his participation in the drug traffic.

The accused is Monico Herrera Nunez, a resident of 4923 Gutierrez Street, who was

captured by federal agents on 2 January, as he was selling several grams of pure
heroin worth $8,000 to another individual.

According to the investigation conducted by the federal police, it was learned
that a heroin "deal" was to take place at Gutierrez and Comer Parias Streets;
and hence they proceeded to watch the area in order to apprehend the drug traf-
fickers.

The operation proved successful, and they succeeded in arresting Honico Herrera
Nunez, but not the "contact," who evaded the vigilance of the agents.

Upon being questioned, the drug trafficker stated that he intended to sell the
heroin at a price of $800 per 5 grana, whereas he had purchased the entire amount
of the drugs in the town of Miguel Aleman for the sum of $8,000.

It was also learned that the aforementioned subject entered prison some years ago
for crimes against health. and was jailed for a period of 5 years, meeting Juan
Antonio Cantu Gonzalez while there.

The latter was responsible for "testing" the quality of the heroin, and he was
therefore captured by the federal police.

Uhcn Honico Herrera was brought before the second district court to make his
proliainnry statement, he denied all the charges brought against him by the
federal prosecutor and the heads of the Federal Judicial Police group, claiming
that he had been tortured to admit his participation in the sale of heroin.

2909
CSO: 5330/86

31
HEROIN, HARIHUANA TRAFFIC PROBE INTENSIFIBD IN VALLE HERHOSO
ﬂ. Hatamoroa BL BRAVO in Spanish 15 May 82 Sec A p 11

[Text] Since Federal Judicial Police agents have been intensifying the investi-
gation of heroin and marihuana trafficking in Valle Hermoso, it will come as

no surprise if powerful, well-known residents of that locality fall into the
hands of the federal police at any momenet.

For over a week, the federal agents under the command of Benito Estrada Villa-
gomez have been conducting detailed investigations after they had managed to
learn about the arrival of a large heroin shipment in Valle Hermoao. It was

_ discovered unofficially that. at any moment. a large group of federal agents
may arrive to reinforce the investigation.

Although the Federal Judicial Police have not issued any extensive information
in this regard, a source close to that entity said that he presumed the heroin
shipment might possibly weigh from 3 to b kilograms, and that it arrived in
the locality about 10 days ago.

It was learned that the investigations are very well under way, and the sudden
arrest of countless residents of Valle Hermoso and Hatsmoros could occur at any
time.

There are several rumors claiming that the valuable heroin shipment belongs to
an organized ring of drug traffickers who reside in various border towns, but
they are said to be primarily persons who are very well known in the area.

It was learned that the federal agents have been making constant tours as part
of their investigation aimed at seizing the heroin shipment that presumably
arrived in Valle ﬂermoso.

Apparently. they are also investigating the arrival in the neighboring town of
other similar shipments of heroin and large marihuana shipments, which come
both by land and by air.

There is the possibility that a throng of Federal Judicial Police agents ray
arrive in the area at any moment as well, to participate in the probe of the
large-scale heroin and marihuana trafficking.

2909

680: 5330/83

32
HARIHUANA TRAFFICKING CONVICTION REVERSED BY COURT
Hermosillo EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 26 May 82 Sec A p 4

[Text] In a verdict handed down on 10 February of this year, the third district

judge, with a residence in Nogales, Sonora. sentenced David Suttal. Larry Rosen-
thal and the latter's wife, Jill Cowan, to a 7-year jail term for being penally

guilty of the crime of marihuana transportation, for which reason they remained

incarcerated in the Nogales jail.

The respective record shows that a trailer was parked in the settlement of Caborca,
containing a shipment of marihuana, but it was not until 1 September 1981. in

the town of Nogales, Sonora, that David Suttal, Larry Rosenthal and his wife, Jill
were arrested. David said that the marihuana had been brought from the city of
Guadalajara, and that the Rosenthal couple were dissociated from that shipment.
But, in any event. the Nogales federal judge sentenced them to 7 years in prison.
There was the fact that they were very poorly defended in the first instance.
especially in the case of the Rosenthal couple.

Joel Castillo Takes the Defense

Appointed by the Rosentnals, Joel Castillo Terrazas took charge of their defense
in the Fifth Circuit unified First Court, established in this capital, which
received the record rn appeal. The result was that Magistrate Alberto Martin
Carrazco declared that Larry Rosenthal and his wife. Jill Cowan, were not penally
guilty of the crime of marihuana transportation of which they had been accused;
and hence they were given an absolute, immediate release.

In ordering the acquittal of the Rosenthal couple, the Circuit Unified Court took
into account the {act that the injury cited by the private defender, Castillo,

to the effect that the statements made by the Rosenthals were obtained through
moral coercion exercised on them by the investigative authorities, proved to have
groun's; because this couple was subjected topressure for 10 days before being
remanded to the judge. This undoubtedly caused a kind of coercion on then, which
affected their attitude toward making a statement with complete freedom, a view
that has also been upheld by the Penal Court of the Supreme Court of Justice.

Closely associated with the verdict of acquittal that is being discussed was the
argument by Castillo Terrazas to the effect that the drugs were not under the

33
pvrnuuul control of the accused; because whereas they were apprehended in Nogalea,
Sonora, the narihuana was located in Caborca, away from their control and availa-
bility, and hence there was no transportation involved in the case. Furthermore,
it was also noted that, during the period of questioning. the foreigners did not
speak the Spanish language. nor did the police captors speak English. Therefore,
without an interpreter it would have been impossible for the data contained in
the official letter of remand to have been correct or accurate. This, in

addition to other views put forth by the private defenizr. culminated in the
acquittal of the Hoaenthala.

2909
C50: 5330/83
PLAN TO REPLACE DRUG CROPS BY AIDING FARMERS DESCRIBED
Culiacan EL SOL DE SINALOA in Spanish 3 Jun 82 p 7

[Text] The Santa Barbara agreement on drugs, backing the development of programs
for the replacement of crops. and promoting agricultural-livestock, industrial
and commercial activities with the pertinent economic incentives. adopted at the
22d Mexican-United States Parliamentary Meeting, has substantially changed the
program that was being pursued. limited to the eradication and destruction of
plantations.

The foregoing was the manner in which Federal Deputy and engineer Jose Carlos de
Saracho. former head of the National Union of Vegetable Producers, described the
current situation. emanating from the policy followed by the government of the
state of Sinaloa, to the effect that, "A program involving eradication and destruc-
tion of plantations would be of no use if it were not accompanied by another

that represented alternatives for those traditionally depressed areas." The
legislator thus summarized his view, explaining what his position had been at

the interparliamentary meeting.

He noted that there had been express recognition from the legislators, through
Benjamin A. Gilman, a member of Congress and representative from New York, who
had mentioned the great effort being expended by Mexico, and in particular by
the government of Antonio Toledo Corro, to replace the drugs with legal crops,
such as vegetables. and voiced his support for a fund that exists in the United
Nations to be contributed to back these programs, which he termed important.

During the 1981-82 season, 1,000 hectares were planted using drip irrigation,
which represented employment for 50,000 workers in their places of origin; and
[or the forthcoming 1982-83 season, the planting of vegetables on 2,500 hectares
is planned. Deputy De Saracho Calderon reported this, adding that, in the
season just ended. an investment of 15 billion pesos had been made, including
“tho uqucstionablo benefits entailed by this program, namely, jobs, roads,
electrification, the construction of business firms and other similar projects."

De Saracho Calderon expressed confidence that, with the support that has been
established in the Santa Barbara agreement on drugs, there might be included

other types of projects that would benefit the farmers in the rainy areas, such

as programs for improving the housing and nutrition, particularly that of children,
with the creation of milksheds, etc.

35
Insofar as the other problems discussed at this interparliamentary meeting were
concerned, Deputy De Saracho also mentioned that of the people without identifi-
cation papers. considering the fact that day laborers emigrate from Sinaloa.

lured by the blinding glitter of dollars. he said that Joaquin Gamboa Pascoe

had, in particular, requested of the United States Government an unlimited respect
for human rights. "that they not be treated as criminals." And, as for considering
that, after 5 years, a day laborer is entitled to regularize his status in
accordance with the Sypson Hasoli bill, he said that the Mexican legislators
refrained from expressing their opinion, and confined themselves only to demanding
respect for human rights.

2909
650: 5330/85
BRIEFS

PILL SHIPMENT SEIZED--Pedera1 Judicial Police agents seized 11,080 toxic pills
with an estimated black market value of half a million pesos hidden in a suitcase
on the "La Bela" train arriving from Guadalajara, Jalisco, and bound for the
border towns of Nogales and Mexicali. The Federal Judicial Police reported that
the owner of the suitcase had not been arrested, because the bag did not contain
any documentation. The confiscated pills (9.260 toxic pills of the Simple Darvon
brand and 1,800 Umm Espacil capsules) were placed at the disposal of the agent

of the Federal Public Ministry. It was also announced that the surveillance on
all transportation facilities. as well as on the highways. has been intensified,
because there have recently been more arrests made for trafficking in various
types of drugs with a direct destination or enroute to the state's border towns
or to the United States. [Text] [Hermosillo EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 8 Jun 82 Sec
A p S] 2909

MAY ANTIDRUG RESULTS-During May, 50 persons implicated in crimes against health
were arrested by the Office of the Attorney General of Justice. Reports supplied
by the coordinator for Zone 06 of the permanent campaign against drug trafficking,
Hector Aviles Castillo, indicate that the destruction of poppy and marihuana plan-
tations was also successful, as was the seizure of substances harmful to health.
Aviles Castillo told this morning paper that. during the operations conducted

last month, seizures were made of 32 kilograms and 999 grams of marihuana, and l
kilogram and 988 grams of poppy seed, representing a serious blow to the organized
drug traffic. The Zone 06 coordinator noted that l kilogram and 493 grams of
opium gum were seized, as well as two long-barreled and three ahort-barreled
weapons which were carried by some of those arrested. Also, five mobile units
that had been used in the unlawful activities were confiscated. As for the
destruction of plantations, Aviles Castillo remarked that 60 poppy plantations

on an area of 150 square meters were destroyed by fumigation, and one mixed planta-
tion covering 180 square meters was also destroyed. The Zone 06 coordinator said
that 093 poppy plantations and 78 of marihuana, over areas of 177,069 and 23,317
square meters. respectively, were destroyed manually. Aviles Castillo concluded
by stating that the battle which the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic
has decided to carry out against drug addiction and trafficking is being waged
with marked emphasis, to preclude an increase in these illegal activities. [Text]
[Culiacan EL SOL DE SINALOA in Spanish 7 Jun 82 p 2] 2909
FUMIGATIUN HELICOPTER CRASHES--Nexico City. 6 May (Lemus)--Aviation pilot Capt
Adrian Sepulvvda Martinen. who is a nwmber of the antldrnu traffic corps of

the 01 fire of the Attorney General of th liepubllc. is confined In the ISSS'l‘l-I
llnstlture of Social Security and Services for Government Workers] hospital ‘0
(Iulianm. Sinaloa, as .1 result of injuries that lee sustained when his Incl icnpler
crashed. Today, the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic reported
that turbulence was the reason that the helicopter of that office's air services,
with registration XC-GOR. came down in the vicinity of the settlement of San
Jose del Llano, Sinaloa, or on the spurs of the Western Sierra Madre. The air-
craft in question. commanded by Capt Sepulveda Martinez, who has had 25 years'
experience, was returning to its base after having engaged in fumigation work

tn destroy poppy and marihuana plants. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL HANANA in Spanish
5 May 82 Sec A p 3] 290‘)

HEROIN, MARIHUANA TRAFFICKERS CAUGHT--Mexico City, 6 May (EXCELSIOR)-The Federal
Judicial Police captured several rings of drug traffickers, primarily in states
in theunarthern part of the republic and Hichoacan. In El Dorado, Sinaloa, the
agents arrested Jorge Enrique Zamora, Manuel Ovalle Ayala and Erasmo Ramirez, who
were growers and distributors of marihuana. In that same location. they also
arrested Eladio Hernandez Rios, who was growing grass in the backyard of his
house. In El Chocotito, Tamaulipas, they captured Pilar claviz Rivera, with 480
grams of heroin. In Zacatecas, they caught Carlos Carrillo del Huro and Antonio
Castaneda Carrillo. who were marihuana distributors. [Excerpts] [Mexicali LA VOZ
DE LA FRONTERA in Spanish 7 May 82 Sec 8 p 16] 2909

MARiHUANA SMUGCLERS ESCAPE-—In Hatamoros. the Federal Judicial Police succeeded in
dealing a heavy blow at the international drug traffic, upon seizing over half

a ton of marihuana which was to be taken illegally into the United States.
According to the reports provided in Hatamoros, Comdr Benito Estrada Villagomez,
heading a large group of agents, managed to ascertain that, at the site of the
[as Brigades communal farm. a trafficking ring was operating. engaged in taking
marihuana across the Rio Bravo in tractor tires equipped with special motors to
drive them. when the agents learned the time at which the operation was to be
carried out. they went to the site. properly supplied with high-powered weapons.
it was reported that. when the traffickers noticed the presence of the federal
police. they put up resistance and fired at them, holding a terrific gun battle
which lasted for several minutes. All the poisoners succeeded in making their
escape to United States territory, leaving behind part of the marihuana shipment
that was valued at several million pesos. It was confiscated by the Federal
Judicial Police. as were the tires and equipment used by the traffickers to take
it across the river. No casualties were reported among either the leice unit

or the narcos. who were reported to the FBI in Texas for their arrest. because
they had managed to take across a moderate amount of marihuana before being
caught by surprise by the federal police. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO
LAREDO in Spanish 8 Jun 82 p 6] 2909

PLANE FOUND HIT" MARIHUANA--Saltillo. Coahuila, 20 May (NOTiHEX)--Today. the
federal public minister In the state announced that a small abandoned plane
containing traces of marihuana was discovered in the settlement of Sauceda, in
the municipality of Ramos Arispe. The report noted that the local farmers had
claimed that the aircraft was crewed by three Americans who were apparently
carrying smuggled marihunna. The witnesses said that, after landing, the Ameri-
cans boarded a vehicle and left. The Federal Highway Police are continuing the
search for the three presumed smugglers. The abandoned plane is a model 60
Piper Aztec. the owner of which is the American Jim Kaarmond. a resident of
Houston, Texas, the report concluded. [Text] [Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DE
PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 21 May 82 See A p 1] 2909

(30: 5330 38
COL NORIEGA PRAISBD FOR “AR ON DRUG TRAFFIC

PA181705 Panama City LA ESTRELLA DE PANAMA in Spanish 16 Jun 82 p 4A

lEditorlsl: "Colonel Noriega. lllt'NJilonul Guard and Repression of Drug Trafficking"]

[Excerpts] The U.S. authorities fighting the drug trafficking have again praised (:01
Manuel Antonio Noriega for the effective cooperation Pena-a is giving to control this
“legal traffic. 01 other occasions Colonel Noriega. as c-2 of the National Guard. and
mun Aronomena. as director ui' the National Departunt of Investigation (DEM). have been
praised and encouraged for their work and that of the personnel under them for their
vigorous and constant control of drug trafficking in our country.

There was a tile when Panau was infamous as a center of drug traffickers and international
criminals involved in these activities. but in a very few years the revolutionary govern-
ment was able completely to change our country's image through decided and strong actions

against drug trafficing, particularly at ports and airports. Since then Colonel Noriega
has becose prosinent in his actions in this area. not only with 6-2 and DE“ personnel but

with the customs inspectors of the Finance and Treasury Hinistry. Visible and favorable
results are constant. and they have generally received the proper publicity.

Therefore it is surprising that certain media are echoing rumors and distorted slanderous
rhanu-s against the National (Iuard. and particularly against Colonel Noriega. regarding
drug: trafficking. 1hese moors are not true and only contribute to sowing distrust and to
«lim-roditing m institution that nuut desaerve the respect of every Pans-anion.

we understand that this is being done because of tactics used by the pol itical opposition.
lluwevur. we do not believe this is ethical or Just. especially at a time when Brig Gen
liuhen Dario Parades. commander in chief of the National Guard. has repeated that this
organization will not become involved in political feuds and will be at the service of
all Panel-anions on an equal. basis. In addition. international authorities who fight drug
trafficking know that Pam-us in rendering effective service in this regard and deserves
praise.

CSO: 5300/2320
BRIEFS

OPIUM SBIZURE-According to an IRNA report. members of the Islamic Revolu-

tion Guards Corps seized 1.300 kg of opium along the Halayer-Nurabad Road

and arrested three persons. [LD190126 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian
1630 GMT 18 Jun 82]

DRUG SEIZURES--In a series of strike operations launched last Friday, the
Revolution Guards in Nurabad seized 1,k20 kg of opium from a gang of smug-
glers in the mountains surrounding Piruzabad in Alishtar. Five smugglers
were arrested in this connection. Investigations are still continuing.
Also. the Islamic Revolution Committee in Mashhad announced that last night
the self-sacrificing guards of the Islamic Revolution Committee in Khajeh
Rabi', while searching a duum truck carrying limestone on the Hashhad-Kalet
Road, discovered 150 kg of opium in 21 bags and 15 kg of heroin in 15 bags.
Three people were arrested in this connection and. together with dossiers

on their cases, were handed over to the competent authorities. [LD210110
Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 20 Jun 82]

OPIUM OONFISCATED--The central news unit reports that through the efforts of
antidrugs headquarters in Lorestan Province 4,780 kg of opium was seized from
smugglers. Also. the antidrug personnel in Bakhtaran Province discovered and

confiscated 2,800 kg of opium. [LD230302 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian
1030 GMT 22 Jun 82]

DRUGS SEIZED--According to the Central News Unit the Central Islamic Revolu-
tion Prospector's Office. Anti-Narcotics Branch, announced in a statement
that though efforts rendered by the brother Islamic Revolution Guards and
[word indistinct] anti-narcotic of the cities of Khorremahad, (Eslam-e—Bakh—
tarnn). Torhat-e Heydariyeh. Qom, (Shahr-e-Kord) and [word indistinct], 150
international smugglers were arrested in a number of clashes in those
cities. More than 6 tons of narcotics including opium juice and heroin were
seized from those smugglers and handed over to the prosecutor's office, who
in turn will submit it to the Health Ministry for pharmaceutical manufactur-
ing. [L025013b Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1030 CHI 24 Jun 82 Lb]

CSO: 5300/2322
INVESTIGATION REVEALS NUMBERS OP DRUG USERS, SOURCES
Dakar APRIQUE HUSULHAHE in French No ’0 Jun 82 pp 9, lo
[Article by Abass Diouf: "Stop the Drugs"]

[Excerpts] Like prostitution and alcohol, the use of drugs is forbidden by
the Koran. Moreover, the Koran does not make any distinction between the
manufacturer or grower. the dealer and the user. They all bear an equal share
of responsibility. And on Doomsday. they will be "dealt with severely."
Therefore, those who use drugs or encourage their use. or wait and see while
drugs devastate our youth have no excuse. Above all. this applies to the bad
heads of families who, as the Holy Book says, will. have to answer to God for

the actions of their children whose "keepers" they are.
The Number of Drug Addicts Increases Every Year

Since our country became a sovereign state, the use of drugs by our youth has
steadily increased. We have reached the point where each citizen. each Huslim
must take the bull by the horns and annihilate the evil which is attacking the
very roots of our society. According to official statistics, the number of
drug addicts has increased 25 times since independence. It is true that eco-
nomic and social development as well as modernism have played an important
part in this increase; nevertheless. a lack of education remains the primary
cause for it. It is sad to say, but parents are increasingly shunning their
responsibilities as educators. Most children are left to themselves and read-
ily become prey to the temptations most harmful to our moral values. Among
them. prostitution, alcoholism and drugs. In the case of the latter, we must
note how quickly the users reach a state of physical and moral degeneracy.

To be able to fight this plague, it is useful to know its various aspects.
Pill Consumption at an All-Time High

Some children become mrihuana or lobito users after smoking first straw, then
cigarettes—either out of curiosity or to imitate others. Habit being a
second nature. they get used to smoking. Others. after using "guinz" for a
while ("guinz" consists in inhaling the vapors produced by a blend of gasoline
and fuel-oil). easily become addicted to pills, which are much more discreet.
Indeed. "guinz," being more inconvenient, offers more risks: burns and an odor

that can be detected from a distance.
The drugs most widely used in our country are marihuana ("yamba"), lobito and,
on a large scale. pills ("pions").

Only a few years ago. cannabis (marihuana) was the drug most commonly smoked
in Senegal. Today, lobito, a hard drug much like marihuans but with less
odor, is outstripping it.

Lobito Outstrips Harihuana

This narcotic is imported from certain English-speaking countries, especially
from Ghana, and offers two disadvantages. Not only is it much more harmful
than marihuana, but lobito users will never again need the latter. Proof:
marihuana consumption is declining sharply and steadily, whereas lobito con-
sumption is steadily increasing. whereas cannabis is easily grown in our
country, especially in Casamance and in the Niayes (Nboro), lobito, until now,
comes from Ghana. Distribution networks controlled by Senegalese and foreign-
ers (especially Ghanaians) have become solidly implanted throughout our
regions.

The Ghanaian Connection

whenever you trace the network to the top, you find a Ghanaian. It is sad to
say, but it is true. We have nothing against citizens of a country which is
a great friend of Senegal, but those of its citizens-and their Senegalese
accomplices-who intrcduce this drug into our country do not deserve our
friendship. And exemplary sanctions should be imposed upon them to make them
think twice, for they all are bad Africans and must be made accountable to
soc1ety.

Substantial Profits From Drugs

Obviously, drugs (lobito or marihuana) purchased 30,000 francs per kilo whole-
sale, and retailing for 300,000-600,000 francs, are a source of rather sub-
stantial profits. Such an opportunity to make an easy dollar is available to
all. Certain shady traders looking for a quick and profitable deal, certain
unemployed with plenty of time on their hands, and even some workers unaware
of what they are doing need only take one small step to become actual drug
dealers.

threas toxic plants (lobito, marihuana) are easily detected because of their
characteristic odor, the detection of pills--newcomers on the market--is much
more difficult. The major difficulty rests with the fact that drugs of this
type are practically odorless and look exactly like any other pills. Some of
these pills, such as hymenoctal, sunnuctane and Noctabiol, are normally bought
with a prescription in any pharmacy. Actually, they are primarily medicines.

Pills Disturb the Nervous System
it is only when they are taken in excessive amounts that they have harmful

effects on the organism, especially on the brain. They disturb the nervous
system for good; as a result, there is no cure for drug-induced madness.

62
These pills sell for 75, 100, 125 [francs] each. When there is a shortage,
they become priceless. This is where the real danger lies, for a drug addict
will shrink from nothing, not even killing or stealing. to get his daily dose.
This sometimes causes tragedies, especially in families. Some parents, far
from suspecting that their child is taking drugs, explain his odd behavior

by considerations which have nothing to do with reality. Often, they will
accuse the ”rab" and djinns of possessing their child. And, after losing

time and money, they end up at tle hospital (Fann or Thiaroye) where they
learn the truth. Worse than the "rah" and certain contagious diseases, drugs
go on devastating all layers of our society. The young are much affected, but
adults are not spared. It is unfortunate that, with drug pills, it is impossi-
ble to know with whom one is dealing: at first sight, there is no difference
between a drug addict and a normal person. As a result, police work is becom-
ing increasingly harder.

Here. in Senegal. the police, the gendarmcrie and the customs carry out inves-
tigations each for itself. It is high time for them to start cooperatina
closely: the customs much more so than the other two, because they are guarding
our borders.

“um'rolc should no longer be limited to purely economical matters. 0r course,
it is essential that they protect the country against fraud, but it is
equally important that they protect it against the infiltration of all
social plagues, among which drugs have a choice position. Therefore, a
dynamic action on the part of the police, with the cooperation of all citizens.
can stop drug in its tracks, as well as any other plagues.

For starters. our newspaper itself has investigated the subject.This has shown
us that. with a little good will, it is possible to obtain many information
that can be useful in achieving effective drug control.

This is why APRIQUE HUSULHANB is appealing to all Muslims to consider drug
control as a sacred obligation and make it one of their daily concerns. They
must consider it their duty to report drug users and smokers (marihuana, lobito,
pills. etc.) for, in doing sn,they would serve the nation.

Smugglers Have More Than One Trick Up Their Sleeves

Taking the initiative, armour. mammal: is listing, as an indication. a few
locations around Cap-Vere where drugs are commonly sold. These are: the whole
cast-west cliff-road, the vicinity of the El Hansour and El Halick movie
theaters, the vicinity of the Independence Monument, Soumbedioune, Sandaga,
the Nguelaw market (around tle new mosk), the Colobane market, the Colobane
garage, the bus station, some neighborhoods in Guediawaye, Pikine and Thiaroye.
To vnnreul their goods, dealers have more than one trick up their sleeves.

In Suumbedioune, for instance, they bury the drugs in the sand and walk empty
handed wailing for a potential customer, whereas on certain markets the drugs
sold are used on the spot. For this, water is offered to the addict who must
swalhm Uu‘pillon um mun. Some peddlers even conceal the pills

in umtchboxes or in the umst unexpected packaging. Some dealers even mix
lohito and marihuana with henna ("Poudeune") into a paste. Of course, you
eanoit know that it is not henna unless you burn the mixture. There are many
tricks like this to conceal drugs.

03
HWvMslHnyaIWrmiw-le

Therefore, the best way to control drugs is to make the public, especially
children, aware of the danger they present. Prevention is better than cure.
hureisro pointin treating drug addicts if they are left to themselves after-
ward. When they get out of the hospital, they must not be allowed to go back
to an environment where vice prevails. And, in this respect, parents can
play a decisive part. They must cut off the patient from all sources of sup-
ply. by keeping him away from bad company and by keeping him busy.

Islam Offers a Reason for Living to the Young

we must also rcrngnizv that the [ad [or drugs is furthered by the crisis of
uur sncicty, with all its aCcompanying evils: idleness, uncertainty as to the
future. These causes are real and they push the young to seek an escape from
the fears generated by the consumer society. Islam, precisely, by offering

a model to society, gives to all these idle young a reason for living and

[or hope. not only in this world, but in tle next world as well.

9294
C50: 5300/5789

44
JIHAD AGAINST DRUGS URGED FOR PﬂBLlMS
Dakar AFRIOUE MUSULHANB in French No b Jun 82 pp 1, 2
[Editorial hy Mansour P. Diouf: "Jihad Against Drug"!

[Text] It is high time for the Muslim community of Senegal to follow the
example of the authorities and of numerous Islamic countries in waging a
ruthless war against the use of drugs, under any form whatsoever. Many young
boys and girls who are assumed to be "possessed" and are treated as such, are
purely and simply the victims of drugs. The specialized police and hospital
departments are overflowing and spend most of their time treating "patients"
who. after creating confusion in their families and disturbing the peace on

tte streets, have become human wrecks: and they are barely 16 to 18. In addi-
tion to the enormous sums which their parents and the state must spend for
their treatment. to the disastrous effect of such nefarious examples on other
young people, to the disastrous image they present of our country, the most
serious fact is that most of these children are Muslims. Seen from this angle,
the one with which we are most concerned, the problem deserves that we give it
priority and declare a true jihad against drugs; a jihad with all our authority,
spiritual, temporal and moral. This is a serious challenge which, for its
part, Islam must meet. even if it means making drastic changes in established
rules which, until now. our society has tolerated or minimized.

Howevur. we should not restrict ourselves to dealing with the victims. Drugs
are grown. manufactured. marketed clandestinely by a category of citizens who
are fully aware of the tragedies they cause and draw from them considerable
profits which, in practice, evade all control. The roots of the evil lie main-
ly with the suppliers. the dealers and 80-betweens. For this reason, the
action of the authorities to eradicate Cultivation of the plants which poison
the livv strengths of the nation could be increased and accelerated. Also,
the controls exerted where sports are practiced, at airports, along roads and
at other locations could be extended to include the markets and even the homes.

At any rate. we. the Muslims of the Federation, are warning those of our fellow
Muslims who might ever so slightly be tempted to get involved in that criminal
traffic which falls under the interdicts mentioned in the surata "Table Served",
ersv 92.

92')’:
(:30: 5300/5789
KIRCHIZ SUPREME SOVIET ISSUES DECREE 0N WILD HEMP

Frunzc SOVETSKAYA KIRGIZIYA in Russian 11 May 82 p l

[Ukase of the Presidium of the Kirghiz Supreme Soviet on Administrative Responsi-
bility for the Failure to Take Measures to Destroy wild Hemp]

[Text] Considering that the eradication of wild hemp, a raw material for the
illegal manufacturing of narcotics, is an important state measure which must be
precisely and promptly carried out by the officials of the respective state bodies,
enterprises, organizations, kolkhozes as well as by the citizens, the Presidium of

the Kirkhiz Supreme Soviet decrees:

1. To establish administrative liability in the from of a fine for the failure to
take measures to destroy wild hemp on the plantings of agricultural crops. in or-
chards, vineyards, forestry establishments, nurseries and parks, along the sides of

fields, irrigation and irrigation-reclamation networks, on the right-of—ways of
highways and railroads, at the farmsteads of kolkhozes and sovkhozes, on the plots

of lands of the inhabitants of cities, settlements and other population points as
well as on the lands of the state forests, bodies of water and state reserves as-

signed to kolkhozes, sovkhozes and other enterprises, institutions nnd organiza—
tinns.

Fur the failure to take measures to eradicate wild hemp, a fine is to be imposed in
the following amounts:

n) From 50 to 100 rubles for the directors of sovkhozcs, the chairmen of kolkhozes
and the leaders of other enterprises, institutions and organizations;

h) From 20 to 50 rubles for the main agronomists (agronomists) of the kolkhozes,
suvkhozes, forestry establishments, forest and orchard nurseries, the managers of
snvkhnz divisions and the brigade leaders of tractor and field brigades;

c) from 20 to 50 rubles for citizens.

2. The fines for violations provided under the current ukase are to be imposed by
administrative conditions under the executive committees of the rayon, city, city
rnvun. settlement and rural sovicts on the basis of a protocol drawn up in the es—
lnhlinhvd procedure by the authorized official from the internal affairs body or
the State Inspectorate for Plant Quarantine under the USSR Ministry of Agriculture

fur Klrkhizia.

Chairman of the Presidium of the Kirkhiz Supreme Soviet, T. Koshoyev
Secretary of the Presidium of the Kirkhiz Supreme Soviet, S. Omurkulova

The City of Frunze 10 May 1982

10272

cm: lam/355
1.6
INTERPOL-SOUGHT TRAFFICKBR ARRESTED

Athens TA NBA in Greek 22 May 82 p 3

1T2g§7 Athens Suburbs Security has found 2 kilograms of a large amount of
hashish dust that had recently been brought into Greece from Turkey. The
hashish was found in the house of Dimitrios Athan. Pourlas. 62 years old who
was arrested. Interpol was also interested in Pourlas who had been imprisoned
in west Germany for trafficking in hashish.

Col 8. Vasiiakis (director of the Athens Suburbs Security) had had information
on the movement of narcotics from Didymoteikhon and Orestias. After
surveillance. Din. Fourlas was arrested in his house (106 Mavromikhali Street)
where besides the 2 kilograms of hashish a sum of 500,000 drachmas was
confiscated. Included in this money were dollars and Brazilian currency.

He also revealed the identities of his accomplices who were interrogated by
gendernary authorities in Lania and Orestias but they were not arrested
because no hashish was found in their possession.

Dim. Fourlas used a young girl as a narcotics "pusher" in Athens. She is now
being sought by the gendarmery.

 

5671 4,
cso: 5300/5415
PIRAEUS NARCOTICS GANG MEMBERS ARRESTED _
Athens AKROPOLIS in Greek 25 May 82 p 2

[Tcx57 The Piraeus General Security has broken up yet another big narcotics
trafficking gang that was operating in the areas of Korydallon, Asia
Varvara, Vathi Square and Exarkheia, distributing the "white death” to
drug addicts. ‘

Those arrested are the following: Pan. Vasilikiotia, 37 years old, unemployed;
Emm. Bismakopoulos, 35 years old, automobile saleggan; I1. Peidis, 25 years
old. sailor; Io. Kalaitzidis, 37 years old, OLP lfiraeus Port Authoriti7
worker and former soccer team player on the Pan-Athenean team; St. Vatistas,
A6 years old, automobile painter; Per. Papadakis, 33 years old, unemployed;
Ar. Vrakhalis, 49 years old, itinerant fruit vendor; lo. Kartelias, 39 years
old. sailor; Al. Marten. 30 years old, private business employee; and

Anast. Doukas, 32 years old. sailor.

Found in their possession and confiscated was the following: 49 grams of
heroin, many capsules of the narcotic drug Romidon, a small amount of
processed Indian cannabis, a fully loaded revolver. a stiletto, a sum of
109.000 drachmas that came from the sale of the narcotics, precision scales.
syringes and all other kinds of paraphenalia used with heroin.

1hc irreversible course for the persons arrested started 15 days ago when the
director of the Piraeus General Security received information about the
activities of Peidia who was the "big shot" and the tough gue of the gang,

as well as Bismakopoulos who had an automobile showroom on Athens Avenue and
who for some time now had turned it into a “den" for addicts.

68
...I .. :l lJ“A ‘k, . .
meaapw meerNmaHm.
Cowpuxaots noanon mod
n:: unau>prm33m= mennmn
nova tso cam mnncmnna
wmmnmuauw mow sunnOanw

nnmnmwnxmsw
vasr GERMAN TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED m'n'mtus
Athens AKROPOLIS in Greek 27 May 82 p 3

LTex§7 Two Gernan narcotics traffickers who passed thenselvea off as tourists
have been arrested by officers of the Athens General security after setting
a trap for then in the Plaka area. '

On their possession was found 160 grams of opium and 10 grams of heroin
and morphint that they had brought with them from India.,

The men are Johannes H. Busner. 28 years old who is also wanted in West
Germany for narcotics traffic. and Martin N. Nitske, 21» years old from
Dortmund.

They arrived in Athens on 19 and 21 Hay respectively, illegally bringing with
them in their baggage an unknown quantity of opium. heroin and morphine.

In Athens, they stayed at the "Faistos" boarding house in Plaka and began
selling their narcotics to drug addicts who frequent the "ghetto" in this area.

Their activity became known to the Athens General Security which iruediately
went into action to locate and arrest them.

One of the officers of the Narcotics Prosecution Service showed up as a buyer
and asked Busner to sell him 2 grams of heroin. The German was persuaded to

do so and asked for 25.000 drachnas. However, at the moment he was handing over
the drug, he was arrested.

After his arrest, Busner revealed the identity of his colleague who was also
arrested. Both will appear before the public prosecutor today.
lS

 

The two German narcotics traffickers Martin
Nitske and Johannes Busncr who unsuspectingly
kept an appointment and were caught in the
"trap."

51
SUPREME COURT UPHOLDS BAN AGAINST CULTIVATING HASHISH
Reykjavik HORCUNBLADID in Icelandic 9 Jun 82 p 32
[Article: "Growing Cannabis Plants Is Illega1“]

[Text] It is illegal to grow cannabis plants in Iceland. The Supreme Court so
decided yesterday and upheld a judgment of the CriminalCourt for Addiction
and Narcotics of 6 January 1981.‘ Therewith a 30-year-old man has been subjected
to a 3.500-krona fine or 20 days in jail if the fine is not paid within 4 weeks.
The man is also required to pay all appeals costs and prosecution costs, 4,500
krona, and 4,500 krona to his attorney.

Thu circumstances were that on 10 April 1979 cannabis plants were discovered
In the residence of the man in the Fludrugrandar'areiof Reykjavik. The cannabis
plants were found in his apartment window and likewise in the basement under
liondlights. In all. 27 cannabis plants were discovered in the man's possession.

The man said that he had not used the plants or grown them for use and denied
having used narcotics in Iceland. He claimed that he was aware of the Law on
Addiction and Narcotics and that the law did not make growing cannabis plants
illegal. An out of court settlement was offered but he requested a court trial
before the Criminal Court for Addiction and Narcotics. The court ordered him

to pay a fine of 3,500 krona and he appealed the decision to the Supreme Court
which has now upheld the decision of the lower court and thereby decided that
it is illegal to grow cannabis in Iceland whether the cannabis is to be used

for producing narcotics or as a decorative plant.

"8'37
(13:0: TWO/2'” 'l

52
COMMENTATOR SUGGESTS LEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF DRUGS
Rotterdam NRC “ANDELSBLAD in Dutch 3 Jun 82 p 7
[Article by A. de Swaan: "A Fair Deal For The Junkies" part 3]

[Text] Heroin cures no sicknesses and neither does it cause any. The sole
misery that is produced by it is also relieved by it: the desire for heroin,
and for more and more. Opiates, then, are only indirectly connected with
sickness and health, but very directly with morality and public order.

Day after day, thousands of addicts commit theft. forgery and robbery, break
all the laws in the book, and a few of God's commandments besides. But it
is a law that is forcing then to commit all these crimes. It is the Opium
Law of the Netherlands, enforced by international treaty as well, wherein
the selling, use and possession of opiates-heroin among them-is prohibited
outside of medical practice.

This prohibition has not caused those drugs to disappear, but has in fact
led to illicit trading and price increases, to criminality among the users
who have to come up with the money for outrageous prices, and to the forma-
tion of gangs and terror among the black-marketeers for whom only the law of
the jungle applies. Here the law leads to crime. .

The results of the law have been contrary to the best intentions of the
legislators. A measure designed to offer protection has made life more
dangerous for citizens-including the users-and has moreover exposed the
users to infection, poisoning, persecution by the police and intimidation
by the deaders.

The Opiun Law must, then, be wiped off the book. and if that is not immedi-
ately possible because of international treaty obligations, then the law

must be circumvented. That can be done by allowing doctors to provide the
drugs to addicts under certain conditions.

The discussion has now progressed to this point of view. This was evident

at a closed gathering of experts convened by the Dude Stadt (district
council) in Amsterdan and can be expected from a conference that is scheduled
in Rotterdam.

53
Controlled distribution, then; but to which addicts and on what conditions?
The proposal that Peter Cohen and Iem Roos placed before the Oude Stadt
excels in its clarity and firmness of principle: any person in the program
can get his choice of drug at cost from the doctor where he has registered.
There is no obligation to seek help, no pressure to break the habit, or even
to reduce the dosage, no placement in guardianship, nor for that matter any
cure or treatment. The doctor acts solely as a dispenser, with no questions
asked. Understandably, that would not at all please a number of attending
physicians. But under the present law only the medical profession may
dispense drugs.

Upon being shown a registration card (to prevent double dipping), the doctor
provides the needed dosage from his supply. wraps it up and hands it over.
But here an awkward complication arises. For the customers could ask for
more than they need and walk down the street a few blocks to sell their
surplus to a foreigner who is excluded from legal access and would be willing
to pay much more for it provided only that it is cheaper than on the inter-
national black market. By reselling in this way, any unemployed school-
dropout could arrange a splendid and troublefree existence for himself. That
would not be the worst thing about it. What is really unacceptable are the
external effects.

As soon as narcotics are cheaper and more easily obtainable in one place in
the free world than elsewhere, the addicts will swarm down on them from
everywhere. Even now they come by the busloads from neighboring countries

to Amsterdam to buy methadone, a drug substitute illegally available fro-

the local junkies who thenselves get it from the GOD (Public Health Service)
or from a family doctor. If all the other drugs as well were liberally
dispensed. the addicts in the surrounding countries would throng to us.

They would linger here without adequate income for their support and for
their expensive hobby. They would become a burden on society, just as they
are even now. Cohen and Roos naively maintained that the police and courts
are in a position to turn back such unwanted foreigners. 0n hearing this,
the police officials who were present burst into laughter. In a cosmopolitan
city like Amsterdam or an international port like Rotterdam, it would take

a system of passport control and police supervision to get rid of undesirable
foreigners that would make South Africa look like a free state by comparison.
In short, there must be a guarantee that nothing, or very little, leaks out
of the distribution system and attracts foreigners.

How is resale to be stopped? One could supply the users with just the amount
they themselves need to avoid withdrawal symptoms. There are even pharma-
cological methods to determine such a dosage. But nothing can be done about
simulation. If a person can work up foam on the mouth and sweat on the
forehead, for a few convulsions and cries he can assure himself of enough
heroin for five hits a day which can be resold to eager foreigners for
hundreds of guilders. Another solution would be to supply anyone with the
dosage he wants, but with the chance that the requested amount might
occasionally and without advance notice be administered on the spot. If the
client had requested too much, he would be overdoaed. This does not comply
with medical ethics. nor with my own.

54
Then, on-site consumption is the only answer left. There are problems with
that too. The effects of heroin pass quickly and after several hours users
need it again, some as much as six times daily. A form of heroin with
delayed action that would help an addict get through the night and the week-
end has not yet been found. Another drawback is that only an injected dose
is unmarketable. Thus, supervision is called for to convert smokers,
sniffers, and swallowers into shooters in order to avoid smuggling. However.
one might think of something better on this point. On-site use is the sole
way to forestall reselling and its attraction of foreigners. But this would
force the users to go to the doctor several times a day, or to spend a great
deal of their time there. Not a very cheerful prospect.

The best thing to do then is to select a user location in a place where the
addict already has to he, say, because he works there. That makes me think
of my former idea: designate a number of businesses, whether they exist
already or must be established, there during workbreaks a traveling doctor
or nurse will administer a dose to the workers who need it. That will at
least provide some of the addicts an acceptable means of support. They will
have a regular place to be and will be provided for in their special need.

This method of distribution is not the answer for all cases. But it probably
is for some. On a very small scale and very discreetly, there is already

in operation in Amsterdam a workplace such as this where morphine is
regularly distributed under medical supervision. This method should be tried
elsewhere. There are many dangers and problems. I have listed and considered
them each in their turn. Now it is time for careful experiments with con-
trolled distribution.

9992
680: 5300/2309

55
PARLIAHm VOTES FUNDS FOR FIGHTING DRUGS
Stockholm SVBNSKA DAGBLADBT in Swedish 21 May 82 p 6
[Article by Hans 0. Alfredsson]

[Text] Liquor conaumption has declined, and that is good. But the fight must
continue. Everyone agreed on that point as Parliament devoted the day before
People's Temperance Day to a long debate on alcohol and drugs.

Minister of llealth and Soc is! Affairs Karin Soder (Center Party) asserted that
the government's hill and Parliament's decision in 1977 marked a turning point
in Swedish drug policy. Evert Svensson (Social Democrat) agreed, but he added
that not much had come of the good efforts.

The Social Democrats wanted to go farther than the government on several points
by setting aside more money for such things as treatment centers and nursing
homes and increasing subsidies to voluntary organisations.

But since it outnumbered the opposition, the nonsocialist majority approved the
government bill instead. This means that 207.1 million kronor have been a110-
cated for the operation of institutions and treatment centers, 1.1 million for
training and joint action in the temperance administration, 13.5 million for
organisations. 16.3 million for infomtion and education concerning alcohol,
113.8 million for the operation of reform schools, 285 million for the opera-
tion of nursing homes and residence facilities, 29.6 million for government
nursing homes for alcoholics, and 96.9 million for alcoholic outpatient clinics
and welfare service centers.

Consumption Down Since 1979

Par! iament also decided that an attempt must be made to overcome the shortage
of space for treating drug abusers.

Karin Sodor noted that liquor consumption has declined since 1979 and that
total sales of alcohol have declined by 18 percent over the past 5 years. This
shows that our efforts have yielded good results, she said. Drug abuse is de-
veloping in another direction, however. The abuse of cannabis, for example,

has increased since 1979.
The minister of health and social welfare said: "What is needed now is not pri-
marily new resources, but coordination of the resources already available."

She also pointed out that the various actions aimed at countering the use and
abuse of drugs "have borne fruit" and that, as one example, drug-free rock
concerts have been big successes.

But she regarded as distressing the "cynical superficiality" still shown by
many people in the debate on alcohol.

Evert Svensson felt that the government had produced a good report on the situ-
ation but that it had come up with a poor action program. Inga Lantz (Left
Party-Communists) also felt that the measures were marginal at best.

Rune Custafsson (Center Party) depicted preventive measures as being the most
important. He pointed out that it is impossible to get rid of the problems by
dealing with them after they arise.

Gertrud Sigurdsen (Social Democrat) claimed that pop music glorifies hashish,

and on that point she was supported by Sten Svensson (Conservative Party). She
asked whether we are not taking the abuse of hashish too lightly. An entire
generation is in danger of going under without anyone's noticing it in time.

Gertrud Sigurdsen said: "It is a disgrace to a rich welfare state that drugs
have gotten such a strong foothold."

Sten Svensson felt that Karin Soder was presenting too positive a picture of
the new Addict Treatment Law (LVN). There must be greater scope for taking

coercive steps in the case of serious abusers. The LVH is not strong enough,
he said.

11798
CSO: 5300/2308

57
STUDY ANALYZES YOUTH DRUG PROBLEM
Stockholm 7 DACAR in Swedish 21 May 82 pp 38-40

[Article by Class Lofgrcn]

[Excerpts] Teenagers are growing up in a country where there
is a double message: alcohol is destructive--but necessary
for having fun. The attitude toward narcotics has become
more negative. Most have tried hashish, but extremely few
become heavy abusers of drugs. Drugs are the topic of this
second article in the 7 DAGAR series on young people.

"They can't say anything—-after all, they do it themselves. The parents of
all my friends drink. I have seen several of them acting like swine. I think
they are worse than we are, really-you'd think they would know more."

One of the 19 teenagers taking part in an attitude study on drugs said that.
And a 15-year-old girl who took part in the ease study said this:

"I really don't want to drink--it just happens. I don't think any of us wants
to drink, and none of us really decides that we are going to drink--it'e just
that there is always beer. so we drink."

Those statements say two things. First, there is a clear connection between
the drinking habits of parents and those of their children. Among young people
between the ages of 13 and 16, 57 percent of those whose parents do not drink
also abstain from alcohol. Of those whose parents do drink. only 9 percent do

not drink.

Second, drinking by young people is seldom a sensual p1easure--it is more often
associated with anxiety and strong feelings. The young people inherit their

parents' hypocritical attitude toward alcohol. Teenagers are growing up in a
country where there is a double message: alcohol is destructive, but it is nec-

essary for having fun.

Around that insoluble contradiction created by hypocrisy there is woven a fine-
meshed net of written and unwritten prohibitions. Society enacts bans on ad-

vertisements for the alcohol that it also sells. Long lines form in front of
restaurants where the poison is served. Alcohol becomes a kind of demon that

puts the free will out of operation.

58
That is the mental climate in which parents try to bring up their children to
be teetotallers or moderate users of alcohol. Some simply forbid their teen-
agers to drink. Others use more liberal methods and perhaps give their 15-
year-old a bottle of wine from time to time.

"My friend and I get a bottle of wine from bad when we are going to a party.
He say that we are going to share it, so they think that we are only going to
drink that, and everything is all right." (Quoted from the attitude study.)

Very Pew Hashish Smokers Become Addicts

Although they themselves are considered addicts by the law, this is what young
hashish smokers say about abusers of hard drugs:

"Addicts should be sent to camps, learn to work? and do their share. There is
certainly something wrong with people who become abusers-othey probably don't
have a chance to be anything else."

It is clear from the partial report published last fall by the Investigating
Committee on the Extent of Drug Abuse that almost all young people have smoked
hashish at one time or another. The same report also shows that an insignifi-
cant percentage uses it at present--a total of 1 percent of those interviewed
said they had smoked hashish during the preceding month. Transposed to the
entire group of young people, this comes out to about 13,000 individuals. Is
that an alarming figure?

Naturally. it is from that group of 13,000 young hashish smokers that out—and-
out drug addicts are recruited. Two seemingly contradictory conclusions can
be drawn from these facts:

First, all heavy drug addicts start with hashish.

Second, very few of all those who smoke or have smoked hashish become heavy
drug addicts.

Statistics show that fewer young people are trying drugs than was the case 10
years ago. Hardly anyone--young or old--can have avoided realizing that society
does not approve of drugs. But at the same time. antidrug propaganda finds it
difficult to penetrate certain subcultures that may be built around an idea or
a film or those that take root in gangs.

lo a sohcolturo--a hashish—smoking group, for example-~the group's rules become
more Important than those of society. There is a great danger that the same
polnrlzution may occur in connection with drugs as has occurred in the attitude
toward alcohol.

In drug abuse among young people a result of their class background? From a
purely statistical standpoint. the children of parents in Social Group 3 are

overrepresented among abusers. But statistics are a dull instrument with which
to get at the reasons for abuse.

59
Where there is a lack of clear rules about what is permitted in the area of
alcohol and drugs, there is naturally a greater risk of abuse among children,
regardless of social group. The fact that Social Group 3 dominates the sta-
tistics must be viewed against the following background:

First, abuse within the upper class is not perceived outwardly in the same way.
The upper class is shielded by large private residences, private physicians,
and a more tolerant environment--at least within certain limits.

Second, Social Group 3 includes what ought to be Social Group 6, in which al-
cohol abuse, unemployment, and penury are characteristic features.

If the "6's" were isolated from the "3's," the "3's" would probably not include
more abusers than the "higher" social groups. But no one is fated to become an
alcoholic or a drug addict just because his father or mother is. Even though

there is a clear statistical relationship, the reasons for abuse are consider-
ably more complicated in each individual case.

Girls More Negative in Attitude Than Boys

If hashish becomes more available, more young people try it out. The curve
representing those who have come in contact with drugs follows almost exactly
the curve representing those who have tried it. The percentage of those who
actually try drugs when the latter are offered seems to be constant. But why
are some curious, while others are not? of two brothers--growing up in the
same family and attending the same sehool-—one becomes a drug abuser. “by?

Often it is a matter of chance. Few young people begin to drink or take drugs
on their own--experimenting with drugs occurs within a group. And since hashish
groups are most often a big-city phenomenon, a move from Saffle to Huddinge or
from Turkey to Tensta may be the starting point for a teenager's career as an
abuser.

The Board of Education's annual surveys of comprehensive school graduating
classes show, incidentally, that only 3 percent of those who tried hashish did
so because it was offered to them by an adult stranger. Young people teach
each other.

Despite the fact that over 90 percent of the young people have a negative atti-
tude toward hashish and about half disapprove of alcohol, there are 87 percent
who have used alcohol and 15 percent who have smoked hashish at least once.

30 it seems that many of them drink and smoke hashish against their own better
judgment. This is especially true of girls, who--despitc their more negative
attitude toward drugs~-use them in approximately the same percentages as boys.

Equality between boys and girls has been achieved in the area of drug consump-
tion. 0n the other hand, the teenagers themselves find it harder to accept
girls who are intoxicated or high on drugs.
"when Pin ls stinking drunk, I think it is much more awful than when Lasse is.
Although rcnlly, one is as awful as the other. But I feel somehow that she
'unkn unrso." (A toenngcd glrl In the attitude study.)

Boys and men still dominate in the use of heavy drugs. Anong those who inject
narcotics and/or smoke hashish every day, there is one girl for every three
boys. Psychopharmaceutical preparations are used almost exclusively by girls.
Boys consider it "unmanly" to take sleeping pills. If they have problems, it
is considered more proper to go on a good drunk. Girls also smoke more than
boys.

0n the whole, the investigating committee's report "Young People, Drugs, and
Preventive work" shows that the use of alcohol and drugs and the sniffing of
solvents among young people have declined over the past 10 years. But the re-
port also points to the danger that a few individuals will become increasingly
heavy abusers. The contrast between the decent and the depraved may becone
sharper.

Loss Drug Abuse Than 10 Years Ago

Percentage of Alcohol Users in Grade 9 as a Percentage
of the Total Comprehensive School Graduating Class

Alcohol Users*
At least At least
once a month once a week

Year Boys Girls Bgys Girls Bgzs Girls
1972 90 91 36 22 8 6
1980 85 88 26 20 a 3

 

 

*Those who drink the equivalent of at least half a
bottle of hard liquor.

Total number of
Age Have tried drugs Current users* zoung people

13-16 27,000 5,000 435,000
17-20 89,000 16,000 431,000
20-26 111,000 9,000 450,000

*navc tried it during the past month.

Number of Heavy Drug Abusers According to Comprehensive
Count by Country's Authorities in 1979*

Age
15-19 700-900
20-24 3,300—6,200

*Heavy drug abuse means the injection of drugs and/or
the daily use of cannabis.

61
l'c-n-mntngo of Students in Grade 9 and of Conarrlpts "110
IIth- 'l'rlml l)rug:: (m: .1 percentage of tho tutu] nunhcr)

_Grade 9 Grade 9 in Stockholm

 

At some time Boys Girls Bozo Girls Conscrizts
1971 1k 17 35 30 15.7
1980 8 8 21* 20* 19.2

*These figures are for 1978.

Percentage of Students in Grade 9 and of Conscripts
Who Have Used Drugs in the Past Honth

Grade 9 Grade 9 in Stockholm

 

 

Year Doze Girls Boys Girls Conscrigts
1971 5 ‘ 11 9 4.8
1980 2 2 6* 4* 3.7

*Thcsc figures are for 1978.

Percentage of Students in Grade 9 who Have Used Drugs
More Than Five Times in the Past Month and of Conscripts
Who Have Used Drugs Twice or More in the Past Month

Year Grade 9 Grade 9 in Stockholn Conscrigts

 

1971 1.6 3.5
1975 0.6 3.4 3.1
1979 0.4 2.6 2.5

Source: "Young People, Drugs, and Preventive Work."

to] 2308

62
STOCKHOLH COUNTY POLICE TO USE TOUGHER MEANS IN DRUG WAR

Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish 26 May 82 p 10
[Article by Hona Johansson]

[Text] The fight by Stockholm police against drug crimes is about to become
more effective. By the end of this summer, an entirely new division with
greatly increased resources will take charge of narcotics work throughout the

county.

The plans for reorganizing the war against drugs in Stockholm are now complete.
The only thing still needed is a government decision, and that is expected
around 1 July.

The police and the government both agree that police efforts against drug crimes
must be beefed up.

Hans Wranghult, acting police commissioner for Stockholm, says: "It is urgent
that we get the proper resources so that an effort as big as this will be ef-
fective. Hith the new narcotics division, we can get a unified grip on all
drug crimes in the county. The resources are currently split up among differ-
ent regions. and surveillance is too fragmented."

Shnrp Improvement

Many places in the country already have special narcotics divisions organized
more or less along the same lines as the one Stockholm is now expected to get.
But in the place where drug crimes and abuse are the greatest, there has been
no single unit to take charge of surveillance.

Hans Hranghult says: "No. Stockholm has fallen a little behind, and perhaps the
war on drugs has been suffering as a result. The new organization should re-
sult in strong improvement."

Narcotics investigations are currently conducted by the nationally famous

County Harcotics Group in Huddinge, the Stockholm Police District, and the Na-
tional Criminal Police Corps. In all, there are between 35 and 40 officers.

63
More Officers

The number of officers will be doubled in the new division: 75 officers will
concentrate solely on the war against drug crimes in the county. The plans
call for including the Huddinge group in the new division. Other officers will
be transferred from the Stockholm Police District.

The National Criminal Police Corps group, which works only with drug proble-s
in Stockholm. may be completely disbanded.

Hans Hrangfelt [nane variation as published] says: "It is not necessary for the
National Criminal Police Corps to occupy itself with local problems in Stock-
holm. It should occupy itself with national matters instead."

New Division Will Be Coordinator

The new narcotics division will be in charge of narcotics investigations at all
levels. but sales of hashish and hard drugs on the street and in the squares
will in general continue to be the responsibility of local police districts.

Hans Wrangfelt says: "But it is important that the narcotics division have the
overall responsibility and that it be able to act as coordinator for the dis-

tricts. The great majority of drug crimes overlap the various district bound-
aries."

Pending a new organization of the fight against drugs, a group of about 10 po-
lice officers has started combating the street trade in drugs. In about a year,
the group has worked all over Stockholm.

Inspector Rune Aggebo, who is in charge of the Ostermaln Group, says: "Sales
are not made as openly as they used to be. As a result of our work. ordinary
people no longer have to be afraid of being accosted if they sit on a park
bench, as they did a few years ago."

11798
cso: 5300/2308

64
BRIEFS

SIX YEARS FOR DRUG VIOLATIONS-~Sandviken (TT)--The leader of a drug gang in
Sandviken has been sentenced to 6 years and 2 months in prison. In addition
to serious drug offenses, the 52-year-old man was also guilty of grand larceny.
larceny, receipt of stolen goods. and driving without a license. His wife was
sentenced to 2 years and 3 months in prison. It was revealed in the trial that
the couple had acted as informers for the police. A police officer admitted
that he had had contact with the defendants, but said that he had acted in good
faith. [Text] [Stockholm SVHNSKA DAGBLADBT in Swedish 19 May 82 p 6] 11798

END
CSO: 5300/2308

65