APPROVID FOR NIL-AOI: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOCOROOOIOOOOOOOC-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100050004-1

FOR UrFlL'IAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8433
2 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 19/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100050004—1
NOTE

”its publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indi:ators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original intonation was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sunsrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPI’RIGBT MRS AND REGUIATIONS GWBRNING WHERSHIP 0F
MTBRIALS REPRDDWED KEREIN mums MT DISSEHINATION
0P IRIS PUBLICATIOH BB RESTRICTED “OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR 'OFPICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8433
2 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(rouo 19/79)

CONTENTS
ASIA "
AUSTRALIA
Briefs
Rehabilitation Center
Theft. From Phamcy
Heroin Pound Buried
Marihuane Snuggler Jailed
Heroin Charge
IanBIA
Briers
Opium Seized
JAPAN
Briefs
Drug Arrest
PAKISTAN

Antiawggling Squad Seizes 9!; Bags of Opium
(meIsTm Tm, 21 w 79) OOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIO.

Briers
Three Arrested in Peshawar Raid

PHILIPPINES

Briefs
Manila Cop Named in Drugs Rap

SOUTﬂ KOREA

Briefs
Drug Network Cracked
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)
CANADA

Quebec Drug Raid Results in Heroin, Cocaine Charges
(“'3 mm STAR. ” “83‘ 79) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

Briers
LSD Seizure
Heroin Conspiracy Sentences
Harihuane Charges

LATIN AMIGA
ARGEITINA

Eight Drug Traffickers Arrested in Raids
(u “8" 17 Mr 79) 00.0.00...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIIO.

BOLIVIA

Briers
Drug Traffickere Caught
Cocaine Ring Broken

BRAZIL

0A3 Caeeatee Lawyer/Colonel for Defence of (LS. Traffickere
(JWAL D0 MIL, 23 "a? 79) Oeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeee

Drug Treataent Centers in Rio, Sao Paulo Seek Support
(JMAL DB MIL, 19 Feb, 11 m 79) eeeeeeeeeeeeee

Rio Treahnent League Campaign
Sao Paulo Center thy Close

Briers
Attorney Sentenced to Prison
Harihuane, Cocaine Paper Seized
Cocaine Traffickers Arrested
Traffickere Arrested in Rio

Judge Denies Tenporary Release
PH Pronotee Antidrug Campaign
comn

Harihuana Legalization Discussed
(nu-1m Santos calm-on; BL 11mm, 11 Her 79)

- b -
Fox orrtcm. use ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

ECUM'DR

Herihuana legalization Debate Continues
(Various 801111308, 16, 19 “u“ 79) eeoeoeeooeeeoeeeeeee

ANIF Proposes Localisation
Scope of the Traffic Described

Anti e Pact Signed With Ecuador
BIO TIM, 3 hr 79) O...'OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOIOOOOOOO

mum-so Asks More Help for Addicts
(31! TM, 12 “If “9) 0..00.0.00.0000000000000000IOO

Reign of Terror in Barranquilla
(Jose cam“! M10, 31: T1390, 13 "a? 79) eaeoeoee

Her on Drugs Stepped Up
(EL TEMPO, 1‘ m 79) O...00.0....OOOOCIOOOOOOOOOOOOO

'Hﬂfla' Chief Hendarree Killed
(BL TIM, 3m 79) eeeeeeeeeeeaoeeoeeeeeeeeeeeaeoo

Traffickere' Airplanes Seized, Arrests Made
(EL SIGm, 7 "at 79) I...OICOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Cocaine Laboratory Raided
(BL 810m, 13 Mr 79) aeeeeeeooeeeeeeeeeoeaeoeeeaoeee

Laboratory Raided in Cauca Department
(BL sIGm, 6 m 79) OIDOCI.0.00.00.00.00000DOOIOOOO.

Cocaine Lab Raided in Bogota, Traffickers Captured
(EL ﬁpmmn’ 8 m 79) COOOIOOOOOOOOIOOIOOIOOOO.ll

Briefs
Coca Plantation Destroyed
DIPBC Drug Seizures Described
Oovemors' Authority Voided
Traffickers' Plane Seized
Ducaramanga Cocaine Seizure

Soldier Involved in International Drug Trafficking
(BI! mac, 23 m 79) .0OCIOOOOODOOOCOICOOI.00....

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

b9

51

53
53
5h
51;
5h

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued) Page
MEXICO

Defense Secretary Cements on 'Operation Condor' Results
(3!) sortmsmm‘, 18m79) OOOOOOOIOOOOOIIOOOCOIO 57

Ring of Traffickers, Counterfeiters Captured
(MARIO w "OTICIAS, 8 Mar 79) OOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOIOO 59

Rural Policeman Shot by Poppy Growers
(BL 30!! DE 8mm, 27 hr 79) OOOOOCOOOOOOOOIOOICOOO w

Briefs
Harihuana, Weapons Seized 61
Heroin Traffiokors Arrested 61
Traffickers Captured, mugs Destroyed 62
Court Secretary Among Traffickers 62
Traffickers Arrested 62
Mendiola: Better Bquipent 63
Three Drug Traffickers Dead 63
Harihuana Samples nailed 6h
PANAMA
Briers
Cocaine Trafficker Arrested 6S
PRU
Briers
Drug Trafficker's Arrest 66
Cocaine Paste Seized 66
Drug Arrest 66
Cocaine Traffickers' Arrest 66
VENEZUELA

Cocaine Traffickers Seized
(BID “ACIONAL, 3 H” 79) 0...‘0‘...b..‘......'......... 67

Briefs
Seizure of Colunbien Mgs
Sentence for Drug Traffickers

88

-d-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

NEAR EAST G: NORTR AFRICA

Hoaocco

ITALY

TURKEY

Briefs
Drug Traffickers Sentenced

"ESTER” EUROPE

Young Socialists Propose Free Heroin
(Mice Boselli Interview; LA RBWBLICA, 11-5 Mar 79)

Two Egyptian Pushers Arrested
(6mm mm Sm, 16 m 79) IOIOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOI

Court Order to Hospitaliae Drug Addict
(Augusto Poazoli; comm DELLA SBRA, 18 Her 79) ..

Uruguayan Drug Dealer Captured in Bone
(BI! PAIS, 17 Feb 79) .00....OOOOOCOCOOOCOIOOCOOOOOOO

Drug Squad Makes Arrests in Two Narcotics Cases
(IL m, 27 Jan 79) 0.0.0....0......IOOOOODOOOOIOI

Drug Squad Seizes 2.382 Kilogram of Pure Heroin
(mm mm Sm, 19 Feb 79) OOOOOQOOOOOOIOOIOOO

Neapolitan Heshish Gang Destroyed
(L'MA, 13 Feb 79) 0IIOOOOOOOOOO0.0000000000IDOOOI

Roms Drug, Prostitution Dealers Arrested
(II: 61m NUOVO, b Feb 79) eeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Briefs

Milan Drug Arrests
Modem-Verona Drug Ring
Arrest of Two Couriers

Briefs
New Narcotics Branch Director

.9.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chRN‘PS (Continued)
UNITED KING“

Alleged Plot To Snuggle Cocaine in wine Bottles Revealed
(m MILY “mum, 27 “I? 79) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

Briefs
Drugs Lab Raid

- f -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

85
BRIEFS

REHABILITATION CENTER--An historical farmhouse near Cam belltown.
owned by the State Government. is to be used as a rehab litation
centre for drug addicts. The James McGrath Foundation is to
lease the 1830's house from the State Government for a nominal
rent for 20 years. After a period of treatment at the farm. ad-
dicts will go to the foundation's rehabilitation centre at nearby
Minto. The centre has 80 residents. who have either volunteered
for treatment or been referred by the NSW Health Commission. the
Parole and Probation Service or the Department of Youth and Com-

munity Services. [Exce ts] [Sydney THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD
in English 17 Mar 79 p 6

THEFT FROM PHARMACY-~A man and a woman with sewn-off shotguns
stole drugs and about $1.000 from a chemist shop in Bayswater
Road. Kings Cross. yesterday. The couple entered the Diplomat
Pharmacy about 1:50 a.m. and demanded money and drugs from the
pharmacist. Mr. Michael Lynch. The woman was described as being
about “5 years old. 152.cm (5 ft) tall and with a small scar un-
der her right eye. The man was between 25 and 28 years old.
167.5 cm (5 ft 6 inﬁ tall and of medium build. He was wearing a

tan T-shirt. [Text [Sydney THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD in Eng-
lish 22 Mar 79 p 5]

HEROIN FOUND BURIED--A man convicted of possessing heroin found
buried in his backyard was sentenced yesterday to three years'
Jail. Judge Somerville said the heroin would have a street value
of $31,600 if sold in capsule form. Lance Christopher McMillan.
2“. a musical equipment hire operator. of Rosella Street. Hurrum-
beena. was found guilty by a County Court jury of having at Mur-
rumbeena. on January 1. 1977. possessed a quantity of heroin rea-
sonably suspected of having been imported. McMillan had earlier
pleaded not guilty to the charge. Judge Somerville said narcot-
ics agents found the heroin in two bags buried in McMillan's
backyard. He said 79.1 grams of white powder contained 29 grams

35 puzﬁ heroin. [Excerpt] [ﬁelbourne THE AGE in English 20 Mar
P
MARIHUANA SNUGGLER JAILED--Sydneys A 27-year-old New Zealand
woman was gaoled for three years yesterday for importing cannabis
into Australia. Linda Louise Herrick. of Gottenham Street. Glebe.
and formerly of Westport. New Zealand. pleaded guilty to a charge
of importing b.5kg of cannabis in the form of buddha sticks into
Australa last October 2?. In the District Criminal Court. Judge
Thorley said that Linda Herrick was arrested when she flew into
Sydney from Noumea. The drug was inside the lining of a suit-
case and she was paid $5000 to bri it in. Judge Thorley said
the sentence would date from March . He set a non-parole peri-

od 0! 12 months. [Text] [Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in English
15 Mar 79 p 1.5]

HEROIN CHARGE-~Mark Raymond ﬂinchcliffe. 2h. unemployed. of
Forrest Street. Cottesloe. was remanded in East Perth Court on
20 March on a charge of importing heroin and another charge of

possessing the drug. Hinchcliffe had been arrested at Perth Air-
port on 1 March. Remand was until 28 March. Hinchcliffe was

granted bail of $5000. [Perth THE wss'r AUSTRALIAN in English
20 Mar 79 p 13]

C50: 5300

lo
BRIEFS

OPIUM SEIZBD--Jaksrts. 9 Apr (AFP)-Three kilograms of high-grade opium
apparently ready for peddling were seized in a police raid in Polnas some
150 miles from Ujungpendang, South Sulawesi, from a Ian named He last
week. ANTARA News Agency reported today. The latest seizure followed

a previous bagging of 6 kilograms of opium by police in adjacent Hajene
Regency in a combined police-customs operation toward the end of last
month. The man in uhoss possession the earlier catch was found had
indicated to police that the opiun was part of a 21-kilogrsm consignment
believed to have originated from Tawao, Sebah. East Halaysia. A police
spokesman in Ujungpandang said that South Sulawesi may have been made a

base link in a narcotic distribution chain by an apparently well—organized
syndicate. [Jakarta ANTARA in Enslsh 1600 GMT 9 Apr 79 BK]
BRIEFS

DRUG ARREST-Tokyo. 18 Apr KYODO--Narcotic investigators said Wednesday
they had arrested Koji Kits, an ax-nambsr of the one-time popular vocal
quartet "Pour Leaves." and a gangster for violation of stimulant drug
control law. The Health and welfare Ministry's Kanto-Shinatsu regional
narcotic investigators office arrested Kits, whose real name is

Koji Hatsushita. 30. of Hinato Hard, Tokyo. when he was found carrying

a 0.2 gram sack of amphetamine last Thursday. The investigators said
Kitn confessed that he had bought a sack containing 0.6 gram of ampheta-
mine for 20,000 yen from Nobuo Hitsui in a car parked at a gas station
in Minute Ward in the early morning last Thursday. Kita's confession
led to the arrest of Hitsui. 35, a leading member of the underworld gang
Sumiyoshi-Rengo's Nippon Sainenshs, of Hinato Hard. The investigators
quoted Kits as saying that he had spent 15 million yen to buy about

300 grams of amphetamine since around autumn of 1975. The two were
turned over to the public prosecutor‘s office. The investigators also
believe Kits. who became acquainted with Mitsui at a nightclub in
Roppongi. in mid-March had bought drugs tron Hitsui on several occasions.
Text] [Tokyo KYODO in English no time given 18 Apr 79 OH]

050: 5300
ANTISHUGGLING SQUAD 851288 94 BAGS 0P OPIUM
Quettn BALUCHISTAN TIMES in Bnglieh 21 Her 79 p 6

[Text] The Anti-snuggling Squad under the leadership of Syed Ssodullsh
Shah seized 94 huge of opium in a surprise raid on a wagon on non nighusy
between Nuehki and Mel on March 19, says a Governnent handout issued
yesterday (Tuesdsy).

The seized opium worth rupees one crore weighed about 705 kilograms including
the cost of the vehicle eeized.

The driver sad the clone: of vehicle have been arrested and further investi-
gations sre proceeding.

\u‘I
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050004-1

 

The staff of the Anti-mggling Squad
with the contraband opium seized near
Nushki on RCD Highway.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050004-1
BRIEFS

mm: ARRESTED IN mum“ RAID-483W“. Herch Sin-The Peehever Police
hoe eeirod 25 neunde of charu. 25 eir conditionere and other etationery
worth about rupeee one end half croree, in e ore-down operation on the
Pcehauar-Kohat reed today. Police eourcee acid that the seizure vet made
from e Karachi bound truck near village Bedeber, about eight lilee from
Pcahwer. The other eoired goods included 16 bags of biri leef, 3!. bags
of tobacco. $0,000 yerda of foreign cloth end about 12,000 foreign-«dc
'dopnttae.’ Three occupante of the truck including ite driver have been
arrested. it ie'reported that e epecial police picquet near village
Bedeber node the heel free a truck, toning fro- Bate toverde Peehever,

for onverd treneportation to Karachi. The truck “mm 3628 van plying
without nuaber plete. The truck hee been i-pounded. The contraband charee,
in 62 enall bege, air conditionere and cloth, were concealed under the
tobecco end biri leaf bage. The erreeted peraone ere ﬁche-led Khan driver,

Culber Khen and laheder Shaw-APP [Tent] [Kerechi m2 SUN in Bngliah
1 Apr 19 p 2!

080: 5300
BRIEFS

MANILA COP NAMED lN DRUGS RAP--Chsrges of illegal possession. distribution
and ndsinistretion of prohibited drugs were filed yesterday against a
Manila police-an with the Manila court of first instance. Accused of vio-
lation of provisions of R.A. 6525 was Pat Ruben Hecaroyo. a neeber of the
anti-organized criae task force of Precinct 6 of the Vestern Police Dis—
trict. Metropolitan Police Force. Dail of P 15,000 was recon-ended for
the patrol-en's provisional release by investigating Assistant Fiscal
Cesnrio L. del Rosario.--Hacaroyo was also accused earlier of the theft

of a caeera worth P 5.500 belonging to Aaerican tourist. Liza Suzanne
Stindrager. 22. His bail was fixed at P 1.750. in the dope pushing

case. the Hanils police-an was alleged to have in his possession in the
south of February and for soaetine prior thereto heroin which he adainis-
tered to Celestina Sanchez. lb. He was also accused of having distributed
earijuana to tourists. through Sanchez. --ln her testiaony. both before
the Manila court of first instance in the theft case against her and
before the fiscal's office. Sanchez cleieed it was Hacaroyo who drugged
end induced her to distribute marijuana leaves to tourists for purposes

of extortion. Sanchez. together with Enrique de Lara. 29. was earlier
accused of the theft of Stindrager's ceasra, but the American tourist
cleared both accused of the charge and instead accused Hecaroyo as prin-
cipal by induce-ant. [Text] [Manila PhlLlPPlNES DAILY EXPRESS in English
31 Her 79 p l]

080: 5300
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOUTH KOREA

BRI BPS

DRUG NETWORK CRACKED-4on1 (llnpdong-Kyode)“Anti-drug police squads have
cracked a large-scale drug network suspected of having snuggled to Japan
about 6.000 million von (1.600 million yen) worth of stimulants called
"philopan" since last year, police said. An official police report said

the ring with its drug processing plant in chungju. north Changchong Pro-
vincc. had employed a Korean resident in Japan as a courier in drug traf-

fic to Japan. The courier. identified as Chang Chong llwan. whose address
in Japan was unknown. had fled and was being sought by Korean police
which rounded up seven persons Hlonging to the underground apparatus,
including the ring leader Kin Dotg noon, ‘3. of Pusan. The police have

confiscated four kilograsa of manufactured drugs and 30 kilogram of un-

processed drug materials from then. reports said. [Text] [Tokyo MlNicﬂl
DAILY NW8 in English 7 Apr 79 p 12]

080: 5300

9
VOR OPPTC‘I’H. new mnv
QUEIH’IC DRUG RAID RESULTS IN HEROIN, WINE CHARGES
Ulndsor Tillt HINDSOR S'l'hlt in English 30 Mar 79 p 10

[Text]

MONTRML lCPl - Thirty-I‘ve peo le. l9 men and I6
“omen. wete uttatgned in session .eoutt utsday on nateot-
m charges lollowlng a tenet of RCMPtaids at private homes
early Wednesday.

Moat wete charged with pmsesslon ot trafﬁcking in heroin.
while two mete seemed ol‘ handling cocaine. All pleaded not
guilty to theehanea and opted To: ttial hy 'ttty.

Prehmmaty hem” tot some see even set to: today.
but most were out until next Week at the nest ol theit
enamel. Sit were muted bail Thursday and othet hail
heuttn‘s wemet l‘ov today.

Three men "lted in the same miuofaida and two otho
em attested let in l Eastem Towntltlpa also pleaded not
guilty to char 0! eonspitaey and possession of hetoln for
the name» trafficking. They are to appest lot a bail heat.
in today lnShethtoolte.0ue.

lice told they believed the thtee attested ln Montteal had
tonnwtions with a ttall’teltin; operation In the Shethtoolte
area.

A spottemsn said two RCMP undetecvet agents dtove with
the three men to Lannoltville. when they made a telephone
order for ldmmaofpureheroin tooth“.

The math. plaeelorthe enehannwas in a motelroont. the
spokesman said. At a man-need time. police broke into the
roommttested twomen and seleed the hetoin.

The Manual aids lo'loued an eight-month investigation in
which agents boonhl 900.000 worth of hetoin. lnspectot
l.G.L. Fawn!) of the RCMP nateoties section said the dtu
will he scarce in Montml for the next month heesttse of the
opetalion.

”0‘! ol’ the hetoin eame rtom the Fat East and Mexico. the
spokesman said.

lnnepatstaease. RCMPsaentsdiseoveteda lahotato
ty Thatsday m Rawdon. One« 65 kilometres non of Mom
tteal. and aeiud IOpoondsofpute methamphetamlne. known
named. wonh shout ”maﬁa theatteet.

Apoliee manaaidamanandawomanaadSOand
24. original l'tom Toeonto. we attested in that aid. Both
atelo heunignedtodayin aeasionseouninloliette.0ue.

C50: 5320

In
BRIEFS

LSD SEIZUR£-The Toronto-based drug squad of the Royal Canadian Mounted
Police has seized 9,600 doses of LSD. valued at about $28,800. after
intercepting three people boarding a rented light aircraft at Buttonville
Airport. An RCMP spokesman said yesterday the haul, which also included
sssll quantities of MDA and hashish. cane after a police probe into the
transportation of drugs between Toronto and Pembroke. A 33-year—old
Pembroke area man has been charged with possession of LSD for the purpose
of trafficking, possession of MDA and possession of hashish. [Text]
[Toronto THE GLOBE AND MAIL in English 22 Mar 79 p 10]

NEROIN CONSPIRACY SENTENCES-~Nelland (CP)-Four Niagara Falls men involved
in a heroin ring in 1976 were sentenced in Ontario Suprese Court yester-
day for conspiracy to traffic in heroin. Dennis Richard Peck. 25. and
John "ideas. 25. each were sentenced to 16 sonths in rcformatory by

Mr. Justice Prank Callaghan. who described the two as "street-level push-
ers." Fortunate Caliguiri, 66. and Thomas Eugene Agretto. 35. who were
described as sessengera in the trafficking ring, each were sentenced to
six months in refer-story. All four had pleaded guilty on March 5.

Judge Callghan said the ring appeared to be run by Pasquale Rocco, 50,
and Natale Mastroianni, 36, both of when returned to Italy and did not
appear for their trial. [Text] [Toronto THE GLOBE AND MAIL in English
23 Mar 79 p 9]

MARINUANA CHARGES--Victoria (CP)--A drug conspiracy trial was told
Uednesday that a member of an Acapulco yacht club in Mexico provided the
vessel which transported 13.5 tons of sarijusna to British Columbia last
summer. Nilo Batista. an unindicted co-conspirator. was named as receiv-
ing more than $100,000 as his rental fee free various individuals in
testimony by Arthur Richard Vandiver. special agent of the United States
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). Vsndiver also testified that he
paid Batista $3,000 fro. the 0£A for expenses. Accused of conspiracy to
import sarijuana. inporting marijuana and possession of marijuana for the
purpose of trafficking are Garth Clarence Vincent Joseph Sexton. 27. of
Vancouver. Ronald Cecil Spurrell. 31. of Surrey. 8.0.. Frederick Charles
Scott. 20. of Vancouver, Prank Piersanti. 28, of Montreal and John Mobley
Doss. 25. of Dillon. Colo., formerly of Newfoundland. Pourteen persons

11
nnmd but not charged in the incident are Batiste. Maurice Pereira, Nail
Harwell Kennedy. Terrence Gererd Trainer. Kevin Gerard Guahue. Robert
Shemn Miller. Gordon Barlow Tait. Frederick Hackintoah Tait. Allen
Valenti. Patrick Joseph Murphy. Edwin Floyd Terry. also known as Philip
Stanley Ward. Melville Douglee Balfour. Jillian Penney and Vicki Benn.
[Text] [Hindeor me HINDSOR STAR in English 5 Apr 79 p 16]

080: 5320

12
EIGHT DRUG TRAPPICKBRS ARRESTED IN RAIDS
Buenoe Aires LA PRENSA in Spanish 17 Her 79 p 6

[Text] The National Directorate of Police has announced that eight persons
involved in the possession and illegal transportation into the country of
drugs have been arrested in several actions in border security zones in
the provinces of Hieionee, Salts and Jujuy.

The report adds that 25 kilogr-s of coca leaves, valued at 3,810,000
pesos, and (.0 grams of chopped narihuana were confiscated.

Squadron 21 La Quiaca was nanning the border stations of 030 de Agua and
La Penitencia, 150 noters from the Argentine-Bolivian international border,
when it surprised several groups of persons in a drug transaction.
Although they succeeded in fleeing to the neighbong country, the group
left behind 120 kilogram of coca leaves.

Oren Squadron

Squadron 20 Oran was checking automobile and railway cargo in the border
areas under its jurisdiction, as well as in Tertagal, Enbarcacion and
Pocitos, when it arrested six persons-ofour men and two non-"iron when
they seized 135 kilograms of coca leaves.

Eldorado

Squadron lo Bldorsdo, while checking passenger cars along with agents of
the iguszu section, arrested Aldo Luis Panuela and Cerlos Alberto Hunt-
telli, both Argentines and unnsrried, residents of El Pale-er in Buenos
Aires Province, who had hidden in their clothing envelopes containing 1.0
grams of chopped nerihuane from Brazil.

13
Inspection 'l'our

Thu national director of police has returned by air to the capital city
after an inspection tour of Sente Cruz Province. First he visited the
16th Group, headquartered in Rio Gallegos, where he was informed of the
action teken by the force in the border security sone under the jurisdic-
tion of the sforeuntioned Pstegonian province.

Later he inspected Squsdrons b2 Lego Argentine, with hesdquerters in
CsleEetc, end 63 Rio Turbio, both dependencies of the Group, uhere he
nude a thorough impaction of specific functions.

8735
(:80: 5300
BRIEFS

DRUG TMPPIOCBRS CAUGHT-4M Interpol department of the National Investi-
gation Directorate has seized 5 kilograms of cocaine sulphate at a house
at 1379 Pelos Blancos Street. and arrested Teresa Herrera, Analia Bernel
Vasquez. and Roner Biin Hostajo, all Bolivian citizens; and Carmen
Cecilia Rodriguez Zangger. a Colo-bisn citizen who was the head of the
dismantled ring. [La Pa: 3!. MARIO in Spanish 16 Apr 79 p 2 FY]

COCAINE RING BROKE-JIM Bolivian and 0.8. narcotics divisions have
broken up an international drug ring operating between Santa Cruz.
Bolivia and Nev York. The ring leaders, (Susan Torres) and (Francesco
Gone: Hachsdo), 0.5. citizens, and (Rinston Vazquez). Bolivian. have
been arrested. Forty uonen couriers. all foreigner-a, have been arrested
in Bolivia and the United States. The ring began to operate in October
1977 and it sent approxilately 350 kg of cocaine fro- Santa Cruz to New

York at a monthly average of 20 k3. [La Paz Radio Pans-ericsne Network
in Spanish 0000 GMT 20 Apr 79 PY]

080: 5300
0A3 CASSATES INNER/COWS]. FOR DEFENSE 0P 0.8. TRAPPICRERS
Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 23 Her 79 p 20

(Textl Lt Col Zaire Lara Pilho. who as an attorney defended seven Alericsn
citizens accused of drug trafficking, had his Ieabarship in the 0A! [Brasil-
ian Bar Association] canceled yesterday "for exercising an acitivty incon-
patible with the legal profession-mane”. that of co-ender of the 13th
battalion of the Military Police ”Ill."

The meeting which decided the cancellation of the PH officer's aubership
use presided over by Attorney Cesar Gonealvea Pereira and Counselor Joan
Batista Louzads Cesare served as trial relator. At the ties of the de-
nunciation Colonel Lara Pilho said only the: "the case should be handled
directly by the 0A8 and lyself."

Prison

On 28 Dace-bar 1978 at the Rio de Janeiro International Airport, agents of
the Federal Police and the Federal Revenue Service arrested seven Aaericane
who had just landed from a 26-3 Lear jet. They had a suitcase containing
17.7 kg of pure cocaine which use scheduled for delivery to the United
States. The plane was chartered by the group fun Executive Aviation Ser-
vices. Long Beach. and node stops in Acapulco, San Jose. Puerto Rico.

Guayaquil. Tegucigalpa. Callao. Cochabasba, Santa Cruz de la Sierra and,
lastly, Rio de Janeiro.

The ruitcasc containing the drug was seized i-ediately and the occupants

of the plane uere taken to the Rio Regional Superintendency of the Federal
Police, who identified th- as: Esther Roan Andoor. professor; harvey Allen
Hisbin. the plane's copilot; earths Anaya Dace. doctor; Robert Joseph Ramirez.
engineer: George Antony Cruz, businessnan; Daniel Uillian Glover, pilot; and
Joyce Anita Hainright. '

Sentcnc ing

The accused were tried in the middle of January in the fourth court of the
Depart-eat of Federal Justice by Judge Ariosto Resende Rocha. uho sentenced

l6
only businessman George Antony Cruz who had confessed that i- was his ner-
chandisc which was seized on the plane and who had exonerated the others
tron any and all responsibility for the drug. George was sentenced to 5
years in prison.

Accumulation of Activities

To defend the Asericens, the 0.8. Consulate in Rio de Janeiro engaged the
services of a teen of lawyers headed by Lars Pilho. who for several days
acted in the defense of the accused, even giving interviews about the plight
of his clients. The newspapers disclosed that he was also a lieutenant
colonel of the PM and cousnder of the 13th battalion. headquartered at
Praca Tiradentes.

In becosing aware of this fact through the newspapers. Attorney haddock
Lobe. president of the Rio de Jsaeiro Regional Section of the 0A3. stated
on 11 January that Colonel Lars Filho. contender of the 13th Pl! Battalion
and defense attorney for the seven Anericana arrested with cocaine in their
possessim. "can have his license revoked or be dismissed from his official
responsibility for having violated Article 86 of Law No 4215 which prohibits
the carrying out of any other function simultaneously with that of attorney.
as of April 1963."

Yesterday the Rio de Janeiro Regional Section of the 0A3 issued the follow-
ing official note:

"In a neeting presided over by Attorney Cesar Concslves Pereira and held
today (yesterday). the 0A]! canceled the nesberehip of Lt Col Zaire Lara
Filho for exercising an activity which is incompatible with legal practice--
nasely, that of co-snder of the 13th PH Battalion. Counselor Joao Batista
bouzadn Cansrs acted as trial relstor.”

8568
(:80: 5300

17
DRUG TREATMENT CENTERS IN RIO. 8A0 wa SEER SUPPORT
Rio Treatment League Campaign
Rio do Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASII. in Portuguese 11 Mar 79 p 27

[Text] “Give a brick for the construction of our hospital." is the appeal
of the National League for the Rehabilitation of Drug Addicts. an institu-
tion providing free treatment for drug addicts. With the launching of the
Brick Campaign yesterday, the league hopes to save the public officials
and arouse the interest of the canunity ‘in the drug problea.

Although no public official had appeared at the launching of the campaign,
Dr Gcraon Hallais, the league preaident, seemed quite pleased with the
telegrau sent by future Vice President Aureliano Chaves and also with the
proaise made by future Secretary of Justice Brasao Martina Pedro to aid
the organization.

Proai sea

The site of the construction of the hospital, a pioneer of its type in our
country. has not yet been determined. although the state governaent has
offered land in Nova Priburgo which. according to Dr Hallais. would require
the renoval of 70 slum-dwelling falilies. Two other pieces of land are at
the disposal of the organization: one offered by the federal government on
the Rio-anesopolis highway and the other, with 123,000 square esters in
the aunicvpality of Hage, donated by a private individual.

According to the president of the league. about 300 young addicts are seek-
ing the services of the organisation: each loath to receive the treatuent
which will bring about total rehabilitation, if the patient is not eentally
deficient. Brick donations exclusively may be delivered to the league's
headquarters. Rue Pedro de Carvalho. 329 in Meier.

18
Sao Paulo Center May close
Rio de Janeiro JORNAL 00 msn. in Portuguese 19 feb 79 p 6

[Text] Sao Paulo-duready in debt in the aaount of 1 million crureiros.

the "case but Huaan Relations Center. which has rehabilitated 65 percent of
the 1.000 drug addicts treated up to now. has its work of 5 years threatened
by lack of govern-eat support. This is evidenced by the uncertainty of the
renewal of the agree-eat with the Sao Paulo Secretariat of Social Welfare.

in denouncing the snail amount of aid given by the government. Batista franco
Rodrigues. founder cf the center. recalls that in his area of 6 alqueires
"drug addicts live as they would in society. treated by doctors and psycholo-
gists." Drugs are given only in extrelc cases but always under intensive
occupational therapy.

Nessa Lar

in the opinion of Rodrigucs-dwho clains to know the problen of drug addicts
for having been one hileelf as a youth-Nosso Lar. established in April
1976. is radically different from a hospital: "I believe that one who has
been rehabilitated becoaes a standard bearer against that vice and here we
are rehabilitating youth.

"With the Medici governaent's legislation on drugs." he goes on to say. "I
felt inspired and. based on Iy personal experience. decided to establish a
casualty center different from hospitals. 1 went to the United States.
obtained firsthand inforastion on aodern aethods of treatment and then
bought the land (on Raposo Tavarea highway 30 In free the capital) to con-
struct the center."

With accounts in arrears totaling 977.730 cruaeiros up to this past Decenber.
Nosso bar has as the basis of its financial assistance :1 sgreeoent with

the Secretariat of Social Welfare providing for a paylent of 208 cruzeiroa
per bed per day and the center has the capacity to treat 150 patients.

8568
080: 5300

19
Ill! BPS

ATTORNEY SENTENCE!) T0 PRISON-ﬁtterney ltacir Alberto Vescowi Paini and
[one Nevea Berboea. who were arrested in Leblon on 2 Pabrunry accused of
drug trafficking. were sentenced yesterday in the 23d Crininel Court to

5 years of inprisonnent each. Judge Sergio Cavalieri Pilho also inposed

a fine of 500 cruceiroe on her and a fine of 12.000 crueeiroe on the attor-
ney. Both were arrested by agents of the Narcotics Delegation who ranked
the tip (anonylous) that drug trafficking was going on at Apartuent 302.
Rue Artur Araripe 77. That is the residence of the couple. Jair Borges dc
Oliveire and Denise Correa Pinto. who are awaiting sentencing. The agents
eeieed 889 guns of conpraesed earihuena and 132 green of cocaine. [Text]
[Rio de Janeiro 0 01.080 in Portuguese 13 liar 79 p 18] 8588

NARIIIUANA. COCAIN! PAPER smmnrnru kilos of conpressed narihuana. 300
cigarettes containing that weed. two precision scales and a roll of vegetal
paper for wrapping cocaine were found yesterday by soldiers of the 5th PH
Battalion in a bathtub buried at the edge of a cliff in Horro da Providencia.
a site known as the Passion Pit. The police. who did not explain how they
cane to the spot in question. stated that the eaterial allegedly belonged

to trafficker Joao ds Manhs. conpetitor of the bandit Sebastiao Correa dos
Santos. known as Tainhe. The. drug was handed over to the 2d Policc Delega-
tion and fro- there to the Institute of Crininology. There were no arrests.
[Text] [lio de Janeiro JORNAL no IRAS“. in Portuguese 23 liar 79 p 22] 8568

COCAINB TIAPPICKBRS mmm-klel-Yesterdsy the Federal Police handed
over the four foreigners who node up a gang of cocaine traffickers, but
they did not disclose the quantity of drugs seized. The traffickers are:
Roaeo Kowlessar. Dherrandan Singh and iiichsel Betson (Guyanese) and en
English-an, Ronnie Renabind. According to the police, this is the first
tine that federal agents have found an indication of cocaine in Belee.
They take this to scan that the Para capital is on the drug route and that
there in cocaine scattered around the city. The four were arrested on the
heels of tips giVen by neighbors who saw a lot of novelent in the house in
which the foreigners were living. The police disclosed that the cocaine
seized in Belc- wss white in color and was divided into curlpaper packages
which would be sold at prices varying frola $00 to 1.000 cruceiros each.
According to the agents. the cocaine entered the country vie the heroine
Mountain territory. [Text] [Rio de Jeneiro 0 BLOIO in Portuguese 17 Feb 79
p 7] 8568

TRAPPICKRRS ARRESTED 1N R10--The Pedernl Police announced yesterday the
arrest of drug traffickers Hilton Roberto dn Silva. known as Hilteo. and
Ariove1do Contesini. both cited as narcotics suppliers. in Rodolfo Dentee.
Riachuelo end Renrique Valaderes streets. The two were discovered as a
result of the arrest a few days ego of Ceni1o Halicio Pilho after an ex-
change of gunfire on the Rio-Riteroi bridge. Cenilo. who hes already

served 11 years of isprisonnent at llhe Grande. is also accused of stealing
core to exchange for drugs in Paraguay. The drug was kept in a house in

See Concslo. Upon being arrested Ceailo was carrying 80 packages of cocaine
in tho cer--a Piat R2 1810. One of his bodygusrdso-Evendro ds Silva Junior--
was also arrested. The Pederel Police also disclosed the arrest of s Turk.
Tuffir Seeoul. and of Nilo Pernando Antunes de Hegelhees. Tuffir. who cleins
to be an addict. is to be expelled froa the country. [Text] [Rio de Janeiro
0 GLOBO in Portuguese 23 Feb 79 p 16] 8568

JUDGE DENIES TEMPORARY RELEASB--Judge Sergio Cavalieri Filho of the 23d
Criminal Court denied tenporary release yesterday to Attorney ltaci Alberto
Paini and lens Neves Berboss. accused of drug trafficking. hondey. Attorney
Jeir Lcite Pereire will enter a plea of hsbeos corpus in Alcada Court on
behalf of Psini. who is being held at Ponto Zero. Peini and lone were
arrested on 2 Pebruary in the spertsent of Denise Corres Pinto together
with Jsir Borges de Oliveirs. who sdeitted being the owner of the 889 grass
of cocaine end 132 grass of ssrihusna seized: he also confessed to being

an addict for 10 years. The four accused elresdy gtve their prior defense
and Monday the trial will go before the judge to set s date for sentencing.
[Text] [Rio de aneiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 16 Peb 79 p 15] 8568

PH PROHOTES ANTIDRUG CAMPAIGN-The 5th Military PM Battelion is conducting
a daily campaign at Horro de ProNidencia-othe largest drug distribution
center in Rio; its objective is to warn the residents about the danger of
drugs and the need to coubat thee. Pelphlets are dropped by helicopter
throughout the area or distributed personally by the military police in
their daily raids to locate the lookout and distribution points of Isrihuane
end cocaine. The pasphlet states: "Help us to help you. Join in fighting
drugs. Do not let a trefficker take over your child. Get in touch with us
by telephoning: 263-6637. 263-0725. 263-0131 or 263-0662. [Text] [Rio de
aneiro 0 GLOIO in Portuguese 10 Feb 79 p 21] 8568

cso: 5300

?1
COMM

MAMHUMM WLIZM‘IN 013603880
logota 8|. nmo in Spanish ll Her 79 p S-A
ﬁrticle by Barique Santos Calderon: “Legalize narihuananeore useraﬂ

mug Drug traffic. with its increasingly aultinillionaire and uncontroll-
able dinensiona. keeps growing parallel to the speed with which the
defiant power of the Colo-bian nafie keeps increasing (the surdera. over
the last several days. of a custoaa director and a Samaria council neeber
who was a nafioso). Proposals to legalize the cultivation and export of
urihuane--ae the only efficient way to alleviate. donestically. a problen
uhose reel control is beyond the Colombian governesnt-u-have been increasing
to a no less significant degree.

we have already too nany findings which agree along these lines so that we
are not dealing here with sons kind of odd way of thinking. In addition to
the already known ergueent by coffee industry leader Leonidas undone. the
chorus of opinions in favor of this neaeure keeps growing all the tine.

In recent weeks these opinions have been joined by couentatora in the
liberal press (see. for exaaple. Bl. TEMPO. l2 l’ebruary) labor union organs.
such as 941801! AGROPBCUARIOuthe somding board of the cotton growers in
Cesar-wand even soee outstanding f: we. leader» in the fight against narcotics.
such as general natallana. Ret.. who. during his tern of office as director
or MS LAd-iniotrntivc Departnant of Securitz7. led the fight against the
natia and narihunna and cocaine traffic. General listallana in a recent
report in ALTERNATIVA (No 199) revealed that he recouended that "the
govern-eat take over control. production. and sale (of narihuena) to those
countries that want to consult it" as the "only realistic and worthwhile
alternative which would work against the domestic and international nafia
because it would deprive it of this business."

Although the governnant enphatically ruled out any steps in that direction
and continues its tough fight against drugs. using the two helicopters

which the United States gave for this purpose, the truth is that the econosic
dynamics of this phenolaenon inposed uni-legalization in any areas involving
this operation. while in other areas the authorities einply prefer to look

the other way (seaming they do not actively participate in this business
in the first place).

22
A short time ago it was announced that electrification plans for Cesar had
been financed partly with the millions in fines imposed upon traffickers by
the government. In the neighboring Department of Magdalena. governor
Humberto Sinnin Nerazo stated that the landing strips used to transport
marihuana have been authorized by Civil Aviation (one of whose top
administrators. Col Osiris Maldonado. had also been eliminated by the
mafia); at the same time it was announced with regret that 27 million
pesos. deriving from penalties applied to traffickers. could not be turned
over to the departmental treasury due to legal obstacles.

And so it goes on. The examples are endless and they only confirm that
economic and social realities prevail over decrees and moralizing inten-
tions. This is true above all when they are dictated from outside by the
country where the problem originates and where legalization of consumption
is progressing with giant strides. General Hatallana in the above-mentioned
report alluded to the rather odd double standard in United States legisla-

tion which punishes the act of dealing in marihuana while it increasingly
authorizes its possession and consumption.

Byery new report coming in fro; the United States speaks for itself. The
reaction of the Gringo [ﬂankeg/ leaders of TIME to the above-mentioned
report on "the Colombian connection” is highly symptomatic; three out of
every four questioned by the magazine use all kinds of economic and cultural
arguments to advocate the free consumption of marihuana and cocaine. "You
have to legalize marihuana. Re are thinking of the advantages of a new
market in terma of taxes, the reduction of our foreign trade deficit (by
cultivating and consuming domestic harvests). and the end of all of the
corruption and violence deriving from imported drugs." one reader from
Illinois argued emphatically.

In its next edition. this same magazine. the most prestigious in the United
States. revealed that the cocaine business has even been extended to the
Chicago Stock chhange where several brokers and financial agents were
arrested on charges of carrying out transactions with this product during
ordinary stock exchange sessions.

The conservative weekly magazine ".8. NEHS AND HORLD REPORT in February
published an extensive report on the traffic and consumption of illicit
stimulants in the United States. reproduced by ab TIEHPO under the
title "Nobody for Drugs." containing soee highly revealing data. Let us
review some of then: between 1972 and 1977, marihuana consumption increased
100 percent among young people and 70 percent among adults while cocaine
consumption went up 125 percent among young people and 92 percent among
adults. There are eleven states that dropped penalties for the possession
of marihuana. It is estimated that. during 1978. the value of illegal
transactions involving drugs fluctuated between $35 and $05 billion. a
figure comparable to the business volume of General Motors or Exxon.
Furthermore. 20 percent of the population of the United States (43 million)
have tried marihuana and in the month of January alone. 16 million people

23
were smoking it. Along with this consumption increase. we have witnessed
the growth of a flourishing accessory industry handling a volume of $350
million per year. already constituting an organised pressure group. "Dur-
ing the parties given by young professional men in the cities, cocaine is
often as frequent as drinking.“

Pacts such as these show how far the drug culture has gone in the United
States. to such an extent that President Carter's son admitted in public
that he smokes marihuana and that it was announced that quite a few Hhite
house officials also consume it. along with cocaine. “for recreation."

The government of that country therefore had to coexist with the problem
within its borders while it seeks to wipe out this scourge in the producing
countries. And, as we have stated so many times in this column. that is

not where the trouble lies. 0n the contrary. the more consumption increases
in the United States. the more attractive does this business become. the
more powerful do the mafias. which control it. get. and the sore ground does
the thesis gain to the effect that the state should take over its production
and export (or that the operation should be handed over to private capital.
which would be in keeping with the nature of the Colombian state).

One of the central arguments against this thesis holds that. so long as

the United States does not do the same thing. it would be necessary to sell
it contraband. with all of the reprisals which this could imply by the big
neighbor to the north. but. in terms of strict equity. Colombia does not
have to have so nany scrupples on this score so long as we are daily flooded
from the United States with all kinds of contraband products. while that
country's government does not care too much how they get out. who buys those
products. and where they arrive. This involves not just ”clean" products
which contribute to the ruination of our domestic commerce. but also
chemical articles. pharmaceuticals. pesticides. etc.. which have been
expressly banded beceusetheyare harmful to health. But they continue to
manufacture this stuff for export to those countries while the Yankee
authorities do not feel that this involves them at all.

The legalization of marihuana undoubtedly involves obstacles of many
different kinds. But it is difficult to imagine a situation more paro-
doxical than the present one for a country which. such as Colombia. can

see how corruption and the mafia keep growing without restraint in the
shadows of an illegal business. And this is happening not only in spite of
the measures taken by the government to combat this business but it is also
the cause of those measures. The very height of irony is that the more
marihuann and cocaine are confiscated. the higher is their value on the
market. the more profitable does the business become. the more small
manufacturers are ruined and the stronger becomes the big mafia which can
take any blow and which goes on spreading its ever greater monopoly power
over all phases of cultivation. transportation. and sales. The powerless-
ness of the government in controlling the vital areas of a phenomenon such
as this one is another reflection of the paradoxes of underdevelopment-
and dependence.

$058 .
CSO:5300
mm mmzmon mm comm
ill? Paoposoo Logolisstion
Bogots a. mum; in Spanish 16 Ho: 79 p1-i. e-c

[Tut] rum in Boats. sttomoys, ooononisto. diplouts.
govsmont ottioisls and businooo losdors boson s vial-suing doboto
on tho imo oi' norihuons and its ooonooio sod sooisl inpliostions.

’i'ho discussion oponod uhon tho prosidont oi‘ tho notional issooistion of
Finsnciol Institutions (mp). arnosto Snpor. pnoposod tho orostion or
u colosbisn-ilorioon oo-isoion "to study. without opprohonoions, tho
possiblo logslisstion of tho tssi‘rio.“

”coloabis should tsko o look ot such s locolisstion. with on ovo tovsrds
rogulotion. so s oorious oltomtivo to s orsokdom, Ihilo wishing.

or oourso. m of tho nontivo sad positivo olo-onts involvod,“ sapor
Piano sosortod st tho oponin; cor-ow oi‘ AIIP's moi mposiul.

Supo: Piano mo a pond: outlino of tho can-oat oitustion to u
mulionco oi‘ sinst 300 porsons in tho Sontsndor Room st tho miton Botol.
Also in ottondmoo voro tho nstion's sttonoy gonorol, Guillono
Gonzalo: Chan-n ond 0.8. Anbsosodor Disco ioonoio.

no ono. hovovor. voiood my counts on Snpor Piano's booio idoso. on
tho mposius dooo not 0031ch until tom.

‘l‘ho All? prosidont disolo s umber oi‘ po o in o [W dono by hio
sooooiotion sud comma otpsnsion “about and osid thot lost your
tho won-oat would hsvo tskom in on oxtrs billion poooo it Isa-11mm
m boon lonl.

Bo bsckod his thoory by pointing out thst booouso of tho drop in coftoo
pricoo. cola-bis will tsko in 8650 million dollsrs loss in ionic: omhsngo

ornithst tom's sro i'soodvith thodilo-soi‘hovin; to import 8420
Iillion in am in 1979.

25
no onid that tho noro oovm tho crackdown. tho noro oxponcivo tho pmduct
hocoaoa and tho noro poooo go to tho m cato. horoovor, tho txoi‘i‘ickoro
aro now trying to find clionto in cclcnhia.

Bo diocloood that according to tho otudy clooo to 4.6 billion poooo
oro paid out in hriboo oach your. hon than 10,000 grovoro. 30.000
fuilioo and 150.000 poroono livo ott thio activity.

Tho crackdown io ocoting Golcohia 5 billion a yoor. and Soupor vondorod
vhothor it no fair or othicol for tho country to opond that ooount of
nonoy to crack down on 180 poroono iron “million- of Colo-hiano lack

a roof over thoir hoodo. huic oorvicoo ond oohoolo."

Tho Moor pointo or hio opooch uoro:

An All! and comma poll of 0.800 pomno in our coin citioo ohwod

that 85 porcont of tho- did not know individualo mo .okod mihunna:
homer. 10 porcont oaid that thoy know it was cookod loot oncng gmupo
or friondo in local noialhorhocdo. ochool; md unimoitioo. linoty-i‘ivo
poi-cont rogarlod it no Juot no mm or onto homml than alcohol. and
80 pct-cont donuts: that mihuano io uood ocro in Colombia todoa than

5 yom no. In othor vordo. no ono odnittod ovon indiroot linko with
norihuona, but almot two-think how how much it no nokod. uhoro. by
when and with mt potontiol conooquoncoo.

Tho taboo minot norihuann hao provontod ociontii'io roooorch. anong now
otho: thingo. Roooaroh into ito nodicinol proportion. ito poychologicol
and phyoiolodcal oido oftocto ond ito glowing and unnoting conditiono
arc topioo on avoidod ao norihuano itoolf in tho anooo mono it io gown.

‘l'ho slogan ”booth to Harihuona' that has tokon hold today hoo mocludod
tho construction of pilot planto in Golcohia. ouch on tho oncncno unit
that oxioto in tho otato or muiooippi and that in doing nooxroh into
tho thorapoutic pmportioo of tho plant. Evorything oouo to indicate
that tho Coloohian mind has aloo hocono a largo mow-courod aion-a,
hooiogod and hounded by holicoptoro. ahipo and planoa. and chidod ovory
tilo it has darod to think that mihuanc is anything looo thon tho
diabolical uood united by post-var hollyvood aotoro ond wthing noro
than a oinplo panccoa to nunh tho moo or young pooplo towards tho
vioion or now world in mich non ho- mwd ovorything. ovon tho
count vhon hio pnooonco vill no longor ho noooooary.

The Social Structuro of horihuona Production

Thus. it lo a hoalthy idoa to diocwd oono of tho voilo of wotory and
onto: tho nohulouo and confinod vorld of nonihunna, which can no lowor
ho conoidorod an incidontol crop puchod by odvontuxors intorootod in
gotting rich ovornidmt. An ontiro ocoiol otructuno hao gvovn up around

26
nuihuana production. and we cannot afford to dieregerd it Juet like
that. here than 10.000 growere and alone to 30.000 faIiliee live directly
off it.

Over tine. the aociel relatione involved in narihuana growing havo become
more ecphieticated and. curiously. evolved into a eort of eyetu running
parallel to the reet of the country'e eocial fabric. ‘lhe growere.
categorized according to their eiee or the degree of their tiee to the
land (tenante or ahareoreppere), have refined their cultivation techniquee.
in new oeeee by annihilating foreign technology traneferred directly

by their 0.8. |'partnere." In the Santa Harte Icuntain range a Spanish-
lensueae booklet. prepared in Florida and concerned with the rudieente

of aarihuana growing. ueed to be circulated. Some copiee of it are

etill to be found in the region. a ead reainder of the tinee when

teachere fro- the north tenant ue how to corrupt the youth of their
country.

The 0111’ utudy that you will beccoe funiliar with aleo found that the
mall (“more are grouping together in union celle. with their own
leadere. in order to inoreaee their meager ehare in the bueineee. In an
even more tentative enalyeie. we found that as neaeuree have beooae more
drastic. interlediate- end large-ecele grower-e have appeared who have
concentrated the lende and have ecoeee to inetitutional credit emaroee.
including comeroial benke. ae well an egrenoaiete and agricultural
engineere in their eervice. In a cleapcut proceee of induetrial
integration, the large-eoale producere and nerketere have begun to
control their own landing etripe and ehipping pointe. to eetehlieh
direct contecte with 0.5. partnere and to buy up the induetriee that
manufacture the packaging. But the Colombian Connection goee thie far
and only thie far, and it ie here that the more profitable Ooloubien-
0.8. linkup beam. be powerful networke of 0.8. haffickere are etill
the coneroial and financial brains behind thie operation. and they

take 80 percent of the mfite. leaving ue 20 percent of the pie

and 100 percent of the nhed image.

The leeaem-ee aimed at martailing the activity have focused mainly on

the deetruction of the enall- and intenediate-eize plots. ‘i'hie apmaoh,
in our opinion. derivee m- a nieconception of the lawe of oaneality
that govern the eoonoaice of mihuena. 0n the face of thinge, we nigat
certainlythinkthat themtcftheevil ietcbefcundinthecxep
itself. But looking deeper. there ie the root of the root of the evil.
when it ie the hid: profit ratioe of the traffickere that increaee ae
pricee riee becauee Iarihuena is being deetroyed? On this point we must
be ac explicit ae we are eincerre: ae long as the crackdown continuee to
focua on the crop and the deetmction of plcte. pricee will continue

to riee for each pound of mihuana eold on the anrket. the pockets of
the fat cate involved in the bunineee will bulge iurther. and all the
aniee in the world won't be able to do away with the problem.

27
llo, gentlenen, the ceee of urihuens can no longer be viewed es one of
policing or bringing to triel the cell-tine operstor. Kore then
150,000 persons. including growers. nell-soele niddlenen end none or
lose pernnent enployeee, elons with the senhere or their tallies.
live off nerihusns tom. end their m in the sctiviv'e end profits.
although enell. is still in: renoved iron ﬁst they would he eerning it
they were involved in other rer- work.

hem of these growers are most likely ewere or sense thst met they ere
doing is illegal. but in light of the eoononio end socisl conditions of
subsistence in which they are living. in other words, met they are doim
end for how such they ere doing it, night it not he lesitinste?

As long as the profit Iotive reneine unohenged. in other words, ee long
as the middleman profits. the destruction of crops will control the
phenonenon in one plsce hut sccelerste the neliauncy in other regions.
Over tine. the crowin; eree in the sierrs. elthcugh it still ecoounte

for at leset 60 percent or eres on which nerihusns is grown. hes creduslly
given way to the eastern pleins, eepecielly Areuce end Viohsds. the
velleys of the Sinu end Atrsto rivers. Vrshe. the Derien region end

other coffee-growing ereee or the Andes. As eerihusm destruction
intensities in these erese. the crops will thrive elsewhere. until the
up or coloshislooke like s quilthrk or nerihnens plentstione.

Our Worsening Issac

At this point I cennot resist the tenptetion to enelyee the other cost
thst we ere towed to pa beoeuse or nerihuens: the nrked deterioration
of our ineee. ‘lhe 'fsce o! e Colombian" hes, in new of the world‘s
airports. become s pessport of chess thet triggers werning ligate st
guerd posts or proepte drug users to mtoesticelly ssh s colonhien for
mihuens. Just es they sek e Mien for pineepplee or s French-en for
cheese. Porhspe become eerihuens is illesel end its consequences
ermersted in the press, Colo-his is now {nous oversees not only for
the 300,000 persons the died as s result of violence but tor s sinister
gang of Hefiosi who. scoordine to certain publicstions. ere seeking to
corrupt innocent Aesricen boy scouts. Former president Alberto Llerse
quite properly ssoerted in a. recent uticle that this "dubious honor
or druuine. poisoning and corrupting nillione oi‘ Area-loans is on the
mm; to all the tiles; ell of the speoislized conwters end ell oi‘ the
sources of intonation shout our country end Lstin Anerios. end it will
contime to be utiliud for the next few veers or sore menswer moue
wants to find out what is hsppenine in Colombis."

The air of ustery Inst marmands the world of narihusns is. none other

thingn. s fertile field for the inesinstion of foreign newnen uho
arrive. listen to t- Jusble of i'ehlee end runore end then lesve to write

28
frenetic feature articles end stories, interspersing conspiracies with
street urchins. and drug operations using diabolical paraphernalia with
innocent flidats in lidnt planes over the beautiful beaches of ‘l‘eyrons
Park. new of these articles are dotted with figures taken iron thin air.
For example. a few weeks ago a article appeared in m that stated that
colosbis was reportedly producing encode narihuana annually to last the
United States 200 years at its current levels of conmption.

But seasons has to tell the public overseas that there is sore than
aarihuana hero in Oolcnbia. that there are businosses, professionals
and social security institutions. Hopefully we will not have to wait
until the entire world believes that we are swash in a see of narihuans
before the germs of a single. solitary factory is regarded as major
news. and people then sat there is indth in colonbia in addition to
narihuana.

0.8. Oonsusption

The fact is, the problem is ceasing to be one in the United States.
Fifteen years ago, five out of every 100 persons said they knew someone
who sacked aarihuanaz tom. 70 out of 100 sea so without fear. Perhaps
became sons of then have been to the tunnel Oregon State Fair. were
Prizes and nedals are awarded for the taste. quality or fragrance of
various kinds of narihuana.

Hillions of Americans. whom we are said to be corrupting. spend 360
billion pesos a year on their daily ration of narihuena cigarets.

Eleven states of the union: Oregon, Alaska, Maine, Ohio, Colorado Cali-
fornia, Mississippi, law York. North carolina and Hebraska. which account
for one-third of the “.8. population, have decrininalized sarihuana,
which is no longer a felony but aerely a nisdeneanor, like a parking
violation.

The Bconcaice of harihuana

It is a mystery to no one that the Oclonbian econcnv is faced with a
complex outlook that could lead to a slowdown in activity in 1979 and
symptoas of a recession the year after. he drop in coffee prices will
mean $650 million less in foreia: exchange this year counted to last.

It is hard to believe that this falloff can be offset by higher non-
traditional exports or by the services account. which is at a virtual
standstill tow. Moreover. as President 'l'urbq Ayala so aptly pointed
out. now that the euphoria of the coffee bonanza has passed, we find
ourselves up against a dietrsssitu sum-3y crisis. due to the shortage and
hido price of fuels, which we will be inporting 8420 million of in 1979.
A few months from now the Colombian econony will be calling distressfully
for more fresh reserves to carry forward its social public works

29
programs. to w for lto inn-utmoturo invoohohto out! to rlmuo tho
omlopaont or tto mm... M thoro will not bo w. No to

onothor roooon to toko onothor look at furor troohoont for tho northoono
OWWo

About 81.4 billion dollm ontonod Colo-bio loot you: than lawman:

ooloo. Ho coat to toko o look at tho brookdoun of thot moo-o to

noototo tho into or mmuono'o ottooto on tho ooonow 1n amoral.
In Billion of colonhlon Poooo

o) Produooro (10,000 poroono) 5.04

b) Landma- otrlp ounoro (70 poroono)3.36

o) Ownoro of ohlpplng ottoo

(12 poroono) 1.12
d) Exportoro uolng plonoo

(70 persons) 27.44
o) Morton ulna ohlpo

(12 poncho) 19-04

Won 11‘ vo am that an or our IoJo: touri- rooolpto had boon
nos-1.11m dolloro. or oomohlo dolloro to uoo ﬂu oolontlno an, only
8265 ullton of tho domontlonod 81.4 billion could huvo ontorod tho
ooonow. mot obout tho root? 1t novod in to otrongthou tho oo-oollod
moot-ground ooonoly, o porollol ooonoqy that to hum tho tmo
Colombian ooonow, mung innotlou. boootlng tho coat of housing,
taking roopootoblo corporation by oton and. “at 1o loot onions.
opening tho dooro of a now totality. tho nudity of tho goldon colt,
oooordln; to which prion oro noro snot-tout than volnoo.

If tux-muons hon boon logo]. and ovon oil-13¢ thot logollutlon vonld

hovo oxortod otnonc domvord mount“ on prion ml wkoto (uhlch, it

I am not ammo. to tho d.- of tho mt awkdm camp). tho
eovornnont would hovo tokon 1n non-l: 6 billion poooo 1n Minot and
lndlroot tmo thlo your, o bit loos thou what it to coottng 1t to

otnp out tho ootlvlty. Colonblo noodo tho poooo that it to not roooivinc
boouxoo Ina-muons hoo not boon log-lino. oo voll oo tho poooo that it

to oosorLV ipondlng to ovoid lounging 1t ond to “up it out. Mo to
an lmhtahlo ooomnio truth. not a voluo Judaoont.

Romuolon and Compvtion

Eoch notion. gontloaon. hoo ito ova hlotory, and oooh hlotory hoo 1to
on norol monto. Hhot to tho Iorol want that vo are oxporlonolp; 1n
Colombia becauoe of marihuana? In an indirect way there can be no
doubt that the already studied underground economy is creating methods
of tax evasion, black markets and sources of irregular money circulation
in a desperate attempt to "launder" the money produced by the underground
sale of the weed. and that all of these courses of conduct can be regarded
as damaging to the ethics of a society. As far as direct effects are
concerned. the marihuana econcsy and the repressive way of dealing with
it are giving rise to forms of institutional corruption in Judges. the
forces of public order and the peasant fans population tied in mass
complicity to the trafficking and growing of marihuana. The AMP study
estimates that 4.6 billion are paid out anmally in bribes in colombia.
tempti sue for policemen who earn less than 3,000. lieutenants to
make 7. . colonels 12,000 or Judges a scant 15,000 a month. The
question that we have asked ourselves repeatedly is: What is going to
happen when these so-cslled ”shipping oouisoions' make the traffic too
expensive? will the middlemen quietly move into another activity? The
survey that we were able to do in the sierra showed us that most of the
population is armed and that the large-scale middlemen are acquiring
uni-heavy weapons. such as machine guns. Hhat are they going to do
with those weapons when they are comred? Perhaps they will lay the
groundwork for a guerrilla war.

we are spending enormous counts of money on the repression. not counting
what we lack and what we are asking for. Is it Just or ethical for a
country to spend more than 5 billion a year to control 180 persons, while
millions of Colombians lack a roof over their heads. hospital services.
clusrocms? A cable from the efficient United States International
Counmicaticn Agency has referred to the concern that casts in the
United States over decreased purchases of military weapons by Latin
American countries. Specifically, it cites a statement by the assistant
secretary of state for security aid. Lucy Vilson, to the effect that

of all the countries on the continent. only Colombia has submitted a
major aid request to buy arms worth 812.? million dollars. close to 500
million pesos. This represents 42 percent of all the requests filed.

how many of these weapons will be used to crack down on marihuana? He

do not know, but we ought to. in order to round out the cost picture of
what now looks to be an uncalculated and imwleive campaign.

An far as I a concerned. I think that I have gone to overly great
lengths to demonstrate that the country coat to take a look at
legalizing marilniana instead of represeiw it as a serious alternative
for regulation. weighing. of course. all of the positive and negative
elements involved in such a move. as there are in all of life's decisions.
Legalization does not mean no controls over Iarihuana but rather, placim
its cultivation, sale and consumption within the framework of the laws
and regulations that govern our economy, our society and our state.

To pnopose such legislation unilaterally, without the United states,
would be nothim more than a stubborn child's boast. Bore. before the

31
legitinete :epneeentetivee ot the two memento. ve hove eeriouely
preeented theee etudiee, come end :oundteblee. in chart. thie entire
capo-in. eo that use thought be given to the erection of e co-ittee
ooneiotin; oi' nepreuntetivee iron the two netione to etudy. tree m-
eppreheneione. the legelieeticn or nerihnnne end to enbeit recc-endetione
teilored to the reality of production in Colo-hie end to the certeinty

of consumption in the United Stetee.

Yet. even if none or thie were poeeible. we would feel note then
eetiei’ied ebont out endemr to cell this looting. it et ite cloee
notional end intonation-l public opinion were ehle. with the tinidneee
oi‘epereon Juet openinehie me to the light. to tell: about the ieeue
ct nerihuene, not the problen o! eerihuene.

Scope of are mmo Deecribed
upunmmmnmsmm 1911.:an

[Text] The etudy done by the Boone-1c Reeeeroh Department of the
AMP. which use epecielh prepu-ed to: the mpoeiu thet ended leet
him et the Roots Hilton Hotel, deele with the “mini end econolic
inplicetione or wihm production in Colcnbie."

Veheve eelectedendnpmduoedeoneofthennineectioneoi‘theZé—pege
IWe

After deter-loin the leueet none oi‘ inﬂuence of the mihuene.
infrastructure in Colonbie. the Sierra. levede de Sente ﬂute. (den-e.
according to the etndy. 60 percent of the country's totnl pmduotion and
85 percent or the mketing ere concentreted, clone with 90 percent of
exports). five nnin eectione one preeentedt en eminetien of the me
and e detenineticn ci‘ ite border" the pmceee or gem mum;

on enelycie ci' nerihuene urketine in the nounteine: the inpect oi'
nerilmm operetione on the nountein region end who on the effecte
of the ectivity on the developent end dynenice oi‘ the countzq'e econcw.

The etudy'e initial tieuree concern the area of Siem leudn do Saints
Harte, which covere e totel of 1.2 nillion hectme with e populetion
of 100.000. 'l‘here ere two mo: population mpe: the tenant tomere
(noet 01‘ M ore involved in the lenihnenn bueineee) and the Indinne.
mo ere generolly excluded iron the activity end nnnber 15,000.

In addition, the acne is looeted in three depertnente: 40 percent in

Hegdelene, 50 percent in Le Mire and 30 percmt in Ceeer. Herihuene
ie 32min here on 19,000 hector»; plote notionuide cover e noxinn of
30,000 hecteree.

32
4.0 Billion a Year

According to tho invootigation. tho rogiono more aarilnaana io currently
being grown are: the Atlantic coaot. Bolivar. the Sim River Valley.

the Gulf oi‘ Uraba. tho itrato River Valley. the Darion highlando. Aroma.
Vichada. Santandoreo. Ctmdinaaarca. ‘l'cliao. the coffee-growing aroao and
other tracto in Cauca. Ruila. lax-inc. income and Vaupoo.

After lioting all or thooo i‘igureo. mo otatoo that nationwide production
totalo 15.000 tone a year. at an average price to the producer of

160 poooo a pound; in other wordo. the country'o annul output oi‘
aarihuana io valued at olooo to 4.8 billion poooo.

According to the All” otudy. there are 6.000 oaall-ooale grower-o in the
Sierra novada to account for 50 or 70 percent or production in their
i‘ioldo. "The groworo are independent. inanuoh ao they can generally
do what they want with their production and nogotiate the oalo of their
crop to their boat advmtoeo.“ tho otudy notoo.

Homer. 'narihuana is usually grown along with other farm cmpo
(corn. yucca). After a umber oi‘ cropo. they tond to ‘oot up' their
farm or cattle ranch and depend looo and leoo orcluoivoly on aarihuana.’

Thus. cone 12.500 waco oarnoro work in tho aarihuana i‘ioldo or the oiorra;
in other wordo. ”oomo 19.000 tuilioo in tho ocuntaino live directly of!
tho production phase of mihuana. and 30.000 taailioo nationwide."

Another point that tho ARI? otudy umaoizoo conceno the daily wogoo

in thooo oonoo ccoparod to tho root of tho camtry. ”Daily wmo exceed
300 peoca. which io ccnoiderably more than in traditional tan octivitioo.
The avorogo daily use in Colombia. in a hot climate and without board.
is 127 pooco."

In a cooporioon of coffee and narihuana production ccoto tho otudy
otateo that in tho mihuana industry "profits total 101.000 poocc per
hoctaro, while for coffee they cro 42.500 peace por hectare. in other
words alncot 2.5 times acre in tho caoo or norihuano.."

'I‘ho 6.000 growers in tho oiorra take in a total yearly incono of 2.4
billion poooo. 594 million in wages and 1.806 billion in protito. The
12.500 wogo oarnoro receive 33.000 poooo each per year and work 5 to

6 nontho. The total income of tho woso earning group per crop lo 406
million poooo.

A hacinooo or ‘lbno and Hilliono

‘l'ho otudy turniahoo additional figures and data: 95 porcont of tho
marijuana grown in tho country io exported, 85 percent oi“ it to tho
United Statoo and the remaining 15 potent to South and Central Aurico.
the Caribbean. Canada and. recently. Europe.

33
Betieetee are that 20 percent oi‘ the weed ie loet due to delvdreticn.
umnrketahle reeiduee end eterege. that enother 15 percent ie conrieoated

in thie country. mile en additionel 10 percent ie eeieed in the United Stetee
end enother 5 percent in other oonntriee.

Nevertheleee. the eggregete velue of Oclcehien nerihuene erporte ie
clone to 81.4 billion dollere (54 Milton peeoe e yeer). m U.8.
nerihnenn nerket reoeivee 60 percent of ite euppliee iro- Colo-Mum
30 percent iron hexico (the eecond leading exporter). vith the remaining
10 percent coming Oren the United Stetee iteelt. Jeneice end heveii.

Setinatee are that eone 500 plenee are being need to treneport net-ihuene.
neinly to North America. the etudv oelmletee that come 100 ehipe are
in per-enent eervioe between Ocluhia end the United Stetee for thie
mp0“.

The ARI? ctudv liete the individule involvei in the nerihuena hueineee
no rollover grovere' niddI-en. eecond middle-en (the one the ehove up)
the ovmer of the lending etrip (vith teue or vorhere end oollahoratore’.
the owner or the loading pleti‘orl. the outer of the ten neer the loading
eito (vith teae ei‘ experte). the exportere end the lerge-eoele nerketere.
vhogoeitherhy eirorhyeee. In the eierrethereere 1.200 firet
niddluen. 7O lending etrip ounere. 12 loediw pletiore ovneo‘e. eoee

70 “air" erportere and 12 “on“ exportere. The entire operation xequiree

5.750 flighte and 164 see oroeeinge a year to chip the nerihuene out or
the region.

At thie point the etudy offere nev i‘ignree on the people involved in
the marketing phone. in tdiich the “are grovere nploy 5.000 pereone
a year. Thee. 6.000 r-iliee are directly dependent on thie pheee for
their eubeietence in the eierre. the neticnvide figure beiw 1.000.

If we Imp together the production. groving end eerketing etegee. 40.000
Coloehien tuniliee live off nerihnene.

In addition to the above figuree, the AMP etndy hee determined thet the
firet niddluan have a pound of eerihuena iron the grower for 160 peeoe and
that in the finel trmeotion the eir exporter two it for 260 peeoe and
cells it to the Anericen ilporter for 2.400 peeoe. vhile the eee exporter
have it at the once price and eelle it for 5.400 peeoe.

with regard to incoee dietrihnticn. the grovere receive only 8 percent.
vhile the dealer-e take in the reneining 92 percent. In netionel tone.

Colcuhia receivee only 20 percent of the totel incoee iron the activity.
end the United Statee gete the other 00 percent.

Another conclueion oi‘ the viderewing my end: ie thet eerihuene
operetione generate eoee 25.000 Johe e yen: in the region end thet ovu-
tine eocial ornniutione have been eet up ranging {roe co-nity
uoooiatione alone noll-ooale aware and uniono to profit-Ming
arrow-ante between tho tonant and the owner of the land.

Social Input

Ae far no oooial inplioationo are concened. mp etatee that "clearly
unfavorable aipa can he neon: pane-urea on Indian linoritiea uho have
boon diolodgod fro: their lande: the immorality and oomption that the
mihuana toade hao oaueod...and nloo tno nanifoetationo of violence that
uoonpam thio activity. that ahoephero of Iietruet and fear that
pmaila anon: people. nobhorioe and other inoidente.‘

Tho etudy noteo that ooneidonahle uounte of veapone have enterod the
oountn an a fon of want to ammo and dealere. the All? aleo
pointe to tho do futo locitinuy that eooial snoupe have uoorded the
mihunna hueineoe, the uooptance of the 'Hafioai" in the oountry'o
eooial fabric. the mihuana inoono that eaten the nation'e
production utivitiea and the introduction of the loot eomietioatod
ooneuer it-e into eooial coupe. vith the dual input of menu
inflation and eroding the incone of Iona privileged coupe.

In oonnection with ecological dosage in the aim. the otudv ueerte
that the proooee of doforeetotion hae oped up and that eoil detorioration
and eroeion have inoreaoed. It calla attention to poeeihle alteration
in Bthe regioa'e monolinato eince the nountain none ute an the Iain
ecological regulator of a not area.”

With regardto the input ofthelarihuanatradeon the Siomlevada
rogion. the otudv oitoe tho following final pointe: Md‘lﬂ' doneotio
oonounption of tho barbiturate hethaqualude. the uontoxino that are
pmduoed during otoroge and that on paoeod on to anokere heoenee of
the luk of quality oonwol and tho varioua offeoto of tho mooning
foreign exchang- fmn narihuana ealeo.

8743
(50: S300

35
l'ogotu l-:l. Tim in apanish 3 ihr 79 p 5-13

[Text] Quito 2 (UPI)--This afternoon the foreign ministers of Coloabia and
Ecuador, Diego Uribe Vargas and Jose Ayala Iaso, signed a Joint declaration,
an agreement for Annazon cooperation, and an administratiVe agreement to
cooperate in the prevention, control and repression of traffic and illegal
use ol‘ narcotics and psychotogenie substances.

The joint declaration rcaffiras the need for collective aeasures to stop
the am: race in the Americas. It also eaphasizes rights of sovereignty
over their respectiVe segments of the geostationary synchronic orbit and

eallr. for coordinated efforts with other equatorial countries to protect
these rights.

liney mention there must be greater stove-eat tovards frontier integration,
and for this purpose an evaluation of the work of the standing csuittee
on ecomsiic integration will be conducted.

'nney also express support for Latin American integration, particularly in
the Andean nubregion.

The preamble of the Amazon cooperation agreement notes that "cooperation
and Hit: development of cannon programs will make it easier to preserve and
nuke optimal use of the vast resources in the border Mason areas."

Amour. the stipulul-imm of the agreement are the following:

"Formation of a Joint committee to study and coordinate programs of cannon
lilLttrtmL.

"Preliminary studler. to set up regular pilot navigation services on the
Putumyo and San Miguel rivers, involving the operation of vessels belonging
In both parties.

“Studied to improve navigable conditions on the two rivers.
--(:oordlnution lmtveen the uinintriec or health or both countries for
reciprocal medical euro in the frontier are“.

«Joint communication services.

--Adoption of neonurcn to help the indigenous comnitien and to further
the prenemtion or their cultures.

9268
cm: 9300

37
raomro ASKS MORE HELP roe ADchrs
Bogota Bl. nmo in Spaniah 12 liar 79 p 12-0

[rout] ‘l'otal lack of concern and indifference on the part of the government
toward drug addicte vaa denounced by the organization for the rehabilitation
of drug addicte. Damn; the organization added that very little money ia
being allocated for prevention while much ia being need for repreeeion of
the problem.

These chargea were made by membera of the board of directore of PRmE‘l‘EO
during a preae conference in Andiarioa, attended by director Maria laabel
de Lincc. board chairman Alfoneo Comer Zuleta, and Guillermo Correal Sanin,
a peychoanelyet.

“It hae been more important for Coloabia and the government to have a good
image with reepect to the United Statee in the fight againat the drug market
rather than to help our own addicted uae.” the participanta aeeerted.

According to Decree 1188 of 1973, the National Narcotica Council muet turn
over 10 percent of the money for the aale oi vehiclee. aircraft. laboratoriee.
and houaea eeieed by the authoritiee from drug traffickera, for agenciee

involved in education. treatment. and aocial orientation in the field of
druga.

“But in reality, the lady director of P3013150 maintained. ”That money ie
uaed nore for repreeaion and coercion on the drug market heading for the
United Statea and Europe, rather than in prevention and education campaigna.
One might nlmoet aay that Colombia ie more intereeted in the foreign drug
addict than our own drug-dependent youthe."

Maria leabel de Lince explained that her agency gete an average of 70 caaee
per day of parenta. brothere. and friends of young drug addicts who come for
help but uho. in view of the deficit of 1.2 eillion peeoa. which P30113130 ie
struggling with at this time. have to be turned away. while their requeata
for treatment muat be rejected. She eaid that her asency'a efforte are
limited by economica and by the lack of govern-eat aid.
Paychoanalyat Dr Guillerno Correal Senin noted that eedical backwardneea in
the treataent of drug addicta ia laaentable and he attributed thia to the
unexpected (or- in which the problen confronted Colombian eedicine.

"In the eetter of rehabilitation, the govern-eat doea not have a eingle
inetitute; nor in there any agency to help people who are dependent on
druga and the aane in true of therapeutic treatment; theee activitiea are

inter-ingled with the general functione of the hoepitele," Correel Sanin
aeid.

Regarding Colombian experience in the latter of drug eddicta. Dr Correal
maintained that druga are a ayepton of other problems. ”eomething that has
come to be a life-atyle. a fad end an expreaaion of youth rebellion ie now
identified with young people in Our lend who lack love. opportunity for
atudiee, and chancea for joba."

Regarding the roota of drug addiction in Colombia. the director of PROHETEO.
haria laabel de Lince. explained that the only atetiatica which have been
prepared on the inatitutionel level in Colombia on drug dependence indicate
that 72.77 percent of the young addicta believe that their family relationa
are altered end that there ia a lack of harmony there.

“The noet difficult age ia adolescence." ahe aeid. "and that in alao the
moat dangeroua time for the etart of drug uae; about 05 percent of the young
people who today are in college have already tried druga; eoat of then be-
gan out of aimple curioeity or preaauree from the group they belong to."

do far as fa-ily reaponaibility toward the adoleacent ie concerned.Dr

Sanin Correal ateted that the lack of love. the crieie of authority, and
Easily dieintegration are the big aocial problela which lead to the use of
druga. aa a aymptom. ”Rho aaya that being an edoleacent in bad?" Dr
Correal aaked. "A youth at that age aaeka modela, aomebody to imitate.
somebody with whom he can identify; but if we tell our child that he ehould
not smoke marihuane while we ouraelvea hold a gleea of whiakey in our hand--
how can the father'a authority work?"

"in the matter of love." Maria Iaebel explained, "the problems which the
young peraon hoe in achool or at home do not matter; the important thing in
that he geta love and anewera to hie queetiona the moeent he needa the. coat
on that.eomething that began ea ainple curioeity will not turn hie into an
addict.’

Hith reapect to the treatment given by PROHETEO. there in one common ceuee
in all caeee: lack of education on the part of the parenta.

Correal Sanin explained how the lack of education on the part of the parents,
plus the entire drug infraatructure, which in antiethical. can lead to the
induatrialization of thia vice: “Narihuena not only has a aignificance in
tor-e of mental health but alao becauae it generatee vagrancy and vices.“

39
”Along virh nerihuene," the doctor Ieinteined. "we get proniecuity.

enuulins. the non of hoye on drug couriere. end libertinieeo-vicee vhich
cone out during getherinse vhere nerihuene in need.“

norm-so hoerd choir-en Alfoneo Gone: Zulete urged the entire notional.
«unity to he were of the drug problen neon; the younger seneretion end
etreeeed the need for hevins privete enterpriee provide economic eupport for
esenciee ouch en "rrmw' in Boson, ”Cuinoe“ in Celi. end the ”Union
mine: Drug Addiction“ in lerrmquine.

"A new eyeten of eupport for drug eddicte hee been proeoted in the enter-
prieee. They ere eeked to provide e were oi 5.000 peer-e per nonth for the
purpoee of helping the drug eddict end the (any. He hope thet our requeet
will produce en echo heceuee e11 of ue Colodeiene ere reeponeihle for thin
yomer seneretion uhich ie on the wrong treck.” Gone: Zulete neinteined.

5058
080: $300
REIGN OF TERROR IN BARRANQUILIA
Bogota in. mm in Spanish Io Mar 79 p l-A, 3-A
[Signed by Jose Cervantes Angulo]

[Text] Barranquilla 2--This city of more than a million inhabitants, once
an oasis of peace and calm away from the political violence prevalent in
the interior 20 years ago, is now a frightened city, one that has lost its
innocence.

The worst thing that could have happened to this city was to have allowed
the mafias of smugglers and drug traffickers to settle here. Every city in
the world makes mistakes. Barranquilla's worst mistake was allowing the
mafia to set itself up in its warm-heartened welcoming midst. The people
of Barranquilla, a carefree, happy and pleasant lot, turned their back on
reality and worried more about Junior [the children] carnival, the bridge
over the mgdalena River, the zoo and other places that give the city its
good image, and ignored the mafia and their outright, dangerous penetration
of a coanunity that deserved something better.

Barranquilla is the empire of impunity. Here the municipal controller
Napoleon Fernandez and his wife were killed and nothing happened. The
director of taxes, Rafael Rubio Pupo, was murdered, and nothing happened.
'l'hcy murdered the seventh criminal court Judge, Jose Ihria Amaris Tatis,
and nothing happened. And now they have wiped out the administrator of
customs, Rodrigo Rodriguez Pacheco, and undoubtedly nothing will be done
about it.

Napoleon Fernadez, the controller, was killed when he started to denounce
irregularities in the Public Utilities Company, the disgrace of Barranquilla's
public administration.

They killed Rafael Rubio Pupo, the director of taxes, when he discovered the
embezzlement of more than 1‘00 million pesos in the treasurer's office of
Barranquilla.
The reasons for the deaths of the city criminal Judge and the director of
customs are still hidden but no one in this city fails to realise that all
the throudn of those murders come from a single sksin, the mafia.

Squad of Death

Almost before the people of Barranquilla had realized what was happening,

a "death squad" was set up here composed of paid killers instructed to
shoot anyone interfering with the godfathers of the smuggling and drug
traffic. The pay ranges between 10,000 and 100,000 pesos per crime depend-
ing on the position of the victim. here in Barranquilla when someone wants
to get rid of somebody else and does not want to reveal his involvement or

awaken suspicions, he hires the killers directly or through an intermediary
and pays them cash in advance.

‘lhe only thing the person has to do is pay up, hand over a picture of the
victim and that's the end of it, he gets rid of an enemy.

ENeryone knows who the paid killers are. Their names are mentioned with

terror, panic and even in a tone approaching respect. They live in luxury
hotels or apartments paid for by the mafia, go to the best restaurants and
sleep with the most beautiful women in the city. Their style is impeccable

if not perfect. After studying a victim's habits for a week, they wait for

him outside his home or office, shoot him a couple of times, and it's all
over.

Era of Terror

A good share of the blame for Barranquilla's living in the midst of anguish
and anxiety is the marihuana bonanza. A fearml caste of traffickers and
smgglers has moved into luxurious mansions which look more like small forts
than homes. As the people watch them surrounded by their armies of body-
guards and armed killers, they complain, more rightly so as each day goes by,
that their prosperity goes unpunished and protected by official fear [garblel
a prcotigiouo political leader of the city was forced to kneel down by members
of the mafia and apologize for not yielding to them in a central city street.

Many citizens have been threatened with magma and submachine guns for failing
to yield to the 'rangers.’ And there have been many victims run over by these
savages.

The mfia Lawyers

The mafia, with its control over millions of pesos in this city, has managed
to form a team of well-known criminal lawyers who see to it that the gang-
sters are released when they fall into the hands of the authorities. It is
these lawyers who also arrange for the release and return of ships, planes
and crews. Generally identified in Barranquilla, these lawyers have an end-
less source of wealth in the mafia.

112
They Buy Everybody

The maria buys everybmw orb-authorities, witnesses to crimes, Jailers,

police, detectiVen and public officials. Anyone who opposes them is done
away with or ruined. Judges do not dare pass sentence because of threats
of death to themselves and their families, and so no member of the mafia

has yet been sentenced in this city.

A Final Word

The city is afraid. The people get edgy everytimo the tires of the 'rangers'
squeal over the pavements or they start target practice on the city streets.
People have witnessed the killings but no one dares talk. A few hours later
they vould be dead. It hurts to say so but the city is in the hands of
gangstern. Somewhere its calm has been lost and the authorities are helpless
to comlmt organized crime.

Barranquilla must wake up. Its leaders should stop their intriguing, their
plant: to pile up easy, exorbitant wealth, and their eupirebuilding and get
together in an effort to fight against crime.

In an editorial in 5!. mm, the city's most influential daily, Juan D.
Fernandez Benowitzky asked, "Rho will be the victim today?" At the same
time, Dr Francisco Posada de la Pena, writing in the daily EL CARIBE, called
for Joint civic action to fight against organized crime and attempt to bring
back the peace that has been lost.

133
HAR 0N 0M8 m U?
Bogota m. 'I'IDIPO in Spanish '0 hr 79 p 3-A

[Text] The official campaign conducted on the Atlantic coast between
23 February and 2 lurch 1979 against the drug trai‘i‘ic yielded the seizure

of more than a thousand packages of narihuna, three planes and three vehi-
clan.

According to a report from the Defense Ministry, troopers from the Cartagtena
battalion seized 550 packages or aarihuana, a .hh cal. rifle, a 9 an pistol,

and an F-lOO truck on 23 February on the Abra road, at km 30 between Riohacha
and Cuestecitas.

The sane day three arrests were nude in xiohacha and a Renault 12 bearing
license JT-5900 was seized along with a J15 cal. pistol.

0n 2': February, troopers from the Cordoba battalion arrested three people in
La Tagua and confiscated 325 packages of aarihuana from them.

At the Monteria airport troopers from the Junin battalion captured an
knerlcan-liconacd Cessna and its pilot, Barry Cooper 311th, who was carrying
a map on which several clandestine runways were lurked.

Troopers from the Air Force's Rondon group confiscated % packages of mari-
huuna in an inlet on 26 February on the road from Cuestecitas to hate Nuevo.

1n the general area of Amine, troopers from the Rondon Air group confiscated
an i-‘-350 truck and 22 packages of Iarihuana. At La Thane, troopers from the
Cordoba battalion seized l3 packages or aarihuana.

On 1 Mirch in Pueblo VieJo, a municipality or Cienaga, an American airplane,
registry No "-2053 that had crashed into the ocean was found. Inside it was
the body of one of the plane's pilots. The plane had hit high tension wires
an It was searching for a clandestine runway in Cicnaga after the inter-
national airport at Barranquilla had authorized it to land there.
M. In Tagua the any seized two and a half bundles of unrihuana needs and
on the Santa ram-310mm hiehvay, near the place called Canaronea, an
American "-5812 plane was found. Its crew members managed to get away from
Um Lrooporn fro- the Cordoba battalion. 'mo airplane had run out. of an.

M
Bogota m. mm in Spanish 3 Mn 79 p l-A, 6-A

[Text] Rafael Aron Warns, AKA ”Maracas," one of the most feared god-
fathers of the narcotics traffic mafia, was shot and killed Thursday night
in Santa thrta. An 8-year-old girl, Claudia ds la Rosa, was wounded in the
leg.

Aron lunJarres had himself elected a titular member of the city council of
Santa hrta for the 1978-80 term in the last elections. He was killed when
he was visiting his deputy, Alberto de la Rosa, in Gaira a few kilometers
outside the city. The killing took place at Calle 16, No 13-01 in Gaira, a
few blocks from a home owned by the victim who also lived in that district.
According to police reports, Akracas had gone to visit his deputy on the
council, Alberto de la Rosa, during the evening and at about 2230 hours
three individuals, their faces whitened with cornstarch and pretending to
be drunk, entered the house in a friendly manner and after saying hello,
took out automatic weapons and began firing right and left.

The attackers, using pistols and magnum, fired more than 20 times. Ten
bullets hit Aron lunaarres who died imdiately when his skull was destroyed.
The little girl, Claudia de la Rosa, was hit in the leg during the shooting
but her condition is not serious. According to the official version, the
gumen fled in a car that was waiting nearby.

Without a Bodygqu

According to early reports, the well-known murder victim did not have his
usual bodyguards with him. They almst never left him. It is not known why
he was alone; presumably he got careless because he was in his own district
and perhaps thought he was safe.

Barely 2 months ago one of his constant companions was also shot and killed,
when he was standing in front of a tire shop.
Nuns-ed a Fortune

Rafael Aron MunJarres, born in Riohacha and hi when he died had lived in
Santa Marta from the time he was very young, and had gone to liVe in Cairo
where he built a tension worth seVeral million pesos.

With the fabulous fortune he amassed from the drug traffic, he had the hobby
of owning the latest model, most luxurious cars, especially sports cars. It
was said he changed cars the way anyone else changes his shirt.

Before he got into the drug traffic, Aron anarres had been a police
inspector several times in this city. He left that to get into drugs and
distinguished himself as one of the boldest and most feared traffickers of
all. Several deaths were attributed to him, which it was never possible
to confirm.

He was also very fond of automatic weapons, particularly expensive pistols
and the notorious Magnun. He was arrested several times for possession of
arm that were for the exclusive use of the military.

One of the mat dramatic episodes in Aron PanJarres' active life was the
kidnapping of his daughter, Sandra Patricia Aron Duran in early September

197' I .

The kidnapping of Sandra Patricia caused a sensation nationwide and the
kidnappers demanded 50 million pesos for her return. A week later, however,
she was returned safe and sound and the kidnappers were captured. The osten-
sible head of the band was a Lebanese.

"Dhrueas" was one of those who arranged for the rescue of the kidnap victim.
A few minutes before her release, the daughter of the lcbanese was kidnapped.
She [Sandra Patricia] was found a few hours later.

Elam for the second kidnapping was attributed to "traces and his gang who
apparently believed in an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.

The wake for Rafael Aron knJarres was held in the city council chambers
and he was buried in the afternoon.

9:268
0130: 5300

117
TRAFFICKIRS' AIRPLMIBS 331230. “38878 MADE
Bogota 31. 8161.0 in Spaniah 7 her 79 p 8

[Text] Two aircraft need in the drug traffic were re-.ently aeired by author-
itiee engaged in conbating the ganga which are operating along the Colabien
Atlantic Coaet.

The operation rcaulted in the aeirure of druga valued at 16 nillion peace.
and three individuale. two Americana and one Colonbian. were arreated.

The initial vereion given by officiela of the town of Jegueicito on the
hagdelena River indicated that a plane had craehlanded eerioualy injuring
the three occupante. The plane cane fron hie-i and wee again taking off
for ita point of origin.

lnaide the plane were lo packagea of narihuana and eeverel kilogram of
cocaine. The nelea of thoae arreated. all eerioualy injured. could not be
aecertained. ea they had to be taken i-edietely to energency centere.

Again yeeterday, an abandoned plane wea diacovered--thie tine in Guajire;

it eppeara that it creahlended for lack of fuel. All ite occupante abandoned
the plane. whoae licenae nunber waa N-SB-DZ; the plane wee taken i-edietely
to the Riohacha Military laae and placed at the diepoaal of the Colo-bian
Air Force.

Colonbian authoritiea have recently dealt heavy blown to drug-traffic gauge
to the extent that. thin nonth alone, they heve eeired druge valued at lore
than 100 eillion peace and arreated more than 20 pereone.

Yeeterday. the office of the Judicial Attorney Generel reported the aeizure
of lore than 800 grana of cocaine et the Bldoredo International Airport of
Bogote end the arreat of four peraona. The drug wee hidden in the ehoulder
etrape of handbage and in belte.

8568
(:50: 5300
COCAINB IAJORATORY RAIDBD
Bogota EL Slaio in Spanish 13 Mar 79 p 8

£T¢K§7 A well-equipped cocaine laboratory was discovered by National Police
units assigned to the Department of Santander. in the township of Capitanejo;
at the seas time it was possible to capture two individuals who were turned
over to the respective authorities.

Uniforned police officers discovered the laboratory. which contained every-
thing needed for the processing of the alkaloid on the basis of confessions
made by sons persons who had been caught recently.

This illicit business was located on the ”Tresnochador” estate. in the town-
ship of Capitanejo; two citizens. who were identified as Maria Reyes Godoy
and Eliseo Godoy were taken by surprise in the establish-ant; at the accent
of their capture. they were processing a large quantity of coca leaves.

The residence also contained 100 packages containing leaves free which the
valuable hallucinogen is extracted. along with several pouches of cocaine
which. according to the inforaation source. were ready for sale.

The two persons apprehended were turned over to the general judge [judge
who tries criminal and civil case;/ in the town of Capitanejo. who had
already initiated the respective investigations. The discovery of the
aodern laboratory took place during the early hours yesterday Iorning
after an operation had been set up in an effort to discover the illicit
business.

The identity of the person arrested-who provided the leads enabling the
authorities to discover the laboratory-owes not disclosed by members of

the National Police who indicated that the equipaent confiscated nay cone
to as auch as 20 nillion pesos.

The two individuals who were inside the hone. where the business was being

operated. did not offer any resistance since the officers took them by
surprise.

$058
CSO:S300
WKATORY M1030 IN CAUCA DEPARMT
logota 3L stow in Spanish 6 liar 79 p 3

[Text] A new blow was dealt yesterday morning to drug-traffic gangs operat-
ing in uestsrn Coloebia by eaabere of the police force of Cauce Depart-ant.
who discovered a nodern laboratory for the processing of cocaine and captured
three persons who were in the building housing the illicit trade.

According to information issued by the press depart-ant of the Rational
Police Directorate. the operation was carried out on Casablanca Road in the
jurisdiction of the sunicipslity of Alesguer. In raiding the residence
owned by Cristobal Jieenee. the police found anodern laboratory containing
all necessary equip-ant for producing cocaine.

Three individuels vars captured durim the operation. one being the ouner
of the building in which the laboratory was neintained and the other two
answering to the names of Neftali end Nestor Genes; all three were taken
to Alnsguer and handed over to the proper authorities.

In addition to tho processing equipnent. 100 arrobas of coca leaves usre
found in the dwelling ready to be converted into the highly valued alkaloid.
According to intonation received by this newspaper. the individuals taken
captive yesterday had been denounced by other eelbers of the crininal organ-
isation. who had fallen into the hands of the authorities and. after intense
questioning. had revealed the identity of those arrested on Casablanca Road.

According to official estimates. the value of the laboratory night cone to
as such as 30 nillion pesos. The individuals seized were placed. together
vith those arrested, at the disposal of the judge of the municipality of
Aluguer. uho initiated the pertinent investigation.

The laboratory had been in operation for about 3 tenths and its eeployees
had been charged with the distribution and processing of all the alkaloid
sold throughout lost of Cauca Department.

8568
080: 5300
COCAINB LAl RAIDBD IR IOGOTA. TRAPPICKBRS CAPTURED
Iogots EL BSPBCTADOR in Spenish 8 Her 79 p 9-A

[Text] In cerrying out en operetion which begsn leet Tueedey evening end
ended yeeterdey. membere of the Adeinietretive Deperteent of Security [Des]
discovered e eodern end couplets leboretory for processing coceine snd cep-
tured 11 persons belonging to s powerful geng of drug treffickere.

They were "working"

The lsboretory wee diecovered et 16-72 l9-A St. Sente Pe precinct. end some
of the trefiickers were ceught in the sct of processing the slkeleid, 2 kg
of which hed slreedy been eerked for distribution to the eerket.

In eddition to en ebundence of equipeent for preceeeing coceine. the secret
egents seized 10 kg of coce pests. the rev eeteriel used in producing the
dengeroue drug.

Movie-type Pureuit

During the reid eoee of the drug treffickers succeeded in firing e nunber
of ehots but. seeing they could not win. decided to give theeeelvee up:
othere stteepted to escepe over the roofe of neighboring houeee. where they
had to be forced down by the detectives efter e specteculer pursuit which
lasted eore then 2 hours.

Second Reid

During the eperetion the sgents eleo reided eperteent 302 of building No
16-59 on 19th St, loceted in front of the houee in which the leboretory wee
opersting. end here other neebers of the geng were ceptured.

Here Ceptures

Ae previously steted. the operetien cerried out by the has lested until
yeeterdey efternoon. end it resulted in the cepture of three eore een end
one uonan. who cans to the laboretory unaware that their cronies hed been

epprehendod end thst severel secret esents were in the house usiting for
than.

Identities

Although ll persona altogether usre captured. only the following names were
released pending a search for other Islbers of the crininel organization:
Juan Jose Hunos. Blanca Ines Castillo Chavea, Pehio Barreneche Acero.

Jaime Cesar Sandoval. Henry Sanshria Pacheco. Liherdo Silve lojes and
Jair Gerardo lernal Cuestes.

In connection with the cepture of the drug treffickers end the eeisure of
the lehorstory equip-eat. the 2 kg of cocsine end the 10 kg of coca pesto.
the corresponding triel use conducted by the Judiciel Police in the presence
of a representative of the Office of the Attorney Generel Delegste.

8568
C50: 5300

52
BRIEFS

coca PLANTATIOR Dzs'l'ROYBD—Iucaramenge. 8 “arch. by Jairo Seravie. The
Office of the Attorney General of the Nation and the Police struck the
hardest blow ever to the drug-trafficking mafiee when they discovered 15
hectares planted with coca. estimated at e value of 500 aillions. This
blow was struck at an estate located in the township of Capiteaejo. on
the border of the Departments of Sentender end Boyaca; 30 peasants were
arrested. The operation was directed by Col Omar Franco. 00 of P2 in
this department. The crop area was discovered on the "San Joaquin" ranch.
in the township of Capitenejo. which borders on the township of Riceurte.
LTextnBogote BL 11990 in Spanish 9 Mar 79 p 8-57 5058

DIPBC DRUG SEIZURES DESCRIBED-Drugs worth more than 546 million pesos were
confiscated by the narcotics detachment of DIPEC [expansion unknown] this
year; the unit also managed to arrest 69 sen end 8 woaen who were caught by
surprise while they were taking care of the marihuena plentetions or while
they were in possession of large quantities of cocaine. The operations.
totalling ‘2. were carried out in various placed throughout the nation by
members of the armed establishment. During January end February of this year.
detachment 82 of the police carried out the following operations throughout
the country: 22 men and b women were arrested end 1077 kilograms of cocaine.
worth 313 million pesos were found on them: ll laboratories for processing
the alkaloid were discovered end 22 men and 3 women were arrested there;
officers also confiscated components for the production of the hellucinogen.
worth more then 2.5 million pesos. The members of the narcotics group of the
"Q of P2 confiscated 11.853 kilograms of marihusna worth much more than 23
million pesos. In the course of the raids. during which the drugs were
confiscated. the officers also arrested 17 men and 1 women. Concerning
marihuana crops. the authorities spotted five huge plantations with an
approximate output of 103.000 kilograms; one of the plentetions consisted
of more than 2,000 shrubs estimated at a figure of 750,000 pesos. The
meters of the narcotics group also managed to arrest six persons who were
growing this plant. Overall. 62 raids were carried out. leading to the
capture of a total of 69 men and 8 women. the confiscation of marihusne and
cocaine as well as processing laboratories for the above-mentioned alkaloid
«all in all worth more than 566.000 pesos. As reported. the results were

excellent thanks to the hard wort don b the personnel of the National
golice ﬁhrgggout the country. Text {Bogota EL SIGLO in Spanish 10 Her
9 p 12

53
caveman AUTHORITY VOIDBD--The Colombian Suprene Court declared a few
nonenta ago the nullity of Decree 402 of 1979 granting the governora
epecial powera to deetroy illegal lending etripe need for nerihuene
anuggling. The value of Iarihuana eeiaed by Colo-bian authoritiea during
the peat 6 aonthe haa been eet at 270 billion peace. a high-ranking
governeent official aaid in reporting on the atruggle ageinet drug
traffickura. Ba Guajira Governor Rafael Iguaren aaid that ainca the
beginning of thie adninietration there have been 107 nurdera in La
Guajira and not a aingla arreat ha been neda. he directly eccueed the
nilitary and police authoritiea of neglect. The governor charged that
corruption had eroded all govern-ant forcea aent to control the drug
trafficking aafia. [Bogota Cadena Radial Super in Spanieh 0000 Off

21 Apr 79 PA]

TMPFICKRS' PLANE SBlzm-Santa Harte, 5 March-4V0 Anericene and one
Colombian were injured when the plane in which they were flying and which
wee loaded with hallucinogenic druga craehlanded in Renolino jurisdiction.
Information received indicatee that the aircraft niehap occurred today in
the locality known at "Jagueicito." in the vicinity of Renolino. a town lo-
cated in the ao-called river province, in Magdalene Departnent. The plane
wae carrying at leaat l million capeulee which, it appears. it had taken on
at aone of the clandeatine landing atripa located in thoee areas. The drug
traffickere were taken to the hoepital in Barranquilla. The plane waa
identified an a twin-engine craft, and it had auffered coneiderable danage
in landing on a peature field in "Jagueicito." The druga being aauggled
were aaid to be worth ae nuch ea 25 million peaoe. Another herican plane
landed in the vicinity of Riohacha and ite occupanta abandoned it and die-
appeared. Thia plane ia an Aeroconander with licenee No "-58 DZ; it landed
on a large beach near Cmronee a few netera from the main highway of
Caribe, which connecte Guajira with Magdalena Department. The twin-engine
plane ia white and red and apparently aade an energency landing due to lack
of fuel, eccording to experte in thie field. [Text] [Bogota Bl. TIDIPO in
Spanieh 6 liar 79 p B-A) 8568

BUCARMANGA COCAINE SEIZURE-Bucarananga. 5 March-v-Henbere of the Adniniatre-
tive Department of Security (OAS) aeized a tractor trailer which wae trans-
porting 267 kg of raw naterial for producing cocaine; the ahipnent waa
valued at 100 nillion peace on international aarhete. Local officiala told
III. rumo that the eeirure took place in the vicinity of the nunicipality
of San Alberto in Ceaar. when the vehicle had left Bogota headed for the
Atlantic Coaet. Juan Cuellar, the truck driver. waa eleo apprehended and
he, together with the vehicle and drug ehipnent. were brought to thin city.
The 267 kg of cocaine were contained in dress in the four of cheeaea.

[Text] [Bogota El. name in Spaniah 6 liar 79 p 9-A] 8568

C50: 5300

51:
SOLDIER INVOLVED IN INTERNATIONAL DRUG TRAFFICKING
Quito 8L CONERCIO in Spanish 23 Mar 79 p 14

[Text] The judge from the Seventh Penal District of Guyas,

Dr Marco Nentillo Murillo, referred to the District Superior Court
of Justice the trial of a group of drug dealers who operated on an
international level and from whom paste cocaine worth 5 million
sucres was confiscated. The case was transferred to enable the
Court to settle a dispute between the judge of the Seventh Penal
District of Guyss end the judge from the Fourth Penal District of
Nachala where a suit for the same offense had also been initiated;

the Guyss judge had conducted a preliminary hearing of the same
case.

Lt Col Luis Alfredo Sentillan. from the battalion "Constitution"
quartered in Nuaquillas, 81 Oro Province, appears seriously in-
plicated in the case. he is accused of driving a military jeep

to carry a drug dealer.Nernan Cueva Pinzon,with a shipment of
cocaine. The officer presumably received over 100,000 sucres paid
by Galo Csneese Barrera, the establshed chief of drug dealers, who
is called "The Godfather." Ne has a long record of drug dealing
offenses, including abroad where he served a partial sentence.

Jurisdiction

Defendant Cueva advised the judge of the Fourth Penal District of
El Oro that he had been arrested within the jurisdiction of the

El Oro Province and therefore his regular judge should be the one
who has jurisdiction in the El Oro Province. As for the other
defendant, Lt Col Santillan, he petitioned the Guyas judge to pro-
hibit the drug dealing trial from proceeding further.

The case presents many peculiarities, such as, for example, the
fact that all the defendants, including Lt Col Santillan, deny
participation in the offense under investigation. pointing out
that the impounded money--260,000 sucres--was for legal commercial
transactions. There is also the fact that the prosecutor in the

95
cane vae oppoeed to the euit being aent to the 31 Oro Court to
eettlc the diapute. conaidering that the Judge of the Seventh Die-
trict hen the authority to continue the action. In another
connection. the department for the fight asainat drug addiction
releaaad a report attributed to the 0.8. consulate and relating
the operationa of the gang.

6857
050: 5300

56
DEFENSE SECRETARY com-rs ON 'OPERA‘IION manor RESULTS
Culiecan a. SOL DS SIWA in Spanieh 18 Mar 79 pp 1, 6

[Text] Gen Felix Galvan Lopez, aecretary of national defenee. gave eaeurance
here yeaterday that. aa a reault of the action taken by the office of the
Attorney General of the Republic and the Mexican May. the cultivation and
trafficking of druga hae declined between 85 and 90 percent. "a percentage
which by no aeana appliea to the international black narkata."

The head of national defenaa gave an encluaive interview to a. $01. DE SIMLOA
a few ninutea before hie departure for Mexico City. following a quick working
tour of Sineloa. during which he waa accoqanied by Gen Rodolfo Perez Gonza-
lez. colander of the Ninth Hilitary Zone.

Galvan Lopez declared that. because of the eucceae achieved in "Operation Gon-
dor." officiala "from abroad (he did not epecify which nation) will be coaing
to learn about the water uaed to codaat the drug traffic. It in poaaible
that they will be here aoaatine next week but (ea he aaid) I do not yet know
free which country thoae officiala will cola."

lie then claiaed that. baaed on the poaitive reeulta achieved in Zone 06 with
"Operation Condor": "We have managed to reduce the drug aarket between 85 and
90 percent. to the point where the United States Government ia alao intereat-
ed in learning about the iwlanentation of the caapaign that we are running
ngeinat druga."

Upon being naked about the plane craah which occurred a few daya ago in the
Sineloa muntaina. in which two aoldiera and a lieutenant fron the lhxican
Army were killed. the aecretary of national defenae aaid that the neduera
of the ailitary had never tortured the pilot: "It wee eiaply that. upon ar-
riving at Santiago de loe Caballeroa. in the municipality of Badiraguato,
the aircraft began to experience mechanical failure. and eventmlly craahed.
‘l'he pilot'a action waa not premeditated, and it waa found that he waa, in-
deed. a notorioua drug trafficker who. furthermore. waa enroute to that lo-
cation to pick up 6 kilograae of pure gun."

lhia theory waa backed by General Perez Gonzalez, who added that aeveral nea-
bera of the any had been killed by the drug traffickers in that location.

57
Sleevhere in hie remarks. Galvan Lope: announced that e personnel shift in
this unitary cone is ininent. after they have served for 6 months in that
post: but he did not disclose when the trenefer vauld take olece.

ﬁnally. he said that his visit to Sineloe vee uinly for the purpose of per-
sonally observing the tteateent received by the troops. "something thet I

do every weekend. when I tour the unitary zones in each state, and the lo-
cations which are regarded ee troubleeoee."

Yesterday afternoon. the head of national. defense returned to Mexico City.
after hie brief tour of the state.

2909
cso: 5330

58
RING OF MHCKBRS. commutes CAPTURE!)
Nogalea DMD DB NOGALSS in Spaniah 8 Her 79 p lo

[Text] ﬂexico City. 7 March—A ring of drug trefficltere operating in Guate-
nele. the United Statee. Peru and Mexico, which wee ettenpting to bring
counterfeit dollera into circulation. wee broken up by egenta of the Judi-
cial Police under ordare fron Gen Raul Hendiolee Cerecero. when they cap-
tured aeven individuele.

Erick Rafael Julio Ceaer and Janee Mendoza Quandt. Francisco Urbina Horalee,
Jeaua heliodoro Gone: Sarna. Victoria Ceetellenoe Martinez de Urbine and
Ingeborg Quandt de liendota are in the lockup of the Office of the Attorney
General of the Republic undergoing cloae queetioning about their activitiee.

According to the inventigetion node by the federal egente who aucceeded in
capturing the drug traffickere and counterfeitere, the latter'e bills were
aede in South America. and their circulation wee planned in Mexico.

The arreet of the crininale took place in a downtown hotel on Reform Avenue
in thie city, ae well ae in Monterrey. Nuevo Leon, and Tapachula, Chiapee.

‘l'hc individuale in cmtody operated ea follows: They arranged the purchase-
aele treneaction for cocaine in Peru; then planned ite ehipnent to Guatemala;
it wee eubaequently brought into our country through ‘l'apechula; and wee taken
from there to the United Statea Second Cour Rodolfo Caetano Ara-hula, aince
he had a tip that e treneection involving the purchaee and eale of cocaine
wee being arranged. ordered atrict eurveillance of the hotel where the drug
traffickera had been diecovered.

men the crininale had been epotted and the activitiee in which they were en-
geged were learned, they were erreated with nearly 1 kilogren of pure cocaine;
and. when the root: in which they were etaying wee aearched. eight bundlee of
$50 and $100 billa are diacovered.

2909
050: 5330

59
RURAL POLICW SROT BY POPPY GROHERS
Culiacan BI. 80!. DB SINALOA in Spanish 27 Mar 79

[Text] The co-ender of the rural defense detachment fron the settlenent of
Villa Angel Flores was seriously wounded in a shoot-out after the police, as
a result of informtion provided to thee, approached a plot on which poppy
plantations had been detected.

Bleodoro Garcia Zavala is the nane of the commander who, with his subordinates,
Juvencio Aispuro beltran. Guadalupe Soto Sauceda and Lorenzo Henson Medina.
drove in a 1972 Ford pickup truck without license plates to the site where

they had been told there was a poppy plantation, which they discovered after
an intensive search. but. as soon as they got out of the vehicle, they were
net by gunfire from high-powered weapons. The rural police i-aediately re-
turned the attsck; and Contender Garcia Zevala wae felled by the first shots,
while his comrades managed to save their lives by taking shelter behind the
truck, end drove off the attackers.

It was announced, though briefly, at the State Judicial Police headquarters
that, a few days ago, the same meters of the rural police had located and
destroyed another poppy plantation within that same jurisdiction, and on
that occasion did not succeeded in capturing anyone. Last night, they left
with the sane intention of performing that job; but they encountered the men
who were apparently waiting for then; because as soon as they got out of the
patrol car in which they were riding, they were net with heavy gunfire in
which the co-ender was seriously wounded.

It was also said that. at that time, the buds were being "scored" to .itrect
the liquid, or "gm," and several individuals were apparently keeping watch.
They were the ones who observed the novenents of the patrol vehicle which
was approaching the eita like any private car; but, upon noticing the police
maneuvers, they decided to open fire inediataly, apparently to prevent the
capture of the "scorers," and thus give that: sufficient tine to escape.

Con-Ir Bleodoro Garcia Zavals, seriously injured, was taken from that location.
between Zapotillo and Constituyentee in the township of Villa Angel Flores,
directly to Guanuchil. where a Red Cross anbulanca took his: to this town to
be examined for several gunshot wounds in the thoracic area. some of which
penetrated it, seriously jeopardizing the policemen's life.

2909

650: 5330

60
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA. HMPONS SEIZBDuAt dawn yesterday. there was a confrontation be-
tween agents of the Padarel Judicial Police and a group of drug traffickers
in a wooded area of Huasteca. San Luis Potosi. in which three of the latter
were killed and five individuals involved in the drug traffic were arrested.
A total of 965 kilograms of aarihuane, a rifle and five pistols were seized
froa than. The federal investigators had arrived at the "El Refugio" fare
in the municipality of El Venado. San Luis Potosi. where they discovered 71
burlap bags containing 870 kilograas of packed varihuana. They arrested hi-
ginio Arriaga Iiernandez. who was aread with a 16 caliber shotgun. At dawn.

2 kilometers from the farm. they were intercepted by four individuals, three
on horseback and the other on foot. who shouted at then, "you won't take any-
thing from here!" and began firing. During the gun-battle. the federal po-
lice killed three of the attackers. and the fourth one managed to escape into
the dense woods. The police retrieved froa the site a rifle. two pistols
and two horses. which they placed at the disposal of the Federal Public Hin-
istry together with the bodies of the deceased. [Text] [Nogales DlAPJO DE
NOGALES in Spanish 9 Her 79 p 6] 2909

HERO!" TRAFFICKBRS ARRESTED-JIM Federal Judicial Police are on the trail of
the drug traffickers who were supplying heroin to taxi-driver Jesus Gradillas
Cruz end his accomplice, Victor Duarte 0rduna. who were arrested by agents
under orders from Comdr Jose de Jesus Gerardo Serrano. Several packages
containing pure heroin of the best quality were confiscated free them. It
was claimed that the two suppliers have been fully indentifisd. but their
naaes were not released so as not to interfere with the investigation; since
they are expected to be apprehended by the federal authorities at any moment.
According to the agency of the Federal Public Kinistry. the suppliers were
selling the heroin to Gradillas for $80 per grass and he subsequently resold
it in nightclubs in the red-light district for $100 per gran. Both of the
arrested men were placed at the disposal of the Federal Public Ministry agent,
hudcrto Garcia de Alba. Cradillas is charged with possession and purchase-
sale of heroin. while Duarte Ordnao is accused of concealment; because he,

as driver of the taxi owned by the former. was driving his to all the sites
of the transactions, mainly in the red-light district, knowing that drug
sales were being made. It was noted that the pair would certainly be re-
sanded to the second district judge. Cayetano Bernande: Valencia. {Text}
[Nogsles MARIO DE: NOCALES in Spanish 7 Mar 79 p 6] 2909

61
TRAFFICKBRS CAPTURBD. DRUGS DESTROYBD--Mexico City. 11 March--During the past
lo days the Federal Judicial Police captured 42 drug traffickers during the
course of 26 operations conducted as part of the program to combat drug
trafficking. They confiscated heroin. marihuana. toxic pills. hashish.
weapons and vehicles from them. Also. over the weekend. they located and
destroyed 1.091 poppy plantations and 53 marihuana plantations in various
sections of the states of Sinaloa. Guerrero and Zacatecas. Likewise parti-
cipating in the Federal Jud‘cial Police action were forces from the Mexican
Army. and both state and municipal authorities. according to an announcement
made by Samuel Alva Leyva. deputy assistant prosecutor of the Office of the
Attorney General of the Republic and coordinator of the campaign against the
drug traffic. They seized 266 kilograms of marihuana. 5 grams of heroin.
1.179 toxic pills, 2 kilograms of poppy seed. 26 kilograms of marihuana
seed. 12 pieces of hashish. ll firearle. four automobiles. six dynamite
charges. eight blasting caps and two scales. The Federal Judicial Police
captured Crescencio Chavez Zuniga with several msrihusna cigarettes and six
toxic capsules in his possession. An hour later, they also caught Americo
de la Fuente Alvarez. with 300 grams of merihuana in the form of joints
which he was carrying inside of the spare tire of his Chevrolet with 11-
cense plates 372-YHE. The latter individual served as a supplier. The

air services of the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic spotted

a clandestine lending strip in the vicinity of the town of Puebla. [Text]
lCuliacan EL SOL DE SINALOA in Spanish 12 Mar 79 p 6] 2909

COURT SECRETARY AMONG TRAP?ICKERS--Acapulco. Guerrero. 6 March-~The secre-
tary of the lower court. Manuel Csssrubiss J.. jockey Ricardo Villa Tornez
and four other individuals were arrested by the police for drug trafficking.
The arrests occurred in the Hueso district. where about 50 Federal and
State Judicial Police agents apprehended them at the residence located at
50-3 Margarita Maza de Juarez Street. Half a kilogram of gum. a product
derived from poppies. l kilogram of marihuana. decks of cards and weapons
were found in their possession. The other individuals who were arrested
are Alejandro de la Cruz. Ricardo Padilla Garcia, Manuel Ugarte Solis and
Miguel Angel Garcia Villa. [Text] [Nogales DIARIO DB NOGALBS in Spanish 7
wr79p6]2%9

TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED--During the last 72 hours the Office of the Attorney
General of the Republic has apprehended 62 drug traffickers. seized mari-
huana. heroin. cocaine. toxic tablets and poppy seeds and marihuans seeds
valued at more than 10 million pesos and confiscated four automobiles and
arms of various calibers which were used by the gangsters. In addition. it
discovered and closed down a landing strip which was used by U.S. planes to
load drugs. These aetions took place in the states of Tamaulipas. Sonora.
Baja California. Guansjuato. Coahuila. Colima. Jslisco, Puebla, Guerrero.
Slnaloa. Zacatecse. State of Mexico and the Federal District. The arrested
persons range from planters to large distributors of the drug in the United
States. All were placed at the disposition of the Federal Public Ministry
on the presumption of responsibility for crimes against the public health.
[Text] [Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 10 Mar 79 p 26-A] 9206

62
MENDIOLA: BETTER EQUIPMENT-“Hun he disclosed that during the last 9 days
three confrontations between drug traffickers and federal agents have taken
place Gen Raul hendiolee Cerecero. director of the Judicial Police. stated
that to check the attacks of national and international bands of gangsters
better equipment will be supplied to the unit; in addition, they will have
the support of troops. handiof \e Cerecero explained that concerning the
authorities' fight against drug traffickers. the traffickers attack police
end soldiers with ispunity: however. he stated that the casualties have
been in the ranks of the drug traffickers. He mentioned that yesterday in
Durengo. when federal agents stationed there want to carry out an order to
arrest Blpidio Estrada Guerrero. a well-kan drug trafficker. they were
greeted with gunfire from three persons. After taking cover so as to return
fire. the federal agents arrested Blpidio Estrada but first wounded two of
his accomplices end killed a third. Fidel Pacheco Morales died end Adrien
Vlvarado hertiner end Jesus Pacheco Morales were wounded. [Text] [Hexico
City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 7 Her 79 p 26-h] 9204

THREE DRUG TRAFFIC!!!” Dunn-In a shootout in San Luis Potosi between federal
agents and drug traffickers, three of the gangsters were killed while attempt-
ing to free five of their comrades who had been arrested. The shootout took
place 2 kilometers from El Refugio Ranch in the municipality of El Venado,
Sen Luis Potosi. Federal agents had come there to arrest two drug traffickers
who were concealing 870 kilograms of merihuane. The agents reported to the
Federal Judicial Police [PJP] Headquarters that they had been underway for
about 3 einutes when six fully armed persons on horseback intercepted them
and after firing at them several times warned them to release the prisoners
if they wanted to stay alive. The police took cover and repelled the attack.
Three of the traffickers were shot down and the rest fled. .The investigators
began their investigation in Monterrey. Nuevo Leon. with the capture of Pedro
Segundo Palomo who had bought and sold marihuane there for transport to the
United States. Segundo Palomo, interrogated as to who supplied him with the
drug. revealed that in San Luis Potosi. at El Pozo Ranch. municipality of
Villa Cusdaupe, two of his relatives. Manuel and Francisco Segundo Rodriguez.
had 95 kilograms of marihuene which they were going to use as a sample for a
large order. Gen haul Hendiolea Cerecsro and Gen Joaguin Figueroa Luna.
director and assistant director of the PJP. respectively. coordinated their
agents by shortwave telephone so that they would go out and find the Segundo
Rodriguez brothers. when arrested. the brothers reported that ﬂiginio and
Asuncion Arriga hernender were at another ranch of El Venado municipality.
San Luis Potosi, and had in their possession 870 kilograms of marihuana which
they were going to send to Monterrey, Nuevo Leon and from there to the United
States. The police continued the search and also arrested the two Arriga
Hernandez. [Text] [Mexico City EXCELSIOR 7 Mar 79 in Spanish p 26-h] 9204
HARIIIUANA SAMPLES mum—A well-organised narcotics ring which works out
of Oaxaca uses the Mexican postal service to send samples of unprocessed
marihuane and marihuana in powder form. The discovery was made yesterday
at the main international post office at Pentaco by a supervisor who im-
mediately contacted the Federal Judicial Police. Jaime Experts Cortins.
an agent of the Federal Public Ministry of the 2nd board of the Attorney
Oeneral's Office. took official cognizance of the facts yesterday at 1000
hours at the office of Ismael Medina Ocans. chief of office No l of the
international mails of the Mechanized Postal Customs Office located on
Ceylan No 648, Penteco. Medina Ocena said that as packages were being ar-
ranged one of them fall and when the protective wrapping paper broke, the
marihuana. which came from Oaxaca in five similar packages. was exposed.
The five packages were viewed by El. 801. DE MEXICO. They bore stamps is-
sued by the official postal service and official seals with customs permit
numbers. Strangely. although the return addresses were filled out in
Oaxaca they were made out in various names with addresses in California,
United States of America. and the packages were addressed to different
people in California. What is involved in asrihuena in powder form and un-
processed marihuans. [Text] [Mexico City ll. $01. 03 MEXICO in Spanish 15
Mar 79 p lO-A] 9206

080: 5300
BRIEFS

OOCAINE TRAPPICKBR ARRESTED-41110 finance and Treaaury Hinietry'e Narcotica
Bureau arreated an American drug traﬁicker at Tocuaen International Air-
port on Sunday. Donia (Uhittard Jordan) fro- North Carolina wee arreated
aa he tried to enter the country with half a pound of cocaine valued at
approximately 30,000 balboaa. Ila vaa coming fro- Bogota. Colo-bio.
[Pena-a City Douatic Service in Spaniel; 2230 GMT 17 Apr 79 PA] The
narcotica aection o! the Finance and Traaaury Hiniatry arreated Dania
Wilfred Jordon of North Carolina for carrying half a pound of cocaine
valued at approxintely 825.000 to $30,000 in hia ahoea. lie arrived

aboard a Brauiff flight {rota Bogota. [Panama City CRITICA in Spaniah
18 Apr 79 p 32 PA]

080: 5300

65
BRIEFS

DRUG mmcxnn's ARREST-dine. 13 Apr (APP)--'l'he police today arraeted
30-year-old Victor Luie Torrea ae he tried to board an airplane for
Bogota with e auitcaee filled with 17.5 kg of baeic cocaine paeta. The
police reported that eo far thie year it hae confiscated approximately
500 kg of beeic cocaine paste and 19 kg o£ cocaine hydrochlorata at the
Jorge Chavez Airport. [Paria APP in Speniah 0151 our 16 Apr 79 PA]

comma PASTE SBIZEDu-Lina. 16 Apr (LAIIN)--According to police eourcee.
the police eaieed aleoet 20 kg of baeic cocaine paete valued at approxi-
Ietely $75,000 ae it wee about to be illegally ehipped aboard a corner-
cial plane to Cali. The drug wee hidden in a euitcaee and wee die-
covarad by an official of the Jorge Chavez International Airport who
wee conducting a routine check of the luggage that wee hcing loaded in
the plane. [nuance Airae LATIN in Spanish 0255 GMT 17 Apr 79 PA]

DRUG ARREST-«line, 20 Apr (RFD-The Peruvian police have arreeted three
drug traffickare and confiacated 103 kiloe of baeic cocaine paeta worth
$292,000 after chaeing the treffickere' motorboat along the Huallaga
River. No of thoee arraeted, identified ae naeon Pena and Honorio Daze.
ere Colo-Man citizens. The police have reported that the lluallega River
hae become a channel for transporting druge to Brazil and Colombia.
[Madrid BPS in Spaniah 0837 or: 20 Apr 79 PA]

COCAINB TRAFFICKBRS' ARREST—~Liee. 21 Apr (BFB)-1'he police have erreeted
ned>ere of a cocaine traffickare gang which had procaeeed 500 kg of baeic
cocaine paate during the peat 8 nontha. The gang wee compoeed of eight
Peruviane and Colonbiana but three were able to aecape when the police
raided their inetallation in a Line neighborhood. [Madrid B?! in Speniah
2236 our 21 Apr 79 PA]

050: $300
COCAINB mmcms sum
Caracas EL MORAL in Spanish 3 hr 79 p D-2h

[Text] The Narcotics Squad of the PTJ [Judicial Technical Police] has
announced the seizure of a kilo of cocaine me two supposed trafﬁckers.
The announcement was made by inspector Vicente Silva Palomo who said the
prisoners handed over to court Jurisdiction in Reten de Catia were Jose
Juan Palms Mnedo, 36, and Demostenes brique Castillo Gonzalez, 26.

According to the inspector, they were arrested in a Dodge pickup, license
AC“ 572, in which the kilo of cocaine was found in two plastic bags.

In a later search of an office used as a front, located between Tempilas
and Hornito in la Pastors, 1&6 tubes of cocaine ready for distribution were

seized, plus tundra: tablets and tilm cartridge containers filled with
urihuam.

The PM placed a value of one million bolivars on the materials confiscated.

Palms Liendo, according to the police, has a past record for the same crime;
Castillo Gonzalez, a Colombian, was carrying a transit docmt and when
arrested said he was an industrial mechanic. They were turned over to
Interpol for possible request of bond from Bogota.

968
cso: 5300
BRIEFS

SEIZURE 0F COLUMBIAN DRUGS--Hembers of the PTJ [Judicial Technical
Police] searched a residence in the suburb of Les Briaes in
Barquieimeto, impounding a large quantity of drugs valued at over
500.000 boliveres and they are looking for its presumed distribu-
tor, identified as Jose Concepcion Pine who was not in the house
at the time of the search. The operation was carried out by means
of e court-ordered police search. upon confidential information

on these illegal activities indicted by the PTJ. It was learned
that during the operation the PTJ impounded 29 cakes of marihuana
and 6.526 tablets of mandrsx which were apparently brought in from
the neighboring country of Colombia. The detectives also found a
large quantity of contraband dry goods and a car used by Pine for
his deliveries. The local PTJ hopes to succeed in arresting the
suspected Jose Concepcion Pine accused of being the distributor of
the drugs impounded at his residence on Celle 53, Vereda 8 of the
Las Brises suburb, west of the City. [Text] [Caracas EL NACIONAL
in Spanish 19 Mar 79 p 0-21] 6857

SENTENCE FOR DRUG TRAPPICKBRS--Dr Ramon Lara Aperte, judge of the
Second Superior Penal District, sentenced Orfelina Garcia de
Ramirez to 2 years in prison for complicity in drug trafficking.
The defendant had been sentenced to a b-year term in the 20th (kil-
insl Court of First Instance after it had been proved that she was
in possession of a suitcase containing cocaine andshe admitted
thinking of taking the drug to Miami. The defendant's confession,
the police records of the arresting officers and the opening of the
suitcase in criminal court in the presence of a public prosecutor
leading to the discovery of the drug proved that the woman was in-
volved in drug trafficking. However, the arguments of the defense
counsel. Dr Claudio Corsira, together with the good conduct of the
defendant prior to the offense, influenced the Court of First
Instance to impose a minimum sentence. It also applied in Second
Instance but.the confirmed complicity of the defendant determined
the commuting of the minimum sentence to a midway term of 2 years
in prison. [Text] [Caracas ULTIHAS NOTICIAS in Spanish 21 Eur 79
p 26] 6857

080: 5300
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFICKBRS SENTENCED-«Rebet—Eerly thie coming the epeciel court of
Juetice in Ilebet pronounced ite eentencee in the ceee in uhich 78 people
were eccueed. including 39 in ebeentie, of snuggling end treffickins in
nercotice end bribery. The triel hed leeted for 80 deye. The court
eontenced 57 people. including high-ranking officere in the Royel Gendernerie,
to prieon eentencee verying iron 1 month to 10 yeere end eeeeeeed fines of
between 1.000 end 10.000 dirhene. Twenty-five o! theee were eentenced in
ebeentie. The court ecquitted l9 defendente. It eleo eentenced forner
eeeenbly deputy Idbib to S yeere in prison end fined hin 5.000 dirhene.
The court eleo eentenced ll: foreignere in ebeentie to 10 yeere in prieon
end fined then 10.000 dirhene. The foreignere include two Spaniarde.
three Britone. one Frenchmen. one Gerunn, three Americene, one Swede, one
Auetrnlien end one Colonbien. [nunbere ee received] [Text] [Rebet MAP
in Arabic 1040 cm 13 Apr 79 LD]

650: 5300
YOUNG SOCIALISTS PROPOSB FREE HERD!"
Kale LA mount“ in Italian 5/5 Mar 79 p 5

[Interview with Enrico Boaelli, national eecretary of the PCS! [Italian

Socialist Youth Federation, by Carlo Rivolta. of LA REPUBBLICA; date and
place not given.]

[Text] Enrico boaelli talke about the P68! lav. Young eocialiete propoae
free heroin for dope addicte.

hone—In the course of a little nore than 3 yeare. the Italian drug lav
hee proved to be completely inadequate in the utter of countering the new
danger. herein. The reeult of patient conpronieee and reticence, the law
of December 1975 allova judgee nple poeaibility for interpretation. Thus.
poaeeaeion of a green of heehieh in Kilan ia not puniahed; in Bari, it leade
to jail. The uin problem continuea to be the dramatic one of black market
heroin. Today. among young people—but the problem pertains not only to
thew-the heroin problen ie forenoet in political diecuaeion.

Young con-union. in mm WA, opened the diecueeion. Indie Popolare,
in Milan, ia fighting for depenalitetion for the poaeeeaion of heroin.
Young eocieliate ere preparing a parliamentary bill to provide for free
availability of thie drug to drug addicte. ae hee been the cm for yearn
in Greet Britain and aa occure in acne American atatee.

Enrico Boaelli. national eecretery of the P681. Iaintaine that the
eocieliet proposal (very realistically Judged ”a difficult fight. in View
of the political eituation") can contribute to solving the problem "We
are not advocating liberalization. Instead. we are speaking of legal,
controlled allot-eat through the eyeten of public and health organizatione
that already exiete and that can be further developed."

[Carlo Rivolta] "What induced you to forlulate thie bill?"

70
[hrico Boeelli] "He eterted eubetentielly from one reflection: the feet
thet there ie no eign thet the dietrihution of herd druge-heroin Ioet of
ell--ie dieiniehing. 0n the contrery. in the peet few Ionthe. the trend
ha been precieely thet of en expending eerket. To be specific end to
counter the figuree of the minister of neelth. who dengerouely underesti-
Ietee the letter. eix young drug eddicte heve died in the peet 30 deye-
en ewerege of care then one deeth per week.”

[Cerlo livolte] "Hell. then?"

[Enrico loeelli] Today. by eeene of e lew. it would be poeeible to limit
the dengere thet reeult fron herd drugs. The politicel point of View of
our work in thie field ie thet the "reflux" will be defeeted not only
through en edded cepecity for initietive on the pert of the workere' forcee
of the Left. but eleo by the initietiye of young people with reepect to
fecing epecific end drenetic problene. herein in one of theee end it ie
eeneeleee to uintein the norelietic ettitude of limiting oneeelf to
etenderd petitione."

[Cerlo Rivolte] "And heve you contected other youth orgeniutione regerding
thie letter?"

[Enrico Boeelli] "Up to now no dialog has been eterted. But there ere
poeitive eigne; for exemle. in the FCC! internal debete. unthinkeble up
to e yeer ego. It in enother letter when young people cone together. no
in the we of free redio broedceete."

[Cerlo Rivolte] "Hhet ere the objectivee of en anti-heroin lew‘!"

[Enrico Boeelli] "The firet ie to etrike egeinet the bleck Ierket. which
cennot be wiped out eolely through police initietivee. Then the terrible
interreletionehip of conemer end pueher. which to e great extent in at the
root of the drug circuit. could be reetricted. Another goel ie to limit

the veet epreeding of thie kind of criminality on the pert of young people—
e trininelity thet proepere ee e reeult of the need of drug eddicte for
lore end lore noney to eetiefy their ever-increeeing dependence on the

drug. And finelly there it the objective of curbing the eucceeeion of
deethe thet result both fro. over doeee end the cutting of doeee.”

8255
680: 5300

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

THO EGYPTIAN PUSHERS ARRESTED
Hilan CORRIERE DELLA SERA in Italian 16 Mar 79 p 18

[Excerpts] A race track gambler by day, a drug pusher by n1ght. lu1g1
Albertario. 51 years old, of V1a Zoagl1 S was arreated yesterday by the
narcotics squad. The police confiscated 50 grams of heroin from h1s
"500" about 10 grams of amphetam1ne from h1s home.

Au he was about to carry out an operation. the traff1cknr (who 1a an
naaiduous fraquenter of racotracka) was stopped near his home. The
policemen found 50 grams of "brown sugar" and of Turkish hero1n 1n h1s
poaaesaion. The drug was hidden under the gearshift box and in the

"pockets" of the doors of his "500." And. f1na11y. 1n v1a Zoa311. the
10 grams were confiscated.

when this search was completed. the aame narcotics squad pol1cemen ar-
rested two known hero1n puahera who were operat1ng 1n the area of corao
Lod1. They are 26-year old 'Abd al-Haaih Hajdi and Muhammad Nabil Zaki.

both Egyptian c1tizens. staying at the public dorm1tory on v1a Ortiea
and in a small hotel in the suburbs.

Suspected for some time of pushing hard drugs, the two were trailed to a
but on piazzale Medaglie d'Oro and then stopped. They had on their per-
sons about 100 grams of pure heroin. valued at almost 18 m1111on 11re.

If the drug had been aold at reta1l, it would however have y1e1ded a
total profit of about 70-80 mill1on.

 

v . ’ \ I l' a '

. , ‘. .‘g .

a: . ' ' -~
.. .74

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Editoriale del "Corriere della Sera" 5.6.5.

cso: 5300 72
FOR OFFICIAL use orm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

MRI ORDER TO EOSPIIALIZB DRUG ADDICT
Hilda comm DELLA st». in Italien 18 Her 79 p 14

[Excerpt from article by Augueto Pouolil For the firet tine the court
hee intervened to unblock the eituetion. ‘ro hoepitelire a drug addict, an
order free e Judge in neceeeery.

The reeietance oi hoepitele with regard to edlitting drug addicte vee
overcone by the authoritiee. For the firet tine, a judge intervened and
ordered the hoepitelizetion of a youth who. notwithetending the intervention
of the police for an entire norning, wee not ehle to find an available hoe-
pital bed. The order cane from Livie Ponodoro, examining judge at the
police court of Milan, in behalf of Ariberto l... 21 years old, a resident
of Corvette end e ueer of heroin for b yeere.

Sou deye ego. Aribarto could no longer go on. lie had cone to the point of
venting to fight egeinet hie etete of elevery end. not hnovingvhere to turn
for help. vent to the Porte Banana police etetion, to Herehel Bnnio G353; din.
who in the peet had etopped hi- eeverel times to check on his movements.

'ﬂe heve by new becoee the leet reeort for teeny of theee unfortunate young
people," eeid the deputy officer, "but we on do very little for then.
Ariberto eeked Ie if I could help to have him admitted to a hospital for
treat-eat. he eeened eincere; vented to give up; and could no longer go
on living that vay. So I began to telephone several hoepitele; but ae eoon
no I eeid thet it wee e question of a drug eddict, there wee en imediate
excuee to eey no to ne. I eleo got in touch with m eeeietent district
attorney. who told no to use hie n-e end to apply to the nnegenent of the

San Cerlo hoepitel. But thie ettenpt eleo failed. And time it went. in the
preeence of the boy. during the entire eorning."

Harehel Gregolin, however. did not give up. The next day the we of
Ariherto L. wee on the deck of Judge Livie Ponodoro vho, in the nene of the
lee. had to protect the right of the unfortunete youth.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is the text of the order with which the judge overcane the resistance
of city hospitals in the natter of attending to drug addicts: "Having
considered that Ariberto needs urgent sedical trestnent. in accordance with
articles 99 and 100 of law 22. Dace-bar 1975. n. 685 provides that he be
hospitalized in San Carlo hospital for whatever period is necessary."

Thus. the bed that up to the day before was not available. became available
on the order of the judge. Ariberto is in a private rooe and hie detoxifi-
cation treatnent has been started. The youth is hospitalized in the sane
hospital where last Saturday the Anti-Drug Addiction Gouittee had organized
a desonstrstion. at the end of which a delegation had asked peraisaion to
discuss the latter with those in charge of the unit and to ask for a
guarantee of hospitalization for drug addicts.

The col-aunique that was issued at the end of the denonetration reads as
follows: "The hospital's answer was clear right iron the beginning. We
were received by a big array of police-en who prevented us free entering.
Finally. some representatives succeeded in talking to the only official
who was present, the doctor on duty. But to the request for hospital bade,
we were given the answer: 'for drug addicts. not even one bed."' The

hospitalization of Ariberto 1.. took place only because the judge ordered
tt.

comment: 1979 Editoriale del "Corriere dalla Sera" e.a.s.

8255
080: 5300

714

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
URUGUAYAN DRUG DEALER CAPTURE!) IN ROME
Montevideo BI. PAIS in Spanish 17 Feb 1979 p 13

[Text] A dangerous Uruguayan criminal, who in recent years had risen to the
international level. was captured in Rose. according to information received
yesterday by Interpols' National Central Bureau.

Apprehendad was Irio Aden Quintana hiralles, who was born 3 July 1939 and has
a long criminal record both in Uruguay and in Europe. This dangerous indivi-
dual . apart from his vile trafficking in prostitution, which extended fro-
South Anerica to Europe. was found guilty several tines of possession and
sale of narcotics.

According to inforaation received officially late yesterday afternoon.
Quintana Hiralles, 62 years of age. known in his world as El Piolo Adan,
was arrested by Ross police and found to be in possession of false identi-
fication and a certain unspecified amount of cocaine. At this nonent
Quintana hirelles' case is in the Italian courts, and while he is awaiting
trial Interpol has contacted Uruguay and other countries in the area--in
addition to Spain and Prance--asking for background material so as to
obtain better information on the criminal.

The shady pinp and drug pusher began his crininal "career" on Noveaber 19S
[illegible text, probably 1956] when he was arraigned on charges of honi-
cide. Then 8 years later. on 21 April 1962, he was jailed for assault and
battery. The sane year. on 29 October. he was arrested for illegal posses-
sion of firearms. and on 19 January 1966 for attespted robbery.

After a period of apparent inactivity, he was arraigned for robbery on 30
March 1968. and finally on 18 Novenber 1969 for atteapted homicide. Us is
presently being sought by Uruguayan police. as well as Spanish and Italian
authorities. who are pressing an intense search.

It should be pointed out that in 1976 Quintana was connected with the
murder of a wonen who had been taken fron South American to "work" in
Europe. The incident occurred in Barcelona, and the victin was identified
as Nelids Justina Signer. Quintana was sought by Italian police from 31

75
July 1976 until 5 February 1977 when he wae arreated in Genoa for trafficking
in cocaine and importation of illegal aliena.

Quintana continued hie activitiea after obtaining hie freedon. even to the
point of joining the notorioua Capocaeale gang. whoae proetitution ring ex-
tended fron Rio de la Plata to the avid European continent. (Cepocaaale wee
recently arreated in Spain, yet again.)

In February. 1977. the leet tine anyone had heard of Quintana, he wae arrea-
ted in Role in poeeeaeion of cocaine and eevaral felae paeaporta. Arreated

with hie were one Ian and two woaen who. once arraigned, epent tile in
Italian prieone.

In May. 1974. Quintana Hirellea uea ehot at cloaa range by aeveral nenbera
of a rival gang when he appeared on the etreete of Rene riding in a late

nodal car. He wee attuck by aix bulleta and critically wounded but wee able
to survive becauae of hie phyaicel etrength.

Quintana waa eleo nought in June. 1976. following the death of an Argentine
pinp, who vae found dead in a river on the outekirta of hone. In their

inaane fury they had cut of! hia handa and torn out his tongue, na well ea
ehot hill.

Cluea led authoritiea to another Uruguayan. lieber Cardozo Rivero. and finally
to Quintana. who quickly fled. Aaauling that the Italian police had forgot-
ten hie, he returned to Italy but wee arreated ahortly thereafter. It acene
that after leaving jail he did not leave the country and. not having altered
hie intentiona in the leaat, wee again captured with druge in hie poeeeeaion.

9077
680: S300
DRUG SQUAD MAKES ARRESTS IN THO NARCOTICS CASES
Rose IL TIHPO in Italian 27 Jan 79 p 6

[Excerpt] Two antinarcotics operations were carried out successfully by
Doctor 01 Gennaro of the drug squad, with the collaboration of Sergeants Main
and Piazuto. two pushers have been arrested and 300 grass of pure herion
seized.

The first operation had its beginnings in the arrest of three Egyptians by

the Danish police and the discovery in Copenhagen of an illicit drug traffic
originating in Thailand and directed toward Role. Investigation of one of

the three arrested Egyptians. Zohdy Saiet. led to Clara Vitaloni. 35, residing
at Via Felice Grossi Gondi 95 in Bone.

The police searched the woman's apartment and found 180 grams of pure heroin
sewn into the shoulder pads of coats. And so, Clara Vitalone, "smuggler"
for an international organization, was handcuffed.

The second of the operations carried out by the drug squad also throws the
spotlight on Thailand. It was discovered that into Valeri, 25, residing at
Via del Pigneto 3. frequently traveled to that country. Unsuspectedly, the
police tailed his and. sensing drugs. loved in. In his home they found a
passport showing Thai entry and exit stamps. and evidence that the young
man had brought in 1200 grams of pure heroin.

It was now a matter of discovering his outlet. which led then to a little
villa located in the neighborhood of Valle Hartella in Zagarolo. owned by
Valeri. There. the police seized 110 grams of pure heroin, other "cutting"
ingredients. a percision scale. and 1.5 aillion lire in cash. ano Valeri
was arrested on charges not only of ilportation and possession but also of

sale of narcotics, and the investigation continues in an effort to discover
Valeri's accomplices.

Four other drug puehers-of hashish this tile-have been arrested in Tor-
pignatara by the sen of the judiciary police squad of the first police
district; Sandro Alessandri, 26, residing at Via Bartolomeo Peristrello 20,

77
manager of the her at Vin dens Herrnnslln 121: Ssvino Giordano. 21a. residing
st Via Conceiii 59: Luigi Ssnrsfede. 29. residing at. Vis anoni 59: snd
Roberto Rutislisno. 30. residing st Vin Psvoni 92. Roberto Hoscstcni. 29.
renidins st Vin Angilotti 13, use siso srrestod on chnrsen of possession of
weapons of us: end receiving of stolen goods. During the sesrch of his

home. police found s Beretta Mods]. 92, 9 u Psrsbcnuu pistol that hsd been
stolen lest October from the hose of s noncouissioned officer of the PS
[Corps of Public Security Gusrds].

9399
cso: 5300
DRUG SQUAD SEIZES 2.382 KILOGRAHS 0F PURE HEROIN
Milan CORRIERE DELLA SERA in Italian 19 Feb 79 p 10

[Excerpt] Agents of the drug squad's Section 3 have seized 2.382 kilograms
of pure heroin worth a total of 12 billion lire. in an operation which has
led to the arrest of four persons and the incrimination of nine others. and
which is still in progress. The investigation. which was being organized by
Assistant District Attorney Emilio Alessandrini before he was killed by a
Front line commando in the Viale Unbria ambush. went into action a few months

ago when the magistrature opened an inquiry aimed at determining the uses
being made of the monies obtained through kidnappings.

The police have actually succeeded now in establishing that part of the pro-
reeds from kidnappings by Mafia bands have been and continue being used to

buy large quantities of drugs on the Oriental and European markets to be
retailed in Italy.

Francesco Hilone, 31. born in Laiiano in the province of Brindisi, residing
at Via Hartinetti 29; [Milan]; his wife, Caterina Brugnani, 26; Giuseppe
Giannetti. 36. born in Canoaa, Puglia. residing at Via Brunelleschi a in
Corsica; and Luigi Fiorentino, 35, residing at Via Camozzi 30 [Milan] have
been Jailed so far in this operation, charged with possession and sale of

narcotics, possession of firearms and explosives. and receiving of stolen
goods.

Caterina Brugnani

Francesco Hilone

   

79
NEAPOLITAN ﬂASﬂlSﬂ GANG DBSTROYBD
none L'UNITA in Italian 13 Feb 79 p 5

(Text! Naplen-Pedd1ing hashish in Naples did not pay. So none 15 Neapoli-
tans started following the Sixth Fleet on its various rounds of Mediterranean
porta-froa Naples to Palerno. tron Taranto to Trieete--to supply their
"devoted clientele." acquired in the Parthenopean city. with precious hashiah.
Finally. however. the ”aoveaanta” of these "drug-peddling camp followers"
aroused the suspicions of the police and the carabinieri. who succeeded in
laying hands, between Naples and Palermo, on nine nelbers of the band. and

in identifying three other persons.

The police operation started last Novenber uhen Antonio Biaaccia was arrested
in Naples and 18 kilos of narcotics were confiscated from the hole of one of
his relatives. But this did not halt the peddling of hashiah. The investi-
gations aoved to Palermo. There, upon indications fro- the Neapolitan inves—
tigators, the forces of order of the Sicilian capital began tailing certain
Neapolitan characters suspected of peddling hashish to American military
personnel. After stakeouta and inquiries, the carabinieri loved in and nabbed
Antonio Frattini. Gaetano Cerrate and Antonio Palledino.

But two Neapolitans succeeded in escaping. and so the investigation moved back
again to Naples. where, yesterday. the flying squad nabbed six other persona
who had taken part in the setting up of the original distribution systen:
Giulia Sceral. who had replaced Antonio Bisaccia as head of the gang; Piorina
Stria, 26. (who had the job of approaching customers); Francesco Toni;
Vincenzo Leopoldo; Antonio Marcello; and Salvatore Quintana.

9399
C50: 5300
ROME DRUG. PROSTITUTION DEALERS ARRESTED
Milan IL CIORNALB NUOVO in Italian 6 Feb 79 p 7

[Excerpts] Rene, 3 Pebrusry--"Pron producer to consumer" could be the trade
slogan of the band of drug pushers that operated in the peripheral quarter
of Centocolle. The gang. in fact, engaged, by neans of "couriers," in the
direct purchase and importation of pure heroin fron Thailand. and. in Rome,
"cut" the drug, packaged it in doses. then distributed it to a network of
snail peddlsre. Along with this activity. the organization also exploited
prostitution. recruiting the girls from along teensged addicts who did not
have money to pay for the "merchandise."

1he arrests began on 7 January with Vincents Hanzo. 21. and Spartaco Tras-
Trasciotti. 25, both drug retailers. who landed in prison. It appears that,
under questioning by Judge Infelisi. they confirmed suspicions regarding
three persons: the brothers Giacono and Lorenzo Rizzieri, 25 and 23 respec-
tively. and Enzo Canspini, 36. alias "Zinbetto." Telephone intercepts en-
abled the police to identify these as the Ianaging staff of the organization
that obtained its supplies of heroin through Maria Fianna Brignola, 23, who
was being frequently sent to Bangkok with a male friend.

The police operation was concluded during the past few days with the capture
of rho rest of the band: Lorenzo Rizzieri was arrested at his hone on Via
dolls Paine, where he had 9 grans of heroin hidden; his brother Giacomo.

who had taken refuge in a villa in Cerveteri. was taken by surprise in that
locality; Camnpini was visited by police at his hone in Centocello. where
they found. in addition to a snail quantity of the drug. the documentation
of the operation contained in iedgers in which the expenditures and revenues
were diligently entered.

The last to end up in prison was Maria Grazia Brignols, in whose home, on
Via Bixio, there were 7 grass of heroin and the receipts for expenses incurred
on two trips to Thailand.

9399
C50: 5300

81
BRIEFS

MILAN DRUG ARRESTS-Pollowing a south of investigations. agents of the 4th
section of the drug squad, led by Doctor Hacri, intercepted a cocaine traffic
operation at rorta Ticinese and arrested two pushers: Umberto Vena, 65, of
Via he Santia 50 and Anna Luigia bongo, 38, of Via degli Apuli b. The couple
had a one-room apart-ant on the 5th floor of a building at Via Gian Giacomo
More 8. in the neighborhood of the colunns of San Lorenzo, in the Carrobbio
section. from which they dispatched the drug to the addicts. In the apart-
nent, the agents confiscated 6b grass of cocaine (being sold at £0,000 lire
per gran). along with scales for weighing, syringes and waxed paper for
packaging the "doses." [Text] [Milan CORRIERB DELLA SERA in Italian

15 Jan 79 p 8] 9399

HODENA-VBRONA DRUG RING-Hodena-—A vast antinarcotics operation has opened
with the seizure in Ancena of a large trailer-truck loaded with one and a
half tons of hashish worth 7 billion lire. The facts are now well known:
Last Saturday. a ferry entered the port of Ancona carrying on board a large
trailer-truck loaded with yarns, automobile replacement parts and textiles.
The vehicle, owned by "Selamgu," a Turkish automotive transport comany,
passed through nornal customs inspection in good order. However, a little
dog in the nntinarcotics service. together with its custons agency trainer,
discovered, hidden within the cargo. 1,700 kilograms of narcotics. The
Turkish driver of the vehicle, Ahnet Abali, 56, of Istanbul, was placed under
arrest. Hith help from Interpol it was detsrniaed that "Selanogu," head-
quartered in ankara, dispatched around Europe, at regular intervals. as many
as 80 huge trailer-trucks. which traveled from Turkey into Greece. then to
itnly by ocean ferry. then. after stops in Hodena and Verona (the headquarters
of the two Italian subsidiaries), to the capitals of the northern countries.
The discovery of the load at Antone opened the way for a series of operations.
Obviously, the first of these took place in Hodena and Verona, where. at the
“Selanogu“ offices. customs agents proceeded to arrest at least six other
persons who may be connected, in various capacities, with what appears to be
the most gigantic drug ring ever discovered it Italy. [Excerpts] [Rome
L'UNITA in ltalian 6 Feb 79 p 5] 9399

82
ARREST 0F THO COURIERs--The hiding place for the drug was not original.
but it was a record asount. Together they had heroin worth a billion in
their intestines-~77O grams of pure heroin which. if cut 80 percent and
resold at retail. would have yielded precisely 1.000 million. The two
traffickers. both Neapolitans. were arrested yesterday earning st
Fiunicino airport. They had just loaded from a flight from Bangkok.

They were Giovanni Albnnese. 27 years old. and Antonio Lombardi. 23 years
old. After being arrested and forced to expel the little plastic bags
that contained the heroin. they were taken to Regina Coali. A very small
anount of the drug had been found in a tiny hiding place inside the heel
of a shoe of one of the two men. But this was just a diversionary trick.
The two were counting on the matter ending with those few grass of heroin.
at worst. But a more and careful search, conducted with the added coopera-
tion of a doctor. foiled their plan. In the end, the two confessed every-
thing. They had not eaten for 2 days in order to leave enough room in
their intestines for the small bags of r oin. inserted through the rectum.
Albnneac had nine heroin pellets wrappeo in plastic in his intestines;
Lombardi. five. Among other things. they both risked their lives. If

one of the snail bags had opened. they would have died in a short space

of tine. The 770 grams of heroin that the) tried to bring to Italy would
have yielded about 50,000 doses of the drug. [Excerpt] [Rene PAESE SERA
in itslian 17 Mar 79 p 12] 8255

C80: 5300
BRIEFS

NEH JARCOTICS BRANCH DIRECTOR--Korkut Coder, who for 2 years has been
chief of the holicide deck in the Iotanbul Security Directorate. was

recently appointed director of the Narcotics Branch in the: directorate.
0nder begun hie career in the Ietanhul Security Directorate as e police

officer 17 yeare ago. He oerved as a teal chief, heed of the robbery
deck. aeeietant director to the Tourien Bureau. chief of the holicide

deck end Bakirkoy eecurity chief. [Text] [Iatanbul GUIAYDIN in Turkish
19 Mar 79 p 3]

030: 4907

8h
MEDPWNSWCOCAH‘EINWWSW
London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 27 Her 79 p 19

[Text] A plot to snuggle large quantities of cocaine in wine bottles into
Britain was alleged yesterday when 13 people appeared in court.

Part of the operation was to import it fron South America by what Mr Nigel
Mylne, prosecuting. described as an "ingenious conspiracy."

he said that the cocaine was floum into Europe in wine bottles carried by
a courier, who would pass them to another courier. usually returning to
Britain by ferry. '

"lie would not have a South Assrican stalp on his passport and, as far as
Customs were concerned, might have been a day-trippsr."

The cocaine, he said, was dissolved in a hydrochloric acid solution to
disguise the distinctive white colouring. At its destination the acid
was evaporated, leaving the reconstituted cocaine as powder. "They then
had an easily marketable and very valuable drug."

Facing cor-ittal proceedings at Havent, Rants, are:

Brien Crump, 27, of London Road. Haterlooville, Rants; Kevern Davies, 39.
Fifth Street, Portsmouth; David Ellis. 30, Chapel Lane, Swanage; Carol
Reading. 30, Mitchell Road, hevant; Trevor Scattergod. 21., The Crescent.
Hayling Island; Stephen Simmonds, 38, Clarence Gardens, Shsnklin;
Geoffrey Speak. 36, Park Road. Swenage; Sarah van Leeson, 25, Stonebarrow
Lane. Charninster, Dorset; Stephen West, 27, Ireland way, Waterlooville;
Diane Jeran. 28, same address; Kenneth Ford, 43, Lowe Lens, Benbridge;
Peter Williams. 29, The Ridgewey, Acton; and Grahan Hood, 26, Carsons
Road. Southbourne, Sussex.

Hr Hylne said that police had been watching the defendants for months.
They swooped after Scettergood [sic]. a courier, missed a rendezvous
with his "day-tripper," Kenneth Ford, in Paris, he said. Scattergood
had to risk bringing his four bottles through Heathrow, where he was
arrested.

85
Mr Hylne seid thet the hottlee conteined well over e kilo of ooceine
worth 250,000 pounds.

Before being ceught. eeid Mr Hylne, they hed snuggled in cooeine worth
thousands of pounds in the eels wey.

"He ere unebie to ssy where it wont. There hes been e well of silence."

Si-ons use described es the hrsine who bought the cheuiosl and provided
deteiie of how to use the. for his use in South Apex-ice, 8111s.

hr Hylne seid thet the other pen of the oporetion involved smggling
cennebis into Britein from Europe.

C80: 5320
mars

DRUGS LAB RAID-Scotlend Yerd Drugs Squad officers yesterday found e
drugs fectory in e flet in the North Finchley eree. The flet contained

e roon eet up es e leboretory to produce euphetenine sulphete. Police
took ewey neerly helf e hundredweight of neteriele, which they believe
would heve eede sufficient quentity of the drug to be worth ebout
250,000 pounds when eold on the streets. [Text] [London m DAILY

TELEGRAPH in English 29 Her 79 p 19]

050: 5320 3ND

87