APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-000008000100020023-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020023-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8278

15 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 7/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00020023-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Ileadlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGRT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSllIP 0F
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINA‘I'ION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIM. USE ONLY.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC OAYA

l. Keven No. J?” L/ 8278 - 3- Recipient's Men-mu .\'u.

15 February 1979

     
    

 

TRANSLATIUNS 0N NARCO‘I'ICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS (POUO 7/79)

 
    
   
   

‘- Prlatuiu Omaaiuuon Rm.

    
   
 
  

    

    

. rum-m. Ulldllllllluﬂ Sun: and Mann l0.
Joint Publications Research service
1000 North Globe Rood

Arlington. Virginia 22201

Progect/Taail'olk Um: .\'o.

   

ll. Convert/Gust .‘c‘o.

   

l2. Spunuum‘ unanirulon Sm soul Mdnu

  

II. Type ol Repou a Pain!
Coveted

   

As above

IS. Suwlcunmy Notes '

M. Mum“:

      

The serial report consists of translations free the world press and radio
relating to low, lsw enforcesent. illicit traffic and personalities concerned
with narcotics and dangerous drugs.

       
   
  

l7. Key Iotds and Dore-eat Analysis.

  

Narcotics
Drug Addiction

Lou (Jurisprudence)
Law Enforcement

 
      
    
 
 

I75. Hamilton/Oneida Toma

  

Dangerous Drugs
Drug Control
Drug Traffic

 
   
 
   
  

necnnsrlrkunuup 5K. 60, 61

It. Availabiluy Sun-em
For Official Use Only.

Lieited Number of popies Available From JPRS.

 
 
 
   

IOIU uni-M Il‘v. Mill

rms sons an st nessoouceo mm“ """'"
BURMA

FOR'OFPICIAL USE ONLY

JDRS L/8278

15 February

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(POUO 7/79)

Coureurs

ASIA

Drug Haul in Hendeley, Three Arrested
(111E HOMING PmPLB‘S DAILY, 17 Jen 79) o................

Cold Turkey: Hey To Cut Down Recidivism
(Bditoriel; THE maxim; PEOPLE'S DAILY, 7 Jen 79)

Briefs
Poppy Crop Substitution
’Ihree Arrested for Possession

IDNG KONG

Pskistnni Tnfficker Gets Five Yesrs
(SOUTH CHINA MINING POST, 6 J.“ 79) sssesessseeoeeeeeeee

She Lo Tong Addiction Center Provides New Hope
(Kevin Sincleir; 5001!! CHINA FORMING POST, 6 Jen 79) once

Government Hove To Employ Addicts
(Kmn.th K0; SOUTH CHI-M mRNING POST, 6 Jan 79) seeeseee

9mg Trend Misleading
(wun' alm mmmc ”ST, 8 J.“ 79) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI...

M Customs Officers Convicted in Ysumsti Fruit Herket Triel
(500111 CHINA PORNING POST, 10 J.“ 79) seeoseeeeeeeesesee-

He Psir Chergsd With Forgery in Tsipei
(anes Kong; SOUTH CHINA mmmc POST, 11o Jen 79) .......

Locel churches Join Fight Against Drug Abuse
(scum cum Momma 1051‘, 15 Jen 79)
FOR oértcm. use ONLY

OONTENTS (Continued)

Former Policemen Deniee Knowledge of Druge
($0011! CHINA mmmc P081‘, 18 Jen 79) ................

Briefe
Drug Trefficker Duped
Couple Denice Drug Chergee

JAPAN

Tvo Ger-en Shepherde Join Tokyo Nercotice Squed
(Kmm' 25 J.“ 79) 00.00.000.000...DOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOO

Driefe
Heroin Treffickere

MALAYSIA

Heleyeien Police Seize 62 Pounde of Morphine After Ger Cheee
(m STRAITS rm, 3 P* 79) OOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOCOOOOCO

Heroin Hidden in TV Set on Pig Fern
("m STMm m. b J.“ 79) OOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOCOOOOOO

PAK ISTAN

Belgian Heroin Snuggle: Sentenced to One Yet
(his so", 9 J.“ 79) C0.00000000000000000.0.0.0.0000...

Five Held for Selling 27 Heunde of Cheree
(mmmm ms, 17 J” 79) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Contrebend Cheree, Cloth, Betel beef, Spore Perte Seized
(“1wa “IL, 27 me 78) 0O.COCOOOOCOOOOOCOOOOCOOOC0..

Three Cheree Smugglers Receive lO-Yeer Prieon Sentencee
(“YER Mn, 5 J." 78) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

SINGAPORE

Arreeted Second Tine, Driver Jailed for 20 Yeere
(ma SUNNY rm, 1“ J.“ 79) CIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOO

TIIA HAND

Arebe Arreeted; Heroin, Herihuene Seized
(max ”81' 22 J.“ 78) OCOOIOOOOOCOOOCOOOO00....OI.

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
16
15

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTEMS (Continued)

Men Hold for No lo lleroin
(“WK ”ST, 20 J.“ 79) 00000.00.....00.0..0...0..0

Ber lioeteu lleid in Heroin Seizure
(MNWK ”ST, 26 J‘n 79) 000.000......0..l..00......

LATIN ”ERICA
BRAZIL

People'e Temple Role in Bolivia-Breril-Guyene Connection
Studied

(W, 6 J.“ 79) one...0.0.0.0...000.000.000.000.

Briefe
Drug Trefficker Arte-ted
Herihuene Plentetion Diecovered

MEXICO

Roeuite of 1978 Druge Campaign Smrited
(BL 80'. DE MEXICO, 29, 3° DOC 78) oaeeeoeoeeeeeooeeee

PFJ Confiecetee Herihuene
Opium, Heroin, Morphine Seizuree, by Joee Viichie

Siciiie'e lienchmm Found Housed in Rio Cell
(all SOL DB mxlm' 20 Dec 78) .OOOO.IOOCCOOOO0OOCOIOI

Prieon Director Accueed of Treffickins
(Seivedor Aguiler; EXCELSIOR, lo Jen 79) .. ... ... .. .. .

PERU

Briefs
Drug Treffidtere Arreeted

VENEZUELA
Briefs
Drug Treffickor Captured
WESTERN EUROPE
DENMARK

Copenhagen Police Dtuge Unit Chief Cements on Trends
(Bent Bel: Andereen, Rie Ernst Hadeen; “RINGS”:
1103"”. 1 J.“ 79) OCOOOOOOCCCOOOCO.C...’.......I...I
.. c -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

26

27

28

30
30

31

33

35

36

37

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wmsu'rs (Continued)

Copenhagen'e New Hethedone Clinice Opposed by Meet Experts
(‘5‘... Ellqﬂltd; BERLINGSKE AFTEN, 5 3m 79) eoeeeeee

FINLAND

Court Sentencee 36 for Drug Crinee, 19 Fined
(IIELSINOIN “NOW. 20 0°C 78) eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

ITALY

Cocaine Drug Ring Duet
(IL mm” mm 33M, 19 me 78) COOOOCOOOOIOOOOOOO

Arrest of Five Drug Peddlere
(Ill com” on“ SB“, 2‘ Dec 78) COOOOOIOOOO'OOO...

Sight Doeee of Retain Seized
(IL CORRIEBE DELLA 833A, 16 Dec 78) ..................

Drugs Seized, Five Arteete Made et Airport
(L'UNITA, 24 Dec 78) OOOOOOCOOOOOOOOIOOQOOOOOOOIOOOOIO

TURKEY

Brief.
Neehieh Seized

- d -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

46

68

50

51

53
DRUG HAUL IN HANDMAY, THREE ARRESTED

Rangoon THE WORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 17 Jan 79 p 1

mm Mumm. x 1mm.
and Cam Main!
four Slogan-n- ot heroin

fmnujup a: New Civil Lina
lute on 7 Jammy.

The 0561* on a
”pm In“?

com-'0! and h ﬁtted:
in New ﬂue-33w

uchep No HIMG La (7

WW M dim
Ymﬁv n *3? met a
MuumpmmduNososin
New Civil lbs.

"antic Dmo LII. .-
Tbis is reputed to be m:
hiya! hctoin hull ever made
in Almaty—(313)

680: 5300
COLD TURKEY: HAY TO CUT DOV“ RBCIDIVISH
Rangoon THE WORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 7 Jan 79 p 2

[Editorinh "Cold Turkey Cuts Recidivism"!

[Text] Speaking at the opening of the Anti-narcotics exhibition at the
Envoy Hall Tuesday, Chairman of the Rangoon Diviuion People's Council
Lt-Col Kyaw Hyint in his capacity as the Chairman of the Rangoon Division
Comittee for the special canpaign against narcotic drug abuse revealed a
few startling facts about the subject.

ile declared that the intensity of the action being taken by the People's
Police Force is indicative of the seriousness of the danger posed by nar-
cotic drugs. A close examination of statistics. he stated, would show

that in spite of the intensive action being taken according to law,
trafficking and consumption of narcotic drugs had apparently not diminished
and for this reason, Operation Galon has been intensified in its third phase.

Startling enough as this revelation is, the Chairaan of the Connittee fur-
ther declared that of the over 2,600 drug users :egistered at the Psychiatric
Hospital, some 70 percent are young people of the 20 to 25 age-group. Some
20 percent of the rest. he said. are those who had become addicted through
dependence upon tranquilizers.

What is probably even more significant than these figures is the revelation
that the percentage of recidivism among those who have been treated is as
high as 80 percent. This means that at least eight out of every ten addicts
who sanage to kick the habit through treatlent at the Psychiatric Hospital
becoae addicts again.

Considering the factors involved, this is too high a rate under any circum-
stances. After all. if the nusber of new addicts are to be considered in
addition to those who assume the habit again, the total may turn out to be
too high to be tackled effectively with existing facilities.
thlc continuing cfforlu must of course he node to prevent new addicts
helng formed through suppression of trafficking and through publicity

about the evils of drug abuse, efforts to cut down recidivism are no less
cruclal.

In this connection. it nay be worth our while to conhider using what is
known as the "cold turkey" method of treatment. In rontrast to the use
of subatitutc drugs to lessen the excruciating effects of vithdraval, the
"cold turkey" literally leaves the addict to suffer the consequences of
his habit in the withdrawal stage. According to experiences of some coun-

tries, the suffering is reported to be one of the factors which frightens
former addicts from taking up the habit again.

we are not aware whether or not this has been tried out in Bursa. In any

case it would not be out of place to experiment. After all. the high rate
of recidivism is in urgent need of being cut down.

(ISO: 5300
BRIEFS

POPPY CROP SUBSTITUTION--Taunggyi. 21 Dec--The Agriculture Corporation has
introduced fruit trees in areas where poppy plantations had been destroyed
in the Shan State. The olanting of fruit trees and seasonal crops has been
uuﬂe under the project for substituting poppy with other cash crops. As
part of the project. the Agriculture Corporation in 1977-78 opened base
cultivation stations. stations for disseminating knowledge and sodel forward
stations for the substitution of poppy with other crops in the Shan State.
A total of 1.300 hoes have also been distributed free of charge to farmers
in these regions. in addition. four drums of pesticides-two drums for
Scmthern Shan State and one each for the Northern and Eastern shan State--
have also been distributed to the former poppy growing farmers under the
crop substitution progranme. [Text] [Rangoon THE WORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY

in English 26 Dec 78 p l]

‘rﬂREB ARRESTED FOR POSSESSION--Handalay, ll Jan-~Tha Mandalay North-East
Township Court No l chaired by U Khin Maung today sentenced three young nen
to seven years' imprisonment each on conviction under Section 6(b) (posses-
sion) of the Narcotic Drugs Law. The three young sen are Painter alias

Khin "in (29), Then "in (21) and Tun Kyi (18) of Kinsanamahi Hard, Mandalay.
The case was that a police party led by Station Officer U Hyint 00 of the

No 8 Police Station raided the house at No 626, Kinsanamahi Hard at 10 pm

on 26 February 1977 and found 12 packets of heroin valued at K 10 each from
the above-mentioned trio. They were accordingly arrested and sent up for
trial before the Township Court. [Text] [Rangoon THE HORKING PBOPuE'S DAILY

in English 17 Jan 79 p l]

(280: 5100
PAKISTAN! TRAPPICKER GETS FIVE YEARS

mam» aw. w MM
.mm
mm 3%

WWW WWW mmm MM.“

CIOII Wm! Daniol

E

u u mm a Mama... Mm
My? mm“ ”mm w

W Wm mm
mm“. Mmmmam Mum

llong Kong SOUTH CHINA KIRNING POST in English 6 Jan 79 p 9

[Text]

5300

(280:
Ilmw, Kong SOUTII CIIINA Momma POST In lingual: 6 Jan 79 p IS

SIIA LU TONC ADDICTION CENTER PROVIDES £38" "OPE

it: IMTmeum m ad.“ ha

w mw. mm
mwuwwmam

“(wwwwm mm .mmmmmumm 33%. Wm

WM mm é? um
WWW... mmmmmw mam WWMMWMW

«Mm .m .WWM a MM .
Mm r mm,“ : W w “Mm
y “mm 0mm . “MN I
I a W&ER.?;a
Mu mmmwwaamwmmmmmﬁ
m .Im mm,“ mm: mammmmmw A.“ .3

5300

350:

I
“-0!-

a

”1 “MW

at )0 um

I n:
In“

m .

um JO) dup
. . ll"! 1°
.. n W mayo
1009'!” POI w

oompum

iii

' A. "1 ”WWW";
um». you PING

l

“ w! x
.372...

)0 nun-nub
w

"I W W! m 19

pa: mayo
”“1" W “2.35111-“

0“ m

M) III IN) I
W PIN

moo um ml

NI alum:

3‘1 WNW-"'0'
5300

‘We the“ have I wide
mm»! for
Io lam-u MI .
m.“
The amp addict In

N h 2| l
..m..:~".':°:::¢..1

w“- 1mm:
MIL! m

Mr Lee Ibo pound on
It“ 'I «cloud
00M“) drug Odd/cu
an unique In the not“ I.
that more II" 10 per cm 0!

Ibenunln
“Named

shimsanm

fund 12kt: h the No.3.
loo. Council of Social Sen.
In waif: unwed «.902;
ml print: ”a"
Ill loam odd/cu hum
"7:324:17. t.
um may
"‘ Mullah“. when,
. um. en. not:
m5“. hold M-Uﬂ.

MI mum and um.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00050R0001000200233

Column!“ "9 ma and
m.) an: (mm
In. (52 '12 ml) have
00 ran 01 m. m (4)
mm”- :m
«blow. P"
Mr In W than
I mlmlu one: win coo
ﬂm um adieu-n am”
at

Mﬁ'mn
M

3§~

"i!

TmI «in: can of
the tang); odd/cram“ In
ltd: Jon for over an.
month.

Mob“ w. the 03..
chain“ Wham Md Sod-

cl . node 34 rowing-u u.
It’cea WM l9”.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00850R0001000200234
DRUG TREND HISLBADING

Ilong Kong SOUTII CHINA mmum POST in English 8 Jan 79 p l

I'l'cxtl

CS'):

3300

The in; «Halo- mad

22....”“5‘3” " ~ "

m m n.

the Comm lot Nu.

mks. Mr Pete: Let. all
midday.

Mr Lu in ninth. tute-
unh and: Inc M by
the Combat 0! am.
Mr 70m 0mm. 1h! he Ill
ﬁlmed by Ike W In
the nabs! of in; «Him
being admitted and a: num-
bu of W people found
lo be an; mum on may
Ilnnlo m.

M! Gum had a“ Ital
dump I916 “I I”? the
3mm: d but m, od-
dict. «hind W m
41 mun“ percent.

a 3;; he said. it had
n In went.
”0|.- :uluum sulﬁdes.
Mr Um I: it: ism-nu
and mu: m
and be noted his m”:
amid a u could
“a «ICU-I qt" on
llamlmﬂduuuicu.

an M: lac. who «mud
bu nut [mun ' up

Io - I ‘
.uW’FaMﬁﬁ
In; Thailand. Dunn and
unwanted”;

‘03:: ﬂ
_) his: I! ggkm

“ll bald [he a dam

In cu I m
“again...” Wu-

"l’uonhct was. lul

' f
mawmh:
I» ma.
1W CUSTOEB OFFICERS CONVICTED IN YAUHATI FRUIT MARKET TRIAL

Ilong Kong SOUTH ClllNll HORN!!!) POST in English 10 Jan 79 p 10

(Textl

h'l’m‘? m magma“ Ho “mull” I'm: “a:
l e ovum we ‘0“ ”'6 - ‘
Scale: wen My - Clan Month.
(“.4 "my 0! Ch. Vld M In" lung
to chum lhc m yard; m‘ ‘
Mu sumawudlhcm
1.63 RUM M Km IIMII!
Ola "WM“ “What the w
&)Imu N3. ‘l’ul-Nn am“: mu «Mu.
NI" ll W.
mus“ m a.»7~.‘m»~n
Kin-mﬂﬂlomym. but «damn lo m
g and Chi. vote that": mmmu
ch Ill. hull «I- u m u I: III up“ 0‘
wilt Ma NI. M II. to.“ no!
DWI-c8500. . «moonlit-khaki“.
Kan. u... and In: a. mo! lk
has glam In. (N then a lcglululu
Mackinaw W I" on! My.“ the
gleam“: “Quad use-ma
I
Mum Ila-cu lunacy all common.
“4“... Man.“- "".‘." @le
we: not a
lion. It: In defend-now should m been by the
«spud Hi. I'm W WW“
dodnunlllolh and n. m an an In
alumna - «lulu Inc all: «my!
loll» hd ale-ad not when. all out
Mn “upload Ihu N.
lalkmdddhula mutual: hm.-
bb 11 m . lluSavlaoﬂlca would
“It" tun. dobhhklohdplknham
“ruminant“: In- a
the Ink-M w y N; and that":
not nuluolldm lmtmlkununhk
he. m m n. you could and to calls: on u-
bouollmmm Manda-cabana
who an at 7'5"" hm lug-n la Mm the
M explldt “all: of Minna.

10
"Just who. apart from cheung. got to participate in the uchcm. I cannot
any, but as n matter of counnn sense there were some because. although by
vlrtuc of his position, N3 even alone could c-mtrlbutc clgnlllcnntly tn
seeurlng n safer envlronment for drug trafﬁckers in the Ynunntl fruit
market. There were llults to what he could achlevo."

When he was brought lnto the scheme by Ng, cheung mot have known that he
was jolnlng n pre-cxlstlng cnnsplrncy, the judge cold.

The Inference was lrtestlble that cheung was aware of what had gone on

before, and he jolned such a scheme knoulng what it was and with full
lntentlun ol‘ dolng to, said the Judge.

NI cu” Wong. u. v» u to ”now
“run“ tut-ind I. m. ”luau.

”I” [:3 “.qgcgg. M? W“ «id w
mar-Museum... millennium
madman..." ulna hummus».
I then .. 5..
cm Fm My um N. You. who
um -- and lg “93 a to: cm... a:
Human. $1.5m. nut mm” m

mum." """‘ m 'm not
dam M he an. all cu in I and.

"W on a number cl new I". M
“auntie-Unwante- hulls lo
mm. nus.“ I'm m but “on

Mr and N M rated have 9h. no
”313:: mu 2! ".M' on I Cod thll
’" m‘ "‘" “mums:

m "
$dﬁmﬁi thcmnh’rva'uz
would Ion hh m .m
will In no tum‘n "Sn-rotted!»-
“hafnium hamddlh mo

”0 M Maul c ya. .

M mm Crown maul Raul!
a. N: u Mmtd.

(:30: 5300

ll
M PAIR CHARGED WITH FORGERY IN TAIPEI

llong Kong 8001‘" CHINA FORM“; POST in English 14 Jan 79 p 1

[Article by Janos Hons]

ITcxtl

C50 :

5300

“Rant” «hummus.
o W an.“
Sit-dun nod mum M:
Wm- ha been W
3 a nine! can on w
I MI. in

tum' lm Mm‘ MW:
on bill inking uh! ea in

W m

ea M with!

Thuamimrlu
M v. «and

“um (cum ’

a.
Mo Sit-cu (40) ml Ma
zen-w ()6) 3n 1'“
U
u a

wad In -
d M! but a II mm”
“mm...
to
than liar-mu. ’
Us“! Tahoe law. to:-

12

rm; pellet «mo

Lulu. . m Nu-
mnu I'm m «a

convicted u... N.
3.“ “Wm-3':
1|:- yuumqu y'- pun-w

«w m «a- mu 'm

mm

In"

undo-co

at 1000!

I
Want”:

mm!

1!“ 8; .‘MW

’0

ma m mama-1..

mm

a l as {wand
3:301); uﬂbi

00"

mun

“5“

09: mm
3&1», m

It“

an In.
Mum mu

)0 no -- mum mo;
autumn-mutton!

'mn
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100020023-3

.5

FORMER POLICW DENIES KMHLBDGE 0P DRUGS

I
' lions Kong SOUTH CIIINA momma POST in English 10 Jan 79 p 1!
[Text] A
hilt! m 13- dour.
old Wme-l’ loll A "My
”5.2mm W '“"
do Com 1 We...“ h tubul-
, M It ht' out of I and will: pollen W
Mlle! I‘m hula nun-t.
tundbypollahhhllnm Hubbub"!
av. dun Mu
W rte-Huh”- humuu.m
am «an-ml“. —mmm.shu
vallhl‘ouubm “ﬁlm-w
with who am [and up In I all
m (or unlawful W- “Vania.
“O «gamma—u
Whmm louse-thunk"
Jana. «human «mutant-l.
muhutlpuoa 80-thth
~26.»me ﬂu .uowauupmum
u “ﬁremanw «Imam-dunk.
Im II: 2»an glrl- 00' W m N:
I‘M Cho- Kuua. an M 19).“th-
mama-tum. «and mm).
all paid his car by a no Ila-1n.
“kl-gm mammal
W on be and lie Cmu coum Cola
to he no Wm: Wm M...
In unto-u Mlelxnulmn
hhudtk’lundluta {MW ”CHEM!
Mahdi math. Add“ tor N. M!
Tu w the-mound WW 4am!“
Mono 'u when n r M
mmnwm Stan. 0"
cso: 5300

16

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-OOOSOROOOlOOOZOOZIl-il
BRIEFS

DRUG 'l'RAPﬂCKER wrap-4 nan was yesterday sentenced to eight years'
inprisoment by Mr Justice Addision at the high Court for possessing
dangerous drugs worth about $200,000 for the purpose of unlawful
trafficking. choi Oi-ke was found guilty by a jury after it had
deliberated for about an hour. The court was told that Narcotics Bureau
officers laid an mush for the defendant in a hotel in Kowloon on
August 5. last year. A detective sergeant posed as a potential buyer
and waited for the defendant in a hotel roon. “the defendant gave his a
bag which contained suspected dangerous drugs and was arrested. [Text]
[liong Kong scum CHIRA mamas P061 in English 10 Jan 79 p 10]

COUPLE DENIES DRUG amass-4 couple stood trial at the high court yester-
day on charges of possessing more than $1 million worth of heroin and
norphine blocks for unlawful trafficking. La- Pui-fung. a 30-year-old
woman, was charged with having 1.68.8 grams of a mixture of heroin, and
Chen Litnan (29) with possessing 8,857.1 grams of morphine blocks and
8,902 gram of a Iixture of heroin. Both pleaded not guilty. Chan
further denied two charges of possessing a .22 calibre double barrel
pistol and 60 rounds of a-anition without a licence. Crow counsel

Joe Duffy told Mr Justice Trainer and a jury that the Crown's case was
that on July 10 last year a party of custous officers nounted a surveil-
lance in Tokwanen, Kowloon. At 11.40 am they saw La. getting out of a
taxi and going into a building in hei King Street with a brown bag. The
officers intercepted her and found a quantity of heroin in the bag. Hear-

ing continues today. [Text] [Hong Kong scum ClilﬂA manna; 2051 in
English 17 Jan 19 p to]

080: 5300

15
W0 GERMAN SHEPHERDS JOIN TOKYO NARGO‘I'ICS SQUAD
'l‘okyo KYODO in English no tine given 25 Jan 79 0“

[Text] Tokyo, 25 Jan KYODO-dwo German shepherd dogs will undergo final
tests l’riday before joining the narcotics squad of the metropolitan police
depart-ant as the nation’ s first canine shifters for stieulant and narcotics
snuggling.

Police. taxed by the increasing ingenuity of drug carriers who have concealed
their contraband in such articles as golf club heads and oxygen tanks, are
hoping that the dogs will help turn the tide against the flood of illegal
narcotics coming into the country.

The United States and Heat Ger-any have used dogs for several years to stroll
out narcotics at airports and harbors. Keen-seelling canines, which are
said to have 6,000 tines the olfactory sensitivity of husns, last year
nosed their way to 8,600 discoveries, including 14 tons of sarihuana and

29 kilograms of heroin, in the 11.8.

U.S.-trsined HPD dog handlers began training last January with the two shep-
herds Kuae No l, a two-year old eels, and Bani No l, a three-year old
fenles

After a year of training the dogs can even sniff out packages of the slnost
odorless stimulants co-nonly snuggled into the country from hiding places
under roofs and below the earth.

C50: 5300

16
BRIEFS

mom mmcmts—ren persons. including an American. a Ger-en, a Dane and

a Frenchaan. have been sent to the Tokyo District Public Prosecutor's office
on charges of taking on trafficking in heroin from Thailand. ﬂarcotics
control officials said bother Reinerwillaar Respondek. a Silo-year-old painter
from Host Ger-my. snuggled in about 100 grams of heroin, worth 30 million yen,
from Bangkok last November. Respondek took sole of the drug with Krijnen
Johannes Antonius, 33, a Danish designer. and llenri Didier Gubleis, 31.

a French furniture repair-an. before they sold it to Miss Carol Mae Johns, 21.
an American model. and some Japanese, according to the officials. Respondek, (_
a resident in Tokyo for 2 years, has visited Bangkok five tines over the

past year for the purpose of smuggling heroin, the officials said. The
officials confiscated 103 was of the drug fro. Respondek and Gublsis.
[Text] [Tokyo KYODO in English no tine given 26 Jan 79 OH]

030: 5300

17
MALAYSIAN POLICE 83123 62 POUNDS OP HORPBINE AFTER CAR CHASB

Kunla Lunpur new smrrs was in English 3 Feb 79 pp 1, 20 BK

[Excerpts] Kuala Lupur. 2 l'eb-Police have seized 62 pounds of morphine
of the "999" brand worth about $14 nillion on the international narket in
Sungei Patani after a loO-ninute car chase from Alor Star.

The drug was found hidden in a specially constructed cowartaent in the
petrol tank of a Thai-registered car.

Police have detained two nen.

Director of cm Col-under Datuk Abdul nah-en Bin Ieaail said that the brand
of the norphine vas well-know.

He said: "We believe the source of this drug is Thailand but we don't know
exactly where."

In Alor Star last Thursday. officers fron the anti-narcotics unit of the
CID at the federal headquerters waited for 3 hours at the stadiun after a
tip-off that a drug courier would be using the route.

"hen the officers. who were in three cars spotted the Thai-registered ve-
hicle at noon, they gave cheae.

Forty ninutes later they forced the vehicle to stop and on searching, the
officers found the morphine in the special co-psrtaent of.the petrol tank.

Police picked up another suspect tvo days later fron Alor Star.

080: 5300

18
NEROIN HIDDEN IN TV SET 0N PIG FARM

Kunln Lumpur NEH STRAITS TIMES in English 4 Jan 79 p 11

[Text] Port Dickson. Hed.--Police detained a suspected pusher and re-
covered about $2,000 worth of heroin hidden in a television set at a pig
for: in Bukit Pelundok last night.

The OCPD, Supt. Gauth Ghani, acid the 28-year-old suspect was believed
to have supplied drugs to addicts in Lukut. Bukit Pelandok, Sepans and
Tenuh Nerah.

He said police had been keeping the suspect under surveillance for four
months.

He added that 12 suspected pushers and several addicts had been arrested
during the past six months.

080: 5300

19
BELGIAN HBROIN SHUGGLER SENTENCED TO ONE YEAR

Karachi THE SUN In English 9 Jan 79 p 3

g» wan“.
3

WWW“: mm“ .W
Wu WWMWW“ ammmmm mwmm “Mar Mmmmﬂmp
WWW WWWWWW WWWWWWWW W WWWWWWWW
mmW mmmmmmma mammww mmm~MwmmmmmwMW

WWWW WWWW. WWW. WWWWWWWW IWIWW.

iuvwmmwmm mm m M

[Text]

5300

a
0

(ISO

20
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100020023-3

FIVE "Ill." FOR SELLING 27 HMINDS OI" CIIARAS
Qua-tun lMIJ/(IIIIS'I'AN TIHFS In English 17 Jan 79 p I

“well MARDAN. Jan. I6: FM

mm. Including u Mad!-
mlc. have been new In
Swabi, on the chm 0! kilo
m on thou 21 and: 0!
MM clam. wont: oc-
venl ”than! tunes. to the
in; It and“ the luv.

Moe mm nkl um lhe
Magnum. who Md Nanci!
mod the «at: for the da-

auction at the than u:
1 involved In tho deal om
mud included . Ntib Ten.
sildar. and lime polio: pu-
sound.
It is I: that line Mu-

Famnd All Shah. Write
m Tel-suds: - Tehiuulhh.
PSI MW. haul and Bud
Comublu bl On! and Z;-
lu. have been clawed nude:
Mlﬂill Luv Regulation l0.
tha imagination. as

m; APP-
cso: 5100

2!.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-OOOSOROOMOOOZOON-ii
CON'I'IMIMND CIIARAS. CLOTH. BETEL LEM". SPARE PARTS SEIZED

l'cslmuar KIIYnl-ZR "All. In lingual: 27 Dec 78 p 1

I110“ I

Lid):

'I ma

(”crummdau‘ﬁiu m «mule Gum \vu
abdingmbrhaWonlmudRMhenonW.

The contubnnd than“ 10- A comprehensive unwin-
rluded 53 kllloumm In "an“ "on Into the hull. whleh Ie‘m-
tom end 32 meunds In em ed Iobcmn oun Inumunel
tom. tumult: mm. but been I»

m ulnar. mo Included “IN
I” m: of foreign doth. « lnlel’pol may mo be modu-
beu ot hue! lent. end a cd with the lnveeuuuon. (he
Mae-bl: qulnmy 0! motor source: aid. _
em none.
The mauled um were
3W Item I we); bound
let amt? '
The «net deer and his
mum have been um Into

MW.

4.? ‘- rumm 'mt
vet
pot! mu 0! {MIL and
temp from “(Multan when
the truck was being latched.
During the touch. Mme.
mum net 0! take documents
0! ’dlolut' wen: mound
Iran the (met. The” docu-
m-u I: m. m to In
M b! the ﬂue): «um lo
mislead the um agenda
dam. minted-i journey.
M dﬂm Anne m.
and his Implie- Khan
Wu: of the 1011‘»: Agency
were bola: hlcmled.

22
THREE CIMRAS SHUGGIJIZRS RECEIVE lO-YEIIR PRISON SIINTENCES

l'cahnvar KIIYIIIIR HMI. In English 5 Jan 78 p 5

[Text]

Tho emu IIIIIuy Conn.
Mum. com or [IL-Col.
mm: "undo 1mm Halo:
1mm uohunund mi Imu-
mto lob-mm mom KIM.
Inn comma mm m to
I. 700: mom “13me
em. l'WOIM In u (m
m an. my hon
MM “Mot hum Act. It“
0! Mon MID) Ind m IM
m of emunllm MI.
MI W "I”. to: m In
nonunion 0! mid “am.
I Inn: at: w an “I;
W" D 7
MqunI mum

1'!» mm comm. m Kahu-
uIJuo. Kindlm Mn and
Inn: am.

The eomIcu won W
”In kn. of count-M dam
and ”‘9 M. do"! 0‘ torch-n
MI-In In mould mm» M
mm on Winn. The Cam
Ms emanated III. 3 all M
km and the m llama In
humor of Ibo m. n m lut-
"no Mood. 0M. 0M mum
m M In W M
tum-Ina In 0'va on Joan-Iv 1
W“ n «no Mn 0! Pans-u
Mum.

7mm mm. m Into
also («and Invomd In I!»
wanna um um accur-
«I by cam I» Went.

11m In AMI]! mum»
uIInII. null mm mun. I!»
m “M. mu on. m.
w
.3“ m

mwmnw

m?“

WWW

mmmamm.

m
AMIIS ARRESTED: HEROIN, MRDIUANA SEIZED
Bangkok BANGKOK POST in English 22 Jan 78 p 3 BR

[Text] Crime Suppression Division police arrested two Arabs and seized
one kilogranme of high-grade heroin and a small number of narijuana sticks
in a Bangkok hotel raid yesterday morning.

The two Araha--a Tunisian and an Algerian--were identified as Jamel Sarbaji
and Small Sellami respectively.

Acting on a tip-oft, a C50 police squad led by Pol Cpt Suphol Assavanond.
split into two groups and simultaneously raided rooms No 209 and No £19 of
the Park Hotel on Sci 7 off Sukhunvit Road where the two men were staying.

After a search, the policemen found three marijuana sticks in Sellami'a

room and 35 small packages of heroin weighing altogether about one kilogramne
in Sarhaii's room.

The two men later admitted that they bought the heroin from a Thai man in
Chiang Mai and that they were heading for France.

 

C50: 5100
MAN HELD FOR NO 4 HEROIN

Bangkok nANGKOK POST in English 20 Jun 79 p 3 BK

[Text] Narcotics Suppression police yesterday arrested a man while he
was on his way to deliver 700 grammes of No. a first grade heroin to cus-

tomers in Saphan Kvai.

A police team laid in waiting after being informed that a drug pusher will
deliver heroin to clients at a rendezvous near the Saphan Kwai intersection.

At about 1 p.m.. they spotted Chokechni Rattanaburi as he arrived at the
scene carrying a paper bag and acting in a suspicious manner. Police then
asked for a search and found the drugs packed in two plastic bags.

He was detained for further questioning at the Crime Suppression Division.

 

C50: 5300

26
BAR NOSTESS HELD IN HEROIN SEIZURE
Bangkok BANGKOK POST in English 26 Jan 79 p l BK

[Text] A resident of Mae Sni District. Chiang Rai Province. and a Chiang

Mai bar hostess were arrested yesterday morning at the Sslokbart checkpoint
after police discovered 4.9 kilos of No. 4 heroin hidden in a secret compart-
ment in their car.

Crime Suppression Division police arrested Aree Snmakthai and Mrs Ms Bukhan
at the checkpoint on the road from Mae Sai to Bangkok after receiving a
tip-off from an inforaant that the drug would be passing that way.

Aree told police that he was hired tor 10,000 baht to deliver the drugs to
an unidentified man at a gasoline station in Rangsit area. However. police
found no-one at the rendezvous point.

Mrs He denied knowledge of the heroin. claiming she was only taking a ride
with Aree en route to Bangkok to visit her sister.

Police, checking all cars passing through Salokbart. found the heroin
packed in 14 plastic bags hidden in a special compartment under the gasoline
tank in the car.

Both suspects were brought to Bangkok and detained at Crime Suppression
Division for further questioning.

 

cso: 5300 27
PEOPLE'S TEMPLE ROLE 1N BOLIVIA-BRAZIL-GUYANA CONNECTION STUDIED
Rio de Janeiro NANCNBTE in Portuguese 6 Jan 79 pp 108-109

[Text] The head of the People's Tenple sect who was responsible for the mas-
sacre in Guyana may also haVe been a major. influential international cocaine
trafficker. Drugs may possibly haVe provided him with much of his enormous
wealth and the total control of his followers. This information is contained
in a report (which is still confidential) of the Brazilian Federal Police who
are currently working on the case in cooperation with the 0.5. Drug Enforce-
ment Administration (a federal department for combating drugs).

Events happened quickly 2 weeks ago. when the Brazilian Federal Police dis-
ruvored the large quantity of smuggled cocaine ever seized on national terri-
tory. arriving from Bolivia. There were 17 kilograms of the drug concealed
in [3 packages and valued at 60 million cruzeiros. In the operation. the
officers captured l2 traffickers associated with the Bolivia-Sao Paulo-Brazil-
Guyana "connection." in their depositions. two traffickers admitted that 10
kilograms of the cocaine were earoute to "Reverend“ Jim Jones. Those 10 hi-
lograms of the drug were actually part of a shipment consisting of 25 kilo-
grams. According to the Federal Police. the 10 kilograms sent to Jones were
delivered on the basis of a "contract" signed by the leader of the People's
Temple with international traffickers. The connections date back 2 or 3
months. when the 25 kilograms of drugs probably left Santa Cruz de la Sierra.
in Bolivia. the world's largest producer of cocaine. The head of the See
hallo Police headquarters for Combating Drugs. Arthur Carbone Filho. stated:
that he "had conclusive documentation to the effect that the cocaine traffic
hetween Bolivia and Guyana has been going on frequently for some time."

The People's Temple

Among the 12 traffickers who were arrested in the operation. there are six
hruzilians. two Portuguese and two Boliviana. one of them a woman. The Sao
Paulo Federal Police chief. Francisco Carlos Garisto. claims that a Bolivian
whom he called "X” had confessed to smuggling cocaine to Guyana. The Bra-
zilian Federal Police contacted their Guyana counterparts. who confirmed the
existence of a criminal record on the individual called "X" who had been ar-
rested in 1973 for bringing cocaine into Guyana. when he had served his
sentence. the smuggler was released. Police chief Gariato adds: "after
this communication. we arranged for another interrogation of those in cus-
lady. dealing mainly with Guyana. Tho Bolivians who were under arrest sent
the drugs to that country 5 years age, using two North American fences. The
first fence died a year ago, and the other is in Jail in the state of Con-
necticut for trafficking in cocaine sent to Guyana. Thus, the testimony
pointed increasingly to James Jones. And that indication increased when it
was discovered that the individual called ”X“ had been a former follower of
Jil's who recruited "believers" for the People‘s Tesple in places visited
by people with troubled lives and without resources. who could be readily
taken in by promises of happiness. Garisto said: "In my opinion. most of
the followers of the People's Temple were addicts or former addicts of co-
caine and other drugs. In Jonestown. the 'reverend' guaranteed them an
abundant supply of drugs. for from the vigilance of the authorities."

A Branch in Brasil

It is the opinion of Chief Arthur Carbone Pilho that. ”The purpose of dance
Jones’ arrival in Brasil in 1969. when he resided in Belo Horizonte. was
probably to establish the connections for supplies of Bolivian cocaine to
the reople’s Teaple. Bolivia. with its 2.000 kilometers of border with Bra-
zil. has an advantageous cocaine route. the largest in the world. Of the

25 kilograas of cocaine which left Bolivia. we do not yet know the destina-
tion of B kilograms." continued Chief Carbone; adding: "They may be on na-
tional territory. but they could also have gone to Guyana."

Chief Carbonc ended his interview with acne shocking information. He said:
"There is in Brazil a secret religious sect of North American origin. si-
oilar to the People's Temple. This sect holds frequent meetings at which
those initiated are 'cleansed.’ The trafficking and consuaption of drugs
are concealed behind a lystical background that promises love. peace and
brotherhood. At their meetings. the initiated members are required to drink
a tea made of 'ausca." an herb from the Amazon Region which causes halluci-
nogenic reactions similar to those from LSD. The Brazilian and United States
police have already discovered the first clues to that sect. And we shall
soon be able to publicize the results of our investigations."

2009
CSO: 5300

29
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFICKER ARRESTED-~0rug trafficker Adauto Pedro Teixeira was arrested
yesterday morning upon leaving the ferry at Porto Prina"era on the Parana
River. Police found 25 kilograms of narihusna and 505 grams of cocaine in
his ear. The drugs had been bought in the Paraguayan city of Pedro Juan
Caballero for sale in Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. [Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE

8A0 PAULO in Portuguese 1 Veb 79 n 32 PY]

HARIHUANA PLANTATION DISCOVERED-~Vitoria--A plantation with 300 plants of
narihuana was discovered today in the village of Boa Esperanza. uunicipsl-
ity of Cachoeira do ltapzuirin. Espiritu Santo state. The owners of the
plantation. sons of a traditional Easily of the region. were arrested by the
military police. The soldiers uprooted all the uarihusna plants. [Porto
Alesre Radio Guoibo in Portuguese 0200 GMT 3 Feb 79 FY]

cso: $300

30
rxsuu's or 1978 news mama summo
PPJ Confiscates Narihuana
Hexico City 8!. 80]. on mum» in Spanish 29 Dec 78 p O-A

[Tent] As a result of the continuing canpaign against drug trafficking
the Federal Judicial Police [rm seized 367 tons of narihuana during 1978.
‘lhe estimated price of the drug on the black nrket is about 3 billion pesos.

Deputy Attorney General Alba Leyva reported that the planting and harvesting
of urihuane dropped this year by 85 percent.

lle asserted that the success of this caqaign against drug trafficking is
such that the percentage of land devoted to the growing of the drug is

very low. ‘lhe regional coordinators of the farming sones and the co-snders
of the NP participated in this caqaign.

he reported that a strong battle was waged against the drug traffickers,
especially in Sinaloa. however, they have turned toward Oaxaca, Guerrero,
Puebla, Veracruz and Queretaro were the drug had never before been grown.

Here than 80 helicopters and light planes of the air section of the attorney
general's office continue flying over the areas where the narihuans fields
were destroyed.

The group destroyed 300 Iillion plants as well as drying sheds fren which
equip-eat was seized for packing the weed into 'bricks” for sale and use,
especially in the United States.

Opiun, heroin, Morphine Seizures
mice City BI. 80!. 08 ﬂuid) in Spanish 30 Dec 78 p 7-A
[Article by Jose Vilchisl

l‘l‘cxtl 1he Federal Judicial Police [NP] has seized drugs, dis-antled
heroin processing laboratories, seised hand guns and shoulder weapons and
land, air and neritins carriers, destroyed poppy and nsrihuena fields and
arrested thousands of drug traffickers.

Jl
'Ihv prlce of drugs wau conservatively estiuated at 3 billion peuoa, in
addltlon to all that remained at the disposal of the Federal Public
Ministry luvs].

Likewise, in tallying up the actions against drug trafficking and organized
crine, Gen Raul Hendlolea Cerecero, comander of the PJP, reported that 382
gangs of drug traffickers were broken up this year.

The police chief emphasised that during 1978, 168 kilogram of opium were
confiscated, 3 of morphine, 163 of heroin, 128 of poppy seed, 22,665,629

items of psychotropic drugs (toxic tablets, LSD and so forth), as well as
33 kilograms of peyote.

Hendiolea Cerecero stated that 36 laboratories where heroin was processed

were dismantled and 756 shoulder weapons, 850 hand guns and 68,337 cartridges
were seized from the arrested.

Also placed at the disposal of the HP? were 187 land vehicles (autos, trucks,
trailers and so forth), Zl air carriers, especially Cessna light planes, and
a boat which was intercepted on the Caribbean coast of Mexico loaded with
marihuana and other drugs, coming from South America and bound for the
United States where the cargo was to be distributed to nae-bars of an inter-
national gang. Members of the PJP and the Mexican Navy participated.

Also, as part of the campaign against drug trafficking, the experts and
pilots of the air section of the office of the attorney general destroyed
25,6“ poppy fields covering 1,933 hectares. similarly, 9,948 urihuana
fields covering 514 hectares were destroyed. Chemical defoliants were used
for this purpose last year.

Frets the gangs of traffickers that were broken up--382 in elk-5,570 Hmdcans
were arrested who were involved in these crines against public health as
well as 214 foreigners of British, Canadian, United States, Colombian,
Peruvian and Ecuadorian nationalities.

9204
(:80: 5300

32
SICILIA'S 1mm POUND “”330 IN HIS CELL
Mexico city BI. 80!. DB HBXIG) in Spanish 20 Dec 78 p lZ-A

[Text] The Ouban Jose Bgoai Vejar, ne‘er of the international gang of
drug traffickers to which Alberto sicilia Falcon belonged, was found dead
in his cell at the Santa Eartha Acatitla prison.

Bgosi Vejar entered the prison on 19 June 1977 for public health erinss,
specifically drug trafficking, according to file No 20/3688/78, of which
Victor Manuel Canasta is the custodian.

Dr Oscar Fernandez, the Federal District Penintentiary doctor, was of the
opinion that death was due to anoxia (asphyxia) and the body showed signs
of nosebleed and cyanosis at the front of the neck.

Bgosi Vejar's body was found yesterday Iorning hung by a sheet fron a
crossbar and everything pointed to suicide but the initial investigations
by the Judicial Police [PJ] indicate that he was killed by neders of the
drug trafficking gang.

Bgosi Vejar was always considered Sicilia Falcon's right am. he was one
of those who lanaged to escape free the old Lecunberri jail through a
tunnel, together with Sicilia Falcon and Carlos Suali Bravo--the latter
still at large-~in 1976.

The guards said that the body was hanging by a white sheet and that to
all appearances he had co-itted suicide.

The theory held up to yesterday by the chiefs of several police organizations

was that the gang that controlled the prison strangled hits to death.
According to the police it was proven that Bgosi Vejar naintained strong

ties with international drug traffickers even in prison from where he
succeeded in co-Iunicating with then.

33
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00050R0001000200233

It mm mull in Iln- Mal-n" ia-li -- nilu- (hut llu- (let
all-- hml lvll I‘nlm .uul n- ‘ II"-- in .'|I'Hlll , llnrltltl.

'lh-- luuly um: arm h- Ilu' 'n-In'm- _,| HP: ZUI'I l'nlh‘t‘ St.-
ulll Iw :mwml l-- Il.-- u . --.. ; '-: ..:15..-.

920/.
(350: um)

3’0

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00850R0001000200234
PRISON DIRECTOR ACCUSED O? TWPIOHNC
Mexico city EXCELSIOR in Spanish lo Jan 79 p 27-h
[Article by BXCBLSIOR correspondent Salvador Aguilar]

[Text] Cnidad Juarez, chlh., 3 Jam-Anastasia Delgado Astorga, warden of
the penitentiary, was pointed out by the prisoners and guards of the
establish-cut as the person responsible for the traffic of drugs, liquor
and food which takes place in the prison.

Prisoner Alejandro Ortega Case, in a complaint signed by 540 prisoners
and 18 guards, node this known.

The complainants assert that Tacho (as they call Delgado Astorga), when he
took office 6 nonths ago, naned as Eoruan his friend the drug trafficker
Martiniano Alejandro Nevares who escaped from the prison on 31 Deceder,
and now he is trying to replace hi. with the prisoner Ruben Ortiz.

'lhe guards assert that Anastasio Delgado nukes these sppointnents in spite
of the (act that by law no convict can exercise authority inside the prison.

I’J agents Juan Moreno and Juan Jose Flores, who yesterday visited the
prison, stated that prisoners "panpered" by the warden control things inside
the prison.

Delgado Astorga also was accused of charging a fee of 30 dollars a week
per call, of closing the school in the jail and of not allowing social
workers to enter.

9206
(:30: 5300

35
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAPPICKERS ARRESTED-~Lim. 31 Jan (EFE)--Hargsrita Collszos. 31o, alias
"La annrm." Iner brother Jeremiau. alias "Lulu." and several of their
accomplices have been arrested for trafficking in cocaine. The arrests
were unde in llunraz. Ancash Department. north of Lime. In addition. o

total of five laboratories for cocaine processing were discovered.
[Madrid EFF. in Spanish 1716 GIT 3] Jan 79 PA]

080: 5300

36
BRIEFS

DRUG MIICKBR CAMP-me police have erreeted international drug
treffioker Joee Vicente llincon Rangel. 39. eleo known no the king of
eerihuena. vho vae found in poeeeeeion of nearly 1 Iillion holiveroe
worth of nerihuena. Rincon Rensel. vho traveled frequently to Colo-hie
to buy the drug. ie reportedly the min eupplier for Techire Stete and
nest of Venexuole'e central region. A national eeerch is currently on
for hie eccoeplitc. [Carecee Radio Continente Network in Spanieh

2055 GMT 30 Jan 79 PA]

37
COPEKHAGHN [ULICE UNUG$ UNIT CHIEF CONMENTS 0N TRENDS
Copenhagen :hkLlhﬁStE iiLiLDE In imniah 1 Jan 79 Fart III p ll
[Article by Bent link Mulernen and Hie Ernst Madden]

[Text] The extremely rich financiers who are presumed to be behind the
narcotics traffic are encountering keen competition from ordinary Danes
who. in thin field. have discovered the possibility of making easy. tax-
frea money by importing narcotics for the Danish market.

At present. several of them are in custody or have been sentenced. They
are quite ordinary citizens who have got together in a so-called business
co-operntion. usually in groups of seven to eight people.

They each contribute a certain amount of money to a pool and dispatch a
courier. _A trip to "oroeco. Turkey or the Fir East may be financed at

a rather low cost. and nobody is ruined financially if they do not succeed
in bringing into the country a quantity of the highly dangerous narcotics.

Easy to Finance

"At the moment. we haVe quite a few people imprisoned in connection uith

a major case. They are school teachers. plumbers. business people. students.
In short. people from all walks of life and income brackets. As a matter

of fact. it is quite easy to finance a 'ahopping triﬂ nor narcotics. The
most important thing in a group is that they can trust one another a hundred
percent." said P. H. Gauguin. assistant commissioner and chief of the
Copenhagen Police drugs unit.

when the courier comes back. the drugs are distributed to the abusers in
the area covered by the organization in question. The accounts are usually
settled once a month. "thes" are then paid. snd a courier is dispatched

again. The only difference is that. this time. they probably can afford
buying a larger quantity.

"It in easy money. and it in doubtful if we shall be able to stop the
traffic completely and find the ring leaders in all the cases. Usually
the one who is apprehended shields the others and gives strange explana-
tions of how he or she financed the trip alone." said P. H. Gauguin.

38
In the opinion of the assistant co-issioner. Copenhagen is priaarily a
transit station. he. an interaediato link in the transport of narcotico
to other Heat auropean countries and to Canada.

”A certain asount is. of course. seized. but the saugglers continue to
invent new and ingenious Iethoda of concealing their drugs. and a large
nusber of narcotics exchanges have now been soved to slaller towns free
which the narcotics are then distributed,” said P. ii. Gauguin.

Uhy is it that there are no aany repetitive offenders asong the narcotics
mgglers apprehended in Demrit?

"This auat probably be viewed against the background of the country's
relatively low aaxiaus and siniaus penalties and the general living con-
ditions of priooners in Danish prisons. it is as if soae hashish dealers
and ssupglers regard a stay in prison as a holiday.

"‘l'hey as} get a longer sentence. but after a few years they are paroled and
able to start all over again. At the ease tine. they often have their
finances and connections in order, so that they can quickly reach the
standard of living they had before their ispriaonsent.

“ilhen they are not in prison. they have a lot of aoney at their disposal.
They lead a life of luxury with expensive habits, big cars. costly restaurant
visits. etc. All of this is sosething they can return to quickly when re-
leased. ‘lhat is why they do not take a prison stay too seriously.” said
P. ii. Gauguin.

The assistant coasissioner is of the opinion tiat Demrk ought to have
the saae main and siniaus penalties as liorwly and Sweden. which have
up to 10 years' ispriaonsent for amggling of ell kinds of narcotics, in-
cluding hashish.

"In Dennrk the penalty is up to 6 years' isprisonaent where it is a
question of snuggling or selling hashish. and taen it does not aatter
if it is a question of several tens of hashish.

"It is sy opinion that we ought to have the sale penal legislation for
narcotics cases in all the Nordic countrihs. tel-tit and Holland have

the nest liberal legislations in this respect. and it is also these two
countries tint have the biggest narcotics problaas in Dumps." said Gauguin.

In 197'? we had 70 deaths in Del-ark in consequence of narcotics abuse.
The Copenhagen Police drugs unit eatiaates that the figure for 1978 will
be between $9 and 85.

‘l'heae are the deaths in which the police have teen involved. he do not
know how-any die in hospitals around the country with narcotics abuse
as a contributory cause.

39
One of the moat frequent cannon or death in nerrotica circles are over-
doses. but. in addition. many addicts die in hospitals around the country
of hepatitis and other coaplicotiona." naid P.H. Gauguin.

Alno Cocaine

*e

In the cases of cost kinda of drugs. the quantities or drugs seized in 1978
are considerably larger than in the previous year.

In the Copenhagen area alone. 750 kg of hashish. h0.000 morphine pills and
7 kg of heroin were seized. In addition. cocaine is now slowly appearing
on the Danish market. It is extracted from the leaves of the coca shrub in
South Anerica and is shipped via Spain and France to Den-ark. Cocaine is at
least as dangerous an heroin. Ia far as its coat is concerned. it in in
the same price bracket so the "less expensive" heroin 3. which costs 1.000

kroner per gran. At present. hrroin h fetches as such as 10.000 kroner per
gram.

The extreanly dangerous drug heroin h is often diluted up to 12 tines. among

other things. with citric acid. It injected pure into the body. it will
kill the user.

In several cases where narcotic: addicts have died of overdoses. the police
have been in doubt whether it was a case of wilful murder.

Nobody can ascertain whether the victim used hie own syringe and thus caused
his own death. or whether the death was caused by a murderer forcing a
syringe into the victim's body. An obvious reason for getting rid of a
narcotics addict would be that he would. in acne cases. know too such about

the ring leaders who would probably be causing his death sooner or later
anyway.

7262
cso: 5300

40
comm in mm cums WED Bf ms? arms
Copenhagen mm m in Danish 5 Jan 79 p 7

(Article by Lease mlegaardl

[Racerpto] The decision by the Copenhagen city Council to set up three
tesporary nethsdone clinics has created fears anong physicians and
therapiata that the Danish narcotics policy will change toward the lean
expennive and easier solution with the so-called ”nethedone unintenance."
but so far it is being denied that sosething of the kind is on its way.

On 2 January. the social welfare layer of the Copenhagen municipality.
Peile Jar-er. opened three tesporary sethadone clinics in the oetropolitsn
area. and this gave rise to the reopening of the discussion on nethods of
troatoent and solutions to the problem of the so-cslled ”hard narcotics
addicts." ‘fo such an extent that the govermant liaison co-ittee on
narcotics and alcohol abuse not already on 3 January to discuss the situa-
tion. The neeting case about after the listional iiealth Service. in a
letter of eight lines, requested the "evaluation" of the liaison co-ittee
on "nethadone Iaintenance for severely addicted narcotics sbuaen."

The three clinics which are to operate for 6 nonths under the guidance of
Preben Freitsg. chief physician. have been opened in the hope of solving

the probless which were left unsolved when last October the National Health
Service was cospelled to take action against the anon-nous quantities of
nethadone prescribed by the ”sethadone physician" Ole Bjorte to a youp of
170 patients. iijorte prescribed up to four tines the noer doeis for

that kind of treat-ant. lie did not allow his patients to aention the treat-
sent. let alone criticize it in statements to the press. and he made it a
condition of the treat-eat that the narcotics addicts changed fros health
insurance group I to group II. ‘fhis meant to his not only increased profits
but also a larger practice.

The oethadone was nailed 0.0.0.. no that IiJorte needed not have physical
contact with his patients. then this traffic had gone on for up to 2 years.
the National liealth Service stepped in after numerous requests and later

on warnings to the physician. In the fall. they were thus left with 1'70
narcotics addicts who were panic-atrichen at the prospect of a discontinue-
tion of the nethadone flow. In haste. three energency clinics were set up.
and it is these energency clinics which have now been replaced by the
"teaporary clinics."

lo].
Against Methadone Clinicn

The problem now in that the majority or the expertn are opposed to setting
up methadone clinica which are to operate for nuch a long period of time.
According to phynicinnn. pnychiatristn and therapists. methadone. which in

a nynthetic preparation with the some effects as narcotics and. incidentally.
with the same aide effects. can only he used for treatment of narcotics
addicts during a short period of time. The addicts are given the substance
for a period of 10-1“ days. after which time the actual treatment can be
started. involving the services of social workers and physicians.

This method of treatment was adopted an a principle in the ao-called "Blue
Report" of 1973 which forms the basin of the Danish narcotics policy. Until
the opening of the municipal clinics. psychiatrists as well as therapists
were opponed to any prolonged methadone treatment because it in in conflict
with these principles and because it is feared that the "temporary" arrange-
ment will gradually be replaced by a permanent one.

There was thus dinagreement in the agency under the Copenhagen municipality
which in called "the methadone Joint council" and in which physicians.
psychiatrists. therapists and municipal politicians discussed the problem in
the course of hovemher and December. The psychiatrists proposed that five
nmnll emergency clinicn he net up which. for one thing. would be staffed
sufficiently for narcotics nddictn to get the proper treatment in addition
to the methadone treatment. and which. for the other. would limit the use of
methadone in such a way that the patients or the clients. as they are also
called. could be without drugs in less than a year. at the most. This proposal
emerged in a commentary in POLITlKEN by Professor Fini Schulsinger. chief
psychiatrist at the Copenhagen Municipal hospital. who. at the same tine.
took the opportunity to call Pelle Jarmer's decision "odd."

Dr. Peter age. who workn at the treatment center Club #7 on Amager. pointed
out in Political Review (th) that the American experience with methadone
does not seem to indicate that the crime rate goes down with methadone treat-
ment. Nor haVe they been able to ascertain a decline in heroin abuse. Peter
Schieler. a narcotics consultant in the Ministry of Education. has. moreover.
stated that the Americans are in the process of abandoning the philosophy of
methadone maintenance as a link in the fight against crime and drug addiction.
"Uhile approxxmately 60 percent of the narcotics addicts who were in treat-
ment a few years ago were on methadone maintenance. the figure has now dropped
to 1? percent." said Peter Schioler. and he added. "Besides. the United States
is one of the countries we can learn from in this area. That is why I feel
that if the Danish narcotics policy is to he changed. it should rather be
changed in the direction of a tightening of the principles which were in-

corporated in the Blue Report of 1973 and which oppose the use of methadone
for more than 3 weeka. at the moat."

Problem of Liaison Committee

The matter now reata more or less with the liaiaon committee which is com-
posed of representatives of the ministries dealing with narcotics problems

62
as well as a nuaber of expert consultants and physicians free the ﬂational
lienlth Service. and it will be known that II. 8. Knipachildt is handing the
coaaittee. This group will now continue the work on the aatter.

The task of the coaaittee in to be an advisory organ for the politicians
nt Christiansborg who. in the last instance. will take a position as to
which forms of treataent will be used. At the nesting last iiednesdsy
two proposals were presented -- each of then with the sane purpose. via.
to wake the liaison co-ittee adhere to the treataent policy pursued thus
for. and thus constituting an official rejection of the initiative taken
by the Copenhagen municipality which. in its turn. was brought about by
Dr. Ole IiJorte'a provocative "treataent policy.”

He is known an en advocate of prolonged aethsdone treataents. which has
node sceptics even sore sceptical.

"l have constantly been working for an arrangeaent enabling patients to be
treated with aethsdone beyond the 3 weeks that were fixed.” said Preben
Preitng. lie added. ”I on pleased with this project even if it is for 6
aonths only because it will seen that patients are getting the possibility
of returning to n coapletely norasl life."

Freitng sdaitted thnt aethsdone can be addictive but added that if no other
drugo are taken together with it. the patient can lead a coapletely noml
life with this dependence in his body. lie also pointed to other Aaerican
findings showing that aethadone treataenta have been effective.

Nevertheless. the Danish Social Uorkera' Society has advised its nowhere.
for the tile being. not to take up eaploylent at the three clinics and.
if they should still do so. to wake certain reservations at the appoint-

aent. This has had the effect that the one social worker who was appointed
did not start working.

”tie must have an explanation of the conditions in a discussion next Friday
aorning with the municipality. Till then. we have advised our aesbers

not to take up eaployaent. We are not either too enthusiastic about that
for- of treataent." said the president of the society. Bjorn Christensen.

7262
050: 5300

103
COURT SW58 )6 FOR Dilllo CRIN“. l9 FINE!)

llelninki IIBLSINGIN SANOMT 20 Dec 78 p 8

l'i‘exll The luniripal court of llelsinkl started to clear a big backlog of

drug cases. A trial that hegan on Rednesday was not coopleted until after
oidninht.

The court sentenced a total of 36 people for counting drug crises. Nine
defendants were sentenced to prison for sore than 1 year; two of then were

sentenced as young criminals. liearlng the cases of 25 defendants will he
cunt inned .

The court sentenced drug snuggle“. agents and pushers. The most severe
nentence. 2 yearn and 2 Isonths. was given to a 19-year-old stockrool worker
who was sentenced as a young criuinal. lie was guilty of snuggling drugs and
nelling oorphine, anphetsaines, LSD. hashish and opiun.

Twenty-one-ycar-old tour aanager Jaakko Sarstroo was sentenced to prison
ior 1 year and 8 nonths for acting as an agent in drug sales. Musician
'nnli i'eltonen who had snuggled 25 grass of oorphine powder fro- lndis was
given a prison tern of 1 year and 4 Deaths.

An lii-year-old unskilled youth was put on probation for 1 year and 9 Ionths
Inr snuggling LSD. The first tine he had snuggled (.00 pills and the second
line sore than 100 pills. liln sister. a 19-year-old hospital eaployee, was
sentenced to prison for 1 year and l sonth for coaplicity in acquiring drugs
in Austerdnn.

Two couples were sentenced for smggling from Morocco cannabis oil which
they had prepared theuelven.
Stevedore Tuolo Nultnnen vnn given a nrinon tern of 1 year and J oonthn [or
nousaiina cannobin oil: his friend. a 22-year-old cook, won out on probation
for 1 year and 2 Ionthn. 1he tvo vooen in the group verc sentenced to prison
for less than 1 your. in addition. two agents were sentenced to prison for

1 year.

A total of 19 people were fined.

915)
cso: 5300

45
FOR OFFICIAL USl-I ONM'

ITALY

COCAINE DRUG RING BUST

Milan IL CORRIERH

 

Arrested: Plcra ﬂiasini, Ciuscppina Portalupi,and Dina Azzolini

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The young businessman, arrested for possession of a firearm
withodt a permit and charged with conspiring to sell narcotics,
was cornered by Warrant Officer Carin and Sgts Havilla, Pecoraro,
and Lunardi in an apartment at 9 Via Cesariano where, according
to police, drug trafficking was going on. Investigators also hand-
cuffed the owners of the apartment, Fulvio Ferrari, 37, and his
companion, Giuseppina Portalupi, 41, and two other women: Dina
Azzolini, 39, of 20 Via Columella, who works as a hairdresser on
Via dolls Spiga, and Piera Alice Biasini, 30, of 12 Via Degli
Imbrinni, formerly the mistress of Giorgio Monaci, one of the

top men in the Vallanzasca gang.

Ms Biasini, found in possession of 10 grams of cocaine, was im-
mediately arrested on charges of narcotics selling. Once in the
apartucnt, police arrested its owners, Ms Azzolini, and the young
rag magnate. The first two, caught in possession of 50 grass

of cocaine, were arrested on charges of possession of narcotics
with intent to sell. Similar charges were lodgedagainst Ms
Azzolini.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Bdltorialc del "Corriere della Sera" 9...:

6182
680% 5300

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' I-‘(ill (WI-'NIMI. llSI-Z ONLY

[TA LY

AIUU'LIH' OF FIVE DRUG PEDDLHRS

Milan IL CORRJERE DtttA SERA in Itulinn 24 Dee 7a p 10

[Iixevrptl t'nruhinlerl arrest SIP technician with .1
kllo of hurulu in hin tool kit, nah two engineers
and a pair of 'lhal dealers.

The Curnhiniore drum sound on Vin Moscovu bugged a big one at
the end or a 2-month invostigution: they arrested five drug
pushers and seized a kilo of Thai heroin valued at 000 million
lire. Held For the district attorney were electronics engineer
Luciano hurtoli, 35, of 21 Via Inamn; an SIP technician, Mario
Sturtc-euunn, I], and hi,» bruthur Paolo, unemployed (who told
Curuhinivri that he had a degree in engineering), of 1 Vin de
inntn, and two traffickers from Bangkok: Prasoet Sirithon, 35,
and Soul-Lu l‘odet, 3.1-

Areordinu to Curnhinieri, the Thais had brought the heroin from
their country to Milan. "A
Lu-ur .unmmt" -- the investi-
gator-N Q-Iid, "enough to in—
rlntu the market“ and send
strm-t prices for this drug
down considerably.

h'lwn the traffickers from
Bangkok arrived lust Tues.-
d.\y at Linute, investigators
moved in to trap the two 1‘0—
rriemn-s in lirrtoli’s house.
The drugs the two Thais had
ln-muzhl with them, however,
were not to he found in the
engineer": house.

 

‘l‘hl: Cornbinieri moved on to Luciano Berton Marlo SC‘H’WSBSM

tlu- SIP technieiun's home,

48

FOR OFFICMI USE ONLY
own van noun: wr. Uﬂul

'nnd, when they inspected the company hianchina he used, came
upon a metal box in which a kilo of heroin had been hidden.

When they searched his rooms, however, they found 6 million lire
and $2,000 hidden away. Another 500 grams of heroin were found
later in the residence of his brother, Paolo. The operation is
not yet completed, and fruther developments are expected within
a matter of days.

In other action, the Carabinieri drug squad, working with their
Verona colleagues, arrested a young drug dealer, 20—year-old
Domenico Battaglia, of 35 Via Longarone, already under indictment
for armed robbery. nattaglia was Jailed by the Verona Carabi-
nieri for possession of a gram of herein, a 38—calibor special
revolver, and 6 million lire, his earnings from earlier sales of
heroin.

in the course of the search of Battaglia's house, investigators
came upon another 221 grams of herein in a closet, along with
scales and measuring cups and a 357-caliber magnum revolver.

corvalarr: 1978 Editoriale dcl "Corricre dells Sets" 0...:

6182
080: 5300

69

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITAU

HIUHT DOSES OF HEROJN SEIZED
l
Milan IL CORRIHRE DELLA SERA in Italian 14 Doc 75 p 10

[Excerpt] Two sisters, surprised

by police as they were distributing
drugs, were captured night before
lusL in Plnzzu Vebru, Milan. The
women uvreubud are Daniela and Vania
De Cristoforo, aged 23 and 22 respec-
tively, of Vin Forte Armnto 327.

In their bright-colored ski socks,
police found eight doses of heroin,
already packed in small envelopes
for street sale.

 

Vania De Cristoforo

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Edltortnlc dcl "Corrlcru della Sara" 5.0.5

6182
(ISO: 5300

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DRUGS SBIZED, FIVE ARRESTS MADE AT AIRPORT

Rome Inunrri in Italian 24 Dec 78 p 14

[Excerpt] Heroin, hashish, and marijuana valued at
1.5 billion lire seized. $0-kilo heard
of drugs found at Piumicino.

heroin, hashish, and marijuana -- 47 kilos of drugs in all --
with an estimated value of better than 1.5 billion lire, plus

5 arrests: that was the haul from three separate drug investi-
gations conducted almost simultaneously by the treasury men and
the Fiumicino airport customs men.

The first to fall into the trap were two Tanzanian nationals:
sinann Ibrahim Hassan, 27, and Ibraham Hassan Shiwani, 60. The
pair was arrested shortly after the discovery of 35 kilos of
hashish hidden in the false bottoms of two suitcases that had
been checked aboard a Pan American flight from Karachi to tis-
bon. In the course of the routine check by the narcotics of-
fice of the Rome District Attorney's office, the two suitcases
were noticed because of the strange odor coming from them.

When the drugs had been found, the Treasury men started a patient
search for the owners of the baggage. They turned out to be the
two Tanzanians who, disguised as British pilots and carrying fake
passports, were about to board a plane for Lisbon, but not the
same plane the hashish had been checked on.

While the Tanzanian couriers were being arrested, two more peo-
ple fell into the narcotics squad trap: a couple from Rome,
whose identity has not yet been revealed because the investiga-
tion is still in progress. In the false bottom of a large tote
bag and hidden in what appeared to he a package of cotton, po-
lice found 1.1 kilos of 80-pcrcent-pure heroin, enough to make
around 360,000 fixes.

When first arrested, the couple tried to pass themselves off as
Argentine nationals, but careful checks of their passports re-

51
Vealed that their passports and documents were fake, and the
couple eventually admitted their true identity.

The two Italians had arrived from Bangkok aboard a Thai Air
rllaht. As they were waltlng to get into the baggage claim
area, the men in charge of the baggage conveyor belt spotted
something funny, and decided to make a thorough search of the
suspicious tote bag. having found the herein in the bottom of
the bag, they preceded to conduct a thorough search of its
owners. Hidden in a sanitary pad they found the rest of the
drug shipment.

The third operation led to the arrest of a Ghana national, Ady
Mensah brown, 24, and to the seizure of 11 kilos of marijuana.
The drug, Flown in from Accra, was hidden inside five wooden
chessbeards, into which false bottoms had been fitted. In this
case the marijuana was destined for Warsaw, the city in which
Brown's flight was scheduled to make a stop.

hlﬁZ
C50: 5300

52
BRIBPS

msmsu 881280"th 38 ulesreee of pondered heehteh vee discovered in
e cer thet wee perked in front of the llenldiye aendernerle etetton neer
the Heluodlye Metrict of Beueehir. No pereone were teken into cuetody

in connection with the heehteh. [mun Danette Service in Turkich
1600 M 16 Jen 79 TA]

(:80: 5300 3ND

53