APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08:

1979

ClA-RDP02-00050R0001 0001 0025-2

0"
1/79)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010025-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8218
12 January 1979

TRANSlATIONS 0N VIETNAM
(F011) 1/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010025-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
l] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied assppropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the v.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING DUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0F ‘ﬂlIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROEFICIAL USE ONLY.
__
9. Potion-3a. Ouaaludoo Nana and Moos
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road II. Comm/on. No.
Arlington, Virginia 22201
n a
Iiliiiiiiliiililiililllll

  
  

  
     
 

I2. Sponsoring Ot‘aalsuioo Nana and Adduu

   
 

As above

 
 

  
 

u. Absmcu

The report contains information on military, political. sociological, economic.
and technical developments in Vietnam, selected from Vietnamese and foreign
newspapers and periodicals.

  
     
     
 

Vietnam
Military sciences
Political sciences
Sociology

Economics

Culture (Social Sciences)
Ethnology
Technological sciences

 
 
      
     
   
 
 

I75- ldutiﬂsto/Opsa-Eadad Tot-a

 
  
    

 
  
 
 

:7. com: ﬂea/am 2. so. SD, 51906, 15

Availability Stale-cat
For Official Use Only.
Limited Sumber of Copies Available From JPRS.

   
  
 

entity lass (This .4»! Pages
Roped) 19

U8€°w°¢ ‘OOIF'Y '

  
     

you I"... "F”.
son OFFICIAL use ONLY

3925 13/82

12 Jenna:

TRANSLATIONS 0N VIETNAM

(moo 1/79)
Coureurs

mm AFFAIRSAHD PUBLIC sscuam
Intonation on Vietnamese Military Units .
mm REIM'IORS, TRADBMDMD

Japanese Analysis of Roots of SRV-PRC Clash
(mac Matsushim; xommo, Nov 78)

Priority Given to cameos in Financing
(Le lane Interview; mmrcm mm: ms, 19 Dec 78)..

Briefs
Cooperative loans From Japan

HEAVY W! All!) COMMION

Briers
Joint Franco-Vietnamese Company
INFORMATION ON VIETNAMESE MILITARY UNITS

The following information on Vietnamese military units was extracted from
Vietnamese press sources published in Hanoi, unless otherwise indicated.
Unit designators and subordination are as they appear in the original
source. The remrks include a brief sunary of the salient information
available in the news items.

Unit Remarks

Yen Vien Machinery Factory Activated on 11 Nov 78. (HAND! m1
Self Defense Bu. Hanoi 16 Nov 78 p l)

707th Rest, 773rd Gp. ray Comnder: Ira}: N39. Principle unit
Nguyen Forces constructing the Dec Uy Hater Conser-

vancw Praise: north nf Knn Tum Citv.
Located in the Central Highlands of
Vietnam. (PRU NU VIBTNAH 8-14 Nov 78 p 7)

Assigned a mobile contat mission. On

25 Aug 78 its units were located within
12 kilometers of the huu Nghia Friendship
Bridge on the PRC border concentrating
on that location following a border inci-
dent. (ms nuc THE THAO 16 Oct 78 p 3)

Photo shows unit members in river cross-
ing exercise. (QUAN DOI NNAN DAN 22 Nov
78 p l)

Naintainsd skeleton crews at gun posi-
tions while majority of personnel used
in flood relief work in Nghi Xuan and
Hung Nguyen Districts. Nghe Tinh Prov-
ince. (QUAN DOI NNAN DAN 22 Nov 78 p l)

Produced parts for arms and armaments,
completing annual plan 2 months ahead
of schedule despite shortage of steel.
gas and oil. (QUAN DOI NBAN DAN 22 Nov
78 p 1)

Living conditions described. (QUAN DOI
NNANDAN22623Nov78p3)

has been fighting Cambodians for at

least 1 year. Among enemy units en-
gaged was the 512th Regiment. (QUAN
DOINEANDANZZNov78p3)

Commended for vegetable farming. (NBAN
DAN 23 Nov 78 p 3)
FOR OYFICIAL USE ONLY

31st Econonic Construction Gp.
5th MR
-Unit 107

95th 6p, 5th HR

31st Gp‘

33rd Op
60th 0p
71st 6p
75th Gp
Cloth Gp

lolst 69
70th Gp
35th 0p
15th Gp

2nd 3n, 03 Gp, Naval Forces

63rd Anti Aircraft Artillery Gp

Highway 16 Road Construction
Corporation Self Defense Rest

8.11 Gp

3

Farming and training cadre.

-conducted live fire exercise with
105— howitzers.
(QUAN D01 NHAN DAN 23 Nov 78 p 1)

Unit newer uses claylnore nine to wipe
out Custodian patrol. (QUAN D01 NNAN
DAN 23 Nov 78 p 1)

Production unit cited in editorial for

production achievements. (QUAN D01
NNANDAN23Nov78p 1)

I! I. l' I.
N 'l " H
II II 0' 0|

Engaged in road construction. Cited in
Editorial. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 23 Nov
78 p l)

Comended for strict adherence to train-
ing schedule. Photo shows nen firing
the 3.40. (QUAN DOI NEAN DAN 21. Nov 78

p 1)
Penning accomplishments reported. (QUAN

_DOI NHAN DAN 2!. Nov 78 p l)

Activated on 19 Nov 78. (NNAN DAN
23 Nov 78 p l)

Recruit training unit. Col-ended for
self support farming under difficult
natural conditions. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN
2!. Nov 78 p 1)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Unit member. uriting from letter box
Ion-1689, Dien Nos, complains of poor
newspaper receipts. They pick up
newspapers at "T" Village, Chau Thanh
District. Toy Ninh Province. (QUAN
DOI NNAN DAN 25 Nov 78 p 2)

Training activities enhance combat
effectiveness. (QUAN D01 NHAN DAN
27 Nov 78 p 1)

Report on feeding troops. /
-Political Officer: Ho‘ang VXn Khang.
(QUAN D01 NHAN DAN 27 Nov 78 p 3)

Border defense activities against Can-
bodian; noted. (QUAN D01 NHAN DAN
27 Nov 78 p 3)

Improvement in discipline reported.
(QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 27 Nov 78 p 1)

Nigh rate of flight training maintained
in subordinating units. (QUAN DOI NHAN
DAN 27 Nov 78 p3)

Training reported. (am nor am DAN
28 Nov 78 p 1)

Unit improvement results reported.
(00.“ D01 NHAN DAN 28 Nov 78 p 3)

Self support farming accomlishments
noted. (QUAN DOI NNAN DAN 28 Nov 78 p 3)

Photo of crew member cleaning mortar.
(QUAN 801 mm! DAN 29 Nov 78 p 1)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5th Engineer Co, Arnor
Comand

17th Military Hospital, 5th HR
Moth Co. 525th Truck Transporta-
tion Rest

183:6 Depot

Unit XJOS

15th Div. Economic Construction
General Department

566th Regt

270th Regt

773rd 6p

Song Da Engineer Gp

Post 173, PAPSP, Cao Lang
Province

Song Da Missile 6p

719th Regt, 33rd Gp

Ba Vi Air Force 6p

C5 [5th 00?]. An Giang Province
PAPSF

7th Co. 195th Bn, 8th Div

Dong Loo 6p. 6th HR

5

Photo of floatation equipment. (QUAN
DOINIIANDAN29Nov78p1)

Excellent performce noted. .(QUAN DOI
NHANDAN29Nov78pl)

Unit driver eaves gaa. (QUAN D01 NIIAN
DAN 29 Nov 78 p 3) ‘

Supply receiving aquad conended. (QUAN
DOINEANDAN29Nov78p3)

Helped in constructing the Quang An
Level I and 11 School, Hanoi. (QUAN
DOINBANDAN29Nov78p3)

Slow issue of uniform reported. (QUAN
DOINHANDAN 29Nov78p2)

Operating the Bien Ho 'rea Factory and
Plantation in Gia Lai-Cong Tun Province.
(QUANDOINEANDAN29Nov78p2)

Report on self support farming. (QUAN
DOI NHAN DAN 29 Nov 78 p 2)

Improvement in overall quality of unit
noted. (QUAN DOI NIIAN DAN 30 Nov 78 p 1)

Work on a dam site reported. (QUAN DOI
NHANDAN30Nov78p2)

Photo of artillery piece and prime mover
being loaded into a Hig helicopter.
(QUAN D01 NBAN DAN 30 Nov 78 p 3)

Unit signalnan comendcd. (TIEN PHONC
31 Oct-6 Nov 78 p 2)

Unit newer writes of killing 13 Can—
bodians in combat in the Dong Thap Area.
(HEN PNONG 31 Oct-6 Nov 78 p 13)

Training new soldiers. (QUAN DOI NHAN
DAN 30 Nov 78 p 1)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Unit member wins prize in athletic meet.
(QUAN D01 KHAN DAN 28 Nov 78 p 1)

Listed subordinate units nominated Hero
Units of the Armed Forces. (IRAN DAN
27 Nov 78 p 1)

Photo shove mechanics maintaining unit
aircraft. (QDAN D01 KHAN DAN 1 Dec 78

p1)

Talent hunt spurred to maintain morale
of workers on Ho Chi Minh Trail.

-Dnit 12 has at least four com-
panics.
(QUANDOINHANDANlDec78pl)

Cultural activities noted. (QUAN D01
“HAN DAN 1 Dec 78 p 1)

Self support farming reported. (QUAD!
DOIRHANDANIDec 78p 3)

Deputy Col-ander: Cao Thinh. (QUAD
DOIWDARIDGC7BP3)

um training noted. (qum no: mun
mu 4 Dec 78 p 1)

Self support farming reported. (QUAD
DOINHANDANIODec'IBP 3)

Engaged Medians in Ten Dien District.
‘ray Ninh Province-on 22 Nov 78. (QUAN
DOINEANDANSDec78pl)

Overcame initial difficulties following
conversion from cadre training unit to

recruit training unit. (QUAN DOI KHAN
DAN 5 Dec 78 p 1)
Trained branch recruits. (QUAN D01
NHAN DAN 5 Dec 78 p 1)

Conducted firing exercises from follow-
ing type vehicles: H85. PT75, K53.
K63. (QUAN D01 NHAN DAN 5 Dec 78 p 3)

Self help construction activities re-
ported. (QUAN D01 NHAN DAN 5 Dec 78
p 3)

Live fire exercise reported. (QUAN D01
NHAN DAN 5 Dec 78 p 3)

women unit members perform well in
training. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN lo Dec 78

pl)

Recently began work on a 56 kilometer
section [new construction] of Bighway
7B. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 6 Dec 78 p 1)

Irregulsrities in operation of unit
kitchen noted. (QUAN D01 NEAN DAN
6 Dec 78 p 2)

Activated on 1 Jun 66. (QUAN D01 NHAN
DAN 6 Dec 78 p 3)

Good results in training and self sup-
port farning reported. (NBAN DAN 7 Dec
78 p 1)

Unit tank driver contended. (NHAN DAN
7 Dec 78 p 1)

Self support farming noted. (NBAN DAN
7 Dec 78 p 3)
1977 did water conservancy york in Ben
Thu District, Long An Province. This
year did flood relief work in the Dong
Thap Huoi area. (W DAN 7 Dec 78 p 3)

Photo of new troops on a field narch.
(WDAN7Dec78p3)

Recent wire installation work reported.
(“HAN DAN 7 Dec-78p 3)

Training achievements noted. (mun DAN
7 Dec 78 p 3)

Successfully completed a firing exer-
cise with tan]: mounted 12.7m- nachine-
guns. (QUANDOINHANDAN7Dec78pl)

Issues orders on preservation of item
of historical significance. (QUAN D01
MDANGDechl)

Meets fishing goals for end of Oct 78.
(quannormnmsnecha)

Built 102 kilometers of axial road in
addition to feeder roads into the Dao
tribal areas of North Eastern Vietnam.
(QUANDOINBANDAN7Dec 78p2)

Photo of truck mounted dipole antenna
array. (QUAN D01 “HAN DAN 7 Dec 78

p3)

Unit reading habits noted. (QUAN DOI
MDANBDec 781:1)
Data on continuing education fox troop.
given. (WM 001 W DAN 8 Doc 78

p1)

Self support farming reported. [8013:
this list includes a unit with this
designation in tho 7th HR]. (QUAN DOI
KHAN DAN 8 Dec 78 p 3)
FOR Ol’l’ICIAL USE ONLY

INTBBNATIONAL RELATIONS. TRADE AND AID

JAPANESE ANALYSIS OF ROOTS OP SIN-PRC CLASB

‘i‘okyo ROKUBO (The National Defense) in Japanese Vol XXVII. ho ll. Nov 78
pp 58-72

[Article by Kunio Hatsushima: "The Deep-rooted Antagonism Between China

and Vietnam--A Study on Circumstances and Basic Factors of the Ethnic Chinese
Problem}?

szcerp£7 As said so far. the precipitous deterioration in relations between
China and Vietnam since May of this year certainly began with the ethnic
Chinese problem. If, however. the ethnic Chinese problem alone were the
essence of the confrontation. then it would probably be possible to restore
relations by concessions on one side or by mutual compromise. The root causes
of the current situation, Mover. are not to be found in the ethnic Chinese
question. We have to feel that even were Vietnam to change its policy on
ethnic Chinese as demanded by the PRC, it would not be possible to restore
relations with China.

This is because it is possible to understand the worsening relations between
the two countries as phenomena of the past few years. and there are root causes
which brought about phenomena such as this. Furthermore. during the 2,000
years of Vietnam's history as a nation, Vietnam has been controlled by China.
This historical fact has implanted in China a sense of being the powerful
country and in Vietnam a sense of being the victim. Consequently. this
historical fact further complicates the confrontation between the two states.

As a phenomenon. feuds between the Conunist Parties of the two countries
occurred even during the rise of the people's liberation struggle. The
Sim-American rapprochement symbolized by the Nixon visit to China (1972) and
Vietnam's reaction against the visit. the Chinese side's reaction against
general support for the Soviet Union's foreign policy (at the time of the
Vietnamese party and governmental visit to the Soviet Union in 1975). and
recently. Vietnam's dissatisfaction with China's support for Cambodia (1977)
are instances of this. The ethnic Chinese problem. too, is the type of thing
that should be seen from this viewpoint; it is not something which occurred
all of a sudden. In back of the problem are those factors which can be called
the root causes of the confrontation. and unless these root causes are resolved.
it is safe to say that contention between the two countries will continue.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic causes are found in the differences and competition between the
party lines held by the Communist Parties of the two countries. Specifically,
(l) differences become apparent in the two parties' strategies for world
revolution (foreign policy line) and (2) competition becomes apparent in
their lines on the building of a socialist state (domestic policy line).

As far as (l) is concerned, there are differences between "the theory of
three worldf' which the Chinese Communist Party began to stress after 1974

and "the theory of three currents" upon which the Vietnamese side has insisted
since 1970.

China divides the world into three categories; it classifies the United States
and the Soviet Union as the first world. developed capitalist countries other
than the United States as the second world. and nations made up of exploited
and oppressed peoples as the third world (China ranks itself in the third
world). China says that a socialist camp does not exist. Thus China sets
forth the line that the United States and Soviet Union. the two countries
seeking hegemony. who belong to the first world. are the common enemies of
all peoples of the world. and the Soviet Union in particular is a hotbed

for world war. china calls on the third world and the second world to unite
in resisting the first world. particularly the Soviet Union. In short. china
sees the Soviet Union as its primary enemy.

In contrast_to this. the basic features of the international situation in
Vietnam's view are that (l) socialism has become a world system. (2) people's
liberation movements have developed in strength and (3) labor movements in
the capitalist countries have grown. In addition. Vietnam says that there
are three main revolutionary currents. first. the socialist camp. second.

the power of the anti-imperialist people's independence movements in Asia.
Africa and Latin America. Vietnam says that these streams should unite.

and China and the Soviet Union in particular should work together to destroy
imperialism. which is led by the United States. Unlike China, Vietnam sees
the United States as the primary enemy. and does not regard the Soviet Union
as an enemy. Differences over whom to regard as the primary enemy also cause
the two states' conflicting views on the United States' military presence

in Southeast Asia. That is. China. which regards the Soviet Union as the
primary enemy, hopes. from the viewpoint of preventing Soviet inroads. for
maintenanCe of a United States military presence. Vietnam. which sees the
United States as the primary enemy. insists on withdrawal of United States
military power. In short. Vietnam's demands spring from an anti-imperialist
position rather than a pro-Soviet anti-Chinese position. but it is clear that
from the Chinese side's viewpoint. Vietnam is seen as serving the Soviet
Union. A move of recent years which should be noted in this connection is
the fact that Vietnam has positively assessed the Soviet policy of detente
as beneficial to the international communist movement, and has supported the
detente policy in the joint Soviet—Vietnamese statement in 1915. (Vietnam
had previaouly opposed the detente policy on the grounds that it would only
be used to advantage by the imperialists.) Accordingly. it is a fact that
Vietnam's foreign policy is coming closer to the position of the Soviet Union.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"hat cannot be overlooked. however. is that there seem to be differences
between the two countries regarding policy on Southeast Asia as well. Vietnam
divides Southeast Asia into Indochina and Southeast Asia other than Indochina.
In the lndochinese region Vietnam aims to consolidate Laos and Cambodia

under the leadership of Vietnam. and in the region of Southeast Asia other
than Indochina Vietnam's goal is construction of Southeast Asia by South-

east Asian peoples without the intervention of major powers. China, however.
regards Southeast Asia as its sphere of influence and does not wish Vietnam

to exercise influence in Southeast Asia. China‘s criticism of Vietnam for

"regional hegemony" or "small scale hegemony" is. in fact. criticism on this
point.

As far as (2) the line on domestic construction is concerned. the two countries
have long had a relationship which. basically, is one of competition rather
than differences. and this has caused headaches for both countries. As its
general line on construction of a socialist economy. Vietnam calls for "simul-
taneous prosecution of the three revolutions (revolution in production.
revolution in science and technology. and revolution in thought and culture)

of which the key role is to be played by revolution in science and technology.
This is equivalent to the three great revolution of the Chinese Communist
Party (class struggle. struggle for production. and scientific experimentation).
“here the two lines differ is on whether to give precedence to science and
technology (scientific experimentation) (as does Vietnam) or to give pre-
cedence to class struggle (revolution in thought and culture) (as does China).
Since the expulsion of the "gang of four," however. China has targeted
”achievement of the four modernizations by the end of this century." Since
Vietnam is trying to achieve socialist industrialization within 20 years.
differences with Vietnam on this point have disappeared. Furthermore. both
countries have the same time frame for achieving modernization.

Given the current situation in which there are great differences in the two
countries' foreign policies. however. this competitive situation will have
decisive significance regarding the effect on the two countries. depending

on which one achieves modernization first. This will lead to an assessment
within the international communist movement and will have repercussions on

the two states. For China in particular. were Vietnam to achieve moderniza-
tion before China. the effect would be serious. If such a situation were to
come about, the communists in Southeast Asia (the mainstream is pro-Chinese)
would probably abandon the line of Mao Tee-tang and be won over to Vietnam.
This would show the world the failure of the Chinese line. and China absolutely

must prevent this kind of situation. In this sense. too, competition is not
desirable.

It seems safe to say. as indicated above. that differences between the two
countries on their stance regarding the Soviet Union in world revolutionary

strategy and their competitive relationship in policy on domestic construction
led to friction at the stage when policy was implemented following the
Vietnamese war. and this culminated in the ethnic Chinese problem and'suddenly
became a confrontational situation. If the root cause of the deterioration

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L?
FOR OPblCIAL USE ONLY

of sino~Vietnasese relations does lie in competition and differences in the
party lines of the two countries, then it is a natural development that the

two countries' policies. which are based on the party line, would be mutually
repulsive and incompatible.

Currently it seems that China is using the ethnic Chinese problem to put
pressure on Vietnam. This is because, in prosecuting its own line, China
has adopted the strategy of (l) thoroughly using what can be used; (2)
neutralizing what cannot be used and (3) isolating what Chins opposes.

Consequently, the pressure on Vietnam, too, must be seen as having been applied
in accordance with this strategy.

In this sense, China has been applying pressure on Vietnam in various ways
since the end of the Vietnamese war; e.g., (1) claims of sovereignty over
the Spratly and Paracal Islands, (2) Chinese support of Cambodia in the
Vietnamese-Cambodian border dispute and, (3) measures to reduce the aid it
had been giving Vietnam prior to the surfacing of the ethnic Chinese problem
(grant aid cut off in 1975 and economic loans cut off in 1977). The ethnic
Chinese problem, too. can be seen as part of this policy.

In this case, China's intention in making an issue of the departure of the
ethnic Chinese is to block completely the spread of Soviet influence in
Vietnam, which is China's neighbor, and to isolate Vietnam politically and
economically. Specifically, China's intentions probably were (1) not to

have the Soviet Union building military bases in Vietnam, (2) to block
Vietnam's assumption of leadership and (3) to prevent Vietnam's attain-eat

of modernization. In addition. China probably would like to prevent any
Vietnamese rapprochement with the Soviet Union. Pursuit of goals (2) and (3)
however, might be a factor which would encourage the rapprochement. but will
not be a factor in preventing it. Because of this. it is thought that, for
the short term, China has given up the idea of preventing Vietnamese rapproche-
ment with the Soviet Union. and is stressing achievement of goals (1), (2) and
(3). China seems to have made (1), in particular, its main objective, and

by actively engaging in critical propaganda which emphasizes the Vietnamese-
Soviet military connection, China is rekindling a feeling of wariness of the
Soviet Union and Vietnam among the ASEAN countries. (Association of South-
east Asian Nations). It is safe to say that as a result of this, a brake

has been put on Soviet inroads into this region.

Conversely, however, it is a fact that the attitude of China, which seems
to have refused its hand to its former comrade, Vietnam, has operated to
heighten apprehension toward China on the part of the ASEAN countries that
have many ethnic Chinese. In order to soothe the apprehensions of these
ASEAN countries, china has insisted that the ethnic Chinese problem "covers
only Vietnam and will not be applied to other countries."

For the present. China. on the one hand. is making every effort to criticize
Vietnam through the negotiations being held in usnoi and, on the other hand,
by artificially creating a tense border situation between itself and Vietnam

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(causing disturbances using ethnic Chinese who have been detained at the
border. concentrating troops in the border area. violating airspace and
stirring up small disputes using minority groups) and by continued support
for Cambodia in its continuing border dispute with Vietnam. china seems to
be aiming at forcing Vietnam to make heavy military and economic outlays.

In response. Vietnam criticizes China's attitude but. at the same time.

it is persistent in calling for settlement through consultations. 0n the
other hand. however. militarily Vietnam is trying to build up its border
defenses and. economically. it has shown a tendency to look to the western
ecuntries such as France and Germany. and particularly Japan. to make up

for the amount of Chinese aid which has been cut back. Politically. Vietnam
has revised its for-er policy of regarding ASEAN as an enemy and is actively
proceeding with maneuvers to move closer to ASEAN by taking a flexible
stance regarding even the concept of neutralizing ASEAN. This clearly can
be taken as a move aimed at escaping from political-isolation. It seems to
be considering the advantages and disadvantages of deciding on military
coercion in its border dispute with Cambodia (putting Thailand and the other
ASEAN countries on guard, China’s reaction. post-conflict disposition). At
present Vietnam is making no visible active moves against Cambodia; however.
in view of the reports that it is training an anti-government element of
10,000 persons. it is conceivable that in the future it will adopt a policy
of weakening the Pol Pot regime through internal harassment.

Thus Sine-Vietnamese relations present a situation which transcends the ethnic
Chinese problem; it is a situation in which the national policies of the two
countries clash head on. sending sparks flying. Both countries are well aware
that drawing in western and ASEAN countries as allies will determine eventual
victory or defeat. both countries are actively moving closer to western and
ASEAN countries. In other words. it can be said that the outcome for the
balance of power in Southeast Asia is in the hands of the non-communist ASEAR
and western countries; but. in this case, it must not be foregotten that the
countries engaged in the competitive struggle are both socialist countries
that espouse international proletarianism. and their goal is to achieve leader-
ship in the international communist movement.

The side that has suffered the heaviest blow from the deterioration of Sino-
Vietnamese relations is probably Vietnam. which has been pouring all of its
strength into economic reconstruction. In particular. the effect of the
complete cut off of Chinese aid on the Second Five-Year Plan, which is now
in progress, will be serious.

There are limits to Soviet and East European aid. and diversification of aid
sources will be a pressing problem for Vietnam. as it aims for economic recon-
struction while enduring economic sanctions from China. In back of Vietnam's
recent positive diplomatic offensive lies the very difficult situation of
worsening circumstances in its domestic economy. It can be said that Vietnam.
which has endured 30 years of protracted warfare. is now placed in serious
danger over relations with its giant neighbor. the PRC.

COPYRIGHT: l978-ncn Asagumo Shinbunsha

9111
cso: 4105 1h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE WLY

IWATIONAL RELATIONS, TRADE AND AID

PRIORITY GIVE" TO mm" IN FINANCIM
tokyo WICHI DAILY NEWS in Mlidh 19 Dec 78 p 5
[interview with Le Kline. vice prenident of the State Planning Counted

[7“] Le km. visiting vlee mmmomit-tenme
' del'kim woodmanmieds-Wﬂh
StnIePIannInxC‘ommtttee. said thenspensionoiainbyi’eking.

Monday It‘hnat Weir; nil!
seek tote capita and
trlde to lloanoe as male
unabﬂltatlon projects but

wetutnedtoConiecontorhelp.
which was given to us im-
mediately. With the assistance
oi Coniecon countries. the

Mufﬂheuientosoebltd pnoleets. started with Chinese
mines. atestesdil yptogtezsinr,
llealseuldibaianthnberol MDN: iietv much aid does
bum/ecu Inltiatedmdertbe Vietnam set iron: Consecon
amidﬂiemlnMuem msmvmnmnme
steadily progress!“ with the Comecon tesolue the shortage
cooperatlon o! Comet-on “ml?
mmmsnotahlmhe unneutwouidbewong
Sovietilolon. It you think the Map oi
Hemadethoseoolnisashe canitaiwasthereasonioeotr
mettbeillainleblballyh'm iolnlnetthommMos
Iorenexchntrelatmtewua uielastncr.necnildnotneet

hotelin Tom. Excerpts:
thN: What anti oi eiiecis do
the conﬂicts between Vietnam
andCanibodia and Vietnatn and
China have on Vietnam's

the whom to join the
Cotnecon. the reoulrenient to
pom» division oi mum
within the teamwork oi
Comeeon. Due to the use. we

mute rehabilitation pm- couldnotototlucenoodsvhich
tents? liave those projects could he united to Conweon
stooped 'llhmﬂtsmionoi inetnhercomtnessunovme
aiditonti’ehtng. cannieetthisreqnimuit.

lselihac: it‘ehavesuitereda
serious blow iron: the

ascension oi Chhtese aband
withdrawal oi Chinese

engineers itotn an m.
But the Vietnamese are

WMWMM

15

We lame to build a solid
inundation oi socialism and
impmeoutstandasdoiliuinﬁ.
Ewan nannies in the
Conieconvaoiiobuyowtno-
plutpmdncthenehange.
we can set conducts!
Guinean countries that we

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3:28. 35.? a: :5
223.5 a... as «20538»
an 8.8 385. is so .8 2
:5 55:3 2. 9338
8.558...

F .98” in 3.3 - 38.5
3.3:». 5 8.. a. 222..
2338.553 .5.» 5.08..
83.2.2.2. .a :3 9:
“2.8932... 5.5.5 9. 5...
5 3.8.. 3.. 883:8 8. :8
no; s 522... £33
a. 938.... 8.. .3 5.8.. 3
main. :3 883:3 1... =5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MWIOML RELATIONS, ME AND AID

sum

OOOPERATIVB LOANS FROM JAPAN-~Tho Bank of Tokyo announced on the not that
a group of banka of our country with Tokyo Finance Limited, which is the
local juridical person in Bone Kong of the Bank of Tokyo, aa leader will
extend cooperative loans of nu 3,959,000 (about “00 million) in to'tal to
the Vietnam l’oreisn Trade Bank. It was signed in Tokyo on the sane date.
“Ibis fund will be appropriated for purchase of oynthetic fibers from such
as Japan. As the Inveotnent Group besidea the leading Bank, three Banks--
Fuji Bank, Taiyo Kobe-Bank, and Yaauda Mat and Banking-will participate.
[Tokyo NIKON mm: in maliah 22 Nov 78 p 3]

cso: 4105

17
FOR OFFICIAL use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAW 1mm m 60387306110!

BRIEFS

JOINT mute-“mums: MANY—The Preach lieu-union Conpany and the
Vietnamese etete enterpriee. Petrovietnsn. have signed a contract setting
up Helivifre. e helicopter transportation company. This took place in the
face of stiff British, Dutch. Japanese and Canadian competition. Relivifre.
with 51 percent of its capital held by Petrovietnen, will employ four French
helicopters for petroleun prospecting of: the Vietnen coset. lieu-union
will train the pilots and technicians. [Text] [Peris VALBURS acmmrs

in Preach 18 Dec 78 p 21]

080: £200

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY