APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP82-00080R000100020013-4

I 1979
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020013-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8268

6 February 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N VIETNAM
(FOU0 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000200134
JPRS publicatiun~ curtain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and hooks, but also from news agenCv
transmissions and broadcasts. tmterials from foreign-hungmge
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
II are supplied ty JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumnarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originatt with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

curraxcur IAHS A30 REGULATIOXS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIX REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
CF iﬁlS PUBLICATION 6E RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
o.
9. Pellet-in Olgaaiwiaa Nana aad Address
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Glebe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

I}. Sponsoring chaaisuiea Nana cad Mice-a I). Type el Repair a Period
Covered

As above

. hmtts

The report contains inforaation on nilitary. political. sociological. economic.
and technical developments in Vietnaa. selected tron Vietnamese and foreign
newspapers and periodicals.

y In“ a eta-eat Aaa us.
Vietnam

Military sciences
Political sciences
Sociology

Econoaics

Culture (Social Sciences)
Ethnology

Technological sciences

"k ldeatllieu/Opea-laded Tet-a

"I- CWTlfiCU/GW 2. SC. SD. 5K. 06. 15

II. Availability Stunner
For Official Use Only.
Limited Nuaber of Copies Available From JPRS.

 

'0‘!“ u'lbII IIO-IOI Ul€°~°¢ 00ll0""
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8268

6 February

TRANSLATIONS 0N VIETNAM

(F000 2/79)
Comems

MILITARY AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC SEMITY
Intonation on Vietnamese Military Units......................
Intonation on Wetnaneso Military Units......................

Pctya Class Escort Vessels Transferred From USSR to SRV
(YquRI SHINE“, 1’. D“ 78)eeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeee

INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS, TRADE AND AID

USSR Indochina Strategy Analyzed
(Takio stazaki; GUNJI KENKYU, Jan 79).................

Briefs
Vietnslese Pressure French
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC SECURITY

INFORMATION ON VIETNAMESE MILITARY UNITS

The following information on Vietnamese military units was extracted fro-
Vietnaneso press sources published in Hanoi. unless otherwise indicated.
Unit designstore and subordination are as they appear in the original

source. The remarks include a brief susnary of the salient infatuation
available in the news items.

[Notez Subordination of navy fleet eleaents, in descending order, based
on articles in the press. is as follows: Han Doi (Pleat). Hai Dosn (Group).
ﬂai Doi (Flotilla), Bien Doi (Border Unit)]

QELE Renarks
*Bach Dong Fleet Activated in 1975
-Chuong Duong Op ~Coapleted training progra-
Vessel HQKH
Vessel 97
-Van Kiep GP -Hsde urgent delivery of supplies
Vessel 04 to islands including the Use To
Archipelago
-ﬂan Tu Gp -COnbat readiness activities in south
2nd Border Unit. llth
Flotilla
Vessel 66
-lst Border Unit -Sank 9 Caabodian vessels

(NHAN DAN 1a Dec 78 p 3)

Van Co Regt. 9th MR Activated following beginning of border
war with Cambodia. Training of new
troops described. (NHAN DAN 16 Dec 78 p 3)

Border Defense Post 769 Located in Thanh Long area. Chsu Thanh

District, Tay Ninh Province. (NMAN DAN
lb Dec 78 p 3)

tfull translation of cited article will be published.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-0perated barges on flood relief work
in the 4th HR
(QUAN 001 mu DAN 12 Dec 78 p 1)

Photo shows unit executive officer at
controls of aircraft. (QUAN D01 “HAN
DAN 12 Dec 78 p l)

Constructed recreaticasl facilities for
subordinate elements on a number of islands.
(VAN NGBB QUAN 001 Nov 78 p 164)

Unit members are avid readers, even in
foxholes. (VAN “CHE QUAN D01 Nov 78 p 1&5)

Cultural activities noted. (VAN “CHE
QUAﬂ 001 Nov 78 p 146)

Located at Cua lo - Cue Hoi. “she Tinh
Province. (THANK NIBN Oct 78 p 56)

Account of billeting troops on local
populace. Recently converted froa a
rehabilitation unit to a recruit training
unit. (TAP CRI QUAN 00! “BAN DAR Nov 78
pp 68-56)

Photo of Senior General Vin Tién Dung,
Major General Ding Rinh. Deputy Chief of
Staff, VPA. the 5th HR Con-under [7l-s
Major General-end three Senior Colonels
of the 5th HR. (QUAN DOI “HAN DAN

12 Dec 78 p 1)
th

uyen

located in the M'Drac area of Dac Lac
Province. (QUAN DO! NNAN DAN 12 Doc 78
p 2)

0n 1 Oct 78 engaged the 221st Cambodian
Division. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 12 Dec 78

p 3)

Photo shows crew members manning anti-
aircreft. (HANOI H01 21 Nov 78 p 4)

601 of unit nembers are from Roan Kiel
Hard and Dong Anh District. Hanoi.

Doing economic construction work in north
western Vietnam. (HANOI H0! 24 Nov 78 p 2)

Account given of unit member who died in
combat in 1967. (PHD NU VIETNAM
29 Nov-5 Dec78 p 2)

Photo shows missiles on mount. (NMAN DAN
16 Dec 78 p l)

Satisfactorily completed 1978 training
progran. (NNAN DAN 17 Dec 78 p l)

Satisfactorily completed 1978 training
program. (NHAN DAN 17 Dec 78 p 1)

Photo of anti aircraft guns on vessel.
(NIIAN DAN 21 Dec 78 p 3)

Reconnaissance team defends border against
enemy incursion. (NNAN DAN 22 Dec 78 p 3)

Training in preparation for combat.
("HAN DAN 22 Dec 78 p 3)

Defending southwestern maritime boundry.
(mun DAN 22 Dec 78 p 3)

Located in the Bay Nui a:ea of An Gisng
Province in Oct 78. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN
18 Nov 78 p 1)

Photo of radar installation at An Nai.
Haiphong. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 18 Nov 78
p 3)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
63rd Cp, Haiphong Air Defense
Forces

6th an, 99th Engineer 6p

Tuy Son Infantry Gp. 1:: HR

26th Slgnnl Bn

86th 6p. Chemical warfare Forces

Recently organized an historical display.
(QUAN 001 “HAN DAN 16 Dec 78 p 1)

Provided instructions in the construction
of 35-50 ton capacity bridges. (QUAN
DOI “HAN DAN 18 Dec 78 p 1)

Assigned to a border location. Self
support farming and food gathering
reported. (QUAH DOI KHAN DAN 18 Dec 78

p 3)

Self support Earning noted. (QUAR DOI
NHAN 18 Dec 78 p 3)
Up,

Forces

Achieved good training reuults under
adverse condition. (QUAN Dal NHAN BAN
20 Dec 78 p 1)

Combat achievements of unit member against
Cambodians in Tny Ninh Province reported.
(QUAN DUI NHAN DAN 20 Dec 78 p 2)

Sci! support farming. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN
20 Dec 78 p 3)

[n combat against Cambodians on the Gia
Lai - Kon Tun Border. (QUAN DOI KHAN
DAN 21 Dec 78 p l)

Propagandization activities noted.
(QUAN D01 NHAN DAN 21 Dec 78 p 1)
(:omuImh-r: Captain Nguyé‘n Dinl: "sun.
Article «llsnmsos arrival of replacements
from llmml . (QUAN DOI NIIAN DAN

2| Doc 78 p 2)

llvpuly I'nl Itlcnl. Officer: II}: Vim Tul-m.
Worklm; un Illnlwny lb. (QUAN DUI NIIAN
mm 21 m-.- 'm p 2)

l'lmlu ul' l-"i rh'Jllt‘l’ planes being armed
mul I'uoltul. (lyllAN DUI NIIAN DAN
2| llm‘ TH II '1)

Hull lmpruvvllt‘ul‘ measures result In hotter
cuml'm lmrfurmnce. (QUAN DOI NIIAN DAN
22 I)I‘(‘ 78 p l)
Roma rks

A Ho Chi Minh City unit. Making prepara-
tions for an upcoming military review.
(Ho Chi Hinh City TIN SANG 2!. Nov 78 p 7)

Located near the northern border.
(NHAN DAN 26 Dec 78 p 3)

Afforestation work in Luc Ngan District,
Ha Bnc Province. (KHAN DAN 26 Dec 78 p 3)

Political Officer: “$111.71.. (QUAN
Dot NHAN DAN 26 Dec 78 p 3)

Good results in technical trnining re-
ported. (QUAN DOI KHAN DAN 27 Dec 78 p 1)

Located in an area through which Can-
bodian refugees entered Vietnam. (QUAN
001 NBA" DAN 27 Dec 78 p 2)

Unit training reported. (QUAN DOl KHAN
DAN 27 Dec 78 p 3)

Photo of men practicing marksmanship.
(QUAN D01 NHAN DAN 27 Dec 78 p 3)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N6 Engineer 6])

40th Brigade

Lam Son Air Force 6p

Navy
llb Brigade

87 Rest

7th 6p. Hanoi Forces

205th 6p, Com-Liaison Forces

10th Gp. Katum Forces

Quyet Thong Corps
Quan Tien Phong Div
Dong Bang Div
alien Thang Div

"8" Sapper Gp
ist 8n
35th 8n

Nguyen Trsi Artillery Gp. 3rd NR
22nd 8n

39th Engineer Gp

Song Thao 6p

Song Lo Op

Song Da 6p

Constructed athletic field.
NIIAN DAN 27 Dec 78_p 3)

(QUAN 001

Unit sewers cot-ended for discipline.
(QUAN 001 mm mm 27 Dec 78 p 3)

Pilot cos-ended for exceeding flying
requirements. (NNAN DAN 28 Dec 78 p 3)

Provided training for local boat forces.
(NNAN DAN 28 Dec 78 p 3)

Conpleted 1978 training in November.
(NNAN DAN 28 Dec 78 p 3)

Increased comunications service re-
ported. (NNAN DAN 28 Dec 78 p 3)

Unit sniper guns down Cambodians.
(NNAN DAN 28 Dec 78 p 3)

Recently conducted extended field mobile

operations. (QUAN D0]: NNAN DAN 28 Dec
78 p 1)

high morale and good training noted.
(QUAN DOl NNAN DAN 28 Dec 78 p 3)

Conended for high level of training.
(QUAN DOI NNAN DAN 28 Dec 76 p 3)-

Photo of unit meats: and bridge laying
trucks. (QUAN DOI NNAN DAN 28 Dec 78 p 3)

Political Officer: V.D.l(. Successfully
completed bridge building exercise.
(WAN DOI NNAN DAN 28 Dec 78 p 3)

Political Officer: T.Q.'r. Provided
assistance in flood relief work in
Nghe Tinh Province. (QUAN DOI NNAN DAN
28 Dec 78 p 3) '

Road construction work reported. (QUAN

DOIMDANZBDec78p3)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'ps

rlse

Dlst

vlce

Local

:urlty

Deputy Polltlcul Ufrleel: L.T. Horked
on the "anal Airport. (QUAN D01 NHAN
DAN 2N Dec 73 p 3)

Recently completed a project [0 days
ahead of schedule. (QUAN DOl NHAN DAN
28 Dec 78 p 3)

Completed work on a dlffltult project.
(QUAN our mum um 23 Dee I8 p 3)

Narksnnnshlp tralnlng reported. (QUAN
not NNAN DAN 29 Dec 78 p 1)

Photo of unlt members loylrg wlre.
(QUAN DOl NHAN DAN 29 Dec 78 p 1)

Activated on 25 Nov 78. (HANOl H01
26 Nov 78 p l) -

Photo of crew neubers at battle stations
(QUAN 001 mm mm 13 Dec 78 p 1)

Flood relief uork by subotdznnte unlts
1n Chin Nan oteo [Nan Dan Districtll,
“she Tlnh Drovlnee. (QUAN DOI NNAN DAN
13 Dec 78 p 1)

Women unlt nemberu score on title range.
(QUAN DOI NNAN DAN 13 Dec 78 p 1)

Recently destroyed elements of the
Custodian 156th Rest. (QUAN ”01 W
DAN 13 Dec 78 p 3)

Satisfactory results of marksmanship
training reported. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN

13 Dec 78 p l)

Provlded flood rsllef assistance in Le
Nlnh, Noon; Dion. Do Ttseh, Neon; Phu
and Ben Hal Districts. (QUAN D01 NRA"
DAN 13 Dec 78 p 6)

Assisted local populace 1n harvesting
crops. (QUAN D01 NNAN DAN 13 Dec 78

94)
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I “NLY

Ilmn Kong Anti Aircraft Arti‘lery
6p

33rd Gp

Ml; (to, 2nd Bn. X7loth

Mechanized (2p. 5th MR

823w Border Defense Post,

People's Armed Public Security
Furccs

l'hu Ilonn Gp

Mth (2p, I‘OI. Department

109th Military llospltal
I'lst Rent. Sao Vang Cp
San Vang (:p

1rd Infantry Gp. lst HR

Mm: (than Infantry Gp, Tay Bac

State of training reported good. (QUAN
I)Ol NIIAN DAN ll. Dec 78 p 1.)

Located on Highway 21A froa southeast of
lluon He Thuot to the food of l’huong

lluong Panes. Self support far-ins re-
ported. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 14 Dec 78 p 2)

Photos show that unit is equipped with
H.113 armored personnel carriers. (QUAN
DOI NIIAN MN 15 Dec 78 p 1)

Located in An Ginng Province. Probably
near Lucas Phi Village, Bay Nui District.
(QUAN DOl’ NllAN DAN 15 Dec 78 p 2)

Unit member writes pen on his unit's
kite shaped antennas. (QUAN D01 "HAN
MN 15 Dec 78 p 3)

Unit garners satisfactory results fro.
self support farming. (QUAN D01 NllAN
DAN l5 Dec 78 p 3)

Vegetable farming results noted.
(QUAN 001 WAN DAN 15 Dec 78 p 3)

Political Officer: [.3 Vin. (QUAN DOI
NHAN DAN 1 Jan 79 p 3)

Assisted local populace along border.
(QUAN DOI KHAN DAN 2 Jan 79 p 1)

Received Presidential Citation for ac-
complishments in 1978. ("HAN DAN J Jan
79 p l)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

28th Navy 63!

Ural Rest, Trmlsportation
Departnent. Rear Services
General Department

600th 6p. Conatruction Depart-
ment, Econoeic Construction
General Depart-ant

525th Truck Transportation Rest

llth Como-Liaison Station.
Blah Tron 8, Transportation
Department

Trung Dung infantry Gp

Pharmaceuticals Enterprise No 2.
Medical Depart-cat

Factory X10. Signal Cot-land

National Defense Factory 59.
Technical General Depart-eat

39th Engineer Gp

103rd Military llospital

Ilong Linh Anti Aircraft
Artillery Op

Binh Long Gp
Theo Nguyen Gp
7th Ba
8th 3n

Unit neebor col-ended for conserving
gasoline. (QUAN DOI NNAN DAN 3 Jan 79

p1)

Self support farming accomplish-eats
noted. (QUAN D01 NHAN DAN 3 Jan 79 p 1)

Good results in tactical training and
marksmanship reported. (QUAN D01 NIIAN
DAN 3 Jan 79 p 2)

Exceeded 1978 gr als. (QUAN D01 NliAN DAN
3 Jan 79 p 2)

Production and repair achieve-eats noted.
(QUAN no: mm mm 3 Jan 79 p 2)

Many production teens completed 1978
plan ahead of schedule. (QUAN DO! NliAN
DAN 3 Jan 79 p 2)

"K";

Political Officer:
"P". (QUAN DOI Ill-MN

Comonder: "1'";
Deputy Comnder:
DAN 3 Jan 79 p 3)

Inspecting nedicinee prior to use.
(QUAN DOI NIiAN DAN 3 Jan 79 p 3)

Provided rice for flood victim of Nshe
Tinh Province. (QDAN D01 NIiAN DAN I. Jan
79 p l)

Satisfactory marksmanship results re-
ported. (QUAN DOI NliAN DAN 6 Jan 79
p l)
z=>z .52 a .5: 3 a 8

:i. .5372. :95": to: n: 55:34
ans—clam. 35>: ao— z=>z u>z s. has 3
v .3

5.0.... ":55. can nosupncnnpaw 389033
71.50. 3.52 8a 552 :3. > has 3 v 3

neon—SJ. man—6.5%.. a: 5:33 onstage:
TEE S 26 a: :9... «can on 9...: .25....
321$. 43. 2?: 30153. SEE 8a
552 5?; m gas so _. C

5::— n—ré—‘aana 2:. ans—on 333.6 27
v3.3a. 3.32 won 2.52 g: u an: so a 5

conga—am moan—Eon" conga? 3:; com
2.52 .52 u um: 3 v 5

94:5 ans—on. 3:3. 03 22>: a;
m Lb: up 5 3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HILITARV AFFAIRS AND PUULIC SECURITY

PKTYA ClASS ESCORT VESSELS TRANSFERRED FROM USSR T0 SRV
Tokyo YOHIURI SNINBUN in Japanese [6 Dec 78 p 1 (Eve)

[Text] 0a 16 December the government source made the follow-
ing disclosure: “it would appear that during the early part
of December, two Petya class (approximately 1000 tons) escort
vessels belonging to the USSR Pacific Fleet have been trans-
ferred to Vietnam (SRV) which has just signed a treaty of
amity and cooperation with the Soviet Union.” This observa-
tion is based on the Defense Agency's detailed analysis and
the transfer is a certainty. The Soviet Union and say are
rapidly drawing closer to each other after the signing of

the Sine-Japanese Treaty of Friendship between China and
Japan. The transfer of the two escort vessels is the first
indication of a move by USSR and SRV to strengthen ailitary
cooperation--especially their naval ties--followlng the con-
clusion of Treaty of Amity and Cooperation between the two
countries. The Defense Agency speculates that the offer of
Soviet warships to SRV will not be limited to mere transfer
of warships but will mean aid toward the construction of a
(naval) base facility to maintain warships.

Transfer will Affeet SRV's Anti-China Struggle

As a result. the Defense Agency holds that the SRV naval base will undoubtedly
be used as a transit facility between Vladivostok and the Indian Ocean that
the USSR's Pacific Fleet has been wanting so desperately. It intends to keep
a elese watch on future developments. According to the Defense Agency. during
the afternoon of 21 November the two Petya class escort vessels believed to
haVe been transferred in SRV were seen due west of Itsushias Archipelago.
Nagasaki Prefecture being towed southward at the rate of l kilometer per hour.
later. the two tnghnats, "Staroyechernoye lphonetic]" (500 ton) and Varus
lphunetiel" (2.700 lun)--buth lone ships--were sighted sailing northward by

a Haritiuw Self-Defense Vessel. Varus was seen in the Tsushina Strait during

the eVeninu of In December and Staroyechernoye. during the evening of 13
Ih'i'vnhr‘ r .

[3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Having assayed the data by means of aerial photography and other methods.

the Defense Agency determined that: (l) the two escort vessels traveling
southward did not have crew on hoard; (2) they were freshly painted; (3) only
the tugboat» made the return trip and judging from the observed speed on both
occasions. the destination had to have been 3500 kilometers from Tsushima
Strait--ln other words. Vietnam-~as the vessels did not go into the

indian Ocean. For these reasons. the Defense Agency Judged that the two
Petya class escort vessels were handed over to SRV.

1he Treaty of Amity and Cooperation between USSR and SRV includes a clause
calling for "consultation in case of emergency" (Article 6). Moreover. it
espouses to strengthen friendly ties, solidify political relations and deepen
cooperation in all sectors--that is to say. the said treaty anticipates
possihle military cooperation between the two countries.

As the border dispute between China (PRC) and SKV intensifies. there have
been repeated maritime skirmishes in the neighboring seas between Chinese
and Vietnamese ships. “tree coastguard vessels and two high speed patrol
boats are the mainstay of the Vietnamese Navy and SRV Navy is capable of
coastal policing functions only. The Defense Agency speCulates, however.
that the addition of two Petya class escort ships will greatly enhance the
SRV'N position in the territorial dispute.

1he lJapanese] government stated that it would like to closely observe the
pace of Soviet military aid to the SRV in the future. Some American experts
claim that the construction of refueling station for the USSR Navy is
steadily advancing in the Camran Bay. Therefore the Japanese government
plans to seek further data while working in close contact with the United
States.

(Notes) Petya Class Escort Vessel

displacement volume: 950 - 1150 tons

total length: 82 meters

width: 9.1 meters

two 76 milimeter artilleriea (double barreled)
{our anti-submarine rockets (16 rounds)

one 16 inch torpedo launching tube (5 rounds)
speed: 30 knots per hour

 

Soviet manufactured Pctyu class escort vessel believed to have been trans-
ferred to the SRV--photonraph provided by the Defense Agency. ‘

Cili'YRiiiliT: Yomiuri Shinhunsha [978

16
Ilnh FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(250: loll)»
“(III OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IN'I‘ERNA'I‘IONM. RELATIONS. TRADE ANI) All)

USSR INDOCHINA STRATEGY ANALYZED

lokyo GUNJI KENKYU [JAPAN MILITARY REVIEH] in Japanese Vol 14 No I (No 154)
Jan 70 pp 34-43

[Article by Takio Yamazaki. international affairs researcher: ”Commentary
on Soviet lndochina Strategy"!

[Text] With the conclusion of the lndochina war which covered thirty years
after Horld war ii. it was expected that a period of peace would settle in.
without any wars in Southeast Asia. and that peaceful coexistence would come
about among the three socialist countries of lndochina and the liberal coun-
tries of ASEAN (Alliance of Southeast Asian Nations).

In reality. however. Vietnam and Kampuchea are continuing a fierce "proxy
Sino-Soviet war" (National Security Adviser Bzrezinski); and the situation
has changed to one in which the Soviet Union. which is backing Vietnam. and
China. which is backing Kampuchea. are in fierce conflict in lndochina. from
which the United States withdrew.

with this kind of situation. China. while restraining Vietnam with a problem
of the overseas Chinese. strengthened its containment of the Soviet Uni0n

by making a treaty of peace and friendship with Japan. But the Soviet Union
strengthened its support of Vietnam in order to roll back this containment.
and. at the same time. has ained at closer relations with ASEAN.

in June of last year. Vietnam became affiliated with the Soviet-led COMECON
(Council for Mutual Economic Aid); also. Party Secretary Le Duan and Prime
Minister Pham Van Dong visited the USSR in November. and ostentatiously

displayed the unity of the Soviet Union and Vietnam by issuing a joint de-
claration.

Now the Soviet Union is reinforcing the fighting power of the Soviet Pacific
rloet which is based in its maritime Provinces. There must be some purpose
to this reinforcement of military power. and it would seem related to the
strengthening of its Support for Vietnam. But there is a concern that the
development of such a state of affairs will influence the security affairs
of our own country.

15

FOR OFFICIAL "SP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Soviet Strategy Viewed from Post-war History

If the post-war history of the Asian Pacific Ocean is taken in summary. the
Pacific Ocean was under the control of the United States for a long time
after the war. although the USSR supported the Chinese revolutiou and
extended the ”communist sphere“ to the Chinese continent. The United States
stationed many military bases in Japan. South Korea. Okinawa. Taiwan. the
Philippines. Thailand and other countries; and the security of the western
Pacific was amintained by American naval power. as represented in the
Seventh Fleet.

The Soviet Union changed this state of affairs and tried to push back even
more American power from Asia. The strategy the Soviet Union employed to
do this was to set up a rivalry between the United States and China. That
strategy was inaugurated at the time of the Korean Har in 1950.

The Soviet Union avoided any direct intervention in the Korean war. and
wanted China. which had just established its Chinese communist government
the year before. to send troops into the Korean peninsula to fight against
the American army. Taking this opportunity. both the United States and
China entered into a state of bitter antagonism; but this was allowed to
happen by none other than the Soviet Union.

Also. the Vietnam war. which began in 1964. aggravated even more the Sine-
Anerican antagonism.

In order to get rid of this Sine-American antagonism. the American scheme
to turn the tables in its own favor was the Nixon visit to China in 1972
and was the drive for the Nixon Doctrine which followed from the visit.

The United States withdrew 540.000 troops from Vietnam and reduced its mili-
tary strength elsewhere in Asia as well. However. with the retreat of Amer-
ican military power. a "power vacuum" was created and the Soviet Union
stepped in to fill that vacuum.

Likewise. Nixon's visit to China became an opportunity which allowed the
commmnist parties of both China and Vietnam to become antagonistic toward
each other. As the Nhan Dan magazine pointed out in August 1972. the Viet-
namese conmunist party has harbored a feeling of mistrust. which is hard
to uproot. toward the Chinese communist party which "gave an innertube to
a drowning bandit". it was none other than the Soviet Union which gave
cnonnous military aid to Vietnam. which further deepened its mistrust of
China. and helped it obtain its victory in 1975.

Having done this. the Saviet Union acouired a “base“ of power in Vietnam
from which the United States had withdrawn. And Hanoi. which won a victory

in the lndochina "liberation war” with Soviet aid. aimed at fanning an
“lndnchinese Federation“ with itself as the leader.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0' FICIM. USP. ONLY

The Soviet Uniun strongly supported Vietnam in this. Pro-Soviet Party Seere-
tary in nuan of the Vietnanmse Conmunist Party visited Moscow in October
1975. and issued a joint declaration with the Soviet Union. but. so as not
to give any room for Chinese intervention. it hurried with its unification
of north and south Vietnam and. at the same time. removed all people of
Chinese lineage from positions of responsibility in the party and the mili-
tary. This became the scurce of the present “problem of the overseas Chin-
ese".

Taking off on this "problmn of the overSeas Chinese.“ China unfolded a cam-
paign of criticism against Vietnam. However. in opposition to this. the
Soviet Union intensified its criticism of China. and. on June 29. Secretary
Brezhnev made a definite statement that Vietnam is an "advanced base“ in
which socialism can put its trust.

The Soviet-led COMECON had formally decided on Vietnam's affiliation the

day before. June 28. This was an indication that Vietnam. the important
place in Southeast Asia. would be committed to the Soviet camp. Undoubtedly.
Brezhnev's speech about "advanced base" was the result of these facts.

According to informatiOn from the United States Pacific Forces Commander
wiesner. it is said that the Soviet Union has already completely equipped
a Soviet missile base in Cam Ranh Bay. it is also said that a Soviet naval
base has been built on Cat 8a island. just outside Haiphong Harbor.

in short. the Soviet Union has changed to a situation which literally makes
Vietnam. the important spot in Seutheast Asia. an "advanced base". This is
nothing less than a sound victory for Soviet military and diplomatic strate-
9y.

USSR Strategy Plans for Asia and the Pacific

Thus. the Soviet Union progressively pushed into the Pacific and post-war
Asia; and. with the retreat of United States military power. it acquired a
base in Vietnam. thereby reinforcing its containment of China.

it seems there are the three following broad aims to this Soviet strategy.
These are the elimination of Anerican military power from Asia. the actual-
ization of China-USSR reconciliation. and control of maritime traffic

from their Far East bases to the Indian Ocean.

First. the elimination of American military power has shown great progress.
The United States military power already has been withdrawn extensively
from indochina; and Thailand. which yielded to Vietnamese pressure. asked
for the withdrawl of United States forces stationed in Thailand. The United
States army pulled its presence cut of Thailand in July [976. Likewise.
American troops are supposed to be withdrawn from Sauth Korea as well.

Consequently. the next important aim will be directed at the elimination
of American military power in the Philippines.

17

FOR OFFICTAI. [NF (Will
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Secondly. the actualization of Sino-Soviet reconciliation is expected to be
achieved by reinforcing its containment of China. The USSR‘s greatest de-
sire is that China will yield to Soviet pressure and convert to the Soviet
line; and then. Sino-Soviet reconciliation will be complete. Hith that. it
would be possible to divert to Europe the 45 army divisions deployed along
the China-USSR border. Therefore. the USSR is reinforcing its containment
of China. By doing so. they anticipate that Soviet influence will gain
power within China and that China-Soviet reconciliatiOn will come about
from the seizing of political power. Their containment of China has been
showing progress. Vietnam. together with Laos. is deepening its leaning
toward the USSR. especially since Vietnam has become an “advanced base" for
the Soviet Union. Therefore. the next aim is directed mainly at ASEAN.

Third. the ”control of maritime traffic" has become indispensable for sup-
porting not only USSR strategy toward Asia but its world strategy.

As for control of maritime traffic. they want to have under Soviet control
maritime traffic which goes through the Strait of Korea. heads south from
the South China Sea. goes through the Strait of Malacca to the Indian Ocean.
in other words. it is to eliminate American control and establish Soviet
control Over maritime traffic from the Pacific Ocean to the lndian Ocean.

However. Scutheast Asia is a great gateway for this maritime traffic from

the Pacific Ocean to the lndian Ocean. After all. whoever controls Southeast
Asia can control maritime traffic from the Pacific Ocean to the indian

Ocean.

Southeast Asia consists of the three socialist nations and the five liberal
nations of ASEAN. The USSR has acouired a base in Tndochina. Therefore.
the Soviet Union will try next to expand its influence to all of the nations
of ASEAH from its base in Vietnam. That will contribute greatly to its
attempt to contain China to the south. to cause American military power to
pull back from ASEAN. especially from the Philippines. and to establish
Soviet control of maritime traffic under the protection of Soviet naval
power. which will use Soviet naval and air bases now in Vietnam.

whoever Controls Oil Controls the Uorld.

in the above manner. the Soviet Union has aimed at control of maritime traf-
fic flowing from the Pacific Ocean to the lndian Ocean. But. as a Soviet
world strategy. that seems to have a close relationship with its strategy
that aims at controlling the petroleum shipping routes which go from the
oil-rich Persian Gulf to Western Europe and Japan.

The Soviet Union has attached great importance to the indian Ocean where
petroleum shipping routes pass from the Persian Gulf to Europe and to Japan.
Since l968. they have already put their naval power permanently in the
lndian Ocean. and given it the duty of "checking“ the petroleum shipping
routes of the west.

18

FOR OFFLCIAL USE ONLY
l-‘llll “Fl-'lifl'M. USE ONLY

(m

Holmium-m:

. lreaties of friendship and coopeation
. USSR
. Manifesto or declaration of friendship

and cooperation

. cancelled
. Bangladesh

Malaysia

. Iran
. Iraq
. lndia
ML
1L
1?.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
?0.

lurkey

Libya

qupt

2.0 million barrels daily

petroleum transport routes

4.! million barrels daily

ithiupia

hnoola

Sonulia

18.0 million barrels daily

Soviet Union expands cilcle of friend-
ship and cooperation to all nations.
(from 1971. Non-socialist countries
are excluded.)

1?

IGIOﬁIip’y

‘1‘

(15) [

enamizrzn-nm

ihaUu-ﬂhﬁlﬂmuﬂ(i

 

After that, the USSR made
a military aid pact with
South Yemen in 1969. and
acquired a naval base in
Aden and an air force base
on Suqutra Island. On the
other hand. South Yenen.
which had received aid
from the USSR. supported
the PFLO liberation move-
ment in Oman. a neighbor-
ing country. and threat-
ened the monarchic govern-
ment of that country. it
also tried to threaten the
security of the Strait of
Hormuz. which is an im-
portant gateway for petrol-
eum shipping routes.

Also. in August 1971. the
USSR made a treaty of
friendship and cooperation
with India. which received
enonnous Soviet Support.
Crushed Pakistan in the
third indo—Pakistani war
and made Bangladesh inde-
pendent. in March 1972.
the USSR made a treaty of
friendship and cooperation
with Bangladesh also.

Moreover. the USSR made a
treaty of friendship and
cooperation with Iraq in
April 1972. and supported
pro-Soviet former Premier
band with the change of
government in Afghanistan.
obtaining that country
for the Soviet sphere of
influence. They made a
treaty of friendship and
cooperation with Somalia
in 1974. completely equip-
ping naval and air mili—
tary bases in that coun-
l’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

try. This became an important base for the Soviet Indian Ocean fleet.

In April 1975. the USSR carried cut “OKEAN” maneuvers. using the world

seas as a stage. Likewise. they carried out naval attack maneuvers in the
Indian Ocean. deploying many ships and aircraft. Moreover. the USSR air
transported directly to Angola 20.000 Cuban troops for the Angola dispute.
which had intensified since the end of 1975. At the same time. Soviet

naval units escorted a fleet of ships. transporting to Angola large numbers
of tanks and heavy weapons.

The USSR. making a treaty of friendship and cooperation with Ethiopia in
May 1977. sent Cuban troops to Ethiopia just as they did with Angola and
their naval power escorted a fleet of vessels to the Eritrean port of Mas-
sawa.

Somalia. objecting to the USSR's assistance to Ethiopia. cancelled unilater-
ally its treaty of friendship and cooperation with the USSR in November 1977
and requested the evacuation of all Soviet military advisers and the return
of baSes being furnished to the Soviet Union. To counteract this. the USSR
gave Ethiopia aid exceeding one billion dollars and 50.000 tons. And. they
sent l7.000 Cuban troops and 2.000 South Yemen troops to Ethiopia. and un-
folded a large scale assault against Somalia. Because of this. the Somalia
side. which had brought the Ogaden area under its control. caved into this
destruction. Somalia's President Barre Suffered the degradation of a de-
feated connunder.

The USSR. which lost the military bases at Berbera and the like because of
Somalia‘s treachery. is trying now to request substitute bases in Eritrea.
it is said that Ethiopia has already allowed a Soviet air base in Asmara
and a naval base on Dahlak islands outside Hassawa Harbor.

Under these conditions. a siege strategy toward the Persian Gulf has inten-
sified since April of last year. This can be seen in the coups d'etat

that have cccurred successively around the Persian Gulf areas. such as in
Somalia. Afghanistan. Yemen. lraq and others. This also indicates how much
importance the USSR attaches to control of the petroleum shipping routes to
the western nations from the Persian Gulf.

The USSR is now supplying 80 million kilolitera of oil annually through l
pipeline to the Eastern European nations. except Romania. But it seems
that the oil production of the Soviet bloc has not progressed enough to
meet increased consumption. Therefore. according to some sources. if the
oil supply to Eastern European nations should stop in the 80's. it would
mean that the Soviet control of Eastern Europe would collapse indisputedly.

From this. it seems that the USSR has been deepening its interest in Persian
Gulf oil. But the security of Japan. western Europe and the United States

hangs on the securing of the petroleum shipping routes leading from the
Persian Gulf to the western nations. So it can be said that whoever con-

20

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

trols the oil of the Persian Gulf controls the world.
Strategic Value of Indochina.

Thus. the Soviet Union attaches great importance to lndochina from its

view of world strategy. especially control of maritime traffic from the Paci-
fic Ocean to the Indian Ocean. That is because the Soviet Union has dis~
covered the great strategic value of indochina.

First of all. Indochina. together with the Malaysian archipelago. constitutes
the "rim-land“ of the southeastern part of the Eurasian continent. However.
since indonesia and the Philippines are in the open seas off of this rim-
land. that area becomes an important gateway. tying together the shipping
routes of the Indian Ocean with the Pacific Ocean.

The shipping routes that go from the Pacific Ocean and pass through this
region to the Indian Ocean can be squeezed into the general classification
of the following four routes.

The first shipping route is the one that passes through the Strait of Malac-
ca. for the Soviet Union. this route is the shortest route tying the Indian
Ocean with the bases in their maritime provinces. In addition. Vietnam.
which has become affiliated with COMECON. and Malaysia. which has advocated
for Soviet "friendship and cooperation". are close to this shipping route.
Therefore. the Soviet Union has the advantage of being able to request bases.
as well as port privileges. from Vietnam and Malaysia.

The second shipping route passes through the Strait of Sunda.

The third shipping r0ute is a route that leaves the indian Ocean. and passes
through the Lombok Strait from the Strait of Makassar.

The fourth shipping route is a route that goes through the Indian Ocean.
passing through the Strait of Ombai from the Molucca Sea.

These last three shipping routes are a greater distance than the first ship-
ping route. and need a mutual Indochinese agreement as well. Therefore.
from the Soviet Union's perspective. it can be said that the first ship-
ping route is much more advantageous. and the possibility of securing it

is greater.

Secondly. lndochina has a great value from the perspective of containing
Ch na.

The USSR has pressured China from the north. deploying a military force of
45 divisions along the Sino-Soviet border. In addition to this. Indochina
has joined the Soviet bloc. If the Vietnamese army of 1.5 million men.
which is the strongest military power in Asia (if one excludes China).
decides to pressure China from the scuth, the containment of China would be

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

solidified even more.
Third, there are great undeveloped underground resources in Indochina.

it is said that there are promising undersea oil fields in the Gulf of Siam
and Gulf of Tonkin in Indochina. Further. it is anticipated that there

are oil and natural gas deposits in the Red River delta area. Besides
this. there are mineral resources of uranium ore. coal. iron ore. zinc and
the like in the Phu Lang Thuong area.

It is said that. in exchange for project
aid, the USSR aims at the acquisition of
these underground resources. Toward this
end. it sent to Vietnam a vice-minister
level investigation team many times.

The investigation team, led by the vice-
minister of the Ministry of Geology.
prospected for oil and natural gas for
abOut one month last year in July.

According to another report. it was said
that the aim which the USSR had in push-
ing for Vietnam's affiliation with COMECON
was the control of its oil an( mineral
Key: resources.

Vietnam's Mineral Resources

 

Fourth. Indochina is an advantageous

1. coal base to expand its influence to the

2. iron ore ASEAN nations.

3. zinc

4. tin After the "lndochinese liberation" in

5. copper 1975. Laos and Kampuchea abolished their
6. gold monarchies and became socialist countries.

Laos deepened its leaning toward Hanoi.

but Kampuchea intensified its resistance
to Hanoi's leadership and. opposing Soviet-supported Vietnam. requested the
support of China.

Vietnam has aimed at a Southeast Asia under the leadership of Hanoi. and ad-
vocated for a “Southeast Asian Common Market“ in June 1975. That concept

was extensive enough to include the ten nations of Scutheast Asia. in short.
Saviet-supported Vietnam is trying to extend its influence to the ASEAN natigns
in place of the Soviet Union. And. Vietnam has become a base for an ASEAN
assault by the USSR.

will Vietnam Become the Cuba of Asia?

On account of the USSR's strategy to make Vietnam an "advanced base". China
has been put into a situation where it is threated from two frants---the

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

north and the south.

China has experienced this kind of military threat three times: the first
was when General MacArthur insisted on attacking Manchurla during the Korean
war of 1950; the serond was when the Soviet arnw assumed a posture of chal-
lenging a full~scaie battle by sending tanks to the front. Therefore.

this present crisis wOuld be the third crisis for China.

lhis crisis materialized more last year. Namely. there was an incident in
which the SOVict troups invaded the USSuri River border on May 9. in the
south. clashes by both parties---China and Vietnam---have occurred frequently
at the China-Vietnam border. The Soviet navy carried out threatening man-
euvers between Luzon island and Taiwan at the end of June. it can be seen
that Soviet naval p0wer was "demonstrating" against China. by getting caught
up in the China-Vietnam dispute. Further. there was an incident in which

the navins of both thina and Vietnam battled over Nanshan island. about
which both China and Vietnam are in dispute and which both claim as its own
possession.

Under this state of affairs. China. putting up its full strength. has en-
deavored to organize an "anti-Soviet consolidated front“. As is commonly
known. Vice Premier ieng Msiao-ping expressed his "discourse on the big
three worlds” at the United Nations natural resources assembly in 1974.
that is. One must look for the source of all the evils of the world's wars
in the hegemony principles of Such large countries as the United States and
the Soviet Union, who belong to the first world. But he made it clear for
the first time that the existence of Soviet socialist imperialism as the
more dangerOus.

China has put itself in the third world against this dangerous USSR. and.
involving the second world of the leading industrial nations. such as Japan
and others. has beoun calling for an “anti-Soviet consolidated front”. in
short. it can be said that China's discource on the world became the yard-
stick to measure all acts as either "anti-Soviet" or "pro-Soviet.“

Vietnam's Prime Minister Pham Van Dong made clear his opposition to China

in a discOurce on the world that divides the world into five worlds at

a natiOnal asSembly just after the 1975 liberation. The first is the social-
ist bloc. led by the Soviet Union; and it has the greatest importance. The
second is Laos and Kampuchea. which must be added to the "indochinese Federa-
tion"; the third is all of the Southeast Asian nations that form the nucleus
of ASEAN. the fourth is the non-aligned nations. And last of all. the
United States. western Europe. Japan and others are mentioned as the fifth.
in short. Vietnam's world perspective is a view which puts as its foundation
a confrontation between the USSR and the United States. whether something

is "anti-American" or "pro-American“ becomes the yardstick for measuring
the Suitability of all acts.

in other words. Prime Minister Pham Van Dong dealt a frontal counterattack

23
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-t ONLY

against the "discourse on the big three worlds" by Vice-premier Teng Hsiao-
ping. So. it is natural that the Soviet Union supports Vietnam.

The USSR allowed Vietnam to become affiliated with COHECON in June of last
year. Secretary Brezhnev made it clear that he would support Vietnam resol-
utely as "brothers" and declared that Vietnam is an "advanced base” which
socialism can trust. In short. the Soviet Union made clear its firm inten-
tion to add Vietnam to the Soviet bloc.

Under theSe conditions. China. which aims at forming an ”anti-Soviet consoli-
dated front". concluded a China-Japan treaty of peace and friendship on
August 12 of last year. The Soviet Union repeatedly objected and warned
against this Sire-Japanese treaty, which includes an “anti-hegemony article"
hostile to the USSR. This has become a frequent undisguised threat. and is

unparalleled as an intervention by a major country in the relations between
two other countries.

But the China-Japan treaty was finally concluded. was formally ratified in
October and became effective. The China-Japan treaty and the United States-
Japan Security Treaty mean that there will be cooperation through the media-
tion of Japan. The USSR. seeing this as the establishment of an 'anti-Soviet
alliance” by the United States. Japan and China. is increasing its vigilance.
This can be seen from the fact that Party Secretary Brezhnev had a cenversa-
tion with First Secretary Tsedenbal of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary
Party in the Crimea on August 23. he declared that “recently. very negative
elements have arisen in the Far East and Southeast Asia."

The Soviet view is that even though the anti-hegemony article may have been
watered dawn. no basic change has taken place in the anti-Soviet character
of the China-Japan treaty. Therefore. the USSR predicted that the status
change important for Asia. which comes from the formation of this treaty.
namely. the balance of power. will collapse. ln order to offset this. the
USSR has emphasized repeatedly that there is a need to change Soviet policy
toward Asia. it can be stated that the substance of this policy has been
able to bring about an important change in the Asian situation. as was
pointed put by Vice-chairman Kowarenko of the USSR-Japan Society.

So. the predicted "roll back policy“ of the USSR is asking to conclude a
USSR-Japan good neighbor friendship treaty in order to restore the balance.
and. secondly. is intensifying the military presSure against China. Third.
it is to make Vietnam the “Cuba of Asia". and to try to assume the duty of
"lead soldier" in its approach to RSEAN.

This kind of movement has already shown itself. Until now. the USSR. along
with Vietnam. has not recognized RSERN as an organization. However.
lZVESTiYA recognized ASERN as an organization for the first time on July l3.
Vietnam's newspapers also advocated for a “Southeast Asian Neutrality Con-
cept." Prime Minister Pham Van Dong himself made of tour of the ASEAN coun-
tries. As China states. their aim is to try to expand their influence within

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rnu nrtlrihl.unr out?

AiIAN as a "irujau Nurse."

Moreover. so as to «uuunrt Vietnam's umve. first Assistant Minister Fillyu«
vin oi the ﬁnviet fureiuu Ministrv. while making a tour of the ASEAN nations
near the end or nrtohei. made a statement of support for the peaceful charac-
ter of AﬁFAN.

Al'ui thit uniiied USKR-Vieinam approach to “SFAN. the USSR invited to the
-rnmiin an athunistrative-Ievel party delegation. led by Party Secretary to
moan and Prime Minister Pham Van Dong. it can be said without a doubt that
their aim was to reinforce Vietnam's "Cuba status.“

utan Han Built a uriduehead in Indochina.

Inn ”23R entered into its “roll haek policy" as prediced. The Soviet UniOn
made a treaty oi irie-Jnhip and cooperation with Vietnam on November 3: and
with that. the U$SR huilt a “bridgehead" with which to impede China's
inroads into the indnchineSe peninsula.

lhe core at this USSR-Vietnam treaty of friendship and cooperation is the
article on "enmrqencv deliberations.“ whereby it was decided to mutually
uupport each othci when either party. i.e.. the Soviet Union or Vietnam.
is exposed to a threat of attack. This article. which makes cooperation

inquirtain from a on litary viewpoint. has a high degree of strategic Sub-
'- i allll'i.‘ .

In June at last vear. the Snvtet-led COHFCON recognized Vietnam‘s formal ai-
illialinn. ihai inditated that Vietnam has already been included economically
In the Sovtet hior Nuwevet, to offset that. thina made its China-Japan
treaty. Moreover. China made clear its plan to cancel the "Sino-Soviet Alli-
anre treaty." ihe powerful "roll back policy" had begun with the Soviet-
Vietnam friendship trealv.

now. full-scale hostilities by troops of both China and Vietnam. which began
in Outeher of last year. have been repeated at the China-Vietnam border.
Alan. iheii uncannv novn. centering around a ”dry season large-scale offen-
.iv"" has continued into the Vietnam-Kanpuchea dispute. Kamouchea's Vice-
ireniei lenq Sary. who made a speech at the United Nations in October of
last year. stated that Vietnam will use again several army divisions. sta-
tioned in foreion territories. in its dry season offensive. in this case.
tan: is clearly indicated as the foreign territory. it seems that about
iuni army divisions of Vietnamese troops are stationed in Champassak Pro~
viuue on the southern extremity of Laos.

in addition to this. Vietnam includes in the "Kampuchean Liberation Front"
tanmUihvuns residinq in southern Vietnam. amOunting to aboat 150.000 men.

lhey have formed a "rampuchean People's Liberation Army" from among these.
and sent out into Kampnrhuan territory well-chosen guerrillas and political

25

Inu- urn-Ir!!! "l". no".-
'..llmlmn". .

    
 
  

  

,.

 

FOR nFl"!l‘lAl. "Si-Z u'lNM'

lhry nru ualnq this dual front stategy to intensify internal
-l i s I urlmm t“. in K-unpm‘hvd .

In short. "one: is using exactly the same kind

oo— ._---— -. —_..__’-..-_.-u———o~.u--—

of strateny against Kanmuchea

.c——. b.— —

I ’0 I'lks'l‘l-

(ll)

 

I
' , . \ ’“I' J ’J
27C(\;’- \, (2.)“ -9"“
L" "l‘ﬂumoméwuem:ammoiruzzw

9 ‘ (1“ . ."-.Tm'”

In this way. if Vietnam uses Lao

territory for troop movements.
it is possible that China will
expand its troop movements into

 

China built 600 kilometers of
road in northern Laos. adjoining
Chinese territory.
seem that if they were to use

this road. they could easily

enter Thailand and ot the same
time. threaten Vietnam from the

rear.
try:
I. (Shim-av "(Inld'i in [NH I7. 0“ 00m 561
Ihln.) Ill. Nam Pak
.. (mm-m l‘ruviuu- I‘l. Vien Sci
J. l.|l than 7.0. linuei Sai
'-_ Hum: .‘thl 2]. Sam lleua
n. uni 5a 22. Muong Beng
’. Viv-mam 23. Oil River
li. Mei-lilo 24. Laos
'l. lenq \alv 25. Pal: Tha
I”. Hyv 26. Muong Son
ll. “it'll Bivn Wm 27. Pak Beng
Ir. ﬂurmn 28. Mekong River
ll. lid [on 29. Luang Prabang
l4. Muunq Khuua 30. Julius {Earns
l5. Muonq La 31. Thailand

lh.

luau Noni [ha

Rnndn hull: with China's assistance
(bull lu iunwrtvn conolcttid)
Undur nonstruction

_‘._l as they used for the conquest of
(ll axzmqqmﬁm ] South Vietnam in the past.
I I
I

too territory to counteract them.

And. it would

um. um. there is a danger that the Vietnam-Kampuchea conflict will spread
in all of Indochina. enquirinu loos.

imtla up Naumurhvn. there is a possibility that it will develop into a Slno-

xuvivi i'L.uh. umkincl Indochina the stage.

if the USSR backs up Vietnam and China

ihv Aston unliuus arr exceediuoly afraid that it will expand to such a situ-
ln particular. the feelinq of crisis is very acute in Thailand.

26

NW. UH'N'II‘I. USE ONLY
l-‘nlt tll'l‘lith. n-ilt ”Nix

lmrcinr". meucliea. In particular. if Kampuchea cannot withstand a large of-
fensive from the USSR-Vietnam union. and. ii‘ a prmSoVietlpro-Hanoi govern-
ment appears upon the collapse of the Pol Pot regime. Certainly this w0uld
he the actualizatlon of an "lndochinese Federation" at which lianoi aims.

Then. the pressure on Thailand would Suddenly increase from the USSR and
from llanoi.

lhailand is a country where two caups d'ctat have occurred since 1976.
caused by the lndochina shock. It is a country which requested a complete
evacuation of United States troops stationed in Thailand. because of Viet-
nam’s pressure. in the event that Thailand offers the air bases at U Thapao
and elsewhere to the USSR. because of presswe from the Soviet UniOn which
has solidified its "bridgehead" in lndochina. the Soviet Union would be able
to control maritime traffic passing through the Strait of Malacca by using
its bases in Thailand and Cam Ranh Bay.

However. the appearance of such a situation would not only threaten the
South China Sea route for transporting natural resources to our own cauntry.

but would have Such a great influence that it would destroy the strategic
balance in Asia and the Pacific.

COPYRIGFT: annn Military Review l979

9400
£50: “05

27

FOR OFFICIAL "SF. ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL "SE URL?

INTERNATIONAL REIATIONS. TRADE AND AID

BRIEFS
VIETNAMESE PRESSURE FRENCIl--llsnoi has been pressuring vsrious French
cot-panics, among them ELF-WP, to pl‘chnt then from signing sny bis
contracts with the PRC. Stould they do so, the contacts they have with

Vietnam will probably be revised or repudiated. [Text] [Paris VALBURS
ALTUELIJ-is in French 1 Jan 79 p Ill

0802 4200 END

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY