FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10605
22 JUNE 1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 12/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFl-TGAL USE ONLY
1m:

3m publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phra'sing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Govermsent.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR omcm. USE ONLY

JPRS L/lOI
22 June 1‘

WEST EUROPE REPORT

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(P000 12/82)

CONTENTS
ELECTRONICS

French Aeronautical Industry Urea , Producea Gate Arrays
(Gerard Collin; m 8 608308. 3 Apr 82) ..................

arc Introduces Couplete Line of BC]. Gate Arraya
(Atk‘mm. 3”: 82) O.U00".IOOOOCOOIOOOIOOOOOO00....

ENERGY
llheinbraun Develops ﬂuidized-led Gaaiﬂeation Proceaaeo
(Bane Teuero . et a1.; BRDOEI. & roux-Bums-
mm’ Apt 82) 0....DOCIIOUCOOOOOO'OOOCOOOOOOOO0.0...
MSPORTATIOE

A 310: Pirat Performance Teata Pro-icing
(Alaacosms. ZIOMOZ) O..00....OOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOI.

Airbua: A 310 Teen, Production, Equip-ant
(unsmsms. ”hr 82) 0.00000IOOOOOIOOUCO00.00.0000...

MM: Saab-Pairchild-M Project Enter. Phaac Three
(AIR&CW. 3A,: 82) C.0.CIOOCOOOOOOOOIOOOIDOOOO'0'...

Project Deocription, Schedule, by Resin Noye
Cockpit, Avionica

-a- [III-WB-ISI
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS

FRENCH AERORAU‘I‘ICAL INDUSTRY USES, PRODDCBS GATE ARRAYS
Paris AIR 5 008108 in French 3 Apr 82 pp 37, 38, ‘1

[Article by Gerard Collin: ”The Vogue of Cate Arrays“!

[Excerpt] Seductive

Prediffused arrays seen indeed very attractive: they truly appear to be the
approach of the future, leaving the arena of specific integrated circuits solely to

universal coqonents (such are licroproosssors and menorirs). and the few very large
production circuits. Prediffused circuits thus encroach both on ouston and on
hybrids circuits; but they can also been-e specific coqonents in hybrid
nicroelectronics, with which they are compatible.

It should therefore not be surprising that the cowonents industry is wide open for
gate-arrays. In France, Thoma-68?, through ”018. has installed in St. Egreve,
near Grenoble, a unit to produce cans and bipolar gate-arrays, going as far as the
characterization of circuits for the final user. Hatra Harris, in Nantes, launched
a family of ans gate-arrays with 600, 800, 1200, and soon, 2000 and 5000 gates in
1983. are as well, is launching a range of circuits (see p 61, this issue). Also
in the running, srs Burotechnique, SIN‘I'RA, SORBP, and others.

This general trend of the national coqonenta industry will be followed with
interest by equipnent manufacturers.

It should be added that until now, such circuits were available only abroad, and
mainly in the United States (in the Silicon Valley. of coursel), an area in which a
French coupany, Atac Diffusion, subsidiary of the Blf Aquitaine group. has already

established soae roots.
Atac Diffusion

Today, Atac Diffusion consists of 17 persons, and represents in France the American
company Interdesign (which has itself become a subsidiary of Perranti), which
produces bipolar and ems gate-arrays. Atac Diffusion also represents Perranti for
ULA digital bipolar gate-arrays. And finally, Atac Diffusion has just reached an
agreement with ZYHOS, a company which offers circuits presented as interlediates
between gate-arrays and custom circuits, based on catalogs! For Mr Creugny, of
Atac, these circuits represent a new step in the field of integrated circuits,

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
?0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coding closer to full cuetoe but retaining the flexibility of gate-arrays. This
should prove, as if proof were needed, that gets— arrays are evolving. According to
Atac, the "catalog full custom" (e granatically offensive uses) is typically

50 percent larger in area then custom integrated circuits (and thus 50 percent eore
expensive in recurring costs), but two to five tines less expensive in development:
the lead time for delivery of the first circuits would be only two eontha according
to Atac! The coeputer resources for moving froe electrical circuit drawings to the
design of interconnection masks are being developed at Atec. end should be
operational by the end of May.

Atac already has the scans to personalise gate-arrays, in the guise of Applicon CAD
(computer-aided design) equipsent. But Atac is also very open to different types of
cooperation with equip-eat unufecturere: from supplying bere circuits to the
delivery of finished ones, and including the training of customer engineers in the
techniques of circuit personalisation. Atac also expects to subcontract the
production of circuits in France.

Atsc has already established contacts with several French eeroneutice companies,
such as Sages, Sfena. Dauault, Metre, Deutsch, and Thouon-CSF.

CAD

One of the inportant features of gate-arrays is that their peuonaliaation can be
performed by the equipment eenufecturers themselves. Indeed, the manufacturer can
work on the arrays in his own plant, thus eliminating the need to deal with e
sicroelectronice company and Iaintaining full control of his own components. This
was the approach taken taken by Sages, which today appears to be one of the Prench
leaders in the use of gate-arrays, from circuit study to ness production.

Sages has already installed. in Argenteuil, considerable resources for coeputer
processing of gate-arrays through all their steps:

Translation of circuit diagrals by leans of CAD. At this point in the process, an
experienced engineer has already a fairly good idea of the gste-srrsy which will
ultimately be used. This is followed by s computer simletion of the electronic
circuit's operation, which involves an electrical simulation (voltage and
teepereture variations), static and dynamic simulations, and verification of testing
capabilities. In this respect, Segen has already acquired extensive knowledge of ,
or experience with the progress known among specialists as DIANA. SPICE l and 2,
ASTEC, LOC CAP, 186A V, and SAGDYN (the latter having been developed by Sage.
itself).

These progress are run on Sagee's oo-puters, or at such fine as CISI or Control
Data. At this level of the study, the engineers are practic lly sure of the choice
of the final gate-array.

The next step is the mask design. Given the selected gate-array. and therefore the
available grid, the interconnection circuit is designed to prepare the mask design.

Sages is currently aiming for 70-75 percent rates, but higher ones are possible,
particularly with sequential logic circuits.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The circuit is designed with interactive CAD (Applicon): the operator has access to
a cell catalog, a library which is gradually enriched by the operator himself, who
eliainates inevitable interconnection conflicts (crossings) by such neana as taking
advantage of underpasses provided in the gate-array.

Beyond this CAD, Sages expects to imtall progress for autonatic location and
routing.

Once the iaplantation has been finalised, a timing analysis can also be perforned by
the conputer. which in addition verifies that the rules of the ert. such as spacing
between connections, line widths. and so on, have been respected (design route
check).

The resainder of the process is no less conputerised: creating the nagnetic tapes
which will control Isak design (pattern generator) and the tape for autonaticslly
testing the circuit, with definition of test prograns and equipment!

‘1“ top it all, we should add that Sage- is installing scans for qualifying scales.
and for characterizing transistors and nodelling their behavior!

For production itself, Sagen is installing facilities for seek personalisation.
primarily using, for the purpose. squipnent and procedures already established for
thin-fills hybrids. ‘l'hese neans are of course intended to assure the production of
gate-arrays for Sages's internal needs (aerospace. rockets, defense). but the
cospany is already offering its know-hour to outside custoners: the lead tines for
availability of first tested sales are shorter than three nonths (including custo-
delays). It should be noted that Sages has already obtained circuits that were good
on the first try. with a single nodification being the naxinun required!

Sages has thus created five new circuits in the last six nontha; typical of the
gate-arrays that have already been fabricated for aeronautics are:

A frequency dividing chain for supplying gyroscopes and gyro-stare;

Logic circuits for detecting and analysing failures in redundant systens:
Ant! increnental accumulators for strap-down conponents.

COPYRIGBT: A. & C. 1982

l [.023
C80: 3102/ 220

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BISCIRONICS

m INTRODUCES comm LINE OF SCI. GATE ASRAYS
Paris AIR & COSMOS in Trench 3 Apr 82 p 61

[Unsigned article]

[Text] RTC has introduced a cmlete line of SOL-technology gate-arrays, called the
ACE (Advanced Custoeised 80L) fasily.

ACE arrays are characterized by their speed (0.6 ns/gate); their factor of merit
(l N); end a cosputarieed sisplitied design.

The line will include five ACE arrays that differ in the cosplaxity of their logic:
600 (600 gates, 26 internal cells); 900 (900 gates, 36 internal cells); 1600

(1‘00 gates. 60 internal cells) ; 2200 (2200 gates, 100 internal cells); [256

(1000 gstes, 256 um sesory points, and 68 internsl cells).

ACE arrays are coepstihle with 10K and 100! BCL's, which then benefit fro. the use
performncee. Moreover, I! end h! [M sesories are equally 10! or IOOK-comstihle
with the some perforsances.

Speed

For gates: propagation time is 0.35 no for GIL-technology internsl gstes, that is,
gstes without power transistors, used solely for SCI. outputs;

For a flip-flop connected as divider. the input signal frequency is 600 Mile;

The rise or decsy tine of input and output gates is 0.75 ns. This speed gives the
srrsy a speed fully cospstihle with the 100K BC]...

Factor of Herit

(Product of consuqtion tines speed, generslly used to consre technologies with one
another). For ACE arrays, the consumption per gate is 2-3 I" for a speed of

0.35 ns, which gives a factor of merit of one picojoule. As a cosparison. and st
the other end of the perforlanca scale, one csn consider a mos LSI circuit whose
consu-ption per gste is about 100 IV for a speed of 10 us. which is also of the
order of l N.

1.
FOR OFFICIAL 08?. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AC! arrays have the following consunptions: 1.8 H for the AC! 600, 2.3 H for the
AC! 900, 3.5 H for the AC! 1500, S V for the AC! 2200, and 3.5 U for the A63 1256.

The consumption per gate is between 2 and 3 IR.

A standard 100K BCL circuit censuses 60 I" per gate. The consuaption gain factor is
of the order of 20. ~

Package
ACE 600 and AC! 900: 66 pins; ACE 1‘00, AC! 2200, and AC! 1256: 120 pins.

Availability dates: AC! 600 and AB! 900, available; ACE 1‘00, third quarter of
1982; ACE 2200, first quarter of 1983; AC! 1256, second quarter of 1983.

RTC has turned an "expertise center," whose function is to train and later assist
customers during the whole design period, or to fulfill this function in their
stead. In 1981. this center trained several custoners in the use of ICL and ISL
gate-arrays, in the areas of couputers and teleconlunications for civilian or
niiitary applications.

Inproved design assistance tools (catalogs, design manuals, and so on) have been a
second aspect of the center's activities.

Finally, RTC has conpleted its line of gate-arrays with the introduction of a LOCHOS
700-gate array.

COPYRIGﬂT: A. d C. 1982

11,023
CSO: 3102/220

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mum W8 INJURED-BED GASI‘FICATIGI W
Mars Ml. G xm-rmas-nmcmm in German Apr 82 pp 178-184

[Article by Dr ﬂans Taggers, Dr Karl-August Theis, Dr bother Schrsder.
Rheiniache Braunkohlenverke AG [Incorporated], Stuettgsnvsg 2. 0-5000, Cologne
bl: "Synthesis Gases and Synthetic Natural Gas froe Brown Coal”l

[Excerpts] Rheinische Braunkohlearerke AG (nheinbraun)

is developing two fluidized-bed gaeification processes
operating under pressure. 0n the one hand the High-
Teapsrature-Uinklerbm-i Process for the generation of
co and az-rich Synthesis Gas and on the other hand the
lydrogaaification of Coal (HIV) to generate Substitute
Natural Gas (8N6). Building of couercial-scale plants
are proposed for both processes. The first line of a m-
Deaonstration plant in s comrcial scale is scheduled for
operation in 1981:. The plant with finally deliver 1
billion I3/yr synthesis gas for nethanol production by
1987. The HIV-Duonstration plant of the sane capacity is
scheduled for operation in shout 1990.

l . Introduction

The generation of gases from coal for chemical syntheses and as energy source
has been known already since the last century. During the 1960's. gas fron
coal in the chemical industry sector was displaced by synthesis gas tron heavy
oil, crude gasoline, or natural gas and from the energy sector by natural gas
for reasons of econouy. Since the start of the 1970's gas generation from coal
has again. been constantly seaming greater significance due to the constant
rise in the cost of crude oil and natural gas. This applies above all to coal
grades which are easy to nine and which have a high reaction capability, for
angle. in the no. brown coal from the Rhineland. The Rhineland hroun coal
plants follow a concept graduated in terms of tine and content vhich futures
the developnent of two gasification processes. that is to say, first of all
for the generation of synthesis gas and then for the generation of synthetic
natural gas.

Due to the high reaction capability and the fine-grained aspect connected with
the production process as such. both cases point to the use of fluidized bed
methods. The development effort extends via the construction and operation of

6
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

experimental and pilot plants—for whose promotion we would like to thank the
am [Federal Ministry of Research and Technology] at this point in this study
«all the way to demonstration plants.

2. Synthesis Gas from Brown Coal: m method

2.1. Development of High-Temperature-Vinkler Method

Union Rheinieche Braunkohlen Kraftstoff AG (UK [division] Heeeeling). an af-
filiate of Rheinische Braunkohlenwerke, during the 1950's and 1960's operated
a synthesis gas generation facility with two Hinkler gaeifiera each with 17,000
m3 (1.“. [standardD/hr crude gas capacity.

0n the basis of these experiences. this technology was developed further with
the objective of improving the performance data and the gas quality through an
increase in the pressure and the temperature. The higher temperature gave the
process the nae m (High-Temperature Winner) method. Here are the main
points in this improvement:

Gaaification under pressure to increase the specific output end to reduce the
coupresaion energy for the subsequent chemical syntheses;

Gasification at higher temeratures to inrove the gas quality and to increase
the volume processed;

Increase in carbon processing rate through return of dust, expelled overhead
into the fluidized bed.

The fundamentals of the method were developed in a technical testing facility
at the mm [Rhine-Westphalia Technical College] in Aachen. This plant is
still being used for basic research to check the applicability of the method
for various other types of coal and carbon sources. In the middle of 1978,
an 81'" pilot plant was placed in operation on the grounds of the Prechen
factory near Cologne. At this time, a demonstration plant for the generation
of methanol synthesis gas on an industrial scale is being planned; its first
line is to go into operation in 1984.

The RT“ method furthermore can he used for the generation of:
Reduction gas for metallurgical purposes,
Hydrogen as chemical raw material and for hydration purposes,

Lean gas for burning purposes.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.2. Description of It!" Experimental Plant

liars are the essential design data for the ETD experimental plant;

Coal processing rate Up to 1,300 kg/hr dry brown coal
Gesitication agent Oxygen/rater vapor or air

on production Up to 2,200 n3 (1.1mm or 107 hol/hr
Gesificetion pressure Up to 10 bar

Gesification tauperature Up to 1,100' c

Cowletion 1978

Figure 1 shows s signified flow diagrea for the experimental plant. The
charge coal for the plant is dry brown coal with 18 percent water content.
such as it is used for hriquette production. The water content, depending on

the goal of the experiment, can be reduced further to 8-12 percent in e
twist-tube drier. '

The coal is brought to the reaction pressure of up to 10 her hy teens of a

system of locks and is introduced into the fluidized bed gasifier via a vor-
gear.

 

Figure 1. Flow diagrea of m experinental plant. Key: 1—Coal hopper;
2—Secondary drying; 3-Cyclone; low-Reactor; 5-ﬂaste heat hoiler; 6-Uater
washing; 7—Conversion; 8—Linsetone hopper; 9-Air: lMtean; 11—Mh;
12-Cyclone dust; 13-Boiler.

In the gesifier, the coal reacts with the preheated gasification agent which
can consist either of oxygen/steal or air and which is supplied on various
levels of height.

Snaller coke particles leave the gas generator at the reactor heed along with
the rev gas. The coarser particles are separated in a first separator and
are returned to the fluidized bed. Further separation of particles carried
along iron the rev gas takes place in the second separator; the ash developing
at the foot of the reactor is evacuated by means of a cooling worn gear and
pressure is removed by mess of a lock systen. In the experiaental plant, the
gas than purified is cooled in a vaste heat boiler and is then burned in the
power plant.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. SNG from Brown Coal: Hydrogaaification of Coal
3.1. Hain Development Points and Areas of Application

The production of artificial natural gas (5N6) offers special advantages from
the angle of long-term marketing possibilities. For this purpose. hydrogasi-
ficstion of coal-likewise a pressure fluidized bed measure-wuss deVeloped.
Gaeification with hydrogen leads to a particularly high primary methane content
in the raw gas and is thus particularly suitable for $86 generation. The
hydrogen can be supplied in two ways (Figure 10). In the first case, the
residual coke from hydrogasification is gasified with the help of the previous-
ly descrihed 3TH method and the raw gas is converted into hydrogen in a cor-
responding, suhsequently connected gas treatment plant. This comhination
process on the whole features a low oxygen requirement, a high carhon process-
ing rate, and does not require any methanization step.

Nyauecsnde seamen". LUKE:

Mama's! Winkle! Venom
mm

mummy leaﬂet
We!”

 

Figure 10. Combined method for brown coal gasification: EXT-380 or HIV-BTU.
Key: l--Gss treatment; 2-Coal; 3-Residual coke lock; 6-Ash lock; HIV--
Hydrogasification of coal; HIV-oaigh-temperature Hinkler gasificstion;
DKA--Steam poser plant; HTR——High-temperature reactor; RSO-Pipe fission fur-

nace o

The energy supply in the form of steam and current can come from fossil or
nuclear power plants. The second possibility of hydrogen preparation consists
in connecting hydrogasification of coal with a high-temperature nuclear reactor.
here, a part of the methane generated is catalytically converted into a
hydrogen-rich gas in a pipe fission furnace with the nuclear process heat.

This combination process leads to a coal saving of up to 40 percent and further-
more, in long-range terms, also promises to yield economic advantages. The

9
FOItOFFNJAI.USEZONLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stoff in Uesseling. This plant was built by the Lurgi Company of l'rankfurt as
engineering partner. The flow diagram of this experimental plant is illus-
trated in Figure 11. The predried coal is brought up to gasification pressure.
as in the m method, viaasystemof locks and is then placed on the fluidized
bed via a worm gear or it is inserted into the lower part of the fluidized bed
via a slanting pipe. Hydrogen, the preheated gasification agent. is inserted
in the lower part of the gasifier and at the same time serves as eddy medium.
As in the case of the HT" method. the raw gas is taken off at the gasifier
head, it is purified in a subsequently connected cyclone, and it is then
cooled and burned. The plant as in experimental operation until the end of
September 1981 for about 21,700 his, including almost 9,500 hmunder gasifica-
tion conditions. During that time, almost 1,400 t of dry brown coal. were
processed at gasification temperatures betveen 820 and 1,000’ 0 and gasifica-
tion pressures between 55 and 95 bar. Here. a methane content in the raw

gas of almost 50 percent by volume and C processing rates of up to 82 percent
were obtained. The longest continuing experimental phase came to 31 days.

a 7

    

Figure 11. Semi-industrial experimental plant for hydrogasification of coal.
Key: 1--'l‘wist pipe drier; 2—Heighing hopper; 3-Coa1 lock; 16--Reactor;
5--Cyclone; 6—Haste gas; 7-Rau gas; 8—-Coal hopper; 9-Heater; lOwCooling
water; 11-Raw gas cooler; 12-41111; 13—High—pressure steam; 14--Coke cooler;
lS--Dust lock; lb—Coke hopper; 17—Compressor; 18—02 [illegible] compressor;
19-~Coke lock; 20-Coke conveyor; Zl—Rav gas condensate; 22--Coke; Oder--
or.

3.4. Status of Hark on HKV Pilot Plant

In the previously described experimental plant, all essential parameters—such
as, for example. the degree of gasification, the raw gas composition, and the

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gasifier output-«ere determined and the foundation for the design of a larger
pilot plant was thus worked out. This plant will have a raw coal requirement
of about 25 t/hr and it will go into operation in 1982. In the experimental
plant, the emphasis was only on the real gaaification step; this pilot plant
will contain all essential system components all the way to the finished pro-
duct, that is, 8N6. Figure 16 shows a rough process flow chart with the
essential design data for this pilot plant which is likewise being erected on
the grounds of the Hesseling UK at this time in the insdiate vicinity of the
BIG] experimental plant.

 

Figure 16. hydrogasification of coal pilot plant. Kay: l—Cyclone; 2--
Secondnry drying; 3v—Heighing hopper; lo—Coal lock system; Subust cyclone;
6--Low-tenperature deconposition; 7-[illegible in photostat]; 8—Coal hopper;
9—Conhustion chamber; lO—Beat exchanger; ll—Stean; lZ—Uaste heat boiler;
l3-Water washing; lb—[illegihle]; lS-Gas neter for lock stressing; 16--Re-
sidual coke lock; l7—Dust lock; mum condensate; l9--Coal delivery; 20-
Residual coke hopper; Zl—Residual coke loading; 22—hactor; 23--Raw gas.
Gasification pressure up to 120 bar; coal processing rate up to 9.6 t/hr TBKI;
Gasification temperature up to 950° C; gas output up to 7,800 .3 (i.N.)/hr.

To design the application of gas to the gas generator [gassing of the gas
generator] and to cool the residual coke produced, cosprehensive flow-nechanics
investigations were again conducted here at the industrial chenistry institute
of the University of Hanover.

After sufficient results are available from the operation of this pilot plant,
plans call for operating a denonstration plant of a consercisl size with an
SNG output of about 1 billion 1:3/yr with conventional energy supply by about
1990. Here again it will be possible to use the lessons learned tron the
operation of the 8TH demonstration plant.

In a next step, in long—range terns, the tie-in with the high-teaperature
nuclear reactor can then take place if this reactor type is improved in keep-
ing with its ultimate purpose.

1].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

3.

5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPIH

I. Teggera and J . Engelhard. "llydrogaaitication of Coal with Process that
iron nigh-Tenenture Nuclear Reactors and line of Residual Coke from
nydrogaeification of Bram Coal.” "Kohlevergaaung in der Energietechnik"
[Coal Gasification in Energy Technology]. van-r3 201, 1979. 99-109; 768
Kraftwerketechnik MB. Publishing Bouae for Technical-Scientific Herb.

Fl. Teggere and K. A. Then, The Rheinhraun high-tenperature Uinkler- and
Bydrogaaification processes. Proceedings of the First International Gas
Research Conference, Chicago, 9-12 June 1980. Library of Congress Catalog
No 80-83 454 0.980) 632-650 (Published by Government Institute, Inc.).

H. Adlhoch and K. A. Thais, The Rheinhraun High Temperature Uinklar Om)
Proceaa- Horkshop on Synthetic Fuels: Statua and Future Direction
San Francisco, 1980.

L. Schrader, Fl. Tenure, and K. A. Thais, "Hydrogasification of Coal."
m-INEENIm-TBCHNIK, 52, 10 796-802, 1980.

P. Speich, "Brown Coal on the Way to Large-Scale Industrial Refining,"
VIK—MIT'I'EILUNGEN, 3/5, 53-61, 1981.

COPYRIM: Industrieverlag von Bernhausaen KG, Ila-burg 1982

5058

080:

3102/275

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MRSPOR‘PATION

A 310: FIRST WHERE mes WSW
Paris AIR 6 008108 in Prench 24 Apr 82 pp 13. 60
[Articles “Airbus a 310: 26 Flight hours in 7 Takeoffs and Landings”:

:_‘i‘ext] Oouencing at 'noulouse Saturday 3 April. flight tests of Airbus No. 162.
in other words A 310 No. 1. continue with impressive regularity in the hands of
Bernard Ziegler and Pierre Baud; two other pilots, Gilbert Defer and Gordon
Corps, have also piloted the new plane.

On Tuesday 20 April, the A 310 totaled 26 hours 20 sinutes of flight in 7 take-
offs and landings. After its first flight on 3 April (duration: 2 hours 15 min-
utes), the plane completed the following ones:

«Plight No. 2 (8 April): 4 hours 45 sin of flight;
"Plight No. 3 (10 April): 4 hours of flight:
"Flight No. 4 (14 April): 3 hours 40 aim

«Plight No. S (15 April): 3 hours;

—?light No. 6 (17 April): 4 hours 5 sin)

"Plight No. 7 (20 April): 3 hours 25 min.

The next takeoff (night No. 8) is scheduled for 24 April. As for A 310 No. 2
(plane No. 172), it will start its flight tests in early May. its first flight
being scheduled for 7 May.

Berna:d Ziegler confirsed to us Tuesday that up to now he has I’every reason to
feel satisfied with the results obtained in the course of these 7 flights."
Testing is proceeding exactly on schedule: exploration of the flight dosain has
already justified reaching into the higher speeds, up to Mach 0.78/360 knots
and Mach 0.82/380 knots (The next flight should persit going to Each 0.84). The
plane's behavior is “very sound": in particular: “The test team has observed

13
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nothing in the plane's performance characteristics to date to warrant a departure
from the original purity of its airfoil.‘

Among the tests carried out. the following are worthy of note: Study of its man-
euvering limits without buffeting at high altitude (35,000 feet). making it pos-
sible as of now to conclude that its maximum ceilings (a function of weight) can
be substantially increased: stall performance tests in all flight configurations
(stringer. slats and flaps out), showing that no modification is required: per-
formance tests with one engine stopped, and reignition tests: automatic approach-
es with slats and flaps at 20 degrees; takeoffs at maximum weight (132 tons):
and. of course, flutter tests, starting from the third flight and based on the
use of flutter vanes. or aerodynamic esciters (one per wing). which per-it the
obtention at will of symnetric or antisymmetric excitations at controlled
frequencies.

In sum. the performance tests carried out to date indicate that the A 310's
efficiency over a type-hop could be improved by 5 percent over its calculated
one. Decidely, at Toulouse as at Seattle (see page 15). the engineers are per-
forming miracles...

 

‘ Which, in plain language, means that the A 310 will very likely be able to do
without the conventional 'vortex generators“ that caused so much ink to flow a
few years ago. We note in passing that the B 767 has them (see page 15); which
does not mean, of course. that the wing of the American plane was incorrectly
designed, to borrow from the expression so imprudently used with regard to the
A 300 by a French deputy...

COPYRIGHT: A. 5 C. 1982

9399
cs0: 3102/27:

15
IN3R 0F11C1AI.UBE§(H‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATIW

arms: a no 1381's. meme-nos. Bournem-
Paris AIR 5 COSMOS in French 30 Apr 82 p 12
[Attica by a. in: '5 no Ahead of Schedule“)

:Text] Test flights of Airbus a 310 so. 1 are continuing at Mlouse with the
sane regularity. Last week (Tuesday 20 April). we were at 26 hours 20 sin of
flight tise aocusulated in 7 flights: this mesday 27 April, Bernard Ziegler
brought us up to date again on the test program ‘i‘he 10th flight had been con-
pleted that morning and the plane had at that tine chalked up 35 hours 55 aim
of flight.

The most recent flights were devoted especially to flutter tests (which actually
began with the third flight), still using "flutter vanes' (aerodynasic exci-
ters). and to the calibration of the Air Data Conputer (an anenoneter systen),
on the proper functioning of which will depend the precision of performance
measurements. M other flights have been scheduled for this week: thus, over
a period of 1 south, the A 310 will very probably have comieted a good dozen
flights and more than ‘0 hours of flight. which represents a net gain over its
planned schedule (35 flight hour per aonth) .

iron the production standpoint. the coming off the asseably line of the first of
the four A 300 Bd-ZOO's for China Airlines. equipped with Pratt and Whitney
mD-56A engines. was reported on 13 April (see AIR 31' 009108 No. 902. p 19).
and on that sane date the maiden flight of the A 300 “-200 (plane No. 188).
equipped with c9640 engines, built.for Air runisi These two planes had been
scheduled for delivery in June. Tunis Air‘s plane has one distinctive feature:
It (like the six A 300 34's already delivered to Indonesia's Garuda cospany) is
equipped with a double Crouset m Type 300 installation for long distance
flights outside of VCR-MB [Very-nigh-Prequency unidirectional Radio Range--
Distance-ﬂeasuring Equip-tent] range. This eystea is characterised by its fully
digital interface compatible with Mime-700 avimics--specifically. it delivers
a guidance signal to the SPENA [french Air-Navigation Equip-ant company] Digital
PA [automatic pilotJ—and from this standpoint is unique on the market.

The control-hos. or CDO [Central Data Unit], was the object of a special study
made together with Airbus lndustrie's pilots to achieve a perfect integration of
the FPOC [forward-Pacing Crew Oospartnent] concept that characterizes the Airbus

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

planes for Garuda and Tunis Air. so as to reduce the load on the crew. The con
per-its the simultaneous loading of both calculators, with preservation of all
the navigational data on flight after flight. A 'check“ function enables is-
sediate verification of the flight plan and facilitates the preparation and
execution of diversion operations.

Optimization of the mega signal processing software took into account the
experimental data obtained on 5,000 hours of flight during which all navigational
data was recorded. 'l‘hese flights were effected on a on [expansion unknown]

DC 10. throughout the world. many of then in Southeast Asia where Omega coverage
is particularly scant, pending the putting into service of the Australian
station.

The performances obtained confor- to m [Radio Technical Co-ission for Aero-
nautich standards in the Garuda operating zone where until then the use of the
Onsga network alone had not been deesed feasible for long distance navigation.

Crouset has in hand 300 first orders for its cam systen and currently produces
60 to so of then a year. which enables the many to envision new applications
for its assets that would integrate it into a complete flight management system.

COPYRIGHT: A. G C. 1982

9399
C80: 3102/272

l6
POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
BMW: This article is republished

fron JPRS L/10559, of 2 June l982,

No (P000 10/82) of this series pp 10-14
TRANSPORTATION to correct certain terminology.

3mm: SMD-FAIRCHTLD-340 PROJECT ems PHASE THREE

Project Description, Schedule
Paris AIR 8 COSHOS in French 3 Apr 82 pp 15, 17, 66
[Article by Regis Noye: "Saab-Feirchild: An Effective Cooperation"]

[Text] Bight nonths after the prototype left the shop, the program of the
American-Swedish SL360 "co-later" plane, developed jointly by Saab-Beanie

and Peirchild Industries, has now cons to naturity. Phase three of the

design, properly speaking, has been underway since Noveaber, at which tine
all the characteristics of the apparatus were established and its principal
systems and equipment chosen. Thus, the “-360 is the noat advanced of the
five progress of counter planes with seating capacity for more then 30 per-
sons presently under developnent throughout the world, illeedietely followed

by the Dash-8 of de havilland Canada and the Brasilia of mm [Brazilian
Aeronautics Conpeny] (the other two being the AIR-42 and the Case-blurtenio-23S).
0n the colleertisl level, despite a nerked slowdown in sales felt for son's nonths
by Saab-Peirchild (as, moreover, by the competition) and attributed to the
worldwide economic recession, the total number of orders has reached 116, of
which 6 are options, or, according to the manufacturers, nearly 30 percent of
the total sales obtained up to now by the 5 conpetitors (2). [Sentence as
published]

In order to show the detailed progress of the work on both sides of the Atlantic,
as well as the facilities developed in Sweden, Seeb-Scenia invited about 20
journalists of the international aeronautical press to Linkoping at the begin-
ning of the week.

Let us first recell that the first egreeaent eiaed at jointly developing a
twin-propeller regional transport plane was signed by the two fires in June
1979 at the Bourget Exposition. The first phase of the program, consisting of
the overall definition of the project during which the choice of notors was
made. was completed in September 1980. The two parties had quickly agreed in
their thinking and, a short time after a earket study indicating that between
now and 1996 there would be a worldwide need for 1,600 to 2,000 units of the
chosen category. they decided on the official launching of the SP-360. Since
then, the second phase, consisting of a detailed study of the equipment and
necessary tooling. took a little sore than a year, being coupleted last
November when the first prototypes of the wings and fuselage nade their

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

appearance. Meanwhile. two important developments were made in June 1981:
the choice of entirely digital standard avionics and rounding the bend on
100 orders. Since that time, the engineering mockmp, constructed in wood at
a scale of 1 to 1, has been serving only to finalise certain systems. It is
to be noted that more than 60 percent of the general engineering of the
equipment is attributed to Saab-Scania and that the two manufacturers are
making considerable use of computer assisted techniques: 20 percent of the
airframe and systems and 60 percent of the tooling were thus conceived.

The Saab-Fairchild—abo is noted for the importance attached to the economy

factor resulting from the application of advanced techniques: modern General
Electric CT7-S motors (1.675 hp); three-bladed Dowty Rotol propellers nade

of composite materials; assemblage of parts by gluing (aluminum on aluminum

for subaasemblies of the airfoil and fuselage; aluainua on honeycomb for the
flaps and stabilizers); the use of composite materials of sandwich construc-
tion (kevlar-kevlsr for the engine naceller, the wing fillets, the ailerons,

the movable surfaces of the empenage; glass on glass for the redone, air in-
lets and cabin floorboard); digital avionics (see page 19 of this edition)
comprising five Collins cathode_displgys and §_fuel management system. The
economy factor is not only apparent in fuel consumption (05 seats per nautical
mile per 0.5. gallon* for 34 passengers, or at least 20 percent better than
the old generation aircraft like the Fokker P-27-500), but also in maintenance.
Thus, the SF-360 will be a craft which offers an extremely low DOC (direct
operational cost), estimated, for example. to be less than 70 percent of that
of the Gulf Stream 1, its principal competitor in the United States at present.

Let us recall at this time that the SF-340 is planned to appear in two versions:
one called an "airliner" for the transport of 36 passengers (11 rows of 3 seats
in front plus 1 row of 6 seats in the back at a distance of 30 inches); the
other called an "executive" for business trips and having a capacity of 12 or
16 seats according to the chosen arrangement. Other versions are now being
studied: for cargo or military use and with stretch-body configuration. Al-
though Saab-Fairchild is not yet giving out any details on the latter, it
nevertheless admits that its capacity will be limited to 50 passengers due to
the chosen width of the fuselage (2.16 meters inside), permitting only 3 seats

in front.

The performance and characteristics of the SP-360 have naturally changed since
the beginning of the studies. Among the latter we note the following: a cer-
tain increase in weight (7.19h kg empty compared with 6,668 formerly; 11,794
kg on takeoff compared with 11,360), which means a slight decrease in the pays
load (3.239 kg compared with 3.311), and an increase in the length of the run-
way required for takeoff (1,175 meters compared with 1,082) and a lowering of
the single engine service ceiling. 0n the other hand, the maximum cruising
speed went from 680 km per hour to 507 km per hour and the range with 34 passen-
gers and IPR reserve went from 1,520 km to 1,670 km.

_____.._____________
*Or 22 seats per kilometer per liter of fuel.

18
FOI:OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Distribution of Manufacture

On the production side, the distribution of workloads is 50 percent for each,
valuedwise. Pairchild Industries is responsible for manufacturing the airfoil
and engine nacelles as well as the tail assemblies; the American firm is also
responsible for the fuel system and all that part of the hydraulic system which

is integral to it, so that the fuel systems can come completely equipped from
long Island (New York). Moreover, they have assigned to their affiliate, Swear-
ingen (Texas) the manufacture of the entire cabin arrangement and its components
as well as their installation on the planes, which will be delivered to the
United States. Saab-Scania, in turn, is building the fuselage assembly (divided
in three sections) as well ag_the_wing fillets; The finsl assembly willalso

take place in Linkoping. In this connection, the Swedish-firm has invested
200 million Swedish krona in the construction of new installations with a
surface area of 25,000 square meters, including a hangar 185 meters long by

35 meters wide by 12 meters high to house the assembly line comprising 12 work
stations. Moreover, the new buildings house a machine shop. a surface-treatment
shop and a gluing shop, the latter two having been operational since August.
They have a large group of machine tools, representing A2 percent of the total
investment, and many of which have numerical control. However, these new facil-
ities might prove to be too narrow to house the preassembly bays (presently
installed next to the Vari-Viggen assembly line) and the paint shop (not yet
located). The first fuselage parts were manufactured in the underground facil-
ities usually reserved for military programs....

First Flight in 10 Months

An initial series of 15 units has been under construction since November on one
or the other side of the Atlantic. Although the upper and lower panels of the
two initial fuselages are already waiting for final assembly, the side panels
are in preassembly, while those of the following two (reserved respectively for
static and fatigue tests) are being fastened together. The first tail assembly
will arrive in Linkoping in hay and the first airfoil in August, when the final
assembly of prototype No 1 will begin; this prototype is scheduled to leave

the shop in November, and the first flight will be at the beginning of next
year, followed shortly thereafter by No 2. Moreover, the CT7-5A motor is to
begin its trials in flight, with the Dowty propeller, in August at General
Electric's flight-testing facility (a Gulf Stream 1). The construction of a
series of lo motors is already underway with 6 units to be delivered this sum-
mer (a for the two prototypes and 2 spare units), the first sample of the
series not to be sent to Saab-Scania until 1983.

Certification of the SP-340 calls for 1,000 flight hours, which will be com-
pleted on the two prototypes by the end of 1985. Swedish confirmation will
first be granted by the LFV [Swedish National Civil Aviation Administration]
European [JAR 25 norms), than the American(FAR 25). At this point we may note
that the total investment in the Saab-Pairchild 360 program is estimated at
$100 million and that the total number of people employed in the program comes
to 1,500, divided equally between the two firms.

19
FOR OFFKJA1.USE(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Half of the Break-Bven Point

On the co-ercial side, the 116 orders now on the books represent more than half
of the program's break—even point, estimated at 200 units sold. The prime ob-
jective is to reach this figure before the first delivery. To do this, the
organization put together by Saab-rairchild is the following: responsibility
for the North American continent (United States, Canada, Mexico) is assigned
to Pairchild Swearingen ($8 planes ordered, half of which are of the executive
version); for Australia and Southeast Asia to the distributor, Stillwell Avia-
tion (Sydney): for the rest of the world to the joint Saab-Tairchild BB affil-
iate, whose administration is in Linkoping with headquarters in Paris (58
planes sold. 6 being optional). One last word on the subject of the unit's
price: $6.75 million for the airliner version. $5.5 million for the executive
version (according to economic conditions of November 1981).

COPYRIGHT: A. b C. 1982
Cockpit. Avionics
Paris AIR & (”$1405 in French 3 Apr 82 p 19
[Article by 6.0.: "SP-340: Only Model With Cathode Instrments")

[Text] Elsewhere in this edition we have given a detailed picture of the
SF-Bbo's cockpit and avionics system.

Obviously, the cockpit is designed for two pilots without a third man. It has
five color cathode displays (Collins); two in the pilot and copilot areas
(electronic ADI [Attitude Director Indicator] and BS! [Horizontal Situation
Indicatorl) and a fifth (optional in a central panel; the latter serves for
the general presentation of navigational information, checklists and so on.

It will be noted that Saab-Pairchild is no longer proposing an "electromechani-
cal" version for the principal flight instrulenta: the advantages of the
cathode system in terms of reliability and maintenance costs (cost of ownership)
appear to be attractive enough to make all users renounce conventional instru-
ments. This simplifies the task of the engineering departments of the aircraft
manufacturers .

with regard to the avionics system, the four principal cathode displays are
supplied by two symbol generators. These receive information from airspeed
and control-mechanism sensors, particularly the attitude data generator which
is of the connected-components type, also Collins.

The upper panel is in conformance with the generally accepted principle: "if
all lights are out, all is well."

Pilot visibility is good, in fact better than that recommended by document
SAESGOB.

with regard to suppliers, we note that Collins has the lion's share in this
plane, particularly with the cathode displays, the automatic pilot assembly

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the flight controludigitel-end the directional and vertical gyro- with
connected coeponente.

Finally, it ehould be noted that Saab and rairchild have retained certain
French equip-ant euppliero for thie plane:

«Sane. which he juet received a contract for cable voltage resulatore for
the firot 50 unite with an option on the next 150.

-Jeo!.‘er: firat order of note than 10 nillion trance for panel inotrunente
(altineter, eirapeed indicator. vertical epeed indicator—primer! and backup.

—3fena: 3-inch horizon standby gyroscope.
-Saft, on order for 30 batteriee in connection vith this program
comm: A. a C. 1982

8568
C50: 3102/ 221 m

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY