FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10142
30 November 1981

USSR Report

CHEMISTRY
(FOUO 1/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in :he first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques‘
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Otner unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOI.OF?1C1AL USElDNLN

JPRS L/10142
30 November 1981

USSR REPORT
CHEMISTRY

(P000 1/81)

Coureurs

CHEMICAL INDUSTRY
Coking By-Product Industry Urged To Greater Efforts.................... 1
chemical Industry in 1980.............................................. 6
COAL GASIFICATION
Plasma Gssificstion of Coal............................................ 16

Status and Prospects for Developing USSR's Underground Coel
Gesificecion......................................................... 28

ORGANOPHOSPHORUS COMPOUNDS

New Selective Acaricides in Series of Thioethynyl Bthern
of Thiophosphoric and Dithiophosphoric Acids......................... 33

PETROLEUM PROCESSING TECHNOLOGY
Development of Siberian Hydrocarbon Resources.......................... 38
MISCELLANEOUS

Installations for Recovery of Helium Prom Low-Grade Materiel........... 65

- a - [III - ussn - 213 Set 5000]
l1)!‘0FF1C1Al.lEﬂE(M§LY

CHEMICAL INDUSTRY

COKING BY-PRODUCT INDUSTRY 03680 ID GREATER EFFORTS
Moscow KOKS I KHIMIYA in Russian No 3, Mar 80 pp 2-3
[Editoria1: "Shockwork in the Decisive Year of the Five-Year Plan")

[Text] The November (1979) CPSU Central Committee plenum and the USSR Supreme
Soviet second session, summed up results for 1979 and examined and confirmed

the national economic plan for 1980, the final year of the 10th Five-Year Plan.
The main indicators for 1979 are characterized by an increase in the scales of
social production, a rise in its technical level, and a further upsurge in the
people's well-being. During 1979, about 1,000 major state industrial enterprises
were commissioned, including the Sayano-Shushenskaya 838, the Kurskaya.
Chernobylskaya and Armyanskaya nuclear power stations, the Pavlodar and Lisichansk
oil refineries, the Kamakiy Automobile Plant, the Vologodon "Atoamnsh" Plant.

and many others. Housing construction took place on a large scale and more than
102 million square meters of residential premises were brought into use.

More than 180 million rubles were assimilated in the construction of projects for
the coking by~product industry, including about 140 million rubles for construc-
tion and installation work. Coking Battery No 10 has been commissioned at the
coking by-production facility at the Cherepovets Metallurgical Plant, and the
capacity of the coal-preparation factory has been increased by 700,000 tons; a
powerful coking battery with 081! [expansion unknown] and a complete covered
coal warehouse with wagon tipplers have been commissioned at the Kemerovo Coking
By-product Plant; the construction of Coal-Preparation Factory No 2 at the
coking by-product production facility at the Karaganda Metallurgical Combine has
been completed; Coking Battery No 6 at the Krivoy Rog Coking By-Product Plant
and Coking Battery No l at the Hakeyevsk Coking By-Product Plant have been
commissioned.

At the Aydeyevsk Coking By-Product Plant, construction of the powerful Coking
Battery No 9 is nearing completion. Construction continues at the Altay Coking
By-product Plant where more than 100 million rubles have been assimilated on
construction projects since the start of construction, and a modern housing
settlement, a school, and a kindergarten and other social and cultural projects
have been constructed. 0n the plant site installation work is underway on the
first section of a Me to be co-issioned this year, and Coking Battery No 1
complete with corresponding workshops.

IINR(Hﬂﬂ(1Al.USElTNL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unfortunately, last year, the construction organizations of the USSR Ministry
of Construction of Heavy Industry Enterprises and the USSR Ministry of Con-
struction did not fully assimilate the capital investment allotted for many
project construction sites for the coking by-product industry.

In 1979 the collectives of most enterprises labored intensely under conditions
of serious interruptions in the delivery of coals for coking. Coking by-product
production facilities at the Nizhniy ngil, Orsk-Khalilov and Karaganda
metallurgical combines, the Cherepovets and nustavi metallurgical plants, the
Moscow Coke and Gas Plant, and the Gorlovsk, Donetsk, Yenakiyevsk, Yasinovo,
Dnepropetrovsk and Dneprodzerzhinsk coking by-product plants operated well.
Certain plants, both in the East and in the Ukraine, did not fulfill plans for
coke production, some because of the untimely commissioning of batteries through
the fault of the construction workers, and others because of their own internal
reasons. without doubt, 1979 was a very difficult and far from favorable year
for the country's coking by-product workers, particularly during the winter
period. Under these difficult conditions the managers of coking by-product
production facilities and coking by-product plants, the chiefs of shops, and
together with them the enterprise collectives, carried out inspections. Not

all managers succeeded in insuring normal operation of the enterprise.

The collective at the coking by-product production facility at the Nizhniy
Tagil Metallurgical Combine imeni V. I. Lenin (managers A. N. berkutov and

A. A. Kern). for example, came through this test with flying colors and are
continuing to operate rhythmically. And the Tagil people have coking ovens,
and all their other equipment too, that have been in operation for 60 years.
Year after year the collectives of the Moscow Coking and Gas Plant, the
Dnepropetrovsk Coking By-Product Plant, which recently celebrated its 50th
anniversary, the Yasinovo plant and a number of other coking by-product plants
in the Ukraine, operate rhythmically and smoothly.

Why is it that these enterprises operate so well? There can be but one answer:
the managers of these enterprises together with the engineering and technical
personnel and the workers under the leadership of the party organisations
strictly guard and multiply the fine traditions, organize work in full accord
with the rules of technical operation, instill a sense of irreconcilability
toward shortcomings, and constantly strengthen labor and technological
discipline.

One of the most important conditions for the normal operation of a shop and of
an enterprise as a whole is, on the one hand, a high level of exploitation of

equipment, and on the other, the strictest observance by the main mechanical
and power services of planned preventive maintenance and provision of the shops

with spares and replacement equipment. This makes it possible to eliminate
the incidence of accidents and rush work. The paramount concern of the plant
director, and the chief of the coking by-product production facility should be
every possible strengthening of the repair base and the creation of mobile
plant repair organizations to carry out operational maintenance on equipment.

- 2 -

F0!.OI1W(]AI.USE¢JNLY
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

The most important state obligation of the chief engineer is constant
organizational work for undeviating observance of the rules of technical
exploitation at all production sectors without exception. Where all these
conditions are observed there is no slack discipline or an irresponsible
attitude toward work entrusted, leading to breakdowns and disruption of the

production rhythm. High labor discipline is the guarantee of fulfillment of
the state plan.

The size of an enterprise does not determine its activity. Success in the
entire business is insured by skillful organization work by managers. As an
example, we can cite the coking by-product production facility at the
Cherepovets Metallurgical Plant (managers N. Ye. Temkin and Ye. N. Hishin)-

one of the largest modern coking by-product enterprises in the country. Two
large-capacity coal-preparation factories, two coking shops with USTK, a

pitch and coking production facility, and shops for the recovery and reprocessing
of chemical products from coking--this is huge even by today's scales of produce
tion! Nevertheless, year after year, the people at Cherepovets overfulfill
plans for output and take places of honor in All-Union socialist competition,
despite the fact that throughout recent years the coking by-product production
facility has been undergoing construction and expansion. The collectives and
managers of many other coking by-product production facilities and plants'also
deserve a good word.

Unfortunately, during 1979 enterprises such as the coking by-product production
facility at the West Siberian Metallurgical Plant (managers V. K. Kachayev and
A. N. Patrushev) and the Kemerovo Coking By-product Plant (managers V. A. Shestakov
and A. H. Denisov), which is the bearer of two Orders, did not work so well and
have never before this been among the lagging enterprises. It is to be hoped
that the Kemerovsksya oblast organizations and the USSR Ministry of Ferrous
Hetallurgy's Soyuzmetallurgprom [All-Union Industrial Association of Metallurgi-
cal Enterprises for Capital Construction] will aid these two major enterprises
of the oblast once again to become leading enterprises. The unsatisfactory work
of the Avdeyevsk, Zaporozhye and certain other coking by-product plants in the
Ukraine has been noted earlier on the pages of this journal. The managers of
these enterprises still have to do a great deal in order to set up rhythmic
operation and remove themselves from among the lagging enterprises.

In recent years there has been a decrease in attention to the chemical shops at
coking by-product enterprises. As a result, the technical and economic indica-
tors for chemical production facilities have fallen sharply, and this under-
mines the economic system of the enterprises and harms the national economy.
High losses of benzene during its recovery from coke-oven gas is permitted at
coking by-product production facilities at the Novolipetsk and Rest Siberian
metallurgical plants, the Karaganda Metallurgical Combine, and the Kemerovo,
Dneprodzerzhinsk, Avdeyevsk, and Krivoy Rog and other plants. Some plants are
not fulfilling plans for the production of ammonium sulfate; the recovery of
phenol from effluent, pyridine bases and naphthalene has deteriorated. This

is happening mainly because of violations of technological conditions and
equipment malfunctions. It is no longer possible to accept such shortcomings;
a decisive struggle must be waged against production losses.

- 3 -

FOR OFF“JAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In his speech at the plenum, CPSU Central Committee General Secretary comrade
L. I. Brezhnev said: "It is essential to implement with redoubled and tripled
energy the party's course toward improving efficiency and quality. There is

no alternative to this course. and it should be undeviatingly followed during
the llth Five-Year Plan." This party directive applies fully to all sections
in coking by-product production. We are obliged at all levels of management

to apply. inedistely, measures for the more efficient utilization of fixed
production capital and the newly commissioned capacities of coking batteries
and coal-preparation factories (this applies primarily to the Avdeysvsk and
Kemerovo coking by-product plants and the coking by-product production facility
at the west Siberian Metallurgical Plant), to recover all the precious products
of coking from coke-oven gas. not to permit losses in the reprocessing of
resins, and to set things to right in the operation of dephenolization installa-
tions. Particular attention should be given to raising the level of the
organizational activity of shop and section chiefs, foreman, and enterprise
managers. The main task for 1980 is that of striving to achieve fulfillment

of production plans by all coking by-product enterprises, and the plan for the
commissioning of new capacities. Resolution of this task will also make it
possible to gradually overcome all other shortcomings in the activity of this
subsector. The problem of the labor force in the coking by-product industry

is now more acute than ever before. It is impossible to be reconciled with
losses of workers to other sectors of industry. Emergency measures are needed
to insure the creation of stable labor forces of specialists at all coking
by-product enterprises. The question also arises of how specialized training
and instruction for (particularly young) directors and chief engineers can be
fitted to the art of enterprise management.

He often say that an economic manager is a trusted person of the party and
state. At the same time it is difficult to imagine successful work in a
manager who acts apart from the party, trade union and Komsomol organizations.

The year of 1980 should become a turning point in the coking by-product
industry. It is necessary to aobilize all the available efforts of engineering
and technical workers and laborers to strict fulfillment of the rules of
technical exploitation, without which it is impossible to count on success:

to strengthen maintenance service and carry out repairs on equipment in full
accord with the schedules for planned preventive maintenance: to improve
technological discipline and not to operate malfunctioning equipment; to
reestablish the refractory worker crews on the coking ovens and to carry out
systematic preventive maintenance on the oven inwalla; and to observe strictly
the cyclic shutdowns, using them for maintenance work and setting the ovens

in good order.

- a -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FT1CJAI.USE(NNLY

Instilling a sense of responsibility for the business entrusted should hold

the constant attention of the manager. This work is difficult but essential.
The plant director and the chief engineer and their deputies should be in the
shops more often during the changing of the shifts, investigate omissions in

the work, and offer specific help to the shop chief. Only systematic help for
the lagging shop will enable it to overcome the hitches. For this, it is
essential to know precisely what kind of help is really needed, work out a
program, determine the persons responsible, and give the order and undevistingly
implement it. The plan for 1980--the final year of the 10th Five-Year Plan-

is an important link in fulfilling the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress.

and rational utilization of material and financial resources, struggle to
strengthen labor and technological discipline. and raise labor productivity.

The coking by-product industry faces great tasks during 1980 in the field of
technical progress, the introduction of new equipment, leading technology,
the mechanization and automation of production processes, and the fulfillment
of scientific research and test and design work, including the construction
of an installation for heat-preparation of the coal charge before coking at
the coking by-product production facility at the Rest Siberian Metallurgical
Plant; project planning by Giprokoks [State Institute for the Planning of
Establishments of the By-Product Coke Industry] for an installation for the
production of molded coke for the Dnepropetrovsk coking by-product plant;
work on partial briquetting of the coal charge before coking and obtaining
nonoven types of coke for sintering. ferroalloy, casting and chemical produc-
tion: and improving processes and designing apparatuses for the recovery and
processing of chemical products from coking.

Much attention will be given to capital construction. In 1980, provision has
been made for the construction and commissioning of a coking battery at the
Altay Coking By-Product Plant, the completion of work on starting up coking
battery complexes at the Zaparorhye and Avdeyevsk coking by-product plants
and the Chelyabinsk hetallurgical Plant, and also advance work for recon-
struction of batteries at the coking by-product production facilities at the
Msgnitogorsk Metallurgical Combine. the Chelyabinsk Metallurgical Plant, the
Zaparozhye Coking By- Product Plant and the pitch and coking installation at
the Cherepovets Metallurgical Plant.

At the November Plenum comrade L. I. Brezhnev said: "At the center of our
efforts should be the mobilization of the workers to fulfill the tasks of the
final year of the Five-Year Plan." In response to the decision of the CPSU
Central Committee plenum and the USSR Supreme Soviet second session, Soviet
workers in the coking by-product industry will direct all their efforts and
energy during 1980 to shockwork to fulfill the plan of the final year of the
10th Five-Year Plan.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Metallurgiya", "lake 1 khimiya", 1980

9662
C80: 1841/180

- 5 -

F0!‘0FFKJA1.USB(NVLY
FOR 0F11CJAI.USE1NVLY

CHEMICAL INDUSTRX IN 1980
Moscow KHIHICHESKAYA PROHISELENNOST' in Russian No 6, Jun 80 pp 323-327

[Article by L. A. Kostandov, ministry of chemical industry: "Performance
Should be Improved Compared Hith the Past")

[Text] The present year 1980 is an important link in the implementation of
tasks of the 10th Five-Year Plan as a whole. At the November (1979) Plenum
of the CPSU Central Committee L. I. Brezhnev pointed out that 1980 is “not
only the final year of the current five-year plan period but also the base

on which the next five-year plan is subatructured. It is a year of active
preparations for the 26th Party Congress. The work accomplished and the tasks
for 1980 should be assessed from precisely these positions."

In the first four years of the current five-year plan period, as was pointed
out at the Plenum, major advances have been made in solving the problems of
socio-economic development of the Soviet Union as formulated by the 25th
Party Congress. A major contribution to the cause of further strengthening
of the nation's economy has been made by chemical industry workers.

During those four years the industry's enterprises produced output that was
27.53 million rubles greater than during the same period of the preceding
five-year plan. The national economy was provided vith an additional 81.8
million tons of fertilizers, including 3S.‘ million tons of nitrogenous
fertilizers, 29.5 million tons of phosphoric fertilizers, and 21.1 million
tons of potassic fertilizers, as well as 568,300 tons of chemical crop
protectants, 3,657,000 tons of plastics and synthetic resins, 1,198,000 tons
of chemical fibers, and 2,800 million rubles worth of consumer goods and
cultural and economic goods. The variety of chemical output was markedly
broadened and its quality improved.

The 10th Five-Year Plan period has been a period of rise of various new

types of large-scale chemical production, including mineral fertilizers and
the corresponding raw materials. Chemical-industry workers and allied
collectives were warmly congratulated by General Secretary of the CPS“
Central Committee L. I. Brezhnev for their notable accomplishment in putting
into operation the most important large-scale chemical industry facilities.

L. I. Brezhnev's words of welcome were addressed to participants in the
construction and preterm activation of large-scale complex fertilizer pro-
duction facilities at the Almalyk and Cherepovets chemical plants, the
Voskresensk Subdivision of Minudobreniya [Mineral Fertilizers], the Novomoskovsk
Subdivision of Azot [Nitrogen], acrylic acid nitrile facilities at the Saratov
Subdivision of “Nitron,” and other major new construction projects of chemical
industry.

Even during the unfavorable previous year, despite various objective reasons
which complicated the branch's performance as a whole, many pacesetting

collectives succeeded in so organizing the activities of their enterprises
that they not only fulfilled but also overfulfilled plan-set tasks and adopted

- 6 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

socialist pledges. These included the Plastpolimer “PO [Nongovernmental
Organization for Polymer Plastics] in 0khta, the Shostkinskoye "Svema,
the Sterlitamak "Soda." the Lithuanian Ltivbytkhim, and other production
associations. The best of these—-the crews of 18 enterprises of the branch-
were rewarded of their outstanding performance in 1979 with Challenge Red
Banners of the CPSU Central Committee, the USSR Council of Ministers, the
All-vnion Central Council of Trade Unions, and the Komsomol Central Committee,
and 15 of these were listed on the All—Union Roll of Honor at the All-Union
Exposition of Achievements of the USSR Economy.

However, our accomplishments could have been greater had not it been for major
shortcomings and interruptions in the branch's performance. In 1979 the

output of the enterprises of the Ministry of Chemical Industry fell short of

the goals by more than 9 million tons of mineral fertilizers, 326,000 tons of
plastics and synthetic resins, 88,000 tons of chemical fibers, and 87,000 tons
of paints and lacquers. Moreover, the brancb's workers failed to satisfy the
demand for consumer goods. The underfulfillment of the plan as regards the
principal types of production has resulted in underfulfillment of targets for
the volume of sales of output, profits. production cost, and labor productivity.
Of course, the past year was extremely unfavorable and difficult: the severe
winter and the shortages of heat and energy complicated the work of the enter-
prises. The branch found itself in a difficult situation owing to stoppages

in the supply of raw materials and gas as well as in the deliveries of freight-
cars. However, the lag of chemical industry cannot be explained by objective
causes alone. Much depends on major internal shortcomings, poor work discipline
and technological discipline, and an insufficiently high level of organizational
work.

The timely and just criticism addressed to the ministry of Chemical Industry

by General Secretary of the CPSU Central Commdttee L. l. Brezhnev at the
November (1979) Plenum of the CPS“ Centraliaumsittee, obligates us to critically
assess the Ministry's performance last year. The causes that engendered such

a major lagging of our branch behind the outlined goals must be most responsibly
analyzed.

A thorough analysis of all the causes of unsatisfactory performance of the
branch last year revealed several principal causes that prevented the branch's
workers from operating smoothly and fulfilling all the state tasks. These
causes are, chiefly, the unsatisfactory rate of construction of new projects
and utilization of new productive capacities, violations of rules for the
maintenance of technological equipment, unsatisfactory organization of repair
services, inefficient use of raw materials, ineffective performance of
scientific research institutes, and the occasionally-encountered formalistic
attitude toward socialist labor competition.

But it cannot be said that the situation in our branch is all bad, that there
are no accomplishments. of course, they exist. Last year much as been done

to put new capacities into operation, such as, e.g., 16 ammonia production
units with a capacity of 450,000 tons each and 18 mineral fertiliser production

FOIiMﬂﬂClAl.USEiﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

units. In addition major facilities for the production of polyethylene,
phtalic anhydride, and raw materials for plastics have been put into operation.
Various steps have been taken to speed up the construction of projects built
on the basis of compensation agreeaents.

Nevertheless the targets set for the year were largely underfulfilled. 0f

the scheduled new 356 production units, 186 were not put into operation, i.e.,
nearly one-half, which markedly complicated the targeted development of the
branch and led to imbalance in the supply of raw materials to the newly
activated facilities.

To some extent the underfulfillment of the construction plan was affected by
shortcomings in the performance of subcontractors and hence also by a marked
lag in construction and installation operations. But that was only one reason.

The fate of chemical-industry projects largely depends on the client himself--
the Ministry of Chemical Industry. Our design organisations often delay
providing blueprints and tolerate errors, which in its turn entails design
revisions. Certain enterprises often disregard the deadlines for equipment
deliveries, and in some instances we encounter facts of unjustified increases
in cost estimates of construction and an uncoordinated activation of discrete
facilities and supply of raw materials for them. All this has resulted in

the failure to complete one-third of the projects through our fault.

The branch's performance is also adversely affected by the slow utilization
of production capacities. Thus, of the 238 newly operating production units
as of 1 January 1980, 60 are being utilized behind schedule and some of their
capacities have long remained underutilized. As a result, in 1979 production
for the national economy fell short by about 220 million rubles.

At the same time, an analysis of the progress made in utilizing production
capacities, conducted by the Administration for Science and Technology,
jointly with the Orgkhim Trust, demonstrated the feasibility of preterm
utilization of these capacities. In particular, this is feasible at the
Novomoskovsk and Novgorod subdivisions of "Azot," at the Samarkand Super-
phosphate Plant, and at the Cherepovets and Pern' chemical plants.

The slow utilization of new capacities is often due to shortage of skilled
personnel and gross violations of rules for the maintenance of technological

equipment. This results in prolonged stoppages of not just discrete facilities
but entire shops.

L. I. Brezhnev said that, "At the present stage the price of stoppages, shoddy
work, and errors is totally different. A half-hour's stoppage by a man with a
shovel is one thing, but a half-hour stoppage by the same man when operating

a heavy-duty excavating machine, a combine, or a tower crane, is another.
There is simply no comparison."

- g -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, at the Bereznikovskiy nitrogen Fertilizers Plant, the ammonia facility
stood idle for 200 days in 1979, and thus the output of ammonia fell short by
200,000 tons or by 800,000 tons in terms of mineral fertilizers. At the
Nitrogen Fertilizers Dorogobuzh Plant, the output of mineral fertilizers fell
short by 600,000 solely owing to the breakdown of a turbocompressor, also in
1979.

There occur frequent instances of violations of equipment maintenance rules

at the Leningrad "Pigment" “PO, and at the Balakovskiy, Keday, Konstantinovskiy,
Chardzhou, and Uvarovsk chemical plants. Ohing to such violations, more than
45 percent of the entire pool of electrical motors has to be repaired annually
at the enterprises of the "Fosfor" All-Union Association.

Clearly, each enterprise should systematically monitor the level of equipment
maintenance and take prompt and needed measures to raise it. All this should
be of unflagging concern to the heads of the All-Union industrial associations.

A well-organized repair service is highly important to a highly productive
performance of any enterprise. Much work has been done in the branch to

develop interplsnt repair organizations, which last year assisted in carrying
out 649 shutdown repair operations. Sometimes, however, the repair services

of enterprises are merely transferred to the jurisdiction of these organizations,
without even adequate specialization in types of operations.

A major oversight in the organization of intraplsnt repair services has been
the dispersal of repairmen among technological shops and types of production.
As of 1 August 1979 the basic shops accounted for 09.5 percent of fitters

and 66.8 percent of electricians for equipment repair. As a result, the

level of the centralization and thus also of the specialization of plant repair
services proved to be totally inadequate given the existing manpower shortage.
It is highly important that the work of repairmen be evaluated according to
quality rather than volume of operations performed. After all, only a smooth
operation and satisfactory state of equip-ant can serve as the criterions for
assessing the performance of repair services.

The quality of repair largely depends on the supplies of spare parts; their
shortage affects the performance of the entire branch. Here, too, there exists
unexploited potential. Thus, certain managers disperse among many enterprises
the machine tools allocated for the production of spare parts, instead of
concentrating these tools at the appropriate bases. It happens fairly often
that the workers of supply divisions poorly utilize the limited funds assigned
to them. For example, at the Soyuzosnovkhim All-Union Association the funds

for chemical equipment were utilized only 70 percent in 1979, and at the
Soyuzkhimvolokno All-Union Association, they were utilized even less-66 percent.
In this matter greater on-the-spot personal initiative is needed.

- 9 -

FOI:0FFRJAI.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.. I. Brezhnev pointed out in his speech during the encounter with voters in
Baumansky Rayon of Moscow: "One thing is clear: failure looms wherever
people sit with hands folded and await instructions from higher up on every
matter. Conversely, if people boldly tackle tasks and display initiative or
support practical undertakings, their success is assured."

Many heads of enterprises which underfulfilled their targets refer to shortages
and uneven supplies of raw materials. Yes, for a number of years the branch
has been experiencing major supply problems. Chemical industry periodically
receives inadequate supplies of such materials as zinc metal, pyrite, sawdust,
viscose cellulose, and cardboard. All this prevents a full utilization of
existing and newly introduced production capacities. Nevertheless a thorough
study of this problem shows that among us there exists an unexploited potential
for a more efficient and economical use of raw materials. But proper attention
is far from always paid to this problem.

It is no secret that a shortage of caustic soda had arisen more than 10 years
ago. But at Sumgsit that soda has been used in lieu of milk of lime in the
production of epichlorohydrin since 1975, while calcined soda has been used
in lieu of limestone since 1979. This can be in no way tolerated.

A large quantity of caustic soda is used for water treatment by the ion
exchange method in ammonia and polyethylene production. This year, e.g.,

plans exist for using for this purpose 60,000-65,000 tons of alkali in amonia
production. And yet the Scientific Research Institute of Plastics has developed
a water treatment method based on the use of electroinite membranes which
serves to markedly reduce or even completely eliminate the use of alkali and
sulfuric acid as well as to reduce the consumption of electrical power and the
liquid waste byproduct. As early as this year it is necessary to test this
method at one of the branch's enterprises.

So far, chemical industry has been wasting a lot of raw materials. During the
first three years of the 10th Five-Year Plan period, for the Ministry of
Chemical Industry as a whole the excess consumption of sulfuric acid reached
550,000 tons; apatite concentrate, 495,000 tons; amnia. 315,000 tons; caustic
soda, 155,000 tons; and sulfur, 60,000 tons. Instances of spoilage and losses
of raw and other materials still persist, along with the practice of planning
different quotas of raw materials consumption for enterprises using the same
technology and producing the same chemicals. The standards for the consumption
of the principal types of raw materials at all enterprises should be raised to
the level achieved at the pacesetting enterprises. Then we can produce
additional hundreds of thousands of tons of mineral fertilizers by saving
sulfuric acid, apatite concentrate, and ammonia.

This country is known to have the world's largest fuel and power complex. But,
as stressed by L. I. Brezhnev at the November (1979) Plenum of the CPSU Central

Comittee, "whatever the rate at which we develop power industry, conservation
of heat and energy will continue to be a most important state-wide task."

-10-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Last year chemical industry workers took part in the All-Union Public Inspection
dealing with efficient utilization of material resources. In the course of

the Inspection 106,193 proposals for conserving fuel, power, and material
resources were submitted. Of these, 85,882 were introduced, producing con-
ditional annual savings of 162.2 million rubles. However, repeated inspection
of the performance of enterprises in 1979 showed that their internal potential ,
for saving fuel and power is far from always and everywhere adequately utilized.
For example, of the 52 production facilities inspected, 14 even operated
without setting targets for reducing the consumption quotas for these resources. .
Instances of considerable losses of fuel during its transport and storage and
inadequate use of secondary resources also were uncovered.

The best indicators of fuel and power savings last year were achieved by the
Dzhanbul Khimprom, Novomoskovsk Azot, Yavorovshoye Sara, and Beloruskaliy

production associations. Thirty enterprises failed to cope with the consump-
tion quotas set for them.

Another source for improving the branch's supply situation is the mobilization

of existing inventory surpluses. Unfortunately, these surpluses are growing
instead of diminishing. They are particularly high at the enterprises of the
All-Union Soyuzkhlor, Soyuzosnovkhim, Soyusasot, and Soyuskhimvolokno.

At many enterprises, freightcar loading and, particularly, unloading opera-
tions are improperly organized. As a result, freightcar demurrage at enter-
prises of the Ministry of chemical Industry exceeded the standard by 2.5
hours on the average, and even nore at certain plants. For example, at the
enterprises of the All-Union Association Soyuzanilpron freightcar desurrage
averages 10 hours. A particularly intolerable situation in this respect has
arisen, e.g., at the Aktyubinsk Chenical Plant, the Samarhand Superphosphate
Plant, the Kemerovo Subdivision of Azot, the Dzhambul Subdivision of Khimprom,
and certain others. Through the fault of these enterprises, 500 freightcars
daily experienced delays .in unloading: this figure accounts for lore than one
half of all freightcars experiencing such delays at the enterprises of the
Ministry of Chemical Industry.

At the same time, experience of the leading crews demonstrates that these
losses can be avoided. Great vistas in this respect are opened by the CPS!)
Central Connittee-approved experience gained by industrial enterprises of
Chelyabinskaya Oblast and subdivisions of the South Ural Railroad in reducing
transloading delays of freightcars.

One more factor hobbling the branch's performance should be mentioned: the
unsatisfactory activity of our institutes and enterprises as regards intro-
ducing new equipment. The related plans are consistently underfulfilled both
owing to certain objective causes and to the low quality of the scientific
research performed. This in its turn results in considerable additional
material expenditures. Consider one example. The All-Union Scientific
Research Institute of Synthetic Fibers spent more than 5 nillion rubles on

-11..

FOROFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

developing a technology for the production of polyvinyl chloride staple fibers,
but the quality of the research performed was so low that this innovation has
not so far been introduced. To perfect this technique, the All-Union
Soyuzkhimvolokno Association had to spend an additional 13.5 million rubles,
i.e., nearly three times as much as the cost of the original project. Three
years ago the Collegium of the Ministry of Chemical Industry had uncovered
major shortcomings in the planning of non work, causing the scientific research
institutes to dissipate their efforts on minor topics or on projects which
subsequently found no practical application.

The performance of the chemical industry in 1979 was the subject of discussion
at a general conference by the Collegium of the Ministry of Chemical Industry
and the Presidium of the Central Committee of the branch's trade union, at
which the existing shortcomings were thoroughly analyzed and measures to

eliminate them as soon as possible and to uncover and exploit latent potential
were outlined.

Hhat matters most is that at present the Party sets the goals for the enter-
prise collectives--this is the fullest and most effective means of utilizing
the mighty economic and scientific-technical potential created in this country
and eliminating any obstacles to a maximally productive performance.

In the light of the decisions of the November (1979) Plenum of the CPSU
Central Committee and the postulates and conclusions of the speeches of

L. I. Brezhnev, chemical industry workers face great and responsible tasks

in 1980. In this final year of the five-year plan we should liquidate the lag
and do everything to fulfill the State plan and the adopted socialist pledges.
An extremely challenging task lies ahead.

The volume of gross output will increase by 10.7 percent compared with 1979.
The output of mineral fertilizers will increase by 25.5 percent; this includes:
nitrogenous fertilizers, by 22.6 percent; phosphoric, by 24.7 percent; and
potassic, by 42.6 percent. The output of synthetic ammonia will increase by
28.5 percent; caustic soda, by 8.9 percent; and chemical fibers and threads,
by 13.7 percent. The production of consumer goods is expected to develop at

a spearheading rate--by 16.1 percent (of which the output of synthetic deter-
gents alone, by 36.7 percent), compared with the slated 10.7 percent increase
in chemical industry output as a whole.

The production of synthetic detergents should provide an instructive example
to all of us. As everyone remembers well, late last year there arose an acute
shortage of these detergents, largely through the fault of chemical industry
workers. For this we were justly criticized at the November Plenum of the
CPSU Central Committee and in numerous press comments.

This year, now that the appropriate associations and enterprises have properly
tackled this problem, the situation has begun to improve. The January and

February plans for the output of the detergents have been fulfilled, although
disruptions in the supply of raw materials to the enterprises still occur.

- 12 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The plan for the output of consumer goods was examined last January and February
by the Collegium of the Minis try of Chemical Industry. The attention of the
heads of the functional administrations and agencies of the Ministry as well

as of the All-Union production associations has been focused on increasing
personal responsibility for the production of consumer goods and the related
raw materials. The Collegiun: assigned the heads of the All-Union production
associations the task of finding the necessary resources for producing an
additional 60-80 million rubles of these goods this year.

Labor productivity is expected to rise 8 percent this year, owing to a rise in
the technological level of production, the mechanization of labor-consuming
manual operations, and improvuents in the utilization of work time. Heticulour
work with those who display lack of discipline and improper behavior is needed.

It is necessary to work better with people, to pay more attention to their
needs and, above all, not to overlook even one initiative, one labor-saving
suggestion. Then, doubtless, the number of our production pacesetters will
be much greater.

In addition to acceleration of the growth rate of production it is necessary
to further work to uncover the exploit more completely the latent production
potential with the object of increasing the output of the principal chemicals,
assuring the fulfillment of the plan for capital construction, activating new
production capacities and accelerating their utilization.

The plans for this year, e.g. , provide for putting into operation capacities

for the production of 10.97 million tons of mineral fertilizers, 1.55 million
tons of ammonia, 1.89 million tons of sulfuric acid, and 1.16 million tons of
plastics and synthetic resins. They also provide for releasing for occupancy
1,446,000 sq m of dwelling area, building institutions with 16,200 vacancies

for children, increasing the number of hospital beds by 1,610, and completing
the construction of various other civic and co-Inal facilities.

As adopted by the CPSU Central Co-ittee, the USSR Council of Ministers, and

the All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions, the Decree "0n Further Consoli-
dation of Labor Discipline and Reduction of Personnel Turnover in the National
Economy" points out: Under present-day conditions, as the scale of production
increases, economic relations grow more complex, and scientific and technical
progress increases, there is a corresponding increase in the importance of
every minute worked, of a strict observance of operating rules, of the formation
of stable personnel at every sector of production."

Hence we face a major task in raising the general discipline and sophistication
of production. Special attention must be given to working with people, providing
them with better working conditions, and forming stable and smoothly-coordinated

labor collectives.
L. I. Brezhnev said that the fulfillment of the challenging tasks for 1980
"requires creating a highly demanding atmosphere, an atmosphere of well-organized

work and creative attitude toward work in every sector of the national economy,
in every cell of production. To this end it is necessary to exploit more fully

-13-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the potential of socialist labor competition by eradicating shortcomings in

its organization and eliminating elements of formalism. It is necessary to
strengthen the attention paid to the educational functions of labor competition
and of the movement for a communist attitude toward work."

Socialist labor competition, which has absorbed the enormously rich traditions
of the communist subbotniks [voluntary Saturday workers] and of the shock-
worker movement of the first few five-year plan periods, provide boundless
possibilities for manifesting creative activity, initiative. talent, and
ability by the toilers within our branch.

We have quite a few workers of whom we can be justly proud. Many of them
accomplished valuable feats and undertakings. More than 6,000 persons already
have fulfilled their personal five-year targets and started to fulfill the
11th Five-Year Plan ahead of schedule. And Galina Dmitriyevna Usatenko,
twisting machine operator at the Berdyansk Glass Fibers Plant, already has
fulfilled two five-year plans and this coming November intends to fulfill a
third.

The entire country has heard of the Delegate to the 25th CPSU Congress

T. N. Kruzina, a machine operator at the Kursk Subdivision of "Khimvolokno,"

A. D. Magnitskaya, an extruder operator at the Vladimir Chemical Plant, and

A. V. rosvezninnvy, a machine operator at the Novomoskovsk Subdivision of Azot.
For their sacrificial labor they were awarded in 1979 the honored title of
USSR State Prize winner.

Chemical industry workers take an active part in the nationwide socialist
competition for streamlining production, improving quality of work, and ful-
filling ahead of schedule the plans for 1980 and for the five-year period as

a whole.

The workers of the OKhta Plastomer NPO, responding by deeds to the CPSU
Central Committee's Decree "0n the 110th Anniversary of the Birth of

V. I. Lenin," resolved to complete the five-year plan for volume of output
by 1 September 1980 and to produce an additional 25 million rubles of output
by year's end.

The personnel.of the Nevinnomyssk Subdivision of Azot pledged themselves to
exceed their output target by 30,000 tons of mineral fertilizers, of which

7,500 tons by the 110th anniversary of the birth of V. I. Lenin, by such means
as intensification of production, more effective use of production capacities,
and prolongation of the inter-repair operating periods. What is more, on the
very day of that anniversary the personnel used in their work only the resources

saved.

The Voskresensk chemical plant workers pledged themselves to fulfill the five-
year plan on 12 December and increase to 11.7 million rubles their overfulfill-
ment of the five—year plan. Ambitious pledges also were adopted by the branch's
other leading enterprises.

- 14 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFTIC1A1.USEIDNLY

Broadly developing socialist competition for the fulfillment and overfulfill-
ment of the 1980 plan and of the entire five-year plan period, the enterprises
of the Ministry of Chemical Industry coped with the targets for the first two
months of the year, and the plan for the sales of principal chemicals has been
fulfilled. These accomplishments must be consolidated. As stressed by

L. I. Brezhnev at the November CPSU Central Committee Plenum, our work should
be chiefly geared toward orienting the enterprise crews to attainment of high
quality indicators and struggle for the fulfillment of the approaching plans.
It is necessary to disseminate more broadly and introduce more actively the
experience gained by the pacesetting enterprises as regards the organisation
of labor and the nanagement of production. as well as to strive for an
unconditional fulfillment of the targets set by the 1980 plan and thereby

also to lsy the foundation for a successful commencement of the 11th Five-Year
Plan period.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Khimiys", "Khimicheskaya promyshlennost'", 1980

1386
C50: 1801/208

- 15 -

FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COAL GASIFICA’HON

UDC 628. 36
PLASMA GASIPICATIW (F COAL
Moscow VBS'i'NIx mom!!! NAUK SSSR in Russian No 12, Dec 80 pp 69-79
[Article by Corresponding newer of the USSR Academy of Sciean G. N. Krurhilinl

[Text] Problems of the fuel and energy complex are now becoming
especially timely. A program for development of the fuel and en-
ergy complex was celled for in L. I. Brezhnev's annual report at
the 25th CPS!) Congress among the important complex programs. de-
velopment of which acquires ever greater significance. Fuel prob-
lems occupy a significant position in it. In the decree of the
general meeting of the 0851! Academy of Sciences (December 1979),
at which tasks of the academy in solution of timely problems of
development of the national economy were discussed, the need to
develop new effective methods of producing synthetic motor fuel
from coal is noted. The problem of processing coal into synthetic
natural gas by the promising method of plasma gasification is
considered in the article of Corresponding Member of the USSR
Academy of Sciences G. N. Kruzhilin, given below. The article,
published in the form of a discussion, contains a number of debat-
able propositions. ‘l‘hey include an estimate of the maximal capac-
ity of LEP [Electric power transmission line], the cost of a ton
of Kansk-Achinsk coal at the mine, the content of co: and H20 in
the gas generated and technical and economic estimates. specifir
ally expenditures for methane and methanol production and the cost
of producing them. The editors propose to continue publication of
materials of specialists in the field of power engineering about
the most important problems and prospects for development of the
fuel and energy complex.

The method of plasma gesification of coal is still in the stage of development both
in our country and abroad. So far as is known, investigations on plane gasifica-
tion have been conducted for a number of years in Japan and the united States.‘
According to special reports, these investigations are also being conducted in
West Germany. The initial developments in this direction were begun in 1971 in

 

t

See: ”Project for Development of Research in the field of New Power Engineering,"
translated from the Japanese, 76/56070 GPN'I'B of the USSR: 3. Douglas, “Gas Prom
Coal," TEXTILB VDRLD, No 10, 1976.

-16-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

our country.‘ (however, the technical and economic feasibility began to gain rec-
ognition, unfortunately. considerably later duc to the use of electric energy in
plasnatrons in this method.

Plasma gasification can be used for the following purposes in our national scone-y
in the future:

for gasification of Siberian coal with production of synthetic natural gas,
that is, methane or liquid hydrocarbon fuel suitable for pipeline transport to the
center of our country:

for gasification of coal in large steam-gas energy unite which census approx-
imately 500-700 tons of coal per hour:

for gasificaticn of coal and other types of solid fuels in gasifiers of rela-
tively low capacity at machine-building, ceramics and glass enterprises and other
sectors of industry which consume gas fuel in production processes.

As one can understand from the literature, comparatively snail gas generators with

capacity up to 4 tons/hour of coal are already being suggested in the United States
for industrial use.

A diagram of a plasma gasifier is shown in Figure 1. The gasifier has the form of
a furnace chamber 1, on whose walls are installed, similar to furnace burners,
plasma reactors 2 with plasaatrons 3. The mixture of water vapor and oxygen is
heated in the plasnatrons by means of an electric gas discharge. The plasma re-
actor in the diagram of Figure 1 has three plasuatrons, from which hot jets of gas
anerge into in body cavity, forming a common incandescent flame. Coal dust enters
reactor: 2 through pipeline 4. Entering the high-tenperature flow of the vapor-
oxygen nixture, it is intensively gasified with formation of 00+H2+st gases,
which enter chamber 1 with average temperature of l,lOO-l,200'c. Similar to a
boiler plant, chamber 1 and the subsequent gas ducts are used to cool the gas to
approximately lOO'c and also to trap the slag and ash.

Due to the use of plasnatrons, the capacity of which is subject to regulation in
the electric current circuit, the temperature conditions in the gasifier can be
automatically maintained at a given optimum level, including that during variation
of quality, inevitable during operation, of the processed, that is, initial fuel.
Adequate simplicity of variation of the gasifier capacity and also starting it
after planned or forced shutdo‘ms is provided by the plasnatrons. In this sense
the plasma gasifier is considerably uore convenient to operate compared to a
coal-dust burner. Therefore, one can confidently assume that the unit coal capac~
ity of a plasma gasifier nay not be below that of modern coal~dust burners reaching
500 tons/hr. Unit power of a plasma gasifier of l,000-l,200 t/hr or approxinately
10 million tons of coal annually, will probably be feasible with respect to mass
refining of coal into high-heat methane or liquid hydrocarbon fuel and electric
power of 100-150 am will be required to power its plasnatrons. Approximately

40 reactors must be installed on the walls of the chuber of each gasifier when

 

.See: 6. N. Kruzhilin and G. N. Khudyakov, "Plauaa Gasification of Coal,” Report

Topics of the Second All-Union Conference on Plana-Chcaical Technology and Apps-
ratus Construction, Vol 1, Moscow, 1977.

-17-

F0! OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
  

   

d (1) !

aaeuweaeeprea

Figure 1. Diagram of Plasma Gasification of Coal: l~gasification chamber:
2--plasma reactor: 3-plasmatronx 4--coal dust separator; S--steam
generator: 6--air heater; 7-energy installation to pater plasma-
trons: 8--discharge of air of dust-coal system; 9-fuel preparation

Key:
(1) Electric energy (4) Steam
(2) Water vapor and air (5) Air
(3) Coal dust

using plasma reactors with output of approximately 3,000 kw each. As is known,
plasma reactors require periodic repair due to electrode erosion, which can be done

with the presence of 40 reactors without any significant effect on the operating
conditions of the gasifiers.

Naturally. the produced gas must be scrubbed of hydrogen sulfide 328. Therefore,
it is important to note that this scrubbing is considerably easier than scrubbing
of the waste gases of coal-dust boilers of sulphur dioxidss so; and $03. First,
this is clear from the fact that the volume of producer gas is approximately 1/5
that of the waste gases of a boiler consisting of 4/5 nitrogen entering the boiler
furnace in air with a given quantity of coal used. Second, as is known, the tech-
nology of removing hydrogen sulfide 828 from a gas mixture has been developed and
is used on a large scale at Orsnburg to scrub natural gas and it is considerably
simpler and more economical than methods of removing so; and $03 from the waste
gases of boiler plants.

It is these two aspectsnthe high unit capacity of a plasma gasifier and the tech-

nically acceptable real capability of scrubbing gas of sulphur compounds--that may

determine to the greatest degree the prospects and special importance of plasma
gasification with respect to mass refining of Siberian coal.

-13-

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'Ihe problem of using Siberian coal to meet the fuel and energy needs of the Euro-
pean USSR is indeed timely to the highest degree. Until now these needs were met
by development of “local" energy resources and also by a supply of large quantities
of petroleu: and natural gas. But, as is known, these sources of energy supply
will be inadequate in the near future. But the reserves of Siberian coal are very
significant. On the other hand, the distances from these coal fields to the center
of the European USSR are so vast that rail transport is practically unacceptable
and even more so since this is lignite—it has a calorific value below 4,000

kcal/kg and is distinguished by rather high moisture content, reaching up to 40
percent.

1!: illustrate this aspect of the matter, one can use the annual level of Siberian
coal production as a future level, 500 million tons, equivalent in calorific value
to approximately 200 million tons of petroleum 'i'he capacity of rolling stock is
aprpoximately 3,000 tons. Therefore, with the shortest possible time interval be-
tween trains of 5 minutes, a maximum of

365'24'60
5

can be delivered annually over a double track railroad. Thus, two new double track
railroads approxiaately 4,000 km long would have to be constructed to transport

500 million tons of coal annually to the center,which is of course hardly attractive
economically.

 

' 3,000 - 300 million tons

with regard to this, versions with preliminary drying of coal were considered at
one time. Crushing to a dust-like state would also be required. Lignite dust,
having a very developed surface, is capable of spontaneous cabustion upon contact
with air. Because of this, special tank cars or containers with inert gas would
be required to transport it. The operations of loading large amounts of coal dust
and of receiving it at the points of destination are also difficult. In any case,
this version was not recognized as efficient.

Naturally, there is always an alternative version of burning Siberian coal in local
electric power plants with transmission of electric power to the center. Electric
power of approximately 120 million kw is provided by this variant of burning 500
million tons of coal annually. a total of 5-7 million kw of electric power can be
technically transmitted over one high-voltage line. Therefore, approximately 20
of these lines would be required to transmit all the indicated power, which can
hardly be regarded as realistic. At the same time, there are additional economic
problems with this variant determined by the effect of an intensive electromagnetic
field.

horeover, the requirements on the methods of fuel use have changed considerably
during the Past few years. Specifically, burning of high-heat natural gas in some
sectors of industry and especially in everyday life has become widespread. There-
fore, it is natural to strive to see that the scale of gas utilisation not decrease
in the case of a decrease of natural gas production. Incidentally, it is this as-
pect of the latter that is esphasized in new developments on gasification in the
United States with reference to the fact that tone of billions of dollars were in-
vested in the pipeline gas transport network and that synthetic production of
methane from coal will be required in the near future to completely load this
network.

-19-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with regard to extensive power engineering, that is, to thermoelectric power
plants, an increase of the fraction of gas or synthetic liquid fuel is also prefer-
able for at least two reasons. One of them is that vapor-gas plants, which have
higher efficiency than classical vapor-turbine plants and fuel econon 10-12
percent higher, may and should be used when burning these types of fuels. The
second reason is related to the Operating mode of electric power plants. Modern
powerful coal and nuclear power plants easily operate under constant load and are
poorly adapted for reducing their load during nighttime hours and on holidays when
electric energy consumption by plants, municipal and other types of users is
severely reduced. Hydroelectric plants can easily cope with operation under vari-
able load but they are generally inadequate. In this regard a rather acute prob-
lem definitely exists. To solve it, it is extremely inortant to have gas or syn-
thetic liquid fuel, upon use of which the output of the steam generator and energy
block as a whole can be varied in practically any range of burning conditions,
that is, almost from zero to 100 percent. of course, mazut is just as convenient
a fuel from this viewpoint, but further increase of it in power engineering cannot
be counted on.

The next modern requirement on the use of fuel consists in the fact that the com-
bustion products not pollute the atmosphere with sulphur dioxides. This require-
ment is becoming more and more rigid since discharge of sulphur dioxides into the
atmosphere have already reached a rather high level with the existing scale of
fuel consunption. And the most important task now is that these discharges be
reduced if possible.

with regard to the enormous scale of fuel used and also with the restriction on
petroleum and natural gas resources, the fuel and energy complex has recently at-
tracted enormous attention to itself both in our country and abroad. his was
naturally determined by the fact that fuel is the bread of industry and therefore
progress in economics is impossible with a shortage of it. Among many papers of a
general nature on this topic, the most complete and extensive is undoubtedly the
article of president of the USSR Academy of Sciences Academician h. P. hleksandrov.‘
It is quite rationally noted in it that, due to the natural restriction of fossil
fuel reserves also required as raw material for the chemical industry, a course
toward conservation of it should be maintained and that in this regard recovery of
the heat of nuclear reactors should be utilized to the widest extent possible, in-
cluding that for production of electric power, for heating cities and also for
production purposes in industry. Thus, protection against environmental pollution
will also be provided to a significant degree since no discharges having a harmful
effect on the plant and animal world will occur during normal operation of nuclear
reactors. The need for thermal refining of Siberian coal with water vapor to pro-
duce hydrocarbons in the form of gas or liquid fuel with high calorific value
suitable "for pipeline transport Over long distances is also emphasized especially
in the mentioned article. To achieve this last goal, we feel that the method of
plasma gasification of coal is best.

One must dwell primarily on the efficiency of the process to evaluate plasma gasi-
fication. In the worst case when only water vapor, breakdown of which into oxygen

 

‘Seex A. P. Aleksandrov, 'Prospects of Power Engineering," IZVESTIYA, 10 April
1979.

-20-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and hydrogen occurs with expenditure of a relatively large aunt of energy is
used during gasification, plasnatrons consume an emunt of electric power for pro-
duction of which approximately 30 percent of the refined fuel is expanded. In this
case approximately (15 '- 30 - (l - n9) - 18 percent of the thereal energy is lost
at the power plant itself with efficiency of n. - 0.4. Moreover, there are also
losses of physical heat of the produced gas and other losses specific to a plasma
gasifier which comprise a total of approximately 2 percent. Thus, in the worst
case the energy efficiency of plants gasification coeprises approximately n9 - 80
percent.

In the other extreme case, gasification is accoeplished on pure oxygen and without
the use of plasnatrons. Electric power, for generation of which approximately 7
percent of the fuel used for refinenent by gasification is consumed, is expended
for oxygen production. With regard to the other mentioned heat losses comprising
2 percent, the efficiency of the process is approrinately 91 percent in this case.

Actually, an oxygen and water vapor mixture is used in plasma gasification and at
the same time plasmatrons operate. It is natural that the required concentration
of water vapor and the output of plasmatrons should be selected experimentally from
optimization of the process itself. Because of this, the efficiency of the process
will be between the indicated values and a value of approximately 90 percent is
quite achievable.

For comparative analysis of the efficiency of plasna gasification, let us recall
that the efficiency of a classical gasifier comprises 40-50 percent. A diagram of
it is shown in Figure 2.

In this case the fuel moves in the font of pieces from top to bottom and air enter
ing from bottoe to top is used to gasify it. It first passes through the slag
layer and is heated somewhat. The heated air then enters the combustion zone and
fuel gasification zone. The produced mixture of C00c02+ll2+02 gases rises upwards
and the last layers of the charge are heated due to its physical heat. The vola-
tile (in the form of resinous) compounds contained in the solid fuel are distilled
in this case and the fuel is dried, leading to ballasting of the produced gas by
water vapor. Moreover, small fuel particles enter the gas in the form of priming.
All these components reduce the quality of the gas and at the sane time are un-
acceptable for cOnditions of transporting it through pipes to the user plants
since they are capable of falling onto the walls and thus clogging the pipeline.
in avoid this, the gas produced free these classical gasifiers is flushed with
water in scrubbers. As a result the calorific value of the volatile fuel coupon-
ente is almost completely lost. At the sans the there are relatively high heat
losses related to slag and entrainment. In this regard, the total efficiency of
this gasifier is at the mentioned rather low level. A significant feature of a
classical gasifier is also the low calorific value of the produced gas, the cm-
ponent of whidn is only approximately l,000-l,200 kcal/nn3. This is deternined
mainly by the fact that the produced gas in gasifiers of this type is ballasted by
atmospheric nitrogen used for the blast. A typical feature of a gasifier of this
type is also its low productivity, which caaprises only several tons per hour of
refined solid fuel.

Nevertheless the role of gasifiers of this type in industry was enorlous. ‘l‘hey
supplied nunerous industrial furnaces with gas fuel for a long time. When these

-21-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

same

g
F

£34334"- maxim» .-: u, ..

 

Figure 2. Diagram of Fixed-Bed Gasitier: l--loading device; 2--gatep 3
and 4--drying and dry distillation zones: 5 and 6--conbustion

and recovery zones; 7--slagy 8--grate

gasitiers were used, the cosparatively low calorific value of the produced gas is
compensated to a known degree by preliminary heating to high tomerature in a spe-
cial air regenerator required for gas combustion. Industrial designs of the re-
generator appeared at the end of the last century. since then the gasitiers thee-
selves have been developed and gasitiers with somewhat different schemes of the
process and accordingly with different design forms were developed. Gasitiers op-

Unlike classical gasifiere, air is not used at all in a plasma gssifier. but only
a mixture of water vapor and oxygen is used, due to which the produced gas is not
ballasted by nitrogen. At the same time the gas of a plasma gasitier is also es-
sentially free of tallesting inpurities of C02 and 820. This is achieved by the

gas system. the C02 and i120 concentrations are clou to zero at 900-l,OOO’c. This
important result was achieved by Ye. I. sanuylov at the State Scientific Research
Power Engineering Institute imeni G. M. Krzhizhanovskiy by the calculation-theo-
retical method. Of course, thermodynamic equilibrium is not achieved in a real

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this, a higher terperature, namely l,loo-l,200‘c, must be maintained to eliminate
the indicated ballasting impurities mder real conditions, which was confirmed ex~
perimentally by G. N. Khudyakov on a laboratory plasmatron having output of 50 kW.
Naturally, the appearance of resinous cooponents typical for ordinary gasifiers is
totally eliminated at this temperature level-~they are converted to C02 and 112.

Let us evaluate the technical and economic indicators of plasma gasification of
Siberian coal with subsequent pipeline transport of methane or synthetic liquid
fuel to the center of the Soviet Union with respect to refining 500 million tons
of coal of the Kansk-Achinsk field annually. A little more than 200 billion nm3 of
methane annually can be produced upon refining of this coal. According to the ex-
isting plan, it is this quantity of natural gas that will be pumped annually
through the NadysrTorzhok gas pipelines. The four branches of the gas pipelines,
each 1,420 nan in diameter, have a length of 2,460 km. The total cost of construct-
ing the pipeline (together with the equipment of the gas pumpings stations) com-
prises 6.4 billion rubles according to plan.

The casifier together with the dust preparation and ash trapping system is similar
to a coal-dust steam generator but has a considerably smaller heating surface
since the amount of cooled gases is approximately 1/5 that in a steam generator.
Because of this, one can assmne in the first approximation that the cost of a plas-
ma gasifier is 30 percent of the cost of a coal dust station which consunes the ‘
same amount of coal. As already mentioned, the total output of coal dust stations
consuming 500 million tons of Siberian coal annually comprises 120 million ha.
Specific capital expenditures in construction of these electric power plants now
comprise approximately 170 rubles/kW. Therefore, the total capital expenditures
for development of plasma steam generators are estimated at 0.3 170420.106 - 6.1
billion rubles. According to calculations, approximately 270 of the most powerful
oxygen machines, each with productivity of 70'103 nm3/hr of oxygen and costing

8.4 million rubles, would be required for gasification in the considered case.
Their total cost will comprise 8.4-270 - 2.3 billion rubles.

Moreover, development of electric power plants for local needs, which will consune
approximately 15 percent of the fuel and whose output will comprise 0.15-120 I 18
million RH and the cost in capital expenditures of which will comprise 17048-105 -
- 3.1 billion rubles, is required to produce oxygen and to supply power to the
plasmatrons.

Capital expenditures on scrubbing the gas of hydrogen sulfide, according to data of
the State Scientific Research and Planning Institute of the Nitrogen Industry and
Organic Synthesis Prducts (GIAP), couprlse 8 rubles per 1,000 nm3 of annual produc-
tivity. Therefore, to scrub 200 billion m3 annually would require

, 9
so . m - 1.6 billion rubles .

103

Methane production from producer gas by means of catalysts, according to data of
GIAP corresponding to foreign publications, requires capital expenditures at the
rate of 40 rubles per 1,000 nm3 annually, which comprises a total sun of

. 9
40 . 239$)- - a billion rubles.

103
.. 23 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, capital investments of 6.4 + 6.1 + 2.3 + 3.1 + 1.6 + 8 I: 27.5 billion rubles
are required to refine 500 million tons of Siberian coal annually, to produce syn-
thetic natural gas (methane) from it and to transport it to the center of the USSR.

As is known, the concept of comparison fuel, having calorific value of 7,000 heal/kg
is used extensively in power engineering. The Siberian coal of the msk-Achinsk
field has calorific value of 3,740 xcal/kg. As a result. 500 million tons of this
coal corresponds to

3‘740'500
7,000

Thus, the specific capital expenditures for comparison fuel will comprise

. 9
2277- 05.1%)? . 100 rubles/ton of comparison fuel.

I 270 million tons of comparison fuel.

similar expenditures for oil and gas production reach 116 rubles/ton of comparison
fuel: therefore, the given value of 100 rubles/ton of comparison fuel should be
regarded as acceptable.

Let us also estimate the increase in the cost of fuel related to the indicated
capital investments. According to available data,“ expenditures for renovation
and major overhaul comnrise 8 percent of the cost of equipment at coal dust sta-
tions and expenditures for routine maintenance and operation comprise another 6-7
percent. Therefore, the total operating expenses for plasma gasification and trans-
port of gas can be estimated at a maximum of 15 percent. Consequently. the in-
crease in the cost of the fuel couprises 0.15-100 - 15 rubles/ton of comparison
fuel. since Siberian fuel is itself relatively inexpensive (4.8 rubles for trans-
port up to 1,000 km), the total cost of methane at the center will be no more than
20 rubles/ton of comparison fuel. For comparison let us add that fuel with aver-
age cost of 16 rubles/ton of comparison fuel is now used in the lbsenergo [Moscow
Regional Administration of Power System Management] system.

When coal is refined to liquid hydrocarbon fuel and namely to methanol CH30H.
capital expenditures on preliminary gasification and scrubbing of gas of hydrogen
sulfide remain the same as in methane production and comprise 6.1 + 2.3 + 3.1 +

+ 1.6 I 12.1 billion rubles. Capital expenditures on methanol production from
gasifier gas using catalysts, according to data of GIAP, comprise 90 rubles per ton
of methanol annually. Approximately 350 million tons of methanol with calorific
value of 5.340 kcal/kg can be produced from 500 million tons of Siberian coal.
Therefore, capital investments in production of it comprise 90-350-106 I 31.5
billion rubles.

Methanol has a density of approximately 800 kg/m3. At the accepted pulping rate
of 3.5 m/s, 350 million tons of methanol can be transported over three branches of
a pipeline 1,420 meters in diameter. Capital expenditures on these pipelines with
all punping station equipment will comprise approximately

 

I
See: A. Ya. Avrukh, "Problemy sebestoinosti elektricheskoy i teplovoy energii"
[Problems of the Cost of Electric and Thermal Margy]. Moscow. Energiya, 1966.

-21.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6+: ° 3 - 4.8 billion rubles.
'the total capital investments in refining 500 million tons of Siberian coal annual-
ly to methanol and with pipeline transport of the methanol to the center of the

USSR will comprise 12.1 + 31.5 + 4.8 S 48.4 billion rubles.

Thus, the expenditures required to refine Siberian coal to liquid fuel-~methanol-
are considerably higher, almost twofold higher, than in refining to a high-calorif-
ic gas--methane. Nevertheless, this refining is feasible since methanol, like any
other liquid hydrocarbon fuel, is an alternative to gasoline and will be required
in the future, specifically, for internal coebustion engines.

Both methane and liquid synthetic fuel are undoubtedly more voluble qualitatively
than the initial coal. They can be used in steam generator plants where an effi-
ciency of 45 percent is achieved (compared to 41 percent at modern steam power
6835). In this regard, fuel economy of 10-12 percent is achieved. which essential-
ly completely compensates for the heat losses related to the process of plasma
gaeification of coal. The especially high conservation free use of these types of
fuel is determined, as is known, by the fact that optimum operating conditions of
thermoelectric power plants during the peak part of the load schedule of the energy
system are provided, including peak electric power plants with gas turbines.

It will apparently be economically feasible to use plasma gasification of coal with
respect to powerful gas-fired boiler units. Sufficiently reliable nulerical data
can be obtained in this regard only on the basis of a real design. Nevertheless.
the available estimates are favorable.

A plasma gaeifier with two operating oxygen plants with productivity of 10,000 m3

of oxygen each per hour, which consune energy of approximately 50 m, and with
plasmatrons having total output of approximately 100 MW will be required for a gas
fired boiler unit having capacity of 1,000 m, being developed at rem [Central
Scientific Research, Planning and Design Boiler and mrbine Institute imeni I. I.
Palzulov]. In this case the dust preparation and ash trapping equipment will be
the same as in a coal-pulverizing arms and only the plasma gasifier itself having
the form of a furnace chamber will be specific. Its cost cannot be relatively high
and should be approximately compensated for by a saving of capital expenditures on
the compact high-pressure steam generator of the gas-fired boiler.

The capital expenditures on the oxygen plant consisting of three machines with
total cost of 25.2 million rubles and also of the sulphur scrubbing plant. which
will cost 14.5 million rubles (according to data of GIAP) with output of 1 million
kw, are also specific. Thus, these total expenditures will ccsprise 25.2 + 14.5 -
39.7 million rubles.

Scrubbing the flue gases of a coal boiler plant of $02 is approximate in cost, as
is known, to the cost of the boiler plant itself, which comprises approximately 50
percent of the total capital expenditures of a coal-fired GEES. Therefore, using
specific capital expenditures on a 61135 of 110 rubles per standard kilowatt (with-
out sulphur scrubbing), we find capital expenditures for e coal-pulverizing boiler
plant of 85 million rubles. Consequmtly, one can sesuae approximately that the
capital expenditures for scrubbing the flue gases of so; in a coal-fired boiler
with output of 1 million It" will be approximately 85 million rubles.

-25-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Comparing the given figures, one can assume that development of a gas-fired boiler
rated at 1 million kw may provide a saving of several tens of million rubles (com-
pared to a coal-pulverizing boiler with the same capacity having sulphur scrubbing).
However, it may be that the main thing is that scrubbing the gases of hydrogen
sulfide has been totally developed and it is operationally simpler than scrubbing
flue gases of 502.

The mentioned efficiency of approximately 90 percent during plasma gasification de-
termines the yield of the potential thermal energy with respect to the potential
thermal energy in the initial fuel. But it can be increased if plasmatrons are
supplied with electric power from an ABS rather than from a thermoelectric power
plant. In this case the problem of conservation of fossil fuel by using nuclear
fuel, the timeliness of which was noted very clearly by Acadcnician A. P. Aleksan-l
drov in the mentioned article, will also be resolved to a known degree. By break-
ing down water vapor into oxygen and hydrogen and by enriching the produced gas
with hydrogen, this indicator can be raised significantly higher than unity. On
this basis one can also produce pure hydrogen and the efficiency of this process,
which proceeds at high temperature and in the presence of carbon, at least accord-
ing to thermodynamic calculations, is relatively very high. without going into
details, let us note that according to calculations, production of hydrogen using
plasma gasification of coal is three times more efficient than the electrolysis
method and is approximately 20 times more efficient than the cost of hydrogen.

'me idea of using nuclear power in production processes, including processes for
fuel refinement, has been discussed widely. But in this case one usually has in
mind the use of thermal energy produced from gas-cooled (helium) nuclear reactors
with gas tuxperature of 800-900’C. Development of this type of high-temperature
reactors is a complex task. We are talking here about use of electric power pro-
duced at ABS. In this case, of course the energy efficiency of the process is es-
sentially lower than when using thermal energy from a high-temperature reactor.
Nevertheless, the use of electric power from ES will generally be rational in the
future.

It is significant that efficient operation of a powerful gasifier according to the
diagram shown in Figure l, with purely oxygen air supply but without plasmatrons,
is impossible. In this case the considerable nonuniformity of the temperature
field which determines the moderation of the gasification process and also deter-
ioration of the quality of the gas due to the appearance of appreciable concentra-
tions of ballasting impurities of 002 and H20 in it are inevitable.

'lb avoid this, either a solid-bed gasifier similar to that shown in Figure 2 or a
so-called fluidized-bed gasifier‘ in which sufficient homogeneity of temperature
conditions in the coal gasification zone is provided is used with purely oxygen
air supply, but other problems which considerably restrict its unit output appear.
One of them is that the air blast in this gasifier is limited by entrainment from
the layer of fine fuel particles by the flow of generated gas moving through the
bed from bottom to top.

 

I

See: R. G. Schwieger, ”Burning ‘nomorrow's Fuels,“ POWER, Vol 123, No 2, 1979.

-25-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The technical problems of more or less uniform distribution of the incoming fuel
through the bed and also remval of slag and ash from it are also very comlex.
These problems are known to a specific degree by the experience of operating boiler
furnaces with block ousbustion of fuel in the bed. 'rheir fuel capacity is limited
to a maximum of approximately 15 tons/hr. unlike that, up to 500 tons of coal per
hour, as already mentioned, is burned in modern coal—pulverizing furnaces of steam
boilers. One can count on approximately the same jump upon conversion to plasma
gasification of coal dust. In this case a high temperature level in the gas jet
directly in the body of the plasma reactor is provided when using plasmatrons, due
to which the coal dust gasificatim process is mainly completed in the reactor it-
self. Therefore, the output of the gasifier is determined by the output of the

plasma reactor 2 and by the number of reactors installed on the walls of the
chamber 1 (see Figure l).

with regard to the conditions of actual realisation of plasma ossification of coal
on an industrial scale, they are quite realistic from a technical aspect. The in-
stallations with expansion turbine developed by Academician P. L. Kapitsa to pro-
duce oxygen from air are now being serially produced in our country with specific
expenditure of electric pom of approximately 0.4 kW/hr per 1 m3 of oxygen. Eburof
these installations, which is of course quite acceptable technically, are required
for a gasifier designed to refine 1,000 tons/hr of Kansk-Achinsk coal. As is
known, production and operation of oxygen installations of this type have been de-
veloped and they operate quite reliably with planned shutdown for preventive sain-
tenance evary one or two years.

Plasmatrons have until now been mainly produced in individual units. Nevertheless,
great success has been achieved in development of tha. hey are used mainly as
apparatus for heating to very high temperature one or another type of gas than
used for production purposes. Specifically, the plasma produced in this manner is
used for testing articles in a gas flow of very high temperature, for melting re-'
fractory materials and application of them in a then layer to articles and also
for other periodic processes. Plasmatrons also find application in continuous
processes of chemical and metallurgical technology. In this regard, the operating
life of plastmatrons, that is, the length of their continuous operation, also ac-
quires especially important significance. It is necessary that the operating life
of powerful plasmatrons comprise hundreds of hours with respect to plasma gasi-
fiers. There are specific difficulties, as specialists well know,. on the path
toward this goal. of course, many problems of a technical nature, related to pro~
vision of reliability and economy of operation, must be resolved when developing a
very high-output plasma gasifier. Work on solution of them is timely, very impor-
wt and at the same time attractive since we are really talking about a new
technology.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo 'Nauka", "Vestnik Wail nauk SSSR", 1980

6521
C50: 1841/57

-27-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTUCJAI.USE|JNLY

STATUS AND PROSPECTS FOR DEVELOPING USSR'S UNDERGROUND COAL GASIFICATION
Moscow KHIHIYA TVERDOGO TOPLIVA in Russian No 6, Nov-Dec 80 pp 57-60
[Article by K. N. Zvyagintsev, H. A. Kulakova and A. F. Volk]

[Text] The methods and prospects of underground coal
gasification in the USSR by blowing air and a steam-oxygen
mixture through a sea- are described.

Experimentation with and scientific research on underground coal gasification
were started in 1933 in lignite and coal deposits existing under different
mining and geological conditions. At this stage, identifying the processes
associated with underground coal gasification with those occurring in con-
ventional gas generators, researchers made it their objective to create and
perpetuate a "working" layer of fuel in an underground gas generator. This
approach was unsuccessful.

The-second state in experimentation with underground coal gasification, which
began in 1935, was based on the principle of gasifying coal and unworked deposits
without their artificial fractionation.

The procedure of underground coal gasification developed in the USSR is based on
shaftless preparation of underground gas generators, and gasification in channels
within which the coal interacts with air, steam, and gas blown through.

Shaftless preparation involves drilling vertical, slant, and slant-horizontal
boreholes into the coal seam from the surface of the ground, and creating gasifica-
tion channels passing between the boreholes through the coal seam.

The following methods are used to create reaction channels in the coal seam:
filtrational crosscutting or burning out of channels, which capitalizes on the
gas permeability of the coal seen, hydraulic disintegration of the coal sean with
water, and slant-horizontal drilling.

Reaction zones form in the gasification channels, and gasification begins, pro-
ceeding as a seni-inverted process. Chemical reactions proceeding in the reaction
channels are similar to those in a gas generator.

Combustible gas is obtained in channels of varying length (depending on the form
of the coal seam) by injecting air and stean into some holes and withdrawing gas

from others.
- 23 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As gas is removed from the coal scan. in response to rock pressure the overlying
material shifts to fill in the spaces from which gas had been removed. Owing to
this the dinensions andstructure of the gasification channels remain more or less
constant for a long period of tine. resulting in relative constancy of the coeposi-
tion of the obtained gas. Timely preparations involving drilling and crosscutting
of new holes insures a generally regular gas discharge.

The appropriate drying methods have been developed for flooded coal seams wider-
going gasification. These methods are also based on the shaftless principle,- and '
they generally entail pinging the underground water out of the corresponding hori-
zons through drain holes.

Practical undergroundcoal gasification projects were conducted with coal seams
varying in class (lignite and coal) situated in different mining and geological
conditions. Six experimental'industrial andindustrial undergromd coal gasification
stations operated in different periods of ties. mese enterprises were created
minly to solve technicaLproblem (with the exception of the 'Podsengaz' station

in Angren) , and their productive capacities were low.

Iuday there are two underground gasification stations, operating in the Soviet Union:
The Angren station in Central Asia, and the Yuzhno-Abinskaya station in the xuznetsk

Basin.

During the tine of their operation, they produced 21 million I3 of producer gas with
heat of combustion equal.to 9504.110 kcal/Ia3 (as opposed to the 750-800 ken/n9
achieved with the older system). the degree of utilization of industrial coal re-
serves was 100 percent, and the-chemical efficiency of gasification was 70 percent.
which exceeds the average‘achieved with the 'Podsemgas' station in Angren.

'ihe Yushno-Abinshaya station hasxbeen operating since 1955.- steeply slopingcoal
seams 150-320 meters deep are gasified. m seals are 3-10 meters thick. They
slope at a 55-57’ angle. 'lhe:coal seen is flooded. The underground water is

drained off during gasification.

Gasification of the coal seals entails injecting air into the initial gasification
channel, created by filtrational.crosscutting with air under high pressure and
hydraulic disintegration-of the coal seen through straight-holes. and withdrawal

of gas through slant gas wells drilled along the axis of the coal scan. the gas
wells are cased to a depth of 80-100 meters. and the distance'between straight holes

is 15-20 meters . '

Work was done at the Yushno-Abinskaya station to develop deep horizons (down to

320 asters). 'mis involved- shaftless preparation of the coal for~‘gasification and
shaftless drying of the coal formations -to insure high chemical efficiency of gasi-
fication and complete removal of .gas fro- the industrial coal reserves.

‘00 support the transition to operation of gas. generators at the Yuzhno-Abinskaya
station fro- 130-150 to 200-320 asters, a new method was developed for starting \p

gas wells, entailing creation of oounterpressure within then, which reduces the in-
flux of underground water into the area of channel burning.

-29-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLY

'noday. underground coal gasification is used as ameans for acquiring gas to be em-
ployed predominantly in power production. In terns of the future, however, it
should be considered that underground gas generators may become a major source of”
gases to be used in the production of synthetic chemicals (alcohols, amonis,

liquid fuel, and so on).

the positive experience of obtaining industrial gas from Moscow lignite in natural
conditions using experimental set-upsdemonstrated the real possibilities for this

process .

Industrial gas suited for synthesis of chemical products was obtained with an en-
riched oxygen blast mixture (65 percent 02) to which steam was added at a ratio of
300-400 gun/m3 blast mixture. The approximate composition of this industrial gas

was as follows, percent: st--2.9; air-28.4; Gwyn-4.2; CO--lS.6; lip-35; div-1.8;
tar-15.7.- 0-1.750 heal/m3. The minimum heat of coubustion of the gas following

removal of hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide is 2,300 kcal/ma. Gasification pro-
ceeded stably in time.

‘lhe energy crisis and the revealed shortageof natural gas and petroleum have made
it extremely important to utilize the enormous resources of solid fuel, which ex-
ceed the petroleum and gas reserves by dozens of times. In this connection a number
of capitalist countries (USA. Belgium, PR6, Canada, and so on) have resumed major
scientific research and experimentation in coal gasification and underground coal
gasification with the purpose of obtaining a natural gas substitute and a hydrogen-

containing raw material .

me work that has been done in the Soviet mion has raised considerable interest
among a nunber of developed capitalist countries seeking licenses. Thus Texas
Utilities Services, Inc., USA, obtainedalicense 'from the £588 in 1975 for the
underground coal gasificationprocess, and it is now using Soviet techmlogy to
develop underground gasification of lignite deposits in the state of 'nexas.

Much attention is also being devoted to underground coal gasification in developed
capitalist countries.such as the PRC, Belgium, and Japan, which have developed

extensive programs for production of low- and high-calorie gases, including one at
great depth under high pressure (40-60 kg/cmz) using a steam-oxygen blast mixture.

Considering the presence of significant coal reserves, , the limited reserves‘of
coal permitting open-pit mining, and the well known difficulties associated with
deep-shaft coal mining, our country could benefit from scientific research and
industrial experimentation on deep horizons with the objective of underground
gasification: there also may be advantages to.high-pressure blowing as well as

to utilization of coal deposits having a high concentration of sulfur and of high-
ash and high-moisture coal. Oxygen-enriched air would best be used as the blowing
agent. The experience of conventional mining operations has shown that at depths
greater than 700-800 meters, rock lining a coal seam acquires plastic properties.
therefore it can become an impermeable barrier preventing the passage of gases,
and owing to its defamation it may promote fast sealing of cracks formed during

exploitation, which should reduce gas leakage from the underground gas generator.

-30-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘lhe transition to greater depth should produce a nunber of technical advantages,
to include injecting blowing agent at higher pressure during gasification, and
reducing losses (leakage) of gas.

“hen high pressure (10—30 atmospheres). is used in underground coal gasification,
the heat of cosbustion of the gas rises due to change in the chemical eguilibriu
in the direction of methane fornation. Producer gas obtained under. pressure may be
utilized more effectively by electric power plants exploying a cosbined cycle: gas
turbine--stean turbine. From the econosdcal point of view the use of high pressure
makes it possible to reduce well diameter and significantly decrease the amount of
electric power consumed to transport the gas.

Gasification entailing the use of oxygen and oxygen-enriched air to which appro-
priate amounts of steam or carbon dioxide are added would make it possible to obtain
industrial gas of any composition whatsoever. suitable for synthesis of many chemical
products, and reducing gases for ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy.

Industrial gas production affords a possibility for sinple methods of H25 and 002
removal. and acquisition of gas with a high heat of coﬂustionnup to 4, 000 kcal/n3 ~-
that can be transported for a distance of 200-250 )ua without the use of compressors.

Thus deep underground coal gasification entailing the use of high-pressure oxygen-
air blowing agent mayproduce natural gas substitutes for synthetic chemical in-
dustry. however, new high-pressure gasification procedures will have to be develond
for deep gasification, and the nunber. of wells emloyed will have to be decreased
with the goal of reducing their influence upon the cost of the gas.

Use of coal having a high sulfur and moisture content in underground coal gasifica-
tion also seems to be promising. Rigs-sulfur coal cannot be used in gasification
processes on the ground in connection with formation of so; during casbustion, which
pollutes the environment; moreover it is impossible to clean the coal beforehand
without smjecting it to thermal processing. In underground gasification of high-
sulfur coal. bound sulfur contained in the coal transforms into hydrogen sulfide,

which cm easily be renoved from the gas.

Evaluating the advantages. of undergroundcoal gasification, we should note the
following features accompanying'this processs' Beavy work harmful to hunan: health

is eliminated undergroundand in transportation of the fuel: additional preparation
of the fuel by the consumer is not required: the condition of the air basin inroves.
'me fertile soil layer is not disturbed, and the need for duping waste rock over
large areas is eliminated.

Conclusions

1. The procedures for underground coal gasification at depths down to 320 neters
have been developed in the Soviet union. . .

when air is used as the blast agent, the heat of combustion of gas produced by
underground gasification of lignite is 700-800 heal/n3, and that of coal is

-31-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BOO-1,050 Real/n3. The heat of combustion of. gas produced by undexground gasitica-
tion rises to 1,800 heal/1:3 with the use of a steam-oxygen blast mixture at con-

ventional pressure.

2. The procegluzes developed in the Soviet Union are a dependable foundation for
underground guiflcation of deeply lying coal with a steam-oxygen blast mixture at

a pressure of 20-30 atmospheres.

(DPYRIGm': Izdatel'etvo ”Nauka". “Khan'- tverdogo topli've“. 193°

11005
C50: 8144/0626-4

-32-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ORGAROPHOSPHORUS COMPOUNDS

UDC 577.1

NEW SELECTIVE ACARICIDES IN SERIES OF TBIOETHYNYL 313285 0? THIOPHOSPHORIC AND
DITHIOPROSPHORIC ACIDS

Moscow DOKLADY AKADEMII NAUK $583 in Russian Vol 259, No 2, 1981 (manuscript
received 28 Oct 80) pp 6710—1077

[Article by T. I. Vasil'yeva, K. N. Savchenko, Ye. K. Balashova, V. I. Rosengart,

0. Ye. Sherstobitov. A. P. Brestkin, L. A. Vikhreva, N. N. Godovikov,
N. B. Abdullayev, B. D. Abiyurov and Academician H. I. Kabachnik. Institute of
Organcelemental Compounds imeni Nesmeyanov, USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] The creation of new, selectively-acting insect acaricides is an important
task in the search for compounds meeting modern demands. 0f great value are
compounds which not only have a low toxicity for warm-blooded animals but also
show a selective activity with respect to various species of Arthropods. we
have found just such effects in studying the insect scsricidal activity of
2,6-diphenyl-3-methyl-é-(dialkoxyphosphorylmercaptoethynyl)piperidine-k-olea

(I) and their corresponding dithio derivatives (II):

 

 

\\oa a-cu.. c.a., c.n,, c.n,; x-om x- so!)

u 0—;-
’ on

Ci!

CJI, N" .N.

In each group of compounds were also studied stable epimers with an equitorial
(E) and axial (A) arrangement of the substituted ethynyl group.

The synthesis of the compounds studied has been described previously (1, 2).
For the substances named, the antiestersae activity was studied relative to
acetylcholine esterase of human erythrocytes (AChE), butyrylcholine estersse
of horse blood serum (BChB), choline esterase (ens). and carboxyl esterase
(K88) of the spider mite. as well as the insecticidal and acaricidal activity

for several species of Arthropods.

Change in the choline esterase activity was deter-ined by the Ellman method

(3) using acetylthiocholine or propionylthiogholine (for mites) as the sub-
strate, in a concentration of 1'10'3 H at 25 c. In determining the activity

0f carboxyl esterase, the substrate was paranitrophenylthioacetate (1‘10'3H).

The antiesterase activity of the compounds was expressed in the form of a
bimolecular constant of anzyme inhibition rats (kII).

- 33 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contact insecticidal activity was determined on the cereal aphid (Schizaphis
graminum Rood) , rice weevil (Sitophilus oryzae L.) and mealy bug (Pseudococcus
martinus L.). Contact acaricidal action was studied on the ordinary spider
mite (Tetranychus urticae Koch) and acariphage phytosyulus (Phytosyulus
persimiles Ah). The substances investigated were used in the form of an
emulsion. The Arthropods were sprayed in Petri dishes in the amount of 0.005
ml of working fluid per 1 cnﬂ. In determining the scaricidal activity, kidney
beans populated by the lite the day before were carefully sprayed. The aperi-
ment was repeated three times, with 30-50 experimental specimens each time.

The toxic effect was determined for the cereal aphid after 24 hours; the spider
mite and phytosyulus. after 68 hours; the scaly bug and rice weevil, 1.3 and

5 days after treatment. The criterion for estimating the compounds' toxicity
was the amount of CKSO, whose calculation was done using the method of least

squares for probit analysis of the curves of lethality (b).

Table l. Antiesterase Activity of Compounds of the Structure:

 

...... -_.___._ _-___.———————_ _ __ ______

. uo eec-s-iN0hh
0.". a“:

N” .
«um an") (1)

cu. A 140' 1.3-10‘ mo' ‘ 5.5-“?
on. s 1 . no' 1340* I ~ 10’ - 1.0- 10'
c,u. A new 3540' 3340* 4.04:»
cm. 3 5.4-10' 4.2-10' 1.0-10‘ 2.9- m
can, A 1.9. 10'. 45-10“ - Lso 10*
cm, 3 0.1.10' 1.: - 10' m- m‘ 2.4 - 10'
cm: A 1.0- 10'. 3.5- w' 1 -10.‘ 5.0- no"
c.u: a . 3.9-10' 6.0- w' 1. 10' 6.6- w'

'mmmommustSImesm-ummw
(7)mm usmmaupmmssmlunemmpumM-b_
mfﬁm

Key: 1. (an'1 min-1)

2. Bpimer

3 . AChB

6. 36h!

5 O Chg

6 . K33

7. These compounds have a reversible type of inhibition relative to

Bchl’. and carboxyl esterase; therefore, their activity is expressed in
the form of ISO' i.e., the concentration at which 50% inhibition is
observed.

_ 34 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The toxicity fur na-Ials was determined on white nice by the Kerber nethod with
subcutaneous injection of the conpounds in a 50! solution of dinethylsulfoxide
in a value of 0.05-0.l ml per 10 g. and expressed in sg/Itg.

The results of detenining the entiesterase action of the nonothio derivatives
are presented in Table 1. It can be seen from this table that all the substances
are distinguished by their low ability to depress choline esterase. of varying
origin, and nits carboxyl eaterase. Clear differences are not distinguished
between the epiners. All the substances are inhibitors of an irreversible type

of action, with the exception of dibutoxy derivatives. which are reversible
inhibitors for BChE and BB.

The nonothio and dithio derivatives studied exhibited low entomotoxicity.

For exasple, in the 0.12 concentration for the cereal aphid, all the substances
investigated induced death in the range of 15-252; for the rice weevil and
nealy bug, 1-21.

Table 2 presents the results of deternining the toxicity of the compounds for
sites and nice.

The toxicity for mice is clearly expressed, and. according to the classification
used (5), the substances investigated can be considered sedan-toxic. The

E episer is 1.5-2 tines less toxic than epiler A. The clinical picture of the
toxic effect does not have the indications of cholinergic stimlation (saliva-
tion. exophthalnia, intensified intestinal peristalsis, and others) so
characteristic of poisoning by anticholine esterase substances. The absence of
inhibition of AchE of the brain, during action of the substances in lethal
doses, also in an indication against an anticholinesterase nechanian of death
in the nice. It should be noted that the dithio derivatives are practically
undistinguished in toxicity froe the nonothio derivatives, which also is
completely uncharacteristic for conpounds with anticholinesterase action.

All the substances tested exhibit acaricidal properties to one degree or
another, despite their low anticholinesterase activity. The nest pronounced
effect with respect to the ordinary spider mite is possessed by diethoxy- and
dipropoxy derivatives of the nonothiophosphates, which are almost as toxic as
the standard Roger. Differences between the epiners were not noted with these
conpounds.

-35-

FOR 0mm USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Toxicity for Mice and Rites of Coupounda of the Type:

 

A 8

3 S
C. ll. A 3 190 0.003
C. II, 3 3 5 I0 0.0I0
C. II, A I 110 0.0"
Q", 3 S 390 0.027
ac: A o no
cu: 3 o no
0. II. A 0 160 am
C, II, 3 0 330 0.0“
C. II. A 0 220 0.001
C, II, 3 0 390 0,“
C. II, A 0 2H 0.05

( 6 ) Cd]. 3 0 330 0.052

m m.

Key :

1. Epiner

2. Mice, LD , walks
3. Spider .1393

lo. Phytosyuluo

5. Selectivity index
6. Rogor

7. (Standard)

8. (with ineruion)

0.0”
M23
0.031
0.00:

0.009
0.010
0013
0.012
0."

0.110

-35-

0063 0.! 20
0.190 0.600
0130 0.290
0.120 0.210
0.360 0.80
0.300 M90
0.200 0.360
0.310 0.‘ I0
0.230 on 10
0.00005

(In «v-

unnu) ( 8’

9.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I!

[9
1.2
‘0‘

52
33

33

4,6

12
50

6.4

The compounds are low-to:
at a concentration of OJ
the death rate was 10 to
FOR‘OFFK3A1.USE(MNLY

For the compounds studied, a minor toxicity was established for the predatory
mites phytosyulus, which is widely used in agriculture to combat the spider mite
under closed soil conditions. These substances are substantially more toxic for
the spider mite than for the acariphage. The selectivity index (ratio of CKSO

or CK95 of the entomophage to CK 0 or CKa of the phytophage) for the more

active compounds reaches 35-52 a cxs a 3 36-72 at CK95. The highest selectivity
(52-72‘ belonss t0 the Cpiﬂer (B) of 2he diethoxymonothio derivative.

At the present time, it is difficult to answer the question of the possible
mechanism of action of the compounds studied, and to what their acaricidal
activity and selectivity of action are due. It can only be noted that the
initial nonphosphorylated alcoha} n _sj;ycture

 
 

.Nu
does not have an acaricidal activity, as our experiments have shown.

In evaluating the acaricidal action mechanics of the substances studied, attention
should be directed to the fact that this action is not at all correlated with
their ability to inhibit choline esterase of the spider mite. A comparison of

the data in Tables 1 and 2 shows that even high-acaricidal compounds, as a rule,
have an extremely low anticholinesterase activity while the only substance with

a relatively high activity (5% - l 10* H ‘1 ain't) shows no difference whatsoever

from compounds close to it. gse anticholinesterase activity is lower by a
factor of two.

The question of the reasons for such a selectivity is of great theoretical
interest. Answering this question requires fundamental research, directed on

the one hand towards studying the physiological peculiarities of Arthropods,

in particular, elucidating the mechanism of death of Arthropods given poisoning
by organophosphorous compounds of this type; and on the other hand, towards the
ability of this type of substance to affect other vital systems besides choline
esterase. The solution of these theoretical questions can have far-reaching
practical consequences, involving creation of new, highly effective insectoacari-
cides.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Abdulayev, N. 3., VESTNIK AN KazSSR, No 10, 68, 1979.

2. Godovikov, N. N., Abdullayev, N. B. and Abiyurov, B. D., IZVBSTIYA AN Xa258R,
Ser. Khim [Chemical Series], No 6, $9, 1979.

3. Ellnan, 6., BIOCHEH. PHARMACOL., V 7, 88, 1961.

4. Prozorovskiy, V. B. PHARHAKOLOGIYA I TOKSIKOLOCIYA, t 25, No 1, 115, 1962.
5. Spravochnik po pestitsidam [Pesticides Directory], Kiev, "Urozhsy", 1977.
COPYRIGHT: lzdatelstvo “ﬂanks", "Doklady Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

9875

cso: 18411169 _ 37 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PETROLEUM PROCESSING TECHNOLOGY

UDC 551538.000

DEVELOPMENT 01’ 313mm HYDROCARBON RESOURCES
Moscow VBSTNIK MM! NAUK $881! in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 55-61

[Article by I. V. Kalechits, head of the chemistry section, State Co-ittee for
Science and Technology, doctor of chemical sciences: "Problems of the Chemical
and Energy Utilization of Siberia'a Hydrocarbon Reaources"]

[Text] With its i-ense raw material and energy resources. Siberia has long

been a base for the accelerated development of power intensive chemical industrial
processes. Long-range national economic plans provide for rapid development rates
of the chemical industry in the eastern regions of the country compared with the
European part, especially its power intensive subsectors. A series of large-
scale scientific and technical problems must be solved if these plans are to
achieve fruition.

The USSR State Cosmittee for Science and Technology, USSR Gosplan and USSR
Academy of Sciences have jointly developed a series of specific integrated
programs and programs for solving the most important scientific and technical
problem, which will be implemented during the 11th and 12th Five-Year Plans.
As is known, the difference between the two types of progress is that in the
specific integrated ones, besides scientific and experimental design work,
measures are stipulated for the application of new developments to the extent
required for complete satisfaction of the economy's needs, i.e., the corresponding
tasks will become part of the national economic plan. The latter type of
programs also become an integral part of the plan for the social and economic
develop-eat of the USSR, but terminate upon establishment of the initial pro-
duction or the first industrial series.

Almost all programs in the chemical field contain tasks for the development of
Siberia'a natural resources and constructing large-scale chemical enterprises
there, including several which are unique in our country or are the first of
their kind in the world.

Foremost among the most important tasks of such programs, and the scientific
problems which must be solved to realize them, are questions of optimal
chemical and energy utilization of Siberia's hydrocarbon resources. Siberia
has already become a main supplier of this resource, and its role in producing
oil, gas and their substitutes will continue to grow in coming decades.

-33-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the last seven or eight years, the efficient use of hydrocarbon resources has
become a major world problems, which basically revolves around the growing
disproportion between the structure of consumption of various types of organic
resources (primarily for producing energy) and the correlation of their natural
reserves. According to UN data, world organic fuel consumption is presently
running at 8.8 billion tons of conventional fuel per year, of which oil, gas
condensate and natural gas account for 672, and bituminous and brown coal account
for 332. The proportion of oil and gas consumed is even higher in the industrially
developed nations. In the United States, for example, they provide 74.12 of its
energy, while coal accounts for lid! (hydroelectric stations account for 3.52,
and atomic power plants for 3.92) . Besides power generation, this resource's
use is also increasing in the chemical indus ry. Some 95% of organic synthesis
products currently are asde from oil and gas , and since the scale of this pro-
duction is growing rapidly, the chemical use of oil and gas is being colpared
with that of energy. According to predictions3, by the year 2000 the chenical
industry (excluding the socialist countries) will use 17% of all oil consumed,
and 502 by the year 2020.

However, according to the moat objective estinates, provided in 1978 at the 10th
World Energy Conference. the structure of world-wide geological resources and
proven recoverable reserves of organic stocks is diametrically opposite that of
fossil organic fuel consunption: bituminous and brown coal account for 932 of
all geological resources and 762 of all proven r coverable resources, while oil
and gas account for only 7 and 262, respectivelyz.

It is obviously impossible to maintain such a disproportion for long, or
intensively increase oil and gas output. The near future will see a stabiliza-
tion, then reduction in their production. These factors have led to the enormous
interest throughout the world in energy conservation and the additional use of
coal and other alternative energy sources in the fuel energy balance.

Although the Soviet Union has substantial reserves of oil and gas, primarily due
to its Siberian desposits, we also have an obligation to provide for the country's
future by developing measures to supplement these resources and use them
efficiently.

The set of specific integrated progress and the programs for solving the most
important scientific and technical problems, developed by the State Cousittee
for Science and Technology. Gosplan and USSR Academy of Sciences for 1981-1985.
is directly or indirectly devoted to these issues.

A prise example of this is the specific integrated program to develop processes
and equipment for producing synthetic liquid and gas hydrocarbons fro. oil and
other non-petroleum resources. Such a program, developed for the first time in
the country's history, is to create the scientific and technical base for a new
branch of the economy: synthetic fuel production. Under this progras. in the
1980's various technological solutions in this field will be tested at large-
scale industrial pilot plants; the technical and economic basis for building the
first industrial enterprise will be developed, and its construction will be

-39-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

initiated in the 12th Five-Year Plan. Once these problems are solved, the
country will be in a position to set up a series of enterprises whose output will
supplement our liquid and gas fuel resources, and the chemical industry's raw
material base, through hydrogenation and gasification of coal. The program
primarily involves the processing of inexpensive Kansk-Achinsk coal, so the work
will basically take place in Siberia.

The program provides for the construction of large-scale industrial pilot plants
for:

- high-speed coal pyrolysis, with corresponding units for processing the
pyrolysis products: semicoke and tar. This plant will make it possible to
obtain data to develop methods of combining pyrolysis with energy production, and
using the products obtained as chemical raw material;

- liquefaction of coal by the hydrogenation method. The plant's operation
will lead to selection of the optimal version for obtaining synthetic oil or
synthetic gasoline on an industrial scale; and

- gasification of coal, followed by acquisition of methanol or hydrocarbons
from the gas synthesis. There are various possibilities here, including that of
combining hydrocarbon synthesis with HID electric power generation, being
developed by Krasnoyarsk scientists. The process of obtaining liquid fuels from
methanol can be very promising; catalysts for this are currently being developed
in the Catalysis Institute of the Siberian Branch of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

This program will be of great national importance, since its implementation will
make it possible to guarantee the USSR's fuel energy balance against any con-
tingencies. The program also determines the most economic method of transmitting
cheap Siberian power to the European part of the country. This might be
synthetic oil and pipeline transport, or refined coal, or electric power trans-
mitted by superconducting transmission lines.

The goal of this program is thus to replenish future hydrocarbon resources. At
the same time, their intensive conservation is no less important, and even more
pressing. We are presently using a significant portion of oil in the form of
fuel oil as boiler fuel. At one time, switching the power industry to fuel oil
was a progressive step, since oil was a good deal cheaper and it was more
profitable to invest in developing its production. However, this situation will
change substantially in the near future. If we take the adjusted cost for 1 ton
of conventional fuel in the form of oil in 1975 to be 1002, then according to the
branch's economic institutes this index for various types of fuel in the future
will amount to:

 

 

Fuel 1975 1980 1990
Oil 100 142 180*
Gas 112 98 116

Coal (USSR average) 168 136 129
Kansk-Achinsk coal - 54 56

* for the worst deposits: 506%

- so -

FOR(NHNC1AL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

These data reveal a clear tendency: the adjusted cost for producing oil is
growing very quickly; for producing gas, it is still growing slowly, but this
growth will obviously accelerate in the future, while coal production expenses
are constantly declining (basically due to an increase in the number of open
fields). The use of oil for energy will be unprofitable compared with coal in
the 11th Five-Year Plan, and even more so subsequently.

Economic factors are thus making the efficient replacement of oil in the power
industry into an essential task, along with comprehensive reduction in enesrgy
costs and resource losses in the oil refining, petrochemical and chemical in-
dustries.

Since up to three-fourths of these branches' output is attained using catalytic
processes, a very important factor in resolving the problem of the efficient

use of hydrocarbon resources is the improvement of catalysts, together with an
expansion and modernization of the range available. The Scientific Council for
Catalysis of the State Committee for Science and Technology, in conjunction with
the appropriate ministries, has developed a specific integrated program for
creating and developing the production of new, highly-effective, low-temperature
catalysts and expanding and modernizing their range. This program has been
approved by the State Committee, Gosplan and the USSR Academy of Sciences, and
provides for:

- construction of specialised catalyst production firms, whose operation
will make it possible to raise their quality substantially;

- complete satisfaction of the economy's demand for catalysts, which had
been initiated in the 10th Five-Year Plan;

— development and introduction of 65 new types of catalysts during the 11th
Five-Year Plan:

- development of new, efficient methods of using (burning) hydrocarbon fuels
for energy purposes by means of catalytic heat regenerators (GER), whose intro-
duction will enable a reduction in fuel consumption and in the size and com-
plexity of equipment. The use of CHR's is especially promising for medium-
temperature power production: reactant heating, heat supply, drying processes
during useful ore concentration;

- development of theoretical catalysis foundations and 56 catalysts for
introduction in the 12th Five-Year Plan; and

— introduction of methods for mathematical simulation of chemical reactions
and optimizing their effect.

Although the main economic effect from this program's implementation will accrue
from the increase in the industrial plants' product quality and productivity, the

task of lowering the temperature limits of technological processes by creating
new catalysts capable of operating at temperatures 1oo-1so° lower than those now

- 51 -

FOIIOFIIC1A1.U8213NLY
FOR 0F11C1AL.USEIJNLY

used, is no less important. Thermodynamic calculations have confirmed this
POSSibilitys. For example. petrochemical processes currently use an average of
1.37 tons of conventional fuel (or 1 ton of fuel oil) for processing 1 ton of raw
material in producing the steam and heat required in the refining process, and
0.18 tons of conventional fuel to produce electric power. According to calcula-
tions, lowering fuel consumption by raising catalysts, selectivity and reducing
the temperatures of technological processes the temperature will enable a savings
of tens of millions of tons of oil annually.

It should be emphasized that this catalysis program, which has great national
importance and was drawn up by more than 100 of the country's scientific institu-
tions, will be directed and coordinated by a Siberian institute: the Catalysis
Institute of the Siberian Branch of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Scienti-
fic Council for Catalysis of the USSR Academy of Sciences, which are headed by
academician G. K. Boreskov. Many of this program's important tasks will also be
carried out in Siberia. For example, at the Omsk oil Refining Plant will be
organized the production of a new microspheric catalyst modified by rare earths.
This catalyst, used in the catalytic cracking process, will raise the gasoline
output from 30 to 382 and save a substantial amount of raw material. In the llth
Five-Year Plan, the hydrorefining plants of the Omsk and Angers oil refining
plants will be switched to a new aluminonickalmolybdenum catalyst, which will
raise their productivity by almost 1.5 times. 011 refining plants being built
lately in Siberia are already completely designed for the new catalysts, meaning
that they will also provide a substantial savings of raw material.

Hydrocarbon resource conservation is an important part of another specific
integrated program, devoted to developing and mastering the production of new
polymeric and composition materials. Called norplasts, these are a mixture of
organic and inorganic components. A new method for filling a polymer with in-
organic fillers, developed at the Institute of Chemical Physics of the USSR
Academy of Sciences under the direction of academician N. S. Yenikolopov, will
make it possible with the introduction of 50-501 filler to obtain materials
equivalent to those made of pure polymers. Both the materials's production cost
and the use of hydrocarbon raw material are almost halved. A method has also been
developed for introducing filler in the amount of 90%, resulting in an excellent
incombuatible insulation and finishing material for construction. whereas most

of the scientific research on this program will be done by Moscow teams, the
production of polyethylene, polymerization-filled by the new method, will begin
at the Tomsk Chemical Plant, where the world's first plant producing such materials
will be built.

The entry into operation of large-scale polypropylene and polyvinyl chloride
production capacity at Siberia's chemical plants during the llth Five-Year Plan
will create very favorable conditions for the widespread use of norplasts, and
their future large-capacity production will yield an economic savings calculated
in hundreds of millions of rubles.

Closely associated with this group of specific integrated programs is the one for
solving the scientific and technical problem of creating and mastering tech-
nological processes and integrated automatic plants providing an increase in the
degree of oil refining.

- ‘2 -

FIMICNHHCJAI.USEGDNLY
FYNRGDFIICLAL UEEZCM‘LY

It was indicated above that the use of oil for energy is becoming unprofitable.
As already stated, our oil processing plants are currently producing a large
amount of fuel oil which is used as boiler fuel. However, in the upcoming decade
it will no longer be possible to meet the growing demand for irreplaceable
petroleum products (gasoline, aircraft kerosene, diesel fuel, electrode coke,

and others) by increasing the volume of oil refining, as in the past. It will
therefore be necessary to develop processes for producing them from fuel oil,
which in turn will be replaced at heat and electric power stations by coal.

The program calls for creation and introduction at oil refining plants of
processes for refining sulfurous and high sulfur fuel oils into white products
by methods of thermal and catalytic cracking, hydrocracking, carbonization and
hydrorefining.

Siberian oil refining plants will also be modernized, and in some areas will
become pioneers.

Many other specific integrated programs and programs for solving the most important
scientific and technical problems are indirectly related to the question of
efficient use of hydrocarbon resources. Those of them directly involving Siberia
should also be briefly mentioned.

The program for creating and introducing new processes for low-capacity chemical
product output, providing a substantial increase in the technological properties
and improvement in the quality of materials, has been formulated according to
economic criteria, not by branch or scientific feature. This involves chemical
substances whose use in small amounts results in substantial qualitative changes
in commercial products, thus yielding a significant economic savings. Very
different chemical compounds can meet these requirements: therefore, the program
is divided into a series of subprograms, providing for creation and industrial
production of:

- new effective polymer stabilizers, including development of methods to
regulate their stability;

- materials for instrument making, information equipment and biochemistry
(ferro- and piezoelectrics for electronics, silver-free photographic materials,
holographic information recording materials, amino acids for making synthetic
protein compounds, and other materials for new, fast developing economic branches);

- additives for lubricating materials;

- new, more effective surfactants;

- new products of fine organic synthesis (paints, pigments, textile additives,
chemical additives for polymers, flotation agents, and others).

Just a list of the groups of chemical compounds whose production development is
envisaged by this program shows that many of them can help replenish resources and
conserve hydrocarbon raw materials. In particular, these are: surfactants

- 43 -

FIHICMWWCJA1.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which enable an increase in oil pool output; stabilizers and additives which
increase the durability of polymer products and thus lower the need for organic
raw materials to produce polymer materials; additives to lubricate which lower
their consumption standards, etc.

It should be noted that. as a rule, the organization of production of low-capacity
chemical production--in particular, of fins organic synthesis products-is
preceded by tests of many tens, sometimes hundreds of individual chemical com-
pounds, of which only the best are used. It is therefore extremely important

that the search for new, potentially effective fine organic synthesis products

be pursued as intensively as possible in the country's scientific institutions,
including those of Siberia. He already have a screening system for fine organic
synthesis products, so that any basic research in this field will be useful.

The specific integrated program for creating and developing the production of new
plant protection chemical agents is also primarily based on hydrocarbon raw
materials. It thus operates on the same principles: assuring maximum selectivity
of the synthesis process, and conserving raw materials and energy by improving

the technology of these processes. It should be pointed out that certain pesti-
cides are being created specifically for Siberia's conditions. These include
oxamate, a repellent to combat blood-sucking insects, and linuron, a herbicide

for soy crops. These compounds will be issued in the 11th Five-Year Plan.

The program for developing lubricant production also contains special tasks for
meeting Siberia's requirements. These include the development of all-usather
motor oils capable of functioning in the Far North, and production of motor oils
for heavy-freight vehicles. These oils are already being used in vehicles working
on BAH construction, and will be widely used in the future for auto transport on
other Siberian routes.

This far from complete list of the most important tasks provided by the 1981-1985
programs describes clearly enough the growing role and importance of Siberia

in the development of the essential and energy-intensive branch of the economy
represented by the chemical industry.

FOOTNOTES

1. cf: Lange, 0., Oil and Gas Journ., 1978, v 76, ho 5, p 119.

2. cf: Heissermel, K.. Arpe, H.-J., Industrielle Organische chemie
[Industrial Organic Chemistry], Heinheim, New York, 1976.

3. CEER, 1978, v 10, No 8, p 26.
6. X Hirovaya energeticheskaya konferentsiya [10th World Economic Conference],
in the book Energetika mira [World Power Engineering], Moscow ENERGIYA [Energy],
1979.
5. Cf. Kslechits, I. V., NYEPTEKHIHIYA [Petrochemistry], 1979, No 19, p 685.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

9875
cso: 1861/148 - u. -
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MISCELLANEOUS

IRSTALLATIONS FOR RECOVERY O? BBLIUH FRO" LOU-GEADE MATERIAL

Moscow VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian lo 9, Sep 80 [page numbers not
provided]

[Article by I. L. Andreyev]

[Text] Thanks to its unique physical properties, helium is used widely in a
number of new sectors of science and technology and, at present, the future
progress of these sectors depends greatly upon the availability of an adequate
supply of helium. Natural gas is the primary raw material for recovery of helium.
Therefore, the establishment and rapid setting into operation of large-scale,
automated installations for recovery of helium from this gas is a vital national
economic problem.

Meanwhile, the helium level in gas of the Orenburg deposit is, in all, 100's

of a percent while gases of most operational deposits in the world contain from
0.6 percent up to 8 percent of helium. Therefore, problems of the technology of
helium recovery and the equipment set-up are much simpler abroad than they are
here.

Some thought that our scientific and technical forces and our industry were
unsuitable for development and construction of installations for large-scale
helium recovery from such low-grade raw material as that found in Orenburg. Two
American firms "Fluor" and "Airproducts", the French firm "Tekhnip" and the west
Germany firm "Linde" presented proposals for the design and supply of equipment
for an Orenburg gas and chemical complex. The prices, however, were prohibitive.
The Americans, in spite of the fact that they have nearly 1 billion cubic meters
in storage at Cliffside, demanded these incredible prices for helium.

Organization of large-scale production of helium on the basis of domestic designs
and domestic equipment was proposed in a report of the director of the Sumy
Machine Construction Industrial Union (SHPO) imeni a. V. Prunse, V. H. Luk'yanenko
and the author of this report. In 1970, work was begun on the development of the
Orenburg gas and chemical complex. Nearly 130 scientific research, drawing and
design and construction and installation organizations of more than 20 ministries
participated in construction of the helium plant.

- as -

FtIICIHHCJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Installations for producing helium concentrate constitute the basic, critical
section of the helium plant. A critical factor in their operation is the con-
densation (liquefaction) of components of the natural gas by deep freezing for
separation and recovery of the products required. In this case, there are plans
for recovery, in the future, of the ethane fraction and the light hydrocarbons
fractions in addition to the helium.

After a comparative workup of several alternatives, a flow chart of concentration
of the helium after liquefaction of a direct flow of the natural gas by coooled
refluxes of gas was selected. The gas is refrigerated by triple throttling
(rarefaction). In addition to this, a propane and then a nitrogen refrigerating
plant are incorporated as additional sources of cold.

After liberation of the ethane fraction, a supplemental turbo-expansion engine
is engaged. The scheme has high efficiency and is protected by two inventors'
certificates: “A Method For Recovery of helium and Ethane" and "A Hethod For
Recovery of Helium and Ethane From Law-Grade Helium-Bearing Cases."

The helium concentrate obtained contains 90-92 percent of helium as well as
nitrogen. hydrogen and traces of methane. The concentrate then passes into
special fine refining installations, where helium of 99.985-99.995 percent purity
is recovered.

A series of installations for producing the concentrate was planned for the
Orenburg helium plant. There were no installations of such capacity, which
operate on low-grade gases, anywhere in the world.

Basic problems encountered in the establishment of the industrial installation
for processing a large volume of gas with such low concentrations of helium
involved assurance of the necessary helium recovery factor (in view of its solu-
tion in liquefied fractions of the refined raw material) and maximal reduction of
energy expenditures. There was the need to solve a group of scientific and
technical problems, associated with development of a flow chart and construction
of equipment, methods of design of the technological process and apparatus, with
the organization of new production of unique apparatus and mastery of manufacture
of large, unitized apparatus and also the need to solve complex problems of
installation of heavy equipment. communications and accessories under highly con-
strained conditions (the need for maximal compactness of disposition of apparatus
to prevent cold loss) in the severe climate of the Orenburg steppe.

In this report, we can only mention the main efforts of the major contributors
to the operation. -

The Leningrad Scientific Research and Design Institute of Chemical Machinery
developed the technological process of production of the helium concentrate and
its fine refinement, made calculations for flow charts and apparatus, and
developed designs of apparatus and complete units. The institute developed
instructions for operation and helped to compile operational regulations, carried
out the inventor's inspection during preparation, installation and start-up.

- 66 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The installation designed at the Leningrad Scientific Research and Design
Institute of Chemical Machinery and the apparatus incorporated into it represent
a significant innovation and are protected by 12 inventors' certificates. .Its
refined gas productivity, provided by the design, is eight times greater than
that of our largest existing installation.

We must emphasize that the increase in productivity provides the required effect
only when the individual capacity of each technological link of the layout
matches its overall productivity, since poor performance of one link cannot be
compensated by apparatus of lower capacity operating in parallel.

This condition was predetermined by the many difficulties arising in the course
of development of such large-scale units as these.

In particular, one of the most important and most complex technical problems
was production of heavy pipe systems of heat exchange apparatus of units for
preliminary cooling and condensation of the gas. Heat exchangers were designed
with small, twisted pipes of 0.6 cm inside diameter which permit creation of an
extremely large surface per unit of volume. To give an idea of the scales
involved, we may say that this apparatus is 37 m high and weighs 160 tons. One
heat exchanger contains 36,000 pipes with an overall length of nearly 600 km.

A basic problem in delaying production of such heat exchangers was the develop-
ment of a reliable method of fastening 10's of 1000's and, in terms of the

entire installation, 100's of 1000's of small pipes into the tube plates. In
order that these large systems with such a relatively weak spot as the fastening
of a vast number of pipes could operate successfully for a long time, it was
necessary to select construction materials and methods of joining them which
ensure prolonged operation at low temperature and high pressure and which with-
stand millions of vibration cycles. Vibration was unavoidable due to the turbu-
lence which arises in the gas flows and the liquid-steam mixture under such high
pressure at the entry of the system, as was required here. These turbulent
phenomena cannot be calculated theoretically and, therefore, estimation of them
requires the use of empirical methods and performance of full-scale tests
(extensometering) with subsequent calculations involving the use of an electronic
computer. Hany new problems had to be solved in the course of installation and
testing of the equipment and. in particular, the creation of new inspection
procedures both in operation and in general form, including the familiar physical.
mass-spectrometric and luminescence methods and new combinations of these.

The Sumy Machine Construction Industrial Union imeni H. V. Prunze, producer of
the basic equipment, mastered the technology of mechanized coiling of the pipe
systems of the heat exchangers with a mass of individual sections of up to 80

tons. A specialised section, at which the aggregate of complex equipment was

concentrated, was created for this purpose.

- 47 -

FOI.OIIWCJAI.USBGNNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Sumy Union, in collaboration with the Leningrad NII [Scientific Research
Institute] and the UkSSR Academy of Sciences Electro-Hydraulics m [planning
and design office], developed and introduced a process of electropulsed pressing
of pipes in the tube plates, which is one component of the project. The combina-
tion of high productivity and high and consistent quality of the connections made
this technological process indispensable for fastening the small-diameter pipes.
Specialized sections, equipped with modern electropulsed processing apparatus,
were created to carry out these operations.

For production of the equipment, the union used, for the first time, cladded
tube plates as envisaged by the design: these are 2-layer plates with a base
high-strength layer made from ferrite-pearlite steel and the clad layer made
from high-alloy austenite steel: cladding was produced by explosion. This per-
mitted savings of much expensive high-alloy steel, while ensuring the required
quality of the equipment.

Fulfillment of all of the basic organizational and technical measures, the
carefully worked out welding technology, assembly and monitoring guaranteed
production of high-quality equipment required for the project.

The VIIIIgaz [All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Natural Gas] and the
Leningrad Scientific Research and Design Institute of Chemical Machinery de-
veloped fundamental technological schemes of production and fine refinement of
helium concentrate, conducted experimental studies of the properties of helium,
developed a procedure for a series of theoretical and technological calculations
and participated in the start-up and mastery of the installations.

The Southern Scientific Research Institute of the State Gas Industry participated
in development of a technology of helium concentrate recovery. in technical
solutions for construction and substantiation of its economic effectiveness and,
also, in the start-up of the installation.

Simultaneously with construction of the installations, a special shop, constructed
in the SHPO at the very beginning of assembly of a second installation, was
designed.

The All-Union State Trust for the Installation of Oxygen Plants and Units in-
stalled the equipment, including equipment weighing up to 160 tons. The trust
also prepared individual elements of metal structures—the condensation unit
housing (diameter 10 m, height 60 m and weight 109 tons) and all of the piping
connnection of complex. 3-dimensional configuration.

There was the need for solution of complex problems of installation technique
for completing the condensation and fine refinement units, including, in particu-
lar. the pipeline of the cryogenic system.

The use of progressive methods of installation in strict conformity with network
schedules, the high quality of welding operation, which promoted effective in-

operation control of welding. permitted a 10-day reduction of the time for
completion of testing of the world's first and USSR's first installation of this

tYPe-
- as -

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY

"Orenburg Power Construction" was the general contractor and coordinator of
all installation and construction operations and performed all construction
operations.

A summary of the work is as follows.

An installation for helium concentrate production was invented. Industrial
production of unique unitized apparatus was developed. The prototype installa-
tion is operating successfully, the installation of a second is being completed
and construction of a third has begun.

Thus, as a result of the joint efforts of collectives of the Leningrad Scientific
Research and Design Institute of Chemical Machinery, SHPO imeni H. V. Prunes,
VNIIgaz, the Southern Scientific Research Institute of the State Gas Industry,

the All-Union State Trust for the Installation of Oxygen Plants, "Orenhurg Power
Construction“ and VPO [expansion unknown] of the "Orenburg Gas Industry." with

the productive assistance of many other organizations and enterprises, created,

in a short time, the world's first scientific, technical and industrial site with
a capacity to ensure for the national economy, a helium concentrate from low-grade
helium gases.

Completion of this work promoted a great increase in the technical level and the
production potential of chemical machine construction enterprises.

Extensive introduction of the installations created will increase significantly
the amount of helium produced in the country and this will serve as a base for
development of qualitatively new sectors of science and technology.

COPYRIGRT: Izdstel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Aksdemii nauk SSSR", 1980

2791
C80: 1861/17

- 49 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY