FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10124

18 November 1981

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 14/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10124

18 November 1981

WEST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(9000 14/31)

CONTENTS

ELECTRONICS

Briefs
Bubble Memories 1

ENERGY

Status of Coal-Ccnversion Projects at Ruhrkohle AG
(Jose: Lanshoff, et 31.; ERDOEL & mm-mGAB-mnocm, Sep 81) 2

TRANSPORI‘ATION

A 320 Development Schedule, Technical Data
(macoMos, 19 sep 81) O...OOOOOOOOODIOIOODOOOC.I'OOOOOIOIOIIOIOI. 16

First Flight Tests of British Aerospace 1&6 Successful
(macosm’ 19 sep 81) COO...00.0.0000....‘OOOOOCOOCCOOCOOOI... 22

Renault's Douai Plant Highly Automated
(Michel Jacques; L'EXPRESS, 2 Oct 81) ............................ 215

New Generation Avionics for Airbw Aircraft Tested
(Gerard 001.11“; AIR & com, 19 89p 81) ooeo-ooooooooooooooeootoo 28

Briefs
British Participation in A 320 31

- a - [III - WE - 151 SET FOU(
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LBCTROIIICS

BRIEFS

BUBBLE MEMORIES—-Bubhle memories have had a decidedly turbulent history.

Following Rockwell and Texas [Instruments] it is now National Semiconductor‘s
turn to announce its withdrawal from the field. attesting to a market which
is too small because of prices which are still high in comparison with compe-
titive technologies, principally magnetic disks and semiconductor memories.
Also working against bubble memories is the slow develOpment of interface and
peripheral circuits. Rational Semiconductor's decision directly concerns

SAGE! [Company for General Applications of Electricity and Mechanics] which had
executed cooperation agreements allowing it to offer a very wide range of pro-
applications upon the market. The

ducts and peripheral circuits for “civil"
SAGEH has no intention of abandoning its bubble memory technology, for aero-

space and military applications, developed

and Data Processing Techno

moreover it is installing large production facilities at Eragny. Nevertheless
the National Semiconductor decision will have an effect because in all probabil-
ity it is going to compel SAGEH to redefine its commercia
civil applications are concerned. [Text] [Paris AIR 6 COSMOS in Prench
12 Sep 81 p 31] tcorrmcm‘: mac. 1980] 11706

(250 : 3102/ 12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGDFHK1A1.USE(NVLY

ENERGY

STATUS or COAL-CONVERSION PROJECTS AT suuaxoau: AG
Hamburg senor-:1. & KOHLE—ERDGAS-PETROCHEHIE in German Sep 81 pp 379-386

[Article by Josef Langhoff, Rainer Duerrfeld, and Eckard Holowski: "New Technologies
for Hard Coal Refining"!

[Text] [English-language summary] The successful operation of
pilot and demonstration plants, followed by preliminary project
estimates for industrial scale plants form the basis of com-
mercialization of new technologies for coal processing. From
a technical point of view large scale plants can be justified
even today. Depending upon the size of the plant and the time
requirements for official approval, it takes four to ten years
to put such a plant into operation. Considering the economics,
however, operation of such plants using domestic coal--apart
from exceptional cases--is not feasible. The financing of
these projects is, therefore, possible only with the support of
public resources. Assuming that the present relaxed situation
of oil and gas supply is only temporary, and supply bottle-
necks and price problems have to be reckoned with in course

of time, financial support of such projects appear justified

from an overall economic viewpoint.
\

Considerable efforts were made in the PRC likewise during the recent decade to speed
up the development of new coal refining technologies. The development programs
carried out jointly by industry and the government in the final analysis are aimed
at a long-term, reliable supply of diversified and regionally balanced and raw
material resources. The important thing is to make more use of coal reserves
available domestically than has been the case so far in order to bring the use of
mineral oil and natural gas into a suitable ratio with respect to the supplies
available in longer-range terms and to counteract an incalculable price rise for
those supplies.

In the past, the PRC spent an estimated DH 4 billion for carrying out such "coal
refining" development programs. The amount might be taken as an indication of the
significance which the government and industry assign to the expansion of coal re—
finement.

2
IN)! OilﬂCIAl.lﬁ5E2(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ruhrkohle AG [Incorporated] currently extracts about 63 million t of hard coal and
has stockpiles of 20 billion t. This fact alone clearly points up the interest, if
not the obligation, which the enterprises have in expanding the "conventional”
sectors of coal refining through coal liquefaction, coal gasification, and fluidized-
bed furnaces.

To do this job, Ruhrkohle AG early in 1975 founded an affiliate which today is
called Ruhrkohle Oel und Gas Gmbﬂ [Incorporated].

This company engages in the following activities:

Investigations of technical and economic utilization possibilities of new coal
refining methods;

Technical process development through planning, construction, and operation of large-
scale experimental and demonstration plants, considering the requirements of en-
vironmental protection;

Utilization of experimental results and the know-how acquired through planning,
construction. and operation of production units;

And sale of products turned out in a form suitable for the market.

These tasks are being carried out by Bﬂlrkohle Oel und Gas Gmbﬂ in very close
cooperation with partners and institutes, for example, Bergbau-Forschung GmbH and
engineering firms. In order. in keeping with the goals, to achieve the production
of products for the gradual replacement of petroleum and natural gas in the fastest
and most economical fashion possible, the various development lines extensively
relied on known basic principles of technologies used in the past for the gasifica-
tion and liquefaction of hard coal.

The following is a report on the projects worked on and the development level
achieved by Ruhrkohle Oel und Gas.

Coal Casification
The selection of methods was essentially determined by two basic viewpoints:
Availability and quality of charge coal,

Production of market-oriented products. that is to say, mostly synthesis gas and
heating gas.

Dust gasification methods are particularly suitable for generating synthesis gas;
these methods are being implemented at high temperatures. Texaco, in the United
States, has developed such a method on an experimental scale (15 t/d). To develop
the method further, Ruhrkohle AG and Ruhrchelie AG have since early 1978 been
operating a demonstration plant with a coal processing volume of 150 t/d or a
synthesis gas output of 240,000 mzld. The following are the advantages of this
method which must he stressed:

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The method is independent of the coal quality (carbonization degree, water-ash
content, grain size, caking properties);

The use of coal as suspension facilitates grinding, conveyance, and dosing without

any problems into the reactor; there is no need for coal drying which uses up
much energy;

Casification at high temperature (about l,500° C) leads to higher output rates;

a crude gas is generated which is free of byproducts (for example, tars, phenols).
Gas purification and waste water treatment are correspondingly simple. The fused
mass of the mineral substance generates a slag which is ready for dumping.

Gasification is accomplished, depending upon the purpose, at pressures of up to
100 bar so that high specific outputs can be achieved in combination with favor-
able investment and compression costs.

The process as such has been described in literature on the subject several times

(i, 2, 3, a) so that in the following we will go into the results of the development
project.

In the course of process-engineering and equipment development, it was possible to
work out essential improvements for the various process stages. By influencing

the grinding fineness of the charge coal and by using additives , the solid-substance
content in the suspension was raised to 70 percent. This is decisive progress in
view of the reduction of the specific 0 requirement, reduction in the C02 content
in the crude gas. and the increase in the efficiency. Changes in the design and
the material of the burner improved the output and the operational safety of the
gasification reactor. Comprehensive development work was required for the fire-
proof lining of the reactor in order to achieve adequate service life. The testing
of the novel waste heat system leads to the extensive recovery of the detectable
heat of the crude gas.

Development progress during experimental operation is illustrated by the plant's
increasing availability. The operation today is characterized by a quiet and steady
pace. The system can be started, controlled, and adjusted in the load range down

to 20 percent without any problems. It is thus comparable to a conventional heavy-
oil gasification system as for as operational performance is concerned. Early in
1980, synthesis gas from coal was successfully fed into the oxo [oxide] plant of
Ruhrchemie AG. In the meantime it has also been possible to supply the mechaniza-
tion plant of Thyssengas A6 with coal gas.

Since the opening of the "Holten xperimental Plant" about 62,000 t of coal were
converted into about 75 million m of coal gns during 8,000 operating hours. Eight
different domestic and foreign coal types, with different ash and volatile substance
content, including coal sludge with an ash content of about 38 percent, were used.
All coal types were easily gasified with good yields. Below, we have some typical
process data:

b
FOR 0F1ﬁC1Al.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Processing rate approximately 7 t/hr coal (wf)
carbon conversion 992 (without C-recycle)
Reactor temperature 1,350 to 1,550' 0

Reactor pressure 40 bar

Slurry concentration 702

Coal-gas efficiency 752

Gas volume 13,000 m3/hr

(‘ 1301 of designo.

The process water is free of organic compounds. In addition to sulfides, ammonia,
and chloride, it contains small quantities of cyanide. The waste water can be
processed without any problems using conventional methods.

Plans call for continued operation of the "Bolten Experimental Plant," in order
primarily to test the gasification of residues from coal hydration.

Parallel to the technical develop-ant work, the economy of the process was also
examined. At the end of 1980, a preliminary project was completed for the "Ruhr
Synthesis Gas Plant" by direction of the federal minister of economy with the
general specifications of a fixed location and a capacity of SO t/hr of coal charge,
corresponding to 80.000 m3/hr of synthesis gas. Here are the essential results

of the preliminary project:

The plant can be built from the engineering viewpoint;
Coal availability and gas utilization exist;

The synthesis gas generation costs on the basis of Ruhr region coal can compete
with the production costs on 8 [heavy] heating oil if both plants are newly built;

If the licensing phase runs according to plan. the system can be completed in
1985.

The "Ruhr Synthesis Gas Plant" project is to be included in the coal refining pro-
gram of the federal government. Lurgi pressurized gasification is the only large-
scale industrial pressurized gasification method which has been tested in many ways
and which has for several decades been used worldwide. Restrictions connected
with the use of fine-grained and caking coal. pyrolytic constituents in the gas.
such as higher hydrocarbons and phenols, as well as the relatively low specific
gasification output were the reasons for the further development of the method
which is being pursued jointly with Ruhrgas AG and Steag AG Iﬂard Coal Electric
Power Company] within the context of the"Ruhr 100" project (5, 6. 7).

The essential innovations compared to the conventional Lurgi pressurized gasifica-
tion method are as follows:

Rise in operating pressure in gas generator to 100 bar to increase the specific

throughput and to increase the methane yield coupled with simultaneous reduction in
the yield of higher hydrocarbons.

5
FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Installation of an additional gas outlet between the low-temperature carbonization
zone and the gasification zone to evacuate "clear gas" which is almost free of low-
temperature carbonization products; this results in reduced gas velocity in the
upper part of the gasifier as a result of which the coal dust release is reduced.
The usable coal grain spectrum can thus be broadened to include finer grains.

The tar oils and phenols remaining in the crude gas or low-temperature carboniza-
tion gas can if desired be hydrated in a thermal or catalytic crude gas cracking
process. In case of thermal cracking and high temperature. all hydrocarbons, in-
cluding methane, are reformed; we get synthesis gas. In case of cracking at low
temperatures, only the condensable hydrocarbons are cracked and the methane re-

mains preserved.

These innovations are currently being tested in engineering terms through the opera-
tioncafthe "Dorsten Large-Scale Experimental Plant“ which daily can process 75-170

t of coal. depending upon the pressure.

~---— -— —————___..————-—-—._. ......

..-.—. .———

1 "mom rd Syﬂhﬂo

“Minnow-

5"

['6
IrO\M\o“Q6
help“ 7

(ho—moh- 8
xln"o

 

 

9 honoring
NEWS-'3‘

K

m
2 '3‘" t-mmm6
mm 7

5:37;?"- 8

   
 

Iau'vulo'

IQ

 

Figure 5. Coal liquefaction processes. Key: 1--Gasification and synthesis:
2--Coal; 3--c°a1 preparation; 4--Gasification; 5--Product processing: 6--Fuel;
7--Heating oil; 8--Chemical raw materials; 9--Hydration; lO-Catalyzer; ll--Steam.

In the case of "Ruhr 100." the coal is raised to operating pressure by means of

two alternately operated locks and via the coal distributor gets into the gas
generator. Here it is first of all heated up by the gas formed in a countercurrent
and it is then dried; after that it is carbonized at low temperature and gasified
with Ozlsteam. The remaining coke is burned in the lower part of the gas generator

to meet the heat requirements.

To break the coke cake open. after it has developed in the low-temperature carbon-
ization zone. we use a stirrer attached to the coal distributor with three vanes

at varying levels. The rotary grill in the lower part of the gas generator

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIH!()FFIC1AI.I£5EZCN§LY

distributes the gasification agent uniformly over the shaft cross-section. carries
the coal filling, and transports the ash into the release lock.

The gas leaves the gas generator via the low-temperature carbonization gas or
clear-gas outlet. Through direct injection of water, it is cooled and saturated
and simultaneously relieved of any dust and tar mist. In subsequently connected
waste heat boilers. the gas is almost completely cooled off along with the genera-
tion of low-pressure steam. Clear gas and low-temperature carbonization gas are
then processed together and are piped into the network of Ruhr Gas AG.

The "Dorsten Plant" became operational in September 1979 and. during about 2,000
operating hours, it gasified about 5.200 t of coal and about 7.5 million m3 of
converted gas were generated.

Here are the essential results from 13 different runs:

Increase in specific gas generator output by 30-60 percent, depending upon the type
of coal, compared to the gas generators operated earlier in Dorsten. In case of
short-term operation with clear gas evacuation, it was possible almost to double
the gas generator output.

increase in methane yield from 9 to 16 percent by volume in crude gas as result of
higher operating pressure.

Improvement in cold-gas efficiency by 7 percent along with definitely decreased
02 requirement.

The fine-coal share of the charge coal temporarily came to as much as 402 < 6 mm.

Experimental operation is for the time being continuing only with low-temperature
carbonization gas evacuation because a new concept is to be worked out for clear
gas evacuation. During the next experiments, the operating pressure will be raised
to 90 bar in order further to increase the output; furthermore, the yield of liquid
hydrocarbons is to be determined as a function of the operating pressure and
agglomerated fine coal (briquettes) are to be put through.

For the purpose of the commercial utilization of "Ruhr 100" development. Ruhrkohle
0e1 und Gas together with Ruhrgas AG by direction of the minister for small business
and transportation of the State of North Rhine-Westphalia prepared a preliminary
project outline which combines the construction of a gasification plant with a
coal-fired power plant. IAR ("Ruhr Industrial Plant") is designed for a coal pro-
cessing rate of 3 million t/yr with a 3-stage construction program. Depending upon
market requirements, the plant can turn out about 1.6 billion In3 natural gas exchange
gas (SNC) or approximately 2.3 million t methanol or both products together in a
joint production program.

According to plan. the first expansion step can go into operation with one-third of
the final capacity in 1988. provided the licensing procedure can be taken care of
briskly. A location in the Ruhr region offer favorsb]! prerequisites for the con-
struction of the plant. The investment requirement for the first phase is about

DM 1 billion. The project was proposed by Ruhrkohle AG/Ruhrgas AG for inclusion in
the federal government's coal refinement program.

7
FOR‘OFTICLAL.USEGMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A significant task. oriented toward the future, has been assigned to Ruhrkohle
Oel und Gas in the utilization of nuclear process heat for coal refining.

in the case of the PNP ("Prototype Plant for Nuclear Process Heat") project, the
share of coal (about 40 percent) is to be replaced through energy supply from a
nuclear reactor which. in autothermal gasification processes, is used for the
generation of reaction heat.

Ruhrkohle AG and Rheinische Braunkohlenwerke AG in 1978 established a planning
company for the planning. construction, and operation of a SOO-Hch ETR proto-
type plant. The development work for the hard coal gaaification segment was done
by Bergbau-Forschung GmbH. The overall project is being promoted considerably by
the BHT [Federal Ministry for Research and Technology] and the HHHV/NRH [Ministry
for Small Business and Transportation 1 [North Rhine-Hestphalia].

Coal Liquefaction

The two basic methods for the liquefaction of coal are illustrated in Figure 5.
in the case of the synthesis method according to Fischer—Tropsch, synthesis gas
(H2, CO) is generated through gasification of coal with 02!steam and from that

synthesis gas it is possible to build up liquid hydrocarbons through catalytic

steps.

in the case of direct hydration according to Bergis-Pier, hydrogen is deposited
against the "high-molecular coar'in the presence of catalyst. We get smaller,
hydrogen-richer'molecule bonds [molecular compounds]. As a function of the quanti-
ty of deposited hydrocarbon, influenced by the reaction conditions (p. T),we get
coal-oil with differing boiling point.

Another possible method in direct hydration is the treatment of coal under pressure
with a hydrogen-yielding solvent according to Pott-Broche. The coal is depolymeriz-
ed here and nascent hydrogen from the solvent is deposited against the coal.

These coal liquefaction methods were developed in Germany and were used on a large-
scale industrial basis during the thirties and forties. The Fischer-Propsch method,
compared to direct hydration--related to the output of fuel and heating oil--

uses more energy and is mostly more expensive. Ruhrkohle AG decided in favor of

the further development of the method of direct hydration and during the second half
of the seventies participated in four different development undertakings which world-
wide are considered the most important.

If we compare the main process plants in these projects to each other then we clearly
see the extensive agreement in the process involved in the following technologies

to be developed: "German technology" (UT), "H-Coal" (Hal), "Exxon Donor Solvent"
(EDS). and "Solvent Refined Coal" (886-11).

In the case of German technology (Bottrop Project), the charge coal is mashed, after

addition of a catalyzer (iron oxide) with oil generated during the process and is
hydrated after the supply of hydrogen at 300 bar and 475' C. During the subsequent

8
FOR OFTWCJAL USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

separation 01‘ the products, we essentially get liquid gas. as well as light and
medium oil. The liquid products can be further processed through refining and re-
forming so that we may get gasoline and heating oil. The hydration hydrogen needed
is generated due to the gasification of the vacuum residue.

According to the H-Coal method (BRI-Catlettaburg Project), the coal is mashed to-
gether with cycle oil and, after the addition of hydrogen, it is hydrated at 185
bar and 450’ C in the presence of a higher—grade catalyst (cobalt oxide, molybdenum
oxide). As products, we get--depending upon the method used--distillates (Syncrude)
or a mixture of distillable and nondistillable components (fuel oil). The liquid
products can be processed into gasoline and heating oil through refining, re-
forming, and hydrocracking. The hydration hydrogen needed is again generated
through gasification of the hydration residue.

The Exxon Donor Solvent method (EDS--Baytown Project) works without the addition of
catalyst in the slurry [semisolid] phase. The coal is mashed with hydrogen-releasing
solvent and is hydrated with addition of molecular hydrogen at 140 bar and 625-480’ C.
The reaction products are then separated. The solvent, obtained through distilla-
tion is hydrated for renewed use catalytically in the solid-bed reactor. The
solid-containing residue can be processed into liquid products, gas, and coke
through coking (flexicoking) or it can be converted into hydrogen needed for
hydration through gasification. The liquid products obtained can here again be
processed into gasoline and heating oil through refining, reforming and hydrocrack-
ing.

In the case of the Solvent Refined Coal Method (SRC-II—-Horgantown Project). the
sulfur-rich charge coal is mashed with returned mash which has reacted, that is to
say. without addition of outside catalyst, and with oil generated in the process,
and it is hydrated with hydrogen at 130-150 bar and 650-665' C. During the separa-
tion of the products, we essentially get SRc-II coal-oil, crude naphtha, and light
hydrocarbons. For the generation of gasoline or heating oil, we need refining,
hydrocracking, and reforming of these liquid products. The necessary hydration
hydrogen is generated through gasification of the vacuum residue. In the following
we will describe the development of the individual products and the current state
of the art.

0n the basis of results from earlier 16 [trust] coal hydration plants, which BASF
[Baden Aniline and Soda Factory] was kind enough to make available, it was possible,
in cooperation with the "veteran hydration experts" (Dr. Ambros, Dr Kroenig,

Dr Raichle. Dr Jaekh), to develop the concept of the ”German technology" (8). The
latter differs from earlier 16 methods in some essential features, such as, for
example, reduction in the processing pressure from 700 down to 300 bar, coal-oil
separation through distillation and gasification of hydration residue, including
the asphaltenes for Hz production. At simultaneously improved heat recovery,we
can expect an increase in the specific coal processing volume by about 50 percent
and a rise in the thermal efficiency by 25 percent (9).

The experimental backup support for this concept was first handled by Bergbau-
Forschung GmbH through the construction and operation of a continually working
pilot plant. The results from experimental operation were fed into the preliminary
project for the construction of a large-scale experimental plant carried out

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

parallel by Ruhrkhole Oel und Gas in 1976-1977. After completion of the preliminary
project, the decision was made at the end of 1977 to build and operate the Bottrop
Coal-Oil Plant (10). The Bottrop location offered advantages because it was pos-
sible to establish a low-cost supply and waste removal setup with the adjoining
Prosper Coking Plant. Construction began in 1979; the plant was completed in terms
of machinery two years later. The various plant divisions have been placed in
operation in succession since February 1981. The hydration of the first coal
shipment is expected for the third quarter of 1981.

The project is connected with an experimental program for the further processing

of coal-oil. 0n the basis of different composition of mineral-oil and coal-base
oils, it is necessary to develop special processing methods. The low sulfur content,
the relatively high nitrogen content, and the oxygen content, which is practically
entirely missing in mineral oil, are characteristic of coal-oil. The high density
and the low hydrogen content are also specific for coal-oil.

0n the grounds of Veba Oel AG in Scholven, a trial plant was built for this
development work; the suitability of coal-oil as preliminary product for fuel and
heating oil production as well as chemical raw materials is being examined in that
trial plant. The coal-oil is first of all broken down through distillation into
easily-boiling, medium-boiling, and slow-boiling fractions and the individual
fractions are then processed further separately. Light-weight and medium-weight
oil are Subjected to cold hydration with subsequent refining. The refined medium—
weight oil can be used as admixing component for EL heating oil [extra light?].
Additional possibilities are the hydration of medium oil under higher pressure into
diesel fuel or hydrocracking of medium oil into gasoline. Heavy oil is refined and
is cracked into gasoline and medium distillates through hydrocracking.

The entire project is being carried out by Ruhrkohle AG and Veba Oel AG. The total
expenditure for the undertaking, which is being considerably promoted by the min-
ister of economy, small business, and transportation of the state of North Rhine-
h'estphalia, comes to about DH (.00 million.

The li-Coal Pilot Plant at Catlettsburg, in the United States, is designed for a
coal processing rate of 200 or 600 t/d, depending upon the process used.

The 0.3. Department of Energy, the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Ashland Synthetic
Fuels Inc, and Mobil Oil, Conoco, and Standard Oil, as well as the Electric Power
Institute. and Ruhrkohle AG are involved in the project together with Veba Oel AG.

The ll-Coal method is based on the development of the ebullated-bed reactor for the
refining of heavy, highly sulfur-containing crude oils and residue oils. It was
used [or the first time in 1964 for the catalytic hydration of coal. After many
long years of development work on a laboratory and trial-plant scale, engineering
work was started on the Catlettsburg pilot plant in 1975. The plant was placed
in operation at the end of May 1980. The project costs amount to about $300
million. The German share is being contributed by the minister of economy, small
business and transportation of the state of North Rhine-Westphalia in the context
of the Bottrop Coal-Oil Plant project.

Two operating methods are to be tested in the plant: the generation of distillates
("Syncrude") at a coal processing rate of 200 t/d and a coal-oil yield of about

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICMI. USE ONLY

80 t/d and the generation of a mixture of distillable and nondistillable coal-oil
(fuel 011) with a coal processing rate of 600 t/d and a coal-oil yield of 220 t/d.

After initial difficulties, the plant in 1980 achieved about 600 operating hours at
50 percent maximum operating rate, using the Syncrude Method. After comprehensive
repair and refitting work, the plant was operated successfully in 1981. During the
first half of 1981, about 7,000 t of coal were processed during 45 days of opera~
tion. The preliminary experimental results confirm expectations regarding process
development. Experimental planning for 1981-1982 calls for another two test runs
using the Syncrude Method. An eastern American coal (Illinois No 6) and western
American coal type (Wyodak) are to be tested. Test runs using the fuel-oil method
are being suspended for the timebeing because the sales plans for the H-Coal method
are within the Syncrude range.

Since the beginning of 1979, Ruhrkohle AG has been participating in the"200-dd
Baytown Coal-Oil" project. Hith Exxon as project manager, the 0.5. Department of
Energy, of Electric Power Research Institute, the Japan Coal Liquefaction Develop-
ment Comp, Philips Coal Gom., Arco Coal Comp., Ruhrkohle AG, and A61?
[National Italian Oil Companylare partners in this project.

The engineering work was begun in 1974 and construction work for the Baytown plant
was started in 1978. The plant was opened in the middle of 1980.

The cost of the project comes to about $370 million; the RAG [Ruhrkohle AG] share
is essentially promoted through the federal minister of research and technology.

In 1980-1981. the plant was able to process about 40,000 t of coal during about
4,000 operating hours; the availability came to about 72 percent. The longest
experimental run lasted about 5 weeks with an average processing output of about

60 percent of nominal output. In June 1981, the plant was converted in order to
test a variation in the operating method, that is, the return of residues. The
experiments run with so far with Illinois Coal No 6 were completed in May 1981.

The continuing experimental program until 1982 calls for the use of Hyodak and Big-
Brown Coal.

Ruhrkohle AG has since 1974 been involved in planning the 6,000 t/d SRC demonstra-
tion plant in Morgantown as a partner of Gulf Oil Company. In 1979, an agreement
was concluded between the U.S. Department of Energy and the federal minister of
research and technology concerning 25 percent German participation in the project.
A government treaty between the United States and Japan on 25-percent Japanese
participation followed in 1980.

Because of the tight financial situation in the United States and in the PRC,

the project's financing was again reviewed by the government in both countries in
1981. Because the project costs, which had been estimated at about $1.4 billion,
cannot be taken care of due to budget cuts at this time. the three participating
governments in June 1981 agreed to terminate the project.

Participation in the various hydration projects provide Ruhrkohle Oel und Gas with
a valuable increase in this field. Cooperation in development undertakings at
the same time also permits a well-justified comparison of the individual methods

from engineering and economic aspects.

11
FORIOFTWC1A1.USEibNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

German technology remains the main point in process development. The operating
results of the Bottrop coal—oil plant are to constitute the basis for the next step
to the sale of this technology. A preliminary project for an industrial plan was
prepared by direction of the minister of economy, small business, and transporta-
tion of NEH in 1979-1980. This preliminary project investigates the technical
feasibility, site and environmental protection problems, charge coal availability,

product sales possibilities, practical implementation, timetable, and economic
aspects.

The size of the plant was designed for a coal processing volume of about 6 million
t/yr in hydration. The expansion scale compared to the 200-t/d plant in Bottrop
is in the technically feasible and meaningful range because the plant has been

designed in the form of four phases to be erected, one after the other, in terms
of time.

In the final phase, such a plant can produce about 1 million t/yr of naphtha, about
2 million t/yr of medium oil, and about 0.6 million t/yr of LPG. Naphtha can be
used as reformer feed for the fuel sector or as chemical raw material for the
production of BTx-aromatics. Medium oil can be considered as substitute for
petroleum-base heating oil.

Another step toward large-scale industrial use of the German technology is being
taken together with a German consortium which, in the context of a feasibility
study, is examining the technical and economic possibilities for the construction
of a fuel plant in Australia with an output capacity of about 3 million t/yr.

The plant concept, depending upon the location, provides for a combination of
coal hydration and Pischer-Tropsch synthesis. Carburetor fuel and diesel fuel are
to be turned out as products. The planning work will he completed in October 1981.

Fluidized-Bed Furnaces

For the heat market, direct coal combustion in heating plants and thermal power
plants, as well as industrial process heat generation, are increasingly gaining
significance.

The stepped-up expansion of district heat supply with generating plants near to the
consumer and correspondingly favorable distribution costs calls for heat generators
with low emission because of the fact that residential areas are mostly heavily
contaminated with high immisions even before that.

“S? (fluidized-bed furnace) is suitable for heat generation in the above-mentioned
sectors on account of its particularly high degree of environmentally safe opera-
tion and the fact that it is so "undemandinf' compared to the fuel quality used.

Under the "environmentally safe power plant technology for coal power plants"
programs, promoted by the federal minister of research and technology, Ruhrkohle AG
took over the job of developing and testing atmospheric “SF in two demonstration
plants.

12
FOR OFFNJAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USEioNLN'

Since 1977, the following NSF projects are being carried out: 35-Mch NSF plant

at "Flingern" and 6-Mch plantat"Koenig Ludwig." In terms of capacity and engineer-
ing design, both plants were intended for certain application ranges: the 6-mth
planthastypical small boiler for process heat generation in the industrial sector
and for decentralized heat supply in the con-unity sector, the 35-!ﬂth has steam
generator unit for larger heating plants and thermal power plants.

The operation of two demonstration plants facilitates the simultaneous testing of
various technical concepts, for example, for fuel charging (mechanical, pneumatic)
and the boiler principle (natural cycle, forced cycle).

Both plants were commissioned during the third quarter of 1979. Here are the
consumption and production figures as of the end of April 1981.

Flingarn Koenig Ludwig
Steam generation 105.000 t 29,500 t
Coal consumption 14,500 t 3,800 t
Operating hours “.300 t 0.600 t

After Successful completion of experimental operation, the Plingern plant was closed
down of 30 April 1981.

Concerning harmful substance emission, the experimental operation of both plants
yielded absolutely positive results and thus proved that "SP is environmentally
safe to a high degree:

In the course of extensive series of experiments for desulfuration, the $02 content
in the flue gas was determined as a function of the type of coal, the operating
conditions, especially the temperature, and the ratio between lime added and the
sulfur content of the charge coal; at an optimum temperature of about 830° C,
favorable deaulfuration degrees of 75-85 degrees were achieved at Ca/S ratio of
2.0-2.6.

The N0x emission was determined for various operating parameters as a function of
the N content of the charge core; Nox contents of <1,000 mg/m3 in the flue gas were
achieved.

The boundary value of 100 or 150 mg dust/m3 pure gas, which is required for li-
censing. was definitely underbid.

The furnace efficiency, which is important for the economy of the NSF method, was
increased to more than 95 percent after improvements in the equipment.

The operating performance of NSF plants regarding starting and stopping as well as
load regulation is absolutely comparable to the conventional steam generator in

this performance category.

Experimental operation of the "Koenig Ludwig" Plant is being continued. The
emphasis in development will be on component testing and optimization; gradual
automation, especially for the supply and waste removal systems; and testing the
use of fine-grained fuels.

13
FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY
2.

3.

7.

8.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

B. Cornils, J. Hibbel, P. Ruprecht, J. Langhoff and R. Duerrfeld: Coal Processing
Technology, Vol V1, 1980, pp 209 ff.

8. Cornils, P. Ruprecht, J. Langhoff, and R. Duerrfeld: CHBHIE TECHNIK 9, 115
(1980).

B. Cornils, J. Hibbel. P. Ruprecht, J. Langhoff, and R. Duerrfeld, Brennst.-
Haerne-Kraft (Fuel, Heat, Power], 32, 10, pp 668 ff (1980).

B. Cornils, P. Ruprecht, J. Langhoff and R. Duerrfeld, Stahl und Eisen [Steel
and Iron], 100, 7, pp 388 ff (1980).

G. Roebke, “The Dorsten Coal Casification Project, Lurgi--Ruht100--Past Opera-
ting Experiences--Lecture at the 1980 Main Conference of the German and Heat
Industry in Frankfurt/M. on 20 Hay 1981.

C. Lohmann, J. Langhoff, "Ruhr 100"--Development Work on the Pressurized Lurgi
Gassifier in Dorsten Presentation at Workshop on Synthetic Fuels Status and
Future Direction in San Francisco from 13 to 17 October 1980.

P. Peyrere, G. Roebke, CHEHIB-TECHNIK, 9, No 8 (1980).

J. Langhoff, E. Holouskiy, "Verfahren zur Hydrierung von Steinkohlen in Pors-
chung Aktuell, Kohleverfluessigung" [Method for Hydration of Hard Coal in
Research, Current Coal Liquefaction], published by the Federal Minister of
Research and Technology, Umschau Publishers, Frankfurt/Main, 1978.

J. Langhoff, E. wolowaki, C. Escher, and H. Hoaang, Status of German technology
on coal hydrogenation development by Ruhrkohle AG and Veba Oel AG. Conference
of the Canadian Society for Chemical Engineering in Sarnia, Ontario (1979).

C. Holowski, "Haus-der-Technik-Vortragaveroeffentichungen" [House of Technology
Publications], No 405, p «7 f., Vulkan Publishing House, Dr. H. Classen, 1978.

R. Specks, J. Langhoff, E. Holouski, G. Escher, The Coal Hydrogenation Plant at
Bottrop; Conference on Synthetic Fuels: Status and Directions, San Francisco,
1980.

c. Escher, J. Langhoff, H. Hosang, E. Wolouski, K. Graeser, and A. Jankowski,
Ruhrkohle/Veba Oel Technology for Hydrogenation of Hard Coal. Conference of
the Canadian Society for Chemical Engineering in Edmonton, Alberta, 1980.

H. Krischke and J. Langhoff, The Proceedings of the Sinth International
Conference on Fluidized Bed Combustion, April 9-11, 1980, Atlanta, Georgia,
U.S.A.

H. Krischke, "Coal Combustion in Fluidized Bed," lecture delivered at the
status seminar on "Environmentally Safe Power Plant Technology," 6-10 October
1980, Juelich.

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

15. J. Langhoff et 31., "The Flingern ﬂuidized-Bed Plant--Structure and Initial
Operating Experiences." lecture delivered at the V63 Conference on "1980 Coal
Furnaces" on 21 Nov-her 1980.

Dedicated to Professor Dr. rer. mt. Werner Peters on his 60th birthday.

Authors: Dr J. Langhoff. Dr R. Duerrfeld, Dr E. Holowski, Ruhrkohle Oel und Gas
anH, Gleivitzer Plat: 3, 0-4250 Bottrop.

COPYRIGHT: Industrieverlag von Hernhnueeen KG, Hamburg 1981

5058
680:3102/61

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

A 320 DEVELOPMENT SCBEDOLE. TECHNICAL DATA
Paris AIR 5 COSMOS in French 19 Sep 81 pp 31-33
[Article by J. H.: '1986: The Future A 320 (135-172 Seats)"]

[Text] In June, at the time of the Bourget Exhibition. we were able to publish
a summary of the first information relased relative to Airbus Industrie's future
A 320 (formerly SA-l/SA-Z) (see AIR 3? COSMOS No 864, pp 31-35).

The A 320 is now closer than ever to being unveiled. We thereftce present here to
our readers the future plane in the form of a more detailed set of technical data:
updated insofar as concerns its calculated performance characteristics. excerpted

from a more recent document dating from the month of August.

The decision to produce the A 320 was announced at Bourget by the management of
the European consortium, armed with Air France's choice of the plane in the form
of a provisional decision: an order for 50 planes. 25 of which on option. with a
binding down payment (10 million francS)—symbolic, certainly, but a non-negligible
factor leading to the mentioned announcement. A timetable has now been set up as
follows:

--March 1984: Assembly of the wing unit and fuselage of the first plane:
--Decenber 1984: First flight:

--January 1986: Certification of the first version: entry into service:
--March 1986: Certification of the second version.

In setting up this timetable. Airbus Industrie is undoubtedly taking a risk; but
the risk would have been greater if the European consortium had not taken the
mentioned provisional decision, taking advantage of the situation in which Boeing
finds itself wherein, after having launched its 3 737-300 program and announced
the start of studies on a 8 727-200 RB, it has very obviously been compelled to
delay until 1988 the roll-out of its future 3 7-7 so as not to interfere with the
marketing of the two above-mentioned planes. If this timetable is maintained.
Airbus Industrie should be the first to bring out a 150-seater of modern design.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The proposed timetable, based as it is on a 55- to 56-month developmental spread,
appears reasonable. The obstacles to be overcome include the necessary agreement
on the distribution of responsibilities (see AIR 3? COSMOS No 870 p 8), the foraal
commitments by the governments, and the availability of the engines: Although
three types of engines are, technically speaking, in the running, all capable of
providing the high levels of performance delanded (CPM 56-2000, RJ-500~35, and

PW 2025), the fact is that the developmental timetable for these three engines
does not really coincide with the one for the plane, unless the latter are ini-
tially equipped with provisional engines. Indeed, this problem could all the more
easily be resolved if the A 320 could go into service with an engine derived
directly from the present CPU 56... .

The first feature that is being specially promoted by Airbus Industrie is the
diameter of the fuselage: It has been carefully chosen to satisfy the demand on
the part of passengers for greater coufort as well as that on the part of the air-
lines for greater conmercial viability, that is, the ability to transport, in the
baggage holds, containers like those of the present LD 3, hence ”compatibility'
(without involving any real trade-off) with the baggage holds of the larger
planes.

By comparison with the standard Boeing fuselage, that is, that of the 8 707/727/
737/757, that of the A 320 thus provides greater interior room (6 inches, or 15
cm), which will mean:

--wider seats, more ceiling headroom;

-- larger luggage compartments inside the cabin (above theseats): 62 dn3 per seat
versus 51 for the Boeing Iuselage and 39 for the DC 9;

-- wider but also higher baggage holds (1.22 m versus 1.11 and 0.99 n).

In 'business' class. that is, with five seats per row instead of six, the seat
widths will be identical to those found in first class on the B767 and the DC 9.

From the technical standpoint, it features the planned use of:

--active cantrol over elevator and stabilizer surfaces;

--simple but effective high-lift devices;

--improved lightweight alloys and composite materials on a large scale (fin, ele-
vator, flaps, spoilers, ailerons, cowlings, fairings, landing-gear hatches, floor
panels):

--color cathode-ray tubes, etc.

of course, the cockpit is designed for a crew of two.

17
FOR OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All of these features will be backed by the experience already acquired. in most
cases on the A 300. the A 300-600 and the A 310. The user will therefore not be
exposed to unwelcome surprises. Aerodynamic studies on numerous wind-tunnel
models are already at an advanced stage at the plants of all the partners. The
total wind-tunnel test time now exceeds 3.500 hours.

Noteworthy also is the operational life of the structure: 60.000 1-hour flights.

The calculated performance characteristics charted hereunder and on the following
pages may be summarized as follows: Fuel consumption 40 percent less than that of
the 3 727-200 and operating cost 20-25 percent less. Its gains with respect to
the 8737-200 are. respectively. 30-35 percent and 18-20 percent. The interest
being shown in the European plane by airlines such as. in the United States.
Eastern and Delta is therefore understandable.

Comparative Characteristics of the Two Versions

Parameters A 320-100 A 320-200
W
King span (m) 34.57 34.57
Overall length (m) 36.04 39.24
Overall height (m) 11.85 11.85
______._____.._______.___________.___.._._._______._.____.________________..______._.
Number of seats at row-spacing of 32 inches 154 172
Number of seats at mixed spacing 135 156
(12 + 123) (12 + 144)

Capacity of forward holds (m3) 13.6 18.3
Capacity of rear holds (m3) 25.1 29.9
Total capacity (m3) 38.7 48.2
W
Fuel capacity (kg) 18.800 10.800
W
Operational weight. empty (kg) 38.478 40.835
Maximum weight at take-off (kg) 66.000 71.900
Maximum landing weight (kg) 60.700 65.700
Maximum weight less fuel (kg) 54.900 60.400
W
Maximum payload (kg) 16.422 19.565
Passenger load (at 32-inch row-spacing) (kg) 13.971 15.604
Cargo load (kg) 2.451 3.961
M

18

FOI(0FFK]A1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Latest edition of payload-range curves, updated
with respect to those released in June.

 

f A 320 efficiencies with those
of the 3 137-200 and the 8 757—200.

Cowper ison 0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

1'": 4 s"‘o" 7‘ e 0

Comparative engine perfornance characteristics.

  

Comparative fuel/seat and fuel/trip
consumption characteristics.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WW1... mmmmmmmmmgmmgmmmmmm ammﬂ/ .1....1 43/
memmmmmmmgmmgmmmag 3mm Cw...” \

. gammmmmmmgggmmammgmmm 5mm .11.... a
.1. mmmammmmmmﬁmmagngamg mg [1.11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

FIRST FLIGHT TESTS OF BRITISH AEROSPACE 1‘6 SUCCESSFUL

Paris AIR 5 COSMOS in French 19 Sep 81 p 15
[Article by J.M.: "Hatfield: First Flights of the ﬁne 146"]

[Text] The first flight tests of the BAe 106-100, which began on 3 September
at Hatfield (see AIR & COSMOS No 872 p 15), taking into account the purpose of
this quadruple jet (capability of using short airfields), focused upon flight
characteristics, take-off and landing included, with deflected wing flaps
(Fowler, with double slots).

This entire first flight, of 95 minutes duration, was effected with the trail-
ing edge flaps deflected 26'; the take-off is known to have required only 17
seconds and was made at about 108 knots but the airplane weighed less than 29
tons. the planned maximum weight being 33.8 tons. The landing gear was re-
tracted, then reextended; the greater part of the flight having been made with
the landing gear extended. the measured fuel consumption was hardly significant.
all the more so as the flaps were also extended and because of this the speed
remained lower than 200 knots (370 km per hour). In 95 minutes of flight, ceil-
ing at about 10,000 feet, the four AVCO Lycoming ALF 5028-3 turbojets (static
thrust: 3 tons) thus consumed nearly a tone of fuel and the plane put down with
weight of about 25 tons, the flaps all the time deflected 26°. It is interest-
ing to observe that during this first flight the airbrakes located at the rear
of the fuselage were used, during the approach as well as in landing. The use
of these airbrakes, flaps and spoilers, combined, should in fact permit best
possible control of the angle of approach and then of braking on the ground
without recourse to thrust reveraers.

Still on the subject of take-off and landing, let us recall that the Ede 146
landing gear was deve10ped from an original scheme of the Hessier-Hispano-
Bugatti firm. accepted at that time by Hawker-Siddeley Aviation, and then
passed on to the Dowty-Rotol firm. However, Hessier-ﬂispano-Bugatti is mass
producing the main structural element, which is the landing gear cylinder, at
its Bedow plant, the remainder being manufactured in Great Britain.

This landing gear with telescoping twin-wheel bogie is a fuselage gear which,
with lateral retraction and shortening, makes it possible to adapt to the re-
quirements of the wheel gauge (6.72 meters) and limited space once the gear is
retracted. In the matter of French industry participation in the BAe 166 pro-
gram let us also point out the presence, aboard this first flight of the ﬁne 146,

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the new TRT ARV-530A (ARINC Standard 552A) digital radioaltimeter. Other French
suppliers: Forgeai, Le Magnesium Industriel, and Raychem France.

Also during this first flight the crew was able to proceed with operational
tests of the systems: electronic, hydraulic, pressurization, air conditioning,
and APU [auxiliary power unit], and to make a preliminary testing of the sta-
bility and pilotability about the three axes, going so far as even evaluating
the damping of "Dutchman's roll" with and without attenuators, and maneuver-
ability with the exterior starboard motor idling.

The days which followed enabled British Aerospace to perform, with the BAe 166
No l:

a second flight of 35 minutes duration with the flaps deflected 30°; and
a third flight with the flaps deflected 18° (planned maximum: 33°).

The airplane should supposedly fly 15 hours before flutter tests (in flight)
with use of an hydraulic exciter begin. The exploration of the flight regime,
the stability and maneuverability tests, and the flutter tests should take abOut
6 weeks; atthe end of that time an anti-stall parachute, necessary for limiting
the risks during tests of low speed flight, stalling, and sensitivity to buffet-
ing, will be installed.

The BAe 166 No 2 should fly in November, the No 3 airplane in January; a fourth
airplane will fly later, about April or May. These four airplanes will have
flown a total of 1,200 hours before certification, hoped for in August 1982, is
obtained.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1980

11,706
650: 3102/12

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

RENAULT'S WUAI PLANT HIGHLY AHMED
Paris L'ExPRBSS in French 2 Oct 81 pp 106-106
[Article by Michel Jacques: I'Rt.'>bots Are Not Armless'f]

[Text] To put a halt to the Japanese invasiOn, Renault has chosen new allies:
Robots. In its front line: Its Douai plant.

This is the other major event marking the return from the vacation period. Less
spectacular, no doubt. than the launching of the rev [high speed trains]. its
impact is nevertheless considerable. with the Regie Renault's new production unit
now being put into service at Douai, in the North, which will be its R9 production
tool, France will have one of the world's most highly automated plants --a plant
that will still be employing 7,000 persons but where 125 robots will be doing, all
unto themselves, a very large part of the welding and Iaterials handling involved
in the manufacture of a vehicle.

It is about time! The Japanese car invasion is not waiting. The reason their
cars are coming into the Western markets at low prices is to a great extent owing
to the fact that their production is robotized. Hence it is on that terrain that
battle must be done. Clearly, robots are following the historic trend. having
made their entry into shops over the last few years, they are competing there with
human beings, without inhibitions and for a cause. Being at one and the same time
awkward yet precise, comical yet disturbing, they paint. weld. cut. and handle
parts and materials, often exceeding fiction, without, however, resesbling it.
Nothing stops them. They already had arms and a memory: Now they are starting to
see and to ”think." Some are even capable of reproducing themselves... We are
at the dawn of a new industrial revolution. A turn that the French automobile
industry cannot afford to miss, and that it is preparing in good time to
negotiate.

“Dauai is not the child of a spontaneous conception: it is the product of a series
of continued efforts," points out Claude Grappotte, a member of the Renault man-
agenent. The fact is that the Regie has introduced robotics very widely into

its Plins (Yvelines) and Hans (Sarthe) plants, even though it embarked on this
route sole 10 years later than did the American manufacturers. According to

2%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

its engineers, there is no 'gap' with respect to the United States and to Japan.
“The Japanese,” they say, “count anything as robots.“ By their definition, Renault
and Peugeot s.a. have between them 16,000 robots, or, as many as the Japanese
industry.“

Exactly what is a robot?

The automation of industrial operations does not date back to only yesterday.
Transfer machines have been used in the Renault plants since innediately follow-
ing the Second World War. These were marvels of equipment at that time and are
still useful today. But they are machines that do the same things time after
time, like beasts of burden, one might say. The robot is not limited by the same
constraints: It is flexible, easily programable, and can perform different opera-
tions on demand. “The life of a transfer machine,‘ says one engineer. "is, broad-
ly speaking, like that of a given model of automobile, in that, when the model is
changed one scraps the old one. With a robot, on the contrary. one need only
change the program.

The Great Leap Forward

For actually, it is first of all a manipulator: An arm at the end of which is
mounted, as required, a welder, a miller, or a materials handling tool, somewhat
as a do-it-yourselfer might adapt his sander or his circular saw to his drill
press. But industrial robots have a flexibility that is little short of astonish-
ing.

On the Douai welding line, the robots can process RS's and R9's on the same line:
one after another, in any order: A simple magnetic card enables them to adapt to
the situation case by case. The same is true at Plins. There, a conical bird--
half ostrich, half brontosaurupecks away obstinately at an R10 carcass: It is
the painting robot. The flexibility of these “vertebrates” enables them to paint
even the inside of the body. Above all, it itself changes colors as required and
adapts its motions to each type of vehicle.

These are not the only smart robots. Others, at Biderman (textiles), sew buttons
on and cut textiles by means of lasers. And even more impressive is a robot
equipped with a television camera--the equivalent to it of having an eye--that
can distinguish... 1,000 billion different shapes!

Record achievements, just the same, in that, there are many generations of robots
of varying degrees of evolution. The most cannon equipment of this genre are
numeric-controlled. machine tools. An echelon above these are the programable
manipulators, capable of 'learning.‘ And at the summit are the robots equipped
with a sensor, a true sensing organ, which no longer repeats the sass notions
endlessly, but 'invents' variants in accordance with the environment.

"None of this would have been possible,” emphasizes Pierre Pardo, father of the
Regie Renault's robots, “without microelectronics, which has increased to an in-
credible degree our calculating powers.‘ The great leap forward was, beginning
in 1970, the advent of the microprocessor. Just 10 years ago, the robots in a

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plant were all tied into the same computer weighing tons and worth a fortune.
Microprocessors enabled the miniaturization of equipment and the bringing down
drastically of costs. Suddenly, the computer began to be mounted directly into
the body of the machine: Each robot was given its own brain.

Was this a unique miracle of technology or was it real progress? whatever the
answer, production has benefited from it in terms of quality. Through the use of
welding robots, a better positioning of the vehicle's components is possible,
reducing noises and aging of the vehicle. In terms of money, it is not that
simply put. "Initially," says Max Richard, head of the Plins plant, I'the instal-
lation of robots was, as is true in all cases of experimentation, a heavy additi-
tional cost. But its true venue is Inouai.‘I

Robots are certain, sooner or later. to pay for themselves. This has been shown
to be the case, for example, by CPAO [Computer-Assisted Design and Manufacture],
another aspect of robotics. It used to take an average of 2 months at $88 [ex-
pansion unknown] to bring out a new model of pressure cooker. with CPAO, the
engineers "pop" the data into the computer, and, 1 hour later, out comes the
design. For added measure, it is in the form of the program needed by the
numeric-controlled machine that will fabricate the stamping press for the cooker.
Result: The first cooker can come off the production line the next day. In the
Dassault design department at Saint-Cloud also, the drawing board has been re-
placed by the computer. Suddenly, everything advances more rapidly: Whereas
before, it took I months to complete the plans for a wind-tunnel maquette of a
plane, today, 4 days are enough.

The Douai Monsters

But what is there in this for the workers? RobOtics does not always have profits
as its motivation: sometimes its aim is to improve working conditions. The good-
fellow robot who does the ”dirty work' of painting in the shop undoubtedly merits
a tip of the hat. In the welding operation as well, automation eliminates annoy-
ing and tiresome work. Nevertheless, all the fallout from robotics is not a shower
of roses: The most disturbing aspect in terms of the long haul has to do with
jobs. By 1990, Renault estimates that, for the same level of production, roboti-
zation will have eliminated 12 jobs in manufacturing out of 100. With compensa-
tions, of course.

Robotics as a whole involves a reduction in the number of skilled factory workers.
But it requires a greater number of highly skilled service personnel, inasmuch as
it generates the need for operational control and maintenance. This often means
promotiOns for the personnel in the enterprise itself. At Douai, the 3S welding
robot operators are all at the BTS [Diploma of Advanced Technician] level: They
were all recruited, following appropriate training, from among the plant's own
personnel. At Hans, where a fully automated lSO—meter-long production line has
been installed, seven men are enough to "drive" the monster. Highly qualified,
they were actually chosen from among the plant's factory-worker personnel: A
training period to bring them up to the required level turned the trick.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The union leaders are nonetheless concerned: "People are being put through demand-
ing training courses and, when all is said and done, they are given but a mere
supply or monitoring job,” say officials of the CPDT [French Democratic Confedera-
tion of Labor]. Another concern is: Since robots are very expensive, they are
given virtually no rest. Suddenly. the need will arise for job crews. hence night
work: The opposite of progress.

A point on the positive side is: The manufacture of robots creates jobs. This is
especially true in the case of Renault. which builds its own automation devices,
through the intermediary of its subsidiary Alma-Cribier. The latter is moreover a
leader of the the French robotics industry. which includes manufacturers such as
Peugeot s.a., SORHEL [Company for the Study of Electrical and Mechanical Clockworks],
AFHA [expansion unknown], Scinky, etc.

Douai is yet but a stage, and the robot revolution is but starting. The most
difficult part lies ahead: Moving into the assembly stage, a technique that is
likely to take several years to master. Robots will of course never do every-
thing. But already, some of them are shrewd enough to go searching in a stack of
parts for exactly what they need. Or to assemble all by themselves an entire
automobile transmission... .

COPYRIGHT: 1981 s.a. Groupe Express

9399
C80: 3102/11

27
FOR 0F1WC1A1.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

NEW GENERATION AVIONICS FOR AIRBUS AIRCRAFT TESTED
Paris AIR & COSMOS in French 19 Sep 81 pp 34-35

[Article by Gerard Collin: "Flights of the A.300 No 3 with BPIS (Electronic
Flight Instrument Systems) and Garuda PPCC (Forward Facing Crew Cockpit) To
Take Place Soon"]

[Text] The flight test Airbus A.300 No 3 of Airbus Industrie on last 15 August
completed the first phase of in-flight evaluations of 8 months duration which
made it possible to test--among other things--the new generation of digital
avionics (confirming to ARINC 700) with the immediate objective--the most
urgent--of category 2 landing certification for the aircraft before delivery to
the Indonesian airline, Garuda, and then to VASP of Brazil. The first A.300 for
Garuda should in fact make its first flight about the middle of October and be
delivered to that airline in January 1982, thus in 4 months.

To accomplish this the A.300 No 3 was equipped with the digital automatic flight
control system-~CADV--developed by the SPENA [French Air-Navigation Equipment
Company] in collaboration with Smiths Industries and Bodenseewerk. The tests
performed with the Airbus No 3 made it possible to explore, under varied condi-
tions (instrument landing system, wind, turbulence. weight, center of gravity)
the various CADV modes, to carry out automatic approaches, landings included
(more than 70) and 38 manual approaches. Pilots from Airbus Industrie and from
French official departments participated in these flights. The Airbus No 3 has
gone back into the shop to receive the first pilot's cathode displays developed,
in this instance, by Thomson-CS? [Thomson-General Radio Company] and its German
partners. VDO-Luft. So equipped. on one side with only cathode displays (there-
fore, half the instrument panel) the Airbus No 3 should be certified for flight
next November.

The airplane will also have the new Garrett GTCP-33l-250 APU [auxiliary power
unit] which provides a weight saving of 130 kg over the APU of the present Air-
bus aircraft. This new APU also makes a 23-percent saving in power consumption
possible. Several modifications are on a par with this new APU: wiring, struc-
ture allowing greater accessibility and easier maintenance, and removal of the
electronic fuel regulation unit to a pressurized area.

It is to be noted that this program--a rather extended one-is being fully car-
ried out and is on schedule. which confirms that the new generation of avionics
and equipment intended for the A.3lo will in fact have been evaluated in flight

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

even before the first flight of the A.310. As for the FFCC design-it is going
to fly very soon with the first Garuda airplane, here, too, providing very
favorable conditions for the A.310; there will be hardly anything but the wings
of the A.310 to receive its airborne baptism next spring....

Substantial Flight Test Facilities on Board

For the Flight tests the Airbus A.300 and A.310 are fitted with an installation
for acquisition, processing, and storage of measurement data designed by AERO-
SPATIALE [National Aerospace Manufacturing Company]. general contractor for
definition of this installation (the flight tests themselves being conducted

by Airbus Industrie). The principal partner of ABROSPATIALE in this matter and
supplier of this measurement system is SPIN, with AHPEX as far as the recorders
are concerned.

A conventional measurement system comprises several levels: sensors, condition-
ing (or adaptation), acquisition with PAH (pulse amplitude modulation) multi-
plexing. digital coding, and utilization (processing, storage in the recorder,
or transmission to the ground by telemetry).

As a matter of fact it may be desirable to reverse, somewhat, the sequence of
the steps in order to multiplex the data delivered by the sensors before they
are conditioned. Actually, conditioning placed upstream from the multiplexing
implies that a conditioner be associated with each sensor; but on a development
Airbus serveral thousand sensors can be expected! Hence the idea of multiplex-
ing before conditioning by combining into families sensors of the same kind
(all synchros, for example) by groups of 8, 16, or 32.

Therein is an evolution underway for the Airbus development airplanes. Another
evolution is tied to the flip-flop over digital connections of the new genera—
tion avionics (ARINC 700, ARINC 429). Thus, aboard the A.310 the installation
"acquires" the major portion of the digital parameters circulating over more
than 30 ARINC 429 buses, from which the flight test installation samples only a
part of the messages ("labels"). To this we must add that the engines will

have available their own box for multiplexing and conditioning their parameters
(box designated E-HUX or P-HUX), which reduces somewhat the task of the flight-
test installation while contributing to swelling still more the volume of numer-
ical data to be processed.

The total volume of data acquired by the recorder--hence at the end of the sys-
tem—-is considerably increased in the A.3lO compared with the original Airbus.
The orders of Magnitude are 9,000 words (of 8 bits) per second for the Airbus
compared with 30,000 (of 12 bits) for the A.3lO, or a factor of increase on the
order of 5.

Samba, Super—Samba, Sardane

These names were chosen by AEROSPATIALB and the SPIN to designate the three
measurement systems used for the Airbus flight tests. All these systems.
physically, are in the form of 19-inch rack units, conforming to aeronautical
environment standards. and originally designed for the Concorde program. As
a rule they are placed inside the cabin.

29
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Samba is the system used at the origin of the Airbus program for the A.300 32/
34. Moreover it was a Samba system which flew aboard the Airbus No 3 of Air-
bus Industrie for evaluation of the digital CADV.

It is a SFIH Super-Samba system with Ampex recorders which will fly aboard the
first two development A.310 aircraft, processing several thousand parameters.

As for the 3, lo, 5 development aircraft, they will receive Sardane test instal-
lations, which are lighter (only several hundred parameters, the bulk of the
evolutions having already been effected upon the l and 2 airplanes) and more
autonomous: this increased autonomy (based upon a Rohlm computer) will facili-
tate the test program farther along (hot and cold airfields, altitude tests,
special runways...). In addition Sardane has recourse to the concept of con-
ditioning after multiplexing as defined above, which lightens the installation.

This brief description of the on-board measurement installations ignores many
other aspects; for example, an ideally simple and effective means of validating
the system before each flight and identifying every defective part or sensor
must be incorporated into the system; this is a difficult problem (several
thousand sensors!) which was the subject of numerous development projects on
the part of AEROSPATIALE since the early days of the Concorde. The installa-
tion also includes peripherals (loading and modification of programs. analog
facilities for reading and display of parameters in real time, printers, etc)
and. of course, data processing facilities on the grounds for "replaying" and
analyzing the flights.

Ampex Recorders

As far as recorders are concerned, it is the American firm, Ampex, chosen by
ABROSPATIALE, which has ordered or already acquired model Mink-1700 and model
“BR-3000 recorders. The speed of acquisition is not, in general, the most re-
strictive factor: typically one megabit per second maximum; Ampex has already
exceeded the level of 100 megabands and is aiming at 200 megabands in 1984 and
2,000 in 1988. On the other hand, the specifications for recording life (6
hours) and error rate of 10'7 per word (or 10'8 per bit) require equipment of
very high quality.

The ERR-3000 includes ll. channels recorded at constant density with tape feed
rate controlled by the effective input modulation speed. The code is the
"Ni ller square" utilizing an Ampex patent.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1980

11,706
CSO: 3102/16

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

BRITISR PARTICIPATION IN A 320--Aerospace problems occupied a prouinent place,
especially in talks between Ministers of State Pierre Chevenenent and Charles
Piternan and their British counterparts, during the sumit meeting in bondon at
the end of last week. The matter of the new Bil-passenger, short-nediun-range
transport plane. the A 320, was discussed. and Mr Piterman stated that the British
have now decided to take a substantial part in the actualization of this project.
The ministers are also going to request the industrialists to proceed with the
studies and to undertake the talks necessary to work out tentative plans for pos-
sible cooperation including the field of engines capable of powering the A 320.
This being the case, joint operations already exist involving the industrialists,
such as, for example, the agreements between SNECHA [National Corporation for
Aircraft Engine Design and Construction] and General Electric on engines of the
cm 56 family, and the intended talks must not disturb this cooperation. Hr

are expected to have submitted their proposals to the governments. These propos-
als lust specifically address the economic viability and the competitiveness of

C50: 3102/15

31
F0! OFFIGAI. US! ONLY