FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10290
29 January 1982

China Report

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
CHINA REPORT

Ecouonlc AFFAIRS
(2000 2/82)

CONTENTS

PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF GIINA
FINANCE AND BANKING

Foreign lbney Key To Better Living
(Yoshio hmui; EB DAILY YOMIUBI, 15 Dec 81)................

Unattrective loan Pepaynent hthod
(Yo.h1° “tau-1; mg MILY Yomm, 29 he 81)....OOOOIIOOO...

INDle

Lack of Interest in Service Industry
(Gare Tasman; m2 DAILY YOHIURI, 22 Dec 81)..................

FOREIQ! TRAN

Brie fa
Computer Ilport

mm AND "MES

Unelpbymnt Becoming Serious Problen
(Goro Tasman; THE DAILY YOMIURI, 11 me 81)..................

(ENEML

Finance Official on Economic Rendjustnnt
(FAR EASE”! BmNOHIC REVIEW. 25-31 Dec 81).

- a - [111 - cc - 33 PC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOREIGN mm KEY TO BETTER LIVING

Tokyo 1112 DAILY YOHIURI in English 15 Doc 81. p 5

[Article by Yoshio Meesul]

[Text ]

1hr Chinese. people's
eagerness tor rarelsn
rencies is snrprisiiu. indeed
they chsnne color when
they receive toreign money
such es the Jspsnese yen or
the America: dollsr.

This reporter wss surpris-
ed st the phenomenon he-
csuse there is no way s
Chinese con use torelzn
money in the within. 80 i
and them shout the res-
sons behind this.

Special Prwiieges

Whenever s Chinese goes
to the hunk of Chins with
foreign money. the hunt
not only converts the cur-
the yusn but
siso oﬂers spedsl coupons
called “tickeis~ to supply
motorists.”

it n persOn you to 3
store with the coupon. he or
she is offered so sdditionsl
smoont or rice. wheat or
on outside the framework
of rstioninc.

It sppesred thst there
were other kinds of specisi
coupons with which Chinese
cauld buy
television sets or bicycles.
nil of well-known hrsnd
names. without wetting tor

their turns se per ion: welt-
ing lists.

This means that specie!
privileges are vented to
those who turn over toreicd
currency to the bunk. s
system which he! become

popuhrsmoncthechineoe

'~ or course. wsys or obtsin-
inc foreign sre
limited. it s person b lucky
he nil»! Get foreign money
directly from foreign me.
ists. slthoueh this prsotlce
is considered iiiegsl.

MainSource

s desperste measure to ur-
ner sii svsilebls roreien
money in the country.
in feet. this is reﬂected
the Chinese Government po-
ilcy on {orcign exchsngc
control. Any otteinpt thst
rnity result in en outﬂux oi
rorelcn money out of the
country slwsys isces strict
ehecits by chinese entrant-i-
ties. on the other hood.
there on no rcstricﬂons on
the inﬂux oi ioreiui cut-

in

the country.

1

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Monica W311.

oi the coupon. csiisii “eon-
vertihie tickets." is the
some so the men

Coupon As Passport

"The coupon shows (or-
eieners to shop st stores
open only to toreien ns-
tsonsis where srtides oi
well-known brand mines
end or nicher quniity sre
svsiisbie. The coupon is
extremely sttrsctive to the
crane. . thus this
coupon, together with the
other .ooupon fro: supply
msterisls. 'is considered s
“on-sport" 'to better living
in chino. .

consequently. the Ivinc
stuidsrd or Chinese who
have woli-to-do relsiives
shroud or who new con-
tscts with roreleners in
Chins diﬂers iron thsi oi
ordinsry Chinese.

In Peking. ror instsnce.
Chinese ismilies living next
to icreim residents own TV
sets. wsshins mschinessnd
bicycles of latest models.
0n the other land. Chinese
people living next to the
shove -' mentioned Chinese
have no choice but to use
outdated bicycles by com-
ing out necesssry repsirs.
This hss crested sn imheio
shoe in the living psttern
or the Chinese people.
When 1 vi ted . people's to curb the "Independent"
mm»: In shwfhu, I tumor“)! “Nth? bro; I
came a u n: by uncut In mm a:
household which mug” math "0m curly
1m with in re. yea. But It who.“
check «vealed that the {h the Oo'ernm

- - _ cannot emu: new": de-

my bad a M In DI'EI’ tron: t
“mu“ Mauve 1" ‘ m" It?“ auth one: It has the:
"9’ my, ' - been mated
Ric]: Province: M. .nmuenwro- econ
a, "I! m. 10.300 ‘ Vince: .nd “a .”0m The
“Win? "55‘1"!“ “‘0 9’“ to Invest «comm to their
1:: begun ”waning!“ own b?” mu. {Manny hm,"
"In 00! the! 9 Wrong, 8nd!
province. which Mum I .pm 62%., m. 1.4 to . "“3
hn‘u lent out t are twang; up in use Iona
Chime over-cu m
"can. mum currency 3‘” I" “’08”
1mm abrond. no the: up For ”Man”.
namely richer "In. other D1 0
aromas. In
t u

. manly. the
. o! employu at n swear,”
denartaaent atom in u-
‘xﬁn': when" hm. Rube! Pm:
e ubenunuon ”5
In Odom.

Shaw“.
was by than. in Milan
Invom‘n’: And Changing In .th
tut-white television Order.

an Richer
UNA‘ITRACTIVB LOAN REPAYW METHOD

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 29 Dec 81 p 5

[Article by Yoshio Haunt]

[Text]

At the outset of my
meeting with iluang Ouom-
ing. vice-superintendent of
the Xiangshou wool-knitt-
ing factory in Bhuhai City.
he said with a wry smile
onhisiace:“ihadnoidea
that the rates of interest
on loans were so high.“

The factory. which be-
gan operating last year. is
a Chinese establishment
bot China provided only
land manpower for the
factory. The iactory's bulld-
ings and machines were
bought with loans totaling
about 1 million Hong Kong
dollars (one liong Kong
dollar equals about 940)
which were obtained irorn
enterprises in Hong Kong.
The loans are to be repaid
over a period of ﬁve years.

However. the factory
must pay the loans includ-
ing the interest. in terms
of wool and woolen goods

that it produces.

The rates of‘ interest on
loans are very high these
days. The factory must
pay an interest of it per-
cent per annum on its
loans. ‘me total amount
of interest that the factory
is required to pay in the
ﬁrst year of the five-year
period is nearly l million
Hon: Kong dollar. The
company's production in
the ﬁrst year amounted to
3 million Hong Kong dol-
lars. which means that it

must use one-third oi its
products as payment for
the interest. This must be
hard on the factory.

"Five years from now.
however, the lactory and
its machines will become
our own property." Huang
said: "So the factory's
staﬂers, including myself.
are happy and eager to
work." Certainly. a keen
sense of purpose ﬁlled the
air in the lactory.

Local Viewpoint

Bong Kong enterprises
granting loans to China to
enable the country to build
a factory and to buy
machines for the factory
do not consititue “invest-

ment of foreign capital" in
china. It is a sort of ex-

port of, ruchina and other
material. to China on a
deterred payment bests.
Seen from China's view-
point. it is the import of
ﬁnished products.

It is called “compensa-
tion trade." The use of this
formula has become popu-
lar in such provinces as
Ouanddong and Niian.
which have much dealings
with foreign countries.

A simpler methon of ob-
taining materials for goods.
which is called" processing
on a commission." is also
being used. Foreign enter-
prises bring their own

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

materials and techniques
ior use at Chinese factories.
where the materials are
processed into ﬁnished
products. The products
concerned are mostly tes-
tile goods such as sweat-
ters. gloves and pajamas.
But this forumla is grad-
ually spreading into other
sectors. such as the elect»
rustic and watch industries.

There are 300 cases of
“Compensation trade” and
“processing on a commis-
sion" in Shencho, which
like Bbuhsi. is located near
Hong Kong. There are
about i500 items of goods
involved in these cases.

Huang 8hiinlng. mayor of
Bhencho. said: "We cannot
belittle the beneﬁts that we
gain from these projects.
We can absorb excellent
techniques and the pro-
iects also give workers the
will to work. which is most
needed at Chinese fac-
tones"

Complex Methods

There is always a rial:
Involved in large invest-
ment. Moreover. the pro-
cedures for such invest-
ments are very complex.
although the government
encourages large invest-
ments. lisny foreign enter-
Prises are troubled by new
demands made by the Ohi-
nese side in connection

LACK OF INTEREST IN SERVICE INDUSTRY

Tokyo m2 DAILY YOHIURI in English 22 Dec 81 p 5

[Article by Goro Tagewa]

[Text ]

oncmornlncthlenﬂter
lnrpﬂeed

noted It ’ .

At am 1 thoneht or he:
a a hlaa echool etudent
who woe working et e new
time job I: she vote 3 tee
with "tnlnee" vrltten on
lt. Bot eho w n etndent at

e hotel echool ln Chengdu.
Rare Begum
she eeld that ehe would
ﬁnd e poettton thb enttmn
otter n tout-month (an-the-
loot tram. aer exploite-
tlon entailed the shoot her
um.
8e: cloud” echedule.
m. nope-red very
tight. She stood et n booth
ulna: mvenlre deﬁne to-
mm. between nee) the
end entertalned mun
customer: et a bet at nuht.
She molly vent to bed
after 1 em. 'But I don‘t
nund this Is I will mute
In two mun." ehe uld tn
ﬂuent lemme.
1 rue], ‘tnet ouch e oed-
one newton lnduetry ‘womr

z
E
El

E

85}:
a6

5
'2’
3

'E
E

i

ﬁx
5 a
a 3333:

g

9
§. 3:
s 358

‘E
:g‘
E
E

x
5

lg

g?

:3
5
g:

E

i

as
‘5
E
E.

Se
:3

.5?
EE

E
3

E
3

g}? m

£5!

E

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5n
5?
:1

!

'§

. One the thle Mend he—
cune lnltnted et a netenr-
‘nnt u nobody tune -_to
tote hle out“ to: n lone
tune. lie then eluted to
mite hle oheemtlooe tn
the Inueetlon notebooks.
Whenever he went hook to
the some Went he no
eerved welL , '
, The suddenelnn'ee otthe
welteh' “am eppuent-
)! cone non the not thnt
m at complellnte
ocelnet then would neon
n teductlon to then home.
But phenomenon of thh
nod m 'o common
elonn III. M toe the
People” look empty.‘ -

1t eeem thot not uonly
mm but eleo Chineee
them-elm and poo: .een-
lce tn the tenth” Mutt-y
e tronhleeoene m
.alnn who; edltoe ‘ot
the Chloe Youth Annnel
Bulletln, end: “It tnkee ue
ee long on two month: to
have 3 people'- eott mode
"than; We ﬁnd It not
long even when 'e m hept
welttn: to: “three home at
e hubere ehop."

Mon, Chlneee people “1
Mn; nhroed have enc-
coedod It: the service In-
dustry In their mauve
countnee.‘ Nevenhelep [who
eentoe ln nulnlend Chloe
been not 1mm? -
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500020059-0

FOR UFHLIAL USE UNLY

mm mm. ”mum”

“mm“ mm“ mm

WMMWM.
umnmm
Wm mmamm x

W. Wm.

.. ,W a“???

”W

Wmhm”;
5m“
Manning

inhuman-Mohan-
dmwuinuneven

hummmo

Em

m..mmm mm

MthonthluythInootol

“the tartar: indu- Ilu comb» 1mm

10mm!” macaw!"

m.

mammal"!

mm“ Mum-l Annunc-
2m

Mntmtum.
Ammumotm

and my land

:4}. r. 'i'z'fdi'

Itmmtuunm-

mu.

«you not.-

mﬂc unit.

The Daily Yoniuri 1981

COPYRIGHT

5020/ 70

080:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020059-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOREIGN TRADE

BRIEFS

COMPUTER IMPORT--Bitachi Ltd. has recently obtained the approval of the
coordinating committee for the Control of Exports to Cunmnust Countries (COCOH)
for the expor' of a medium conputer to China. An order for the conputer,
"ii-1501!." which is used for training technicians was sent in from the management
modernization research institute of the Chinese Scientific and Technological
Association. For Hitachi, which has exported more than 40 computer sets to
China to date, this will be the first computer exported for trcining purposes.
The Chinese Scientific and Technological Association is to use the "H-lSOH"
computer to train computer technicians in computer technology and software.
[W120235 Tokyo NIKON KBIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 7 Dec 81 Morning Edition

p9OH]

CSO: 6020/77

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LABOR AND “ACES

7"“ Off“ IAI. URI. Ul‘lJ

UNBELOYPBNT BECOMING SERIOIB PROBLEM

Tokyo me new: mm in Englieh 11 Dec 81 p 5

[Article by Gore 'i‘egewe]

[Text]

In chine, there ere nanny
people who went‘ to work
but eennot and e Job. for
eorne teem theee people
ere not celled Wye" (uh-
employedl penone but do
moot elweye'relerred to es
“'deiye" (lob-eweiting) per-
eone.

Med ehout the diderenee
between the tee, en omelel
expieined:“0nernployedpeo-
ple ere thoee who lave loet
their lobe heeeuee they
were either dlenlleeed or
their oornpenl. went henk-
rupt. People wetting tor lobe
ere thoee young people who
heve not yet iound I 10h
elter mduetinc from
echoole

“There ere lob-eweiting
people in our country. but
never unemployed people."

Corning A Word

Thu reporter wee deeply
impreeeed with the Chineee
ehllity to coin euch e
eeneible cure-ion ee “dei-
ye" ee might he' or
the people or e country with
e rich culture. But it u dit-

iicult to and lie equiveient
in litigate. A mg;
pere e epeneee
might be "ehuehozyronlnf
"Bhuehoku min.” how-
ever. relere to e rether
“cereiree” job eeeirer who
le relreining from tehing up
e lob until he can find e
poeition thet he iikee.

"Dniye" young people ere
decielyely diaerent irorn
"ehuehoku ronin" in thet
they ere herd preeeed with
everydey bie end eennot
euord to look {or e lOb in

e leisurely menner.

Ii unemployed people ere
deﬁned ee thoee who here
the ehility end will to work
but unnot and e lob.
“delye” people belone to
than?!» word :odei‘yee" hee
recon heron M
in chine. preeuniehly he-
ceuee lob shorteee h” 50-
foul. e um eoeiel prob-
Um. ' .

Thie repoder tappened to
meet e “W? Mlle ,men
in shenehei end ehetted
with him (or e while. he
eeid: "I mderetend thet
Jepeneee newepepere ellow
much ”4:thqu
ede every . ere
there more then one W
unemployed people e-
pen?” ‘l'hie reporter wee et
e loee tor en meet.

The youn men. who eeid
he wee lei eround e
per! every dey. mnded In-
credible when he eeld: "i

’:3qu he willing to do my

Young people venting to
and e Job in e meioe city
numbere 800.0000“: Shem.
hei. 200.000 in end
000,000 in aiohuen Province.
The totel number or euch

people in Chine ie eeid to
elnount to tone or million.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Coot Policy

)low eo eneny "delye"
people were meted in cm-
ne where there ere no
"ehlye" We?

Article e of the chine-e
eonetitutton eupuletee thet
the memrnent ehouid teke
the neponeihiiity or helping
the people one ern t.
Chine echieved the "tent“
or ellnoet perfect employ-
ment in the beginning at
the ”we.

Although the m
Governing? the lone
tor neer ei Wh-
erery eetehllehuent uttered!
roan en extreme nrplue 0
letter heeellee it hired wort-
ere rer more then eetueily
needed

teeny Chine. teetoriee
here three to are three ee
lneny'v employee ee caree-
pondne Jepeneee oom-
penlee. rr ouch mm
went to retloneliee their
ineneeelnent by introducing
modern tneohlnery. they
eennet enord to do eo he.
eenee or their ewe-ire

lnenpower.

Life Employment
Once In worker linde em-
plomnt. he will not he
ﬁred unieee there ie eorne
exoeptionei reeeon. end en
enterpriee will never
henkrupt how big e dent-it
it my run. A worker hee
no leer or losing his 100.
If e veeeney is created
by e worler who retires un-
der the eke limit system. it
will be filled by his oil-
epring. Thus e worker‘hoid-
ing e position has vested
rights to it.

At the Wuhan steel com-
plex. whose operetlon role
was reduced by hell es e
result oi economic edluot-
ment. all!) workers were
told of! end forced to ste!
et home. but they received
their regnier seierteo. They
were not edvised to resign
volunterlly. nor wes there e
personnel reduction.

That the! be the way so-
cleiitrn works. but in the
eyee of e person who hes
been brought. up in eepitel-
iern. Chine's perfect employ-
ment is only superileiel. In
chine. to to speuit, the
whole netion is devoted to
employment end wellere
projects. This situetion is
elrin lo the operetlon oi
Jepeneee lyetionei Bellweys
(Ml.

Under the ebove circum-
etenees. it will be dulleult
lor Chine to employ new
workers unleee it increases
lte economic growth rote
eherply.

Durine the culture! Re-
volution. however. the em-
ployment problem did not
surleee very much beeeute
you!!! peolm living in citie-
were eent to lectoriee end
were engeped In lerming on
the pretext thet they ehOuld
dliluee knowledce to term-
Ing villegee.

But elter the Culture!
Revolution when e greet
number oi men young peo-
ple returned to cities. the
employment eltuetion wee
thrown into n Ireet contu-
sion. suddenly bringing the

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020059-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON' V

"deiye" problem to etlen-
tton.

some such young people
bepen to commit crimes or
other ects of Meet end
some others sterted under-
ground entigovernment ee-
tivities. Is it neturel for
young people who hove
undiluted from schools but
cennot and e wey of euro-
ing e living to become
desperate end ect reckless-
I?

New Measures

_Chlne is now meﬂng el«
torts to increese Job oppor-
tunities by developing pri-
vetely opented stores end
the eervloe industry. Chine
it elso exporting iebor
—|n cooperetion with Jeo-
enese compenles. It hes
sent workers to construc-
tion projects in other coun-
tries.

But out such meesures
elone secure employment for
ell "delve" young people?

Some Chinese even heve
begun to enue thet the em-
ployment oi merrled women
should be restricted lor the
purpose ol giving Jobs to

young people.
The editor of e eertein
newtpeper eeid: ~11 both

husbend end wile continue
to work in Chine. which
has e bio populetion. the
‘dulye' problem will never
be solved. Partly to melte
eomlortebie homes. women
should etey et horns. It is
not e good trend thet elec-
trle weshlng rneehines end
retrigeretore sell well be-
eeuse nobody wente to do
Musework.“

This to oi course e
minority opinion in Chine
where women's sey het
gelned power since the
revolution oompered with
thet in Jepen.

u’l‘o be continued»

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Yoniurl. 1981

CSO: 6020/ 70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500020059-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

62m

FINANCE OFFICIAL 0N ncouomc READJUSTMIBNT
“(290835 Hong Kong PAR EASTER“ ECONOMIC REVIW in hglish 25-31 Dec 81 pp 66-48

[Report from Beijing: "Open to the World: A Top Beijing Finance Official Talks
of the Prohl-s and Opportunities in Economic Readjustment'ﬂ

[Text] In his report to the fourth session of the Fifth National People's
Congress (UPC) Premier Zhso Ziyang reaffirmed China's couitment to expanding
economic cooperation with foreign countries and further utilisation of foreign
capital.

To gain further insights into what China's policies toward foreign investment
will he in the period of readjustment new extended until the end of 1985,
Robert Delfs talked to Wei Yuming, vice chairman of the Foreign Investment
Control Omission (P196) and the Import-Export Conission (IBC), chaired

by Vice Praia: Gu Mu.

The HOG and 1m are one organisation, with identical staff, operating out of a
single office complex in Beijing; As the FICC, the organisation has the sole
authority to approve foreign investments in China, and coordinates the related
activities of ministries and 10ml goverment agencies. As the IEC, it super-
vises foreign trade and oversees. the related work of ministries, foreign trade
corporations and the general administration of exchange control.

This interview took place prior to the conclusion of the NPC session.

[Question] How will the extasion of the period of readjustment affect foreign
investment in China?

[Answer] At the third session of the NPC, it was decided that the policy of
opening up would be adopted in our economic affairs with foreign countries.
At the same time, the policy of readjustment was also adopted. As you know,
after the 10 years of the Cultural Revolution, our national economy suffered
heavy losses and was out of proportion, so without readjustment our national
economy cannot be further developed.

The policy of opening up to the outside world is not a temporary policy, it
is a long-term strategy. of course, China is such a large country, with such a
large population, we must develop our economy relying on our own efforts. But

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at the same time, we should expand our foreign trade with various countries.
Only by introducing advanced technology from advanced countries and by
absorbing foreign funds can we solve the problem of lack of capital, and
realise the four modernisations.

Recently some foreign friends have been confused about the significance of
our present readjustment. They thought that readjustment meant a slowing down
of the modernisation process. But actually, the current readjustment doesn't
mean slowing down. Progress will be made in some economic sectors.

For example, our light industry and textile industry have been developing quite
quickly: their growth rate this year will reach 12 percent. It is also true
that the growth rate of heavy industry dropped a little. because some factories
are under-utilised. This is only temporary. It is our hope that by readjust-
ment internally-~within heavy industry-the growth rate of heavy industry

will catch up a little bit.

The utilisation of foreign funds will not adversely affect our national economy,
but will serve the readjustment and expansion of our national economy. Just as
Premier Zhao said, we will actively utilise foreign funds, and we will use
foreign funds from various sources.

[Question] "111 China maintain high levels of capital inflow during the extended
period of readjustment?

[Answer] Under the guidance of the policy of opening up to the outside world,
we have been utilising foreign funds for the past 2 years, and we are going to
use more. Here I can give you some figures: over the past 2 years, loan
agreements were concluded with various governments and organisations totalling
$17.3 billion. In the past 2 years (1980-81) we have used up $1.2 billion.
Besides this, we have also used foreign funds in the form of processing imported
materials and compensation trade, imported equipment and new technology.

[Question] Does the $17.3 billion include loans from international organisations.
that is. World Bank loans and International Monetary Fund (IMF) credit?

[Answer] Of the $17.3 billion, purchasers' credits account for $12 billion. but
up to now we have not used a single penny of the buyers' credits. It does not
include IHF credit, but it does include the World Bank loans.

We have utilised loans from Japan, both OECP (Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund)
and EXIH (the Japanese Export-Import Bank), mostly relating to development of
railways, port facilities and coal mines. Re have also used certain amounts

of loans from the World Bank--$200 million for education and $200 million for
agricultural development.

In the field of economic cooperation, we have approved 29 joint-venture projects
and more than 400 coproduction projects as well as compensation trade and
processing of imported materials. The coproduction projects represent a
utilisation of funds equivalent to $1.5 billion, and the compensation trade repre-
sents another $300 million.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These figures really are not very big, however. Actually, in relation to the
size and population of our country, they are quite small. Re have decided

to use lore foreign funds in the Sixth 5-Year Plan (1981-86). If you as]: me
how web, I cannot really tell you. But I can assure you we will use such sore
foreign funds. For example, in the field of coproduction, compensation trade.
and processing of imported materials. we will approve not hundreds but
thousands of projects in the years to tone.

[Question] According to Minister of Finance Vang Bingqian's report on the
budget at the NFC, goverment revenues this year include 8 billion yuan

($10.7 billion) in foreign loans. So there nust be foreign loan receipts other
than IMP credit that are not included in your figures.

[Answer] The figures we gave you do not include m funds, which are used for
deficit purposes. They also do not include loans arranged in the 1978 contracts,

for instance the Balgsng (Baoshan Steel) Complex, and they do not include
loans to the goverment from the Bank of China.

Different government departments use different bases for calculating these figures.
we just calculate how much foreign funds have been utilised. For example, we

would determine the value of equipment and technology used in a conpensation trade
agree-ant or a joint-venture agreansnt, and then incorporate this into the figures.

The budget is prepared by the Ministry of Finance, which has a different account-
ing approach. The foreign loan receipts and loan repay-ants are recorded in

the Ministry of Finance Accounts. But I do not have the figures for a breakdown
of the 8 billion yuan in foreign loan receipts in the budget for this year.

[Question] th is it that only a sail portion of .the available credit has been
used so far?

[Answer] Due to readjustnmt, the scale of capital construction has been reduced
and curtailed. Because the loans obtained fron foreign governments were mostly
in the form of purchasers' credits, we have not used most of then. [Words
indistinct] have to confess that we have very little experience in using foreign
loans--this is also a reason we have not used up the entire amount of foreign
loans available. Another is the inadequacy of our economic legislation, the

lack of relevant laws and regulations. Furthermore. poor organisation and manage-
neat have delayed our use of these loans.

[Question] The world Bank in its report on the Chinese econony of June 1981
basically urged higher levels of capital inflow, but cautioned that unless
exports expanded quickly. China could face debt-service problems by 1990.
Could you discuss your strategies to avoid future debt-service probl-s?

[Answer] We have considered this problan very seriously. Our conclusion is
that, up to now, the problem is that (shortage of capital has) bound our

hands. Sons experts have suggested that debt servicing and repayment of principal
should not be allowed to exceed 20 percent of foreign—currency incone. We have

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

decided that our debt servicing should not go beyond 15 percent. Also, we
have coal, we have oil and we have non—ferrous metals. We can use these to
pay our foreign debts. There will be no debt-servicing problems.

We have also determined that we will keep our reputation and credit standing.
If we borrow from a foreign country, or from an international organisation,
we will surely repay in full.

[Question] Zhao's report on the economy and future policy indicated that the
Sixth 5—Year Plan is still not in its final form. Can you discuss the overall
directions the plan will take, and perhaps some of the specific projects where
foreign participation could play a major role?

[Answer] In general, the first priority will be given to transport and energy
resources development, because these are the weakest links in our national
economy. For example, we have large amounts of coal in Shanxi Province, at
least 10 million tonnes (annual production), but there is a problem in rail
transport. That is why we want to expand railways and coal facilities in
conjunction with coal-mining development.

He also have abundant hydroelectric resources. Up to now. we have used at
most 5 percent of the exploitable hydroelectric potential. So we want to
bring our advantages in these fields to their full potential, by developing
more hydroelectric and coal-fired power stations. Also, because of our
abundant coal reserves, coal will be a good card to play in foreign trade.

The second priority is technological transformation of the machine-building
industry. The third priority comprises light industry, the textile industry,
agriculture. forestry and animal husbandry.

The emphasis is on the technical renovation of existing enterprises, but we will
also be building some new factories. We have 370,000 existing (industrial)
enterprises that urgently need technical transformation to raise the quality

of their products and their competitiveness in international markets.

We have decided that in the Sixth 5-Year Economic Development Plan we develop
coal mines in Shanxi Province and in Guizhou Province. Reserves in Shanxi
amount to 200 billion tonnes. In Guizhou, there are 12 billion tonnes of re-
coverable reserves. In Guizhou we will develop not just the coal mines, but

in an all-round way. There are sulphate and non-ferrous metals in Guizhou

as well as coal. He will improve the railway between Guizhou and the port of
Zhanjiang in Guangdong Province, and expand the port facilities in Zhanjiang.

To develop Guizhou, the capital that will be needed is very large. Not hundreds
of millions of dollars, but billions of dollars. We also plan some major
projects in the northeast plain, and we plan to develop one or two nuclear power
stations during this period.

What I have discussed here are mainly large-scale projects for which the capital
needs will be high and in all of them foreign capital will be used. He have
contacted various foreign governments and consortia, which have shown very

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

strong interest in participating in joint-venture development projects (in these
areas). He also plan to establish some media: and small projects (in these
areas). we also plan to convene an international conference.

[Question] When will this take place and who will participate?

[Answer] Next year, roughly in June. Approximto 200 foreign businessmen
will be invited. During the conference, we will offer 100 mediua- and stall-
sised projects.

[Question] How will the new economic laws under consideration at the NPC affect
foreign investment? There is some confusion about these laws among foreign
businessmen, especially the income—tax regulations for foreign firms.

[Answer] The principle is that economic cooperation should be based on equality
and mutual benefit. 80, we will create a legal environment for foreign business
to make investments and to protect their interests. Some foreign businesses are
concerned that our policies may suddenly change, or they fear expropriation.
This fear is groundless. We will make more efforts to make more laws in this
area to give very firm protection to the foreign business interests.

The income-tax law under consideration at the current NPC session is one of these.
As far as I know, the tax levels set forth in this law are not high. relative to
developed countries and relative to some developing countries. In order to
provide more protection for the legitimate interests of foreign businesses, the
Chinese Goveth is negotiating bilateral agreasents for mutual investment
insurance and protection. Re have concluded such an agreement with the United
States, and an agreeaent will be concluded very soon with Switzerland.‘ We are
discussing and negotiating similar agreements with France, Sweden, Canada and
west Germany.

mere have been serious shortcomings and weaknesses in our utilisation of foreign
funds. In many cases, both parties have not clearly understood our position and

policies. Maybe we have not publicised our policies, laws and regulations very
effectively, or very efficiently. We have established four special economic

zones (SE). Later, we will also grant more autonomy to coastal provinces.

Another way to encourage foreign investment is to try to do a good job with the
existing joint ventures and coproduction projects. Another measure is to strengthen
and expand the popularisation of economic laws and policies. We have decided to
publish a booklet of guidelines for investment in China.

[Question] When will this be available?

[Answer] As early as the first quarter of 1982.

[Question] As a conditioa of joining the IMF, China has essentially agreed to
take steps to abolish the present system of dual achange rates for internal

and external foreign-currency transactions. Hhen will this take place, and
what will be the effects on domestic prices and prices of export articles?

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] I assure you, there is only one exchange rate.

[Question] I'm referring to the internal settlement rate. As I understood it,
this would constitute a dual exchange-rate system as far as the IMF is concerned.

[Answer] That is not an exchange rate. The internal settlement rate is used
only to subsidise exports, and it cannot be called an exchange rate. It is a
means of subsidising our export industries--many countries adopt such means
to encourage exports, and we still use this means. Whether or not this means
will still be used in the future is a matter which will be considered.

[Question] As a condition of IMF membership, China will also eventually have to
make public the method used to determine the official exchange rate, which we
understand to be a weighted basket of other currencies. Will this happen soon?
And have there been any recent changes in the composition or weighting of the
basket? will you move towards making the renminbi a freely—traded currency?

[Answer] For the present we cannot give you a good answer to this question.
The calculation method used to determine the exchange rate is very complicated.
As for making the renninbi a freely-traded currency. this can only happen when
materials (that we produce) are very abundant, otherwise the results could

be catastrophic to other countries.

[Question] China has recently pursued a policy of decentralising economic
decision-making to the provincial, municipal and enterprise levels. But
excessive investment at the local levels was a major factor in the large

budget deficits recorded in 1979 and 1980. This has induced a countervailing
trend to reassert central control over local investment. Could you discuss

the issue of local autonomy versus centralised control over investment decisions?

[Answer] I think this is really a problem. You know, some Chinese provinces

have populations reaching 100 million—-so it is quite reasonable to grant more
autonomy to the provincial authorities. The direction of reform and restructuring
is to enlarge the power of decision-making of various entities. We are now
considering the problem of centralised management and control over foreign

trade affairs. He will increasingly practise our control via the price and market
mechanisms.... I have to admit, we are quite inexperienced in this matter. How
can we manage to grant greater autonomy to local levels but not (let the situation)
run into disorder and chaos?

[Question] How do you evaluate the experience of the $52 so far, and will you
establish new SE2 in the coastal provinces, for example at Tianjin, or elsewhere?

[Answer] The four SEZ have only recently been established, so it is too early
for us to be able to cite any remarkable results, but I think the progress has

been fine. The SEZ have made good contributions to market prosperity in local
areas, and have also contributed to the utilisation of foreign funds.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] But 82?. camot be established anywhere. They can be established
only in certain geographical and econonic conditions. Our SE are presently
run on an experimental basis, and for the tine being, we do not want to
establish any nore. He not want to wait to see the results.

COPYRIM: PAR EASTERN WRONG REVIEW 1981

(:80: 1020/77 m

16-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY