2..

APPROVED FOR RELEASE:

1979

2007/02/00:

ClA-RDP02-00050R000 1 0001 0020-0
Fm: nFl‘HHM. PSI-t anY

Table 1

Computation of Hater Hmm of Some (:lncleru on Severnuya Zu-mlyn me. We "I'
More Profiles

M“

M no 1301- M W!”

saw.
551... r 3 "Pu m. ,

  

Husanus numm fast I In:

h

l 2

    
 

 

 

 

 

           

5 Assassin uyu ll I 2317mm
mans" JI 2| 0377 29586.8 6701 5
5 M 23 0.523 mom 0’
7 Mud-sues 3 16.5 M63 3‘9339 .4
u :9 om #675 m”
8 Hum A ”.5 0.295 82075.! «:32
5 [4.25 0.363 57342.?
8 I335 0.340 31213.3
9 Venues: [1 22 0.537 26043.9 some
'I’ [9 0.463 "$5.5
10 Batman - -— - - W

Note n p I u e n a a a c. [Immune rates w as Muses en. a [5].

Key:

1. Name of glacier

2. Run

3. H along sections, millions of tons
4. Resultant H, millions of tons

5. Akademiya Nauk

6. Shmidt

7. Al'banova

8. Pioner

9. Ushakova

13. Vavilova
Note. For the position of the runs and their numbers see [5].

For precise measurement of the thicknesses of anilovn Glacier a “he" for
their measurements was developed. In constructing the scheme use was made
of ground and aircraft radar runs: the surface of the glacier was broken
«lawn into squares with an area of A b2 x 1.072; the coefficient 1.072 is
the result of refinement of the glacier area from a map at a smaller scale
than that which was used initially. The square was selected in such a way
that its side was commensurable with the distance between the survey runs
in the central and northern parts of the glacier: the division a; the
glacier into squares was accomplished from north to south and from east to
west. It is assumed that the ice thickness within the limits of the square
is a constant value. The numerical values are distributed in the middle of
the square and reflect the mean thickness (in meters) for the entire square.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Interpolation of thicknesses from the sections was accomplished on the
assumption of a smooth (graphic averaginga) change in the profile of the
glacier bed along the section from run to run. In such cases we took into
account the change in bed relief along the last sections. along transverse
sections and along near-lying sounding runs; in the eastern and southwest-
ern sectors of the glacier the thicknesses in the squares were obtained by
extrapolation. Near the radar measurements the thicknesses were assumed to
be close to those for runs, taking into account the tendencies in change
in thicknesses in the northern and central parts of the glacier. At a con-
siderable distance from the run we made the following assumptions: the bed
in the middle part of the glacier is even and virtually plane; the glacier
surface drops off toward the edges approximately in conformity to a para-
bolic law; the thickness of the glacier with approach to the edge (some 3-
3 km) changes in conformity to a law close to linear [this assumption is
backed up by radar measurements); the volume of a column of ice is deter-
mined as the product of the mean thickness for a square over the area of
the square (in the marginal sector -- in an area of a part of the square).

The volume of Vavilova glacier was determined by computations and with the
adopted assumptions was $79.8 km3. The area of the glacier was assumed to
be 1,816.8 k . Taking into account the mean density of ice in the glacier,
which is equal to 0.9 g/cm3, we find that the watuv mass of Vavilova glacier
is H - 520,000,000 tons.

The table shows that the water reserve of the five mentioned glaciers is
about 2.8.1012 tons. Radar observations of the remaining glaciers in the

archipelago makes it possible with a reliability greater than earlier to
ascertain the total mass of water in the glaciers of Severnaya Zemlya.

. The considered method can be applied to computations of the water reserves
in any glaciers. including mountain glaciers. we note that for sounding of
mountain glaciers it is necessary to have radar apparatus with other tech-
nical specifications in comparison with that which was used in flights
over Severnaya 2cmlya.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Bogorodskiy, V. V., FIZICRESKIYE HETODY ISSLBDOVANIYA LEDNIKOV (Phys-
ical Methods for Investigating Glaciers), Leningrad, Gidromcteoisdat.
1968, 212 pages.

2. Bogorodskiy. V. V., RADIOZONDIEDVANIYB L'DA (Radar Sounding of Ice).
Leningrad, Gidrometcoizdat. 1975, 63 pages.

3. Bogorodskiy, V. V., Trepov, G. V.. Pedorov. 8. A.. TENZORNYYB ELEKTRO-
HAGNITNYYB-SVOYSTVA GLETCHERNOGO L'DA (Tensor Electromagnetic Propert-

ies of Glacier Ice), TRUDY AANII (Transactions of the Arctic and Antarc-
tic Scientific Research Institute). Vol 295, pp 120-123, 1970.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
S.

6.

7.

8.

FOR OPfICIAL USE ONLY

Bogorodskiy. V. V.. Khokhlov. G. P.. "Acoustic Characteristics of Ice
Under Static Pressure." AKUSTICHHSKtY ZHURNAL (Acoustics Journal).
Vol XIII, No I, pp 18-22. 1967.

Bogorodskiy. v. V.. Padarov. B. A.. "Radar Sounding of Glaciers on
Savernaya Zealya." TRUDY AANII, Vol 295, pp 5-16. 1970.

Govorukha, L. 8.. Ivanov. V. V.. Chishov. 0. P.. "Hater Resources of
Glaciers and the Glacial Runoff of the Arctic." PROBLBMY ARKTIKI I
ANTARKTIKI (Problems of the Arctic and Antarctic), No 65, pp 5-12. 1976.

MIROVOY VODNYY BALANS I VODNYYB RESURSY ZBHLI (World Water Balance and
Hater Resources of the Earth). Leningrad. Gid'oaateoisdat, 1976. 638
pages.

RUKOVODSTVO P0 SOSTAVLBNIYU KATALOGA LBDNIKOV 885R (Manual for Preparing
Catalogue of the Glaciers of the USSR), Leningrad, Gidroaateoisdat.
1966, 150 pages.

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
mu OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.(b65.7i$l3)(27)

SYNOPTIC CONDITIONS FOR CRANGBS IN POSITION OF THE GULF STREAM
Moscow HBTBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 1978 pp 78-82

[Article by Candidate of Geographical Sciences V. P. Kapralova, Odessa
Division State Oceanographic institute, submitted for publication 1 March

1978]

Abstract: Using the coefficients of expansion
in Chebyshev polynomials. a study was made of
the peculiarities of variability of the pres-
sure field over the Gulf Stream for different
types of atmospheric processes in the A. I.
Sorkina classification. The article defines
the principal synoptic situations prevailing
when there are considerable fluctuations of
the Gulf Stream axis.

[Text] Despite the obviousness of the general relationships between circul-
ntion of the ocean and the atmosphere and the fact that the principal
changes in velocity, direction and geographical distribution of some
branches of oceanic circulation are related to atmospheric processes.

in many cases it is nevertheless difficult to explain the details of
spatial-temporal variability of ocean currents. This is particularly char-
acteristic for such a current in the temperate latitudes es the Gulf Stream.
which is a typical western boundary current with an easterly extension --
the North Atlantic Current.

The problem of the interrelationship between the.Gulf Stream and the process-
on transpiring in the atmosphere has attracted the attention of many re-
searchers, but by virtue of its complexity and the inadequacy of regular
instrumental observations of the current it has not yet been studied ade-
quately and requires further special investigations.

He carried out a comparison of the pressure fields with prolonged observa-
tions of the Gulf Stream for clarifying the relationship between the spatial

and temporal variability of the position of the Gulf Stream and the pecul-
iarities of atmospheric circulation in different seasons of the year.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-2 ONLY

As the initial material we used the menu monthly values of the position
at the current axis at the meridians 80, 75. 70. 65 and 60'“ during 1966-

l973, obtained by Ye. I. Baranov [il.nnd the moan monthly pressure fields
at sea leVel over the Northwestern Atlantic during this same period [2].

  

:5 Ja O In 0 I! 4")! 2

 

 

6 Jo 6 Is It :a

    

3 "Mn ¢ J5 '0

\
\..

In 3d :5 2

   

Fig. 1. Values of A1, coefficients for different types of atmospheric cir-
culation according to A. I. Sorkins classification.

All the deviations of the Gulf Stream axis from the mean monthly values
during the sentioned period were divided into three groups: I - small
(0110' in longitude). II -- intermediate (ll-29' in longitude) and III -
considerable (£B30' in longitude). The breakdown found was: small -- 361.
Intermediate -- about 602 and considerable deviations -- 26: of the cases.

It was established earlier [1] that the greatest deviations in the axis of
the current to the north or to the south of the mean position. equal to 2.5-
3‘ in longitude. are noted in the eastern part of the current (from Cape
Hatteras to the traverse of Sable Island).

For an analysis of the intraannual changes in the position of the Gulf
Stress axis we reckoned the frequency of recurrence of its deviations from
the neon monthly "nor." by seasons.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1 shows that in the seasonal variation the greatest frequency of
recurrence of considerable deviations of the current axis at 70'" is ob-
served in winter and summer (29% of the cases). intermediate deviations
-- in winter, and small -- in summer (46! of the cases).

The greatest frequency of recurrence of Gulf Stream deviations to the north.
both in the western (from Florida Strait to Cape llattcras) and in the east-
ern parts of the current,is noted in the warm season of the year, that is,
the Gulf Stream is displaced to the northwest. closer to the shores of the
North American continent. In winter the current in its western part has a
tendency to be deflected to the south. that is. the Gulf Stream deviates
from the shore, being displaced to the southeast, in the direction of the

open ocean.
Table 1

Frequency of Recurrence (2) of Deviations of Gulf Stream Axis from Mean
Monthly "Norm“ (70"!)

 

Grumman \‘I’ came res uun

    
 

Ctaou t :uulr l ensures»
nus
" “’9" 030')

    

   

 

 

§ 3m“ . . . . . 25 46 29
.2::'---~%: a: a
9 Oran. .' . I I 3 as 33 29
Key:

1. Season 6. Winter

2. Deviations of Gulf Stream axis 7. Spring

3. small 8. Swat

4. intermediate 9. Autumn

S. considerable

 

The greatest frequency of recurrence of deviations of the eastern part of
the current to the scuth is noted during the transitional seasons: in
spring and autumn (28 and 262 of the cases respectively). and in summer
and winter is identical (23% of all cases each).

These conclusions are entirely satisfactorily explained on the basis of
the general circulation conditions in this region.

The dependence between the peculiarities of the pressure field over the
Northwestern Atlantic and atmospheric circulation over the North Atlantic
sector in general was investigated using the expansion of the mean monthly
pressure fields over the Gulf Stream using P. L. Chebyshev polynomials.
During the mentioned period for all types of atmospheric circulation in

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the A. I. Sorkina classification [5] we ascertained the values of the most
informative expansion coefficients A13.

It was found that for the coefficients Ali, having a definite physical
pa

sense, it is possible to define the princ l combinations of types of at-
mospheric circulation. Each of the combinations corresponds to its own
level of expansion coefficients different from others (Fig. 1).

Table 2

Dependence Between Types of Atmospheric
Circulation According to [5] and the

eel/A10 Parameter

Circulation types A01/A10
30. 3b 11.. 29-1100 12
2, 53 80010-50 33
6, 1b, 0 3.28-1.71
5b 9 18 1. 1.0.6

The greatest variations are experienced by the values of the coefficients

A00 and A01. characterising, as is well known [4]. the mean pressure field
and the meridional transfer of air masses.

Subtype 3b and type 2 are characterized by the maximum value of the A00 co-
efficient.

The coefficient A01 attains a maximum value with meridional type 6.

The coefficient A10, characterizing latitudinal transfer, assumes a maximum
value for synoptic subtype la.

An increased level of the A20 coefficient is noted for subtypes 5b and 3a.

Table 2 gives what in our opinion are quite clear combinations of types (sub-
types) of atmospheric circulation for one of the A1 complexes: in the form
of the ratio of the intensity of meridional transfer to the intensity of lat-
itudinal circulation (ADI/A10).

in winter with type 3 there is an increased meridionality of atmospheric
processes characterized by a maximum value of the meridionality index A?1/
A10. For summer circulation subtypes (la. lb) there is a predominance 0
small ‘01/‘10 values.

In order to characterize the synoptic conditions for significant spatial-
temporal variations of the Gulf Stream we listed the dates of considerable

()>0.5' in longitude) deviations of the axis of the current from the mean
monthly values ("norms") for 1966-1973 and examined the synoptic situations

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

under which these variations were observed to the north and south. Use was
node of the already nentioned classification [5] and long-tern data on the
intensity and migration of the Icelandic Low and the Azores high [3).

Considerable deviations of the western part of the Gulf Streaa to the north
(0.9'-l.2° in longitude) in winter are observed in type 3b under the influ-
ence of the southwestern part of the Canadian anticyclone or its nucleus.
The Canadian enticyclone (1025 ah) is stationary over the North American
continent; its ridge extends in a southeasterly direction toward the Ocean
to the meridian 45'". An independent nucleus with a pressure at the center
of 1025-1030 ab is formed frequently in the mentioned ridge in the region
32°N, 67-70'". '

The intensity of the Icelandic minimum, as a rule, is 4~6 ab greater than
the neon long-tern nora (for example. by 5.8 ab in February 1968); its cen-
ter is situated to the southeast of Greenland and the trough extends to 40°
N.

 

Pig. 2. Synoptic situation for considerable deviations of Gulf Stream axis
to north in sue-er.

The Azores anticyclone is situated to the west of the Strait of Gibraltar;
pressure at the center is close to the lean long-term value or less by

4-5 ab.

The eastern part of the current is deflected in winter to the north (0.6-0.8’
in longitude) in the case of type h under the influence of the leading part
of the trough or the particular cyclone (1010 ab) of the Icelandic law.

The axis of the trough extends in a southwesterly direction from Newfoundland
to the Florida peninsula. The anonalies in depth of the Icelandic Low vary
from b.9 ab (in neceuber 1968) to 13.8 ab (in Pebruary 1969). The Azores
High over the western half of North America is almost destroyed; its center

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with a pressure of 1027.5 is situated at about 60°N. 25°". The anomalies
in the intensity of the Azores antivyclnnc vary from -3.3 to -9.1 mb.

Considerable (up to 1’ in longitude) deviations of the Gulf Stream axis to
the south in winter are noted in the case of subtype 3b and type 6 under
the influence of the spur or nucleus of the Canadian anticyclone with its
center (1.020 mb) over the scutheastern states of the United States.

The Icelandic Low (995 mb at its center) is situated over the Norwegian
Sea and its trough over Newfoundland usually forms a particular cyclone.
The anomalies of intensity of the Icelandic Low in the Azores High in
cases of considerable migrations of the Gulf Stream axis to the south vary
in a broad range.

In winter. with a predominance of type 3 of atmospheric circulation,between
the position of the Gulf Stream axis and the index of neridionality A01/A10
there is found to be a synchronous correlation (correlation coefﬁiqient 0.65)

Considerable (0.6-1.2' in longitude) deviations of the western part of the
Gulf Stream to the north in summer (Fig. 2) most frequently occur in syn-
optic type 1 under the influence of the westerly ridge of the Azores high,
occupying almost all of the North Atlantic. The pressure at the center
(35‘N, AO'H) in the Azores High is greater than the mean long-term value;
its intensity anomalies vary from 1.6 to 6.2 mb.

The Icelandic Low is traced in the form of particular cyclones over the
northern peninsula of Labrador and Iceland; pressure at the center is with-
in normal limits (1006-1009 mb).

In summer considerable deviations in the position of the Gulf Stream to the
south (0.5-0.8‘) at TO’H are noted with type 1 (subtypes a and h) under the
influence of the rear part of the trough of the Icelandic Low or a partic-
ular cyclone situated to the northeast of the Labrador peninsula,with

their interaction with the ridge or the nucleus of the Azores High over the
southeastern states in the United States. The Icelandic Low is weakened; its
intensity anomalies are -3.9 (in June 1968) and -k.6 mb (in July 1971). The
Azores High (1026 mb at the center), extensive in area. occupies almost the
entire North Atlantic, except for the region to the north of the 45th paral-
lel.

Thus, the results of our invastigation give an additional confirmation of
the definite interrelationship between variations in the position of the
Gulf Stream and atmospheric circulation during different seasons of the
year.

The detected peculiarities in atmospheric processes in the case of consid-
erable variations in position of the Gulf Stream can be used in routine
work in the hydromateorological servicing of navigation, and also in fur-
ther work on prognostic recommendations for commercial fishing regions in
the Northwestern Atlantic.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

lo.

5.

FOR OVFICIM. USE ONLY

BIBLIOGMPIIY

Baranov, Ye. 1., Kapralove. V. P., "Variations in the Gulf Screen Axis
in Dependence on the Nature of Atmospheric Circulation," MB‘I'SGROLOGIYA
I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology). No 5, pp 56-62, 1917.

SINOP‘I'ICKESKIYB BYULLETENI SEVERNOCO POLUSHARIYA (Synoptic Bulletins
for the Northern Hemisphere). Part III, Moscow, HTsD, 1966-1973.

SINOPTIGHBSKIY BYULLETBN' SMRNOGO Powsmnm. PRILOZHENIYE No 2 (Syn-
optic Bulletin for the Northern Hemisphere. Appendix No 2). edited by
A. I. Sorkine, Moscow, ﬁrst), pp 3-7, 1972.

Son'kin, A. 3., "Relationship Between the Intensity of Zone]. Transfer
Over the American Sector and Surface Pressure daerscteriatica." TRUDY
060 (Transactions of the Main Geophysical Observatory), No 181, pp 80-
83. 1965.

Sorkins, A. 1., "up“ of Atuospheric Circulation in wind Fields Over
the Northern Part of the Atlantic Ocean," TRUDY coma (Transactions
of the State Oceanographic Institute), No 86, pp 5-131, 1965.

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 556.56

THREB- AND THO-DIMENSIONAL MODELS OF SPREADING OUT 0? RIVER DISCHARGE
UPON ENTRY INTO THE SEA

Moscow NETBOROLOOIYA I GIDROLOOIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 1978 pp 83-92

[Article by Candidate of Geographical Sciences 0. I. Samsonov, Moscow Af-
filiate of the Leningrad Institute of Water Transportation, submitted for
publication 27 February 1978]

Abstract: The article gives an analysis of
the possibility of three-dimensional model-
ing of complex cases of hypopycnel spreading
out of river discharge upon entry into the
sea. The author shows the applicability of
two-dimensional aodels for describing the
honopycnsl discharge. A study is made of
horizontal circulation in a river jet spread-
ing out in different directions. A method
for calculating the jet under these candi-
tions is given.

[Text] "hen there is a considerable broadening of a channel in a place
where there is a change in the bottom profile, at a place where a river
enters into the sea and in other cases it is necessary to deal with river
flows which are partially or completely detached from the solid bed.

A knowledge of the structure and dynamics of detached flows is necessary
when investigating reformings of bar shoals, the silting of navigable
channels, erosion of the lower pools at hydroelectric complexes. and in
solving some ecological problems. In many problems related to detached
currents it is necessary to take into account the density stratification
of the waters: intrusion of a wedge of saline waters into the river mouth,

propagation of a jet of impurity in a water body, designing of cooling
ponds for thermal and atomic electric power stations, etc. Detached cur-

rents as a rule have a very complex structure. Frequently they are three-
dimensional and nonstationary.

According to observations made at the mouth of the Mississippi [18], a
river jet spreads out into the sea es en "injected" layer above the eel-
ine sea water. which in the torn of e pycnocline penetrates into the river

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

channel, sometimes for great distances from the mouth. The spreading out
of the river flow is accompanied by its thinning, which leads to the gen-
eration of waves at the discontinuity between the two media. Internal
waves at a distance of four-six channel widths lose their stability, are
destroyed and are introduced into the river flow. This causes intensive
vertical mixing. The divergence of flow at the surface in combination
with the intrusion of saline waters into the river flow causes a second-
ary convergence at the discontinuity of the two media and somewhat below
it. This gives rise to a "two-spiral" vertical circulation. A similar, but
frequently more complex character of currents was also observed at the
mouths of other rivers [11, 12].

Until recently in our country and abroad use has been made of simplified
models of two-dimensional steady-state spreading out, making use of rel-
atively simple equations. But a two-dimensional model is not adequate

for the just-mentioned case, and as will be demonstrated below, many other
cases of a current in the mouth region of a river.

The following conclusion can be drawn after analyzing the studies on riv-
er mouths carried out during recent years in our country. The set of ex-
isting models is extremely small. Models of detached currents are lacking
for conditions of tides and waves; there have been no studies of cases of
nonisothermic spreading out of river waters; there is no reliable model
of a current in stratified flows, etc.

The prevailing situation is attributable not only to a shortage of actual
observational data, but also primarily to the fact that up to the present
time mathematical modeling has not been playing its proper role in invest-
lgating river mouths. In any plan for solving many problems relating to

a mouth region it is necessary to combine field measurements with physical
and mathematical modeling. In this connection, it seems desirable to employ
the following complex approach to mouth problems:

1. Organization of preliminary expeditions for studying the boundary and
initial conditions for the mathematical model (morphological investiga-
tions, measurements of the velocity field, pressure, salinity and temper-
ature at mouth stations. and also on the boundaries of interaction between
the river jet and the sea current, air flow and bottom of the water body,
etc.).

2. It is economical to employ a physical model (laboratory experiment) for
studying the turbulent exchange of matter, momentum, heat and other sub-
stances.

3. A mathematical model (results of numerical solution of equations) can

be used in determining the most important sectors for future field invest-
igations (zones of water circulation, zones of maximum concentration of
an impurity, temperature, salinity, etc.) and for checking a system of

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
" POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

physical models.

Such a research approach makes maximum use of the possibilities of comput-
ations, experimentation and field measurements. If the model has been de-
veloped in accordance with the plan presented here, there will be assur-
ance of the reliability of the predictions obtained on its basis, both the
hydrological predictions, associated, for example, with a decrease in the
level of the receiving basin or the removal of part of the river runoff
for its diversion to arid regions, and also morphological predictions, as-

sociated with the reforming of bottom relief forms in the mouth region of
a river.

As a result of accumulation of experimental and field data and broadening
of the computation possibilities (use of electronic computers) it has now
become possible to change over to three-dimensional models, describing
jointly the effects of expulsion of the river flow by the sea, inertia,
turbulent exchange and pressure. From these models, by means of neglecting
factors which are not decisive under specific conditions, it is possible
to obtain simpler two-dimensional models. The first step in this direction
is an evaluation of the contribution of individual forces to the general
motion of the river jet.

The principal forces under whose influence there will be an undetached current
in the channel and which are taken into account in a two-dimensional model
are the components of the inertial force

3“ v22 é! , 2!
“37’ by ’"ax vay’

in the horizontal plane XOY, bottom friction and the gravitational force 3,
offset by the vertical pressure gradient 1 a?

(the latter circumstance makes it possible i): trig-dimensional problems to
replace'the

lﬂ la
Pax‘“ Pay
values by the longitudinal and transverse gravity components
Q! and 3—"
83x 8 3!

where H is depth).

[Here and in the text which follows the u, v, w denote the components of
current velocity H; all the forces are related to a unit mass; the bottom
of the water body is assumed to be plane and horizontal; the origin of the
rectangular Cartesian system of coordinates is at the middle of the bottom
traverse at the mouth station; the xnr plane coincides with the bottom; the
z axis is directed upward.]

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In detached currents the forces caused by turbulent mixing of the waters

in the horizontal (with detachment free the shores) and vertical (with de-
tachment fron the bottom) directions assume decisive importance. Therefore,
in an investigation of such currents it is impossible to employ the simplify-
ing assumptions of the theory of a three-dimensional boundary layer (neglect-
ing the component of inertial force in n vertical direction and the deriva-
tives of shearing stresses in the coordinates x and y). In a general case

it is impossible as well to neglect the inertial terms

w gg- and 9 %§
since in a river jet spreading out in the stratified waters of a water body
(which can have its own current) it is cannon to observe considerable ver-
tical currents caused by the difference in the densities of the flows (in
the presence of density differences gravity is not counterbalanced by the
vertical pressure gradient and therefore it is impossible to replace the
values

.1. atand}. it by 3" and .11.).

1° Ty 1° ay 3 7; 8 av
Now we will investigate in greater detail all the possible cases of the
spreading out of a river jet in the flowing waters of a receiving water
body. If the density of waters in a river and in a water body are virtually
constant values (P and Pbod :1 const). then, adhering to Bates [14],
it is possible to differentiate {hree types of inflow: homopycnal (’Driv -
Pbod ). hypopycnal (P iv< Pbody)' and hyperpycnal (9,“) Pbody’t rarely
encouhtered in nature. in the two latter cases, the jet is acted upon by
an additional force. In the case of hypopycnal inflow it is directed up-
ward and favors buoyancy of the jet. whereas in the case of hyperpycnal
inflow it is directed downward. favoring its "sinking." In the presence
of density stratification in a river and a receiving water body the picture
is greatly complicated. Expressions of the type "the density of river waters
is less than the density of waters in the water body" become uncertain and
even with the introduction of some characteristic density values (such as
the mean. maximum and minimum values for each flow) it is inpossible to de-
scribe the behavior of a river jet in a water body in all theoretically
possible cases.

For all practical purposes, however, the difference in densities at differ-
ent points in the flow is usually a small value, about 0.1-2!. And al-
though this small density difference can substantially change the struc-
ture and dynamics of the flows, nevertheless in evaluating buoyancy and
"sinking" of the jet it is useful to employ the Bates classification ap-
plicable to mean ,0 riv and ,0 body values of flow densities. But here it

is necessary to be very careful.

The following cases are frequently encountered in actual practice.

Direct (stable) density stratification of a fluid characterized by a density
increase with depth. Direct density stratification can be caused by saline
waters present in the bottom region, the presence of sediment-saturated

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

flows, which behave as a homogeneous fluid with a density greater than the
density of pure water. by a decrease in the density of the surface layers
as a result of natural (solar radiation) and artificial (discharge of
thermal waste waters) heating. In a stably stratified aediua the river
Jet will_ba acted upon by a lift not only in the case of average hype-
pycnal_(p tit?” b y) inflow. but also in the case of honopycnal in-

flow (P riv ' P body ‘

Inverse (unstable) density stratification of a fluid characterized by a
decrease in density with depth. An inverse stratification of a fluid is
usually observed in fresh water basins. It is usually caused by a water
temperature inversion in winter. Under such conditions the lighter and
warasr river Jet, as a result of mixing with the cold water of the re-
ceiving water body and a decrease in temperature. sometimes to b'c. will
drop downward at sole distance iron the site of inflow. A “deepening" of
the lighter Jet of ispurity was observed in Lake Baykal [lo]. As noted in
this study. the deepening of the Jet in the case of__a hypopygnal 0°, <
Pbod ), and especially in the case of hompycnal (p riv- Pbod ) inflow.
is poxsible when there is a temperature inversion also under urine condi-
tions. It is only necessary that the salinity of the sea water be less
than 24.70/00 (in this case the warmer and more saline button layers can
have a lesser density the less saline and colder are the surface layers).

The deepening of the river Jet in the case of hypopycnal inflow into an
unstably stratified basin occurs, first of all. as a result of a tempera-
ture decrease due to the mixing of river waters with the colder waters of
the basin and evaporation free: the surface. and second. due to the entrain-
ment of the Jet into a vertical convection current. Convection is always
observed in unstably stratified Iedia. It is characterised by e sin‘ting of
the denser masses and the rising of lighter assess: this leads to an even-
ing-out of densities. tesperature and salinity. It therefore follows that
for an investigation of Jet currents in stratified waters it is necessary
to sake use not only of the equation of notion. but also the equations for
the diffusion of salinity (or other coaponer'.) and thermal conductivity.

A stable stratification of waters causes a decrease in the exchange of
heat. matter and momentum primarily in a vertical direction. Unstable
stratification causes intensive vertical exchange in the water layer.
This leads to an asymtric spreading out of the river Jet in the strat-
ificd waters. In the first case the norsal section of the Jet will be
elongated in a horizontal direction (the vertical disensions are less
than the horizontal dimensions), and in the second case - in a vertical
direction.

Thus, in an investigation of the probles of the spreading out of river

flow upon entry into the sea in a general formulation we have no basis

for neglecting any one cosponent of the tensor of turbulent stresses or
any component of the vectors of inertial forces and pressure. The only site-
plification which can be aede here is the following. Since in all cases of

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

practical inportence (or river currents and currents in water bodies the
density changes little, with a cunvcreion from the Nevier-Stokes equations
to the averaged equations of turbulent motion and in the derivation of the
continuity. diffusion and thermal conductivity equations it is possible to
neglect the density change; then we obtain the following system of equa-

tions in partial derivatives. describing three-dimensional nonsteady non-
isothernic flow of en inhomogeneous incompressible fluid:

vw=0
do

l 0P 0 on 4 0s
72—(Vll)w-‘7F+F(dl 7:) -P 3-;(0

00 ‘0P 0 W
w3-(td)w-Tw+T;-(t,-a;-)+ F("71-’+

0 do
+7:('- -,,-.

%=-(vu)W3-—:-%?-+ {7(8, 73%) «Ha-b %)+
+-,‘-:—(:. -'f,—':-)-g.

%=—<vS)W+ -."r( :‘-.i-)+%’;(Dv %§-)+1°«‘(D'%sr)

%=-enw+—,1-(«,-:’,;)+-:,-(~.%)+
t%e%

Here 6 , D, d- are the coefficients of turbulent viscosity, diftusion and
thermal conductivity in the directions x, Y. 2. which can be determined,

for oxen-pie. using the formulas of Schlichting [13], Schmidt [15]. Prendtl
l8] and tarsushev [5].

Equations (l.~(6) contain seven unknown functions of the variables x. y. x,

t:u, v, v, P. p , S, ‘1'. In order to close this systes it must be supplement-

ed by an equation showing the density change as a function of temperature 1'
and salinity S.

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

931(7'. 5)- (7)

For the relative values P1 - P [P iv. 1' - '1‘ - Turin/Teas: -'l‘. 81 - s «-
sum/8,.“ - 8 the authors of [17] used the dependence

p.=l+a$.4-OT‘ (7.)

where a _ o
a =1§P b - 7".-
Por all cases of practical interest a< 0.03. b < 0.005.

The system of equations (l)-(7) sakes it possible to solve any problem in-
volving detached currents in rivers and water bodies. In particular. in
an investigation of the isothernic spreading out of a honogeneous fluid
use is made of equations (l)-(lo) with four unknown functions u, v, w. P;
in an examination of stationary processes the tine partial derivatives

of the velocity, salinity and temperature conponents are omitted, etc.

Sonatina in equations (2)45) in place of total pressure one can write
the difference in total and static pressure in none homogeneous fluid
with a density equal. for exasple, to Pbody In this case in equation
(6) there will be a new value '

Pbody a,
p
characterizing the expulsion of the river flow by the waters of the water
body. In such a form the equations (l)-(lo) are called a system of equa-
tions of notion in the Boussinesq approximation.

In order to proceed to the modeling of a specific mouth by the use of equa-
tions (l)-(7) it is necessary to have a knowledge of the boundary and ini-
tial conditions. It is possible to obtain these conditions, giving a solu-
tion which in every case is unique. reflecting the specific peculiarities
of a specific current, only by using prelininary expeditionary investiga-
tions which above all must yield data on the distribution of velocity,
tenperature and salinity at the mouth station. In a similar way it is neces-
sary to investigate the velocity, temperature and salinity fields in the
coastal current (outside the zone of action of the river jet). At the bot-
tom it is customary to use the attachment condition (9 . 0).

It is also necessary to make measurements in the surface layers of the jet.
The pressure along the free surface is equal to the atrospharic pressure.

and the current is directed along the tangent to the surface. Since the
water surface usually has complex relief, the latter condition does not
seen that at the free surface 9 - o.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SH "NW

The air temperature at the free surface and date on the wind regime can
also be included in the boundary conditions and than we will have a model
of nenisothermic spreading out under wind wave conditions. Morphological
investigations are also necessary (bathymetric survey, ground samples,
turbidity measurensnts, etc.).

The initial conditions are determined by measurement of the velocity,
pressure. density, temperature and salinity "ct sons moment in ties" for
the entire space of the investigated water body.

With the spreading out of flow in e stably stratified medium the expulsion
force is an obstacle to the development of exchange (especially in a ver-
tical direction). The degree to which the flow is mixed or is stratified
in density is dependent on the Frauds densimstric number:

sz—sg-r.
1/e&ag

[B - body] where 49 - Pbody - [3 iv is the difference in densities of
sea and river water. h is the thicﬁnees of the fresh water layer.

Small Fr values of the order of 1 correspond to a predominance of the re-
pulsing force; large Pr values correspond to a predominance of inertial
forces. At the mouths of large rivers the vertical density contrasts are
"softened” by the exceptionally powerful inflow, completely repulsing the
saline waters to the seaward of the bar crest. At the mouths of interned-
iate-sised and small rivers (in the absence of-tidss) there are condi-
tions for appreciable density gradients at the point of entry into the
sea and seaward. In such cases the values

a. 0 0' .2. .ﬂl
{79:37} W("71')’ .. (‘- .. )'

characterizing turbulent mixing in a vertical direction, can be neglected
in equation (é) (at least in the section to the bar crest). Such a model
with a predominance of the repulsive force was investigated in [17). Us-
ing the derived equation it was possible to describe the internal converg-
ence. surface divergence and "two-spiral" vertical circulation of the jet
not far from the place where the river enters the sea. Comparison of the
results of computations with the data free expeditionary investigations

at the mouth of the southern arm of the Hississippi delta was deemed to be
entirely satisfactory. A three-dimensional model of steady-state noniso-
tharnic spreading-out with a number of sinplifying assumptions was examin-
ined in [16].

The flow spreading out fron the river into the sea can be either detached

from the bottom or nondetached. As shown by observations, with detachment

of the flow from the bottom, beneath it there is formation of a so-called

stagnant zone of secondary circulation currents, which are introduced into
the flow froa below [ll].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ‘

Since the angle of free broadening out of the jet is about 12.5° and the
angle of bottom slope of the river entry into the sea in the direction of
the river flow current is usually a considerably lesser value. the detach-
nent of the Jet can occur only as a result of the repulsion or river voters
by sea vatars. (This circumstance gives. among other things, a possibility
for carrying out eosputations of jet currents over a barren of arbitrary
configuration on the basis of theoretical studies carried out for condi-
tions of a plane horizontal bottos). In the case of a spreading out vith-
out detachment Iran the bottom or with spreading out in the motionless
vaters of a very deep vater body. vhen the bo:tsa influence can be neglect-
ed, the diffusion of momentum in a transverse direction is most important.
It in this case there are no veil-developed convection currents (by virtue
of the cos-ants asda above all these conditions correspond to hosopycnal
spreading out). there is no basis for expecting appreciable vertical cos-
ponents of the velocity of nation. averaged in tine; it can therefore be
assumed that v - 0. Then from equation (4) ve obtain a hydrostatic lav of
pressure distribution. Therefore, in equations (2) and (3) the values

I 'o" .| 21'.
1'1EF' a 0!

are replaced by

Taking this into account. equations (l)-(3) are rewritten as follows

%:.+.:_:.=o. (8)
14% + v%—--z-§¥- +-£:(h %)+
_(_,—.— v»
u% + 0%: —g%’,1 + .5376, %)+

At real souths, vhen the voter body does not have its ovn current having
an appreciable transverse component, the velocity along the jet axis is
nuch greater than the transverse coaponeets (u)v). and also the velocity
changes in a longitudinal direction are such less than the changes in the
transverse direction

Am“;
(a “ w)’

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This makes it possible to carry out an evaluation of the terms in equa-
tions (8)-(10). After discarding values of the second order of magnitude,
from equation (10) we obtain ail/By - 0. that is. we eotablish absence of
a transverse slope of the water surface. In this case equations (8) and

(9) give
.2L d.J!L;:(L .
0x ' Or (11)
do on .m d ' an d be
“37*”7-‘8‘.rr*77(‘:'37)+‘.T.":7)- (12)

The simplest two-dimensional models of homopycnal spreading are based on
equations (ll)-(12).

l. Inertial nodal or model of homopycnal spreading in case of an insignif-
icant interaction with the bottom. this model. obtained from equations
(11)-(lZ) with

{£%:=Op€%(Q‘-gé)=200

was for the first time applied to river mouths by Bates_(lb]. Inertial
spreading out of the flow is usually associated with a flow which is al-
most uniform in width. flowing into a deep fresh-water lake, although
from time to time it is observed in newly foraed mouths entering the open
09's

II. Friction model. Inflow of the purely inertial type, described by the
Bates model, is a rather rare phenomenon at mouths. The prolonged depos-
ition of sediments seaward of the lowermost mouth station. in the long run
causes a substantial decrease in depths. which leads to an intensification
of the role of turbulent friction against the bottom. In most cases. under
natural conditions the depth of the see where a river enters rarely ex-
ceeds the depth at the lowermost station on a river. and usually the

depth at this lowermost station is greater. If under these conditions the
velocity of inflow and bottom shearing stress are great (the river trans-
ports much entrained alluvium), bottom turbulent friction predominates.

It was demonstrated in [6] for the first time that botton friction. acting
Jointly with the lateral diffusion of momentum, causes a substantial in-
tensification of the spreading out of the flow and an attenuation of velo-
cities. It was demonstrated in [9] that bottom friction favors not only

an additional spreading of the entire jet, but also a-broadeaing of the
nucleus of river waters situated in the axial part of the jet (bottom
friction impedes horiaontal mixing). For very small water bodies the
width of the nucleus of river waters is not decreased and it persists far
from the shore up to the place where the jet loses its individuality and

passes into the passive phase of the current. This is the profound qual-
itative difference between frictional spreading out and spreading out of
river flow as described in the Bates inertial model, according to which

109
FOR USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010029-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the nucleus of the river waters always decreases linearly.

Thu frictional model, based an allowance for all terms in equations (11)-
(12), except all/3x. was investigated in [9]. A model using the Rayhardt-
Knnovalov hypotheses can be obtained from the one equation (12) by dis-
carding the
v 2.9.
3y

values in it. This model. leading after vertical averaging to the thermal
conductivity equation relative to a function related by a simple expres-

sion with the longitudinal component component of plane velocity. was ex-
amined in [1. 10].

III. Channel model. In this model we dispense with the basic assumption of
the theory of turbulent jets

(u)>e. -%-¢.-%-).

but in return no allowance is made for the effect of mixing of the waters
in the river and water body [7]. In other words. one uses the usual ap-
proach of two-dimensional hydraulics in an investigation of nondetached
channel flows. The channel model is obtained from equation (8)-(lO) by
means of deleting

a an a do n i 0' W)
w("a7)' WV??? 79:“). ”5.7(“77

and subsequent vertical averaging. The model can be used under the condi-
tions prevailing in the shallow waters at the river mouth when the nucleus
of the river waters'occupies the entire region of the jet currents (a case
when the waters in the water body are completely washed out by the river
waters). It is proposed that plans of currents be computed by the N. M.
Bernsdskiy method with use of a natural coordinate system. here we can as-
press only one consideration. Since there are considerable depth differen-
tials in the shoals at river mouths (in a transverse direction. "furrows”
and bars at the river mouths) and since there is an intensive exchange of
momentum between the ”furrow” and plane flows over the mouth bars, for
calculating the plan of currents it is natural to use the fragments method
developed by K. V. Grishanin [3]. breaking the flow down into several sec-
tions and carrying out appropriate calculations for each of them.

The plane model, proposed in [9]. makes it possible to compute the velocity
field of a river jet spreading out in oppositely directed flows. The equa-

tion for plane motion and the continuity equation, after vertical averaging
of system (ll)-(12). is written as follows:

 

00 cu _ r , all I 0-. GUI! mm
”7.7+VT-“c7rV-hr‘737" .. ox +7”.
' 110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ilere U and V are the. longitudinal and transverse cospononts of plane vale--
city, 0 is the Chery coefficient. 1: is shearing stress.

In the case of spreading out of river flow in opposite directions in a region
of mixed waters we have

U: U. +10... - U: ) Fm- . (13)

Here 0; is the velocity or the forward (with 0; >0) or return (with U, <0)
flows. l.

F(Y)=l-—6Y’+8 ra-ar'. y- ” .

H - n(ucleus); c - n(ixed)) where 5 n is the half-width of the nucleus
of river waters, 5 c is the zone of nixed waters.

By virtue of the swnsetry of the examined currents relative to the X-axis
we can investigate only the region of mixing corresponding to positive y
and Y (sue ya“ 4» 5 .. osrci). In this case the function PU) decreases
from 1 to 0.

Equation (13) shows that with spreading out in the return flow (03(0) along
the lateral boundaries of the jet 'there can be regions of return flow even
when a current in the direction of the sea persists in the axial part of

the jet.

The change in current velocity in the zone of river waters is
we“ (X) = [03 +2 l (”10— Hi). 9'2"" (“O

I a
where {4- I- 93’?- 9"”.

[lo and 1110 are the values of jet velocit and the function ll], at the lower-
uost station at the river south. f - g/c H. Equation (16) shows that the
maxim velocity in the jet decreases if ll], is an increasing function,

that is, in the backwater sector (all/3300).

The condition of absence of an increasing current in the axial part of the
jet. according to equation (16). is written as follows: 03
77> H] " ”'9.

It is interesting that in the case of a direct flow, as follows from (16),
when the current ceases in the axial part. the current retains its initial
direction at the sides of the jet. As noted above, in cases of countertlow
the return current tons first in the marginal parts of the jet. Thus, each
of these cases corresponds to a circulation of the opposite direction. The
circulations investigated here theoretically were observed by the author
on the bars in Tasovskaya Cuba (bay). Generations by the proposed method
were made separately for river tone waters using forsula (lb) and for a
zone of nixed waters using fornula (13).

111
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

3.

la.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Butakov, A. N., "Computation of Currents for a Case of Sudden Expan-
sion of a Plow,“ METEOROLOGIYA I OIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and hydrol-
ogy), No 11, pp 70-76, 1970.

Ginevakiy, A. S. TBORIYA TURBULENTNYKH STRUY I SLEDOV (Theory of Turbu-
lent Stream and Wakes), Hoacow, "Haahinoatroyeniye," pp 62-146, 1969.

Griahauin, K. V., DINAHIKA RUSIDVYKll PO‘I‘OKOV (Dynamics of Channel Flows),
Leningrad. Cidroneteoitdat, pp 225-281, 1969.

Zhurhas, V. 11., "Investigation of the Patterns of Propagation of Tur-
bulent Streams of an Impurity in the Sea," Author's Summary of Thesis

for Award of Academic Degree of Candidate of Physical and Mathematical
Sciences, Moscow, Institute of Oceanoloslh 1977, 18 pages.

Karaushev, A. V., ”Problems in Fluvial hydraulics," REGINAYA GIDRAVLIKA
I RUSLOWYB PROTSBSSY (Fluvial Hydraulics and Channel Processes), Part
1, Moscow State University, pp 25-33, 1976.

Mikhaylov, V. N., "Dynanice of a River Stream Plowing into a Water Body,"
TRUDY COIN (Transactions of the State Oceanographic Institute), No 65,
pp 73-90, 1959.

Mikhaylov, V. N., Rogov, H. 14., Hakarova, T. A., Polonskiy, V. P.,
DINAMIKA GIDMGRAPICHBSKOY SETI NEPRILIVNYIO! UST'YBV RBK (Dyna-ice

of the Hydrogrephic Network of Nontidal River Mouths), Moscow, Gidro-
Iseteoizdat, lbscow, Cidroneteoizdat, pp 96-131, 1977.

Prandtl, 1..., GIDROAERODINAHIKA (Hydroaerodynanics), Moscow, IL, pp 157-
192 and 527-569, 1951.

Sansonov, 0. 1., "On the Problem of Calculating Runoff Currents in a
Houth Zone," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 8, pp 60-67, 1971.

Seleznev, V. 11., "Plane Problems in Fluvial Hydraulics," RBCHNAYA CID-
RAVLIKA I RUSLOVYYE PROTSESSY (Fluvial Hydraulics and Channel Processes),
Part 2, M60, pp 43-60, 1976.

Simonov, A. I., "Hydrology and Hydrochelaistry of the Mouth Reach of a
River," mm COIN (Transactions of the State Oceanographic Institute).
No 92, 1969, 230 pages.

Skriptunov, u. A., cmaotocna Patnus'r'nvooo vzma'u vow: (Hydrology
of the Mouth Reach of the Volga). Moscow, Gidroneteoisdat, 1958, 16.6
pages.

Schlichting, 6., TBORIYA FOGRANICHNOGO SIDYA (Boundary Layer Theory),
lbscow, "Naulta," pp 649-690.

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bacon, 0. 0., "Rational Theory of Delta Formation." AMER. ASSOC. PETROL.
GEOL. BULL., Vol. 37, No 9. pp 2119-2161. 1953.

Scintdc, m. ”be: Maesonnuuausch in train [.ch and vewandce Enchan-
unsan,” PROBLBHB DER KOSHISCRBN PHYSIK, Bd 7. Hamburg. 1925. 118 pages.

Stolzenbach, K. 0.. Harlennn, D. K., "mree-Dtmnaional Hunted Surface
Jets," HATER RESOUR. 388.. Vol 9, No 1, pp 129-137. 1973.

woldrop. H. 8., Farmer, R. 6.. "Three-Dimensional Conputacion of Buoy-
an: Plumes." .168. Vol 79, No 9, pp 1269-1276. 197a.

”right, 1.. 1).. "Sediment Transport and Deposition at River Mouths: A
Synthesis," 6201.06. SOC. AMER. 301.1... Vol 88. pp 857-868, 1977.

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 556.565(57l.12)

FREEZING 0F LOHLAND SWAHPS AND THE INFLUENCE OF TNBIR DRAINAGE ON THE
DEPTH 0F FREEZING

Moscow HBTBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 1978 pp 93-100

[Article by I. H. Romanova, Tyumen' Hydrometeorological Observatory, sub-
mitted for publication 1 February 1978]

Abstract: In this article, for the first time
for the conditions prevailing in the southern
part of Tyumanskaya Oblast, the author gives

an analysis and generalization of materials on
the freezing of a peat deposit in undrsined low-
land swamps. It was possible to obtain the prin-
cipal quantitative characteristics determining
the freezing process: thickness of the frozen
layer. intensity of increase in seasonal perma-
frost and thermal index of swamp freezing. The
article gives a comparison of the results with
the investigations of other authors. 0n the ba-
sis of an analysis of data from parallel observ-
ations it is shown that there is a change in the
depth of freezing under the influence of drain-
age and a formula is derived for computing the
thickness of the freezing layer in the drained
peat deposit.

(Text) During recent years the Party and government have been devoting
great attention to the problem of the exploitation of swamps and swampy
lands in the nonchernozsm zone of the RSFSR. western Siberia is the
swampiest region in the Soviet Union. Ninety-six percent of the territory
of Tyumenskaya Oblast, located in the Heat Siberian Plain, is occupied by
forests, lakes and swamps. In implementing the resolutions of the Party
and government. in Tyumsnskays Oblast specialists are carrying out a great
volume of melioration work. In the Tenth Five-Year Plan alone, plans cell
for the drainage of 30,000 hectares of land. In addition, considerable
areas of swamps, drained at the present time for the production of peat,
will be put into the hands of kolkhoz and sovkhoz enterprises in the
oblast. when using meliorated lands for agricultural crops it is necessary
to have data on the freezing and thawing of swamps.

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The freezing of soil and ground of different mechanical composition has
been investigated for more than 70 years. however. the study of freezing
of undrained and swampy territories began relatively recently. The invest-
igations of A. D. Dubskh [5], A. P. Pechkurov and H. A. Kaplan [9], A. P.
Domenitskiy [4] and A. D. Kibsl'chich [7] and others have established a
number of peculiarities in the freezing of swamps. The authors have empha~
sized examination of the hydraulic-thermal properties of the frozen layer
of swamps. Since 1953 S. A. Chechkin [18] has carried out physical-stat-
isticsl investigations of the freezing of swamps for the purpose of obtain-
ing the quantitative characteristics determining the process of freezing of
the peat deposit. As such characteristics 5. A. Chechkin proposes use of
thickness of the frozen layer h(cm), intensity of increase in seasonal
permafrost i (cm/day), and the thermal index of freezing of swamps r?(°c/
cm).

At the present time the quantitative long-term characteristics of the freez-
ing of swamps. obtained using data from direct measurements of the network
of swamp stations, are very limited. Some indirect evaluations of the freez-
ing of uninvestigated swamps were carried out using relatively limited in-
itial material. At the same time. the quantitative characteristics of the
parameters h. i snd’I for undrained swamps are of scientific and practical
interest.

In this connection. in the example of the Tarmanskiy swamp srea,we investig-
ated the considered characteristics of freezing of swamps. The total number
of processed and analyzed data is more than 1,500. The observation points
take in the most characteristic microlandscapes for the investigated data
and all types of microrelief; this makes it possible to draw conclusions
concerning the possibility of using the data obtained below in character-
izing the freezing of similar swamp microlandscapes. A brief description

of the microlandscspes and the peat deposits in the investigated swamp is
given in [14, 15].

Observations of the freezing of an undrained peat deposit in the Tarmanskiy
swamp area have been carried out since 1960 in five microlandscapes: hum-
mocky sedge, sedge-hypnospore. hypnospore-sedge-mnsaic and swampy-wooded.
The observations characterize low-lying and high-lying sectors of microre—
lief and are carried out once each five days. and during thawing of the
swamp - each day. The measurements of the depth of freezing are made using
a Denilin permafrost meter and using monoliths.

In the drained sector of the swamp, used for past production by the cutting
method. observations of freezing are also made once each five days in the
middle of the map and once each ten days along a route extending 2 km each
20 m. Snow surveys are made along this_sama route. Observations are made

daily during thawing.

The increase in the frozen layer in undrained swamps during the cold season
occurs with different intensities (i cm/day). The greatest rate of formation
of the frozen layer was noted during the initial autumn-winter period. Hith

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

respect to the conditions for growth of the frozen layer it is easy to trace
two periods of freezing which differ substantially from one another with
respect to a whole series of quantitative indices. This peculiarity of the
freezing process, most characteristic for physiogrsphic regions with a
stable snow cover, has been noted in the studies of V. V. Romanov [11],

S. A. Chechkin [18], and others. The first period, characterized by in-
tensive freezing, begins from the time of a stable transition of air tem-
perature through 0'c to negative values. The end of this period coincides
with the formation of a stable snow cover of a definite depth. According

to the data published by A. G. Gayel' [3] and P. I. Koloskov [8]. for min-
eral soil and ground the critical depth of the snow is 15-18 cm. Applicable
to undrained swamp deposits, according to the investigations of S. A. Chech-
kin [18] and O. A. Belotserkovsksya [1]. this value varies in the range
5-10 cm. For the conditions of the Tarmsnskiy swamp area the critical depth
of the snow is 6-8 cm. For mineral soils in this zone it is 12 cm. The dif-
ference in the critical depths of the snow in swamp areas and mineral soil
is attributable to the dissimilar moistening of the upper layers.

Table 1

Mean long-Tern Intensity of Growth of Frozen Layer (1 cm/day)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 Oren; 3 3mm
M"W“m'¢' 1r assume-sea nommesues nosumr-ue‘ easements
6 l'psnoso-nossstusul 0.69 0.26 0.30
7 Orososo-rsnnosul . |.|0 0.30 0.30
8 Orouosul sourspuss . |.00 0.20 0.20
rsmloso-orososo-uouss-
9 nun . . . one — 0.25
Key:

1. Microlandscspe

2. Autumn

3. Winter

6. increase

5. decrease

6. Ridged-Ioss

7. Sedge-hypnospore

8. Hunmocky sedge

9. Hypnospore-sedge-nosaic

The second period of freezing continues until a maximum depth of freezing
is established. According to the investigations of s. A. Chechkin [18]. in

swamp deposits this period ends 4-8 days earlier than the onset of snow
cover destruction. Our data coincide with the results of an analysis by
S. A. Cheehkin.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Above we mentioned the difference in the quantitative characteristics of
the freezing process during the first and Bucond periods. 1hls was caused

both by the uonidentlcul bent-insulating role of the snow cover of differ-
ent depth and by the conditions of vertical dissemination of heat in the
swamp deposit.

In order to evaluate the intensity of increase in the frozen layer we carr-
ied out computations of 1 separately for the autumn and winter periods for
the entire series of observations. The results of the computations are
presented in generalized form in Table 1. An analysis of the data in the
table shows that a change in the intensity of freezing even in the limits
of one swamp microlandscope during the autumn period is dissimilar. During
this time the greatest rate of freezing was noted in the sedge-hypnospore
mierolandscspe. The freezing process transpires identically in ridged-mossy
and hypnospore-sedge-mosaic microlandscapes; this is associated with the
uniformity of conditions for these microlandscapes, exerting an influence
on the freezing of the peat deposit. In winter the difference in the in-
tensity of freezing. both for different types of microrelief. as well as
for different types of microlandscapas, is considerably less; for all in-
tents and purposes the intensity during this period for the entire mass

is identical (0.2-0.3), which is attributable to the influence of the snow
cover.

A considerable role in increase in the thickness of the frozen layer is
played by the snow cover, which is a good natural heat insulator, safe-
guarding the pest deposit against cooling and thereby protecting it against
deep freezing. In the Tarmanskiy complex the snow-free pest deposit freezes
to a depth of 1.5-2 times greater than under the snow cover. According to
the investigations of S. A. Chechkin [18], applicable to the undrained
swamps of the European USSR.these relationships on the average are equal

to 3.5-6.0. In mineral soils and ground. according to the data of a number
of authors [8, 19]. the similar relationship is 2.5-4.0.

In order to clarify the role of the snow cover in the freezing of the prin-
cipal types of swamp microlandscapes, we will examine the values of the
heat index of swamp freezing 'l('C/cm), which is the sum of the negative
mean daily air temperatures necessary for forming a frozen layer with a
thickness of 1 cm [18]. The '1 value takes into account many factors in
the state of the active layer at the time of freezing and varies in de-
pendence on the hydrometeorological peculiarities of the year, the thick-
ness of-the frozen layer and the physical properties of the active layer.
Computations of the Tlvalues were made for the autumn and winter periods
of freezing. The ’7. value was determined on each day of measurements of
thickness of the frozen layer during the entire period of observations
separately for "up" and "down" microrelief elements. In generalized form
the results of the computations are given in Table 2. The table shows
that the nvalue is dependent on the depth of the snow cover. The greater
the depth of the snow cover, the greater is the 11 value. The influence
of the snow is confirmed by the 71 values for elevated and depressed

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nicroreliaf typeu. Pur elevations the thermal index as a rule is 1.5-2.5
tinee leaa than in depreaaiona. The computed data for the Ternanskiy cae-
plex agree well with the investigations of P. I. serebryanskeya [17].
carried out for Central Berebe, and A. 0. Gayel' (3] for the neadov soile
of the northern Aral region. According to date published by P. I. Serebr-
yenekaya, the themal index for lowland avenpa during the winter period

is bz‘c/cn. for headwater avanpe -- about 39'Icn, according to A. 0. Gayel'
-- about 37°lcn. For the Tamenskiy svenp area rt in elevated sectors ver-
ies during this sale period from 3!. to 36.8'0/cl. in depressions - from
38 to Sl'c/cn. -

Tab le 2

Hean bong-Tern Value of Thermal index of Freezing of Swamps (’1' - c/cu)

0cm 3 3mm
Mpoanamov 1 eoeuuelm I noaumales noeumenur‘ neonate-u!

 

      
  
 
   

l‘pnowuoearnmuh

 
   

9 Ooonoeomnoeul . I 2.2 38.2
8 Orouosua xompanx . 2.6 6|.0
hemoroxowuoum-
9 we . . . . . — «.0
Key:
1. Hicrolandstape 6. Ridged-Ieossy
2. Autum 7. Sedge-hypnospore
3. Winter 8. lluueocky sedge
lo. elevation 9. liypnospore-sedge-noeeic

5. depression
Table 3
Nean Long-Tern Values of Coefficient

Manpower-sot 1| Ocunezl anneal Been ‘

 

 

 

 

; mmmf . 3:? h: Li:
l'pnumoumammuua . I." I.“ I."
Key:
1. Hicrolendscape 5. ﬂuocky sedge
2. Autumn 6. Sedge-hypnospore
3. Winter 1. Ridged-uossy
b. Spring

An analysis of eaterials on freezing shows that in individual years the in-
fluence of the snow cover on the increase in thickness of the frozen layer
is considerably greater than the increase in the sues of negative air

118
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tesperatures. For example. the sun of the negatiVe mean daily air tempera-
tures by 20 December 1967 attained 257°C. and by 20 December 1970 -- 586'03
the thickness of the frozen layer. howeVer. was 52 and 60 an respectively.
that is. despite the comparatively severe winter. the freezing of the peat
deposit in 1970 was 12 on less. This phone-anon is attributable. in partic-
ular. to the difference in the depth of the snow cover. In 1967 the snow
depth on 20 December was only ll an. and in 1970 -- 60 cm. I similar result
is obtained free a comparison of observational data for winter in 1961 and
1963. The sun of the mean daily negative temperatures by 10 January in these
years is identical (926 and 927‘0). but the difference in the thicknesses of
the freezing layer was 18 on (33 and 71 cm). The snow depth in 1961 was 50
cu. in 1963 -- 38 en. Thus. the snow cover plays one of the principal roles
in foraation of the frozen layer in swamps.

Table l.

cooperison of Mean Monthly Snow Depths in Drained (a) and Undrained (U)
Sectors of Swamp Complex

Head to 311ch Sines Oct ass 6 Mar

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

1972—1973 - -- IO 23 Is 27 28 38 19 42
Min-ION 2 d l2 l8 IO 23 .
ION-I976 3 l2 3 95 l6 3:! g: 33 f; 4%
Key:
1. Period 3. Deceabsr 5. February 7. Drained (D)
2. Nova-her lo. January 6. Hatch 8. llndrsined (U)

in addition to the snow cover. a considerable influence is exerted on the
freezing of undrained sweeps by vegetation [12. 13]. noisturs content

and eicrorelief of the surface in the active layer of swoops. Vegetation
favors snow accumulation on the sweep surface. retention of the snow cover
in a more unconsolidated state and thereby safeguards the upper horizons
of the sweep deposit from strong freezing. The joint influence of the nois-
ture content of the pest deposit and the nicrorelief of the sweep micro-
landscapea on the degree of freezing is expressed by the value of the co-
efficient 9’ - “no/“ﬂew where hp“ is the depth of freezing of positive
forss of nicrore of, “neg - negative focus of nicrorelisf. we computed
the 9‘ values for each day of measurements of the thickness of freezing for
all uicrolandscepes using data froa long-tern observations. In generalized
fora the 9’ values are given in Table 3. Analysis of the 9’ coefficients
shows that it is always greater than 1, that is the value for elevated
uicrorelisf ferns is always greater than for depressions. The 59 value
also does not remain constant during different periods of freezing. The
coefficient attains its maximum value in the autuan snow-free period. and
this indicates that the joint influence of moisture content and fares of
aicrorelief is greater than in autumn. The analytical data agree with the

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

results of investigations made by 3. A. Chechkin [181.

The characteristic" of a number of parameters determining the process of
freezing of swamps in related to undrulned swamps of the lowland type.

For investigating the influence of drainage on the thickness of the freez-
ing layer we carried out a comparison of the results of parallel observa-
tions of the depth of freezing of drained areas in peat production and un-
drained peat deposits during 1972-1975. The analysis indicated that the
depth of freezing in the drained sector is distributed extremely nonuni-
formly over the area. This is attributable to the peculiarities of depos-
ition of the snow cover in drained swamps. During winter in the drained
aector there is a deflation of the snow, the snow is accumulated in de-
pressions, in canals, and the elevated sectors remain bare. The depth of
the snow in the sector in individual places varies from 0 to £0 cm; the
corresponding thickness of the frozen layer varies from 66 to 80 cm. The
freezing of the drained deposit by 20-60 cm exceeds the freezing of the
undrainad deposit, which in turn was caused by a considerably lesser depth
of the snow in the drained sweep in comparison with an undrained swamp
(Table 4). The increase in freezing of drained sweeps in the territory

in the southern part of Tyumenskaya Oblast is mentioned in the investiga-
tions of B. D. Vvedenskaya and I. P. Rusinov [2].

The nonuniformity of deposition and small depth of the snow cover during the
course of the entire winter favors a great intensity of freezing of the
drained deposit in winter. Prior to appearance of snow with a depth of

20 cm the intensity of freezing is 1.2 cm/day. According to data from

three years of observations, such a snow depth was noted during the last

few days in January. During February, March, after the snow had reached

a critical depth, the intensity of increase in thickness of the frozen

layer was equal to 0.4 cm/day. Thus, an analysis of observational data in-
dicates an increase in the intensity of freezing of the drained deposit in
winter in comparison with.the undrained deposit.

In characterizing the freezing of the undrained peat deposit it was pointed
out that the principal factors exerting an influence on the increase in the
depth of freezing are an increase in the sum of negative temperatures, depth
and density of the snow, vegetation, and form of microrelief. A swamp
drained and in past production has an open, level surface free of any vege-
tation. The levels of the swamp waters in the drained area are usually 1.5-
2.0 m below the surface. Thus, the influence of moistening, vegetation. and
forms of microrelief on the freezing of the drained deposit in any specific
case can be neglected. Taking into account that the snow depth in a drained
swamp is considerably less, as is confirmed by data from direct observa-
tions, cited in Table 6, it can be postulated that the main role in in-
crease in the thickness of the freezing layer in drained swamps is played
by air temperature. Proceeding from this point of view, on the basis of
materials from three years of observations we constructed a graph of the
dependence of the depth of freezing of the drained deposit on the square root
of the sum of the mean daily negative air temperatures (Fig. l). The correl-
ation coefficient was 0.95. The dependence has a linear form

120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR M’I’ICML USE ONLY

II:|,8VE(—:'C ~3. (I)

where h ie treeeing depth.

 

Pig. 1. Dependence of depth of freezing of dreined peet deposit on we of
neen deny nesetive eir teepeteturee. 1) 1973; 2) 1976: 3) 1975

Teble 5

Contention of Freezing Depth of Undreined Peet Depeeit veins Penile (1)

 

10 9.2 n
6 m ”'6" m u u. 3"
to 13.9 82 a 1M
7 2| ”nope 21.0 95 so u
a: 20.7 41 :u ”.0
8 l0 ueepe ”.1 a 40 20.0
20 3M 61' 8! 10
9 an M 39.7 on as e
20 40.0 69 74 6.!
1° gum 3'3 3: 3' :33:
an ' «is n 75 a
M
Key:
1._ Dete tot which conputetione cede 6. Actuel 7. Decent“
2. heating depth. ca 5. Reletive enter 8. Jenuery
3. Counted 6. Novenbet 9. Pebtuety

10. “etch

121
FOR OPPICUJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Using the derived equation. for different periods in winter we carried
out computations of the depth of freezing of a drained deposit and com-
puted the error in computations from the actual values. The greatest
error is 20.6%. The results of the computations are presented in Table
5. It must be remembered that the formula was derived on the basis of a
short series of observations and requires further checking, but even now
it can be recommended for computing the depth of freezing of lowland

uwamps, drained for the purposes of peat production, situated under
physiographic conditions similar to the Tarmanskiy swamp complex.

Summary

1. This investigation of the process of freezing of an undrained deposit
under the conditions prevailing in the southern part of Tyumenskaya 0b-
last made it possible to refine a series of computed characteristics of
freezing for lowland types of swamp microlandscspes.

a) The snow depth for the conditions prevailing in the Thrmanskiy swamp
complex. with which the winter period of freezing of the peat deposit
begins. is 6-8 cm.

b) The intensity of freezing is considerably greater during autumn and
varies even within the limits of a single microlandscape. In winter. as
a result of leveling-out of the thermal resistance of the snow cover.
the intensity of freezing is virtually identical over the entire area.
e) The depth of freezing for positive forms of microrelief in swamps

h os considerably exceeds the depth of freezing of negative forms hasg‘

t e “goo/hnsg ratio attains its maximum values during the autumn snowfree
perio .

2. The depth of freezing of s drained area in peat production exceeds by
20-‘0 cm the depth of freezing of an undrained area.

3. The intensity of increase in the frozen layer in drained swamps during
winter is considerably greater than in undrained swamps.

4. Under conditions of insignificant snow cover depths. for computing
the freezing depth of a drained deposit it is possible to use only the

air temperature values. The greatest relative error in the computations
in this case is 21!.

ﬁtﬁﬁh

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
l.

23

J.

6.

S.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

FOR Ol-‘l-‘ICIM. USB ONLY

IN IIMOUIIM'IIY

Belotuerkovekeye. 0. A.. ISSLEDOVANIYE TBPLOVOOO RBZHIHA TORI-YANG?
ZALBZHI VBRKIIDVOGO TIPA (Investigation of the Theer Regine of a
Peat Deposit of the Upper hype). Author's Sumery of Candidate'e Dis-
sertation. Kalinin. 1968. 26 pages.

Wedenekaye. B. D.. Rusinov. I. P.. "Hater Regine and Balance in Dried
Drainage Systeae Under the Conditions of the Poreat none in western
Siberia." MENDUNARODNYY SIHPozIUH Po DIDROLOGII ZASOLOCHENNYIOI m-
RI‘I‘DRIY (International Synposiun on the Hydrology of Svenpy Territor-
ies). Minsk. 1972. 8 pages.

Gayel'. A. 0.. "Freezing and ‘l'having of Soil and Ground in tho Northern
Arel Region." POCIWOVBDBNIYB (Soil Science). No 7. pp ‘29-‘91». 1968.

Donenitskiy. A. P.. "Paeeability of Frozen Sweeps.” I'll. NIU OHS (Trans-
actions of the Scientific Research Institutes of the Rydronetaorolog-
ical Service). series VIII. No 1., 1963.

Dubekh. A. D.. 06m: PO OIDROLOOII DOLOI‘ (Outlines on the Hydrology
of Svanps). Hoecov. Rechirdet. 1936. 120 pages.

Zepol'skiy. I. A.. ISSLBDOVARIYB VLIYANIYA RLIORA‘I‘SII NA VODNYY DALANS
R. TRUDwI (Investigation of the Influence of Helioration on the water

Balance of the Irubaeh River). Author's Sumery of Dissertation. Kiev.

1969. 2‘ pagae.

Kibal'chich. A. D.. ”Preeeing and Theving of Pest Swamps and Mineral
Soils." mm W11 P0 HELIORA‘ISII I OSVOYBNIYU mom I
momma rocav (Transactions of the conference on Helioration
a'nd Exploitation of Sweep and Sweepy Soils). pp 268-250, 1956.

Koloskov. P. 1.. ”Seasonal Soil Paraeiroet." RUDY II VSBSOYUZNDGO
GIDDDIDOICIISSKOGO 8"YEZDA (Transactions of the Second All-Union Hy-
drological Congress). pp 3643. I968.

Pechkurov. A. P.. Kaplan, M. A.. "Deter-ination of the Depth of Free:-
ing and viewing of Sweeps." OSUOYBNIYB mum MI.‘ (Exploit-
ation of Svaepy Lands). Moscow-Leningrad. VASKhNIL. pp 7846. 1937.
Ronanov. V. V.. Rochanakeya. 0. D.. ”Experience and Investigation of

Physical Properties of the Freezing Layer of Svanps." TRUDY 661 (Trans-
actions of the State Hydrological Institute). no 7(61). pp 93-105, 1968.

Ronsnov. V. 9.. OIDROPIZIKA DOLD‘I' (hydrophyaics of Swans). Leningrad.
Gidronateoiedat. 1961. 359 pages.

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rolanova. Ye. (1.. "nova. 1.. 1.. "ceobotanital and Brief Hydrological
Characterisation of Swampy Landscapes of the Watershed of the Vakh and
Vatinekiy Yegan Rivera in Heetern Siberia." TRUDY 661 (Tranaactione
of the State Hydrological lnetitute). No 157. pp 98-122. 1969.

Ronanova. Yo. A.. Ivanov. K. Ye.. "Svanpe of the Anadyrakaya Lowland.
Their Geobotanicel and Hydrological Characterietice." TRUDY 001. No
157. pp 123-137. 1969.

Rounova. 1. H.. "Computation of Freezing Depth of Sweiape of the Low-
1end hype in the hoopla of the Tarnenekiy Sweep Complex." METEOR-
Olggglu 1 6101101301“ meteorology and Hydrology). Ho 9. pp 103-106.
1 .

Rounova. 1. 11.. "Influence of Drainage on the Temperature Regine and
Evaporation of lowland avanpe (in the Bxaaple of the 'rarnenehiy Sue-p
Complex in ‘l‘yueneheye 0hlaet)." TRUDY 601. No 229. pp 169-176. 1975.

Ronanova. 1. 14.. "Influence of Economic Activity on the Hydrological
and Heat Regine of the Tamnekiy Swamp Complex." 1131301101061“ 1
GIDBDIDGIYA. No 5. pp 76-80. 1977.

Serehryanakaya. P. 1.. "Phenomena of Seaeonal Preeaing and Thewing
of Soils in the Central Bareba." mm POCHVBHHOOO INSTIMA (Trenc-
actione of the Soile lnetitute). Vol 102. pp 37-61. 1951..

Chechkin. 8. A.. VODNO-TBPIDVOY 112111111 NEOSUSHEHNYKH 301.01 I YBGO RAS-
CHBT (Hater-Heat Regine of Undreined mm and its Cooputation).
Leningrad. cigrooeteoicdet. 1970. 205 pagee.

Shul'gia. A. 11.. KLIHA‘I' POCINY I YBGO RBGULIROVANIYB (Climate of the
Soil and itegasulation). Leningrad. Gidroneteoicdat. 1972. 31.1 pegee.
4

11
.h.

126

FOR OPPICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR Ol’l’lCMh USE ONLY

000 $51.50:633.1(l;70)

- REASONS FOR UNDERSIZED GRAIN FORMATION AND MEASURES POR PREVMINO 11‘

Moscow EROROMOIYA I GIDROLOOIYA in Bullion No 11, Nov 1978 pp 101-106

[Article by Candidate of Geographical Sciences 1. V. Svisyuk. Heather Bur-
eau, Roetov-on-Don, sublitted for publication 20 April 1978]

Abstract: The article gives an analysis of the
reasons for undersized grain formation in grain
crops in 1977 in the northern Caucasus. in the
lower Volga Region and in Rostovskaya Oblaet.

An attenpt is nade to predict this phenenenon and
introduce corrections to the forecast of the crop
yield of winter wheat and spring barley. Racon-
nendstions are nade on the alleviation of the
harnfulneae of undersized grain formation.

[Test] In investigating the reasons for the formation of undarsised grain
in the Northern Caucasus. bower Volga region and in Rostovskaya Oblaet.
we hecane convinced that they are not the sane. being dependent for the

nest part on weather conditions developing during the spring-sun“ per-
iod. and to acne degree on the agricultural techniques employed.

‘lhe principal reason for the fornation of undersized grain in these regions
is drought. due to which, on the average, in two to four years out of ten
in different regions in the untioned territory grain is formed which is

not fully developed. The second reason is excessive overnoistening during
the period of grain (creation, resulting in undersized grain fornetion. Over
great areas this reason prevails extreeely rarely. During the last 40 years
it was observed only twice: in 1933 and in 1977.

In 1977, in the eastern regions of Volgogrsdskaya Oblast and in some south-
eastern rayons of Stavropol'skiy Krey (Fig. l) the undersized grain was
caused by drought. The sown crops in the trans-Volga region of Volgograd-
okaye Oblest were subjected to particularly severe drought. There during
the period of grain formation the moisture reserves in the meter soil layer
were less than 10 I. less than 30 II of precipitation fell during the per-
iod. and in many regions - less than 20 n. The mass of 1,000 grains was
not eore than 30 grass.

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 1. Mass of 1,000 reins of winter wheat in harvest of 1977. 1) 21-29 g
(drought). 2) 30-39 g drought), 3) 60-69 g, 4) 30-39 g (undersized grain
formation)

In the eastern regions on the right bank of the Volga there was also
(although lesser) undersized grain formation -- the mass of 1,000 grains
was 3l-38 3. here the supplies of productive moisture during the period
of grain formation in the meter soil layer were 40-70 mm, but during this
period there was from 20 to 50 mm of precipitation. In addition, at the
end of the phase of milky ripeness there was a marked increase in daytime
temperatures (from 20-22 to 28-31'6). This caused an acceleration of the
end of grain formation, and in the long run, incomplete filling of the
grain.

Similar conditions also developed in the eastern and northeastern regions
of Stavropol'skiy Kray, with the single difference that there the period
of formation and filling of grain occurred approximately a week earlier
than in Vblgogradskaya Ohlast and therefore the marked temperature increase
at the end of the third ten-day period in June was virtually not reflected
in the yield formation. In these regions filled grain was formed (the mass
of 1,000 grains exceeded 60 3), whereas in lpatovskiy Rayon, where the sup-
plies of productive moisture in the meter soil layer during the period of
forming and filling of grain were held in the range 40-60 In and about 50
mm of precipitation fell, a good yield was obtained for the conditions
prevailing in this region.

The conditions were somewhat poorer in the Blagodarnenskiy, Prikumskiy,
Stepnovskiy and Kurskiy Rayons in Stavropol'skaya Oblast, where during
the period of formation and filling of grain the moisture reserves were
inadequate (in the meter layer - l5-20 mm) and also little precipitation
fell - 20-30 mm. This also caused undersized grain in winter wheat. The
mass of 1,000 grains in the enumerated regions was 34-39 3, that is, the
same as in the eastern right-bank regions of Vblgogradskaya Oblast.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OH’ICIAL USE ONLY

Favorable conditions for the forming and filling of grain were created in
u narrow zone in the western regions of Volgogradakaya Oblast. in most of
the rnynna nt Stnvropol'skly and Krasnodnrskiy Kraye, where during the
period of forming and filling of grain the moisture reserves in the ester
layer remained for the most part in the range 00-70 mm and from 50 to 90
an of precipitation (oil. In these regions the mass of 1,000 grains was

60-53 g, locally even greater than 50 3.
Table l

Decrease in Grain Unit After Entry of Plants into Total Maturity Phase in

Dependence on the Quantity of Felling Precipitation During Harvesting Per-

iod According to Observations in Three Rsyons of Roetovekaya Oblast in the
Summer of 1977

    

Vacuums-e
eerypu tapes to

   
 
  

Cyuwe ouenoe as
nepnoz. AU!

  

 
       
   
 

5 Mentalo-Kyprsmee Owns- autumn l6 lo
ﬂpoeoe assent .. u

6 3epeerpeateen Owns antenna ll 9
”ocean seam . .. m

auwoeeuoeorsl 03mm nucleus 8 2 7

7

   

7 ﬂeece. sum 2 -

Key:
1. Rayon 6. Zernogradskiy
2. Crop 7. Ziuovnikovskiy
3. Precipitation one during per- 8. "inter wheat
iod, n 9. Spring barley
4. Decrease in grain unit by
periods. 3

5. Hstveyevo-Kurgenskiy

In the extreme western regions of Volgogredsksya Oblast, in the entire ter-
ritory of Rostovskaya Oblaet and in the northern rayons of Krasnodarskiy
Kray, where during the period of forming and filling of grain there wee
from 90 to 150 me of precipitation, and locally up to 200 e. there was
also undersized grain formation. but there it was caused by a phenomenon
which is very rare for these regions - an inadequate development of grain
size. It was established in the investigations of S. I. Kheriroeenov [3]
that undersized grain formation is most probable when there is abundant
precipitation both before and after the onset of grain formation. H. I.
Knyagichev and A. I. Nosetovskiy [1. 2], citing investigations of a number
of scientists, indicate that the undersized formation of grain in the case
of very moist and warm weather during the period of filling and maturing
transpires se a result of a great expenditure of dry eatter in respiration

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and direct washing out of nutrients by rains. The experiments of N. G.
Rholodnyy which they have cited show that under the influence of artif-
icial sprinkling the weight of the grain can be reduced by 16.5-581, de-
pending on the maturity phase of the grain during which the ear was expos-
cd to the sprinkling. The fact that under the influence of rain there is
on exosmosis of sugar. a hydrolytic breakdown of starch and an outflow of
plastic substances wee demonstrated by the presence of sus.r in the water
flowing from the ears. The undersized formation of grain can also occur
after harvesting. as long as the grain moisture content is greater than
252 [2]. that is, also in sheaves after mowing of the grains. This is also
indicated by the date published by K. Ye. Murashkinskiy, who notes that in
such cases "sweet dew" appears on the ears. this being an indicator of the
washing out of mobile carbohydrates.

M. l. Knyagichev [l] mentions the possible disturbance of metabolism under
the influence of direct washing-out of sugars. This also leads to an in-
crease in puniness of the grain.

Our investigations. carried out over great areas in summer in 197Z.show
that the undersized formation of grain frequently is accompanied by other
damage to plants, especially the falling down of grains, increasing the
moisture content of the grass stand and worsening metabolic conditions in
the plant.

In addition, there is a washing out of mobile forms of nitrogen from the
soil by abundant reins before and after the onset of filling of the grain,
especially in unfertilized fields of nonfallow precursors. In 1977 in the
upper soil layers during the period of formation and filling of grain
there were only traces of such nitrogen.

Table 2

Decrease in Crop Yield of "inter "heat in Dependence on Delays in its ner-
vesting and Quantity of Precipitation During June in Some Regions of Ros-
toveksya Oblsst in 1977

 
 
  
 

  
 
    
     
     

Cyuua 3eaepmss ydepse
etaanee mom useryaatens
as sleet. (mu amuse

u 2 tncaecru. as: 3

Cmesae

”0M.
nerve. i

Passe

   

l.

S WIMI. . . m 10 45

6 Hepvwosctnh . . no . 8 39

a KIICICII. . . . 130 8 26

Bepsmeeteen . . us 8 to

9 a»,..d2..r ' ' ﬁg ? '0

1° Mamas '. I m a g
11 I
128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Region
2. Sun of precipitation for June, In
3. Deley in herveet after onset of totel nnturity pheee. deye
lo. Reduction in crop yield. _2
S. Oktyebr'ekiy
6. Chertkovekiy
7e KAIOMkiy
8. Verkhnedonekiy
9. Aeovekiy
10. Hororovekiy
ll. Reeontnenekiy

 

The undersized grein fornetion wee eccoepenied on well by the "inveeion"
phenoeenon due to denege of the plente by ruet end other fungal dieeneee.
Blight locelly ceueed e preneture dying off of the lenvee end ceeeetion

of eeeiniletion proueeeee in plente even before they entered into the pheee
of golden'ripeneee, which eleo led to the foreetion of undereieed groin.

A decreeee in grain neee eleo trenepired efter oneet of totel neturity of
the gre'ne: thie ie treced eeeily in Teble l. cited below.

It ehould be noted thet under identicel conditione the decreeee in the neee
of grein during thie period wee obeerved eore in thoee plecee where the
greine efter their entry into totel neturity releined unnowed for e longer
tine. however. in fielde where the greine were mowed not leter then 3-6
deye after their entry into the pheee of totel neturity the decreeee in
yield wee ineignificent. with en increeee in tine between the oneet of

totel neturity end nowing the decreeee in crop yield eleo increeeed (‘l'eble
2).

A deley in the herveet due to heevy reine led to e strong owergrowing of
low-growing greine (eepecielly epring berley) by weedy vegetetion, which
eleo increeeed the yield loeeee.

In clerifying the neture of the undereieed grein forution. we etteepted
to find the cerreletion between the neee of l.000 greine en en index cher-
acterieing the coepleteneee of filling of the grein end neteorelogicel con-
ditione. We need the correletion of the me of 1.000 greine end eir ten-
pereture end precipitetion for different periode during the epring-eu-er
growing eeeeon. Since the eu-er of 1977 the different regione of the ter-
ritory were enceptionelly divereified with reepect to weether conditione;
thie nede it poeeible to cerry out inveetigetione in e wide renge end
clarify einulteneouely the influence of both drought end overeaietening on
the forcing end filling of winter wheet grein.

The cloeeet oorreletion between the neee of 1,000 greine (y) wee found
with the precipitetion out during the period free flowering to golden
ripeneee (n). An influence wee eleo exerted by the techniquee end

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equipment used in cultivation. Six equations were derived for winter wheat
und two equations were derived for spring barley.

Pot winter wheat for optimum sowing times on here fellow in eovkhoa and
kolkhor fields

y-—o.ooe4x2+o.sax+al.2.
(1)

For winter wheat of the Saverodonsltaya variety in the state strain testing
station under theee same conditions

”-0.000” x’—0.087 ”32.06. (2)

For winter wheat, town at optimum tinee in the can of nonfallow fertilized

precursors .
' y-—0,M23 “0.325 x+32.06.
(3)

For winter wheat town at late times in the case of nonfallow fertilized
precursors,

y-—0.0033 x3+0.520 x+ 22.67. (1.)

For winter wheat sown at optimum times in the case of nonfellow precursors
without fertilizers,

y- 0.00003 x'-0.0095 x’+0.83 8+ 19.3. (5)

For winter wheat, sown at late tiaea in the case of nonfallow unfertilized
precursora. ‘

[II-0.000004 r‘—0.0061 x’+0.65 14-180. (6)
For spring barley with optimu- eowing times in loolkhor and sovkhoz fielda

-—0. 7 1.0.
y 0 0r+5 (7)

For spring barley with optimum sowing tines in fields at atate strain teat-
ing stations

v--o.osv x+so.o. ‘ (a)

The correlation ratios and correlation coefficients for the cited equations
fall in the range 0.72-0.96. The errore in the equations are 8, - tlo-9 g.
A graphic representation of equations (l)-(8) is shown in ﬁg. 2.

The derived equation- ahow that an increase in precipitation to 70 III (60-
80 as) during the period of foruation and filling of grain improves the
conditions for the trancpiring of these highly important processes. so a

130
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

result of which the mass of 1,000 grains is increased. With 70 m of pre-
cipitetion it is highest, and thereafter with an increase in precipitation
during this sane period there is a decrease.

 

Fig. 2. Dependence between mass of 1,000 grains (y) and the quantity of
precipitation (x) falling during period of formation and filling of winter
wheat and spring barley grain. l) optinun sowing times, 2) late sowing
tines, 3) optinun sowing times in fields of state strain testing stations.

Table 3

Correction for Undersized Grain Formation for Different Quantities of
Precipitation Falling During Periods of Formation and Filling of Grain

 

 

 

Cyuue‘ruuon "g“:mgfm Cyan-Irene 30;?63
80 0 I30 I6
’0 4 I30 20
1” 6 I40 ' 27 '
"0 ll I50 35

 

Key: _
l. Precipitation total, m
2. Decrease in crop yield, 1

A mass of 1,000 grains is formed which is higher in the case of fellow pre-
cursors, optinun sowing times, in fertilized fields and in fields of state
strain testing stations. The course of formation and change in the mass of
1.000 grains is similar to the course with any agricultural techniques used
in cultivation. But in absolute terms a higher mass of 1,000 grains in the
case of undersized grain fornation corresponds to a higher level of agri-
cultural engineering practice. Therefore, for introducing a correction for
undersized grain formation we computed the mean values of the possible

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFIICIM. USE ONLY

decrease in crop yield. which we recommend be used under the condition of
appearance of the phenomenon of undersized grain formation (Table 3).

The investigations show that the phenomenon of undersized grain formation
can be considerably lessened by an increase in the application of fertil-
irers on sown grain fields. the carrying out of saving of winter crepe

only at optimum times. the use of optimum areas of fellow precursors with
the sewing of winter crops. end the organiretion of harvesting in years

of possible undersized grain formation by a separate method in the shortest
possible time.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Rnysgichev. M. 1.. BIOLOOIYA PSNBNITSY (Biology of wheat). ﬂeeces-Lenin-
grad. Sel'khosgir. 1951. £15 pages.

2. Nosatovskiy. A. 1.. PSHBNITSA (BIOLOGIYA) ("heat (Biology)). Second
Edition. Moscow. “Roles," 1965. 568 pages.

3. Kharisosenov. s. 1.. "Influence of Precipitation and Air Temperature
on Orsin Yield." SBL'SKOKHOZYANSTVBNNYY VBSTNIK YUGO-VOSTOKA (Agricul-
tural Herald of the Southeast). No 3-6. 1911.

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPI’ICIAL USE ONLY

unc 551.465. ”(670.2”
CALCULATIONS 0P HATBR SUROBS AT 1118 “OUT“ 0? m NEVA

Moscow HB‘I’EOROLOOIYA I OIDROLOOIYA in Russian No ll, Nov 1978 pp 107-108

[Article by 0. A. Kruglyak. candidate of Geographical Sciences K. s. Penet-
enets and B. N. Turuntayeva, Leningrad Division State Oceanographic Inst-
itute. subsitted (or publication 21 February 1978]

Abstracts'l‘he article presents the results of
computations of three cases of dangerous water
surges at the nouth of the Nova. The amputation
error for all the nininun and hourly levals does
not exceed 20 ca. which is evidence of the possib-
ility or using the hydrodynamic nethod for pre-
dicting surges.

[Text] Leningrad ﬂoods have long ago acquired vide reknown and their study
and prediction is now being devoted considerable attention. however, inun-
dations are only one of the unifestations of aperiodic level fluctua-

tions which are observed in coastal seas. At Leningrad. in particular.

in addition to inundations there are considerable decreases in water loyal.
also disrupting economic activity. however. this phenoesnon has not been
especially examined in the literature, other than a study by A. I. Preyd-
zon [5]. It is noted that considerable decreases in level are a result of
atnospheric processes over a considerable area when the regions of reduced
pressure are situated prinarily in the southern part of the Baltic Sea. It
is pointed out that a reliable method for predicting surges of water at the
south of the have is yet to be developed.

Recently Leningrad inmdationa have been investigated by a hydrodynamic
method based on nuerical integration of one-dimensional equations for
shallow water [1]. Tests were carried out of a nethod which includes com-
putations of about 70 cases of reel level rises. including 19 inundations
at Leningrad above 180 on during the last 30 years [2]. For checking

the universality of the nethod and for practical purposes it was of interest

to apply it to cowetations of considerable reductions in level at the have
south.

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Now we will examine three cases of water surges at the mouth of the Nova
during the last 10 years: 22 September 1973, 9 October 1976, 20 November
1975. when the minimum levels attained the readings -90 on, -116 cm and
-103 cm respectively. The computations were made for 18 hours from the in-
itial time, 6-8 hours prior to the onset of the minimm level. The method
for computing the surges is completely similar to the computations of in-
undatione and was applied using actual hydromsteotologicel information.

He used observational data collected at ehore stations in the Gulf of Pin-
land end the beltic See above the level at the initial moment and wind each
three hours. Linear interpolation of these date was carried out on the
longitudinal axis of the basin from the mouth of the have to the Danish
Straits at points of intersection situated eech 75-120 km. The value of the

element at such an axial point was found using the formula
'0' ’a [A +0.! .

where £5. in are the observed values of the element at stations A and s.
situated on opposite shores of the basin on the same line with the inter-
polation point i; ui A. at, are linear interpolation coefficients;

a
a‘ it‘ll. ‘0- f‘ r.

r is the distance between A end B, rA, r; is the distance from the stations
to the point i.

The shearing stress of the wind over the sea was computed using the formula
1. I 3.2-10'“6 "2 cos ,8 (R is wind velocity in m/sec. ﬂ is the angle observed
between the wind direction and the azimuth of the axis).

Table 1

Errors in Computations of Water Surges st houth of Neva
#

no wussu'u ﬂour-lets“ seen.“
An I A! s K I “I I e

+-| II N

 

 

nets 1

   

Key:
1. Date
2. For minimum
3. For hourly levels, on
Io. hours

The results of comutstions in cowarieon with level observations at Lenin-

grad are given in Figure l. The errors in computations of minimum and
hourly levels. similar to the evaluations of cowutstions of inundations

[2, 3], are given in Table 1. For each case we determined the errors for

136

FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
NR OWICIN. US! ONLY

the ninimum A and the tine of its onget A t. the seas (of 18 hourly values)

errors A . the mean absolute errors [AI and the mean square errors 0‘.

 

Fig. 1. Observed (l) and computed (2) levels at mouth of Neva during surges.
e) 22 September 1973; b) 9 October 1976; c) 20 hovember 1975

It follows from the figure and table that the quality of the computations is
quite satisfactory. 'lhe errors in conputing each surge case with respect to
any index. other than time of onset of the mininum. were almost half the
conutetion errors in the four individual cases of inundations st Lenin-
grad during recent years [3]. It can be postulated that the more satis-
Eactory results of cosputstiona of surges in comparison with inundations are
essociated with different level changes with time during these phenomena.
During surges the level changes considered here during an hour did not ex-
ceed 20 cm. whereea in the case of inundations. including those computed

in (3], these changes were 50-80 cn. A smoother change in level with the
existing three-hour discreteness of meteorological observations is repro-
duced better by numerical solution of one-dimensional equations for shallow
water. with respect to the systematic error in computations at the time of
onset of the minimum. it means that the actual mininum level sets in later
than the computed level. This circumstance has a definite positive import-
nnce in prognostic respects. The source of this systematic error can be es-
tablished using some numerical experiments. Their purposefulness. however.
is not obvious. since all other errors in comuting surges are seen.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

The results indicate that the hydrodynamic nethod can be applied not only to
aonputations. but also to predictions of surges. the aane as it is applied to
predictions of inundationa. Since predictions differ from computations

only with respect to neteorologicel initial information. it is obvious that
in the considered cases when there were satisfactory predictiona of wind and
surface pressure fields there was a possibility of satisfactory prediction
of level decreases at the nouth of the Nova.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1e v01.‘.‘n8.r. Ne Y's, Py..kov.ktyg Re V.. TEORIYA HELKOY VOW (Theory
of Shallow water). Leningrad. Oidroneteoiedat. 1977. 207 pages.

2. Kruglyah. 0. A.. Poneranets. K. 8.. "Resulte of Application of the
Mydrodynendo Method for Predicting and Coeputing Inundatione at Len-
‘ ingrad." MBTBOIDLOOIYA 1 OIDROLOOIYA (Meteorology and hydrology).
Mo 11. pp 66-56. 1976.

3. Kruglyah. G. A.. Poeerenets. K. 8.. Turuntayeve. B. N.. Chernysheva.
Ye. 8.. "Numerical Forecasts and Coeputations of the Considerable
Inundations of 1973-1975 in Leningrad." TRUDY coo (Transactions of the
Main Geophysical Observatory). Me 382. pp 99-107. 1977.

9. Preydeon. A. 1.. ”Meter Surgea at the Mouth of the Maya River." 830R-

NIK RABOT LBNINORADSKOY OIDROHBTOBSBRVAIORII (Collection of Papers of

the Leningrad Mydroeeteorologicel observatory). Mo 3. pp 119-123.
1966.

136

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
'OR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

one 551.661(261. 33) (262.267. 21)

WDBLINO 0P SUPBRPOSITIONINO 0? WI!“ 01’ TN! 8810113 LEVEL. WIND-INDUCED
SURGE AND A LONG HAVE IN the NEVA INLET

Holcov BEDROLOOIYA I OIMOLOOXYA in Rustinn No 11, Nov 1978 pp 109-110

[Article by Candidate of Geographical Sciencee V. G. Noakov. State Hydro-
logical Inatituto. euhnitted for publication 10 January 1978)

Abetrnct: It hee been eatebliehed ueing large-ecale
hydraulic nodela of the Gulf of Finland and the
Baltic Sea that with nutual euperpoeitioning of
aeiche. long-wave and oeaterly wind-induced var-
iationa of water naaaea the reeultant naxiaun

riae in water level at the head of the Gulf of
Finland in lean than the eua of the individually
taken variation conponenta. An explanation of the
reaeone for thie phenoaenon ie given.

[Text] when there are etorI-induced level rieee at the head of the Gulf of
Pinland. with none degree of arbitrarineea it in poeaihle to dietinguieh
three principal typee of rieee: eeiche. longuvave rieea and riae due to
surge of water naeeee under the influence of the veaterly wind. Sonatiuee
at the head of the gulf only one of the aentioned typea of rieee is noted.
but lore frequently there in a euperpoaitioning of variationa of two or
all three typea. in the courae of the inveetigatione of a hydraulic nodel
of the Gulf of Finland for deternining the nechanien of fornation of eea
inundatione in the have delta we reproduced the nutual euperpoeitioning of
the aentioned typea of level riaea.

The Neva delta. Gulf of Finland and the northeaetern half of the Baltic Sea
proper were forned in a oodel constructed in a channel laboratory at the
State Hydrological Inetitute in 197‘. The horizontal ecale of the Iodel

wna 1:10.000 and the vertical ecale vae 13200. The area of the nodal wee '
1.200 .2. long vavee of different dinaneiona were reproduced by e epecial
wave generator. wind-induced eurgee were produced by centrifugal fene

nounted in eufficient nuaber over the water eurface of the nodal. and
seiche variationa developed in the nodal ae a reault of reflection of long-

vavee at the head of the gulf and had the nature of inertial. gradually et-
tenuating variatione.

137

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

"I

  
   

— f
-- n z
-o— ’
uuuouu ,

  

Fig. 1. Variation of wator lowol in Nova dalta with auporpoaitioning of dif-
Earont typoa of lovol rioaa (nodal). 1) obaorwod raaultant laval variation.
2) long-wawa wariationa. 3) lawol variation cauoad by wind-inducod aurga,

lo) oaicho variation.

‘l'ho hoight of tho riaa and tho lowol variation wara rogiatarod uaing auto-
natic rocordora of oloctric naaauring aquipoont oinultanaoualy at 20 ata-
tiona in tho nodal (l in tho Nova dolta, 12 at tho hood of tho gulf tron
tha mouth of tho nova to Shopalavo and 7 in tho rouining part of the gulf).
Aa a control ayatan wa uaad apacial rulaa (rulora) which at those aano
pointa rogiotorod tho oaxinua hoight of tho wntor lowol riooa with a noon
aquaro orror of 10.5 an or no on for tho natural acolo.

In tho courao of tho uporinonta wo roproducod four coobinationa of aupor-
poaitioninga of ditforont typos of lovol riaoa:

o) riaa duo to the long wavo running into the riaa tron tho aaicha;

b) riaa iron tho wind ourgo "on top" of tho rioo from tho aaicha;

c) riaa fro- tho wind aurgo "on top" of tho riaa from tho long wavo;

d) riaa fro- tho wind aurgo "on top" of tho riaa fro- tha long wave, which
at tho aano tilo waa auporpoaod on tho riaa from tho aaicha.

‘l'ha oxporilonto woro carriad out in such a way that tho marina of the aupar-
pooad riooa coincidad in tino. With ouch ouporpoaitioning than was axcita-
tion of aoicho oacillationa giving lavol riaaa in tho Nova dolta of

138
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

approximately 100 cm, wind-induced surges -- 150 cm and rises attributable
to long waves -- 250 cm. that is. rises with an exceedingly rare frequency

of recurrence. since in the case of higher rises the relative measurement
error will be less.

An analysis of the experimental data indicated that the real picture of law-
el variations in the case of mutual superpositionings of different kinds of
irregular long-period variations differs from that which is assumed in com-
putations made using well-known theoretical models. In particular. in al-
most the entire gulf from Tblbukhin beaten the magnitude of the resultant
rise observed in the case of such superpositionings is equal to (or in any
case is close to) the arithmetical sum of separately taken rise components.
In the Nova delta and in the Neva inlet (including the northern and southern
"gates") the resultant magnitude of the rises in the case of such super-
positionings of phenomena is less than the sum of the components of these
rises. In other words. at the head of the gulf there is no superpositioning
of phenomena. Ne resonance phenomena were detected in experiments with
superpositioning of phenomena.

Figure 1 shows an example of auperpositioning of phenomena in the have del-
to for three simultaneous rises of different origin. In this case the re-
aultsnt rise was approximately 172 less than the arithmetical sum of the
separately taken rises. This phenomenon can arbitrarily be called level
loss. Its approximate value for different combinations of superpositioning
of phenomena in individual cases attains 202.

The level less in the case of superpositiening of a long wave on e seiche

is attributable to the differences in the hydraulic conditions for propaga-
tion of the long wevaz'in one case it is propagated in an undisturbed water
medium where there are no currents, and in another case, in a water medium
which has first lost equilibrium and experiences seiche oscillations complic-
ated by the peculiar plane outlines of the Baltic Sea and the great nonuni- '
formity of depths. It goes without saying that in the second case the loss-
es of wave energy will be greater than in the first case.

The magnitude of the wind surge (whose dependence on depth of the water
body is known) with its superpositioning on a seiche or on a long wave
probably becomes less because in this case the surge takes place with a
depth which is increased as a result of the rise from the seiche or long
wave. In addition. with a level increment there is an increase in the area
of the water bodygend therefore a definite volume of water mass, advancing
in the head of the gulf with a higher initial level will give a lesser lev-
el increment than the same volume advancing with a lower layel.

The level loss when.there is a superpositioning of all three mentioned
types of riaea is evidently attributable to these same factors.

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the haeie of nunoroue experieente carried out using our nodal or the
Gulf of Flnlnnd and confirmed by experiments using another nodal of the
entire Baltic See at a scale of 13100.000 it can he aeeunad that the level
loee phenomenon in the ceee of euperpoeitioning of irregular long-period
veriatione under einilar topographic and hydraulic conditions hae a general
character and in cheracterietic not only of the head of the Gulf of Pin-
land. but alao the heede of other narine enbaynente. baya and eetuariee,
although without quaation the magnitude of the level loee. to a conaider-
able degree dependent on their topography, will be different.

140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"no 531.509.616
INVESTIGATION OF AN AIRCRAFT LIQUID OENBRAIOR OP ICE-FORMING ABROSOLS
Moscow HBTIONDLOOIYA I OIDROLOOIYA in Russian No 11. Nov 1978 pp 111-115

[Article by Candidate of Physical and Hatheaatical Sciences 9. P. Belyayev,

N. 8. Kim and Yu. N. Hatveysv, Institute of Experimental Meteorology. sub-
nittad for publication 29 March 1978]

Abstract: The article describes a nodal of an
aircraft generator, the apparatus and nathod
need in its testing. Also given are the results
of determination of the ice-forling activity of
aerosols of a number of reagents. Active aerosole
were obtained either with the conbustion of an
acetone or aorpholina solution of silver iodide
or in the thermal sublisatiou of copper acetyl
acetonate.

{Text} In the arsenal of modern eeens for the nodification of supercooled
clouds, in addition to antihail shells, rockets and pyrotechnic nixturea.
use is being nade of aircraft generators of ice-forming aerosols in which
an active aerosol is formed with the combustion of solutions of silver io-
dide. for example. in acetone. Their use is justified by the fact that
aircraft supplied with such generators can seed clouds of different areal
extent with an active aerosol; the density of such seeding can be prestip-
ulated. Aircraft generators are widely employed abroad and the literature
describes the results of their testing both under natural conditions and
in wind tunnels [5]. However, in our country they have not yet cone into
extensive use. for example, in wind tunnels. For the most part we employ
pyrotechnic generators of ice-forming seroeols and generators operating
on the explosive dispersion principle. but aircraft generators could be
useful for sany practical situations.

In this paper we describe the results of wind tunnel tasting of a nodal of
an aircraft generator. Three series of generator tests were carried out.
In the first series of tests the active eerosol was produced by conbustion
of a 22 (by weight) solution of AgI in acetone; in the second series -
with combustion of a 22 (by weight) solution of Ag! in norpholina: in the

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu (WI’NﬂM. "8“ "MIN

 

Fig. 1. Diagram of testing of generator of ice-fornin; aerosols.

Key:
A. Air flow

a. Cospressed nitrogen

c. Colorssssd sir
D. Outflow of aerosol
B. Pulsatins gas flow

third series - vith thsrlel sublilstion of pulverized copper acetyl sce-
tonats.

The first series of tests with acetone solutions of silver iodide was carr-
ied out for the purpose of coupsring the results obtained using our generb
ate: with the results obtained abroad in the testing of similar generators.

162

’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

 

Pig. 2. Dependence of yield of ac- Pig. 3. Diagran of activity of ice-
tive nuclei N on tenerature 1' of foraing nuclei. l) copper acetyl
supercooled fog. l) conbustion of acetonato (that-a1 sublilation):
acetone solution of Agl-Kl: 2) coe- Agl (coebustion of acotone solution
bustion of norpholine solution of of AgI-Kl): 3) Ag! (coebustion of
MI: 3) that-Isl suhlisation of pul- pyrotechnic mixture).

verised copper acetyl ecetooata.

The dashed curve represents tho

theoretical Iletcher curve.

In the second series of tests we investigated the possibility of obtaining
an active Ag! aerosol using an aircraft generetor with combustion in it

of an Ag! solution in eorpholine instead of the usually elployod Agl-NH‘I,
AgI-lu or Agl-Nal solutions in acetone. Horpholine is s colorless oily
hygroscopic fuel ﬂuid with a low viscosity and an anonia soon. The choo-
ical fornula is c‘nguo. The density is l glcn3. A 2: silver iodide solution
is obtained by the dissolving of a corresponding quentity of silvar iodide

in norpholine without eny additives. The first co-unications on the use

of norpholine without its joint use with Ag! for the nodificetion of cuulus
clouds were given in a series of studies [4, 6. 7]. It was noted in [7]. in
particular, that there are (acts indicating that soee organic aninos, enong

which norpholine is included. in snail quantities can tevor. or on the other
hand, i-psdc the (oration of ice crystals.

163

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the third series we carried out an investigation of the possibility of
using an aircraft generator for obtaining active aerosols of organic sub-
stances. In particular, we used copper acetyl acatonate as the reagent.
The ice-forming properties of this reagent were discovered for the first
time by Nalkina and Patriheyev [3. 9]. Copper acetyl acetonate is a powder
of a blue color with particle sizes measuring several microns. Its chem-
ical formula is Cu(an70z)z. At a high temperature copper acetyl acetonate
breaks down and loses its ice-forming properties. Therefore. in order to
‘obtain a highly dispersed aerosol the thermal sublimation of the reagent
must take place at temperatures which are considerably less than the tem-
peratures within the aircraft generators. The developed model of an air-
craft generator is easily transformed into a generator of copper acetyl
ocetonste aerosol if within the generator there is combustion. for ex-
ample. of pure acetone and powders of this reagent are introduced into

the low-temperature flame sense by means of a special sprayer.

Generator and method for its testing. The generator and a diagram of its
testing are shown in Pig. 1. In the first two series of tests we combust-
ed acetone or merpholine solutions of silver iodide. A solution of silver
iodide is fed to a pneumatic nozzle 3 from the tank 2 under the influence
of the pressure of compressed nitrogen, whereas air is fed from a com-
pressed air line; as a result, in the combustion chamber 5 with a volume
of 2.8 dm3 there is a sprayed mixture of a fuel solution and air which

is ignited using the aparhplug 6. Combustion of the solution causes for-
mation of a stream 9 of highly disperse silver iodide aerosol. The expend-
iture of silver iodide was selected at the level 0.05 g/sec; this corres-
ponds to the usual expenditure of reagent for aircraft generators and ex-
ceeds by several times the expenditure of reagent for ground generators

[S].

In the third series of tests we combusted pure acetone for the thermal sub-
limation of copper ecetyl acetonate in the generator. Copper acetyl aceton-
ute was introduced into the flame sons 6 with a temperature of about 430‘6
by means of a special sprayer of measured quantities of the powder P
through the line 8. The reagent was fed toward the flame plume. At some
distance from this line there was a light screen 7 for preventing the re-
agent from entering the tone of higher temperatures, where its decompo-
sition can occur. After thermal sublimation of the reagent and its subse-
quent condensation beyond the generator a stream 9 of highly dispersed
copper acetyl acetonate aerosol was formed.

The sprayer for delivery of measured quantities of powder P which we devel-
oped is a modernized variant of the sprayer described in [B]. The detailed

design of this sprayer is shown in the lower part of Fig. 1. In the housing
of this sprayer 12 there is a hopper 13 having a grid bottom 16. The powder

is, which is to be sprayed. is loaded into this bin and the latter is cover-
ed with the lid 16. It is mandatory that there be a free space between the
powder and the lid. A gas flow is fed through the entry line ll into the

166

FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY
powder sprayer; the pressure in this line fluctuates. The dosed feeding
of the powder from the sprayer bin is accomplished by a pulsating change
in pressure of the gas medium under the grid bottom of the bin and a pul-
sating change (with some phase lag) in gas pressure over the powder with-
in the bin. for better spraying of the powder, at the beginning of the
output line there is a diaphragm l7 and the line itself or a part of it
is bent in the form of a ring 18.

The expenditure of the reagent powder from the sprayer is set by the area
of the working section of the bettom of the bin, the size of the grid
openings, the area of the diaphragm aperture, and the frequency and in-
tensity of pressure pulsations in the gas flow.

In the sprayer there is a bin having an internal volume of 75 cm3. en in-
ternal radius of the upper base 2.5 cm, and a lower base -- 1 cm. The grid
openings in the bin measure 1.5 x 1.5 mm. The internal diameters of the
entry and output lines were 61mm. The pulsating change in pressure of the
gas flow was ensured by use of a modulator installed in the compressed

air line. Hith a frequency of the pulsations 2 Hz with an amplitude of
about 1 atm the expenditure of reagent powder was 0.1 g/sec.

The method used in all three test series for the generators of ice-forming
aerosols was identical and involves the following. The generator is
mounted in an adjustable air flow I in a wind tunnel. During operation of
the generator, behind it there is formation of a stream 9 of active aero-
sol that is mixed uniformly in the section of the tunnel by special agi-
tators 10. At a distance of 5 m downstream from the agitator, a part of
the aerosol is continuously removed through an intake tube; in case of
necessity this aerosol is diluted by pure air. A definite volume of the
aerosol sample is introduced into a chamber with a supercooled fog. The
forming crystals are trapped on glasses and on the basis of the number of
crystals observed in the microscope field of view, taking into account
the characteristics of the employed apparatus, we ascertain the ice-formr
iag activity of the reagent (yield of ice-forming nuclei from 1 g of re-
agent) for a stipulated operating regime of the generator. The test meth-
od is described in greater detail in [2].

Test results. In the tests the generator of ice-forming aerosols operated
under conditions close to the natural operating conditions of the air—
craft generator; this was achieved by its ventilation by an air flow hav-
ing a velocity up to 60 m/sec. The greatest number of tests was carried
out for an air flow velocity of 20 misses therefore, in this article a
comparison of results of tests of this generator is made only for this
one velocity.

Figure 2 shows the results of all three series of generator tests in which
we determined the yield of active nuclei N from 1 g of reagent as a func-
tion of temperature T of a supercooled fog.

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIM. USE ONLY

Table l

 
 
  

 

Bum extusuux Imp e I o Agl Mm .
suuupouanuoa muparypc nepeoa-
amasuoro users I.

    

Mtuoasayesuc "gm"
pumps 2 elm 3

     
  

~8'C

 
 
   
     

5 More» tam
mo mapmpe.
um amuse.

    
   
   
 

     
  

13.] u 4 .iou
I.“ u '34.,“

0.05 3- It)"

I. 7
M n 0.05 1.840"

Agl-K . aneton 8

 
  
  

  
  
    

  
   
 

   

6 Cauoaenm reus-
R' mm "3.111.. m vs: aumu our 910'. ”no" ' nou
_. ., , . . .
NOAA B . . A l—NHl.auuou 0.09 MO" - i - N
NOAA a . . Agl-Nalfmmn 0.09 2.10» :13; 3.}3'.

     

     

1. Generator

2. Solutions used

3. Ag! expenditure. glue

4. Yield of active nuclei from 1 g of Ag! for fixed tmeraturs of
supercooled fog

5. Model of aircraft generator, our data

6. Aircraft generators

7. Horpholina

8. Acetone

The results of the first series of generator tests with its operation with
acetone solutions are given in Pig. 2 (curve 1) and in Table 1. In addi-
tion, the table gives the results of similar tests of aircraft generators
carried out by Garvey [5] using a .wind tunnel. The aircraft generators
operated using 21 Ag! acetone solutions. The table shows that in the en-
tire temperature range the yield of nuclei from 1 g of Ag! for our gener-
ator approximately corresponds to the yield of nuclei for foreign aircraft
generators. Thus, on the basis of the results of tests of a model aircraft
generator which we developed it is possible to evaluate the effectiveness
of aircraft generators of this particular type.

The results of the second series of generator tests, with its operation us-
ing a morpholine Ag! solution. are also given in Pig. 2 (curve 2) and in
Table 1. It can be seen that in the tenperature range for a supercooled
fog, -ll - -l6°c. the ice-forming activity of Ag! aerosols obtained by

the combustion of acetone and morpholine Ag! solutions virtually coincides.
The difference is observed for the temperature range -7 - -11‘c. In this
temperature range the yield of active nuclei during tests of a generator
with an Ag! solution in norpholine exceeds the yield of active nuclei for

tests of a generator with an Agl-K! solution in acetone (curve 1). For a
temperature of -s°c this difference attains 20 times. However, in work
with s morpholine solution there was found to be a number of shortcomings:

lore difficult ignition of the sprayed reagent in the combustion chamber
166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY

and the formation of a thick encruatation on the internal surface of the
combustion chamber. Therefore. for the time being this solution cannot
be recommended for practical use without the development of applicable
methods for its combustion. despite some advantages which it has in the
high-temperature range.

In the third series of tests, as already mentioned above, the generator
operated in a regime of production of a highly disperse copper acetyl
acatonete aerosol. In order to ascertain the ice-forming activity of

this reagent. a passage of vapor was first employed in a cold chamber for
creating a model supercooled cloud; then the aerosol to be tested was in-
troduced there and we calculated the number of precipitating ice crystals.
The number of crystals was relatively small. With the repeated introduc-
tion of vapor into this same volume the ice crystals again formed. but in
this case in a considerably greater number. Ice crystals continued to be
formed in subsequent introductions of vapor, but each time their number
decreased. Figure 3 (curve 1) illustrates these experimental data. Along
the y-axis we have ;lotted the percentage of nuclei manilasting their ac-
tivity after the corresponding introduction of vapor. and along the x-axis
-- the number of the vapor introduction. As a comparison, on this same
graph we have shown the dependencea which we obtained when using a wind
tunnel for investigating pyrotechnic compositions with Ag! (curve 3 -
very rapid dropoff) and in an investigation of acetone solutions of AgI-
KI. combusted in our generator (curve 2 - slower dropoff).

These results of study of the ice-forming activity of copper acetyl aceton-
ate aerosols confirm what was found earlier by other authors [1]: a strong
sensitivity of aerosols of this reagent to brief supersaturations of water
vapor. _

The yield of active nuclei from 1 g of copper acetyl scetonate (see Fig.
2, curve 3). if it is calculated by first summing the number of nuclei
manifesting their activity after each introduction of vapor, with a tem-
peretura of the model cloud -s°c, 1. 2.5.1012. at -a°c - 1.2.1013. u
-1o°(1:‘— «.1013, at ~12'c - mel‘, at ~1a°c -- 2-1016 and at -16'C -
"10 0

Thus. the results show that the presently used aircraft generators can be
used for the sublimation of organic ice-forming reagents. This requires
their insignificant modification; in particular. the sprayer of measured
quantities of pulverized substances developed by the authors can be used
for the spraying of reagents.
I.

2.

3.

lo.

5.

7.

8.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Akeenov, N. Ye., Bronherg. A. V., Bychkov. N. V.. Kordyukevich, N. 6..
Plnude. N. 0.. "Inveetigetion of the Ice-Forming Propertieo of Copper
Acetyl Acetonete Aeroeole of Different Diepereivity," 18218? DOKIADOV
VIII vsnsomzuoco NAUCHNOGO SOVBSNONANIYA PO PROBE!!! IZYSKANIYA I
ISSLBDOVANIYA L'DOOBRAZUYUSHCNIIOI RBAGEN‘I‘OV I IKN ABROZOLBY (Sui-er-
iee oi Reporte et the Bighth All-Union Scientific Conference on the
Problee of Seeking end 'l'eeting Ice-Forming Neegente end Their Aero-
eole), Kiehinev. pp 16-17. 1977.

Belyeyev, 8. P., D'yechenko, Yu. 1).. Kim. N. 8.. Netveyev, Yu. N., Si-
dorov. A. 1.. "Inveetigetion of the effectiveneee of Action of Full-
Site Pyrotechnic Generetore of Ice-Poning Aeroeole," TRUDY 1m (Irene-

eetione of the Inetitute of Bxperinentel Meteorology), No 16(52). pp
21-32. 1976.

Helkine, A. 0.. Petrikeyev. V. V.. "Peculieritiee of Aerosols of Hotel
Acetyl Acetonetee ee Ice-Porting Reagents." T8218? DOKLADOV VIII
VSBSOYUZNOGO NAUCIINOGO SOVESBCRANIYA P0 PROBLM IZYSKANIYA I 188130-

OVANIYA L'DOOBRAZUYUSHCRIKH WV I IKB ABROZOLEY, Kiahinev, pp
15-16. 1977.

Sedunov. Yu. 8.. ”Americen Inveetigetione of the 'Neether Nodificetion'
Problee." METEOROLOGIYA I 610801106121 (Meteorology end Hydrology), No
9. PP 107-111. 1975e

Gervey. D. H” "Testing of Cloud Seeding Heteriele at the Cloud Simul-
etion end Aeroeol Laboratory, 1971-1973." J. APPL. “3130301... Vol 16,
No 8, pp 883-890, 1975.

Hendereon. ‘r. J., Duckeing, D. N., "Ice Cryetel Inhibition (ICI Pro-
ject). An Applicatione Progrel oi menial Diepereel in Snell annulus
Cloude." REPORT AD-775630. Ateoepherice Incorporated, Fresno. Celifor-
nie, 15 June 1973, IV, 35 pages.

Nendereon, ‘1'. J., Pinnegen, N., "Resulte fro: the Field Application
of Norpholine end Bthyleeine to Snell annulus Clowle." PROCEEDINGS OF

THE FOURTH CONFERENCE ON HEATHER MDIPICA‘I‘ION, Pt. Leuderdele, Florida,
pp 210-213. 1976.

Peleelund, A. J., "Geret tut Veretebung von Pulver, inebeeondere Sched-

lingohekenpfmgepulver,” Nest Genen Petent, Kl. 65k 902. No 811882,
1951.

Petrikeev, V. V.. Nelkine, A. 1)., Kerteivedee, A. 1., "Method of Cryo-
telliretion of Neter in Supercooled Cloude end Page and Reagent Useful
in Seid Method," 08A Petent, Cl 252-319. No 3887580, 1975.

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 356.335.6

INVESTIGATION OF PBBBLY CRARNBL SBDIHENTS IN RIVERS USING UNDEWAIBR
PHOTOGRAPHY

Hoecow METEOROLOOIYA I OIOMLOOIYA in Russian No 11. Nov 1978 pp 115-117

[Article by Candidate of Geographical Sciences R. V. bodies and A. I.
Shtraukh, Moscow State University. subeitted for publication 19 Dace-her
1977]

Abstract: The paper exaainas the use of an un-
darwatar photographic survey in a study of chan-
nel pebbly and bouldary sedinant. The authors
describe an apparatus for underwater photograph-
ic work. A nethod for carrying out work with an
underwater photographic survey of the channel bot-
tea is presented.

[Text] Many studies have been devoted to an investigation of channel de-
posits in nountainous and seniaountainous rivers [1-3. 5, 6]. however,

the conclusions end regularities defined by different researchers are
based exclusively on estarials fron studies of the pebbles making up

the shoals along the channel which energa fron beneath the water at low
water. Date on the underwater part of the channel are lacking. which reduces
the value of the results and linits the possibilities of their use. In ad-
dition, the content of pebbles of different particle site was deternined
in sanples or in areas selected or laid out in the shoals along channels,
on the basis of which it was possible to coepute the nose disaster or
other norphonetric characteristics of the pebbles. me napping of pebbly
channel sediment-in the channel with respect to their types. as has been
done for lowland rivers with sandy alluviua (labedeva, Chalov [6]). has
never been accoaplished. Nevertheless, the solution of different problem
related to channel sedinents (construction of mountain reservoirs. stabil-
ity of cuts in navigable rivers, etc.) requires nora detailed data on their
cognition. Therefore, the Channel Expedition of the Soil Erosion and
Channel Processes Problene Laboratory of Roscow State University, working
on the Kirenga River (a right tributary of the bane River), used an mder-
water photographic survey in a study of channel pebbly and heuldery sedi-
nents, which in coabination with a couple: of traditional nethods for
making investigations in shoals, made it possible to obtain valuable

1’09

FOR USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82~00850R000100010020-8
FOR Ol-‘I’ICML USE ONLY

aateriala concerning the peculiarities of distribution of eedieente along
the entire channel of this eeninountainoue river in a reach with a length
of 260 he. The average width of the channel here in 600-500 In: the uean
annual water diachatgn ie 665 ﬁle».

 

Pig. 1. Diagram of underwater photographic apparatue for eurvay of pebbly-
boulder-y alluviun for depths from 1.5 to 6 a for current velocity from 0
to 2.5 Blue. 1) directing an: 2) shaft; 3) unit for supplying current to
flashbulb; lo) lever for camera ehutter; 5) housing with camera: 6) handle
for winding film; 7) rod for driving shutter lever; 8) canere flash bulb;
9) scale-lever for activating ehutter

The meat iaportant characterietic feature in the morphology of the Kirenge
channel ie that it ie highly branching (broken by ialanda and ehoale into

a great nunber of one and eubeidiary channels). The exceptional transparen-
cy of the water at low water in the Kirenga River channel (turbidity -
0.0050 g/liter or leae). when even at depths at great as 6 I it ie paeeible

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to see almost every fragment and it is possible to carry out an underwater
photographic survey of bottom sediments.

The investigation of the composition and distribution of pebhly alluvium
was carried out in stages. In the first stage we made a granulometric de-
termination of the granulometric composition of the surface layer of
pebbles in shoals in areas measuring 1 x l m using the method described

by Ya. I. Sakharova and N. V. Lebodeva [6]. An analysis of data from 200
sampling areas made it possible to formulate a classification of types of
pebble deposits based on a predominance of the fractions within the limits
‘of the sampling area. In the next stage we carried out photographing of
these same areas on shoals with subsequent measurements of pebbles by frac-
tions within the limits of each survey frame. with photographing of the
sample areas there was adherence to the condition of verticality of the
camera objective axis to the surface of the area by means of attachment

of the camera to the tripod. A scale ruler was photographed as part of
each frame. The discrepancy in the results of determination of direct meas-
urements of the mean diameter of pebbles in an area and the results obtain-
ed by the processing of a photograph was not more than 10-15%. In this com-
parison it was found that the fractions of boulders. large and intermediate-
sised pebbles are contained in approximately equal quantity both in the
processing of photographs and in indirect measurements on shoals and there
are some discrepancies for small pebbles only.

A comparison of the results of determination of the mean weighted diameter
by the measurement and photographing methods made it possible to use a
single method for the mapping of sediments along the entire channel and
determining the mean diameter both for the parts of the channel above the
water at shallow water and for the underwater parts. However. at different
water levels the above-water shoals can be submerged below the water. and
vice verse. Therefore. the method for determining the mean diameter of
pebbles by the photographic method, developed for shoals, is applicable
for the processing of underwater photographs.

An underwater survey of the channel bottom was carried out using an apper-
atua constructed by A. I. Shtraukh (Pig. 1). The operating principle for
the apparatus was based on use of a camera hermetically isolated from the
water medium. The survey was made under low water conditions. Precisely
during this time a water thickness with a depth up to 6 m had a very high
transparency. The current velocity in the river varied in the range from
0.5 to 2.5 m/sec. The proposed construction ensured the possibility of a
survey at depths from 1.5 to 6 m. The upper range was limited by the maxi-
mum extent of the area taken in by the frame using a wide-angle objective
with a focal length of 37 an and constituting 0.8 m2. The lower limit -

6 m - was the depth at which with daytime solar illumination there was a

sufficiently good bottom visibility. The use of a synchronized photoflash
hermetically isolated from the water medium makes it possible to use this
apparatus independently of the intensity of solar illumination. which can-
sidersbly broadens the possibility of a photosurvey of the channel bottom.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The apparatus for underwater photography is a framework-arm assenbly in
which is mounted a housing and a rigid coupling in the form of a special
scale coupled to the camera shutter by a system of levers. At the moment
of contact between the object to be surveyed and the special scale the
camera shutter will be triggered. The support with the camera housing

is mounted on a wooden shaft 6.3 m long fitted into a slot in the direct-
ing (guiding) arm. On this shaft there are graduations making it possible
to ascertain bottom depth during the photographic work. The directing arm,
mounted rigidly to the prow of the vessel, made it possible to maintain
the verticality of the objective axis to the surface of the alluvial
shoal, which excluded scale distortion in a case when the photographing
was carried out with a small angle of inclination to the surveyed object.

The apparatus was mounted on a vessel of the "HKH" type with an outboard
motor. Photographing was carried out along longitudinal runs with a dis-
tance between adjacent points of 50 m. The number of runs in the channel
was determined by the width of the latter. The distance between runs was
50-100 m. A detailed survey was made in sectors of rapids; smooth sectors
were investigated in less detail. The points of photographing of the channel
botton were registered on the plan instrumentally using two plane tables.

In all, we obtained about 5,000 frames under water and 2,000 frames in the
shoals.

The subsequent processing of the photographs was carried out under office
conditions. 0n the photographs, using a scale grid for each fraction,
mounted on a "Clara camera" cartographic instrument, we successively dis-
criminated the pebble fractions. The discriminated fractions were outlined
with ink and by means of a "Lsdoga" electronic planimeter we ascertained
the percentage content of pebble fractions of different sizes. Then we
carried out computations of the mean diameter of the pebbles on the photo-
graph. Prom the 300 photographs processed in this way we selected standards
("heys")for the visual determination of the types of pebbles on the photo-
graphs taken in great numbers. This determination was made by an inspection
of the films on a "Hikrofot" instrument and by a comparison of each frame
with the standard for a particular type of pebbles.

The bottom material survey made gave us the possibility of compiling a map
of the distribution of channel pebbly sediments in the channel of a semi-
mountsinous river; this is of very great importance for an analysis of the
conditions for channel formation, computation of its stability, discrimina-
tion of zones of predominant erosion or accumulation of alluvium during
channel-forming discharges, determination of noneroding velocities, etc.

In addition, the results of mapping of bottom neterials in sectors of
rapids are very important in the planning of bottom-deepening work.

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

1..

5.

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

norsuk. 0. A., "Sane Results of Granulonetric and Horphonotric Study
of Alluvial Deposits of Southeastern Transbeykalia." KOLICHESTVWYB
HE‘l‘ODY V GBOGRAPII (Quantitative Methods in Geography). Moscow. led-90
mu, pp 21-26. 1966.

Zudina. N. 1.. "0n the Prohlen of Formation of Channel Deposits of the
Mountsinous Chad“ River." 13215? DOKL. l VSESOYIIZNOY mmuzovsxor
KONPERENTSII PO PROBLM "ZAKONONBRNOSTI PROYAVLBNIYA BROZIOVW I
RUSLOVYKR PROTSESSOV V RAZLICHNYIOI PRIRODN‘IIOI USMVIYAKH" (Sumries
of Reports at the First All-Union Intereollegs Conference on the Prob-
len "Patterns of Appearance of Brosionel and Channel Processes Under
Different Natural Conditions"), Moscow. Ind-v0 H60, pp 69-79, 1972.

Kroshkin. A. N., "Determination of the risen Weighted Diameter of Al-
luviun of Mountain Rivers in Kirgizia," snams POTOKI I come
RUSLOWYB P3013333! (leadflowe and Mountain Giannel Processes), Yere-
van. lad-vo AN Anssa, pp 169-173. 1968.

Lebadeve, N. V.. Chelov. R. 8., "Experience in Use of the Cartonetrie
Method in Study of the Grenulonetry of Channel Alluviun." mmtx
nosx. UN-‘IA 88R. 630cm. (herald of Moscow University, Geographical
Series), No 3. pp 92—91.. 1966.

Iodine, R. V.. "Sorting of Alluviun in the Rivers of Western Georgia."
BROZIYA POCRV I 110st P8018888? (Soil Erosion and Gunnel Process-
es). Moscow, Izd-vo H60. No 4, pp 143-148. 1976.

Sakherova, Ye. 1., Lebedevs, N. V., "Orange in the Mean Grain Size of
Alluviun Along the Length of a Mountain River (in the Example of the

Heywte R1ver)." 1.11011)an I POLBZNYYB ISKOPAYEHYYB (Lithology and
Minerals), No 1, pp 97-109. 1967.

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FIPTIBTR ANNIVERSARY OF THE RDSTOV HEATHER BUREAU
Moscow MBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No ll. Nov 1978 pp 118-119
(Unsigned. submitted for publication 13 March 1978]

[Abstracts The article briefly discusses the his-
tory of development and results of work of the
Rostov Weather Bureau.)

[Text] The Northern Caucasus Kray Heather Bureau, as it was then called,
began its operations at Rostov-on-Don in February 1928. This was the

first tiny weather service institute on the Don and its mission and its
task included the supplying of meteorological information and forecasts

to the workers of the Northern Caucasus Railroad, airlines. agriculture and
the fishing industry in the Sea of Azov. Heather information was sent to
the bureau only twice a day by telegraph from several tens of meteorolog-
ical stations in Severe-Kavkazskiy Kray, and free adjacent territories --
by radio from the Moscow Meteorological Center.

The first weatherman (physicists) at the bureau were N. K. Krylov, Professor
P. H. Yerokhin, r. L. Honosron; l. V. But, V. A. Dahordthio, V. P. Dubentsov
and others arrived somewhat later.

In those years it was difficult for Rostov meteorologists: there was a lack
of actual infornation on weather from outlying areas, a lack of technical
facilities and equipment, a shortage of the necessary specialists; methods
for foreseeing the weather were not developed; local peculiarities of atmo-
spheric circulation and weather were not known. But the years passed and
there was a growthand improvement of the weather service in the country.
including on the Don. In the 1930's Rostov weatherman began to use so—call—
ed frontological analysis of synoptic processes, proposed by the Norwegian
school of weatherman and later improved by Soviet meteorologists. In this
respect such was done by the former chief of the Rostov Weather Bureau, now
Professor I. V. But. These and other scientific innovations considerably in-
creased the quality of all the meteorological information, including weather
forecasting.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the early 1930's two related services were established in the weather
bureau: hydrological forecasts and ngrometeorological information ("yield

services"), whose purpose was the routine collection and dissemination to
interested organizations of information on the state of rivers and hydro-
logical forecasts, on changes in the state or sown agricultural crops in
relation to weather conditions. For the same reasons as for weatherman, it
was difficult for hydrologists and agrometeorologists. And nevertheless
the modest information which they collected and the forecasts which they
prepared enjoyed a great demand from water and agricultural organisations.

During the war years the work of the Roatov Heather Bureau was briefly in-
terrupted, after which a qualitatively new stage began in its history.

This was characterized by the rapid technical and scientific growth of all
its services. During this period the specialists in all fields created

more than 130 scientific and methodological innovations for predicting the
elements of the hydrological regime of water bodies, most weather phenomena
and agrometaorological indices. Some of these scientific studies, such as
predictions of water inflow into Tsimlyanskoye Reservoir, hurricanes and

the choice of the optimum times for the sewing of winter wheat. received

a high evaluation at scientific organizations and their authors (I. H. Cher-
noivanenko, N. K. Parshina, I. V. Svieyuk) were awarded the academic degrees
of Candidates of Sciences.

In the everyday work of weathermen they introduced new, computation methods
for predicting almost all weather parameters, which considerably objectiv-
ised the preparation of forecasts. During the postwar years weatherman re-
ceived the most modern equipment: electronic computers, meteorological earth
satellites, surface radiometeorological radars, high-speed rsdiotelegraph
and facsimile apparatus, automatic transponders, etc. The introduction of
new weather forecasting methods, local scientific developments and tech-
niques had an appreciable effect on increasing the quality of short-range
weather forecasts. For example, whereas in the 1950's their mean probable
success was 78-80%, during the last five years it has been 86-861. Heather-
men have learned relatively well how to predict marked warnings, coolings,
freezings, strong winds, blissarde and frontal continuous precipitation.
But it is still difficult to predict such phenomena as local summer heavy
showers, hail falls and squalls.

Due to the great amount of research work, there is a firmer scientific ba-
sis for the hydrological and egrometeorological forecasts, the probable
success of which is now 85-952, and for short-range forecasts of water
levels in rivers - 98-1001. The mean rayon yields of winter and some
spring crops are predicted with a period 1.5-2 months in advance with an
error of not more than 5-101. The agrometeorologists of the 1930's could
only dream about this.

0

Over a period of 50 years the Rostov weather bureau has introduced a major
contribution to socialist construction in the Northern Caucasus and on the
non. Advance warnings of dangerous and especially dangerous hydrometeorolog-
lcnl phenomena always served as an acute signal for the taking of some

155
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

emergency measures for preventing or reducing materiel losses from the ac-
tion of meteorological phenomena. During the last three years alone the
economic effect from the use of hydroneteorological information. forecasts
and warnings. according to preliminary data. was about 27 nillion rubles.

A particularly great economic effect is obtained from economic measures
taken on the basis of the warnings of hydrologists concerning anticipated
floodings of the floodplain along the mouth sector of the Don when the
waters are driven by the wind. long-range forecasts of the inflow of water
into Tsimlyanskoye Reservoir. warnings of weatherman with respect to sharp
coolings. frosts. forecasts of agrometeorologista concerning spring supplies
of soil moisture. results of wintering of winter crops and grasses. con-
csrning optimum times of sewing and yields of agricultural crops. and also
different kinds of recommendations on agricultural to hniques and equip-
ment to be used. such as may be indicated by the currtxt and expected agro-
meteorological conditions.

Now a large staff of specialists is working in the weather bureau. For the
most part these are young. knowledgeable. work-loving people: V. A. Kirnos.
L. I. Halygonovs. N. Ye. Veremsyenko. N. K. Parshiaa. V. A. Veail'yeva. and
others. who are carrying forward the work of service veterans -- Ye. P.
Goncharowa. N. s. Taran. A. V. Zarevakaya, A. t. nurasova. I. H. Chernoivan-
enko. N. S. Dvurechsnakaya and R. c. Yeritspokhova.

Re are also proud of the scientists who have now gone from our weather but-
eau. those from whom we acquired a love for creative work: Corresponding
lumber 0388 Academy of Sciences Ye. N. Blinova. Doctors of Sciences 1. V.
But'. V. R. Dubantsov. V. A. Drhordahio. A. D. Zamorskiy, L. S. Ninina.
Candidates of Sciences 3. A. Halik. A. H. Basin. all of whom have made a

considerable contribution to the development of hydrometeorological sci-
NICO.

In the coming years Noatev hydromsteorologists and agrometeorolegists are
anticipating new scientific research and more modern and higher-speed
computers. by means of which it is planned to carry out new and improve
old numerical programs for short-range weather forecasting and especially
showers, thunderstorms, hail. precipitation and also long-range forecasts
of individual elements of the hydrological and agrometeorological regime.
In this way still another step will be taken on the path to highly accurate
computed hydrometeorological forecasts.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IIBVIW 0? “DOWN BY A. N. POLEVOY: AOM‘I'EOROLOOICNBSKIYE USLOVIYA I
PRODUKTWNOST‘ KARTOPBLYA V NBCNBRNOZW'YB (AGMTEOROLOGICM. WDITIONS
AND PRODUCTIVITY 0? PMA‘I'OBS IN rue NONCNBRNOM ZONE). LBNINOMD.
GIDRWSOIZDAT. 1978. 118 PAGES

Moscow HBTBOROIDGIYA I GIDRDLOOIYA in Russian No ll, Nov 1978 pp 120-121
[Article by Candidate of Geographical Sciences H. 8. Kulik]

[Text] This reviewed book by A. N. Polevoy generalizes the experiences in
agroneteorological support of potato production. It exaaines recouaenda-
tione on the cultivation of potatoes, taking into account the developing
agroeeteorological conditions, which is of particularly great iaportancs
for the Nonchernosea zone. In this zone plans called for the consolida-
tion of existing and the organisation of new specialised vegetable and
potato ferns. the expansion of potato cultivation neer industrial centers.

Agroastaoroiogists have published a number of studies devoted to the prob-
lees involved in evaluating the correspondence between the climatic condi-
tions in different regions in our country and the biological peculiarities
of the potato crop and asthods for evaluating and predicting sgroasteorol-
ogical conditions for the foraation of the yield of this crop. First of

an we should aention the studies of A. u. Rudenko - VLIYANIYE 25.801011 NA
11me mmmra (Influence of Drought on the Potato Yield) (1958). 0. H.
Popovshaya - HBIODIKA cram AWROLOGICIIBSKIIOI usmvn PROIZMSI'AN-
IYA KAR‘IOFBLYA V ISNML'NYKII OBuS‘I'YAKIl Ye‘rs (Hethods for Evaluating Agro-
ssteorological conditions for the Cultivation of Potatoes in the Central
Oblasts of the European USSR) (1957). Ye. A. 'rsuberbiller - PU‘II row/Ism-
IYA UNZHAYNOS‘I’I “NORMA (Rays to Increase Potato Yields) (1969) and
others. The inortancs of these studies for the agroneteorological support
of potato cultivation is very great. However, during the last decade there
has been a substantial increase in the level of agricultural engineering in
the cultivation of potatoes. new varieties have been introduced, the large-
scale use of eineral fertilisers was begun. the use .of more effective scans
for contending with potato crop diseases and predators has been ensured.

All this requires the inproveeent in the egroaeteorological support of potato
cultivation.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nev types of agrometeorological observations (contectless measurements, aer-
ial investigations, etc.) make it possible to broaden and deepen agrometeor-
ological servicing.

The book by A. N. Polevoy is the first attempt at filling the gaps in the
literature concerning the new requirements on agrometeorological support
of potato cultivation and the present-day possibilities of agrometeorolog-
ical predictions and computations applicable to the potato crop.

The book examines problems characterizing the object of the investigation,
the influence of environmental factors on the growth, development and pro-
ductivity of potatoes. the problems of prediction of yields for different
times in advance: the author gives an evaluation of the possible yield loss-
es during harvesting in connection with the unfavorable weather conditions;
there is a discussion of the spatial-temporal variability of the potato
yields

The author has succeeded in bringing together fragmentary studies on the
evaluation and prediction of the agrometeorological conditions for the
formation of the potato yield in the Nonchernosem zone.

The first two chapters of the book set forth the methods for evaluating the
state of potato plantings and determination of the phases of development
over great areas by means of aerophotometric measurements, as well as meth-
. ods for predicting the phases of potato develOpment.

In examining the rates of formation of individual plant organs. the author

in sufficient detail dwells on the great importance of the rates of develop-
ment for crop yield. Chapter 111 gives a critical generalisation of exist-
ing methods for predicting the moisture supply of potato plantings and
evaluating the current and predicted conditions for yield formation.

The principal content of Chapter IV is an analysis of the influence of
meteorological conditions on formation of the potato yield: on this basis
the author has proposed a method for predicting the mean potato yield for
a territory (rayon. oblast). Also given is an evaluation of the possibility
of predicting the random component of the time series for the mean oblast
potato yield; also given is a quantitative evaluation of the dynamics of
the mean oblast yield through the temporal change in the structure of the
influence of environmental factors characterizing both agrometeorological
conditions and the agricultural techniques and equipment used in cultiva-
tione '

For the long-term planning of the development of agricultural production
it is necessary to predict the crop yield level for the years immediately
ahead. The possibilities of such prediction are set forth in Chapter V.

Chapter VI describes methods for evaluating agrometeorological conditions
during a period of harvesting; it gives the characteristics of the depend-
ence of losses of tubers during harvesting due to unfavorable weather

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conditions. Chapter VII examines the spacial-temporal variability of the
yield of potatoes in relation to the peculiarities of climate of the Non-
chernozem zone. In the Nonchernozem territory the author has discriminated
zones of different climatic variability of the yields of potatoes and com-
putations of synchronous variations of yield have been made.

An evaluation of the spatial and temporal variability of potato yields was
supplemented by data characterizing the degree of favorable agrometeorolog-
ical conditions for the harvesting of tubers.

The book is not without its shortcomings.

Now there are different approaches to a quantitative description of the in-
fluence of environmental factors on the productivity of cultivated plants.
For this purpose the author has made extensive use of the methods of math-
ematical statistics. However. the book does not include work done by the
author on creating a dynamic model of formation of crop yield. One such
model was published by the author. The use of dynamic models for the devel-
opment of methods ror evaluating the conditions for the formation of the
productivity of agricultural crops is an extrenely promising approach to
the evaluation and prediction of agrometeorological conditions. the creation
of dynamic models remains unmentioned by the author. In developing methods
for predicting the potato yield it is necessary to take into account the
importance of the variety structure of potato plantings for the mean oblast
yield in years with different moistening conditions and also a possible de-
crease in crop yield due to damage by predators and diseases.

In general, the book merits a high evaluation. Without question, it will be
read by specialists with interest and profit.

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR (WPICMI. llSl-i ONLY

SBVBNTIBTH BIRTHDAY 0P ALBKSEY NIKOLAYEVICH LBBBDBV
Moscow HETBOROLOOIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No ll, Nov l978 p 122
[Article by a group of comrades]

[Text] 0n 8 July 1978 Doctor of Geographical Sciences Aleksey Nikolayevich
Lebedev. one of the leading scientists in the field of climatology, marked
his seventieth birthday.

Aleksey Nikolayevich dedicated almost forty years of his life in the ser-
vice of climatology.

In 1939, after graduation froa Leningrad State University, he began his
work activity at the Main Geophysical Observatory. In October l9b0 he
entered the ranks of the Red Army and participated in the war with the
Belotinns and in the Great Fatherland Her. For his defense of the mother-
land he was awarded the Order of the Fatherland Her (second degree) and
many combat medals. After demobilization Aleksey Nikolayevich became a
graduate student at the Main Geophysical Observatory, from which he grad-
uated in May 1947.

Since 1950 A. N. Lebedev has continuously headed the Earth Climatogrephy
Section of the Division of Applied Climatology at the “sin Geophyrical 0b-
aervatory. he was the initiator in creating a series of studies on the cli-
mate of the USSR which constitute a multivolune description of the climate
of our country. This series of studies was carried out under the direction
and with the personal participation of Aleksey Nikolayevich. he invested '

considerable work in preparation of the SPRAVOCHNIK P0 KLIHATU 888R (hand-
book on the Climate of the USSR).

A distinguishing characteristic of all his scientific investigations is an
inseparable relationship to the needs of the national economy.

The monograph PRDDOLZHITBL'NOST' DOZHDEY NA TBRRITORII SSSR (Duration of
Rains in the Territory of the USSR) is of broad scientific and practical

importance; it received great praise fro- planning and construction organ-
izations in the country.

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

he has played a major role in the writing of monographic studies on the

earth'n climate. Due to his inexhaustible energy and creative enthusiasm
soviet climatology has been enriched with major works on the climates of
the continents.

The climatography of the earth created at the the Main Geophysical Observ-
atory under the direction of A. N. Lebedev can serve as an example of sci-

entitle and practical research.

"is work PARAHBTRY TROPICHBSROGO KLIHATA DLYA TEKHNICHBSKIKR TSBLEY (Para-
netere of Tropical Climate for Technical Purposes) received merited recog-
nition among many design and scientific research organizations.

In all his research studies Aleksey Nikolayevich devotes particular atten-
tion to meteorological problems - he is constantly refining, working on
and improving research methods.

The multisided scientific activity of Aleksey Nikolsyevich has been highly
recognized by the Party and the government: he has been auarded the order
"Badge of Honor" and the medal "For Illustrious Hark.”

Us willingly shares his rich experience and knowledge with his students.
Under his direction many graduate students have successfully defended their
candidate's dissertations.

The broad vision of the scientist-communist, the deep ideological conviction.
the businesslike approach to solution of the arising problems, his dcdica»
tion and devotion, brought him the love and respect of all his colleagues
and students. Nikolayevich stedev meets his 70th birthday full of strength
and creative thoughts.

In congratulating Aleksey Nikolsyevich on his noteworthy birthday, we wish
him good health and new creative successes.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RORK OF THE ALL-UNION SEMINAR SCHOOL OF YOUNG SCIENTISTS
Moscow WOROLOOIYA I OIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 1978 pp 122-126
[Article by 8h. A. Husayelyan]

[Text] An All-Union Seminar on the Problem "Numerical Modeling of Large-
Scale Atmospheric Processes and long-Range Heather Porecasting" was held
during the period 17-30 October 1977 at Dilizhan (Armenia). Such a seminar

was carried out for the first time and it is seemed that it will be held
periodically.

The seminar school was attended by more than a hundred speakers, reporters
and auditors. There were two discussions on the subjects: "'lhe Predictabil-

ity Problem" end "Physical end Mathematical Difficulties in bong-Range
Heather Forecasting."

The subject setter of the seminar school included the follouing matters:
1) Methods for long-range weather forecasting; 2) Hodeling of large-scale
atmospheric-oceanic processes, general circulation of the atmosphere and
climate; 3) Energy aspects of the earth-atmosphere system. Boundary layer
of the atmosphere. Parsmeterization of nonsdiabstic factors; I.) Predicte-

bility problem; 5) Problem of eerometeorological end hydrophyeicel inform-
ntion.

The experience in modeling of the process of formation of the homogeneous
layer of the ocean on the basis of integration of the equations of hydro-
thernodynamics. very important for long-range weather forecasting, was the
subject of a joint report by Academician c. I. Marchuk, V. P. Kochergin,

V. I. Klimuk and V. A. Sukhorukov entitled "Mathematical Modeling of ‘rur-
bulence in the Surface Layer of the Ocean." The report dealt uith the prob-
lem involved in the mathematical modeling of turbulent transfer processes
in the world ocean within the framework of semiempirical theories. Empha-
sis wss on investigation of the upper turbulent layer of the ocean. Using
the concept of the coefficient of turbulent viscosity, the authors have
constructed a model consisting of two energy equations: the energy of tur-
bulence and the rate of turbulent dissipation. ‘Ihe coefficient of turbulent
viscosity is determined by a simple algebraic expression. Using the propos-
ed turbulent model. the authors examine the physical aspects of formation

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the homogeneous layer in the ocean. 0n the basis of the solations ob~
tainsd for the surface turbulent layer in the ocean. using the energy

equations the authors validate the 0bukhov formulas in combination with the
concept of the Prendtl mixing length for the coefficient of turbulent vis-
cosity. The seasonal variability of the turbulent layer generated by the
model was surveyed on motion picture film. The information obtained in

the course of the numerical experiment was fed out to a microfilming
machine of the Karat type. connected to a BESH-G electronic computer.

using a system for the mathematical support of graphic devices developed

at the Computation Canter Siberian Department 188R Academy of Sciences. As
an illustration of the solution the authors showed a motion picture film
of the evolution of the surface layer over the ocean surface.

In his extremely interesting report entitled “Nonlinear Models in Problems
in Geophysical hydrodynamics" Academician A. H. Obukhov pointed out that

at this stage in the development of the problem of general circulation of
the atmosphere and weather forecasting it is extremely productive to exam-
ine simplified models with few parameters. The letter are obtained by ex-
pending the fields in some system of "control" functions and approxima-
tion of the equations of hydrodynamics by a finite-dimensional system of
differential equations by the Galerkin method. However, it is necessary
that there be retention of the most important characteristics of atmospher-
ic movements, the most important of which is the quadratic nonlinearity

of the equations. As is well known, in 1969 A. H. Obukhov introduced the
concept of systems of the hydrodynamic type (SHT), such dynamic systems for
which: 1) the phase space is finite-dimensional; 2) the phase volume in the
process of motion is conserved; 3) the equations of motion are quadratic-
ally linear; i) there is at least one quadratic positively determined inte-
gral of motion (energy). SHT are convenient models for study of hydrodynam-
ic instability, evidently being one of the factors causing a sudden change
in the weather regime. They demonstrated the results of numerical and lab-
oratory experiments for modeling of both the simplest SﬂT and multieddy
currents which are described by chains of the cascade type. It is demon-
strated that depending on the external parameters the system can be in
different stationary states (characterised in the experiment by differ-
ent inclinations of the eddy axes) and under the influence of different
types of noise or carefully applied externa1_force or removal of the lat-
ter can undergo transition from one state to another.

A group of reports was devoted to the development of ideas and theoretical
developments of G. l. Harchuk on the application of the conjugate equations
of hydrothermodynamics of the atmosphere-ocean-continent system to the
problem of long-range weather forecasting.

For example. in a report by Yu. N. Skiba, for the purposes of predicting
temperature anomalies for periods of up to a season, the author proposed

a hydrodynamic model, using as the prognostic equation the law of conserva-
tion of thermal energy in the atmosphere, the world ocean and in the soil
of the continents. The model assumes the wind velocity in the atmosphere
and the velocity of currents in the oceans to be known and takes into

163
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

account the radiation influxes of heat to the earth's surface. For the

considered formulation of the problem use is made of the theorem of
existence and uniqueness of the generalized solution.

The method for computing the temperature anomalies uses a solution of the
formulated conjugate problem obtained in a definite way.

A report by V. P. Sadokov and D. B. Shteynbok examined the thermal conduc-
tivity equation for mean temperature. for which the conjugate equation is
written. In particular, an evaluation was made of the contributions of
different factors to the temperature anomaly (circulation, influence of
the ocean. other types of heat influx). Some prognostic possibilities of
the method were discussed.

V. P. Sadokov and A. I. vathnik presented the principles of a method for
numerical forecasting for average times for the fields of the SOO-mb iso-
baric surface for the northern hemisphere based on an integration of a
system of conjugate equations in hydrodynamics.

In a large group of reports there was a discussion of problems important
in developing methods for long-range weather forecasting; these related
to the parameteriaation of large-scale nonadiabatic factors and process-
es transpiring in the atmospheric boundary layer.

D. L. Laykhtman, in a review lecture, pointed out that at the present time.
in accordance with a description of the effects of turbulence. four models
have been developed: a) the Kptheory with an a priori stipulation of the
turbulence coefficients. b) the nonlinear K-theory, c) samiempirical
theory. d) a theory based on integration of unsmoothed equations with
parameterisation of the high-frequency part of the turbulence spectrum.
however, the nonlinear K-theory is a rational description of the boundary
layer. satisfactory with respect to the required accuracy and correspond-
ing to modern capabilities of computers. An important part of the problem
in general is the construction of a "splicing" of processes in the boun-
dary layer with processes in the free atmosphere and also a "splicing"

of the planetary boundary layer of the temperate latitudes with the
boundary layer of the equatorial region.

Ye. M. Feygel'son discussed important problems in ideology and practical
methods for taking into account radiant heat exchange in general circula-
tion models. It was shown that when taking radiant heat exchange into ac-
count in general circulation models there must be adherence to the follow-
ing principles: 1) The values necessary for computing radiation must eith-
er be reduced to parametric form using the characteristics generated by
the general circulation model or be stipulated by special models. 2) The
radiant fluxes must be expressed in explicit form through the parameters
of the principal radiationally active anthropogenic substances. 3) The
algorithms for computing the radiant fluxes must in explicit form con-
tain cloud parameters. The speaker dealt in greatest detail on the pro-
cess of functioning of the integral albedo of the atmosphere-underlying
layer system. 164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY

Sh. A. Musayelyan. A. D. Tavadyan and Ye. M. Chechetkins. on the basis of
earlier investigated asynchronous relationships between anomalies of the
cloud cover over the ocean and deviations of air temperature over the con-
tinent from the norm. proposed a method for dynamic-statistical parameter-
ization of the process of the thermal effect of the hydrosphere on the at-
mosphera.

A report by N. N. Kol'chitekiy. K. I. Haslov, 8h. A. Husayelyan and Ye. M.
Chechetkina was devoted to an investigation, employing a very simple hydro-
dynamdc model, of the contribution of convective heat transfer of the ocean
to the formation of the atmospheric temperature field. As the lower boun-
dary condition at sea level use was made of date on the anomaly of convec-
tive heat transfer, computed using the G. N. Hileyko method. Also examined
were the prognostic aspects of the problem.

T. G. Berlysnd devoted his report to a climatological description of the
distribution of cloud cover over the earth. it was pointed out by the
speaker that as a rasult of a climatological generalization of the accumul-
ated observational data for the land and ocean it has been possible to re-
fine and deepen our ideas concerning the cloud cover regime in different
parts of the earth.

A number of reports dealt with spectral methods for investigating the dy-
namics of large-scale atmospheric processes. For example. a report by Cor-
responding Henber USSR Academy of Sciences 6. P. Kurbstkin and V. N. Sinya-
yev was a discussion of a spectral dynamic-statistical model of prediction
of the pressure field up to seven days in advance. The basis for the model
is the idea of "stabilization" of ultralong waves using statistical deter-
mined sources. Nonadiabatic factors are included differentially. in depend-
ence on the scales of movement. The report gave a method for Fourier comput-
ations of the components of nonlinear terms of the equations, making it pos-
sible to reduce to a minﬂmum the expenditures of computer time in the inte-
gration of the prognostic system. Also discussed was the problem of the
"optﬂmmf'basis to be used in spectral formulation of problems in a quasi—
solenoidsl approximation. The paper gave some results of experimental tests
of a prognostic eight-level model for a time up to seven days.

8. A. Hashkovich, in his report. dealt briefly with the history of develop-
ment of linear spectral prognostic models. The speaker examined the prin-
cipal spectral methods for solving nonlinear prognostic equations. Inform-
ation is given on modern spectral models with use of full equations. on
experience with long-term integration of spectral models, and on routine
use of spectral prognostic models.

I. G. Veyl' described a spectral quasisolenoidsl model based on use of ser-
ies in spherical functions and the use of interaction coefficients. Also
discussed were the results of numerical experiments carried out for the
purpose of studying the influence of waves of a subgrid scale on the evo-
lution of large-scale circulation components.

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

In the work of the seminar-school much attention was devoted to statis-
tical methods of analysis and a long-range forecasting of meteorological

fields.

6. V. Gruaa proposed a multiaspect classification of statistical long-range
forecasting methods and methods for the joint use of numerical hydrodynamic
forecasts with statistics. The speaker analysed the present status of use of
statistical automated forecasts in the United States and discussed the
prospects for increasing the advance time of forecasts and the problems
involved in evaluating the predictability of empirical-statistical methods.
The author examined problems relating to the formulation of forecasts in
stochastic form. methods for evaluating their information content, qual-

ity and feasibility of practical use.

In another report by the same author a study was made of the problem of
taking into account information on climatic trends during longrrange fore-
casting. The author discussed some statistical multifactor models of
meteorological processes, which are used for a quantitative evaluation of
variability factors. The paper dealt with the problems involved in evalu-
ating the information content of smoothed temperature characteristics,

and in addition-- possibilities of extremal climatic trends and their
use in long-range forecasting.

A report by 8. Ya. Ran'kove was devoted to a method for the statistical
forecasting of weather with application of the principle of group similar-
ity and possible aspects of its use in meteorology.

Methods for evaluating the success of forecasts were covered in a report
by L. s. Gandin. The use of correct methods for evaluating the success of
forecasts is of great importance in developing methods for making weather
forecasts, especially long-range forecasts. The use of inadequately sound
evaluations not only favors false ideas concerning the success of fore-
casts, but can also lead to the evolution of forecasting methods in an in-
correct direction. The success of the method for making forecasts in the
servicing of specific users must be evaluated using economic criteria. The
report gave examples of such evaluations.

During the work of the seminar school there was repeated discussion of prob-
lems relating to the predictability of atmospheric processes. For example,

a report by H. I. Portus was devoted to the statistical predictability of
climatic changes. The speaker proceeds on the assumption that climate is

a realization of a stationary random process and considers the problem,
arising in such a case, of finding such linear functionals of the values

of meteorological elements which can be predicted with a minimum mean

square error from the values of these elements "in the past." For the

considered processes it was possible to obtain the best predictable charac-
teristics and the corresponding mean square forecasting errors.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a joint report by R. N. Drhnbar~2ade, Ye. M. Dobryshman, H. M. Fortue
and Ya. M. Kheyfets the authors used statistical methods in examining the
problem of interaction between the hemispheres, and in particular, the
problem of air exchange between the northern and southern hemispheres.

In the work of the seminar-school attention was devoted to the problem of
processing and use of nerometeorological and hydrophysical information. In
a joint report by Corresponding Member USSR Academy of Sciences K. Ye.
Kondrat'yev and 0. M. Pokrovskiy there was examination of the following
problems: present status of the global observation system from the point of
view of the interests of long-range weather forecasts and the prediction
of climate: the relationship between ordinary and satellite meteorological
information; validation of satellite data and clarification of their value
for the prediction of weather and climate. Particular attention was devoted
to the problem of the information content of date from space remote sensing
and optimum planning of application of remote sensing methods. The report
gave a concise review of investigations with remote methods for determining
parameters of the atmosphere and the underlying surface, necessary for
long-range weather forecasting and climate predictions.

A report by V. V. Penenko was devoted to the problems involved in the use
of actual information in numerical models of the dynamics of the atmo-
sphere. The speaker reported on some numerical methods for solving problems
in the analysis and assimilation of hydrometeorological information, as
well as its assimilation and use in models of atmospheric dynamics. The
basis for these methods is variational principles, the splitting method
and the methods of the theory of perturbations and optimization methods.
Specifically, the problem requires that the information be employed for
evaluating and adjusting the parameters of the models described by systems
of nonlinear differential equations in partial derivatives. With an unin-
terrupted receipt of information one of the proposed "adjustment" schemes
realizes a feedback between the changes in the state of the system and is
preferable in diagnostic investigations of the model.

A report by L. S. Gsndin examined methods for the numerical modeling of
observation systems. '

There are two fundamentally different approaches to the modeling of observ-
ation systems: statistical and dynamic. The speaker presented the methodol-
ogy of the two approaches, gave a brief outline of their development, and
cited a comparison of their advantages and disadvantages. The statistical-
dynamic approach proposed recently by N. Phillips was also described.

The speaker noted that among the different types of new observations exist-
ing at the present time the most promising is the indirect sounding of

the atmosphere from satellites. In this connection, the report gave a de-
tailed examination of the methods and results of evaluation of observation
systems, including indirect sounding.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'“ FOR 0?VICIAL USE ONLY

The problems involved in the introduction of the results of scientific
research into practical work were given primary importance in the work
of the seminar-school. In this connection leading specialists in the
field of practical weather forecasting were invited to attend. Thus, the
fundamental principles of preparation of a monthly weather forecast were
presented in a report by N. I. averev. The speaker emphasized that during
recent years in the process of preparation of a monthly weather forecast
great attention is being devoted to the role of the underlying surface.
Host of the time-consuming work of forecasters is being acconplished
using electronic computers. For these purposes it has been possible to de-
velop similarity criteria for the compared meteorological fields.

A report by 6. G. Gromova examined the dependence of the success of 3-10-
day weather forecasts on the quality of schemes for hydrodynamic forecast-
ing of the pressure field. His paper presented examples of the use of
numerical forecasts and mentioned the importance of their further improve-
ment.

A number of reports were devoted to the modeling of oceanic processes.

For example, A. S. Sarkisyan, D. G. Seidov, D. G. Raheplinskiy and V. N.
Droadov. in their joint report, examined the problem of modeling of large-
scale circulation of waters in the world ocean.

A report by V. I. Kalatskiy discussed the problems involved in long-range
forecasting of the thermal structure of the active layer of the ocean, the
basis for which is the equation of motion, thermal conductivity equation
and equation for the balance of turbulent energy. The speaker demonstrated
experimental forecasts of the spatial distribution of the thickness and tem-
perature of the quasihomogeneous layer in the North Atlantic in the summer

of 1976 and analyzed the prospects for improving methods for predicting
the characteristics of the active layer in the ocean.

Taking into account the importance of the problem of contamination for Ar-
menia, the agenda of the seminar-school included examination of the problem
of propagation of an impurity in the atmosphere over Armenia. H. Ye. Ber-
lyand presented the principles of the theory of atmospheric diffusion with
its applications to computations and forecasts of air contamination. The
speaker cited a series of results of both an experimental and a theoretical
nature, and in particular, applicable to the conditions prevailing in Ar-
menia.

A report by G. A. Helkonyan examined problems relating to numerical model-
ing of the process of propagation of substances contaminating the atmo-
sphere over Armenia.

In addition to those mentioned above, several interesting reports were pre-
sented on the general problems relating to atmospheric dynamics (L. V.
Rukhovets, Ye. Ye. Kolenkovich, and others).

168
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The work of the seminar-school demonstrated that such a method for the
broad discussion and popularising of ideas on major and important problems
in the science of forecasting the steto of the environment is useful and
pronising. Such seminar-schools favor not only the attraction of capable
youth to the problem of long-range weather forecasting, but also solution
0! the problees developing in the considered subject matter field.

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NOTES FROM ABROAD
Moscow MBTBOlDLOGlYA I OIDRDLOGIYA in Russian No ll, Nov 1978 pp 126-127

[Article by B. I. Silkin]

[Text] Specialists in the field of atmospheric electricity 3. Edgar (Aero-
space Corporation. Los Angeles, California) and B. N. Ternan (Center for
Applied Aviation Technology. United States) presented a report at a con-
ference of the American Geophysical Union. held in San Francisco in Decen-
ber 1977.

The report describes the results of a first investigation of lightning dis-

charges carried out using equipment carried aboard the "DMSP" meteorolog-
ical satellite. There was registry of lightning discharges associated

with neteorological activity along fronts, occurring over all the states

gf the southeastern United States, over the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean
ea.

The analysis revealed that at sunrise lightning is observed most frequently
over the ocean. whereas at sunset it is observed most frequently over the

land.

A nap coepiled on a preliminary basis gives reason for aseuning that on a
global scale during the sunrise period thunderstorms are distributed rather
uniforaly over the earth, whereas during the sunset period there is a ten-
dency for then to be concentrated over the continents. The thunderstorms
occurring in the second half of the day are associated with upward-directed
thermal convection of air masses receiving heat from the sun-heated under-
lying surface of the land.

The Strength typical in the observed lightning is about 10 billion watts.
The duration is approximately 1 usec. However, several times there were
discharges with a strength of about 100 billion watts and a duration up

to 2 meet. Lightning with a strength of 10 trillion watts, earlier report-
ed on the basis of observations from aboard the VBLA satellite, for the
time being has not been registered in these experiments.

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

In July 1977 scientific specialists at NOAA in the United States 3. B. stu-
nrt and J. Prnni established that in the Gulf of Hexlco there is an annular
wanm current. This current is a closed flow of slowly noving water masses
with a diameter of about 225 miles. Their temperature is approximately 1'0
higher than the temperature of the surrounding waters.

Continuing the observations, H. 3. Stuart and J. Proni discovered a rela-
tionship between this current and hurricane Anita, developing on 28 August
1977. As the hurricane moved in the direction of the center of this annular
current the intensity of the hurricane increased. The beginning of the
sharp increase observed here coincided with the moment when the hurricane
entered the "ring" of the current on its western side.

Detailed meteorological and oceanological observations were made both a
south before the hurricane and during its course and after it; this yielded
a great mass of data characterising interaction between the Ocean and the

atmosphere. An important fact was that the sea surface after passage of
the hurricane was reeled by a'c.

The opinion is expressed that hurricanes can draw part of their energy from
warm annular currents and as a result of this process can substantially in-
crease their intensity.

According to the opinion prevailing up to now, in the event of a partial
melting of the glaciers in western Antarctica there should be an increase

in sea level and this rise should be identical in all regions of the world
ocean.

Now J. A. Clark (University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado) and z. s.
Lingl (University of Maine, Orono, Heine) express a new opinion. They in-
dicate a need for taking into account the inevitable changes in structure
of the ocean floor under the influence of the changing loads arising with
transformation of part of the ice into sea water and its redistribution
in different basins.

In addition, in their opinion, the degree of rising of sea level should
also change with time, since the rapid initial elastic deformation of

the ocean bed must be followed by processes of inflow of viscous mater-
ials from the deep layers of the earth, which would gradually compensate

the effect of the new distribution of the weight load on the crust.

In particular, according to the calculations of these specialists, as a re-
sult of melting of the West Antarctica ice done over the period of the.next
1,100 years, near the shores of the Ross ice shelf and Cape Horn the sea
level should fall off as a result of a rise of the ocean floor in the ad-
jacent regions. Near the Hawaiian Islands the rise in sea level must be

25% greater than the average for the entire world ocean. Similarly, in

all regions located distant from the glacier cover, for axesple, along the

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shores of New York State or in the North Sea. the rise in sea level will
lnitinlly be 10-152 greater than the average for the earth. and then. after
approximately a thousand years, will gradually become equal to it.

A portable lidar, used for observing tornadoes and waterspouts, based on

use of the Doppler effect. has been constructed at the scientific research
laboratories of NOAA in the United States.

The new instrument, whose length is 120 cn and whose height is 50 cm, is

easily carried aboard aircraft-laboratories of any type at the disposal
of American meteorologists. The instrument consists of an ordinary SO-cm

telescope and a laser operating on carbon dioxide. It makes it possible.

with a great accuracy, to determine the velocity and direction of movement
of the air captured by the waterspout.

During the first flights in the summer of 1977 this apparatus already made
it possible to study the previously mysterious "double-walled" waterspouts.
It has been established that their diameter can attain 30 m. The structure
of such waterepouts differs, it was found, in that they consist of two

different eddies which rotate at different velocities. but in one and the
same direction.

The velocity of such rotation can attain 90 kn/hour. In section a "double-
walled" waterspout has the configuration of two concentrically arranged
belle. An investigation of such winds, sometimes dangerous for both surface
structures and for aerial transport, is continuing on a major scale with
ever-greater use of the latest instrumentation.

172

FOR 0F7ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICLAL USE ONLY

OBITUARY 0P SERGBY VASIL'YBVICH SOLONIN (1923-1978)
Moscow WOROIDGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 1978 pp 127-128
[Article by a group of comrades]

[Text] Professor Sergey Vasil'ysvich Solonin, Doctor of Physical and Math-
ematical Sciences, rlied after a short but severe illness on 26 June 1978.
He was an outstanding scientist and a leading specialist in the field of
aviation meteorology, head of the Department of Space and Aviation Re-
search Hethods in Hydrometeorology of the Leningrad liydrometeorological
Institute. S. V. Solonin was a member of the CPSU.

S. V. Solonin was born on 6 October 1923 at Sukhinichi in Kalushskaya
Oblast.

In 1952, upon graduating with distinction from the meteorology department
of the hydrometeorologicel faculty, 3. V. Solonin was sent to serve as an
instructor at the uningred llydrometeorologicsl Institute. All his subse-
quent creative and pedagogic activity is associated with this institute.
There he moved along the long route from instructor to department head.
There the creative capabilities and talents of Sergey Vasil'yevich were
developed to the fullest degree. During 1952-1957 he carried out a. whole
series of investigations important for aviation meteorology and aerial
navigation. A brilliant mathematician, Sergey Vasil'yevich during this
period solved a series of problems related to the movement of an aircraft
in the field of a variable wind, the problem of the trajectory of the
minimum flight time for an aircraft (Tsermelo problem), for the first
time applied the Format principle, well known from physics, for calculat-
ing the trajectory for the minimum flight time of an aircraft. In these
studies fundamental scientific findings were coatined with mathematical
refinement. S. V. Solonin was one of the founders of a new scientific di-
rection - navigational meteorology.

In 1959 S. V. Solonin was awarded the degree of Candidate of Physical and
Mathematical Sciences.

Sergey Vasil'yevich was the initiator and propagandist of s new approach
in the scheduling of aircraft traffic for civil aviation which takes into
account the climatic characteristics of the equivalent wind.

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPl’iCML USE ONLY

0n the basis of the results of these investigations, Jointly with 0. G.
.‘larovlyanskiy, in 1962 he published the monograph EKVIVALENTNYY VETER l
l—ETODY YBGO MSCIIETA (The Equivalent Wind and Methods for its Computation).

In 1967, at the USSR hydrometaorological Center, S. V. Solonin defended
his doctoral dissertation, and in 1971 he was awarded the title of pro-
fessor.

The period 1965-1978 in the life of Sergey Vasil'yevich was characterised
by great creative attainments.

8. V. Solonin published a total of more than 130 scientific studies, among

which, as a co-author, he wrote the textbook AVIATSIONNAYA METEOROLOGIYA
(Aviation Meteorology), which has gone through two editions.

During recent years 3. V. Solonin has been actively engaged in problems re-
lating to space meteorology.

Sergey Vasil'yevich was no office scientist. He put all his scientific ideas
to practical application, over a period of years being the scientific direc-
tor of many investigations carried out for the enterprises of the Civil
Aviation Ministry and for institutes of other departments.

The "Automated System for Meteorological Support of Flights" (Avtomstizir-
ovannsya Sistema Meteorologicheskogo Obespecheniya Poletov -- ASMOP). in
combination with the "Automated System for Navigation Computations" (Avto-
matizirovannaya Systems Shturmanskikh Raschetov - assth was developed
under the direction of s. V. Solonin.

s. V. Solonin successfully combined his scientific-teaching activity with
public work. he was repeatedly elected a member of the Party bureau of the
institute. he headed different Party-public comissions.

5. V. Solonin was a major scientific organizer. lie inspired the idea of
centralization and coordination of all the scientific research work in

the field of aviation meteorology. In 1965 he created the Scientific Re-
search Institute of Aviation Meteorology at the Leningrad Mydrometeorology
Institute and in 1912 the Department of Space and Aviation Research Methods
in Hydrometeorelogy and remained its head to the end of his days.

5. V. Solonin generously shared his knowledge and experience with his stu-
dent. More than 20 Candidate's dissertations were prepared and defended
under his direction.

Sergey Vasil'yevich had exceptional purposefulness, persistence, unlimited
devotion to science, enormous love of work, optimism, comlete dedication
to work, and at the same time modesty and good will. lie left this life at
the height of his creative forces, full of scientific innovations, remain-
ing on the job to the last minute.

1710

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The bright Ianory of n great oclentlut. an enthusiast and optimist. teacher.
collcnguo and comrade will forever remain in our hearts.

COPYRIGHT: "Motocrologiyn 1 gidrologiya". 1978

5303
C80: 1866 -END-

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY