APPROVED FOR RELEAOE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00000R000‘I 00010003-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010053-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY

JPRS L/8246

26 January 1979

THE ANTARCTIC: MAIN RESULTS OF
20 YEARS OF RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC

U. S. jOlNT MLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00010053-1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

'lhe contents of this publication in no my represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGIT MUS A!!!) REGULATIORS GOVERNING WWI? 01’
MATERIALS RBPNDUCED 113nm mums THAT DISSEHDWI'ION
OP TRIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED POROFPICIAL USE ONLY.
m on - I
W! nocuuummu Jenner no.
JPRS L/82 4 6

 

O-MWW

m ANMRC'I'IC: mm RESUME 0F 20 YEARS OF RESEARCH IN
THB MARCHC

two
0. A. Aveyuk (editor)

M Ono-use- am as W
Joint Publications Research Service

1000 North Globe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

laMdMaw-aumu

1a m Ines
mm: W ITCIII IZWHERIYA WARMIICI 2A 20 LE, Moscov, 1978

“man-tease“

The report contains a collection or papers read at the 2nd All-thion Conference
on Antarctic Studies. These papers bring to light the are important results

or 20 years of investigations and their application in exploiting the southern
polar regions as well as pointing out mrther directions in antarctic research.
Articles on nteorology, hydrology, fishing and human adaptation are included.

3’. H AI“ 0. w
USSR Geophysics
Antarctica Hydrology
International Cooperation Biological Resources
Meteorolog nu-n Adaptation
a W van.

nest-um... '03, 6A, 61', 8A, 80, 88, 85

Q to“ M I M as” ﬁle is."
hr Official Use Only. United WCMSSIPIED
“be: of Copies Available Free Jras . ‘ M” 0" h“
UNCLASSIFIED
“m “We-m moon-enrol»
m ans-m

mace-lune
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

asks L/8246
26 January 1979

Tlf ANTARCTIC: MAIN RESULTS OF
20 YEARS OF RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC

Moscow ANTARKTIKA: OSNOVNYYE ITOGI IZUCHBNIYA AN'I'ARRTIKI 2A
20 LET in Russian 1978 signed to press 23 May 78 pp 5-26,
51-74, 82-110, 132-143, 226-267

(Selected chapters from book edited by 6.1x. Avsyuk, Izdatel'stvo
'Nauka', 950 copies, 276 pages]

CONTENTS PAGE
Twenty Years of Soviet Research in the Antarctic
(re. s. manna, L. I. mhrovin) 1

Antarctic Research Cooperation on International Level nailed
(re. I. TastikOV) I0......00.0.00...0.000IODOO-OOOOOOOOOOOIOO. 20

Status and Prospects of Ibteorological Research in Antarctica
(A. I. vubeumuy) .QOOOQOOIUIOOQODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOIOOQ0.0I 29

Results of Soviet Research in the Southern Ocean
(A. P. m.m1k°v) I.OOIOOOOOOOIOOOOIOOOIO00....OOCO‘OOOOOOOO. 60

Soviet Antarctic Geological Research Accomplishments Sunrized
(“0 a. mﬂch) .0OOOIOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOIOOOOOO ”

Features of Atmospheric Circulation in Antarctica and or the
Circulation of Southern Ocean Haters

(A. “0 may) oeonsosooosseessoseeonesoosossoooeseeesosooeeeso 9“

Study of the Biological Resources or the Southern Ocean
(A. .80 mm, To Go Mbm) oeacesoeaeooseeeooeaoseooeoo 115

Runs Adaptation and Health in Antarctica
("I 80 um”, et ‘1.) .0000...C0.00.0000000000QOOOOOOOOOOOO. 130

State 01' than I-anity Under the Btu-on: Conditions of Antartica
(R. I“. mnmtov, Qt u) OOOOOOICIOOOOOOOOOOOOIOIOQOOOIOOOO 1&5

-a- u-ussn-zrouo)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010053-1

‘ FOR OFFICIAL {BE OHLY

PUBLICATION DATA

TEE MIC: MI]! RES

English title
YEARS OF RESEARCH IN TE

Russian title : WWW: OSIIOVNYYB
mm mm 2.

Author (a) :
‘ Editor (0) : G. A. Avnyuk
Publishing Home : Mun

Place of Publication : ﬂoscov

Date of Publication : 1978

Signed to put. : 23 by 78

Cabins : 950

comma : Imul'ntvo "m", I

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-OOOSORMO‘IOOOiOObS-‘l
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEM! YEARS OF SOVIEB RESEARCH IN THE WARC‘HC

Noscow ANTARKTIKA: OSNOVNYYB 11061 IZUCHBNIYA ANTARKTIXI 2A 20 LET. DOMY
mssn in Russian No 17. 1978 pp 5-19

[Article by Ye.s. Korotkevich and L.I. Dubrovin]

[Text] Systenatic comrehensive Soviet research in the southern polar region
was begun in association with preparation for and the proceedings of the
International Geophysical Year (HOG).

Participants in the First Soviet Antarctic Expedition diseabarked onto the
icy continent from the expeditionary vessel "Ob'" on 5 January 1956. They
were the first Soviets to have stepped onto the shores of the Antarctic Con-
tinent. On 13 February the State flag of the Soviet Union was raised over
the first Soviet scientific coup in Antarctica, called Hirnyy in honor of
one of the ships of the expedition of P.F. Bellingshausen and N.P. Lararev.
and systelatic scientific observations began in the observatory. The paths
of the first scientific sled and caterpillar convoys led into the inner
regions of the unexplored continent, the routes of scientific research flights
led over the continent and ocean. and along the coastline of Antarctica to
the east and west of Hirnyy. the routes of expeditionary vessels, on which
were made conprehensive oceanographic and cartographic studies.

Soviet expeditionary research on the southern polar region has represented
a systesetic continuation of the job begun by Russian sailors, who discovered

the icy continent. and the accouplishnent of the intentions of leading doaestic

scientists who have long been interested in the nature of Antarctica. As
early as in the 1760's, thirty years before J. Cook's second expedition and
allost 60 years before the expedition by P.P. Bellingshsusen and H.P. Lararev.
the great Russian scientist H.V. Lononosov hypothesised that in the southern
polar region there exist islands and e "aainlsn ," and gave an idea of the
physical geographical features of these regions brought about by cossographic
factors. At the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries to Ant-

arctica were devoted studies by such famous Russian scientists as A.l. Voyeyhov

and Yu.ﬂ. Shoksl'skiy.

Soviet scientists had planned to begin expeditionary research in Antarctica
as early as the beginning of the 30's. The first plan for the Soviet

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'e
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Antarctic Expedition was developed on the eve of the Second International
Polar Year (1932-1933). Suggested for employ-eat for expeditionary work

was the whaling flotilla of the Kamchatka Joint Stock Coepany. According to
the study plan worked out, called for were exploration of the coast of the
Antarctic Continent and aerial photography by means of an airplane with its
base on a ship, free Enderby Land in the west to the southern half of Ross Sea
in the east. In keeping with an extensive program, it was proposed to lake
oceanographic and hydrographic studies. as well as glaciological, geological
and geonorphologlcal investigations. Meteorological and aerological observa-
tions were to have been wade throughout the entire voyage. Appointed as parti~
cipants in the expedition were the famous polar researcher R.L. Saloylovich,
Oceanographer A.P. Laktionov and Geologist H.H. Yer-clayev.

Unfortunately, this expedition to Antarctica did not take place, since the
authorities of the Union of South Africa refused to render the necessary
assistance to the whaling flotilla. In particular, they refused to supply
the flotilla with fuel.

Realization of the plans for expeditionary research in Antarctica becsne
possible only after the Great Patriotic Her. Our scientists began to lake
scientific observations in antarctic waters on vessels of the Soviet "Slave"
[Glory] whaling flotilla in 1946. But extensive conprehensive scientific
research covering both the Southern Ocean and the Antarctic Continent began
to be carried out by Soviet antarctic expeditions only 1v years later.

An organizing coalittee in the USSR Acader of Sciences headed by 1.0.
Papanlu. prior to the proceedings of the H06, developed an operations plan
for the Soviet antarctic expedition. In July 1955 the decision was node to
arrange for the USSR Academy of Sciences Coaprehensive Antarctic Expedition.
General leadership of the expedition was entrusted to the Presidiun of the
USSR Acadeay of Sciences. and organisation of the expedition to the northern
Sealane Central Adsinistration. which was at that tine under the jurisdiction
of the Arctic Scientific Research Institute. Associates of this institute,
having had such experience in conducting scientific research in the arctic.
took an active part in preparing for the expedition.

For the purpose of coordinating plans and programs for expeditionary work
and for nonitoring their fulfill-ant, the Presidium of the USSR Acadeny of
Sciences on 16 Septsnber 1955 created the Council on Antarctic Research.
Appointed as neabera of the council were distinguished scientists and di-
rectors of institutes and institutions having taken part in antarctic re-
search.

Later. on 10 October 1958. the Council on Antarctic Research was abolished
and in place of it. under the auspices of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences. was
organised the Interdepartnental Coalission on Antarctic Studies (HKIA). This
was caused by the transfer of all functions relating to organization of the
expedition froe the Acadesy of Sciences to the jurisdiction of tha'ussn Hin-
istry of the Haritiae Pleet. The Iain goal of the HKIA reaainad coordination
of scientific research on the Antarctic Continent and the Southern Ocean.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the beginning the USSR Academy of Sciences Comprehensive Antarctic
Expedition (NAB) consisted of two sections-continental and sea. These
were essentially two independent expeditions. The first performed studies
on the continent year round. and the second conducted research from expedi-
tionary vessels in coastal antarctic waters and on the open sea. After the
third expedition the asount of scientific research performed on ships was
considerably reduced. as the result of which the sea section ceased to exist
as an independent expedition. and beginning with the fourth expedition
(1958-1959) only the naval detachaent was working aboard ship.

A further change in the structure of the expedition took place in 1962,

when the Eighth SAB [Soviet Antarctic Expedition] was divided into winter
and seasonal expeditions. The staff and structure of the winter expedition
resained basically as before. Enlisted for the seasonal expedition were all
tease having conducted their studies during the susmer season. regardless of
whether they worked on board ship or on the continent.

In 1958 organization and leadership of the SAB were entrusted to the Arctic
Scientific Research Institute. which from this tine began to be called the
Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute (AANII). At the sane tine
began to be published the INPORHATSIONNYY BYULLBTEN' SOVBTSKOY ANTARITICEESKOY
EKSPBDITSII [Information Bulletin of the Soviet Antarctic Expedition]. and

the collection PROBLEM? ARKTIKI [Problems of the Arctic] produced by the in-
stitute received the title PROBLEM! ARKIIKI I ANTARKTIKI [Problems of the
Arctic and Antarctic]. Soon after completion of the proceedings of the first
expedition began to be published TRDDY SOVETSKOY ANTARKTICHESKDY EKSPEDITSII
[Proceedings of the Soviet Antarctic Expedition]. and from 1960 the collection
ANTARKTIKA [Antarcticsl.‘

For 19 years the main expeditionary vessel of Soviet antarctic expeditions
was the specially equipped expeditionary vessel "Ob'" built in 1956. Parti-
cipants in the expedition and cargo were transported on board this ship to
Antarctica, and scientific observations were asde on board it on the open

sea and along the coast of the icy continent; in addition, it was used for
piloting other vessels through the ice. In 1975 to replace the "0b'" came
the scientific expeditionary vessel (NBS) "Mikhail Sonov" (fig 1), specially
built for Soviet antarctic expeditions. In 1967 the AANII scientific research
vessels (le's) ”Professor Vise" and "Professor Zubov" began to take part

in antarctic expeditions. In addition to these vessels have been used diesel
electric sotor ships of the ice class, passenger motor ships. tankers, re-
frigerator ships and cargo notor ships. In recent years the scope of studies
and the staff have been increased to such an extent that sore than five
vessels are required to provide for an expedition. for example, the 22nd

*This collection is prepared by the Interdepartmental Com-lesion on Antarctic
Studies.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Antarctica o

x was sent to
“ the diesel electr .
p "Bnohkiriyn‘ an

:5 "Professor
ad “Punching,“ the pnoaen

no tanker "Celendzhik."

:uterpiilar vehicles (tractors, towing vehicles, cross country vahiclea) are
mod for ad route reoenrch and various transportation nocd . Yor long
'ripo through interior regions of the icy continent the powerful "Khor‘kov—
thanki“ snow cats first delivered to Antarct cu in 1958 have shown themselves

1-111 good.

to be eopec
purpoaea. too. each as for on
for unloading veaaela. for tr

    

Figure 2.

Tho—Story house at lenyy Station

'n the spring of the acne year (in October) at Bunger'
f "likes Land was created the Oazta station. In 1957 in the in

f Beet Antarctica were opened the Voetok-l and

net regions
t the end of the year Voatok Stati

Kooeonol'akaya stations. and
on, located in the area of the South

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 3.

Geo-agnetic Pole. In February 1958 in the central part of East Antarctica
appeared one sore station--Sovetakaya—-and in the middle of December a sled
and caterpillar convoy. traveling lore than 2100 kn, reached the most redote
point of the continent from the shore, where the tenporary Pole of Inacceesi-
bility station arose. So. for the purpose of taking scientific observations
according to the prostate of the M06, Soviet antarctic expeditions during the
period 1956-1958 created eight stations. and only two of then were located on
the coast. while the remainder were situated in the lost hard to reach regions.
characterized by exceptionally severe natural conditions.

In March 1959 on the coast of Dronning Maud Land was opened the Lazsrev station.
and two years later in the sauna area the Novolazarevskaya station. In February
1962 in lnderby Land began construction of the Holodezhnaya station. It

began to operate steadily in January of the following year. This station has
been expanded each year and it soon was transforned into one of the largest
scientific settlenents in Antarctica, with a powerful radio center. rocket
sounding station and computer splendidly equipped with scientific instruaenta-
tion areas and laboratories. In 1971 Holodethnaya (fig 3) became the Soviet
Antarctic Meteorological Center (Ma) and the train base for Soviet antarctic
expeditions. Then were opened two more stations: in 1968 the Bellingshauaen
station on King George Island (Rsterloo) , and in 1971 the Leningradskaya sta-
tion or: the northern coast of Victoria Land.

 

Yigure 3. General View of Holodezhnaya Station

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to longtern operating scientific stations, Soviet antarctic ex-
peditions created temporary and seasonal stations, which have been used to
make shortterl stationary observations or have served as bases for seasonal
field studies. Pot example. in the winter of 1960 in the area of Hirnyy three
tesporary stations were in operation for note than two aonthsx Brushes (on
the West Ice Shelf). Mir (on Drygalski Island) and Pobeda (on glacial Pobedn
Island). In 1972 the Sodruzhestvo base was created on Anery Ice Shelf , to
provide for an extensive group of geological-geophysical and cartographic
studies which continued for three suner seasons. In 1973 the temporary
Rusekaya station arose in west Antarctica on the coast of Marie Byrd Land.

Although 136 years had passed since the aomnt of the discovery of Antarctica
by the First Russian Antarctic Expedition of LP. Bellingshausen and H.P.
Lazarev to the beginning of the mo. and the icy continent had been visited
during this ties by nany expeditions fros various countries, very little was
known about the nature of the South Pole continent and antarctic waters. The
outlines of the continent's shores had been entered approximately on charts
for a great distance. The thickness of the ice cap was estimated from in—
direct data. Even the altitudes of the surface of a great portion of the
continent were unknown. Measurements of the thickness of the ice had been
Iade at one cooperatively not too great coastal section-win Dronning Hand
Land—by the Norwegian-Swedish-nritish expedition (1969-1951). No data existed
on the relief of the bedrock surface of the continent, alnost conpletely
concealed by a thick ice cap. Geologists of various expeditions had aade only
a reconnaissance exploration of relatively not too great areas—of not more
than three to seven percent of the continent's area free free ice. Regarding
the regions of East Antarctica where Soviet geologists later launched their
studies it was known only that they are conposed of ancient gneisses and
distinctive granitoids. At this tine geological charts of these regions did
not exist; in place of then on geographical sketches were indicated only
points where these rocks had been discovered. At this tine a total of only
a few scientific stations were in operation on the coast of Antarctica, and
there were none at all in the interior of the continent; therefore. estimates
of the climate of Antarctica, especially of its inner regions. were also lads
chiefly fron indirect data.

Very little was known also about geophysical phenomena'in this section of

our planet. By this tine scientists had at their disposal only frsgaentary
infornation relating to geonagnetisn, but even then there existed no precise
idea of the pernanent nagnetic field, nor of the spatial distribution of mag-
netic variations. There was entirely no knowledge about the gravitational
field in Antarctica and about its seismicity, not to speak of phenonena in
the ionosphere and phenonena associated with cosnic rays. Little was known
about the hydrologic and ice cycle of antarctic coastal waters or about the
fauna and flora of Antarctica. Therefore it is no wonder that during the
period of the HOG. when various stnlies were launched in the southern polar
region. conducted in coordination by expeditions from 12 countries employing
modern technical facilities and equip-ant, such an extensive amount of sci-
entific data was collected in Antarctica as had not been able to be collected
over all the previous 100 odd years since the discovery of the icy continent.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0“ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the very first days of operation of Soviet antarctic expeditions
reconnaissance explorations had been begun, by enploying sviatloa. of

regions adjacent to the coastal bane. in almost every flight Soviet re-
searchers gained new information. For example. as the result of a flight on
16 January [956. from Hirnyy along the coast eastward to Knox Coast. were
discovered many previously unknown islands and outcrops of bedrock. and
alterations were observed in the contour of the Shackleton Ice Shelf. During
flights into the inierior of the continent it was determined that in the
inner regions of East Antarctica the altitude of the ice cap's surface
reaches 3500 to 6000 m. in Davis Sea and regions adjacent to the Southern
Ocean regular aerial reconnaissance began to be carried out. which in the
first few years of the expedition's work was carried out monthly. including
during the winter period. Later. aerial reconnaissance began to be performed
during the navigation period and in the area of other coastal stations.

Since the very first few expeditions there has been extensive development in
aerial photographic survey work. the data of which has made it possible to make
reliable charts of many sections of the coast and of mountain regions in the
interior of the continent. By means of aviation participants in expeditions
have made geological. glaciological. gravimetric. magnetic, meteorological.
biological and other observations. and in recent years radar measurements of
the thickness of the ice cap.

There has also been extensive development of scientific research by means of
ground transportation. Soon after completion of construction at hirnyy. in
spite of the late fall period. in April-May 1956 was completed the first
intrarontinental sled and caterpillar trip into the interior of the continent.
for a distance of 375 km. As a result of this trip vss obtained the first
information on the thickness of the ice cap. the relief of the glacier bed.
climate features. and a series of data on the nature of the glacier slope
southward of Hirnyy. At the end point of this route was created the Pionsr-
sksys station. This journey. traveled under incredibly difficult conditions.
formed the basis for research on the interior regions of East Antarctica by
means of sled and caterpillar convoys. Participants in these trips as a

rule made the following studies: seismic sounding of the ice cap. determina-
tion of the altitudes of its surface. magnetic. gravimstric and meteorological
observations. and glaciological research. In addition. sic and caterpillar
convoys were used also for the purpose of creating and supplying intraconti-
nsntsl scientific stations.

Later. in 1957, several sled and caterpillar trips had already been completed.
and one convoy at the end of the year reached the area of the South Geomag-
netic Pole. where the Vostok station was created. The Third Antarctic Bx-
psdition expanded even more extensively cross-country research in the interior
of the continent. Its participants completed a journey from Hirnyy to the
area of the Pole of Relative lasccessibility. traveling a routs more than
2100 km long. As a result of scientific observations made on this journey.
interesting information was obtained on ths thickness of the ice cap and the
relief of the glacier bed. as well as data on nstsorology and gsomsgnstism

in the vast expanses of last Antarctica.

8
FOR OFFICIAL US£ ONLY
FUR (IFFICIM. "5|: ONLY

Participants in the fourth SA]: in the sun-oer season of 1959-1960 conplated
the intracontinentsl Hirnyy - South Pole - Voetok Station journey, out-
standing in terns of its significance (length of the route about 6000 kl).

On this journey for the first ties were used the powerful "lazar’kovchanka"
snow cats.

0f the other most significant sled and caterpillar journeys, from the sci-
entific standpoint. nention should be node of the journey fro- Vostok Station
through the Pole of lnaccessibility to Holodeshnaya Station. cospleted in
1966, and also the journey undertaken by the 12th sat in the susaner season
of 1966-1967 along the Holodezhnaya - Pole of lnaccessibility - Plato lntra-
continental Station (USA) - hovolazarevakaya route. During the course of 89
26-hour periods researchers surmounted more than 3600 Ian. and the route
passed nainly through areas not previously visited by nan.

In the period from 1971 through 1973 extensive conprehensive geological-

geophysical and cartographic-geodetic work (employing aerial photography)

was perforated in the area of Amery Ice Shelf. In 1976 on the Pilchner Ice
Shelf was created the teeporary Drushnaya station. representing a base for
carrying out a wide complex of geological-geophysical and cartographic-geo-
detic studies in the vast region of the Pilchner and Rome ice ahelfs. the
rock nassifs surrounding then. and the adjacent water area of Heddell Sea.

So. during the past 20 years cross-country research on the continent (geologi-
cal-geographic, aerial photographic surveys. biological, glaciological. etc.)
by Soviet antarctic expeditions has been carried out along the greater part

of the coast and in the interior regions of East Antarctica contiguous to it.
During the period of this work geological land groups surveyed rock outcrops
on the coast and in the interior of the continent. Soviet scientists having
taken part in foreign antarctic expeditions surveyed nany regions of Heat
Antarctica and of the islands situated near it.

The routes of sled and caterpillar convoys of Soviet antarctic expeditions
have led along the vast expanses between Novolasaravskaya Station in the
west and the Himyy - Vostolt - South Pole line in the east. 0n the seat
difficult journeys over the boundless snow-covered expanses of the central
regions of the Antarctic Continent. at high altitude and in constant freezing
weather. in 20 years sled and caterpillar convoys have traveled a total of
sore than 80.000 kn. During this period Soviet antarctic expeditions have
lads sore than 55 long and short journeys. In then have participated about
500 people. and the duration of these journeys has totaled nore than 2500
26-hour periods. i.e.. sore than six and one half years.

During the past 20 years free on board the scientific research vessels
"0b'." "lane." "Professor Zubov.“ and "Professor Vite" about 1500 oceano-
logical stations were set up in the Southern Ocean. as well as at lower
latitudes of the global ocean. and ears than 1000 stations fro. on board

the flagship of Soviet antarctic expeditions. the expeditionary vessel ”Ob'.”
At these stations were sade standard neuuresents of water tenparature at

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (IFHCIAI. I33}: "hi3.

(lifforont dcpths. and from the same levels were taken nnmplas of voter for
hydrologic analysis. At almost 700 polntn acre taken specincns of rocks

from the ocean floor. and at more than 100 points inatrunent observations
were made of the swell and currents. along with optical hydrologic observa—
tions. in addition. at many points biological spccincnn were taken (plankton.
benthon and ichthyofsunn). ?or a distance of more than 300,000 nilas echo
aounding measure-ants \sro aaae fro- thc "Oh'." the results of vhich were
used to asks nautical charts; for a distance or almost 100.000 ailas samples
of sea water var: collected for the suspended latter contained in it. On
expeditionary vessels of Soviet antarctic cxchitions were made systerztic
Icteorologicoi and actinonctric ohaerVationa. ontological sounding was carried
out. actinoaatric sounding balloons and probes for studying cosaic rays in
the stratosphere have been sent up. rocket sounding of thc ataoaphere has
been porter-ad, and Iagnctir :Lgcrvations and a number of other utudias hava

bean lads.

The scientific research prograas of Soviet antarctic expeditions have ax~
pandcd nVcry year (fig 6).

I ' -- « . -.“a-aa£l0ﬂ.¢

.5'. y } 3k ' noun-“Oy-

##-
____—-,_——~.

Gus-I'm- na-

 

Pigura a. Chart of Operations of Soviet Antarctic lxpaditiona

[Key on folloving page]
10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l-«ocean research areas; 2--key oceanographic sections; 3-routes

of key sled and caterpillar research convoys; b-routss of key research
flights: 5-routes with trigonoaetric leveling; 6-«aerial photogrephic
survey erce; 7--srees and some routes for radar sounding of ice cap:
Boogeolegicsl research areas (in Heat Antarctica. sections surveyed by
Soviet geologists working on the staff of foreign expeditions); 9.10--
Soviet and foreign stations at which Soviet representatives have worked:
9-active; lO-closed; ll-tenporery stations: 2--erees of detailed
aerial survey and oceanographic studies

Key:

1. To Cape Town 15. Mir

2. atonington Island 16. Pobeds

3. Bellingshsuesn 1?. Oasis (Dobrovol'skiy)
b. Aladrante Brown 18. Pionerskeya

5. Drurhnays l9. Vostok-l

6. Lazarev 20. Koasoaol’sksye
7. Novolarerevsksye 21. Byrd

8. Holoderhneye 22. Vostok

9. Pole of Insccessibility 23. Russkeya
lO. Alundsen-Scott 2L. HcHurdo

ll. Sovetskeya 25. Vanda
l2. Sodruthestvo 26. Leningradsksya
l3. Druehbs 27. To Christchurch
l6. Hirnyy “

In recent years year-round observations have been made at six Soviet antarctic
stations (Holoderhneya. Hirnyy, Vestok. Novolarerevekeya, lelliogeheusen and
Leningradskays). Cross-country field studies have been Iade chiefly in
Dronning Maud Land, HacRoberteon Land and Princess Elizabeth Land, and in

the interior of the continent. in the territory between the Hirnyy observatory
and Vbstok Station.

Greatest attention is being paid to e group of studies in aeroeeteorology,
which includes the follouing kinds of studies: aeteorological and actino-
eetric observations, aerological sounding. weather service, reception of
satellite inforeation, rocket air sounding. radar observations of aeteor
trails (Ila [expansion unknounl), observations of radioactivity of the ateo-
sphere. observations of noctilucsnt clouds, and ozonolstric observations.

Continuous. as well as special sporadic. observations are being Isde in a
nusber of divisions of geophysics: geoesgnetic. studies of the ionosphere
and of radio wave propagation, observations of cos-dc rays, terrestrial and
stratospheric sounding, seisaie observations and observations of brief-period
fluctuations in Earth's electrolagnetic field. In addition, geophysical
lethods are being extensively e-ployed in glaciological, geological and
other research.

Glaciological observations are being eade at aleost every station and on
journeys. In recent years at the Vbstok station deep drilling of the ice

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USr: uh‘i."

cap is being perforned by the thawing-through method. Since 1975 glacier
and hydrologic research enploying drilling of the ice cap hes been taking
place in the area of the Novolszarevskays station.

Oceanographic research has been performed in recent times chiefly from on
board expeditionary vessels. to not too great an extent at coastal antarctic
stations. and. in add!tion. by gathering and analyzing satellite information
and the data of aerial eurveys of the ice.

In the last 20 years highly valuable informs! ion has been obtained on the
structure of the Atmosphere and s nudwr of important conclusions have been
drawn which have disclosed the laws of overall atmospheric circulation and
have been conducive to improving forecasts of the weather and climate of the
southern polar region. The meceeses achieved along this line in the first
decade have been reflected fairly completely in studies by Soviet researchers.

The first decade of neroneteorological research in Antarctica has been called
by V.A. uugayev the period of descriptive clinatology. when each report on
meteorological phenomena was new. often sensational. Research in recent years
has been distinguished by a tendency to explain the interaction of factors
responsible for specific meteorological phenomena. to give than a quantitative
estimte, which. is required for shifting to a numerical description of the
climate and making weather forecasts on s longterm basis. For example, from
rocket sounding data at the Holodethnsys station it has been established that
seasonal variations in tewerature in the upper mesosphere are of an opposite
nature as compared with the stratosphere. A relatively high temperature in
the ":per mesoaphere is usually recorded around mid-winter, and the lowest

in th: sill-ct, which is caused by the heat balance of these levels. warming
in the stratosphere and cooling in the mesosphere alternate in synchronise.

An analysis of observations over many years has made it possible to reveal
the difference in the content of ozone in the atmosphere in the Arctic and
in Antarctica during the course of the year and to understand the reasons
for this phenomenon.

It has been established that the cooling role of Antarctica so a continent
extends only to the troposphere of East Antarctica and to the water area of
the Southern Ocean contiguous to it. The drift and circulation of cold air
masses from Antarctica are localized for the following reasons: 1) the
smaller sire of the atmosphere above Antarctica resulting from its cooling;
u equals 99 x 7 x 1015 kg. which is 1.6mm smaller than above the Arctic;
2) the specifics of the circulation mechanism above Antarctica, consisting
in the inflow and descent of air over the high-mountain section and its
flow at lower levels to the periphery. with subsequent drawing in of a great
portion of this air flow into the antarctic circulation cell.

Another yardstick for measuring the cooling influence of Antarctica in the
discharge of snow and ice into the Southern Ocean. as the result of which
cooling of the surface air layer takes place. Just for thawing :he anew dis-
charged into the ocean l X 93 X 1011 J are consumed.

12
30R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A balance chart has been made for the hydrologic cycle in Antarctica. The
total annual advection of moisture to the continent has been determined at
2600 km3. of uhieh 2500 hm3 are consumed for precipitation. The ice evapora-
tion vapor (160 kn3) is apparently drawn off by the runoff. Thus. the
climatic runoff is about 270 ha3 of water per year.

As of the present time sufficiently reliable charts have been made for al-
most the entire continent. based on serial photographic survey data for
coastal regions and on data of cross-country airborne barometric leveling
for interior regions. Now the problem is to refine and detail these charts
for especially important sections, and it is necessary to update charts in
regions of considerable changes in glacial shores. As the result of the
cartographic work of Soviet antarctic expeditions and of aerovisusl and
ground surveys. more than 800 new geographical sites named by Soviet re-
searchers have appeared on maps of Antarctica.

Since the start of the work of Soviet antarctic expeditions much attention
has been paid to geological-geophysical studies At the present time it

has become possible to make an extensive summary of the geology of Antarctica
and a series of geological and geophysical charts.

There has been especially extensive development in recent years in compre-
hensive geological-geophysical, aerial photographic and geodetic studies in
Antarcticainthe area of the Amery and Lambert glaciers and in the Prince
Charles Mountains. These have been distinguished not only by comprehensive-
ness (topographical. geodetic. gravimetric. magnetic, seismic and geological
studies), but also by the use of the latest techniques and equipment. In
particular. seismic depth sounding has been carried out. as the result of
vhich a cross section has been obtained of Earth's crust and mantle surface
for a distance of 600 km. A detailed geological and a series of geophysical
charts have been drawn. A detailed study of the profile of the upper Protero-
zoic complex of the crystalline basement has demonstrated its high saturation
vith iron ore levels. A large-scale investigation of Psrmden deposits in

the area of beaver Lake has made it possible to construct their complete
profile. in which more than 60 coal beds have been counted. The experience
of these comprehensive studies has demonstrated their high effectiveness.
Since 1976 similar research has been begun in the area of Heddell Sea, and

it will be extended later to other regions of Antarctica.

Of course. the presence of a continent in the southern polar region creates
favorable conditions for the study by means of ground observations of various
electromagnetic phenomena in the upper atmosphere and in the space about
Barth--Berth's magnetosphere. As the result of stationary geophysical ob-
servations over many years. including research on geomagnetism, the iono-
sphere. low-frequency radiation of the magnetosphere, polar auroras. and
cosmic rays, new phenomena have been discovered. associated vith the effect
of solar activity on the atmosphere and the space about Earth. In particular,
regular relationships have been established between the sectoriel structure
of the interplanetary magnetic field and Earth's magnetic field--its varia-
tions and disturbability. sporadic ionisation in the 3 layer of the ionosphere.

13
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘ou HFFU‘IM, list: ”3;.-

the movement of an auroral electrojct, and the dynamics of polar auroras.
A new effect has been discovered in the modulation of galactic cosmic rays-
the influence of the sun's total magnetic field on cosmic rays.

New kinda of magnetic field pulsations in the polar cap and at the geo-
magnetic poles have been discovered. characterizing the dynamics of pro-
cesses at the periphery of the magnetosphere and at its tail end. Aayametry
has been discovered in the northern and southern hemispheres-~a different
reaction of the geoeagnetic field (variations and pulsations) to the influence
of the solar plasma.

A determination has been made of the distinctive features of the manifestation
of a aubstorm in the generation of polar aurora pulsations and of the fore-
runners o‘ a substorm in the fore of magnetic field pulsations of a special
type and intensity.

from stationery and field observations of ONCh [very low frequency] radiation
was discovered the theoretically predicted region (KASP) of direct contact

of the solar wind with Earth's atmosphere. An influence was discovered. of
the aectorial structure of the interplanetary magnetic field on the pressure
field of regions of Earth falling under KASP's. Ground geophysical studies
have acted as an important supplement to satellite data.

In recent years successful use has been made of a new method of investigating
the ionosphere-oblique sounding along the auperlong Holodethnaya-Hoscow
direction. this method has made it possible to obtain efficiently date on
the state of the ionosphere which is of great importance in ensuring radio
coueunicetions. All the greater importance has been gained by field studies
on the continent for the purpose of studying the space-time features of
Barth's magnetic field and its variations (the "Geophysical Testing Ground"
project-installation of automatic stations). as well as the Chen radiation
of the magnetosphere.

Scientific observations made by the Soviet antarctic expedition have re-
presented an important contribution to fulfillsent of research goals during
the period of the proceedings of the ”International Year of the Magneto-

sphere."

In the area of studies of Earth's form. work has been done on making a cata-
log of gravimetric points and a gravimetric chart of Antarctica has been
prepared. Based on seismic observations, a seismic zone was discovered
around Antarctica, which has joined zones known earlier. Antarctica itself
has been proven to be almost aseismic. A study of the propagation of seismic
waves has shown that Antarctica has a continental crust structure. The same
results were obtained on the basis of seismic depth sounding (682). A study
of microseisms in Antarctica has led to the discovery of the general hydro-
mateorological conditions for their formation. Seismic observations have been
employed in recent times for the purpose of investigating the dyes-ice of

the edge zone of Antarctica's ice cap.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For further advances in geophysical research it is necessary to set up
several automatic geophysical stations with the inuediate sending of data
to a satellite. Stations will be set up at preselected points on the con-
tinent. observation results at which will make it possible to obtain the
first-hand information required for diagnosing the state of the magneto-
sphere, the magnetic field and the ionosphere. for the purpose of utilizing
it in developing forecasting methods.

During the first few years of operation of the Soviet antarctic expedition

a systematic study was begun of features of the hydrologic and chemical
hydrologic cycle of the Southern Ocean. the relief of its floor and of the
ice cap, and of biological resources. As the result of these and subsequent
studies. a determination was made of rather precise physical-geographic
boundaries of the Southern Ocean, the key types of water masses were dis-
tinguished and their distribution was learned, the regions of formation of
antarctic waters near the ocean floor were established. and the first approxi-
mate diagrams were obtained for the circulation of Southern Ocean waters.

It was determined that the key circulation system of the Southern Ocean is
the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, which determines the hydrological cycle

of waters of the southern polar region. In addition to this a determination
was made of the main features of the circulation of waters in coastal regions
of Antarctica, consisting in the existence of several stationary cyclonic
cycles.

On the basis of a study of thermal and dynamic conditions, the major frontal
surfaces of the Southern Ocean were found. In addition, it became obvious
that the physical patterns established for the thermal and dynamic conditions
of Southern Ocean waters cannot be explained within the framework of existing
ideas on the nature of oceanic processes and must be related to the nature of
large-scale interaction between the atmosphere and ocean. Besides, remaining
unexplained are the key features of the structure of the circulation of
Southern Ocean waters and the nature of the dynamics of intermediate and

deep waters; quantitative estimates have not been obtained of water and heat
exchange between Southern Ocean waters and the adjacent water areas of other
oceans. as well as reliable estimates of flowrates of waters carried by the
ATaT [Antarctic Circumpolar Current). which are required for hydrodynamical
models of global circulation of the ocean.

These problems have formed the scientific basis for planning full-scdle ex-
periments relating to a comprehensive study of oceanic and atmospheric pro-
casaes taking place in the Southern Ocean, the combination of which has re-
presented the major content of the "Polar Experiment South" (POLEKS-Yug)
program.

At the present time two full-scale experiments have been conducted within

the framework of Soviet-American cooperation in the field of global ocean
research in keeping with the POLEKS-Yug and AYSOS programs. aimed at studying
the dynamics of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (Ala!) and the Antarctic
Polar Front (AP?) as related to atmospheric processes. The results of

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL U‘S'.‘ U.‘.|‘

full-scale experiments have considerably broadened existing ideas regarding
the structure and dynamics of the ATsT and its interaction with the APP, and
have nade it possible to detect by direct measurements s slight countercurrent
at water levels near the ocean floor in Drake Passage. and to estimate the
energy characteristics of the atmosphere. The data obtained have been used
to estimate flowrstes of the ATsT in global models of the ocean's circulation.

Further study of the Southern Ocean involves the development of extensive
research at large-scale testing grounds in the Scotia Sea, in the regions
between Africa and Antarctica and between Australia and Antarctica. Called
for are a comprehensive study of processes of large-scale interaction between
the atmosphere and ocean. as well as a study of the structure and dynamics

of waters of the ATsT and of its interaction with the APP.

0f the achievements of recent years in the field of glaciology. mention should
be made of research on the ice cap by means of deep drilling, comprehensive
research within the continent between the Hirnyy and Komsomolskaya stations,
and also radar sounding of the ice. These studies are being conducted in
keeping with the International Antarctic Glaciologicsl Project (HASP). As

the result of an investigation of a 9SO-meter well and of the couple extracted
from it at Vostok Station. information was obtained on the temperature state
of the ice cap, the content of chemical elements in the ice and of isotopes

of oxygen. and other parameters. These data have made it possible to con-
street a representation of the contemporary state of Antsrctica‘s ice cap

and to reveal.trends in its develop-ant. They have made it possible to pre-
dict the change in Antsrctics's climate for the future.

Studies in the area of Novolazarevskaya Station, where a through hole was
made for the first time in the ice shelf, made it possible to obtain informa
tion on the hydrological characteristics of waters beneath the shelf. An ‘
analysis of soil taken from the floor has proven that an ice shelf has
existed in this region for the last 10,000 years.-

Prom the data of studies made in the interior of the continent at key
testing grounds it is possible to explain the rate of movement of the ice
cap. The data of a radar survey made by Soviet antarctic expeditions in
recent years and the data of foreign expeditions (chiefly of the USA and
England) were used to make a new chart of the subglscial topography of
Antarctica.

In the future glaciologicsl research in Antarctica will develop along two
main lines: A study will be made of the water balance of Antarctica and of
the paleoclimatology and paleogeogrsphy of Antarctica. The development of
these subject areas will make it possible to approach a solution to the
problea of forecasting the development of Antarctica's ice cap and a solution
to the question of the balance of its mass.

The development of glaciologicsl research involves first of all further de-
velopment and more extensive application of methods of deep drilling the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ice cap and of radiophysicai methods of determining its thickness and the
rate of movement of the ice. as well as an analysis of different forms of
satellite information.

Every year different biological research programs are carried out. which
cover basically the waters of the Southern Ocean. Proof has been gotten of
the abundance and variety of organisms. not only in the open sea. but also

in the coastal zone covered with sea ice. As the result of year-round
diving investigations highly abundant data have been obtained relating to
bottom-dwelling biocenoses and biocenoses associated with sea ice. Exceed-
ingly interesting are microbiological studies made for the first time in the
Southern Ocean. which have demonstrated the very low density of the bacterial
population and the feasibility of using the bacteria method in separating
water masses.

Much interesting data has been obtained as the result of research over many
years on the ecology and life cycle of seals and birds.

Studies have been made to a considerably lesser extent on biocenoses of dry
land. but here, too, great successes have been achieved. Studies have been
made of bird colonies. the vegetative cover, and of biocenoaes of lakes.

At the present time we have a rather complete idea of the floral abundance
and plant combinations of Antarctica. Confirmation has been given to data
regarding the exceptional poverty of dry land biocenoses. but at the same
time was found the capacity of organisms to adapt to extremely severe con-
ditions previously considered unsuitable for their vital activity.

At each antarctic station. in addition to treatment and prevention work.
medical research has been conducted. including a group of physiological
studies of higher nervous activity and of other functional systems of the
body in the process of adaptation; experimental hygienic and medical biological
studies as applies to questions in space medicine; study of the adaptation
mechanism; studies of changes in the functional state of the central nervous
system under conditions of the influence of extreme factors; a study of the
influence of prolonged isolation on the psychological and social compati-
bility of participants in the expedition; and a group of hygiene and sanita-
tion studies relating to studying residences. the water supply and nutrition.
and to other questions relating to general and communal hygiene at Soviet
antarctic stations.

In addition to the above-mentioned studies. physicians at all stations have
been carrying out a program of observations relating to a study of environ-
mental pollution in Antarctica.

Hora than £0 institutions in our country have been taking part in the develop-
ment of antarctic topics or have been utilizing in their own scientific re-
search the data of antarctic expeditions.

In 20 years almost 9000 people have taken part in Soviet antarctic expeditions.
of which 3400 have vintarad at stations. about 2000 have participated in
seasonal research. and more than 3600 have been crew members of expeditionary

vessels.
17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI‘. UM":

Associates of Soviet antarctic expeditiOns, in keeping with the scientific
exchange progran, have been participants in thc antarctic expeditions of
foreign countries. Twenty-one Soviet scientists have worked on expeditions
by the USA (at the HcHurdo. Little America, Byrd and Anundsen~$cott stations
and on the expeditionary vessel "Eltanin"). Great Britain (at the Stonington
station), and Argentina (at the Alnirnnte Brown station). and several people
have taken pert in seasonal field studies.

Scientists from other countries have worked on Soviet antarctic expeditions.
They have conducted research at stations and on expeditionary vessels and have
taken part in cross-country investigations on the continent. In 20 years
sore than 70 foreign scientists have taken part in the winter operations of
Soviet antarctic expeditions. and in seasonal operations about 60, and more
than 10 different foreign writers, newspaper correspondents and television
and film personnel. They represented 14 countries: bulgarin, hungary. the
GDR. the Mongolian People's Republic. Poland. Czechoslovakia. Romania,
Australia. Great Britain. Argentina, the USA. France, Japan and India.

Over the last 20 years more than 6000 articles on all branches of science
represented in the programs of Soviet antarctic expeditions have been pub-
lished in various publications. Dozens of monographs have been created on
the most important problems of science. In 1969 publication was completed
on the first two-volume atlas of Antarctica in the world. which was based on
data of scientific research performed by Soviet antarctic expeditions. More
than 60 volumes of TRUDY [PROCEEDINGS] of Soviet antarctic expeditions have
been issued. and more than 90 issues of INFORMATSIONNYY BYULLBTEN' 8A3 and
16 it-ues of the collection ANTARKTIKA.

The research conducted by Soviet antarctic expeditions during the past 20
years can be arbitrarily divided into two periods. the first period. which
continued up to the aid-60's. was distinguished chiefly by general recon-
naissance studies. During this period many new geographical sites were dis-
covered, geographical charts were refined and for many areas the first re-
liable ones were Iade, the first ideas were obtained regarding the nature'
of interior regions of East Antarctica. etc. This period concluded with

the publication of the two-volume atlas of Antarctica, in which the results
of this research were summed up.

The second period is characterized by an in-depth study of natural elements,
components and phenomena in Antarctica. As the result of research conducted
during this period, monographs and detailed scientific developments have
appeared which have shed light on the geology and deep structure of Earth's
crust in several regions of Antarctica. cycle characteristics of the ice cap.
the dynamics of waters and the ice cycle of the Southern Ocean, atmospheric
processes over Antarctica. various geophysical phenomena. etc. During this
period fundamentally new methods of research began to be developed. which
have broadened to a great extent the capabilities of studying the nature

of the southern polar region. Under this heading come radiophysical re-
search and, in particular, radar sounding of the ice cap. the reception of
satellite information. etc. In addition. during this period medical research
has achieved extensive advances.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the present time is beginning the third period of research in Antarctica,
characteristic of which is the accomplishment of vast comprehensive, often
international. research programs. such as the International Glaciological
9roject (HAO?) in which, in addition to Soviet scientists, are taking part
scientists from the USA. Australia. England and francs. the Polar Experiment
(POLEKS-Yug), being carried out Jointly with the USA, comprehensive geological—
geophysical and cartographic studies in the area of Weddell Sea, etc.

Data accumulated as the result of research on the nature of Antarctica, as
well as the experience of expeditionary work, have made it possible to begin
mastering the southern polar region.

A clear example of the practical utilization of scientific data has been

the hydrometeorological service for the operations of people in Antarctica,
and, primarily, the furnishing of information and shortterm weather fore-
casts to commercial and expeditionary vessels and aircraft. At the Holodesh-
nsya AHTs longterm weather forecasts have begun to be issued for a short
period in advance (three 26-hour periods, maximum). Ships sailing in the

ice zone are supplied with information on the state of sea ice; forecasts

of ice conditions have begun to be made.

Climatic data and information on ice cap conditions are being utilized in
designing and constructing various kinds of structures (buildings, under-
ground services, airfields, etc.). In particular, for the first time in-
structions have been developed for creating a takeoff and landing strip on
the snow covering for wheeled airplanes.

Based on medical research and the experience of expeditionary operations,
clothing designs have been developed, along with nutrition standards and
.housing equipment. Based on geophysical research, forecasts are being made

of the-state of the magnetosphere and ionosphere and of conditions for radio
wave propagation. In particular, a forecast has been made for the reliability
of radio communications in terms of the hours of the clock for seven major
microwave links.

Especially extensive use has been made of the results of oceanographic and,
primarily, of hydrologic research in mastering the biological resources of
the_Southern Ocean. Proof has been given of the feasibility of a fishing
and shellfishing industry.

In carrying out measures of any kind in Antarctica, especially on the main-
land, it aust all the time be remembered that Nature in the polar lands
reacts exceptionally sensitively to human activities. It is easily violated
and is restored with great difficulty. In order not to inflict irreparable
here on Nature, on expeditions a study is being made of the influence of man
on the environment and measures are being taken to lessen this influence.

Great successes have been achieved in 20 years of research in Antarctica.
But every year scientists are confronted with new and newer, sometimes lore
difficult, problems than before, both in the line of scientific research and

of mastering the Antarctic Continent and the Southern Ocean, the resources
of which are enormous.

comes-r: Irdatel'stvo Nauka, 1978 19
8831 . momcmussomz
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL‘.’

ANTARCTIC RESEARCH COOPERATION 0N INTERNATIONAL LEVEL HAILBD

Moscow mmcrm: osuomvz- ll'OGl IZUCHBNIYA mm 2A 20 L31“. mm
«01413311 in Russian No 17. 1978 pp 20-26

[Article by Ye.l. Tolstiltov: “Antarctica--the Continent of Peace"]

[Text] The joint work of scientists fron different countries in Antarctica
is a graphic example of how, by uniting the efforts of scientists of a nulber
of countries, it is possible to solve relatively quickly scientific problems
for the solution of which one country would require dozens of years.

"hen the decision was node to hold the International Geophysical Year, sci-
entists froa nany countries turned their attention to Antarctica, the least
studied area of our planet. It was clear that it was ilpossible to solve
problems on the global scale without having arranged for a definite systen
of geophysical observations in the extrene south of the globe.

Scientists free 12 countries expressed a desire to arrange for research in
Antarctica. The Soviet Union got the user difficult and least studied region.
- Soviet scientists assuned the obligation of setting up stations inside the
continent in the area of the geomagnetic pole and in the area of the Pole of
Relative lnaccessibility. This was a courageous decision, since neither the
conditions for nor the nethods of setting up these stations were known.

These obligations were based on the inenae knowhow gained by Soviet polar
explorers under the complex conditions of the Arctic.

Pros: the very beginning of the work on the sixth continent very were friendly
relations were forned between scientists of different countries.

The scientific work in Antarctica required coordination. That is why the
Scientific Council on' Antarctic Research (SCAR) was for-ed in 1957-1958 by
the International Council of Scientific Alliances (HSRS). The duty of SCAR
was to develop programs and coordinate research in Antarctica, both between
countries and with special scientific alliances (e.g., with the International
Geological Alliance, the Geodesy and Geophysics Alliance of the world
Meteorological Organization, and the International Biological Alliance).

The nenbe'rs of SCAR are countries taking part in the Antarctic Treaty and
actively doing research in Antarctica. and international alliances united

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
by MSNS and interested in doing research in Antarctica. as well as the

World Meteorological Organization. Each country and alliance sends one
representative each to SCAR.

SCAR issues annually a bulletin representing a report on its activities,
as well as shedding light on najor achievements in studying Antarctica.

In addition, SCAR publishes the scientific results of symposia which it

conducts.

SCAR is a very useful international scientific institution, which does much
work associated with research on Antarctica. The Soviet Union is represented
in SCAR by the USSR Academy of Sciences. which is a permanent nenber of SCAR.

For the development of progress and the coordination of scientific research

in Antarctica, in our country has been formed the Interdepartmental Comisaion
on Antarctic Studies under the auspices of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

to which has been entrusted the functions of the Soviet Comittes for Antarctic
Studies. The permanent Soviet representative in SCAR is USSR Academy of
Sciences Corresponding Haber G.A. Avsyuk, chairman of the Interdepartmental
Col-aission on Antarctic Studies.

The Interdepartmental Comiasion on Antarctic Studies has 10 representatives
in SCAR work groups. They represent leading scientists in different fields
of science.

An important place in the activities of the Soviet National Cos-ittee for
Antarctic Studies is held by information operations. For this purpose the
Soviet comittee disseminates reports on foreign research. scientific syn-
posia and conferences, and also writes and publishes in English 'an annual
report to SCAR on the activities of Soviet scientists in Antarctica. Also
published annually isqthe special collection ANTARKTIKA in Russian, in which
are printed reports and articles on the nest topical problems relating to
antarctic research.

The Soviet connittee does a great amount of work associated with corres-
pondence between work groups and the SCAR Bureau, nainly with regard to
program problem, as well as in connection with carrying out various neasures.
sessions of neetings and symposia, in particular.

He polar explorers can be proud of the fact that the friendly relations be-
tween aciantists of different countries working in Antarctica were conducive
to the fact that the Antarctic Treaty was concluded in Decodaer 1959 by the
governments of Australia, Argentina. Belgium, Great Britain. New Zealand.
Norway, the USSR, the USA. France, Chile, the Republic of South Africa and
Japan.

According to this treaty. and in the interests of all hunanity, Antarctica
must henceforth be utilized exclusively for peaceful purposes and must not
becone an arena or subject of international controversies. In its territory

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0H H‘IM. llhll "Nil

it is forbidden to carry out any nenaures of a military nature. nuclear
explosions. and the burial of radioactive mate. The treaty calla for
research in Antarctica to be exclunively of a peaceful nature.

it is impossible for the vast area of Antarctica not to interest all coun-
tries iron the viewoint of maintaining peace. Our country. taking this into
account. has adhered 'u the position of solving this problem on the basis of
an agreement between all interested countries with Iutual allowance for their
rights and interests. But prior to 1958 some countries wanted to solve the
problen of the legal status of Antarctica separately.

Seven countries (Great nritain. Australia. New Zealand. France. Norway.

Chile and Argentina) nude unllrteral claims to sectors in thin region.
covering a total of about I» ;— fifths of the area of Antarctica.

These countries justified their claims with different kinds of historical.
geographic»? and legal censiderations. For exanple. England announced its
claims because its subjects had discovered a nunber of territories in Ant-
arctica. Chile and Argentina cited the fact that they had inherited the
rights of Spain to the lands located south of the Strait of Magellan. In
addition. they pointed to the territorial proximity of their countries

to these regions of Mtarctico. Australia affirned its right by the proxinity
of Antarctica to it and. in connection with this. its great acononic and
strategic inportance. France and Norway aubnitted claiss on the brain that
certain lands in Antarctica had been discovered by their citizens. but this
sectorial division of the sixth continent would have ignored the rights and
intercsta of other countries. of the USSR and USA. in particular.

Attenpts at a sectorial division of Antarctica were fraught with the danger
of transforning Antarctica into a region of rivalry and international con-
flicts.

The question of the legal status of Antarctica was raised several tines.
but special attention on the part of the global con-unity was attracted
to Antarctica's fate in connection with the holding of the International
Geophysical Year. Scientists of 12 countries took part in scientific re-
search in Antarctica in connection with the m6 [International Geophysical
Year]. Our country set up six stations in various areas of Antarctica.

During the period of the mo countries which had laid claim to sectors did
not oppose the creation by other comtriea of bases in regions of Antarctica
to which the for-er had laid claina.

Cooperation along scientists of different countries during the course of
the MG exerted a considerable influence on the solution to the proble-
of the situation of Antarctica in the international scheme of things by
the awning of a conference of interested countries.

The Soviet govern-eat thought favorably regarding the USA's suggestion to
su-oa the Conference on Antarctica. Invited to the conference were only

' 22
FOR Ol’FICIAl. USE ONLY
Fun OFFICIAL Far "NLY

those countries taking an active part in scientific research on the Sixth
Continent. The Conference on Antarctica opened on 15 October 1959 in
Hashington and concluded with the signing on 19 December of the same year

of the first international Antarctic Treaty in history. As already mentioned.
the fundanental principles of this treaty are the utilization of Antarctica
for peaceful purposes alone. and freedom in scientific res: ch.

The Antarctic Treaty does not place any one country participating in it in an
advantageous position in the question of territorial claims in Antarctica.
The balance created by the treaty in various positions regarding the question
of territorial claina in this region can and should ensure the realization of
the fundamental principles of the treaty.

The Antarctic Treaty went into effect on 23 June 1961. Joining the treaty
were Poland, Czechoslovakia. Denmark. the Netherlands and Brazil.

During this period were held eight advisory meetings. at which specific ques-
tions were discussed and recomendations were made.

The First Advisory ﬂeeting (Canberra. 10-24 July 1961). It was deemed ad-
visable to teen-mend that the governnents of countries participating in re-
search in Antarctica continue the practice, formed during the period of the
H66. of exchanging scientific infornation. scientific personnel and plans for
scientific operations.

The Second Advisory Meeting (Buenos Aires, 18-28 July 1962). Measures were
taco-ended. contributing to free access to the published results of research
in Antarctica. and to regular presentation of scientific observation data at
world data centers.

for the purpose of utilizing Antarctica for peaceful purposes alone, at these
advisory meetings detailed recouendations were made regarding the regular
and duly presentation by countries conducting research in Antarctica of
information on all expeditions and stations in Antarctica. on the amount and
kinds of equipment, on the number and areas of specialisation of personnel,
on scientific equipment. etc.

The Third Advisory Meeting (Brussels. 2-13 June 1966). Bleven reconnendations
were sade. The following are the nain ones among these: information regarding
airplane landing conditions and telecomnications. and the recouendation

"0n Coordinated tiessures for the Protection of Fauna and Flora in Antarctica."
The last recouendation is very important. since the foundation was formed

for the protection of Nature in this unique region of our planet.

The Fourth Advisory Meeting (Santiago. 13-18 November 1966). Twenty-eight
taco-endationa were made, including recouendations on regions to be especially
protected. tenorary guidelines for voluntary regulation of the pelagic seal
trade in Antarctica. and tourism.

23
ran orncm. use any
FOR OFFICIAL Uh}. UNIT.

The fifth Advisory Meeting (Paris. 18-29 November 1969). Nine reconnendstions
were made. including on measures for improvmg telecomnications and on SCAR'a
suggestions on changing the temporary guidelines for voluntary regulation of
the pelagic seal trade.

The Sixth Advisory Meeting (Tokyo. 19-31 October 1970). fifteen reco-endationa
were made. including on antarctic telecommunications. on improving nateorological
operations. on research on the ntaosphere by means of rockets. and on coordina-
tion of research involving the utilization of radioisotopes.

The Seventh Advisory Meeting (Wellington. 3') October - 10 November 1972).
Nine recouendations were made. including on the influence of man on the en-
vironment. on a review of regions to be especially protected. and on regions
of special scientific interes-.

The Eighth Advisory ﬂeeting (Oslo. 9-20 Jtne 1975). hecouendutions were made
on regions of special scientific interest. on the exchange of information. on
ocean resources. and on prospecting for ainerals in Antarctica.

-All these advisory meetings have taken place ~.'n the spirit of cooperation. in
the search for compromise settlenents for very complex problems. The Soviet
government has approved all recouendations mad-1. It must be regretted. how-
ever. that individual countries have still not approved certain race-endations.
including such an inortant recounendation as "Coordinated Measures for fro-
tection of flora and Fauna.”

It should be mentioned that SCAR is the scientific advisory agency for the
Antarctic Treaty. This organization has contributed many useful suggestions

and race-endaiions. The Antarctic Treaty is one distinct indicator of the
possibility of a fruitful solution to highly complex international problems

on the basis of mutually taking into account the rights and interests of nations.
and. without doubt. represents a contribution to the natter of developing
thoroudr cooperation among countries with different pclitical system.

The regulations regarding procedures in Antarctica established by the Ant-
arctic Treaty in terms of their aigni ‘icance project be yond the scope of
this region and can serve as a good example for melting similar coordinated
decisions aimed at the development of peaceable friendly relations in other

areas of international cooperation.

fulfilling the obligations assumed by the Soviet Union in connection with the
proceedings of that highly prominent scientific measure. the international
Geophysical Year. and in every way possible maintainir' the spirit of inter-
national cooperation and mutual aid in the southern pc.-: region. which later
found reflection in the articles of the Mtarctic Treaty, Soviet polar explorers
from the very first days of operation of Soviet antarctic expeditions (SAB’s)
began to establish friendly contacts with foreign expeditions at work in
Antarctica. They have taken part in the broad exchange of scientific informa-
tion. have offered scientists from other countries the opportunity to work on

2';
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 08”

the staff of Soviet expeditions. have arranged for exchange of scientists
with foreign expeditions, and have always cone to the assistance of polar
explorers from other countries who were found in a disastrous situation.

The exchange of meteorological information and certain geophysical data began
as soon as the Hirnyy observatory went into operation (in February 1956).
Beginning with the Second 3A3. the regular exchange of scientists began with
antarctic expeditions of the USA.

Over the past 20 years 21 Soviet scientists have participated in the winter
operations of foreign expeditions. and sons people have taken part in seasonal
field studies. Our representatives--wcather forecasters. meteorologists, geo-
physicists. geologists and glaciologists-have worked at the American HcHurdo.
Little Alerica V. Byrd and Aaundsen-Scott stations and on the USA expeditionary
vessel "Bltanin." They have taken part in field research. chiefly in various
regions of Heat Antarctica. Irregular exchange of scientists has also taken
place with expeditions of other countries.

Scientists of other countries have also been working on Soviet antarctic ex-
peditions. part of then under the arrangenent for exchanging scientists. and
the directorship of Soviet antarctic expeditions has offered others an oppor-
tunity to do research together with Soviet polar explorers under the treaty
stipulations. Coadng under the latter heading are chiefly scientists from
socialist countries. In the 20 years sore than 70 foreign scientists have
taken part in the winter work of SAE's. and about 40 in seasonal operations.
In addition. more than 10 foreign writers. newspaper correspondents. and tele-
vision and fill personnel have worked on Soviet antarctic expeditions.

Representatives froa a total of 15 countries have taken part in Soviet ant-
arctic expeditions: Bulgaria. Hungary. the GDR. the Mongolian People's Re-
public. Poland. Czechoslovakia. Ruaania. Australia. Great Britain. Argentina,
the USA, trance. India and Japan.

Joint studies with foreign scientists ,s.;2-2,a:2ug in SAz's are being con-
ducted in a nuaber of science programs. They cover glaciology, geophysics.
geodesy and other disciplines. Por exaaple. in 1964 and 1969 Soviet glacio-
logists and geophysicists together with French specialists carried out glacio-
logical research in the interior regions of East Antarctica between the Vostok
station and Hirnyy Observatory, having organized for this purpose a special
sled and caterpillar convoy. Beginning in 1963 Joint Soviet-Alerican geo-
physical observationa began to be made at the Vostok station. USA specialists
supplied scientific equip-ant to the station. a laboratory was created. and

an antenna was installed for asking observations of ultrashort radiowave pro-
pagation. The research program called for studies in a number of areas. 0b-
servations were made alternately by Alerican and Soviet researchers. All ob-
servation data were duplicated and placed at the disposal of both countries.
Thus. as the result of joint work the extent of scientific observations at the
Vostok station was broadened considerably. and Soviet geophysicists gained
additional valuable scientific data which has substantially broadened our ideas

25
son orncrat use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-l "NH

on the developaent of geophysical processes taking place in the area of
Barth's South Oeonagnetic Pole. These darn nave been used by Soviet scientists
in their scientific studies.

Polar explorers of the 18th 5A3 took part in the installation of responders on
icebergs. by neans of which Prench researcher». utilizing artificial Earth
satellites. are studying the drift of icebergs in the Southern Ocean. French
scientists are placing the results of these observations at our disposal; they
have been utilized in scientific developsenta in our physical oceanography.

0n the initiative and with the assistance of French scientists who have furn-
iehed the appropriate equip-ant. at the Noledeahnaya station observations of
radius esanation are being carried out for the purpose of a profoundar study
of large-scale atnospheric circulation in Antarctica. As the result of this
scientific cooperation. the r.ench have furnished us with data from a nusber of
other foreign Antarctic stations and. thus. Soviet scientists have gained
valuable data for the study of atsoepheric processes in the vast territory of
the southern hnnisphere.

Participants in Soviet antarctic expeditions together with scientists fro-
!rance. the USA. Australia and Great Sritain in recent years have been working
on the International Antarctic Glaciology Progran (HASP). This research is
being conducted by Soviet scientists for the roost part in the nest hard to
reach and severe regions of East Antarctica. As the result of this coordinated
research. data have been obtained for the vast region of the Antarctic Continent
fros Dronning Maud Land in the west to Victoria Land in the east. This terri-
tory has been covered by a dense network of air routes while sounding the
thichntas of the ice cap with radar. At a nusber of points by scans of the
latest radiogeodetic asthods (utilising navigational Isz's [artificial Barth
satellitesl) s detersination has been ends with high precision of the rate

and direction of sovessnt of the ice. At the center of the region studied.

at the Vostok station. as well as on the coastline in the areas of the Dusont
d'Urville and Casey stations. deep bore holes have been soda in the ice cap
with core sasples taken. Over the Hirnyy-Vostok section for a distance of sore
than 1‘00 he systesstic observations have been ends of snow accusulation. along
with other studies. As the result.of these studies a sore detailed chart has
been node of the topography beneath the ice. the sorphonetric characteristics
of the ice cap have been refined. the rates of love-ant of the ice have been
established (at a nusber of sections). and data have been obtained on the
structure of the higher-kiloseter strata of the ice cap and on its tesperature
state. which in turn has made it possible to solve in a first approxisstion

the probles of the dynamic state of the ice cap and the trend in its develop-
lent. Oxygen isotope studies of a core sample have ends it possible to de-
ter-ins key features of clinstic change during the last 50.000 to 60.000 years.

Acceeplishsent of this extensive research program becsne possible only as the
result of the successful accosplishsent of coordinated work by scientists of
five countries. on the basis of the international cooperation called for by
the Antarctic Treaty. Data fro- this research have been utilized in the
scientific develop-ants of Soviet scientists.

26
ton onmm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conjunction with USA researchers. our scientists have been taking part
in carrying out the POLEKs-Yug [Polar Exploration. South) program. etc.

In Antarctica the exchange of scientific information is taking place between
expeditions of different nations. including the Soviet. The Holoderhnaya
Soviet Antarctic Meteorological Center (AHTs) is receiving weather forecasting.
aerological and seteorologicnl inforsation free aleost all stations in Ant-
arctica and is receiving information from artificial Earth satellites. In turn.
the Molodezhnaya AHTs is gathering. processing and transmitting into the ether
(circulating) extensive meteorological information. including data from all
Soviet antarctic stations. This inforaation is being utilized by vessels
sailing in antarctic waters. by seteorologicel centers of countries in the
southern healsphere, and by airplanes. In addition, at Holodezhnaye weather
forecasts are being soda and transsitted into the ether. along with infersstion
on ice conditions necessary for expeditionary vessels sailing in the ice.

8A3 participants. on the request of foreign expeditions. have sore than once
conducted aerial surveys of the ice. thus making it possible for vessels to
approach coastal stations and to leave the ice tone. Pb.eign stations. too.
neVsr refuse aeteorologicsl inforsstion needed for flights of airplanes over
routes where these stations are located. This inforastion is furnished to us
especially frequently by the Australians and Japanese.

A nuaber of isportant studies are being node by foreign scientists on the

staff of Soviet antarctic expeditions. especially by scientists of socialist
countries. For axe-pie. highly valuable geodetic studies which have sade it
possible to deter-ins correctly the rates and direction of aovesent of the ice
cap in the areas of Hirnyy and Holodethnaya. as well as precise aetronoaical
observations at the Vestok station. have been made by con scientists. Inter-
esting hydrobiological observations have been made in the area of Holodethnaya
by scientists froa the Polish People's Republic. As already mentioned, Soviet-
Alerican geophysical studies at the Vostok station have proven very fruitful.
Biologists and Iedical personnel fro. the GDR have Iadc studies on discovering
the biorhythna of the huaan being under antarctic conditions. and another group
of specialists free the GDR has been involved in studying refraction, etc.

The participation of Soviet specialists in foreign expeditions has substant-
ially broadened the capabilities of scientific research and has made it possible
to cover new areas in which Soviet antarctic expeditions have not worked. and

to become acquainted with the knovhov and techniques of expeditionary operations
and with the modern equipsent and instruaents used by foreign scientists for
studies in the southern polar region. For example. Soviet geologists and
glaciologists, because of participation in expeditions arranged by the USA

and Great Britain. have been present in asny areas of Heat Antarctica. in
Victoria Land. the Antarctic Peninsula and its surrounding islands. The data
gathered in these areas has been used in scientific developncnts. and the
inforaation presented in reports on the organization of the operations of
foreign expeditions has been taken into account in planning Soviet antarctic

expeditions.

2?
roe orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Many instances are known in which participants in Soviet antarctic expeditions
cans to the aid of polar explorers of other c.antries who were found in a
calasitous situation. For exasple. in Octoher 1958 Soviet polar explorers
saved four participants in the Belgian Antarctic Expedition whose airplane

had an accident in the area of the Crystal Mountains in Dronning Heud band.
This rescue operation van successfully carried out by the crew of an Ll-2
airplane under the leadership of Pilot V.h. Perov. who flew out of Hirnyy.

All its participants were awarded the Order of the Soviet Union and Belgian
orders and sedals

In January 1960 the expeditionary vessel "Ob'" case to the assiatance of the
Japanese icebreaker "Soya" trapped in the ice. Physicians of Soviet antarctic
expeditions have sore than once rendered skilled medical assistance to partici-
pants in foreign expeditions in 5.. at the lallingshaussn station).

Soviet polar explorers are cordially received at foreign stations at which
they sust be present. Australian and Japanese polar explorers at the Hawson
and Syowa stations have rendered assistance to our researchers in flights
between Hirnyy and Holodezhnaya. A cordial reception was given Soviet ex-
plorers at the Hchurdo station (USA) during the period of the flight of heavy
airplanes from Moscow to Antarctica and at the Amundsen-Scott station (USA)
during the period of the voyage to the South Pole.

The sutual exchange of specialists. the exchange of scientific inforsetion.

and Iutual assistance in expeditionary operations have strengthened the prestige
and international authority of Soviet antarctic expeditions and have proaoted
the reinforce-eat of peaceful international scientific cooperation in the
southerc polar region called for by the Antarctic Treaty.

COPYRIGHT: Itdatel'stvo Nauka. 1978

8831
080: 8156/0h59

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "Si-2 ONLY

STATUS AND PROSPECTS OF METEOROLOGICAL RESEARCH IN ANTARCTICA

Moscow ANTARKTIKA: OSNOVNYYB ITOGI IZUCHENIYA ANTARKTIKI 2A 20 LET. DOKLADY
KOHISSII in Russian No 17. 1978 pp 51-75

[Article by A.l. Voskresenskiyl

[Text] The past 20 years of Soviet research in Antarctica have enriched
leteorologicel science with highly valuable infer-scion on the structure of

the atmosphere in this area and have node it possible to obtain a nuﬂer of
isportsnt results conducive to progress in knowledge of the laws of overall
circulation of the atsosphere, in isproving weather forecasts and in evaluating
the cliutic resources of the southern polar region.

In a number of studies dedicated to the 10th anniversary of Soviet research
in Antarctica a cosplete analysis was trade of the results obtained and the
Iain guidelines were fomleted for further research.

Hithout dwelling on these results. which are sufficiently well known both in
the USSR and abroad, it should be sentioned that they all, as in the next 10-
year period. were obtained at the level of modern science.

The greatest measure in the area of scientific organization in recent years
has been the creation of a Iodern regional seteorological center (Ms) at the
Holodezhnsya station, whose operations are aimed at the accospliehsent of two

najor goals:'

1. Obtaining weather forecasting. satellite. seteorological. actinosetric.
aerological, osonosstric and other data required for studying atsoepheric
circulation and the clisste of Antarctica.

2. Developeent and taking of weather forecasts for the needs of southern
polar stations. antarctic journeys. aviation. whaling flotillas and other
vessels sailing in the waters of antarctic seas and the southern hemisphere.

The following are the key functions of the seteorologicsl center:

29
roe onxcm. use om:
FOR (ll-'PICIAI. USE ONLY

1. Arranging for and carrying out a combination of standard meteorological
and aerological observations and rocket sounding at Soviet southern polar
stations in conformity with the requirements of the Horld Neteorological
Organisation.

2. Arranging for and carrying out scientific topic investigations in keeping
with programs. as well as observations made on sled and tractor expeditions.
during airplane flights. on vessels. and the like.

3. Gathering and processing of eerometeorologicel information. both from
all stations in Antarctica. and on the scale of the southern hemisphere;
transmission of this information by radio to other meteorological centers in
Antarctica and to the ﬂorid Meteorological Center in Moscow.

A. ﬂaking. analyzing and transedtting into the ether different kinds of
weather forecasting charts and “nephologicel analysis" charts; developing
weather forecasts for supplying reports to the maritime fleet. aviation and
other users of meteorological information in‘Antarctics.

At the Holodcshnaya Station RHTs a rocket sir sounding station has been set

up. which operates in keeping vith an international program. Radar of meteor
trails has been begun and is being performed regularly. and camera observations
are being made of mesospheric clouds. The reception and decoding of satellite
information have been set up. the data of which are utilized in direct fore-
casting work. Hark has been completed on the introduction of the "Heteorit"
I12 [rocket space probe] system for making aerologicsl observations. Meteor-
ological observations have been begun and are continuing at the Bellingshauaen
and Leningredskeye stations. Hind—temperature and ectinometric radio air
sounding is being performed at the Bellingsheusen station. A number of quali-
tative changes have taken place in the area of measurements of meteorological
parameters in the surface boundary layer and in actinometry. After the in-
stallation of a Minsk-32 computer at the Holodeehneys station. the majority of
observations have been processed by utilising automated systems. Meteorological
conditions in the atmosphere over Antarctics's water area are being studied

in their totality from the scientific research vessels "Professor Visa" and
"Professor Zubov.” Thus. the last decade has been characterized by great
successes in the area both of furnishing equipment and of broadening areas of
research.

The first decade of meteorological research in Antarctica has been called by
V.A. lugaysv the period of descriptive climatology, when each report on meteor-
ological phenomena was use and often sensational.

The second decade can be regarded as a period of research on the interaction
of factors responsible for specific meteorological phenomena. a period for
their quantitative estimation and of preparation for-s numerical description

of the climate and for longterm forecasting (Voekresenskiy. 1971). Mention
should be made of the fundamentally important work in this area performed at
the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute. the Central Aerologicsl

Observatory and the ﬂydrometeorologicel Center.

30
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rocket probe data have been summarized in studies by 8.8. Gsygerov (1973.
1975). It has been established that seasonal temperature variations in the
upper mesoaphere. according to rocket probe data at Holodezhnaya, are of the
opposite nature as compared with the stratosphere. A relatively high tempera-
ture in the upper mesosphere is usually recorded around mid-winter, and the
lowest in the auner. which is determined by the heat balance of these levels.
H:rming in the stratosphere and cooling in the meaosphere alternate in syn-

c ronism.

0.0. Karimova (1975) has analyzed the content and variations of atmospheric
ozone. an important component of the atmosphere, knowledge regarding which is
extremely necessary in analyzing processes of atmospheric circulation and the
dynamics. radiation balance and photochemistry of the stratosphere and in con-
sidering longterm changes in climate.

Observations over many years have made it possible to reveal a difference in
the behavior of the total content of ozone in Antarctica and in the Arctic.

In particular, the maximum ozone content in the atmosphere over Antarctica

(350 to 376 x 10-3 cm) begins to be reached on average two months after the
vernal equinox, while in the Arctic the ozone maximum is observed before the
entry of this astronomical factor. This is explained by differences in the
periods of existence of polar vorticea in the northern and southern hemispheres.
which govern the advectiva flow of ozone. To this fact are also due the
shorter periods of an increase in ozone in Antarctica before reaching a maximum
in the annual cycle and its subsequent drop to mid-level aummmr values.

The periods for the advent of the ozone maxinum directly above Antarctica

are shifted to a later period along a line from east to west (the Hirnyy sta-
tion in October and the Argentine Islands station in hovamber). An estimate
of the probability of the appearance of a biologically harmful concentration
of ozone in the stratosphere of Antarctica (200 mb level) has shown that it
does not exceed 29 percent in summer and is practically absent in winter.

The vertical distribution of ozone is highly non-uniform. The ozone content
in the troposphere is on average from two to five percent. and from 92 to 98
percent in the stratosphere. and not more than six percent is concentrated in
the layer above 10 mb.

In spite of the high scientific and applied value of these and other studies
devoted to problems of physics and atmospheric circulation not studied pre-
viously. there are a number of great problems which have not found the re-
quired solution. Under this heading must first of all be placed those such
as a quantitative estimate of the reasons responsible for the mechanism of
atmospheric circulation above Antarctica. an estimate of heat, moisture and
energy discharge, and the influence of Antarctica on the climate and weather
of adjacent areas and on the circulation of the southern hemisphere aa a whole.
At the present time estimates of heat, moisture and energy flow are being pub-
lished. to create the prerequisites for solving these problems (“Haterialy

po klimatu..." [Data on Climate...]. 1976).

31
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The climate of Antarctica, as is that of any geographical area. is in direct
dependence not only on the distinctive features of the formation of thermal
conditions and the hydrological cycle above the continent. but also on the
influence of ocean areas on those components. The heat accumulated by the
ocean's surface at tropical latitudes is transferred to the polar regions
chiefly on account of atmospheric and, to a lesser degree, oceanic circulation.
Regardless of the quantitative relationship of these factors. only atmospheric
circulation is of najor importance to Antarctica as a continent. Therefore.

a study and understanding of Antarctica's clients are possible only with know
ledge of conditions and atmospheric circulation above the -vater area of the
Southern Ocean.

It should be added that for successfullongtern forecasting of the weather
and climate in the southern polar region is required a detailed study of
large—scale interaction between the ocean, atnosphere and Antarctica as a
continent.

Geographical Factors

In the general geographical ethane of things Antarctica has. we night say,
a unique sinilsrity to the Arctic-its high-latitude position. In such else
these regions are alnost totally the opposite.

At the center of the southern polar region is situated a high-mountain continent
covered with ice and surrounded by ocean. In the arctic region the central
position is occupied by the Arctic Ocean (equal in area to Antarctica),
surrounded by dry land. The Arctic Ocean receives. along with radiative heat,
a considerable percentage of its heat with currents free the Atlantic and
Pacific oceans. as well as on account of were fresh-voter runoff from rivers.
All this governs the great flow of heat froa the ocean to the atmosphere.
Antarctica, on the other hand, being a high-altitude glacial continent. dis-
places the densest layers of the lover troposphere, at the 'same time excluding
the arrival of warm noiet air streams fro. oceans. These factors to a con-
siderable extent pradeternine also the difference in teaperature of the central
regions of Antarctica and of the Arctic Ocean. -

Astrononical‘ factors influencing the flow of solar radiation in these two
regions are also considerably different because of the perihelion position
of Earth in relation to the Sun during the period of the antarctic sum-er.
This fact provides Antarctica with a seven percent additional flow of solar
radiation as coepared uith the Arctic. -

Because of the exceptionally high optical transnittance of the atmosphere and
the continent's altitude. its surface reaches 80 percent of the radiant energy
arriving at the upper limit of the atnosphere. This figure is reduced to 59
percent on the coast. and hecones even lover on the Antarctic Peninsula. for
this reason the vertical gradient of the radiation flux is tvofold less than
in the Arctic and equals a total of 0.020 cal/cazos per km.

32
ron omcm use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Maximum radiation velucs equal 29 to 30 kcal/cmz-month at intracontinental
stations. 22 to 26 at coastal stations. and 14 to 17 kcal/cmZ-month at
stations on the Antarctic Peninsula. Direct radiation equals 70 percent of
the total radiation flux in central regions. 50 percent on the coast. and

20 to 30 percent on the Antarctic Peninsula. During the smmmer months the
total radiation on the coast is greater than in the Arctic by a factor of

1.5 to 1.7. and in the spring and fall. by a factor of 1.2 to 1.3. The
annual totals (95 to 105 kcal) are greater than in the Arctic by a factor of
1.3 to 1.5 and are comparable to annual totals in the equatorial zone. These
radiation flux values are highly stable from year to year. and for the purpose
of ensuring mean monthly values with a precision of five to 10 percent two and
five years of observation of total radiation are sufficient. six and 30 years
of direct radiation on the coast and two and four years at intracontinental
stations.

Aperiodic fluctuations in solar radiation resulting from turbidity of the
atmosphere fro. aerosols can reach significant values. For example. as the
result of eruption of the Agung volcano. the direct radiation at Soviet sta-
tions at the end of 1963 was reduced 30 percent. 0n the whole. the values of
aerosol attenuation over the coast of East Antarctica are negligibly low and
cannot be paid attention to in estimating the radiation balance. As far as
the central regions are concerned. characteristic of them is the process of
formation of crystals outside 0; clouds. which results in considerable aerosol
absorption. reaching 0.3 cal/cm omin.

At intracontinental stations. in spite of the heavy radiation flux, because of
the exceptional conditions for reflection and radiation during the entire year.
the absorbed radiation equals 6 to 7 ltcal/cm2 during the summer period. or

21 to 22 keel/cm2 per year. which totals the monthly total of solar radiation
reaching the coast. The existence of a negative radiation balance predetermines
a reduction in air temperature from year to year. but because of the advection
of heat and the presence of latent heat, no reduction in temperature is ob-
served.

Atmospherie Circulation

Numerous investigations made in recent times have asde it possible to get an
idea of the major traits of atmospheric circulation in this area. The major
elements which form atmospheric circulation over Antarctica must be considered
a circular cyclone zone. the circumpolar vortex and a system of surface anti-
cyclone circulation, including flowoff.

Cyclone activity is the consequence of processes originating in the system of
the planetary heat engine which governs global circulation. In terms of the
entire system of the planetary heat engine. made up of cold centers at high
latitudes and a heater in the tropical zone. the medium-latitude region re-
presents s zone in which extreme temperature contrasts are observed. In this
latitude zone occur the realization and conversion of these temperature con-
trasts into the energy of cyclonic vortices.

33
roe omcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the circular cyclone zone the low-pressure surface areas most significant
in the climatic respect are situated in the crca of the Lazarev and Riiser-
Larson. Davis and Hawson. Ross and Bellingshauaen seas. This circular zone.
representing a zone of convergence of lowen troposphere air mass flows and
runoff. is one of the major elements of atmospheric circulation at medium and
high latitudes of the southern hemisphere. As will be demonstrated below,

air running off over the continent's slopes in the low-pressure region to the
coast of East Antarctica is lifted up. forming sections of meridional circula—
tion. The circular zone is constricted with an increase in altitude and takes
on the form of a conic surface. The circular zone is tilted in the direction
of the cold. i.e., it reflects the familiar properties of the position of the
axes of cyclonic vortices.

In fig 1 is shown the position of the axes of anticyclones of the subtropical
zone and of cyclonic vortices having their origin in the area of the Ross and
Lazarev seas. The axes of climatic low-pressure areas having the significance
of centers of activity of the atmosphere are positioned along the 0 to 180'
meridian and are slanted in the direction of a cold zone located in the strato-
sphere.

The low-pressure area over Ross Sea, forming under the influence of cylcone
activity in the Indian and Australian sectors of the Southern Ocean. is well
pronounced throughout the entire troposphere, and in the stratosphere becomes
the central part of the circumpolar vortex of the southern hemisphere. This
low-pressure area lust be regarded as the main center of activity of the south-
ern hemisphere's atmosphere.

The low situated in the Lasarev Sea sector has been traced clearly approximately
to the level of the SOO-mb constant-pressure area, and above this it takes

the form of a trough of low pressure associated vith the main cyclonic vertex
of Ross Sea. The distinctive features of.the vertical structure of love forming
the southern hemisphere's circular cyclone zone are due to various causes.

A possible reason for dissolution of this low in the upper half of the tropo-
sphere is the system of air circulation. It has already been accepted that

in the troposphere of West Antarctica the advection of warm air and positive
vertical velocities predominate, while in Best Antarctica the advection of cold
and subsidence do. The subsidence is localized over high sections of the
glacial plateau and conforms to the central section of an extensive region of
surface divergence of currents covering the surface of the continent. The
process of subsidence represents a compensation for this continental divergence.
forced by a system of surface winds. including runoff winds. Subsidence, en-
veloping the densest lower air layers, exerts a considerable influence on the
formation of tropospheric circulation over the continent. "here the axis of.

a cyclonic vortex passes through layers with positive vertical velocities

the vertex is well developed vertically and reaches the stratosphere, and the
Ross Sea vortex possesses this property. The vortex whose axis is directed
into the antarctic troposphere from the area of Lasarev Sea, approximately at
the 500-mb constant-pressure ares. reaches a zone of negative vertical velo-
cities above the continent, which is one of the reasons for its dissolution.

3h
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

....u . .luli~\\§ I'.§2

A." :33 h\3\. “\R .\ 5\\\\ N\\¢\\ ~\
oﬁk o§§ oa o§§ o§N ‘3‘ oﬁﬁ o‘N oQK o§

..... 93/13 4., «4-----f/llﬂlj
Il._TI\\\\_\ _ a” 1A.».Q/V _l§... as WWI/[Ami

N
Moan Position of Axes of Climatic Lows in the Boss and Lazarev

Son:
[by on following page]

Pigure l .

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (lFHi'IM. USE l‘h’L‘.‘

i--sxis of lows; 2--nxis of subtropical nnlicyclone; 3--zoac of vertical ,
divergence; h-jdirection of sir movvm-nt; 5--isotherns; 6~-constant-
pressure arena

Key:
1. Latitude 2. Longitude

This sketch of the cpntiai position of axes of the circular zone and of axes
of enjor lows rcquires the additional nnu‘ysls of layers which directly border
upon the surface of the ice cap and in which signs of anticyclone circulation
have been discovered. Attention on the pl". of aeteorologists is constantly
being paid to the problen of the antarctic nnticyclone. ideas regarding the
antarctic anticycione have not in requentiy been contradictory. But at the
present tine we know that lht.t is no stable anticyclone over Antarctica. This
has been distinctly prmlcn for Rest Antarctica by P.D. Astapenko (1960). and
this question will be discussed below with respect to East Antarctica.

It is necessary to differentiate between at least two kinds of anticyclones
which can be found above Antarctica. First. there are instances of anticyclone
circulation which originate over the mainland in the fore of centers of not

too great vertical and horizontal length. Secondly. there are anticyclones

of considerable vertical and horizontal length having a connection with high-
aititude tropospheric ridges which reach Antarctica during the intense develop-
ment of seridional processes. In spite of this, certain writers discuss ant-
arctic nntieyclones without differentiating between these two kinds (Astapenko.
1960: Gnygcrov. 1966; Zhdanov. 1970).

Let us discuss anticyclones of only the first group, since they can appear as

the result of local anticyclogenesis caused by regional features of the continent.
Now we know that many features of surface circulation of air over the Iainland
are of an anticyclono nature. in particular. the systea of surface wind currents
represents an extensive region of horizontal divergence with its origin over

the highest sections of the Best Antarctica ice cap. An extensive circular
surface region of horizontal divergence cannot exist without vertical cospon-
sation. i.e., requires the existence over interior sections of the mainland

of settling of air free the layers above. As already sentioned. this type of
settling has been observed over East Antarctica.

The existence of quasi-stable surface divergence and conpensation for subsidence.
as we know. is a necessary eleeent of any anticyclonic circulation systen.

it is possible to establish from the vertical wind distribution at coastal
stations of East Antarctica that the replace-eat of surface antieyclonie circu-
lation with tropospheric cyclonic can take place on average between constant-
pressure levels of 700 and 500 lb. But this does not seen that steady anti-

cyclonic circulation predoeinates on slopes of the eainland. In analyzing
certain cases of wind observations at Soviet intrecontinental stations. 8.8.
Gaygerov (1966) found that in the layer of about 3 ha above the surface of the
glacier both anticyclonic and cyclonic circulation have been observed to an

approximately equal degree.

36
FOR omcm. use ontr
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ability to identify signs of the existence of an antarctic anticyclone
has becone realistic by constructing charts of the GOO-ab constant-pressure
level. i.e.. of the first standard level which is not in contact with the
level of its highest sections. In analyzing AI-SOO and AT-600 charts for
1958-1970 it was found that only at level AT-600 (fig 2b) are pressure fields
found which can be interpreted as anticyclonic. Cyclonic fields predominate
on AT-SOO charts at all seasons: The main center of the cyclone region is
found to be in the area of the Ross Sea and Ross Ice Shelf. and the trough of
low pressure occupies East Antarctica (fig 2a).

Over interior sections of the continent the SOO-Ib constant-pressure level

is separated from the underlying surface by an atmospheric layer about 1.5 to
2 km thick. Since cyclonic forms of baric topography are well pronounced at
AT-SOO and anticyclonic located below then at AT-600. then the layer between
these constant-pressures levels (about 1200 n) represents a transitional layer
from the lower anticyclonic to the upper cyclonic system. with this vertical
pressure field structure there must be a vertically oriented deformation field
formed by the positive vertical velocities of the cyclonic vortex located on top
and the descending currents which are involved in compensation of air nasses
running off along the slopes. This field. as a necessary part of the inter-
action between the tropospheric cyclonic vortex and the surface wind system,
represents a layer of vertical current divergence.

In analyzing changes in atmospheric pressure and mass at the Vostok station
it was found that the most dynamic layer in which interseasonal changes in
atmospheric sass most of all influence the formation of surface pressure is
the layer contained between the 600- and SOO-mb levels. This can serve as
one of the characteristics of the vertical divergence layer (Aver'yanov and
Voskresenskiy. 1972).

For Antarctica it is extremely important to study the mechanism of interlati-
tudinal circulation and of vertical novements on the synoptic scale. A.H.
Gusev (1959) provided a theoretical foundation for the pattern of meridional

circulation.

A single opinion is still lacking regarding a quantitative estimate of all
elements of this mechanism. since the few verifications of the pattern have

been based on disconnected data from several stations with not too great a
number of observations.

For the hirnyy - Vostok - Amundsen-Scott szction we have estimated the momentum
as the transfer of an air mass from one region to another through a unit area
in the horizontal (oVy) and vertical (9“) directions.

To construct a profile of the transfer of an air mass in the meridional di-
rection over the Antarctic Continent. an analysis was made of the scan monthly
values of meridional components of the resulting wind (V ) for each year.

In keeping with the orientation of the section, the val s of V characterize
the redistribution of air between the eastern and western hemispheres.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR IWFICIM. “SF. 081?

 

Figure 2. ”can Puuurc Plaid of Level 1: $00-11: (a) and 6004b (3)

Level. in January 38
ma OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Over the Amundsen-Scott station this movement of masses is in accord with

the tonal components of the resulting wind velocity. For the purpose of
elaboration of the structure of transfer in the surface layer. in addition

an analysis was made of mean monthly values of V for many years at three
additional levels in the layer from Earth to the ¥irst constant-pressure level.

The air mass transferrable in the meridional direction for each month accord-
ing to data oi many years at the level of Earth and at any standard constant-
preseure level was determined by the equation:

run-[$3 ("Vol .
"(-1 '

(l)

where n is the number of years. (9V ) is the mean monthly value of the
momentum for each year. and p is the density of the air. defined as:

D-P/Ms

For the purpose of computing the velocities of vertical movement. we utilized
a method based on solving the equation for the first law of thermodynamics.
The utilization of this method makes it possible to limit oneself to the data
of a single station. vhich is especially important under conditions of the
extremely slight aerological illuminance of the antarctic region and deter-
mines the advantages of the method selected over others.

The heat flux equation. taking into account advective, adiabatic and non-
sdiabatic changes in temperature. has the form:

or er ar L.
7-—(Uf;+v; -(Ya—Y)+c'

(2)
(the letter symbols here are the conventional ones).

Local changes in temperature. (OT/at) - ar/ac . are determined from the data
of daily radiosonde observation, as t e difference in the mean temperature of
the layer over a 26-hour period. Advective changes in temperature. (OT/3t) -
- -[u(er/ax) + V(aT/3y)] . are calculated from the data of a single station8

by means of the thermal wind equation:

(’7'). " #21717“ ' W"

(3)

39
roe orrxcm. use ONLY
FOK ﬁl-‘l-‘llIlM. Ubl-I ()NI '1'

where T. in the lean temperature of the layer. 1 is the Coriolis parameter.
g is the acceleration of gravity. (22 - 2.? is the thickness of the layer.

V and V are the velocities of the wind at the lover and upper boundaries
0} the laygr. and a is the wind rotation angle in turns of altitude.

Non-adiabatic changes in tenpcratnre, GOT/tit)“a - c/C . are occasioned in
our hypothesis by the radiation factor. 9

Taking into account the slight variability of circulation conditions in the
southern polar region free your to year. we thought it possible to utilise
calculated data for lean monthly radiation flux in different atmospheric layers
at high latitudes in the southern hemisphere given in the "Aaroclinatic "and-
book" (1972). in uhich taken into account as absorbing and radiating cosponents
of the ataosphere are water vopor, carbon dioxide gas. ozone. oxygen and
cloudiness. i.e.. the calculations lust be considered fairly complete. The
difference of these calculated data from the actual in each specific year
results in a such slsller error than oniosion of the radiation factor in solving
the heat flux equation.

Adiabatic changes in temperature. (UT/at). - ~(1 - y)» . are defined as the
reeainder of heat flux equation (2). The velociey of vertical love-ants we
arrive at fro. the equation:

(6)

The results of these calculations deucnstrate good agree-eat of the velocities
arrived at with the sign and intensity of the development of atmospheric pro-
ceases.

The scan monthly values over many years of the air lass transferred in the
vertical direction through a unit area are calculated in the following Ianner:

P;. - 1' i (9' ﬂ); 0
“ M (s)

where (o'u) is the mean monthly values of the aoseatun for each year. and
o' is the Idea density of the air in the layer.

The results of the co-putations are presented in the fore of sections in the .
Ieridionsl and vertical directions over Antarctica along the Hiruyy - Vostok -
- Aaundsen-Scott - Byrd line for January and July (fig 3).

b0
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
g as saw taiéit‘nn 5: Ac

   
   

.§ ks LR .§ its
§§r
. . .

 

FOR "Fl-'ICMI. USE ONLY

\| ‘OII'IOIUO
\Q

| \
lllllllll
\

and key on following page]

“1

FOR OFFICIAL 088 MY

caption

[Continuutom

ﬁgure 3.
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

33‘ an i
h .g

 

0 330:3 3 G
.R L: in»

an

  

3 2. i=9 I3.§n 1a?
.a .5‘ i a .II

 

Transfer of Mr it... our Antarctica to Janus

k-Iﬂ'ﬂﬂond (10-3

.[Kcy on removing page]

y (2):

(1) and Jul

1y
teal (10-6 sled-I)

hunt:

”I ORIGIN. USE ONLY

ﬁgure 3.
FUN iWPlCI/il. USE ONLY

Key:
1 . if. lab 5. Amundsen-Scott
2 . South latitude 6. Voatok
3. Antarctica 7. Hirnyy
lo . Byrd

In January (fig 3a, 1) in the troposphere and lowest layer of the stratosphere
are observed two sajor air mass flows aised toward one another. Pros regions
of the Pacific Ocean the air travels through the geographical pole and the
Vostok station to the central regions of East Antarctica. Above the Byrd
station this flow extends to an altitude of 12.5 kn. In the ease region are _3
observed nasisus values of momentum. reaching near Earth's surface 516.7 x 10
g/cs3~s; at the opposite end of the continent--through the Hirnyy station area--
the air soves from regions of the Indian Ocean to the plateau. These seridional
‘flows last at the plateau. Because of the convergence of soeentun. here is
for-ed a surplus of less. part of which is cospensated by the runoff of air
in a thin surface layer through the Amundsen-Scott station area into the area
of the Hirnyy station.

In higher atsospheric layers is observed a unified seridional transfer of
nasses fro: the Indian Ocean coast of Antarctica through the geographical pole
to the Pacific Ocean coast. Thus, in the suuer period. in spite of reduced
tesperature contrasts. the pattern of horizontal air eoveoent in the Isridional
direction appears rather clear. The key features of this pattern are the con-
vergence of assess in the troposphere over the central regions of East Antarc-
tice and the runoff of air fros the dose in a thin surface layer.

In keeping with the pattern of horizontal sovesent of air losses. a field of
vertical sovesent also ferns in the stmspherc (fig 3b. 1). l'or example, in
the sons of convergence above the plateau are observed descending novesenta
'with nasims velocities in the troposphere on the order of 0.17 to 0.20 calls.
which corresponds to e nosentus in this region of frol 50.10"6 to 55-10'6 glee .
Ascending novenents are observed in the troposphere of the coastal zone of

Best Antarctica (up to 0.65 cs/s in the 850 to 700 ab layer) and over the

Byrd station (0.21 cIa/s in the middle troposphere).

Heridionsl flows generally reach their saxim values in July. The greatest
changes have occurred in the stratosphere. Whereas in the sunser period over
the region discussed has been observed a unified flow of masses from the Indian
Ocean to the Pacific Ocean coast. in the winter air from the Pacific Ocean
predosinates over Heat Antarctica.

The seridionsl flow of air assess in the stratosphere is most intense in the
region of the coast of Best Antarctica where solentus values are alsost an
order of sepitude higher (froe 35-10'5 to 1055.10‘3 g/cszos) than the corres-
ponding values typical of the area of the Byrd station (fros 2'10'3 to 9'10"3
glcnz-s). This also explains the possible anoealies in tesperature conditions
observed nost often over the coast of Best Antarctica. They represent the
prerequisites for springtiee rearrangennts of the teqersture and pressure
field in the stratosphere.

1.3
roe onrcuu. use ONLY
The vertical transfer of air saseee varies little fron fall to winter (fig

3b. 2). The mechanism of mass sovenent is maintained as before. with the
predominance of descending novesents over East Antarctica and of ascending
lovenents. sore pronounced than in the fell. over Heat Antarctica. whereby the
distinctive feature of these uovencnts is an increase in the intensity of
vertical transfer over the entire region considered, especially in the strato-
sphere.

The advent of suaner conditions in the stratosphere is most often accoaplished
through regions of Best Antarctica. In October the anount of air transferred
here fron the ocean is reduced in all layers of the etnosphere. This takes
place chiefly because of a reduction in cyclone activity during the spring
period as conpared vith the winter. The nest intense sir exchange is observed
in the 200 to 150 lb layer. In precisely this section of the stratosphere the
total transfer of the quantity of air is increased froa July to October. Con-
sequently. here take place great seridional disturbances. corresponding to the
process of the intrusion of an anticyclone from ocean regions onto the seinlend.

The intensification of the influx of air in the stratosphere free the direction
of the Indian Ocean is compensated not only on account of its partial flovoff
in the direction of Heat Antarctica. but also because of the activation of
descending aovenents of leases. whose role in the foraation of the spring
circulation cycle is neat significant. Beginning in the upper layers of the
stratosphere. intensification takes place in the descent of air over Bast Ant-
arctica. along with the spreading of descending sovenents to Heat Antarctica.
for exaaple. over the Anendsen-Scott station ascending aovenents are recorded
in the spring only in the troposphere. Over the coast of East Antarctica in
the aigdle stratosphere the velocity of descending covenants reaches 0.8 to
1.0 ca s.

In Antarctica' a air coluan up to the 20-hn point, the seas of the air on
average for a aonth equals 99.1 1015 kg. and its variations over the course
of the year equal two percent. This air sass, because of the high-altitude
nature of the continent. is 1.6-fold lower (in cosparable areas) than the
nean sass over the Arctic. but the intensity of air exchange is greater in
Antarctica than in the tropical zone of the northern and southern hendspheres
and the Arctic at cospsrsble areas. This fact indicates the large role of
vertical love-ants of air over Antarctica and of the low-pressure zone near
the coast in air exchange.

It is sufficient to note that the prevailing figure for the descent of air
over the 1continent free a saxisen in the 700 to 500 ab layer equals on average
115. 6- 10” kg/sonth.

The regular receipt of satellite inforsation in Antarctica begun in 1970 has
sade it possible to discover a nusber of features vhich have substantially
refined our ideas regarding the circulation and dynalics of the ataosphsra
in the southern heaisphere. Unlike ideas for-ed earlier. artificial Barth
satellite data have desonstrated that the zonal paths of cyclones are dis-
tributed over a rather extensive area. The axis of this area. characterised

bk
’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by a maximum number of paths. passes approximately along 58’ latitude south.
but not near the coast. as was thought earlier. The northern boundary of
zonal paths of cyclones migrates from 45 to 50‘ latitude south in the warm
season to 35 to «0' latitude south in the cold. This fact has been reflected
also on charts obtained for distribution of the cloud cover.

In studying atmospheric processes in the southern hemisphere it was established
that here all processes can be generalized into three forms of circulation: a
tonal and two meridional. On this basis atmospheric processes at high latitudes
in the southern hemisphere have been given a standard classification. This
standard classification has made it possible to extend the macrocirculation
method of weather forecasting of the AANII [Arctic and Antarctic Scientific
Research Institute]. as well as the hydrodynamic method based on utilizing a
spectrum model of the dynamics of planetary atmospheric circulation. to the
high latitudes of the southern hemisphere.

Experiments have been conducted on mathematical modeling of circulation in the
southern hemisphere at the AT-SOO level. A determination was made of the nature
of the influence of nonlinear factors on the formation of a longterm trend in
the development of atmospheric circulation. Experiments in forecasting AT-SOO
for eight to lo 26-hour periods have been run on the "Minsk-32" cosputer. The
correctness of these experimental forecasts has been about so percent.

Thermal Conditions

The role of the polar regions is great in the formation of thermal contrasts

on the planetary scale. and. consequently. of the intensity of overall atmo-
spheric circulation. since the greatest temperature ranges are observed in these
regions.

The mean annual air temperature in the surface layer along 70‘ latitude north
and south equals -9.2 and -ll.0'C. Furthermore. the annual temperature range
in Antarctica equals 17.1“. uhereaa in the Arctic it equals 31.6‘. Consequently.
the thermal conditions of the coast of Antarctica are more "marine" than those
of the coastal regions of the Arctic Ocean. Of course. a great. if not a major.
role in the stability of the air temperature on the coast of Antarctica belongs
to the foehn effect during the period of flouoff winds. for this reason on

the coast of East Antarctica in the cold season of the year the air temperature
is five to seven degrees higher than in the analogous season in the Arctic.

And in the warm season of the year in Antarctica. in spite of the increased
influx of shortwave solar radiation resulting from the perihelion position of
Earth in its orbit. because of the glacier's high albedo. the air temperature
turns out to be nine to ll degrees lower than that of the Arctic.

The vertical distribution of air temperature has made it possible to determine
the structural features of the atmosphere'a composition. At intracontinental
stations the troposphere is colder than at coastal. and the stratosphere is
warmer in summer and colder in winter. In the troposphere the difference be-
tween the mean temperature in January and July in the 500 to 300 mb layer
equals about 12°. and in the stratosphere reaches 45 to 55' at the 10 to 20 mb

"5
son onrcuu. use our
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

level. The above-mentioned reasons for tenperature stability in the surface
layer (advection of sea air and adiabatic naming as it descends) result in
the fact that the continental features expected in the upper troposphere are
not observed.

The spatial position of iaothern levels over Antarctica has a nuaber of well
pronounced features. The key distinctive feature of the thereal field of
Antarctica‘e troposphere is the slope of isothern levels which contact the
continent's ice cap. This feature, as is the presence of a surface cold cap.
is most clearly pronounced in the winter.

Changes in thermal fields in the first half of the fall period are most pro-
nounced in the stratosphere. where the drop free January to April equals 33'.
The temperature drop at Earth's surface reaches 30'. and in the troposphere
four degrees maxi-us. As the result of these changes by April- a region of
cold fares at altitudes of about 25 to 30 la. There is pronounced intensifi-
cation of this region of cold in the area of the tropopsuse and in the surface
layer. All three of these cold centers. positioned one above the other. are
localized within the boundaries of the Iainland. which apparently points toward
the growing role of radiation cooling and toward the cooling influence of the
Iainland.

The form of isotheras in April creates the impression that in the lower strato-
sphere there exists a were ring surrounding a colum of cold air. This ring

of war- air. which has been traced at altitudes of 10 to 16 kn. and beginning at
about 55° latitude south, at altitudes of 12 to is lee. is located approximately

over th: continent's coastline.

by aid-winter. over Antarctica at altitudes of 20 to 25 In is located a strato-
spheric region of cold with a lean Ionthly tenperature of about ~90‘. to
addition to this region. over Bast Antarctica there is a well pronounced sur-
face region of cold with a mean teaperature in July of «438' (Vostolt station).
The subsequent seasonal tenperature changes are highly noteworthy in tens of
the annual cycle. The teaperature rise process (fro. July to Rove-bar) is

neat observed (approxinetaly -50') at altitudes of 20 to 25 It. and (approxilata-
ly ~-20‘) in the surface layer on the glacial done. The slightest changes

(lo to 1') are observed in the middle and upper troposphere.

In the suI-sr the stratospheric warn-air region is situated above 30 h. and
the lowest-tesperature region at the level of the tropopsuse (-56'). To de-
teraine periods of seasonal transfomtions in therlal fields in the lower
stratosphere. we have analysed the annual behavior of teqerature at constant-
pressure levels of 200. 100 and 50 It at the liirnyy station (fig a). At these
levels. in the annual thenal cycle are found periods representing intraeeasoeal
and interseaaonal trmforuations. i.a.. the appearance of a winter liniu.

a spring rise in teeperature. conversion of lapse rates to inversions. the
appearance of a spring-senor maxim. a period of smer high te-perature. and
a fall-winter drop. in the course of which a reverse takes place in teqerature
lapse rates free su-er inversion to winter.

u6
roe omcrat use my
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Uauelly in the annual cycle appearances of an extreme teuperdture are
aeparated by a period of a half a year. but this ie not obeervcd here. Accord-
ing to the lean date the appearance or e lininun telpereture at ell equal-
preaaure levela occura at very brief intervelenbetvean 3 and 18 Auguet. i.e..
ehout the niddle o! the aetrononicel winter.

 

Pigure Io. Annual Behavior of Air Tenpereture et Conatant-Preaeure
Levele of 50 lab (1). 1.00 ab (2) end 200 lb (3) at turn”
in 1967

The length of the period iron the winter minim to the apring teaperature
urine in the 100 to 50 eh layer equals on average 108 to 114 daye. vhich
acute to aoeevhat leaa than one third of the year. At the 200 lb level
the average length of thie period equale 150 days. It ie neceaeary to note
the aigniiicant ditferencea in the thereal cycle between the 200 lb conatant-
preeaure level and the 100 and 50 lb levela. It ie ohvioua froe coeparing
the behavior of the teeperature in theae layera that during the van aeaeon
the 200 d level provea to be the coldest, uhereae in the cold half of the
year it ie the var-eat. In addition. the period of appearance of a tenet-a-
ture mine at the zoo eh level coaea about so daye later then at the so ah
level. Thia agreea with the known aeaaonel teaturee of teqerature distribu-
tion in the upper tropoaphere and lover atratoaphere.

Bapecially prolinent in the annual cycle ia the apring rearrange-ant of
ta-perature fielda in the lover atratoaphere. which we will diacuaa in very
great detail. Thia can he conaidered the key period for the appearance of
nonperiodic diaturhancea of the annual teqerature cycle. A characteriatic
feature of thia period ie a very rapid riee in telperature in the lover

In
POI ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stratosphere. The rise in temperature in these layers is such that by the
end of the spring rearrangement the temperature here reaches values which
are maximum values at these levels for the entire year. although they occur
in the second half of the astronomical spring season. and not in the summer.

The appearance of a maximum temperature is observed at the 100 and 50 mb
constant-pressure levels at middle periods-~from 5 November to 21 December.
i.e.. in the second half of the astronomical spring season. and at the 200 mb
level between 10 and 25 January. which approximately corresponds to the middle
of the astronomical summer season.

A change of sign in temperature lapse rates (reversal) always accompanies sea-
sonal rearrangements of stratospheric temperature and pressure fields. Periods
of reversal of temperature lapse rates quite clearly reflect seasonal changes
in atmospheric circulation taking place at these levels.

The process of spring reversal of lapse rates must be associated with lowering
of the warmeair region. which. having formed in the higher layers of the strato-
sphere. is spread downward. causing deformation of the stratospheric portion

of the cyclonic vortex.

A determination was made of spring dates of the reversal of temperature lapse
rates in the layer between the 200 and 50 mb constant-pressure levels for nine
antarctic stations. from radiosonde observation data for 1961-1970 (the length
of periods for some stations equaled from six to 10 years). Mean dates were
detersined Eros specially plotted curves.

As the result of an analysis of these curves. the following mean dates were
arrived at for the reversal of temperature lapse rates in the spring period
in the layer between the 200 and 50 mb levels:

Hirnyy 16 Sep . Amundsen-Scott 8 Oct
Vostok 30 " Halley Bay 16 "
holodeahnaya 25 Sep Argentine Islands ' 20 "
Novolasarsvskaya 6 Oct Hallett 23 "
Byrd 6 Oct

Consequently. the period during which spring reversal of temperature lapse
rates takes place over Antarctica in the 200 to 50 mb layer on average equals
the period from 16 September to 20 October. i.e.. corresponds to the first
half of the astronomical spring season.

It can be assumed that there can be well pronounced seasonal reversals in
temperature lapse rates only at the higher latitudes. This assumption is

based on the fact that. if_the reversal of lapse rates is associated with
seasonal rearrangements of stratospheric circulation. then the spatial spreading
of this phenomenon must be limited to those latitudes at which a seasonal

change in sign in stratospheric temperature and pressure fields takes place.

To verify these ideas. consideration was given to data for ﬂowe Island for
seven years (1962-1963. 1965-1969). It was determined that no seasonal re-
versal of temperature lapse rates is observed on Howe Island.

#8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Poa' orncm. use ONLY

Similar temperature data were considered for the Hacquarie Islands (approx.
510' latitude south) for the period 1963-1969. The temperature cycle on the
Hecquarie Islands proved to be more disturbed than on Rowe Island. but con-
siderably smoothed out as compared with antarctic stations. During periods of
spring stratospheric rearrangements. which were recorded at higher latitudes.
on the Hacquarie Islands there was a moderate rise in temperature. but no
reversal took place in lapse rates in the 200 to 80 mb layer.

In comparing the data presented it is obvious that in the range layers con-
sidered the temperature rises along the line from low latitudes to high.

The earliest dates of the reversal are recorded in the Indian-Australian sec-
tor. and the latest in the Atlantic sector. we know that during periods of
spring rearrangement of temperature and pressure fields in the stratosphere
of Antarctica the center of the stratospheric portion of a cyclone shifts
into the Atlantic sector. If this pattern does occur. then applying it to
the phenomenon discussed can explain the position of isochrones for the re-
versal of temperature lapse rates in the lower stratosphere.

In spite of the fact that the spring periods of a rise in temperature comprise
a portion of seasonal transformations of thermal fields. they are usually con-
sidered stratospheric war-up periods. Therefore, the above-mentioned periods
of a rapid spring rise in temperature and the appearance of a temperature

maximum must be considered the consequence of stratospheric warming. observed
during spring rearrangement of stratospheric temperature and pressure fields.

During the period 1961-1969. at the Hirnyy. Voatok, Holodezhnaya and Novolaza-
revskaya stations this warming was observed each spring season. Since this
warning (like the reversal of lapse rates) is observed each year, this provides
an opportunity to represent it by certain mean characteristics. Taken as

-the beginning of this warming is the end of the period of level temperature
lapse rate reversal. and as the end. the time when the temperature reaches

a maximum.

The spring stratospheric warming period exhibits differences from winter
warming. In this connection it is possible for a certain vagueness to arise
in explaining the time limits for the phenomenon. since during this period
the rise in temperature more often does not take place smoothly. but consists
of certain fluctuations over a considerable range. For example. very typical
is the year 1967 (cf. fig 6). when at Hirnyy at the 50 ab level from 20 Sep-
tember through 31 October (62 days) were observed five fluctuations with an
‘average range of about 28'. Usually in one of these concluding fluctuations
the annual temperature maxi-mm is recorded, after which the temperature drops
somewhat and during the period of the warm season no longer reaches values

of this sort. The impression is created that the temperature of these layers,
in addition to the seasonal cycle brought about by radiationel causes. ex-
periences the influence of certain aperiodic surges which create fluctuations
over a wide range against the backdrop of the seasonal rise in temperature.
These surges nust bearelated to the influence of dynamic factors which arise
during the spring disturbance of the stratospheric portion of the cyclonic

1&9
roe onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vortex. The influence of dynamic factors during. this period has been ac-
knowledged by many investigators. although they sometimes attach a different
signiﬁcance to it.

The manifestation of the annual temperature maxi-um in the lover stratosphere
over Antarctica has a rather broad range of variation in tcrea of space and
time. For example. vhenees the maximum is most of ten observed at the 50 ab
level in November. at the loo ab level it is observed in Deceeber. end at the
200 ab level in January. It is obvious from this that with a reduction in
altitude the time for appearance of the maximum shiits to later periods. i.e..
is extended from up to down. This has been verified by the mean and extreme
dates of appearance of the temperature maximum

The mean length of the period 8A0. reversal of lapse rates in the 200 to 50 mb
layer to the appearance of the maximue temperature at the 200 mb level is

107 days. at the 100 ab level 75 days. and at the 50 mb level 55 deys. During
this period in 76 percent of the cases the tespersture at the 50 ab level rises
from 31 to 60'.

The spring temperature maximu- in the lover stratosphere is observed first in
the Indian-Australian sector. and then moves in the direction of the Atlantic
sector. It is possible that these characteristic features of the spring tee-
pereture cycle in the lover stratosphere are determined by the features of
atmospheric circulation in the Indian-Australian sector.

It is obviousthat all this is the result of a rise in baroclinicity here.
which c-‘.abliehes this sector as the place for the earliest spring disturbance
of the cycle of the stratospheric portion of the cyclonic vortex.

Anterctica's hydrological Cycle-

As the result of existing climatic conditions. about 90 percent of the fresh
water of rivers. lakes and glaciers on the globe is concentrated in Antarctica.
The dynamics of these resources is of extraordinarily great importance to

the entire globe (Voskresenskiy. 1961; "The Horld's Hydrological Cycle...."
197‘). Antarctica does not have considerable sources for hueidifying the
atmosphere for the purpose of maintaining the cycle within the range of the
region; therefore. the key role in snow accumulation belongs to the edvection
of water vapor from ocean regions.

in the table are given the characteristics of the hydrological cycle for
three regions of Antarctica typical of the major geographical zones of the
continent (Voskreeenskiy. 1976). Taking into account the relative stability
of atmospheric processes in Antarctica, the assuntion was made that each
serological station characterizes a region 280.000 b2 in area (effective
radius of station, 300 he). '

A characteristic feature of the ice shelf zone is. in addition to high evapor-
ation in the suaer season (10 1:13). the considerable sublimation of water

50
FOR OFFICIAL 053 01113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vapor on the surface of the ice during the winter period. which totals 18 km).
The hydrological cycle coefficients for all zones are not too high (1.00 to
1.04). which is indicative of the advective source of precipitation. The
etsospheric drain of moisture caused by evaporation equals from zero in the
ice shelf zone to 49 km3 in the coastal zone and reflects the circulation
features of these regions. The ratio of the total atmospheric removal of
moisture free the region to the occurrence of precipitation points toward
sild precipitation forsing processes. In the ice shelf zone P./P factors
equal 1.00 to 0.98 at the Vostoh station. and 0.97 at the Hirnyy station.

Characteristics of the hydrological Cycle in the Atsosphere Over Antarctica
for the Year

Characteristic Ice Shelf Intra- Coastal zone
Zone (Laza- conti- (Hirnyy station)
rev station) nentel

region

(Vostok

station)
Area. 1-2 3 200.000 200.000 200.000
Precipitation, P, km 80.1 10.6 119.6

Atmospheric moisture
content in 0-7 km

layer, a, 0.3 0.0 0.1 1.0
Total annual moisture

transport. A, lua3 Hole 25 605
Advsctivs precipitation,

r , no.3 00.1 10.2 110.1.
Pr‘cipitstion from evapo-

ration from continent,

p , u3 0 0.2 5.2
‘l‘rgnsit of moisture across

continent. C - A - I".

11-3 361 15 691
Atsespheric runoff of

moisture caused by eve ora-

tion from conﬂuent. c - B -

- r. 10-3 ' . 0 0.92 40.0

Total resova: of moisture in the

atmosphere from continent. C -

- c1 + c2, 1.3 361 10 540

hydrological cycle coefficient 1.0 0.98 0.97

note: The concept “precipitation" includes accumulating (sublimation) pre-
cipitation. P - P + Paccum .

Since the zones selected are typical. the advective origin of. the precipitation
does not cause doubt. The mechanism for the advection of moisture remains in

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

naod of explanation. In {is 5 ia ahovn the total noridionnl noiatura trana-
port nvaragcd tron daily data tor a period of many years iron the Hirnyy -

- Voatok - Mundaan-Scott - Byrd - Argentina Ialanda atationa in an atnoapharic
coin-1 extending Iron tha undorlying surface to 5 ha. incluaiva. Tha noiaturo
tranaport figuraa givan hora agree wall with the oxiating pattern of circula-
tion ovar Antarctica. In tho vintar in tho tropoaphoro the noiaturo transport
ia diractad iron the Indian Ocean toward Antarctica (Hirnyy atation). vith a
union- at tho 3 ha laval (-1.5 alts/ma). In the araa oi the Voatok atation
tha tranaport figure aquala zero. Iron thu direction of tha Antarctic Penin-
aula ia diractad a largo-acala tranaport of noiatura. vhich at tho 3 ha laval
cquala 3.0 s/kg/a-a and raachoa the South Pole.

  

'I 0 6));1
-I-b m
.1 _ ‘—
9’ 1’,— \\ w
CO ,/—/./I \ a
l) ‘ AM- - W a an: 5) And—-
I - 0 ' “I
I / o—ﬁ
cu ~
' N
I ‘\\
J " fa . a a
1M 2 an 3 , «1—6 a— s w -’

Pigura S. ‘ Total Horidional lioiatura Tranaport Ovar Antarctica (kg/ma)
in January (a) and July (h)

Kay :
l . Argantina Ialanda lo. Voatok
2. Byrd -S. nirnyy
30 M.m’sc°tt 60 P. g

In tho diatrihution or loiatura thara ia a diatinctly pronouncad influanca

of orography on the depth of panatration of air man into tha continant.

0n the Heat Antarctica aida. vhich ia mildly alopin; and narrow, noiat maca
fro. the ocaan pcnctrato into tho intarior of tha continant in cyclonic for-a-
tiona two tinaa further than in But Antarctica. In hat Antarctica. by

52
ton onrcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

virtue of the considerable height above sea level and great steepness of the
slope. cyclones usually cannot penetrate far into the interior of the con-
tinent. and those that do are without the lower east moisture bearing section.

In the suamartime the distribution of aeridional transport is practically
aaintained coaplstely. But there is a change in the proportion of components
in the transport. with a twofold increase in the atmospheric aoisture content
the meridional coaponent of the wind velocity is reduced. and on the whole the
transport of aoisture in the troposphere reaains the same as in winter.

Zonal transport of moisture evidences a distinctly pronounced annual cycle
and is reduced drastically from coastal regions into the interior of the con-
tinent.

It is of specific interest to estimate the amount of outside-cloud precipitation.
a phenpaenon widespread in Antarctica. The existing mechanism for meridional
circulation continuously supplies relatively warm and moist ocean air to the
upper troposphere and lower stratosphere. The moisture content near the under-
lying surface is exceptionally low because of the low temperature. Thus.
humidity inversion is created. which is observed practically all year. Be-
cause of descending aovenents. "moist" air masses reach saturation. and the
crystals formed fall to the surface. This phenomenon is widespread in terms

of time and space. and, in spite of negligibly lav 24-hour figures (less than

0.1 an), about 60 k-3 of water falls over Antarctica annually.

X

 

rigure 6. Diagraa of Hydrological Cycle in Antarctica (Rea): A-advection
of water vapor; P.-precipitation in the form of sublimation
of water vapor at the surlace; P --precipitation on account of
crystals; P -precipitation from advective water vapor: P-
total amount of precipitation per year; c'-transit advection
of water vapor; c-annual extent of evaporation

53
roe orncm. use our
Fl)" HH-‘IIIIM. "SE IINM'

In (is 6 la shown a dingran o! tho hydrological cycl in Antarctica. we
have not total annual advcctlon at 2600 km . £500 km of which soon toward
precipitation. Hater vapor from evaporation (160 :3) in apparently renoVQd
by runoff. and cloud formation proccnaea (deacending loveacnta) have evolved
but alightly in Antarctica. Thus. cliutic runoff equals about 270 its-3 of
water per year. which equals one tenth of the entire total of ndvection plua
evaporation. Nonty-thrce hundred cubic hilonctera arc withdrawn iron the
global hydrological cycle to maintain the 2500 hail of precipitation which
fella on Antarctica. Tho problea of the ratum of thin water to tho global
ocean has not yet been treatod fully. On the whole, Antarctica. which con-
priaee about 2.5 percent of the total area of Earth. annually coneunea about
all: percent of the nurplua Iolature dcliwred into the otloaphere by the global
OCCCRo

‘l'he Cooling Role of Mtarctica

 

Pigure 1. Deviation of Kean Annual Value. of Air reaperature in the
1-5 lua Layer at Points on the Coordinate Syeten, no. u“-
Latitude Valuce

51.
roe orncm. use om:
l-‘lm (WPIIIIM. USE ONLY

In studying the thermal cycle of the atmosphere at high latitudes in the
southern henisphere. the question arises of the thermal influence of Ant-
arctica on the ataosphere and ocean. V. A. Bugayev (1967) stated that this
question is of great interest free the viewpoint of both knowledge and prac-
t ca ty.

Let us discuss this problen. utilizing data on deviations of air teaperature
figures at points on the geographical system of coordinates froa the aid-
latitude value in the 1-5 kn layer (fig 7). The spatial distribution of

air tenperature deviation figures sakes it possible to point out well pro-
nounced areas of deviation with different signs. positioned ayanetrically

in relation to the Antarctic Continent. It has turned out that for the lower
troposphere at aoderate and high latitudes in the Atlantic-Indian sector nega-
tive deviations are characteristic. and positive for the Pacific Ocean sector.
from this it is possible to see that the lower troposphere is shown to be
considerably colder in the Atlantic-Indian sector that at the sale latitudes
in the Pacific Ocean sector.

It is possible to arrive at an explanation for this distribution of centers
of deviation by coaparing the relative position of latitude circles and iso-
hypses of the 700 lb constant-pressure level, which can be considered the
aidpoint of this layer. lsohypses on the seen annual AT-7OO chart deviate
from latitude circles in such a way that in the Pacific Ocean sector the ad-
vection of air takes place fron low latitudes to higher (heat transport). and
in the Atlantic-Indian sector there is a well pronounced aeridional cosponent
running free high latitudes to lower (cold transport). Consequently. the po-
sition of centers of deviation in temperature with different signs in terns
of the aid-latitude temperature is found to agree with the predominating forls
of transport in this layer. On this basis it can be said that the influence
of Antarctica as a source of cold is lost pronounced in the Indian sector.
The position of zones with the thickest ice cap in Antarctica and with the
laximun extent of ice during the year agrees coupletely with the position of
cold advection zones. Attention should be paid to the great ruggedness of
the coastline of Antarctica in areas of location of heat centers and to the
cooperatively aild features of the coast of Best Antarctica where the cold
center is located.

Another estimate of the cooling influence of Antarctica is represented by the
expenditure of heat in the equatorial tone to cospensate2 radiational cooling.
This figure has been estimated at approxisstely 5. 25 1022 J. In addition.

as indicated above. about 9. 109 tons of snow are reloved free the continent' s
coastline into the sea. for the thawing of which it takes 1.93"1011 J. of
course. these are just rough estilates which will be refined in the future.
but they indicate Antsrctica's significant role in the atmospheric energy
balance.

Conclusion

Since Antarctica is a key heat sink region in the Barth-atnosphere systes.
aeteorological conditions in this region will becoae lore intelligible in

55
ton onzcuu. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USh ONIN

relation to a consideration of the thermal. moisture and energy balance and
of those physical processes which they determine. Starting from these pre-
mises. the main objectives in the area of the meteorology of this region can
be formulated in the following manner:

1. Research on the radiation balance and development of n model of s standard
actinemetric atmosphere. The solution to this problem involves an extensive
combination of studies in the free atmosphere which is also of independent
scientific and applied significance (temperature profiles. water vapor. carbon
dioxide. osone. cloudiness. aerosols).

2. Research on the statistical structure of meteorological fields and develop-
msnt of climatological "standards" for the purpose of forecasting and studying
contemporary climatic trendo.

3. Research on the mechanism for circulation (vertical movements and horizon-
tal flovs) of pressure formetiens and on the quantitative characteristics of
the stmoephere's mass balance.

A. Research on thermal and energy transport. both within the scope of the
region itself. and at its outer limits. for the purpose of s quantitative
estimate of the role of Antarctica as a heat and energy sink. and on the role
of descending winds. atmospheric fronts. cyclones. anticyclones and jet streams
in the energy balance.

5. Research on the atmospheric hydrological cycle. and determination of the
role of Antarctica as a region for the runoff of atmospheric moisture. The
influence of the cryosphere on the climate and usether of various regions.
Research on continental ice and snow as climate indicators.

6. Development of models of climate and atmospheric circulation as means of
forecasting climate changes on a longterl basis.

Accomplishment of this program will enable us to come considerably closer to
a quantitative estimate of the role of Antarctica in overall atmospheric cir-
culation. The results of recent research presented briefly here have demon-
strated the possibility of new quantitative estimates of conditions and pro-
cesses in the atmosphere of Antarctica and of its influence on adjacent terri-

tories.

Bibliography

1. Aver'yanov. v.0. and Voskresenskiy. A.I. ”Certain Features of the Annual
Pressure Cycle at the Vostok Station." TRUD! 8A3. Vol 60, 1972.

2. Artom'yev, A.N. "Interaction Between the Atmosphere and Underlying Sur-
face on the Antarctic Plateau.” TRBD! 8A3. Vol 66. 1976.

56
roe ontcm. use our
3.

6.

5.

6.

7i

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

Astopenko. r.». "At-osfcrnyyc protseasy v vysokikh shirotakh Yuzhnogo
polushariys" [Atmospheric Processes at high Latitudes in the Southern
Melisphere]. Moscow. Isdatel'stvo AN SSSR. 1960.

"Atlas Antarktiki" [Atlas of Antarctica]. Vol 1. Moscow and Leningrad.
000K M0 SSSR. 1966: Vol 2. Leningrad. Cidrometooizdat. 1969.

Dolsin. I.M.. ed. "Aeroklimsticheakiy spravochnik Antarktidy" [Aaroclimatic
Handbook for Antarctica]. Books 1 and 2. Leningrad. Cidrometeoirdat. 1966.

Cuterman, 1.0.. ed. "Aeroklimaticheskiy spravochnik kharaktcristik vetrs
v uslakh koordinatnoy satki Yuzhnogo polushuriya no isobaricheskikh po-
verkhnostyakh" [Aeroclimatic Handbook of Hind Characteristics at Points
of the Coordinate System of the Southern Hemisphere at Constant-Pressure
Levels]. Moscow. Cidroneteoirdot. 1972.

Sugayev. V.A. "At-ospharic Processes in Antarktike" in "Canovnyye itogi
icucheniya Antsrktiki so 10 let" [Key Results of Antarctic Research Over
a lO-Year Period]. Moscow. Nsuks. 1967.

Voskreeenskiy. A.1. "Results of the Meteorological Observations of the
Pirst Air Expedition to Antarctica." TRUDY SAE. Vol 37, 1966.

Voakresenskiy. A.I. “Snow Accumulation in the Section of the Glacial
Slope (roe Mirnyy to the loo-km Mark." INFORM. BYUL. 8A3. No 63. 1967.

Voskresanskiy. A.1. "Centers of Condensation in the Area of Mirnyy,"
TRUDY 8A3. Vol 38. 1968.

Voskresenskiy. A.I. ”The Moisture Content in the Atmosphere of Ant-
arctica," TRUDY AANII, Vol 327. 1976.

Voakresenskiy. A.1. ”Meteorological Studies in Antarctica Over a
20-Year Period." INFORM. SYUL. 8A8. Mo 95. 1977.

Voskresenskiy, A.1. and Lysakov, B.P. "The Mechanism for "inter Meri-
dional Circulation Over Antarctica." PROBLEMY ARKTIKI I ANTARKTIKI. No
66, Leningrad. 1975.

Ceygerov. S.S. ”Aerologiya polyarnykh rayonov" [Aerology of the Polar
Regions]. Moscow, Cidrometeoizdat, 1966.

Csyserov. 8.8. ”Issledovsniye sinopticheskikh protsessov v vysokikh
sloyakh atmosfery" [Study of Synoptic Processes in high Layers of the
Atmosphere]. Leningrad. Cidrometeoizdst. 1973.

Csygerov. 8.8.. Zsychikov. S.P.. Kalikhasn. M.Ya. and Pedorov. v.v.
“Votduehnyye techeniys v mezosfere Antsrktidy" [Air Currents in the
Mesosphere of Antarctica]. Leningrad. Cidrometeoisdat. 1975.

57
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cuaev. am. “Theoretical Pattern of Air Circulation Over Antarctica"
in "Klieat Antarktiki" [The Climate ot Antarctica]. Hoacov, Ceografgiz.
1959.

Delgin. 1.1!. "Some Reaulta of Meteorological and Aerologicol Reaearch
in Antarctica During the Period 1956-1966.” INFORM. mm. SAC. No 57. 1966.

Zhdanov. l..A. "Ateoefernyyo protaeaay nad Voatochnoy Antarktidoy"

[At-napherlc Proceeeea Over Beet Antarctica]. ﬂoacov. ﬂauka. 1970. .

Kari-ova. 0.0. "Atloapheric Ozone in the Polar Regiona," TRIM AANII.
Vol 333. 1975.

Liaogurakiy. 11.1. "Temperature 1 tairkulyataiya voaduhha v atratoafara
Antarktiki" [Teeperatura and Air Circulation in the Stratoaphere oi
Antarctica]. Leningrad, Cidroeateoizdat. 1976.

Cuteraan. 1.6. and Voakreaenakiy, A.I., ado. "Hatarialy po klilatu i
tairkulyataii evohodnoy atloafary nad atraneai Yuzhnogo poluahariya”
[Data on Cliaate and Free Ataoapheric Circulation Over Countriea in the
Southern Haaiaphara]. Vole l. 2 and 3. No 1. “ocean. Cidrooeteoizdat.
1976.

'Mirovoy vodnyy balana i vodnyye roauray zamogo ahara" [Global hydrolo-
gical Cycle and Hater Resourcee]. Leningrad, Gidroeateoizdat. 1976.

Pctrov, vm. "Ataoafernoye pitaniye ledniltovogo pokrova Antarlttidy"
[At-oapheric Feeding of Antarctica'e Ice Cap]. Leningrad. 1975.

Ruain. NJ. "Sou haeulta of and Proapecta for Raaearch on the heteoro-
logy of the Surface Air Layer in Antarctica," mmm. m. 8A3. No 58,
1966.

Khanevakaya, 1.17., doctor of geographical aciancaa, profeaaor, ed.
”Sredniya anacheniya taperatury. davleniya i plotnoati na atandartnykh
motakh v uzlahh kartografichealtoy aetlti nad Yuzhnyn poluahariyu"
[than Valuea of Teaperature. Preaaure and Denaity at Standard Altitudea
at Pointa on the Cartographic Grid Over the Southern lieniapherel, Part 3,
"ocean. Gidroueteoizdat, 1972.

Tauher. can. ﬂakerov. Yu.V. and Nazarov. v.5. "On the 20th Annivereary
of Soviet hydrouteorological Beaearch in Antarctica" in "Antarktika

(Dokl. Koliaaii ca 1967)" [Antarctica (Report of the Co-iaeion for 1967)].
Hoacov, Nauka. 1969.

‘l'reahnikov, A.1'., Voakreeenakiy. 'A.I., Savchanko. v.6. and Tinohhov, l..A.
"Nataional'naya progra-a nauchnykh iaaledovaniy 8881! v Iazhdunarodnykh
programkh PIOAP. Polyarnyy eltaperiaant-Sever (Pam-Sever) i polyarnyy
ekaperilent-Yug (Fouls-mg)" [The 08811 National Scientific Reaearch

58
roe OFFICIAL use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Program in International Prograu of PIOAP. Poior Experiment North

(POLBKS-Sover) and Polar Expat-inn: South (POLEKs-Yusﬂ. Soviet PIGAP
Couioaion. Leningrad. 1976.

COPYRIGHT! Iadatoi'atvo "an“. 1978

8831
C80: OHM/0'69

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RESMS 0P SOVIEI‘ RESEARCH IN mm SOUTHERN OCEAN

Moscow WWI“: OSNOVNYYB l'l‘OGI IZUCIIZNIYA MAM!!! 2A 20 LET. DOW
KWISSII in Russisn No 17. 1978 pp 82-95

[Article by AJ. Treshnihov]

[Text] Reseerch in keeping with the progren for the International Geophysicsl
Yeer (use). in terse of its ecele end exceedingly inortent scientific velue.
hes leid the foundstion for s nev period in studying our plsnet. In keeping
with e unified end predeveloped progren. reseerch hes been begun on phenonsne
in Berth's crust. the etnoephers. spece, end the seas end ocesns. Sixty-five
countries hevs teken pert in this reseerch. An inportent position in the

mo‘. plens hes been assigned to studying Anterctice, es the lust studied

eree of Berth. In the Soviet union the orgenisstion of reeeerch in Anterctice
end it. eccoeplishesnt heve been entrusted to the Cashined Antsrctic Expedition,
specielly crested in 1955 under the euspices of the USSR Acedely of Sciences.

The interest of Soviet scientists in studying the southern poler region wee
understendeble. since neny netursl phenonem on the globe csnnot be understood
without observetions in Antorctics. Iniorsntion on hydroleteorologicel end
geophysicel processes in this region wes quite scenty. end on gsogrephicel
leps e considersble pert of Anterctice wee e white spot. Ships seiling in
the weters of Anterctice nsde hydroeeteorologicel observstions fer fro. the
continent's shores. being efrsid to cell for en extended period et the see
ice sons surrounding the continent.

An ieportent piece in the plsns of Soviet enterctic expeditions. in eddition
to reseerch in Anterctice. hes been occupied by observetions in the weters

of the Southern Oceen.

Unlike reeeerch conducted on Snglish vessels of the Discovery Conittee. re-
seerch during the tins of voyeges by vessels of the Soviet enterctic expedi-
tion. the expeditionsry vessels "0b'." "Lens." end others. covered not only
the northern. but eleo the southern regions of snterctic weters. including
the iloeting see ice zone.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OP‘HCIAL USE ONLY

The following have been the sain objectives or Soviet antarctic expeditions
in research on waters of the Southern Ocean;

1. Discovering the nature or the thernal and dynamic cycle of southern polar
waters. and or water and heat exchange with adjacent regions of the global
ocean and the atsosphere.

2. Studying the hydrological cycle of Antarctica's shelf seas.

3. Studying ice conditions and features of the distribution of icebergs. as
well as the physical-mechanical properties of antarctic ice.

a. Studying the circulation of surface and deep waters.

5. Gathering instruasnt data on elesents of waves in waters or the Southern
Ocean. and studying their relationship to wind and ice conditions.

6. Studying the geological and morphological structure of the ocean floor.
and asking a hydrographic survey of coastal regions of Antarctica.

7. Studying the zonal distribution of fauna in waters of the Southern Ocean.
8. Studying features of geophysical phenosena in the Southern Ocean.

Thus. in the prograa for antarctic aarins expeditions were concentrated all
the lost iaportant and least studied questions relating to the hydrology of
the Southern Ocean. Also paid attention to use the uneven distribution of
observations of the Southern Ocean water area nade prior to the start of the
H06.

Before the lid-50's a picture of the hydrological cycle could be drawn only
for certain regions of the Southern Ocean. The Indian and Pacific Ocean
sectors resained poorly studied. The region located south of 60’ latitude
south use alaost not covered by hydrological observations.

The results of oceanographic research done during the voyages of the expedi-
tionary vessel "Ob'” and other vessels of SAB's [Soviet anarctic expeditions]
begun in 1956 and continuing every year thereafter have been a great contri-
bution to the oceanography of the Southern Ocean.

The sale area for Soviet hydrological research has becoea the Indian sector
of the Southern Ocean. where observations have covered both coastal and
ocean areas. and this research has been conducted iron ships and airplanes
(aerial ice surveys) and at antarctic stations. host studied in the hydrolo-
gical respect. as the result of the work of Soviet antarctic expeditions. are
Davis Sea and Prydz. Alasheyeva and Leningradskiy bays.

Dsepuater observations on the open sea have sost frequently been Isde by
ﬂaking hydrological profiles. the enjority of which intersect the Southern
Ocean in a asridional or near meridional direction.

61
roe onrcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fifteen tines hydrological studios have been made on the cross section along
20’ longitude east tron Africa to Antartica. Observations have been node

four tines each on the Prenantlc (Heateru Australia) - Mirnyy and New Zealand -
Antarctica cross sections. Deeerving of attention are two hydrological cross
sections aade by the expeditionary vessel "Ob'" in the Indian sector on the
first two voyages. One of thea intersects the Indian Ocean from the Antarctic
coast to the Cult of Aden. and the other from Antarctica to the Bey of Bengal.

8A2 vessels have made a soneuhat lesser number of observations in the Atlantic
and I‘acific Ocean sectors of the Southern Ocean. In the Pacific Ocean sector.
in addition to the cross section between Nrw Zealend and Antarctica already
mentioned, observations have also been nude on croea sections along 160’ and
109' longitude west, on a cross section iron Easter Island to South America.
and in the region of the South Anerican coast. In the Atlantic sector studies
have been aede on cross sections in Drake Passage. tron Drake Peaaege to
Montevideo, and along 30° longitude west.

The greatest amount of oceanographic observations wee ads by 8A8 vessels--
the expeditionary veneela "0b'" and ”Lena"--during the first three expeditions,
i.o.. right during the tine the International Geophysical Year was held, the
Year of International Cooperation. and the International Year of the Quiet
Sun. During this tine, in addition to hydrological observations. research

was conducted on asrine biology and geology and studies were node of wave
activity. currents. sea ice and icebergs, the topography of the ocean floor.
optical hydrological characteristics. etc. Trips were aede to the little-
studied shores of Antarctica and they were described.

After the end of the H66 the ascent of physical oceanographic observations in
the Southern Ocean was considerably reduced. Major attention was paid to
studying the hydrological cycle and ice conditions of coastal regions of
Antarctttr. with the slightest opportunity studies were also ends on standard
meridional cross sections. Beginning in 1968. in addition to the expeditionary
vessel "Ob'." the scientific research vessels "Professor Zubov" and "Professor
Vice" began to take part in Southern Ocean research.

During the past 20 years SAB vessels have set up in waters of the Southern
Ocean About 1500 hydrological stations. of which about 1200 were iron on
board the expeditionary vessel "Ob'." On each voyage to Antarctica en-route
neasureaente were node of the te-perature and salinity of the ocean's surface

layer.

While 8A3 vessels have been selling in the Southern Ocean hundreds of thousands
of miles have been traveled while melting sonic depth finding aeasurenente, and
dozens of thousands of hydro-eteorological observations have been made. nea-
sureaents of ocean currents by name of am [electronechanical neasuring
aquipaentl have been ends for a distance of 35.000 nautical miles. At 26
hydrological stations. by aeane of 3” [expansion unknown]. neasureasnts have
been node of currents at deep levels, while recording current eleasnts for as
long as 30 26-hour periods. Bleaents of waves have been aeasured at 160

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stations. and 155 wave records and 980 stereoscopic images of waves (stereo
photographs of waves) have been nsde. At sore than 500 stations sasplee of
ocean floor sediment have been gathered; more than 200 measurements have

been made of the thickness of marine sediment by the seismo-acousticsl method;
and more than 300 geographical stations have been set up. Expedition biolo-
gists have collected more than 4000 plankton and about 1:00 bottom sampler and
trawl samples; 7300 specimens of fish have been recorded. On the 11th SAE
for the first time in Antarctica biological studies were made by using an
aqualung. On many journeys of the expeditionary vessel "Oh” I: cartographic
survey was made of the coastline, covering more than one third of the peri-
meter of Antarctica. It must be stressed that research conducted in the
gouthern Ocean‘on 3A3 vessels has been performed at a very high methodological
evel.

In recent years more and more extensive use has been made of computer techno-
logy in oceanographic research. "Minsk-22" and "Minsk-32" computers have

been installed on. the AANII [Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute]
vessels "Professor Zubov" and "Professor Vise," which have been at work every
year in the waters of the Southern Ocean. Because of this there has been an
increase in volume, quality has improved, and the time required has been
shortened for estimating oceanographic characteristics.

It is hard to overestimate the scientific inportance of the observation data
which has been gathered and of the research done. Without exaggeration it

can be said that during the last 20 years we have learned about the nature

of Antarctica i-easurably more than during the entire preceding history of
studies on it. Soviet researchers on the Southern Ocean have published dozens
of scientific reports. monographs and articles on natural phenomena in the
southern polar region. The majority of these have been published in TEDDY
SOVBTSKOY ANTARK'IICHBSKOY EXPEDITSII [Proceedings of the Soviet Antarctic
Expedition], in the collection PROBLW MIKI I ANTARK'IIKI [Problems of

the Arctic and Antarctica]. in the DIFORHATSIONNYY BYULLETEN' SOVBTSKOY
ANTARKTICRBSKOY EKSPEDITSII [Information Bulletin of the Soviet Antarctic Ex-
pedition]. in the journal OKEANOLOGICHESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA [Physical Oceano-

‘ graphic Research) of the Interdepartmental Committee on Proceedings of the
HOG, in the collection ANTARKTIKA [Antarctica], and in other publications.

But the fullest reflection of the results of comprehensive study of Antarctica
is found in the two-volume Soviet "Atlas Antarktiki" [Atlas of Antarctica].

In it is presented a long section on the oceanography, meteorology and biology
of the Southern Ocean ("Atlas Antarktiki," 1966. 1969).

In "Atlas Antarktiki" are presented the results of many years of research

on Antarctica conducted by scientists of different countries, and especially
by Soviet scientists. This atlas marks the end of the stage of elementary
study of the nature of Antarctica.

Below are presented the main scientific results obtained by Soviet researchers
in the Southern Ocean.

63
FOR onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Regarding the Boundaries of the Southern Ocean

Characteristic of the Southern Ocean is the absence of any distinctive morpho»
logical or orographic boundaries with the southern sections of adjacent oceans.
and therefore the question of isolating the vast ocean area surrounding Ant-
arctiea as an independent ocean has for a long time remained moot.

observation» made in recent years in antarctic waters have demonstrated that
the southern halves of the Atlantic. Indian and Pacific oceans (south of 60

to 65' latitude south) represent a unified independent physical geographical
region of the global ocean. distinguished b" unity and peculiarity of natural
processed. Therefore. the isolation of the Southern Ocean as an independent
ocean does not raise doubts now. Research conducted in the Southern Ocean has
not only proved the correctncr' of isolating it as an independent ocean. but
has also made it possible to precisely define its natural northern boundaries.
Previously many researchers took the zone of antarctic convergence as the
boundary of the Southern Ocean. But. as research has shown. the choice of
this zone as the boundary of the Southern Ocean is an unfortunate one. since
it runs through the southern half of the Antarctic Circa-polar Current (ATsT).
And it is precisely the Antarctic Circumpolsr Current. extending from the
antarctic divergence in the south to the subtropical convergence in the north.
which in essence forms all the key features of the hydrological cycle of the
Southern Ocean. Thus. only the subtropical convergence. representing the
northern boundary of the Aist. can be considered the natural boundary of the
Southern Ocean.

However taking into account the fact that the position of subtropical coa-
vergenrc varies over tile and is not always sufficiently distinctly marked.
in determining the boundaries of the Southern Ocean used in the Soviet "Atlas
Antsrktiki" use was made of a principle making it possible to draw boundaries
conventionally by taking into account local orographic features. but with a
aaximum approximation of the position of subtropical convergence (Kort at al..

1966; Treshnikov. 1968).
llydrography

in the cartographic and hydrographic respect, the least studied up to recent
times has been the coast of East Antarctica. here coastal regions abounded

in "white spots." Based on a cartographic photographic survey of the antarctic
coastline, the depiction of the coastline has been considerably refined for

a distance of more than one third of the periseter of Antarctica. Dozens of
new geographic points have been discovered (aouataias. glaciers. islands.

bays. and the like). From the results of this research new nautical charts
have been created for the Indian sector of the Southern Ocean.

Sonic depth finding measure-eats have made it possible to refine considerably
the relief of the ocean floor and to find a number of previously unknown troughs
and proniaences. The continental shelf of Antarctica has been outlined and a
study has been made of its sorphology. In certain regions of Antarctica ice
shelves shut off the greater part of the continental shelf. A ch.rgcter‘.t1c

6%

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR IWFICIAI. USE ONLY

feature of Antarctica's continental shelf is the fact that it is sunk deeper
(as much as 500 m) than around other continents (200 m maximum). This is
occasioned by the total submersion of Antarctica under the influence of

the gigantic ice load.

in many areas of Antarctica's shelf Soviet researchers have found narrow
intrashelf channels with depths as great as 2000 m. As explained by Soviet
geologists. their formation has taken place on account of the cracking of
Earth's crust during vertical tectonic movements of the Antarctic Continent
under the influence of a change in the thickness of the ice cap in the Quater-
nary Period CTreshnikov. 1963a).

Study by Soviet researchers in the coastal area of Antarctica of the configura-
tion of the coastline. the relief of the ocean floor. currents. water masses.
and ice conditions has revealed the individuality and isolated nature of a
nuaber of regions of Antarctica. As the result of a thorough analysis of

data obtained. at the present time on the map of Antarctica on a section of
the coast from 0 to 113‘ longitude west have appeared new land-locked seas,
answering all the requirements made for the concept "lane-locked sea." These
are the Lazarev, Riiser-Larsen, Kosmonavty, Sodruzhestvo and Hawson seas
("Atlas Antarktiki." 1969). Just recently the suggestion was made of singling
out a new independent sea-Somov Sea. so named in honor of the famous Soviet
polar researcher M.H. Somov.

Marine Geology

Prom data of research on the underwater topography of the Southern Ocean cnarts
have been sade of the types of topography of the floor of the Indian and Pacific
Ocean sectors. Based on a study of the composition of soil samples it has

been established that in the region of the antarctic continental shelf, the
continental slope and the peripheral section of the ocean bed iceberg deposits
predominate. forming around the continent a belt from 500 to 1000 km wide,

and in the deepwater section of the Southern Ocean, biogenic deposits.

In long soil cores was discovered a recurring alternation of sediment associ-
ated with fluctuations in climatic conditions. The analysis of data has made
it possible to study the history of the climate and glaciation of Antarctica,
as well as to at the present time come near to solving the problem of genetic
classification of the topography of the floor and of sediments over a vast
area of the Southern Ocean.

Oceanography

Physical oceanographic research in the Southern Ocean in the last 20 years
has made it possible to a considerable extent to refine and elaborate existing
ideas regarding the circulation of waters and to reveal the system of currents
at deep and floor levels. and also in little studied coastal regions. Based
on new patterns of water circulation constructed by Soviet scientists, it

has been determined that the hey circulation system of the Southern Ocean

65
roe orncm. use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is the Antarctic Circunpolsr Current. which governs the hydrological cycle
of waters of the southern polar region (Kort, 1963; 'i‘reshnikov. 1966. 1966).

This current is renarkably stable and is well evolved in terns of depth and
width. The width of the A'l‘a'l‘ varies free region to region froa 300 to 1500
ailes. and its depth of imreion free 1500 to 3000 n. A characteristic
feature of the A‘rs'l' is its asy-etry. i.e.. its configuration. which is
irregular and does not fall in line with the trend of parallels. The furthest
distance of its current free the shores of Antarctica is observed in the
Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean. and the shortest in the eastern half
of the Pacific Ocean sector.

The results of dynaaic analysis of observation data. as well as instrument
leesureeente of currents. show that the velocities of the Antarctic Circuepolar
Current are relatively not too high; even in the narrowest section of the
Southern Ocean—in Drake Passage. where velocities are nexisal—they do not
exceed 100 m/s.

The structure of the A'l's‘l' is rather coeplex. As a rule. the current is a
nultiple one. It is interesting that the wider the A‘i's‘i' is in a specific
region of the Southern Ocean. the sore nultiflow it is end the slower are
the velocities of currents observed in its streaes.

As the result of recent research. the hypothesis has arisen regarding the
existence in the Southern Ocean of a floor-level countsrcurrent. which has
been followed at alnost ell longitudes of the ocean beneath the nainstrean
of the .‘Js‘r (Treshnikov et al.. 1966).

A detersination has been nade of the key features of water circulation in
coastal regions of Antarctica. Around the Antarctic Continent have been
discovered soee instances of stationary water circulation located in areas

of cyclone localization. It has been hypothesized that the coastal antarctic
current consists of the southern peripheries of these instances of circulation.
Branches of this circulation directed northward from the continent relove
floating ice and icebergs to northern latitudes. This explains the relatively
rapid washing sway of sea ice fron a-nunber of regions along the coast and

the “nation of evacuation zonu. which sakes it possible for vessels to
penetrate into coastal waters relatively easily.

The first estieates have been obtained of water exchange and heat exchange
between the Southern Ocean and the Atlantic. Indian and Pacific oceans. It
has been established. in particular. that the Atlantic zone is a zone for
warning and replenishing waters of the Southern Ocean. The Indian Ocean

is a neutral ocean in relation to the Southern. while the Pacific Ocean zone
represents a zone for the discharge by the Southern Ocean of part of its
water (Treshnihov et al.. 1966). '

Date on water transport in the Southern Ocean testify to the fact that the
Antarctic Circunpolar Current represents a very powerful ocean current of

66
roe onrcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the glgbal ocean. In terns of the amount of water transported by it (about
500 kn lh). this current surpasses six- to elghtfold such a powerful current
as the Gulf Stress.

Physical oceanographic studies of recent years haVe shown that the velocities
of the KTsT and. consequently. the transport of water by this current. undergo
seasonal and longtera variations. Changes in the rate of flow of the ATsT

in time can reach 60 percent. high variability in the velocities of currents
and water transport figures is observed in the northern half of the Antarctic
Circunpolar Current. while in the southern half this variability appears
chiefly because of changes taking place in the structure of the currents
the-selves (Treshnikov et a1.. 1970. 1972).

In the last 20 years. sinultaneously with research on currents. studies have
been made of water masses of the Southern Ocean. The key water masses of Ant-
arctica and their interaction were revealed long before the beginning of the
HBO (Hakerov. 1956; Deacon. 1937; Swerdrup et al.. 1957). It was established
that the entire depth of the waters is divided into three types: surface ant-
arctic, warn deep and floor-level antarctic waters. Observations of recent
years have verified this division and have made it poasible to add to. refine.
and in sane cases to shed new light on the structure of water masses and the
key patterns of space and tine distribution of hydrological characteristics
and the factors causing then. These data have also made it possible to de-
ternine the reasons for and areas of formation of different water nasses and
the routes along which they spread. which is exceedingly important in studying
the thermal influence of waters of the Southern Ocean on waters of neighboring
oceans (Haksinov. 1961; Klepikov. 1963; Fonichev. 1965; "Atlas Antarktiki."
1969: Grigor'yev, 1972).

Before the start of the Mac. because of the lack of the necessary observation
data. charts of the distribution of hydrological characteristics in the
Southern Ocean were constructed according to the principle of smooth inter-
palation of isolines between the zone of antarctic convergence and the coast-
line of Antarctica. ﬂew charts constructed free the data of observations at

a rather dense network of oceanographic stations have shown that clearly aarked
zonality in the distribution of hydrological characteristics in surface waters
is observed not in the entire Southern Ocean. but only in its northern regions.
In the coastal regions of Antarctica the distribution of hydrological charac-
teristics has been shown to be exceedingly cosplex--saonsi. Here are observed
large tongues of cold waters which extend far northward. and relatively warm
waters heading toward the shores of Antarctica ("Atlas Antarktiki." 1966. 1969).

The main factors responsible for the couple: azonal distribution of hydrological
characteristics in coastal regions of the Southern Ocean are the processes of
atlospheric circulation and water circulation and the distribution of drifting

In recent years, with the accunulation of hydrological data in the coastal
zone and a deeper analysis of it. the question has arisen regarding the

67
ms orrrcm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distinction within the boundaries of the antarctic region of one more water
type-shelf waters. These waters are located on the continental shelf, in
regions directly abutting the coast of Antarctica. In teras of their origin
shelf waters represent modified antarctic surface waters from the wintertime
and are distinguished by very low tenperatures and very high salinity.

Extrene values of these characteristics (teaperature below -2.0‘. salinity
about 35.00 percent) can be observed within the range of the antarctic region
only in shelf waters. They are caused by snpercooling of waters in regions
of stationary ice clearings. and also by the influence of its shelves.

A careful and thorough study of shelf waters is the key to discovering the
secret of the genesis of floor-level antarctic waters. It is precisely shelf
waters. and not surface antarctic waters. as was thought earlier, which together
with warm deep waters participate in the formation of floor-level antarctic
waters. And if the mechanism for the formation of these waters is still not
completely clear at the present time. than the fact has already become indis-
putable that these waters form not only in Heddell Sea. as has been assumed

for a long time. but also in the Ross and Davis sees. in Prydz Bay. and in a
number of other coastal regions.

In connection with the "widening" of the boundaries of the Southern Ocean
northward to the zone of subtropical convergence. the efforts of scientists
have been directed toward investigating two more water masses of the Southern
Ocean located within the boundaries of the subantarctic region: subantarctic
surface and antarctic internediate wsters. Special attention has been paid
to studying this. since it has been established that these waters. as do eat-
arctic floor-level waters. extend far beyond the boundaries of the Southern
Ocean northward (right up to 60° latitude north) and exert a great influence
on thermal conditions of waters of the global ocean.

A thorough investigation of the circulation of waters and water lessee of the
Southern Ocean has made it possible to consider from a new viewpoint the mechan-
ism for the formation of frontal zones and their structure and geographical
location. Besides refinement of the boundaries and structure of the earlier
known subtropical and antarctic convergences. as well as of the antarctic di-
vergence, the subantarctic divergence and a number of other interaediete frontal
zones have been discovered. Seasonal and longterm variations in the position
of frontal zones have been revealed. At the present time in research on frontal
zones there is still a whole series of unsolved questions concerning primarily
their formation and structure (lvanov, 1961: Botnikov. 1963, 1969; Kort. 1967:
Buynitsltiy, 1974) .

There is the opinion that the origin of frontal zones in the Southern Ocean
and their geographical position are due chiefly to atmospheric circulation.
Recent research has shown that atmospheric circulation plays a definite role
in the formation of this frontal zone. but by no means a major one. Its ex-
istence. as the majority of scientists think. is related to the movement of
deep and floor-level waters.

08
_POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The zone of antarctic divergence is of a distinctive nature. According to
the data of observations by Soviet antarctic expeditions it has been deter-
mined that this frontal zone does not represent a continuous region for the
ascent of waters. but is detected in the fore of spots at the centers of
cyclonic cycles. This conclusion has been verified also by the results of
hydrobiological observations.

Sea Disturbance

0n the basis of instrument and visual observations of sea disturbance, ideas
have been arrived at regarding the features of wave fornation in different
cliaate zones of the Southern Ocean. along with information on the possible
values of wave elements ("Atlas Antarktiki." 1969).

It has been detersined that the key feature of Southern Ocean waves is their
great height and steepness. In some areas the height of waves reaches 25 to
30 n. This feature of sea disturbance is explained by the relatively not too
great wind acceleration caused by the horizontal dimensions of pressure forea-
tions passing over the ocean. The Iain areas of steady generation of store
waves are located in the cone of western transport of air masses. sore pre-
ciaely. within the range of 40 to 60' latitude south. In this zone have been
found five clisate regions with highly intense store seas. These areas are
directly associated with regions of heavily developed cyclone activity.

It is interesting that in the Southern Ocean a region of highly violent stor-
aeaa is found in the Indian sector with its center around Kerguelen Island.
To the east is found a New Zealand area of intense stern activity with its
center between New Zealand and Antarctica. In the Pacific Ocean sector such
a region is found approximately between 100 and 130 to 140‘ longitude west.
Two sore regions of heightened stern activity are found in Drake Passage.

Observation data have revealed seasonal variability in the intensity of sea
disturbance in the Southern Ocean.

Ocean Tides

Ebb and flow phenonena have been studied relatively little in the Southern
Ocean because of the widely spaced network of observation points.

because of this we have only a very general idea of the nature of tides in

this ocean ("Atlas Antarktiki," 1969). Near the coast of the Antarctic Con-
tinent is observed the predoninance of irregular diurnal or purely diurnal
tides. In some regions the nature of tides changes to irregular senidiurnal.

0n the open sea the diurnal conponanrs are few and tides are of a senidiurnal

or irregular senidiurnal nature. The anxious values of high tides very near the
antarctic coast fro: 1.6 to 3.5 n. The high tide figure is soaewhat lower

in the open section of the Southern Ocean.

New data on tides obtained at the tine of the HOG and in subsequent years
have nade it possible to refine considerably the cotidal charts for the

69
so: orucm. use om!
Southern Ocean. to nuke important adjustnents to our idea of the nature of
propagation of tidal waves. and to explain a nunber of features of tides
in the coastal area of Antarctica.

Sea Ice

During the period of work done by the Soviet antarctic expedition an inonse
group of observations of sea ice has been made. Ice observations are nede
regularly on expeditionary vessels. at coastal antarctic stations and fron
ice surveying aircraft. Pro- observations nade prior to 1962 su-aries have
been made in which intonation is given on ice conditions, along with charts
of the seasonal variability of antarctic ice (Treshnihov. 1963b; ”Atlas Ant-
arhtiki." 1966, 1969).

Further observations have nsde it possible to establish that the drifting of
ice in the antarctic region is in keeping with the fundamental patterns of
travel of surface waters and etnospheric circulation and is chiefly of a renal
nature (Yeskin, 1969; Buynitskiy, 1973). But the circulation of ice has a
number of distinctive features (Ronanov. 1976). Along the shores of Antarctica
ice drifts in a general westward direction; north of this zone there takes
place the renoval of ice in the north and northeasterly directions. and then
the ice is drawn into the easterly drift system. Several strong cyclonic
drift systems have been distinguished. whose positions natch the points where
clinatic cyclones station the-selves. A precise determination has been made
of the reasons for and the areas of formation of stable accumlations of drift-
ing icenice nassifs.

it has also been observed that ebb and flow phenomena and sea disturbance
influence the formation of channels and open water patches in the ice zone

of the Southern Ocean. During the period of three to five days after an
astrononical syzygy (a full noon or new moon), in the ice cap are formed long
channels up to 60 to 50 m wide extending approximately in the latitudinal di-
rection parallel to the general coastline.

In recent years in the practice of Soviet antarctic research nore and more
extensive use has been made of satellite information. which makes it possible
to obtain information on the distribution of sea ice in hard-to-reach and
little studied areas. '

It has been learned fron satellite observation data that the ice content of
the Southern Ocean. as_an indicator of which has been used the area of the
expansion of the ice cap in August-September, is related to forms of atmo-
spheric circulation. The predominance of a zonal form of atnospheric circula-
tion is accompanied by a low ice content. and the high recurrence of a neridi-
onal form is associated with a high ice content in the Southern Ocean. And
in only one instance has the predominance of the meridional fern been accol-

panied by a low ice content.

Against the backdrop of an overall increase or decrease in the ice content of
the Southern Ocean in some sectors of Antarctica is observed opposition in

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

alteration of the state of the ice. The greatest internnnunl changes in the
position of the edge of antarctic ice in August-September are observed in

the eastern half of Ross Sea and in Amundsen Sea. the Scotia Sea. in sectors
of 0 to 50' longitude east (the Latarev, Riiser-Larsen and Kosmonsvty seas),
and 100 to 160‘ longitude east (the Manson and d'Urville sens). The position
of the its edge in these areas varies from year to year from 100 to 250 miles,
and the ice content changes in synchronisn and accounts for a major percentage
of interannual variations in the ice content of the Southern Ocean.

Slight variations (0 to 100 miles) in the position of the ice edge in August-
September are observed in sections uhere opposition in a change in ice content
is characteristic. These sections very in terms of length from year to year,
and their position can shift to the east or west. On average they are located
in the following sectors: 15‘ longitude west to 20’ longitude east, 60 to 100°
longitude east (the Sodruzhestvo and Davis seas), 160' longitude east to 170°
longitude vest, and sporadically in the area of the Scotia Sea.

V.Yu. Vise (196‘) advanced a hypothesis regarding the unidirectionality in
fluctuations in the amount of arctic and antarctic ice. It was demonstrated
that the change in distance along the meridian from the Hirnyy station to the
edge of the ice in August-September correlates with the ice content of the
Greenland and Chuhchi seas. The shape of the curves asserts that definite
agreement in these changes is observed only in the Indian-Atlantic sector and

in the Greenland Sea, but in general they are out of synchronism with variations
in the ice content of the Chukehi Sea. The features revealed testify to the
complexity of the dynamics of the ice cap.

Preliminary research has shown that elements of an association are found in
changes in the state of the ocean ice cap in the Arctic and Antarctica. But
the mechanism of this association. to the same degree as the interaction of
ice caps with overall circulation of the atmosphere and ocean, is to a great
extent unclear and requires further research.

Icebergs

Icebergs exert a considerable influence on the hydrological cycle and ice
conditions of the coastal zone of Antarctica. The distribution of icebergs
probably does not undergo considerable changes from year to year. It is set
under the influence of steady factors, among which must be placed the station-
ary location of key areas for the production of icebergs, the general patterns
of the circulation of the atmosphere, surface waters and ice, and also the
configuration of the coastline and the relief of the ocean floor.

The boundary for the dispersal of icebergs almost agrees with the front of
antarctic convergence. The distribution of icebergs takes place in conformity
with the fundamental rules characteristic of the distribution of ice. The
density of icebergs is reduced with distance from the shore and on the open
see it does not exceed three. A reduction in the number of icebergs takes
place on account of intense melting and disintegration, as well as of their
dispersal as they advance into northern regions.

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A comparison has been nade between the size of icebergs and their geographical
location. and curves have been plotted for the probabilities of iceberg lengths
and heights south and north of 65' latitude south.

Marine Biology

Extensive observation data gathered by Soviet antarctic erpeditions have made
it possible to nahe great strides in the development of a nunber of big prob-
laee relating to the narine biology of the Southern Ocean. Included under
this heading in particular are such problels as that of biopolsrity. latitude
by latitude changes in fauna. patterns of vertical zonality for fauna. biolo-
gicel types of fauna. etc.

Quantitative and qualitative :haracteristics have been obtained for the tonal
distribution of plankton. For the first tile in Antarctica a quantitative
study has been ends of ocean-floor fauna fro. bottoa ealpler specimens. It
has been learned that one of the lost characteristic biological features is
the high variegation of its ocean-floor classifications with relative Ionotony
of underwater topography at depths froe 100 to 500 a. resulting in the absence
of distinctly narked vertical zonality. The Iain background of fauna on the
antarctic shelf is ends up primarily of organises which do not serve as food
for fish (sore than 60 percent).

In the collections which have been ease-bled there is a nunber of new species
and even genera of anilale. The Ieny subtropical species found along antarctic
fauna testify to the connection between deep waters of these regions. It has
been established that near the shores of Antarctica there is rather abundant
water plant vegetation-~sore than 100 varieties.

Ichthyologicsl research has also Iade important contributions to our knowledge
of the species conpoeition, ecology and distribution of antarctic ichthyofauna:
new previously unknown species, genera and fa-ilies of fish have been dis- '
covered. Leukemia has been detersined in nine species of fish. It was found
that the greatest variety of ichthyofeuna species is observed in the northern
seas within the range of the upper 100 n of the shelf, and near the shores of
Antarctica it shifts to a depth of 300 to 500 I.

The ocean-depth routes for the penetration of certain northern groups of fish
into the southern hemisphere have been discovered and verified. Along these
have been identified fish which cone to the surface in the zone of antarctic
convergence. So. specific species of fish can be indicators of different
water Iasses. Systeaatic observations of the distribution of sea birds.
pinnipeds and whales have Iade it possible to give a zoogeogrsphic description
of waters of the Southern Ocean.

In eulnary it Inst be said that the scientific develop-ant of oceanographic
observations Iade in the Southern Ocean during the past 20 years has brought
Iany important. interesting and valuable results and has to a considerable
extent enriched our knowledge of the nature of this section of the global

ocean e

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

In addition. the processing and analysis of available observation data have
made it possible to point out new problems which must be solved in future
scientific and expeditionary research in the Southern Ocean.

At the present time there has been exceptionally little study of questions re-
lating to the interaction between ice shelves and the waters flowing around
them. to the reasons and conditions for the formation of cold ocean-floor
waters. to the thermal influence of the Southern Ocean on waters of adjacent
oceans, and to the influence of the ocean on atmospheric circulation. There
has been little study of the variability of hydrological characteristics over
time. There is still no clear idea of many processes originating in waters of
the Southern Ocean and of the factors causing them.

At the same time it has become obvious that many processes originating in
waters of the Southern Ocean are directly related to atmospheric circulation.
and therefore can be explained only on the basis of a thorough study of the
interaction between the atmosphere and ocean. It was for this purpose that
the Polar Experiment (POLBKS) scientific program was developed. Its aim is
to study the large-scale interaction between the atmosphere and ocean in the
polar regions and their role in the formation of the energy balance of the
atmosphere-ocean system, and to reveal the mechanism forming longterm changes
in hydrometeorological processes in the Arctic and Antarctica.

A study of the hydrological cycle of the Southern Ocean and of the circulation
of waters and of their influence on changes in weather and climate conditions
on the global scale is called for in the "POLBKS-Yug" [Polar Experiment South]
program (Treshnikov et a1., 1973).

In keeping with this program. research in the Southern Ocean is aimed at
solving the following problems: 1) the dynamics of the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current (ATsT) as a component of overall circulation of the global ocean;

2) balances of energy and mass and other elements of the Southern Ocean;

3) the mechanism for the formation of antarctic ocean—floor waters and its role
in global circulation of the ocean.

Expeditionary research for enacting this program was begun in 1975 on the
scientific research vessel "Professor Zubov" and was continued in 1976 on
the scientific research vessel ”Professor Vize" (Treshnikov et al.. 1975).

Of course. expeditionary studies carried out in keeping with the "POLBKS-Yug"
program by utilizing a single scientific research vessel could not embrace

with their research both the entire set of goals set and the entire water

area of the Southern Ocean. Therefore. all efforts on these expeditions were
concentrated on carrying out one of the key experiments of this program-
"Dynamics of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current." The area for research selected
was Drake Passage, since this region is one of the most interesting from the
viewpoint of the dynamics of the ATsT.

In keeping with the main objective of the experiment, the expeditionary
operation program included a number of divisions, the major ones of which

73
ron orncm, use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vero a study of the space-time structure of the Ala? and disclosel of the
Iain causes governing its dynamics: obtaining data for verifying existing
models for circulation oi waters in the research area; a quantitative estimate
of water and heat exchange in Drake Passage and of their variations over time;
a study of stasll- and nedimcale space-time variability of physical oceano-
graphic fields in the passage; and a number of other problems.

Setting aside a division for verifying existing models for circulation of
waters in Drake Passage as an independent division was dictated by the
difference formed at the present time in vieva on the structure of currents
vertically.

The question is that among researchers on the Southern Ocean for a long time
the opinion has existed that the Antarctic Circunpolsr Currant—the strongest
current in the global ocean—has evolved vertically to very great depths. and
in certain regions down to the ocean floor. But in recent years. based on
data of estimates of currents by utilising hydrodynamical models. the hypothesis
has been advanced that in the Southern Ocean beneath the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current there exists a strong circuspolar countercurrent. which equals the
A'i‘s'r in its rate of flow (Tresluikov et al. . 197‘). The one thing has been
indicated by an analysis of the distribution of water lessee in the research
area. The nature of the distribution of velocities with depth contradicts

the conclusion regarding the equivalence of rates of flow of the A'i'al' and of
the countercurrent underlying it.

To disclose the actual pattern of currents in the Southern Ocean. longterm
iutmnt measurements of currents are required. by means of recorders in-
stellcd in self-contained buoy stations (ABS's). The taking of instrument
measuresents of currents. as well as the performance of a hydrological survey

in Drake Passage. have been a component part of the plan for full-scale research
on the ”WLBKS-Yug-B" and 'TOLBKS-Yug-M" expeditions.

An analysis of the space and time structure of currents in Drake Passage

has indicated its coaplexity. In the passage it is possible to distinguish
three current streams, the central of vhich is the mainstream of the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current; this can also be divided. The northern stream represents
the currents of Cape Horn. and the southern, the currents of Bellingehausen

Sea.

The central stream of the A‘l‘s‘r falls in line with the position of the Antarctic
Polar Pront (APP), in the area of which are observed marked temperature lapse
retes. salinity and other physical oceanographic elements to considerable
depths. In this region can be formed meanders and vortices. Heandering of

the stream and the formation of vortices are associated with high horizontal
lapse rates in the density and velocity of currents and with the influence

on the Ai‘s'i' of the complex topography of the ocean floor in the region of the

passage.

’lfhe general direction of currents in the entire 0-2500 n top layer is north-
easterly. The origin of vorticea and meanders results incomplicetion of the

7k
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I ONLY

actual pattern and the presence in certain areas of streams with a reverse
direction, which have more than once been taken for countercurrents in making
individual cross sections or instrument observations.

In the lower 3000-3500 m layer is observed a relatively weak ocean-floor
current directed westerly. which has been verified both by calculations and
instrument observations.

The opinion has existed among scientists that the Antarctic Circumpolar

Current is of wind origin. But the nature of the Antarctic Circumpolsr Current
is closely related to the zonal thermal inhomogeneity of the southern hemi-
sphere. which is intensified by temperature contrasts between Antarctica and
the oceans surrounding it. The good alignment of the axes of the ATsT and APP
is explained by the cannon thermodynamical reason for their origin and is
supported by dynamic interaction between meridional and zonal atlogpheric
circulation in the area of the maximum of ATsT velocities. which is responsible
for the relative intensification of both phenomena.

As calculations have shown, the major shift in the mean climate position of
the ATsT and AP? from strict zonality is associated with the asymmetry of
the position of Antarctica in relation to the pole. with the geometry of the
shores. and with the topography of the floor of the Southern Ocean.

The results of the expedition's observations were taken into account in drawing
up the Soviet variant of the program for joint Soviet-American research in the
Southern Ocean for the next few years. Agreement on the need to carry out

this research was achieved at the second session of the Soviet-American United
Commission for Cooperation in the Area of Research on the Global Ocean. held

in Hoscow from 27 through 30 Hay 1975.

Soviet proposals call for carrying out an international combined expedition
with a force oi 10 to 15 vessels in the entire water area of the Southern

Ocean, placing anchored current meters and temperature gauges in a number of
areas of the Southern Ocean. including in Drake Passage. and making oceano-
graphic studies in Davis Sea and Heddell Sea. relating to the problem "Formation
of Antarctic Ocean-Floor Haters," including a hydrological survey and the
placing of buoy stations.

Successful accomplishment of these measures will be conducive to a deeper
understanding of the processes of interaction between the ocean and atmosphere
and will create the prerequisites for developing numerical methods of fore-
casting the variability of hydrometeorological elements for different periods
in advance.

Bibliography

1. "Atlas Antarktiki" [Atlas of Antarctica], Vol 1, Moscow and Leningrad,
CUGK H6 8858, 1966.

75
ms orucm. use ouu
2.
3.

Se

6.

7.

8.

9D

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Atlaa Mtarktiki." Vol 2. Leningrad. cidroneteoirdat. 1969.

Iotnikov. v.11. "Geographical Location of the Zone of Antarctic Convergence
in the Southern Ocean." INNER. m. 8A3. “0 41. 1963.

lotnikov. V.N. "New i'rontel Zonee of the Southern Ocean.“ “(RUDY 8A3. Vol
50. 1969.

Buynitakiy. VJOI. 'Morekiye l'dy i ayabergi Antarktiki" [Sea Ice and
Iceberge of Antarctica]. Iedatel'atvo LOU. 1973,

Buynitakiy. V.Kh. "0n the Nature of the Antarctic Convergence." mm.
mm. 8A3. No 89. 1976.

Vise. V.Yu. "Oenovy dolgoarochnykh ledovykh prognosov dlya arkticheekikh
norey” [Pmdamentele of Lonsten Ice l’orecaata for Arctic Sena]. Hoacow,
Irdatel'utvo Cleveevnorputi. 196‘.

Origor'yev. Yu.A. "TeirkuIyataiya vod i vodnyye naeay v tikhooheanakon
aektore Yurhnogo okeana” [Circulation of Hetero and Hater Finance in the
Pacific Ocean Sector of the Southern Ocean]. abetrect of candidate's
dissertation. Hoacov. 1972.

Yeekin. I..I. ”Sea Ice of the Southern Ocean” in P1103191! mm 1
ANTAIKTIKI. No 31. Leningrad. Gidroneteoirdat. 1969.

Ivanov. Yu.A. ”Frontal Zones in Antarctic Hetero." OKBANOLOGIOIESKIYB
ISSLBDOVANIYA. No 3. Hoacou. IndeteI'atvo All 8883. 1961.

nepmw, v.v. ”hydrology of man 3..." mm sax. Vol 11. 1963.

Kort. v.6. "Hater [exchange of the Southern Ocean.” OWICEISKIYB
ISSLBDOVANIYA. No 8. bacon. Indetel'ntvo AN 883. 1963.

Kort. v.c. "Geneeie oi Frontal Zonee of the Southern Ocean." INFORM.
BM. 8A3. No 65. 1967. '

Kort._V.G., Korotkevich. Ye.s. and LedneV. v.6. "Boundaries of the
Southern Ocean.” mom. BYUL. 8A3. No 50, 1966.

Hakerov. Yu.V. "Key features of 'the aydrologica1 Cycle of Mtarctic
Haters." MANN. No 2. Leningrad, Gidro-eteoizdat. 1956.

Hekeinov. 1.9. “The Southern Ocean and Antarctica." mmna. No lo.
1961.

Romanov. A.A. "Ice Conditione for Sailing in Vatera of Antarctica,"
mm M1111. Vol 335. 1976.

76 _
you orncm'. us: om:
18'

19C

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Treahnikov, A.P. "Morphological Outline of Land-Locked Seas of
Antarctica." TRUDY SAE, V01 17. 19638.

Treahnikov, A.P. "Features 0: Ice Conditions in the Antarctic Ocean,"
TRUDY 3A2, Vol 21. 19631).

Treshnikov, A.P. “Circulation of Surface Waters of the Antarctic Ocean."
INFORM. BYUL. SAE. No 45, 19610.

Treahnikov, AJ‘. "Ten Yeare of Soviet Research in Antarctica," PROBLEHY
ARKTIKI I ANTARKTIKI, No 22, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1966.

Treahnikov, A.P. "Circulation of Haters and Drifting of Ice in the
Southern Ocean" in "Oanovnyye probleny okeanologii. Doklady na plenar-
nykh zaaedeniyakh" [Fundamental Problems in Physical Oceanography.
Papers Delivered at Pull Meetings], Moscow, Nauka, 1968.

Treahnikov, A.P. "Hinter Operations in Antarctica in 1973," METEOROIDGIYA
I GIDROIDGIYA, No 5, 19710.

Treehnikov, A.P. , Hakailnov, I.V. and Gindyah, B.V. "The Great Easterly
Drift of the Southern Ocean," 1’30an ARKTIKI I ANTARK'IIKI, No 22, Lenin-
grad , _Gidrona teoizdat , 1966 .

Treehnikov, A.P., Grigor'yev, Yu.A. and Belinakaya, L.A. "The Problem of
Longtern Variability of Currents in the Cross Section Along 20" Longitude
Beat," PROBLM ARKTIKI I ANTARKTIKI, No 33, Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat.

1970.

Treahnikov, A.F., Shanont'yev, V.A., Grigor'yev, Yu.A. and Belinakaya,

L.A. “Seaaonal and Longtern Variability of Hydrological Blenenta in

the Cross Section Along 20‘ Longitude East," PROBLEM? amm I ANTARKTIKI,
No 39, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1972.

Treehnikov, A.P., Gira, A.A., Baranov, 6.1. and Yeti-0v, V.A. "Buoyekt
progrmy Polyarnogo ekeperinenta yuzhnoy polyarnoy oblaati" [Draft of
the Program of the Polar Experiment in the Southern Polar Region],
Leningrad, 1973.

Treahnikov, A.P.. Baranov, 6.1. and Kornilov, N.A. "Circunpolar Counter-
currents of the Southern Ocean," PROBLM ARKTIKI I ANTARK‘I‘IKI, Nos “-54,
Leningrad, Cidrmteoizdat, 1976.

Treehnikov, A.P. , Sarukhanyan, 3.1. and Slirnov, N.P. "Polyarnyy eke-
perinent-Yug" [The Polar Experiment South]. Leningrad, 1975.

Polichev, A.V. "Hater Haases and the Vertical Structure of Antarctic
Haters," TRUDY VSBSOYUZ. moon-1851.21). Ill-TA MRSKOGO RY‘BNOW KHOZYAYSTVA

I OKEANOGRAPII, Vol 57, 1965.

77
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICXM. USE ONLY

31. Deacon. 6.3.R. "the Hydrology or the Southozn Ocean." DISCOVERY REPORT.
Vol 15. 1937.

32. Swordrup. 31.. Johnson. H. and Flo-ins. R. "The Ocean." Prontloo-aoll.
Inc.. Inglewood Cliffs. N.J.. 08A, 1957.

OOWRIOHT: deotel'otvo Nauko. 1978

8831
cso: am/ousg

78
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WFICIM. USE ONLY

SOVIET ANTARCTIC GEOLOGICAL RESEARCH ACCOMPLISHMENTS SUMMARIZBD

Moscow ANTARKTIKA: OSNOVNYYE ITOGI IZUCHENIYA ANTARKTIKI 2A 20 LET. DOKLADY
KOMISSII in Russian No 17, 1978 pp 132—1103

[Article by M.G. Ravich: "Soviet Geological Research in Antarctica")

[‘rext] Geological and geophysical studies in Antarctica have been carried

out since the beginning of 1956 by associates of the Scientific Research
Institute of Arctic Geology and the Sevmorgeo Scientific Production Geological-
Geophysicel Association of the USSR Ministry of Geology. The subject of

these studies has been primarily territories of the continent (Antarctica)

free from ice, making up about 800,000 km2 (together with glaciers separating
rock structures), since the total area of rock outcrops per se does not exceed
6000 kaz. Over the past 20 years geological-geophysical tens of the Soviet
antarctic expedition have made the following major studies:

1. Geological napping of Dronning Maud Land (central section) on a scale
of l : 1.000.000, covering an area of 60,000 kmz, and of Enderby Land on the
same scale. covering an area of 50,000 kmz.

2. Geological mapping of the mountain settings of the Lambert Glacier and
Amery Ice Shelf (Prince Charles Mountains) on a scale of l : 2,000,000.
covering an area of almost 250,000 kaz. "

3. Geological exploration of the Yamato and Sir Rondane mountains (eastern
half of Dronning Maud Land), covering an area of more than 70.000 W.

lo. Geological mapping of the Humboldt Mountains on a scale of l : 200,000,
covering an area of 2000 kaz.

5. Geological magping of Bunger's Oasis on a scale of l : 100,000, covering
an area of 600 km .

6. Seisaic depth sounding of the' crust of the crystalline basement of the
Antarctic Platform, along the following cross sections: a) 625 km in the

aren of the Novolazarevskaya station. and b) 550 km on Ingrid Christensen
Coast (frol the Vestfold Hills to Beaver Lake).

79
FOR OFFICIAL us: 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. An ssronsgnetic survey of various territories of East Antarctica on
scales of l : 1,000,000 and 1 : 2.000.000, covering an area of sore than
1.2 nillion knz, and, acconpanying it. air-landing seisnogravinetric studies
and radar sounding of the ice shell.

8. Reconnaissance studies of certain regions of Host Antarctica, on the
staff of American and English antarctic expeditions.

9. Studies on the geology of shelves in Best Antarctica.

In the years which have passed 10 subject areas have been developed. of which
the najor are the following: 1) the Pre-Canbrinn of Best Antarctica; 2) the
crystalline basesent of the Antarctic Platfors; 3) the Reeves and Lover Palae-
zoic of the Antarctic Platform 6) geology and petrology of Harie Byrd Land
and Eights Coast: 5) processes of sedinsnt accunulation in the Indian sector
of the Southern Ocean in the Upper Pleistocene and Holocene: 6) a geological
nap of Antarctica on a scale of l : 5,000,000; 7) geology and deep structure
of Hackobertson band and Princess Elisabeth Land; 8) netanorphic and logistic
complexes of Rest Antarctica (develop-ant work of this type is continuing).

As the result of the studies carried out, sore than 250 articles have been
published on different aspects of the geology of Antarctica, and five nono-
graphs have been published (Ravich, 31.0., Klinnv, L.V. and Solov'yev, 0.8.,
"The Pre-Canbrian of East Antarctica," 1965; Ravich, 11.6. and Solov'yev, 0.8..
"The Geology and Petrology of the Central Section of the Mountains of Drowning
Maud Land." 1966: Ravich. no. and Ksnenev, Ye.N.. "The Crystalline Basement
of the Antarctic Platforn," 1972; Grikurov. 6.2.. "The Geology of the Antarctic
Peninsula," 1975: bopatin. 3.6. and Polyakov, “.11.. ”The Geology and Petrology
of Marie Byrd Land and lights Coast," 1976). In addition, 21 geological laps
have been nade for the "Atlas Antarktiki" [Atlas of Antarctica] on scales of

1 : l00,000 to 1 : 20,000,000, vhich were published in 1966 and 1970. In

1969 was published a tectonic chart of Earth's polar regions, on a scale of

1 : 10,000,000.

Major Results of Research

Topography

The subglacial topography of Antarctica is quite varied and is characterised
by a combination of differently oriented nountain ranges and vast lovlands
and depression basins separating then. This topographical contrast is caused
by alternating tectonic sovenents of blocks of the nainland vhich are trans-
forled in addition by agents of physical erosion characteristic of the glacial
wasteland.

Bast Antarctica represents a continent which for the most part bulges up
steadily: Its neon height above sea level is about 600 n. In the eastern

half of this continent there are two lowlands separated by a relatively
soderate-sise rise. The base of these lowlands is sunk about 100 to 300 n

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

below sea level, and certain sections represent depression basins as much
as 1500 m deep. The rise in the for: of a ridge is from 200 to 500 m high,
and certain peaks on it are as much as 1500 m high. The rise, extending.
with breaks. almost 2000 kn. is broken up by faults. along which is foraed
a feathering series of grabans, which gives the ridge a scalloped character.

In the very center of East Antarctica is subglscial mountainous country occu-
pying an area of not less than 500,000 km (fig 1). The largest are the
Gamburtsev Mountains. They are formed by two individual blocks whose peaks
are covered with a relatively thin layer of ice with a total thickness of

900 to 1000 m, while the thickness of the ice cap here. in the center of the
continent. not infrequently reaches 0000 m. The largest block consists of

the radial systems of the range. which merge at their roots and form a gigantic
figure reminiscent in shape of the foot of a gigantic prehistoric animal.

The surface of the camburtsev Mountains is strongly disjointed and is similar
to young mountains of the alpine type. Peaks reaching 3000 m in height above
sea level could not rise above the continent's ice cap and have been forged
by the powerful glacial waste. The other. smaller. block is made up of par-
allel ridgeliks plateaus with a smooth and mildly sloping peak type of relief.
Their height does not exceed 1000 to 1200 m. and therefore the ice cap above
them reaches a thickness of two to 2.5 km.

The western section of Best Antarctica is a vast plain. raised slightly above
sea level and divided by relatively narrow troughs. Only at its frontiers-
on the continent's coast-~do craggy mountains rise, "piercing through" the
thin ice cap 300 to 500 m thick.

In contradiatinction to East Antarctica [Greater Antarctica]. more than 65
percent of the territory of Heat Antarctica [Lesser Antarctica] is sunk below
sea level. Actually it is a gigantic ice shelf with large archipelagos sealed
into it. The largest of these is the Antarctic Peninsula, whose mountain
chains extend more than 1000 km. In the center of west Antarctica there is

a rocky upland about 600 km long, which abutts an even longer ridgelike broken
range. And, finally. in the coastal areas of Marie Byrd Land there is a
rather extensive plateau occupying an area of 500,000 kmz. with peaks more
than 3000 m high.

Like the horn of a rhinoceros. crowning Antarctica in the northwest, extends
among the glaciers the mountainous archipelago of the Antarctic Peninsula.

Its northern half is a narrow cut ridge with heights of 500 to 1000 m, bordered
by countless coastal islands. Its southern half is a wide mountain range

500 km long with heights form 1200 to 2500 I. Some peaks reach 3000 1, and

the highest peak of the Antarctic Peninsula-Jackson Hountain-—is 6200 m high.
The majority of peaks rise above the ice cap. 0n the Antarctic Peninsula

rock massifs free from ice make up about eight percent of the land. i.e..
considerably more than in remaining sections of the continent.

The central massif includes the Ellsworth and Hhitmore mountains and cmaller
uplands. Its absolute heights do not exceed 2500 m and are usually covered
with ice. Only certain peaks rise above the glacial shell hundreds of meters

81
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and even hiloaetera. including a nountain with an absolute height of 5140 I.

repreaenting the higheat point in Antarctica.
to an alpine type of relief. and of eubglacial mountaina.

peak type.

 

Typical of the higher nountaina
a nildly sloping

i‘ . ‘ Ina~
,m". .' ‘
it; ~
5“ ’
ng

.293

in. '_ _,
a. i r .;
‘2‘. ..‘

I
9

Figure 1. Diagram of Subglacial Relief of Antarctica. Made by
O.A. Znachko-‘larovakiy. Height above on level: 1—
greater than 1000 a: 2—500 to 1000 I; 3-0 to 500 I;
balov sea level: £-0 to 1000 I; 5—hore than 1000 a

Key:

1. Antarctic Penineula 11. Heat Antarctica

2. Reddell Sea 12. Lanbert Glacier

3 . Novolazarevakaya 13 . Voatok

la . Holodezhnaya llo . Koneonol ' altaya

S. Dronning “and Land 15. Hirnyy

6. underby Land 16. no“ Ice Shelf

7. Bellingahauaen Sea 17. Traneantarctic Hountains

8. Pilclmer Ice Shelf 18. Ross Sea

9. Beat Antarctica 19. Victoria Land

10. Ell-worth Hountaiue

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL?
IPOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The coastal massif is a vast volcanic plateau with heights of a few hundred
meters. covered with a glacial shell. Only the conical peaks of extinct
volcanoes. reaching heights of #000 m above sea level. rise many hundreds
of meters above glacial fields.

As a whole. Heat Antarctica is a slightly wavy plain lying 500 to 1000 m

below sea level. Between its rocky archipelagoa there are deep depression
basins whose floor is sunk 1000 to 2000 m below sea level. Therefore, West
Antarctica cannot be considered, as Best Antarctica is, a continent. but
represents a gigantic shelf region covered by thick strata of ice; furthermore,
it is not possible to exclude the existence of an intermediate water had be-
tween the floor of depression basins and the ice cap.

And so, the antarctic glacial waste, if the glacial shell were to he removed
from it. would look to the researcher's eyes like a heavily disjointed con-
tinent with numerous mountain ridges and plains. deep depression basins and
plateaus. This continent is sunk below sea level at its frontiers and is
pressed down by dozens of millions of tons of ice. It is surrounded by the
gigantic its shelves of the Boss and Heddell seas, which occupy about two
million square meters. and the ice fields, close to them in structure, in
Heat Antarctica, occupying an area of more than three million square meters.

Stratigraphy

For the first tie a stratigraphic diagram has been made of the early Pre-
Cambrian, which makes up the crystalline basement of the Antarctic Platform,
whose thickness, according _to geological observations and 632 [seismic depth
sounding] data, is about 1.0 km. The crystalline basement consists of 11 series
of metamorphic rocks, which can be correlated for the entire continent. The
most ancient laggatt and Thule series, whose thickness exceeds 12 to 15 km,
are made up of rocks with an absolute age on the order of four billion years
(determined by the lead-isochrone method). These are the oldest rocks of

the globe. They form exceptionally stable blocks of the crystalline basement,
of the granite-gnaiss dome type, and are represented by quite distinctive
ultramatagenic mesoperthite granitoids (enderbytes, charnockites and granites
per se), formed under conditions of high degrees of a granulite environment.

Strictly Lower Archean rocks make up two other series of the same sge—Condon
and Hay (thickmss of 10 to 12 km each) , encountered also only in stable blocks.
where they clothe domes of the most ancient rocks. They are represented by
standard vestigial granitoids of chamockite and granite composition. which
alternate with abundant fields of migmatites. In these series for the first
time have appeared carbonate rockao-granulite-mvironment calcifers. Along
with numerous stacks of basic-composition dipyroxane crystalline schists.
characteristic also of the two preceding series, there has been sose develop-
ment of garnet-aillimanite-cordierite crystalline sehists with an acidic
alumina composition. 0n the whole, raw vulcanites of average and basic com-
position make up more than 60 percent, and sedimentary terrigenous rocks not
more than 20 percent. while carbonate deposits make up five to 10 percent

83
ton onrcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFVXCIAL USE ONLY

of the total volume or Archean strata. The age of charnockites of these
series, determined by the lead-isochrone method. is three to 3.3 billion
years.

Upper Archean deposits are spread to a maximum over the boundaries of the
crystalline basement of the Antarctic Platform. They form exceptionally
mobile blocks of the basement which participate in tectonic and metamorphic
processes, not only those having formed them, but also later processes having
taken place in the Lower and even in part in the Middle Proterozoic. There-
fore. quite characteristic of them are polymetamorphic rocks of an original
grenulite and superposed amphibolite facies. represented by crystalline schists
of both a basic and acidic alumina composition. through which there has been
intense development of migmetites and less vestigial granitoids of charnockite
composition. Among these strata appear thick stacks of calcifsrs and quartzites
and tones of typical granulites. Numerous determinations of the absolute

age of these rocks by the potassiumnargon method have given 500 to 550 million

years; infrequent deviations go back 2 to 2.5 billion years. The most re-
presentative Humboldt series in Dronning Maud Land reaches a thickness of

eight to 10 km. while the Larsemann and Reinbolt series, probably of the same
age. in the Prince Charles Mountains have a thickness of as much as seven to
nine kilometers each.

The higher-lying Lower Proterozoic deposits differ radically from the Archean.
They make up geosyncline-like zones which Earned by that period among Archean
interdomal structures and are distinguished by the following features: a)

the structure of original volcanogenic-terrigenous deposits (sedimentary
deposit; predominate over vulcanites). among which can be distinguished
eugeosyuclinal and niogeosynclinal formations; b) exceptionally extensive de-
velopment of metamorphism of the amphibolite facies, as the result of which
culmination of the processes of nigmatization and granitization has been
achieved; c) total shift in intrusive formations. when intrusions of gsbbroids
and granitoids developed extensively in place of anorthosite and chsrnockite
massifs. The main rocks of the Loner Proterozoic series (the Insel in Dronning
Maud Land and the Lambert in the Prince Charles Mountains) are biotite-garnet-
sillimanite crystalline schists with an acidic alumina composition, plagia-
gneisaes and amphibolites, as well as migmatites, developed extensively
through then. and less developed vestigial granites. The thickness of Lower
Proterozoic deposits does not exceed seven to eight kilometers.

Local development in grabens of the crystalline basement or in structures

of the non-volcanogenic type is evidenced by quite distinctive sedimentary
strata. most frequently transformed into various schists and phyllites of

a green shale facies (Rocker series). Only in spots are they probably re-
peatedly metamorphizsd and changed into garnet-containing double mica schists
with large-crystal staurolite, cyanite and other minerals of a low-temperature
amphibolite fscies (Menzies series). Very characteristic of the lower portion
of the Rocker series are thick strata of ferruginous quartzites and jaspilites
and, in addition to phyllites. quartz carbonate schists and quartzites. In
the upper half of the Rocket series are found abundant dikes and sills of
metabssites. whose age, determined by the not very'relisble potassium-argon

8's
to: cement use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

method, is one to 1.2 billion years. The location of this series is de-
termined by its occurrence in the crystalline basement. represented by
vestigial granitoids. whose age, established by the rubidiunpstrontium
method. is 2.5 billion years and more. which corresponds to the lower limit
of the Lower Proterozoic. But the presence in these deposits of jaspilites
end relatively young metabasitss makes it possible to believe that the upper
half of the series can belong to the Middle Proterozoic. Their total thick-
nesa is four to five kilometers.

Magnetism

Three highly characteristic intrusive formations of Antarctics's early
Pre-Cembrian discovered by Soviet geologists-an anorthosite, metsgabbroid
and charnockite-have been studied thoroughly with respect to composition

and genesis. The largest anorthosite massif in Dronning Maud Land, with

an area in outcrops of up to 900 kmz. has been shown to be indistinctly
stratified. Peripheral sections are made up of leucocratic gabbro-norites,
which have been considerably recrystallized and metamorphized under con-
ditions of the amphibolite facies, as the result of which new formations have
appeared, of garnet, hornblende and orthoclase. The rocks of the central
portion of the massif are rather new; they consist of labradorite with an
insignificant admixture of hypersthene and augite. The nature of the form

of the massif and of its primary structural elements testifies to the magmatic
origin of the anorthosites. which are the most ancient intrusive rocks on

the continent.

Intrusions of metagabbroids are quite numerous and have highly varying di-
mensions. from single numbers to many hundreds of square kilometers, and

the largest of them are considerably differentiated. They have all been
subjected to metamorphism under conditions of granulite and superposed
smphibolite facies, but most frequently under conditions of the latter alone.
These intrusions are made up of various rocks, beginning with metagsbbroids
and metsdiorites right up to typical amphibolites, and even to basic crystal-
line schists. which will be talked about below; in spots they have been con-
verted into apogabbroid charnockitoids, whose primordial magmatic origin is
highly probable.

The formation of intrusive and apointrusive charnockitoids is extremely wide-
spread in the crystalline basenent of the Antarctic Platform and is sharply
distinguished from the formation of ultrametagenic enderbyte-charnockites,
which in the majority'of cases make up the most ancient series of the crystal-
line basement. These intrusions hsve been primarily confined to mobile blocks
of the crystalline basement. Their dimensions vary from a few dozen to a

few thousand square kilometers. The smallest of them most frequently are

of the nature of domes or ridges, and the largest (up to 0000 kmz) intrusion
in Dronning Maud Land is in the form of a complexly constructed plate of a
pseudo-batholithic nature. While the smaller intrusions were formed in the
process of metasomatism of gsbbroid domes, the larger are of rheomorphic
genesis. They were formed on the eve of crstonirstion of the crystalline

85
son orucm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

basenent, under conditions of heightened tectonic activity. when there
occurred fusion of the lost fusible elenente free the crystalline basensnt,
partial transition of the letter into the plastic state, and the preservation
of high-nelting conponents. such as pyroxenes end olivines. From the inter-
action of ell three aedia chernockitoids for-ed. in which. in various quanti-
tative ratios, are coebined ninerel associations of acidic and basic rocks.
because of which the series described here begins with orthoclsee-conteining
noritss and ends with eulyte-fsyalitic grancsyenitss. having as transient
varieties pyroxene end olivine dioritosyenites and syenitas. Nora infrequent
are chsrnockitoids of neglatic gensis. in which are clearly observed several
stages of for-etion (under various physical-chemical conditions). distinctly
placed on one another.

Tectonics

The continent's structural geology is characterized by the interaction of
three global structures: 1) an encient-«n extreIely early Pre-Cenbrisnu
platform for-ed onlhe crystalline base-ant end located in Best Antarctica,
probably covering an area of eight to 10 million 1‘32; 2) a young extrenely
early Paleozoic platform on the folded base-ent of loss (late haykal) age.
located in the Transantarctic Mountains, covering a probable area of not
less then two million Inez; 3) Paleozoic-Mosaic fold systole included in the
Pacific nigrstory zone end located in West Antarctica. with an area of as
Iuch as m eillion keZ.

0f the major elenents of the ancient Antarctic Platfore. on the coast of
East Antarctica for a distance of alnost 8000 kn, on block aountains and

in rocky oases is revealed the crystalline basement. in whose structure are
distinctly isolated two structural conplexes (fig 2): l) stable regions
cretonized in the Archean and representing typics' plates such as, for
exasple. in Bnderby Land and Terra Malia; 2) mobile regions cretonised in
the Proterozoic. but note than once subjected to tsctonic-Isgntic activation
in later epochs, such as, for exenple. Dronning Maud Land. The internal
structure of stable regions is determined by a codeination of very ancient
domes of granulite fscies crystalline rocks and linear folded syncline sys-
tens. Characteristic of these are stable and persistent rises, but not
especially intense once. within their boundaries deep faults and block
tectonics have developed relatively slightly. These plates have reacted
little to the latest stages of tectogeneeis.

Mobile regions. on the other hand, have been subjected to tectonic rearrange-
sent. not only in the Proterozoic, but also in the early Paleozoic. because
of which characteristic 'of then is a block structure with an abundance of
deep faults. Typical of nobile regions are intense differentiated block
novesents; therefore. their internal structure is deteninsd by a coﬁination
of large short folds (for-er dance) with, superposed on then. linear folds
of several orders of aagnitude. In connection with this, in nubile blocks
are rarely preserved the nost encient granulite facies rocks. but note often
there is a predo-inence of poly-etenorphic rocks. when an uphibolite fecies

86
roe onxcw. us: out!
Figure 2.

 

Tectonic Chart of Antarctica. Made by H.c. Ravich and

6.8. Grikurov. l-crystalline basement of Antarctic Plat-
form (age. two to three billion years): a-very ancient
plates; b--regions of activated basement; 2-relstivaly
ancient rock structures (age, 500 to 600 million years)-
folded basement of Antarctic Platform; 3-cover of Antarctic
Platform (age. 200 to 600 million years): a-—benaath ice

cap; b-on block mountains; 6-young rock structures of Ant-
arctica (age less than 200 million years); 5-intrusive lassifs:
a-charnockites in crystalline basement; b-—granites and sabbro
in folded basement; c-granitea and diorites in antarctands;
6-lavas and tuffs of the Antarctic volcanic area (ass, a half
to 10 million years); 7-deep faults; 8-deep depression

basins with an unknown combination of rocks
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

Key:
1. Weddell Sea 11. Rest Antarctica
2. Novolasarevakaya 12. Laebert Glacier
3 . Holodethnaya l3 . Komsonol ' okays
lo. Bellingahauaen Sea lb. Vostok
5. Antarctic Peninsula 15. Hirnyy
6. Pilchner Ice Shelf 16. Oazis
7. Dronning Maud Land 17. Ross Ice Shelf
8. Transantnrctic “contains 18. Ross Sea
9. East Antarctica 19. Victoria Land

10 . Ellsworth Mountains

The cover of the ancient platforl is of a dual nature: On the one hand it
represents slightly netamorphitcd and subhoritontally bedded terrigenous
rocks of pre-Reevea age (they are broken up by traprocks having an age of

1.7 billion years) with a thickness of up to 2000 n. and on the other. Pernian
carboniferous deposits with a thickness of a few hun .red meters and rarely up
to 1300 n.

The young extrenely early Paleozoic platform (plate) was forned at the location
of early Paleozoic Reeves geosynclinal fold systems, which are customarily
called Ross systems. The Rose geosynclinal formations in the Transantarctic
Mountains reach a thickness of 10 to 12 In. The most widespread is a schist-
greywacke formation netsnorphired under conditions of a green shale facias.
Below it lies a terrigenous carbonate fonation. and above it a volcanogenic
rhyolite fornation. At certain sections have been found deposits with frag-
nents of Cambrian fauna. which are also included in the folded basement of

the Ron Plate. All these fornations have been intensely dislocated into
narrow linear, often isoclinal, folds. Sone blocks of intensely netanorphised
amphibolite facies rocks are probably ledges of a pre-Ross folded geosynclincal
base-ant, since their absolute age reaches two billion years. The cover of
this young platforn, with a lam thickness of 6 kn, contains Devonian to
middle Jurassic deposits. usually called the "bicon group." The full cross-
section of the cover includes four formations: 1) a basal Devonian made up

of aeacoast and subcontinentel quart: sands; 2) a carboniferous Lower Permian
teallite; 3) a Persian-Triassic carboniferous; 6) an early to middle Jurassic
traprock.

To the Pacific fold zone of Heat Antarctica certainly belong the Antarctic
Peninsula and the lands adjacent to it. The most widespread representatives
of the maeozoid base-eat are prinarily Ross conplexes. lying in the form

of nunerous blocks anong geosynclinal complexes of middle to late Paleozoic
age. consisting of greywacke-schist and volcanogenic siliceous fomtions
with a total thickness of six to seven kilo-stars. Linear fold structures
of this basement were for-ed ‘not later than the Triassic on the border of
220 to 180 nillion years ago. An extrenely early ki-eridgean orogenic com-
plex with a eaxinun thickness of 3 km. made up of vulcanites of a dacite-
liparite structure with layers of seacoast deposits and cut through by gabbro-
granite intrusions, was formed on the border of 120 to 100 million years ago.
A Cretaceous eolasse couple: 2 to 3 km thick is represented by non-dislocated

88
you orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

clay and sand deposits with conglomerates of nore ancient rocks at its base.
Late Cenozoic formations are represented by a basalt plateau complex up to
3 to 4 km thick. which covers not only fold deposits of the Pacific zone,
but also formations of the epi-Ross plate. forming the so-called antarctic
volcano area, which probably extends over an area of 2 to 2.5 million kmz.

Comparing the tectonic stages in the formation of Antarctica with the nature
of the metamorphism of its major formations, it is possible to draw the
following conclusions:

1. The early Archean stage (concluded on the border of 3.3 to 3.5 billion
years ago) is characterized first by the formation of the very ancient con-
tinental crust, consisting of vulcanites with an andesite-besalt structure.
converted into specific aesoperthite enderbytes and charnockites and crystalline
pyroxene schiete. At the concluding step in this stage were formed normal
enderbytes and charnockites, interstrstified with the former sedimentary rocks,
converted into granite-sillimanite-cordierits crystalline schists, their mig-
matitea and vestigial granites.

2. The late Archean stage (concluded on the border of 2.6 to 2.8 billion

years ago) is characterized by further growth of the continental crust, primar-
ily on account of a considerable heightening of the role of sedimentary rocks
(pelite-peanldte and carbonate). which. under conditions of metamorphism of
comparatively lower-temperature subfacies of the granulite facies, have been
converted not only into crystalline schista, quertzites and calcifers, but

also to an even greater extent into migmatites and vestigial granites. At

this stage has occurred ctatonizstion of the most ancient sections of the

crust formed in the early Archean, and their transformation into stable domes,
representing typical crystalline plates.

3. The early Proterozoic stage (concluded on the border of 2 to 2:2 billion
years ago) is characterized by the termination of cratonizstion of the entire
crystalline basement. with the separation in its structure of mobile massifs
(domes). Latertheseamesifs were more than once subjected to tectonic-magmatic
activation, the last stage of which concurred with the Boss orogeny, on the
borderline of 500 to 550 million years ago. At the stage considered here
there took place intense accumulation of volcanogenic sedimentary rocks in
wide protogeosynclinal zones, meta-orphized, as a rule, under conditions of
high levels of the amphibolite facies. because of which, along with plegio-
gneisaes and anphibolitea. extensively developed were migmatitea and, to a
lesser extent. vestigial granites. It is very characteristic that, in the
process of cratonization of the crystalline basement, during this period there
took place meta-orphic reprocessing of Archean rocks of the granulite facies
under conditions of tne amphibolite facies, with the extensive development of
polymetamorphic rocks. especially developed in mobile domes of the crystalline
basement.

6. The middle Proterozoic stage (concluded on the borderline of 1.5 to 1.6
billion years ago) of tectogeneeis is manifested, apparently, but slightly,
and is far fron universal. since by this time the rigid crystalline basement

89
roe orncm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(the East Antarctica craton) had been completely formed. within its linits
there probably appeared along zones of deep iaults structures of the graben
and non-volcanogenic type. filled with terrigenous and carbonate deposits.
netaeorphized under conditions of the green shale fecies. with the foreation
of strata of phyllites. green shale. quartz carbonate schiats and various
quartzitea, including magnetite-containing varieties. All these were gathered
into steep iaoclinel folds. often horizontal and tilted and in places cut
through and complicated by thrust faults.

5. The late Proterozoic to early Paleozoic stage (on the borderline of 500
to 600 million years ago) was the concluding stage in formation of fold aya-
tens at the location of geosynclines in the Transantarctice Piountaina and
Heat Antarctica. Associated with it is the so-called hoes orogeny, which
formed the folded basement of the young antarctic platforn (plate) and caused
its saturation with various granitoid intrusions. Associated also with the
Ross orogeny are activation of mobile blocks of the crystalline basement and
the appearance within their boundaries of intrusions of quite different com-
position, from granites to syenites.

6. The middle Paleozoic to early Mesozoic stage (on the borderline of 280

to 220 million years ago) is the ieportant one for the formation of the
"bicon" cover, both in the Transantarctica Hountains and in the interior
regions of Heat Antarctica, where it is not infrequently folded and is of
increased thickness (e.g. . the Ellsworth Mountains). At the and of this period
there took place the formation of fold systees and inversion of the Paleozoic
geosyncline of the Pacific zone.

7. The late Mesozoic to Cenozoic stage is characterized by the development

of platformed depression basins and domelike rises within the boundaries of

the crystalline basement. At the same time there occurred the powerful bulging
up of Pacific fold systems, ending with their peneplanization. At the con-
cluding stage the antarctic volcano area was formed and heavy continental
glaciation occurred, probably having begun about (or more than) 20 million

years ago.
Hinersls

Direct discoveries of minerals in Bast Antarctica. where Soviet geologists
have been at work, have been relatively rare. In the majority. there have
been only signs of deposits, with the exception of iron ore, which even at
this stage in studies of the continent can be classified under large deposits.
This situation is explained by two main causes: 1) the small-scale nature of
research on the continent's geolog, where the objective has not been set of
prospecting for minerals; 2) the quite scanty exposure of the continent

(only in coastal regions). however, on the basis of the identity of the
geological structure of Antarctica with other continents of the southern
hemisphere and with Hindustan, which asde up probably even 200 million years
ago the single supercontinent of Gondwanaland, the prospects of the icy
continent with regard to mineral resources must be considered quite consider-

able.

90
FOR OFPICIM. USE ONLY
This refers primarily to deposits of iron ore, which have been discovered

in the Prince Charles Mountains in MacRobertson Land. Here have been en-
countered bedrock outcrops of magnetite quartzitas (jaspilites). which can
be traced 2.5 km. with a visible thickness of 100 to 150 m. The content of
iron in heavily weathered specimens reaches 30 percent. In addition to bed-
rock outcrops. in the region have been discovered two subglaciel magnetic
anomalies with a strength of as much as 6000 gamma, extending 120 and 160 km
each. which, without doubt, have been formed by levels of jaspilites lying at
a depth of 300 to 500 m beneath the ice. With respect to the nature of the
iron ore and enclosing rocks. they are close to the Krivoy Rog type of de-
posit.

In calcifers and diopside rocks close to them, which are widespread in the
crystalline basement. accumulations of phlogopite are constantly encountered.
Phlogopite pockets reach 1 m in diameter. and some crystals in them measure
up to 10 cm across. The degree of saturation of enclosing rocks with phlogo-
pite is two to four percent. This type of phlogopitisation is promising,
since the majority of deposits of this mineral come under this heading.
similar accumulations of phlogopite have been encountered in an entire series
of locations in Enderby Land and Dronning Maud Land.

The abundance of pegamatite veins, especially in mobile blocks of the crystal-
line basement, has made it possible to find (in differentiated veins) muscovite,
rock crystal and beryllium at many points on the coast of East Antarctica.

Some veins contain crystals of muscovite measuring 10 X 10 X S cm. and their
mics content reaches three to six percent. In greisenized veins abundant

in places are crystals of beryllium 5 to 10 cm long, forming pockets of up

to 0.5 to 0.7 m across. Rock crystal is concentrated in axial bulges of

wider pegmatite veins. In these there are not infrequently crystals of rock
crystal 0.2 to 0.7 m long, most often lying in distinctive troughs. In
collapses of these veins are found semitransparent crystals of rock crystal,
colored in places smoked and violet. In an entire group of veins crystals

of rock crystal make up as much as four to five percent of the vein. Bepecially
many veins with rock crystal have been encountered in the central area of
Dronning Maud Land.

Copper and molybdenua occurrences have been found in the Prince Charles
Mountains and on Prince Olav Coast. Molybdenite, chalcocite and chalco-
pyrite have been encountered in migmatites of the amphibolite facies, making

up a total of one to five percent. Areas inoculated with ore minerals are
measured in hundreds of square meters; they are confined to narrow zones near
faults, extending as much as 1 km. This type of copper and molybdenum mineral-
ization in the Pre-Cambrian is of industrial significance.

The list of mineral occurrences can he concluded with graphite. which. in the
form of flakes measuring 2 to 3 cm, is found in strata of marble. where its
amount reaches 10 percent. The thickness of graphite-bearing strata is 5 to
7 m. -

As is obvious from this list, the overwhelming majority of minerals is con-
fined to various strata of the crystalline basement of the Antarctic Platform.

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP02-00000R000100010003-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Beuides iron ore. it is as yet possible to speak only of signs of deposits.
But in a whole series of sections these signs are so reliable that. if
necessary. it is possible to recomend carrying out exploratory and pro-
specting operations there for the purpose of uncovering deposits.

Objectives of Future Research

Taking into account the fact that Antarctiaa is covered with a thick glacial
shell. priority in studying its geological structure has gone to methods of
exploratory geophysics—oerogravimagnetic and seismic. The regional nature

of the studiJ has determined their two major scales: 1 : 1.000.000 and

l : 2.000.000. Using these scales. the entire continent and the shelVes
surrounding it (an area of approximately 16 million klz) can be surveyed in

10 to 12 years with the active work of all 12 countries taking part in studying
Antarctica. This research should be conducted in keeping with a unified inter-
national program coordinated with all countries which are parties in the
Antarctic Treaty.

A special study by direct geological and geophysical methods is being made

of the exposed areas of the continent. which make up about 750.000 to 800.000
hmz. including mountain glaciers separating mountain rock outcrops. No
scales have been proposed for these areas: 1) l : 1.000.000 for the more
homogeneous areas of the crystalline basement. equaling approximately 1.00.000
W; 2) l : 250.000 (or 1 : 200.000) for all remaining exposed areas of the
continent. equaling approximately 350.000 10’.

Aeromgnetic and aerogrnvimetric surveys on a scale of l : 2.000.000 accom-
panieo by radar sounding of the ice cap should cover the entire mainland and
the surrounding shelves. for an area of 16 million luaz. Of these 3.5 million
hmz of exposed lands and surrounding shelves should be detailed on a scale

of l : 1.000.000.

Air landing seismic (reflected wave method) and gravimetric studies on a
scale of l : 1.000.000 should be made in shelf and coastal areas. representing
a total area of about lo :illion hmz.

Seismic depth sounding should be performed on shelves and coastal areas of

the continent. as well as in the Transantarctic Mountains and on the Antarctic
Peninsula. using cross sections intersecting regions with the most complex
geological structure. It is suggested that roughly 25 to 30 687. cross sections
be made. for a distance of 15.000 kl.

After the performance of geophysical studies it is necessary to select areas
for drilling five or six reference wells. which are needed to study the
sedimentary cover. primarily in shelf areas.

Geological surveys, especially on a scale of l : 250.000. should be accom-
panied by a detailed study of reference cross sections of various formations
of rocks. and by electronic exploration. mapetic and other geophysical land
operations.

92
m omcm. use can
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010053-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0! the above-listed group of regional geological and geophysical operations,
as of the present time the antarctic expeditions of the 12 countries (espec-
ially oi the USA and USSR) have already accomplished about 20 to 25 percent
of the total. covering the most easily accessible regions of the continent.

As a result of accomplishment of the proposed international program, it is
possible to study the deep structure of the continent end surrounding shelves;

' to give a general mineral forecast: to reveal in shelves and coastal areas
structures of the first order of magnitude which are promising in terms of
oil and gas; to reveal in mountain regions sections which are promising in
terms of ore and non-ore minerals; to obtain unique data for the purpose of
correlating the geological structure of Antarctica and other continent: of
the southern hemisphere in light of the Gondwanelend hypothesis; to obtain
dots on the structure of the crust and on the relationship betveen ocean
structures and continental; and to make an important contribution to the
geological mapping of Earth.

COPYRIGHT: lzdetel'atvo Nauke. 1978

8831
cso: aw. /o|ss9

93
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FEATURES OF WWI!) CIRCUWION Ill ANTARCTICA AND 0? m CIRCUIA‘I'IOR
0? WHEN 00W HATES

Hoscov MARTINA: OSNOVNYYE I'I‘OGI IZUCIIDIIYA mm 2A 20 LET. now
MISSII in Russian No 17. 1978 pp 96-110 ‘

[Article by Ant. Gusev]

[Text] Anterctica end the entire Southern Oceen represent regions of our
plenet where processes distinctive and of grandiose proportions heve developed
in the atsosphere and hydrosphere. The letitudinsl tespersture contrest.
accentueted by the tenpereture contrast betueen Anterctics's ice cap end the
relatively warn veters of the Southern Ocean surrounding the continent. hes
been responsible for the i-ense strength end intensity of these processes.
end the sy-etricel position of the continent and of the ocean surrounding it
in rention to seogrephicel coordinates. the goo-stricel regularity of large-
scale circulstion phenonene in the etnosphere end oceen. This fact hes also
ends it possible to attenpt to create physicel end uthensticel nodels of
phenonene, end to discuss these reeions of the globe as e distinctive nsturel
node]. of phenonena. of e sinilar physicel neture. in the etnosphere end hydro-
sphere of the northern henisphere, where they have developed under intoqarably
lore coqlsx geogrephical conditions, and. consequently ere sore coeplear in
terns of configuration end are less accessible for e precise nethensticsl
description.

As we know. typicel of Anterctica's etsoephere is the noveeent of continuous
circuler loops of cyclones eround the neinlend. This phenonenon is not ob-
served in the etnosphere of the northern hesisphere. But in the nest severe
half of the yeer iron the Atlentic to the zuropean seinlend ones. as e rule.
not individuel cyclones. but series of then. representing. as it were. bits
of e broken circular loop which is powerless to exist es a whole under the
conlex geosrephicel conditions of the northern henisphere.

General Pattern of Atnospheric Circulation in Antsrctice

ﬂunerous observations nsde in Anterctice have nede it possible to construct
the generel patterns of etnoepheric circulation and of the circulation of
ocean waters in this eree of the globe. The pattern of etaospheric circula-
tion is shown in fig 1 (Gusev, 1967). In constructing it cnly the troposphere

9h
roe ormuu. use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was considered. since there is reason to believe that the mass balance of
this circulation forms a closed circuit there. horizontally was considered
the area from the south Pole to the center line connecting the centers of
elevated pressure regions encircling the southern hemisphere at a latitude
of 20 to 30’. This choice of boundary was a natural one. since it separates
circulation systems in the atmosphere of the southern hemisphere which, al-
though related, are fairly independent.

 

Figure 1. Pattern of Air Circulation Over Antarctica: l--interface;
2-tr0popause; 3--polar front; b—antarctic front; S—air
currents; 6--Antarctica; 7--ascending air currents; 8--same,
descending

Key:
1. South Pole

The basis for constructing this circulation diagram was charts of atmospheric
pressure at sea level and at an altitude of about 10 km, as well as vertical
cross sections of the atmosphere with data on wind velocity and temperature,
taken from 8.8. Gaygerov's study (1962).

The pattern constructed characterizes a certain mean annual circulation cycle.
Observation data have made it possible to discover different kinds of devis-
tions in the circulation cycle from the mean. These are seasonal deviations
and deviations in the weather's time scale. The former are detected as a
growth and reduction in the intensity of general circulation from the winter
season to the sun-er with a corresponding shift in the mean position of the
lines of the polar and antarctic front.

0n mean monthly charts of pressure in the region studied have been detected
loops of not too large stationary cyclones located directly near the shores
of Antarctica (fig 2, insert [figure not reproduced]). 0n synoptic charts

95
roe onrcm. use out?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to this stationary loop are added two snore loops of larger cyclones located
successively north of the former over the Southern Ocean (fig 3. insert
[figure not reproduced)). The cyclones of these loops. unlike the stationary,
are separated by netsorologicel fronts and aove continuously from west to
east. These formations are responsible for changes in circulation on a yearly
eca e.

Synoptic charts node for different days and periods record not infrequent
changes in the radius of these loops over a period close to 25 hours. a
change in the nusber of cyclones in loops. and ahortterl shifts northward
and southward in sons sections of circular loops. The letter teeporsrily
disturb the ay-etry of the pressure field in this region.

Seasonal shifts in front lines and periodic changes in the radius of loops

of noving cyclones were related by am. Guaev (1967) to transverse waves at
the doneshsped interface between the cold cotinentel and warn ocean air. These
waves were studied by h.Ye. Kochin (1969) for an infinite flat interface
inclined by the effect of the Coriolis force. Changes in the intensity of
circulation, according to the liargules equation. should result in bulging or
flattening of the doneshaped interface end. accordingly, to a shift in its
edge—the line of the front along the surface of the ocean. Slow seasonal
changes in the shape of the interface are explained by a gradual seasonal
change in the intensity of circulation. end shorttern changes by randon dis-
turbance of it and by subsequent variations in keeping with the natural cycle
of the aysten.

The loops of cyclones moving around Antarctica are explained by Add. Gusev
(1967) oy lonutudinal internal gravitational waves at the interface. which
develop and break down under the conditions of the systes's rotary notion.
They arise as the result of the relative notion of two layers of air. There
has still been no strict solution to the problen of the origin and develop-ant
of these waves. ILYe. Kochin (1949) in his study investigates the conditions
for the stability of these waves with different lengths, propagated along

an inclined interface of infinite length. end relates the origin of cyclones
in the atmosphere to the instability of long waves. In Add. Guev's study
(1967) an investigation is made of the conditions for the stability of these
waves at different distances free the center of the interface. end their rate
of propagation is discussed. along with the nudeer of waves originating at
circular interfaces. The possible nunber of cyclone-waves has been estinated
on the basis of the results of a umber of experinents using circular and
annular tanks (Shuleykin. 1968; may. 1962).

General Pattern of Circulation of Haters of the Southern Ocean

The cycle of the waters of the Southern Ocean has been studied to a lesser
extent than has the atnosphere over this region. Observation results were
derived by us chiefly fro. studies by v.6. Kort (1963) and v.6. Neynan (1961)
and front "Atlas Antarlttiki" [Atlas of Antarctica] (1969). It should be Isn-

tioned that infer-nation on currents in waters of the Southern Ocean was

96
'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

obtained chiefly by indirect methods. Instrument observations are quite rare
in this region of the global ocean. Diagrams of the circulation of surface

and deep waters of the Southern Ocean were constructed by \.G. Neyman by the
dynamical method. The first of these is shown in fig 4. The northern boundary
of the Southern Ocean and the lines of divergences and convergences observed

on its surface can be seen in fig 5. In fig 6 is shown the distribution by
meridian of the mean annual wind velocity, averaged in terms of longitude. with
a maximum value of about 6 m/e. There also are shown the mean position, in
terms of longitude. of lines of convergencea and divergences. as well as zones
of the ocean covered by different currents. In fig 7 we see the distribution
of velocity through the entire depth of ocean waters in a section extending
along the 20° longitude east meridian, from the shores of Antarctica to Africa.
In cones of convergence and divergence is observed a marked vertical displace-
ment of water masses. since when they converge at the surface an increase in
level occurs, causing the appearance of a vertical motion component pointing
downward. and when they diverge. a vertical component pointing upward. This
movement of water masses results in the appearance of interfaces-frontal zones
extending from the surface to the depths of the ocean. The existence of verti-
cal displacements of water has been detected by observation and by the re-
spective rising and dipping of isotherms.

The most typical and important stream of Southern Ocean waters is the Antarctic
Circular Current. Sometimes it is called the Heat Hind Drift. This current

is found between the zones of subtropical convergence and antarctic convergence,
located around Antarctica within the range of 36 to 52' latitude south.

The Heat Hind Drift is almost universally divided into two parallel streams.
These streams are located at its edges, and the maximum velocity in them
varies from 20 to 60 cm/s. Between these streams is found a region of weak
currents and closed-circle circulation. It is precisely as the result of this
distribution in velocities in the effective zone of the Heat Hind Drift that.
approximately at the center of this current, there arises a line of divergence
of waters--the line of eubentsrctic divergence, which runs along the circle
of latitudes within the boundaries of 40 to 45' latitude south.

Observations have shown that the line of antarctic convergence is the northern
boundary for the spread of antarctic surface waters directly interacting with
the atmosphere. Therefore. the region from the shores of Antarctica to this
boundary is customarily called the Antarctic legion of the Southern Ocean,
which conforms well with the definition of the boundary of Antarctica as a
geographical region of the globe. The water space between the antarctic and
subsntarctic convergences is called the Subantarctic Region of the Southern
Ocean.

The next zone of general circulation of the waters of the Southern Ocean is

the zone located south of the antarctic convergence to the antarctic divergence,
surrounding the mainland within the boundaries of 63 to 64’ latitude south.
Typical of this region of the ocean are weak currents directed easterly. with

a mean velocity of S cm/s.

97
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ONICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6. Dynamical Chart of Surface of tha Ocean in Relation to

3000 dhar
South Aurica 8. Antarctica
Atlantic Ocaan 9. no” Saa
Scotia Sea 10. (Pm-vine Sea
Haddan Sea 11., Davis Sea
Indian Ocean 12. Pacific Ocaan
lallinphausan Sea 13. New Zealand
Almanac Saa 16. Australia

to
NOUFUNH
a o a a o o o

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- .s-wz - .
' ’n; :.(:.A._.-3._;:T-
x x’. ‘

 

Figure 5. Location of Lines of Divergence and Convergence: lnantarctic
divergence; Zuentarctic convergence; 3—subantarctic diver-
gence; loo-subtropical convergence, northern boundary of
Southern Ocean; Depths: 5—fron o to 4000 I: 6--deeper than
4000 u; 7-depth points and markers

1. Argentine Basin 5. louvet Island

2. Falkland (Helvinae) Islands 6. Agulhu Benin

3. South Georgie 7. African-Antarctic Ridge
6 South Atlantic Ridge 8. Hedogucer

continued on folloving page]

99
FOR ontcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9. Crozet Islands 17. Australian-Antarctic Basin
10. Crozet Basin 18. South Pacific Rise

11. African-Antarctic Basin 19. Australian-Antarctic Rise
12. Karguelen Island 20. Southern Basin

13. South Pole 21. Chathan Islands

15. Kerguelen Ridge 22. New Zealnnd Islands

15. Bellingehausen Basin 23. Tasmania Basin

16. Antarctic Circle 24. South Australian Basin

 

Figure 6. Diagram of Distribution of Wind by Haridian Over the Southern

Ocean
Kay:
1. Subtropical convergence 6. Antarctic Circular Current
2. Subsntarctic divergence 7. Zone of weak easterly currents
3. Antarctic convergence 8. Best Hind Britta
b. Antarctic divergence 9. South Pole
5. Heinland

The positions of zones of convergence and divergence of surface waters. and,
consequently, the widths of the rings between then, are not identical at
different longitudes in the Pacific Ocean. Atlantic and Indian sectors of
the Southern Ocean. Nor are their position and width identical in terns of
time. They vary both fros season to season and free year to year for the
ease seasons (cf. figs 5 and 6).

for investigations of the te-perature cycle of levels of Southern Ocean waters
it is very inportant to know its water exchange and water balance. and. in
particular, the water balance of the strongest ocean stress. which is the
Antarctic Circular Current. Utilizing the data of all observations, and
supported by special observations made for different Ieridional cross sections
connecting the shores of Antarctica with the extreaities of other continents.
Soviet researchers have been able to deter-ins the rate of flow of water in
the tone of the Antarctic Circular Current in several areas of it. It has

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been shown that the transport of water by this current, for a cross section
running through its entire depth fron the surface to the floor at 20° longitude
east, equals 19.8 nillion n 3Is. For a cross section at 165° longitude east,
the amount of water transported per second equals 18. 9 nillion and for

s cross section across Drake Passage, 16.5 million n3. °

 

Figure 7. Values of Velocities of Currents (cl/e) in a Section Along
20’ Longitude Bast. From the Coast of Antarctica to Africa

Key:
1. Latitude south 4. SAD [subantsrctic divergence]
2. AD [antarctic divergence] 5. ST! [subtropical convergence]
3. AK [antarctic convergence]

The inequality in the amount of water transported by the current at different
sections is totally explainable. The boundaries of the Antarctic Circular
Current are by no means isolated. and across then takes place the exchange
of waters of the Southern Ocean with waters of other oceans. which is accon~
plished by currents having a meridional or close to meridional direction.
Such currents, for example, are the Cape Point Current. carrying the waters
of the Indian Ocean to the south, and the Peruan Current. representing the
discharge iten in the balance of Southern Ocean enters, and other currents.

Prom these cross sections and v.c. Neylnn's chart for the GOO-dbar level

(cf. figs 6-7) we are convinced that the screens of easterly currents cover
the entire depth of Southern Ocean waters, which testifies not only to their
drift. but also to their gradient origin. But as soon as « current extends

to the floor, of course, the contour of the floor will influence the direction
of flow. And in fact the lines of flow are not circles. 1hey are deflected

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

first to the right and then to the left. and now to the south and then to
the north of latitude circles. This well-known phenomenon was studied by
Yu.A. lvsnov and V.M. Kanenkovich (1959) for the Antarctic Circulation
Current.

The most cosplicated is the pattern of currents at the approaches to the
shores of Antarctica whure winds with an easterly component begin to blow.
These regions of the ocean have been studied less because of the coeplexity
of sailing in sou ice and among icebergs. Here are observed vortex-type
currents differing in scale. rotating prisarily clockwise. These vortices
can be seen on the diagrsa of coastal surface water currents made for this
section of the ocean (fig 8). It is hard to talk of the degree of precision
of this diagram. we do not know whether these vortices do move around the
continent. But it is clear that vortex-type currents do exist. Many re-
searchers in Antarctica have observed then.

Directly near the coast is observed a current with a westerly direction.
caused by the effect of s southeast wind blowing from the icy continent. This
current must surround the continent in a continuous ring. The considerable
changes in its cycle near the shore itself can be related to the cosplicatod
configuration of the coastline in certain places.

Let us now discuss how the Antarctic Circular Current originates (fig 9).
Northwest winds acting in a wide belt along the latitude ring in the

Southern Ocean create a strong drift current flow. This flow. encountering
the flow of subtropical waters. forms a line of convergence-othe subtropical
convergence. It is precisely for this reason that the level of the ocean
along it is raised somewhat as the result of the two-way surge of waters.

This also determines the pressure gradient of current sets. in particular
southward. The vector of the gradient current encompassing the entire depth
of waters points eastward. The vector of the total surface current on average
agrees well with reality. But the current flow is non-unifors with respect

to breadth. There are observed intensification of it along its edges and
weakening in the center. which is related to the features of wind distribution
along meridians (cf. fig 6). This sale cause results in the origin of other
lines typical of the Southern Ocean: the subtropical divergence. the antarctic
convergence and the antarctic divergence. Consequently. the overall slope

of the surface of the ocean fros its northern boundery-the subtropical con-
vergence-to the south is non-unifore; rises and dips occur.

Let us turn now to coastal circulation. Southeast winds blowing along the
entire extent of Antarctica's coastline create a surge of water. since here
the Coriolis force deflects the current to the left of the direction of the
effect of the wind (fig 10). The pressure gradient originating as the result
of this inclination in level. as well as the Coriolis force. force coastal
waters throughout the entire depth to move westward around the mainland.

The overall gradient drift current on the surface will also have a westerly
direction with northern components which differ in magnitude depending on

the features of the position of the coastline. but are not too great.

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hydrological cross sections perpendicular to the coastline graphically

show the surge-typo nature of circulation near the coast of Antarctica.

Of course, the cycle described here is an average one. At each specific
section of the coastline it depends on its position in relation to the wind,
on the distribution of sea ice (shore ice) and on the depth of the see.

 

Figure 8. Vortex-Type Currents in the Southern Ocean

Key:
1. South Pole 2. Anterctic Circle

The vortex circulation loop is the nest difficult to explain and estimate.
here we have to tu... to ataospheric vortices—ocyclone loops, since the reasons
for their origin can be shove to he the seas free the tarsal stendpoint.

:03
'0! 0177161“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

figure 9. Diagram of the tornation of the Heat Wind Drift Current
(Antarctic Circuapolar Current): V—wind; D-surface
drift current: P-wtotal drift current flow; R—slope of
ocean level; 3-gradient current; s—totsl surface current

Key: .
l. Subtropical. convergence ‘. Antarctic Circle
2. Hadagascsr 5. South Pole
3. South America 6. Australia

a. recall that cyclone vortices in the atmosphere were regarded above as
internal gravitational waves breaking down under conditions of rotation at

the interface of layers of air of different density. - Obviously, vortex
currents can originate in this manner in the ocean. too, if there exist there
interfaces between layers of water of different denaity' and relative novenent
of these layers. It is also obvious that, as the result of the greater density

10h
roe onrcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of water as conpsred with air and the lower relative velocities as compared
with in the atmosphere, vortex waves in the water will be smaller than atmo-
spheric waves. Lines of convergence and divergence on the surface of the
ocean represent the beginning of interfaces between different water masses.
Theae interfaces are then traced at different depths. In the case of the
antarctic divergence is observed an extrele sudden change in the density and
relative velocity of two different water leases. Incidentally it is precisely
in this area that vortex currents are concentrated in the Southern Ocean.

 

Figure 10. Diagram of the Formation of Coastal Circulation of "stars
‘ Around Antarctica

Key:
1- Antarctic Circle 5. Gradient current
2. "bddell Sea 6. Slope of level
3. Surge 7. South Pole
6. Surge 8. Rose Sea

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let on talk some more about the cycle of internal waves under different con-
ditions. with a great difference in the dennity of two layers of fluid. the
waves will be more stable. and very high relative velocities are required for
them to reach high ranges and begin to break down. In the other extreme case
when the difference in density approaches zero and a relative velocity exists.
all waves will break down at the very start of their formation. creating anall-
scale turbulence. Consequently. large waves and large vortices corresponding
to then can form only with definite relatively not too high differences in
density and values for the relative velocity. corresponding to then. of the
two layers of air or water. But such a purely wave-type pattern will arise
only upon the condition of homogeneity. in terms of density. of the two con-
tacting layers of fluid and of their interfacing horizontally. If the inter-
face is inclined. then this inclination must be counterbalanced by sons other
type of force. In the case of the absence of this force. density convection
will originate.

He will not be concerned here with cases of wave notion taking rotation into
account and developing all the nore under conditions of density convection.
A strict solution to such problems is exceedingly difficult.

Mathematical Model of Large-Scale Vortex Circulation in the Atmosphere of
Antarctica and in the Voters of the Southern Ocean

The above suggests that vortex winds and currents can be related also to
another cause-horisontal large-scale convection in the atmosphere and ocean.
developing under conditions of Earth's rotation. He will attenpt to clarify
this question. enploying experimental data and theoretically. Let us imagine
an annular vessel whose vertical walls are formed by two coaxial cylindrical
surfaces of different radius. If the inside wall is cooled and the outside
heated. then in the annular space filled with fluid will originate convection
with closed lines of flow in terms of radii. At a certain depth of the fluid
an interface will occur. Gravitational waves cannot arise at this interface
on account of convective notion. since the relative velocities of the two
layers are not great and are directed along the radii. along which there is
no space for "acceleration" of a wave. If this vessel begins to rotate. then
the interface is twisted and the lines of flow deviate from the radial di-
rection and take on a periodic wave nature. It is precisely tr.ces of such
lines of flow which have been detected in experiments by R. Side (Hide. 1958)
and D. Fultz (Pultz. 1951) at the interface. The transformation of wave lines
into closed cells with a vertical axis. which ensues with a certain lossby
nunber. testifies to the fact that the circulation becomes close to two-
diaensional in the now level plane; in this plane. consequently. the equation
of discontinuity is also closed. Strictly speaking. this pattern of circula-
tion should arise in a vessel of infinite height. when the influence of the
botton disappears. Thus. gravitational waves can arise in annular tanks.
rotating and not rotating. only with a sufficiently intense relative velocity
of the two layers along the circunference of the tank. not caused by means of
convection. It should also be mentioned that gravitational waves and vortices
corresponding to then must as a rule be shifted in relation to the circun-
ference. and the convection cells must rennin stationary if there is no
circular motion caused by another reason.

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the purpose of constructing a mathematical model or this process, it

is possible to use the system of equations of thermohydrodynnmics in the
Boussinesq approximation. In studies by V.V. Alehseyev. T.c. Akimove end
A.H. Gusev (Akimova et al., l97é. 1975; Alekseyev et al., 1975). this non-
linear aystem was studied analytically for the purpose of determining the
number of vortices and was solved numerically for the purpose of studying
the process of their development in the atmosphere. a solution was found to
the plane problem, corresponding to a certain cross section of a cylindrical
vessel of infinite height. It was verified by the insignificant influence
of the vertical component of the large-scale convection studied on its overall
vortex nature and the number of vortices. But fundamental difficulties do
not arise in solving the three-dimensional problem numerically. either.

  

””2 o 5 am
1) muwvlhnuu

 

Figure 11. Mathematical Model of Atmospheric Circulation: a-cross
section of vessel formed by two coaxial cylinders; b-
dependence of number of vortices on Grashof number: 1-
r0 - l; R - 1.5; 2-r - 0.85; R - 1.5; 3--r - 0.75; R -
- 1.5; c-vortices wigh steady-state convectgon conditions.
Cf. text for letter symbols.

1. Number of vortices

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It in poeeihle to write in the following nanner the eyeten of equatione in di-
neneionleae fern in polar coordinatea. describing the ateady-etate notion of
e viecoue incoepreaaible fluid hetveen tv; coaxial cylindera of infinite height

with radii of r(, and n (fig lle). rotating with a conetant identical angular
velocity of n l

Vp-Av—GIT: diva-0; 7174“,».

(1)
where V‘ I . c'-En"R-’w‘” (71-7.)

R

rin—
'e

in the Cranbof nuber. where 1' - l. 'r I- 0 are the temrature of the
outaide large cylinder and the inaide Jaller cylinder. reepectively. written
in certain dinenaionleee unite. An ve nee. the tenparature of the aurface

of the inaide cylinder in lover than the temperature of the eurface of the
outeide. The ease conditione vere inpoaed elao in the experinente of R. aide
(llide, 1958) and n. rultt (Yultr, 1951). Sinilar conditions occur in nature,
too: The etnoaphere near the ahoree of Antarctica in colder than the atto-
ephere of lore northern latitudea near the boundary of the outer loop of. cy-
clonea. Pr - v/x ia the Prendtl nuder (u repreeente the kinenatic nodulua
of viacoeity; x in the coefficient of themel conductivity 3 v (r.9) and
v (rm: are the radial and tonal couponenta of the velocity, r pectively;
1‘ r,” in the deviation in tenerature fron a certain equilibriun value:
p(r.0) ia the overpreaeure of the fluid (the deviation from its atatic value):
and v and d are individual operatora. Uaed aa boundary conditiona were
the conditiona of i-perIeability and adheaion. and for the teqerature. ite
conatancy at boundariea. An added condition in the condition of continuity
of all functiona with reepect to angle.

The integral cherecterietica of tho ayaten atudied are the nubera of convection
celleuthe nuber of vorticea. Per the purpoae of «tanning their dependence
on the creahof nuﬁer it uaa ehovn to be convenient to utilize the principle
of leaat effect. In general. the variation principle for these problena van
euggeeted by VJ. Alekaeyev (Alekaeyev and Alekeandrov, 1973). the dependence
of the nuﬁer of vorticea on the Greahof nuder for three varianta of the
ratio of radii r and l in ohovn in fig llb. In fig llc in ohm the

ring of vorticea griaing in the convection ayaten etudied. there alao in

ahovn the eyaten of ooordinatea choaen. In fig 11b are plotted three curvee
corruponding to the valuea of radii ro and l . given in dieenaionleaa
valuee.

The linin- value of the Greahof war on each curve correaponding to the
range of the dineneion aelected. and. lore preciaely. to the width of the ring
vhere convection developa, correeponda to the neat probable nt-ber of vorticea

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the conditions imposed. It is obvious that the value of Cr grows
and the number of cylcones increases with a reduction in the widghnof the
convection ting. These results accord well with reality. Let us coepare
them with the number of cyclones originating in the atmosphere around Ant-
arctica. Prom data given in HBTEORDLOGICﬂESKIY BYULLBTEN' [Meteorological
Bulletin] (1958). in January (the summer) the latitude difference between
the inside and outside radii of the cyclone region equals approximately 22°,
and the difference in air temperature at its boundaries equals approximately
22'c. here the nueber of cyclones equals six. In July (the winter) the
cyclone ring region is narrowed down to 18' in latitude, and the temperature
difference at the boundaries reaches b0°c. The number of cyclones observed
equals seven. In spring. when the cyclone region expands to 26’. and the
temperature contrast is reduced to 32‘6. the number of cyclones is reduced
to five. Of course. this is a question only of the agreement of the order
of magnitude of numbers calculated and observed. as well as of agreement in
the overall trend. But this does testify to the fact that the model suggested
correctly reflects the key features of the phenomenon studied.

Let us dwell now on one discrepancy between the theory and reality. The
theory indicates that. under steady-state conditions. the number of vorticea
lust be even and equal Zn. In nature. however. are observed both an even
and odd nusber of cyclone vortices around Antarctica. But this discrepancy
is only an apparent one. He becone convinced of this in a short while below.
when we give the results of calculations of the developeent of convection
over time with different modes of it characterized by different Graahof
numbers. The number of vortices depends essentially on R - r . since

this parameter enters the equation for Or to the fourth poweg.

Por the purpose of studying changes in the mode of convection in cylindrical
vessels. taking place over time and under different conditions. consideration
was given to non-steady-state equations written for a rotating system of
polar coordinates:

a: Hay)". _%£ + vAu-2(oo)+arlo(0r)l.

91 «Mom - w. diVo-O.
0‘ (2)

The symbols used here are the former; in addition. 9 represents density.
8 is the coefficient of thermal expansion. and n i the vector of the
angular velocity of rotation.

Applying the rot operation to the first equation of system (2). introducing

the flow function. e . and its total temperature. it will be possible to
write it in dimensionless for- in the following manner:

1m
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'91 122.421.29.13. «1
+r( dr 0! so) 66.4-0’60'

a: co
9.". lﬂ.9l..2!..91 J. 124.12.
a+r(ao Or a. ao)'r,"+mukp.) or (3)

Here the transition to dinensionless variables is executed by scans of the
following relationships:

where values with primes represent disensi'onleso variables. Fri-es after
the respective transforms of equation (3) are omitted. Or and Pr in
system (3) are the Grashof and Prandtl nuiaers already familiar to us. the
expressions for which are written above.

for the convenience of solution. introduced into syste- (3) is also the
syn'ol aw - -e . where 0 represents vorticity on axis x . Thus. the
solution to the problen boils down to solving a systes of two quasilinear
second-order partial differential equations with boundary conditions of the
first kind. and to the Dirichlet problen. At the boundaries are saintained
the previous conditions of inperneability. adhesion and constancy of tapers-
ture. This systel has no analytical solution. lie will not dwell here on
the process of its nunerical solution. we will just present its results.

In fig 12 are shown lines of flow and isotherms at different tenants of tine.
In the first nunericel experiment with Or - 6000 . the artificially iqosed
insignificant disturbance first. increasing. results in succession in the
appearance of two. three and. finally, four vortices. This state. as denon-
strated by further calculations. proves to be stable. In the second experi-
Ient. conducted with Cr - 8000 . precisely this state (four vortices) was
used as the initial. Further calculations showed that over a specific period
of tine one vortex is split in two. and via a node with five vortices the
systes gradually passes into a steady state with six vortices. Thus. an odd
nutter of vortices in the atnosphere of Antarctica should testify to in-
stability in the synoptic conditions of the at-osphere. This phenolenon was
also noted in experiments by T.V. lonchhovskaya (1962). conducted by using
rotating physical nodels of the ataosphere of the southern henisphere.

llu-erous synoptic charts nade frost observations in Antarctica denoutrate
that the nusber of cyclones observed around the continent at different tines
of the year varies fro. five to 12. In T.V. lonchhovskeya's nodal were ob-
served five to eight vortices. The crashof nuders, representing einilitude
criteria. cowuted for different natural conditions and conditions of the
physical esperinent varied fron 5000 to 12000. i.e.. were close to those
with which a calculation was ads by using the ssthmtical eodel. All this

confirm their sisilsrity to nature.

FOR OhFICIAL USE ONLY

The nodal described here can be used with total justification also for
studying vortex currents in the ocean. "hat in this case will the results

be of the different physical characteristics and constants of water? The
considerably greater viscosity of the water, for exmle, which enters the
equation for detornining the Graehof nuaber es a square. will reduce its value
with other conditions being equal. This will characterize a note steble node
of convection with a correspondingly suller number of vortices. Unfortunately.
we do not yet have for the ocean the sane date as for the ataosphero. The
diagraas constructed for the sovenent of its voters have been averaged and ere
not very accurate. But in the ocean. too. (cf. fig 8) it is possible to
count six to eight large vorticas.

And so, as the result of research on vortex currents in the ataosphere of
Antarctica end in the waters at the Southern Ocean. it can be asserted that
their ceuoo can be both wave processes at interfaces. end convective processes.
Just as in studying the overall dyes-ice of ocean voters. in deter-lining the
causes of vortex currents it is iqoesible to leave coapletely out-of con-
sideration the role of cyclone winds in the creation of similar drift currents
o water.

The note distinctly pronounced the interface, and the higher the relative
velocity of layers of different density, the nore probable the occurrence of
vortex waves. with a slight difference in the density and velocity of currents
the nore probable is the occurrence of vortex convection cells. But purely
convective currents cannot cause large internal waves. for this are required
high relative velocities of the layers. caused by other reasons.

An interesting but insufficiently studied question is that of the agreenent
of the order of nagnitude of the nuaber of convection-type vortices and wave
vortices. tinder conditions when the probability of the occurrence of vortices
because of both reasons is identical. vavas can turn out to be the prinary
disturbances for the dovelomt of convection cells. The reason for the
agroaoent of the order of asgnitude of the nuﬁer of waves and cells under
purely convective conditions and purely vove-type conditions is still not
clear.

If the novenont of loops of cyleones of wave origin around Antarctica can be
explained by the relationship between the rate of vavo propagation at the
interface and the velocity of the lover current. than the rotation of con-
vection cells can be related only to the total transport velocity in relation
to latitude circles, caused by another non-convoction-type reason—overall
etsosphoric circulation. or a gradient or drift current in the oceam

In the atnoophere of Antarctica and in the .waters of the Southern Ocean
tanperature and dyn-ic conditions are caused by the entire group of factors
annotated. Therefore, for an sari-ate and forecast 'of these conditions

it is necessary to go fro. framers to the problem as a vhole. This problea
is not easy. but it is very inert-It. It is necessary to begin to construct
a full nodal just for Antarctica, for the southern bonisphere.
1.

2.

3.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bibliography

Alekseyev. V.V. and Alakaandrov. A.A. "Nodal of. M-Dinenional Con-
vection and of a hoe-Layer l'luid." 12V. AN 888R. 88R. PIZ‘JI AWSPBRY
I OKBANA. Vol 9. No 8. 1973.

Alekseycv. V.V.. Cuaev, Am. and Denent'yevs. T.C. "(m the Question of
a Hodel of Atmospheric Circulation in Antarctica," VESTN. msx. UN-TA.
No 2. 1975.

Akieova. 1.0.. Alekseyev. V.V. and Cuaev. AM. "Hathenaticel Hodel of
Cyclogenesis in the Atmosphere of Antarctica." TRUD.‘ NOR. GIDROPIZ. IN-TA
AN USSR. Savaatopo1'. 1974.

Akilova. 1‘.G.. Alekseyev. V.V. and Cusev. AM. "Regarding Heat Convection
in a Field of Centrifugal Forces." 12V. AN SSSR, 83R. PIZIKI ATMOSPERY I
OMA. V01 11, No 8, 1975.

"Atlas Antarktiki" [Atlas of Antarctica], Vol 2. Leningrad. Gidroneteo-
izdat. 1969.

Bonchhovshaya, T.V. “Scale Results of nodeling Ateoapheric Convection"
in "Hodelirovaniye yavleniy v atnoafere i gidroefere" [Modeling Phenomena
in the Ateosphere and llydroaphere], Moscow, 1962.

Caygerov. 8.8. "Queationa Relating to the Aerological Structure, Cir-
culation and Clieate of the Free Ateosphere of the Central Arctic and
Antarctica" in "Rezul'taty issledovaniy po progra-e Hezhdunarodnogo
geofiricheskogo goda" [Results of Research in Keeping with the Program
of the International Geophysical Year], noncov, Itdatel'stvo AN 888R.
1962.

Ousev. A.H. ”Circulation and Pronto- and Cyclogenesis 1:. the Atmosphere
Over Antarctica" in "Oanovnyye itogi ieucheniya Antarktiki re 10 let"
[Main Results of Research on Antarctica Over a lO-Year Period], Roscoe,
Naulta. 1967.

Ivanov, Yu.A. and Kanenkovich. V.R. "Relief of the Ocean Floor as a
Key l'ector Forming the Azonality of the Antarctic Circunpolar Current,"

non. AN 8851!, V01 130. No 6. 1959.

Kort, v.6. “Hater Exchange of the Southern Ocean," TRUDY WT-
mm mm P0 PROVIDER" mo, OMOGRAPICHESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA.
No 8. Rescue. l963.

Kochin, Ede. "On the Stability of the Hargulea Interface," SOBR. 8063..
Vol 1, Moscow. Izdatel'etvo AN 888R, 1969.

WWICHBSKIY W' (Nevada! 1957), Noam. Oidroneteoiadat,
1958.

1.13
13.

1‘.
15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nemn. v.0. "Dynelicsl Chsrt of Antarctica," mm HBZHWVEDOHSTVBNNOGO
WITB‘I‘A PO PROVEINIYU mo. OWOIDOICUBSKIYB. ISSLBDOVANI‘IA. No 3.
Hoscov, 1961.

Shuieykin. V.V. "Piziks norys" [Physics of the See], Hoecov. Monks. 1968.

Pultz, D. "Experiments Colbining Convection and Rotation and Sons of
Their Possible leicetions." me. HID". CORP. FLUID man. No 1. 1951.

Hide. 11. "An Experimental Study of Therm Convection in s Rotating
Liquid," PHIL. TRANS. ROY. SOC. LONDON, A950. No 983, 1958.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'stvo "suite. 1978
FOR OFFICIAL USE-2 ONLY

STUDY OF THE BIOWICAL RESOIBCBS O? m SOUl‘HHlN OCEAN

Moscow ANTARKTIKA: OSNOVNYYB 11061 IZUCRBNIYA ANTARKTIKI 2A 20 LET. DOKLADY
KOHISSII in Russian No 17. 1978 pp 226-236

[Article by A.S. Bogdanov and r.c. Lyubinoba]

[Text] Fishing industry research in the Southern Ocean was begun in 1961
by the Atlantic Scientific Research Institute of Marina Fishing and Oceano-
graphy (AtlantNIRO) on the SRIH [fishing and serchant motor ship] ”Huksun”
in the southern half of the Atlantic Ocean. The results of research done
during this voyage clearly desonstrated the need to arrange for conbined
fishery research studies in the Falkland-Patagonia region and in the Scotia
Sea.

Systematic combined fishing industry research was begun in 1965 by the All-
Union Scientific Research Institute of Marina Fishing and Oceanography (VNINO)
in the Atlantic sector of Antarctica, on the NPS [fishery research vessel]
"Akadenik Knipovich." the flagship of the scientific research fleet of the
USSR Ministry of the Fish Industry.

The NPS "Akadendk Knipovich” is the first and best outfitted ship of a series
of Soviet scientific fishery research vessels constructed on the basis of a
large freezer trawler and designed for extensive cosbined research on the
ocean. Accommodations have been asde on this ship for physical oceanogrerhic
and biological laboratories. five winches with the necessary equipment. and
deepwsrer sonic depth finders. This sakes it possible to gather and process
data thoroughly characterising hydrological and hydrochemical features. the
relief of the ocean floor. soil. plankton. ichthyoplankton. and benthos of
regions being studied. Studies of ichthyofauna are lads not only by special
gathering of material. but also. what is especially important. by fishing
with different commercial gear. followed by an analysis of the needed portion
of the commercial catch.

The "Akadenik Knipovich" has at its disposal in addition great opportunities
for doing research work relating to improving fishing gear and developing
technological processes for processing commercial goods. 0n the ship there
FOR Ol-‘HCIAI. USE ONLY

are well equipped technological laboratories, aechaniaed lines for processing
fish and antarctic krill. a waste recovery ouit. and refrigeration con-
partaents with s 300-ton capacity. The ship delivers fron expeditions con-
siderable batches of finished products whose value is especially high since

in the majority of cases they are made from new goods of the industry (Gerahano-
vich and Lyubinova. 1971).

Research over any years by men on the are "Akadenih Knipovich." which

has cospletsd nine extended antarctic expeditions (l96d-l976), has not only
nade a very valuable contribution to the Job of studying the biological re-
aourcea of the Southern Ocean. but has also served for the further developoent
of donestic research on the technique of finding and evaluating the ocean’s

raw anterial resources. A coobination of large-scale regional research in
keeping with an extensive comprehensive prograa and a detailed study of regions
of promise to the industry as applies to different seasons and stages in the
life cycle of co-ercially-suited organises has been the basis of the fishery
research expeditions of vum. Further-ore. to the aaxisun degree oceanographic
and biological data have been coapared, daterainations have been node of the
feasibility of entering specific regions and products free the coessercial
viewpoint. and an evaluation has been node of the co-ercial utilieation of
biological raw eaterial resources. The reality of setting up an industry

has as a rule been substantiated by the experilsntal operation of the vessel

in a co-ercial situation.

This oethodological principle has proved itself on all expeditions of vane
and has been utilised successfully in the industry's syste- of ocean fishery
instit":es doing research in subantarctic and antarctic waters on vessels
equipptd siailsry to the NPS "Akadenik Knipovich" (the 203's "Atlant."
“Zvriha.” "Skif." ”Gerald." "Professor Deryugin.” etc.).

In 1967 research was begun in the Pacific and Indian sectors of Mtarctica
(the New Zealand region, lellingshausen. mindsen. loss and d'Orville seas,
and the water area south of 50' latitude south between 20 and 90° longitude
east) by the Pacific and Asov - black Sea scientific research institutes of
aarine fishing and oceanography. An iaportant role in antarctic research
was played by co-srcial basin explorations. such as the Zsprybproerasvedka
(ltaliningrad), the Yugrybproerarvedlta (Kerch' and Sevastopol') and the
WI? [expansion unknown] (Vladivostok). by whose efforts were node a con-
siderable nunber of expeditionary voyages on vessels of different types,
free M's [long-range co-ercial fishing vessels] to sm's. and a great
a-ount of exploratory work was done.

Of great ieportance to the intensification of fishery research studies in
subeotarctic and antarctic regions was the organisation in 1971 of the Ant-
arctic Coebined Peresoent fishing Industry Expedition of the 033R Kinistry
of the Iish Industry. lihereas during the period of 1961-1971 a total of

27 scientific research and exploratory voyages were «ads in the Southern
Ocean. fro- the accent of organization of this expedition through 1975 the
order of voyages Isde reached 60.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This large industrial expedition combined the forces of all ocean fishery
institutes and couercial exploratory groups and to a considerable extent
activated and intensified research on the biological rav asterial resources
of the Southern Ocean.

As the result of the fishing industry research which has been done. very
isportant theoretical and practical results have been obtained. The greatest
successes in studying biological resources and in deternining their connercial
value haVe been achieved in the Atlantic sector of Antarctica, uhere research
began earlier than in the Pacific and Indian sectors and was carried out by
the efforts of run institutes. Systeaatic research over many years conducted
by VNIRO in the Scotia Sea and vaters adjacent to it has shovn that certain
of its regions can serve in a number of instances as a distinctive proving
ground for studying the fundamental patterns of distribution of antarctic narine
organisms and. primarily. of those spread in circunpolar fashion through the
Southern Ocean.

Based on the results of basic research perforoed by Soviet antarctic expeditions
during the period ”56-1966 in the area of studying geomorphology, atnospheric
circulation. oceanography. plankton, and ichthyofauna of the Southern Ocean.

on the data of the thorough eta-arise of the Discovery Couittee expedition
(Deacon. 1937; liart, 19‘2: Pt—rton. 1956; Herr. 1962). and on an analysis of

the data of detailed regional fishing industry research in Antarctica. a
determination was nade of high-output regions and of the key patterns in the
fornation of biological productivity for many of then.

It has been established that the nature of biologically productive processes
in the waters of the Southern Ocean is detersined chiefly by the Antarctic
Circuqolar current (am). which exerts a nultilateral influence on the
distribution of biogenic ale-ants. hydrological and hydrochemicel character-
istics. phytoplankton and antarctic fauna.

The Antarctic Circe-polar Current. vhich passes around Antarctica from vest
to east. is the lost inortant circulation system in the global ocean and is
exceptionally stable in terms of time and space. Its effect has been traced
to a depth of 300 m. and its range of extent stretches almost from the shores
of Antarctica to the subtropical sons of the southern hemisphere. The main-
streas of the A‘rs‘l' passes between $0 and 55‘ latitude south (Horoshkin, 1960;
Kort. 1961, 1963: hey-an. 1961: hahsisov. 1962).

Chance in the direction and strength of the Al's'f's flow are closely related
to changes in the nature of the relief of the ocean floor (Ivanov and linen-
ltovich. 1939: Kort, 1963; ‘l'rsshiltov. 196‘).

Because of deviations of the current ‘s mainstrean under the influence of the
relief of the ocean floor. in a under of regions of the Southern Ocean a
system of powerful cyclonic for. of circulation for-s. The largest circula-
tion systems are created in the Heddell. loss. lellingshaueen and Anundsen
sass. Circulstion processes close to the nainland are intensified as the
result of the influence of the West Coast Current Mai-av, 1958; ‘rreshnikov,

19“) .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As was discovered during the tins of regional fishing industry studies.
complex and distinctive hydrodynamic processes take place because of dis-
turbance of the zonal transport or the ATsT near islands. underwater pro-
minences and banks located on the path of the current's track. Here. above
the island shelf and the central section of submerged banks are formed local
closed-circuit circulation systems. as well as secondary forms of circulation
in the area of the outer edge of the shelf and continental slope. Especially
intense vorticity is aroused from the leeward side in relation to prevailing
winds and the current (Yelizarov. 1969; Haslennikov. 1969; Haslennikov et al..
1971). The coastal merger which forms is responsible in the majority of
instances for high productivity of waters, especially in regions of subantarctic
and antarctic islands and prominences.

An important influence on the formation of productivity in open areas of the
Southern Ocean is exerted by the meridional circulation of waters created in
the effective area of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. As the result of
meridional circulation in the region between 50 and 70° latitude eouth are
formed the frontal zones of the subantarctic divergence. the antarctic con-
vergence, and the antarctic divergence (Ivanov. 1961; hahsimov, 1961; Botnikov,

1966; Nay-an, 1966).

The nature of the distribution of biogenic elements over the water area of
the Southern Ocean correlates with the position of frontal zones and regions
of strong cyclonic circulation formed in the star system. Analysis of the
quantitative distribution of biogenic elements testifies to their pronounced
increased concentration in circulation systems of the southern half of the
8cotia Sea and of the ﬂeddell. ﬂoss, Bellingehausen and Amundsen sees, as
well as near islands and underwater prominences located in the effective area
of the ATsT. During periods of vegetation the concentration of major bio-
genic elements in these areas is reduced because of their consumption by
living organisms, which is testified to by the increase in the supply of
nitrites. which are indicators of the decomposition of a great amount of
organic matter (Volkovinshiy, 1969, 1971).

The highest values of the zooplankton biomass are observed primarily in the
areas of fronts. Some plankton-rich spots are observed in the areas of circu-
lation of waters near subantarctic and antarctic islands and underwater pro-
minences, the main ones being the islands of South Georgia, Crozet. Kerguelen,
and Bouvet, the Balleny Islands. the Hacquarie Islands, the 0b', Lane and
loirdwood banks. and prominences located in the water area of the Karguelen
Ridge. It has been determined that the biomass of copepod plankton in these
regions equals 600 to 600 mg/m3 (Vinogradov and Neumov, 1961; Voronina and
Naumov, 1968; Kanayeva. 1969: Pervushin and Naumov, 1970).

Distinguished by especially high productivity is the epipelagic zone near the
antarctic divergence, because oi the intense development of macrozooplankton,
among which luphasia superba D. predominates in terms of biomass. Haas con-

cantrationa of individuals of this species are known by the name of antarctic
krill. B. superba is one of the most typical representatives of antarctic
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

macrozooplankton, living in the Southern Ocean south of the antarctic con-
vergence. In certain regions of the Southern Ocean are formed dense clusters
of B. superba, considerably surpassing in biomass the concentration of meso-
plankton. "heroes the maximum biomass of mesoplankton in the areas of its
highest concentration equals 20 to 30 g/m3 (1 g/m3 is the highest fi re for
mesoplankton), the biomass of antarctic krill reaches 10 to 15 kg/mg .

The formation of mass concentrations of B. superba in the Southern Ocean

is caused by a nusber of factors of a biotic and abiotic nature. It has been
established that the largest clusters of crayfish originate in the spring,
sunmer and part of the fall period (November-Hay) and are associated with
their breeding and feeding (Naumov, 1963; Hakarov and Shevtsov, 1969, 1971;
Hakerov st a1., 1972).

Combined fishing industry studies over many years in the Scotis Sea have
provided an opportunity to determine not only areas of mass concentration of
crayfish, but also the conditions under which the formation of dense clusters
takes place, as well as to determine the reasons for and the length of pre-
servation of these clusters and their disintegration. It should be mentioned
that main patterns of the distribution and formation of clusters of krill
discovered by using the Scotia Sea as an example are cannon to the entire
water area of the Southern Ocean, since this was confirmed later by the
results of research in the Pacific and Indian sectors of Antarctica.

0n the basis of features of the distribution of physical and chemical charac-

. teristics in the southern half of the Scotis Sea, VNIRO physical oceanographers
as early as the first year of research discovered the existence of a secondary
frontal zone (VPZ) separating the waters of Weddell Sea and the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current (Bogdanov et a1., 1969; Yelissrov, 1969; Haslennikov, 1969).
Later the location of the VP2 was verified by detailed research on geostrophic
currents of the Scotis Sea and the adjacent water area. The general direction
of this secondary frontal zone runs from the southwest to northeast, parallel
to the Scotis Arch, in relation to the water transport predominant in the
Scotis Sea, and its meandering nature matches the kinks in dynamic lines of
flow (Haslennikov et al., 1971). The latter fact is especially important,
since concentrations of antarctic krill are related to vertical formations

of the VP2.

Every year during the summer within the range of the frontal zone are con-
centrated sexually mature crayfish, where they spawn at the end of the summer.
Fry during this period are distributed south of the Scotis Arch, so the
separate occurrence of generations of crayfish is observed (Makarov, 1970) .
With the approach of the fall-winter period, the areas of habitation of the
fry and sexually nature crayfish in this section of the sea gradually overlap.
At the same time in another section of the sea, in the area of South Georgia
Island, every year a significant quantity of fry accumulate.

But this region represents an anomaly from the viewpoint of the habitation
and reproduction of this species and is characterized as a sterile zone
for eviction of the Buphasia superba population (Hakarov and Shevtsov, 1971).
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The occurrence of l. superba and its spatial and quantitative distribution

are closely associated with plankton. Phytoplankton and sons ferns of too-
plankton are a steady source of food for krill. Thu rather even distri-
bution of phytoplankton and roeplankton, whose areas of ease develop-ant during
the period of vegetation surround the continent in an alnost continuous ring.
provides antarctic krill with a large food base in all regions of its
geographic range (Vinogradov and Naunov. 1961). Consequently. the food base
cannot be the decisive factor of the conditions for forsation of their sass
concentrations. The distribution and the bio-ass of food organises apparently
exert a decisive influence on the behavior of crayfish in clusters. on their
concentration at the surface or in the depth of the water. on their eubnsrsion
depth, the nature of vertical eigrations. etc. (Pavlov. 1969; Hakarov and
8hsvtaov. 1971).

By research by VRIRO in the Scotia See it was established that the fornation
of uses dense concentrations of krill in regions of distribution of cray-

fish (the area of the V12. the waters of South Georgia Island) is deternined
by specific features of the dynaaics of the waters. in analysis of the vertical
circulation of whters in regions of ease concentrations of krill hg. desen-
strsted the confinement of clusters to sections where waters sink. adjacent to
areas of a rise. furthernore. areas of descent where concentrations of
krillarefound can be related both to the center of an snticyclonic for- of
circulation. to the periphery of a cyclonic fern. and to straight-line sove-
sent of a flow along a shore or underwater prosinence. but is certainly to

the left of horizontal currents. The velocity of the horilontal flow in this
case is not of essential significance to clusters of krill. An inportsnt
condition for the fornation of concentrations of crayfish is. as it were. re-
striction of the section for descent of voters by distinctive "walls." This
restriction can be either of s dynanic nature (for the open see). when waters
flow froe both flanks to the section of descent. or of an orographic (for
coastal regions). where the role of one of the "walls" is played by the shore.
These patterns have been revealed both in the open section of the Scotie Bee
and in the coastal waters of the South Orkney Islands and South Georgia Island.
It has also been deternined that. in the absence of a distinctly pronounced
region of descent of waters. concentrations of krill do not for: even in
regions of distribution in which this is nornal. e.g.. in the secondary frontal
zone where the wntere of Heddsll Sea and the ATeT nix (Bogdanov and Solysnkin.
1970; Ielinarov. 1971).

The length of tile crayfish rennin in clusters in various regions of the
Scotia Sea is not the eels. In the Iain geographic sons (the southern half

of the see) where the breeding of l. superba takes place, clusters of cray-
fish are stable right up to the end of the spawning period. after which. in
february-Harch, is observed the process of disintegration of dense clusters
(Hakerov and Bhtheov. 1971). In the waters of South Georgia Island. where
the accunulation of crayfish is observed during the eunaer-fall period. trans-
ported by the Uhddell sea current. the stability of concentrations is governed
chiefly by the period concentrating for-s of horizontal circulation continue.
i.s.. by the Iaintanance above the shelf of a systel of powerful cyclonic and
snticyclonic for-s of circulation (Haslennikov. 1912, 197‘).

120
’0‘ OYPICIAL 082 OIL?
The pntturun which tho hven determined for the formation of clusters of
antarctic krill. using the Scotin Sea as an example. are of very important
theoretical and practical value. since the types of vertical circulation of
waters described above are observed in many regions of the Southern Ocean.
Consequently. concentrations of krill can be found in the open area or

the ocean--in frontal zones. in forms of circulation originating on the
periphery of horizontal currents. in the coastal waters of inlands and
underwater prominences. and to the left of a horizontal stream passing along
the shore. from this viewpoint especially close attention is deserved by
regions of cyclonic and anticyclonic circulation in the open seas of the
Southern Ocean (the Bellingshausen. Amundsen. Ross. d'Urville. Sodruxhestvo.
etc.. seas). as well as the waters of antarctic islands and banks on the lee-
ward side in relation to prevailing winds and currents (the islands Bouvet.

Herd. Scott. Peter the first. the Balleny Islands. the ob' and Lena banks.
etc.). Haas concentrations of krill have already been found in many of

these regions (Lubimov et al.. 1973).

Antarctic krill are the central element in the ecosystem of the Southern .
Ocean. because of their high number and the influence they erert within the
range of a specific trophic level on the distribution and number of antarctic
marine organisms.

According to the estimates of various authors. based on data on the feeding
of the whisksred whale and other consumers of krill. the total supply

of antarctic krill in the Southern Ocean is reckoned in astronomical
figures-ofrom 800 million to five billion tons (Klumov. 1961; Pequegnat. 1958;
HcQuillan. 1962; etc.). It has been estimated approximately that the hump-
backed whale. during the time it remains in Antarctica. consumes as much as
450 tons of krill (lvashin. l961). These figures characterize the ex-
tremely high level of the biomass of r. superba.

The vast supply and the formation of mass concentrations of antarctic krill
through certain areas of the vast water area of the Southern Ocean testify to
the extensive opportunities for commercial utilization of its raw material
resources as an independent objective of the industry. In connection with
the fact that individuals of commercial site among the B. superba population
make up no more than 30 to to percent of the total supply. and that a consider-
able percentage of the crayfish output is eaten up by an enormous number of
krill-consuming species. the total figure for possible commercial removal

can equal not less than 25 to 50 million tons per year. without detriment

to the supply. .

The first experiments in trapping clusters of antarctic krill in the

Scotia Sea and in obtaining human and animal food products from it. conducted
by Soviet scientists. produced positive results and proved the feasibility
of commercial adoption of this product (Lubimova et al.. 1973).

As the result of a thorough study of ocean biocenoses by marine fishery in-
stitutes. many patterns have been discovered. relating to the biology. zoo-
geography and distribution of antarctic ichthyofauma in shelf waters and in

121
rue OPPICIAL 082 OIL!
FOR OPPlCMl. USE ONLY

the open area of the ocean. and a determination has been node of the popula-
tion level of various groups and species. as well as of the position and
significance of fish in the ecological systems of certain regions of the
Southern Ocean.

The nest detailed nodern description of the distribution and general traits
of the biology of antarctic ichthyofauna was trade by A.P. Andriynshev (1962.
1964). The data of regional fishing industry research have substantially
broadened the previously existing notion regarding the species composition
of antarctic ichthyofeuna and its distribution in the Southern Ocean. and
the vertical distribution of fish in certain regions. and have deepened our
knowledge of the biology of nany species of fish with regard to the conditions
of the environ-ent in which they live. Species of fish nev to science have
been discovered. as well as cuatlin species. genera and fanilies previously
unknown in antarctic waters. The fact of circuspolar geographic tones has
been established for a number of antarctic species (Parnitin. 1966. 1969).

The perunency in the existence of frontal zones in the Southern Ocean. where
either an ascent or descent of waters occurs, is responsible for the high
concentration of biogenic elenents and the abundance of eooplankton. especially
of antarctic krill (south of the antarctic convergence). which has provided‘
the pelagic fish living here with optinal conditions for distribution over
water levels. as well as for breeding and feeding and for the develop-ant of
larvae and fry. In addition. the high availability of food practically uni-
versally deternines the vastness of the geographic tones of nany antarctic
fish species and the significant level of their population in the effective
range so: the Met.

the waters in the area of the southern edge of the antarctic convergence are
characterized by a high eooplankton bio-ass. not only during the an.» maxi-
num. but also throughout the year, as veil as by intensity in the quantitative
development of plankton vertically to depths of 500 n and lore (Voronine.
1.971). In connection with the deepwater distribution and high bio-ass of
food-type sooplankton in waters of the southern edge of the antarctic con-
vergence at depths of up to 600 n. bathypelegic plankton-eating fish are
widespread. the nest nunerous are representatives of the ”glowing anchovy"
fanily Oiyctophidae)-speciea of the genera Electrons and Gymoscopelus.
Among other mass bathypelagic fish can be nentioned Iathylagus antarcticun
(family Sathylagidae) and farelepis atlanticus prionosa (fully Paralepididae).
Pelagic clusters of these species can be fotnd fron surface level to a depth

of 200 to 600 n.

Directly associated with antarctic krill are the distribution and fornetion
of concentrations of epipelagic krill-eating fish in the areeof the ant-
arctic divergence and south of it. Among these fish nention should be nde
first of the two nest nunerous epecies-tiicronssistius australie (family
Gedidee) and the antarctic silverfish Pleuragra-s antarcticun (fa-ily Noto-

tben iidae) .

122
FOR OFFICIAL I182 OllLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hicroaesistius australis ferns pelagic clusters in the southern half of the
Scotia See at the 0 to 100 n level and floor clusters in shelf waters and
waters of the continental slope in the Palkland-Patagonia region. at depths
of up to 600 s and sore. because of the wide distribution and asaiailstion
of a highly productive krill none. the population of this species has
reached a high level (Shubnikov et al.. 1969).

Distinguished by an even wider distribution in the Southern Ocean is the
antarctic ailverfish. which lives in circuapolar fashion near the edge of
the ice and for-s pelagic clusters in the level iron the surface down to

{007) a at points of concentration of antarctic krill (Lubinova et el..
9 J).

The conditions of habitation and the spatial and quantitative distribution
of ocean floor ichthyofauna in the waters of the subantarctic and antarctic
islands and banks have been found to agree with the main patterns of the
forastion of biological productivity in these regions. which are located
within the effective range of the Antarctic Circuapolsr Current: one is
near the highly productive zone of the antarctic convergence. and the others
right indie tone of the antarctic divergence. Thus. the hey patterns of

the forlation of productivity in the Southern Ocean are co-son to the waters
of islands and banks. ln addition. it should be eentioned that the features
of horizontal and vertical circulation and the enrich-ant of waters with
biocenosea and nicroelenenta because of continental runoff deter-ins the
unusually high productivity of any of then, the high bio-ass of food-type
seas- and lacroplanhton and of nectobenthic organises (Volkovinakiy. 1969;
Kanayeva. 1969; Lyubinova et al.. 1971).

The shelf waters of islands and banks are populated by ocean floor ichthyo-
fauna of the families hototheniidae. Chaenichthyidae, ”uraemlepidae. "scruti-
dae. Sothidae. etc. In spite of the isolation of their areas of habitation.
along the ocean floor ichthyofauna of the Southern Ocean can be observed

no snall nunber of genera and species distinguished by wide distribution.

and in soae instances by a circunpolar geographic cone. These are chiefly
representatives of the nest noserous {Julia sototheuiidae and Chaenicbthyidae.
For exasple. wide distribution around the continent has been eetablished for
ﬂotothenia rosai (waters of the Antarctic Peninsula and of the South Shetland
Islands. South Orkney Islands. South Georgia, the hacqusrie Islands. and the
islands Souvet. Croset and Kerguelen). Che-paocephalus gunnari (waters of

the Antarctic Peninsula. South Shetland Islands. South Georgia, and the
islands bouvet. Croret and hrguelen), and hotothenia larseni (waters of the
Salleny Islands. South Shetland Islands. South Georgia. and Bouvet Island).
Also with a circuqolar geographic zone are the species Disaostichus newsoni.
Treaatoeus hensoni. Rotothenia coriicepe. and several others (Lubinove. 1976).

The seat significant quantitative developlsnt has been achieved by those
species of bottoe fish of when is characteristic a high degree of adaptation
to utilization of the rich food base of the pelagic cone. i.e.. those whose
food base is nade up of plankton organises and antarctic krill, in arti-
cular. In their search for food sons bottoe fish are capable of as

123
M OFFICIAL I183 ONLY
FOR UN‘ICIM. USE ONLY

coneidereble vertical migrations, right up to the aurface levele of the
water. Under the heading of theee epeciee will firat of all plenktophagoue.
or. note accurately. krill-eating. fish. such an Notothenlo roeei end
Cheapeocephalue gunneri. Speciee of fiah which do not coaplete euch con-
aiderable nigrationa and feed on nectobenthic and benthic organiena. ea. for
exaaple. N. gibberifrone. N. eeuanifrona. Chaenichthya rhinoceratue, etc..
are notaiaglinferior to planktophagoue fiah in tone of nuder (Lyubiiaova
Ct .1... e

Peaturea of the geoaorphologicnl atructure of ieland ahelvea and the apecifice
of hydrodynanica and of the nature of bottom depoaita (Avilov end Gerahanovich.
1969) deter-line in the majority of inatancee the poverty of the benthoa food
baae. it hee been learned that characterized by the loweet population are
botton fieh cloeely bound to the bottoa throughout their entire life cycle

and feeding excluaively on benthoa (repreaentativea of the faailiee huraeno-
lepidee. Bothidee. Liparidae. etc.).

Based on the trophic reletionahipa between bottoa ichthyofama of the ehelf
watere of aubantarctic and antarctic ialanda. different ecological groupa of
fiah have been dietinguiahed. including different faniliee. genera and epeciee.
It hae been learned that between related epeciee of fieh in Antarctica. and
aoletinee even between different generatione within the one epeciee. there
exiate an ecological aeparation. which in of decieive inportance to the for-e-
tion of their nulber. he an exaaple can be given two apeciee of bottoe fiah
living in the «la region (near South Georgia lalmd—Notothenia roaeii aar-
aorata end N. gibberifrono). The apecifica of the nature of how each of

theee :peciee feede. the firat being a krill eater and the other a bentho-
phagou: fieh. and ecological featuree reapectively eeeociated with thie. de-
teninc the conaiderably lower population level of N. gibberifrona. in apite
of the fact that ita geographic tone within the boundariee of the aaae area

of habitation in twice ea large aa that of N. roaaii ear-orata.

0f great iaportanca in for-etion of the high population of N. roeeii annotate
ia the ecological individualization of the non-aeaually-aature part of ita
population. which livea in open ieland fjorde, fro. the usually nature. which
in diatributed over the open area of the ehelf. lecauae of thia a certain
extenaion of the geographic zone ia achieved and the fry are renoved free

the conetant influence of predatora in open ehelf watera. he the reeult of
thie intraapeciea ecological individualization. the apewning part of the popu-
lation of thin apeciea ie guaranteed relatively eteady repleniahlaent every

year.

The reaulta obtained fro. any yeara of co-bined reaearch in the ehelf watera
of the aubantarctic and antarctic ialanda. beginning with the deter-ination
of the aegnitude of prilary production and ending with the diacovery of abio-
tic and biotic factore in for-lation of the population of narine organieu of
different trophic levela. and with an eatiute of their bio-nae. haa Iadc it
poaaible even now to approach a determination of the key ale-cute of the
atructure of ecoayateae in difierent regione of Antarctica. In the future.

12';
roe . USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

study of the features of energy metabolism at different trophic laVels and
of the patterns of the quantitative transformation of organic matter in eco-
systems will make it possible with much higher accuracy to determine the
magnitude of the and product in a specific region of the Southern Ocean
(Lyubimovs at al.. 1971: Lubimova. 1976).

No doubt. the best prospects for the industrial utilization of antarctic
ichthyofauna resources are represented by the highly productive subantarctic
and antarctic epi- and bathypelagic zones. where the supply of fish is fairly
large and has not been touched by industry. The industrial utilization of
fish resources in the shelf waters of islands is of secondary importance be-
cause of the liaitedness of the total area of island shelves in the Southern
Ocean and of the locality of populations of species of bottom fish which live
in these waters. In addition to the prospects for the industrial utilization
cf also planktophagous and krill-eating fish in Antarctica. it is necessary .
not to forget about the utilization of the raw material resources represented
by bathyal fish. in particular. by representatives of the families Macruridae.
hsrlucidae and horidae. as well as the large fish of the family Nototheniidae.
Of course the supply of these fish. which are on a higher trophic level.

is not as great as the supply of planktophagous fish, but it is possible to
set up an efficient controllable industry for them. Among these species it

is possible to mention Dissostichus mawsoni. Coelorhynchus fasciatus. Hacru-
ronus magellanicus. etc. (Lubimova et al.. 1973).

In conclusion it is necessary to mention that success in mastering the pro-
ductive regions of the Southern Ocean will depend to a considerable extent
on the organization of further extensive combined fishing industry research.
utilizing high-efficiency exploratory and commercial equipment.

The vastness of the water area, the severity of hydrometeorological conditions.
and the distinctive nature of the horizontal and vertical distribution of ant-
arctic marine organisms make it necessary to use for fishery research opera-
tions in regions of Antarctica vessels of the ice class. with a high degree

of self-sufficiency in sailing. and with improved acoustical equipment and
underwater equipment for studying the behavior of organisms at water levels.
and to create in some instances fundamentally new automatic controllable fish-
ing gear with a wide catching range and devices for attracting and forming
schools of commercially suited organisms.

Taking into account the increasing human demand for animal protein, in addi-
tion to conducting exploratory scientific and fishery research, it is necessary
thoroughly to develop new methods for the technology of obtaining food pro-
ducts from fish and invertebrates which hitherto have not been traditional

raw material but which in the not too distant future will become products for

coamercial use.

125
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

6.

5.

6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bibliography

Andriyoshov. A.P. ”Bothy-pelagic Pish of Antarctica: l. The Panily
Hyctophidao" in "Isslcdovaniya fanny noray. t. 1 (X). Rcrul'tsty bio-
logichoskikh isslcdovaniy Sovatskoy antarhtichoskoy akapodits‘ii (1955-
1958 33.)" [Roscarch on Harino Pauna, Vol 1. No 10. Results of Biological
Rosoarch by tho Soviet Antarctic broodition, 1955-1958]. Moscow and
boningrad. Itdatol'atvo AN $83!. 1962.

Andriyashsv. A.P. "Survoy of Ichthyotauns of Antarctica" in "Ioslodo-
vaniya fanny noray. t. 2 (X). Rocul'tnty biologichoskikh isslodovaniy
Sovstskoy antarktichoshoy akspoditsii (1955-1958 35.)." Hoscov and
Laningrad. Nauka. 1965.

Avilov. 1.x. and corahanovich, D.Yo. "Raliof of tho Ploor of tho Scotia
80a,” mm W180. V01 66. 1969.

losdanov. H.A.. Oradovskiy. 8.0. and Khvatskiy. BIN. "rho Frontal Zone
in tho Scotia Son.” WW1“, Vol 11, No 6. 1969.

Bogdanov. ma. and Solyakin. Yo.V. "Changa in tho Rut-her of Euphasis
suparha in tho nogion or South Georgia Island in Relation to Paaturos
of Hydrological Conditions.” WM. Vol 10. No 6, 1970.

lotnikov, VJ. ”Souonal and Longtorn Variations in tho Zone of Antarctic
Convergencs,” 11mm. HULL. 8A3. No 65, 1964.

Vinosradov, )1. Yo. and Ram, A.c. ”Quantitativo Distribution of
lekton in Antarctic Hators of tho Indian and Pacific Oceans."
OKBAIDWICIIBSKM ISWANIYA. No 3. Moscow. Itdatol'otvo A11 8881!, 1961.

Volkovinskiy. V.V. ”Seasonal Variations in Bydrochcnical Charactoriatics
and Primary Productivity in Antarctica and the South Atlantic. Survoy
Intonation fro- rmmnn.“ rmswvau 0W1“. Sorios 9,

no 1, 1971.

q
Volkovinskiy. VJ. "unsure-onto of Primary Production in tho Scotia
Sea,” mm W180. Vol 66. 1969.

Voronina, um. ”Distribution of the Bio-ass of Zooplankton in the
Southern Ocean." OKZAIIOIDGIYA. V01 6. No 6. 1966.

Voronina. m1. "Annual Cycle of Plankton in Antarctica” in ”Osnovy
biologichoaltoy produktivnosti okaana i yayc iapol'zovaniyo" [Pundanontala
of Biological Productivity of tho Occan and Ito Utilization], Hoocov,
ﬂanks, 1971. '

Voronina. um. and Nan-9v. A.G. "Quantitative Distribution and Con-
pooition of Nosoplankton in tho Southern Ocean." WI“, Vol 8.

No 6, 1968.
13.

110.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

2‘.

25.

26.

27.

Oarahanovich. D.Ye. and Lyuhilova, 'r.c. "Expeditionary Reaearch on
th; Piahery Reaearch Veuel 'Akadenik Knipovich,m TRUDY VNIRO. Vol 79,
19 1.

Yelizarov, A.A. "Hydrometeorological Conditions in the Scotia Sea
in February-March 1965," 111le VNIRO, Vol 66, 1969.

Yelirarov. A.A. "Features or Hydrodynamica at Points of Haas Oluotera
of Krill." TRUDY VNIRO, V01 79. 1971.

Ivanov, Yu.A. "Frontal Zonee in Antarctic Hatera," OKEANOMOICIIBSKIYB
ISSLBDOVANIYA, No 3. Moscow. Izdotel'etvo AN SSSR. 1961.

Ivanov, Yu.A. and Kamenkovich. v.14. "Relief of the Ploor aa a Key
Pactor Yoruing the Azonality of the Antarctic Circunpolar Current."
DOKL. AN 8831!. Vol 128, No 6. 1959.

Ivaehin. MN. “The Cyclical Nature of Feeding in the Hunphaclted "hale
in the Southern Half of the Atlantic Ocean." BYUL, non, Vol 66, No 6.
1961.

Kanayeva, LP. "The Quantitative Distribution of Plankton in the Scotia
Sea and Adjacent Regions," TRUDY VNIRO, Vol 66, 1969.

Kluaov, -s.x. ”Plankton and the Feeding of Hhukered whales (Hyatacoceti)."
TRIM IN-TA 0mm. AN SSSR. Vol 51, 1961.

Kort, v.0. "Heat Exchange in Antarctic Waters," INFORM. BYUL. SAB, No 30,
1961.

Kort, v.6. ”Hydrological Cycle of the Southern Ocean," OIGANOLOGICIIBSKIYB
ISSLBNVANIYA. No 8, Moscow, Izdatel'atvo AN SSSR. 1963.

Lyuhiaova. 1.6., Shevtaov, V.V. and Shunt, KN. "lanarakterietika fauny
norakikh organic-0v v ahel'fovykh vodakh o. Yuzhnaya Georgiya" [Charac-
teriatica of Harine Organiaa Fauna in Shelf Waters of South Georgia

Island]. Hoacov. MI. 1971.

Nakarov, 11.3. ”The Separate Occurrence of Age Groups of Antarctic
Krill," INFORM. BYUL. 5A8, No. 77, 1970.

Hakerov, 3.x. and Shevtaov, V.V. ”Biology of Antarctic Krill."
TRUDY W130, Vol 66, 1969.

Hakerov, ILR. and Shevtaov, V.V. "Some Probleae'Relating to the Dis-

tribution and Biology of Antarctic Krill" in "Oenovy biologicheakoy
produktivnoati okeana i yeye iepol'zovaniye." Hoecow, Nauka, 1971.

Haharov, R.R., Naunov. A.G. and Shevtaov. V.V. "Hetodika obora 1 ob-
rahotlti nteriala po biologii anterkticheakogo krilya" [Technique for

127
roe omcm. use out!
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

‘0.

’01.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- Gathering end Processing Date on the Biology of Antarctic Krill].

Hoacov. 0811. 19 72 .

atheism. I.V. "Studying the Heat Coast Antarctic Current." mm.
m. M. No 2, 1958.

Hakainov, LV. "The Front of Antarctic Convergence and Longtcrn Chengee
in the Northern boundary of the Distribution of Icebergs in the Southern
gcean." “031.3“ MIR! 1 mmm. No b, Leningrad. Oidronateoitdat.
961.

hakuinov. IN. "The Nature of the Greet Easterly Drift ,” mom. HULL.
8A3. No 32. 1962.

Hsslennikov. V.V. ”Hater lessee of the Scotia See." mm WIN). Vol 66,
1969.

Maelennikov. v.v. "Influence of Hydrodynamics on the Distribution of
Euphaeia euperbe D. in the Region of South Georgia Island.” TEDDY WHO.
Vol. 75. 1972.

haelsnnikov. VJ. "Drift Currents in the Scotia See,” now MRO,
Vol 98, 1974.

heelennikov, V.V.. Parfenovich, 8.8. and Solyankin. Yew. "Beaesrch on
Surface Currents in the Scotia See." TEDDY mm, Vol 79, 1971.

Horoshkin. KN. "Cherecterietics of the Circupoler Current in the
Pecific Ocean." OWMGICEBSKIYB IWANIYA, No 2. Room. luster-
stvo M 8883. 1960.

New, LC. ”The Biologicel State of Cluetere of Bupheeie euperba D.
Your“! [leer the Mllcny hhnde." INFORM. HULL. 8A3, Ito 39, 1963.

Rey-an, v.6. ”Dyna-ion Chart of Antarctica." OWICHBSKIYS
ISSLKDOVARIYA, No 3, Hoacov. Itdetel'stvo All 8883, 1961.

hey-an. v.6. ”lleridionel Circuletion of Haters in the Southern Ocean."
MOM. mm. 8A2. No 58. 1966.

Pavlov. V.Ya. "Nutrition of Krill and Certain Futures of Their
Ilehevior," TRUDY W180, Vol 66, 1969.

Pervushin. a.s. and ham, A.G. ”Influence o! Hydrological Conditions
on Distribution of Plankton in Antsrctice (Region of the Croeet Ielsnds),"

mm ammo. No 29. 1970.

Pernitin, YuJe. "New Data on the Species Coqosition and Distribution
of rish o! the Scotie See in Antarctice.“ VOPROS! MIOWII, Vol 6.

No 3030), 1966.

128
FOR OFFICIAL 088 MY
b2.

43.

Mo.

63.

46.

A7.

(08.

49.

$0.

51.
$2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pereitin. Yu.Ye. "New Data on the Species Composition and Diatribution
of Piah of the Scotia See in Antarctica (Second Report)." 90PM”
IKHTIOLDOII. Vol 9. No 2(55). 1969.

Treahnihov. A.P. "Circulation of Surface watera or the Antarctic Ocean,"
INPORH. NULL. 8A8. No ‘5, 196A.

Shubnihov. D.A.. Pernitin. Yu.Yo. end Voanyak. 8.P. "Data on the
Biology of Hicroueeietiue euatralie." TRUDY VNIRD, Vol 66, 1969.

Deacon. 0.3.x. ”The Hydrology of the Southern Ocean." Disc. 33323..
Vol 15, 1937.

toxton. P. "The Distribution of the Standing Crop of Zooplankton in
the Southern Ocean," otsc. nms., Vol 28. 1956.

hart. 'l'. "Phytoplankton Periodicity in Antarctic Surface Hetero."
DISC. arm's” Vol 21. 1962.

Luhilaova, 2.6. "Principal Regularitiee of lchthyofauna Diatrihution in
the Southern Ocean" in ”moses kept. 3rd Sylpoe. Antarct. Biol.."
washington, 1976.

Luhinova, 1.6., Naueov. A.c. and Lesunov, 1..1.. "Proapecte of the Utilisa-
tion of Krill and Other Nonconvcntional Resources of the world Ocean."
.1. nsa. 1138. BOARD. CANADA, Vol 30. No 12, Part 2, 1973.

Herr. YJI. "The Natural Hiatory and Geography of the Antarctic Krill
(Bupheeie auperha Dena)." mac. 3913.. Vol 32, 1962.

HcQuillan. h. ”The Antarctic Krill." "BEST. ”BIL. Vol 63, No lo. 1962.
Pequegnat. ".8. "Whales, Plankton and Han," 801m. AMERICAN. Jan 1958.

COPYRIGHT: ltdatcl'etvo Naulta. 1978

8831
cso:

sue/oh”

129
run or . use our
FOR OPVICIM. USE ONLY

HUMAN AMT!“ AND RM! IN ANTARCTICA

Moecow manna: momma ITOOI IZUCRMYA MM!!! 2A 20 m. comm
[0318811 in Malian No 17. 1978 pp 237-2“

[Article by NJ. Daryapa. A.l.. hatueov and 1.1. Tikhonirovl

[Text] Antarctica ia of exceptional intereat for conducting eodical reaaarch.
ainca on the Sixth Continent hulan vital activity takee place under extra-e
conditiona of aocial and natural enviromant. Leading awn; eedical biological
probleea are the ditierent aepecte oi huean adaptation and of polar health.

During the 20 yeara of reaearch in Antarctica dorena oi phyaiciana have been

at work on Soviet antarctic axpeditiona. 'lhe key objectivaa of eadical ra-
eearch have been to atudy the proceea of adaptation of polar explorara in
different regione of Antarctica. to etudy the inﬂuence of the natural environ-
aant and working and living conditiona. and to develop eeaeuraa for preventing
iiaedaptaticn dieordere and for the vital protection of polar explorera.

Unlike other diaciplinaa. there vaa abeolutaly no kind of Indical raaaarch
on expeditiona for a period of aeveral yearn. ‘I'ha firat nedical reaearch wae
parlor-ed by expedition phyeiciana at time without aufficient acientiiic
guidance and lateriala and equip-ant. but it waa preciaaly the obaervationa
of theee enthuaiaatic phyaiciana which were a kind of "ecientific exploration.”
which attracted the attention of the eadical public at large to the proble-
of health care in Antarctica. lt wee only in 1962 that the aubject area of
nedicine waa included in the overall plan for reaearch on Antarctica by the
Interdepartaental Main on lauarch on Antarctica under the auepicea of
the 0333 Acadaay of Sciencaa. upon the initiative of Proteaaor 0.“. Daniahev-
ekiy.

The next iaportant atop wee the creation in 1966. under the auapicea of the
0883 Acad-y of Hedical Sciencaa. of the problen co-ieeion on hunan acclina-

tiution in Antarctica. and the enliateant for thia job of a under oi ecian-
tific reaearch inatitutee. At thia tine aedical raaearch conducted on Soviet

antarctic expeditiona began to enter the plane for acientitic reaearch work
of the learned aedical council of the USS! Hinietry of Public Bealth and
FOR orrtcm. USE ORLY

the USSR Acadeny of Hedical Sciences. In connection with thin, in addition

to practicing phyaiciana. aciantific aaaociatea in different fielda of ape-
cielieation (phyaiologiata. paychoneurologiate, nicrobiologiata and hygieniate)
began to be aant on antarctic expeditiona.

In the beginning of 1966 in the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Reaeerch In-
atitute wee created a chical group. which won reorganiaed in l967 into the
Divieion of Polar Medicine. which for a nuder of yeara haa been an organizing
center on the Union acale. Since thia tine ecientific and eedical reaearch
haa finally acquired a ayatenatic and orderly nature, and ita nethodological
and technical level hae been raiaed to the front ranka of nodern nedical
acience.

The creation in 1970 of the Siberian Branch of the Acadeuy of Radical Sciences
and the tranafer to it of the functiona of the head center for planning and
coordinating aciantific reaearch work relating to the problane of the north.
the Arctic and Antarctica nade it poaaible for thia line of nedicine finally
to take ahape in an organieed nanner. The way had been onved toward the
further inprovenent and longtarl planning of radical raaeerch in Antarctica.

During the leat decade aoee of the largaat aciantific reeearch inatituteo in
the country have taken an active pert in working on the problen of huIen
acclinetiration under the conditiona of Antartica: the USSR Miniatry of
Public health lnatitute of Medical biological Problem. the USSR Am [Medeny
of liedical Sciancea] lnatituta of Snperinentel Medicine. the USSR Am Inatitute
of General end Public hygiene inani Am. Syein. the USSR am Siberian branch
Inatitute of Clinical and Saperinentel Medicine. etc. A great contribution

to working out the problen of hulan acclinetiration in Antarctica hae been
uda by acientiate at the hilitary Medical Acade-y inani SM. Kirov.

There in no doubt that the enliateent of auch aciantific reaearch inatitutione
for etudying hunn ecclieatitetion in Antarctica not be regarded ea the

greatest contribution of Soviet chicel acience to aolving problenatic quea-
tiona relating to further and thorough notary of the Sixth continent.

Conducive to aucceea in atudying the problan of adaptation in the polar regiona
of Sarth have been the extanaive develop-en: of raeearch on uedical geography
and geographic pathology. the ayateletic holding of ell-Union aciantific con-
ferancee on the problem of nedical geography. and the enliatoent for work

on thin problen of any aciantiata of our country and countriee of the eocialiat

co-unity .

During the 20 yeare of research by phyeiciana participating in wintering
aeaaiona. coneiderable aciantific date have been accu-ulated on huleen adapta-
tion under apacific conditiona of habitation. and data have been obtained on

clinical-biochenicel. phyeiological end hygienic eepecta of the adaptation of 'x.

polar eeplorera in coeatal and intracontinental regiona of Mtarctica.

During thin period eix eonogrephe have been publiehed (Deryapa. 156$; Tikho-
Iirev. 1965. 1968; llatuaow. 1972; Sorineltiy. 1.973; Daryapa et al., 1975),

131
M I 083 MY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

so well so three collections of scientific studies ("Acclinstisetion of Hem..."
1969: INNRHATSIONNYY MULLBTN' SAB [Soviet Antarctic Expedition Infomtion
Bulletin). 1969: mm MNII [Proceedings of the Arctic and Antarctic Scien-
tific Reseerch Institute]. 1971). More then 250 scientific articles written
by SAB physiciens here been published. Physicians G.A. Bernshkov. V.V.
boriskin. PN. Bundren. ".11. Derysps. I.I'. nysbinin, I.I. 'rikhonirov, I.V.
Shestin end A.l.. hetusov heve successfully defended doctoral dissertations.
end A.P. levedovshiy. ".1. Mekerov, hm. Peleyov. 0.1. Pnl'yenov, A.A. Popov.
Yu.A. Senhevich end Ade. Shsnis end others. csndidste dissertations. utiliz-
ing esteriele fro: their resesrch in Antorctics. N.R. Deryeps hes been
elected s corresponding Insnber of the USSR Academy of Hedicsl Sciences.

Internetionsl ties hsve been extended end will grov stronger. Soviet physi-
cisns psrticipeting in SAB's have been delivering pepers end publishing
studies ss pert of the proceedings of internstionel conferences end synposie
(Finlend. the USA. England. Censde. the no). Soviet nedicel personnel ere
represented end ere ective essocistss in the SCAR [Scientific Council on
Mtsrctic Reeesrchl study group on hunsn biology end nedicins.

Thus. the renge of scientific nedicsl institutions end individusls uhich have
node on ilportent contribution to studying hueen sdsptetion end heelth in
Anterctice is quite vest. Soviet resesrchers have been occupied vith studying
verious espects of huesn sdeptstion in Anterctice.

Sociel end hygienic Problem in Adsptstion

Resesrch on hunsn ecclinstiestion in Anterctics nerges es s «hole into the
generel problee of the edeptstion of non to neturel conditions. The problee
of the longtern end couplets edsptstion of men to unusuel end severe environ-
Ientsl conditions is especislly topicsl in our country. with its veried
nsturel condition. At the sens ties the successful fulfillment of the goels
set by the petty end govern-ent concerning the brood netionsl economic neetery
of new little-populsted regions of the country. in psrticulsr, regions of

the extrene north, depends to e greet desl on on intelligent solution to the
problen of the scclinetirstion of people in their new hebitet. In the future
the sons problees cen originste with respect to Mterctice.

In Anterctics ere coebined the nsturel conditions of the Arctic end high
lounteins (Central Anterctice). I'hs intense cooling resulting from the
severe poler clients. the contrest of light conditions, the nexinns degree
of isolstion fron other continents. the lifelessness end nonotony of the

lendscspeusll this eeItes it necesssry to work on the socisl end hygienic
sspects of edeptetion. In Centrsl Antsrctice on independent problen is the
protection of use free ths unfevorebls influence of reduced stnosphsric

pressure (becsuse of e reduction in the content of oxygen). typicsl of high-
nountein regions of Berth.

In eddition, the conditions of life st enterctic polsr ststione ere quite
distinctive by virtue of the feet thet e nude: of eociel fsctors pleying
en enornous role in ordinery life ere either ebsent here or. so it were.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

withdraw into the background. For example, questions of wages or spending

money. family relationships and relationships between the sexes, different
:ocial pressures, etc. The role of different interrelationships in the team
ncreases.

More distinctly pronounced also is the effect of natural environmental factors,
the more so in that the intensity of many of then under local conditions ex-
ceeds ordinary parameters. These features made it possible for us even more
than 10 years ago to characterize Antarctica as a natural laboratory where,

as in a gigantic experimental chamber, biotropic environmental factors veiled
in everyday life by social factors are most accessible to consideration and
observation.

A distinctive feature of human acclimatisation is the fact that it is not

so much a physiological process as a social and hygienic one, in which the
major role, unlike the acclimatisation of animals and plants, is played by
an active influence on the environment for the purpose of creating favorable
conditions for human life and work, and not the development in the organism
of various physiological adaptations. It is precisely tnis approach which
has made it possible for people to penetrate habitats where biological life
was considered impossible (Central Antarctica, space). And the achieve-eats
of the scientific and technical revolution taking place at the present time
have created enormous opportunties in this respect.

The social and hygienic aspects of optimizing the living and working con-
ditions of organized teams under extreme conditions are quite manifold and
include such problems as the design of housing and clothing, arranging for
food and water, and the work and rest routine (all these aspects are included
in the range of interests of researchers). Recommendations have been drawn
up and partly put into effect, which have made it possible to improve con-
siderably working and living conditions at stations. In each specific
situation (coastal or intracontinental stations, sled and tractor journeys,
etc.) it is important to choose the most advisable form of vital protection
and to avoid extremes in solving this problem. The best thing to do is to
be concerned with a reasonable maximum level of convenience, ensuring a high
level of efficiency and a high level of health for members of the team, but
at the same time without pampering the body and requiring excessive expense.

It has been established by studies by Soviet physicians taking part in winter
expeditions in Antarctica that the existing standard buildings of antarctic
stations are capable of effectively protecting from the cold. Comfortable
microclimate parameters are maintained in rooms, the air temperature, primar-
ily (Tikhomirov, 1962, 1968; Deryapa, 1965; Deryapa et a1., 1975; Maharov,
1969; Garehenin, 1971). At the Vostok station have been observed considerable
temperature gradients, which has made it necessary to improve the ventilation
system. Buildings made of aluminum panels best satisfy hygienic requirements.

The clothing of SAB participants satisfies practical requirements, including
protection from supercooling at a superlow temperature (down to -80'c and
below). But existing outfits require improvement, especially with regard to
FOR ()I’I’ICIAI. USE ONLY

wind protection properties (Pal'yanov. 1972: etc.). New clothing designs
are needed for polar explorers in Central Antarctica. as well as devices

for effective protection tron supercooling of the respiratory tracts (‘rikho-
mirov, 1968; Maharov. 1969). Without denying the high qualities of the
traditional clothing of peoples of the north. we suggest all the same that
it is more promising to utilize the new synthetic materials and a self-
contained electric warmer.

Many domestic writers hava aade profound studies of the problem of nutrition
for polar explorers (Tihhomirov. 1965. 1968: Hakarov. 1969; Shamis. 1969:
nyabinin. 1972). The contesporary food ration in Antarctica in terms of
quantitative and qualitative structure is sufficiently close to a balanced
diet and provides for the energy requirements of the body. On the contrary.
under conditions of partial hvnodynemia the diet for certain professional
groups can be excessive. The cost difficult thing is to ensure a high-
quslity diet structure for the duration of the entire winter period to con-
form to hygienic standards. As a result of the longterm storage of food-
stuffs the vitamin content is especially reduced. thus requiring compensation
with nultivitamin additives. Under conditions of consumption of low-mineral
water. it is necessary to test for the content of calcium and other minerals.

In connection with this. recollandations have been developed on the artificial
ainerslization of drinking water. Although scurvy and other avitaminoses

are things of the past. the problem of adjusting the vitamin balance at polar
stations continues. A solution is needed to the problem of utilizing spe-
cially prepared products (sublimation drying. etc.). In this connection,
having become urgent are clinical and biochemical studies on nutrition for
polar explorers in the future. too. Questions relating to the water supply.
bathing and laundry facilities. and removing impurities and waste are being
solved at the present time by taking into account the relatively shortterm
existence of antarctic stations. Further work is required for the creation
of stationary systems of this nature (water mains. a sewer system. and the
like. taking into account the polar climate and the knowhow gained in mastery
of the Arctic).

Modern comaunicstions facilities and means of providing polar explorers with
leisure have made the life of polar station personnel sufficiently varied.
But the effect of the monotony and relative sensory deprivation has not

yet been completely conpenssted.

At the present time Antarctica is a "man's continent.” which has facilitated
the solution of social and hygienic problems here. But with complication of
the social infrastructure and the t;pesrance of bases with a mixed (male and
female) population higher levels of vital protection systems are required.

0n the whole it can be stated that because of the decisive influence of the
social conditions of human life on the adaptation process constant attention

is required to the social and hygienic aspects of adaptation, as well as
further intense study of them. The social conditions which have been created

at the present time at antarctic stations meet the requirements of general
and public hygiene.

1310
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ﬂlv‘I-‘ICIAI. USE ONLY

clinical and Physiological Aspects of the Adaptation of Polar Explorers

In the most general sense adaptation is a complex social and biological
process of adaptation of the husan body to new environmental conditions.
in which. together with social and hygienic aspects. a significant role
belongs to strictly physiological mechanisms of bodily adaptation.

8A2 physicians have obtained unique factual data characterizing the adaptive
changes of various physiological systems of the body.

The sajor research results boil down to the folloving. higher nervous
activity (VRD) has as a rule been characterized by adequate reactions of
people with a normal psyche to the extreme conditions of polar stations.

A considerable impression on the behavior of polar explorers has been made
by life in isolated miniature collectives, where the problem of psychological
and social compatibility is especially acute.

Characteristic is the relative frequency of subjective disorders of different
natures (modification in sleeping. pains in different places. “polar dyspnan").
with the maintenance or even improve-ant of the saint psychic functions

(thinking. memory. attention), at polar stations attention has been drawn to
neurotization in a percentage of associates to the point of clinically pro-
nounced forms. Changes in the functional sphere have been more profound than
in the associative (thinking). Various forms of adaptive changes in VHF have
been studied by ”.8. Derpaya (1965), Ye.A. ll'in (1969). P.V. Bundzen (1972).
V.V. Boriskin (1973), etc.

Special studies have also shown great diversity in reactions of the vegeta-
tive nervous systen. which in the majority of polar explorers have been of
a normal physiological nature.

The problem of studying the state of the central nervous system of man in
Antarctica remains quite topical in the long term. Especially needed are
an intensive study of the question of the social and psychological compati-
bility of associates of isolated polar station teams and the development of
methods of preventing nervous and psychic disorders.

The great homeostatic importance of the circulatory system is completely
obvious. which explains the special interest in studying it under conditions
in Antarctica. The data available can be evaluated as proof of the develop-
ment in polar explorers of fairly pronounced seasonal changes in hesodynemic
indicators in the process of adaptation. These changes have been of a normal
adaptive nature. and pathological variants have been rare and most often have
represented the aggravation of a previously existing cardiovascular pathology.
The use of modern methods (tachooscillogrephy. sphygmogrsphy, phase analysis.
etc.) has made it possible to broaden and deepen our ideas on the range of
changes in the circulatory system.

The state of other physiological systema (external respiration, digestion.
urination) has been characterized by the predominance of physiological changes

135
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

over pathological. But the existing factual data do not profoundly enough
reveal the essence and ranges of adaptive changes in these systeaa.

A.Yo. Shania (1969). I.P. lyabinin (l972) and other researchers have obtained
inportant facts on the biocheaical aspects of the adaptation of polar explorers
under conditions in the coastal and central sections of Antarctica. Various
changes have been discovered in protein. fat and carbohydrate aetaboliss.

as veil as shifts in vitenin balance and uster-and-salt homeostasis. with
respect to acne indicators (calcium) they have been of a (pre-) pathological
nature; quite typical are biochcnical signs of hypopolyvitaeinoses, especially
with regard to ascorbic acid and B vita-ins. High extrarenal moisture loss
has been detersined. especially under conditions in Central Antarctica. on
account of drying out of the aucoaal respiratory tracts (Tihhonirov. 1962;
Maharov. l969). _The increase in the content of cholesterol and lipoproteins
discovered in Antarctica has confirned the hypothnsia regarding the change
free a carbohydrate type of natabolisn to a fat type upon aoving to the
Arctic. advanced by scientists of the USSR ANN Siberian branch (Panin. Belove
et al., 1926: Panin. Kovalanho at al.. 1976).

At polar stations in Antarctica contradictory data have been obtained re-
garding the biocheaical asnifestations of huaan stress. The absence of
distinct activation of functions of the hypophyaeal adrenal systea is ex-
plained by the asjority of writers as an effective special defense for polar
explorers. froa supercooling and other entrees effects of Antarctica's natural

phenonens on the hunsn body.

Of special interest are data on changes in the biorhythns of physiological
functions in polar explorers (circadian and seasonal). Under conditions of
contrasting light conditions and a reverse in the seasons of the year. sub-
stantial biorhythaological changes have been found, up to the point of
dysynchronoses. especially in the initial periods of adaptation.

Interesting data regarding bodily biorhythas. especially free the viewpoint
of the effect on the body of global heliogaophysical factors (the geonegnetic
field. etc.) have been obtained by the 088R ans Siberian Branch in the course
of tun-year observations in Antarctica and the rainyr Peninsula (Hoshkin

et al.. 1976).

The understanding of the physiological nechanisns for the fornstion of dis-
orders revealed in several bodily functions (astaolsbility. asthanisation.
polar dyspnes and other synptons), originally designated by 6.“. Danishevskiy
as disadaptstion nataoneuroses. has obtained a further explanation on the
biological level free the positions of the hypothesis of 0881 ANN Acadeaician
V.P. Kannacheyav on the "polar stress syndroas."

Thus have been established distinct adaptational changes in the body's control
and honsostatic systsns. the definite phassl nature of the adaptation process,
and the origin of a state of chronic stress on adaptation nechanisas. In
polar station teens in Antarctica ”failures" in adaptation are relatively
rare. They aost often testify to the aggravation of pre-existing chronic

136
roe onrcuu. use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

diseases under the influence of the extreme factors of Antarctica. Under
conditions of the antarctic high-altitude zone. adaptive reactions occur
more suddenly than on the coast. testifying to the difficulties of adaptation
to hypoxia. 0n the other hand. facts have been obtained regarding the
favorable (training) influence of chronic hypoxia on the after-effects of
husan hypodynania in Central Antarctica (Zavadovshiy. 1973: etc.). There
is no doubt that research on the physiology and pathology of nechanisms of
huaan adaptation in the Arctic and Antarctica conducted in recent years by
Soviet polar physicians under the methodological guidance of the USSR ANN
Siberian Branch has hastened an understanding of the adaptation process and
has facilitated the health care of the variable population of Antarctica by
introﬁucing into the practice of polar health care the results of basic re-
saarc .

Horbidity Along Polar Explorers

The systematic study of morbidity among participants in Soviet antarctic ex-
peditions was begun in 1966. after unified sedical record and reporting docu-
mentation was introduced into the practical work of physicians working at
polar stations. asking it possible every year to obtain comparable and sta-
tistically reliable inforsation on the state of health of polar explorers

for the entire period of the expedition.

The specific features of the vorh of physicians on polar expeditions have
nade it possible to make active systenatic prophylactic observations of the
state of health of personnel at polar stations and to record in the medical
record files of polar explorers all cases of disease and trausa revealed
both when expedition participants have sought medical assistance. and in
monthly medical exaainations, which are conducted by expedition physicians
at all antarctic stations.

Thus. we have had an opportunity to utilise data free all sources of disease
detection: seeking assistance. medical examinations. statistics on dis-
ability. and records of causes of death among polar explorers.

A statistical analysis of our data has node it possible to determine that
on Soviet antarctic expeditions 16.2 percent of personnel at polar stations
in 196&-1973 did not have a single case of disease or trauma. and 72.2 per-
cent of polar explorers did not less time from work because of illness.

In the structure of overall norbidity among antarctic polar station personnel.
a key place has been occupied by dental and oral cavity trauma and disease.
acute purulent and other diseases of the skin and subcutaneous fatty tissue.
muscular diseases. neuroses. and diseases of the peripheral nervous systes.
here than tuo thirds of the total number of primary treatment cases sore for
these diseases.

Participants in antarctic expeditions have had a rather low index for norbid-
ity vith temporary disability (on average. 28.9 cases and 256.9 days of dis-
ability per 100 participants in a single wintering expedition). whereas

137
roe onrcm. use our
I-‘OR OFl-‘ICIM. USP. GNU

the relatively high rate of treataent can be explained by the high access

of polar explorers to skilled medical assie.onee. by eystenatic active pro-
phylactic observation. by the recording in outpatient Journals of the slightest
changes in the state of health. which would not be recorded under ordinary
conditions. and. finally. by the specific features of work and life at polar
stations. then the insignificant percentage of morbidity with teaporary dis-
ability along polar explorers and the high percentage of expedition partici-
pants who have not been disabled on account of disease testify to the good
state of health of polar station tease and to a certain extent characterize
the high quality of the work of physicians in Antarctica.

The highest nuaber of requests for eedicai assistance is found anong polar
explorers whose nein activity involves doing outside work. It is necessary
to especially anphaeiee the tendency toward aggravation of previously noted
chronic diseases eeong polar explorers. Re have regarded this as proof of
an isperfection in the systen of sedical selection of participants in arctic
and antarctic expeditions. since people with an existing pathology are shown
to be neat vulnerable to the influence of various unfavorable environsental
factors.

ln-hospitai eedical assistance to polar station personnel has its own charac-
teristic features. For exasple. on average for a single wintering expedition.
per 100 participants in Soviet antarctic expeditions there are l6.8 cases of
hospitalisation at coastal and intercontinental station hospitals. 0f the
total number of diseases along polar explorers during the period of a wintering
session (with tenporary disability). ‘2 percent have been accoepanied by
in-horritai treat-ant. This can be explained by the high access to in-
hospital treateent and hospitalization (in infirsaries at been). even with
conarative figures.

In 8A! explorers. during all the years of operation of our stations in Ant-;
arctics. asong diseases accoepanied by in-hospital treatasnt. in first place'
are trauses (21.6 percent). in second. appendicitis (12.6 percent). in third.
diseases of the peripheral nervous syetes (11.3 percent). in fourth. pneu-
sonin (9.9 percent). and in fifth. acute respiratory diseases (8.8 percent).
Under the heading of these five nosological for- cose 64 percent of the
total amber of cases of disease requiring in-hospital treat-ant on wintering
expeditions. ‘l'o traumas. appendicitis, diseases of the peripheral nervous
system. pneuaonia and cardiovascular diseases are due 72.1 percent of the
total nusber of days of ire-hospital treatment at antarctic stations.

The data which we have obtained on in-hoepital treat-ant of antarctic polar
station personnel confine the opinion which we and other physicians have
expressed sore than once. regarding the need to send on polar expeditions
physicians with the highest skills. who have eastered aodern eethods of diag-
nosing and treating various diseases .and traulas.

tree the data given here it is possible to dru certain conclusions regarding
the Iain causes of heightened norbidity in different nosological for-s during
the period of polar wintering expeditions. Knowing these causes. physicians

138
'08 00101“. 083 ONLY
taking part in expeditions. as well as directors of scientific research
stations. can take specific preventive measures. for the purpose of reducing
the unfavorable influence of the environment on the human body under severe
natural conditions. and of improving the body's ability to adjust in the
process of adaptation. These measures will make it possible to preserve to
the maximum degree the health of polar station personnel and at the same time
to increase labor productivity and improve the efficiency of the work of
Soviet antarctic expeditions.

In the meantime. aspects of the course of some diseases under conditions in
Antarctica have still been insufficiently studied. The little study there
has been of the state of health of polar expedition participants after com-
pleting wintering expeditions and returning home has not made it possible to
objectively estimate the remote consequences of human adaptation under the
extreme conditions of the Arctic and Antarctica. This fact is of important
value in determining optimal periods of stay for polar explorers at polar
stations. their age for sending them to work in various regions of Antarctica.
the period of rest between wintering expeditions, and areas for resting after
an extended stay under conditions on the icy continent.

Medical Services for Antarctic Expeditions

During the period of work done by Soviet polar explorers in Antarctica highly
valuable know-how has been gained in supplying medical services to expeditions
and polar stations. A characteristic feature of this has been the presence
among small teams of polar explorers of highly skilled physicians furnished
with the necessary medical equipment. This has made it possible for them

to carry out the active prevention of dissdeptation disorders.

The considerable remoteness of polar stations from civilisation and from
one another, the low and superlow temperatures, the hurricane winds. the
polar night, the difficulty and sometimes the impossibility of establishing
communication between stations (this is basically done by radio), and often
the lack of insurance of aviation because of the impossibility of making
flights under so complex climatic conditions-all this requires special
stipulations for arranging for medical aid at polar stations. Medical ser-
vices for antarctic expeditions are typified by considerable specificity.

The "Statute" and "Instructions on the work of Physicians on Arctic and
Antarctic Expeditions” developed at AANII [Arctic and Antarctic Scientific
Research Institute], as well as the new "List of Medical Contraindications

for People to Be Sent on Arctic and Antarctic Expeditions" (approved by the
USSR Ministry of Public Health in November 1972) and other documents have
made it possible to improve the organizational forms and working methods of
physicians in the medical service for participants in polar wintering ex-
peditions. and to carry out in a better organized manner the medical selection
of future expedition participants.

The division of polar medicine created at the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific
Research Institute (1967) has become the main organization and methodological

139
roe omcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

center for arranging for medical services for participants in polar and
marine expeditions of the Central Administration of the Hydroeeteorological
Service under the auspices of the USSR Council of Ministers. Its work is
based on a systematic study of the health of polar explorers under specific
environmental conditions. for the purpose of developing a coebinatioa of
measures which. on the one hand. will be able to reduce the unfavorable effect
of the extreme factors of the Arctic and Antarctica on the body, and. on the
other. to improve the compensatory functions of various homeostatic systems
in the process of adaptation to special living conditions.

Thus. the final goal of studying the problem of adaptatioa and morbidity in

the Arctic and Antarctica is to develop scientifically substantiated principles
for medical services to polar explorers. In addition to taking into account
the specifics of conditions. this service must be based on achievements in
Soviet health care. especially with regard to confined teams.

Improvement in living. working and domestic conditions on Soviet polar ex-
peditions. as well as in the quality of medical services. has resulted in a
systematic reduction in morbidity (especially that accompanied by temporary
disability among polar explorers because of illness).

Observations of human adaptation in different regions of Antarctica have made
it possible to develop a number of important rules regarding the work of
physicians under specific conditions of polar stations (medical selection of a
polar explorers, their toughening and training, transportation facilities.

and other prevention and treatment measures). The practical application of
these recommendations has been conducive to improving the living conditions

~of polar explorers and has had an influence on improving the labor productivity
of participants in antarctic expeditions.

Prospects for further Research

The medical research conducted in Antarctica by Soviet medical personnel

over the 20-year period has made it possible to a great deal to reveal the
specifics of human acclimatisation under local conditions. to develop a number
of practical recommendations. and to improve considerably the living conditions
of polar explorers. But. in spite of the successes achieved, it is necessary
to designate future longterm trends in this research. Guidance on this prob-
lem from the USSR ANN Siberian Branch will make it possible to make studies

at new organizational and methodological levels. The realistic opportunity
has appeared of making synchronous studies in keeping with unified progress
and techniques in remote regions of the planet (e.g., the Antarctica - hovo-
sibirsk - Taimyr Peninsula experiment).

For the purpose of developing scientific recommendations on the vital pro-
tection of the variable structure of Antsrctica's population. it is necessary
to solve a combination of problems, the first among which are the following:

1. An estimate of the level of the physical and mental working capacity of
a human being during different periods of its life in Antarctica.

1&0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. A determination of the optimal period for n wintering expedition from
the viewpoint of health. on the basis of research on the remote after-effects
of one-time or repeated participation in SAB's.

3. The development of means of preventing (pre-) pathological states of
the organism of polar explorers originating as the result of the unfavorable

influence of social, heliogeophysical and other ecological factors in Ant-
arctica.

4. Finding methods and means of monitoring and adjusting social relationships
in polar station miniature collectives.

These goals are based on methodological approaches developed by scientists

of the USSR ANN Siberian Branch (Kasnacheyev, 1973; etc.). which provide for
the need to solve the problee of adaptation on the social-hygienic. biological
and bodily levels.

The social-hygienic aspects of adaptation remain topical. Needed is a
scientific evaluation of new types of buildings and clotning and of methods
of balanced diets and of organizing the work and leisure of polar explorers
for optimisation of the adaptation process in Antarctica. Extensive use
should be made of modern methods of hygienic science. Deserving of special
attention is the problem of the health of polar explorers ("failures" in
adaptation, and morbidity in polar station teams), and especially needed is
a study of the health of polar explorers from the viewpoint of the possible
remote after-effects of one-time and repeated wintering expeditions in Ant-
arctica.

It should be mentioned that as a successful solution is found to a number of
the most important problems relating to medical and sanitation services for
polar expeditionary personnel new problems come to the forefront. One of
these is the psychological adaptation and compatibility of people under con-
ditions of a small isolated team. Therefore, more and more attention is being
paid to developing principles and criteria for a psychological evaluation

of expedition candidates and for forecasting the functional structure of
personal interrelations in formation of a miniature collective. In some
countries not only physical status, but also psychological status is beginning
to be taken into account in the process of medical selection of candidates.

At the present time there has been shown a relationship between capacity for
psychological adaptation and not only psychological aspects of the personality.
but also the intellect and skills of the specialist. The most courteous '
and tolerant are individuals of the intellectual type with high professional
skills. and an insufficient level of skills in a specialist generates lack

of self-confidence and phenomena of neurotization. Consequently, questions

of psychological adaptation should occupy an important place in the plan for
further research.

A number of problems must be solved at the bodily level. 0f great importance
for an understanding of the adaptation process is an explanation of interaction

151
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010053-1
FOR , . USE ONLY

between the body and a combination of heliogeophysical factors from the
viewpoint of the “polar stress syndrome." Han under conditions of an
antarctic wintering expedition has been a unique subject for research data.

Biochemical research along several lines is promising. Under conditions of
the Arctic and Antarctica have been established important changes in carbo-
hydrate and fat metabolism (Bysbinin. 1972; Panin et al.. 1976). This re-
search must be continued for the purpose of precisely determining the mechan-
isms for the readjustment of energy metabolism among inhabitants of the Arctic.
Together with an evaluation of key oxidation substrates. it is necessary to
study the state of key carbohydrate metabolism enzymes, taking into account
the vitamin balance and neuroendocrinnl regulation factors. This research

was begun by the USSR ANN Siberian Branch on the 21st 8A3.

0n expeditions during the period up to 1980 has been planned research on
bioenergetics, based on a study of oxygen transport systems (respiratory and
cardiovascular). This will make it possible to estimate the physical working
capacity of a human being under extreme conditions.

The specifics of infection processes in isolated groups of polar explorers
and the role of the immunostructural homeostasis system in adaptational re-
arrangements have occasioned the obvious interest in conducting immunological
research on SAB's. especially in conjuction with virology.

The specifics of the work done by SAB associates must be taken into account

in estimating the tension of the adaptation process and its prognosis. There-
fore, a research division has been assigned to studying the degree of working
tension among the major professional groups of polar explorers (magnitudes "

of information and energy flow in relation to production and living conditions).

Accomplishment of the key trends in scientific research work indicated above.
relating to the problem "Human Adaptation in Antarctica." will make it possible
to introduce adjustments into the existing system for vital protection of

8A3 polar station teams. In particular, the following are possible: a) the
development of means of preventing "failures" in adaptation; b) recommenda-
tions on preventing emotional stress andon adequate selection of polar ex-
plorers for not too large (low number of personnel) stations; c) optimal

limits (periods) of a human being's stay in Antarctica. and intelligent
methods of readaptation; d) review of the diet for polar explorers.

The unique scientific data on human adaptation in Antarctica accumulated up

to new has been the basis for the creation of a new branch of medical science-«
polar medicine. The great services rendered by domestic scientists in estab-
lishing it are obvious.

The most important prerequisite for future successes is a broad combination
of representatives of medical science and allied sciences involved in studying

nature 0

1&2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The various aspects of human adaptation under the severe conditions of Ant-
arctica should become the subject or systenatic intensified research. based
on the state combined scientific prograa "Human Adaptation" (on the social-
hygienic. biological and bodily levels) developed by the 088R Academy of
Medical Sciences Siberian Branch.

1.

2.

3.

6.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

Bibliography

"Akkliaatiaatsiya cheioveka v usloviyskh polyarnykh rayonov. Metarialy
k konferentsii” [Acclinatisation of Man Under Conditions of the Polar
Regions. Conference Materials]. Leningrad. Oidroaeteoizdet, 1969.

Boriskin. V.V. "Zhian' chelovska v Arktike i Antarktike" [Huaan Life in
the Arctic and Antarctica]. Leningrad, Meditsina. 1973.

Bundzsn, P.V. "Major Aspects of Psychophyaiological Research in Antarctica,"
AHTARKTIKA. No 11, Moscow, Hanks. 1972.

Csrshenin, V.P. "Characteristics of the Microclinate of Residential
Buildings at the Molodezhnaya Station." CICIYBHA I SANITARIYA, No 8, 1971.

Deryepa. H.R. ”Priroda Antarktidy i akkliaatiaatsiya cheloveks” [The
Nature of Antarctica and Human Accliaatizetion]. Moscow and Leningrad.
Meditsina. 1965.

Daryape. H.R., Matusov, A.L. and Ryebinin, I.P. ”Chelovek v Anterktide"
[Man in Antarctica]. Leningrad. Meditsina. 1975.

Zavadovskiy, A.P. "Msdiko-fiziologichsskiye aspekty ekkliastiaatsii
cheloveka v Tsentrsl'noy Antarktida" [Medical and Physiological Aspects
of Human Accliaatizetion in Central Antarctica]. author‘s abstract of
candidate dissertation. Moscow. 1973.

Il'in. Ye.A. "Psychophysiologica1 Research and Observations" in ”Materia1y
k konferentsii 'Akkliastizatsiya cheloveka v usloviyskh polyarnykh rayonov,'"
[Data for the "Huaan Acclinatization Under Conditions of the Polar Regions"
Conference]. Leningrad. 1969.

INFORMATSIONNYY BYULLETEN' 8A3. HEDITSINSKIY VYPUSK [SAE Inforlltion
Bulletin. Medical Issue], No 74, 1969.

Kaznacheyev, V.P. "Biosisteas i adaptateiye" [The Biosysten and Adapta-
tion]. Novosibirsk, 1973.

Mskarov, 8.1. "Cigiyenicheskiye voprosy obitsyeaosti v rayonekh Teen-
tral'noy Antarktide" [Hygienic Questions Relating to Habitability in
Regions of Central Antarctica], author's abstract of candidate disserta-

tion, Leningrad. 1969.

1h3
POI OFFICIAL USE OﬂlY
12.

13.

1b.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

Natuoov. A.l.. "la iatorii noditoinakogo oboapachoniya ruaakikh oorokikh
i polyarnykh akapoditaiy" [tron tho History of Radical Sorvicoo for
Ruaaian ﬂarina and Polar Bxpoditiona]. Leningrad, Oidronotooiadat. 1972.

Moahkin. H.P.. Poanyy. V.S.. Kin. Yu.0. and Shorin. Yu.P. "loportanca
of Social and Light Patton for tho Pomtion of Physiological Rhythm
Undor Conditiono of dish Lotitudoo" in "Biologichoakiyo proh1ony Sovara.
V11 ainpoaiua. Adaptatoiya cholovoka k ualoviyaa Sovora" [Biological
Probloao of tho North. Savonth Syopoaiun: noun Adaptation to Con-
ditiona of tho North), Potroaavodak. 1976.

Pal'yanov. 0.1. “Toplovoyo aoatoyaniyo i anorgotichaakiy obaon u
cholovaha v Antorktido" l‘l‘horaal Stata and doom Hotaholioo in “an in
Antarctica]. outhor'o abstract of candidata diaaortation. Hoacov, 1972.

Panin, l..Ya.. Salova. 0.17.. Ootanina. 1.8.. Pilatova, 1.6., ‘l'rat'yakova.
'l‘.A. and Polyokov. lull. "ﬂotaholic Aapocta of Human Adaptation to
Conditiona of tho Arctic" in "coografichookiyo aapoltty okologii chalovoka"
[Goosraphic Aapocta of human Scolowl. ﬂoacov. Naulta, 1976.

Panin. L.Yo.. Kovalonko, I..A., Panooynk. 0.V.. Oatanina, l..S. and
Khriatonko. P.P. ”biaturbanco of Aboorption and Aaaiailation of Rotor-
Solohlo Vita-int in tho Procooa of Ila-an Adaptation to Conditiona of tho
Sxtrona North” in "Iiologichookiyo poohlaly Savor-a. Vll oimcim.
Adaptataiya chalovoka It ualoviyaa Savora." Potrouvodok. 1976.

Pyahinin. LP. "Klioiko-biolthi-ichaokiyo aapoltty adaptatoii cholovako
v: Antarktido" [Clinical and Siochonical Aapacto of “man Adaptation in
Antarctica]. author'o obotract of doctoral diooartation. Loniosrod. 1972.

rikhonirov. 1.1. "Nokotoryya voprooy akklinotiaotoii chalovoka vo’.
vnutrioatorilmykh rayonakh Antaﬂttidy" [Sono Quaationa Rolati to

Hanan Acclinatitation in lntracontinantal Rogiono of Antarctica . anthor'o
ohatract of condidato dioaortotion. Hoocov. 1962.

limo-1m. 1.1. ”Ochorki po fiaiologii chalovoka v okotro-al'oyhh
uoloviyakh" [Outlinoa Rolatios to Susan Phyoiolosy Undor Extra. Coo-
ditiona]. Hoacov. Haditoina, 196$.

'l'ikhonrirov. 1.1. "Sioklinatolosiya raootral'noy Aotarktidy i altltlinati-
utoii cholovoka" [Sioclinatology of Control Antarctica and um
Acclinotiutioo]. Hoacov. Haditaino. 1968.

"Hodical loaaarch on Arctic and Antarctic Sxpoditiono,” my W11.
Vol 299. 1971.

311-1.. Ada. "Piahchovoy otatuo polyarnikov” [Nutritional Statno of
Polar Explorer-o). author'a abotract or candidato diaoortation, booingrod.

1969.

cannon: Izdatol'otvo huh, 1978

8831
030:

1“
8196/0959 rot ontcw. us: on!
WATS 0! HUM" 11mm UNDER m m CONDITIONS OF MARC?!“

lioscow WWI“: OSWB 11001 Izucnmm MARK?!“ 2A 20 LET. DOKLADY
MISSII in Russian ho 17. 1978 pp 2‘9-267

[Article by R.Yu. 'l‘ashpulatov. Ye.V. Ouseva. 9N. Yewdokimov and VJ). Petrosovl

[Text] Antarctica. with its severe cliaatic conditions and practically
abacterisl environ-ant. places strict requirements on the adaptive abilities
of the human body. Obviously. in the process of adaptation its i-une system
will also be affected. the indicators of which can change in the higher or
lower direction.

Up to the present tine there has been practically no direct inunological re-
search on representatives of the continent's animal world. concerning cellular
and huaorsl factors of the immne response. Therefore. it is difficult to
coapsre indicators of the insanity of the animal world of an abacterial con-
tinent with indicators of the impunity of animals in regions with a moderate
clients. In research on seals and penguins (bruden and Lin. 1969; Mejia and
Vince. 1970) it was established that the amount of circulating blood in adult
southern seals equals 16 percent of body weight. whereas the hemoglobin con-
centration was the sees as in man. in spite of the sasller number of erythro-
cytes. which on average have greater dimensions. In penguins the blood volume.
in scaling per unit of weight. is greater than in domestic birds and white
rats. The increased blood volume in penguins is also explained by a greater
site of erythrocytes with the same volume of plasma.

Investigations of plasaa proteins. glycoproteina. lipoproteins. lipids and
inunoglobulins (lg) in Ueddell's seals (Hargni et al.. 1971) showed that
there are no marked differences between plasma proteins and whole and free-
tionatsd glycoproteins and the same indicators in other mausals. Just a
considerable increase in lipids and lipoproreins was observed. Classes of
i-unoglobulins in seals were similar to ismnoglobulins in other verterbrates:
A determination was Iade of four main imnoglobulins. two of which corres-
ponded to Ig((:1 and (:2). the third to 101 and the fourth to lg.

The great importance was established of serum glycoproteins. which play the
role of antifreeze in antarctic fish. The blood serum of antarctic fish

11.5
roe omcw. use our
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010053-1
FOR A, USB use:

freeres at me. This temperature is approximately one degree below the
melting point of their note. The freezing and melting points of aqueous
solutions of purified glyaopreteins make it possible to hypothesize that
this temperature leg in freezing of the serun is the result of adsorption
of a molecule of glycoprotain on the surface of crystalline particles of ice
(DeVries. 1971).

Thus. the incomplete informtion on iemunological indicators available in the
published data makes it possible to think that a material for the appearance
of humeral factors of insanity in animals exists (inuneglobulins). But
remaining unstudied are indicators of cellular imunity. and the specificity
of humoral factors of impunity in response to stimuli in the form of bacterial
and other antigens. From the data available it is impossible to estimate

the influence of extreme factors of the environment with its practically
abecterial nature on the immne system of the animal world and the correlative
changes in this system in relationship to the influence of bacterial antigens
and microbial associations. for the same reason it is difficult to predict
possible changes in microbial flora and in the inunity of a human being
staying in Antarctica. It is natural to assume that the prolonged stay in
Antarctica of a human being adapted to existing in other regions of Earth
with its abundant microbial flora, with the diversity of his own microflora
and the indicators of the imnity of hie body. should be reflected essen-
tially in the many quantitative and qualitative indicators of his microbial
flora and i-unity.

The results of research have shown that under the extreme conditions of.Ant-
arctice there takes place a ”simplification” of the specific structure of” j
microbial flora in people. which should be reflected in the level of may].
of a human being during the period he is on an expedition. and. probably. in"-'
particular after his return home. when he "plunges" into the environment
customary for him, with its abundant microflora. It is possible to assume
that the practically abacterial environment of the Antarctic Continent and

the elimination of certain kinds of micro-organism of hmsn flora will be
accompanied by a reduction in the level of non-specific resistance in the
human body. In a similarly formed situation representatives of conventional
pathogenic flora can begin to manifest their biological activity. which is
indicated by the origin of infections of endogenous etiology.

Evidence of the changes taking place in the human body during a period of

stay under the extreme conditions of Antarctica is changes in the peripheral
blood pattern of polar explorers. We know that the peripheral blood pattern
in many instances reflects the state of the body when it is under the influence
of various physical, chemical and biological factors. Under conditions of

the icy contintent the human body is influenced by at least two of 'these

three factors: physical (insolation and the total absence of it for an
extended period. low temperature, ugnetic and corpuscular disturbances,

and the like). and biological (practical absence of a microbial environment).

Of course, changes in the peripheral blood in response to the effect of
extreme environmental factors are of an adaptive nature. From the viewpoint of

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

red blood calls these changes are reflected in seasonal fluctuations in

the level of hemoglobin. erythrocytes, the chromatic index. and the erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate. For example. A. Merwe (Nerve, 1962) observed a
reduction in the amount of hemoglobin and erythrocytes in the first five
months of a wintering period in Antarctica. K. Rodahl (Rodahl, 1956) showed
that in the winter the content of hemoglobin in eskimoes is higher than in

the summer, while the erythrocyte sedimentation rate did not reveal seasonal
variations. A. Marwe (Herwe, 1962) thinks that a further reduction in the
content of hemoglobin and erythrocytes can be prevented by prescribing 0.025 g
per day of ascorbic acid. These data indicate that environmental conditions
govern physiological reactions of the body in response to stimuli of a physical
nature-the cold. Serving as a confirmation of this are data obtained with
animals subjected to chilling (Savchenko and Haksimova, 1974). In some of
them were observed reticulocytosis, increasing on average 60 percent in the
peripheral blood. and elevation of the acid resistance of erythrocytes.
Reticulocytosis and an increase in erythrocytes with improved resistance serve
as proof of heightening of the erythropoietic function of the bone narrow
under the influence of cold. Similar data--reticulocytosis, elevated resist-
ance in erythrocytes and some increase in hemoglobin content under the in-
fluence of cold--have been obtained with animals (Shchupak and Ugrilovich,
1959; Hannon and Young, 1959; 0rme and Beaten, 1962). It is probably possible
to explain by the influence of cold similar changes in the red blood of polar
explorers at the Hirnyy and Molodezhnaya coastal antarctic stations (Gershenin,
1969), when in the middle of the polar night, i.e., in the most intense freez-
ing weather, was observed a definite increase in the number of erythrocytes.
At the same time similar investigations of red blood at the Mirnyy station
carried out two years later (Ventsenostsev. 1969), on the other hand, showed
a reduction in the amount of erythrocytes and hemoglobin, reaching its minimum
in the coldest months (July-August). The varying nature of the data obtained
at coastal antarctic stations is probably explained by changes taking place
in the environment of Antarctica, under which heading can come cosmic rays,
UV radiation, changes in the ionosphere and magnetic disturbances.

0f considerable interest are similar investigations at the Vostok intrecon-
tinental antarctic station, located at the South Geomagnetic Pole at an
altitude of 3650 m above sea level and in Earth's cold zone (at the Vostok
station in 1960 was recorded the lowest temperature on the globe, - 88.2°C.).
The severe conditions of intrscontinental Antarctica with pronounced hypoxia
cause more important adaptive changes in the hemopoiesis of polar explorers.
accompanied by a significant increase in hemoglobin content (from 13.6 i 0.7
percent to 18.7 + 1.4 percent) and erythrocyte count (from 6.53 to 6.2 million

1.1. Tikhomdrov (1968) found a gradual increase in the amount of hemoglobin
in the blood of polar station personnel at the Vostok station, which exceeded

in the second half of the wintering session the original level by 73 percent.

A large role in the prevention of infections is played by leukocytes and
granulocytes in particular, which have the ability to phagocytize bacteria,

1k?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ee well ae by hunoral factore of immunity of the blood aerun and of different
aecretione of the human body (aeliva. soatric end inteatinal juicea). It in
natural to expect that in the practically ebacterial environaent of Antarctica
with ita extreme conditiona conaiderable chansee muat take place in tho leuko-
cyte count of the blood. in the ability of aranulocytee to phagocytiee bacterial
antisena. and in huaoral factora of human i-unity. If the cold factor ia

an inducer of arythropoieaie. than the environment'a microbial deficiency

can probably influence laukopoieaia activity. in addition to the cold factor'e
influence.

The laet decade hae been characterized by a prosreeaiVe reduction in the
leukocyte count with a eieultaneoue relative riee in the lymphocyte count

in healthy people (Kochetova, 1960). Variationa in the white blood cell count
depend on the latitude of the locale. and aa one goee northward there ie a
aignificant riae in the nulber of functional neutropenia I‘d relative lylpho-
cytoaie caua. In ronea with a tropical climate there are no chance in
blood count. ‘l'hia phenomenon ie explained by the fact that. the cloaer the
area of rceearch in to Barth'e polea. the more eignificant are the effecta of
coaaic radiation and corpuecular and magnetic diaturbancea. Baeed on nuleroua
obaervetiona made over the period of eeveral aolar cyclea. ILA. Shul'te
(Kochetove. 1960) cane to the concluaion of an indieputable relationahip be-
tween quantitative changea in white blood cello and the etete of aolar activity.

Reaearch in Antarctica haa ahown that the leukocyte count in the peripheral
blood of polar explorere in reduced by the middle of e wintering expedition.
and by the end of it it in aonewhat increaeed. without reaching. however. the
origincl level (Ventaenoataev, 1969; Praiter, 19105: Hilaon, 1962). Changer
in leulocyte count probably indicate diaturbance of the interrelationahipa
of white blood form elementa or indicate an increaae or reduction in aome
einsle atructural for: of leukocyte.

liention in node above of the leading role of neutrophilic granulocytea in
proceaaea of phagocytoaia with bacterial infectiona. He know that phasocyte
activity ie one of the atrong factora of the body'a natural i-unity in the
prevention of infection and in combating it. The human body muat produce a
eufficient number of neutrophila. eince they conatantly leave the blood
channel and can be found in the aaliva. bronchial aecretiona, urine and
contenta of the inteatine (Bout et al.. 1960). They alao play a major role
in preventing invasion of the ”normal bacterial flora" of the hoat, which

ia the aource of many endogenoua infectiona encountered in neutropenia patiente
(Boss- et al., 1967). Of couree. the human body'a level of reaiatance dependa
to a conaiderable extent on the functional capabilitiea of neutrophila.

Studiea on the ratio of white blood form elemante in polar explorere over

the period of a wintering aeaaion in Antarctica have ahown a reduction in

the abaolute and relative number of aegmented and etab neutrophile (from

3960 to 2950 kill-3; from 60 percent prior to the expedition to 50.6 percent

at the polar etation) and an increaae in the abaolute and relative nuaber of
lymphocytea (from 1790 to 2‘55 Ell-3; from 27.3 to 51.8 percent. reapectively).

1'68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The maximum reduction in the number of neutrophils and increase in lympho-
cytes have been recorded in July. Then the content of neutrophila began to
increase. and of lymphocytes to decrease. but their number was considerably
. less than the original (Ventsenostsev. 1969). A. Barsoum (Barsoum. 1962)
reports considerable lymphocytosis (at 10 to 48 percent of their initial
level) in polar explorers under conditions of a wintering session in Antarc-
tica. l.l. Tikhomirov (1968) detected lymphocytosis in polar explorers at
the intracontinental Vostok station. increasing from 31.29 to 33.25 percent
during the observation period.

It has been determined by several investigators that eosinophiis do not
very in number (Ventsenostaev. 1969). others have observed eoainophilia
(Wilson. 1962). and A. Bereoum (barsoum. 1962). finding eosinophilia in
polar explorers. explains the phenomenon he has detected by stimulation
of the body‘s adrenal system.

Thus. the change in the ratio of white blood form elements in polar explorers
requires further study. since these changes have been found in practically
healthy young people in satisfactory living conditions with good nutrition.
The changes detected are probably of an adaptive nature. and must be taken
into account in practical work. since indicators which are normal under
extreme conditions can prove to be pathological for Barth’s mid-latitudes.

The change in the ratio of white blood form elements, in particular. of
neutrophilic leukocytes. is probably actually an adaptation to the practically
abacterisl environment of Antarctica. This hypothesis can be confirmed by
studies of granulocytopoiesis in abacterisl and ordinary mice (Boggs et al..
1960). which have shown that granulocytopoiesis is not impaired in gnoto-
bionts, and mature neutrophilic leukocytes. because of the absence of a
bacterial stimulus and the products of their vital activity. are deposited

in the spleen and bone marrow. and they are instantly expelled into the blood
channel upon introducing bacterial antigens into the body of an abacterisl
mouse.

The increase in the content of lymphocytes in the bodies of polar explorers.
responsible for the synthesis of specific and non-specific immunoglobulins.
is probably caused by non-specific stimulation of the lymphoid system of

a polar explorer's body by the extreme factors of Antarctica's environment.

It is natural to assume that a change in the quantitative ratio of white
blood form elements can be accompanied by functional changes in them. A
study of the functional activity of neutrophils conducted at the American
antarctic station at the South Pole in 1973-1976 (Muchmore and Shurley, 1974)
showed a considerable reduction in the phagocytosis function of staphylo-
coccus eureus. He knew that the capacity of neutrophils for phagocytosis
depends also on the content of lysozyme in the blood serum and secretions of
the body. So. the activity of phagocytosis is related to the effect of
lysozyme on both bacteria and phagocytes. Lysozyme is adsorbed on them and
promotes their coming together and phagocytosis of the bacterial cell

1R9
roe ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Zhukovskaya and Likina. 1966). Unfortunately. the content of lynozyne in

polar explorers in Antarctica was not studied previously. in spite of tho

fact that lysoryae. being one of the important indicators of natural ilnunity.
increases the gases globulin fraction of the blood serum. heightens the activity
of die ACTH [adrenocorticotropie hormone] and raises the number of leukocytes and
neutrophiis in the first few hours after its introduction into the body
(Zhukovakaya and Likinu. 1966).

In conbating infection. the first to cone to the forefront are the cellular
and huaoral factors of the body’s non-specific resistance. which begin to

act with an agent two to five hours after injection. and only later (from

a few days to a few weeks) do specific antibodies which have forned enter the
battle. Specific and non-specific antibodies. which play an important role

in infectious and non-infectious pathology. are represented by inmunoglobulins.
which are subdivided into five classes: h. A. D. B and c. lmnunoglobulins.
in addition to their physical-chenical differences. are distinguished by
biological properties and functions performed in the human body. Por example.
XgH contains the main mass of antibodies against somatic antigens of intesti-
nal bacteria; lga is subdivided into secretory. contained in saliva. sputum.
lacrisal fluid. bile. and intestinal juice. and seruaal. It is assused that
secretory lgA plays an ilportant role in litre-organism protection. from
infections of the respiratory tracts and from intestinal infections; Igc con-
tains the main lass of antibodies in the body.

:esearch on classes of ilmunoglobulins in the blood serun of polar explorers
has been conducted in only one teen (16 individuals) at the American station
at the South Pole (Huchnore and Shurley. 1976); determinations were nade of
aerosol innunoglobulins H. A and G by the method of radial ismunodiffuaion,

at the beginning. in the sdddle and at the end of the expedition. A consider-
able reduction was shown in the content of Igc and IgM during the period of
isolation; the authors explain this by the absence of new infections during

a period of prolonged isolation of a not too large group of people.

Changes in huaan aicrobial flora under conditions in Antarctica. indicated
by a reduction in the total nuaber of sicro-organisns. lower the antigen
load on the body and influence hunan iamunity. lowering the level of its
intensity.

In view of the fact that the peripheral blood pattern in many instances re-
flects the physiological and immunological state of the huaan body. we node
a study of peripheral blood indicators in polar explorers in action during
the period of the 12th 8A3 at the Novolazarevskaya station and during the
period of the 15th SA! at the Vostoh intracontinantal antarctic station.

The research results obtained during the period of operation of antarctic
expeditions were subjected to statistical analysis. and the iaportance level
of the discrepancies obtained (P) was deterninad from a Student table

(Oyvin. 1960).

The dynanics of heaopoiesis in polar explorers at the Novolazarevskaya station
during the period of the 12th 3A3 showed that the variations in the
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

erythrocyte count (fig 1) during the entire period of. the expedition were
atatieticelly unreliable, while the hemoglobin content woe found to be 2
directly dependent on eolar activity (eolar activity waa measured in keel/cm
by the etetion'e meteorologiet. 0.A. Khlopuehin). For example. while during
the period of the polar night eolar activity equaled zero. then the content
of hemoglobin in the blood wee reduced from 15.0 t 1.6 to 12.5 t 1.1. g!

(P < 0.001). end thie reduction continued even in Auguat to 12.0 1,1.0 g:

(P < 0.001). when solar activity increeeed to 0.5 kcal/caz. with a further
increaee in aoler activity the content of hemoglobin grew, and. having reached
itaooriginel level, produced atetiaticelly unreliable variatione from P <

< .2 to > 0.5.

      

”0"” 2)
U” ‘~
1.! '. ‘5
1)” ::
1 x
in 0 a“;
i
a: e
ll
”4: .v I” b)
I
0.:
ub’xwfgﬂmatﬂﬂllll! ’
mum». ) mu. me:

e—«r o——og 50-dJ Mo o-no:

Figure 1. Dynamic Variations in Erythrocytes, Hemoglobin and Leukocytee
in the blood of Polar Explorers as a Function of Solar Acti-
vity: l--aolar activity. kcal/cmz; 2—Hb, g2; 3o-erythro-
cyte count. million; buchromatic index; 5--1eukocyte count

Key: 2
1. Chromatic index 6. Q. keel/c-
2. Brythrocytca. million 5. Prior to expedition. 1966

3. Leukocytes , thousand/m1

'l'he chromatic index curve (cf. fig 1) practically imitate: the hemoglobin
content curve. During the period of the polar night in atation aaeociatee
wee obaerved a drop in the chromatic index with an unchanged erythrocyte count
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

iron 0.93 g 0.06 (before the expedition) to 0.7!. t 0.02 (P < 0.05) in

Auguet (the fifth nonth o: the wintering eeuion). i.e.. hypochrouic enenin
wee obeerved. ‘l'he leukocyte count (of. iig 1). having increeeed in the

firet tvo eonthe of the study tron 5.35 _+_ 1.3!. thoueend/nl in Leningred to
8.7 t 2.7 thoueend/nl (P < 0.001). lnter fluctueted iron 7.5 g 1.9 thoueend/nl
(P < 0.01) in hove-her (the eighth nonth e! the wintering eeeeion) to 5.0 1

g 2.4 thoueend/ul in April when peeeing through the tropice after comieting
the expedition.

In (our poler explorere (MN. m, PIN end Shim) leukopenie uee obeerved,
elounting reepectively to 3.1 to 3.9. 6.3 to 3.2. 4.6 to 3.2 end 3.3 thoueend/
Ill. but it wee obeerved only for the period of one or two nonthe in the
eecond helf of the expedition.

:‘Ie
II

 
   

' .
run»: a x .n n I I I a r
we 1) ma mu

Pigure -2. Dynamic Verietione in the Quentitetive Ratio of llhite Blood
For. Eletnente in Poler Bxplorere: l-eteb neutrophile;
2—eegnented neutrophile; 3--eoeinophile; lo—lylphocytee;
S—Innocytee

Key:
1. Prior to expedition, 1966

Free the viewpoint of cherecterietice of the inmologicel etete of the
body of e poler explorer of coneiderehle intereet ere dete obtained free

studying the lcukocytic blood count (fig 2). In the fire: in Innthe of

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the study was observed some shit: in the leukocytic blood count to the left.
i.e.. there took place an increase in. stab neutrophil leukocytes from 2.0 1-
: 1.6 percent to 6.0 1; 2.8 percent (P < 0.01). The number of segmented
neutrophilic granulocytes. eosinophils and lymphocytes remained unchanged,
and the nuﬂer or monocytee was lowered only slightly. from 8.0 t 3.6 percent
to 6.0 :0; 1.1 percent (P < 0.01). By October. i.e.. in the second half of

the expedition. the nunber or stab neutrophilic granulocytee returned to the
original level. 2.0 g 1.3 percent. whereas the number of segmented granule-
cytes was lowered to 67 -_l-_ 9.8 percent (P < 0.05) against a background of
eosinophilie. 6.0 3; 2.2 percent (P < 0.05) end lymphocytoeie. 39 1 7.8 percent
(P < 0.05). Relative lymphocytoeie end moderate neutropenia were maintained
to the end of the expedition and were normalized only after returning home.

It should be mentioned that in passing through the tropics after the expe-
dition slight eosinophilie was observed (6.0 t 2.1 percent. P < 0.001). end
upon returning to Leningrad it reached 8.0 g 2.6 percent. P < 0.001. whereas
the number of monocytes dropped suddenly to 2.0 3; 1.2 percent. P < 0.001.

In September a reduction in the relative number of segmented neutrophilic
granulocytes was observed in three associates: in BIN-42. in NAYu--66 end
in 80K--66 percent (absolute numbers equaled. respectively. 1302. 2026 and
3633. i.e.. in BPV end NAYu the absolute number of segmented neutrophilic
granulocytes wee also reduced). In two associates wee determined an increase
in the absolute nudeer of lymphocytes (BPV-68 end $0K-63 percent). although
their absolute number wee within the limits of the norm. Absolute end rela-
tive monocytosie were observed in NAYu end 80K.

In October similar changes in the ratio of white blood form elements were
observed in nine station associates. in November in five. end in December
in three.

Table 1. Leukocyte Count in Polar Bxplorers at the Vostok Station During
the 15th 8A2 [Soviet Antarctic Expedition]

Initials of ' anths

explorers III IV V VI VII VIII xx x XI XII
WP 8800 9500 10200 6050 12150 7050 10000 7550 8500 8800
LPN 10350 10350 11600 11600 10650 7750 9200 11600 13100 12600
$111 7950 5950 9100 8100 8600 9350 9850 6700 9650 9050
m 7950 9550 10950 7950 6600 9650 11250 8500 9650 9100
WI 6850 6750 6650 3555 6600 3650 3560 6600 5750 5650
SPA 5600 6000 6250 3600 5650 5200 6100 3600 6650 6650
WA 6500 6900 2800 6500 6050 3550 6600 6750 6500 6700

Prom table 1 it is obvious that in polar explorers there occurs basically a
redistribution or the ratio of relative values of leukocytes, while their
absolute amounts remain within the limits of the accepted physiological norms

(Denshchikov. 1969).

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ae elreedy mentioned ebove, er the Vostok intrecontinentnl antarctic etetion.
loceted et e height of 3650 n ebove eee level. en additional factor influ-
encing the huen body is hypoxie (the etmoepheric preeeure equele 1.50 an Hg);
therefore. the body of e poler explorer. of course. responded to hypoxie'by
en increeee in the henoglobin content fron 14.6 gX in Leningrad (reference
point) to 20.4 g2 in July (niddle of the wintering seeeion). However. at

this etetion. Just ee er the Novolererevekeye etetion, wee obeerved e definite
reduction in hemoglobin by the end of the four-nonth poler night-from 20. 4 +
+ 0. 33 g! in July to 19 5 + 0. 63 g! (P < 0.001) in August (eighth month of
the wintering session)

In five etetion essocietee woe obeerved a more pronounced reduction in heeo-
globin content er the end of the poler night: in VVP-froe 21.2 to l7.é g
percent; in GTKh-from 22.0 to 20.2 g percent; in LIN-from 22.b to 19.2 g
percent; in SPno-fron 20.0 to 18.0 g percent; end in UNh--froe 19.4 to 17.8 g
percent.

The reeulte obteined in studying the red blood heve shown that the level

of the content of hemoglobin in the red blood ie found to be in direct re-
letionehip to eoler ectivity, end thet even et the Voetok etetion. where the
key effective fector influencing the content of hemoglobin end erythrocytee

ie hypoxie, the ebeence of soler ectivity somewhat lowere the hemoglobin level.

Dynemic etudiee of the leukocyte count et the Voetok etetion heve shown that.
juet ee at the Novoleeerevekeye etetion, in the first two nonthe of the stay
of poler explorere at the Voetok etetion the leukocyte count increeeed from
6026 (reference) to 8000 1 68.3 (P < 0.001), then, lowered solewhet, veried
within the range of 6210 to 7680. It wee eeteblished in the proceee of obeerv-
etion thet. of the 23 people of the etetion'e teen, in 16 no eignificent
fluctuetione in leukocyte count were detected for the entire period of the
expedition. while in four poler explorers (VVP, Lrh, 8V1 end PEN) leuko-
cytoeis wee obeerved elnoet eteedily. In three explorere (DUI, SPA end OVA),
on the other head. leukopenie wee observed for the greeter pert of the ex-
peditionery period (cf. teble 1).

It should be mentioned thet in not one of the groupe of explorers mentioned.
be it the group with leukocytoeis or with leukopenie, wee there any compleint
of feeling bed. The pronounced leukocytoeis end leukopenie in poler ex-
plorere et the Voetok etetion ere probably the coneequence of en edeptive
reection of their bodiee to the influence of the extrene fectore of Anterctice.
In this case the chengee in the leukocyte count probably indicete changes in
the leukocytic blood count. which can be reflected either by e redistribution
in the retio of white blood for. elemente. or in en increese or decreeee in

eny of the etructurel for-e of leukocytes.

Studiee of the leukocytic blood count et the Vbstok etetion heve shown thet
beginning in the first few monthe of the expedition there tekes plece e shift

of the blood count to the left. eccoepenied by e eignificent increeee in the
nunber of eteb neutrophilic leukocytee. Their increesed content ie meinteined

13h
FOR 09PICIAL USE ONLY

right up to the last month of the expedition. varying from 304.0 in the first
month, to 191.7 in the middle, and to 292.0 in the last month of the expedition.

In the first two months of the expedition (January and rebrusry) was observed
also an increase in the content of segmented neutrophils, to 5636.0 and 5040.0,
respectively. In the remaining months this was reduced and kept at the same
level with slight variations up to the end of the expedition.

In the first (January), fifth (Hay), seventh (July), llth (November) and 12th
(December) months of the expedition cosinophilia was observed, equaling, re-
spectively, 220.0, 219.0, 299.2, 220.5 and 219.0. For the entire period of
the expedition, in polar explorers at the Vostok station monocytosis was ob-
served, varying within the range of 496.8 to 608.0. Insignificant changes
were observed in polar explorers with regard to the lymphocyte count.

Attention is drawn by the fact that, against a background of intensified
poiesis of stab neutrophilic leukocytes, the number of mature forms is reduced
beginning with the third month of the expedition. Probably, mutual infection
of station associates by representatives of their microbial flora is con-
ducive to the maintenance in the peripheral blood of these explorers of a
large number of segmented neutrophilic leukocytes, and upon termination of
this autual infection the need for their phagocytic function drops because

of the absence of an attack by bacterial antigens, and they are either do-
posited in the spleen and bone marrow, as was demonstrated in gnotobionts
(Boggs et al., 1960), or their intensified destruction takes place.

It is probable that the extreme factors of Antarctica exert an influence on
leukocytosis. A demonstration was given above of the influence of the cold
effect as an inducer of erythropoiesis (Seychenko and Maksimova, 1976).

An analogy can be drawn with leukopoiesis, too. It has been shown that in a
great number of polar explorers at the Vostok station increases have been
observed (in absolute numbers) in the total number of leukocytes, and their
stab and segmented neutrophils, eoeinophils, monocytes and lymphocytes, over
the accepted physiological norms (Denshchikov, 1969); these indicators have
been shown to be very low in a smaller number of explorers.

The number of explorers at the Vostok station with deviations from the norms
for the content of different forms of leukocytes to one side or another makes
it possible to assert that under the extreme conditions of the Vostok station
intensified poiesis of stab neutrophils is observed in the greater number of
explorers, whereas there have been considerably fewer explorers with an in-

creased number of segmented neutrophils.

but what can be the cause of the restructuring of the ratio of white blood
form elements? It is probable that a human being, finding himself in the
abacterial environment of Antarctica, in a new group of people in which each
individual has his own microbial flora, is subjected to infection from re-
presentatives of the microflora of each member of the group. The body reacts
to this infection via its immune system, in particular, by a shift in the
blood count to the left, i.e., leuokopoiesis is intensified. But in the

155
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

majority of expedition associates pronounced segmented neutrophilia is not
observed. in spite of the fact that considezably more stab neutrophils are
detected in the blood than the accepted physiological norma. The data ob-
tained eake it possible to suggest that under the influence of the extreme
conditions of Antarctica leukopoiesis of the human body is intensified on
account of an increase in the number of stab neutrophila. eosinophilia and
Ionocytoeis. Segmented neutrophils. whose number practically does not change
or is reduced. serve as an indicator of a reduction in the bacterial antigen
load on the macro-organism. and they either are deposited in the cells of the
bone marrow and spleen. as was demonstrated in germ-free animals when they
were subsequently infected with micro-organisms (noggs et al.. 1967), or

they are destroyed.

One of the remarkable properties of neutrophilic leukocytes is their ability
to phagocytize micro-organisms. This property is a leading one in the macro-
orgenisn's struggle against infection of bacterial origin and comes under

the heading of the body's non-specific resistance factors, the level of this
resistance being able to vary in relation to the effect of very different
environmental factors and to the state of the macro-organism.

9'. “2-1); . 1) up.

   
  
  
 
  
 

If“

OI
I

  

"nnzznnzz ’

 

’1 Inna-nun!" ’

Figure 3. Phagocytic Activity of Granulocytee in the Blood of Polar
Explorere: a-thh 8A3. Novolaaarevskaya station; b-13tb
8A3. Novolazarevekeya station; c—-l5th 8A3. Vbatok station;

1—phegocytosia; 2—index

1. Index
156
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vity to 61.7 percent in the group who had already wintered there and to 60.0
percent in the newly arrived group (January). with indices of 6.0 and 5.7.
respectively. In February the increase in phagocytic activity continued to
71.6 percent in the group already there and to 73.8 percent in the newly
arrived group. with indices of 11.6 and 11.3. respectively. In March was
observed a reduction in the activity of phagocytoais to 46.5 percent in the
group already there and 45.7 percent in the newly arrived group. with indices
of 7.6 and 7.0. respectively.

A study of the same indicators in action in 16 polar explorers of the 13th
SAE at the Novolazarevskaya station indicated identical changes in activity
and the phagocytosis index. consisting in a curve of the same nature. It is

The results of research on the phagocytic activity of blood granulocytes in
polar explorers at the Novolazarevskaye station during the period of the
12th and 13th SAE's make it possible to for. the opinion that in a single

the human body. As demonstrated by the results of research conducted during
the 12th 8A8. upon contact between a newly arriving group and the group al-
ready there. in both groups an increase in the activity of phagocytosis can
take place. It is probable that this phenoaenon can be explained by mutual
infection of the two groups by representatives of the nicrobisl flora of the
associates casing into contact. as the result of which an induction of
ianunity takes place in the explorers. which had been lowered fro- the pro-
longed stay in the practically sbscterial environ-cut of Antarctica. Appa-

the data obtained. it is possible to suggest that in a larger group of
associates such a colparatively rapid reduction in the phagocytic activity
of neutrophils can be absent. since. for mutual infection by representatives
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the microbial flora of each of the associates of a large group, a longer
tile is required for the body to become immunologically "accustomed" to re-
presentatives of the nicroflora of station colleagues.

An example of the possibility of this hypothesis can be represented by studies
on phagocytoaia activity and index in blood granulocytas among the group of
polar explorers at the Vostok intracontinental station during the period of
the 15th 3A3. asde up of 23 people. The results of these studies are shown
in fig 3c. vhere it is obvious that upon arrival at the Vostok station in
January the phagocytosis activity and index equaled respectively 86.4 percent
and b.8ﬁ. In the next month an increase in these indicators continued to
93.4 percent and 3.92. In March, i.e.. in the third month of the stay of the
explorers at the station. a reduction in the phagocytosis activity and index
took place to 29.9 percent and 0.74. respectively. Such lov indicators of
phagocytosis. with a slight increase in June to 31.2 percent and 1.99. were
maintained for the entire polar night, i.e.. up to August. and beginning in
September thcre occurred an increase in phagocytic activity and its index.
reaching 83.3 percent and 3.92 in Nova-bar. Phagocytic activity vas not
increased further, while the phagocytoaia index continued to increase to 5.11.

As is obvious from the research results cited, phagocytic activity of blood
granulocytaa at the not too large Novolataravshaya station and the intracon-
tinental Vostoh station are distinguished free one another by the nature of

the dynamic curves. In the small group at the Novolararevskeya station the
phagocytic activity of neutrophils was reduced. probably as the result of

the affect of the isolation factor and the practical absence of micro-organises
in the environment. while at the Voatok station, at vhich there was a relatively
large group. the immune system of the explorers was influenced. in addition to
the practically abacterial environment, apparently by high cosnic radiation.
magnetic disturbances and a longer polar night. Remaining unclear is the
reason for the increase in the phagocytic activity of leukocytes in the

second half of the expedition beginning in August. if antigens of bacterial
origin are considered the inducer of phagocytic activity.

An attonpt has been made to explain the changes observed in the phagocytic
activity of blood granulocytes by changes in the content of lyaoeyme in the
blood aerun of polar explorers. In addition to its antibacterial effect,

lyeoaer stimulates the protective povsrs of the macro-organism and under

its influence the phagocytic activity of blood granulocytes is intensified.
Studies of lysoayme in the blood serum of polar explorers were made at the
intracontinental Vostok station during the time of the 15th and 17th SAB's.

The results of studies of the lysoxyme activity of the blood serum of polar
explorers during the period of the 15th 8A3 have shown that the content of
lysoeyne is subject to fluctuation and changes in a two-phase manner: The
first phase is represented by a statistically reliable increase in it immedi-
ately upon arrival at the station in Harch. 2.92 1_0.20 11ml, P - 1.6 percent,
as compared with normal indicators of 2.35 2.0010 y/ml, and a tendency toward
a reduction in the accepted norms in April and Hay to 2.19 3.0.10 y/ml. P >

> 5 percent and 2.03 t 0.13 y/ml. P - 5 percent, respectively. The second
FOR OFFICIAL "SR ONLY

phase is represented by an increase in lysozyme activity from June through
October. variations in the amount a! iysozyee within the range of 2.67 1 0.13
to 3.16 1 0.25 Y’Il. P 4 5 percent. and a reduction in its anemic in the last
few Ionths of the stay at the station to 1.92 1 0.15 y/nl, P - lo percent.

A study or the lysotyle activity of the blood serum of polar explorera node

at the Vostok station during the period of the 17th SM: shoved that the amount
of lysoryle increaeed by the end of the wintering session, reaching 3.0 1 0.3
Y/ul in December. In the iirst month of the wintering session its level equaled
2.0 1 0.3 y/nl (table 2).

Table 2. Indicators of the Imnologicsl Reactivity of Polar Explorers at
the Vostok Station During the Period of the 17th SAE

Indicator Months
II III IV-W V-VI

Blood lyso-

tyne. Y/Ill 2.01-0.8 2.210.3 l.810.3 2,0+o,2
Bacterial ac- "
tivity of

blood serum,

titer 1815 70122 3215 79127
Staphylo-

coccic 0-

entitoxin.

ARI-.1 0.97 1.17 1.00 0.31
1035- '8’

(not: 90-

450) 127.6111.3 131.6110Jo 135.919.5 11.5.1110.1
logo. as!

(not: 800-

1800) l228.01121.0 1266.51104.8 1202.71118.6 1062,11103J
1°85. .3;

(non 60-

250) 95.518.3 88.019Jo 87.618.3 39,513.13

VI-VII VII‘* VIII 1X

Blood lyso- 2.010.2 2.0.10.2 2.310.2 2.010.2
tyne

Bacterial ac-

tivity of

blood serum 56114 57122 100165 116136
Staphylo-

cocci:

entitexin 0.91 0.75 1.00 0.85
1o“ 137.719.9 132.3110.5 127.6110.6 122.1+10.1
mo 937.7180.6 1120.91126.7 1090.919” 1233.312”
103” 83.318.8 82.817.8 87.218.5 76.118.6

day.
tion with staphylococcic mtoxin. three moulee per
3:23:th with anetoxin once” three anpoules, from 26 Jul to 10 Aug.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2 . (continued)

Indicator Months

1: X1 1!!! 1
blood lyso-
tyne 1.810.: 2.0.10.3 3.0-;0.3 2.8103
bacterial ac-
tivity of
blood serum 54118 83:38 68 70136
Staphylo-
coccic
antitoxin 1.05 1.00 0.95 0.85
logs 121 . 3110.6 119 $310.1 123. 1:10. 8 129 . 2:11. 2
logo 1110.5:lll.7 1049.5106.1 983.&_¥73.7 993.0:823
logu 79.9136 76.1104 93.1:10.0 86.238.1

Unlike the date of other authors (Zhukovskeya and Likina. 1966). no correlation
was observed between an increase in the content of lyeozyne in the blood serum
and an increase in the phagocytic activity of blood granulocytes, but, on the
contrary. an inverse relationship was observed: with an increase in the content
of lyaoeyne the phagocytic activity of neutrophila was reduced.

Lysozyme hes a direct relationship to the bactericidal activity of human skin.
The extent of bactericidal activity of the skin of polar explorers varied

for the length of the stay on the expedition. For example. at the Vostok
station during the period of the 15th SA! in the firat month of the expedition
the average nunber of deposited colon bacillus colonies equaled 32.1. per 30
min; then the bactericidal activity of the dermal integumenta increased,
corresponding to a reduction in the nuﬁer of colonies to 3.2 to 3.10. A
narked reduction in the bactericidal activity of dermal integuments was ob-
served in November, when from the forearm were sown up to 110 colonies/cmz.
In fig lo is shown the bactericidal activity of derlal integments in polar
explorers at the Novolssarevsksya station during the time of the 12th 5A3.

It is obvious that if the bactericidal activity of dernal integumante is
deter-lined by the content of lyeoryne, then its quantity in the blood serum
and dermal integunenta must be intercorrelated.

I-unoglobulins are an important indicator of humeral i-unity, which plays
a asjor role in hunan infectious and non-infectious pathology (fig 5). A
dynamic study of inmoglobulins A. n and G in the blood serum of polar ex-
plorers at the Vostok station during the period of the 15th SAB showed that
in a group of associates consisting of 23 people variations in serumal IgA
throughout the expedition were statistically unreliable. Prior to the ex-
pedition. in Leningrad (reference). Iga in then equaled 168.3 1 10.2 mg per-
cent. A tendency tovsrd an increase in its content vas observed beginning
in the middle of the expedition (155.3 1 12.2 ng percent). By the end of the
eorplorers’ stay at the station there ocwrred a drop in the level of 13a below
the indicators obtained prior to the expedition (13m 1 7.7 mg percent), and
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

below the indicator: obtained in January and rebruary of the following year
(142.5 3; 21.7 nu percent).

I I I 0' I ‘0 I? ll 8"! 17 11 I I

  
    

 

Figure A. Change in Bactericidal Activity of the Skin of Polar Ex-
plorers During an Expedition: l—at Voatolt station; 2—at
Novolazarevakaye station

Key:

1. Number of colonies, me2
In. 1) a) 1’)
luv 1;:
rm [’5
m.

    

"' Jo rluomln
Mia... i)‘ ‘M’mug‘mwm

Figure 5. Content of Imunoglobulina in Blood Serum of Polar Bx-
plorera at Voatok Station: enduring 15th 8A3; b-during

17th 3A!

Key: -
1. n3 : ' lo. Polar day

2. Prior to expedition 5. Rather of months
3. Polar night

161
FOR OFFICIAL 08!! ONLY

The quantity 0! 1g)! hogan to inoraaao inadiatoly aEtar arrival of tho ax-
ploraro at tho ototion (108. 6 1 6. 6 lg porcanz) aa colporad with tho raioranca
figura (86. a 1 7. 3 lg porcant, 2 1 5 porcant). reliably incroaoad during
Hay-soptmr _2rol 113.6 1 9.7 to 118.9 1 10.2 lg porcant. 1’ - 3 to lo porcont.
and than gradually waa raducod to tho originol liguraa. 67.0 1 26.6 lg porcont.
P > 5 porcant. 'l'ho quantity of 130. having roliahly incraaaod in May (tho
filth lonth of tho atay at tho ototion). rolainad roliahly high to tho vary
and of tho axpodition. 1531.0 1 160.1 lg porcont, P - 5 parcant, 1635. 3 1

+ 103. 6 lg parcont. 1' I 6 poroont. with a non of 1202. 6 1 26. lo lg poroont
Yet. tig 5a).

Sililar atudiaa of Ig lada during tho 17th SA! at tho Voatok ototion in a
group of 27 pooplo producod indicatora ditforing frol thoaa ohtainod during
tho 15th 8A! (of. fig 51:). Per anolplo. tho lovol of no waa loworod during
tho period of tho polar night (frol April through Auguat). frol 1202.7 1 ll6.6
to 1090.9 1 96.5 mg porcont. and toward tho and of tho oxplorora' otay at

tho ototion wna ohaorvod tho loailun drop in tho lovol of thio innoglohulin
to 993.0 1 62. 9 lg porcont. ‘rha contont of 1g! during tho poriod {rel Pohruary
through July droppad gradually frol 95. 5 1 6. 3 to 62. 2 1 6. 3 lg poroont. and
ita laxilul roduction waa obaarvod in Soptolhor-ﬂovolhor (76.1 1 7. 7 lg par-
cont). Tho contont of IgA on avorago woo laintainod at tho norlal phyaiolo-
gicol lovol (127. 6 1 11. 3 lg porcont): only o alight incroaoo in it wao oh-
aorvod during tho poriod of tha polar night (to 145.1 1 10.1 lg porcont).

An analyaia of tho natura o! changoa in tho contont of i-unoglohulino in
oovorol oooociotoa ot tho Voatolt ototion during tho poriod of tho 15th 8A2
ohowod that in tho procoao of tho hulan body‘a adaptation to tho aovora con-
dition: of Antarctica tho lovol o! i-anoglohulina in tho blood aorul ia
auhjoct to conaidorohlo individual variationo. For onlplo, in {our ox-
plorora tho incroaoo in tho loyal of 130. dotorlinod to ono oxtont or anothor
in all lolhoro of tho group. wont hoyond tho rongo of variation of tho gono-
rally accoptod phyaiologicol norm: for thio i-Inoglohulin. Thio rioo onauod
oithor i-odiatoly ottor arrival ot tho ototion (tohlo 3) and woo lointainod
for tho oxtont of tho ontiro oxpodition. or ottor oovorol lontho of otoying
at tho ototion. The high loyal o! no ogrood with on incroooo in tho contour
of 1g! (within tho ranga 6! ml phyoiological indicatora) and with tho
tondoncy toward on incroaoo in tho alount of IgA in thou uplororo.

hut in nu ototion oaaociatoa a aporadic inoroaao in tho lovol of I“: in
opocitic lontho of tho wintoring ooooion woo accolpaniod by on incrooao not
only in 101. but oloo in I“.

A atay ovor tho oouroo of a yoar undor conditiono in Mtarctico rooultod in
tho laniioatation of dittoront, not introquontly oppoaito raootiono with
rogard to a ohongo in tho lavol oi i-unoglohulina or “throat olaaaoa.
tor oz-plo, in I’ll woo ohoorvod a drop in IgA and IgG holow tho lilita of
.tho oocoptod phyoiological norlo (tohlo 6).

1.62
mo onxcm on can
FOR ()l’l-‘JCIM. "SI-3 ONLY

Table 3. Chaise in the Content or 130 in the Blood Serum of Polar Bxplorere
At the Voetok Station During the 15th an, as:

 

Key:
1 . Initiele of explorer 4 . 8|“:
2 . Honthe 5 . WA
3. WC 6 . FCV

‘l'ehlo lo. Change in Content of Imnotlohuline in Blood Senna of mm During
the 15th 8A8, e3!

 

Key :
1. Immoglobuline 2 . Monthe

Table 5. Change in Content of Illinoglobuline in Blood Seru- of Yell! During
15th 8A2. :31

 

   
 
 

         
 
        

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘ so
I10 1238 i5” 1210 “52 not it“ “Ii
[1“ i0 i0 46 id is 50 63
Key :
l. I-unoglohuline 2. Honcho

The reeulte obteined have ehown thet in none eaeocietee of the etation'e teen
e non-identical adaptive reection of the body's inunologicel etete wee ob-
urved: In none thie involved en increeee in one of the cleeeee of i-nuno-
slobuline and e reduction in othere, and vice-veree. It ehould he nentioned
thet in the etetion'e group three eoeocietee hnd lov [pl indicators even in

163
FOR orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the reference period in Leningrad (1.2.5. 1.2.5 and 51.0); hypoirnunoglobulin-
enia with regard to lg}! can probably be explained by deficiency of the lywhoid
systen.

The question of the increase in the content of Igh and IgG during the period
of the polar night requires an explanation. since it is not known what sets
as an inducer of the synthesis of these i-unoglobulins.

Division of the team of associates at the Voatoh station during the 15th 8A8
(23 people) on the basis of frequency of participation in antarctic expeditions.
into two groups--the first group consisting of 11 people taking part for the
first tine. and the second of 12 people taking part aore than once—showed that
no substantial differences in the extent and nature of the change in the level
of inunoglobulins were observed. But in explorers of the first group the
early period of adaptation (March) was accospanied by a slight drop in the
levels of lgA and lgc. while in explorers of the second group was observed an
increase in these i-unoglobulins i-ediately after arrival at the station.

In addition. before the expedition a reduced level of Igli was detsrnined in
some associates of the first group. and for the extent of the entire wintering
session there was traced a tendency toward a change in this class of i-suno-
globulins at a lower physiological level as eoapared with analogous indicators
in explorers of the second group. Apparently adaptation of the human body to
changed climatic conditions is accoapaniad by an increase in the level of
i-aunoglobulina and in the humeral defense aechanisn index. and in people having
repeatedly taken part in antarctic expeditions the process of tutoring inuno-
logical reactivity begins earlier.

A well -known antigenic stiwlus of lylphoid tissue is represented by micro-
organisms of internal huaan nicroflora with the products of their vital ac-
tivity. A study of the dynamics of the content of the staphylococcic alpha
antitoxin in the blood serua of polar explorers (fig 6) during the period of
the 15th 8A2 at the Vostok station showed that during the tins of the expedi-
tion no imrtant variations occurred in the alpha antitoxic activity of the
blood serun of explorers; it equaled on average 1.0 to 1.5 AB/nl. A study

of the level of the staphylococcic alpha antitoxin in polar explorers at the
sane station during the tine of the 17th 8A3 showed that for the extent of
the entire period its quanitative content was' not changed. equaling on average
0.75 to 1.2 AB/nl, in spite of perorel vaccination and revaccination with
staphylococcic anatoxin.

Thus. the conclusion can be drawn that the ainiaal content of nicrooorganisus
in the coastal regions of Antarctica and their total absence within the con-
tinent result in a quantitative reduction in hulsn microbial flora. 'l'his
phenenenen is probably explained by the elimination of saprophytic foras of
aicrobes. "Simplification" of the specific ceaposition of licrobial flora
results in lowering of the level of resistance of the house body, the indica-
tors of which are an increase in the aaount of conventionally pathogenic flora.
a tendency toward leoukopenia, and a reduction in the phagocytic activity of
blood granulocytes. The reduction in the level of resistance of the human

16h
rev. 0771an use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

body obviously explains the "seeding" or human deranl integuaents with re-
presentatives of conventionally pathogenic flora of the upper respiratory
tracts and the manifestation of intectioua discuss of endogenous etiology.

 

’ sttrrmmrxxnn-lt

Figure 6. Staphylococcic Alpha Mtitoxin in Polar Explorers at the
Vgstok Station: l-during the 15th 8A3; 2—during the
1 th 3A3

Kay:
1. AE/ml

It is interesting to note that quantitative disturbances in the microbial
flora of polar explorers are not accompanied by a change in the biological
properties of the types of nicrobas studied, which rennin practically at the
level of the reference data (pathogenic properties. carbohydrate utilization,
virulence .

It is obvious that from the environment nicro-organisma constantly enter the
human body and are destroyed by its i-une powers. and only as the reeult of
a drop in the level of inanity taking place under the influence of extreme
environmental factors or disease can a change in the strain repreeentation
of human microbial flora take place. ,

The results of research in dynalics, on the non-specific and specific inunity
of polar explorers during an expedition, have about that the non-specific
resistance of a polar explorer's body is lowered by the end of a wintering
session in an isolated group. and in order for there to be an increase in

some of its indicators it is necessary that a new antigenic stimulus enter
this group, in the form of people fro- a new station replacement group with
their own microbial flora.

In view of the {act that the alpha untitoxic activity of the serum. pertaining
to specific sntistaphylococcic imnity. reliably does not change. it can be
assuaed that the increase in the content of 136 and Iga on the 15th 8A3 and
their periodic increases during the title of the 17th 8A3 are the consequence
of non-specific stimulation of the human lywhoid systen. But this increase
can be caused also by bacterial antigens of other conventionally pathogenic
microbes which have not been considered in this study.

165 ,
roe omcw. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The imnological reordering of the human body under extreme conditione ie
indicated both by a reduction of the level 0‘. non-opacific reaiatance. and by
the nanifeetation of epecific i-mological reeponee reactione. The conae-
quence of a reduction in the level of a hmn being'e non-epecific reeiatance
ie obviouely aeeding of hie body with repreeentetivee of hie ovn nicroflora.
reaulting in the origin of infectioua dieeaeea of endogenoue etiology.

An anelyeia of the reuulte of reeearch conducted in Antarctica end on groupa
of teetere in ground experinente while initnting the conditione of flight into
apace hee redo it poeeible for us to advance a hypotheeia regarding the poeai-
bility of an endogenoue etiology for poetoperative purulent infectione in
surgical varda. 'l'hia hypotheeia hae found verification in the practice of
health care. inranalyring poetoperative purulent infectione in a group of
neuro-oncologicel patience.

The active atinulation of the apecific i-mity of neurovoncologicel patienta
with the etephylococcic anatoxin created powerful antiataphylococcic ill-unity
and showed a pronounced clinical effect, reducing fourfold the ntder of

pea toperative couplicatione.

Peaearch on the etate of the ﬂame ayeten of the human body under extreme
conditions will help to reveal the pathogeneaia of poaaible endogenoue in-
fectione and to develop intelligent veya of preventing then.

bibliography

l. Garnhenin, V.P. "Dynanice of llenatological Changee in Polar lxplorera
in the Coaetal Zone of Antarctica” in ”Heterialy h honferenteii 'Akklina-
tiretaiya cheloveha v ualoviyalrh polyarnykh rayonov'" [liateriala for the
hunen Acclintiration Under Conditione of the Polar legione Conference].
Leningrad, 1969.

2. Venteenoateev. 3.8. ”Changea in the Peripheral Blood in Polar Bxplorere
in Antarctica“ in ”Material, h honferentaii 'Akklinatizateiya cheloveka
v ualoviyakh polyernykh rayonov,” Leningrad. 1969.

3. Denahchikov. v.1. "None for the Content of Leukocytea in the Peripheral
Blood of Healthy People." mum GMTOWGII I PMIVAIIYA m1. Vol 8,
1969.

6. Zhukovelteya, h.A. and Likina, 1.3. "the Queerion of the Non-Specific
Protective affect of Lyaozyle on the Body.” mmm, Vol 10. 1966.

5. Kochetova. A.I. ”The Prequency of Functional Leuhopenia During the Period
of the 19th Solar Cycle Under Conditiona of the Arctic” in "Trudy vrachey
g. Noril'aha" [Proceedinge of the Phyaicim of the City of loril'ak].
Krunoyarek. 1966.

166
roe onlcm. 1133 our
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oyvin, LA. "Statistical Analysis of the Rasulta of Bxperinentel
”Baum: PATOLOGICHSSKAYA l'lZlOLOOlYA I BKSPBRIHBNTAL'NAYA TBBAI’IYA,
Vol 6, 19 0.

Poggenpol', v.5. "Characteristics of Sole Henstological Indicators and
of Oxygen Saturation of the Blood During a Year's Stay of a human Being
at the Vostolt Station" in "Hnterialy k konferentsii 'Akklimstiaatsiya
chelovelta v usloviyakh polyernykh rsyonov,” Leningrad, 1969.

Savchenlto. Yu.1. and Hsksimov, um. "Qualitative Changes in the Red
Blood Under the Influence of Cold" in "tiaterialy po fiziologii cheloveka
i :hivotnykh" (Materials Relating to Human and Animal Physiology].
Kresnoyarsk, 1976.

Tikhomirov, 1.1. "Bioklimatologiya 'l‘sentral'noy Antarktidy i eldtlinsti-
:ataiya chelovalta" [Bioclimetology of Centeral Antarctica and Human
Acclinstizationl, Moscow, Nauka, 1968.

Shchupak, 8.“. and Ugrilovich, 1.1’. "The Question of Changes in the
Horphological Structure of Blood Rith Hypotheraia” in ”Voprosy gipotermii
v patologii" [Questions Relating to Hypthernia in Pathology], Kiev, 1959.

Barsoum, A.U. "Some Observations on Blood in Relation to Cold Acclims-
tizetion in the Antarctic," mrr. HEB” Vol 127, No 9, 1962.

Boggs, DJ... Cherveniclt, P.A., Marsh, 1.6., Pilgrim, 11.0., Cartwright,
6.3. and Uintrohe, 14.11. "Ormulocytopoesia in Germfree nice," w‘l. SOC.
MR. B101. AND HEB” Vol 125, No 1, 1960.

Bruden, 11.14. and Lin, O.B.K. "Blood Parameters of the Southern Blephant
Seal (Hiroungo leonina, Linn.) in Relation to Diving," COMP. 310cm.
PHYSIOL, Vol 28, Bo 1, 1969.

DaVries, A.l.. "Glycoproteins as Biological Antifreeze Agents in Antarctic
Fishes," 801., Vol 172, No 3988, 1971.

Praizer, a.c. "Acclimatization and the Effects of Gold on the Human
Body as Observed at Little America 3 on the United States Antarctic
Service Expedition, 1939-1961," All. PHILOSOPB. 306., Vol 89, No 1,
Philadelphia, 1965.

Hannon, J. and Young, B. "Effect of Prolonged Cold Exposure on the
Cross Blood (Io-position of the Bat." Ali. J. “18101", Vol 197, 1959.

Hargni, R.A., Bajoa, s. and Ronero nercado, H. "Plasma Proteins,
Glycoproteina, Lipoproteina and I-Jnoglohulins in Antarctic Seals,"
00811113. INST. ANTARCT. ARGENTIIO, Vol 1.39, Button Airu, 1971.

Herve, Am. "Die Voorsiening en vernruii van aakorbiensuur by die
auidafrikaanse Antarctic basis, 1960," SOUTH AFRICAN 1430. J., Vol 36, 1962.

167
ton 0??th use our
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

new, RJI. and ﬂute. J.B.B. "Body fluid Distribution in the Papua
Pensutn (Spanieh)." OONTRIB. INST. ANIMCT. ARGBRIINO, V01 127. Buenoa.
urea. 1970.

ﬂuctuate. ".0. and Shurl . J.'l‘. "Hicrobtology and qunology of South
Pole Anttgen Deprivation. ’ ANTARCTIC .7. 0.5.. V01 9. No lo. 197‘.

Ruth-ore, 11.6.. Tatem. B.A.. Wot-lay, R.A.. Shurley, JJ‘. and Scott, N.
“I-Iunoglobunne During South Polar Isolation" in "Proc. SCAR/IUPSIIUBS
Syap. on lluaan Biology and Medicine in the Antarctic." Cuhrtdge,
England. Sept 19-21, 1972. 8d. 0.0. whom and 2.x. Gunderaoo, tendon,
H1111“ Reine-arm Medical Books, Ltd., 19710.

One. ‘1'. and Beacon, J. "llaeloto1ostc Changes Cauaed by Hypothermia 1n
Haneteu and Rate," WAD. J. 31061191.. Vol 40, 1962.

Rodehl, K. "Blood Sedilnntation Katee 1!! Bottles." NORSK POLAR INSTITUT.
3mm. V01 102. 0010, 1954.

"neon. O. "Phyeiological Chaos» in Blood in the Antarctic, A Pre-
lmnery Report," 8311‘. HID. J.. No 6851. 1962.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'etvo New, 1978

8831
(:80:

slab/cuss» m

168
1'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY