FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

JPRS L/10499

6 May 1982

USSR Report

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY
No. 1. January 1982

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY
No. 1, January 1982

Translation of the Russian-language monthly journal METEOROLOGIYA I
GIDROLOGIYA published in Moscow by Gidrometeoizdat.

CONTENTS

*Investigation of Intensity of Westerly Air Transport in Northern Hemisphere
by Probabilistic Methods................................................... 1

*Dynamics of Nonstationary Atmospheric Front.................................. 2

*Hesoscale Structure of Occluded Front Over Center of European USSR According
to Data From Special Measurements.......................................... 3

1"Two Classes of Small-Variance Schemes for Solving Advection Equation......... 4

*Representstion of Fields of Meteorological Elements Stipulated at Points of
Intersection of Latitude-Longitude Grid.................................... 5

Correlation of Seasonal Processes of Restructuring of Ionospheric F Region
and Stratospheric Circulation.............................................. 6

Interaction of Clouds Hith Ambient Aerosol Medium...... ..... ................. 12
Creating New Observational Network for Monitoring Environmental Contamination 22
Oceanic Planetary Haves of Seasonal 0rigin................................... 32

Vertical Coherence of Tidal Semidiurnal Currents in Hydrophysical Polygon-70
in Atlantic Ocean ..... ..................................................... 40

*Use of Data on Thermal Industrial Effluent for Studying Dispersion of
Pollutants in Rivers....................................................... 46

*Temperature Regime and Wintering of Apple Tree ...... ......................... 47

———————-

* Denotes items which have been abstracted.
svn V0. IEOI‘I- 9-10. Ul‘h‘

*Computing Concentration of Atmospheric Fallout in Hater Body.............. 48

*Determining Rate of Development of Morphological Formations in River
Channels Using indirect Criteria................ ..... ................... 69

*Calculating Times and Normn for Irrigating Agricultural Crops on Basis of
Dew Point Spread........................................................ 50

MMR-06-M Meteorological Rocket and Instrument Complex for Measuring
Density, Temperature. Hind and Electron Concentration................... 51

Protection of Hydro-eteorological Instrumentation Against Influence of
Ambient Conditions...................................................... 56

Use of Lasers in Hydrometeorologicnl Reaearch............................. 62

*Review of Monograph by T. V. 0drov: 'Gidrofizika Vodoyemov Suahi'
('Hydrophysics of Land Hater Bodies'), Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat. 1979.

311 Pagea............................................................... 76

*Review of Handbook: 'Gidrometeorologicheskiy Rezhim Ozer i Vodokhranilishch:
Irkutskoye Vodokhrnnilishche' ('Hydrometeorological Regime of Lakes and
Reservoirs: Irkutskoye Reservoir'). Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdst. 1980,

140 Pages............................................................... 77

*Sixtieth Birthday of Dmitriy Antonovich Ped' 78
Conferences, Meetings and Seminars........................................ 79
*Notes From Abroad......................................................... 90

*Obituary of Dmitri} Andrianovich Drogaytsev -- 1911-1981.................. 91

* Denotes items which have been abstracted.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 551.513+551.509.314(215-17)

INVESTIGATION OF INTENSITY OF HESTERLY AIR TRANSPORT IN NORTHERN HEMISPHERE BY
PROBABILISTIC METHODS

Moscow HETEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
16 Apr 81) PP 5-15

[Article by G. V. Gruza. professor. and V. T. Radyukhin, All-Union Scientific Re-
search Institute of Hydrometeorological Information-World Data Center]

[Abstract] A method for a probabilistic analysis and investigation of the possib~
ility of predicting the Ye. . Blinova daily values of the circulation index ‘or
the northern hemisphere is presented. This index is employed in describing the
intensity of zonal circulation at any level and represents the angular velocity
of atmospheric movement relative to the earth's surface. The authors analyzed

the archives of the daily values of the circulation index at the SOO-gPa sur-
face. computed by the usual method, for the zone 40-65‘ for the winter and sum-
mer seasons of 1949-1978. The pocential predictors selected were the circulation
index values for 10 successive days and the predictants employed were the circul-
ation index values for the 11th. 12th.....20th days (in other words, a forecast
for 1, 2.....10 days was considered). In writing the probabilistic expressions
use was made of the 25 first years of the archives. Sixty "central" days were us-
ed for each season and the sample included observations with a three-day inter-
val. The sample therefore contained 350 observations which had little dependence
on one another. This investigation revealed that a statistically significant cor-
relation between successive values of the circulation index disappears in winter
after seven days and in summer after four days. Text and tables give the results
of evaluations. made on the basis of independent material, of the quality of prob-
abiliStic predictions of the circulation index for l, k and 6 days in winter and
for l. 3 days in summer. This is followed by an evaluation of probabilistic pre-
dictions that the circulation indices will not exceed a fixed level in the course
of different time intervals. Figures 2. tables 4; references l7: 13 Russian, 4
western.

INNRCNWWCJAI.USEIDNLY
I’UK OI'HLIAL USE. UNI.)

UDC 551.515.8+551.509.313

DYNAMICS OF NONSTATIONARY ATMOSPHERIC FRONT

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
5 Jun 81) pp 16-23

[Article by G. I. Shapiro, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, Inst-
itute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Abstract] A nonstationary three—dimensional hydrodynamic model of an atmospheric
front is proposed in which allowance is made for the effects of turbulent viscos-
ity. three-dimensionality and nonstationarity of movement. The author presents a
detailed examination of the movement of air near the frontal discontinuity separat-
ing air masses with different temperatures. In his formulation of the model the
author postulates that the potential temperature of the air masses is known and
constant and that the field of geostrophic wind or high-altitude pressure field is
stipulated. Moreover, the turbulent viscosity coefficient is assumed to be con-
stant and identical in both air masses. The turbulent viscosity coefficient must
not be dependent on altitude within the limits of the Ekman boundary layers where
frictional forces play an important role (there can be two such layers in high-
altitude fronts).The configuration and rate of frontal movement are unknown in ad-
vance and are determined in the course of solution of the problem. Simplifications
are introduced in the course of the analysis due to the smallness of the slope of
the frontal surface to the horizon. as well as the smallness of inertial forces in
the momentum balance equation. In this complex formulation the author then pro-
ceeds to the derivation and analysis of an equation which describes evolution of
the frontal surface h(x,y,t). Step-by-step the presentation reveals that this equa-
tion can be used in describing the nonstationary movement of a surface warm front.
the formation of an occluded front and curvature of the cold front line at the
rcntcr of a cyclone. The overall conclusion is drawn that the proposed model

gives results which are in agreement with earlier known results. Figures 2; refer-
ences 10: 8 Russian, 2 Western.

2
270! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 551.515.8(47)

MESOSCALE STRUCTURE OF OCCLUDED FRONT OVER CENTER OF EUROPEAN USSR ACWRDING T0
DATA FROM SPECIAL MEASUREMENTS

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
24 Jun 81) pp 26-33

[Article by B. M. Hatkovskiy and N. P. Shakina, candidate of physical and mathe-

matical sciences, Institute of Experimental Meteorology and USSR Hydrometeorolog-
ical Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] An analysis was made of the mesoscale structure of an occluded frontal
system using measurement data obtained in the lower half of the troposphere dur-
ing a special experiment at Obninsk on 22 November 1972. Over a 24-hour period
the experiment was carried out in 8 rawin and 11 aircraft soundings at intervals
of 1.5-3 hours. These data were supplemented by observations from the 300-m high
meteorological mast. The analysis revealed a complex picture. It was found that
the mesoscale structure of the occluded cyclone includes a number of narrow baro-
clinic zones. A circulation develops in the neighborhood of these baroclinic
zones which is thermally direct in some cases and thermally inverse in other cases,
resulting in the formation of different types of cloud cover associated primarily
with the baroclinic zones. Over the inversion layer, in the middle part of the
occluded air mass, there is a tongue of relatively cold air, with which a de-
crease in cloud cover is associated. The rear part of the occluded air mass con.-
sists of the warmest and moistest air: in the baroclinic zone, separating it from
the mesoscale cold wave, the warm air rises vigorously and Na clouds are formed.
The upper cold "cont is characterized by subsidence in the rear part of the zone
and ascent in its forward part. especially in the neighborhood of the upper oc-
clusion point. Convection develops there and the heaviest precipitation falls at
the surface. There is a wind velocity maximum in this frontal zone. The air situ-
ated behind the upper cold front is drier. In this air cloud- and precipitation-'
formation processes weaken and the vertical thickness of clouds decreases. The
species of clouds and the processes of their formation are different in different
parts of the occluded zone: ordered ascent over the stable frontal layer (Na-As
clouds), some convection in the unstable layers (Ac and Sc clouds) and forced
convection on the front (Cb and thick Ac). All these phenomena are observed over
a stable layer occupying the upper part of the planetary boundary layer. Within
this layer baroclinicity is relatively poorly expressed: only the passage of a
surface occluded front substantially changes its structure. The boundary layer
under the frontal inversion was dynamically unstable during the entire period and
the lower part of the 300-111 layer was also statically moist-unstable. Figures lo;
references 13: 5 Russian, 8 Western.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU“ \Il‘l‘l\ IAI. \u‘u’. \II‘IJ

UDC 551.509.319

[Article by Ye. Ye. Kalenkovich. candidate of physical and mathematical sciences,
and I. V. Cholakh, west Siberian Regional Scientific Research Institute]

[Abstract] Amplitude and phase errors arise in difference schemes when using har-
monic analysis, but it is the phase errors which give the forecaster the greatest
difficulty. For example, they can cause errors in determining the rate of move-
ment of high— and lowbpressure formations and the fronts associated with them.

in order to overcome this problem the authors investigated two classes of schemes
for the advection equation in a one-dimensional case. This made it possible to
formulate a method for constructing difference schemes which lessen the disper-
sion. The proposed method is both theoretically and experimentally compared with
alternative schemes which have been published in the past by Crank-Nicholson, Lax-
Wendroff and Gadd. The comparative results. presented in a number of tables. re—
veal that the authors have developed a superior scheme: the phase errors are ee-
creased and dispersion is lessened in comparison with the schemes now in comon
use. This will facilitate solution of different problems encountered in weather
forecasting and in studies of general circulation of the atmosphere. A number of
variants are analyzed and two specific variants are recommended for routine use.

Tables 3; references 6: 3 Russian, 3 Western.

b
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 551.501.5+551.509.lh

REPRESENTATION 0P FIELDS OF METEOROLOGICAL ELEMENTS STIPULATED AT POINTS OF
INTERSECTION OF LATITUDE-LONGITUDB GRID

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
9 Apr 81) pp 61-68

[Article by G. S. Rivin. candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, and
A. I. Kulikov, West Siberian Regional Scientific Research Institute]

[Abstract] Highly efficient plotting of isolines for the representation of the
fields of meteorological elements in a latitude-longitude grid requires use of

a curve plotter, but four problems must be solved for obtaining suitable repre-
sentations: selection of the cartographic projection; plotting of isolines: seek-
ing and plotting local extrema: representation of outlines of the continents in
the required projection, plotting of parallels and meridians. Each of these four
tasks is briefly discussed in this article in describing the experience accumulat-
ed in such work at the Heat Siberian Scientific Research Institute. Actual work

is illustrated in the example of several such fields plotted in different carto-
graphic projections when using BESH-6 and Yes-1052 electronic computers. Stereo-
graphic. Mercator and square projections can be used. the first two being confor-
mal. The advantages. disadvantages and special uses of each of these are discuss-
ed. The procedures for plotting of isolines are discussed in detail, followed by

a description of the procedures employed in finding local extrema. Two variants
are described for ensuring that the meteorological fields will be plotted together
with outlines of the continents (use of a preprinted "blank" and simultaneous
plotting). All this is illustrated in specific examples. Figures 3: references:

12 Russian.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fun we a'ssanu Van. wuss.

UDC 551.513:551.510.535.4

CORRELATION or smsoruu. Processes or RESTRUCTURING or IONOSPIHZRIC r REGION ARI)
STRATOSPHERIC cmcuu'rlou

Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
26 May 81) PP 49-53

[Article by V. P. Chepura, candidate of technical sciences. Institute of
Experimental Meteorology]

[Text] Abstract: As a result of investigation of varia-
tions in the mean monthly midday values of the
critical frequencies of the F2 layer over Moscow.
Leningrad and Ottawa during 1958-1980 it was es-
tablished that the times of the spring and autumn
restructuring of the ionospheric P region in the
middle latitudes of the northern hemisphere outrun
the times of the corresponding seasonal restructur-
ings of stratospheric circulation in this region
on the average by b-6 weeks, whereas the spring
restructuring of the F region outruns the restruc-
turing of circulation in the meteor zone on the
average by two weeks.

Introduction. The existence of a correlation between the change in circulation in
the northern hemisphere stratosphere and other atmospheric processes, including
the features of distribution of total ozone content [2] in the stratosphere and
the spring restructuring of wind in the meteor zone (altitudes 80-100 km) [4, 6L
has been demonstrated in a number of studies.

The principal reason for the change in stratospheric circulation in this hemisphere
in the last analysis is a seasonal change in the influx of solar energy into this
hemisphere. Accordingly. it is natural to expect the presence of a correlation be-
tween the seasonal change in stratospheric circulation and processes having a sea-
sonal periodicity, not only in the strato-, neso- and lower thermosphere, but also
in the higher layers of the latter.

In this study such a dependence was detected by a comparison of the variation in
changes in the critical frequencies fon of the ionospheric F2 layer and the times
of spring and autuan restructuring of stratospheric circulation according to Ped'
[3] during the period 1958-1980.

6
INJR‘OFIHCJAI.IISE!OBHUY
Method. The seasonal periodicity in the ionosphere is manifested most clearly in
the behavior of the F2 layer. Its critical frequency experiences both diurnal
changes. attaining a maximum after midday. and seasonal changes. By virtue of the
peculiarities of structure, composition and dynamics of the F region the daytime
fofz values in summer are less than in winter [7, 8]. The main reason for this is
that in winter in the F region the ratio of the 0/“; concentrations is greater
than in the summer [8]. which in the last analysis is evidently associated with
the macroscale transport of air masses. It is known that the Fz-layer ionization
is produced by solar radiation at wavelengths shorter than 800 A [5]. It is situ-
ated above 200-250 km. where the magnetic and electric fields to a considerable
degree determine the dynamics of charged particles; therefore, changes in solar
activity, regular and irregular, exert an extremely significant influence on the
state of the layer and the fon values. In this connection. the latter. together
with regular seasonal changes. are characterized by brief fluctuations. In order
to exclude them and ascertain the changes correlating with the seasonal restruc-
turing of circulation in the stratosphere, we found the increments of the midday
foFZ values. averaged for periods from a week to a month. during successive inter-
vals of time equal to the averaging interval. Since the restructuring of circula-
tion in the stratosphere. according to Ped', relates primarily to the middle lat-
itudes of the northern hemisphere, we analyzed the variation of change of such
increments of f F2 for Ottawa (£5.4’N. 75.9’H). Moscow (55°28'N. 37°19'B) and Lenin-
grad (59°57'N. g0°62'3) during a 23—year period (1958—1980).

lﬂlz

. t: "It;

 

Fig. 1. Variation of change in increments!) of mean-monthly midday fol-‘2 values over
Moscow in 1969 (l) and in 1971 (2). The beginning of the spring and autumn restruc-
turings of the F region is indicated by vertical arrows.

The increments A of the midday mean monthly fol-'2 values of the type A - fon 11 -
fon l' EOF2 III - fon 11' etc. correlated best with restructuring in the strato-
sphere. Using these data we constructed graphs of the change in Akin the course of
each year for the three mentioned stations similar to those shown in Fig. l.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
av“ vases-m... -..... a. a...

The seasonal changes in fon are the most characteristic. With the approach of
spring 13 decreases. usually changing sign from + to - (Fig. 1). This is evi-
dence of the onset of spring restructuring of the F region -- the daytime appear-
ance of the F1 layer and a decrease in fon in comparison with the preceding
month. Sometimes as a result of the masking influence of solar activity varia-
tions this is manifested in the form of a sharp bend on the Alcarve. The dates
when the A curve intersects the x-axis or a bend appears on this curve during

the February-April period were used in our study as the onset of the spring re-
structuring of the P region. During July-August A) increases. usually changing
sign from — to +, or increases sharply (Fig. 1). indicating the onset of spring
restructuring of the P region (decrease in the critical frequency of the P1 layer
and an increase in f0? during the daytime). We adopted the dates of these pheno—
mena as the onset of t e autumn restructuring of the F region. As already mention-
ed. the seasonal restructurings of the P region are probably associated with the
macroscale transport of air masses.

It should be noted that since t1e P2 layer is very sensitive to solar activity
variations the averaging of fon for the month does not always make it possible
to avoid the influence of its irregular changes. In order to clarify their influ-
ence on the seasonal £3 gradients. we analyzed the course of change in solar ac-
tivity during the mentioned 23 years on the basis of the relative mean monthly
increments of the Zurich Wolf numbers H of the type ¢5H - (H11 - HI)HI'1. ("III -
"II)"E¥' etc.. where "Iv "11.... are the mean monthly H values.and on the basis
of the similarly obtained relative mean monthly increments 6 S we obtained the
densities of the solar radiation flux 8 at a wavelength 10.7 cm. Since in most
cases I5 W|>|6 SI. for evaluating the influence of solar activity fluctuations we
used the A N values.

Results

The table gives the dates of the onset of spring and autumn restructuring of the P
region which we determined. For Leningrad and Ottawa we obtained results which are
close in value. Since in determining them we used the mean monthly fon values.
the maximum deviation of the true dates of restructuring of the F region from
those cited in the table can attain two weeks. This table also gives the relative
mean monthly increments of Hblf numbers during the period (January-March) preced—
ing the spring restructuring. As a comparison the table gives the dates of the
spring and autunn restructurings of stratospheric circulation in the northern hem—
isphere according to Ped' [1, 3; during the years 1977-1980 the data were obtained
from D. A. Ped']. the dates of the spring restructuring of the wind in the meteor
zone according to measurements at Obninsk [4. 6] and the times of outrunning of
the restructuring in the meteor zone and in the P region over Moscow relative to
the restructuring in the stratosphere.

During the years 1958-1960 and 1975-1976 it was not possible to ascertain the tines
of the spring restructuring in the P region. During these years. as a result of the
specific sequence of solar activity during January-Harch,the ordinary variation of
change in the increments of the mean monthly foF2 values was disrupted. With the
approach of spring the.6 curve did not intersect. as usual. the x-axis. and there

was no sharp bend on it. The table shows that such a situation is observed when
6 u1< -o.2s and a "22 o.

INJR‘OIFICIAI.I£5E.(MVLY
In I —n —= O _ c
On :> 0— av = on c >— D
8 :7» n 2 _= a 3 w“
2 :> 2 . 8 = a. _ _ an
0v :3 w— I: I: u . =.
8 :5 _ I l . n o.
6“ —_Fr n— G” .~ n- s ___ an
an :_> _ .h = a m >— a
On :71 — N- :- 0— 6 mm
8 _=> _ h- :- — . 2. n—
..N :-> n «v _= _ um :
0w :..’ o . _n =- 0- _ﬁ 0.
_m => 0 a >— — —=> 3 «N
g Fa @- Qv :- n— 88
on :b o. mv : «a on 0
ha .2.) _ S —: M~ #8 >— o—
; :> 3 h :— : .6 =— n—
8 :> an n > _ NM. > V
3 .2? : N9 = «N as >— mm
a. :> a. o :_ n n... :. o
no —> a I -I On >_ O—
_m —_\r _— II II _P ——_ MN
8 3» ON I I
I'll,
-§ ~h— —°.N'8.h — p928 — -I.NIFI.N OIK
. .
Gals... 1...: .5 1...: as. G as _G Am a... G
. 3:. .. 2.2...
. 3.39.3 _ _ 238:0
lanﬂlvuo _ 3.8- .! '93
lllll.ll!.: Am 0:3 :2. N .2 2.... AH
.. .._..n_.m........u.......§...n§ .. 2...... 2...... . .......... .....u..............

m .5223 n Econ—89: 332.53....— «SE83

.huoa~: Ip-aw

22
a8.
5—
cs.
v.3.
:0.
n3.
n8.
:2
63.
$2
08—
N8—
32
32
.8.
20.
mom—
.8—
3a.
93.

 

III}

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run IIrI-ILIM. not. VIVLI

KEY 10 TABLE

1. Year

2. Dates of restructuring of circulation in the stratosphere according to Ped'
3. Spring restructuring of circulation in meteor zone

A. Restructuring in ionospheric F region over Moscow

5. Mean monthly increments of Wolf numbers 5"

6. Spring

7. Autumn

8 Dates

9. Outrunning. days
10. B = spring
11. 0 - autumn

 

     

rm m: m I m: I as

Fig. 2. Values of outrunning of spring restructuring in F region (1) and in meteor
zone (2), restructuring in stratosphere according to Ped'.

We note that the scatter of values of outrunning of the autumn restructuring in the
F region relative to the stratosphere is considerably less than for the spring re-
structuring, the same as the times of onset of the autumn restructuring in the
stratosphere in comparison with the times of the spring restructuring. These vari-
ations in outrunning times are not directly related to the changes in Half numbers
and the flux of solar radiation at a wavelength of 10.7 cm in periods preceding the
corresponding seasonal restructurings.

He will cite the mean 23—year values of outrunning of restructuring in the upper
layers of the atmosphere relative to the stratosphere: in the meteor zone in spring
-- 17 days. in the F region in spring over Moscow, Leningrad and Ottawa -- 32. 34
and 37 days respectively. in autumn -- 61, 39 and 45 days respectively. The scatter
of mean values of outrunning of restructuring in the F region relative to the
stratosphere is probably determined by the difference in latitudes and longitudcs
of the observation points.

Conclusions
1. The spring and autumn restructuring of the ionospheric F region (altitudes 250-
400 km) in the middle latitudes of the northern hemisphere on the average regular-

ly outpace by 6-6 weeks the corresponding seasonal restructuring of wind in the
stratosphere in this region.

10

KWOHKMLWEOMN
2. The spring restructuring of the ionospheric F region on the average sets in
two weeks earlier in comparison with the spring restructuring of the wind re-
gine in the meteor zone. There is an appreciable correlation (Fig. 2) of outrunn-

ing of the spring restructuring in the F region and in the meteor zone (T32 - T31
and T33 - T31. see table [3 - sprinsl).

3. The dates of onset of the seasonal restructurings in the ionospheric F region.
meteor zone and the stratosphere in the course of approximately 20 years are evi-
dence that these restructurings in the middle latitudes of the northern hemisphere

are propagated in a downward direction, successively affecting the lower-lying lay—
ers to altitudes 20-30 km.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Zakharova, N. M., "Possibility of Determining the Dates of Change of Circula-
tion in the Stratosphere According to Data for a Limited Territory," METEOR—
OLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology). No 1, 1978.

2. Ped', D. A. and Uranova. L. A.. "Characteristics of the Distribution of the
Total Content of Ozone and Its Role in Change of Circulation in the Northern
Hemisphere Stratosphere." TRUDY CIDROHETTSENTRA SSSR (Transactions of the USSR
Hydrometeorological Center). No 198. 1976.

3. Ped'. D. A.. "Determining the Change in Types of Circulation of the Circunpolsr
Vortex in the Stratosphere," TRUDY GIDROHBTTSENTRA SSSR, No 115. 1973.

4. Portnyagin, Yu. 1., et a1.. IZHERENIYE VETRA NA VYSOTAKH 90-100 kn NAZEHNYNI
HETODAHI (Measurement of Wind at Altitudes 90-100 km By Surface Methods), Len-
ingrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1978.

5. Uitten, R. and Poppov. I.. OSNOVY AERONOMII (Principles of Aeronouy), Leningrad,
Gidroneteoizdat. 1977.

6. Portnyagin, Yu. I., et a1.. "0n the Temporal and Spatial Variability of the
Vernal Change of Upper Atmospheric Circulation," ZEITSCHRIPT FUR HETBOROLOGIB,
n 6. B 30. 1980.

7. Schunk. R. H. and Nagy. A. F.. "Electron Temperatures in the P-Region of the
Ionosphere: Theory and Observations." REV. CEOPHYS. SPACE PHYS., Vol 16. No 3,
1978.

8. Stubbe, P., "The Effcct of Neutral Winds on the Seasonal F-Region Variation."
J. ATHOS. TERREST. PHYS.. V01 37, 1975.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘VI‘ ul'a's\.u\s. Una. \IIIIcI

UDC 551.576.11

INTERACTION OP CLOUDS WITH AMBIENT AEROSOL MEDIUM

Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA I CIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
20 Apr 81) pp 54-61

[Article by I. P. Hazin. professor, Central Aerological Observatory]

[Text] Abstract: It is shown that the interaction of
clouds with the ambient atmosphere leads to a
transformation of its aerosol characteristics
- the concentration of fine aerosol particles
(AP) decreases. There is a transformation of
the spectrum of sizes and composition of aero-
sol particles, and their vertical distribution.
As a result, there is also a change in the
spectrum of sizes of claud particles with time;
the droplets coalesce. Their concentration de-
creases and there is an increase in the proba-
bility of the icing of a cloud at negative tem-
peratures. The effectiveness of the considered
processes is evaluated and on this basis it is
postulated that the considered processes may
play an important role in the formation of
clouds and precipitation.

Origin of problem. The purpose of this article is to bring the attention of spec-
ialists in the field of cloud physics and atmospheric aerosols to the interesting
physical process of interaction between a cloud and the ambient aerosol medium.
This interaction is exceedingly diversified and can lead to extremely important
consequences.

We will illustrate what has been said in the simple example of an individual cumu-
lus cloud. It is known that such a cloud constantly exchanges mass with the ambient
medium. For example. H. Wakeman and A. Rabb cite cases when on the basis of comput-
ations individual cumulonimbus clouds "drew in" about 12 000 and 27 000 km3 of air
respectively [6]. According to the estimates of Ye. L. Kogan. in his three-dimen-
sional modal a total of 15 km3 of air passes through a cloud with a volume of

about 2 km in 60 minutes. In other words, due to ordered and turbulent exchange
the air in the convective cloud can be replaced 5-10 times or more during its life-
time. In stratiform clouds the time of presence of air particles within a cloud

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
may be less than the lifetime of the cloud as a whole by more than 1-3 orders of
magnitude [3]. It can be said figuratively that in this case as well the air
seemingly passes through the cloud.

In this case how do changes occur in the microstructure of the cloud and how do
the aerosol characteristics of the ambient air change? It is evident that in pass-
ing through the cloud the air is purified of the air particles suspended in it,
that is. the cloud operates as a filter. The aerosol particles are washed out

by the cloud droplets and as a result the concentration of the air particles in
the air passing through the cloud decreases sharply. On the other hand. soluble
and insoluble air particles are collected in the droplets and when the droplets
are transported from the cloud and evaporate only a dry residue remains in the
air. Such a residue is a mixed condensation nucleus (CN). Within the condensation
nucleus there are insoluble inclusions, surrounded by a hygroscopic substance
which precipitated on them as the droplets evaporated.

Thus. the aerosol particles, entering the cloud together with the air, are col-
lected by the cloud droplets and if precipitation does not fall from the cloud
these particles are again transported into the ambient air already in the form

of larger condensation nuclei with a complex structure and composition. The trans-
formation of the aerosol component of air. essentially involving a decrease in the
concentration of aerosol particles and the appearance of more effective condensa-
tion nuclei and ice nuclei. leads gradually to a change in cloud microstructure.
The latter seemingly shifts to a microstructure of a marine type - the concentra-
tion of droplets is reduced and the droplets themselves become larger.* At nega-
tive temperatures the presence of mixed nuclei favors the freezing of the drop-
lets forming on them because the insoluble particles present in them can play the
role of ice nuclei. The described transformation of the microstructure of clouds
favors the generation of precipitation. The question arises: are the mentioned
effects significant in magnitude?

Before proceeding to their evaluation we will enumerate again the spatial-temporal
changes in the structure of clouds and the ambient aerosol medium resulting from
the interaction between them.

Change in aerosol medium. Clouds (stratiform or convective) should lead to a grad-
ual purification of the atmosphere in their neighborhood from small aerosol par-
ticles and the appearance of large aerosol particles of a mixed structure. It is
not impossible that precisely this mechanism plays an important role in the forma-
tion of large mixed aerosol particles in the free atmosphere. If there is no pre-
cipitation the specific mass of the aerosol particles should not change substan-
tially during the considered transformation.

The air enters the clouds primarily in their lower part and is propelled into the

upper part. Since the propelled air should contain fewer small and more large par-
ticles, this should lead to a sharper decrease in the concentration of small aero-
sol particles with altitude and a slower decrease in the number of large particles.

* The considered processes should be less effective in sea air containing consider-
ably fewer submicron aerosol particles.m.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UR Ul'l'lkll‘la UJIL Vl‘hl

Thus. with increasing altitude not only should the concentration of aerosol par-
ticles begin to decrease. but there should also be a transformation of the droplet
size spectrum and activity. In other words, the clouds transform the spectrum of
aerosol particles in the direction of larger particles and a decrease in their
total concentration and favor the transport of larger condensation nuclei and the
formation of mixed condensation nuclei. The slowed decrease in the concentration of
gigantic aerosol particles with altitude detected by V. G. Khorguani in the pres-
ence of cumulonimbus clouds and the multiple increase in their concentration in

the layer below the clouds (see [5]. pp 2-3) are possibly associated with the con-
sidered processes. According to the data of V. A. Devyatova and B. G. Andreyev [1].
directly within stratiform and convective clouds the total concentration of aero-
sol particles decreases with altitude considerably more sharply than in the cloud—
less atmosphere.

The decrease in the concentration of submicron particles under clouds [8] discover-
ed by L. Radke. P. Hobbs and M. Eltgroth can be fully attributed to the discussed
effect of filtering of air by a cloud.

Change in cloud microatructure. A change in the aerosol medium also results in a
change in cloud microstructure. As time elapses the clouds have larger droplets
and the droplet concentration in them decreases. If the top of the clouds is situ-
ated above the zero isotherm, as time passes the probability of its icing will in-
crease. which can cause. in particular. a change of Cu cong. to Cb. In general the
transformation of cloud microstructure occurs in such a way that it. as already
noted above, is shifted in the direction of a microstructure of the sea type, and
in the last analysis there is an increase in the probability of formation of pre-
cipitation.

Concentration of Condensation Nuclei Transported Into Ambient Atmosphere by
Evaporating Cloud Droplets

Now we will return to the question as to whether the effects enumerated above are
so significant that they cause appreciable changes in the structure of clouds and
the aerosol medium surrounding them. The simple-estimates given below make it pos-
sible to give an affirmative answer to this question.

It was noted above that during its lifetime a convective cloud "draws through" it-
self. that is. "filters" in many cases more than a tenfold volume of air. Accord-
ingly, a 2/10—3/10 field of cumulus clouds with a thickness of 1.5d2 km in 1-1.5
hours transforms the distribution of aerosols in a 3- - é-km air layer. It trans-
forms the aerosol characteristics in the adjacent layers of the atmosphere and the
stratiform cloud. Here exchange with the above- and underlying layers occurs pri-
marily as a result of turbulence. Thus. in a relatively short time (sevezal hours)
enormous masses of ambient air are entrained into the process of interaction with
clouds. He will show that during these several hours there is a substantial change
in such an important characteristic of the air mass as the aerosol component.

He will examine the quantity of large nuclei transported by a cloud into the atmo—
sphere. In the case of absence of precipitation it is reasonable to assume that
the quantity of such nuclei coincides with the quantity of evaporating droplets.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The droplet concentration in the clouds is hundreds per cubic centimeter. Over
the course of several hours an order of magnitude more droplets (and accordingly
nuclei) will be propelled into the atmosphere than is present at a given time in
the cloud. If the air volume passed through a cloud mixes with a Volume an order
of magnitude greater, that is, is propagated virtually to the entire troposphere.
in such a case as well the concentration of nuclei remaining after evaporation of
the droplets will be about 10 per cubic centimeter. Thus, the concentration of
condensation nuclei transported by the cloud into the ambient atmosphere can at-
tain thOusands per liter, and such nuclei. if they are adequately large. thereaf-
ter should play an important role in the formation of clouds and the formation of
precipitation. In other words. if the condensation nuclei forming during the evap-
oration of cloud particles are sufficiently large. this means that in the evolu-
tion process the cloud itself produces large condensation nuclei which later.
again entering into the cloud. become precipitation nuclei.

Naturally. important questions arise: how many large condensation nuclei are pro-
pelled into the atmosphere by cloud droplets and what is their size distribution?
And related to this and not less important: to what degree is there a decrease

in the concentration of submicron cloud condensation nuclei whose diameter is
less than 0.1—0.2? m*.

Size Spectrum of Aerosols Formed by Cloud Droplets

It is evident that the size of the condensation nuclei remaining after the evapor-
ation of droplets is dependent on how effectively these droplets captured aerosol
particles in the course of their lifetime. This question is exceedingly complex

in a rigorous formulation of the problem. There is an extensive literature devot-

ed to the washing-cut of aerosol particles by precipitation. and unfortunately very
little attention has been devoted to the washing-out of these particles by cloud
droplets in the absence of precipitation. The "washing-out" coefficient is depend-
ent on the size of the aerosol particles. on the size of the droplet. which changes
with time, and on many other factors. However, a number of important results and
convincing estimates can also be obtained with a simplified approach to the problem.

We will introduce a number of notations.

Assume that 9-13 the mass of the aerosol particle. fo(rL) is the spectrum of the
masses of aerosol particles in the air mass interacting with the cloud, N‘I(a) is
the spectrum of the sizes of droplets in clouds. where 9’(a) is normalized to l.
K(r, a) is the coagulation (washing-out) coefficient of aerosol particles of the
radius a. Numerically this coefficient is equal to the volume from which all par-
ticles of the radius r are washed out by a droplet of the radius a in 1 see.

It is known that in the region r< 0.01 p.m the K(r, a) coefficient is determined by
Brownian diffusion. that is

K(ro 0) BKIU. 0) 4,10,“. (1)

We recall that in continental air masses the concentration of such particles is
initially -102 cm‘3. whereas in marine air it is an order of magnitude less.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run orrtunnt. U-ll- sons.-

The coefficient of Brownian diffusion increases rapidly with a decrease in r
_ pr . - _
l),—m(l +3|\ﬂ). (2)
The Cunningham correction for large Knudsen numbers, according to Davis [7], is
n- l.257+0.400 cxp (—l.lO/Kn). (3)

For r< 0.01 it follows from (2) and (3) that

kfi_
hull“ '

 

 

IT ..
~
D,%”".n\ ~

(‘0)

Here k is the Boltzmann constant, T is absolute temperature, n is the coefficient
of dynamic viscosity of air, A is the length of the free path of molecules.

In the case of large particles (r>rlme) washing-out transpires rather effectively
as a result of inertia and turbulent diffusion. However, in the region from 0.01
to lp-m in the enumerated washing—out mechanisms there is "gap" where the K(r, a)
coefficient is very small. But the main mass of aerosol particles is concentrated
precisely in this region. Investigations of recent years [7-9] have indicated

that allowance for phoretic forces and the forces of electric interaction will
make it possible to fill this gap.

As a result of thermal and diffusion phoresis the aerosol particles move against the
the temperature and concentration gradients respectively so that in the neighborhood
of a droplet growing and heating relative to the air thermophoresis impedes, where-
as diffusion phoresis favors the capture of aerosol particles. In the neighborhood
of an evaporating, and accordingly, colder droplet, on the other hand, diffusion
phoresis impedes, whereas thermophoresis favors capture.

Due to turbulent eddies in the air the droplets move randomly in cloud space. In
contrast to the partial reversibility of stochastic condensation processes (drop-
lets moving upward increase, whereas droplets moving downward evaporate), the capv
ture of aerosol particles can occur during the movement of a droplet in any direc-
tion. As a result. the mass of the aerosol particles in the droplet. all other condi-
tions being equal. will increase with the "age" of the droplet.

It is impossible to carry out rigorous computations of the process of washing-out
of aerosol particles by droplets without a knowledge of the detailed characteris- '
tics of microscale turbulence in clouds. We will limit ourselves here exclusively
to the roughest estimates. Accordingly, as a simplification we will assume that the
size of the cloud droplets and their spectrum is invariable with time. In addition.
we will assume that in the region of aerosol particles with a radius from 0.01 to
r0 - lg—m the coagulation coefficientis not dependent on the size of the aerosol
particles and is equal to K" (0.01; a), that is

leu with r( 0.01pm:

[((r, a): "F (5)
4*Dopna-2'104Da with 0.0l< r41 1"“

l6

FOR‘0FFKJAL.USE¢)NLY
Here D is the coefficient of diffusion of vapor in air. Judging from the data
in [7-9], such a simplification is entirely admissible for the estimates.

In the washing-out process the concentration of aerosol particles of the radius r
(lwrcu-u-s in conformity to the law [7]

.}(r. 1):" (r. 0)e"‘"". (6)

where the washing-out coefficient is
A (r) : NS K(r. a) 9(a) dd. (7)
0
Substituting the values (5) here. we find that
Q—L when r<0.01pul

_ 0 a.

[p I r(elaxation)] A(r)_ (8)

IDA/r, when 0.01< 1" 1 pm.

Then we have _
‘r - (Ion DNa)‘1, (9)

the 'so-called phase relaxation time, being a characteristic parameter of cloud
microstructure [A].

He will find the rate of washing-out of the aerosol mass present in particles of
the radius r< r0 - 10"“ cm. The mass of such aerosol particles present in a unit
volume of air is

a '9
MU) = 1-“? AP 6",” (r. 0dr: (10)

We find from (10), with (6)-(9) taken into account, assuming that the main mass of
the aerosol particles (AP) is contained in particles with a radius from 0.01 to

1 . th t ' .. -3
P“ ‘1 MU): -§-spm§r’n(r. 0)exp( '0 )dr:

 

’ (11)

 

Ho—a
=M(0)cxp(_l ’ ).
The time 1 during which the mass of aerosol particles in cloud air is reduced to

half is equal to {£5103 In 2 ‘er

For example. in a cloud whose liquid water content is w - 0.5 g/m3 . and I I 14pm,
{r a: 1 sec and t - 16 min Thus, the air passing through clouds in the course of
20-30 min is purified by more than half from aerosols. These estimates are correct
both for the loss of mass of aerosol particles present outside the droplets and for
the concentration of aerosol particles whose radius falls in the range from 0.01
to lptm. The concentration of aerosol particles remaining after the evaporation of

droplets and falling in this size range is relatively small and exerts no influence
on the estimates. -

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I uses \a. e .‘vIIIIe a“- u. a...

‘.
I

It sums of ’more than a little significance to examine such additional problems as
the following: how does the mass of soluble and insoluble particles increase in
one droplet with time and what nucleus remains after the evaporation of a droplet
of a stipulated size present in a cloud a certain time”.

Assume that P's“) is the mass of aerosol particles present in a droplet of the

radius a present in a cloud for the time t. For the subsequent tine segment dt
this mass increases by the value

«1... = (it; —3— app. I" [{(r. a) n(r)dr=-3-epm dt 5 r’n (r, 0) epr
0

[Mi - aerosol par- (12)
ticle - AP] “2
x [— m“) 1m, 0) 9(u)da]l((r, a)d2.
Integrating (12) for t. we find .
’e
_ 4 . I—e'm"
”(0-?” n of drIr'n(r, O)K(r. {QT}. (13)

In the case t>A"1(r), that is, in the case of complete washing-out. from (13),
with allowance for (5) and (9), as might be expected, it follows that

MN)
.1. (0 = 1:“- (14)
It is evident that in this case
'5 p, (t) N901) da = M (0) = const. (15)

In this case the distribution of aerosol particles by masses (after the evaporation
of droplets) has the form

_~ EN EN (16)
In the case of arbitrary t. taking into account that the main mass of aerosol par-

ticles is concentrated in particles with a radius from 0.01 to 1P n, for which we
used K(r, a) - 10‘3 bnba, from (13) we find

40":
u~.(tr= T“? (I —¢T). (17)

We introduce the aerosol-cloud parameter A - M(0)/N;. [If the coagulation coeffi-

cient is not described by expression (5). but a lore general expression of the type
K(r, a) - cr“a‘ (in particular. 5 - 2 is possible), the parameters A and X would

I E .. .
wave the cm A J Mm). x__p_.
Na’ i ]

*
The examination presented below can be applied separately to the soluble and in—

soluble conponents of aerosol particles.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'This parameter characterizes the mean mass of the aerosol particles received per
unit droplet radius and has the dimensionality g/cm. He also introduce the vari-
able 1: - P/a; this aerosol parameter is related to droplets of the particular rs-
dius a. In the new notations (17) is written in the form

_ 10-3: (18)
X=A(l —e ‘9 ).

 

If the droplets leaving the cloud have a size and age distribution V(a, t), then
with (18) taken into accOunt it would also be easy to determine the distribution

3 (’w) of the aerosol particles by masses after evaporation of the droplets. In at-
tuality. from the expression

t (a, !) dl=6 (X) «M (19)
it follows that
9(X)=?ln. tang; . (20)
From (18) we find that
[p - r] 1(X) = -~10'=,In(1— 2). .112; = 3% . (21)
And, finally. w
a (1*) ._-_. N; 9(%)7 (a) du. (22)

If the functions V(a,t) and 9 (a) are known, it is possible to find 90:) using
(20) and (21) and then also the explicit form of the function *8 (IA).

It is characteristic that 8 (u) is not dependent on the initial distribution of
AP by sizes, but is dependent only on the cloud parameters N and 9’ (a), the aero-
sol-cloud parameter A and the distribution of droplets leaving the cloud by ages
and sizes 1((a, t), which is determined directly by the nature of ordered and tur-
bulent movements in the cloud and in its neighborhood.

Subsequently the air passing through the cloud is mixed with the ambient air and
as a result the transformed spectrum of masses of aerosol particles f(p.) is a
singular combination of the foul) and %(y.) spectra.

Thus. examining the influence of a cloud on the parameters of atmospheric aerosol
it can be said that it must be significant and that the cloud serves as a sink for
small aerosol particles and a source of large aerosol particles, including cloud
condensation nuclei and ice nuclei. In examining the processes of formation of the
spectrum of sizes of aerosol particles in the atmosphere it is necessary to take
into account the role of clouds as sinks and sources and in creating a model of
atmospheric aerosol it is desirable to take into account the regional peculiarit-
ies associated with the climatology of cloud cover.

The considered effects make it possible to formulate a number of problems for both

theoreticians and experimenters. In particular, first of all a study should be made
of the nature of the change in the parameters of atmospheric aerosol with time with

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OW vrrsuuu. v.10. onus

the apnearance of clouds. It is important to detect changes in the concentration of
aerosol particles in the neighborhood of clouds and the transformation of the spec-
trum at different altitudes. It would be of unquestionable interest to investigate
the transformation of the composition of aerosol particles. especially from the
point of view of change in the percentage of the hygroscopic fraction.

with respect to clouds, it is important to trace the temporal change in the concen-
tration and spectrum of droplet sizes and how ice crystals appear in clouds and how
precipitation is generated. In a case when experimental investigations confirm the
anticipated effects, theoreticians are faced with specific problems with respect

to the development of a theory of interaction of a cloud with an aerosol medium.
Here it is important to have a further comprehension of the processes of washing-
out of aerosol particles by cloud droplets and crystals, associated, in particular.
with the joint effect of phoretic forces and turbulence. creating inhomogeneities
both in the field of air velocities and in the temperature field. A new stimulus is
appearing in the finding of the distribution function of cloud particles by ages.
The listing of the tasks arising in connection with this problem could be continued
considerably further.

In conclusion we note once again that this communication by no means solves the
problems set forth in the heading. It only emphasizes their importance and indicates
the possible directions of changes in the characteristics of a cloud and atmospheric
aerosols arising during their interaction; a number of qualitative patterns are es-
tablished. In particular. here it is shown that the cloud transforms the spectrum
of aerosol particles in the ambient atmosphere to a form not dependent on their in-
itial distribution.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Devyatova. V. A. and Andreyev, B. 0., "Characteristics of the Distribution of
Condensation Nuclei in the Atmosphere Over Moscow According to the Results of
Observations Aboard an Li-2 Sounding Aircraft," TRUDY TsAO (Transactions of the
Central Aerological Observatory), No 50, 1963.

2. Kogan, Ye. L., "Three-Dimensional Numerical Model of a Droplet Cumulus Cloud
Uith Allowance for Hicrophysical Processes," IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATHOSFERY I
OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and
Ocean), Vol 14, No 8, year not given.

3. Hazin, I. P.. "Age of Particles in Stratiform Clouds," TRUDY TsAO, No 67, 1963.

b. Marin. I. P., "Temperature and Humidity Stratification in Clouds." TRUDY TsAO,
No 71. 1966.

5. Khorguani, V. 6., HIKROPIZIKA ZAROZHDENIYA I ROSTA GRADA (Hicrophysics of Gen-
eration and Growth of Hail), Author's Dissertation for Award of the Academic
Degree of Doctor of Sciences, Moscow, 1980.

6. shmeter, S. M.. FIZIKA KONVEKTIVNYKH OBLAKOV (Physics of Convective Clouds),
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1972.

20
FOR OI!“CD\LIJ§E(M§LY
Pruppacher, H. R. and Klett, J. D., HICROPHYSICS 01” CLOUDS AND PRECIPITATION. .
D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1978.

Rcdke. L. F., Hobbs. P. V. and ﬂisroth, H. w., "Scavenging of Aerosol Particles
by Precipitation," J. APPL. METEOROL, Vol 19, No 6, 1980.

Young. R. C., "The Role of Contact Nucleation in Ice Phase Initiation in
Clouds," J. ATHOS. SOL, V01 31, 1976.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Un urrlyana. voa'. unh-

UDC 551.578.46
CREATING NEW OBSERVATIONAL NETWORK FOR MONITORING ENVIRONMENTAL CONTAMINATION

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOCIYA in Russian No 1. Jan 82 (manuscript received
24 Jun 81) pp 62-70

[Article by T. N. Zhigalovskaya, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences,
I. H. Nazarov, Sh. D. Pridman, candidates of technical sciences, and 0. s. Renne,
Institute of Applied Geophysics]

[Text] Abstract: The authors validate the feasibility
of creating a new observational network (on the
basis of network snow surveys) for monitoring
the contamination of natural media: atmosphere,
surface waters and soils. The article examines
the problems involved in organizing observations,
their use for evaluating the state of contamina-
tion of the environment and prediction of change
of this state. The examination is carried out on
the basis of five years of experience in work in
different regions of the USSR.

Introduction. As was indicated in [7], the network for measuring the parameters of
snow cover (depth. density and moisture reserve) existing in the USSR State Com-
mittee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring can be used in observations
of env1ronmenta1 contamination. The snow cover is a natural accumulator of contam-
inating substances falling from the atmosphere in dry form and with precipitation.
During thawing it is a source of contamination of soils and surface waters. Accord-

ingly, data on the contamination of snow constitute an index :haracterizing the
contamination of these natural media.

Five years of experience in carrying out observations of contamination of the snow
cover at a number of meteorological stations indicated that these studies do not
require an increase in the number of observers because the taking of samples, com-
bined with measurement of snow cover density. is carried out quite rarely. once or
twice a season.

The density of the existing snow-gaging network of the State Committee on Hydro-
meteorologv and Environmental Monitoring is characterized by the following figures.
The total number of hydrometeorological stations and posts at which the de-

termination of snow depth and density is carried out regularly is about 7500 [6].
At each station or post the measurements are carried out along one or more snow-
gaging lines which cross the principal landscape complexes of this territory [8].

22

FOR‘OFFKJAI.US£(MVLY
We note that with respect to territorial coverage this network surpasses the net—
work of the National Service for Observing and Monitoring Environmental Contamina-
tion, which includes systematic observations of atmospheric contamination in 350
cities and contamination of the surface waters of the land in 1200 water bodies
[4, 5]. The location of stations for making observations in the snow-gaging net-
work as a rule appropriately supplements the existing network for the monitoring
of contamination. The snow—gaging observation network covers major industrial re-
gions in the country as well as territories remote from then. In the industrial
regions there are approximately 2500 meteorological stations and posts where meas-
urements of snow parameters are made; over the remaining areas there are about
5000. Over the greater part of the European USSR (excluding the extreme northerly
regions) there is one station or post in an area of 3000-6000 kmz, in the area of
Western Siberia and Kazakhstan -- one each 8000-10 000 kmz, in Eastern Siberia and
in the Northeastern USSR —- one each 13 000-17 000 kmz. Thus, the use of the snow-
gaging network for observations of contamination should give more complete inform-
ation on environmental contamination with extremely low expenditures of material
and human resources.

In order to characterize the possibilities of any monitoring system, including the
proposed network, it is necessary to examine the following questions: reliability
and representativeness of the results of observations. effectiveness of their use
in evaluating the state of the environment and predicting change of this state

[4, 5]. Below, on the basis of this approach and five years experience in carrying
out observations of snow cover contamination in a number of regions in the USSR,
we will give an evaluation of the feasibility, on the basis of the existing stan-
dard snow-gaging network of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environ-
mental Monitoring, of creating a new observation network for the monitoring of con-
taminstion of the environment as a component of the national service for observing
and monitoring environmental contamination.

Observation Method

Snow samples for determining the content of contaminating substances (dust, heavy
metals, sulfates, etc.) are taken along snowbgaging lines while carrying out plann-
ed snow surveys. The planned snow surveys are carried out two or three times each
month and therefore in case of necessity it is possible to obtain detailed data
concerning the dynamics of contamination. However. as a characteristic of contamin-
ation during the time of accumulation of snow during the winter period it is suf-
ficient to take a single sample at the time of the snow accumulation maximum. This
considerably reduces the time required in sampling itself and the subsequent work
load in laioratoriea.

In sampling the snow the results of the work can be influenced by contamination of
the snow by the snow-gaging tool itself and contamination as a result of presence
of soil particles.

The use of a standard metallic snow gage, as indicated by experience, does not in-
.troducc significant errors into the qualitative and quantitative composition of
the sample because the sample is in contact with the metallic surface of the snow
gage for a short time.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-Uu tin-luau. 03:. man

During the taking of a sample insignificant quantities of soil particles can enter
the sample. According to our observations. made for a large number of snow-gaging
lines, even in places separated by great distances from industrial sources, in
most cases the ratios of the concentrations of elements in the dry precipitates of
snow to their concentration in the soil is tens or hundreds of units. However.
when these concentrations for any substance are close. this means that contamina~
tion is insignificant or completely absent.

In order for errors of this type to become minimum, the soil samples must be taken
on snow-gaging lines at the places where the soil is entirely snow covered.

The samples can be analyzed by different methods, depending on the capabilities of
the laboratory. For example. an analysis for the content of trace elements can he
made by spectral methods: atomic-absorption or emission; an analysis for the content
of benzapyrene can be made by the method of low-temperature luminescence. sulfates
can be analyzed by the turbidimetric method, etc. The content of contaminating sub-
stances in a sample of snow water is determined by the total content of this sub-
stance in the insoluble fraction on the filter and the total content of the soluble
fraction in the filtrate.

The levels of contamination of the snow cover are computed in the following way. We
have

a _ on (1)
u — 1"-
where C71 is the density of contamination by an ingredient according to data from
the i-th sample. Q1 is the total quantity of the j-th substance present in the
i-th sample, 51 is ghe area from which the sample was taken.

The value

913 " Q11 :11 4: Q13 sub. (2)

where Q11 £11 is the quantity of substance remaining on the filter —- the condi-
tionally insoluble part, Q11 sub is the quantity of substance in the conditionally
soluble part of the sample passing through the filter.

He will designate by cij the concentration of substance in the conditionally sol-
uble part of the sample and v1 will be used in designating the total volume of

the melt water in the i-th sample. For the usually employed snow gages (circular
cylinder) the area 51 - kixtrz, where k1 is the number of snow samplings at a par-
ticular point, r is the radius of the cylinder. Thus.

[49- m; a - sub] o”: ﬂag—3”“. -W. (3)

0n the basis of the 011 values we find the mean values

' I
0’ =7h2'o” (‘)

and on this basis the density of precipitation per unit time is

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“I
a. = '7'-

where m is the number of samples taken along the line, T is the time of accumula-

tion of contamination.

Spatial and Temporal Structure of Snow Cover Contaminations

Network observations of the level of snow cover contamination give some idea con-
cerning the spatial and temporal structure of the snow cover. They make it pos-
sible to detect centers of contamination, determine the range of priority contam-
inants in a given industrial region and study the seasonal dynamics. These possib-

ilities are indicated below in a number of examples.

Table 1

Relative Mean Rate of Fallout of Metals in Investigated Regions

Stations Cu Zn Fe Ni Mn Pb
I 57.0 2.0 19.0 43.00 11.0 4.00
n 1.5 2.5 6.0 3.00 3.0 26.00
m 1.9 36.7 15.3 ~1* 37.0 ~1*

*
Hithin the limits of measurement accuracy.

 

Fig. 1. Sketch map of contamination of territory with nickel. l) sampling points.

2) contamina t 10“ source .

1) We examined industrial regions with linear dimensions of several tens of kilo-
meters each. situated at distances of hundreds of kilometers from one another. In
the first of these regions there was a nonferrous metallurgy enterprise and in the

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a an we new”... a..- anus-a

second -- an enterprise for the production of lead-zinc ores. The third region

was in a zone of ferrous metallurgy enterprises. Table 1 gives the relative mean
rate of fallout in these regions. Averagings of the results of analyses of snow
cover samples were made over the territory and over a period of 3-4 months. As
unity we employed the mean rate of fallout in a region distant from industrial een-
ters. It can therefore be seen that in the region of nonferrous metallurgy the
principal contaminants are copper and nickel. in the second - lead and in the
third -- zinc, iron and manganese.

2) As a result of use of the snow-gaging network we obtained maps of the distribu-
tion of heavy metals over the extensive territory with the use of 25 meteorolog-
ical stations and posts; we detected zones of contamination associated with the ac-
tivity of industrial enterprises, studied seasonal and annual dynamics and varia-
tions of fluxes at the surface. Figure l is a sketch map in relative units which
shows the structure of the field of contamination by nickel. The principal source
is located at the center of the investigated region. Near the source. at a dis-
tance of several kilometersI there are higher nickel levels in the fallout. At dis-
tances of 40-50 km from the source there is a zone of secondary contamination

where the fallout density is approximately 7 times lower than near the source. Next
there is an extensive zone where only traces of contamination are found, and final-
ly, the part of the territory bordering the zones where the concentration of nickel
in the fallout is below the sensitivity of the method. In this case the structure
of the zones duplicates the character of local relief with an increase in the con-
centration in places of depressed relief; all the zones extend in a northeasterly
direction, which coincides with the prevailing direction of the wind in this sea-
son. This sketch map shows that such a detailed study of the territory of a region
makes it possible to detect sources of contamination, the distribution of fallout
levels as a function of the location of the sources. their intensity. composition
of effluent and landscape characteristics of the territory. Similar sketch maps
could be constructed for 12-15 elements and it was possible to discriminate those
elements whose presence for the most part is associated with effluent from anthro-
pogenic sources.

3. The local fa110ut levels are dependent on meteorological conditions and can con-
siderably change with time and over the area. However, as indicated by observations,
with technology remaining unchanged the sum of fallout during the season over the
territory in a range of 50-100 km around the enterprise remains virtually con-
stant from year to year, varying only within the limits of measurement errors. For
example, as a result of 5-year observations in a region with ferrous metallurgy en-
terprises it was found that the sum of dust fallout deviated from the mean value

by 1301. Accordingly. by knowing the mass of matter in effluent and the quantity of
matter falling onto the territory around the enterprise or industrial center it is
possible to estimate the fraction entering into distant transport.

Assume that the mean intensity of the effluent E is known, in kg/day. Then the mass
of matter expelled into the atmosphere during the accumulation time T, in days,
will be equal to Q - qT. In the studied territory we will discriminate relatively
homogeneous sectors with fallout densities exceeding the background values, much as
was done in the figure. If the mean value of the total density of fa110ut (wet and
dry fallout) per unit time in the i-th sector is (T1, the quantity of matter ac-
cumulated in the snow cover in the i-th sector with an area 81 will be equal to

26

FOR‘OFTICIAI.USE¢JNLY
EFiSiT and the total quantity of matternfalling on the studied territory will be
:,S T

where the summation is carried out forlall n sectors. The quantity of matter H,

including in distant transport. can be found from the obvious relationship
I
M: ’. ;$)T. .
(q “n’lll (6)

According to our data, the fraction s - H/qT 100 falls in the range 60-801. depend-
ing on the disperse composition of the effluent.

By knowing a it is possible to solve the inverse problem -- use the results of snow
cover contamination to estimate the mean intensity of the effluent.

XEISI (7)
_ l'l
q: (|_‘".

 

4) A substantial change in total fallout during a season can be evidence of a

change in the technology of production or the functioning of purification struc-
tures. By determining the mean relationship between the intensity of the effluent
and the total fallout on the snow for a particular point and the contaminating sub—
stances of interest to us, thereafter on the basis of data on the intensity of inte-
gral fallout it is possible to judge changes in effluent. An example of such ob—
servations is the data in Table 2, which gives the mean levels of the density of
fallout of dust in relative units (the fallouts of 1975 were used as unity) in the
region of the industrial center of ferrous metallurgy during the period 1975-1979
for a number of elements.

The table shows that a decrease in the fallout levels occurred in 1976 and 1978.
This was associated with the starting-up of new dust-trapping apparatus, and as a
result of this, a decrease in effluent.

Evaluation and Prediction of Contaminationa of Atmosphere. Hater and Soil

An evaluation -- a short—range forecast of meltwater pollution of rivers and soils --
is possible on the basis of date from network observations of the density levels
of contamination of the snow cover.

A prediction of the contamination of river waters by melt water is of particular
importance for rivers or their reaches into which waste water is not discharged or
into which it is dumped in small quantities. Such forecasts have been made in a
number of investigations. For example, according to studies [7, 9], the mean con-
centration of the j-th ingredient at the lowest-lying gaging station in the basin
during the period of spring high water is

N
c=-Lw-L. (8)

where fj is the coefficient of the j-th substance or the fraction of its total re-
serve entering the river channel with the melt water;

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I VA VI repent. was. Vl'hI

Nj is the reserve of the j-th ingredient in the water discharge prior to the
melting of the snow; H is the volume of the water runoff.

The prediction of soil contamination without allowance for evaporation of snow and—

contaminating substances can be accomplished on the basis of the following rea-
sonings.

Assume that p(t) g/ (cmzvsec) of snow falls in a unit time. During the time dt the
quantity of falling snow is

dll(l)=p(!)dl. (9)
During the winter season the total snowfall is

1’
M7) = 3 MM. (10)

Assume that the weight concentration of contamination in the snow is c(t) 3/3. Then
during the time dt the falling of contaminating matter is

d o(l) -c(l)n(l)d!- (11)

During a season of the duration T the following quantity of matter falls

r
om-Icwmdt. <12)
' o
and the sorption of matter in the soil is

T
mm :11, Sc(t)p(t)dr. (13)

where is a coefficient determined experimentally. The loss with melt water is
(l - k3 0' (T).

Assume that the runoff coefficient is kmn; then the concentration in saltwater is

,
u H m (I—k.)5c(0q(t)dt
- - _ . —-
[CT run(off)] cwater W_ﬁ_‘ (1’0)

hymn

with allowance for evaporation of the contaminating substance and snow the computa-
tion of the balance has the following form. Contaminating substance 836“) is re-
turned to the air, where :13 is the fraction of evaporating matter. The evaporation
of snow is 'snow(T)- The quantity of matter (1 - a3)k a'(T) remains in the soil;
the loss of matter with melt water is (l - a3) (1 - k3 o'(T). The concentration in
the meltwater will be

(1 - a3) (1 - k3)a’(T)

c - ————— , (15)
(1 ' asnow)‘“runh('1')
Relative Density of Dust Fallout Table 2
Years 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979
Fallout 1 0.5 0.30 0.05 0.08
28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where all the coefficients are determined experimentally. The a3 value is dependent
on the properties of the investigated substance and the specific conditions and

is also determined experimentally. Here we have cited only the most general rea-
sonings which to some degree can be useful in studying contamination under the con-
dition of availability of the necessary experimental data.

The concentration of contaminating substance falling in a unit time on a unit sur-
face (flux) [1. 2] is related to the concentration of this substance in the atmo-
sphere.

0n the basis of the measured values of the flux of matter on the surface it is pos-
sible to estimate the concentration c in the atmosphere [1,2]. Near industrial en-
terprises it can be assumed that the flux on the earth's surface is 17- cv, where
v is the rate of precipitation.

Evidently, for practical purposes for such computations it is possible to use a

sketch map similar to that shown in the figure if the mean values for this region
are adopted for the flux onto the surface from the atmosphere. Then

(16)

e421

3:.

The velocity values v vary little in a given place and for an evaluation it is ad-
equate to obtain v for a particular region once. The averaging must be carried out
over the selected territory and during the selected observation time. For a large
territory it is possible to obtain approximately

I
2E8:

n - In]
a ,
23.

III

 

(17)

where n is the number of regions in which observations are made, Tr1 is the mean
flux on the surface for the i-th region; 81 is its area.

It must be taken into account that TI is the sum of the dry and wet fallout. The
dry fallout near the source (in a radius of 50-100 km) is caused by this source.
The wet fallout can in part be a result of transport from other regions and is
not associated with the concentrations of impurities in the atmosphere in a par-
ticular place, but for industrial regions they can be neglected. The relationship
between concentrations in the atmosphere and the flux on the surface can probably
be used for establishing the conditional value of the maximum admissible flux on
the surface for a conservative admixture if it is assumed that the maximum admis-
sible concentration TTHAC - cHAC v,

0n the basis of the measured intensities of the fluxes onto the surface, using the
sketch map, it is possible to obtain the v value. As indicated in the figure. all

the studied territory is divided into several sectors with identical mean values
of the fluxes onto the surface.

29

FOR 0FTWC1AI.USE10NLY
[\lﬂ urnbuu. one. ensue

Data on the fluxes'onto the surface near an industrial enterprise can be used in
predicting contaminations of remote territories as a result of distant transport.
A generalization of data on the content of a number of elements in the samples
taken in regions remote from the industrial centers at different distances led to
the conclusion that industrial aerosols are transported for thousands of kilo-
meters from the source [3]. It was found that the weakening of the concentrations
of elements, the density of fallout and fluxes onto the surface in this case con-
form to an exponential law [3]. The density of fallout of metals on the .no: cover
decreases with distance x from the source in conformity to the law

“(K)-3(0)e“‘, (18)

where (7(0) is the density of fallout at the point used as the initial point. The
k value is a constant value with a given mean wind velocity (that is, in a given
dirgctio?) for a particular group of elements and falls in the range (1.5-0.6).
10’ km‘ .

As indicated above. systematic observations of the levels of contaminating sub-
stances in the snow cover make it possible to solve a whole series of scientific
and practical problems, as is evidence of a number of advantages of such a method
for making observations over such a method as a direct analysis of impurities in
the atmosphere. Accordingly, in the future it is necessary to increase the number
of points for observing the levels of contaminating substances in the snow cover

in such a way as will take in all the regions where there is a stable snow cover

so that the number of such stations will approach the number of stations in the
snow—gaging network and the set of determined substances quite completely charac-
terizes contamination of this region. The levels of contaminating substances in the
fallout can serve as input data for normalizing effluent of industrial enterprises.

The most important merits of the method are the following. The data obtained by an
analysis of snow cover samples are immediately averaged over a considerable time
and therefore are more representative. The accumulation of the studied substances
in the snow cover. used as a natural plane table, makes it possible in a number of
cases to detect low concentrations of contaminating substances in regions remote
from industrial centers. which may be impossible when using other methods. This
cannot be achieved by any other methods in study of the global background. It is
posslble that such a network will make it possible to reduce the number of observa-
tions of the state of atmospheric air on the basis of measurements of the aerosol
component of air at some points; in other cases, on the other hand. it is possible
to detect previously unknown sources requiring more careful observation. The method
makes possible a more complete study of the laws of propagation of an impurity in
the atmosphere - direction, range of transport and other characteristics of inter-
est to the researcher. Only the possibilities of use of the proposed network are
mentioned in the study. In the future, together with a broadening of network ob-
servations, it is necessary to improve the method for analysing samples. to develop
the theoretical principles of the method and to study the possibilities of obtain-
ing input data for computing the formulas.

Conclusions

It was demonstrated that the use of the existing snow-gaging network. including sev-
eral thousand observation points, in monitoring the level of atmospheric contamina-
tion can effectively supplement the network for both observations and monitoring

30
FIHRCHHNCJAI.lﬂﬂE(N'LY
of environmental contamination (OCSNK) and will make it possible to solve a num-
ber of important problems:

1. Carry out background monitoring over extensive areas, including monitoring of
distant and transboundary transport.

2. Characterizing the dynamics of effluent of industrial enterprises.

3. Obtaining the spatial structure of aerosol contaminations near industrial cen-
tera.

4. Evaluating and predicting contamination of the atmosphere, river waters and the
soil cover.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Berlyand, M. Ye.. SOVREMENNYYE PROBLEMY ATMOSPERNOY DIFFUZII I ZAGRYAZNENIYA
(Modern Problems of Atmospheric Diffusion and Contamination), Leningrad, Gidro-
meteoizdat. 1975.

2. Byzova. N. L., METODICHESKOYE POSOBIYB P0 RASCHBTU RASSEYANIYA PRIMESEY V
POGRANICHNOM SLOYE ATMOSPERY (Methodological Aid for Computing the Scattering
of Impurities in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer), Moscow. Cidrometeoizdst, 1973.

3. Zhigalovskaya, T. N.. Nazarov. I. M., Pridman, Sh. D. and Renne. 0. 8.. "Inves-
tigation of Fallout of Aerosols During Distant Transport of Contaminating Sub-
stances," MBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology). No 4. 1980.

4. Israel', Yu. A., "Global System of Observations. Prediction and Evaluation of
Changes in the State of the Environment. Monitoring Principles." MEIEOROLOCIYA
I GIDROLOGIYA, No 7, 197‘.

5. Izrael', Yu. A., Casilina, N. K., Rovinskiy, F. Ya. and Pilippovs, L. M..
OSUSHESTVLENIYE V SSSR SISTEMY MONITORINGA ZACRYAZNENIYA PRIRODNOY SREDY
(Implementation of a System in the USSR for Monitoring Environmental Contam-
ination), Leningrad, Cidrometeoizdat, 1978.

6. Kopanev. I. D.. METODY IZUCHENIYA SNEZHNOCO POKROVA (Methods for Studying the
Snow Cover). Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat. 1971.

7. Nazarov, I. M., Fridman. Sh. D. and Renne. O. 8., "Use of Network Snow Surveys
for Studying Contamination of the Snow Cover," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA.
No 7. 1978.

8. NASTAVLENTYE CIDROMETEOROLOCICHBSKIM STANTSIYAM (Instructions for Hydrometeor-
nlogical Stations), No 3, 41. Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat, 1969.

9. Sinitsina, Z. L. Buyanova, L. I. and Cherkhanov. Yu. P., “Atmospheric Precipi-
tation as a Source of Contamination in the Moskva River Basin," TRUDY IPG
(Transactions of the Institute of Applied Geophysics). No 31. 1979.

31

FOIIOFFKJAL.USE(HVLY
ovn~ VIODNrp-l- . .— ..—.

UDC 551.&66+551.463.6(261)
OCEANIC PLANETARY WAVES 0F SEASONAL ORIGIN

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
8 Apr 81) PP 71-77

[Article by A. A. Kutalo, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences. USSR
Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Text] Abstract: This is an analysis of the observable
features of water temperature distribution in the
Northeastern Atlantic predictable by means of hydro-
dynamic modeling of the ocean. 0n the basis of the
results of the analysis it is asserted that the
basis for mesoscale organization of the temperature
field is oceanic planetary waves of seasonal origin.

The results of hydrodynamic modeling of the ocean indicate the existence of plan-
etary waves of seasonal origin (in the text which follows -- PS waves) [3, b. 11-
13]. The length of such waves of an annual period varies from 200-300 km in the
high latitudes to 5000-10 000 km in the low latitudes. The extent of the waves is
determined by the dimensions of the oceans.

There have been no direct observation of these waves. The available results of an-
alysis of meaoscale (200-500 km) features of the distributions of hydrological
characteristics in the temperate latitudes of the ocean only illustrate the pos-
sibility of their interpretation as a manifestation of PS waves [5-9. 13]. Such

an ambiguity in interpretation of the results of observations is attributable to
two main factors: commensurability of the spatial-temporal discreteness of meas-
ure-ents with the length of the PS waves and the small extent of oceanographic sur-
veys in comparison with the extent of these waves.

Below we present the results of an analysis of measurement data on the temperature
field of the northeastern part of the Atlantic Ocean. the discreteneas of which
was such that at the present time it makes possible the soundest evaluation of

the existence and energy significance of PS waves in nature.

Now we will examine the principal parameters of PS waves and the thermal field,
on the basis of which we will evaluate their correspondence to one another. Ac-
cording to [6, 7. 13], over the entire area of the ocean PS waves can create a
stable intermittence of mesoscale cyclonic and anticyclonic circulatory forma-
tions. The wave nature of such circulatory formations causes purely advective

32

F0!‘0FFN3A1.USE(NWLY
cyclic redistributions of water masses in the baroclinic layer of the ocean and

a corresponding vertical consistency in the distributions of characteristics.
Thus, cyclonic formations. as a result of the divergence and upwelling of waters
will be colder than anticyclonic formations in which there is a convergence of

the upper. warmer waters. Thus. if PS waves are real and energetically signif~
icant. they will create in the thermal field of the baroclinic layer of the ocean
alternating zones of warm and cold waters. These zones will be associated with

the wave crests and troughs. The presence of such zones in the ocean, their num-
ber. orientation and correspondence of these characteristics to the computed phase
field of PS waves will be regarded as parameters for evaluating the degree of man-
ifestation of the latter in the thermal field of the baroclinic layer of the
ocean.

For these purposes we carried out computations of the phase field of PS waves of
an annual period. The computations were made for a two-layer model of the North
Atlantic described in [10]. The lines of zero phases were determined using the

e uation
q },+c!-2k:l(k=0.1.2.3.”).

where _ I M1,.) .
c“ isolismiy

is the phase velocity of the waves, 3 is longitude, reckoned from the eastern
shore in a model of the ocean. 5" is latitude. t is time. h(/\.(P) is the thickness
of the upper layer. J is the difference in the density of the lower and upper lay—
ers. F'is the density of the lower layer. a). R is the angular velocity of the
earth's rotation and its radius.

The computed isolines of the zero phases of the PS waves of an annual period are
shown in Pig. 1 by wavy lines. Their numbering runs from the eastern shore in the
direction of the phase velocity vector and begins from 1980. Computations were
not made near the line of emergence of the interface between the layers at the
surface, h - 0. In the model this line is identified with the southern boundary of

the polar front. In the neighborhood of this line, that is. in'the region of small
h values. the adequacy of the model to nature is problematic.

Figure 1 shows that in the ocean. from its eastern shore to the polar front, there
are not less than nine waves. This means that if the energy of PS waves is impor-
tant. in the thermal field of the baroclinic layer there should be nine alternat-
ing warm and cold zones, oriented along the phase isolines. He will be guided by
these characteristics in an analysis of the results of observations.

Tho structure of the thermal field of the region was determined using measurement
data from the scientific research weather ship "Husson" (34th voyage, 1 October-
30 December 1980. 220 days). the scientific research ship "1-0847 "Ayaks" (24th
voyage. 23 August-4 November 1980, 137 days). scientific research weather ship
"Passat" (33d voyage, 26 November-3 December 1980, 18 days). On the map in Fig. l
the hydrological stations are designated by circles, the figures accompanying
them designate the depth of the lO'C isotherm in meters, the lines indicate that
the temperature from the surface to the bottom is below lO'C. The smoothing and
filtering of the measurement data were omitted. The sixty-five stations occupied
in the region 39-42’N and 25-30'H (in Pig. 1 the region of the "track") are not

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I VA VI A I‘vﬂf‘l‘ vua— V-Ihi

represented on the map because of the closeness of their spacing. In this polygon
the stations were occupied in a regime of tracking the position of the boundaries

of the observable mesoscale structural formations of the thermal field in the baro-
clinic layer of the ocean.

 

 

mllslnslnlw mluluilzln lolsle

o(r..z,)wn 29 u so so no 65 on tales to 49
I

”4.4-910: — as 62 7a 79 w 76 17in; 73 71 75 79

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

The oceanographic section along 50'“ in the sector from 7 to 30‘" was run three
times: 1-5 November, 10-15 December and 17-25 December 1980. In the third repeti-
tion the profile was continued to 43‘“. The profile along 30'W between 37 and 50°“
was run twice: 5—10 November 1980 with a distance between stations of 30 miles

and on 5-10 December 1980 with a discreteness of 120 miles to 40°H and 60 miles to
50°N. Figure 1 shows data from the first measurements.

As a characteristic structure of the thermal field of the investigated region of
the North Atlantic we selected the topography of the 10°C isothermal surface. For
the particular region of the ocean the depth of the 10°C isotherm characterizes
the thickness of the baroclinic layer. A validation of such a choice is the con-
sistency of the observable changes in the temperature of the water in a vertical
direction in the baroclinic layer. The table gives the values of the rank correla-
tion coefficient 1 illustrating this consistency. The correlation was computed
between the temperature of the surface layer of water Tu and the depths of the
integral values of the isotherms ZT from the surface layer to 8'0. and also be-
tween the depths of the adjacent isotherms. In the computations we used the sta-
tions No 7-150, 36th voyage of the scientific research weather ship "Musson." The
correlation coefficient is considered reliable if its significance level is less
than 0.01 [2]. For the cited X this condition is satisfied, except for the cor-
relation between Tv and 220. For this pair the significance level is 0.04.

The high values of the correlation coefficients in the entire thickness of waters
of the baroclinic layer reflect the high consistency of vertical temperature
changes. we note that in the region of the main thermocline (isotherm 13-8’0) there
are some increases in the rank correlation coefficient. This means that the topo-
graphy of the isothermal surfaces can serve as a more significant indicator of the
structure of the thermal field of the entire baroclinic layer than the above-lying
layers. The legitimacy of such an approach to description of the thermal field is
also confirmed by the results of analysis of the vertical distributions of water
temperature obtained in [1. 7-9].

Thus. on the basis of the presence of mesoscale disturbances in the topography of
the 10°C isothermal surface and on the basis of the degree of their correspondence

to the characteristics of the phase field of the PS waves we will also evaluate
the reality of the letter.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600060012-7

a"
.V
..

0'.--_..-.._

l
J
. "
.1!
'.|

:4

a!

 
  

Fig. l. Hesoscal
ocean. l) zero—p

lO‘C isotherm. m. Oceanograp :
"Husson." A) scientific research ship “1-0347 "Ayaks,

search Heather ship.

arrylng out the analyzed measurements takes in h months.
PS waves of an annual period are displaced in a
h. With an energetic significance of

the waves so 1d is manifested in a corresponding di

placement of the warm and cold zones. Since the greatest displacement in 5 months
does not exceed half the wave length, in an analysis of the measurements their
«synchronicity leads only to a curvature of the zones. The degree of curvature
will be proportional to the time interval between the analyzed adjacent stations.
0n the whole. such an asynchronicity of the measurements, taking into account
small displacements of the zones in comparison with the wave length, exerts no
influence on the number of the discriminated zones and on the general character
of their distribution in the region. It follows from the above that the first
necessary conditions of the reality and energy significance of PS waves should be
the presence and temporal stability in the thermal field of structural formations
of the corresponding scales on any oceanographic section. We will check these con-
ditions on the basis of the data from the sections represented in Fig. 2. These
show the distributions of the depths of the 10°C isotherm and the temperature of
the surface water layer as parameters of the structure of the thermal field and
the vertical consistency of its changes. All the sections show the presence and a1-
ternating character of the warm and cold mesoscale formations. Repeated measure-
ments along the runs )0= 50°N and A- 30°" with interruptions of 1.5 and 2 months
graphically illustrate the temporal stability of these formations. The third sec-
tion serves these purposes: it intersects the ocean from Cape San Vicente (9’-
37'11'8. X = 9°13'H) in a northwesterly direction to ocean station "C“ (q,-
52°45'N, A - 35°30'H). This section was run in 1978 and therefore it also shows
that the represented structure of the thermal field is characteristic for other
periods than the observation period 1980-1981.

We note the correspondence between the characteristic dimensions of the discrimin—
ated formations of the thermal field and the computed data on the PS waves. On vir-
tually every one of the sections the number of waves coincides with the number of
pairs of warm and cold alternating formations. The noncorrespondence of the scales
is observed Only near the shores and polar front. One of the reasons for such a non-
correspondence may be that the real complex configuration of the eastern shore of
the ocean is simplified in the model. it has the form of a straight line and this,
naturally, cannot but be manifested in the coastal regions. Near the polar front.
as already noted. the model also cannot describe the real processes with an ade-
quate accuracy. The mentioned noncorrespondence, however. cannot change the observ-
ed general character of the mesoscale structure of the thermal field. It can be
stated that according to the considered data the necessary condition of reality of
the PS waves is satisfied.

The next important link in the analysis is an evaluation of the features of dis-
tribution of mesoscale formations over the area of the ocean, their anisotropic-
ity and the correspondence of the PS waves to the phase field. For these purposes,
using the indicated measurement data. we constructed a map of the topography of
the 10°C isothermal surface (210, Fig. 1). 0n the map it can be seen that the
values of the 210 depths with respect to their positioning are clearly grouped into
mesoscale formations. These formations of increased and decreased 210 values have
the form of alternating zones, that is. warm and cold tongues. In regions with a
discreteness of observations allowing an ambiguity of interpretation such forms-
tions have been outlined by analogy with those situated nearby, discriminated un-
ambiguously. Hesoscale formations of increased 210 values have been stippled.

The nature of arrangement of the discriminated mesoscale formations and their num—
ber agree well with the computed phase field of PS waves of an annual period. The

shaded formations correspond to the troughs of the waves and the regions of lesser
210 values correspond to the crests. Nine such formations are discriminated in the

36

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
considered ocean area; these have the form of alternating warm and cold zones. The
same number of PS waves is given by computations using the model.

I
'u ’0 am
Polar W” " '

front

      

. 0 0‘
”taunt-0m -
_ zer|> phase of PS

    
   

W
M
' I50
19'
n
*0}! I III!
~ e

-hase 0 PS

 
 
 
  

m m
M
m H J-Jﬁ'il 9N
— . II

M *H-ﬂﬂiﬂl I!
H 20
‘0' ' mg. 2/ N

' v». k
m olar front ! __ ; ’3‘.“ I: w

”lulu“; . . n .

0pc." i .. 'meami nelt'ation 29
m - (9 n “ "' ’0 .m'xl. "

’0 3! :0 N"

Fig. 2. Mesoacale formations of the temperature field in the distributions of depth
of the 10°C isotherm (210) and temperature T" of the surface water layer on oceano-

graphic sect ions.

It was noted that the measurement data were not subjected to any smothing and fil-
tering. The fact that the mesoscale formations are clearly discriminated on the
basis of the data from these measurements indicates that the energetics of the

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
r0. m'I'IVCNI- UH.- VIVIIO

tidal. inertial and other disturbances of the temperature field of lesser scales
is considerably less than for mesoscsle formations.

The results make it possible to conclude that the features of the temperature
field of the baroclinic layer in the ocean predictable by modeling are observed
in nature. For this reason it can be asserted that PS waves of an annual period
are an objective reality, with significant energy. and thereby are responsible
for the mesoscale structure of hydrological fields in the ocean.

He note that the characteristic differential in the depths of the 10°C isorherm
between the discriminated warm and cold mesoscale formations is 200-300 m. Such

a differential corresponds to the geostrophic transport of waters in the baro-
clinic layer amounting to 15-25 sverdrup. These values are comensurable with the
transport in the components of macroscale circulatory systems in the ocean. This
fact and the close correlation between the temperature of the surface layer of
water and the structure of deep circulation make the mesoscale problem extremely
timely in investigations of macroscale processes both in the ocean and in the at-
mosphere.

The author expresses appreciation to Ye. B. Chernyavskiy and F. P. Crishakov for
discussion of the material and assistance.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Byshev, V. I. and Snopkov, V. 6., "Role of Synoptic Disturbances in Variabil-
ity of Hydrological Conditions in the Ocean," OKEANOLOCIYA (Oceanology), Vol
20, No 6, 1980.

2. Kendel, M., RANGOVAYA KORRELYATSIYA (Rank Correlation), Moscow. Statistika,
1975.

3. Kutslo, A. A., "Seasonal Changes in Circulation in the North Atlantic." IZV.
AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences:
Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 7, No 3. 1971.

4. Kutalo, A. A., "Hesoscale Disturbances in the Ocean," HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDRO-
LOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology). No 10, 1975.

5. Kutalo, A. A., "Horizontal Circulation of the Baroclinic Layer and Westerly
Boundary Currents in the Ocean," OKEANOGRAFICHBSKIYB ISSLBDOVANIYA (Oceano-

graphic Investigations), Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio, No 25, 1977.

6. Kutalo. A. A.. "Hydrodynamic Basis of Stability of Vertical Structures of the
Baroclinic Layer in the Ocean," TRUDY GIDROHETTSBNTRA SSSR (Transactions of
the USSR Hydrometeorological Center). No 200, 1978.

7. Kutalo, A. A. and Hakarov, S. 5., "Intraannual Variability of the Vertical
Structure of the Baroclinic Layer in the Ocean," TRUDY GIDROMETTSEHTRA SSSR,

No 182. 1976.

38

FOI‘OFHKJAI.U8E(NNLY
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Kutalo, A. A. and Grishakov. F. P., "Features of Hesoscale Horizontal Cir-
culation of waters in the western Part of the Sargasso Sea," TRUDY GIDRONET=
TSENTRA SSSR. No 221 [year not given].

Kutalo, A. A. and Chernyavskiy. Ye. 8.. "Nesoscale Structures of Hydrolog-
ical Fields in the Southwestern Part of the Sargasso Sea and Planetary Haves,‘
TRUDY CIDROHETTSENTRA SSSR, No 229. 1980.

Kutalo, A. A., "Some Features of Hater Circulation in the North Atlantic."
HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 2, 1980.

Lineykin, P. S. and Katalo, A. A., "Dynamics of Currents in the North Atlantic
and Their Seasonal Changes." IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKEANA, Vbl 10,
No 4. 1974.

Maderich, V. 8., "Partial Solution of the Nonstationary Equation of Density
Transport." TRUDY GIDRONETTSENTRA SSSR, No 161, 1975.

White. H. 3., "Annual Forcing of Baroclinic Long Waves in the Tropical North
Pacific Ocean." J. PHYS. OCEAN.. Vol 7, No 1, 1977.

39
FKHIIJFFICLAI.IISII(MNLY
I'Vn vs ray”... gun. vetoes

UDC 551.466.75(261)

VERTICAL COHERENCE 0F TIDAL SEMIDIURNAL CURRENTS IN HYDROPHYSICAL POLYGON-70 IN
ATLANTIC OCEAN

Moscow METEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
2 Apr 81) PP 78-81

[Article by V. N. Bol'shakov. candidate of geographical sciences, s. K. Gulev and
A. S. Matygin, All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydrometeorological In-
formation — world Data Center. State Oceanographic Institute and Odessa Hydro-
meteorological Institute]

[Text] Abstract: On the basis of data from the process-
ing of more than a million measurements of the
current vector and investigations of the depend-
ence of the coherence of semidiurnal currents on
the spacing of instruments along the vertical it
was established that the semidiurnal currents
above and below the density jump layer are inde-
pendent. Below the horizon 200 m in the layer of
smooth changes in the Vlisﬁll frequency the esti-
mate of the scale of vertical coherence was 900 m.

An analysis of the coherence of fluctuations of oceanographic characteristics at
different pairs of points is the simplest possibility for obtaining some idea
concerning spatial field structure. In this article we examine the vertical co-
herence (coherence between data from instruments spaced along one vertical) of
currents at a semidiurnal frequency -- one of the most conspicuous frequencies
in the general variability of the ocean.

Observations. In this study in computing coherence values we used data from vir-
tually all observations made in the course of the half-year experiment POLYGON-70
[2] at the standard horizons 25, 50. 100. 200, 300, 400. 500, 600, 800, 1000, 1200
and 1500 m at each of 17 points -- a total of more than 1.1 million measurements
of the current vector with a discreteness of 30 minutes.*

a

The observations at the horizons 800 and 1200 m were continued only 1-1 1/2
months. The coherence values computed on the basis of series of observations at
these horizons had a number of degrees of freedom sharply different from the mean
and are not examined in the article, although qualitatively they do not change
the results.

60
FOR‘OFFKJALIAEB(M‘LY
Method. The initial vector series were subjected component-by-component to low-
frequency filtering by means of moving averaging of data for 2.5 hours. By suc-
cessive sampling of each fourth term in the filtered series we formed series with
a discreteness of 2 hours, entirely adequate for investigating the semidiurnal
fluctuations. The new series were broken down into short, 2.5-day segments. This
made it possible to postulate stationarity within each of them such as is neces-
sary for the correct application of spectral analysis. In order to compensate the
inhomogeneity in the intensity of vertical fluctuations associated with density
stratification and then validly average coherence in the case of an identical
spacing of instruments in different depth ranges, the smoothed segments of observ-
ations prior to cross-spectral analysis were normalized in accordance with [8]:

l I: } = { f, IIN(:).=N.I-'I=. (1)

Here u. v are the initial and u‘. v* are the normalized latitudinal and meridional
components of the current vector; N(z) is the mean Vlisala frequency for the poly-
gon at a particular horizon, and N is a standard frequency equal to 3 cycles/
hour and close to the mean weighteg Vﬁisﬁli frequency in the layer from the sur-
face to the bottom in the open ocean.

A cross-spectral analysis of current fluctuations for each pair of horizons at each
station was carried out for all those 2.5-day time intervals for which there were
simultaneous observations and in which there were no shiftings of the positions of
buoy stations. Twenty-nine such segments on the average were selected for each pair
of horizons.

I I o I ”III! cycles/hour

 

Fig. 1. Coherence of fluctuations of semidiurnal currents at adjacent horizons (l).
95% confidence level of zero true coherence (2): vertical distribution of Vlisila
frequency for mean hydrological conditions in polygon (3).

The evaluations of the cross-spectra at the semidiurnal frequency were averaged
and then were used for computing the full vertical coherence of current fluctua-
tions at the horizons zt and z: in accordance with formula (2) from [a]

E. )+? -)~L'.:z)+5 up)F
HURI): I (1:11 c-(IM I IV ( :1" v I . (2)
If. (:n + S'mnniun 4 am,"

Here Eu(zizj), Ev(zizj) are the real and 6h(7121) and 6v(ziz ) are the imaginary
parts of the cross-spectrum of identical u or v components 0 the current vector;
5 and S are the autospectra of these components at these same horizons. The line

v
ag top denotes the averaging of the spectral characteristics, computed for 2.5-day

#1

FOR OIIICIAI.IEHBCNVLV
Fig. 2. Coherence of fluctuations of semidiurnal currents between any pair of hor-
izons. Above main diagonal -- absolute coherence value, below diagonal -- related
to 952 confidence level of zero coherence. The regions where coherence differs
significantly from zero are shaded.

Formula (2) is also suitable and was used in computing the coherence of individual
components: in the computation of coherence of the latitudinal components in (2)
we omitted the spectral characteristics, also related to the meridional components,
and vice versa.

The evaluation of the significance of the determined coherence values was accom-
plished by their comparison with the 95! confidence level for a zero true coher-
ence [7]. In determining such levels for the coherence of individual components
the number of independent averagings was assumed to be equal to the number of 2.5-
day segments participating in the averaging. For total coherence the number of in-
dependent averagings with this same number of segments was assumed to be greater
by a factor of 1.35.

This value follows from the formulas for the effective number of degrees of free-
dom contained in [S] on the assumption that the coherence among the components on
the average is equal to 0.5. An increase in the number of degrees of freedom for
evaluating the total coherence in comparison with the evaluations of coherence of
individual components reflects the greater information yield of the evaluation
computed on the basis of two components. We note, however, that this information
yield Is not doubled due to partial dependence of current vector components.

Results. The vertical coherence values computed in the manner described above
were averaged for all stations in the polygon for each of the 45 possible instru-
ment spacings at 10 horizons. The coherence values for spacings including only
adjacent horizons are shown in Fig. l. The lowest coherence was noted between

the horizons 50 and 100 m, but for them it was higher than the 95! confidence
level of the zero true coherence.

62

I‘lltlﬂﬂCUULllli(lVlY
The matrix in Fig. 2 above the main diagonal contains the mean coherence values
between each pair of horizons. Below the main diagonal we see the ratios of these
coherence values to the 95% confidence level of the true zero coherence with the
same number of degrees of freedom. The values of the ratios greater than unity
show between what horizons the coherence values differ significantly from zero.
It can be seen that the semidiurnsl currents at the horizons 25 and 50 m, lying
above the density jump layer. are significantly coherent only with the currents
at adjacent horizons. Below the density jump layer the currents are coherent at
several horizons. The small excesses of coherence values for the pairs of hori-
zons 50-500 and 50-1500 m over the 95: confidence level of zero coherence can be
attributed to the fact that near these horizons we find the theoretical maxima
of the horizontal velocity of semidiurnal currents in the third mode of internal
tides. which, according to [5]. predominated in the neighborhood of the polygon.

The absence of a significant correlation of currents through the pycnocline indi-
cates a considerable contribution of the baroclinic component to the semidiurnal
currents since a barotropic tide must not react to the density stratification of
ocean waters.

In connection with what has been stated above, the problem of the scale of vertical
coherence, which we determined as the maximum vertical spacing of instruments with
which the observed semidiurnal current variations are still coherent. should he
raised only with respect to the layer below the horizon 200 m where there are no
marked changes in the Viiséli frequency. This problem was solved in the following
way: on the basis of observations at all 17 stations we determined the mean co-
herence for each of the possible (from 100 to 1300 m) vertical spacings in the
layer 200-1500 m; the dependence of coherence H on instrument spacing A z was ap-
proximated by an exponental function in the form

1'! = ae' " + C. (3)

Then in accordance with the mean number of degrees of freedom of the coherence val-
ue for each spacing we determined the 95% confidence level of the zero true coher-

ence. The spacing corresponding to the intersection of the approximating curve and

confidence level must be regarded as the vertical coherence scale.

Such scales were obtained both for the total coherence “u+v (Fig. 3a) and for the
coherence of the individual components ﬂu and RV (Fig. 3b). The corresponding ap-
proximating expressions are:

Hui.” = 0,630 e-=H + 0,257,
1'], =1 0.522:"-" + 0.259.

H, = 0.522 e'“ ' + 0,352.

The standard deviations of coherence values from the approximating curves do not
exceed 0.04.

The mean scale of total vertical coherence obtained in this way is equal to approx-
imately 900 m (Fig. 3a). which considerably exceeds the value 300 m determined from

an 11-day observation segment only at the 9 central points of the polygon [3].

43

UOR'OFFKJA1.US£(MVLY
I’UK UH‘ICIAI. LIN: ONLY

    

"o m m m no mo .41.-

Fig. 3. Dependence of total coherence of fluctuations of semidiurnal currents (a)
and coherence values for individual components (b) on vertical spacing. 1, 2, 3)
total coherence and coherence of meridional and latitudinal conponents of currents
respectively in layer 200-1500 In. 4) total coherence of current fluctuations for
pairs of horizons with participation of horizons 25 and 50 n, 5) 95! confidence
level of zero coherence.

We note in conclusion the higher coherence for the v component in comparison with
the coherence for the u component, a fact which is easily confirmed graphically
(Fig. 3b), and the considerable difference in the coherence scales: more than 1300
and 600 m respectively. This fact supports the idea of a predominant direction of
propagation of internal tides along the meridian [2. 5].

Thus. the principal result obtained in the article can be sumrized as follows:
the semidiurnal currents at horizons separated by the pycnocline are poorly re-
lated to one another already at distances of 100 m. whereas below the pycnocline
these currents are coherent at points separated vertically by distances up to
900 m.

BI BLIOGRAPHY

l. Bol'shakov, V. N. and Pilonov, A. Ye., "Fluctuations of Currents of a Semidi-
urnsl Period in Hydrophysical POLYCON-70 in the Atlantic Ocean," TRUDY VNIIGHI-
HTsD (Transactions of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydro-
meteorological Information-world Data Center), No 80, 1980.

2. Kort. V. G. and Neyman, V. 6.. "Atlantic Hydrophysical POLYGON-70," ATLANTIC!!-
BSKIY POLIGON-70 (Atlantic Bydrophysical POLYGON-70), Moscow, Nauka, 1971..

3. Lyashenko, A. F. and Sabinin. K. 0., "Spatial Structure of Internal rides in
Hydrophysical POLYGON-1970 in the Atlantic," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA AMSPERY
I OKEANA (News of the USSR Acadsny of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and
Ocean), Vol 15. No 8. 1979.

Mo

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY .
lo.

5.

Sabinin. K. D., ISSLEDOVANIYE PROSTRANSTVENNO-VREHENNYKH KHARAKTERISTIK
VNUTRBNNIMI VOLN V OKEANE. (HI-:I'ODY I RBZUL'TA'I'Y PROVEDENIYA, OBRABO‘I‘KI I
INTERPRETATSII OKEANICHESKIKH BKSPERIMENTOV) (Investigation of the Spatial-
Temporal Characteristics of Internal Waves in the Ocean. "tethods and Re-
salts of Carrying Out, Processing and Interpretation of Oceanic Experiments).
Author's culinary of dissertation for award of the academic degree of Doctor
of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Moscow. 1978.

Sabinin, K. D. and Shulepov, V. A., "Spatial Characteristics of Senidiurnal
Internal Waves in Hydrophysical POLYGON-70 in Atlantic," OKEANOLOGIYA (Ocean-
ology), Vol XVIII, No 3. 1978.

Bell, 1‘. IL, "Processing Vertical Internal Have Spectra," J. PHYS. OCEANOGR.,
Vol 4, No 4, 1974.

Carter, C. C., Knapp, C. H. and Nuttal. A. H.. "Estimation of the Magnitude-

Squared Coherence Function Via Overlapped Fast Fourier Transform Processing,"
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO ELECTROACOUSTICS, No 10, AU-Zl. 1973.

Garett, C. J. R. and Hunk, EL, "Space-Time Scales of Internal Haves," CEOPHYS.
FLUID DYNAMICS, Vol 3, No 3, 1972.

45
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IUI UI‘I'IKOAI. oar. UNI—t

UDC 551.53l.b

USE OF DATA ON THERMAL INDUSTRIAL EFFLUENT FOR STUDYING DISPERSION 0P POLLUTANTS
IN RIVERS

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
25 May 81) PP 82—87

[Article by V. A. Averkov, N. N. Del'vin and V. V. Pisarev, candidates of technical
sciences. R. L. Struenze, and A. K. Sukhoruchkin. candidate of physical and mathe-

matical sciences. Institute of Applied Geophysics;

[Abstract] A study was made of the possibility of using heated waste water for
studying the dispersion of the pollutants which it carries into rivers. This as-

sentially involved finding a sufficiently simple and reliable correlation between
temperature and the concentration of matter which would be correct for any point
in the mixing flow. An increased temperature is characteristic for the liquid
wastes discharged by many metallurgical. chemical and other indusrries. The rel-
atively pure heated waste waters of thermal and atomic electric power stations
also contain chemical impurities. After examining the theoretical basis for such
an investigation, the authors derive equation (13) which shows that there is a
linear dependence between the heating of the water and the concentration of matter
at each point in the flow. Unfortunately, this equation is inapplicable for prac-
tical purposes due to the complexity of the expression for one of the required
functions. The authors therefore proceed to simplifying assumptions and give the
results of numerical modeling. A simplified expression is obtained for the requir-
ed function. Then a final expression (formula (17)) is obtained for the relation-
ship between the relative concentration of pollutant and water heating. The re-
sults of computations are compared with in situ measurement data obtained on the
Oka River in the neighborhood of entry of heated waters from an electric power
station. As an analogue of the dissolved pollutant use was made of the radioactive
isotope Au193. Measurements of temperature and isotope concentration were made at
four points 0.5, 1.5. 3.0 and 6.0 km distant from the discharge point. Computa-
tions using equation (17) give exaggerated concentrations in comparison with ex-
perimental data. Accordingly. a refined equation (18) is proposed for correcting
this discrepancy. In order to find the concentration C in an arbitrary section of
the heated flow. using equations (17) or (18). it is necessary to measure the in-
itial concentration, the initial heating, heating at the pertinent point and dis—
tance from the point of discharge to the measurement point and ascertain the decay
function. Different variants are examined. Figures 1; references: 7 Russian.

A6
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TEMPERATURE REGIME AND HINTERING OF APPLE TREE

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
26 May 81) pp 88-94

[Article by V. H. Stepanova. candidate of agricultural sciences, and V. I. Mayor-
ova, candidate of biological sciences, All-Union Scientific Research Institute of

Plant Cultivation]

[Abstract] The authors have established temperature criteria for the summer, autumn-
winter and winter-spring periods for determining the successful wintering of dif-
ferent varieties of apples. Such an evaluation of winter-resistance of apples is
extremely complex. Since apples have fluorished in the northwestern part of the
nonchernozem zone in the RSPSR, the mean long-term temperature of that region was
adopted as the optimum for apples and the conditions of individual winters were
evaluated relative to it. A comparison of the mean long-term rates of development
of apples with the temperature curve led the author to conclude that the following
can be considered the main criteria of winter resistance. 1. Coincidence of the
date of the end of flowering with the transition of air temperature through lS'C.
2. Duration of the period with an air temperature above 15°C. It is important that
this temperature last a definite time, 70-75 days. 3. During autumn the accumula-
tion of reserve substances in different organs and tissues is very important. By
the time of transition of air temperature through 7—5°C the end of the growing sea-
son should begin and the period of temperatures 7-S°C to 0°C should last some 25-
30 days. 4. The final dehydration of the cells, completion of physiological pro-
cesses in the tree and change in the physicochemical properties of protoplasm oc-
cur with a drop in air temperatures from O'C to -5, -6‘C; this period lasts about
30 days. 5. The absolute temperature minimum is important, since it governs the
range for planting and productivity of different species. All these criteria were
tested against conditions and productivities for the years 1974-1978. This study
revealed which varieties are most winter-resistant under differing conditions.
Figures 2, tables 3: references: 6 Russian.

67
FOR‘OF11CIAL USE()NIX
rvn Ufl‘lLIAL val. un‘ul

UDC 556.531.6+556.535.8

COMPUTING CONCENTRATION OF ATMOSPHERIC FALLOUT IN HATER BODY

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
31 Mar 81) pp 95-97

[Article by V. A. Borzilov, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, and
N. I. Troyanova, Institute of Experimental Meteorology]

[Abstracr] The authors have presented a model for describing the redistribution of
global atmospheric fallout of contaminating substances in a drainage basin-contain-
ing rivers and lakes with a total surface and volume Sq and V. All parameters are
averaged for a year, so that the fluctuations of S" and V associated with the fall-
ing of precipitation and evaporation are neglected. All drainage basin characteris-
tics are considered spatially uniform. asking it possible to compare the results
only with the concentration of contaminating substances in the soil, water and bot-
tom deposits. In examining the processes determining exchange of pollutants between
the atmosphere and these three media it is assumed that some of the fallout onto
the soil surface will relatively rapidly be washed into surface water bodies and
another part will migrate into the depths of the soil, be sorbed there and tend to
be retained. With these and other assumptions, the model can be written as a system
of four equations. The model is illustrated in the example of Sr90. The drainage
basin employed in the calculations was the Moscow basin with an area of about 60 000
kmz. Experimental data and the results of computations of the concentrations of Sr90
in the rivers of the Moscow basin are compared. The model must be regarded as ap-
proximate because it does not establish functional correlations between the charac-
teristic times, meteorological parameters and drainage basin characteristics. None-
theless, the use of the model gave results close to data collected in the field.

A similar problem was examined by K. P. Makhon'ko in MBTBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA,
No 8, 1980, but deficiencies in his approach gave inferior results. Figures 2; ref-
erencea: 2 Russian.

#8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 556.535.6

DETERMINING RATE OF DEVELOPMENT OF MORPHOLOGICAL FORMATIONS IN RIVER CHANNELS
USING INDIRECT CRITERIA

Moscow MBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
13 Apr 81) pp 97-99

[Article by A. A. Levashov, candidate of geographical sciences, Leningrad Hydro-
meteorological Institute]

[Abstract] An example is given of methods for investigating the channel process,
including a morphological survey, which involves the use of indirect criteria.
This is illustrated in the study of a beach along the Ta: River, where the auth-
or interpreted the rate of its growth in the complete absence of photographs,
charts or other archival data, that is. exclusively using data from one-time in—
vestigations of traces left by former positions of the downstream beach bar. The
study was carried out in 1980 on a river meander; the beach was about 1700 m long;
its greatest width was 155 m. Complete details are given concerning its struc—
ture and the seasonal and annual events leading to changes in its configuration.
For example, it is shown how, on the basis of the number of layers, it is pos-
sible to date curvatures in the beach shoreline from the direction of the water-
course flowing into the river behind the beach. This makes it possible, measuring
the length of built-up sectors, to evaluate the rate of increment of the bar dur-
ing the year. The presence of willow and different species of scrub on the beach
is also helpful in interpreting the history of its formation. In this way it was
possible to determine the rate of bar augmentation during the period from 1973
through 1980. Also on the basis of the difference in the widths of the annual in-
crements it is possible to ascertain the annual growth of the beach bar in width.
By this method the age of the beach could be set at 19 years. A determination of
the number and thickness of layers of deposits, on the other hand, gave an esti-
mate of 23 years (but this discrepancy is resolved). Use of such indirect criteria
as shoreline curves, stratification of deposits and age of vegetation nuke it pos-
sible to study channel deformations and determine the age of shore floodplain sec-
tors when no other research data are available. Figures 1, tables 2; references:

1 Russian.

49
FORTOFTWCIAI.USEI(NVLY
I'UK UI' FIL'IAL Us}. ONLY

UDC 631.67:551.571(470.45)

CALCULATING TIMES AND NORHS FOR IRRIGATING AGRICULTURAL CROPS CN BASIS OF
DE" POINT SPREAD

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
9 Feb 81) pp 99-102

[Article by I. N. Taran, candidate of agricultural sciences, and A. H. Gritsayeva,
Volgograd Division, All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Bydroengineering
and Melioration, and Volgograd Hydrometeorological Bureau]

[Abstract] Meteorological indices are being employed with increasing frequency in
order to determine the proper times and norms for the irrigation of agricultural
crops. But experience has shown that these methods have either limited applicabil-
ity or have a low accuracy. This problem is acute in the Lower Volga region, which
has a high evaporability, where even brief delays in irrigation lead to a decrease
in soil moisture condition below the optimum level. this being harmful for the de-
velopment of plants and crop yield. This led the authors to develop a simple method
for determining irrigation times and norms for different moistening levels. The
study was specifically directed to checking of the bioclimatic method for determin-
ing the irrigation times and norms for the conditions prevailing in Volgogradskaya
Oblast during the years 1972-1975, 1977-1979. An effort was made to develop and
analyze the bioclimatic coefficients for different moistening levels as a function
of weather conditions. During the growing season the weather conditions were dif-
ferent in different years: 1972 and 1975 were dry and hot. 1973 was moist and 1976
was average. The coefficients were computed by the A. H. Alpat'yev method. The tem-
perature and dew-point spread for the nearest meteorological station were used. An
analysis of these coefficients revealed a dependence on ambient conditions: temper-
ature and precipitation. In most cases the coefficients increased in the mist
years and decreased in the dry years. The value of the coefficients of the biolog-
ical curve, averaged for a number of years, always was lower than the coefficients
for moist years and higher for the dry years. During rainy periods the coefficients
increased and accordingly curve corrections were required. It is shown that such
corrected curves can be used in computing irrigation times in Volgogradskaya 0b-
1ast. The maximum error in the computed moisture reserves during all the years of
the investigations did not exceed 19 mm (162 of the actual values). Tables 2; ref-
erences: 6 Russian.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 551.5083629.53l.5

HMR-O6-M METEOROLOGICAL ROCKET AND INSTRUMENT COMPLEX FOR MEASURING DENSITY.
TEMPERATURE, WIND AND ELECTRON CONCENTRATION

Moscow MBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
11 Mar 81) pp 103-105

[Article by D. Zaytandzhiyev. H. Gernandt. doctor, A. N. Mel' nikov, I. 0. Neyelov
and S. V. Pakhomov. candidate of technical sciences, Institute of Hydrology and

Meteorology, People's Republic of Bulgaria. Lindenberg Aerological Observatory,

GDR Meteorological Service. and Central Aerological Observatory, USSR State Com-
mittee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring]

[Text] Abstract: The article gives the results of devel—
opment of two variants of the nosecones of the
HMR-06-M small meteorological rocket for meas—
urements of density, temperature and wind by the
falling spheres method and for measurements of
wind using radar dipole reflectors and electron
concentration by the electrostatic probe method.
The work was carried out by Soviet, East German
and Bulgarian specialists under the "Intercosmos"
program. The authors describe the design features
of the instruments used and present design layouts
of the meteorological rocket nosecones.

At the present time the family of Soviet meteorological rockets is being supplement-
ed by the MHR-06-H rocket, which has undergone field tests. It was developed on the
basis of the MMR-Oé meteorological rocket by use of a nosecone of a sweptback con-

figuration of the DART type. It is small in size and mass and can be used in dense-
ly populated regions with a low launching zone [5].

The separation of the nosecone from the rocket engine occurs at the time of ending

of its operation due to the difference in the aerodynamic drag. An aerodynamicslly
stabilized nosecone continues flight to an altitude of 85 km.

In a standard variant the on—board instrumentation of the rocket (sonde) contains a
resistance thermometer or thermistor and a radio block ensuring the transmission of
telemetric information to the earth and radar tracking of the sonde descending by

parachute by means of the "Heteorit—R" radar with an additional device for the re-
ception of telemetric Information [6].

51

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a-.. ~a..~...— -w- ~u..a.a

The program of cooperation of the socialist countries in the field of space meteor-
ology ("Intercosmos") provided for the creation for the HMR—Ob-H rocket of instru-
mentation for measuring the thermodynamic parameters of the atmosphere and wind us-
ing inexpensive passive radar targets -- falling spheres [7] and dipole reflectors
[8]. The problem was also formulated that instrumentation should be developed for
measuring the parameters of the charged component, in particular, the electron con—
centration profile.

In this connection two variants were created for complexes of on-board instrumenta-
tion for the MMR-OG-H rocket. The figure shows layouts of this rocket.

The first variant (figure a) ensures measurement of density, temperature and wind
by the method of radar tracking of a light gas-filled spherical envelope ejected
from the nosecone at the peak of the trajectory. The theoretical principles of the
method and the methods for making measurements and processing data. as well as an-
alyzing accuracy, are set forth in [7].

The spherical envelope with a diameter of 1.5 m is fabricated from a plastic film
with a thickness of lS"_m. In order to ensure radar reflectivity the surface of
the sphere is metallized. The spheres are filled by the evaporation of the working
medium -- isopentane present in a capsule connected to the envelope. The design of
the capsule provides for evacuation of the residual air present in the volume

of the envelope packed in the container during rocket flight and gradual filling
of the envelope with isopentane vapor after its ejection from the rocket. Such a
design prevents the explosive filling of the envelope and its bursting. The packed
envelope 3, together with the capsule 2, is placed in a container of cylindrical
configuration k consisting of two flaps held together by an annular retainer 1.
After ejection the container flaps are opened under the influence of internal
springs, setting free the envelope and at the same time bringing into operation
the mechanism for the opening of the capsule.

In order to ensure radar tracking of the rocket nosecone on the ascending segment
of the trajectory the on-board instrumentation includes a radar responder 5, oper-
ating with the "Meteorit-R" radar, rigidly coupled to the nosecone housing by an
elastic line. Such a design ensures a smooth separation of the envelope from the
container and prevents impact of the container against the opening envelope.

Instead of the standard pyrotechnic system for ejecting the payload a pneumatic de-
vice 6 has been developed for the HMR-OG-H rocket. This precludes damage to the
envelope by hot powder gases of the pyrotechnic shell and reduces accelerations
during ejection. It contains two cylinders with 002 in a volume of S cm3 under a
pressure of 60 atm. The cylinders are opened by a command sent by the timing de-
vice 7 which is triggered at the time of rocket launching.

This variant of the payload ensures the collection of data on the air temperature
and density from the peak of the rocket trajectory to an altitude of 35-37 km
where the internal pressure in the envelope becomes equal to the atmospheric pres-
sure and the envelope loses its spherical configuration. Wind velocity and direc-
tion to the earth can be measured.

52

F03¢MﬂﬂC1Al.USE(NVLY
The second variant of the instrumenta-
tion (figure b) is used in measuring the
wind by means of radar dipoles and the
electron concentration profile employing
a d-c probe. This complex is especially
important for carrying out investigations
of processes during the period of the win-
ter anomaly in the ionospheric D region
-.. when the greatest variations are exhibit-
ed by the charged component under the in-
fluence of dynamic processes in the upper
atmosphere.

J 71'

The wind sensor used consisted of flat di-
poles fabricated from aluminum foil with a
thickness of 6p.m. As was indicated in

[2], such dipoles. by virtue of the char-

acteristics of aerodynamics. have a small
vertical velocity at great heights and a

high velocity relative to dipoles of other
types at low altitudes. This makes it pos-
sible to obtain information on the wind in
the altitude range 85-30 km with a mean
square error not exceeding 10 m/sec. The
dipoles are placed in three containers
joined together in the magazine 8. After
ejection from the rocket the containers
are opened under the influence of ribbed
springs and the dipoles form a radio-rer
fleeting cloud drifting with the wind.

The trajectory elements of the cloud form-
ed by the dipoles are measured by radar
for subsequent computation of the wind.

   

A sonde [1] was used for measuring the
Layout diagrams of HHR—Oé-H meteorolog- electron concentration. It consists of a
ical rocket. spherical collector 9. guard electrode

10 and an electronic unit 11. The collec-

tor is under a constant potential equal to
+4 V relative to the sonde housing. The potential of the guard electrode, insulated
from the housing and collector, is equal to the collector potential; it is used in
evening—out the electric field in the neighborhood of the collector. The collector
current produced by the free electrons of ionospheric plasma collected by the col-
lector is amplified by electrometric amplifiers with a dynamic range from 10‘9 to
5-10'7 A. which corresponds to measurements in the altitude range 55-85 km. The am-
plifier with a current source and a circuit for shaping calibration signals is
placed in an electronic unit 11. The signals are fed from the electronic unit
through an electronic commutator to the input of the radio unit 12, which does not
in principle differ from that described in [6) and ensuring the transmission of

telemetric information and radar tracking of the nosecone by means of the "Heteorit"

53

FIH!(“WWCJAL USE!)NLN
I Ul‘ \II I 18.6.: V0.- Vo‘kl

e

radar. The pneumatic ejection unit and the command mechanism are similar to those
used in the first variant. The radio unit is integrated with the body of the sonde
electronic unit; in the measurement segment (85-60 km) the in-flight sonde retains
a predominantly vertical orientation.

For converting the measured sonde current parameters into electron concentrations
use is made of the calibration expressions obtained at the time of simultaneous
launchinga of rockets with sondes and coherent-frequency transmitters [3]. The
conversion factor increases linearly from a value 9.2-109 electrons cm'1 A'1 at 55
km to 1.3.1010 electrons cm'3 A"1 at 85 km [A].

In this system the collector can be replaced. for example, by an aspiration appar-
atus for measuring the concentration and mobility of ions [1].

The described instrument complexes were successfully tested at Volgograd in 1980.

The authors express appreciation to Yu. V. Vasil'yev and V. D. Grinchenko for great
assistance in preparing the experiments.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Borisov, A. I., Kikhtcnko. V. N. and Pakhomov. S. V., "Preliminary Results of
an Investigation of the Vertical Distribution of the Charged Component in the
Upper Atmosphere," TRUDY TsAO (Transactions of the Central Aerological Observ-
atory), No 144. 1981.

2. Gaytandzhiyev, D., "Hind Measurement by Means of New Radar Reflectors," TRUDY II
MBZHDUNARODNOGO SIMPOZIUMA P0 KOSMICHESKOY METEOROLOGII (Transactions of the
Second International Symposium on Space Meteorology), Moscow. Gidrometeoizdat.

1978.

3. Clotov. A. P., Pakhomov. S. V., Slnel'nikov. V. M. and Culyayeva. T. L.. "Phase
Doppler Method for Measuring the Vertical Profile of Electron Concentration in
the Lower Ionosphere Using Geophysical Rockets," ISSLEDOVANIYE STRUKTURY I
VOLNOVYKH SVOYSTV OKOLOZEMNOY PLAZMY (Investigation of the Structure and Have
Properties of Circumterrestrial Plasma), Moscow, Izd-vo AN SSSR, 1980.

b. Glotov, A. P., Pakhomov, S. V. and Sinel'nikov, V. M., "Experimental Determina-
tion of Calibration Expressions for Measuring the Electron Concentration by the
d-c Probe Method." TRUDY TsAO, No 152 (in press).

5. Grytskiv. I. V.I Khvostov, V. G. and Shidlovskiy, A. A., "Problems in the De-
signing and Testing of the MMR-O6—DART Network Meteorological Rocket." TRUDY II
MEZHDUNARODNOGO SIMPOZIUHA P0 KOSHICHBSKOY HETBOROLOGII, Moscow. Gidrometeoiz-
dat. 1978.

6. Grytskiv, I. V., Markov. G. F.. Romanenko. N. T., Yermakov. V. I. and Chernova,

G. 6., "On-Board and Control-Checking Instrumentation for the MMR-06-DART Meteor-

ological Rocket." TRUDY II MEZHDUNARODNOGO SIMPOZIUMA P0 KOSMICHESKOY METEORO-
LOGII, Moscow, Gidrometeoizdat, 1978.

54
FKHRCNHWCIA1.USE(NVLY
7. Dyubua, P.. Mel'nikov. A. N., Pskhouov, S. V. and Pinskiy, M. 3., "Some Results
of Development of a Method for Measuring Density and Temperature Using Falling
Spheres," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROUJGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No lo, 1979.

8. _ Pskhomov, S. V., "Radar Measurements of Hind in the Mesosphere," METEOROLOGIYA
I GIDROLOGIYA, No 3. 1969.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A ten! VI 0 even-- u.“— was...

UDC 551.508.90

PROTECTION OF HYDROHETEOROLOGICAL INSTRUMENTATION AGAINST INFLUENCE OF AMBIENT
CONDITIONS

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
26 May 81) pp 105-108.

[Article by I. H. Shenderovich, candidate of technical sciences, Scientific Research
Institute of Instrument Making]

[Text] Abstract: The article gives an analysis of
the development of means for protecting hy-
droneteorological instrumentation against the
influence of ambient factors and examines the
present-day status of the testing facilities
used in checking the quality of the methods
and instruments employed.

Purpose and methods. An increase in the quality of apparatus and the effectiveness
of its use applicable to hydrometeorological instrumentation (8M1) is very closely
related to the problem of ensuring the reliability of operation of HHI under the
diversified and complex conditions of its use. According to the USSR State Standard
[3], reliability is defined as "the property of an apparatus to perform stipulated
functions, retaining its operational indices within set limits during a required
time interval or the required lifetime." In particular, the performance of the hy-
drometeorological instrumentation used for obtaining quantitative estimates of the
physical characteristics of different processes and phenomena developing in the
earth's atmosphere and hydrosphere is essentially dependent both on the conditions
of the operative ambient factors and on the operating regime of this instrumenta-

tion.

Assurance of a high level of reliability of HMI is obtained in all stages in crea-
tion of the instrumentation - during its development, fabrication and in the pro-
cess of its use. An increase in reliability may involve both the use of new, more
reliable elements forming part of the HM! and the use of progressive solutions and
schematic diagrams, as well as use of different protective schemes involving the
creation of such work conditions and operating regimes with which there is a lessen-
ing of the intensity of the transpiring of physicochemical processes in the elements
of the instrumentation exerting an influence on the quality of the EMI.

S6

FOR'OFTTCLALIISEfﬂNLY
The prorective devices employed for hydrometeorological instrumentation. shield-
ing them from the modifying factors in the environment, differ with respect to
their purpose and their design characteristics. In a broad sense the term "pro-
tection" can be understood not only as the total exclusion of the influence of
the modifying factor, but also as a decrease in this influence to a level accept-
able for practical purposes or allowance for this factor when making observations
and during the subsequent processing of the results.

Under real conditions of operation, storage and transporting of hydrometeorolog-
ical instrumentation the individual parts. components and assemblies of hydro-
meteorological instrumentation as a whole are acted upon by a great many forces
and processes causing different undesirable phenomena and leading to a decrease
in the reliability of the hydrometeorological information. These forces and pro-
cesses are usually called modifying factors which are determined by the conditions
in the medium surrounding the instrumentation, use regime, as well as the quality
of the circuitry, design and technological solutions adopted for the instrumenta—
tion in the stage of its development and manufacture. The effect of these factors
can be manifested in a change in the metrological characteristics of the hydro-
meteorological instrumentation, reliability indices, technical parameters, decor-
ative qualities and other properties of the apparatus.

In an analysis of the possible results of the effect of ambient factors it is also
necessary to take into account the duration of operation, storage and transport of
hydrometeorological instrumentation because the operating quality of the instru—
mentation deteriorates as time passes.

In a general case in order to ascertain the principal functional correlations be-
tween the values of the technical parameters of the hydrometeorological instru-
mentation and the magnitude of the modifying factors it is necessary to carry out
an analysis which contains three principal investigation stages [9]:

l) the stage of analysis of the principal characteristics of the modifying factors
(their origin, intensity and duration, type of energy transmitted during the oper-
ation of hydrometeorological information units and components);

2) the stage of analysis of physicochemical processes transpiring in hydrometeoro-
logical instrumentation under the influence of external factors (deformations of
materials, changes in technical specifications, etc.);

3) the stage of analysis of the maximum admissible changes in characteristics of
hydrometeorological instrumentation, the exceeding of whose level leads to a de—
terioration of the technical specifications of the instrumentation (metrological,
accuracy, reliability indices, etc.).

In the first stage of the analysis it is necessary to examine the entire complex
of factors exerting an influence on the instrumentation, which in a general case
is usually subdivided into two groups [1]:

-- external (or objective) factors, caused by the influence of the environment,
conditions and regime for operation of the apparatus. and

-- internal (or subjective) factors caused by the human element in the process of
designing, fabrication and operation of hydrometeorological instrumentation.

The effect of factors in the first group is manifested in the process of opera-
tion of the hydrometeorological instrumentation without regard to man's wishes.
However, the result of this effect can be foreseen for the purpose of undertaking

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

appropriate measures directed to a decrease in its influence.

The manifestation of second-group factors is dependent on human actions: the cor-

rectness of choice of design and construction solutions in the course of develop-

ment of instrumentation, adherence to technological standards in its manufacture,

organization of technical servicing during the period of storage and operation of

the hydrometeorological instrumentation, and timeliness in carrying out prescribed
adjustment work and repair.

The external factors in turn can be subdivided into natural factors caused by the
influence of the environment and factors dependent on the stipulated regimes of
operation, storage and transport of hydrometeorological instruments and the in-
fluence of other technical (artificial) factors. '

Among the external factors exerting an influence on the performance of hydrometeor-
ological instrumentation the greatest influence is exerted by climatic factors [2].

Depending on the classification criterion adopted in the analysis, the influencing
factors can also be subdivided into controllable and uncontrollable [10], revers-
ible and irreversible [9], brief and prolonged, informative and noninformative [4],
etc.

The second stage in the analysis is an investigation of the physicochemical pro-
cesses transpiring in the hydrometeorological instrumentation under the influence
of external factors. It shows that these processes can be reduced to three prin-
cipal groups:

-- a group of processes changing the mechanical characteristics;

-- a group of processes changing the electrical characteristics;

-- a group of processes causing corrosion and a change in the state of surfaces.

This circumstance makes it possible, first of all, to reduce substantially the
number of types of protection since there is no need to develop individual tech-
nical means of protection for each influencing factor, and second, affords a pos-
sibility for defining those fundamental methods which can serve as a basis for their
development.

In a general case it is possible to use the following methods for creating tech-
nical protection devices: computation method, compensation method, insulation meth-
od and strength method.

The computation method is used in a case when the nature of the influence of the
modifying factors on some output signal or technical parameter of the hydrometeor-
ological instrumentation, determined in advance by theoretical or experimental in-
vestigations, can be taken into account in the processing of the readings of the
hydrometeorological instrumentation. Accordingly, in the case of use of the comput-
ation method for taking into account the influence of the influencing factor it is
necessary to carry out measurements of the parameters characterising this factor.
Unfortunately, as already noted, the quantitative dependences between the para-
meters of the hydrometeorological instrumentation and the magnitude of the influenc-
ing factor were determined sufficiently unambiguously only in some special cases.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
For this reason the computation method is used for the most part when there is
an influence of ambient temperature, and less frequently, when an influence is
exerted by atmospheric and hydrostatic pressure. In the case of measuring instru-
ments an allowance for the influence of the operative factor on the readings of
hydrometeorological instrumentation essentially involves a determination of the
additional error caused by this factor and the introduction of corresponding
corrections into the final measurement result.

The compensation method differs from the computation method in that with a known
character of the correlation between the output signal or parameter of the hydro-
meteorological instrumentation and the influencing factor this correlation is
realized in hydrometeorological instrumentation for an automatic allowance for
the influencing factor. The compensation may be complete (in the entire range of
changes of the influencing factor) or partial. As in the case of the computation
method, the compensation method is used for the most part for protection against
the temperature effect.

The insulation method provides for the use of technical devices enSuring. wherever
it is possible, a full or partial protection of the instrumentation against the
influence of external factors by employing screens, hoods, sealed housings and
different kinds of gaskets or coverings. This method is used for the most part

in the protection of hydrometeorological instrumentation from the influence of
water, solar radiation, air humidity, hydrostatic pressure, dust and sand. biol-
ogical and corrosion factors and other such factors.

The strength method provides for the use of materials, coverings and construction
parts resistant to the action of external factors in hydrometeorological instru-
mentation. Protection of such a type is used in cases of exposure to corrosion
and biological factors, solar radiation, pressure, etc.

Naturally, all four protection methods enumerated above can be used in one appar-
atus bath separately and in any combination with one another.

In the third stage of the analysis a study is made of the admissible changes

in the technical parameters and characteristics of hydrometeorological instrument-
ation under the influence of external factors which can involve both a theoretical
examination of the admissible limits of these changes and an experimental check-
ing of the proposed variants of the protective methods.

Unfortunately, by no means for all cases can there be an adequately complete theor-
etical examination of the results of the effect of external factors and the prin-
cipal criterion for the correctness of development of the means for the protection
of hydrometeorological instrumentation remains experimental investigations carried
out under both laboratory and operational conditions. Although field tests are
used quite extensively in modern practice, in comparison with laboratory investi-
gations they have a number of substantial shortcomings, the most important of
which is the impossibility of monitoring the change in the external influencing
factors and obtaining timely and reliable information on operation of the instru-
mentation [10]. Accordingly. the principal tests whose results are used in making
a decision about the admissibility of standard apparatus are experimental

S9

FOR<0FF1C1AL USEiiNlY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

investigations under laboratory conditions ensuring the possibility of creating
the required levels of influencing factors, maintaining the necessary duration
of the effect and monitoring using certification stands and chambers in studying
the parameters of these factors and the readings of the hydrometeorological in-
strumentation [5]-

Laboratory (factory) checking of the quality of the technical means for protecting
hydrometeorological instrumentation at the present time is usually carried out
successively for each type of influencing or modifying factor using special

stands and in chambers. The numerical values of the characteristics of the exter-
nal factor must correspond to those adopted for the particular design of the appar-
atus and the effect of Others, not checkable in this test, must be of negligible
importance or equal to zero.

It must be noted that these traditional methods for laboratory tests, based on the
successive determination of the influence of each factor on the performance of the
hydrometeorological instrumentation, do not always correspond to real operating
conditions and do not make it possible to obtain a full idea concerning the qual-
ity of the developed protective procedures and devices.

In industry and in scientific investigations during recent years extensive use

has been made of multifactor experiments making it possible to evaluate the nature
of the simultaneous effect of several factors on the tested system [6, 8]. However,
investigations of this type in actuality are not used in laboratory tests of hy—
drometeorological instrumentation. This is attributable primarily to the fact

that until now no experimental base has been created making it possible under labor—
atory conditions to study the effect exerted on the performance of hydrometeoro-
logical instrumentation by several simultaneously operative factors. The neces-
sity for carrying out such tests is confirmed by the circumstance that at the pres-
ent time we do not know the reliable character of behavior of hydrometeorological
instrumentation under real conditions with combined exposure to a number of
meteorological factors since under laboratory conditions it is very difficult to
reproduce these effects. Among such multifactor tests we must first of all include
investigations of the simultaneous influence of solar radiation and air tempera-
ture. wind velocity and air temperature, precipitation and air temperature, precip-
itation and wind velocity.

The creation and use of combined-purpose test stands (or chambers) sufficiently
fully modeling operational conditions is a complex technical problem which can be
solved only with the participation of specialists in different areas of special-
ization. In addition, taking into account the uniqueness of such instrumentation,
it is necessary to organize a departmental key center for carrying out multisided,
including national. tests of means for measuring hydrometeorological parameters

In the atmosphere.

In conclusion it must be emphasized once again that the range of problems related
to the development of means for protecting hydrometeorological instrumentation
from the effect of external factors constitutes a serious scientific-technical
and organizational problem whose solution will ensure creation of reliable and

high-quality apparatus and effective collection of hydrometeorological informa-
tion.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1

2.

9.

10.

Bulovskiy, P. I. and Zaydenberg, N. 0., NADEZHNOST' PRIBOROV SISTB! UPRAVLENIYA:
SPRAVOCHNOYE POSOBIYE (Reliability of Control System Instruments: Reference

Manual), Leningrad, Mashinostroyeniye, 1975.

0081' 16350-70. EMT SSSR. RAYONIROVANIYE I KHARAKTERISTIKI KLIIMATICRESKIKH
PARAMETROV DLYA PROMYSHLENNYKH IZDELIY (State Standard 16350-70. USSR Climate.

Regionalization and Characteristics of Climatic Parameters for Industrial Ap-
paratus) , Moscow, 1973.

6081' 13377-75. NADEZHNOST' V TEKHNIKE. TEMINY (Reliability in Engineering.
Terms), Moscow, 1975.

6081' 8009—72. NORHIRUYEHYYE METROLOGICHESKIYE KHARAKTERISTIKI SREDSTV IZMER-

ENIYA (Normalized Metrological Characteristics of Measurement Apparatus),
Moscow, 1976.

COST 8001-71. ORGANIZATSIYA I PORYADOK PROVEDBNIYA GOSUDARS‘NENMYKM ISPYTANIY
SREDSTV IZMERBNIY (Organization and Sequence for Carrying Out State Tests
of Measurement Apparatus), Moscow. 1972.

Daniel, K., PRIMBNENIYE STATISTIKI V PROMYSHLENNOM EKSPERIMENTE (Use of Stat-
istics in an Industrial Experiment), Moscow, Mir, 1979.

Frolov, A. 0., TEORETICHESKIYE OSNOVY KONSTRUKTIROVANIYA I NADEZHNOSTI RADIO-
ELEKTRONNOY APPARATURY (Theoretical Principles of Designing and Reliability
of Radioelectronic Apparatus), Moscow, Vysshaya Shkola, 1970.

Hicks, Ch., OSNOVNYYE PRINTSIPY PLANIROVANIYA EKSPERIHENTOV (Fundamental Prin-
ciples of Planning Experiments), Moscow, Mir, 1967.

Shmidt, E. P., NATURNYYE ISPYTANIYA ELEKTROMNYKH PRIBOROV (Field Tests of El-
ectronic Instruments), Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio, 1976.

Yastrebenetskiy, M. A. and Solyanik, B. L., OPREDELENIYB NADEZHNOSTI APPAR-
ATURY PROHYSHLENNOY AVTOMATIKI V USLOVIYAKH EKSPLUATATSII (Determination of

Reliability of Automatic Industrial Equipment Under Operating Conditions).
Moscow, Energiya, 1968.

61
FOR 0F11CLA1.USE|)NLY
m'vn v. m swans. Uvu so. onus

UDC 551.501.816
USE OF LASERS IN HYDROHBTEOROIDGICAL RESEARCH

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
24 Apr 81) PP 109-116

[Article by V. M. Zakharov, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, Central
Aerological Observatory]

[Text] Abstract: This article gives a review of the
most important results of use of lasers in
hydrometeorological research: optical and
microphysical parameters of atmospheric aero-
sol; gas composition of atmosphere; standard
meteorological parameters; microstructure,
dynamics of generation and development of
clouds and fogs, as well as the effect of
their artificial modification; petroleum
products on the water surface; parameters
of sea waves. The author notes promising
directions in the use of laser research
methods, including from artificial earth
satellites, as well as the most promising
types of lasers for these investigations.

Introduction. Investigations of the atmosphere with the use of lasers began in the
1960's. Initially these were very simple laser sounding devices employing relative-
ly low-power pulsed ruby and neodymium lasers and they were intended for the most
part for investigation of cloud and fog aerosols.

The fields of application of lasers for hydrometeorological investigations have
considerably expanded. we will examine some of them:

-- determination of the optical and microphysical parameters of atmospheric aero-
sol;

-- study of the gas composition and gas contaminants of the atmosphere:

-- remote measurements of standard meteorological parameters in the atmosphere;
- investigation of microstructure, dynamics of generation and development of
clouds and fogs, and also the effect of their artificial modification;

-- detection and identification of petroleum products on water surface;

-- measurement of sea surface parameters (characteristics of waves), etc.

62

INIRCHNNCIAI.U§EIINLN
For solution of these problems use is made of different effects of interaction of
laser radiation with the investigated medium [12, 14, 16].

Aerosol

The aerosol scattering effect is virtually always observed during the propagation
of laser radiation in the atmosphere. This is one of the most intense interaction
processes. The relative simplicity of the laser apparatus employed in studying
this effect already in the mid-1960's made it possible to begin investigations of
tropospheric and stratospheric aerosol. The principal complexities arising in this
case include ascertaining unambiguous correlations between the parameters of the
backscattered signal, the optical characteristics of the atmosphere and aerosol
parameters. A significant role here is played by numerous methodological problems.
whose solution makes possible a correct interpretation of data from laser sounding
of the atmosphere.

The authors of [12] proposed a method developed at the Central Aerological Observ-
atory making it possible to reconstruct the profile of the backseattering index
without a priori assumptions concerning the optical properties of the atmosphere.
The data from single-frequency sounding of the atmosphere obtained on the basis
of this method confirmed the global nature of the stratospheric layer of aerosols
and demonstrated that the assumption made earlier concerning nonturbidity of the
atmosphere is not applicable at an altitude of 30 km and confirmed the presence
of an intensive layer of aerosol particles at altitudes of 60-45 km, which agrees
with data on the aerosol stratification of the stratosphere obtained as a result
of twilight and satellite observations.

At first the operational laser sounding of the stratosphere to an altitude of 50
km was in sessions which made it possible to observe a rapid variability of the
altitude and intensity of the aerosol layers in the stratosphere during the course
of two-hour changes.

The experiments also indicated considerable spatial and temporal variations of
backseattering to altitudes of about 20 km. Above 20 km the aerosol stratifica-
tion of the atmosphere was more stable.

The enumerated results also constitute information on atmospheric aerosol which
cannot be obtained without the use of laser apparatus. This information is of
great importance not only for atmospheric optics, but also for determining the
role of atmospheric aerosol in changes of the radiation balance in the atmosphere.
It therefore follows that these observations are important for investigations of
possible climatic changes.

Somewhat later lasers came into use in experiments for studying atmospheric aero-
sol of anthropogenic origin. These experiments included. for example, determination
of mass concentrations of aerosols in the plumes of industrial enterprises, the
distribution of aerosols at industrial centers. etc. [12, 17).

63
FI”!(HWH(1A1.USE(NVLY
I’Vll wrauuu. var. \u nu

Gas Composition

In investigations of the gas composition of the atmosphere it is customary to em-
ploy methods for sampling the air involving its drawing into a cell and its subse-
quent spectral analysis, as well as different remote methods for analysis with use
of laser sounding.

The methods of IR absorption spectroscopy [16] have come into the widest use for a
quantitative analysis of impurities in the sample. The use of ordinary IR spectro-
meters with low and intermediate resolution as a rule leads to significant errors
in determining the content of minor impurities as a result of broadening of the
lines or their complete overlapping at atmospheric pressure. In this case the use
of lasers is extremely promising because at reduced pressures in the cell this
makes it possible to obtain resolved spectra of the sample and thereby carry out
precise quantitative measurements. The sensitivity of local analysis methods with
the use of lasers falls in the range from l min"1 to 0.1 min‘l. Such a sensitivity
is entirely adequate for an analysis of the air samples taken from the stacks of
thermoelectric power stations. industrial enterprises and automobile exhaust.
Source [131 gives the results of measurements of the content of C284, C0, NO in
automobile exhaust obtained using adjustable semiconductor lasers operating in
the IR range and also with use of the spin-flip of a Raman laser and an optical-

acoustic detector.

The method for laser analysis of samples has been used in measuring the 802 con-
tent in effluent from the stacks of thermoelectric power stations [16]. The radia-
tion source used was a continuous diode laser with frequency modulation operating
in the range 8.7an. In this case. as in the analysis of contaminations in the
exhaust of automobile engines, there was complete exclusion of the influence of
other sample components on the accuracy in analysis of sulfur dioxide.

Interesting possibilities of the method for laser spectroscopy of samples were suc-
cessfully demonstrated by Patel in [13] in an analysis of nitric oxide and water
vapor in the stratosphere. The measurement apparatus and the cell are situated

in a sounding balloon raised into the stratosphere and operated in an automatic
regime. As a result of an analysis made using the frequency-adjustable laser spin-
flip and an optical—acoustic detector the air samples taken at an altitude of 28

km revealed the diurnal variation of NO concentration at this altitude. It is
difficult to overestimate the importance of this result due to the need for study-
ing the chemical and photochemical interactions of minor gas components of the at—
mosphere at these altitudes. The experimental data on the altitudinal distributions

of nitrogen oxides and a number of other minor components available up to now are
extremely limited and contradictory.

The use of adjustable semiconductor lasers for investigating atmospheric gases by
spectral analysis methods is extremely promising. However. it seems that spectral
instruments with the use of semiconductor lasers can find extensive practical use
in such measurements only after a substantial improvement in their technical and
operational characteristics. and in particular. after increasing their useful life
when operating by means of radiation in the one mode 1-5 m". It is also necessary
to develop reliable closed-cycle condensers for operation of laser spectrometers
under field conditions.

FINI<HNHC1A1.USE¢MVLY
Remote methods for investigating composition of the atmosphere by means of lasers
have now been considerably developed [9, 12]. We will analyze the results of use
of the following methods:

—- spontaneous combination scattering of laser radiation and resonance fluorores-
cence;

—- differential absorption;

—- laser heterodyne radiometry.

The first work on the practical use of the combination scattering of laser radia-
tion (CSLR) effect for investigating atmospheric composition was published by
Leonard in 1967 [12]. That study gave the results of measurements of the profiles
of concentrations of atmospheric nitrogen and oxygen to an altitude of 2 km. Since
1969 a major series of studies has been carried out for determining the gas compo-
sition of the atmosphere by researchers in Japan, United States and West Germany
[12, 16]. These researchers also carried out measurements of the concentrations

of C0, C02, CH4, CZHA' C3H6, H CO, 502, N0, H28 in the exhaust gases of automobiles
and in a specially contaminates atmosphere from a distance up to several hundreds
of meters.

In our country similar investigations are being carried out for the most part at
the Spectrometry Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences, Institute of Atmospheric 0p-
tics, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences and Central Aerological Observ-
atory of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring.

In the remote excitation of the combination scattering spectra in a Iidar develop-
ed at the Central Aerological Observatory [9]. use was made of an yttrium-aluminum
garnet laser with frequency conversion to the second and third harmonics. Sounding
of the atmosphere at the converted frequencies made posr ble an increase (by sev-
eral times) in lidar sensitivity as a result of the increase in the combination
scattering section.

Measurements of NZ, H20. 002 and CH4 in a natural and in an artificially contamin-
ated atmosphere indicated that the accuracy in measuring the concentration of gas
components using combination radiation scattering is silo-152.

The use of the combination radiation scattering method makes possible an unambig-
uous determination of the gas composition of the atmosphere. The intensity of the
received signals at any particular frequency is related to the concentration of
molecules causing them. This method for investigating the gas composition of the
atmosphere has a good specificity and accuracy and a high spatial resolution be-
cause in the spectrum of scattered light the combination scattering lines of all
gas components of the investigated objects are simultaneously present. However,
due to the small cross section of the backseattered combination radiation ("110'30
cmzvsrrl) this method does not have an adequate sensitivity and effective range.

Further prospects of use of the combination scattering method are related to the
use of more powerful pulsed lasers operating in the UV spectral range, that is,
lasers with an energy to several J and a pulse frequency up to a ftw KHz. It ap-
pears that eximeter lasers may be extremely promising for this purpose. However,
we feel that at the present time their demonstrated operational characteristics
are not satisfactory. As was demonstrated in [26, 27], for some atmospheric

65

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HULY
contaminants, it can be seen clearly that with the excitation of both gases and
aqueous aerosols by UV radiation there will be resonance combination scattering
(RC5) or fluorescence. The scattering cross sections can be increased by several
orders of magnitude. With such excitation the molecule can re-emit the absorbed
energy of a photon more rapidly than it collides with another particle. In this
case quenching does not occur as a reSult of collision and re-emission is insens-
itive to external pressure. In the experiments which were carried out [231 the in—
tensity of scattering from 12 vapors was 10 times greater than the intensity of
the combination radiation signal from N2.

In 1970 Nakahara, et al. [12] carried out a lidar experiment for detecting 502 at
the output of a contamination source making use of resonance excitation of the
second harmonic of an adjustable fluid laser with All 300.1 nm. The minimum con-
centration detected by the authors was 103 mill‘1 and was limited. according to
them. by the presence of an elastic scattering component in the signal. The pres-
ence of a strong Mie component in the signal limits the lower range of the measur-
ed concentrations in the troposphere by the above-mentioned method to a value

~ 103 mill-1. This interference can be eliminated with the reception of signals

at a frequency displaced relative to the exciting line caused by the appearance

of the Stokes wide-band fluorescence effect. A set of lidar measurements of the
Stokes fluorescence of N02 was registered by Birihaum, et al. [12] in the case

of excitation by an argon laser. 0n the basis of the intensit of the fluorescence
signals it is Possible to determine N0 in concentrations 10' -10’2 mill'1 at at-
mospheric pressure. However. it is stifl not clear how the intensity of this
fluorescence is influenced by changes in temperature and humidity. In addition.
they discovered that the simultaneously present fluorescence of atmospheric aero-
sol also exerts an interfering influence on the identification of N02 fluorescence.
In this vary same study the authors proposed and described the testing of a method
for two-wavelength sounding ( l - 0.h965y m, 2 = 0.5017“ m), making it possible to
separate these two signals, since in the first case the signal from N02 is half as
great as in the second. whereas the intensity of aerosol fluorescence remains con-

stant -

The Stokes fluorescence of $02 in the atmosphere was observed by Penna [12] when
using a double dye laser (1 - 0.3me) and reception with a Stokes shift 1150.5
cm‘l. The registered detailed spectrum of the 802 electron absorption band (0.22—
0.34p.m) indicates that the strongest absorption peaks fall at 0.29996 and at
0.30015y-m. The dependence of the intensity of $02 fluorescence on pressure found
in this same study indicates that with a change in pressure from 600 to 800 mm Hg
the effective re-emission section changes by not more than 151 and has a value
1-10'25 cmzlsr at atmospheric pressure, which is four orders of magnitude greater
than the combination scattering section. A strong increase in the signal from $02
and 03 was observed by Zaromb. et al.[12] when using a laser with ) - 266 nm, a
pulse power of 0.1 J and a diameter of the receivin antenna 0.25 m. The presence
of $02 with N - 5-10"2 mill'1 and 03 with N - S-lO' mill‘1 was discovered from
distances up to 3 km. The measurements were made at the frequency shifts of com-
bination scattering of these molecules. but it is not clear what was responsible
for such a great increase in the lidar sensitivity: a resonance increase in the

combination scattering signals or fluorescence.

66

FOIIMﬂﬂCJAl.USEIMNLY
Laboratory investigations were carried out for the purpose of identifying the
processes of re-emission of N02 and I2 [24]. The determined dependence of re-
emission of these molecules on pressure is evidence of fluorescence at a low gas
pressure and on the mixture of resonance fluorescence and resonance combination
scattering at atmospheric pressure. The authors also attribute the re-emission
process observed during the excitation of vapors by a pulsed nitrogen laser
(0.3371P.m) to resonance combination scattering.

Source [12] gives the results of computations of the resonance combination scatter—
ing cross sections and experimental data from measurement of these sections.

Using the lidar which was employed in determining the composition of the atmosphere
on the basis of combination scattering, specialists at the Central Aerological Ob-
servatory carried out measurements of the gas components in the surface air layer
by the resonance combination scattering and fluorescence methods [9].

In a lidar investigation of the spectrum of combination scattering by the pure
atmosphere with excitation at A- 266 ma it was possible to detect the preres-

onance amplifzcation of signals of atmospheric oxygen, whose electron absorption
band has a maximum at 2.- 143 nm.

A comparison of the ratio of intensities of signals from $02 and Hg with their ex-
citation by the second and third harmonics of laser radiation gives an oxygen in-
teraction section at l - 266 nm which is 2.3 times greater than at‘A - 354.7 nm.
Such an increase in the section agrees well with computations using the well-known
Shorygin formula [21] for resonance combination scattering. A still greater in-
crease in the intensity of lidar signals was obtained in an analysis of the
fluorescence spectra of of vapors and aerosols of benzenes, diesel fuels. soil
dust and industrial haze.

With a concentration of matter (0.1-1) mg/m3 the intensity of their fluorescence
signals as a rule exceeded by a factor greater than 100 the combination scattering
signals for atmospheric nitrogen with a signal-to—noise ratio of 100 even on clear
sunny days. Using a portable model of a combination scattering lidar, specialists
at the Central Aerological Observatory during 1973-1980 carried out an extensive
cycle of studies for investigating air basin contaminations at a number of indus-
trial centers in our country [11].

There is no question but that the resonance combination scattering-fluorescence
methods are promising. However, at present there has been an inadequate study of
the problems related to identification of the processes of re-emission of most of
the gases at different pressures and also to the determination of gases from res-
onance combination scattering and fluorescence spectra in an absorbing medium.

It is also necessary to carry out investigations for choice of the optimum wave-
lengths of exciting radiation under real atmospheric conditions.

He will examine the use of the differential absorption methods: its essence is meas-
urement of two signals received in sounding at and outside the absorption line of

the investigated gas. A great effective range of such measurements is achieved
by the use of corner reflectors, topographic features and scattering on aerosols,

67

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
which play the role of a volumetric reflector distributed in the atmosphere.
Schemes with corner or topographic reflectors have a very high sensitivity, but
make it possible to determine only the integral concentration of a contaminant
along the entire ray path. A scheme with the use of scattering on aerosols makes
it possible to eliminate this shortcoming and carry out measurements of spatial-
temporal profiles. although, to be sure. by means of a decrease in response.

A scheme with a corner reflector was used in [16] for measurements of N02 in the
urban atmosphere using an argon laser operating at the lines 596.5 nm and 501.7

nm. The radiation from the corner reflector at a distance of 7 km was received by
an optical antenna with a diameter of 10 cm; it was focused on a holographic mono-
chromator. from whose output it was sent to two photomultipliers by means of a
fiber opiical element. This instrument registered a N02 concentration of about 10'3
million" .

The reflection from the topographic reflector (the wall of a building was used for
this purpose) was used by Japanese researchers [28] for detecting N02 in concentra-
tions of 10‘3 millionths on a path 1 km in length by means of an adjustable dye
laser (A - 663V.m; ;\ '- l«65.8 nm) and a receiving system with a diameter of 50 cm
with a spectral resolution 0.3 nm.

Spatially resolved N02 profiles were obtained in the studies of Rutkhe, et al..
with the use of a Hie reflector [12]. They employed a lidar with a dye laser, ad-
justable in the range 655-470 nm with a line width of 0.1 nm. a pulse power of 10'3
J and a duration of 0.3p sec. The radiation scattered from the aerosols was re-
ceived by an antenna with a diameter of 60 cm and was focused onto the slit of a
diffraction monochromator with a dispersion of 7 nm/mm. The registry system con-
sisted of a photomultiplier and a five-channel system for synchronous photon
cOunting. At distances up to 4 km the minimum measured 502 concentration at night-
time was 0.2 mill‘l. Later the apparatus was modernized and N02 measurements were
made at the stack mouth of a chemical plant at distances up to 21 km. The authors
of [9. 13, 15] described apparatus with the use of a 002 laser and cited data from
NH3 investigations on paths up to 1000 m in length with an apparatus response of
10‘3 million'1 and meaSurements in the surface air layer on a path with an extent
of 2.1 km (ozone -— 6.7-10-2-6.3-1o-1 million'1 amonia -- 3.0-10-3-23540-2
million'l. ethylene -- (l.72*6.0)'10'2 million'i).

Source [16] gives the maximum absorption sections of a number of gases measured at
atmospheric pressure at the individual generation lines of 602 and C0 lasers.

Definite progress in the technology of growing of semiconductor crystals has led
during recent years to the creation of adjustable lasers with a power which has
proven adequate for carrying out measurements of the absorption of laser radia-

tion on extended paths in the atmosphere. Source [16] gives data on the content

of C0 and NO on surface paths at different times of day obtained using semiconductor
lasers operating in the spectral region 4.7 p-m and 5.3,» m respectively. These
results give basis for assuming that with improvement in the characteristics of
injection lasers and 602 and CO gas lasers there will be real possibilities for
creating operational means for the monitoring of gas contaminations in the atmo-
sphere on their basis. and most importantly. for investigating the content and

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
variations of chemically active gas impurities in the atmosphere, obtaining ex-
perimental data for validating models of transport of contaminations, predicting
air contamination levels, etc.

The successful use of the resonance absorption method requires detailed investiga-
tions and the development of special spectral high-resolution detection systems
[15]. Using the developed apparatus it was possible to detect eight weak absorp-
tion lines not registered earlier by classical spectral instruments. The develop-
ed instrument can be employed in the receiving system of a meteorological lidar
for measurements of the concentration of water vapor and oxygen, whose lines fall
in the range of frequencies of thermal adjustment of a ruby laser. The operating
principle for the apparatus can be developed on the basis of similar systems for
other spectral regions.

The possibilities of the method of differential absorption of laser radiation have
been demonstrated most clearly in measurements of the vertical distribution of
ozone in the atmosphere [8], with use of a laser with radiation energy in the
range of a wavelength ).- 100|Lm W - 50 mJ. This makes it possible to carry out
remote measurement of the ozone density profile to an altitude 25 km. It is evi—
dent that the sounding range can be increased when more powerful and frequency—
adjustable lasers operating in the UV range become available.

Infrared heterodyne radiometry is one of the promising passive methods for remote
measurement of contaminating and natural gases in the atmosphere [1]. The task of
measuring the attenuation of monochromatic radiation by the entire thickness of
the atmosphere in the IR spectral region must also be regarded as an extremely
timely application of a heterodyne dcteccor of thermal radiation. The principal
merits of the heterodyne spectrometer are the possibility of achieving an ultra-
high (relative to IR standards) resolution and response. limited by the level of
quantum signal noise. This makes possible a successful solution of the problem of
interference of the absorption bands of different gases when carrying out remote
spectral investigations in the atmosphere. A practical confirmation of what has
been said is provided by the results of investigations in IR stellar astronomy,
obtained by the photoshift technique.

Considerable progress has now been attained abroad in the development of similar
instruments for measuring contaminating gases in the earth's atmosphere. There
are a considerable number of publications dealing with measurements of the fine
structure of the absorption spectra of the gases N02. ““3, Czﬂa, 03, 002 and C0.
as well as their concentrations in thermal emission spectra. Unique results are
obtained in measurement of the absorption spectrum of solar radiation by the en-
tire thickness of the atmosphere in the region 1010.9-1011.8 cm'1 with a resolu-
tion of 0.0067 cm'l. work is being carried out for creating surface. aircraft
and satellite heterodyne radiometers for measuring the altitudinal profiles of
03. Ni; and other minor atmospheric components.

The heterodyne radiometer described in [23] makes it possible to carry out sur-
face measurements of the vertical profile of ozone density in the entire thick-
ness of the atmosphere. The method is based on the reception of solar radiation
in the hand 9.58y-m with a spectral resolution.Av - 0.004 cm‘l. Further progress

69
FOI‘OFFKJAL.US£(NNLY
I'UK WPMAL 03!. URL!

in the use of heterodyne methods for analysis of gas components in the atmo-
sphere is contingent on the development of adjustable and frequency-stable lasers
in the 1R range, especially semiconductor diode lasers and waveguide-type 602 and
C0 lasers.

Without question, in the future heterodyne methods for the detection of gases will
become a powerful tool for remote investigations of the atmosphere from aboard

flightcraft.
Standard Meteorological Parameters

Naturally. information on aerosol in the gas medium without data on other atmo-
spheric characteristics does not make it possible to create a full picture of the
processes transpiring in the atmosphere. This pertains, in particular, to study of
contamination of the air basins of industrial centers, where the interaction of
aerosol with the humidity, wind and temperature fields leads to a change in the
distribution and propagation of aerosol in the surface layer and to the forma-
tion of new components. If it is taken into account that the use of rockets and
balloons, by means of which the standard atmospheric parameters are determined,

in most cases is impossible under these conditions, the development of remote
methods for measuring the standard atmospheric meteorological parameters seems

extremely important.

Doppler lidars with heterodyne photoreception are in use for measuring wind velo-
city. In these the transmitter used is a 002 laser with a radiation power up to
30 U and an effective range up to 500 m and also lidars with use of correlation
processing of the received signal [2, 13].

Remote methods for measuring the absolute content of water vapor in the atmosphere
by means of a lidar are usually based on a comparison of the energies of com-
bination vibrational-rotational scattering of laser radiation by water and nitro-
gen molecules. whose concentration in the lower troposphere changes insignificant-
ly and can be considered known. For measurement of atmospheric temperature use is
made of the effect of rotational combination scattering of laser radiation, with com-
parison of the scattered energy in two parts of the rotational spectrum of nitrogen

[22].

Source [13] gives a description of a laser system for determining temperature, den-
sity, humidity. transparency. wind direction and velocity.

Measurements of wind velocity are made by the pulsed laser sounding method with

the use of multiray optical reception and multichannel wide-band (with respect to
radio frequency) receiving-registry apparatus. The employed processing methods

make it possible to determine the position of the maximum of the cross-correlation
function for signals received from two spatially separated volumes. and on the basis
of the known distances between volumes to compute wind velocity. It should be noted
that this method makes it possible to determine all three components of the velo-

city vector.

The basis of the method for measuring atmospheric temperature is the fact that at-
mospheric kinetic temperature has a functional dependence on the saturating elas-
ticity of water vapor. In turn, a determination of the characteristics of moist

70
IIHRCHHHCJAI.USEIMNLY
air. the same as the elasticity and saturating elasticity of water vapor, is ac-
complished using laser sounding apparatus and employing the effect of combination
vibrational-rotational scattering of laser radiation by water vapor and nitrogen
molecules. The maximum computed mean square error in measuring temperature in the
entire altitude range was 0.8'C. and humidity -- 0.25 g/m3. During the daytime
the sounding range was very short: it was only 200-500 m. In order to eliminate
this shortcoming it is first necessary to increase the radiation energy of lasers
and employ lasers operating in the UV range of wavelengths where the level of
background noise of the atmosphere is considerably less. In order to obtain a
sounding range up to 3 km during daytime, which is the minimum necessary range and
which is dictated by the requirements of a number of specific problems in the
national economy. such as the establishment of airport meteorological services,
monitoring systems and systems for issuing storm warnings concerning dangerous
meteorological phenomena. as well as other special-purpose systems, the energy of
the laser radiation must be about 10 J in the range of working wavelengths of
about 0.3p-m with a radiation pulse repetition rate of not less than 1 Hz.

Clouds and Fogs

In determining the microphysical characteristics of clouds and fogs application
is made of measurements of the scattering and depolarization coefficients of laser
radiation and also pulse deformations [12].

The successive layers method which has been proposed and experimentally checked
makes it possible on the basis of laser sounding data to reconstruct the profile
of the scattering index in clouds. With the adopted assumptions concerning the
gamma distribution it is possible to ascertain the profiles of liquid-water con-
tent and the droplet concentration in liquid-droplet clouds.

A major cycle of investigations has also been carried out for clarifying the prob-
lemof determining the phase state of the cloud cover. Surface and aircraft measure-
ments using the information contained in the polarization characteristics of laser
radiation have demonstrated the possibility of determining different types of
clouds [6].

An entire series of studies [7] has been devoted to investigations of changes in
the characteristics of scattering and depolarization of laser radiation in the
process of formation and disappearance of a fog. In the sounding of the aerosol at-
mosphere at wavelengths 0.53 and 1.06fim the values of the scattering coefficients
differ by several times if the size of the aerosol particles is less than the wave-
length. In the fog formation process the size of the scattering particles increases
and the difference in the numerical values of the scattering coefficients for the
mentioned wavelengths decreases. During the scattering of a fog this relationship
again increases. In a turbid atmosphere, when the asphericity of the aerosol par-
ticles to a considerable degree depolarizes the scattered radiation the condensa—
tion process is easily detected on the basis of an increase in the degree of pol-
arization of the scattered radiation. In fogs the depolarization increases due to
multiple scattering. As the fog scatters the depolarization again decreases. It
should be noted that a change in the polarization is observed sooner than the vis-
ual appearance and scattering of the fog; this can be used for a timely forecast

of the appearance and disappearance of a fog with a high probability. It is also

71
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
evou u..-~..-~ u...— .0...

waves by the water surface. both free from contaminants and covered by a film of
petroleum products. Theoretical computations. laboratory and field experiments

face itself as a result of the change of evaporation conditions, waves, ion form-
ation, etc. under the influence of a film. These changes are also reflected in

the characteristics of reflection of electromagnetic waves. The first laser sound—
ing investigations of the reflective properties of petroleum films on the sea sur-
face were based on the contrasts in the reflective properties of pure water and a
petroleum film. An example of such an approach can be a field experiment carried
out in 1975 in the neighborhood of the "Neftyanyye Kamni" petroleum field for in-
vestigating the contrasts in the reflective properties of the sea surface under
different wave conditions and with different degrees of contamination. In the in-
vestigations use was made of a lidar with 1- 1.06pm and 1- 0.53 p.111, carried on
an 11—18 aircraft. As a result, there was found to be a considerable increase in
the reflection coefficient in places of accumulation of a petroleum film on the
sea surface [5). Methods have now been developed and models of apparatus have now

NHOHKHLMEOMN
possible to refine the principal approaches for a technical solution of the prob-
lem of laser scunding of the atmosphere, land and sea surfaces from artificial
earth satellites. It will also afford possibilities for a substantial increase

in the information yield of meteorological space systems by introducing in-

to the on-board instrument complex lidars capable not only of distinguishing _
clouds from the underlying surface, but also of determining with a high accuracy
the altitude and phase composition of the upper boundary of clouds, the strat-
ification of aerosols. the characteristics of waves and contamination of the sea
surface by petroleum products.

We note in conclusion that in a number of cases, especially if it is necessary to
carry out remote and operational observations. laser measurement apparatus is the
only possible means which can be employed.

All these laser investigations required the development and creation of a whole
series of special apparatus. The use of lasers is limited for the most part to
solution of special research problems or a fundamental demonstration of their
possibilities. It is still necessary to do considerable work in order that lasers
could be used extensively in the practice of regular hydrometeorological observa-
tions.

Particular attention must be devoted to the creation of lasers capable of operat-
ing aboard aircraft laboratories and satellites, which on their basis will make
it possible to create measurement systems for carrying out global observations
of the state of the atmosphere and underlying surface.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Astakhov, V. 1., Vanin, I. V., Galaktionov, V. V., et al., "Use of Laser
Heterodyne Spectrometry for Determining Monochromatic Transmission of the
Atmosphere," KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA (Quantum Electronics), 6, No 10, 2122.
1979.

2. Baykov, Yu. P., et al., "Correlation Lidsr for Measuring Wind Velocity," 6-y
VSESOYUZNYY SIMPOZIUM P0 LAZERNOHU I AKUSTICHESKOHU ZONDIROVANIYU ATHOSFERY
(Sixth All-Union Symposium on Laser and Acoustic Sounding of the Atmosphere),
TEZISY DOKLADOV (Summaries of Reports), Tbmsk, Part I, 180, 1980.

3. Birich, L. 8., "Determination of Altitude of the Upper Boundary of Clouds
With Scanning Lidars From Space Vehicles," 6—y VSESOYUZNYY SIMPOZIUM P0
LAZBRNOHU I AKUSTICHESKDHU ZONDIROVANIYU ATMOSFERY. TEZISY DOKLADOV, Tomsk,
Part I, 134, 1980.

4. Bogorodskiy, V. V. and Kropotkln, M. A.. DISTANTSIONNOYE OBNARUZHBNIYE NEFT-
YANYKM ZAGRYAZNENIY VOD IK LAZEROM (Remote Detection of Petroleum Contamina-
tions of Waters by an IR Laser), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1975.

5. German, A. I., OPTICHESKIYB METODY IZUCHENIYA OKEANOV I VNUTRENNYKH VODOYEMDV
(Optical Methods for Study of Oceans and Internal Hater Bodies), Novosibirsk,
Nauka, 1979.

73
IN)! OFFICIAI.IJSIICMVLY
6.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

German, A. I., et a1.. "Investigation of Cloud Formations and Underlying Sur—
face Using a Two-Frequency Lidar," TRUDY TsAO (Transactions of the Central
Aerologicsl Observatory). No 138. 106. 1979.

German, A. I., Tikhonov, A. P. and Tysbotov, A. Ye., "Use of Laser Sounding
for Determining the Predictors of Formation and Scattering of a Fog," 6-y
VSESOYUZNYY SIHPOZIUH P0 LAZERNOMU I AKUSTICHESKOMU ZONDIROVANIYU AIHOSFERY.
TBZISY DOICIADOV. Tomsk, Part I. 310, 1980.

Gusarov, V. P., Kostko. O. K., Prokhorov, A. P. and Smirnov, N. 0., "Measure-
ments of Atmospheric Ozone by a UV Lidsr," 6-y VSESOYUZNYY SIMPOZIUM P0 LAZER-
NOMU I AKUSTICHESKOHU ZONDIROVANIYU ATHOSPERY. TEZISY DOKLADOV, Tomsk, Part

I. 1980.

Zakharov. V. H., "Investigation of the Gas Composition of the Atmosphere
Using Lasers," S-y VSESOYUZNYY SIMPOZIUM P0 LAZERNOHU I AKUSTICHBSKOHU ZON-
DIROVANIYU ATMOSPBRY. TEZISY DOKLADOV (Fifth All-Union Symposium on Laser
and Acoustic Sounding of the Atmosphere. Summaries of Reports), Tomsk, Part
2. 96, 1978.

Zakharov. V. M.. German. A. I., Tikhonov, A. P. and Tyabotov. A. Ye.. "Fea—
tures in the Hacrostructure of the Peripheral Region of Cumulonimbus clouds
in a Prethunderstorm and Thunderstorm State," DOKLADY AN SSSR (Reports of
the USSR Academy of Sciences), Vol 236, No 3, 1977.

Zakharov, V. M., Klimova. T. I., Krivolapov, V. F., et a1., "Lidar Spectro-
metry of Atmospheric Contaminations in the Atmosphere in Industrial Regions,"
OPYT I HETODY EKOLOGICHBSKOGO MONITORINGA (Experience and Methods of Ecolog-
ical Monitoring). ITsBI AN SSSR, Pushchino. 118, 1978.

Zakharov. V. H. and Kostko. 0. K., HETBOROLOCICHBSKAYA LAZBRNAXA LOKATSIYA
(Meteorological Laser Sounding). Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat, 1977.

Zakharov, V. M.. Portasov, V. S. and Khattatov, V. U., "Use of Lasers in By-
drometeorological Investigations and for Monitoring the Natural Medium."

IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics). Vol 44,
No 8, 1980.

Zuyev, V. Ye., RASPROSTRANENIYE VIDIHYKH I INPRAKRASNYKH VOLN V ATMOSPERE
(Propagation of Visible and Infrared Waves in the Atmosphere), Moscow, Sovet-
skoye Radio. 1970.

Zuyev, V. Ye., Lopasov. V. P.. Makagen. M. M., et e1., LAZERY S PERESTRAIVAXEH-
OY CHASTOTOY (Lasers With an Adjustable Frequency), Kiev, Izd-vo AN UkSSR.
1973.

LAZERNYY KONTROL' ATMOSPBRY (Laser Monitoring of the Atmosphere), edited by
E. D. Khinkli, Moscow, Mir. 1970.

74

FOI10FFKJA1.USE(NNLY
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

20.

. 25.

26.

27.

28.

Nazarov, I. M.. et al.. DISTANTSIONNYYE I EKSPERIHBNTAL'NYYE HETODY OPRED-
ELENIYA ZAGRYAZNENIY OKRUZHAYUSHCHEY SREDY (Remote and Experimental Methods
for Determining Contaminations of the Environment), Moscow, Gidrometeoizdat,

, 1977.

Nazarov, I. H., et a1., "Determination of the Ammonia Concentration Along an
Extended Path on the Basis of Resonance Absorption of Radiation of a CO;
Laser," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOCIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 7, 1977.

Novogrudskiy, B. V., Sklyarov. V. Ye., Pedorov, K. N. and Shifrin. K. S..
ISSLEDOVANIYE OKEANA IZ KOSHOSA (Investigation of the Ocean From Space), Len-
ingrad, Gidrometeoizdat. 1978.

Samokhvalov, I. V., Sosnin. A. V. and Khmel'nitskiy, G. 8., "Laser Instrument
for Measuring Atmospheric Transparency," TBZISY VSESOYUZNOGO SIMPOZIUMA ”RADIO-
PIZICHESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA ATMOSPERY" (Summaries of Reports at the All-Union
Symposium "Radiophysical Investigations of the Atmosphere"), Leningrad, Main
Geophysical Observatory, 1975.

Shorygin, P. P., REZONANSNOYB KOMBINATSIONNOYE RASSEYANIYE SVETA (Resonance
Combination Scattering of Light), DOKLADY AN SSSR (Reports of the USSR Acad~
emy of Sciences), Vol 87, 1952.

Cooney, J. A., APPL. OPTICS, Vol 14, No 2, 1975.

Holzer, W., Murphy, H. F. and Bernstein, H. J., J. CHEM. PHYS., Vol 52. No
399, 1970.

Kobayasi, T., Aruga, T. and Inaba, H., TRANS. TECHN. GEOPRYS. 0N QUART.
ELECTR. INST. ELECTR. COMM. ENG. JAPAN, QE-70-26, October, 1970.

O'Shea, D. C. and Dodge, L. 6., APPL. OPTICS, V01 13, No 6, 1974.

Penney, C. H.. LASER RAHAN GAS DIAGNOSTICS. edited by H. Lapp and C. H. Penney,
Plenum Press, New York, 1976.

Rosen, H., Robrish, P. and Chamberlain. 0., APPL. OPTICS, V01 16, No 10, 1975.

Trujl. T., Higuchi, Y. and Kimura, H., ABSTRACTS INTERN. LASER RADAR STUDIES
CONP., Sendai, Japan, Vol 103, No 6, 197A.

75
FINI¢NFFICJAI.LEHE(NVLY
EUK UI'I‘ILIAL bat. URL!

REVIEW OF MONOGRAPH BY T. V. ODROV; 'GIDROFIZIKA VODOYEHOV SUSHI' ('HYDRDPHYSICS
OF LAND HATER BODIES'). LENINGRAD, GIDROMETEEIZDAT, 1979. 311 PAGES

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1. Jan 82 pp 117-118

[Review by V. s. Hezentsev, professor]

[Abstract] The reviewed monograph is essentially intended as a college text and
therefore much of the material is of a background description preparing the stu-
dent for the more complex subject matter contained in the chapters which follow.
Its basic content is a description of the hydrophysical phenomena transpiring in
water bodies on the land and caused by the heating and cooling of water, its phase
transitions and mixing conditions. Materials on water masses in lakes and reser-
voirs and on formation of water quality are included. It is possible to get a gen-
eral idea concerning the methods employed for investigating and analyzing field
data. The book. perhaps for the first time, gives a complete overview of the fea-
tures of the thermal regime in lakes and reservoirs. This is accompanied by a de-
tailed summary of methods for computing the heat balance components for a water
surface. Much attention is devoted to the measurement and computation of evapora-
tion from a water surface. While giving due attention to the standard computation
method, the author demonstrates the further possibilities for developing computa-
tional methods and cites new formulas which at present have not come into wide

use but are sounder in physical character. Both the setting-in and going-out of
the ice on rivers and lakes are examined in detail. This is also true of methods
for computing the growth of ice thickness. The role of the ice cover is analyzed
in relation to the thermal regime of a water body. its influence on heat exchange
with the surrounding area and its characteristics as an insulator. The author
strives to describe processes from the point of view of their physical development.
dealing with the role of the principal physical factors and presenting the best
available computation methods. Approaches to further research are suggested. The
text contains great quantities of factual material and clearly depicts the present-
day status of study of the considered hydrophysical problems. There is a carefully
selected bibliography of 153 items.

76

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
REVIEW OF HANDBOOK: 'GIDROHETEOROLOGICHESKIY REZHIH OZBR I VODOKHRANILISHCH:
IRKUTSKOYE VODOKHRANILISHCHE' ('HYDRONETEOROLOGICAL REGIME 0P LAKES AND RESERVOIRS:
IRKUTSKOYE RESERVOIR'), LENINCRAD, GIDROHETEOIZDAT, 1980, 160 PAGES

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 pp 118-119

[Review by H. Furman, candidate of geographical sciences]

[Abstract] The Irkutskoye Reservoir is formed by the backwaters of the dam at the
Irkutskaya Hydroelectric P wer Station on the Angara River. It has an area of 154
km2 and a volume of 2.1 km . The handbook reviewed here summarizes the results of
studies of the hydrometeorological regime of this reservoir during the period of
its normal operation from 1962 through 1975. All the data and analyses presented
in this publication were prepared by personnel at the Irkutsk Hydrometeorological
Observatory. The data were gathered in the network of stations and posts situated
on the shores of this water body, except materials collected during a number of
expeditions. The handbook was edited at the State Hydrological Institute to ensure
that this handbook would conform to the standards of this series of publications.
There are 11 chapters which give a description of the physiography of the reser-
voir area, meteorological conditions prevailing in the region and economic use of
the water body. The different chapters give reference materials on such subjects
as levels, ice and thermal conditions, water balance, wind waves and currents, hy-
drochemistry, etc. The changes in the regime of the Angara River as a result of
creation of the Irkutskoye Reservoir are analyzed. Practical recommendations are
given on exploitation of the zone surrounding the reservoir. The last chapter deals
with the hydrochemical regime; it appears that this regime has changed insignif-
icantly and for the most part remains the same as it was in the waters of the An-
gsra prior to its regulation. There are 160 tables and 66 figures which illustrate
the natural processes and phenomena transpiring in the water body. The presented
materials can be used in formulating a scientifically sound scheme for improving
the technical state and well-being of the reservoir and its coastal zones, as well
as serving as a basis for evaluating changes in water quality under the influence
of economic activity and hydrometeorological conditions.

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Un Us‘s'lbll‘l— wus— «we...

SIXTIETH BIRTHDAY OF DHITRIY ANTONOVICH PED'
Moscow MBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1. Jan 82 p 120
[Article by staff of the USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] Professor Dmitriy Antonovich Ped'. doctor of geographical sciences,

head of the Seasonal Weather Forecasts Laboratory. marked his 60th birthday on

19 November. He graduated in 1944 from the Higher Military Hydrometeorological
Institute of the Red Army and then served in the Administration of the Hydrometeor-
ological Service on the Far Eastern Front, where he headed the weather bureau.
After 1947 he was affiliated with the USSR Hydrometeorological Center, where he
also received his candidate's and doctor's degrees. He has now spent 40 years in
field and scientific work and has achieved reknown as an outstanding specialist

in all types of weather forecasting, from 26-hour to seasonal. The results of

his research work have been published in more than 170 articles. He has proposed
methods for predicting anomalies of air temperature and the quantity of precip-
itation for 10 days and a month, as well as seasonal air temperature anomalies. His
work has also included studies of seasonal weather conditions associated with the
times of changes in stratospheric circulation. He formulated indices for character-
izing droughts and excess moistening and demonstrated the possibility of forecast-
ing such dangerous phenomena. In addition, he has examined in detail the condi-
tions for the formation of atmospheric droughts and excessive humidity in differ-
ent years, methods for ascertaining the limits and duration of seasons and clarify-
ing their precursors. While continuing such important research work, he devotes
great attention to the training of graduate students. In his current work emphasis
continues on the development of seasonal weather forecasts. Figures 1.

78

FKMICHWHC1A1.USE1DNLN
CONFERENCES, MEETINGS AND SEMINARS
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 pp 120-127

[Article by S. s. Khmelevtsov, N. M. Bazhin, G. I. Skubnevakaya, Yu. Ye. Kazakov.
A. V. Tsvetkov and B. s. Ustyuzhanin]

[Text] An All-Union Symposium on "Influence of Environmental Contaminations on
Change of the Earth's Climate" was held in Obninsk during the period 12-1b Hay
1981. It was organized by the Institute of Experimental Meteorology in collab-
oration with the Climate Commission of the Interdepartmental Geophysical Com-
mittee of the USSR Academy of Sciences Presidium.

The symposium was attended by 60 delegates representing 15 scientific institutes
of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring, USSR
Academy of Sciences and the Ministry of Education from seven cities in the
country. Twenty—six reports were presented which dealt with the influence of at-
mospheric contamination by aerosols, minor gas impurities and heat on changes

in the characteristics of the earth's climatic system and the earth's climate.

The results of the inVestigations reported at the symposium indicate that there
is a rapid contamination of the atmosphere and ocean as a result of human activ-
ity and natural processes. Particularly alarming are the possible changes in
climate due to the accelerating contamination of the oceans. A report by V. I.
Hikhaylov (Odessa Division, State Oceanographic Institute) presented data on
severe contamination with petroleum and petroleum products in many extensive re-
gions of the Atlantic. In some of its regions (in the northern part of the At-
lantic Ocean, in the subtropical zone) the content of contaminating substances
in the upper millimeter layer of water is greater than the admissible level by
a factor of 10.

A number of reports were devoted to a parameterization of the radiation budget

of the atmosphere and the cloud cover and the tropospheric aerosol exerting an
influence on it. Ye. H. Feygel'son and P. A. Tarasovoy (Institute of Physics of
the Atmosphere, USSR Academy of Sciences) computed the albedo of the tropospheric
aerosol as a function of the great number of particles and the rate of increase
in contaminating soot particles. This work created a methodological basis for a
global-scale determination of aerosol albedo values. A report by L. D. Krasnokut-
skaya (Institute of Atmospheric Physics, USSR Academy of Sciences) gave the com-
puted values of albedo of the atmosphere-underlying surface system and the ab-
sorptivity of the cloudy atmosphere for the tropical, temperate and arctic

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
latitudes. On a qualitatively new basis these data make it possible to para-
meterize the properties of the cloud cover for climatic problems. A report by

I. I. Hokhov (Institute of Atmospheric Physics, USSR Academy of Sciences) gave
an analysis of the influence of cloud cover on the energy balance of the earth's
climatic system on the basis of the mean zonal data from satellite and surface
measurements of planetary albedo, outgoing thermal radiation, surface tempera-
ture and extent of cloud cover. The derived expressions can be used in climatic
models.

In the discussion of the role of the cloud cover the opinion was expressed that
it plays a subordinate role in the formation of the radiation regime in the cli-
matic system.

Several reports were devoted to an analysis of stratospheric aerosol of volcanic
and anthropogenic origin on the physical parameters of the earth's climatic sys-
tem. The report of A. P. Grinin. A. S. Kabanov and F. H. Kuni (Leningrad State
University, Institute of Experimental Meteorology) developed a theory of forma-
tion of a nucleus from a two-component gas and applying this theory it was pos-
sible to demonstrate the possibility of homogeneous formation of nuclei by drop-
lets of sulfuric acid in the stratosphere after powerful volcanic eruptions.

The physical conditions in the stratosphere most favorable for the formation of
a sulfuric acid aerosol were determined. It was postulated that the different
effectiveness of formation of a sulfuric acid aerosol determines the different
climatic effect of explosive eruptions occurring in different latitude zones.

In several reports presented by a number of organizations (Institute of Experi-
mental Meteorology, Inatitute of Applied Physics, Leningrad Division of the In-
stitute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences, Leningrad Hydrometeorological
Institute) the authors gave the results of computations of the radiation prop—
erties of stratospheric aerosol and the modeling of the thermal regime of dif-
ferent latitude zones with an increase in contamination of the stratosphere by
aerosol. Proposals call for the creation of a new network of lidar sounding sta-
tions for climatic monitoring of stratospheric aerosol. The functional structure
of the network is described and a number of station blocks have been developed.

A number of reports at the symposium were devoted to the study of climate using
physiconathematical models of different complexity. G. P. Borisenkov, V. P.
Meleshko and L. K. Yefimova (Main Geophysical Observatory) presented the results
of numerical modeling using a three-dimensional hydrodynamic model of thermal
contaminations and their influence on general circulation of the atmosphere and
the earth's climate.

The reports presented by V. P. Dymnikov, V. N. Lykosov and V. Ya. Galin (Meteor-
ological Computation Office, Computation Center, Siberian Department, USSR Acad-
emy of Sciences) and L. R. Dmitriyeva and L. V. Samoylova (USSR Hydrometeorolog-
ical Center, Main Geophysical Observatory), by using numerical hydrodynamic mod-
els, investigated the influence of changes in albedo of the underlying surface
and the type of parameterization of the cloud cover and radiation on change in
the general circulation of the atmosphere. An interesting conclusion from these
studies is that there is a low response of elements of general circulation of the
atmosphere to the form of parameterization of radiation and cloud cover. Mention

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
should also be made of an interesting study by V. K. Petukhov (Institute of Physics
of the Atmosphere) in which, by means of a nonstationary energy balance two—level
model of the thermal regime the authors made an analysis of variations in the
troposphere-stratosphere system and a study was made of the influence of strato-
spheric contaminations on the change in the period of quasi-two-year temperature
variations in the stratosphere. It was demonstrated that such initiators of var-
iability may be explosive volcanic eruptions during which great masses of gas and
aerosol are ejected into the stratosphere.

A resolution of the symposium noted the importance of further expansion and deep-
ening of investigations of the influence of environmental contamination on cli-
matic changes. The symposium recommends that attention be given to monitoring of
aerosol contaminations of the stratosphere after explosive volcanic eruptions and
anthropogenic contaminations of the stratosphere and the ocean surface and there
must be further improvement in models of climate for use in evaluating its changes
under the influence of contaminations and creation of data banks on environmental
contamination.

S. S. Khmelevtsov

The Second All-Union Seminar on "Atmospheric Photochemistry" was held during the
period 12-14 thy 1981. It was called on the initiative of a number of institutes
of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and
Environmental Monitoring. The purpose of the seminar was a discussion of timely
problems of atmospheric chemistry. The following subjects were examined: 1. Ele-
mentary chemical and photochemical processes in the lower and upper layers of
the atmosphere. 2. Experimental and theoretical modeling of homogeneous and
heterogeneous reactions, as well as photonucleation processes in the atmosphere.
3. Evaluations of possible effects of photochemical transformations of anthropo—
genic effluent on the state of the atmosphere. 6. Methods for investigating chem-
ically active compounds and aerosols in the atmosphere.

The scientific program of the seminar included ten review reports. nine original
communications and 36 stand reports. Participating in its work were more than
120 persons from 24 organizations. The organizing committee of the seminar under
the chairmanship of Yu. N. Holin, corresponding member, USSR Academy of Sciences,
made mnny efforts at a quite complete reflection of investigations on problems
related to the transpiring of photochemical reactions in the atmosphere.

The seminar work was opened by V. L. Tal'roz. corresponding member, USSR Academy
of Sciences, in a review report entitled "Chemical Kinetics of the Atmosphere,"
in which the interrelationship of the three principal branches of atmospheric
chemistry was characterized (in the ionosphere, stratosphere and troposphere); he
emphasized different possibilities of the transpiring of chemical reactions in
the real atmosphere and model conditions. N. H. Bazhin, in a report entitled
"Photochemical Reactions in the Troposphere," demonstrated that the lifetime of
some small components, such as sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, formaldehyde,
and methane can be dependent on the rate of transpiring of reactions with active
atoms and free radicals generated under the influence of sunlight. A. I. Poroykov
discussed possible schemes for transformations of organic substances in the atmo-
sphere. The participation of free radicals in the photochemical oxidation of

81

FOR OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
I'UK UI'I‘ILIAL 05". VIVLI

hydrocarbons was discussed by A. A. Hantashyan. The results of investigations of
the influence of electron vibrational excitation of haloid atoms by light on
their reactivity were reported by V. N. Panfilov. Photochemical reactions and
photonucleation with the participation of sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere were
analyzed in a report by G. I. Skubnevskaya and N. H. Bazhin. V. s. Komarov told
of new data on the photochemical reactions of freons. A. G. Sutugin read a re-
port entitled "Hodeling of Chemically Nonstationary Nucleation in a Spatially
Inhomogeneous Medium."

Some reports pertained to the use of new physical methods for investigating gas—
phase reactions and measurements of the characteristics of atmospheric aerosol.
The possibilities of use of lasers created at the Institute of Atmospheric 0p-
tics. Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences, were discussed in detail by
its director, V. Ye. Zuyev, corresponding member, USSR Academy of Sciences. The
use of laser magnetic resonance and intraresonator laser spectroscopy for meas-
uring the new constants of elementary reactions was demonstrated in the reports
of Yu. H. Gershenzon, L. N. Krasnoperov and S. G. Cheskis. The methods for meas-
uring the concentrations and size of aerosol were described in a report by K. P.
Kutsenogiy. The possibilities of monitoring chemical compounds in the atmosphere
by means of a lidar with an eximer laser were discussed in a study by I. I. Ippo-
litov. et al. The possibilities of a method for studying the kinetics of photo-
nucleation and the features of the photochemical formation of aerosol developed
at the IKhKiG [expansion unknown], Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences,
were outlined in a study by S. B. Pashchenko. et al.

The reports of V. V. Penenko and I. L. Karol' dealt with mathematical modeling
of the processes of atmospheric transport. taking into account chemical and pho-
tochemical reactions and their influence on the climatic characteristics and at-
uospheric contamination. I. A. Shevchuk told of the problems in the Siberian re—
gion associated with contamination of the air basin of cities in Siberia and the
Kuzbass. The seminar ended with an interesting report by 0. F. Vasil'yev. corres-
ponding member, USSR Academy of Sciences. entitled "Ecological Problems Within
the Framework of the 'Sibir" Program," in which it was demonstrated that such
widely separated fields as atmospheric chemistry and the problem of shifting of
the rivers of Siberia can be interrelated in the not distant future.

It was noted that from the time of the first seminar, held in 1979 in Leningrad.
a substantial advance has been made in study of the photochemical and chemical
processes transpiring in the pure and contaminated atmosphere. The following im-
portant results were obtained:

New physical methods have been developed for investigating the mechanisms of re-
actions which are of considerable importance for atmospheric chemistry.

For the first time it has been possible to determine and ascertain more precise-
ly the constants of the rates of chemical reactions with the participation of
atoms. free radicals and molecular ions. which serves as a basis for a quantita-
tive description of chemical processes in the atmosphere.

It has been shown that in the chemical reactions in the atmosphere an important
role can be played by electron- and vibrationally-excited particles.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Investigations were begun on mathematical modeling of the processes of atmospher-
ic transport, taking into account chemical and photochemical reactions and their
influence on climatic characteristics and atmospheric contamination.

It was noted that the total volume of investigations in the field of atmospheric
chemistry is still disproportionally small in comparison with those requirements
which are imposed primarily by the problem of predicting the danger created by
anthropogenic contaminations of the troposphere and stratosphere. The coordina-
tion of the work of kinetic chemists and the work of other specialists engaged in

study of the atmosphere from the point of view of these requirements is inade—
quate. Nevertheless. these results already make it possible to give some im-
portant practical recommendations.

Since interest in work in the field of atmospheric chemistry is increasingly un-
deviatingly and there is an increasing number of specialists ~oncerned with the
problems related to chemical reactions under atmospheric conditions, at the sem-

inar a desire was expressed for its further transformation into a regularly held
conference on atmospheric chemistry.

N. H. Bazhin and G. I. Skubnevskaya

A Soviet-American Symposium on "Influence of Solar Activity on Climate" was held
in Vil'nyus during the period 26 Hay-2 June 1981. The eo-chairmen of the symposi-
um were Ye. P. Borisenkov (USSR) and G. A. Eddy (United States).

Among the principal problems discussed at the symposium were the following:

-- the nature of the change in solar activity with different time scales;

-- variations in solar activity (do v from direct measurements on satellites and
at the earth's surface, and also changes of this constant. caused by disturbances
of the earth's orbital parameters; comparison of variations of the solar constant
with geological data);

-- modeling of global dynamic processes in the middle and lower atmosphere. changes
in the chemical composition, wave characteristics of the troposphere, taking into
account changes in solar activity and the solar constant;

-- possible mechanisms of the influence of solar activity on weather and climate,
as well as means for their experimental checking;

-- use of dendrochronological information (tree rings) and radioisotopic methods
for investigating changes in the earth's climate in the past and also a statis-
tical analysis of meteorological data for clarifying their correlation with solar
activity.

Long—period changes in solar activity were discussed in a report by G. A. Eddy,
head of the United States delegation. In his opinion slow changes in solar activ-
ity play an appreciable role in weather and climatic processes. Accordingly. now
it is very important to make precise measurements of the total flux of solar en-
ergy reaching the earth (solar constant).

K. Ya. Kondrat'yev and G. A. Nikol'skiy (Main Geophysical Observatory, Leningrad
State University) devoted their report to results of recent investigations of
changes in the solar constant (astronomical and meteorological). Variations in

83

FOR¢OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
the astronomical solar constant constitute about 0.52 and changes of the meteor-
ological constant -- up to 41. An analysis indicated that cosmic rays play an im-
portant role in the change in the component makeup of the stratosphere and tropo-
sphere, and accordingly, also the meteorological solar constant. A report by P.
Foukal (United States) examined the results of recent.measurements of the solar
constant on satellites and it was shown that the solar constant changes by tenths
of a percent. The amplitude of the variations agrees with evaluations of the am-
plitudes of modulation of brightness of sunspot regions.

A report by Ye. P. Borisenkov, A. V. T3vetkov and S. V. Agapopov (Main Geophys-
ical Observatory) examined variations of the solar constant (secular and short-
period), caused by disturbances of parameters of the earth's orbit. Against the
background of secular changes of the solar constant with a period of 20. 40 and
100 thousand years there are variations with a period of 11.9, 18.6 and 2.7-3
years. The amplitude of the variations was about 0.02%.

E. R. Hustel', V. Ye. Chertoprud and N. B. Mulyukova (Astronomical Council, USSR
Hydrometeorological Center) presented a report devoted to a statistical analysis
of data on atmospheric circulation in relation to the change in solar activity
manifested in the form of geomagnetic storms. The analysis indicated that the in-
stability of the troposphere can increase on the 2d-4th day after the earth's en-
try into solar corpuscular streams. This effect is traced most clearly in the re-
gions of temperature contrasts over the surfaces of the oceans and near the ocean-
earth boundary. G. G. Gromova and V. F. Loginov (USSR Bydrometeorological Center,
Main Geophysical Observatory) devoted their report to the problems involved in
change in atmospheric energy after powerful solar flares. They confirmed the con-
clusion drawn earlier that the kinetic energy of the atmosphere in the high lati-
tudes increases after large disturbances on the sun and in the earth's magnetic
field.

M. Mitchell (United States) discussed problems relating to fluctuations of the
earth's climate in different time intervals: from tens to several millions of
years. In his opinion. short-period changes in solar activity give an insignif-
icant contribution to the overall variability of climate, but long-period changes
can cause a more appreciable effect in climate.

R. North (United States) gave two reviews on the results of investigations using
simple models of the response of climate to solar activity changes. Models of

the energy balance were also examined from the point of view of their response to
changes in the solar constant. These models, describing the seasonal variation
well, are nevertheless not responsive to changes in the solar constant as a result
of disturbances of the earth's orbital parameters.

Hydrodynamic models of planetary waves, with allowance for the influence of solar
activity. were presented in several reports. For example, L. R. Rakipova and N. I.
Yakovleva (Main Geophysical Observatory) in their report presented quantitative
evaluations of the influence of the 11-year cycle of solar activity on the ampli-
tudes of stationary pressure waves propagating from the troposphere into the strat-
osphere.

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H. Heller (United States), within the framework of a two-dimensional quasigeo-
strophic model of stationary planetary waves, evaluated the effect of the mean
zonal wind on the vertical profile of geopotential waves. Heller feels that
disturbances of the zonal wind can be attributed 202 to solar activity. A. I.
lvsnovskiy and A. A. Krivolutskiy (Central Aerological Observatory) examined
macroscale waves with a period of 27 days. They postulate that planetary Rossby
waves with a period of 27 days are resonance waves. The characteristics of

waves which they computed with different heights and widths, given in the report.
agree fairly well with the data obtained on the basis of geopotential and the
index of zonal circulation. In the opinion of the authors, the excitation of 27-
day planetary waves occurs as a result of rotation of active solar longitudes.

Among the reports devoted to the possible mechanisms of the influence of solar
activity on processes in the lower atmosphere we should note the report of V. F.
Loginov and B. I. Sazonov (Main Geophysical Observatory) which gave a review of
the mechanisms of the influence of solar activity on weather changes.

The report of S. I. Avdyushin, V. V. Hikhnevich and R. V. Smirnov (Institute of
Applied Geophysics) was devoted to the problems of the state and prospects for
further investigations of the problem "Sun-Atmosphere." Some correlations were
found between meteorological and cosmophysical phenomena. A report by L. A. Ryaz—
anova and G. A. Kopin (Central Aerological Observatory) gave an analysis of the
correlation between the directions and intensity of mesospheric and stratospher-
ic winds and the solar activity level. Seasonal effects were discovered. A. Few
(United States) presented a communication on evaluation of the influence of solar
activity on weather and climate through changes in atmospheric electricity. He
presented a review of the mechanisms by which there is an interaction between
electric and meteorological characteristics (at the molecular level, with the
participation of aerosols, by an electric effect on a cloud, global currents).

The report of I. L. Karol', A. M. Shelomyanskiy, et al. (Main Geophysical Observ-
atory) was devoted to a new method for averaging the reSults of the total content
of ozone for the main types of air masses. making possible a sharp decrease in
the natural variability of the mean values of the total content and detection

of weak indicators of the influence of solar activity on ozone content.

At the symposium reports were given on the results of investigation of dendro-
chronological data for the purpose of obtaining evaluations of the influence

of the variability of solar activity on climate in different regions. L. A. Kay-
ryukshtis (Academy of Sciences Lithuanian SSR) in his report discussed the re—
sults of an investigation of the dynamics of arid periods during the last several
centuries and predicted drought in the future. T. T. Bitvinskas (Botany Institute,
Lithuanian SSR) presented a report on the development of dendrochronological in-
vestigations in the northwestern part of the USSR. The report gives an analysis of
the variability of the radial increment of trees in relation to the solar activity
level. C. Stockton (United States) presented a report on the use of tree ring data
for ascertaining the cyclicity of droughts in the western United States during the
last 363 years. This material was analyzed in detail and on its basis it could be
demonstrated that the main period in the change in aridity is a period of 22 years.

There was found to be a high coherence between the 22-year period of droughts and
the Hoyle solar cycle.

85

lﬂ)R()FFﬂJA1.USE()NlN
awn VIIQUIlI-n sung snug.-

Among the reports presented at the symposium there were those devoted to the
problem of use of radioactive isotopes in the investigation of changes in the
earth's climate. 6. Ye. Kocharov (Physicotechnical Institute, Leningrad) in his
report discussed the problems involved in the distribution of cosmic isotopes in
lunar ground and on the intensity of solar and galactic cosmic rays on a time
scale from the present day to a million years ago.

M. Stoyver (United States) presented a communication on the formation of CIA radio-
carbon and the streams of cosmic rays associated with it. Data on C15 "fitted in"
with tree ring data. The analysis indicates that there is a small number of re-
gions in which carbon content is modulated by solar activity.

Thus, the extensive subject matter of the reports presented by symposium parric~
ipants is indicative of the great interest of scientists in the problem of the in-
fluence of solar activity on climate. However. further success is dependent on the
appearance of new ideas concerning the mechanisms of the influence of solar activ-
ity on different processes in the earth's atmosphere and also on the organization
of experiments for checking already known mechanisms.

Yu. Ye. Kazakov and A. V. Tsvetkov

A session of the Section on Use and Conservation of Water Resources of the Euro-
pean USSR of the Scientific Council "Multisided Use and Conservation of Water Re-
sources" of the USSR State Committee on Science and Technology was held at Chelya-
binsk during the period 30 June-2 July 1981. Problems in water supply of the
Middle and Southern Urals were examined there. Participating in the work of the
section were specialists in the field of hydrology, hydrogeology and water manage-
ment of the leading scientific, planning and academic institutes of different min-
istries and departments, a total of 81 persons.

In opening the session the section chairman I. A. Shiklomanov emphasized that the
water supply of the Middle and Southern Urals is an important link in the develop-
ment of the productive forces of the Ural economic region, whose improvement must
be devoted daily and very careful attention. Most important is the implementation
of measures directed to the creation of systems for precise and reliable inven-
torying of water resources and their use. for the development of water-free tech-
nology and cycling systems in industry. for improvement in the quality of water
(especially the waters of rivers, lakes and reservoirs) and their preservation
from exhaustion and contamination.

Fourteen reports were examined. These characterize the present-day status of study
of the surface waters of the Urals and ways to improve monitoring of their quan-
tity and quality (report of V. N. Babchenko. H. A. Yeremina and G. P. Lashmanova),
the present status of water supply and the prospects for the introduction of
water cycling systems at the enterprises of the Middle Urals (report by P. A.
Yermolayeva). the problems of water supply in the Southern Urals (report by I. T.
Borodatyy), ground water in the Urals and its use in the national economy (report
of V. S. Palkin), the creation of water-free technologies in industry (report of
c. D. Kharlampovich and R. I. Kudryashcheva) and other problems. A report of con-
siderable interest was that of the director of the Ural Scientific Research Inst-
itute of Water Management. This report by I. S. Shakhov was devoted to the main

86

F03<MﬂﬂC1A1.USE(NNLY
methodological reasons for planning the optimum development of water management
in the Urals.

The conferees, discussing the problem of water supply in the Urals. noted the
following:

1. The supply of the Ural Economic Region (UER) with river runoff resources, ac-
cording to mean long—term data, is 136 km3; about 3/4 of these resources are ac-
counted for by the poorly developed regions of Permskaya and Sverdlovskaya
Oblasts. The natural operational resources are about 75 km3. The predicted opera-
tional resources of ground water are 7.5 km3/year; proven resources are about

1 km3/year.

2. Inventorying of water consumption and water diversion has been poorly organ—
ized. Accordingly, report data on the use of fresh water in the Ural Economic
Region vary considerably, on the average being l2 km3/year, and with respect to
water diversion -- about 10 km3/year.

3. The present—day water management system in the Ural Economic Region is

the most extensive. complex and capital-demanding in comparison with other re-
gions of the country. Here there is the country's highest level of water supplv
to industry by means of cycling systems (about 801). Work has begun on the plann-
ing of systems for the water supply of industrial enterprises without runoff
(shops of the Verkh-Isetsk Tin-Plate Metallurgical Plant in Sverdlovsk). Repeated
use has been made of the purified urban waste water for industrial water supply
(Krasnoural'sk). Purified industrial waste water is now coming into use in the
irrigated SKIICUIturaI fields in Orenburgskaya and Chelyabinskaya Oblasts.

4. The problem of reliable water supply of the national economy in the forsee-
able future must be solved on the basis of an intensification of the use of
local resources and industrial renewal of industrial water in cycling water sup-
ply systems with a gradual changeover to systems without runoff.

5. A major contribution to the study of water resources and improvement of water
management has been made by Ural scientific research and planning institutes, in-
dustrial and agricultural enterprises and organizations.

The Ural Territorial Administration of Hydrometeorology and Environmental Mon-
itoring is carrying out a study of the water resources at 242 stations on riv-
ers and 62 stations on lakes. A study was made of the regime of small rivers
and its change under the influence of economic activity.

The Ural Scientific Research Institute of Hultisided Use and Conservation of Water
Resources has developed a strategy for the development of water management in the
Urais for a long time in advance, including effective use of water resources by
means of optimum regulation of local river runoff and its redistribution within
the region. industrial renewal of waste water on the basis of cycled and runoff-
free water supply with recovery of useful components. Limits have been set for

use of water resources in the region and the optimum development of the water
economy using an economic criterion. A long-term scheme was proposed for the use
of ground water under complex hydrogeological conditions. The Ural and Chelyabinsk

87

FORiOFFKJAl.USEZONLY
.au -..---..— - ._ -.-~o

Polytechnic Institutes have developed schemes for runoff-free water supply systems
in the Urals and effective techniques for the purification of waste water at indi-
vidual enterprises.

Perm' and Bashkir Universities have developed refined methods for computing local
water resources and for the multisided use of major reservoirs.

The Chelyabinsk Affiliate of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Water
Hanagement has developed optimum schemes for water supply of industrial enter-
prises.

Planning institutes have determined the long-term requirements for water and have

prepared schemes for the multisided use of water resources in individual river
basins.

Economic institutes have developed economic evaluations of individual components
of the water management system.

The Northern and Southern Ural Basin (Territorial) Administrations have carried
out systematic work on improving the monitoring of water consumption and water
withdrawal, the effective diStribution of local water resources, the effective-
ness of operation of purification structures and monitoring of allocation of
capital investments in water conservation measures.

At the same time, the section noted a number of inadequacies in the study, use and
conservation of the water resources of the Urals. in particular:

a) inadequate study of the conditions for formation, the regime and quality of run-
off of small rivers and its transformation as a result of intensive economic use;
b) poor supplying of enterprises with measurement instruments for monitoring the
consumption, withdrawal and quality of waste water, resulting in inadequate re—
liability of data on the use of water resources and making difficult the effec-
tive control of the water management system:

c) inadequate study of the interrelationship of surface and ground water, the in-
fluence of anthropogenic activity on the change in their resources and quality;
poor rates of exploitation of explored reserves;

d) poor study of technical-economic evaluations of water management measures;

e) lack of reliable methods for the decontamination of purified household-waste
water for use in different spheres of the national economy and also the utiliza-
tion of solid precipitation;

f) inadequacy of water-balance investigations in regions of planned reservoirs, as
well as those which under construction and in operation.

Among the shortcomings we should also note the poor coordination of work on the
problem of water supply of the Ural Economic Region and the low level of planning
of water supply features in the Southern Urals.

In order to improve the study and multisided use of water resources in the Middle

and Southern Urals the section adopted a resolution concerning the feasibility of:
-- developing a scheme for the multisided use and conservation of water resources

88

FOI.0IIICIA1.IEIE(HVLV
ritories for the computation levels 1990, 2000 and 2020, as well as the creation
of a "water management" branch in the country;

-- cessation of the constant cutting of forests in the Ural Economic Region, espec'
islly in Chelyabinskaya Oblast and in the Bashkirskaya ASSR, orientation of the

able increase in forest planting;
-- development of standardized methods for the chemical analysis of natural and
waste water;

sources;
-- organization of a hydrometeorological network for studying the water regime of
small rivers and water bodies in the neighborhood of reservoirs under construc-
tion and in operation (for example, the Dolgobrodskoye, Kyshtymskoye, Yangel'skoye
and other reservoirs), determination of the number of reservoirs for which it is
necessary to determine water balances for the purpose of routine monitoring and
use of the water resources which they contain. activation of work on creating

a network of hydrological posts in national forest and animal preserves;

-- formulation of scientific principles. a scientific-technical program and prac-
tical recommendations on the optimum use of water resources in the Ural River

monitoring methods;

-- development of effective and economical methods for the sanitizing and utiliza-
tion of solid precipitation, demineralization of water during the purification of
different categories of waste water. decontamination of household-waste and run-
off waters at livestock farms, taking into account the presence of new aeration
equipment and structures in water management syscems:

—- formulation of validated technical—economic indices for different methods for
reproduction, regulation and territorial redistribution of water applicable to
the Ural Economic Region;

-- intensification of work on the introduction of water conservation measures for
small rivers, reservoirs and lakes;

8. S. Ustyuzhanin

89

it!!!)FFIClAL USIZtHNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

NOTES FROM ABROAD
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 pp 127-128
[Article by B. I. Silkin]

[Abstract] As reported in NEW SCIENTIST, Vol 91. No 1256, p 331, 1980, the British
Atomic Energy Agency has published a report on "Radioactivity of Air and Precipita-
tion as of the End of 1980." During 1980 the level of radioactivity of precipita-
tion throughout the world was less than 11 of its maximum level in 1963—1966. The
concentration of long-lived decay products had dropped to 2/3 of its 1979 level.

In December 1980 about half the long-lived radioactivity could be attributed ex-
clusively to the Chinese nuclear test of 16 October 1980.

in FLIGHT INTERNATIONAL (Vol 119, No 3765, p 412, 1981) it is reported that the Euro-
pean Space Agency has decided to create an organization known as Eunetsat for observ-
ing and investigating meteorological phenomena from space. It will direct experiments
using the "Heteosat-Z" satellite, which is expecced to remain functional until 1984-
1985, and using a future satellite of this type. These satellites will transmit

cloud cover images and will collect and disseminate meteorological information re-
ceived from ground stations.

In SCIENCE NEWS, Vol 119. No 17. p 262. 1981, it is reported that G. Kitterman of
Kansas City. Missouri, made a photographic study of lightning discharges over a Der-
iod of 77 hours. The purpose was to ascertain if, and how frequently, lightning
discharges may occur simultaneously. He registered 15 pairs of simultaneous light-
ning strokes. This phenomenon has been considered rare.

In JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY. No 10, p 1228, 1980. there is an article con-
cerning American studies of the dynamics of waters in the Bering Sea conducted un-
der the auspicies of NOAA and the us Navy. The principal result of this work was
the discovery of a quasistationary mesoscale eddy which exists in the southeastern
region of this sea. The accumulation of a vast amount of data has made it possible
to draw conclusions concerning the temperatures, salinity and velocity of movement
of waters in the studied region.

.90

FINI(NHHC]AI.[EHE(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OBITUARY 0F DHITRIY ANDRIANOVICH DROGAYTSEV —- 1911-1981

Moscow HETEORDLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 p 128

[Article by staff of USSR Order of Lenin Hydrometeorological Scientific Research
Center]

[Abatract] Dmitriy Andrianovich Drogaytsev, doctor of geographical sciences, an
outstanding specialist in the field of long-range weather forecasting,affiliated
with the Seasonal Heather Forecasts Laboratory at the USSR hydrometeorological Cen-
ter, died on 17 November 1981. A graduate of the Moscow Hydrometeorological Insti-
tute. he devoted his entire life to the field of hydrometeorology. Among his ini-
itial posts was that of senior weatherman on Dikson Island. working for the Arctic
Scientific Research Institute. After receiving his candidate's degree in 1951. he
continued to work with the Arctic Scientific Research Institute of the Main Admin-
istration of the Northern Sea Route and almost every summer was in arctic seas
where his assignment involved servicing of operations for guiding ships along the
Northern Sea Route. By 19b8 he had received his doctorate. During the period 1948—
1950 he was director of the Central Institute of Forecasts. Thereafter he turned
to research work and published more than 50 works devoted to long-range weather
forecasts. predictions of ice, river runoff. precipitation and the thermal state
of seas. He was also a lecturer on marine forecasts in the Oceanology Department
at Moscow State University.

COPYRIGHT: "Neteorologiya i gidrologiya", 1982

5303 - m _
cso: 1864/7

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY