FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10193
16 December 1981

USSR Report

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 10. October 1981

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts; Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10193
16 December 1981

USSR REPORT
METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY
No. 10, October 1981

Translations or abstracts of all articles of the Russian-language
monthly journal METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA published in Moscow by
Gidrometeoizdat.

CONTENTS

“Changes in the Therm l Regime of the Pmnerozoic Amsphere. e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e s o e 1

Dynamic-Statistical Parameterization of the Process of Thermal Effect of the
Ocean on the At.osphere00IIOIOOOIIIC0.000000000DIIIOIOOOOOOO...OIOOOOOOOOOOOO... 2

Scattering and Transport of a Pollutant Cloud in the Tropoephere................ 11

Method for Variational Vertical Adjustment of Clinatic Telpereture and
Geopotential FieldsooI...0.00.00...0.0.0.0...OCOOOOOOOOOOOOO000.00.00.0000...... 20

Precipitation Distribution Over Territory of Bxperinental Meteorological

PolygonOOOOOIOOOIOODO.0.OOOOOOOOCOOOOOO00.0000...00.0.00...IOOOOOOOOOOIOOOCIOOOO 21
Optical Properties of Clouds.................................................... 28

Method for Computing Effective Radiation of the Ocean Surface With Allowance for
Different cloud Levels.QOOOOOOIDIIIOOOOOOOOOCIDIOIOOO'0’...OOOOOOOOIOIOOOOOOQOOO 33

Influence of Cold Synoptic Oceanic Eddies on the Trajectory and Evolution of
Tropical Cyclones.................."on..."no.......-...nounuuounou... ‘3

Physical Structure of the Ocean Surface Layer................................... ‘9
i'Angular Spectrum of Wind Haves.................................................. 60
“Solar Energy Supply to Dnepr Cascade Reservoirs................................. 61
*Cumputation of Dynamics of River Flows Under Nonstationary Conditions........... 62

{cf-Iodcllng of Radiation Regine 1n Punt coveraeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 63

* Denotes items which have been abstracted.
FINICINHCIAI.IEIE(MNLY

Agrometeorological Conditions, Crop Yield and Quality of Spring "heat Grain... 6b
*Diacrinination of Travelling Havea From Experimental Data..................... 76

*Inveatigating the Convergence of a Dry Convective Adaptation Scheme in Kodela
of Hacroscale Atmospheric Processes........................................... 75

*Deteruining Parameters of Correlation Functions During Objective Analyaia of
Hydmleceorological F1e1d800000000OOOOOOOO...0.0.00...OOOOJQOOIOOOOOOOOOCOCCCC 76

*Pornation of Stratus Clouda and P039 on Hydrological Pronto................... 77

Role of Advanced Space Systems in Inplementing the Oceanographic Part of the
world climte Research ProgrmoooootooI0.0.0000000000000000...GOOOOOOOOOOOCOO. 78

*Revieu of Monograph 'Agrophyaical. Agrometeorological and Agroengineerins
Principles of Crop Yield Prograuming' (Agrofizicheakiye, Asrometeorolosicheak»

iye i Agrotekhnicheakiye Oanovy Programmirovaniya Urethaya'), by I. S. Shatilov
and A. F. Chudnovakiy, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1980, 320 Pagea............ 90

*Sixtieth Birthday of Andrey Sergeyevich Monin................................. 91

“Seventieth Birthday of Semen Senenovich Gaygerov.............................. 92
*Sixtieth Birthday of Nikolay Gavrilovich Leonov............................... 93
At the USSR State Committee on Hydroeeteorology and Environmental Monitoring.. 96

Conferences, Meetings, sm1mraeoeeoeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeev-eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 95

*Obituary of Taisiya V8811‘yem Poktovskaya (1900—1981)...o...u.....uon... 101

t
Denotes items which have been abstracted.

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USIIIULY
_f' roe OFFICIAL us: ONLY

UDC SSl.52b.36(100)

CHANGES IN THE THEﬁHAL REGIME IN THE PHAREROZOIC AIMOSPHEIB

Hoscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10. Oct 81 (manuscript received
3 Feb 81) pp 5-10 .

[Article by H. I. Budyko, corresponding member USSR Academy of Sciences. State By-
drological Institute]

[Abstract] In the study of natural conditions in the past the greatest attention is
usually devoted to the last interval of the earth's geological history, the Phaner-
ozoic, which began about 570 million years ago. The problem of the reasons for the
considerable difference in the climatic conditions of the main part of the Phsnero-
zoic and present—day climate has only recently been clarified. The matter can be
investigated by using the semiempirical theory of the thermal regime of the atmo-
sphere, whoa use makes it possible to compute the mean air temperature at the
earth's surf ce and the temperature at different latitudes as a function of the
principal climate-forming factors, including the value of the solar constant, albedo
and the atm‘spheric 002 concentration. It has been concluded that the warm climatic
conditions of the past are attributable for the most part to the higher concentra-
tion of cog in atmospheric air. It has been established that the global cooling
caused by a decrease in the CO; concentration under certain conditions was intensif-
ied by an increase in the earth's albedo as a result of an increase in the area of
the polar snow and ice cover. Since data are now available on changes in the 002
concentration for the entire Phaneroaoic, it is possible to make computations of
mean air temperature not only for the Cenozoic, but also for earlier time intervals.
In such computations it is necessary to take two additional factors into account
whose influence on Cenozoic climate was less important. One of these is a change

in the solar constant, which as a result of the sun's evolution in the past was less
than its present-day value. The second factor is a change in the earth's albedo due
to fluctuations in the area of the oceans, whose increase led to some decrease in
the albedo of the earth-atmosphere system. The evaluation of the role of these fac-
tors makes it possible to conclude that although their influence on mean air tem-
perature was usually less than the influence of fluctuations in 002 concentration,
in some cases it was not negligible. Accordingly. the author has compiled a table
which gives the change in mean air temperature in comparison with the present day
for each geological period from the Lower Cambrian to the Pliocene. The presented
materials make it clear that the variations in mean air temperature in the Phnnero-
zoic were dependent for the most part on changes in CO; concentration and to a less-
cr degree were dependent on changes in solar radiation and the earth's albedo.

Tables 2; references 17: 11 Russian, 6 Western.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omaAL WE ONLY

UDC 551.465. 7+551. 509. 313

MIC-STATISTICAL PWIZATION 07 THE PROCESS 01' rm EFFECT 0? m
OCEAN ON THE ATMSPHERE

Moscow METEOROIDGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 (mnuscript received
28 Jan 81) pp 11-18 _

[Article by Sh. A. Musayelyan. doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, A. D.
Tavadyan and D. B. Shteynbok, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences,
USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Institute]

[Text] Abstract: The authors propose a nodal of the
asynchronous effect of the ocean on the at-

mosphere. The "thermal memory" of the ocean

is parneterised by means of integral allow-
ance for the cloud cover over it. A study was
uncle of the possibility of computing the asyn-
chronous influence function applicable to pre-
diction of two-month anomalies of the heat in-
flux over the European USSR. The results of
massrical experiments for coaputing the asyn-
chronous influence function on the basis of
factual data are presented.

In weather formation processes on the earth an iaportant role is played by the
ocean. One of the possibilities for studying the influence of the ocean on the

atmosphere is mathematical modeling of their interaction on an electronic com-
puter using complex hydrodynamic models. The integration of a nonlinear system
Of equations in partial derivatives, describing the process of interaction be-
tween the atmosphere and ocean, is an extremely couple: and time-consuming com-
putational problem. Many physical aechanisn of interaction between the ocean
and the ataosphere have not yet been fully clarified and their description in
models is approximate. The numerical values of a number of parameters in hydro-
dynamic models, such as the turbulence coefficients and thermophysical psrsneters,
are known only extremely approxinately. Additional hypotheses are used in their
stipulation. Among the serious problems we should also include inaccuracy in the
stipulation of initial and boundary conditions which are necessary in integrat-
ing the equations of the problem and also the inadequate resolution in the models
and other errors in numerical solution methods. As a result of the factors enu-
erated above, at the present tine, using models of the indicated type, it is im-
possible to make a realistic prediction for a time of a week or more. A theoret-
ical analysis of the errors in these models is exceedingly difficult due to their

MOFFICIALUSIONLY
I1JI¢OFIICIAI.IISE2(H¥LV

nonlinearity. To be sure, complex hydrodynamic models adequately describing pro-
cesses of interaction in the earth-atmosphere system must be formulated in the
future since only by using them is it possible to describe the entire diversity
of the processes transpiring in these media. however. at present it is evidently
difficult to hope for quick success when using these models for the purpose of
long-range weather forecasting. Therefore, together with investigations for im-
proving complex models it is also necessary to develop other approaches to solu-
tion of the long-range weather forecasting problem.

A possible approach to the problem of predicting air temperature for long periods
in advance is the use of simpler models of the thermal effect of the ocean on the
atmosphere in which a detailed description of a number of physical processes is
replaced by their indirect description on the basis of different parameteriaa-
tions. These parsmeterizations must reflect the macroscale features, synchronous
and asynchronous relationships of processes occurring in the real "ocean-atmo-
sphere" system.

To be sure, on the basis of such models it is impossible to formulate a detailed
long-range forecast of meteorological fields, but it is entirely reasonable to
attempt to predict individual averaged characteristics of meteorological elements
and phenomena for a long time in advance. As such a characteristic, as proposed
by Academician c. I. Harchuk [1], it is possible to use the mean value of the
monthly or seasonal air temperature anomaly for a fixed region. Without question.
such characteristics are very important from the practical point of view. One of
the merits of the approach developed in [1] is that the inaccuracy in describing
some mechanisms can be partially compensated by including in the model actual in-
formation concerning the prehistory of behavior of the ocean and the atmosphere.
Here it is desirable to combine hydrodynamic and statistical methods. The applic-
ation and theoretical analysis of such models was also simpler than for full de-
tailed models. All this is indicative of the high prospects for this approach.

Now we will introduce into consideration a model of the type described above, in-
cluding an indirect description of the thermal effect of the ocean on the atmo-
sphere and oriented on a long-range forecast of the air temperature anomaly. For
a parameterization of the heat flux from the ocean to the atmosphere during the
cold half year we will use the fact of presence of asynchronous relationships be-
tween air temperature anomalies over the land and cloud cover anomalies over the
ocean discovered by one of the authors [2] as a result of processing of a great
volume of meteorological data. The physical mechanism of these relationships was
described in [3. 4]. In particular, in [A], on the basis of the mentioned asyn-
chronou. relationships. a dynamic-statistical approach was proposed for the prob-
lem of parameterization of the thermal memory of the ocean, based on use of the
heat influx equation. Thus, in accordance with [4], in the model it was assumed
that the principal source of heating of the atmosphere in the cold half-year is
the heat content of the active layer of the ocean. formed during the elapsed

warm half of the year, whereas the cloud cover is a regulator of the thermal ef-

fect of the ocean on the atmosphere. This process of heat transfer from the ocean
to the atmosphere can be described mathematically using the following simple mod-
.I for a spherical earth D:

FOI:0I1WC1AI.1EII(IVLY
MWLIJSEONLY

”:11,” «Vrru. ~)--:~-\7"U- "4‘

 

(l)

-_ i. \' - r. 1'. ~. wwu’. »‘ d-'dt'+x (I. w).
[0K - ocean] ,-._,. M ) ,

where S' and T‘ are anonalies of cloud cover and air tapereture respectively;
V - (V9 , v;) is horizontal wind velocity; "is the aacroturbulence coefficient

(horizontal); V and A is the gradient operator and the Laplace operator on a
sphere; (J - (9.7x), 6 is the coaplelsent of latitude to 1r/2; 2 is longitude;
do) - sin 9d9d) is an element of the surface of a sphere 0; ”ocean is the re-
gion on the sphere occupied by the ocean; x(t, t', 0, al') is an asynchronous
influence function characterizing the degree of influence of the cloud cover
anomly at the point d' - (9'. A ’) over the ocean at the time t' on the change
in air tenperature at the point 0- (6.)) at the time t (t>t'); ‘1 and ‘52 are
non-negative nuabers (or functions which are dependent on t and d), determining
the tine interval in which data on the cloud cover anomaly are taken into account;
82 are those nonadiabatic factors which cannot be described by the first term
on the right-hand side of foruula (l).

with respect to the type of equation (1) it is possible to note the following. The
sane as in [A], we will use the phenonenological approach to the considered prob-
lem and the integral tern on the right-hand side of equation (1) is one of the pos-
sible methods for paraneterisation of the heat influx fron the ocean to the atmo-
sphere. Reneeforth this tern will be dusted 51 (no). It follows from the form
of 81 that it describes the asynchronous relationship observed in nature between
the cloud cover over the ocean and temporal change in the air temperature anomaly.
(The nodel (l) with a nonlocal integral interaction operator is new for netsorol-
ogy). He note that in [6] for the paraaeterization of the heat influx froa the
ocean by scans of cloud cover use was nade of a special case of nodal (1) obtained
from the latter in the absence of a dependence of the function x on t' and 0'.
that is, with X" )L(t, a) ). The latter condition aeana that in [6] the iqlicit
assunption was made that there is an identical role of all regions of the ocean
in the formation of air tasperature on the continent. which is evidently a signif-
icant linitation of the model. however. with use of the nodel (1) such a linita-
tion is remved. In [5] use is made of a model siailar to (l), but for deter-ining
the function f a spectral approach is considered.

Our objective is the use of aodel (l) for a long-range forecast of the tine-aver-
aged «air teqerature snoaaly -

7",(0, 1): 4.5 r (t. a, 1) dt, (2)

where 2‘, - [t1 - ‘6, t1) is the tine-averaging interval; ‘C is the averaging scale.

In order to integrate aodel (1) it is necessary to know the function X(t, t', a),
a) '), and also 11 and {2. A determination of the precise fora of the spatial-

temporal dependence of the asynchronous influence function I- (kernel of the in-
tegral operator) is a complex problea. In order to ensure the uniqueness of the

solution it is necessary to use not only equation (1), but additional considera-
tions concerning the nature of the x function. Here we will examine only an

memusamy
I‘llflﬂﬂ(1Al.US£1DNlN

approximate method for computing the erunction. using data on the time-averaged
fields of temperature anomalies and cloud cover anomalies. This method involves
the following.

He will rewrite equation (1) in the form
F’=%-er--:i>7"- (3)

where F' - £1 + 82. We introduce into consideration the grid of points of intersec-
tion Dh on the sphere D. He will assume that we have an archives of scan monthly

fields of air temperature anomalies, cloud cover anomalies and wind velocity for N
years. Then. using difference approximations for the derivatives entering into the
right-hand side of formula (3). using the latter it is possible to compute the "ac-

tual" mean mOnthly values of the heat influx anomalies during these same N archival
years.

In order to determine the problem of computing the asynchronous influence function
) completely we will impose two natural limitations. The first of these involves
the requirement of an approximate periodicity of the function‘x in time with a per-
iod equal to a year, that is

xU-HTo. !'+IT.. a). m')-1ﬂ. t’. e,e’) (4)

with all t, t', (J, «J'. In expression (6) To - 1 year, r is any whole number or
zero. Condition (A) means that the nature of the relationship between cloud cover
anomalies and the change in the temperature anomaly in different years is approx-
imately one and the same. Here we take into account the assumption made in [6] that
the asynchronous influence function of interest to us is quasiuniversal. If this
requirement of "universality" of the asynchronous influence function is satisfied,

).can be computed in advance (on the basis of archival data) and then it is pos-

sible to use model (1) for the purpose of long-range forecasting of the air temper-
ature anomaly for any year. The second requirement on the X-function is related to
the limitations on the "time radius" of influence of cloud caver on temperature, as

is also manifested in equation (1) in the form of a finite lower limit in a time in-
terval. Mathematically this condition of finiteness is formulated as follows:

1 u. f’. to. «0-0 with c - :'>€2. (5)

Conditions (A) and (5). in combination with formula (3), make possible an approx-
imate computation of the grid values of the x function. For this we will examine
the following approximation of the integral term of interaction 51 in model (1):

1;" .' (0. «all = 2 2 7' (’a- 6- "a- "’5’ (’i‘ '2) 6'76 t’ (6)

GGIEJ’WGDQ

wnere '7‘.“ '1 = "I “ ‘2. (a " ‘3';
Dhcean is the totality of points of intersection in the grid Dh entering into the

ocean region; (it is the interval of the quadrature formula for time integration;
lNJ; is the area of the [-th "cell" of the cubature formula for integration in space
variables.

b‘l

Ff”!(lﬂﬂ(1hl.lﬂi£(ﬂ‘t¥
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we will also represent £2 in the following form. whose sense will be clarified be-
low:

‘3 “1' “ll = 7 (’1' I.) + 0(1‘. '99

(7)

where Y is a time-periodic function with a period equal to one year; 0’ is a resid-
ual term.

The discrimination of the periodic component Yin formula (7) is related to the fol-
lowing circumstance: even with a zero cloud cover anomaly over the ocean there .can
be formation of an air temperature differing from the norm over the region of inter-
est to us. associated with other heat transfer processes. The Y function character-
izea precisely this "residual" heat influx.

For computing ‘X we will examine a set of grid quadratic functionals
Q“: (1.. 2’.) -' z 2 IFIUD 'n)"f'"’(!n ”J-TUu '.)P' (8)

2‘ Ll} I", ”.72"
Here X“ and 7" are the grid values of the X and Y functions; Pto is a set {t1} of
moments in time such that :1 - to + riTo; here To - 1 year, r1 is a whole nder or
zero; to is a fixed moment in time (or a fixed month), for which we want to deter-
mine )L ; 52“ is a grid region where we want to compute the heat influx anomaly.

The 1" and 7" values will be found from the condition of a minimal functional
Q'hgz, also using (a) and (5).

The minimizing of 021 ‘2 means that the asynchronous influence function 7‘ is deter-
mined by the best mean square approximation of the actual heat influx anomaly. Deter-
mining the ”Khan and 7:1 ‘2 values for different 11 and {2. we find such “€10
and $20 that '

a .a _ ' . a -a
0:1». 'w‘I’nsc '1' "Is- 2as) .33.: 'Q:l- HM’I- 1:. "-1- '~:“. (9)

Then, evidently, the asynchronous function ﬂaw-r2 (t, t', w, (9') (together with
yﬂloﬂzo (t, t', a) , u ')) will be the best appro tion of the heat influx anom-

aly in model (1).

Now we will proceed to a description of the numerical experiments carried out for
practical realisation of the dynamic-statistical parameterization method described
above.

We are interested in computation of the asynchronous influence function for predict-
ing the winter air temperature anomaly for the European USSR. He had at Our disposal
archives of data on the mean monthly fields of the cloud cover anomaly and the air
temperature anomaly in the lower half of the troposphere at the points of intersec-
tion of a geographical grid measuring 5 x 10’ in the northern hemisphere for 1965-
1967 and 1970-1976. Using archival data and formula (3) we computed the actual heat
influx anomalies averaged for two successive months. Use was made of nondivergent

wind velocity obtained by solution of the linear balance equation wing climatic
data on geopotential at the mean level of the atmosphere. The approximation of the

FOIOFI‘ICIALUSEONLV
roe OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

space and time derivatives in formula (3) is similar to that set forth in [7]. Be-
low we present the determined actual values of the heat influx anomly, averaged

for Novaber-Decenber and relating to the point “’0. located approximately 100 km
from 'ioscow.

 

Fig. 1. Ocean regions used in computing the asynchronous influence function.

Data on the anomaly of total quantity of clouds were taken into account in our ex-
periments only over the waters of the North Atlantic, which was divided into faur
regions, as indicated in Fig. 1. He computed the grid asynchronous influence func-
tion for the cloud cover anomaly over each of these regions relative to the forma-
tion of the heat influx anomaly in NovemberDecember at the point do. The averaged
heat influx anomaly, in accordance with what has been stated above, will have the
following form:

Ext—x" (.0 = Eff-m “90)32‘ (.1) + tin-m: Moo). (10)

llere 7. is the number of the region of the Atlantic; ‘1 is the central point of the
l-th region; n is the number of the year; j is thi we; of the math (or mths)
during which cloud cover is taken into account; 1,. 1' ' (00) is the grid func-
tion of the asynchronous influence of the clOud cover anomaly over the l-th re-
gion of the Atlantic in the j-th month on the formation of the heat influx anon-
aly averaged for November-December at the point do (multiplied byHA t); 3'?“ 0’0)
is the cloud cover anomaly averaged for the region I, in the j-th mnth of the n-th
year; 77114113qu) is the heat influx anomaly averaged for Novedaer-December at

the point “’0 with a zero cloud cover anomaly over the Atlantic in the j-th month.

Actual Values of Heat Influx Anomaly, Averaged for November-December, at Point 0'0
(in 10'5°C/sec)

Years 1965 1966 1967 1970 1971 1972 1973 1976

Ileat influx
Value -1a6 0e] -1e7 0e8 "0e3 ‘lel 2.3 -oe4

h'c :arried out different variants of computations of the X function differing from
"no another with respect to the initial data on temperature and cloud cover, that
is. with respect to the sample used. A list of the variants is given in Table l.
“m: table shows that for computing the asynchronous influence function, for ex-

ample. for the first variant, in the functional (8) it is necessary to use a
sample of data on the temperature and cloud cover anomalies for 1965, 1967, 1970,
i972, 1973 and 1974.

FOIOFHCIALLSEONLY
M OFFICIAL [8! ONLY

Table 1

Variants of Nuletical Experiments for Computing Asynchronous Influence Punctioa

No of variant Years included in snnple

1965 1967 1970 1972 1973 1976
1966 1967 1970 1971 1973 1976
1965 1966 1967 1970 1971 1972
1965 1967 1970 1971 1972 1976
1965 1966 1971 1972 1973 1976
1966 1967 1971 1972 1973 1976

OU§UPJH

r
.—

9 . '
O .

O
Inga-e N variant

———-;i--—5

I 1 .
o . . ‘ .
9 e e A
‘
, \
5 G
d ..
of A! 3"
.§
I

it :3

 

Fig. 2. Values of asynchronous influence function W'nn" “’Bfin 10'5°C/(oec'
unit)) for four regions of ocean and values of the function ’ ‘VI (“10) (in
lO'S'CIsec). ogtained in different variants of numerical experiments. 1) 71; 2)

’2‘ 3) i3; 6) 1.1.; 5) i7 .

In computing the values of the grid asynchronous influence function W'XIIWI
we used the June cloud cover anomaly over the Atlantic, that is. ll. emined e
case when in the model (1) the T2 -'61 difference is one month. Figure 2 shown

8

MWLIBEONLY
FOIOW'ICIALUSEWLY

that the values of the function i‘XI-XIIWI for the corresponding regions of the
ocean are close. especially for regions from the first to the third. The estab-
lished fact confirms the assumption nade above concerning the universal nature of
the )1 function (see (4)) and indicates a strong asynchronous correlation of the
June cloud cover anonaly over the first, second and third regions of the Atlantic

'-'1th a heat influxvfnonaly at the point “’0 averaged for NovemberbDec-her. The

component {Ail-XII: has a more unstable character. The variability of W411”!
evidently indicates a diversity of the physical processes forming the heat influx-
es over the European USSR in November-December. He also note that the values of

the X function for regions 2 and 3 were negative, which corresponds to the results
in [4].

. Table 2

Ancnaly of Heat Influx {or November-Deceﬁer at Point “’0, Computed Using the Asyn-
chronous Influence Function yin-nun (in 10"5’c/sec)

 

No of Years
var i- '

ant

 
 
    

it"sin'o'a'oo

OOQQN~
IIIIII

Using the determined asynchronous influence function i XI-XII;VI we carried out
computations (diagnosis and prediction on the basis of independent data) of the
heat influx anomalies themselves in November-Decedaer at the point “’0 using for-
mula (10). Table 2 gives the results of these computations. Some of the values
in this table represent the result of prediction, whereas the others represent
diagnosis. For example. the data in Table 2, corresponding to 1965, are (see
Iable l) prognostic in computations under the second and sixth variants; corres-
onnding to 1966 — for the first and fourth variants. etc. It can be seen that
--‘th the diagnostic and pragmatic values for the heat influx anomaly are close
-- their actual values (presented above) for all variants except the fourth. In
general, however, the guaranteed probability of a forecast of the sign of the
heat influx anomaly at the point ab, averaged for November-December, is approxi-
mately 832 according to the data in Table 2.

3c carried out numerical experiments similar to those described above for computing
.:.|' asynchronous influence function and diagnosis and prediction of the heat influx
u-omly Ull.‘h use of the summer cloud cover for other some: months. They also con-
!‘ﬁrmod the desirability of introducing universal asynchronous influence functions

' -.- prvdirrtng the heat influx anomaly. Later we plan to examine different cases

.4 '.--.r,.nr.:l and spatial averaging, investigate the role of circulation in compute»
:Sons of x and use of the resulting asynchronous influence functions for the long-

range forecasting of the air tesperature anomaly in model (1).

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

So

6.

POI OFFICIAL IS! ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Harchuk, G. I., CHISLENNYYB RESHBNIYA ZADACII DINAMIKI £1108me I OKEANA
(Nu-cries]. Solutions of Problems in Dynamics of the Atnosphere and Ocean),
Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1971..

Harchuk, c. I. and Husayelyan, Sh. A., "Method for Computing Variations of the

Total Flux of Radiant Energy for the Purpose of Long-Range Forecasting of
Hacroscale Meteorological Fields." )ETBONLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology

and Hydrology), No b. 1971‘.

Husayelyan, Sh. A., "Problem of Paranaterisation of the Process of Transfer
of Radiant Energy of the Sun in the Ocean-Atmosphere System and Long-Range
Forecasting," HE‘IDOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 10, 1974.

Husayelyan, Sh. A., 0 PRIRODE NEKOTORYKH SVBRIGIDLITBL'NYKH AMSFERNYKR PMSBS-

sov (Nature of Some Superlong Atmospheric Processes), Leningrad, Gidroueteoiz-
dat, 1978.

Husayelyan, Sh. A. ‘l‘avadyan, A. D. and Chechetkina, Ye. PL, "One Method for
Paraneterization of the Process of Macroacele Effect of the Ocean on the Atto-

sphere ." TRUDY GIDROHETTSENTRA SSSR (Transactions of the USSR Bydroneteorolog-
ical Center), No 204, 1978.

Sadokov, V. P. and Shteynbok, D. 3., ”Computation of the Temperature Anolaly
of the Tropoaphere by the Conjugate Equations Hethod Using Cloud Cover Data,"
TRUDY GIDRW‘I’SENTRA SSSR, No 222, 1980.

Shteynbok, D. 3., "Use of Conjugate Equations for Studying the Formation and
Computing the Anomaly of Mean Tropospheric temperature." Author's Su-ary of

Dissertation for Award of the Acadeaic Degree of Candidate of Physical and
Hathaatical Sciences, Moscow, Gidrolettaentr 8883, 1979.

10

MWMONLY
l-‘OIOFII'ICIALISEONLY

UDC 551.510.62
SCATTERING AND TRANSPORT OF A POW? CLOUD m m morosrms

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIIA in Russian No 10. Oct 81 (sanuscript received
17 Feb 81) pp 19-25

[Article by V. P. Gavrilov, candidate of physical and sathsmstical sciences. and
A. A. Kostrikov, Institute of Experimental Meteorology]

[Tut] Abstract: On the basis of a seniespirical equa-
tion of turbulent diffusion of a parabolic type
the authors formulated a nodal of scattering of

a pollutant cloud in the troposphere. Using the
moments sethod it was possible to obtain a clos-

ed systen of equations describing the behavior

of the coordinates of the center of gravity and
dispersions of a cloud of passive impurity from

an instantaneous source. In the model use is made
of the hypothesis of a dependence of the coef-
ficients of horizontal diffusion on the corres-
ponding dispersions (dimensions) of the cloud.
Analytical formulas describing the behavior of the
center of gravity trajectory are derived for the
horizontal conponents of wind velocity, linearly
dependent on altitude, and the constant coefficient
of vertical diffusion. Nonlinear equations ’for'dis-
persions in which the coefficients of horizontal
diffusion are proportional to the dispersions

in the power 2/3 were solved numerically. The de-
pendence of the horizontal dispersions on the
diaensionless umber characteristic for the prob-
lee is examined. Also discussed is the problem of
computation of the distribution of the field of

concentration of the impurity and an evaluation
is made of the assusption of the normalcy of dis—
tribution of this field for the special case con-

sidered in the article.

In order to solve many practical problems, such as the tracking of the propagation

of accidental industrial effluent over great distances and s nudier of other prob-
lens it is necessary to be able to compute the atmospheric behavior of a cloud of

pollutant having small initial dimensions. In most cases it is necessary to know

11

”MWWLY
FOI!OFFKJAI.USEIMULV

the trajectory of the cloud and the distribution of the concentration in it at
different moeents in time, including ten hours after the moment of its formation,
and not only near the earth's surface, but also in the troposphere.

The problems involved in the turbulent diffusion of a passive pollutant have been
relatively well studied theoretically and experimentally for the case of the sur-
face layer of the atmosphere and have been studied less well for the boundary lay-
er and very poorly for the higher layers of the atmosphere. An analysis of the
present status of work on atmospheric diffusion can be found in monographs and
review articles, such as in [6, 7, 12, 15, 17].

As the mathematical model of the process of transfer and scattering of a cloud of
pollutant in the troposphere we will use the widely employed semismpirical equa-

tion of a parabolic type ,5,
a, . _ d
amt-m0“, on) (1)

where q is the pollutant concentration, v1 are the wind velocity components, K11
is the tensor of the diffusion coefficients, 1, j - l, 2, 3.

The stipulation of the functional form of the coefficients in equation (1) is a
significant, if not the fundamental difficulty in this description of scattering

of a pollutant in the turbulent atmosphere. Accordingly, we will first sxenine
the problem of the presence (collection) of information pertaining to the veloc-
ity vector v1 and the tensor K11.

No fundamental difficulties arise in determining the wind velocity vector vi; the

only difficulty nay be a shortage of factual information. In the solution of the
problems of transport of a pollutant over great distances in a general case the
vector v1 aust be stipulated as dependent on time and coordinates in connection
with the spatial inhomogeneity and tesporal evolution of the velocity field. For
solving the problem of the behavior of a cloud of pollutant during some time inw
terval in the past (diagnostic problem) it is necessary to have information on

the wind velocity field, obtaining it from data from standard radiosonde observb
arions, using interpolation at the point where the cloud is situated. The vertical

component can be determined from the field of horizontal velocity, for this pur-
pose using the continuity equation. Existing routine methods for weather forecast-
ing make it possible to obtain prognostic information on the three-dimensional

field or wind velocities [l].

The choice of the functional form of the diffusion coefficients involves consider-
able difficulties because they cannot be unambiguously related to the characteris-
tics of atlospheric turbulence.

According to modern concepts. the scattering of a cloud (increase in its dimensions)
occurs under the influence of turbulent eddies whose size is coeparsble to the sire
of the cloud of pollutant or seallerthan thissise. This means that for the cloud

the coefficient of turbulent diffusion (which is determined as the rate of increase

in its dispersion) is also dependent on the size of the cloud until this size is

12

INJIiOIIiClAL lliﬁtﬂllv
I!!! 0'!ﬂ(1Al.ll§El0tﬂLY

substantially greater than the size of eddies with a maximum energy, that is, the
external turbulence scale. A coefficient specifically dependent on the size of the
cloud must also be used in equation (1) for computing the evolution of a cloud
fron an instantaneous source [2. 3. 7, 15, 17].

In choosing the components of the K11 tensor for specific problems it is necessary
to take into account the anisotropy of atmospheric turbulence. Since in the tropo-
sphere the spectrum of vertical fluctuations of wind velocity has a maxim- in the
microscale range, a cloud with a small initial vertical dimension rather rapidly
attains such a size that the vertical diffusion coefficient K33 will not increase
with a growth of the cloud and will be determined by the intensity of the eddies
with the maximum energy. Precisely for this reason the vertical diffusion coef-
ficient is assumed to be either constant with altitude or the troposphere is broke
en down vertically into layers with different behavior of K33 in each layer [6, l3,
16].

The maxnnun in the spectrum of horizontal wind velocity fluctuations is in a region
of considerably greater scales - in the synoptic region [20] and therefore the
tensor components K13 responsible for horizontal scattering must be related to
cloud size. We note that in turn the horizontal dimensions of the cloud ere influ-
enced by both the value of the horizontal diffusion coefficient and the effect of
the joint influence of wind velocity shear and vertical diffusion. The contribution
of the latter to horizontal scattering can be substantial [7, 8, ll, 14, 18]. In a
number of models this complex dependence is simplified by means of a priori stipul-
ation of the dependence of the Kg; coefficients on diffusion time (the time from
the noeent of cloud formation) [13, 16], or, which is the equivalent under the con-
dition of satisfaction of the Taylor hypothesis. on the distance to the source [17].

In this article we propose the direct use of the dependence of the horizontal dif-
fusion coefficient on the horizontal dimension of the cloud.

The nondiagonal components of the tensor K11 are assumed to be equal to zero; the _
latter means that we use the hypothesis of a nondependence of horizontal diffusion

on vertical diffusion.

The specific meteorological conditions will determine the specific dependence of
the horizontal diffusion coefficients on cloud size. In particular, there are def-
inite indications that in the range from microscales to tens and even hundreds of
kilometers this dependence has a power-law character with en exponent~6l3 [9, 19,
20]. In this article we employ two variants of writing of the dependence of K); on

cloud scale ”£53:

I I C‘U-IDSZI‘ (2.)
A“ = l ‘- g'l“D” D::I"" I. a: 1.2.

(2b)
where c is constant (for numerical computations, see below. we used the value c -
0.1), 8 is the velocity of cascade transfer of energy through the spectrue, by;
are the horizontal dispersions of the cloud of pollutant.

The mean velocity of cascade energy transfer can he obtained from information on
the wind velocity field [5].

l3

FOI!OIFHJA1.USICNVLY
FtIICHﬂNCJAl.lEIE(ﬂ‘LY

The second variant of the dependence (2b) appears to be physically more valid be-
cause numerous experimental investigations in the free atnosphere [20] show that
the nicro- and nesoscale horizontal disturbances of wind velocity are virtually
isotropic. Nevertheless. the problem of how significantly the deviations froe iso-

tropicity are reflected in the scattering of a cloud of pollutant in the tropo-
sphere for the tine being remains open.

At first glance the problem is greatly conplicated since the horizontal diffusion
coefficients are functions of the dispersions, which in turn are deternined

through the field of concentration. that is, with such coefficients equation (1)
' will be nonlinear.

The experimental method and technique of diffusion experiments at the present tine
do not sure it possible to speak 0 obtaining a detai ed experimental distribution

of the field of concentration of a pollutant. The dispersions of clouds and plumes
of pollutant are measured relatively reliably and precisely, as are the trajector-
ies of movement of the center of gravity of a pollutant cloud. Accordingly, it is
more logical to derive equations directly for deter-ining the simplest diffusion
characteristics of the pollutant cloud and not extract them from the distribution

function. This method, the so-called noeents method, has been repeatedly used in
exanining the diffusion process [11, lb, 18].

Now we will examine the behavior of a cloud of passive pollutant fro. an instant-
aneous point source. We will integrate equation (1) for x1 and x2, first multiply-
ing it by xfxB (n, n - 0. l. 2) and limiting ourselves to the case when v1 and Rig

are not dependent on the horizontal coordinates, but v3 - 0. As a result, we ob-
tain a system of five equations: -

(3)
do
00.. 0 WM‘
W—7’-(K.'.¢T -2Kh.4.“2010I~o (s)

where

?

S xfqulx.y.z,t)dxdy,

«In (:. r) = J

i.p-l.2; m.n-0.l.2

are the monents (l- m + n) of the order (not greater than the second) of the con-
centration distribution function. Through these nonents we deternine the central

nonents of the second order - the dispersions; then the horizontal diffusion co-
efficients will have the form

K.. = .‘ w-[Zef — (%)' m. ‘6"
mac-mm:-(z:')’][%-(-:‘:)’h‘"- ‘°"’
14

FOI‘OFFIJAI.USIGIVLY
FUIlDFﬁlJAI.USE(IVLY

Now we will exaaine a specific case when the pollutant is propagated from a high
(x. y - 0, z - h) instantaneous point source, K33 - k - const, 81- const, va - VD
+)a(z - h). The boundary conditions for the moments are found fro. the ordinary
conditions for the concentration - with the concentration tending to zero at in-
finity and with absence of a flow at the underlying surface. With these simplifica-
tions it is easy to obtain an analytical solution for qo and q; , describing the

behavior of the integral concentration qo(z,t) vertically and the coordinates of
the center of the pollutant cloud X; - q;_/qo

_(ao-f _(x-Aﬁ (7)
9.,(2. f) =-—;27-';=;-[e "I +8 “i Jo

IR!

.=(o‘f-nh)t+l} :Tx

 

34-1: ’37 _ on»?
., .. . 'TF'
(r-- h- «- 2enedt (m) + N: ., A) 1/ 7 e
X _. (um: _ 13-h: ’
' ""1"“, "TT (8)
where l
eric (x) = l - s?- {c-“dx.
)'= 5

Expressions (8) for the coordinates of the center of gravity of the pollutant

cloud differ from the corresponding foraulas derived in [18] in an exasination of
diffusion from a surface point source with a linear wind profile and K3 - conet,

K11 - coast (or Kf,z) in that in (8) the height of the source is taken nto ac-
count. Uith h - 0 formulas (8) undergo transition into the formulas in [18].

As indicated by the computations, with large s and h and relatively short dif-

fusion tiaes (z, ha/kt) the curves (8) for X) are approxiaated well by the asyap-
totic straight line

X,=(o':+n £51]: _ (9)

which can be used in approximate computations of the trajectory of the center of
gravity of a diffusing cloud of pollutant.

The last two equations (5) in the systen. describing the behavior of the second
moments and accordingly the horizontal dispersions of the cloud of pollutant. are
nonlinear and therefore are not subject to analytical solution. For a numerical

solution we will reduce the equations to a dimensionless fora and we will assume
that the initial distribution in the cloud is Gaussian and v2 - 0. He will use

the following scales: Q is the seas of pollutant introduced into the ai’gsphere:

U is the scale of wind velocity; T - 0/5 is the tine scale; 2k - (RT)
U(k/$ ) ’2 is the height scale, L - UT - Uzle is the length scale. It is found

15

FIIICHHNCJAI.IINE(IULY
FOItOFI‘CIAl.lEIE(l'L¥

that k and 6 will not enter into nations (3)-(S), whereas the expression for
dimensionless wind velocity V1 . V + G (2' - h') will include the dimensionless

parameter

—~

- "('T) ' (10)

which is the ratio of the diffusion height scale zk - (kT)1/2, found relative to
gradient height scale Zy- U/Yl (with 7’1 - 10‘3 sec‘l, It - 10 mzlsec an; a - 5-
10’“ m2/sec3, G - 0.16). The parameters forming the number G - 6( )ﬁ, k, 5) in
principle are correlated and therefore, despite the fact that we know the limits
of change of these parameters, it is difficult to say what C values are observ-
able in the atmosphere.

The equations (3)-(S), reduced to dimensionless form, were solved by the finite
differences method. For approximating the equations we used a Crank-Nicholson
scheme having a second order of approximation in space and time. The trial-and-
?rror method with iterations was used in solving the derived difference equations
10 .

The correctness of application of the finite-difference scheme was checked by a
comparison of the numerical solution with the analytical solution (7) and an an-
alytical expression for the horizontal dispersions relative to the center of

gravity of the cloud of pollutant:
2 I
Du=(D},"+ 769‘") O (11)

which was obtained from solution of equation (5) with k - 0 and with K,} in the
form (2a).

Numerical experiments were carried out for determining the dependence of the hori-
zontal dispersion of the cloud on the dimensionless nunber G characterizing the
joint influence of the wind velocity shear and vertical diffusion on the horizon-
tal scattering. In these experiments the pollutant "was introduced" so high above
the underlying surface and such diffusion times were considered that the horizon-
tal dispersion was virtually not dependent on height. The figure (a,b) shows curves
of change in dimensionless longitudinal and transverse dispersions when the initial
size of the cloud no longer exerts an influence on the behavior of dispersion.

As might be expected, in all the experiments the horizontal dispersion already
with relatively short times (t'ov0.07) increases as t'3. It can be seen from this
same figure that the coefficient on t'3 is essentially dependent on G. In addi-
tion, with the stipulation of K13 in the form (2b) the transverse dispersion is
also dependent on G.

If G - 0.14 is used as the characteristic value, then, comparing the horizontal
dispersions obtained in the model [13, 16] and from solution of equations (3)-(5)
we see that the longitudinal dispersion is greater by a factor of approximately 15
(with stipulation of K); in the form (2a)) and by a factor of b (with K3; in the

fora (2b)) than the cloud dispersion in the absence of wind shear. Thus, the model
in [13, 16] understates the longitudinal dispersion value by several times.

16

INIICIHWC1A1.0851IVLY
FOI1OFFKJA1.US£INILV

The different stipulation of the functional form of the horizontal coefficients
Kg; in the form (2a), (2b) leads. beginning with relatively large 6 values (of
about 10'2). to an appreciable difference in the ratios of the horizontal disper—
sions ”ll/”22 for a given 6 (see figure c). The figure shows that for large 6 val-
ues the ratios ”ll/”22 increase in the first variant (2a) of stipulation of Kan
as 62. in the second variant - as C. An answer to the question as to what variant

of the behavior of D3; is observable in the atsosphere can be obtained only by a
field experiment.

 

Fig. 1. Dependence of horizontal dispe sion of pollutant clo on time with dif-
ferent Values of the 6 number, V'l . v; + G’s' - h'), where V1 - 10 u/i,§. h ' 5000
m. v2 - o, ”o - 5000 .2. a) not” - cr1 3 DZ 3; b) KM- eel/3 (1111022) ; 1 and 2
-- longitudinal and transverse dispersions obtained as a result of computations us-
ing model; 3) longitudinal dispersion computed using formula (12); 6) transverse
dispersion colputed using formula (13); c) ratio of dispersions D11/D22 as function
of 6 number; a) It” - ct I392/3. b) Kn- ca 1/3(Dnnzz)1l3.

For many problems information on the behavior of the first two monents of the dis-
tribution function for the mean concentration is entirely adequate. In addition.
in case of necessity it is possible to write equations for the higher moments and
solve them. determining asymmetry, excess and other characteristics of the pol-
lutant cloud. But for some practical problems it is necessary to have evaluations
of the mean concentration distribution. A necessary condition for the horizontal
distribution to be Gaussian is that the asylletry and excess coefficients be equal
to zero.

As is well known, the third moment of the Gaussian distribution is expressed
through the lower moments in the following way:

 

__ ‘l 'A': —0 i)’
“Ann—3 ﬁ -m “-

(12)
Substituting this expression into the equation for the third moment
04““ 0 “3” - '. - is
‘7:- .. 77(KJ'1T) .. Shawn + 39..” (13)

INJI‘OIIICIAI.IISIZ¢HVLY
[WWWONLV

we see that the equation is not identically satisfied; on the right-hand side is
the additional tern dX OD
' I u.

“Kat-5' 17-

Thus, the distribution of pollutant becomes asynastrical if this term is different
from zero. Since in the real atmosphere there is virtually always a wind shear, the
gradient ax. la a is virtually always different froe zero. At the same ties, as
indicated by our numerical experinents, the dispersion gradient angle a is equal
to zero with a linear wind velocity profile and only near the lover boundary be-
comes different from zero. A similar, but externally sore couples result is ob-
tained for the fourth moment. Thus, if the initial distribution of the pollutant

is Gaussian, the cloud noves distant free the underlying surface and the wind velo—
city changes virtually linearly with altitude, the distribution of the pollutant at
a given level in a cloud within the framevork of this nodel can also be considered
normal.

In conclusion , - n" . express appreciation to N. L. Dyzova for discussion of
the article ano attention to this study.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Veyl', I. 6., "Hydrodynamic Scheues for Short-Range Forecasting," TRUDY GIDRO-
MBTTSENTRA SSSR (Transactions of the USSR Mydroneteorological Center), No 126,
1973.

2. Voloshchuk, v. M., "Vertical Turbulent Transfer in the Surface Layer,"
METEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 10, 1975.

3. Voloshchuk, V. M., "Nonlocal Paraseterisstion of Vertical Turbulent Zachange
in the Surface Layer," HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 6, 1976.

6. Koropalov. V. H. and Severov, D. A., "Propagation of a Light Pollutant Over
Great Distances From a Linear Source." TRUDY IPG (Transactions of the Insti-
tute of Applied Geophysics), No 39. 1978.

5. Leys. Ye. K., "Two-Dimensional Turbulent Viscosity Coefficients," TEDDY Z-go
TOKIYSKOCO SIMPOZIUMA P0 CHISLENNYM METODAM PBDGNOZA POGODY (Transactions of
the Second Tokio Symposium on Nunerical Methods of Heather Forecasting), Len-

ingrad, Gidroseteoizdat, 1971.

6. METEOROLOGIYA I ATOMNAYA BNERGIYA (Meteorology and Atoaic Energy), translated
fron English, edited by N. L. Bysova and K. P. Maknon'ko, Leningrad, Gidro-

neteoizdat, 1971.

7. Monin, A. S. and Yaglon, A. M., STATISTICHESKAYA GIDROMZKBANIKA (Statistical
Hydrosechanics), Moscow, Nauka, Part I. 1965, Part II, 1967.

8. Novikov, Ye. A., "Turbulent Diffusion in a Flow With a Transverse Velocity

Gradient," PRIKLADNAYA MATEMATIKA I MBKHAMIKA (Applied Matheaatics and Mech-
anics), Vol 22, No 3, 1958. ‘

l8

ros<orruna1.usr¢nutv
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

M omen. IS! ONLY

Pinus, N. 2., "Energetics of Turbulent Hove-eats in the Troposphere," IN. All
5588: PIZIKA AMSFERY I am (levs of the USSR Acadeuy of Sciences: Physics
of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 8, No 8, 1972.

Salarskiy, A. A., VVBDENIYB V menu WOW 8-! (Introduction to Theory
of Difference Schemes), Hoscou, Nauka, 1971.

Aria, 8., "On the Dispersion of e Solute in a and moving Through a Tube,"
PROC. ROY. SOC. (London), A 235, 1956.

Corrsin, 5., "Limitation of Gradient Transport Models in Randoa Walks and in

Turbu1ence," TURBULENT DIFFUSIOII IR mu. POLLUI'IOII, ADV. cactus”
Vol 18A, 1976.

Crawford, T. V., "Atmospheric Diffusion of Large Clouds," "DC. 0! I!!! USABC
WNL. INFORM. KEEPING, 1967, CHALK RIVER, Canada, Rapt. AME-2787, 1968.

Csanady, G. ‘1'., "Diffusion in an Bit-an Layer,” J. Arms. 801., Vol 26, No 3,
1969.

Csanady, G. T., TURBULENT DIFFUSION I“ I’ll! MIMI, 0., Raids]. Publ. 00.,
1973.

Knox, J. 3., "Nmricsl Hodeling of the Transport Diffusion and Deposition of

Pollutants for Regions and Extended Scales," J. an POLLUT. OONT. ASSOC., Vol
21., No 7, 1974.

Pasquill, P., AMSPHERIC DIFFUSION, 2d Edition, John Wiley and Sons, New
York, 1975.

Seffnan, P. 6., "The Effect of Hind Shear on Horizontal Spread Proa an Instant-
aneous Ground Source," QUART. J. ROY. 1131301101.. 900., Vol 88, No 378, 1962.

Syrekov, 3., "0n the Basic Dependence of the Relative Eddy Diffusion in Syn-
optic Scales for Rotating Ataoephere," Paper presented at the m Syrupoaiun on

the Long-Range Transport of Pollutants and Its Relation to General Circulation
Including Stratospheric/‘rropospheric Exchange Processes, Sofia, 1-5 October

1979, WHO S38, Geneva, 1979.

Vinnichenko, N. K., "The Kinetic Energy Spectrum in the Free Atmosphere — 1
Second to 5 Years," TELLUS, Vol 22, No 2, 1970.

19

MWALIBIONLV
MWLUSCONLV

UDC 551. 526 . 73551. 5107 . 5: 519. 3

mo FOR VARIATIONAL VERTICAL ADJUST”! 0? CLDWIIC TERM“ AD GROWN
HMS

Moscow WROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 (manuscript received
a Jan 81) pp 26-33

[Article by K. G. Rubinshteyn, candidate of physical and aathuaatical sciences.

and V. B. Shilyayev. All—Union Scientific Research Institute of Bydroasteorolog-
ical Infornstion-Horld Data Center, and 08511 hydrometeorological Scientific Re-

search Center]

[Abstract] A method is proposed for vertical adjustment of the temperature and geo-
potential fields as a solution of the variational problem. The authors have em-
played the traditional approximation of the equation of statics eaployed in the
static monitoring of aerological data. Three possible variants of foraulstion of
the variational problem are presented. Analytical solutions are given for two of
these and the results of a nuaericel experiaent are given for the third. The paper
is presented in three parts: formulation of vertical adjustaent problem in the

form of a variational problem adjustment algorithm; example of use of vertical ad-
jultmcnt method. The materials presented here indicate that use of the proposed
.nethod leads to retention of the funds-anal structure of the cliaatic teapereture
and geopotential fields vhen there is assurance of precise satisfaction of the eel-
ected approxiaation of the equation of statics. At the present time work is pro-
ceeding on a more detailed analysis of the influence of adjustment on the initial
fields, their integral characteristics and spectral properties. Future plans cell
for investigation of sensitivity of the adjust-ant aethod to changes in the weight-
ing factors free the point of view of retaining the fundsoental structure of the
long-wave part of the field spectrua. After optimizing the method, it vill be used
in adjusting the archives of climatic aerological data created at the lbscov Div-
ision of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Bydrometeorological Infor-
mation. Thus, the proposed aethod is a necessary part of the process of creating
aerological archives. Figures 3; references 10: 6 Russian, 6 western.
FOI‘O'TWCIAI.IEHE(IVLY

. UDC 551.577.2(477.63)
PRECIPITATION DISTRIBUTION OVER TERRITORY OP EXPERIHBNTAL METEOROLOGICAL POLYGON

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDIOLOGIYA in Russian lo 10, Oct 81 (manuscript received
3 Her 81) pp 35-39

[Article by V. H. Huchnik, candidate of physical and natheaatical sciences, Ukrain-
ian Regional Scientific Research Institute]

[Text] Abstract: Data are given on the distrib-
ution of summer prediction as a function
of the direction of its transport.

In [1] we established statistically that stable local nonuniformities of precipit-
ation exist (during the warm season of the year) over the territory of the Exper-
inentel Meteorological Polygon (EH?) of the Ukrainian Scientific Research Insti-
tute of the State Committee on Hydroeeteorology and Environmental Honitoring. It
was postulated that such a distribution of precipitation is attributable to the
effect exerted by major industrial cities (especially Krivoy Rog. situated within
the liaits of the polygon) and large water bodies situated near the SIP. Accord-
ingly, within the polygon there should be a dependence of the distribution of pre-
cipitation on the direction of its transport. In particular, it eust be expected
that with directions of transport froa the west the distribution of precipitation
over the territory will be determined by the influence of Krivoy Rog. especially
since with the transport of precipitation with a westerly component the moat abun-
dant showers occur because the novement of fronts over the Ukraine in lost cases
occurs with westerly directions.

In order to clarify the influence of cities and water bodies on the distribution
of precipitation over the territory of the EM? we coepiled naps for the four prin-
cipal directions of transport: northerly (315-065'). easterly (ass-135'). souther-
ly (135-225') and westerly (225-315‘). The directions of transfer of precipitation
were determined frou the prevailing direction of the wind in the layer 2-3 km [2)
over the course of 25 hours. For this purpose we used the same date on precipita-
tion for May-August 1966-1970 in the EM? which were used in [1).

Figure 1 shows that for all directions of transport of precipitation there is :n
extrenely significant breakdown into local regions. As in [1], we will designate
regions with an increased quantity of precipitation on the maps by the symbol "+"
and regions with a decreased quantity by the synbol "-". As a convenience in com-

parison of maps of the distribution of precipitation for the different directions
of transport with the general nap published in [1] we reproduce it here as Fig. 2.

21
FOI‘OIIICIAI.IEII¢INLY
MWWMV

h)

d)

 

(Hay-August) precipitation naps for the bperinental Heteoroh
1966-1970 for directions of precipitation transport. a) north
c) southerly; d) westerly.

 

(May-August) precipitation nap for the Experimental Heteorolo:
1966-1970.

the precipitation distribution maps (Pig. 1) that with norther:
c) and westerly (6) directions of transport the num- quanti1
falls in the M. In the case of northerly and westerly direc-
e "+" are arranged for the most part tron N" to 38. Per sea-pk

he centers 1 n, v3, VI: follow one another, whereas on up ((1)
, 1V2. V1, VIP we note that the ”-" centers exhibit approxilal
vior. for exanple. on the nap (a) the centers 12, 1112. V}! are
irection. '

22

Newman“
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1

Coincidence of Centers "4-" and "-" on Maps with Different Directions of the
Transport of Precipitation During 1966-1970 With Regions "+" and "-” on the
Overall Map for These Sane Years

    
 
  
   

Direction of
precipitatio "
transport '1'-

i

Northerly

Easterl
Southerly

Hester 1y

Note: co -— number of coincidences, nonco — amber of noncoincidences for all re-
gions of precipitation.

Table 2

Frequency of Recurrence of Centers of Precipitation by Directions of Transport
and \alues of p Parameter for 1966—1970

 

 

Centers I Direction of precipitation transport
I——'—g——_—
:northerly : easterly southerlylvesterly

l4

 

 

A further examination of the maps of distribut -on of precipitation by the directions
of transport indicates that despite all the diversity there is one notevorthy fea-
ture: both the centers "+" and "-" are arranged on then in an extreeely sieilar nan-
ner. This becomes especially obvious in a conparison of the arrangenent of centers
on the maps in Fig. l with the arrangement of regions of increased and reduced
quantities of precipitation on the map in Fig. 2. These data are presented in

Table 1. The coincidence of a center "+" with a region of increased quantity of
precipitation and a center "-" with a region of reduced quantity of precipitation

is noted in the table by the symbol "+" and their noncoincidence by the symbol "-".

We note that cases are possible when with a particular region of precipitation on

the overall nap there can at the same time be a coincidence with a center of one
sign and a noncoincidence with a center of the other sign. In addition. there

can be cases of absence of a coincidence, which are denoted by an "x".

Table 1 reveals that the number of coincidences of "+" and "-" centers with corres-
ponding regions of precipitation on the overall tap for 1966-1970 considerably exe
ceeds the number of their coincidences for all directions of precipitation transfer.

23
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MMLUSEONLY

These data indicate that not only with northerly and westerly directions of trans-
port of precipitation onto the experimental polygon is there a manifestation of
the influence of the peculiarities of the terrain on its distribution, but also

with easterly and southerly directions. This influence evidently has a similar
character for all directions. It can be assumed that with northerly and westerly

directions of transport Krivoy Rog exerts an influence on the distribution of pre-
cipitation over the experimental meteorological polygon.

Table 3

Frequency of Recurrence of Centers of Precipitation by Directions of Transport for
Individual Regions and Values of p Parameter for 1966-1970

  
 
 
 
  

Direction 0d; _."_
precipitati n‘. - u ! 0 r l n .
! .

t runsart

l
.3323?”

Souther y
westerly

prec ipitati
transport

“1':

 

Northerly ,38 .
Easterl ’41

Southsi'ly 3.1! . .
facet y )3: I.;,
P

PI
PI

 

Note: co - number of coincidences, nonco -- number of noncoincidences. o - cases
of absence of coincidences or noncoincidences for individual regions of precipita-

tion.

Now we will endeavor to ascertain whether the regions "+" and "-" on the maps of
distribution of precipitation by directions of its transport is a random phenomenon
or is governed by some constantly operative factors. Por this we introduce some
parameter p - sln, where II is the number of the "+" centers and n is the total num-
ber of the "+" and "-" centers. For determining the lilits p~p1 and p2 we will
stipulate the 992 confidence level, as was done in [1]. The limits p1 and p2 will
be determined free the p and n values using the nomogras in [3].

26

summon“
FOIMLIBIONLV

‘l'able lo

Frequency of Recurrence of Centers of Precipitation by Directions of Transport and
Values of the p Parameter Pros: Annual Maps 1966-1970

 

The data from the naps in Fig. l were used in deteraining the frequency of recur-
rence of "+" and "-" centers for different directions of precipitation transport.
Table 2 indicates that the p values for different directions of transport of pre-
cipitation, although deterained from a stall m-ber of cases, are approxi-etely
identical and on the average p - 0J6. This p value is already statistically more
guaranteed. It was close to the nean value p - 0.151, deterIined using data on the
distribution of precipitation by months for the sane period of tiae [1].

In order to evaluate the hypothesis that the foraation of "4-" and ”-" regions of
precipitation in the experiaental neteorological polygon is a result of sons con-
stant factors. we will undertake a conparison of the p paraaeters detsrained using
the data in Table 1 with the corresponding p parameters according to the data in
Table 2. Unfortunately, the data in these tables do not take it possible to carry
out such a coaparison separately for different directions of transport and indi-
vidual regions of precipitation due to the low level of guaranteed probability.
Accordingly, we will nake such a comparison using total data for all directions
and separately for all positive and negative regions of precipitation. From Table
l Is+ - 14. n+ - 16, p+ - 0.88 and a“1 - 1, n‘ - 11, p’ - 0.09. Using the nonogrsn
froa [3], eaploying these data we obtain p - 0.62 and pf ' 0-98. P' ' 0-01 and PE
- 0.42 respectively. From a comparison of p and p' with p it can b seen that
these values differ greatly from one another and that their confidence limits pf,
pf, pi, p} for all practical purposes lie outside the confidence liaita p1 and

p2 (Table 2). Thus. already on the basis of these data it is possible to assuu

to be confirmed the assumption that the distribution of precipitation over the

As indicated by Table 3, the p value for all positive regions of precipitation for
all directions of transport considerably differs from the p value for negative re-
gions: p(2 +) - 0.614 and p(};_) - 0.23 respectively. At the ssae tine, the

25

MWLWONLY
MMLMONLY

p1(2+) - 0.56 value for positive regions does not overlap the value ”(2-) - 0.32
for negative regions. This indicates unambiguomly that the distribution of precip-
itation for positive regions differs coapletely fron the distribution for negative
regions.

we will sake the sane coaparison for values of the p parameter for individual posi-
tive regions of precipitation vith p values for all the negative regions. It ap-
pears that the values p(l+) - 0.88, p(IL,,) - 0.56, p(III - 0.57 and p(lV+) - 0.54
cansiderably differ from p(2 _) - 0.23, and p1(I ) - 0. and p1(lll+) - 0.38 do
not overlap with p2(2 -) - 0.32. Only p1(lv+) - 0.25 to some degree overlaps with
920)-). It can therefore be assured that the distribution of precipitation in the
regions '14.. 11..., UL... and in all probability, IV... differs free the distribution
in the negative regions of precipitation.

Nov we will compare the values of the p parameter for individual negative regions
of precipitation with the p value for all the positive regions. It is fomd that
p(l_) - 0.05. p(ll.) - 0.2.1. and pull.) - 0.31 differ greatly from p(2+) - 0.64,
and the values pz(l-) - 0.25, p201.) - 0.62 and pz(III-) - 0.4.6 fall belov the

values p1(2 4.) - 0.510. Thus, we obtained still a further proof that the distribu-
tion of precipitation in positive and negative regions belongs to different sets.

‘ Nov we will nake a siailar analysis of date for positive and negative regions sep-
arately for each direction of precipitation transport. Table 3 shows that virtual-
ly all the values of the parameters ”(2 4.) fall below or extremely insignificant-
ly overlap the values p2(2-). It can therefore be asserted that the distributions
of precipitation in positive and negative regions for all directions of transport
of precipitation belong to different sets.

Nov we vill attmt to clarify to what extent there is justification of the hypo-
thesis that the distributions of precipitation for positive and negative regions
for individual directions of transport are not a result of random events but are
caused by some constantly operative factors. For this we vill compare the values
of the parameter p (Table 3) with the values obtained from annual seasonal naps
(Table 6). These latter values are the most reliable since they vere obtained on
the basis of a large masher of cases.

It follows from this colparison that the p(2 4,) and p(2 _) values for all direc-
tions of precipitation transport are considerably greater than and less than the
p(£) values respectively. But at the ease tine, only for easterly and westerly
directions of precipitation transport does the entire range of p1(2+)-p2(z+)
values fall outside the range of p1(2‘ )-p2(Z) values. For northerly and southerly
directions of transport there is an appreciable overlapping of these ranges. A
completely different situation is observed for negative regions of precipitation.
For example. for northerly and southerly directions of transport of precipitation
the range of p1(2-)-p2(2 -) values falls virtually outside the range of 91(2)‘
”(2) values, whereas for easterly and westerly directions these ranges alnost
completely overlap.

From the cowarisOn of the values of the p parameter on the basis of Tables 3 and
la it follows that ve have confirmation of the hypothesis that the distribution of
precipitation over the territory of the experimtal aeteorological polygon is not

26

MWUSIONLY
M OFFIGAL USE ONLY

a result of randon events but is caused by constantly operative factors and with
any direction of transport. However, the existing area of the network in the ex-

perinental polygon is inadequate for determining all the local reasons for modific-
ation of the distribution of precipitation.

We point out in conclusion'that an increase in the duration of the series of used
precipitation observations in the experimental meteorological polygon (which is
now completely feasible) will make it possible to obtain more valid data for solu-
tion of the problems considered in this study. In addition, it can be essmd
that the implementation of this type of research for the winter period of the year
will make it possible to obtain an answer to certain questions. In particular, from
a conparison of the distributions of precipitation during su-sr and winter it is
possible to some degree to clarify whether the water bodies around the experimental
meteorological polygon exert an appreciable influence on the distribution of pre-
cipitation since in winter such an influence out be virtually absent. He note
that an investigation of the distribution of precipitation during the cold season
of the year in the experinentsl meteorological polygon is of independent ignorance,
especially for studies in the field of artificial modification and agromsteorology
carried out in this territory.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Huchnik, V. FL, "Statistical Indices of Distribution of Precipitation in the
Experimental Neteorological Polygon," WROIDGIYA I 6111:30me (Meteorology
and Hydrology). No 12, 1978.

2. Stepenenko, V. D., RADIOLMTSIYA V mmnowcn (Radar and Meteorology), Len-
ingrad, Gidrometeoisdat, 1973.

3. Khan. 0. and Shapiro, 8., STATISTICHESKIYB mun: V mm mm
(Statistical Hodels .‘n Engineering Problems), hoscow, Mir, I969.

27

FOIOFI’ICIALUSEONLY
memuseontv

UDC 551.521.3

OPTICAL PROPERTIES 01" CLOUDS

lbscow METEOROIDGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 (nanuscript received
17 Peb 81) PP 40-63

[Article by V. V.. Kuzneteov and L. N. Pavlova, candidate of physical and maths-st-
ical sciences, Institute of Experimental Meteorology]

[Text] Abstract: The dependence of values of the
linear depolarization ratio in a backseat-
tered signal I), on the contribution of drop-
lets Pd to the volunetric scattering coef-
ficientrggr e nixed cloud is examined. The auth-
ors propose a samiempirical expression for de-
termining Pdrop for known by . The article
gives measure-ants and coeputations of the
scattering indicatrices for nedia with a nix-
ed phase content characterised by different
by values.

It is known that clouds with a nixed phase composition can consist in their entire
thickness of a mixture of supercooled droplets and crystals or of successive layers
of droplets, crystals or their sixture. Clouds which are mixed in their entire

thickness are encountered aost frequently.

The optical properties of mixed clouds should be determined by the optical charac-
teristics of both liquid and solid particles which are present in the clouds. ke-
ssarchers do not always have data" on the relative concentration and spectra of
sizes of droplets and crystals in a nixed cloud. However, the relative contribution
of the droplets and crystals exerts a definite influence on the values of the lin-
ear depolarization ratio by in the backscsttered signal [lo-6], which can be deter-
mined by roots sounding of a cloud, as a result of which it is convenient to use
this parameter as a characteristic of mixed clouds.

He will examine the influence of the liquid phase in a cloud with a nixed phase coe-
position on the values of the volumetric scattering coefficient. scattering indica-
trix and Orr .

He will introduce the following notations: 1drop(9)v 13(9) and 1.1;(6) -- nor-
malized values of the scattering indicatrix for droplets, crystalline particles

and their aixtures respectively; ‘drop(A)- 0;“,(1) and aging) are the volu-
netric coefficients of scattering of droplets, crystals and their aixturea:

28

”WW“?
INJI‘OIIICIAI.IISEZ(NULN

pan-",0 ) - Udroﬂx )/ 6.134)) is the contribution of droplets to the volunet-
ric scattering coefficient of a mixed cloud.

With the propagation of plane-polarized radiation through a wired nediul the polar-
ized components in the backscattered signal can be written in the following way:

[u - drop(1et); I (ah =..u.).a'. (=il’.(l)+i~p (=X!-P-("-)I|¢““"~' (1)

kp - cr(ystn1): - ~: .~ - -,_ - g _ g | uﬁbt.
cm _ nix(ed).l I,(..) ...Ull.-.iﬂP-()+lcp ( )ll Md].e

where 1‘ (n) and I. (n) are the conponents of beckscattered radiation with a pol-
arization perpendicular and parallel to the polarization of the incident radiation;
or (x) is the index of attenuation of the :Iediu; I. is the backscattering measure-

ment path.

It is known that with the backscattering of polarized radiation by spherical par-
ticlea a state of polarization of the incident radiation is naintained [6). There-

fore, the contribution of droplets 1dropi (n) pdm()) to the signal I; (a) can
be neglected.

The linear depolarization ratio D17 for a nixed nedim is determined as follows:

I_ (1") ~ . I- .0,
or: I \I) ‘0: 'Ps('-)( 2" )’ ‘ (2)

where D} ' 1cm (IN/i". (W) is the depolarization ratio for radiation with the
wavelength 7\ in a crystalline nediun:
Bﬂ' ' 1dr“)! (W)/tcrl (If).

It follows from (2) that by knowing I): and B... 1: 1; possible to deteraine the con-
tribution of droplets to the volumetric scattering coefficient of the nixture for

each D“ (5]:

D°—o
[k - drop(1et)] p'“) D. (8. - U r 0- when 11" D: . (3)

And knowing the pdeUU values and the optical characteristics of the droplets and
crystals, it is also possible to determine other optical characteristics of a nixed
claud. such as the scattering indicatrix:

(a)
ten - awed): i..m)=:.wmm + iatﬂm -p.(‘ul-
kp - cr(ystal);
k - drop(1et)]

Thus, it is of interest to measure the D: and B" values for crystalline media with a
different microstructure, since it is inpossible to compute these parameters.

For radiation with 1- 0.63pm the I); and 3..» values were measured in cold chanbers

in la, 7, 9]. 0n the basis of the results in [7] it can be seemed that 0:,» 0.5 for
crystals of different size and shape.

29

FOR ONO“. USE ONLY
roe omaAL use ONLY
”5' ”4309

30

  

a! a: u at.

Fig. 1. Dependence of pd,” on I),r for different 3.; values (3.; are indicated by the
f igurea on the curves).

At the present tine there is no complete clarity concerning the Mr values. In in-
vestigations in [4] for crystals of different shape neesuring 10-2an it was pos-
sible to obtain a value Bu - 1.56301), which in [8] was confirled by measurements
of light scattering by hydroneteors. however. in [9] for ice crystals measuring
less than 20pm the value 1cr|l (n) - 0.0101 was obtained. This wes substantially
lower than‘idm ' (a) for nodels of a droplet cloud [2] (thus. for nodel S.l

1dropm ) - 0.0 055). with these nomalized values the scattering index for crys-
tals and droplets is B“ - 5. It should be noted that the latest data [9] were ob-

tained by the extrapolation of values neasured with 6- 175°.

The discrepancy in the results of deter-ination of By.» in [6, 8] and [9] can be at-
tributed to the influence of the size of the crystals on the 1cr|l (n) values or a
measurement error which has not been taken into account. Figure 1 shows how sensi-
tive the PdroMl) values are to a change in DW with different 3w-

In order to deter-nine the 3,, value in a cold chanber with a volume of 100 n3 we
carried out a series of neasurenents. The measurement nethod involved the follow-
ing. Plane-polarized radiation with A- 0.63pm was directed along a horizontal path
into a chanber where droplet and crystalline fogs were created. A detector receiv-
ed the radiation scattered at angles 9 - 178'60 (130') in the horizontal scatter-
ing plane. At the sane tine we nade neasurenents of the optical thickness of the
nediua 1:0.63° The 3, value was deternined as the ratio of the parallely polarized
conponents of the intensity of radiation scattered in droplet and crystalline fogs
with identical to. 3 values. The neasurenents were ends with vertical and horizon-
tal polarizations o the incident radiation. In the case of vertical polarization
of the incident radiation (the 8 vector oscillates in the vertical plane) the aver-
aged Bu values for crystals of platy and acicular ferns are different: for prises
measuring free 10 x 10 to 60 x lSOpn Bg- 1.5(i221) (a total of 96 neasurenents).
whereas for platelets (and "stars") 3" 2.2(“09 (166 neasurenents). In individ-
ual experinents for platelets the aeasured Ba values attained 3.6. In the case of
horizontal polarization for platelets and prism Bu - 1.36302) (67 neasur-Ients).

Thus, the measurements indicated that the Mr value is dependent on the relative
orientation of the polarization plane for incident radiation and the plane of scat-

tering neasurenent. with their orthogonality the 3.7 value is sensitive to the form
of crystals.

30

MWWONLY
MWUSEONLY

i.’DI/£.'10’)

    

I
5
7
I

l‘.g. 2. Comparison of computed values of indicatrix of mixed cloud (curves 1-10)
with experimental indicatricea (5-8); 5) Day- 0.08-0.15; 6) D, - 0.22-0.27; 7) D'-
0.30-0.36; 8) 0.00.35.

Figure 2 shows the results of computations and measurements of the relative scatter-
ing indicatrix for a mixed cloud with different on» values. The computations were

made for Dsr - 0.1(0.l)0.lo. In the computations use was made of the 14“,,(9) val-
ues with 1' 0.7pm for the 5.1 value [2] and as i¢r(9) — the experimental data
in [1] (without allowance for the halo), 3,. - 1.5 and n: - 0.5. As indicated by the
computed curves, in“ (eﬂimix (10') with an increase reveals the greatest change
in the region of lateral scattering angles. In addition, there is a smoothing of the
maximum in the corners of the rainbow. In the experiments a mixed medium was created
in the chamber by the introduction of AgI crystallization nuclei into a supercooled
droplet fog. As crystallization continued measurements were made of the D" values
(with 9% 179' and vertical polarization of the incident radiation) and the indica-
trices in the horizontal scattering plane. The time required for measuring the in-
dicatrix in the range of scattering angles 9 - 10-170‘ was 10 sec [3]. The rela-
tive error in measurements of 1mix(9) and Or did not exceed 1:102. The experimental

results agree well with the computed values. thereby confirming the retults of meas-
urement of the By parameter.

Thus, it was shown that the on» parameter can be used as a basis for the classific-
ation of mixed clouds on the basis of the contribution of the droplet fraction

pdeO‘) to the volumetric scattering coefficient and, towing D"- it is possible
to determine the optical characteristics of mixed clouds. It should be noted that

31

roaomaatwtowtv
INOI<OFINCIAI.IISI3(MVLY

this requires the making of measurements of Bn- in natural crystalline and droplet
clouds for specific optical systems of lidars and for different observation angles.

Ihekauthors express sincere appreciation to 0. A. Volkovitskiy for attention to the
wor .

1.

3.

5.

6.

9‘

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Volkovitskiy, 0. A., Pavlova, L. N. and Petrushin, A. 6., "Optical Properties
of Crystalline Clouds," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKEANA (News of the
USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 16, No 2,
1980. -

Deyrmendzhan, 0.. RASSBYANIYE BLEKTROMAGNITNOGO IZLUCHENIYA SFERICHESKIMI
PGLIDISPERSRYMI CHASTITSAMI (Electronagnetic Radiation Scattering by Spherical

Polydisperse Particles), translated fro. English, Moscow, Mir, I971.

Nikiforova, N. K., Pavlova, L. N. and Snykov, V. P., "'Rassvet' Velocity Instru-
ment for Measuring the Scattering Indicatrix," TRUDY IBM (Transactions of the

Institute of Experimental Meteorology), No b(38), I978.

Pavlova, L. N., "Investigation of the Attenuation and Scattering of Laser Radi-
ation in a Medium Containing Ice Crystals," Author's Su-ary of Dissertation

for Award of the Academic Degree of Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sci-
ences, Obninsk, IEM, 1978.

Pavlova, L. N., "Method for Polarimetric Analysis of the Optical Properties of
Suspended Particles," Author's Certificate USSR No 731363, BYULLBTZN' 1203331.

(Inventors' Bulletin). No 16, I980.

Khyulst, 0., RASSEYANIYE SVETA HALYHI CHASTITSAHI (Light Scattering by Snell
Particles). Moscow, IL, 1961.

Sassen. K., "Depolarization of Laser Light Backscattered by Artificial Clouds,"
J. APPL. HETEDRDL., Vol 13, No 8, 1976.

Sassen, K., "Backseattering Cross Sections for Bydrometeore: Measurenents at
6328 A," APPL. 0PTICS., Vol 17, No S, 1978.

Sassen, K. and Lion, K. N., "Scattering of Polarized Laser Light by Vater Drop-

lets, Mixed Phase and Ice Crystal Clouds. Part I. Angular Scattering Patterns,"
J. ATHOS. 861., Vol 36, No S. 1979.

FIHIINNICJAI.USE(IHLY
“OFFICIALUSIWLY

unc 551. 521. 32

mo FOR COMPUTING MBCT‘IVB RADIATIOII 0? 1'!!! 0M SURFACE m M ma
DIFFERENT CLOUD LEVELS

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I CIDROIDGIYA in Russian No 10. Oct 81 (unmcripc received
lo Feb 81) Pp 64-52

[Article by G. V. Girdyuk, candidate of geographical sciences, and s. P. Halevskiy-
Halevich, candidate of physical and mthenatical sciences, Hut-anal: Affiliate.
Arctic and Antarctic Institute, and Main Geophysical Observatory]

[Text] Abstract: The article gives the results of
checking of a nethod for oonputing long-cave
atnospheric radiation over the ocean, proposed

by the authors earlier, using neasur-ents of
this parameter made on a nuﬂer of voyages of

scientific research vessels. The results of
neasurenents nade it possible to refine this
aathod due to separate allowance for the in-
fluence of clouds at different levels. The
corresponding coefficients for different air
temperature values are given. A method is pro-

posed for correcting the dependencea for their
use in clinatological cmutations.

In [3] we proposed a method for oowuting long-mve atmspheric radiation and ef-
fective radiation of the ocean surface. This nethod, in tabulated form. is given
in a recent edition of the OCEANOGBAPRIC TABLES [13]. Its individual points have
been checked in a nutter of subsequent studies [6-9, 12].

According to [3], the atnoapheric radiation 8. over the ocean is determined on the
basis of data on the tesperature of the near-water air layer and the tenths of
total cloud cover. The characteristics of air humidity in explicit form are not
taken into account as a result of the high correlation of tenperature and absolute
air humidity values over the ocean [3, 5, 11].

with conversion to standard units the expression derived in [3) for eowuting long-
wave atnospheric radiation E. in Killnz has the form

550,026 r: Iu--'--o.5mu + ma). (1’

33
MWWONLV
n.¢
A.n
v.n
w.n
N.

Qm
a;

we‘ll-CVO"
o o
“ONMI'DN

Coco.

030°!“th
MHQnONu-a

ab

N.HI
o.~
«.0
o.n

«.0
N.n

N

I
Q
N

QI‘ONO"
. o
MOMHMO

NN I

O O. .0
l o-o—cN

O‘H-CMNON
QBVDU‘OO‘IA

H

a»

A.~
n.~
¢.N
N.~
w.~

u.~
~.n

o a o
MNNNNN

NQN‘OVDN
O

connecoouo)
0
NNMNMMN

a.n
N.»

n.w

GINO
0
DAN"

NQNOOO
o
ﬁhwhﬂm

O

O

QNOOOQIA
C
nausea-n"

o:

000m
oucouan vac nuanczvoz .vaoanuouo
anew unauo:

Iuoz can mucouun .oquadau< Juno:
oqom

vcoaaoouu can coauoahoz .auaouan
anon

vcuanoouu can aaauvsuoz .oucouon
«com asun03uoz can mucous:

«com coauonuoz can uncounn
undue naive" no

yuan aawu0uasvo .aom «cusp canon
van com Isuzu unnu .coaon «0 now
«am mucounn

com uncouqn

com Quechua

now nuuouan

ouucqau< uuauouaaau

:aouo aoavcu no sauna Awaken
Iasvo can cuozuaoa .uoooo ouuaoum
no anon Hawuouqaco vac duosuuoz
ouunauu< unencunavu

caucnuu< suuoz

uuuacuu< suuoz

caucouu< auouooazuuoz

cum ouuouan

com «vacuum

com suauoauoz .ouucauu< zuuoz

couwou accluuauco:

:uvgm o O:
.oﬂﬂ‘ﬂohg o .?
con—gag“ o .>:

:cuxnouon .n>:
:cuxuouun .m>:
:nqxuouon .a>:

.Buxuouon .u>:
:wuonoh<:
:wuopnhdz
:vogxoo>:

33.38..
:.~oxaouu .m:

:>o&0n«£m xdlivnx<:
:U 3"“00

: uuuwoaaoxo:
:unuwocuoxo:
:.Honouao>om:
:‘ °§O°>3

:xucuahuom:
:uuono><:

Hoooo>

uaooo vane: no ocean»: uaouuuuuo :« coauaavuz canonnoaiu< no unannousooox no Quad

anon
anon

anon
whoa

whoa

chad

numH
«nan
000“

head
wood
meow

uqor

34

FOI‘OFFIJA1.UBE(IULY
MWL‘JSEONLV

where Ta is air temperature in 'K; no is the tenths of total cloud cover.

The first factor in expression (1) represents smospheric radiation in a cloudless
sky 88,0. As demonstrated in [3, lo], the values of the coefficients to. taking in-
to account the influence of total cloud cover on atmospheric radiation. are depen-
dent on air temperature. They were determined on the basis of experimental data

from the expression

1' - 5a. 10m " Emu"
a“) —""E—_' (2)

I. 0“)

where 3mm“) is atmospheric radiation at the time of continuous cloud cover and
the determined air temperature values. 30.0“) is the same for a cloudless sky
and the same temperature values.

The analysis indicated that with 10/10 cloud cover the atmospheric radiation value
can be approximated by the following dependence (in KH/mz):

Es. no ‘3? 0,938 T: 104— 0,397. . (3)

Dependence (l) and the nuerical values k0 were obtained using data from approx-
imately 1100 measurements of atmospheric radiation made using a Main Geophysical
Observatory radiometer with a germanium filter [1. 10] in 1965-1969 in the North
Atlantic. Norwegian and Barents Seas [3]. During subsequent years observations with
the Main Geophysical Observatory radiometer and an unchanged measurement method and
the same procedures for checking the instrtmaents were made on a nuber of voyages
of the scientific-research ships. During the period 1965-1979 the total nusber of

measurements exceeded 6000. The observations covered a considerable part of the
area of the world ocean: they were made in the northern and equatorial parts of

the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, in the equatorial and southern parts of the Indian
Ocean and in the seas of the northern Arctic Ocean basin. Table 1 gives the mean

values of total cloud cover and air temperature for each voyage and the dispersions
of these parameters. An analysis of this material made it possible to check the

method in [3] and its refinement by taking into account the influence of different
cloud cover levels on the formation of atmospheric radiation. especially important
in computations of the unaveraged radiation flux values.

The checking of the method in [3] by means of a comparison of the results of comput-
ations with data from individual measurements was carried out on some of these voy-
ages [6, 7, 9. 12]. Table 2 gives a comparison of the measured (3a,meas) and com-
puted (Ea,comp) atmospheric radiation values for the entire mass of data with aver-
aging of these results within individual groups, discriminated on the basis of the
gradations of the determining parameters (air temperature and cloud cover tenths).

The data in Table 2 reveal the absence of significant discrepancies in the results
of measurements and computations for the entire possible range of initial data. The
maximun discrepancy for individual gradations of air temperature and cloud cover

is e(0.6-1.22).

If we regard the cited values of the discrepancies as the errors in the computa-
tion method, in computations of effective radiation of the ocean surface

35

FOIOI’IICIALUSEONLY
3.35 W
.m: on: 8% 8:. 3n 8.... 21.." :8 o... 82 8.: E 2.3 2
was 3. Pure 32. to. “86 _ 21: .3. 3+ 83 5.... I: 2...”... glo
sa £7 memo . no 3 28 a...» 8.... no! :2 8a... «:2 22. Ta
3. . we 2%. 33 3 82 _ «I»: «8 3| .8... 83 n2 8% «1.6
3. . is _ 83 _ 3:. 3| _ 82 SIIBLE 3.. 82 88 3... 3...... c 3

unauauumsu nun .3 wcuaaokv

 

MWWONLY
roe omcuat use ONLY

Eeff I l (0 T‘s-Ea) (A)
where 8 is the integral emissivity of the water surface, 6- 0.91 [2], ads the

Stefan-Boltzmann constant. 0’ - 0.561°10‘1° lull (mz-K‘); To i. water surface temper-
ature in °K, they do not exceed 102 (with 2.“) 0.035 KH/m .

Thus, the checking of the method on the basis of adequately extensive experimental
data revealed its universality and the possibility of use in the form proposed

in [3]. At the same time. as a result of the "averaged" allowance for the influence
of cloud cover on the formation of atmospheric radiation (use of data only on total

cloud cover with corresponding tsQerature coefficients), the errors in this method

can be substantial in computations for individual moments in time, especially in
the case of a predominance of upper-level clauds [12].

The available mass of measurement data, a list of which is given in Table 1, made
it possible to refine the role of clOuda at different levels in the general flux

of long-wave atmospheric radiation (some preliminary data with the use of some of
these materials are given in [9]).

The sampling of measurement data and their processing led to the following t e of
computation expressions for the conditions of a cloud cover of 10/10 (in [GI/m ):

— for upper-level cloud cover

5.. no = 0.995 r;- 10-8 - 0.496: (5’
-- for middle-level cloud cover

Es. to = 0.93273104- 0,401; (6)
-- for lower-level cloud cover ‘

5.. n = 0.921 T3 - lO' 5 — 0,365. _ (7)

Figure 1 gives the atmospheric radiation values for a cloudless sky and with con-
tinuous cloud cover at different levels computed using the expressions cited here,
normalized for the radiation of an ideally black body at air temperature -- atmo-
spheric emissivity 83/01:. It follows from this figure that the degree of influ-
ence of clouds at different levels on atmospheric radiation decreases with an in-
crease in air temperature. For example, with t. - ~20’c the emissivity of the at-
mosphere varies from 0.50 to 0.88 with transition from some extreme conditions
(cloudless sky) to others (continuous cloud cover at the lower level). With t. -
30°C this value varies from 0.84 to 0.96 respectively. Accordingly. detailed a1-
lowance for the level structure of clouds in computations of atmospheric radiation
over the ocean is extremely important for the polar and temperate latitudes and
is less important for the tropical and equatorial latitudes.

It also follows from Fig. 1 that the atmospheric emissivity values in the presence
of a middle-level cloud cover and with a total cloud cover virtually coincide.
This means that the influence of middle-level clouds on the formation of atmo-
spheric radiation over the ocean reflects some "mean" conditions for the receipt

37

l-‘OIOWICIALISEONLY
MWLUSEONLY

of long-wave radiation in the presence of a cloudy sky, taking into account the
real distribution of the frequency of recurrence of clouds at different levels.

At the same time, with an middle-level cloud cover the Ea/O' T“ value is closer to
the conditions of lower-level cloud cover than to upper-level conditions. However,
cloud cover observations do not provide for a separate determination of the quan-
tity of clouds at the middle and upper levels. Therefore, in computations of atmo-
spheric radiation it is impossible to take into account the influence of middle-
and upper-level clouds separately. except for those cases when there is- cloud
cover at only one of these levels.

Accordingly, the influence of the different levels of clouds on atmnspheric radia-
tion in a general case can be determined only by the separatioa of total cloud
cover into clouds of the lower and middle + upper levels.

Then , \

E, = 5.. ..u + min! + k.-.(n; - ":Jl-
[H - low; c - mid; B - up] (8)
where n is the tenths of lower cloud cover: k1“, kmid‘hp are coefficients for

taking {30 account the influence of clouds at the lower and middle + upper levels.

it is assumed here that the lower-level cloud cover completely screens the thermal

influence of c10uds at higher levels. For determining the coefficients kmidm nec-
essary for computations using formula (8). we have the dependence

5.. w - 0.904 T; w-5 — 0.44s (9)

on the assumption of an equal probability of clouds of the middle and upper levels

over the world ocean. This assumption must be introduced in connection with the
fact that real data on the frequency of recurrence of clouds at these levels are

available only for the areas of some seas.

The computed values of the It coefficients for all three cloud levels. for total
cloud cover and cloud cover of the middle-tupper levels are given in Table 3.

The 51W values were computed using formula (2), taking into account expressions
(9). They can also be determined from (7) and (8) as

‘0": ' “I“:

[c . mid; B - up; D! - low] "“=W'n5‘ (10)
Our computations of the ‘51de values using formula (10), with the mean kg and
k1“, values taken into account. using data on cloud cover [15], made it possible
to check the reliability of the WW values cited in Table 3. In general, for
the world ocean (the mean ta value according to all these data was 17'C) the use
of formula (10) led to a kmid+up value equal to 0.13, which agrees well with the
data in Table 3.

Thus, for determining atmospheric radiation in the-presence of a cloud cover of

one of these levels it is possible to use formula (1) with corresponding nlowv
“mid or “up values and the coefficients n10", n.“ or nup cited in Table 3. In

all other cases the computations must be made using expression (8) and the values

38

MWWONLY
FINI!0I'NC1AI.IEIE¢MVL¥

of the coefficients l‘low and knidhrup given in Table 3.

[e "I .0. “

    

4-: -: : '1‘ 50.32,.

“~8- 1- 099804011“ 0‘ ratio EJUT‘ on air tewerature for different cloud cover
conditions. 1) cloudless sky, 2) cloud cover 10/10 at upper level, 3) cloud cover
10/ 10 at middle level, lo) cloud cover 10l10 at lower level. 5) total cloud cover
10/10.

we note once again that the use of formula (8) improves the results of coaputstions
in these cases when there is a predominance of lower or middle+upper cloud cover,
and with adequate averaging the use of formlas (l) and (8) leads virtually to the
same results if the frequency of recurrence of clouds by levels does not have sys-
tematic deviations from some mean conditions.

With the use of espressions (l) and (8) for determining the averaged 55 value; it
is necessary to use data on the mean squares of the input parameters n and 1“, but
using reference data it is possible to obtain intonation on the square of the mean
values. This makes it necessary to correct the conputetional expressions for their
use in computing the nean values of the long-wave radiation fluxes.

An analysis of the errors arising because of this indicated that the differences
between 1'3 and T3 do not have any significant influencg on the results of computa-
tions: they can change the radiation flux by 0.01 W/m only with 0" values exceed-
ing 10‘C. However. the characteristic 0' values for air tewerature are 240°C (Table
1).

In order to take into account the differences between 3% and 33 in [A] it is propos-
ed that a correction factor be introduced

 

3: l " ‘03:
l to 1.7:; ' (11)
In turn, the differences between 3% and 33 are deternined by the known expression

7:; .. 7::‘. + :g. (12)

For computing the standard deviation for the tenths of total cloud cover 0' n we
used cloud cover observations made four times a day on nine weather ships in the

North Atlantic during 1956-1968. The results of the computations were grouped by

39

FORMING“!
FutiofFKJAl.UBE(INLY

gradations of the mean monthly tenths of total cloud cover. Table 6 gives the <7
values combined for all weather ships corresponding to a definite total cloud cover

unit. It also gives the as“ values. The data in Table 4 make it possible to express
the correlation between the mean tenth of total cloud cover and the dispersions of
this value in the for-

a: = (H'- in U -' 3°" (13)

where 0’“, the sane as no, in contrast to the data in Table 6, are expressed in
fractions of unity. Observational data show that the dependence of (13) is real
not only for total cloud cover, but also for lower-level cloud cover.

Table 3

Values of Coefficients for Total (k0). Lower (klow)o Middle (hlid). Upper (kup) and
Hiddle+Upper (km1d+up) Cloud Cover for Different Air Temperatures

3°C
-20 -10 0 10 20 30
1.0 0.70 0.65 0.32 0.23 0.18 0.13
km, 0.76 0.69 0.35 0.26 0.20 0.15
km“ 0.68 0.66 0.31 0.23 0.18 0.13
am, 0.22 0.16 0.10 0.07 0.06 006
Raid”, 0.1.6 0.30 0.21 0.15 0.12 009

Table 0

Mean 05 and CI nValues for Total Cloud Cover in North Atlantic

      

'-
'n
I

0.20 0.26 0.25 0.74 0.2! 0.25 0.20

O

.2!

Number of

months '0

 

For checking (13) we used data on the frequency of recurrence of the total cloud
cover unit in 10° zones of the world ocean obtained by L. A. Strokina on the ba-

sis of materials from the sea climatic atlas [15]. The frequency of recurrence
of the total cloud cover unit for the latitude zones of the world ocean was det r-

ained at 248 points for the four central months of the seasons. For computing no
and 33 we used the lean annual values oft t_a cloud covgr unit. As a whole for the
world ocean (70°N— 65's S) it was found that no - 0. , I 0. 41, no - 0.50 and CV" -
0.30.

The 0’ value computed using fornula (13) is 0.31. For individual latitude zones
of then ocean the discrepancies between the actual n values and the values com-
puted using (13) are of the order of ‘Ern (Table 6). The established correlation

40

F0.‘0Fﬂﬂ3Al.U§E(lVLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between an and 32 for cloud cover observations made four times a day in the North
Atlantic is confirmed by observ. tional data for other regions of the world ocean.

Table 5

Values of p Coefficient

 

  
   

s§§§§§

 

Computations of the B coefficient were made using formlas (ll)-(l3). It has been
established (see Table 5) that the Bcoefficient is dependent not only on the total
cloud cover unit, but also on air temperature. as a result of the dependence ko(t.).
It shOuld be noted that $31, as was noted in [14.].

Thus, in conputstions of atsospheric radiation on the basis of mean values of the
cloud cover unit in the absence of information on :20 the factor F lust be intro-
duced into the right-hand side of expression (1).

If, however, for computing the aean E. values use is made of formula (8) it is nec-
essary to introduce the factor 9', similar in sense. determined using the formula

—,- ‘1’ -e
(I +e.n;lll +td_.(n;-N; )I

- 1!.
l' "’ kins)"+‘tvl(u‘l- "I" ( )

[ll-low; 3- up; C-nid] 3’:

These computations indicated that with an accuracy adequate for practical purposes
it can be assumed that the coefficients Band ﬂ' are equal. -

The results of co'smutations of effective radiation by the described method were
compared with data from independent measurements with a thermoelectric balance-
neter at nighttime. For this purpose we used measuruents node on ships of the

Murmansk Administration of Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring in the
northern seas during 1958-1971 (3335 individual nessureuents). The mean 8.ff value

according to neasuresents was equal to 0.0115 lesz, and according to couputations
-- 0.048 “/1112. The order of magnitude of the divergence and its sign correspond

to concepts on sone understatement of the effective radiation registered with the
thermoelectric balancemeter.

We note in conclusion that with use of the proposed method atmospheric radiation
and the effective radiation of the ocean surface must be determined with an accur-

acy to 0.01 KW/mz.

1.1

FOIOIFIOALUSEONLY
1.

2.

3.

5.

6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13‘

1‘.

15.

MWWONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Girdyuk, G. V., "Use of the coo Radiometer for Measuring Effective Radiation
of the Sea Surface," TRUDY (:00 (Transaction of the Main Geophysical Observa-
tory), No 206, 1967.

Oirdyuk, O. V. and Halevskiy-Halevich, s. P., "hissivity of the Water Surface,"
TRUDY coo, No 206, 1967.

Girdyuk, G. V. and Malevskiy-Halevich, S. P., ”Method for Colputing Effective
Radiation of the Ocean Surface," TRUDY 660, No 297, 1973.

Girdyuk, G. V. and Kirillov, T. V., "Method for Computing the Radiation Balance
Couponents for the Ocean Surface." METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA Meteorology and
Hydrology), No 12, 1974.

Girdyuk, G. V., "Computation of Heat bosses of the Barents Sea Surface," PmB-
LEHY ARKTIKI I ANTARKTIKI (Problem of the Arctic and Antarctica), No 52, 1977.

Girdyuk, G. V., "Conputation of the Radiation Balance of the Sea Surface Using
Total Solar Radiation," '1'va AANII (Transactions of the Arctic and Antarctic
Scientific Research Institute), Vol 368, 1980.

Yegorov, B. N., "Dependence of Atmspheric Long-Have Radiation on Cloud Cover
in the Tropical Regions of the Atlantic," NORM-72 (Iropeks-n), 1976.

Yegorov, B. N., "Influence of Cloud Cover on Atlospheric Radiation in the Trop-
ical Zone of the Atlantic Ocean," MYERS-7!. (Tropeka-M), Vol 1, 1976.

Kirillova, ‘1'. V.. Girdyuk, G. V., Strokins, L. A. and Halavskiy-Halevich, S. P.,
"Comparison of Different Methods for Counting Couponents of the Radiation Bal-
ance of the Ocean Surface,“ METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 11, 1976.

Halevskiy-Halevich, S. P., "Method for Making Radiation Measurements of Water
Surface Temerature," TRUDY 000, Re 206, 1967.

Halevskiy-ﬂalevich, S. P., "Determining the Bowen Ratio Over the Ocean," ERROR-
ODOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 9, 1973.

Halevskiy-Halevich, S. P. and Petinova, A. Ya., "Method for Computing Atmospher-
ic Radiation Over the Ocean ('Results of the 12th Voyage of the Scientific Re-
search Ship 'Akadenik Shirshov')," TRUDY DVNIM (Transactions of the Re: Best-
ern Scientific Research Hydrometeorological Institute), No 56, 1975.

OKEANOGRAI’ICHBSKIYE TABLI‘I‘SY (Oceanographic Tables), Leningrad, Gidrouaeteoisdat,
1975. .

rinofeyev, N. A. and Petrova, 0. 1... "Heth for Coaputing Radiation Balance
Components for the Ocean Surface,” mmwclu I GIDROWIYA, No 11, 1976.

U. S. NAVY MARINE CLIMATIC ATLAS OF THE HORLD. Washington, D. 0., Chief of
Naval Operations, 1955-1959, 1965, Vols I-V, Vol XI. .

62

FOIOFIICIALMONLY
F1IICIHNCIAI.IEIE(IVLY

UDC 551.b65.7+551.515.2

INFLUENCE OF GOLD SYNOPTIC OCEANIC 300128 on THE TRAJBCTORY AND EVOLUTIOR 0P
TROPICAL CYCLONBS

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 (manuscript received
9 Feb 81) pp 53257

[Article by v. I. Byshev, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences. and
V. c. Snopkov, candidate of geographical sciences, Institute of Oceanology,
USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Abstract: Two cases of the passage of tropical
cyclones over cold synoptic eddies in the open
ocean are considered. It is shown that in both
cases the hurricanes responded rapidly to the

reduction in the transmittal of energy from the
ocean into the atmosphere: they filled, there was

a marked decrease in the velocity of move-ant and
looping movement occurred. It is postulated that
the looping trajectories are caused by the passage
of the tropical cyclones over the cold oceanic

add 1“ o

It is known from an analysis of empirical data and theoretical investigations that
tropical cyclones are formed and persist due to the energy received from the ocean
[3-5, 10]. The genesis of tropical cyclones with a warm center is associated with
those regions of the world ocean where the water surface temperature exceeds 26‘C
[11]. Here the ocean is capable of imparting the maxi-um quantity of heat to the
atmosphere. 0n the other hand, tropical cyclones never develop in places where the
water surface temperature is less than 26'0, where air humidity is less than 601
and where vorticity at the lower levels of the troposphere has negative values. The
formation and development of tropical cyclones requires the constant influx of heat,
momentum and water vapor from the atmospheric boundary layer [1]. These facts indi-
cate that tropical cyclones are extremely sensitive to small changes in temperature
and humidity.

Earlier it was noted in the literature that there is a correlation between the fre-
quency of recurrence of tropical cyclones and water temperature anomalies. For ex-
ample, Jordan [5] demonstrated that the mean monthly positive anomalies of 1'c are
frequently observed in the region of formation of tropical cyclones in the Western
Atlantic. Miller [10], in the example of study of hurricane Donna, demonstrated
that for the attenuation of a hurricane the factor of primary importance is the
disappearance of an oceanic heat source, not an increase in dissipation under the

influence of surface friction. Accordingly, the passage of a tropical cyclone over
a cold water surface or the intrusion of cold dry air into the region of a tropical

cyclone at the lower levels leads to its attenuation.

63

FOIiOFFﬂJA1.USE(liLY
F0.:0'11C1AI.lEﬂE(HILV

Academician Shuleykin [7], modeling the evolution of a tropical cyclone, indicat-
ed that there is some critical surface water temperature above which a tropical

cyclone receives more energy than is expended on its dissipation, whereas with a
water temperature below the critical point in a tropical cyclone the energy expend-

iture on dissipation exceeds its receipt from the ocean, as a result of which the
tropical cyclone begins to weaken.

At the present time in the practical prediction of movement of tropical cyclones use
is made of the "steering current" rule, according to which a disturbance moves to-
gether with the "steering current" in the middle troposphere, that is, the atmo-
sphere controls the movement of a tropical cyclone. Sometimes there are unusual
trajectories when a tropical cyclone experiences a looping movement. In this case
the ”steering current" rule is not operative and the prediction of movement of a
tropical cyclone becomes the central problem. Below we will examine two cases of

the passage of hurricanes over a cold synoptic disturbance in the ocean and we will

trace their behavior. First we will cite the necessary information on the cold
oceanic synoptic disturbances.

 

Fig. 1. Map of mean monthly water surface temperature for September 1977 and the
trajectories of movement of hurricane Clara. 1) tropical low, 2 tropical storm, 3)
hurricane.

Investigations of synoptic variability in the ocean (Poligon-70, mos, POLDDDB)
made it possible to discover eddy disturbances in the ocean with a diameter of

100 km or more. Among these synoptic disturbances were rings and eddies in the
open ocean. The rings are warm and cold. They are formed as a result of the dynam-

ic instability of a jet current, have a thickness in depth of about 1000 m and
usually are transported to the west or southwest with a variable velocity of sev-

eral kilometers per day and persist for two years or more. Cold rings are observ-
ed in the Atlantic and '-cific Oceans to the south of the Gulf Stream and Kuroshio.
The temperature and salinity of the rings is usually below the temperature and

44
FOI.0INNCJA1.IEIE(MVLV
FOI10FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

salinity of the surrounding water by 3-4.0 and by several tenths °Ioo.

 

Fig. 2. Map of water surface teaperature for period 1-6 August 1978 and trajectory
of movement of hurricane Virginia. Solid curve - typhoon, dashed curve - tropical
low. The insert shows the water surface temperature for the period 23-28 June 1978.

The general situation is such that the temperature field of a hurricane is formed
due to the receipt of apparent and latent heat from the ocean both from the peri-
phery and from the internal region of a hurricane. Accordingly, moving over the
cold water, the hurricane is deprived of that part of the energy which could be
received from the region occupied by cold water. As a result, the hurricane will
expend more energy on dissipation than it receives fro: the ocean and begins to at-
tenuate.

Case 1. Hurricane Clara was observed in the Atlantic Ocean during the period 6-12
September 1977. It developed on the east coast of the United States fron a tropical
low. Figure 1 shows the trajectory of the hurricane and also the mean monthly sur-
face temperature of the ocean in September 1977 [9]. It can be seen that between 8
and 9 September the trajectory of hurricane Clara passed over a cold ring in which
the water temperature was 26.8’6, which differs froa the surrounding water by 2'0.
The temperature contrast must evidently exceed Z‘C. Due to the nobility of the ring
and monthly temperature averaging it is appreciably smoothed. The spatial scale of
.ne ring is more than 100 km.

A tropical low. moving over warm water with a temperature higher than 27°C, on 7
September was transformed into a tropical storm and on 8 September it became a
hurricane. Then, with passage of the hurricane onto the cold ring. it began to
weaken rapidly. The pressure at its center already on the first day increased by

12 mb. the intensity decreased and the hurricane was transformed into a tropical
storm. Simultaneously with weakening of the hurricane there was a change in the

65

FIIICINIIJAI.USEIN‘LY
FOIllﬂﬂClALIEEZONLY

trajectory and a decrease in the velocity of novenent. Between 9 and 11 September
the tropical stone made a 100p and then moved in a northeasterly direction. Thus,
the passage of the hurricane onto a local cold fornation led to a rapid change in

its intensity, velocity and direction of movement.

7'6] . ' U a

   

Fig. 3. T,S curves at point 3(a) and at points 1 and 2 (b) (see Fig. 2). I) before
passage of typhoon. II) after passage of typhoon, III) at point 1, IV) at point 2.

Case 2. In 1978, in the northwestern part of the Pacific Ocean, under the "Tayfun-78"
program [6], investigations were made in the region 10-35’N and 125-170'2. A hydro-
logical survey in the region 28’" and lb3-lSl‘E from 23 through 28 June made it pos-
sible to detect [6] a cold cyclonic formation in the northeastern sector. Its posi-
tion is indicated in the insert in Pig. 2. The temperature and salinity of the sur-
face water in the cold disturbance (Pig. 2. point 2) were lower by 3°C and 0.6°/oo
than the temperature and salinity of the surrounding water (Pig. 2. point 1). The
horizontal scale of the cold disturbance (Pig. 2) is more than 100 kn.

Pigure 3b, on the basis of data in [6], gives 1.8 curves characterizing the struc-
ture of waters in the cold cyclonic formation (curve IV) and the structure of the
surrounding water (curve III). It can be seen that the thickness of the cold cy-
clonic disturbance attains 1000 e in depth. The presence of a cold cyclonic disturb-
ance and its direction of movement. in accordance with [6], was traced fro- Japanese
daily satellite cloud cover laps in the form of a cloudless zone. These laps were
received daily in the period from July through Septelber.

An analysis of cloud cover laps indicated that the cloudleas zone loved in a south-

westerly direction. Assuning that the velocity of aovanent of a cold cyclonic for-
mation is about 5-5.5 miles/day [2], it can be expected that after a aonth. that

is, about 26 July. it would nove fros the region 25-26'N and lSO—lSl‘B to the region

23-26'N and 148-149‘5 (position of the postulated center on 26 July). Typhoon Vir-
ginia approached this region on 26 July. here it was transformed from a typhoon in-
to a tropical store. The pressure at its center increased tron 980 to 990 lb.

66

llﬂlllnﬂC1A1.lﬂlE¢NVLY
itlllDFFIClAl.lElE(HWLY

On 27 July, typhoon Virginia, passing over the cold disturbance, was filled (the
pressure increased by 10 ab). was transformed into a tropical cyclone, changed
direction of movement and lost velocity On 28 July it began to drop slowly to the
south, to the warmer water, where it again began to deepen; pressure at its cen-
ter decreased to 980 sb. On 29 July the tropical cyclone continued to develop, ac-
quiring a velocity of about 15 km/hour and over a 26-hour period was displaced

to the northwest 3‘ in latitude. On 30 July at ZS'N the tropical cyclone passed
over the warm water and was again transformed into a hurricane.

Figure 2 shows the distribution of water surface temperature according to data

of a repeated survey froa 1 through 6 August, as well as the trajectory of sove-
ment of hurricane Virginia. Figure 3a shows the 1,8 curves for point 3 (see Fig. 2)
with the coordinates 22°“ and 147°20'B before (I) and after (II) passage of the
typhoon [6]. The 1.5 curves for the cold cyclonic formation in Fig. 3b (IV) and
the 1,8 curves in the wake of the typhoon in Fig. 3a (II) have much in common: in
the upper lSO—a layer the T,S curves for temperature and salinity duplicate each
other well. This fact, in our opinion, is evidence that the cold cyclonic forma-
tion (Fig. 2, insert) after 40 days could be in the region 22'30'N and 167‘3, that
is, in the place through which the typhoon has passed. Thus, in this case as well
the passage of a hurricane, Virginia, over a cold cyclonic formation, which over
the course of 40 days had moved southwestward for a distance of about 400 km, led
to a rapid change in its intensity, velocity and direction of movement.

The two cases of the influence of cold synoptic disturbances in the ocean on trop-
ical cyclones considered above give us basis for assuming that the looping trajec-
tories of tropical cyclones in the open ocean are caused by the passage of a trop-
ical cyclone over a cold oceanic disturbance.

In order to confirm our assumption it is necessary to have statistics on similar
cases. Unfortunately, there are only a few known cases of the passage of a trop-
ical cyclone over a cold oceanic disturbance. In addition, there is no synchronous
information on a tropical cyclone and synoptic disturbances in the ocean. Accord-
ing to the data in [3], in the region of the Philippine Sea over a period of 15
years (1953-1968) there was an annual average of 12-13 typhoons, one or two having
a looping trajectory. Without rejecting the existence of an atmospheric influence
on looping trajectories of tropical cyclones it can also be assumed that the pea-
sage of a tropical cyclone over a cold synoptic disturbance is the reason for its
loOp1ng trajectory. In order to supplement our knowledge concerning the mutual
influence of atmospheric and oceanic eddies in the future it is desirable to carry
out experimental investigations in the corresponding regions of the world ocean.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Ivanov. V. N., Nikhaylova, L. A. and Nekrasov, I. V., ”Some Statistical Prop-

crties of the Phenomenological Parameters of Cyclogenesis in the Tropical
Zone," TAYFUN-78 (Typhoon-78), Leningrad, Gidrcmeteoizdnt, 1980.

'9
e

Kort, V. G. and Pavlova, Yu. V.. "Structure of the Field of Hesoscale Eddies
According to Data From Hydrological Surveys," OKEANOLOGICHESKIYB ISSLEDOVAN-

IYA (Oceanological Research), No 30, GIDROPIZICHESKAYA EKSPEDITSIYA POLDDDE
(POLIHODE hydrophysical Expedition), Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio, 1979.

47

FUI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
10.

11.

liDI‘OFFICIAl.lISE§CHULN

Hanedov. 2. S. and Pavlov, N. 1., TAYFUNY (Typhoons). Leningrad, Gidroueteo-
izdat, 197k.

Pal'nen. B. and N'yuton. Ch., TSIRKULYAISIONNYYE SISTEMY AIHDSFBR! (Atmospheric
Circulation Systems), Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat. 1973.

Ril'. 6.. TROPICHBSKAYA METEOROLOGIYA (Tropical Meteorology). Moscow. IL,
1965.

TAYPUN-78 (Typhoon-78). Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1980.

Shuleykin, V. V., RASCHE‘I‘ RAZVITIYA, DVIZHENIYA I ZATUKHANIYA rmucassxnm
URAGANOV I GLAVNYKH VOLN, SOZDAVAYEHYKH URAGANAHI (Cowputation of the Develop-
ment, Movement and Attenuation of Tropical Hurricanes and Main Haves Created
by Hurricanes), Leningrad, Gidrouoteoizdat, 1978.

Gray, U. H., "Global View of the Origin of Tropical Disturbances and Storms,"
HEATHER RBV., Vol 96, No 10, 1968.

GULFSTRBAH, Vol III. 80 9, 1977.

Miller, B. 1., "0n the Filling of Tropical Cyclone: Over Land," HURRICANE RES.
PROJ. REPT., No 66. 1963.

Palnen, 5.. "0n the Formation and Structure of Tropical Hurricanes," GEOPHYSICA.
Helsinki, 3. 1948.

68

FIIIIHNNCIAI.UEI(I‘LY
MOMMIISEONLY

000 551.665
PHYSICAL STRUCTURE OF THE OCEAN SURFACE um

Moscow 11311030106le I cinnowcua in Russian No 10, Oct 81 (nanuscript received
17 Feb 81) pp 58-66

[Article by K. N. Pedorov. doctor of physical and nathsaatical sciences. Institute
of Oceanology, USSR Acadeny of Sciences]

[Text] Abstract: A study of the structure of the ocean
surface layer under different hydroneteorolos-
ical conditions notes it possible to discrimin-
ate at least four characteristic physical rest-es
of the upper layer in the ocean: l) intensive
wind-wave aixing, 2) Lananuir circulation, 3)
intensive solar heating during calls and periods
of weak winds (with nodulations by internal waves
and without thu). ‘) surface freshenins by pre-
cipitation. It is shown that the spatial variabile
ity of tenperature of the ocean surface (108), ver-
tical thernal structure and heat content of the
upper layer have a different character in differ-
ent reaines. which lust be taken into account when
selecting the horizon for measuring 1‘08 by contact
methods and when conparins contact and satellite
1‘08 data. The need for further investigations in
this field is emphasised.

In standard hydrological neasurenents at sea the upper bathoneter is usually placed
at the horizon 1 n. In principle no one has ever precisely measured the distance
from the sea surface to the first hathoneter and in fact it cannot be precisely
measured because the length of the bathoneter itself is comensurahle with this
distance. In order for the hathoneter not be exposed when it is subjected to the
swell and waves it is usually subeerged with a sort of safety factor, but in sales
it is situated as close to the surface as possible. In any case, in tables of
standard oceanographic data this horizon is designated 0 n. It is implicitly as-
suned that the structure and variability oi teeperature and salinity in a layer
with a thickness of several meters near the ocean surface can be neglected. But
can this always be done?

Oceanologists have long known that the upper quasihonogeneous layer (UQL) of the
ocean in actuality not everywhere and not always is hoaogeneous or even quaaihono-
geneous [9, 13]. However, scientists have been interested in the thin surface

49

”MUSEONLY
FINI¢IHWCJAI.U$E(NVLV

layer of the ocean only recently. The highly promising prospects for the use of
satellite methods in mapping the temperature of the ocean surface (108) have re-
quired a detailed knowledge of the characteristics and an understanding of the
physical nature of the spatial-temporal variability of the T08 under the most dif-
ferent geographic, weather and climatic conditions.

In connection with the development of methods for remote investigations of the
ocean, during recent years special attention has been devoted to the heat-exchange
surface layer, which in most cases with adequate basis can be called the "cold sur-
face film" of the ocean. The thickness of this layer does not exceed 5-8 mm. and in
most natural situations it is actually colder than the underlying layers [b-b]. How-
ever. it soon became clear that the "cold film" alone cannot lead to substantial
differences between the observed parameters of the radiation TOS and the observed
kinetic temperature at a depth of l m or more. In the surface layer of the ocean
with a thickness of several meters there was found to be a complex structure and

an increased spatial-temporal variability of many hydrophysical characteristics. It
was established that the greatest variability of thermal structure is observed dur-
ing intensive solar heating in calm weather or in the presence of light winds [12]
and is associated for the most part with volumetric absorption of solar radiant en-
ergy, heat losses in evaporation, convection, modulation of the surface layer by in-
ternal waves and the peculiarities of surface salt stratification. The high vari-
ability of salinity in the surface layer is determined primarily by the long-pre-
vailing consequences of its freshening by rainwater. Horizontal differences in
salinity of about l°/oo per kilometer arise in the upper meter layer of the ocean

in the absence of intensive wind mixing [3].

The appearance of a hydrostatically stable thermal or salt stratification near the
surface gives rise to a sort of "blocking effect" which prevents the downward prop-
agation of wind-wave and convective turbulent energy into the thickness of the

UQL. A stable stratification extinguishes the earlier developing turbulence and

can impede the development of shear instability within the UQL. Since the variabil-
ity of the thermal structure in the surface layer of the ocean most frequently has
a clearly expressed diurnal variation, the intensity of turbulence within the "Oh
also should experience a diurnal variation. as is confirmed by observations [10).
However, the salt stratification not only is less subject to diurnal changes. but
can also substantially disrupt the diurnal variation of changes in thermal struc-
ture, leading to prolonged overheating of the surface layer persisting over the
course of natural synoptic periods.

The discovered variability is not an anomalous or exotic phenomenon. It is charac-
teristic during the entire year for the entire Intertradea zone of the world ocean.
for extensive subtropical regions where the velocity of the Trades decreases to

5 s/sec, and over the sunset period, also in the middle latitudes. Altogether the
regions where such a variability can be observed constitute more than 601 of the
area of the world ocean. Such regions as the Sargasso Sea in the Atlantic, the
western part of the Pacific Ocean and the northern part of the Indian Ocean are
especially characteristic from the point of view of an increased variability of

the thermohaline structure of the upper layer of the ocean.

In order to demonstrate graphically everything which has been stated above in spe-
cific examples from observations it is first necessary to examine some important
parameters of the surface layer of the ocean associated with heat exchange

50

IIIICIHHCIAI.USIIMVLY
“ll mmut \& (”“3

between the ocean and the atmosphere. Assume that n denotes the thickness of the
UQL and h the thickness of the layer in which convection develops under the influ-
ence of heat losses from the surface. It is convection which is the principal
source of kinetic turbulent energy in the QHI. in windless or slightly windy westb-
er. At nighttime, as a rule, h - H and convection carries turbulent energy direct-
ly to the lower boundary of the 0111., which deepens under the influence of turbulent

entrainment. Thus, ll in the nighttime hours can increase. During the daytime, when
the receipt of solar heat exceeds the sum of losses due to long-wave radiation,

evaporation and contact heat exchange. h<ﬂ. Since all heat losses for all prac-
tical purposes occur from the ocean surface (s - 0) and the absorption of incoaing
solar radiation in the upper 'layer of the ocean has a volumetric character, this
absorption can be represented as some distributed source and beneath the ocean sur-
face there will be some horizon D at which the total heat flux is equal to zero.

t this horizon, accordingly, the vertical temperature gradient d‘r/dz is equal to
zero and a layer with a stable thermal stratification also arises. The depth D is
called the depth of thermal compensation [16]. It can be assumed that during the
daytime h - D. The D value does not remain constant over the course of 24 hours
because it is dependent on the intensity of the incoming solar radiation and on
the intensity of the total losses of heat through the ocean surface. Since the
solar heating maximum is usually observed at 1500-1600 hours local solar time. the
thickness of the convective layer at this time in the absence of salt stratifica-
tion is ainimum and does not exceed 10 on. It attains l a by 1600 hours [1] and
then rapidly increases. at nighttiae propagating to the entire on. With sunrise
the h and D values again begin to decrease, closing the diurnal cycle by 1500-1600
hours. Radiation models can be constructed for computing the diurnal variation of
D [11, 16].

The existence of a depth of therasl compensation is not soae theoretical abstrac-
tion. A detailed measuremnt of vertical tasperature profiles in the upper layer
of the ocean with a thickness of 10 m by means of a special floating-up probe de-
signed by Vershinskiy and Solov'yev (Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sci-
ences) [l] repeatedly revealed the near-surface presence of a homogeneous layer
with a thickness of about several tens of centimeters with a small temperature in-
version directly beneath this layer (Fig. 1). This is also the daytime convective
layer, whose lower boundary virtually coincides with the depth of thermal convene-
ntion.

The snall thickness of the convective layer in call: weather when there is intensive
solar heating and absence of other sources of turbulent energy in the Q‘il. has the
following result: the greatest increase in heat content occurs in the thin surface
layer with a thickness of only 0.5-1.0 In. The vertical temperature profile acquires
the form shown in Pig. 2 and the tenperature difference in the surface layer from
the temperature at a depth of 7-10 m by 1600-1900 hours local solar time can at-
tain 3°C [14]. The stability of thermal stratification in the layer below the tea-
perature saximum. that is, at the horizons 2-5 a. can in this case be characterized
by a VﬁiinIA-Brent frequency N of about (3--’o)-10'2 sec-1. Under these conditions
the diurnal thermocline is sharper than the seasonal and main thermoclines. With
an llu-runsc in the thickness of the layer affected by convection there is a gradual
evening-out of the T(z) profile vertically; at nighttime a virtually coaplete hono-
thermy develops within the limits of the entire QHL.

51

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
woe 0M“. USE ONLY

 

Fig. 1. Vertical profile of temperature in the Sargasso Sea on a sunset day with
little wind. In the upper part of the profile there is a daytime convective layer

with a thickness h. (Measurements by the author nede using a floating-up probe on
the 27th voyage of the scientific research ship "Abdenik Kurchatov"). At the
time of the measurements (21 September 1978, 1M9 hours) the weather was cloud-
less, the wind was 3 m/sec, air temperature was 26.0%: and hunidity was 761.

The appearen--e of a stable salt stratification near the surface as a result of
showers additionally complicates the picture. The measurements which were nade in-
dicated that when there is a relatively weak wind showers with a duration of 1-2
hours and an intensity of 20 Ins/hour or more there can he a freshening during

the falling of the shower of a thin (up to l a thick) layer near the ocean surface
by 0.5-1°/oo, which considerably exceeds the usual local variability of salinity

in the upper layer in the absence of rain. Brief lighter showers reduce salinity
near the ocean surface by 0.2-0.3°/oo [3]. The salinity (and density) jup at the
lower boundary of the freshened spot, ineding turbulent and convective heat as-
change with the lower-lying layers, during the daytine leads to extra-a1 heating of
the surface layer. For example, in the sI-er of 1978 in the sargasso Sea (region
of the POLIHODE experiment) during caln weather the water tenperature near the sur-
face in the freshened spots attained 29-32'c, whereas at adjacent points, where
rain did not fall, it did not exceed 27.5-28.5‘C [3]. Cleerl the case of spatial-
tasporal variability of T08 with an mlitude greater than c is completely not
characteristic for the mean clinatic conditions in this region in su-er.

The density jusp at the lower baundary of freshened spots can be characterised by
the values of the Vlisdll—Brent frequency of about (1-3)-10’2sec’1. The sharper

vertical gradient of salinity (density) near the surface corresponds to more in-
tensive daytime heating. This can be seen clearly in Pig. 3, which shows three

profiles of deviations of temperature AT“) and salinity AS“) from the corres-
ponding T and S values at the horizon 10 I in the Sargasso Sea in the sunset of

52

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1978. The measurements were made using a special method using the "AIST" hydro-
physicnl probe [3]. In accordance with the sue physical logic the freshened

spots are more intensively cooled at nighttime in comparison with the surround-
ing waters as a result of a forced limitation on the thiclmess of the freshsned

layer affected by convection (see Fig. lo and also [3]). Thus, showers lead to
the appearance of significant horizontal temperature inhomogeneities in the
surface layer having a spatial scale of about 1-10 km.

1’
‘\
20
Fig. 2. Vertical temperature profile in the upper lO-m layer of the Sargasso Sea

typical for conditions of intensive solar heating according to measurements made
by V. T. Paka and the author (27th voyage of the scientific research ship “Akad-

emik Kurchatov" on 25 August 1978 at about 1600 hours). The horizontal lines near
the Surface indicate the limits of temperature variability on the basis of meas-

urements from a float.

I! H J! "C

Precipitation by no means is the only factor favoring the formation of horizontal
inhomogeneities of T08. Another and evidently more universal mechanism for the
formation of horizontal inhomogeneities of T08 of a kilometer scale is the modu-
lation of the thickness of the heated surface layer of the ocean by internal waves
of the seasonal thermocline, manifested very appreciably during cell weather and
when there are weak winds at the hours of intensive solar heating [12]. The fact
is that the heat accumulated as a result of solar heating in the surface layer

of the ocean enters as a passive admixture relative to the convergent and diverg-
cnt movements generated in this layer by internal waves. He note that in a similar
way internal waves can modulate the thickness of the freshened surface layer and
the thickness of spots of plankton or its concentration, etc. The amplitudes of
inhomogeneities of TOS associated with modulation of the heated layer by internal
waves can attain l-2°C. At the edges of the warm and cold spots there are very
sharp horizontal tmperature gradients (up to 2 or more °C per 1 km). Examples

of the characteristic registry of ”calm weather temperature inhomogeneities"

53

”OFFICIALUSIONLY
FOI‘OFFIFIAI.IGITORN}'

obtained during the towing of a temperature sensor at the horizon 0.15 m in the
summer of 1977 in the Sargasso Sea are shown in Pig. 5. "Calm weather inhomogen-
eities" arise most frequently at 1000-1100 hours local solar time, and sometimes
later, attain a maximum amplitude at about 1500 hours, that is, by the time of
maximum heating of the surface layer, and virtually completely disappear by 2100-
2200 hours. In the case of strong heating inhomogeneities of a kilometer scale are
also registered at the horizon 3-4 m [12], whereas the smaller inhomogeneities

with a scale of about 100 m and an amplitude of several tenths of a degree accom-
. panying them. seen easily in Fig. 5a, are observed only near the surface of the sea

and disappear completely after 1500 hours.

 

Pig. 3. Three types of dependence of vertical temperature profile in surface layer
of ocean on salt stratification. The 13? and ‘38 values represent deviations from
the temperature and salinity values at the horizon 10 m. I) weak salt stratifica-
tion, 11) moderate salinity gradient in entire layer, 111) sharp salinity gradient

near surface. Measurements made by the author on the 27th voyage of the scientific
research vessel "Akademik Kurchatov."

7'C[
' o

\ a": \
a5
.1.
min 2‘
_ .
”than. ('7 7’ ,0 9‘ 5' 5? “'0”
an ' IV I? I, ’ ‘ O I i '

Fig. 6. "Track" of rain cooling during night in the surface layer of the ocean reg-
istered at 0700 hours near Cuba using a temperature sensor towed from the scientif-
ic research vessel ”Akademik Kurchatov" at the horizon 0.15 m (27th voyage, 16 Sep-

tember 1978).

An evaluation of the characteristic horizontal scale L of temperature spots made in
[12] in accordance with the results [8] of a theoretical analysis of modulation of
the fields of movement and a passive impurity in the surface layer by a random

5h

FOI,OFINC1A1.IENIIHNLY
ROI OIWHCIAI.IEIEIHULY

field of internal waves gave for the observation region a value Lzuoo m. which
coincides well with the results of in situ measurements. Temperature inhomogen-

eities with a scale of about 100 m are associated. in all probability, with differ-
ences in the intensity and depth of penetration of daytime convection as a result

of the presence at the surface of spots of surface-active substances. as well as
fluctuations of the position of the temperature sensor vertically during towing
in a layer with a sharp temperature gradient.

Ripples .Slick
5, c5

         

2i}! 2!. ’0 “JG

Pig. 5. Thermal inhomogeneities during calm weather registered with a towed temper-
ature sensor at the horizon 0.15 m on the 25th voyage of the scientific research
ship "Akademik Kurchatov" in the Sargasso Sea in August 1977.

In addition to the regimes associated with surface freshening and modulation of the
thickness of the heated layer by internal waves and characteristic for windless
weather or weather with little wind, it is common to observe a regime of circula-
tions or Langmuir cells setting in with winds from 3 to 10 m/sec. Langmuir circul-
ations are a result of interaction between drift currents and waves and are mani-
fested at the ocean surface in the form of many parallel convergence bands elongat-
ed along the wind or at a small angle to it. The distance between the convergence

bands is approximately equal to the thickness of the UQL and can vary from 5 to 100
m. Divergence bands are situated between the the convergence hands over the as-

cending branches of the vertical circulations.

In a transverse vertical section of a Langmuir circulation there are closed cells
of streamlines penetrating into the depths most frequently (but not always!)
Lo this lower boundary of the mixed layer. when there is a weak wind enJ intensive

solar heating the water temperature in the convergence bands is greater than in

the intervals [7]. The heat carried downward by the descending currents creates in
a layer with a thickness of several meters a bandlike thermal structure (Fig. 6).
Since in this case wind and wave mixing is also operative, the amplitudes of the

SS

ﬁbl‘OlIlC1A1.U§£lMNLY
INN! OFFICIAI.USIE(HVLV

horizontal changes in temperature in these bandlike structures are not always as
great as in calm weather inhomogeneities and evidently most frequently do not ex-
ceed 0.5-0.6‘6. As indicated by Fig. 6, illustrating the results of our measurements
in Langmuir cells in the Sargasso Sea in the summer of 1978, the heat content of the
layer with a thickness of 7 m can differ in the convergence and divergence bands

by approximately 0.3-0.6 of the daytime sum of direct solar radiation. Thus, the
Langmuir circulations are an extremely effective mechanism for the redistribution
of heat horizontally and its transfer into the depths and with intensive develop—
ment can completely determine the position of the diurnal thermocline with depth.

cal/cmZ

 

Fig. 6. Distribution of temperature profile in Langmuir cells. Measurements by
the author on 21 September 1978 in Sargasso Sea (27th voyage of the scientific re-
search vessel "Akademik Kurchatov"). The difference in the heat reserve between re-

gions of convergence and divergence is indicated between the profiles. Heather:
c10udless, wind 3-6 m/sec, air temperature 26.0°C. 1) in convergence band, 2) be-
tween convergence bands.

Thus, in the considered regions of the ocean it is possible to discriminate at
least four sharply differing regimes of the upper layer in the ocean:

I. A regime of intensive wind-wave mixing (wind velocity um) 8-10 m/sec).
2. A regime of Langmuir circulations (“10 from 3 to 10 m/sec).

3. A regime of intensive solar heating in calm weather and weather with little
wind (“10 from 0 to 3-5 m/sec) with modulations of the heated layer by internal
waves and in the absence of internal waves.

IOR10FFK1ALINI:0NLY
INIR‘OFFICTAI.Iﬂ5EI(NVLV

a. A regime of surface freahening by precipitation.

Accordingly, by the light part of the day the diurnal thermocline in different re-
gimes can be situated at different horizons from 2-5 to 30-60 m. The least deep di-
iurnal thermocline (2-5 m) with sharp vertical temperature gradients is usually
associated with a strong fresheninc of the surface layer by precipitation. Langmuir
cells and intensive wind-wave mixing can be responsible for the propagation of day-
time heating to 30-60 m, where the diurnal thermocline becomes very weak and virtual-
ly merges with the seasonal thermocline. The distribution of the diurnal receipts
of solar heat, at the considered latitudes being about 500-600 cal/cm2 [15], in a
layer of such different thickness also gives a range of local variability of TOS
from one regime to the next of 3'C. The convergent and divergent currents, caused
by Langmuir circulations and internal waves in the surface layer, horizontally re-
distribute the heat absorbed near the surface in the course of the light part of
the day. He observed situations when, for example. by the end of the day due to the
effect of internal waves the difference between the heat content of the upper layer

of the ocean at two adjacent points at a distance of only about 1 km attained the
totals of the solar radiation absorbed during the day. In this case the amplitude
of the spatial variability of T03 can easily attain Z’C.

The data cited above indicate that allowance only for the "cold surface film" does
not solve the problem of an adequate correction of the measured values of the radi-
ation T08 for the purpose of obtaining information reflecting the changes in the
heat content of the upper layer of the ocean. The correction AT due to the film
can be computed relatively easily from the known or predicted hygromateorological

conditions using available formulas IS, 6]. however. these same conditions also de-
termine the specific regime of the upper layer with which in turn some distribu-

tion of solar heat entering the ocean is associated. Unfortunately, there are
still no good models describing the regimes which are most complex in structure.

It also follows from the data cited above that the measurements of T08 made using
contact apparatus situated at arbitrary horizons beneath the ocean surface can
provide inadequate material for judgments concerning the heat content of the upper
layer of the ocean, for comparison with satellite data or for their tie-in if one
does not take into account the peculiarities of structure of the surface layer
characteristic of the specific regime in which the measurements are made [2].

In connection with what has been cited above it is entirely desirable and timely
to formulate the problem of a many-sided intensification of investigations (by the
personnel of several scientific institutes) of the range of problems dealt with

here, which it would be fitting to give the arbitrary name "physical oceanology
of the upper meter of the ocean."

The formulation of the necessary investigations meets with serious methodological
and instrumental difficulties because for making the desired in situ measurements
in the surface layer of the ocean the standard measurement.instruments and methods
are not suitable. For a number of instruments. such as for hydrophysical STD probes,
u special measurement method is required which takes into account the rolling and
drift of the ship. which introduce disturbances both in the measurements themselves
and in the structure of the medium in which the measurements are made. Many meas-
urements could be made while the vessel is proceeding on course, but the

57

FOI:OIIIC1A1.USEIMNLY
HOI‘OFIICIAI.CEIE(HVLV

instrumentation registering not only temperature, but also salinity near the ocean
surface, necessary for this purpose, is completely lacking. None of these setters

have been discussed to any extent from either the methodological point of viev or

in themselves. One of the purposes of this article is to stimulate an active discus-
sion of the mentioned problem.

1.

2.

3.

5.

9.

10.

11.

12.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Vershinskiy, N. V. and Solov'yev, A. V., "Probe for Investigations of the Sur-
face Layer of the Ocean," OKEANOLDGIYA (Oceanology), Vol 17, No 2, 1977.

Ginsburg. A. 1., "Methodological Problems in Measurements of Temperature and
Salinity in the Boundary Layer of the Ocean," HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA
(Meteorology and hydrology). No 6, 1981.

Ginzhurg, A. 1.. Zatsepin, A. 6., Sklyarov, V. Ye. and Fedorov, K. N., "Effects
of Precipitation in the Ocean Surface Layer." OKBANOLOGIYA, Vol 20, lo 5. 1980.

Ginsburg, A. 1., Zatsepin, A. G. and Fedorov, K. N.. "Fine Structure of the
Thermal Boundary Layer in Water at the Hater-Air Discontinuity," 12V. AN SSSR:
FIZIKA ATHOSFBRY I OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the
Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 13, No 12, 1977.

Ginsburg, A. 1. and Fedorov, K. N., "Hater Cooling From the Surface During Free
and Forced Convection," 12V. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATHDSFBR! I OKEANA, Vol 16, No 1,
1978.

Ginsburg, A. I. and Fedorov, K. N., "Thermal State of the Boundary Layer of
Cooling Hater With Transition From Free to Forced Convection," 12V. AN SSSR:
FIZIKA ATHOSFBRY I OKEANA, Vol 1‘. No 7, 1978.

HODELIROVANIYB I PROGNOZ VERKHNIKH SLDYEV OKEANA (Modeling and Prediction of
the Upper Layers of the Ocean), Leningrad, Gidrometsoisdat, 1979.

Honin, A. S. and Piterbsrg, L. 1., "Statistical Description of Internal Haves,"
DOKLADY AN SSSR (Reports of the USSR Academy of Sciences), Vol 236, No 3,
1977.

Honin, A. S. and Fedorov. K. N., "Fine Structure of the Upper Layer of the
Ocean," 12V. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATHOSFBRY I OKEANA, Vol 9, No 6, 1973.

Paks, V. T. and Fedorov, K. N., "Influence of Thermal Structure of the Upper
Layer of the Ocean on the Development of Turbulence," 12V. AN SSSR: FIZIKA
ATHDSFERY I OKEANA. 1981 (in press).

Solov'yev, A. V., "Fine Thermal Structure of the Surface Layer of the Ocean in
the POLIHDDE-77 Region," IZV. AR 8558: FIZIKA AINOSFERY I OKEARA, V01 15, No
7, 1979.

Fedorov, K. N.. Ginsburg, A. I. and Piterbarg, L. 1., "Physical Nature of

'Calm Heather Inhomogeneities in the Temperature Field of the Ocean," OIBAN-
OLDCIYA, V01 21, N0 2, 1981.

58

FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(IVLY
13.

14.

15.

16.

INDI1OFINC1Al.llﬂE(H‘lV

Fodorov, K. N.. Plakhin, Ye. A., Prokhorov. V. I. and Sedov, V. 6., "Charac-
teristics of Thernohaline Stratification in the Region of the Polygon in the

Tropical Atlantic." ATLAﬂTICHESKIY GIDROPIZICHBSKIY POLIGON-70 (Atlantic By-
drophysical Polygon-70), Moscow. Nauka. 1974.

Bruce, J. G. and Firing, 5.. "Temperature Measurement in the Uppet 10 I Hith

Modified Expendable Bathythernograph Probes." J. GEOPHYS. £85., Vol 79. No 2,
1976.

Fedorov, K. 8., "0n the Sumner Daily Heating and Diurnal ﬂeet Budget of the
Upper Ocean Layer." STUDI IN ONORE DI GIUSEPPINA ALIVERTI. Napoli, 1972.

Hoods, J. 0., "Diurnal and Seasonal Variations of Convection in the Hind-nixed
Layer of the Ocean," QUART. J. ROY. HBTEOROL. 5°C., Vol 106, No 669, 1980.

59

FOI‘OFFIJAI.USE(N‘LY
R0. OIIIClAl.lEIE(NVLY

UDC 551.666.$

[Article by I. P. Trubkin, candidate of physical and nathenetical sciences. State
Oceanographic Institute]

[Abstract] The wave-covered sea surface is anisotropic. The properties of the wave-
covered surface. described by statistical eethods, especially anisotropy, are re-
flected in the angular spectruu, characterizing the statistical distribution of the
energy of waves in the direction of their propagation. Present-day concepts concern-
ing the form of the angular spectrul function are based exclusively on limited ex-
perimental data. Accordingly, in this article the author has made an attenpt at an
analytical deternination of this function within the framework of a linear probabil-

in situ neasurenents in the Caspian See. It is shown that in the considered case of
waves developing in deep water (22 n) a large part of the wave energy is propagated
in the direction of the waves. In the region of the maximum of the 8(9) function
the distribution of wave energy is narrow (angular width at the 0.5-1eve1 is about
F!!!‘)FIICIAI.IIBII(HULY

UDC 551.521.31:627.8(282.247.32)

SOLAR ENERGY SUPPLY TO DNEPR CASCADE RESERVOIRS

Moscow HETBORDLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 (manuscript received
7 Jan 81) pp 72-78

[Article by V. n. Shnakov, candidate of technical sciences. Hydrobiology Institute.
Ukrainian Academy of Sciences]

[Abstract] The solar energy incident on land or water surfaces is seasured by ac-
tinoeeters, but in the Dnepr basin in the Ukraine there are only seven sctinonet-
tric stations and they are distributed nonunifornly and without any particular
relationship to reservoirs. Continuous measurements of solar energy are not made
at a single one of the reservoirs in the Dnepr cascade. however, it has been es-
tablished that total solar radiation is an extremely stable characteristic. An an-
alysis of the results of observations at the seven sentioned stations revealed an
entirely satisfactory correlation of the monthly radiation sums with correlation
coefficients 0.93-0.98. This indicated that it was possible to use the data fron
these observations for calculating the solar energy incident on the reservoir sur-
faces. The collected data revealed that solar energy exerts a great influence on
hydrobiologicel processes in water bodies, governs their thermal regime and affects
the foraation of water quality. Photosyntheticslly active radiation is of special
importance because it directly controls the quantity of primary production of phyto-
plankton. The investigations revealed a dependence of the quantity of solar energy
on solar altitude. ataospheric transparency and cloud cover. Conversion factors
from total solar radiation to photosynthetically active radiation make it possible
to compute these quantities. The propagation of photosynthetically active radia-
tion in water is influenced by solar altitude and also by water color and trans-
parency. In the reservoirs of the cascade there is a decrease in the absorption

of solar energy by the water and its color and an increase in transparency free
the upper (Kiyevskoye) to the lower (Kakhovskoye) reservoirs. The distribution of
photosynthetically active radiation with depth in the reservoirs of the cascade
occurs in conformity to curves close to hyperbolic. whose parameters are water

transparency and solar altitude. The depth of penetration of photosynthetically
active radiation into water bodies increases with an increase in transparency and

solar altitude. The quantity of solar energy penetrating to the deeper layers in-
creases with an increase in water transparency and decreases with an increase in
depth. Figures 3. tables 2; references: 8 Russian.

61

FOI10FFKJAI.UBBIH‘LV
”OFFICIALLBEONLV

UDC 532.5‘3

OORPUI‘ATION OP DYNAMICS 0? RIVER nous UNDER MNSTATIONARY CONDITIWS

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 (Ianuscript received
20 Jan 81) pp 79-87

[Article by G. A. Raspopin, candidate of technical sciences, and Ye. A. Kovalev,
Novosibirsk Civil Engineering Institute and Mathematics Institute, Siberian Depart-

ment, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Abstract] At present there is no universal nethod for cosputing nonstationary flows
in rivers with wind and Coriolis force taken into account and thus there is no set-
isfactory nethod for deternining local velocities and levels for any given nonent.
The authors here describe a successful algorithm for casputing the dynanics of
river flows in channels having tine-variable discharges and wind velocities. As a
theoretical basis use is made of the known equations of notion in stresses, the
continuity equation and the Boussinesq hypothesis.‘The pressure distribution in the
flow is described by the equation of hydroetatics. The fundaaental equation aploy-
ed in the coeputations is the continuity equation written in finite differences.
The proposed algorithe is characterised by rapid convergence. The algoritlu is il-
lustrated in the exanple of coeputations of the dynamics of flow in the 0b' channel
at Barnaul. There was an excellent agree-ent of colputed and measured parsneters
with respect to the velocity vector eodulus and its direction. The nature of river
flow is influenced considerably by wind velocity and direction. The proposed sethod
is shown to be universal. It takes into account all the principal factors exerting
an influence on the flow. including friction at the free surface. inertial ter- and
Coriolis force. As a result. the vectors of bottom and surface velocities have a
different direction, making it possible to describe circulation currents caused by

meandering of the channel, Coriolis force and wind. The computation elgorithn is
simple and requires little cosputer tine. It therefore can be recouended for wide

use in the planning and construction of hydraulic structures on rivers. Figures 3;
references 7; 6 Russian, 1 Western.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”OFFICIALUSIWLY

UN 551.521
:01»:me 0F RADIATION REGIME IN PLANT COVER

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10. Oct 81 (nanuscript received
31 Mar 81) pp 88—93

[Article by 0. A. Anisinov and G. V. Henrhulin, candidate of physical and mathemat-
ical sciences, State Hydrological Institute]

[Abstract] The models of the radiation regime in the plant cover which have already
been published do not fully clarify the possibilities of radiation transfer theory.
This is attributable primarily to the fact that in order to facilitate solution of
the pertinent systen of integrodiffarential equations it has been necessary to in-
troduce simplifying assumptions which considerably lisit the sphere of possible ap-
plication of the nodeling results. In order to test fully the possibilities of ra-
diation transfer theory the authors have developed a aodel of the radiation regime
of a horizontally unifora plant cover without assumptions concerning its phytonet-
tit and optical properties limiting universality. The results of numerical experi-
aents are presented. The phytometric characteristics of the plant cover (relative
size of leaves. relative area of the detector registering radiation, profile of
specific leaf surface and orientation of leaves) were interpreted as randon func-
tions with a priori stipulated distributions. The algorithm used in connection with
the statistical tests method aade it possible to compute the distribution function
(probability density) for direct solar radiation at any height in the plant cover.
The systematic discrepancies between the experimental data and the results of aodel
computations are explained. A method for developing a theory of radiation transfer
in a high-dispersion, two-phase sodium is proposed. Figures 2; references: 3 Rus-
sian, 2 western. .

63

FOI'OUIWCJAI.USI¢0NLN
FIIII)FFICIAI.IISE<OhﬂJV

UDC 632.11:633.11(57‘.11)
AGRONETEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS, CROP YIELD AND QUALITY 0? SPRING "HEAT GRAIN

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10. Oct 81 (Innuecript received
6 Nov 80) pp 94-101

[Article by L. G. Pigarevs, candidate of agricultural sciences. Western Kazakhstan
Agricultural Institute]

[Text] Abstract: A group classification of agro-
clinatic indices detersining the corres-
ponding changes in crop yield and the qual-
ity of spring wheat grain and the possibil-
ity of their prediction is substantiated.
Procedures are proposed for increasing the
effectiveness of use of photosynthetically
active radiation by plants. governing the
increase in yield and quality of grain, as
well as the output of the final product -
bread.

A search for means for agricultural crops to make the most effective use of agro-
climatic resources against a background of a high level of agricultural crop cul-

tivation techniques is an important and tiaely problen in the effort to enhance
crop yield and the quality of production. For Kazakhstan this problen is even
greater because as a result of the exploitation of the virgin and idle lands it
has been transforled into one of the principal regions for the production of high-
quality grain from wheat of strong and hard varieties.

The sharp fluctuations in yield and the technical qualities of grain free the spring
wheat varieties Saratovskaya-Zlo. Saratovakaya-42 and Saratovskaya-60 on the dark
chestnut soils of northwestern Kazakhstan during six successive years (197‘ and
1975, 1976 and 1977, 1978 and 1979) is evidence that a favorable conbination of
solar radiation. nunher of hours of sunlight and moisture supply results in reval-
ation of the potential biological possibilities of the variety and indicates ways

to make effective use of agroneteorological factors for the purpose of ensuring a
stable yield of wheat with a high quality of grain.

In the zone of northwestern Kazakhstan soft wheat of the Saratovskaya-bz and Sara-

tovskaya-210 varieties can fern up to 201 protein in the grain, nore than ‘0:

first-group gluten and ensure a volumetric yield of bread from 100 g of flour of
735 cu with an evaluation of 5 scale units (without improvement).

64

FOI:0IIIC1NLIIHB(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in individual years these indicea decrease sharply, to 11.242. 19.202 (100-1

100) and 195 cm3 respecrively, which results in a low quality of the grain and
reduces the bread yield. Bread, as the fundamental product of nutrition, is eval-
uated. on the one hand. by quality (calorie content. protein quantity, etc.). and
on the other hand, by quantity, -hat is, the volumetric yield from 100 g of flour.
The voluaetric yield of bread in turn is a function of may factors:

[y - m;1l'- soil] l’=/(b'-_.K .71”... .\.¥I;.‘-‘O:\l’.l\"l. [@AR - pm]

where V is the volumetric yield of bread; 5; is the protein cbntent of the grain;

K is the gluten and its quality; ‘1' is the technology employed in bread production;
#901 is soil fertility; A is the agricultural technique employed; Zte is the

sum 0 hours of sunshine during the vheat growing season; 2 PAR is the sum of pho-
tosynthetically active radiation during this same period; It, is the mistening co-

efficient, (I.

K) = u. |.'- E d:

2 h is the sum of falling precipitation; id is the sun of the mean daily air nois-
ture deficits during the agricultural year.

Our experiments in 1970-1979 were carried out at the same level of agricultural
techniques. on dark chestnut soils, and the technology for the production of
bread froa 100 g of flour remained standard. Under these conditions 2:0, ZPAR
and K... were decisive in the change in the volumetric yield of bread.

Thus. the volumetric yield of bread vas examined from the point of view of its de-
pendence on the protein content of the grain, quantity and quality of the gluten,
which in turn are determined by the above-mentioned integral agrometeorological
indices. An analysis of available materials for the last 10 years (number of er-
periments n - 107) indicated that the prevailing agrometeorological conditions
also determine the yield and the quality of the grain; Kg, 2PM! and 2‘0 have a
high correlation with the latter.

Moisture under the conditions in our zone limits the process of photosynthesis of
plants, but in moist years 2 PAR and 2 telimit both the yield and quality of
grain.

In this connection a differential analysis of the dependence of the quality of
grain, yield, volumetric yield of bread on agrometeorological conditions enabled
us to discriminate five groups of K. and 2PM! values which can be considered ag-
roclimatic indicators of the corresponding changes in protein content. quality
of gluten and volumetric yield of bread.

Changes in K" from 0.38 to 0.55 and EPAR from 100.4 to 107.9'107 J/Iz, according
to our experiments, which we assigned to group 1, under unirrigated conditions

ensure the formation of the highest grain yield (from 26.7 to 61.3. on the average
30.8 centners/hcctare), protein content (from 19.0 to 20.02), first-group gluten

65

FOIOITICIALUSCONLY
POI OFFIGAL USE ONLY

with a 1002 probability and a voluaetric yield of bread from 100 g of flour be-
tween 510 and 735 «9. With agroclinatic indices in group I, which we evaluate as
optimua, the correlation coefficient between the protein content and the volun-
etric yield of bread is 0.701. The volumetric yield of bread froa 100 g of flour
with a protein content of the grain 19.502 attains a maxim- value 735 cn3. It is
important to note that with the indicated agroaeteorological conditions the pro-
tein content in wheat grain of the varieties Saratovskaya-bz and Saratovsksya-Zlo
attains 202 and reaches a plateau (Fig. l).

Agroclinatic indices of group II (Kw from 0.31 to 0.38 and X PAR fro. 95.0 to
100.3407 J/nz) result in a yield of 20.3 centners/hectare (from 15.0 to 30.0

centners/hectare) and the formation of protein content in the grain from 16.75
to 18.50%. as well as f irst-group gluten with a 77% probability. The volunetric
yield of grain from 100 g of bread under these conditions is fron 675 to 700 Ciao

Group III takes in cases with Kg from 0.23 to 0.30 and XPAR froa 82.0 to 96.9.107
JIIIZ. He evaluate these agroclinatic indices as "average." They result in a yield
of 15.0 centners/hectare (from 7.0 to 25.2 centners/hectare), a decrease in the
protein content to 14.0-16.02, a quality of second-group gluten with a 482 prob-

ability and maximum variations in the volumetric yield of bread froa 100 g of
flour -- from 195 to 610 cn3.

GrOup IV of agrocliuatic indices is characterized by a relatively high moistening
coefficient (from 0.30 to 0.70), but a low sun of PAR during the "sprouting-gold
ripeness" period (from 66.40 to 82.00-10 J/nz), which is a condition for the
formation of grain with a yield of 210.9 centners/hectare (fron 15.7 to 37.0 cent-
ners/hectare), but a low protein content (froa 11.0 to 13.22) and second-group
gluten up to 751.

A considerable reaction of plants to change in 2 PAR is characteristic of the
processes trans iring under the influence of indices of this group. With an in-
crease in the PAR the protein content attains 13.22 and the voluaetric yield of
bread from 100 g of f10ur is 515 cn3. He categorised agroclinatic indices of
group IV as "satisfactory." In group V we included Ru below 0.20 and a high sun
of pan (from 90.0 to 100.0-107 J/nz or more). Such a conbination of agroclinatic
indices, which we designated as "unsatisfactory," in actuality has no value in
production. In the case of a low noietening coefficient plants do not assinilate
PAR and this does not ensure a yield even for replacing the expended seed; the
grain in such cases will usually be inconpletely filled and impoverished, although
its protein content can attain 171.

The principal groups of agroclinatic indices, deteraining the change in protein
content of grain of spring wheat of the variety Saratovsltaya-bZ with different coa-
binations of the noistening coefficient and PAR sun, are represented in the fora
of a three-diaensional diagram (Fig. 2). On this diagraa It" is read along the
right side of the base of the parallelpiped, the sun of PAP during the "sprouting-
total asturity" period is plotted along the left edge, and the protein content

of the grain is read along the vertical edge.

The diagram, constructed on the basis of actual data, gives a graphic idea concern-
ing the dependence of protein content in the grain on It. and EPAR. Thus. the Inex-
inun Protein content of spring wheat grain of the variety Saratovskaya-loz was

66

MWWONLY
F0!‘0FFKJA1.UBEIIVLY

obtained with a noistening coefficient 0.50-0.60 and a sum 0 PAR lOS'lO7 J/nz.
with this same moistening coefficient but a sum of PAR 60'10 J].2 the protein
content is reduced to 11.50-12.002, but with a moistening coefficient 0.70 or
above the protein content falls even to 11.241.

In northwestern Kazakhstan both a decrease (from 0.50) and an increase (from 0.60)
in the moistening coefficient. on the one hand, and a decrease in the sum of PAR,
on the other, cause a decrease in the quality of grain and especially one of its
principal indicea - protein content.

 

  
  

5 Mignon/n2
'3 K" K .1!- ‘1', ~
”T ]:u :ai’;1'7:‘5
.. , [cm
W "19 Group I
.1, . I
u I an as: n;

Fig. 1. Principal groups of agroclimatic indicea determining quality of grain and
volumetric yield of bread (V) from 100 g of f10ur from spring wheat of variety
Saratovskaya-bZ. B x - protein content of grain; R; - gluten, IDC-l;>~50-70,
PAR -- during period "sprouting-total maturity"; Kw -- noistening coefficient

During moist 1976 and 1978, with irrigation during the period of the initial

stages of grain formation,the grain was puny and there was a reduction to-ZSX of
the yield, which was caused, in our opinion, by "runoff" of the grain.

In northwestern Kazakhstan and in the regions adjacent to it the deficit of pre-
cipitation in more than 7oz of the years reduces the effectiveness of use of light
and heat resources by the wheat plants. The classification of the groups of agro-
clinatic indicea determining the yield and quality of the grain served as a basis
for seeking methods and procedures for the optimum (under the given conditions)

spatial-temporal moisture supply and the maximum utilization of solar radiation
by plants. '

67

FOIIOIFKJAJ.USE(IULY
F0!‘09FKJAL.USE(IVLY

The reserves of productive moisture in the soil layer 0-100 cm at the beginning
of the sowing season constitute an agrometeorological index which to a consider-
able degree determines the fate of the future yield. However, with one and the
same soisture reserves in the soil for the rational use of agroclimatic resources
both in the initial and in the subsequent phases of development of plants it is
extremely important to determine (with allowance for asroclimatic conditions)

the optimum times of sowing and to ensure the sowing of spring wheat at these
times.

 

Fig. 2. Change in protein content of wheat grain of Saratovskaya-ez variety with
different combinations of moistening coefficient and PAR.

In the case of early sowing times a shortage of heat inhibits the appearance of
early sprouts, whereas weeds actively absorb the moisture reserves and develop

rapidly. Early sowinss nost frequently are spare. develop lesser leaf surface, fall
under the influence of May droughts and searing winds and develop prematurely. As

a result, the plants receive a lesser sum of photosynthetically active radiation.

In the case of late sowing tines and moisture reserves in the soil of not less

than 502 of the total field moisture capacity the duration of the "sowing-sprout-
ing" phase does not differ from its duration with optimum sowing times. but the
duration of the subsequent development phases is sharply reduced. The reasons for

68

FOI1DPFIJA1.U§EilMLY
FINI‘DIFICIAI.IIBI OlﬂUV

this are the high temperatures and the deficit of air moisture, as well as high
transpiration. At the midday hours the plants lose their state of turgor, have
a weak increase in leaf surface, which in the last analysis results in a reduc-

tion in yield and quality of grain.

 

 

- Y part
Fig. 3. Dependence of loss of yield (K103. - 'J§F1;JE d.y ) of spring wheat on sow-
0

ing time. 1) Saratovskaya-AO; 2) Saratovskaya-ezg o - optimum sowing date; n -
number of days from optimum date; K1°,, - coefficient of yield IOIISY o -* yield
with sowing on optimum date; Yn - yield with deviation by corresponding number of

days from optimum date.

Thus, unfavorable conditions develop with both early and late sowing times. Even
with satisfactory moisture reserves (70! of soil moisture capacity) the deviation
of sowing times from the Optimum dates causes a sharp reduction in the yield. es-
pecially for valuable varieties of spring wheat. Our investigations, carried Out
in 1970-1979. indicated that even a small deviation from the optimum sowing date in
the direction of both early and later times results in considerable yield losses
and with a deviation by 7 days these losses attain 7.8 contacts/hectare. A graphic
idea concerning this is given by the curves of losses in the yield of wheat of the
hard varieties Helyanopus-Zé. Saratovskaya-bo and the soft varieties Saratovekaye-
210. Saratovsksya-bz (Fig. 3). It should be noted that the losses of yield of hard
wheat with a deviation from the optimum sowing date by one and the same number of
days exceed the losses of yield of soft wheat. This means that hard wheat is more
demanding on agrometeorological conditions and in favorable years (1976, 1976)

its yield is higher than the yield of soft wheat.

0n the other hand, with nonadherence to optimum sowing times, especially during
arid years, the yield of hard wheat decreases sharply.

in order to determine the optimum sowing dates we will employ the method of tee-

perature-phenologicel nomograms, which is based on an allowance, on the one hand,
for the dynamics of the mean 10-day air temperatures on the basis of long-term

69

lili¢lﬂﬂ€1hl.08£ll§l¥
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE‘0NLY

data and each specific year, and on the other hand. the biological requirements
of spring wheat to a change in mean daily temperatures and moisture supplies by
phase: of developnent.

Table 1

Sowing Times. Crop Yield. Grain Quality and Agroueteorological Indices for the
Growing Season of Spring Wheat, Saratovskaya-42. Sovkhor ineni Prunes. In

Ural'skaya Oblast, Northwestern Kazakhstan

 

   
     
    
 

3 I
. 3“ a o u?“ 0
Index Phase 2 1: 2 .3 > g >= .’ 3. >3
; o S: s. 2 ". _ 0 I: O 2 ﬂ
—————————________'
| . . II
I976 r A -(‘.5-) I I979 r. K -0.33
1) limo Juu‘u. cucu-
o ' ' I
-n )utoam I? I . ll 7 1
IICXOJU'"
1 )l:o.1u:ls cne-
Home 73 $3 1!

      
    

           
         
 

 

      

     

     
    

2) C;.-:ws “(on (0.1qu- «scrum —
noro cmnux. E I“ )nomus cuev
' not!» (89 730 79) m
3) X GAP-IO‘ .‘11 n‘ star-m —
noanaa one
noctm 97.4 l03.3 95.0 $.8 98.7 88.0
I.) )‘poxannocm «(r-a 36.0 29.2 2|.8 6.8 18.7 I7.8
5) Sewn. $ 17.6! If”:~ I730 15,]? 15.83 N.“
6) Kaeﬁsosnsa.
9.:HJK-l 32.‘3-'a'0 35.9 70 12.4.3.0 34.0!90 3150,85 3.0155

    
 
 
  

7) Gaussian man: we-
Ca In l00 .‘ wyxu. .1"

450 195 340 210

  
   
   

    

3) fpynnw Offs-emuﬂw
teem: notan-Jcﬁ

     

   

    

KEY:
1. Number of days.211 6. Gluten. Z/IDC-l
2. Sun of sunshine hours. Etc 7. Volumetric yield of bread from 100 g
3. ZPAR°10 J/I2 of flour, cn3
4. Yield, centners. hectare 8. Groups of asroclisstic indices
5. Protein. 2 9. "Sowing-sprouting"

"Sprouting-total maturity"

An analysis of the yield of rcgionalized varieties of spring wheat which we used.
Saratovsknya-az and Saratovskaya-éo in experilents and production fielda,indicat-
cd that the shortest "sowing-sprouting" period (6-7 days) under the conditions of

70

F0.‘0FFRJA1.US£(INLY
POINFICIMJSEONLY

the very continental cliaate of northwestern Kazakhstan corresponds to a stable
mean daily air teaperature of 16-15'C, which also determines the option sowing
date. Hith this air teaperature and reserves of productive moisture not less
than 501 of the field moisture capacity in the soil layer 0-100 ca relatively
favorable conditions are created for the early phases of developnent of spring
wheat. According to long-tern data, for the northern regions of the zone and the
experimental field of the Heat Kazakhstan Agricultural Institute the optima
sowing date falls in aid-May; for the sauthern regions - in the aiddle of the
first 10-day period of Play. During specific years, depending on the value of the
aeteorological elements, the optima date of sowing varies in the range fro- the
heginning of the second 10-day period in April to the end of the second 10-day
period in May.

Table 2

Dependence of Yield and Quality of Spring wheat Grain on Orientation of the Son
Rows. Sovkhoz ineni Prunae, Ural'skaya Ohlast. Northwestern Kazakhstan

IDirection of Yield [Protein J
c Pr tein i 1
Years 'sOVing Emu“: 2 t I lugenJ kgyhectagee d

Saratovskayn-laz

1975 9-6 6.3 I8.l 3 38.2 96
- 4.0 I724 345 00

WM ”-8 22.8 l6.” 34.8 365
8-" 21.3 ".88 am 317

1977 "-5 8.0 ".98 33.8 144
3-" 7.0 17.64 32.2 123

l978 "-5 30.4 19.97 37.5 607
3-1; 27.9 16.04 30.! 470

Mean "-8 I6.6 “.02 36.! 303
15.»: 15.0 16.65 32.1 244
Increment |.6 L37 4.0 59

Saratovskaya-éo

I975 I "-5 3.5 ms 42.0 67
13.” 2.0 l0.“ 35.2 30

I976 3—5 24.6 ”.58 25.6 359
I54: 2L9 13.68 26.! 291

:97? N-S 6.7 ".64 32.8 I 12
15-01 5.0 um 30.4 84

ms “-5 10.3 m9 34.0 603
E-" 25.5 33.09 32.0 461

an..." n-s 10.3 :ms 33.7 205
l-I-H 13.0 l6.£l 30.9 220

27 0.84 29 l 05

Inc ronwnt . _
“— .. ————-—__.___

71

POIOFFICIALWONLY
F0.‘0FFKJAI.USS(IULY

we feel that the last two years (1978 and 1979) warrant special attention. In 1978,
according to the forecast, during the third 10-day period of April, the air tem-
perature was to be 3°C above the mean. Therefore, according to our computations,
the optimum sowing date was expected on 27 April (experimental field at the Agri-
cultural lnstitute, Sovkhoz imeni Frunse, Ural'skayn Oblast). In 1979 during the
first 10-day period in May the temperature was close to the mean long-term value
and the optimum date for sowing was 14 May. In the field experiments the earliest
date for sowing was determined by the possibility of operation of the drill. Sow-

ing at late times was carried out three or four times each subsequent three days
from the optimum date.

An analysis of the collected data (Table 1) reveals that the optimum sowing date
results in a minimum duration of the "sowing-sprouting" phase (7 days) and a maxi-
mum duration of the "sprouting-gold ripeness" phase during the season (in 1978

-- 87 days; in 1979 -- 83 days). Such a duration of the development phases prede-
termines a high sum of sunshine hours (813 and 790), sum of PAR (103.3 and 98.7-
107 J/mz), and as a result - a higher yield (29.2 and 18.8 centners/hectsre) and
better technological indices of the grain. With early and late sowing times the
duration of the "sprouting-gold ripeness" period is reduced by 5 or more days, as
a result of which the plants receive a lesser sum of sunshine hours and sum of
PAR ensuring the photosynthesis process. The yield and quality of the grain in
this case are reduced to the level governed by the egroclimatic indices of groups
it and Ill.

At the present time in the programming of yields of agricultural crops more and
more attention is being devoted to photosynthetically active radiation [1, 3-5],
since the more the quantity of solar energy which plants can assimilate, the
greater will be their yield. This, as indicated by our investigations, is favored,
on the one hand, by optimum sowing times, and on the other hand, by a north-south
orientation of the sown rows.

In the case of a N—S orientation of the rows, in comparison with “-2, all other
conditions being equal (moisture supply, agricultural techniques, etc.) the plants
in our experiments received a Sum of PAR during the growing season which was 18.7-
107 J/mz greater, and this in turn ensures a better developed leaf surface and root
system, higher indices of elements of yield structure. an increase in the yield and
technological qualities of the grain. Table 2 gives the results of our four years
of experimentation (1975-1978) carried out in an experimental field at the west
Kazakhstan Agricultural Institute with soft and hard wheats. The table shows that
the mean increment of yield, protein, gluten and protein yield from one hectare of
\meat of the Saratovskaya-aZ variety were 1.6 centner/hectare, 1.372, 6.01 and 59
kg/hectare respectively. and for the variety Saratovskaya-ao - 2.7 centners/hec-
tare, 0.8k2, 2.82 and 65 kg/hectare.

The agrometeorological validation of the optimum sowing times for spring wheat, its
sowing in rows primarily of a N-S orientation, are procedures ensuring the plants
the best agrometeorological conditions and as a result of this give a considerable
economic effect. This is indicated by data from field tests carried out at a number
of farms in northwestern Kazakhstan. The use of these procedures at the Sovkhos
imeni Frunze in Zelenovskiy Rayon in Ural'skaya Oblast during 1975-1979 ensured a
mean five-year yield increment of 2.7 centners/hectare, as a result of which

72

FOIiOlIlCLALIﬂ!E(HULY
FilliJFFICIAl.lEIE(M'LY

the sovkhoz without the slightest additional expenditures received an additional
26,173 centners of high-quality grain of strong wheat, and converted to noney this
In 265,978 rubles. in 1979, with relatively unfavorable weather conditions, on
only {our [arms in the ohlast -- the ”Frunze" and ”Kushusskiy" sovhhozes in Zelen-
nvskiy Rayon, at the "Tel'nnn" kolkhoz in Burlinskiy Rayon and at the "Kuyhyshev"

sovkhoz in Chapayevskiy Rayon, as a result of the use of these procedures the lean
increment in yield was 1.7 centner/hectare and the fares without the slightest

additional expenditures received 9,210 centners of spring wheat of the Saratovsk-
aye-42 variety or nore than 81.367 rubles of additional incose.

In this connection we feel that it is necessary to introduce the nentioned sisple,
but rather effective agroseteorological reconsendations into agricultural production
more extensively and with greater vigor and thereby make a significant contribution
to increasing the production of grain and an increase in its technological qualit-
ies.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. Nichipnrovich, A. A., " nys to Increase the Productivity of Photosynthesis of
Plants in Sown Fields," FOTOSINTBZ I VOPROSY PRODUKTIVNOSTI RASTBNIY (Photo-

synthesis and Prohlens in Plant Productivity). Moscow, Izd-vo AN SSSR, 1963.

2. PSHENITSY MIRA (World Hheats), edited by D. D. Brezhnev, compiled by V. P. Dor-
ofeyev, Leningrad, Kolos, 1976.

3. Tiniryazev, K. A., "Plants and Solar Energy," SOLNTSB, ZHIZN', KHLOROIILL
(Sun, Life and Chlorophyll), Moscow, Sel'khozgiz, 1956.

a. Toosing, Rh. 0.. SOLNECHNAYA RADIATSIYA I PORHIROVANIYB UROZHAYA (Solar Radia-
tion and Yield Formation), Leningrad. Gidroneteoizdat, 1977.

5. Shul'gin. I. A., SOLNECHNAYA RADIATSIYA I RASTENIYE (Solar Radiation and
Plants), Leningrad, Gidroneteoisdat. 196].

73
F0.‘0FFHJAI.U§E{MULY
FﬂlinFFKTAI.USE(ININ

UDC 551.509.313

DISCRIMINATION 0F TRAVELLING WAVES FROM EXPERIMENTAL DATA

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA l GIDROLOGITA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 (manuscript received
29 Dec 80) pp 102-106

[Article by A. A. Krivolutskiy, Central Aerological Observatory]

[Abstract] Global waves propagating along a circle of latitude, associated with
the gyroscopic stability of the atmosphere (Rossby waves), are of great interest
to meteorologists. it is important to be able to deternine the structure of such
travelling waves and separate standing and travelling waves of the ease period.

R. J. Deland (J. METEOROL. SOC. JAPAN, Vol 50, 1972), for example, represented a
disturbance in the form of sums of waves of the same period travelling toward one
another (with summation for all periods). But that intuitive form of representa-
tion did not take into accOunt the possible influence of standing waves. This

made it necessary for others to correct the method, which greatly complicated the
procedure for discriminating the travelling wave. Thefore, the author has proposed
a method which makes determination of the amplitudes of travelling and standing
waves quite simple. Assuming that Y(t,)) is the distribution of a meteorological
paraaeter at sane level as a function of time t and longitude }_. and representing
Y(t, l) in the form of an expansion in a two-dimensional Fourier series, a series
of expressions is derived for representing the real field in the form of a series.
thereby obtaining the amplitudes of the waves for discrete values of frequencies
(periods). Foraulas are then derived for separate determination of the tine spec-
tra of travelling and standing waves for any s, whose value characterizes the con-
tribution of variations with a different longitudinal structure to the total var-
iability. The described procedure was applied to analysis of real data: daily
geopotential data for the circle of latitude 60'“ at the level 100 mb for the win-
ter of 1972/1973. During this period one-dimensional statistical analysis reveals
variations with a period of 27-28 days in the zonal circulation index series. An
effort was aade to ascertain whether these variations were associated with a prop-
agating planetary wave. The length of the interval was about five months. It was
found that variations with a period of 27-28 days cause a planetary wave with a
longitudinal wave number s - 1. There were virtually no travelling waves with other
a. For a - 2 there was a standing wave with a period close to 60 days. Figures 1;

references 9: 2 Russian, 7 western.

7A

FOI:0INICIAI.IEIE(IHLY
POI omnu {8" OMS

UDC 551 . 513

INVESTIGATINC THE CONVERGENCE 0? A DRY WWBCTIVB ADAPTATIM $611943 IN masts 0P
MACROSCALE ADDSPIIERIC PROCESSES

Moscow PETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian ”0 10, Oct 81 (manuscript received
11 Dec 80) pp 105-107

[Article by I. V. Cholakh, Heat Siberian Scientific Research Institute]

[Abstract] In models of general circulation of the atmosphere it is now co-on to
use a scheme for dry convective adaptation which was proposed by S. Hanabe, et al.
In the review of this ache-e it is pointed out that as a result of such adaptation
there can be a disruption of stability of stratification of adjacent layers and
then the entire procedure must be repeated. In the models a liait is sonstines set
on the number of such iterations since the latter of the finiteness of the itera-
tion process or its convergence has not been studied. This question is mined
here in a special case. It is assumed that the umber of levels is 3 and it is
further assumed that the initial distribution of tenperatures is such that only
the lower layer requires adaptation and after its adaptation there is disruption
of stratification of the upper layer. It is shown that the process of convective

adaptation will continue infinitely. Accordingly, a ncdifiad procedure is proposed
and it is shown under what conditions the convective adaptation procedure will con-
tinue a finite number of steps. This inprovenent in the scheae is completely applic-
able to a case when it is assued that the convective adaptation is accouplished
layer-by-layer. that is, when at each nonent the tenperature values are scaled

only at two adjacent levels. References: 2 Russian.

75

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l-‘SE 0515'

"DC 551.509. 313

DETERMINING PARAMETERS 0F CORRELATION FUNCTIONS DURING OBJECTIVE ANALYSIS OF
IIYDRWETWROLOCICAL FIELDS

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 (manuscript received
28 Nov 80) pp 108-110

[Article by B. Bakirbayev and V. V. Kostyuhov, candidate of physical and mathemat-
ical sciences. Heat Siberian Scientific Research Institute and Computation Center.
Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Abstracti Optimum interpolation is an effective means for describing and studying
hydrometeorological fields. However, its use is possible only with the availability
of statistical information on the elements to be analysed, usually as a result of
processing of a great number of measurements. Therefore, for elements in which in-
terest has recently arisen, and accordingly, whose statistical structure has been
studied poorly, no interpretation can be made by the mentioned method. The authors
have therefore proposed a generalization of optimum interpolation making it possible
to carry out objective analysis in the absence of precise data on the correlation
function. It is only necessary to assume its general character. expressed by a func-
tional dependence on distance. The specific form is determined in the course of the
analysis. The essence of the approach is that the minimum of the mean statistical
error is sought using not only the values of the interpolation weights, but also the
unknown parameters of the correlation function. Station measurement data are used

as superposed correlations, which makes it possible to ascertain the sought-for val—
ues of the parameters. The method evidently can be used in cases of complete absence
of statistical information on the analyzed element. for example. for the fields of
contaminations by different ingredients, which may even have a unique character. The
application of the method is illustrated for the geopotsntial field A7500. surface
temperature of the Black Sea and the concentration of radioactive contamination of
Atlantic waters by 9°Sr. Tables 1; references: 5 Russian.

76
ETHICHHHCJAI.IHHE(NNLY
FOR OFFIFHI. l SF "NI \

000 551.575. 551. 576.11.551.665. 7

PORHATION 0F STRATUS CWDS AND F068 0" HYDROLDGICAL FRONTS

Moscow HEIBOROIDGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian “0 10. Oct 81 (manuscript received
17 Nov 80) pp 110-112

iArticle by V. V. Rossov, candidate of geographical sciences. Polar Scientific Re-
search Institute of Marine Fishing and Oceanography]

[Abstract] During recent years satellite information has cone into use for deter-in-
ing the position of hydrological fronts in the oceans. In addition to infrared sens-
ing methods, it is also possible to use remote determination of the position of hy-
drological fronts on the basis of cloud cover on images in the visible spectral
range. It is assured that if in a low-gradient pressure field over the ocean an

air mass moves in the direction of cold waters, the boundary of the stratus clouds
or fog coincides with the position of the hydrological front. whereas with the nove-
nent of the air mass in the direction of the war. waters a cunulus cloud cover is
formed over the warm waters. The author has endeavored to clarify (semiempirically)
at what distance from the front and under what temperature contrast conditions on
the front there can he fornation of stratus clouds or fog. The analysis reveals that
in the first approximation it can be assuaed that under conditions typical for the
ocean ro>801 and 3-811 To - T; values (r0 is relative huaidity, To ~ 1‘1 is the dif-
ference between the air temperature in the near-water friction layer and the sur-
face taperature of the underlying water mass) the dew point is attained at a rela-
tively short distance f ron the front over cold water, but with a high To - 1‘1 value
and a broad transition (frontal) zone a fog or stratus clouds can also develop over
the frontal zone itself. (The width of the transition zone for mean conditions is
reckoned at about 25 kn.) A table gives the results for different variables: To - 1'1
- s, 10, 15° and r0 - so, 60, 70, 80, 9oz. Figures 2, tables 1; references: 5 nus-
slan.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON”
INJI‘OFFICIAl.lEIE(NNLV

UDC 551.665.7:629.78

ROLE OF ADVANCED SPACE SYSTEMS IN IMPLEMENTING THE OCEANOGRAPHIC PART OF THE
WORLD CLIMATE RESEARCH PROGRAM

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 (manuscript received
31 Her 81) pp 113-119

[Article by I. P. nerestovskiy and S. V. Viktorov. candidate of physical and math-
ematical sciences, USSR State Coummttee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Mon-
itoring and Leningrad Division, State Oceanographic Institute]

[Text] Abstract: In this review. based on materials of

the International Coordination Conference, the
authors examine the problems related to the use

of space information in the implementation of
major oceanographic experiments planned within
the framework of the World Climate Research Pro-
gram in the late 1980's. Plans and programs for
the creation of satellites and space systems of
interest for oceanography are set forth.

1. Introduction. A conference on the coordination of plans for future satellite
systems for sensing the earth and oceanic experiments organized within the frame-
work of the world Climate Research Program was held during the period 26-31 Janu-
ary 1981 near Oxford (England) under the aegis of the world Meteorological Organ-
ization (HMO), International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) and the Inter-
governmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO. This conference was called by
the Joint HHO/ICSU Scientific Committee on the world Climate Research Program and
the Program for Investigation of Global Atmospheric Processes and the SOORB/IOC

Committee on Changes in Climate and the Ocean.

The conference was attended by scientists from 12 countries. including special-
ists of the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring.

The tasks of the conference were as follows:

-- discussion of the problem of whattype of space system for remote sensing of the
ocean is the most acceptable for use in the implementation of major oceanographic

experiments planned within the framework of the world Climate Research Program in

the late 1980's;

-- analysis of existing plans for the launching of satellites, data from which can
be used for oceanographic research;

78

FilltlﬂﬂCIAl.USE(NNLY
“I. 051ml“ IISO' 0N! \'

-- l'nrmulallun of rt-comcndations for optimizing these plans for the purpose of
u-hlcving the maximum effect when using advanced oceanographic space systess with-
in the framework of the world Climate Research Program.

The conferees were familiarized with the Preliminary Plan of the World climate Re-
search Program (HCRP) and with the existing plans for the organization of major in-
ternational oceanographic experiments within the framework of the WCRP. The repre-
sentatives of the USSR, United States, Japan and the European Space Research Agency
told the conferees about the preliminary plans for creating satellites and space
systems which are of interest for oceanography. Also examined were the problems in-
volved in the development of new methods and apparatus (including satellite equip-
ment) necessary for implementing the oceanographic part of the VCR? and the prob-
lems relating to the rational joint use of space and traditional methods for ob-
taining oceanographic data.

2. World Climate Research Program (VCR?)

The principal purpose of the VCR? is a determination of the degree of predictabil-
ity of climate and the influence of mankind on climate. In order to achieve this
goal it is necessary to solve the following problems:

-— improve our knowledge concerning global and regional climate. variations of cli-
m-Il'l' and the mechanisms responsible for these variations;

«- determine the presence of significant trends in global and regional climate;

-- develop and improve physical and math-stical models capable of describing and
predicting climatic phenomena of different spatial and temporal scales;

-- study of the response of climate to possible natural and anthropogenic influ-
ences and evaluation of climatic changes as a result of such modification.

The principal HCRP time scale is from several weeks to several decades. However,
this also includes processes of a synoptic scale. The spatial scale is from re-
gional (about 1000 km) to global, the emphasis being on the desirability of devel-
oping methods making it possible to interpret macroscale results within the frame-
work of local phenomena.

in the Preliminary Plan for the "CR? the terms weather, climate and climatic
changes are defined and components of the climatic system are determined. This
system includes the atmosphere (including the troposphere and stratosphere),
moans, crycophere (including the ice and snow of the oceans and continents, land
md also the biosphere. Although there are no elements in the program which can
I--~ neglected. from among the many climatologically important processes it is pos-
.-:lh1e to discriminate two which require special attention. This is attributable
mu: in their special position as the factors determining th. climate and to the
-.wt that in order to organize experimental programs for their study it is neces-
nry to invest a great amount of time. These processes include the process deter-
J'Lnllw, the influence of cloud cover on the radiation energy balance of the climate
.vstum .und the process determining the influence of physics and dynamics of the
wean cm the global circulation of heat, water and chemical substances (especial-
' unrhun) in the climate system.

f'lu- \etiitl' provides for extensive theoretical and experimental studies for investigat-
ing m-eanic process“. In the section "Oceanic Processes" of the Preliminary Plan
5' ‘r the VCR? it is emphasized that in comparison with the atmosphere the system

79

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR4OFFI341.USE(HNLY

for observing and modeling the ocean is developed to a considerably lesser degree.
Accordingly, the purpose of tue oceanographic part of the HCRP should be an im-

provement in our comprehension of the three—dinensional circulation of heat, water
and chemical substances (especially carbon) in the world ocean, and thus a clarif-
ication of the role of oceanic processes in the climate system. Particular atten-

tion should be devoted to the factors which can exert an influence on changes in
atmospheric climate at the principal "CR? time scales.

In the Preliminary Plan for the "CR? it is pointed out that the collection of quite
representative data concerning the world ocean is a grandiose problem which simply
cannot be accomplished without using new methods. It requires a changeover fron an

almost cosplete reliance on scientific ships to a new era in the use of instrument-
ation carried aboard regular ships, drifting and anchored buoys, on the sea floor

and satellites. This process has already begun and should be accelerated for the
successful implementation of the HCRP.

3. Major International Oceanographic Experiments Planned for the End of the 1980's
Within the Framework of the World Climate Research Program

It is nOted that existing international and national programs for study of the
ocean will not be able to satisfy all HCRP requirements. Therefore, the Prelimin-
ary Plan for the VCR? provides for carrying out special oceanographic projects for
ensuring receipt of the most representative information.

a) An experiment for studying global circulation of the ocean. The purpose of this
experiment is a considerable decrease in the presently existing uncertainty of our
knowledge concerning macroscale oceanic circulation, including seasonal variations
of circulation in the upper layer of the ocean (at least to a depth of 1 km). It
is assumed that this objective can be attained with the joint use of diagnostic
models based on the geophysical "inverse" method and observations made using dif-
ferent new technical apparatus. The experiment, which is to be carried out in the
late 1980's, will create an information base for the development of climatic mod-
els of interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere.

Tne principal role in this experiment is to be played by satellite systems for
measuring the level surface of the ocean. Professor C. Hunsch visualises that by
the late 1980's, beginning in approximately 1986, there will be an altimetric sat-
ellite with a lifetime of several years in the necessary orbit (or more than one
such satellite), with a small orbital inclination; there will be an altimetric sat-
ellite with a solar-synchronous orbit and also a gravitational satellite.

The following requirements are being placed on the characteristics of apparatus
for an altimetric satellite. it should ensure measurement of the distance from a
satellite to the sea surface with an accuracy attaining two centimeters. The meas-
urement system must determine the level surface of the ocean relative to the ter-
restrial ellipsoid with an accuracy to 10 cm in segments of about 3000 km or
shorter and the accuracy should attain 4 cm in horizontal 30-km segments. The or-
bital inclination will be about 65° with repetition of transit of the subsatellite
line through any point with an accuracy of :1 km each 10 days. The minimum life-
time of the satellite will be 5 years.

80

F0310¥FKJAJ.USE(MNLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

Efforts must be undertaken for improving our knowledge concerning the sea geoid,
especially at scales from several hundreds to several thousands of kilometers.
The principal role in such work will evidently be played by a special gravita-
tional satellite. It is supposed tr ' it should be launched prior to ending of
the five-year lifetime of the altimetric satellite. Using the data obtained from
the gravitational satellite it should be possible to decrease the systematic
errors in measurements by the altimetric satellite to the level 4 cm or less for
any revolution. Then in segments of about 500 km or more the ocean level surface
will be determined with spatial averaging with an accuracy to less than 1 cm.
Thus, it is expected that general circulation and its variability (from mesoscsle
to interannual) will be determined with an accuracy to several centimeters per
second, at least for most of the earth's oceans.

Another important part of the planned experinant for the study of global circul-
ation of the ocean is hydrographic investigations of the oceans in their entire
depth. These will be investigations resembling those which were carried out under
the program of the International Geophysical Year, but will be more extensive.
with use of new methods for the collection and processing of data. The expendi-
ture of shipboard time is estimated at eight ship-years during the entire five-
year period. Altimetric measurements, in combination with improved evaluations

of the geoid, will make it possible to localize the position of surface geostroph-
ic currents in the ocean in regions of several hundred kilometers or more. Such a
localization will mean that the hydrographic profiles for the first time can be
used in such a way that they finally will not require the introduction of velocit-
ies of the relative level. For the first time oceanographers will be able to cal-
culate the absolute geostrophic currents without having recourse to arbitrary as-
sumptions concerning the levels of a "zero current" and avoid the relatively poor
spatial resolution resulting from the use of inverse and relative methods.

Thus, the described concept of a global experiment assumes the collection of satel-
lite and traditional data making it possible to determine the general circulation
of the ocean, its annual and year-to-year variability with an accuracy which elim-
inates the existing uncertainties concerning the transfer of heat, salt and other

tracers.

b) Experiment for investigation of heat flow and water masses. The objective of
this experiment is to decrease the uncertainty in modern estimates of the velocit-
ies of heat and water transfer in the world ocean. The main task is to compare the
different estimates applicable to a region with a large heat flow and (or) flow of
water masses. According to the preliminary plan, presented by Doctor P. Dobson, for
carrying out the experiment the subtropical region of the North Atlantic was sel-
ected; this area has additional advantages from the point of view of work organ-
ization and data interpretation. The mean heat flow transported in this region in

a northerly direction is estimated at 1015“ at 26'N. Estimates of the flow differ
by almost a factor of 2. but the evaluations of the errors are still greater. with-
In the framework of the experiment plans call for measuring the flow with a total

Ircuracy of about 1202. The data obtained in the course of the experiment should
make it possible to determine the seasonal variability of the flow. It is supposed
(31: the experiment will begin in the late 1980's and will continue for several
years. The code name of this experiment "Kletka" (Cage) reflects the fact that

81

FIIICHNHCJA1.USEiNILY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with use of the difference method for estimating the velocities of transfer in the
ocean it is necessary to employ a "cell" of meteorological observations in order
to determine the divergence of the flow of heat and water into the atmosphere.

An important role of satellite systems in this experiment is the supplying of reg-
ular measurements of temperature of the sea surface with the maximum accuracies
attainable in the late 1980's. The desirable accuracy is 30.5’K. (Model investiga-
tions show that a temperature change of 1°K changes the quantity of the heat trans-
fer between the ocean and the atmosphere in the middle lat tudes over the area of
the Atlantic Ocean by 20 "In2 and in the tropics by 60 "In .) We note that the radi-
ation balance over the entire zone of the experiment should be determined with an
accuracy not less than 110 H/mz. Using satellites plans also call for determining
the characteristics of the wind over the water for the entire zone of the experi-

ment with an accuracy to 110° and :1 m/aec. The spatial averaging for all these
measurements was not more than 120 km, the frequency being once in two days.

In addition, the desire has been expressed that a study be made of the problem of
the possibility of satellite measurements of the vertical profiles in the atmo-
sphere (the accuracy in determining temperature is tl'x, the accuracy in determin-

ing wind velocity is :2 m/sec, the accuracy in determining humidity is *302) along
the boundaries of the experimental zone.

c) Time series of oceanographic measurements. The purpose of the program "Time Sar-
ies of Oceanographic Measurements" is the coordination of the activity of a number
of countries for obtaining time series of oceanographic measurements in key re-
gions. The need for studying the processes of interaction between the ocean and

the atmosphere in energy-active zones of the ocean follows from the theoretical
studies of Academician G. I. Marchuk. In the opinion of most scientists, the data
obtained under the "Profiles" program will play an important role in comprehend-
ing a number of problems relating to interaction between the ocean and the atmo-

sphere. and accordingly. in the development of new, more perfect models of climate
and methods for long-range weather forecasts.

The approach involving the coordination of individual national and departmental
experiments for the purpose of studying temporal variations in parameters of state
of the ocean has received universal support; new specific plans are being develop-
ed deteraining the recommended profiles and the necessary observation programs.

4. Plans for Creation of Satellites and Space Systems of Interest for Oceanography

European Space Agency Program

Within the framework of the European program for remote sensing of the earth the
BSA during the period 1980-1990 plans to create two types of satellite. The first
(it is possible that there will be two) is intended for observation of the oceans,
the second -- for investigation of the land. The program for the ans-1 oceanograph-
ic satellite provides for solution of the following tasks:

-- the development of economic practical investigations in connection with the prob-
lems arising due to the introduction of a 250-mile economic zone;

82

F0. OFFICIAI.lﬂiE(ﬂVLY
FOIlOFIﬂCJAl.USI§0mﬂJV

-- improvement in understanding of dynasic processes in the ocean and in the coast-
al zones;

- observation of the polar regions;

- ensuring a considerable contribution to the HCRP.

At the present time the makeup of the on-board measurement complex has not yet been
finally determined. Among the possible instruments are the following: 1) scanning
microwave radiometer; 2) scatterometer; 3) side-view radar; 6) altimeter with an
additional system for the precise determination of satellite position at individ-
ual points in orbit; 5) instrument for determining the color characteristics of

the sea; 6) instrumentation for obtaining images of the surface in the visible and
near-IR ranges.

Such an instrument complex makes it possible to deter-ins the characteristics of

the wind near the water (direction and velocity), waves (length and direction of
gravitational waves, wave height, direction of internal waves), ice, topography of
the ocean surface, temperature of the ocean surface, and detect zones of increased
concentrations of suspended particles of different origin. There are several var-
iants for the combining of this apparatus. For era-pie, there is a variant of an
oceanographic satellite for global observation of the ocean consisting of a seat-
terometer, altimeter, microwave radiometer with spatial resolution of tens of kilo-
meters and instrumentation for obtaining images with a resolution of several kilo-
meters with a small number of measurement channels and also a variant of an ocean-
ographic satellite for investigating the shore sons of the ocean consisting of a
side-view radar, microwave radiometer and instrumentation for obtaining images with
a resolution of about hundreds of meters with narrow spectral channels. In general,
with the selected orbit (solar-synchronous circular, altitude 675 km, local time of
transit of satellite for 65’“ - 1130 hours) the width of the scanning zone for the

on-board instrumentation (other than the side-view radar) was determined in such a
way as to ensure a global coverage in 3 days.

USSR Program

System of "Meteor-2" improved Operational Meteorological Satellites. Satellite! in
this series are put into a polar orbit with an altitude of about 900 km with'an in-
clination of 81° and a period of revolution of 102 minutes. Information on the op-
erational purpose and makeup of the on-board measurenent complex has been repeated-
ly published. The characteristics of the "Meteor-2" meteorological system during
1981-1990 will be improved, which will make it possible to increase the effective-
ness of the collected data.

"Meteor" Experimental Meteorological Satellites. The "Meteor" experimental meteoro-
logical satellites have the following purpose:

-- taking of multizonnl photographs of cloud cover and the underlying surface over
limited regions;

-- collection of data on the spatial distribution of zones of precipitation and
their intensity, on the total liquid-water content of clouds, position of boundar-
ice of the ice cover and their continuity;

—- collection of data on the total moisture content of the atmosphere;

—- collection of data on temperature of the underlying surface;

33

FOI<OFFKJAI.UBE(MNLY
WOI.OIINCIAI.UEIE(HULY

-- measurement of reflected radiation and its polarization components for the pur-

pose of determining the phase composition of clouds;
-- measurement of the intensity of fluxes of corpuscular radiation.

The "Meteor-18“ and "Meteor-25" were put into an orbit with an altitude of 900 km
and an inclination of 81°; the "Meteor-28" and subsequent "Meteor" experimental

artificial earth satellites were put into solar-synchronous orbits with an alti-
tude of 600 km.

The sensors included:

- scanning four-channel apparatus of the television type. Spectral intervals: 0.5-
0.6lam; 0.6-0. 7,; m; 0. 7-0.8pm; 0.84.1", m. Coverage on the surface of 1800 km
with a resolution of 600 m at the nadir;

-- scanning two-channel apparatus of the television type. Spectral intervals: 0.5-
0.7tim and 0.7-1.1'1m. Coverage on the ground 1200 km, resolution 250 m at the
nadir;

-- microwave radiometers;

-- four-channel spectrometer for measuring the intensity of fluxes of corpuscular
radiation;

- scanning IR radiometer for slant sounding for measuring thermal radiation of the
upper atmosphere.

Individual "Heteor" experimental artificial earth satellites are used in direct
transmissions of images obtained in the visible spectral range in one of the spec-

tral intervals. Five satellites of this series have now been launched. The program
will be continued.

Geostationary Operational Meteorological Satellites. A Soviet geostationary meteor-
ological satellite will be launched into a geostationary orbit at an altitude of
about 36 000 km and will be situated over a point about 70's. The operational pur-
pose will be:

-- collection of data on the distribution of cloud cover in the equatorial and tem-
perate latitudes on the illuminated and shaded sides of the earth;

- collection of data on the wind direction and velocity at two or three levels;
- collection of data from surface platforms (buoys). including international;

-- dissemination of images of the cloud cover, diagnostic and prognostic weather
maps on a regional and international basis;
-- collection of data on temperature of the sea surface.

The sensors will include:

- scanning apparatus of the television type (visible part of spectrum), resolution
2-6 km;

-- scanning IR apparatus (in transparency window 8—12ylm), resolution about 12 km;
- receiving-transmitting apparatus.

The system for the collection of data and the system for direct transmissions are
planned taking into account the recommendations of the coordination conference on

geostationary meteorological satellites.

8b

INJI‘OIIIC1A1.IISI:(MVLY
FOIIOFFICJAI.IEIE(MVLN

Spauc System for Investigating the Earth's Natural Resources. In the USSR plans
call for the creation of a permanently operating space system for investigating
natural resources based on the use of space vehicles outfitted with instrusenta-
tion for remote measurements of parameters of the land, ocean and atmosphere.

As the principal instruments for study of the earth's surface and ocean plans call

for the use of multizonal optical-mechanical scanning units with a high and inter-
mediate resolution with the following characteristics:

-- the extent of a resolution element on the ground is 50 m in the visible range.
200 m in the IR range (for high-resolution units) and 150-250 m in the visible

range, 500-600 m in the IR range (for intermediate resolution units);
-- scanning band 180-200 km and 500-700 km respectively;

- number of spectral zones 8 and 4 in the spectral range 0.6-12.5|Lm.

The periodicity of scanning (along the equator) for one space vehicle of the opera-
tional subsystem is 16-17 days with the use of multizonal units with a high resolu-

tion and 6-5 days with the use of multizonal scanning units with an intermediate
resolution.

In order to study the ocean and the earth's surface plans call for radar apparatus
and also scanning radiometric apparatus in the SH? range as operational tools.
Plans call for the development of a system for transmission via the space vehicle

of information from surface and sea platforms for the collection of data used for
refining the results of remote measurements.

For the reception, processing and propagation of the data from remote measurements
provision is made for organizing regional processing centers: in Hoscow, Novosib-

irsk and Khabarovsh. The Moscow Data Processing Center will be the main center and
will ensure control of operational subsystems.

These characteristics of the system are preliminary and can be refined in the
course of development of the system.

Manned space stations of the "Salyut" type. meteorological satellites of the "Met-
eor" system, space vehicles of the “Cosmos" series and aircraft laboratories will
hr employed as components in the space system for the study of natural resources.

The data obtained using the created system can be used for international exchange.
in the implementation of different scientific research programs, including in the
caurSc of carrying out of work under the oceanographic section of the HCRP.

United States Program

oceanographic satellites. The objectives of the program for study of oceanic process-
vs developed by NASA include the formulation of scientific principles for measuring
oceanographic characteristics from satellites and demonstration of the usefulness

of inlvrmation on the ocean received from space. In the 1980's the research aspect

at iu.s program will be directed to an improvement in the understanding of the fol-
lenlne problems: circulation and heat reserve of the oceans, movements and destruc-
tion of sea ice, biological productivity of the ocean.

85

itIICIﬂWCIAI.lEﬂE¢NVLY
FOI!0FFRJAI.USE(NVLY

Plans call for the creation of four space systems: National Oceanographic Satel-
lite System, Topographic Experiment, Gravitational Satellite and a satellite with a
side-view radar station with a synthesized aperture.

The purpose of the National Oceanographic Satellite System is a limited operational
demonstration of the use of satellites for determining the characteristics of waves.
near-water wind, water temperature and color, ice and currents. In addition, these
data will help to solve two scientific problems: scatterometric measurements of the
wind together with contact measurements of currents will be used in studying wind
circulation, chlorophyll concentration, and with determination by use of a color
scanner, together with shipboard data, will be used in investigating the relationship

between the productivity of phytoplankton, variability of the ocean and other ele-
ments of the food chain.

The Topographic Experiment and the Gravitational Satellite are research programs.
Data on the topography of the sea surface, determined by means of altimeters (Topo-
graphic Experiment), and the results of measurements of the marine geoid (Gravimet-
ric Satellite) will be used jointly with shipboard gravinetric, hydrographic and
other data for studying geostrophic circulation. In particular, it is planned that
images of the sea surface and ice from a satellite carrying a side-view radar will
be used for investigating the influence of the wind effect and currents on the char-
arﬁristics of the ice cover on the seas.

Nor will be continued for investigating improved methods for the collection of ref-
erence (polygon) information both for chenking the functioning of space Systems for
sensing the earth in general, and also for obtaining information from the deeps for
the purpose of supplementing ordinary satellite two-dimensional information on the
sea surface. work is planned on the development of means for the collection and
comparison of data from contact and satellite measurements, their joint storage,
compression of information, its dissemination and analysis by different users.

Meteorological satellites. In the 1980's plans call for three space systemshmose
information can be used in the interests of oceanography: an experiment for inves-
tigating the earth's radiation balance, a series of operational meteorological sat-
ellites (NOAA) ir polar orbits and geostationary operational satellites for study-
ing the environment (known as GOES satellites).

The purpose of the expeerent for investigating the earth's radiation balance is
measurement of the earth's radiation balance, including the total energy release
of the sun. The experiment is based on the use of three satellites, including two
of the NOAA type and one specialized satellite. It is planned that in the 1980's
the NOAA satellite system will consist of 10 satellites. At present there are two
satellites of this series in operation (altitude 870 km. orbital inclination 98.9',

time for intersecting the equator on the descending branch of the orbit 0730 and
0230 hours respectively). Each of the NOAA satellites has: 1) a radiometer with

superhigh resolution in the optical and IR ranges, 2) a block for determining

the atmospheric profile, including an IR high-resolution probe, a block for sound-
ing the stratosphere (supplied by Great Britain) and a microwave sounding block,

3) a monitor of the solar radiation flux, 4) a system for the collection of data
from surface platforms (buoys) of the ARGOS type (supplied by France) and

86

FOIIOFFHJAI.USE(NNLY
FOIiDFFKJAI.USE(l¥LY

5) a system for automatic transmission of images. Beginning with the fifth satel-
lite of this series they will carry an emergency search and rescue block, and be-

ginning with the sixth -- blocks for measuring the components of the earth's radia-
tion balance.

During 1981-1990 plans call for the use of 8 satellites of the 0038 series. Now
there are two operational vehicles in service (altitude 36,000 km above the earth's
equator. one at the point 75°" and another at 135’"). Each satellite of the GOES
series has: 1) a monitor of the flux of cosmic radiation. 2) a block for the fac-
simile transmission of weather maps, 3) a lZ-channel scanning radiometer for the
visible and IR ranges. Beginning with the fourth satellite of this series instead
of the latter instrument they will be outfitted with improved radiometers capable
of giving a multispectral image.

Japanese Program

The preliminary plan for 1981-1990 provides for the creation of three satellites
for remote sensing of the earth. The first Japanese oceanographic satellite, the
HOS-l, is intended for determining the color characteristics of sea water (for
the purpose of detecting contaminations, the "red tide" phenomenon. and also for
observing fishing regions) and ocean surface temperature. In addition, the set-
ellite will be used for studying vegetation on the land. The on-board measurement
complex will consist of a radiometer operating in the visible and near-IR ranges,
a radiometer operating in the visible and thermal IR ranges, a microwave radio-

meter and a system for the collection of data from surface platforms (buoys).

The radiometer operating in the visible and near-IR range, intended for determin-
ing the color characteristics of the sea, is a four-channel scanning unit with a
high resolution with electronic scanning, designed on the basis of instruments
with so-called charging elements. The measurement channels are: 0.51-0.59, 0.61-
0.69, 0.72-0.80 and 0.80-1.1'im. The spatial resolution is 50 m with a scanning
hand of 100 km for each of the two optical systems. Each optical system consists
of a Gaussian telescope and prisms separating the incident flux into two parts in
dependence on wavelength and two series of charging elements consisting of 2,048
subelcments. The number of signal quantization levels is 64.

The radiometer operating in the visible and thermal IR ranges. intended for deter-
mining the temperature of the sea surface. is a four-channel scanning unit with
optical-mechanical image scanning. The measurement channels are: 0.5-0.7; 6-7;

10.5-11.5; 11.5-12.5tlm. The spatial resolution is 0.9 km for the visible range
and 2.7 km for the IR range with a scanning band of 1,500 km. For increasing the
instrument reliability each measurement channel has two radiation detectors. The

number of signal quantization levels is 256.

the microwave radiometer, intended for measuring the water vapor content in the at-
mosphere, is a two-frequency scanning unit with conical mechanical scanning. The

working frequencies are 23.8 and 31.6 GHz; the spatial resolution is 32 and 23 km
respectively. The scanning band is 317 km, the radiometric response is 1°K (at
300°K). and the number of signal quantization levels is 1,026.

87

FOIiofEKJAl.U8£(NVLY
ma OFFICIAL 1.88 ONLY

For work with the nos-1 satellite and the processing of data plans call for the
use of the space center Tsukuba and three stations: Hatsuura, Matsuda and Okinawa.

The second Japanese oceanographic satellite, the ills-2, is intended for the investi-
gation of dynamic phenomena in the ocean (near-surface wind, wave heights. oceanic
geoid, currents, ocean circulations, tides). The on-board measurement complex will
probably consist of an altimeter, scatterometer, microwave radiometer and a sys-

ten for the collection of data from surface platforms (buoys). The third oceano-
graphic satellite, the HOS-3, will differ from the second by the presence of in-
strumentation for the all-weather collection of images of the sea surface (side-
view radar and radiometer operating in the visible and IR ranges).

In addition to the three oceanographic satellites, Japan within the frmeworh of
the VCR? is also planning to employ its geostationary satellite ans-2. which it
is planned will be launched in 1981 to the point 140’3.

5. Development of New Means and Methods for Studying Ocean From Space

The conference noted that there is a great gap between the requirements for global
information advanced by the NCRP and the modern technical possibilities for the
collection of such information. This applies, in particular, to oceanographic

data and neteorological information over the oceans. In many cases there is no hope
for obtaining the necessary global intonation without the use of space observation
systems. Emphasis should be on the development of on-board measurement systems.
continuation of efforts for the development of methods for the processing, analysis
and interpretation of space information, and the coordination of space programs for
the purpose of optimum organization of observations in time and space.

In this connection, in the conference documents it is noted that in the past inade-
quate attention was devoted to the problems of optimum use of satellite data on a
regular basis. The employed algorithm are possibly ineffective for the complete
extraction of useful information from the primary data of satellite measurements.
For a number of characteristics which must be determined there is an inadequate
volume of synchronous surface measurements and calibrations. Satellite data must be
reinforced by traditional information serving as a comparative base for ascertain-,
ing the reliability and accuracy of the space measurements; with this taken into
account, in the opinion of Soviet specialists, there should be planning of future
systems for remote sensing of the earth and the world ocean.

It was noted that in the carrying out of satellite measurements in the interest of
oceanography within the framework of the VCR? it is necessary to organise special
calibration experiments. It is possible that after some time it will become clear
for all that the success of satellite measurements will require the implementation
of calibrations by means of contact measurements on a regular basis. In a number

of cases it will be useful to carry out a comparison of different satellite meth-
ods and also to combine experimental methods created at different institutes which
mutually supplement one another.

It is recognized that for the successful realisation of the oceanographic part of
the "CR? it is necessary to devote special attention to the formulation and develop-

ment of space methods and facilities for observations! purposes intended for the

88

MWWONLY
POI OFFICIAL USEONLY

global determination of temperature of the ocean surface and the near-surface wind
over the ocean, measurement of rises in the sea surface relative to the geoid and
determination of pressure in the near-water layer and the spectrum of surface
"av“e

Also noted was the importance of bringing the attention of specialists to the de-
velopment of promising satellite methods, vhich on a global and operational basis
would make it possible to determine the air-water temperature (for the Gulf Stream
region an accuracy of tOJo’K is required) and the moisture content of :he near-
water layer of the atmospuere (0-20 m) with an accuracy to 0.05 g/kg, as well as

the falling of precipitation over the ocean and the salinity of the water surface
layer.

In conclusion it should be noted that the holding of the conference on the coordin-
ation of plans for future satellite systems for sensing the earth and oceanic ex.
periments was an important and necessary stage in preparations for the VCRP. The
mutual exchange of information and opinions nde it possible for the conferees to
form a sufficiently complete idea concerning the attained level and the prospects
for the development of space methods and technical means for determining oceano-
graphic parameters and characteristics of the atmosphere over the ocean. The
course of the discussion indicated the enormous interest of specialists in the
field of climatology, meteorology, oceanograph' , hydrology, as well as other sci-
outlets in related fields in the use of the potentialities of existing, and espec-

ially future satellite methods. we should also note the increasing attention to the
characteristics of new noncontact methods on the part of representatives of trad-

itional scientific fields.

The nolding of this conference created the prerequisites for subsequent discussion
of the problems involved in the international coordination of national plans and
programs for creating individual satellites and space systems, information from
which will be a necessary element in implementing the oceanographic part of the
World Climate Research Program.

89
roeosmatmouu
FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY

REVIEW OF HONOCRM’H 'AGROPHYSICAL, ”WMWICAL AND AGBDWDIERIIK:
PRINCIPLES OF CROP YIELD PROGMIM' ('AGROPIZICEBSKIYB, ”WMWICIESKIYE
I AGROTEKHNICHESKIYE OSNOVY PWIROVANIYA UROZEAYA'). B? I. S. SHATHDV AND
A. P. CHUDMJVSKIY, LENINGRAD. GIDWEOIZDAT, 1980. 320 PAGES

Moscow METEOROIDGIYA I CIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10. Oct 81 pp 120-121
[Review by 0. D. Sirotenko]

[Abstract] This book, for the first time from an integrated point of vieu. examines
the agrophysical, agrometeorological and agroengineering aspects of yield program-
ing. Taking into account the increasing interest in this subject. which for many
specialists is assaulsted with the introduction of physicomathematical methods into
agronomy, it is probable that the book will be eagerly received. Now, as never be-
fore, there is a need for generalizing works on yield programing. The continuous
increase in the number of publications on this problem has revealed a broad spectrua
of possible approaches to the problem of ensuring planned yields. A great nany types
of mathematical models have been formulated for describing the processes of influence
of weather, soil. agroengineering and other factors on yield formation, which in
principle can be used in descriptive, predictive and control work in the field of
plant cultivation. Meanwhile. until now there have been virtually no generalizing
works guiding specialists in the development and use of the most effective approach-
es and models. The book consists of three parts and seven chapters. The first part
gives a lengthy exposition of the fundamental problems involved in developing meth-
ods for yield prograning. The second part is devoted to the modeling of processes
of energy and mass exchange in the soil-agrocoenoais-atmosphere system, that is. an
inventorying of the concepts and models vhich in principle can be used in develOping
automated systems for the control of technological processes in plant cultivation.
The third part of the book examines the problems involved in the mathematical and
technical support of automated systems for the control of technological processes

in yield programing. Despite a masher of shortcomings, such as some unevenness in
treatment of different aspects of the overall problem, the book is the best of its

kind on this subject.

90

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI1OFFIJA|.UBE(IWLY

SIXTIETR BIRTHDAY 0P ANDRE? SERGEYEVICH mourn
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDBOLOGIYA in Russian No l0, Oct 81 pp 122-123
[Article by specialists of the Institute of Oceanologyl

[Abstract] Andrey Sergeyevich Honin. corresponding nesber, USSR Acadely of Sciences.
director of the Institute of Oceanology. lurked his 60th birthday on 2 July 1981.
He is characterized by an astonishing work capacity, being the author of hundreds
of articles and sonographs; he is the chair-an or a nenber of a great many concis-
sions, the director of a sesinar on geophysical hydrodynanics. has been a partic-
ipant or director of nany sea expeditions and an investigator of the sea floor. The
principal stages in his career have been as follows: sole 7 years at the Central In-
stitute of Forecasts. 15 years at the Institute of Atnosphsric Physics, 16 years at
the Institute of Oceanology. In his years at the latter institute he was neat re-
sponsible for publication of the ATLAS OKEANOV (Atlas of the Oceans)(l980). Recent-

sunnarizes the lost up-to-dste infornation concerning the oceans: on the history
of developsent of the oceans, the course of their natural evolution, their geology
and geography, chenistry and biology. on the dynanics of currents, wave and turbu-
lent processes. ﬂis range of scientific interests is astonishing: fro: flying
saucers to evaluation of global productivity of the oceans. his principal nono-
graphs (some with co-authors) have been: STATISTICBBSKAYA GIDBDHIKHANIKA (Statis-
tical Hydronechanics), 2 volumes. 1965, 1967; PRDGNOZ P0600! KAI ZADACHA PIZIKI
(Heather Forecasting as a Problem in Physics). 1969; VEASBCHENIYI ZEHLI I KLIHAI
(The Earth's Rotation and Clisate). 1972; IZNENCHIVOST' MIRDVOGO OKZANA (Variabil-
ity of the World Ocean), 1976; ISTORIYA ZEHLI (History of the Earth). 1977; 1510R-
IYA KLIHATA (History of Climate). 1979; OKBAhSKAYA IURBULENTNOST' (Oceanic Turbu-
lence). 1981. Figures 1.
F0.‘0FFIJAI.USS€ONLY

SEVENTIETH BIRTHDAY OF SEHEN SEHENOVICH GAYGEROV
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA l GIDRDLOCIYA in Russian No 10. Oct 81 pp 123-126

[Article by personnel of the Central Aerological Observatory]

[Abstract] Professor Semen Semenovich angerov. doctor of geographical sciences,
head of the Laboratory of Meteorology of the Upper Atmosphere at the Central Aero-
logical Observatory. marked his 70th birthday on 15 October 1981. Beginning his
work in the Hydrometeorological Service in 1929. he progressed from observer at a
meteorological station to a leading specialist in the field of experimental aero-
logy and synoptic meteorology. He is now well known in the USSR and abroad. He was
one of the organizers of the Central Aerological Observatory in 1960 before serving
as a meteorologist in the armed forces. After the war ended he participated in
unique investigations with balloons. making possible a quantitative evaluation of
the principal meteorological parameters of moving air in the troposphere. As an ac-
tive participant in the IGY. Gaygerov during 1955-1956 carried out aerometeorolog-
ical investigations on the drifting station "Severnyy Polyus—b," and in 1956-1958
he participated in the Second Soviet Antarctic Expedition. The results of these
studies were generalized in a number of articles and monographs and were included
in the ATLAS OP ANTARCTICA. Beginning in 1966, Semen Semenovich made studies of
nacroscale processes in the high layers of the atmosphere. He headed a number of
expeditions at sea on which rocket measurements were made and with use of data

from thermal sounding from satellites. He directed work at the Central Aerological
Observatory for developing a new standard atmosphere for the layer 30-80 km. The
results of the mentioned studies were a coeponent part of the COSPAR Reference At-
mosphere of 1972. During 1971-1972 Gaygsrov participated in the 16th Soviet Antarc-
tic Expedition. heading the aerometeorological detachment. At that time investiga-
tions of atmospheric circulation were made to an altitude of 90 km. the results
being included in the monograph VOZDUSHNYYB TBCHENIYA V “32087332 ANTARKTIKI (Air
Currents in the Antarctic Hesoaphere) (1975). S. S. Gaygerov has published more
than 100 scientifir studies. including six monographs, which have received recog~
nition in both the USSR and abroad. his book AEROLOGIYA POLYARNYKH RAYONOV (Aero-
logy of the Polar Regions) has been translated into English. Figures 1.

92

F!!!(Iﬂﬂ€1Al.U§EiMULY
F0! omcm USE ONLY

SIXTIETH BIRTHDAY 0F NIKOLAY GAVRIDOVICH Lnomv
Hoscow HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 124-125
[Article by specialists of the USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

(Abstract: Nikolay Cavrilovich Leonov, candidate of physical and mathmtical sci-
ences. head of the Short-Range Heather Forecasting Division of the USSR Hydro-
meteorological Scientific Research Center, marked his 60th birthday on 7 August
1981. together with the 140th anniversary of his scientific work. After graduating in
1943 from the Higher Military llydrometeorological Institute of the Red Army, he was
sent to the Adninistration of the Hydrometeorological Service of the Far Eastern
Front, where he participated in hydro-eteorological and forecasting work. After the
war N. c. Leonov went to work at the Central Institute of Forecasts, where he ad-
vanced through the ranks to be deputy director. He is an outstanding specialist in
different fields of synoptic meteorology. Between Novmber 1955 and August 1957 he
participated in the First Soviet Antarctic Expedition, data from which he general-
ized and published in three scientific studies. While deputy director of the USSR
Hydrometeorological Center. Nikolay Gavrilovich did much work directed to improv~
ing the collection, processing and preparation of routine materials and introduc-
tion of advanced forecasting netth for the analysis and forecasting of weather.
At the USSR Hydrometeorological Center he was the first to prepare global naps of
cloud cover on the basis of observations from meteorological artificial earth sat-
ell ices. he headed a section in the world Heather Service and directed the section
for the analysis of world weather and data dissemination. N. G. Leonov did much
work alung the lines of international technical cooperation in the field of syn-
optic meteorology and is widely known among foreign scientists. 8e occupied a ser-
ion or responsible posts in the R40 Secretariat. He was Vice President and later
President of the HMO Comission on Synoptic Meteorology. For many years Nikolay
(:avrilovich headed a working group on codes at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center
and devoted much attention to the development of new and improvement of existing
international meteorological codes. Figures 1.

93

MWWMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AT THE USSR STATE COHITTEE 0N HYDROHETEOROLOGY AND ENVIRONMAI. MNITORING

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I CIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 p 125

[Article by V. N. anlmrov]

[Text] In accordance with a decree of the Board of the USSR State Conittee on Sci-
ence and Technology, in April 1981 the Valday Scientific Research Hydrological Lab-
oratory imeni V. A. Uryvayev of the State Order of the Red Banner of Labor Hydrolog-
ical Institute was transformed into the Valday Affiliate of that institute.

Stepan Fedorovich Fedorov, doctor of geographical sciences, has been deeigneted di-
rector of the Valday Affiliate of the State Hydrological Institute.

In connection with the creation of the affiliate its nieaiona have been expanded
considerably in comparison with those performed earlier by the Velday Laboratory.

96

mmusnonu
IKIIIJFIICIA1.l§iE(NMLY

CDN?ER£NCES, MEETINGS, SEMINARS

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10. Oct 81 pp 125-128
[Article by M. A. Butuzova. A. A. Zhelnin and N. A. Zaytseva]

[Text] A session of the Scientific Cauncil on the Problem "Artificial Modification
of Hydrometeorological Processes" of the State Couaittee on Hydrometeorology and
Environmental Monitoring was held during the period 22-23 April at the Central
Asian Regional Scientific Research Institute imeni V. A. Bugayev (Tashkent).

About 25 members participated in the work of the Council, as well as specialists
of the Artificial Modification Division of the Central Asian Scientific Research

Institute.

The forum of scientists was opened by M. N. Aksarin, director of the Central Asian
Scientific Research Institute. I. I. Burteev, head of the Administration on Use of
Artificial Modification in the National Economy, presented appropriate introduc-
tory remarks free the State Committee on hydrometeorology and Environmental Moni-
toring. He noted the principal problems facing the institutes of the State Com-
mittee on Hydroneteorology and anironnental Monitoring in the field of artificial
modification of precipitation during the current year and during the Eleventh Five-
Yeer Plan.

In accordance with the work plan for the Council for 1981-1982, the session of the

Scientific Council discussed programs for regulating precipitation in different
regions of the Soviet Union. It was noted in the reports and coemunications that

during recent years the institutes of the State Committee on Bydrometeorology and
Environmental Monitoring have carried out a considerable volume of investigations
in the field of artificial increase in precipitation in lowland and mountainous re-
gions of the country.

The Ukrainian Scientific Research Institute has developed and presented to the State

Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring a method for the artif-
icial augmentation of precipitation in the lowland regions. Beginning in the win-
ter of 1980/1981 an experiment was initiated for increasing winter precipitation
over an area up to 500,000 hectares for the purpose of evaluating the nodifica-
tion effect. Experimental studies are being carried out for an artificial increase
in precipitation in the basin of the Iori River under a program bearing the sane
ndmu. Investigations of the possibilities of organizing work for obtaining addi-
tional precipitation in Central Asia and the Lower Volga have been initiated; be-
ginning in 1980 regular work has been carried out on an artificial increase in

95

FOI‘OIIICIAIJUEIilﬂlv
FII!(INH(1A1.USE¢HVL¥

precipitation in the basin of Lake Sevan. There has been further development of
work on methods for statistical evaluation of the results of experiments for an
artificial increase in precipitation. A statistical model of the quantity of pre-
cipitation is now being developed.

However, the programs for work on the artificial increase in precipitation reported
at the Scientific Council require further improvement and especially with respect
to the planning and evaluation of the effectiveness of the experiments. It was
noted in the course of the discussions that special attention should be devoted to
the development of methods for evaluating the physical and economic effectiveness
of artificial modification; there was emphasis on the need for development of in-
vestigations in the field of physics of the processes of natural cloud and precip-
itation formation and artificial modification of these.

A brief communication was presented on the possibility of using aircraft generators,
pyrotechnic shells and rockets, as well as artillery shells, in work for increasing
precipitation. 0n the basis of these computations it was established that in order
to increase precipitation from stratiform clouds not one of the known antihail tech-
niques is suitable. Host of these techniques are far from optimum even for the mod-
ification of cumulus clouds.

In the communications there was repeated emphasis on the inadequate outfitting of
projects with the necessary technical apparatus, including for the introduction of
reagents. as well as instruments for a detailed investigation of the microphysical

characteristics of clouds. especially for measuring the concentration of small crys-
tals, which makes difficult the carrying out of investigations under programs at

the modern level.

The results of discussion of the reports determined the fundamental points in the
resolution ado:.ed by the Scientific Council. It was noted in the resolution that
in implementing the planned programs for increasing precipitation it is necessary
to devote particular attention to the planning of experiments with a possibility
of evaluating the effects. The resolution noted the need for developing investiga-
tions in the field of physics of processes of natural cloud and precipitation for-
mation and artificial modification of them, experimental investigation of the
microphysics of the solid phase of clouds. and improvement in statistical methods
for evaluating the effectiveness of an artificial increase in precipitation.

It was deemed desirable that particular attention he devoted to the development
of an expanded program of work on the problem of an artificial increase in precip-
itation for the period up to 1990.

According to the approved plan, at the next session of the Scientific Council at
Nsl'chik there will be a discussion of the status of scientific investigations

and the results of practical work on the problem of prevention of hail in the USSR
and the socialist countries and also work on hail prevention carried out in the
United States.

In 1982 plans call for two sessions of the Scientific Council in Leningrad and
Seven. The first will be devoted to an analysis of the status and prospects of
remote methods for investigating cloud media and precipitation. At the second
session there will be a discussion of the research programs carried out at the
field experimental bases of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environ-
mental Monitoring.

96 H. A. Butusova

IOI*OFFKJA1.USI(I!LY
FOIIOIFICIAI.USElMNLY

An international conference on the preliminary results of the F668 and the macro-
scale aspects of its monsoonal experiments was held during the period 12-17 Jan-
uary at Florida State University (Tallahassee, Florida). It was organised by the
American Meteorological Society under the direction of the "MD. This was the sec-
ond international forum of scientists devoted to a discussion of the preliminary
results of the F062. The first conference of this type was held in June 1980 at
Bergen (Norway). At the conference at Tallahassee there were 106 reports from 10
countries: United States (53). India (15). USSR (12), France (8), Australia (5).
Japan (2), Chinese People's Republic (2), Caseroon (1), Malaysia (1). The confer-
ence program included 13 sessions; 14 requested reports were presented.

Session 1: Review of international results of FUSE. Six reports were presented, of
which 4 were requested. In a review report by V. Suomi (United States) information
was given on the operation of meteorological satellites during the F003 period.
there was discussion of work on the collection of data from automatic platforms
(buoys, balanced probes) with the use of artificial earth satellites and examples
were given of forecasts for four days in advance. taking into account the wind
reconstructed on the basis of satellite photographs. L. Bengtson (Great Britain)
analyzed FGCE data on global mean daily forecasts and noted the good results of
forecasts for five days in advance in the southern hemisphere. It is anticipated
that the deterioration of the observational network after the F602 will reduce the
quality and shorten the advance time of forecasts. especially in the tropics and
In the sOuthern hemisphere. H. Halem (United States) told about the use of data

on wind and temperature profiles obtained using artificial earth satellites. In a
review report by T. Nitta (Japan) the author gave the preliminary results of the
F668 and HONEX. Data from geostationary artificial earth satellites are used in
studying the spectrum of the development of cloud cover; maxi-a with periods of 2-3,
4-5. 14 and 68 days are discriminated; the aaximua amplitude of the 68-day varia-
tions is noted in the central part of the Indian Ocean. Results of an analysis of
the profiles of wind divergence in comparison with the CAI! period are presented.
In the requested report of K. Hiyakods, et al. (NDAA. United States) there was a
discussion of the results of four—dimensional analysis of FGGB data carried out

at the Princeton Geophysical Fluid Dyna-ice Laboratory.

Session 2: Contribution of FGGE data. The requested report of P. Julian (NCAR,
Lnited States) described a system of observations in the tropics during the F663
period and gave a qualitative and quantitative analysis of level III-b data. F.
Mosher (United States) cited the results of a comparison of wind fields obtained
using data on cloud cover from different artificial earth satellites and from
radiosondes; the error varied in the range 2-3 mlsec. G. Hills (Australia) demon-
strated the results of a numerical experiment for objective analysis and forecast-
lng for 24 hours in advance in the Australian region during the second special
observation period (SOP-II). He pointed out that for a complete system of "analy-
uis-forecasting" equations the F663 observation system was adequate but with the
usual system a c0mplete analysis is impossible.

Session 3: Diagnosis on the basis of FGGE data. Five reports were presented by the
United States (Goddard Atmospheric Sciences Laboratory, Uisconsin and Maryland

Universities). An analysis of FGCE data made it possible to establish the presence
of stationary Rossby waves in the atmosphere over the Pacific Ocean in the zone
20-40°S with a wavelength of about 120' in longitude in the air flow beyond the

97

FOI‘OFFIIAI.USIIIVLY
FOI:0"1C1AI.USEIMNLY

Andes. A detailed analysis was made of the transport of energy on a planetary scale
and the spatial and temporal distribution of nonadiabatic energy "gains" and "loss-
cs." It is asserted that the energy sources are situated in the region of Indonesia.
the Philippines and Southeast Asia, whereas the losses occur in the Sahara region
and in the eastern parts of the subtropical anticyclones. There is a seasonal move-
ment of sources from one hemisphere to the other.

Session a: Winter HDNEX -- Planetary Scale. The reports analyzed the wind field and
atmospheric temperature and energetics during the period of winter HDNEX. T. Mura-
kami (United States) analyzed the orographic influence of the Tibetan Plateau on
atmospheric circulation in Asia during the winter monsoon. A westerly flow at the
SOO-mb level, bending around Tibet, is discriminated; its southerly branch is char-
acterized by the presence of a jet stream. At the ZOO-mo level there are short-per—
iod (3.5-5.5 days) eddies observed for the most part over China and long-period
(12-20 days) stationary disturbances over India. P. Webster (Australia) described
the mechanism of macroscale circulation of the winter monsoon. He defined two crit-
ical moments: I) limitation of the field of nonadiabatic heating and the jet stream
caused by it in the northern part of Asia; 2) as a result of spatial-temporal char—
acteristics of nonadiabatic heating in the low latitudes the total heating is di-
rectly related to the dynamics of the system, whereas in the high latitudes this
relationship is weak. A theory of low-frequency modulation of macroscale circula-
tion of the winter monsoon is formulated on this basis.

Session 5: Summer MONEX -— Planetary Scale. Eleven reports were presented, devoted
to an analysis of atmospheric circulation in the prenonsoonal and monsoonal periods

and attempts to clarify the reasons for phenomena and finding prognostic criteria.
The reports of G. Young (United States) and H. Uebois (France) analysed data from

the geostationary satellite GOES together with data from radiosondsa and equal-al-
titude balloons. The mean fields of circulation were obtained and the eddy and di-
vergence fields were computed. D. Cadette (France, United States) analysed the inr
fluence of middle—latitude disturbances in the sauthern hemisphere on the low jet
stream over eastern Africa and established a correlation between interhemispherical
interactions and eonsoonal activity over India. S. R. V. Roman (India) demonstrated
a correlation between middle-latitude westerly transfer over Asia and the southwest-
erly monsoon. R. Pasch (United States) revealed the relationship between the pro-
cess of setting-in of the monsoon over India and changes in tropical circulation on
a planetary scale. P. R. Pisharoti (India) formulated a new theory of the develop-
ment of the summer monsoon; it relates the develop-eat of the monsoon to the condi-
tions for the transport of heat across 30-bO'N from the equatorial to the polar
latitudes in the course of the preceding winter. In other words, monsoonal anomal-
ies must be expected as a result of anomalous energy transfer into the polar re-
gions during winter. P. Ardana (United States) demonstrated the relationship between
monsoonal interruptions and the westward advance of lO-ZO-day waves. 8. Kang and T.
Sharif (United States) presented a multiple regression method for the setting-in of
the monsoon and the total quantity of precipitation for an advance time of about two

months.
Session 6: Summer HONEX -- Radiation Heat Sources. An analysis was made of the radi-
ation characteristics of the atmosphere tn the basis of satellite. aircraft and

radiosonde data. A study was made of the influence of a high surface albedo and at-
mospheric aerosol. A requested report by 8. Cor (United States) gave the results of

98

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEIMULY
FORi0531CLAl.US£1)NLY

a multisided analysis of the radiation fluxes over the Arabian Peninsula. A total
cooling of the layer from the surface to 860 mb by 2.5'C/day and heating of the
layer 840-695 mb by 0.2'C/day are found.

Session 7: Summer NONE: - Numerical Modeling. The requested report of P. has
(India) was devoted to an experiment with a three-level numerical model of re-
gional forecasting based on primitive equations. The requested report of T. Krish-
namurti and I. Ramanathan (India) by means of a three-dimensional analysis invest-
igated the state of the atmosphere prior to the bursting of the monsoon. Other re-
ports described numerical experiments with regional forecasting models. The varia-
bility of circulation is investigated.

Session 9: West African Honsoonal Experiment (BAMBI). In a requested report 5. “Dela.
Hbong (Cameroon) described a system of observation stations in the tropical sons of

Africa and discussed their operation during the P068 period. Three reports from
France and one from Nigeria described the results of observations during the HAHBX

period .

Session 9: Summer HONEX - Oceanographic Results. In a requested report P. Schott
(United States) described the results of oceanographic observations in the Somali

Current in connection witu the setting-in of the summer monsoon. In other reports
(United States, India, USSR) an analysis was made of the upwelling phenomenon, the
distribution of water surface temperature and the characteristics of water circula-
tion in the Arabian Sea.

Session 10: Winter HDNBX - Circulation and Convection. Reports from the United
States. Australia, USSR, Malaysia and China gave the results of an analysis of

meteorological conditions on the basis of data from satellites. aircraft and radio-
sondes. A study was made of the diurnal variation of convection in the South China
Sea and on Borneo. The characteristics of development of cloud clusters were de-
scribed. An analysis of the cold intrusion of 10-12 December 1978 was presented.

Session ll: Summer HONEX - Lows; Session 12: Summer NONE! -— Circulation; Session
13: Summer HONEX -- Problem of Setting-in of Monsoon. At these sessions there was

a discussion of different aspects of study of the summer monsoon: the dynamics of
the boundary data using data from equal-altitude balloons (France) - the results
of the BALSAHINE experiment; numerical modeling of circulation, including jet
streams at different levels; characteristics of the formation and development of
Iowa in the Bay of Bengal and the possibilities of their prediction; changes in
meridional circulation and phases of the sunset monsoon; aspects of interhemispher-
ical interactions, etc. An analysis was made of the transfer of air masses and
water vapor. structure of convective cloud cover, etc.

The conference graphically demonstrated the high quality, completeness and unique-
ness of the mass of FCC? data, making it possible to carry out a more complete an-
alysis and prediction of circulation, earlier iﬂpossible in some regions. Partic—
ulur attention was given to the work region and the results of the winter HDNBX.
The FCCE materials indicated that during winter the region of the Malaysian-Indones-
ian archipelago is a special territory of the equatorial zone where there is maxi-
mum interhemispherical and interlatitudinal exchange, having great importance for

99

FOIiOFlKJAl.UBIIIULY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USC(NVLV

the circulation in the extratropicnl latitudes. FGCE results are being used ex-
tensively now for the planning and coordination of new investigations of atmo-
spheric circulation both on a globtl scale and in individual regions.

A. A. Zhelnin and N. A. Zayteeva

100

EDI OIIWCIAI.IENB(HULY
FOI!0FFHJAI.USE(IVLY

OBITUARY 0F TAISIYA VASIL'YEVNA POIBOVSIAYA (1900-1981)
Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 p 128

[Article by specialists of the Order of the Red Banner of Labor Main Geophysical
Observatory ineni A. I. Voyeykov]

[Abstract] Professor Taisiya Vasil'yevna Pokrovskaya, doctor of geographical sci-
ences, one of the outstanding clieatologiats of the Soviet Union. died on b April
1981. After graduating from Leningrad State University in 1926, she began her work
at the Main Geophysical Observatory in 1925, where she worked for 56 years. After
defending her candidate's dissertation in 1938, Pokrovskaya bees-e a senior sci-
entific specialist in the climatology division and later section head and division
head for the division of synoptic research and the division of world climatology.
The scientific activity of T. V. Pokrovskaya was directed to the develop-eat of
Soviet climatology and long-range weather forecasting. In 1936 she prepared a cli-
aatic description of drift of the "Chelyuskin." Later this work was developed in
her monograph KLIHATICHESKDYE OPISANIYB SEVERNOGO HORSKOGO PUT! (Climatic Descrip-
tion of the Northern Sea Route). Then she published a Iajor work on the clisate of
Central Asia. During the war Taisiya Vasil'yevna took an active part in cliaatolog-
ical support of operations of the stay and air force. She proposed a synoptic-cli-
matological method for long-range forecasts. In the aonograph SINOPTIIO-KLIHAIO-
LOGICHESKIYE I GELIOGEOPIZICHESKIYE DOLGOSROCRNYYE PROGNOZY POGODY (Synoptic-C11-
natolngical and heliogeophysicsl Long-Range Weather Forecasts) (1969) T. V. Pokrov-
skaya generalized the results of long-tern studies. During recent years her sci-
entific activity was devoted to study of the change in cliaate. study of the con-
ditions of the formation of droughts and the development of aethods for predicting
then on the basis of allowance for circulatory and heliophysical factors. The
publications of T. V. Pokrovskaya are well known among Soviet and foreign scien-
tists.

COPYRIGHT: "Heteorologiya i gidrologiya", 1981

5303 - m -
cso: 1866/6

101
F0.‘0IUIIAI.USIIINLY