FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10147

1 December 1981

USSR Report

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 8. August 1981

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION senvuce

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10147
1 December 198

USSR REPORT
METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. B, August 1981

Translations or abstracts of all articles of the Russian-language
monthly journal METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA published in Moscow by
Gidrometeoizdat.

CONTENTS

Anthropogenic Changes in Climate...........................r....................
*Indirect Computation of Characteristics of the Prevailing Wind..................

Investigation of the Energy Cycle in the USSR Hydrometeorological Center Model
of General Circulation of the Atoosphere........................................

Vertical Circulation in the High-Altitude Frontal Zone Over western Siberia and
Krasnoyarﬂkiy Kray'OeooiteeeoleoiCOO...It.OOOIOOOOOOOIOCCOOIOOOOIIICC-0.0.0.0...

Numerical Model of Pollutant Transport in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer........
Correlation Between the Electrification of Thunderstorm Clouds and Electricity..

*Influence of Highlands in the Asiatic Territory of the USSR on the Thickness of
Glaze and Riﬂe Deposits...”u...n........unn.oouuuooo............u"...

Model of Circulation of a Baroclinic Ocean Under Influence of the Wind and Heat
F10" Fro. the A‘mospheteooe.IICC...00.000.00.000IIOOIOCOOOOIOOOIOOIOOCCOC0......

*Sone Methodological Problems in Applying the Main Components Method in Studies
of River Runoff Fields-econ.essosees.-0.0.0.00toOOOOIOOoeoooee.eon-OIOOCIIOOOOOO

*Evaluation of Parameters of Probability Distributions for River Runoff..........

*Statistical Characteristics of River Bottom Ridged Relief.......................

*Computation of Turbidity Profile in Plow With Transported Sediments.............

 

* Denotes items which have been abstracted.

1

1

15

16

2b

31
46

57

58

73
7b
75

76
FOR‘OFF1C1AI.IEIE(H§LY

*Regulation of Phytoclinste as a Means for Substantiating the Couponents
for combined swin880000000..0.ol..'..I...0.0.0.0000!C.OIOIOICCOOQOOCOOUCUIOOOO

*Investigation of Heat Flows in the Atmospheric Near-Hater Layer Under the
Atlantic Tmpicll Experiment Program“.......u...u......................uu-

*Sone Applications of the 'Heathernan-Electronic Conputer' Dialogue System in
Problems of Routine Data Processing and Nulerical Weather Forecasting..........

Experience in Scientific-Operational Hydrometeorologicsl and Ice Date Support
for Hinter Voyages in the Arctic...............................................

*
Catalogue of Ice Bncrustations in the Baykal-Anur Railroad Zone, Issue I:
Ice Encrustations of the Upper Part of the Chars River Basin (Kstalog Neledey

Zony BAH, Vypusk I: Naledey Verkhnay Chaeti Basseyna R. Chery). Leningrad.
cidrmte°12d3tg 1980.....OOOOOOOC.0.It...0.00.00.09.00...COOOOOU"OCOOCOOOOOOO
*Piftieth Birthday of Georgiy Vsdimovich Gruza..................................

Awards at the USSR All-Union Exhibition of Achievements in the Netional

Economyeeoesvoseeson.esassoc-sacs.eesaoeeeeossoaso.0as000.000oeoeoeeeeeoeeooeee

Conferences, Meetings and Seminars.............................................
*“otes Prom Abroad.‘OI...OIOOOOIOOCOOC0.0.0.0....0.0...I...IOOOOOOUOODOOOOOOIOOI
*Obituary of Pavel Samoylovich Lineykin (1910-1981).............................

*Hemorial to Grigoriy Ivanovich Shanov (1891-1956)..............................

*Denotes items which have been abstracted.

- b -

FOI1OFFHJA1.UBE(H‘LY

77

78

79

80

86
87

88
93
96
97
98
FIIIINﬂﬂCIAl.lEI§(NUlN

UDC 551.588.7(100)

ANTHROPOGENIC CHANGES IN GLOBAL CLIHAIB

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received
10 Feb 81) PP 5-14

[Article by H. I. Budyko. corresponding member USSR Academy of Sciences. B. K.
Byutner. doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, K. Ya. Vinnikov, candidate
of physical and mathematical sciences, G. S. Golitsyn. corresponding member USSR
Academy of Sciences. 0. A. Drozdov. doctor of geographical sciences, and I. L.

Karol'. doctor of physical and mathematical sciences. State Hydrological Insti-
tute]

[Text] Abstract: The article discusses the problem
of impending anthropogenic changes in global
climate. It is concluded that the climatic
conditions of the end of the 20th century and
especially the first half of the 21st century
will substantially differ from those of today
under the influence of an increase in the con-
tent of carbon dioxide in the earth's atmosphere.

The hypothesis that under the influence of economic activity there can be a change
in global climatic conditions was already expressed in the 1930's [33]. The first
scientific conferences on this problea were held in the USSR in 1961 [11] and in
1962 [12]. .

During the period 1975-1980 there was a series of international and national con-
ferences at which there was discussion of the anthropogenic change in modern cli-
mate. Among these conferences was the First World Conference on the Climate Problem
(Geneva. 1979). a series of Soviet-American scientific symposia. the All-Union Con-
ference on Anthropogenic Change in Climate (Leningrad, 1980) and many others. Dur-
ing recent years materials and conclusions from a series of scientific conferences
have been published. as well as the reports of different scientific organisations
on the problem of anthropogenic change in climate [10. 30. 36-36, 39, 61 and oth-
ers]. In these publications the opinion is expressed that there can be a major
change in global climate in the near future and because of this the task of evalu-
ating the anthropogenic change in climate is acquiring great practical importance.

*tﬁ

Natural climatic changes. Anthropogenic changes in global climate are developing
against the background of its natural fluctuations. whose temporal changes fall
in the range from a few years to a time period commensurable with the duration of

1
FOIIOFFKJAI.USI(HULY
FIII(MHHCIAI.EEHECHILY

the earth's existence. In a study of modern climatic changes it is possible to lim-
it the examination to an analysis of the fluctuations over the period of a century.

A spectral analysis of time series of different meteorological elements. including
the mean air temperature of the northern hemisphere. does not reveal a distinct
periodicty of the natural changes in climate [8. 14 and others]. However. there
are a considerable number of investigations whose authors feel that the natural
fluctuations of climate have a more or last cyclic character [16. 26, 26 and oth-
ers].

These studies point out the existence of cyclic fluctuations of climate with a dur-
ation of 1500-2000 years, 300-500 years. 60-120 years (secular cycle) and less than
a hundred years (intrssecular fluctuations). By the term "cyclicity" is meant fluc-
tuations whose periods and amplitudes can vary in definite, but rather broad lim-
its. In a number of studies information on climatic cycles was used in predicting
natural changes in climate [l6 and others].

The physical mechanism of modern natural climatic changes is governed to a consid-
erable degree by the attenuation of solar radiation penetrating into the troposphere
by stratospheric aerosol, whose mass is determined by the regime of explosive vol-
canic eruptions [6. 18. 62, 64. 52]. There is basis for assuming. in particular.
that repeated coolings in Europe. accompanied by an increase in ice content in the
northern part of the Atlantic Ocean, for the most part are attributable to a de-
crease in atmospheric transparency after group explosive volcanic eruptions. Harm-
ings occur with an increase in transparency in an epoch with a lessening of volcan-
ic activity. Such transparency changes are easily traced using data on fluctuations
in conductivity of Greenland ice during the last 250 years [42]; these are associat-
ed with the fallout of the products of volcanic eruptions.

A number of studies give a discussion of the problem of the influence of solar ac-
tivity on modern changes in climate. Such an influence can be associated with
changes in the concentration of stratospheric ozone [23]. However. there is no re-

liable empirical confirmation cf the influence of solar activity on climate [25,
56, 55].

Astronomical factors -- fluctuations of parameters of the earth's orbit -- exert
no influence on modern climatic changes because they involve time scales of
thousands and tens of thousands of years.

The amplitude of natural climatic changes which can occur in the course of the next
decades is small. Thus. in particular. it is extremely improbable that there will
be a deviation from the norm for the mean global temperature averaged for five-
year intervals greater than 0.25' at the earth's surface under the influence of
natural factors [29]. In this connection an anthropogenic warming. changing the
mean global temperature not more than tenths of a degree, can be appreciably in-
tensified (or compensated) by natural climatic changes. Greater anthropogenic
changes in climate. associated with fluttuations in mean global temperature by
several degrees. will considerably exceed the natural climatic changes and will

be decisive for the climatic conditions of the future.

Anthropogenic factors in climatic change. According to estimates available at the
present time. an increase in the content of atmospheric carbon dioxide is the
principal factor exerting an influence on climate and is a virtually inevitable

2

ROI OFFTCIAI.IEIB(HULY
F0l(lﬂﬂC1A1.USE(MNLY

consequence of the development of world electric power production.

A prediction of the consumption of fossil fuel is an important factor on which the
prediction of the atmospheric C02 content in the coming decades is dependent. Hith
the availability of such a prediction the computation of the distribution of anthro-
pogenic carbon dioxide among the principal reservoirs, that is, among the atmo-
sphere. ocean and biomass. is carried out by solution of a system of equations de-
scribing the global cycling of carbon. The principal parameters entering into these
equations have been considerably refined during recent years as a result of new
experimental investigations, and in particular. by data from monitoring of the
content of atmospheric 602, which has been carried out since 1958 [30, 67]. The
results of monitoring indicate a continuous increase in the 602 concentration in
both the northern and southern hemispheres. The mean annual concentration in-
creased from 315 million’1 in 1958 to 336 million'1 in 1978. An analysis of data
from measurements made sporadically in the 19th century gave a concentration of
about 290 million'1 for the middle of the century [30, 33}.

Numerous computations [27, 31, 32. 58. 61] of the 60: distribution as a result of
exchange processes occurring between the atmosphere. ocean and biomass predict for
the coming century an increase in the fraction of anthropogenic carbon dioxide re-
maining in the atmosphere. This fraction should be not less than 601 in 2025. Thus,
with retention of the present-day rates of energy development (5.5: annually, see
[39]) and under the condition that coal. petroleum and gas in 2025 will constitute
56: of all the energy resources used (which corresponds to the most probable pre-
diction of the development of energy [59]). the carbon dioxide content in the atmo-
sphere in this case in 2000 will be 380 million-1. in 2025 -- 520 million'1 and

in 2050 -- 750 million'l.

The probable error in these evaluations under the condition that the industrial
effluent is precisely known is about 201. The results of computations by different
authors relating to temporal changes in ca; content in the atmosphere up to 2100
with identical rates of industrial effluent agree with one another in approximate—
ly this same range.

The greenhouse effect. caused by doubling of the C02 concentration in the atmo-
sphere, should, as indicated below, result in an increase in mean temperature at
the earth's surface by 2-3°C. The scale of these changes will considerably exceed
the changes in the thermal regime on the earth under the influence of other an-
thropogenic factors.

In principle. all the gases having absorption bands in the IR spectral region can
make a contribution to the greenhouse effect.

Estimates of the direct influence of changes in the content of minor gas components
on the radiation fluxes and on the temperature of different layers of the tropo-
sphere and stratosphere were made for the most part using models of radiational-
convective equilibrium with various additional assumptions [29, 60. 63 and others].
In such models it is possible to determine the change in air temperature caused
only by the direct influence of minor gas components on the radiation fluxes. A
warming in the lower troposphere with a doubling of the present-day content of

CH4 and N20 and an unmodified relative humidity will amount to 0.10-0.60; there
will be approximately the same warming of the troposphere with a 20-fold increase

3

F0I10FIIC1AI.IENE(MVLV
FINI!)FFICIAJ.IEHE(MVLY’

in its content of freons. A decrease in the content of ozone in the stratosphere
by 302 will result in an increase in the temperature of the lower troposphere
by several tenths of a degree [56].

As is well known [1. 67]. minor gas components in the atmosphere actively partic-
ipate in many photochemical reactions with other gaseous and aerosol compounds.

The rate of these reactions is dependent on temperature and the fluxes of ultra-
violet radiation in different layers of the atmosphere. A substantial warming of
the troposphere and cooling of the stratosphere with an increase in the COZ con-
centration will exert a substantial influence on the intensity of photochemical
transformations and on the content of minor gas components. whereas the latter

in turn will change the radiation and temperature fluxes. The first attempts at
model investigations of this effect indicated that its influence on the temperature
increase caused by an increase in C02 is small [17].

The atmosphere contains a considerable quantity of anthropogenic aerosol, most of
which is concentrated in the troposphere over industrially well-developed coun-
tries. There are contradictory opinions concerning whether the global content of
aerosol in the troposphere will cease or continue to grow as a result of economic
activity [21. 60]. Taking these estimates into account, the preliminary conclusion
can be drawn that there is no adequate basis for expecting a considerable increase
in the quantity of anthropogenic aerosol. especially since at the present time in-
tensive work is being carried out for purifying the air of populated regions
against contamination.

The results of different investigations [21, 60] also lead to the conclusion that
the possible relatively small anthropogenic increase in aerosol content in the
troposphere will not result in any considerable climatic effect because on a
global scale it is possible to expect compensation of the effects of heating and
cooling due to the absorption and reflection of radiation by aerosol.

The quantity of aerosol of anthropogenic origin in the stratosphere evidently is
small in comparison with the mean natural level arising as a result of volcanic
activity.

According to estimates, the background aerosol forming in the stratosphere during
a period of low volcanic activity (for the most part as a result of oxidation of
ocs gas -- carbonyl sulfide -- entering from the troposphere) will reduce the
global temperature of the earth's surface by not more than 0.1‘C [2. 62]. Prelim-
inary investigations of the OCS balance in the atmosphere reveal that it is deter-
mined to a considerable degree by anthropogenic sources. The possible increase in
the background concentration of atmospheric 005 during the first half of the next
century will lead to a global decrease in temperature of the earth's surface by
not more than 0.1-0.3'.

Estimates of the influence of development of stratospheric aviation and transport
space vehicles on background stratospheric aerosol content and climate reveal
that this effect will be insignificant [4. 21]. Thus, the probable increase in
the content of anthropogenic aerosol in the atmosphere will not lead to climatic
effects comparable with the effect of the increase in atmospheric 002 content.

Ft“!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USE¢NHLY
FOR‘OFFIJA1.USE(MVLY

The very same applies to anthropogenic changes in the state of the earth's sur-
face. At the present time these factors are changing the mean global temperature
by not more than o.1°c [S]. The direct heating of the atmosphere inevitable with
the use of any form of energy can be of definite importance for the climate of the
future. However. computations reveal that the influence of this factor will be
manifested in the more remote future and that during the next 70-100 years it

cannot be comparable with the influence of an increase in the C02 concentration
[40].

Response of climate to changes in climate-forming factors. It is usually assumed
that changes in global climate can be regarded as the sum of definite factors and
random changes transpiring under the influence of phenomena external relative to
the climatic system. which are a result of instability of the climatic system it-
self [4, 5].

Among the most general characteristics of the determined component of changes in
global climate is a dependence of mean air temperature at the earth's surface on
changes in the climate-forming factors exerting an influence on the earth’s energy
balance.

As a measure of the response of climate it is customary to use estimates of changes
in the global or local climatic characteristics with a stipulated change in cli-
mate-forming factors.

Estimates of the response of the global thermal regime to an additional heat in-
flux or to a change in the atmospheric 002 content were obtained first in simple
models of the theory of climate [6. 5 and others]. Then they were confirmed and
made specific by computations using models of general circulation of the atmo-
sphere [67-69, 66. 65], and also empirical estimates based on data from study of
the annual variation of meteorological elements, on data on modern changes in cli—
mate and on changes in the climate of the past [5. 22, 50 and others].

The computations in [64]. agreeing with empirical estimates in [5, 22, 37]. reveal
that changes in the global cloud cover. accompanying changes in the thermal re-
gime. exert little influence on the response of global climate, although this
problem will require further investigations.

According to [35], which gives a review of the results of computations for five
general circulation models. the change in the mean global air surface tempera—
ture with a doubling of atmospheric C02 content is 3:1.5'0. The incomplete coin-
cidence of existing estimates of this parameter is attributable to the presence
of different simplifying assumptions in all models of the theory of climate.

The computations in [48. 65] have indicated an appreciable role of allowance for
the seasonal variation of meteorological elements in models of the theory of cli-
mate. Accordingly. the computations of response in [#8. S7, 65] are the moat re-
iiahle. There seasonal variation is taken into account and this value falls in
the range 2.0-3.3'C. The empirical estimates in [5, 22, 50] do not contradict the
theoretical estimates.

The conclusions cited above concerning the response of the global thermal regime
to external factors are correct for stationary or quasistationary climatic
changes. Computations of climatic changes for several decades must include

5
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE¢INLY
FOIIOIIICIAI.IEIE(IVLY

allowance for thermal inertia of the climatic system.

This inertia is related primarily to the heat capacity of the upper quasihomogen-
eous layer of the ocean and to processes of interaction between this layer and
the deeper layers [19. 38, A3]. Estimates of this inertia obtained by means of
models of the theory of climate, taking into account the upper quasihomogeneous
layer of the ocean [43] and by means of an analysis of empirical data on the
modern changes in climate [5. 52]. satisfactorily agree with one another and give
a lag time in changes in mean annual air surface temperature of about 10 years.
With allowance for interaction between the quasihomogeneous layer and the deeper
layers this time can be increased [38], but this problem requires more detailed
study.

Hodels of the theory of climate make it possible to study the patterns of change
in the zonal and seasonal characteristics of the thermal regime and the moisture
cycle with an increase in atmospheric CO content, but because of the approximate
nature of the models the accuracy of these conclusions is less than the accuracy
of computations of the response of the global mean annual thermal regime.

Quantitative information on local climatic changes, accompanying changes in cli-
mate of a global scale. can be obtained using models of general circulation of

the atmosphere but also by a statistical analysis of empirical data on changes

in climate during the period of instrumental meteorological observations [7, 9, 13,
65, 66 and others].

These estimates can be used as materials characterizing the changes in climatic
conditions with a relatively small increase in the content of atmospheric CO;

if the changes in mean annual air surface temperature in the northern hemisphere
do not exceed 0.5'c.

Empirical information on climatic conditions for a higher atmospheric 002 content
can also be obtained by the use of paleoclimatic data [5-7 and others].

In investigations of evolution of the chemical composition of the atmosphere it
was found that in the Neogene (3-22 million years ago) the atmosphere contained
a quantity of carbon dioxide exceeding the present-day level by a factor of 2-4
[5. 6]. The use of data on climate of the Neogene for computations of the thermal
regime and the moistening regime with high 002 concentrations gave results close
to the results of computations using models of general circulation of the atmo-
sphere [5-7].

Computations using models and empirical estimates show that the greatest changes
in surface temperature will be in the polar regions where they can attain 8-10'c
with a doubling of the atmospheric 602 content [5-7, 69. 65].

Anthropogenic climatic changes. Since 1972. first in Soviet investigations, and
then in the studies of foreign authors. a number of computations of impending
anthropogenic changes in climate were published [3-5. 7. lO, 20. 29. 60]. These
computations were based primarily on an estimate of climatic changes under the
influence of an increase in the atmospheric C02 content. In some of the investi-
gations in this cycle of studies in determining the climatic conditions of the
future the authors employed models of the theory of climate, whereas in other
studies this was accomplished using empirical data on the patterns of change

6

FOR OFFICIAl.lEIE(NVLY
FOR!OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

of climate in the modern epoch and in the geological past. A fact worth noting is
that the results of these computations in most cases agree well with one another.

Evaluations of the climatic change caused only by the increase in the concentra-
tion of carbon dioxide must be considered minimum. In addition. it is improbable
that the influence of other factors will increase the anticipated changes in the
mean global air temperature by more than a factor of 1 1/2.

0n the basis of computed data from models of the theory of climate and empirical
models, with allowance for the data cited above on the increase in atmospheric

C02 content. it is possible to obtain the estimates of the anthropogenic change in
mean global temperature cited below for the earth's surface in comparison with the
temperature at the beginning of the 20th century.

Years 2000 2025 2050

Change in mean tempera-
ture, °C 0.9 1.8 2.8

The changes in mean air temperature at different latitudes are not identical. As
noted above. they increase with an increase in latitude. The nature of this depen-
dence can be seen from data (see below) which give the changes in the mean latitud-
inal temperatures corresponding to an increase in mean global temperature by 1°C.

Latitude, degrees 0 20 60 60 80
Change in mean annual
temperature. °C 0.5 0.6 1.0 1.7 3.0

In the middle and especially in the high latitudes the temperature changes substan-
tially in the annual variation. attaining a maximum in winter and a minimum in sum-

mer .

It can be concluded from the data in these tables, based on materials in [5, 69],
that sea polar ice in the near future must be transformed from perennial to one-
year ice. The problem of the regime of sea ice under conditions of development of

a global warming has been discussed in a number of studies [5, 47. 53 and others].
Taking into account the materials of these investigations and data from the tables
cited above it can be concluded that arctic perennial sea polar ice will be destroy-
ed prior to 2050 and possibly even before 2025.

Data on the impending change in air temperature over the territory of the USSR were

obtained by empirical methods: for the late 20th century -- on the basis of the pat-
terns of modern climatic changes [9], for the 21st century -- on the basis of paleo-
climatic analogues [7]. Taking into account more pre:ise geochronological data, the

latter can probably be considered as characterizing the climatic conditions of 2025-
2050 [6].

In this epoch the mean air temperature in the summer months in the territory of the

USSR will increase by several degrees in the northern regions and by about 1° in the
southern regions. During the-winter months there will be a more considerable change

in climate [7L

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR1DFFKJAI.USE(N'LY

It follows from materials on the moistening regime over the territory of the USSR
in the future [5. 7, 9] that in the late 20th century in the central regions of
the European USSR and in the northern part of Kazakhstan there will be some de-
crease in the precipitation totals. most significant during the winter. During
the second quarter of the 21st century in the northern part of the European USSR
and in Western Siberia the quantity of precipitation will increase considerably;
in the central regions the precipitation total will also increase, although less
significantly; in a number of southern regions the quantity of precipitation

may decrease.

The annual sums of runoff in this territory will increase considerably in the
north. somewhat increase in the central regions and decrease in the southern re-
gions.

Conclusions concerning the moistening regime in the future [7] can be checked in
part on the basis of materials from an investigation based on model computations
of the theory of climate [69]. A comparison of the results of these independent
studies reveals that they give similar conclusions with respect to changes in the
moistening regime for warming conditions [6].

Reliability of information on climatic conditions of the future. In an analysis
of the reliability of available data on the climatic conditions of the future it
must be taken into account that these materials are based on two fundamentally
different types of initial data. One of these is evaluations of economic activity
in the future and the second is computations of the influence of this activity on
climate.

The need for taking economic data into account in computations of anthropogenic
changes of climate gives these computations a conditional character, making them
sharply different from such types of forecast as a weather forecast. Thus, in
particular, evaluations of climatic conditions of the future should differ ap-
preciably for different scenarios of energy development.

However. computations of the climate of the future retain the quality of s fore-
cast of events which will occur under the mentioned conditions of economic develop-

ment. The degree of conditionality of such a forecast will increase for the more
remote future.

A source of error in computations of climate is the approximate nature of existing
methods for determining climatic change with stipulated values of changes in exter-
nal climate-forming factors. Since all models of the theory of climate used in
these computations have limited accuracy. the possibility of comparing the con-
clusions of model computations with the results of use of independent empirical
models, based on a generalization of data on modern changes in climate or on the
climatic conditions of the geological past, is assuming_a great importance.

In those cases when similar conclusions are obtained by several (not less than two)
independent methods these conclusions must be considered quite reliable.

Conclusions. 1. It follows from modern investigations of anthropogenic changes of

climate that the climatic conditions of the end of the 20th and the first half of
the 21st centuries will to an ever-greater degree be dependent on economic

INJI‘OIIICIAl.lEﬂE(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

activity. The most significant influence on global climate will be exerted by an
increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the stmsphere, which by the
middle of the let century will more than double in comparison with the present-
day level. The increase in the 002 concentration will lead to an increase in the
mean global air temperature at the earth's surface by not less than 2-3°C. In
the high latitudes the temperature increase will be several times greater, which
will result in a partial or complete destruction of perennial sea polar ice in
the northern hemisphere. A change in the thermal regime will exert a substantial
influence on the conditions of moistening of the continents, in individual regions
of which the quantity of precipitation will increase, whereas in others (for the
most part in the zone of unstable moistening) it will decrease.

2. 0n the basis of data from long-term meteorological observations it can be con-
cluded that during the modern epoch. under the influence of natural climatic fac-
tors, the mean air temperature at the earth's surface will change by not more

than several tenths of a degree. Accordingly, in the llst century the natural
fluctuations of climate will be appreciably less than the anthropogenic changes.

3. In order to ensure the needs of the national economy with data on the climatic
conditions of the future it must be. taken into account that these conditions, as
a result of the influence of economic activity, will differ substantially from
the modern level.

Such an allowance is particularly necessary in the long-range planning of economic
activity and in the planning of long-operating objects. These include, in partic-
ular, a complex of structures ensuring the interzonal shifting of runoff.

lo. The problem of optimum methods for using available information on the climatic
conditions of the future requires special study.

It is necessary to develop a strategy for the use of these data in solving various
practical problems. taking into account the limited accuracy and detail of now-
existing evaluations of climate of the future.

The authors express appreciation to V. N. Adamenko, 'v’. G. Boldyrev, G. V. Gruza,
V. F. Zakharov, B. V. Kobysheva, L. R. Rakipova and Yu. 1.. Banner, who read the
manuscript and made valuable comments.

B 131. IOGRAPHY

l. Aleksandrov, E. L. and Sedunov. Yu. 8., CHELOVBK l STRATOSPERNYY OZON (Man and
Stratospheric Ozone), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1979.

2. Asaturov. M. 1... "Modeling of the Stratospheric Aerosol Layer," TRUDY GGI
(Transactions of the State Hydrological Institute), No 257, 1979.

3. Budyko, H. l., VLIYANIYE CHBLOVEKA NA 10.11%“! (Man's Influence on Climate),
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdst, 1972.

lo. Budyko, M. I., IZMENBNIYA “.er (Climatic Changes), Leningrad, Gidrometeo-
izdat, 1975.

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

6.

8.

10.

11.

12.

13.

lb.

15.

16.

17.

18.

MWALIBEONLY

Budyko. M. N., KLIMA‘I' V PROSHLai I BUDUSBCNEM (Climate in the Past and in the
Future). Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1980.

Budyko, M. I. and Yefinova'. N. A., "Influence of Carbon Dioxide on Climate,"
METEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 2, 1981.

Budyko, M. 1., Vinnikov, K. Ya.. Drozdov, 0. A. and Yefinova, N. A., "Impend-
ing Climatic Changes," IZV. AN SSSR: SERIYA GEOGR. (News of the USSR Acadeny
of Sciences: Geographical Series), No 6, 1978.

Vinnikov. K. Ya., "Spectrum of Spatial-Temporal Fluctuations of Mean Monthly
Air Temperature in the Northern Heaisphere Averaged Along Circles of Latitude
During the Period 1881-1969," RUDY GGO (Transactions of the Main Geophysical
Observatory). No 37A, 1978.

Vinnikov. K. Ya. and Groysnan, P. Ya.. "aspirical Model of Modern Changes in
Climate," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA, No 3, 1979.

VSDHRNAYA KONFERBNTSIYA P0 KLIMATU (World Conference on climate). Geneva,
February, 1979.

Cal'taov. A. P., "Conference on the Problel of Transformation of Climate."
IZV. AN SSSR: SERIYA GEOGR., No 5, 1961.

Cal‘taov, A. P. and Chaplygina, A. 8., "Second Conference on the Problem of
Transformation of Clilate," IZV. AN SSSR: SERRA GEDGR” No 5, 1962.

Grigor'yeva, A. S. and Drozdov. 0. A.. "On the Influence of Volcanic Eruptions
on Precipitation in the Northern Basisphere,“ TRUDY GOO, No 356, 1975.

Gruza, G. V. and Ran'kova, E. Ya., "Structure and Variability of the Observ-
ed Clinate," TFMPERATURA VOZDUKHA SEVERMGO POLUSHARIYA (Air T-perature in
the Northern Nanisphere). Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1980.

Drozdov, 0. A.. ZASUKHI I DINAMIKA UVLAZRNBNIYA (Droughts and Dynamics of
Moistening), Leningrad. Gidroneteoizdat, 1980.

Drozdov, 0. A. and Grigor'yeva, A. 8., MNOGOLETNIYE TSIKLICHESKIYE KOLEBANIYA
ATMOSPERNYKN OSADKOV NA TMI‘I’ORII SSSR (Long-Tern Cyclic Precipitation Var-
iations Over the Territory of the USSR), Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat. 1971.

Karol', I. l... "Systeaic Modeling of the 'Gresnhouse Bffect,’ Transfer and
Photochemistry of Gas Impurities in the Atmosphere," IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA
ATMOSPERY I OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the
Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 16, No l. 1980.

Karol', I. L. and Pivovarova, z. 1., "Correlation Between Changes in the Con-
tent of Stratospheric Aerosols and Fluctuations of Solar Radiation," METEOR-
OIDCIYA I GIDROLOCIYA, No 9, 1978.

10

_l-‘0I OFFICIAL USE ONLY
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

210.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kagan, B. A., Ryabchenko, V. A. and Chalikov, D. V., "Paraneterization of the
Active Layer in a Model of Hacroacale Interaction Between the Ocean and the
Atmosphere," mmaowclu I GIDROLOGIYA, No 12, 1979.

Kellogg, U. 14., "Influence of Man's Activity on Climate," BYUILETEN' no
(“‘0 Bulletin), Vol 26, No «'0, 1977; Vol 27, No 1, 1978.

Kondrat'yev, K. Ya., RADIATSIONNYYE FAHORY sovnmmm 1mm GLOBAL'-
N000 KLIHATA (Radiation Factors in Hodern Changes in Global Climate), Lenin-
grad, Cidroneteoizdat, 1980.

Hokhov, I. I., "Influence of 002 on the Thermal Regine of the Earth's Climatic
System," mmmmcm I GIDROIDGIYA. NO ’0, 1981.

Rakipova, L. R., "011 the Possibility of ll-Year Cyclicity in Variations of
Stratospheric Circulation and Temperature," TRUDY Gm, No 607, 1978.

Rubinshteyn, Ye. S. and Polozova, L. 6., 50mm IZHENENIYA KLIHAI‘A
(Modern Changes in Climate), Leningrad, Gidronetaoizdat, 1966.

Khromov, S. P., "Solar Cycles and Climate," WROIDGIYA I CIDROLOGIYA, No
9, 1973.

Shnitnikov, A. V., VNUTRIVEKOVAYA IWCBIVOST' KOHPONENTOV OBSHCHEY UVLAZH-
NﬁﬂmsTI (Intrasecular Variability of General Moistening Components), Lenin-
grad, Nauka, 1969.

Bacaatow, R. U. and Keeling, C. D., "Models to Predict Future Atnoapheric 002
Concentrations," WRKSROP ON THE GWBAL EFFECTS OF 00; FROM FOSSIL FUELS,
Miami Beach, Florida, 1977.

Bach, w., "Global Air Pollution and Climatic-Change," REVS. amounts. SPACE
PHYS., V01 16, No 3, 1976.

Bach, w. , "The Potential Consequences of Increasing (”2 Levels in the Atmo-
sphere. Carbon Dioxide, Climate and Society," PROC. 0F IIASA WRKSIDP OOSPON-
SORED BY H0, UNEP AND SCOPE, Peb 21-2‘, 1978.

Baea, C. P., Jr., Goeller, R. 5.. Olson, J. S. and Rotty, R. 11., THE 6103“.
CARBON DIOXIDE PROBLEM, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 1976.

Bjorkstroln, A. A., "A Model of the 002 Interaction Between Atmosphere, Ocean
and Land Biota." SCOPE REPORT 13. The global carbon cycle. Ch 15, 1979.

Broecker, U. S., Takahashi, T., Simpson, H. J. and Pang, T. H., "The Fate of
Fossil Fuel 002," Report at the Soviet-American Synposiua, 1978, Dushanbe.

Callendar, C. S., ”The Artificial Production of Carbon Dioxide and Its Influ-
ence on Temperature," QJART. J. ROY. WROL. 8°C., Vol 66, No 27, 1938.

11

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
36.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

60.

61.

42.

43.

64.

65.

46.

47.

FORIOFFKJAI.USE10NLN

"Carbon Dioxide Effects Research and Assessment Program,” WORKSHOP ON THE
GLOBAL EFFECTS OF CARBON DIOXIDE PROM FOSSIL FUELS, Miami Beach, Plorida,
March 7-11, 1977. Edited by H. P. Elliott and L. Hachta.

CARBON DIOXIDE AND CLIMATE: A SCIENTIFIC ASSESSMENT, National Academy of Sci-
ences, Washington, D. C., 1979.

CARBON DIOXIDE, CLIMATE AND SOCIETY, edited by J. Hilliams, PROCEEDINGS OF AN
IIASA UORKSHOP COSPONSORED BY HMO, UHEP AND SCOPE, Feb 21-26, 1978, Pergamon
Press, 1978.

Cess, R. D., "Climatic Change: An Appraisal of Atmospheric Feedback Mechan-
isms Employing Zonal Climatology," J. ATHOS. 801.. vol 33, No 10, 1976.

Cess, R. D. and Goldenberg, S. D.. "The Effect of Ocean Heat Capacity Upon
Global Warming Due to Increasing Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide," Presented at
a Symposium on Empirical and Model Assisted Diagnosis of Climate Change,
October 1979, Tbilisi, USSR.

ENERGY AND CLIMATE. STUDIES IN GEOPHYSICS, Hashington: Nat. Acad. Sci., 1977.

Flohn, H. H., CLIMATE AND ENERGY. A SCENARIO TO A let CENTURY PROBLEM.
CLIHATIC CHANGE, Vol 1, No 1, 1977.

GLOBAL CHEMICAL CYCLES AND THEIR ALTERATIONS BY MAN, Dahlem Conf., Berlin,
1977.

Hammer, 6. U., Clousen, H. 3., Dansgaard, 9., Gundestrup, N., Johnson, 8. J.
and Reeh, N., "Dating of Greenland Ice Cores by Plow Models, Isotopes, Volcan-

ic Debris and Continental Dust With an Appendix on Accumulation Rates," J.
CLACIOL., Vol 20, No 82, 1978.

Hunt, 3. C. and Hells. N. C., "An Assessment of the Possible Future Climatic
Impact of C02 Increases Based on a Coupled Atmospheric-Oceanic Model."
J. GEOPHYS. 888., Vol 86, No CZ, 1979.

Lamb, H. H., "Volcanic Dust in the Atmosphere," PHIL. TRANS. ROY. 5°C., LONDON,
A. HATNEH. AND PHYS. SCI., V01 266, No 1179, 1970.

Lamb, H. H., "The Current Trend of Horld Climate - A Report on the Early

1970's and a Perspective," Climatic Research Unit, School of Environ. Sci.,
Univ. of East Anglia. 1974.

Logan, J. A., Prather, H. J., Hofsy. S. G. and HacElroy. H. 3., "Atmospheric

Chemistry: Response to Human Influence," PHIL. TRANS. ROY. 800., London, Vol
290, No 1367, 1978.

Mansbe, S. and Stouffer. R. Jr, "A 002 Climate Sensitivity Study With a Math-
emstical Model of the Global Climate," NATURE, Vol 282, 1979.

12

ﬁOIINﬂﬂCJAl.USECNNLY
48.

49.

$0.

51.

52.

53.

56.

SS.

56.

S7.

58.

S9.

60.

61.

62.

FINI¢IHHCJAI.UGI1UNLV

Manabe, S. and Stouffer, R. J., "Sensitivity of a Global Climatic Model to an
Increase of C02 Concentration in the Atmosphere," J. GEOPHYS. RES., Vol 85,
No 610 [year not given].

Hanabe, S. and Wetherald, R. T.. "On the Distribution of Climate Change Result-
ing From an Increase in C02 Content of the Atmosphere." J. AIMOS. 861., Vol
37, No l, 1980.

Miles, N. K. and Cildersleeve, R. V., "A Statistical Study of the Likely Caus-
ative Factors in the Climatic Fluctuations of the Last 100 Years," HETBOROL.
HAGA2.. Vol 106, 1977.

Oeschger, 3., ct s1.. "A Box-Diffusion Model to Study the Carbon Dioxide Ex-
change in Nature," TELLUS, Vol 27, No 2, 1975.

Oliver, R. C., ”On the Response of Hemispheric Mean Temperature to Strato-
spheric Dust: An Ehpirical Approach," J. APPL. METEOROL., Vol 15, No 9, 1976.

Parkinson, S. L. and Kellogg, "Arctic Sea Ice Decay Simulated for a COZ-Induc-
ed Temperature Rise," CLIH. CHANGE, No 2, 1979.

Pittock, A. 8., "A Critical Look at Long-Term Sun-Heather Relationship," REV.
GBOPHYS. AND SPACE PHYS., Vol 16, No 3, 1978.

Pittock, A. 8., "Solar Cycles and the Heather: Successful Experiments in Auto-
suggestion?" SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL INFLUENCES HEATHER AND CLIMATE, Dordrecht, 1979.

Ramanathan, V. and Dickonson. R. 8., "The Role of Stratospheric Ozone in the
Zonal and Seasonal Radiative Energy Balance of the Earth-Troposphere System,"
J. ATHOS. SCI., Vol 36. No 6, 1979.

Ramanathan, V.. Lian, H. S. and Cess, R. 0., "Increased Atmospheric 002: Zonal
and Seasonal Estimates of the Effect on the Radiation Energy Balance and Sur-
face Temperature," J. GEOPHYS. RES., Vol 86, No C8, 1979.

Revelle, R. and Hunk, H., "The Carbon Dioxide Cycle and the Biosphere," ENERGY
AND CLIMATE, washington, Nat. Acad. Sci.. 1977.

Rotty. R. H.. "Present and Future Producéion of C02 From Fossil Fuels -- A

Global Appraisal," CORP-770385, HORKSHOP ON THE GLOBAL EFFECTS AND CARBON
DIOXIDE FROM FOSSIL FUELS, 1977.

Schneider, 8. H., "The Effect of Man's Activities on Climatic Changes," EVOL.
ATMOS. PLANET. ET CLIMATOL. TERRE. 00L. INT., Nice, 1978, Toulouse, 1979.

Siegenthaler, w. and Oeschger, 3., "Predicting Future Atmospheric Carbon Diox-
ide Levels," SCIENCE, Vol 199, No 6327, 1978.

Turco, R. P., Whitten. R. C., Toon, O. 3., Pollack, J. B. and Hamill, P.,
"OCS, Stratospheric Aerosols and Climate," NATURE, Vol 283, I980.

13
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(INLY
63.

65.

66.

67.

MWWONLY

Hang, u. C., et 3)... "Greenhouse Effect. Due to Man-Made Perturbations of
Trace Gases," SCIENCE, Vol 196. 1976.

Hetherald, R. '1‘. and Hanabe. 8., "Cloud Cover and Clinte Sensitivity," Sub-
mitted for publication to J. A. 8., Septuber. 1979.

Hetherald. R. ‘l‘. and Hambe, 8., "Influence of Seasonal Variation Upon the
Sensitivity of a Model Climate," J. GEOPHYS. 385.. Vol 86, N0 CZ, 1981.

wigley, ‘1'. H. 1... Jones, P. D. and Keely. P. 11., "Scenario for a "an: High
002 World," NATURE. Vol 285, No 1, 1980.

mo PROJECT ON RESEARCH AND MONITORING OF AMSPHRIC 002. REP. No 3. ATMO-
SPHERIC €02 COMENTRATION HHSURDBNTS. A REVIEW OF WMOGIBS, EXISTING
PROGRAMS AND AVAILABLE DATA. Penman G. 1., 1980.

14

FOR OHIO“. IS! ONLY
HO. OFFICIAI.lEﬂE(ﬂVLY

UDC 551.553.6

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received

[Article by P. P. Bryukhan'. Moscow Division. All-Union Scientific Research Insti-
tute of Hydrometeorological Information-world Data Center]

[Abstract] In problems related to evaluations of the transport of atmospheric impur-
ities and contaminants it is cos-non to use the characteristics of the prevailing
wind. These characteristics (direction, frequency of recurrence and velocity) are
also important in the planning of air flights since allowance for these makes pos-
sible a considerable reduction in flight time. Computations of the prevailing wind
are also important in climatology because they graphically characterize the regime
of air currents. The method outlined in the manual “3100? KLIHATOLOGICHESKOY OBRA-

the computetion of these characteristics. However, this generally employed method.
requiring a knowledge of the wind roses, is quite approximate. For example, the
frequencies of recurrence computed by that method can exceed 1001. In addition.

in the case of a small number of observations such computations do not make it pos-
sible to smooth the actual wind roses. An extremely convenient computation method

by the author in two earlier studies: TRUDY III VSESOYUZNOGO SIHPOZIUHA P0 PRIMER-
ENIYU STATISTICHESKIKH HETODOV V HETEOROLOGII, 1978 and TEDDY VNIIGHI-HTsD, No 65.
1979. However, that method is correct only in those cases when there is one pre-
vailing direction and when the ellipticity parameter is close to unity. Here the
author develops the method still further, presenting an improved method for indir-
ect computations of characteristics of the prevailing wind. using as a point of de-
parture an elliptical form of the two-dimensional normal law. Such computations

acteristics. When there is one prevailing direction and a weak ellipticity the

computations can be made using a circular law. Figures 1, tables 1; references 6:
5 Russian, 1 Western.
lillilﬂﬂCIAl.USEIDNlﬂ'

INVESTIGATION OF THE ENERGY CYCLE IN THE US$R.HYDROHETEOROLOGICAL CENTER MODEL OF
GENERAL CIRCULATION OF THE ATMOSPHERE

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8. Aug 81 (manuscript received '
25 Nov 80) pp 19-25

[Article by A. Ye. Nikitin. USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Text] Abstract: A study was made of the [arena energy
cycle reproducible by a four-level hemispher-
ical model of general circulation of the atmo-
sphere developed at the USSR Hydrometeorological
Center for January conditions. The results char-
acterize the properties of the model and its cor-
respondence to the real atmosphere. The author
has demonstrated the relationship between some
energy characteristics and macroscale circula-
tion processes.

At the present time the most complete evaluation of the intensity of general cir-
culation of the atmosphere is possible from the point of view of an analysis of
atmospheric energy in the understanding proposed by Loren: [3. 7]. Because of this
energy is one of the most important criteria for evaluation of the adequacy of
global and hemispherical hydrodynamic models of general circulation of the atmo-
sphere to processes in the real atmosphere. In this article we give the results of
an analysis of the energy cycle of a four-level hemispherical model of general cir-
culation of the atmosphere developed at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center. The
number of points at each level is 32 x 18 (along a circle of latitude and meridian
respectively). The model was described in detail in [5].

Method and data. In the selected experiment the initial data applied to November
(Basic Data Set archives). The integration was carried out under fixed January
circulation conditions (ocean temperature, albedo. cloud cover, short-nave radia-
tion). Hhen computing the energy characteristics use was made of date on geopoten-
tial, temperature and wind at the levels 125, 375. 625 and 87S gPe, as well as on
vertical velocity at the intermediate levels and surface pressure from the first to
the 98th day of the experiment. we computed the values of the zonal and eddy compon-
ents of the available potential and kinetic energy (A2, A8, K2, K3) and the rate
of transformation of one type of energy to another. specifically: CA -- rate of
transition of AZ into AE. Cg-AE into KB. CK-KE into K2 and Cz-AZ into K2. The gen-
eration of available potential energy and the dissipation of kinetic energy were

16

FOI!0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OF'KJAI.USE(NVLY

computed from the equations for the balance of the corresponding energy compon-
ents. The method for computing the energy characteristics use described in [6,8].
The derivatives were approximated by central differences and at the boundaries

by directed differences. The boundary conditions corresponded to the boundary
conditions of the model. The eddy components of energy were represented in the
form of the sum of eddies of a synoptic scale (period less than seven days) and
the energy of quasistationary disturbances (period seven or more days). The cited
results relate to the period from the 30th to the 95th days of the experiment,
that is, the period of intensive "acceleration" of the model.

Notations employed:

AZ, AE -- zonal and eddy available potential energy,
K2, K5 -— zonal and eddy kinetic energy,
AT' KT -- available potential and kinetic energy of moving eddies of a synoptic

AS, Ks -- available potential and kinetic energy of quasistationary disturbances,
CZ, CE -- rate of transition of AZ into :2 and AB into Ki,

GT, Cs -- rate of transition of AB into K3 in moving and quasistationary eddies,
CA, CK -- rate of transition of Ad into AB, K2 into K2,

61' GE - rate of generation of Al, A3,

Dz, DE -- rate of dissipation of K2, K2,

V -- wind velocity,

OJ -— vertical velocity,

T —- temperature,

25 - surface pressure,

X -- averaging of X for the hemisphere,

[X] -- averaging of X along a circle of latitude,

X* -- deviation of the latitudinal x value from the mean.

Results. Figure 1 shows curves of the temporal variation of available potential
and kinetic energy (a). rate of transformation of available potential energy into
kinetic energy (b) and standard energy diagrams (c) (obtained by Oort [8] on the

basis of real data for the northern hemisphere (c ), in the described experiment
(c2), in the old model of the CFDL model and in t a 6185 model [1a] -- (c3 and c4))

In the variation of the zonal energy components it is easy to see an increase in AZ
and K2 to the 50th-60th days of the experiment. In the variation of the eddy com-
ponents, especially in the change in the energy of the quasistationary eddies and
eddies of a synoptic scale, there is no definite trend beginning on the 30th day.
At the same time, the changes in eddy energy were somewhat smoothed in comparison
with the period from the 55th through the 95th days, which is evidence of an under-
stating of the pressure and temperature gradients along the circles of latitude.
These facts indicate that the restructuring of the model to winter conditions is
completed only by the SOth-60th days. After the 60th day the zonal and eddy energy
are in antiphase. During the entire experiment the ratio of KS to K2 is approx-
imately 0.S~0.6, decreasing to 0.4 only by the 90th-9Sth days. It is interesting

to note that the preliminary analysis of the temporal variation KB/KZ, and espec-
ially AE/AZ, indicates the existence of a quasiperiodicity in the variation of
these characteristics. The period of variations was close to two weeks. Since the
KE/KZ and AE/AZ ratios can be interpreted as some analogue of the index of zonal

l7

FORCHHNEIAI.USB(HVLV
FIHICIWNC1A1.1EHE(MVLY

circulation, it can be stated that in the model there is reflection of the known
fact of two-week periodic variations of the index.

 

Fig. l. Integral energy characteristics of model. a) temporal variation of AZ. K2,

AR, KE, AT. KT, As and Ks; b) temporal variation of CZ and CE (the dashed curve
gives the seven-day moving mean values of the energy characteristics); c) diagrams

of the energy cycle; c1) real atmosphere [7]. c2) in described experiment; c3) in
CFDL model [13]; c4) in 6158 model [14].

The energy of the moving eddies of a synoptic scale is more significant than the
energy of the quasistationary eddies and on the average is about 601 of the eddy
energy. This agrees with the results of empirical investigations [12, 16]. It must

be noted that the averaging period in our case is considerably shorter (7 days in-
stead of 30). Thus it can he assumed that the energy reserves in the eddies of a

18

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
F0810FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

synOptic scale are exaggerated due to an underatating of the energy of stationary
eddies, that is, the synoptic disturbances in the model are more active than sim-
ilar formations in the real atmosphere.

The rate of transition of the available potential energy into kinetic energy Cg and
CZ does not reveal a definite trend in its secondary variation, that is, these
characteristics are adapted to winter circulation conditions stipulated in the
model more rapidly than the values of the available potential and kinetic energy.
An important fact is that these transitions are in antiphase (this is especially
conspicuous on the curves of the 7-day moving means 63 and CZ); accordingly, the
model has a tendency to conserve the full energy, compensating its changes with a
change in the intensity of the transitions. The transitions between available
potential and kinetic energies of moving (CT) and quasistationary (Cs) eddies are
also in antiphase, that is, the increase in the intensity of cyclonic activity is
accompanied by a decrease in the intensity of quasistationary eddies and vice
versa. In this case the decisive role is played by energy exchange in the system
of moving eddies. From the 35th through the 90th days it is about 802 of the eddy

transition CE. A predominance of C over or is observed only at the beginning of
the experiment (up to the 35th day§. At the end -- about the 90th day - the ratio

0f Cs to CE is approximately 0.5, which is attributable to an attenuation of cy-
clonic activity when there is a strong activation of zonal flow.

Now we will examine the energy diagrams shown in Fig. 1c.

The zonal energy components are exaggerated in comparison with the real data, but
the eddy components agree with them quite well. The values of the transitions CA
and CE, as well as the dissipations of eddy kinetic energy D: (the residual term
in the equation for the balance of eddy kinetic energy),are somewhat understated.
Nevertheless, on the whole the energy cycle reflects the processes existing in the
real atmosphere and agrees satisfactorily with the energy in other models [13-15].

Figure 2 shows the meridional sections of zonal kinetic and available potential en-
ergy and also the transitions 0; and CB, determined during the period from the 60th
through the 70th days (this period is characterized by active synoptic processes).
As a comparison we give some characteristics obtained for the real atmosphere by
Oort and Rasmusson [10]. The distribution of the cited characteristics agrees well
with the real data but some differences should be noted.

The jet stream is displaced poleward by approximately 10° and its intensity is
somewhat exaggerated. There is also an exaggeration of the KB values, especially
in the lower troposphere. We note a K! maximum near the equator at altitudes of
about 7 km. It is evidently related to fluctuations at the equatorial boundary.
The distribution of AZ and AE. interpreted as the contribution of this latitude zone
and layer to the total available potential energy, shows that in the model at the
present levels near the equator there is a rather significant understating of the
horizontal temperature in the pole-equator direction, whereas near the pole it is
exaggerated. The AB maximum in the latitude zone 20-400" at the lower level indi-
cates a great activity of meridional processes on the periphery of subtropical
anticyclones. Judging from the 02 distribution, the Hadley cell in the model is
narrowed and its intensity is exaggerated. The Ferrel cell, on the other hand, is
"drawn out" along the meridian. These differences are attributable not only to the
characteristics of the model, but also to different periods for averaging of the

cited results.

19

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USICHNLY
II 't a. “I OI

 

Fig. 2. Heridional sections of energy characteristics of model averaged during the
period from the 60th through the 70th days (at left) and characteristics of real

atmosphere for January [10] (at right).

Despite the cited differences. it should be noted that the zonal structure of the
model in general is close to the structure of the fields in the real atmosphere.

20

INDI‘OFIICJAI.1£9E:(HVLN
POI40FFKJAI.USCIN'LY

For a deeper understanding of the energetics of general circulation it is of in-

terest to examine not only the zonal, but also the latitudinal-longitudinal dis-
tribution of energy characteristics for the hemisphere.

A joint analysis of the thermopressure fields and the K2 and CE fields indicates
that eddy kinetic energy is closely related.to the pressure field. Its maximum

values are localized within the leading parts of the cyclones, which agrees with
the analysis of kinetic energy of cyclones in [6] and in zones of convergence of
flows in the rear parts of cyclones in the presence of a blocking anticyclone or
Vith lowering of a trough into the subtropical latitudes. The minimum KB values

are noted in the low and high latitudes and middle-latitude low-gradient fields..

In many situations cyclonic formations are displaced in the direction of the KB
maxima.

The maximal P081t1ve CE values are associated with regions of heat advection
where the heated air experiences ascending movement in virtually the entire thick-
ness of the atmosphere, and in addition. in zones of advection of cold in the sys-
tem of a blocking anticyclone. In cold troughs the process has a dual character.
In the rear part of the trough the cold air subsides, leading to a transition of
the eddy available potential energy into kinetic energy. This process has a con-
siderably lesser vertical extent than the ascending movement of air during the
advection of heat, and therefore the C3 maxima in the cold troughs are less clear-
ly expressed. 0n the other hand, in the leading part of the trough the relatively
less cold. and accordingly, less dense air rises in the region of convergence

over the colder air, leading to the transformation of eddy kinetic energy into
available potential energy.

The results presented above make it possible to draw some conclusions relating,
first of all, to the properties of the described model itself, second, to the
correspondence of the model to the real atmosphere, and third, to the relation-
ship between the energy characteristica and macroscale atmospheric processes.

1. The transitions between the zonal and eddy components of available potential
and kinetic energy are in antiphase, that is, the model has a tendency to con-
serve the total energy.

2. The temperature gradients in the pole-equator direction are somewhat distorted

in the high and low latitudes, which is manifested graphically in the meridional
sections of available potential energy.

3. The eddy formations of a synoptic scale are more active than the similar eddies
in the real atmosphere.

k. The "wall" at the equator increases the eddy kinetic energy in the middle tro-
popsphere.

5. The integral energy characteristics of the model agree satisfactorily with the

characteristics of the real atmosphere, that is, the energy of the model in gener-
al corresponds to the real atmosphere.

21

FIMI(NHHCIAI.USE(NVLY
IOI10FFKJA1.UI£(H‘LY

6. Moving eddies of a synoptic scale carry the greater part of the eddy energy
(about 601) and about 802 of the transformation of eddy available potential energy
into eddy kinetic energy occurs in them.

7. The interaction between the zonal components of energy is related for the
most part to the intensity of the Hadley and Ferrel cells, whereas the interaction
between eddy formations is related to processes of a synoptic scale in the middle
latitudes.

8. In the variations of the KE/Kz and AE/AZ parameters, in their physical es-

sence closely related to the index of zonal circulation, there is a quasiperiodic-
ity with the period of the variations being close to two weeks.

9. The maximum values of eddy kinetic energy are related to the leading parts of
cyclones and zones of convergence of flows on the northern periphery of subtrop-
ical anticyclones. especially in the system of the blocking anticyclone.

10. The zones of maximum rates of transition of eddy available potential energy
into kinetic energy are related to the advection of heat in cyclones and cold in

anticyclones. The zones of maximum rates of transition of eddy kinetic energy in-
to available potential energy are related to the advection of cold in cyclonic

systems.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Borisenkov, Ye. P., VOPROSY BNBRGETIKI ATHDSFEINYKH PROTSESSOV (Problems in
the Energy of Atmospheric Processes), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1960.

2. Van Higheim, J., BHERGETIKA ATHDSPERY (Atmospheric Energy), Leningrad, Gidro-
Ieteoizdat, 1977.

3. Lorentz, Ye. N., PRIRODA I TEORIYA OBSHCHEY TSIRKULYATSIT AMSFERY (Nature
and Theory of General Circulation of the Atmosphere), Leningrad, Gidrometeo—
izdat, 1968.

a. Pinua, N. Z. and Kogan, Z. N., "Budget of Kinetic Energy in Cyclonic Forma-
tions," htTEORDLOGIYA l GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No A, 1976.

5. Trosnikov, I. V., "Model of General Circulation of the Atmosphere Developed at
the USSR Hydrometcorological Center," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, Ho 11,
1980.

6. Krueger, A. F., Hinston, J. S. and Haines, D. A., "Computations of Atmospheric

Energy and Its Transformation for the Northern Hemisphere for a Recent Five-
Year Period," mu. HEATHER R£V., V01 93, No 6, 1965.

7. Lorenz, E. N., "Available Potential Energy and the Maintenance of the General
Circulation," TELLUS, Vol 7, No 2, 1955.

8. Oort, A. H., "0n Estimates of the Atmospheric Energy Cycle," MON. HEATHER REV..
Vol 92, No 11, 1964.

22

FKHI13FFIC1AI.IEI!(HWLY
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oort, A. H. and Peixoto, J. P., "The Annual Cycle of the Energetics of the
Atmosphere on a Planetary Scale," J. GBOPHYS. RES” Vol 79. No 18, 19710.

Oort, A. H. and Rasmussen, E. H.. ADDSPHERIC CIRCULATION STATISTICS, mu
Prof. Paper.

Peixoto, J. P. and Cart. A. H., "The Annual Distribution of Atmospheric En—
ergy on a Planetary Scale," J. GBOPHYS. 325., Vol 79. No 15, 197A.

Saltzman, B. and Fleisher. A.. "The kchange of Kinetic Energy Between Larger
Scales of Atmospheric Motion," TELLUS, Vol 12, No lo, 1960.

Smagorinsky. J., Manabe S. and Holloway, J. L. (Jr.), "Nmerical Results From
a Nine-Level General Circulation Model of the Atmosphere," HON. WEATHER RBV.,
Vol 93, No 12, 1965. -

Stone, P. ll., Chow, S. and Quite. H. J., "The July Climate and a Comparison
of the January and July Climates Simulated by the 6188 General Circulation
Model." HON. WEAThER REV.. Vol 105, No 2, 1977.

Tenenbaun, J., "Spectral and Spatial Energetics of the 6185 Model Atmosphere,"
FUN. WEATHER REV., Vol 104, No 1, 1976.

Min-Nielsen, A.. Brown, J. A. and Drake, u., "0n Atmospheric Energy Converb
sion Between the. Zonal Flow and the Eddies," TELLUS, Vol 15, No 2, 1963.

23
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.(515.8+SS7.5)(571.1)(571.51)

VERTICAL CIRCULATION IN THE HIGH-ALTITUDE FRONTAL ZONE OVER WESTERN SIBBRIA
AND KRASNOYARSKIY KRAY . ‘ ‘ . '

Moscow HETEORDIDGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8. Aug 81 (manuscript received
5 Nov 80) PP 26-31

[Article by L. I. Vinogradova and N. P. Shakina, candidate of physical and mathemat-
ical sciences, Krasnoyarsk Heather Bureau and USS! Hydrometeorologicsl Scientific
Research Center]

[Text] Abstract: The authors made an isentropic
analysis of the intensive high-altitude
frontal zone (HAFZ) over Hestern Siberia
and Krasnoyarskiy Kray. It is shown that on
the cold side of the region of entry into the
HAP! the air descends from the tropopause and
from the stratosphere. whereas an the side of
the warm air there are ascending movements. In
addition to this main thermally direct circul-
ation cell, on the cold side of the entry re-
gion there was a local thermally inverse
frontogenetic circulation. In the delta region
the direction of the vertical circulations is
the opposite: the main circulation cell is
frontogenetic and imparts a katafrontal char-
acter to the front.

Processes of frontogenesis and frontolysis are three dimensional both at the lower
levels and in the upper troposphere and form regions of well-expressed vertical
movements affecting thick air layers. The nature of the vertical circulation
(thermally direct with ascent on the side of the warm air or thermally inverse
with ascent on the side of the cold air) is determined by the direction of evolu-
tion of the frontal zone [5. 8]: thus, with intensification of the latter there

is a thermally direct circulation. Computations on the basis of real date present-
ed in [6. 10, Ill and relating to intensive frontal zones over the territory of
North America show that in the process of upper tropospheric frontogenesis there
is a subsidence of the tropopause and the stratospheric air situated over it to
tropospheric altitudes. Such systems of movements in high-altitude frontal zones.
described in the late 1950's, at one time were a subject of discussion (see [2,
3]); they still cannot be regarded as adequately investigated.

This article gives an isentropic analysis of an extensive and intensive high-alti-
tude frontal zone situated over the territory of Western Siberia and Krasnoyarshiy
Kray. Such an analysis has not yet been made in this geographical region.

2‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!‘0FFNJA1.USE(MVLY

Another feature of the case is that both the "input" and the "delta" of the frontal
zone were situated within the limits of the mentioned region.

The synoptic situation during the analysis period (30 December 1978-1 January 1979)
was characterized by the presence of a deep cyclone over the Arctic. The input of
the high-altitude frontal zone (HAFZ) was situated to the east of the Ural Range,

whereas the the delta was over the Yenisey. During the studied period at the earth's
surface there was a displacement of the deep cyclone, arising after the wave dis—

turbance had crossed over the Urals. The Arctic front, on which this cyclone had
developed, by the end of the period had passed across the entire Krasnoyarakiy Kray,
bringing with it an abrupt cooling (by 25.300c). The zone of this front is traced

in the entire troposphere up to the tropopause.

In the analysis we made use of data from 60 radiosonde stations for five basic obw
servation times. Since outside the boundary layer the isentropic surfaces. that is,
the surfaces of equal potential temperature, can with an adequate degree of accur-
acy be regarded as material surfaces, analysis of their topography has a number of
advantages in the study of high-altitude frontal zones.

In addition to potential temperature 69, as a tracer it is convenient to use still
another conservative characteristic of a material particle, Brtel potential vortic-
ity, being an invariant of the system of so-called full (primitive) equations,

. 09
q: —(‘.+l)7p-.

Here [ - av/ax - au/ay is the relative vorticity, 2 is the Coriolis parameter.
The isolines q - const on the isentropic surfaces represent (on the assumption of
adiabaticity) material lines. Ertel vorticity has a significantly (by an order of
magnitude) different value in the troposphere and stratosphere; taking this into
account. it is possible to distinguish tropospheric air (with a characteristic val-
ue qr?! 5.10-6 K/ (sec-gPa) from stratospheric air (for which qr‘v’ (30-60)-10‘5l(/(sec.
gPa)).

The interpolation of the wind velocity components at the surface 9 - const was ac-
complished using a cubic spline function of altitude [1], after the altitude of the

surface 6 - const was computed by linear interpolation between the isobaric sur-
faces.

Haps of the topography of the isentropic surfaces (9 maps for each observation time)
with plotted p, u, v, q values give some idea concerning the structure of the ther-

mal field and the location of the frontal zones. These maps also show the velocities
of vertical movements aJin gPa/lZ hours, computed with use of the properties of con-
servancy of temperature and potential vorticity.

An example of a map of the isentropic surface 300 K is shown as Fig. 1. In the north-
western part of the region he mentioned surface lies above the isobaric surface

300 gPa; here q - (20-45)-l '6K/(sec-gPa). In a southeasterly direction the pressure
at the isentropic surface increases sharply; it slopes steeply downward; in this

case q decreases to typically tropospheric values. It is necessary to discriminate
boundary values q by means of which it would be possible to distinguish stratospher-
ic air and the air of the tropopause layer from tropospheric air.

25

FOR‘OFHKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOI‘HNHCIAI.USE¢MVLY

I

 

Fig. 1. Map of ieentropic surface 300 K for 1500 hours on 30 December 1978. 1) iso-
lines of potential vorticity each 5'10‘6K/(sec-gPa), 2) jet stream; 3) isobars each
100 gPa; 4) isolines «3- 0; 5) lines of vertical sections; the a’vslues are given
at individual points in gPa/lZ hours. The region of ascending movements is shaded.

we recall that Ertel potential vorticity in general increases from south to north:
on the mean meridional section, constructed using Petterssen's data, at latitude

60° values q) lO-lO'6 K/(sec-gPa) are noted beginning at the level 500 gPa, where-
as at latitude 35° the isoline q - 10'10‘6K/(sec-gPa) runs at the altitude of the
surface 300-350 gPa [6, 9]. Accordingly, the mentioned q value, which under condi-
tions, for example in the United States, must be considered essentially substrat-
ospheric, and possibly also stratospheric [6, 12], in our case is instead more char-
acteristic for the upper troposphere even in the warn air; however, in a cold air
mass the layer of an inversion-type tropopause is characterized by considerably
higher potential vorticity values. We therefore should consider values qj>(25-30)'
10‘5K/(sec-gPa) to relate to the stratosphere, q - (20-25)°10'6K/(sec°gPa) are char-
acteristic for the tropopause layer, and q - (10-20)‘10‘6K(sec-gPa) are character-
istic for stable layers under the tropopauee and in the upper troposphere. '

Three-dimensional sections reveal the detailed picture of the structure of movements
in the HAFZ input and delta. They were constructed in the following directions: in
the input region - along the norml to the “Al-'2 (section 1 in Fig. 1), through the
stations Salekhard - Khanty—Nsnsiyak - Omsk - Pavlodar - Balkhash, and at the end
of the period, in addition, along the normal to the surface front, through Sale-
khard - Aleksandrovskoye - Kolpashevo - Krasnoyarsk - Nizhmeudinsk - Irkutsk, and
also in the delta region (section 2 in Fig. l) -- through Turukhansk - Podkamennuyu
Tungusku - Yeniseysk - Krasnoyarsk - Abakan - Kyzyl.

26

FOR OFINCJAJ.IEIEIHULY
FORiofFﬂJAI.UBE(NULY

     

5 """""""" .....---. .r ”
.--_. ""'" '3”
~‘~- "‘-~-ov'y
‘Ettt ~“~~~--_-.."
r "_‘1 “Nair \““~...’.--4u
- W>JF ’III’“\ .206
Jamal: Selekhard ""W‘ Irkutsk

Fig. 2. Vertical section through input region of HAP! (Salekhard - Aleksandrovskoye
- Kolpashevo - Krasnoyarsk - Nizhneudinsk - Irkutsk) for 0300 hours on 1 January
1979. 1) isolines of potential vorticity in 10'5K/(aec-gPa); 2) ieolines for

each 5 K; 3) frontal zone boundary; a) tropopause; the cross denotes the jet stream
axis, the arrows denote the direction of vertical novenents, indicated in gPa/lZ
hours.

 

Fig. 3. Vertical section through region of HAFZ delta (section 2 in Pig. 1) for
1500 hours on 30 December 1978. The notations are the same as in Fig. 2.

The section through the input region (Fig. 2) clearly shows the tropospheric frontal
zone, the descending movements in it and the ascending movements to the right in the

warm air mass and also in a less extensive region in the cold air mass. The jet
stream axis is situated in the descent zone. It can be seen how the isolines of high
q values outline a descending "tongue" of air in the frontal zone. This pattern was
a result of the evolution which can be observed in the sections at the preceding ob-
servation times (along section 1 in Fig. 1). For example, in the section for 1500
hours on 30 December the tongue of stratospheric air is still relatively little de-

veloped so that the isoline q - 20'10'6 bends only to the level 6.5 km. He note the
well-developed ascending branch of circulation in the warm air at this tine:

27

FOR1OFFKJA1.UBE(MNLY
FOI‘OFFﬂJAl.USE(ﬂULY

the vertical velocities attain -127 gPa/lZ hours (at this time the maximum of de-
scent is 50 gPa/lZ hours). Both branches jointly create a frontolytic effect,
straightening out the curved isentropic surfaces in the main part of the HAPZ

to the right of the jet stream axis. At this time there is already noted a sec-
ond, less intensive circulatory cell on the cold side of the front; it includes
the same descending branch in the frontal zone and slight ascent (to -30 gPaIlZ
hours) in the direction of the cold air mass. The circulation here is obviously
thermally inverse and frontogenetic (this cell can be seen clearly in Fig. 2,

its left part, where ascending movements attain ~53 gPa/12 hours). Later there

is a narrowing of the tongue of descending air; at 0300 hours on 1 January in
section 1 the isoline q - 20-10"6 already reaches an altitude of 4 km. The sub-
siding stratospheric air is localized well in the frontal zone so that the sec-
tion at this observation time is similar to that shown in Fig. 2, differing, how-
ever, in having a considerably greater intensity of the ascending branch of cir—
culation in the warm air (maximum value -238 gra/lz hours). Weak ascent on the
cold side persists.

The results obtained for the input of the BAPZ agree with those described earlier
in (6, 10, 11]. The differences involve a greater intensity of the ascending
branches of circulation in comparison with that found in the cited studies, es-
pecially in the warm air; on the other hand. the descent of stratospheric air
was found to be more intense in [6, 10, ll]. The existence of stable deep regions
of ascending movements evidently plays the role of a forcing factor for processes
of cloud and precipitation formation before and over the surface cold front.

In Our case on the warm side of the front during the entire time we observed

the volume of the warmest air (in the neighborhood of Pavlodar in the section in
Pig. 2), to the south of which in the middle and upper_troposphere the tempera-
tures drop rapidly. It is possible that the presence of such an inversion of the
horizontal temperature gradient also caused the development of such intensive
ascent. The warm air in this part of the section appeared as a result of occlusion
of a cyclone moving over these regions earlier.

Now we will proceed to a discussion of the results obtained for the HAFZ delta.
Insofar as we know, in the scientific literature there are no descriptions of ver-
tical circulations in this part of the HAPZ, computed on the basis_of real data;
on the basis of theoretical considerations [5, 7, 8] it is possible to expect a
thermally inverse frontagenetic circulation which would develop primarily as a
compensatory circulation relative to the frontolytic effect of the horizontal
movements. Such a direction of circulation in the delta is actually observed (see
Fig. l): the warm air descends to the right of the jet stream axis, whereas on the
axis of the jet stream and to the left of it there is ascent. The velocities of
vertical movements here, in general, are less than in the input. A more detailed
picture can be seen in the vertical sections, in particular in the section for
1500 hours on 30 December, shown in Fig. 3. All the branches of vertical circula-
tions here have a direction opposite of those in Fig. 2. Instead of the tongue of
air penetrating to tropospheric altitudes with large q, observed in all sections
in the input region, here it is possible to see only a rather considerable bending
of the q isolines. The sections at successive observation times passing through the
delta region show that the reverse movement of the region with large q occurs very
rapidly. The ascent of relatively cold air from the lower-lying layers, maximum at

28

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FIN!‘HWHCJAL.USE‘ONL¥

an altitude of about 6 km at 1500 hours on 30 December and 8 km at 1500 hours on
31 December has the following result: the horizontal contrasts of temperatures in

the HAFZ virtually do not change during the course of a day. The descending branch
of the circulation on the warm side of the HAPZ warrants attention: here subsid-
ence is observed at all isentropic surfaces below 324 R, that is, from the tropo-

pause and at least to an altitude of 4.7 km (the altitude of the surface 296 K at
Yeniseysk); thus, the front in the middle and upper troposphere assumes the char-

acter of a katafront, which is characteristic for the late stages in the develop-
ment of frontal discontinuities. This leads to an increase in the horizontal temr
perature gradients not only in the frontal zone, but also in the right part of the
section -— over Krasnoyarsk and Abakan. We will also note the following circum-
stance: the maximum wind velocities are observed in the region occupied by ascend-
ing movements and the line of change in the sign of vertical movements (01- 0)
divides the zone of maximum slope of the isentropic surfaces approximately in half.

Thus, the employed method for isentropic analysis made it possible to examine the
structure of vertical circulations in the input and delta of the HAPZ with the same

degree of detail as is allowed by the spatial and temporal resolution of the employ-
ed datn. We will enumerate the principal conclusions from this study.

1. The phenomenon of subsidence of air from the tropopause layer and from the strat-
osphere on the cold side of the region of input into the HAPZ in the case of inten-
sive horizontal frontogenesis. The penetration of air with high values of Ertel po-
tential vorticity to tropospheric levels was observed as a stable process over a
considerable territory. 0n the side of the warm mass there were extremely signif-
icant ascending movements vertically occupying a great part of the troposphere. The
principal circulation cell, including the mentioned ascending and descending
branches, is thermally direct and in the central part of the frontal zone - on the
jet stream axis and to the right of it - creates a frontolytic effect.

2. 0n the cold periphery of the NAPZ input there is a region of weaker ascending
rnvements taking in a thinner layer; these movements. together with the principal
descending branch in the frontal zone, form a local thermally inverse frontogenetic
circulation increasing the temperature contrasts on the periphery of the HAPZ.

3. The vertical circulations in the region of the HAPZ delta in the studied case
have a direction which is the reverse of the direction in the input. Specifically
in the region of maximum horizontal temperature gradients there are ascending move—

ments taking in the jet stream axis. As a result of these ascending movements air
with high potential vorticity values, subsiding earlier from the tropopause layer
and from the lower stratosphere, is expelled from tropospheric levels, in this case
in an upward direction. Together with intensive descending movements in the thick
air layer on the warm side of the frontal zone these ascending movements create a
cell of frontogenetic, thermally reverse circulation. imparting the character of

a kstafront to the frontal discontinuity. At the same time, on the cold side of

the HAFZ there is a weak thermally direct circulation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Albert, Dzh., Nil'son, E.and Uolsh, Dzh., TEORIYA SPLAXNOV I YEYE PRILOZHENIYA
(Theory of Splines and Its Applications), Moscow, Mir, 1972.

29

Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEli(NVLY
2.

3.

10.

11.

12.

FOI!0FFIJA1.USIGHVLY

Burkove, M. V. and Dzhordzhio, V. A., "Aerosynoptic Investigations of Some

Complex Atmospheric Formations," TRUDY SARNIGMI (Transactions of the Central
Asian Regional Scientific Research Hydrometeorological Institute), No 57/72,
1972. -

Cubin, V. I., K GIDRDDINAMICHESROY TEORII FRONTOGENRZA (0n the Hydrodynamic
Theory of Frontegenesis), Tashkent, Izd-vo AN UzSSR, 1960.

Zverev, A. 3., SINOPTICHESKAYA METEOROLOGIYA (Synoptic Meteorology), Lenin-
grad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1977.

Shakina, N. P., "Vertical Circulations in Jet Streams and Frontagenesis,"
METEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No a, 1980.

Bosart, L. F., "Mid-tropospheric Prontogenesis," QUART. J. ROY. MBTEOROL.
$00., V01 96, No 609, 1970.

Huskins, B. J. and Bretherton, F. P., "Atmospheric Prontogenesis Models:
Mathematical Formulation and Solution," J. AIMDS. SCI., Vol 20, No 7, 1972.

Hoskins, B. 3., Draghici, I. and Davies, H. C., "A New Look at oJ-EqustiOn,"
QUART. J. ROY. METEOROL. 800., Vol 106, No Q39, 1978.

Petterssen, 5., "Some Aspects of the General Circulation of the Atmosphere,"
ROY. METEOROL. SOC. CENTENARY PROCEED., 1950.

Reed, R. and Danieleen, E. P., "Fronts in the Vicinity of the Tropopause,"
ARCH. NET. GEOPH. BIOKL., V01 11, N0 1, 1959.

Reed, R. and Senders, F., "An Investigation of the Development of Mid-Tropo-
spheric Frontal Zone and Its Associated Vorticity Field,“ J. METEOROL., Vol
10, No 5, 1953.

Hillett, B. C. and Sanders, F., DESCRIPTIVE METEOROLOGY, Acad. Press, 1959.

30

IND! OFFICIAI.IEHBCHVLY
INJI‘OFFICIAI.[EHE(N‘LV

UDC 551.(509.313+510.42+510.522)
NUMERICAL MODEL OF POLLUTANT TRANSPORT IN THE ATHDSPHIRIC BOUNDARY LAYER

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received
29 Sep 80) PP 32-43

[Article by A. Ye. Aloyan, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, D. L.
Yordanov and V. V. Penenko, doctors of physical and mathematical sciences, Comput—
ation Center, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Abstract: The article examines a joint model
of the dynamics of atmospheric processes and
the transport of pollutants in the atmospher-
ic boundary layer. The authors describe a
method for parameterization of interaction be-
tween the pollutants and the earth's surface
and a numerical scheme for solution of the
transfer equation based on the method of
splitting with respect to physical processes.
Examples of the numerical experiments are
given.

In connection with the intensive development of man's economic activity there is
much interest in the problem of evaluating the influence of the results of this
activity on the environment. With an increase in the scales of economic activity
the quantity of energy produced is increasing, as is the quantity of discharge

of heat and pollutants into the atmosphere. The released pollutants experience
different transformations and are propagated for great distances, causing environ-
mental contamination. The propagation of pollutants in the atmosphere is essen-
tially determined by the wind field. In this connection, when formulating mathemat-
ical models the need arises for a joint solution of problems in atmospheric dynam-
ics and the transformation of pollutants. A number of investigations have been
carried out in this direction during recent years and a detailed review of these
has been given in [1-3, 10, 14].

In this article we examine a method for parameterization of the interaction of
pollutants with the underlying surface and a numerical method for solving transfer
equations. In describing atmospheric dynamics we use the numerical model of the
boundary layer given in [12, 13]. The interaction between the atmosphere and the
underlying surface is taken into account using a surface layer model.

31

Ft“!(MﬂﬂC1Al.lﬂﬂE(ﬂ§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We will begin exposition of formulation of the problem with a description of e
model of atmospheric dynamics. He will examine a spatial nonstationary numerical
model of the boundary layer over orographically and thermlly nonuniform surfaces
[12, 13]. As in [13], we will formally divide the atmosphere into two layers: the
surface layer and the layer situated above it. The surface layer will be parameter-
ized in such a way that its influence is taken into account by means of boundary
conditions.

The initial system of equations will be written in the following form:

”—3,- +(liv;u=—93§-+lo'+l.b"o'+3.4, ( )
' 1
1:;- +dl\'-u1'=: —%m— lu'+;a’.°’+;v. (2)

dr' _. ,

7.7-*"v (3)
na- - , , . _ . . ~.’
a—,-+dI\-u8 7 SW =--n(Sa,1 H,)—o (so,+9,)+ae, (4)

or . 09' our _

‘ar-w*-a--0. (5)
o ' '9 ’ I I ~ I
—;"—+dlvuq =—uQ,—12Q,+Aq. (6)
-,. L 13 0 00 0 0'
‘3': 0‘9!) 03+WPI' a" +WV93“.
" dsu du- d, (7)

 

dlvu; :17 + 7,— + a:- (g—u.o,-0’.q’).

Here t is time, x,y are curvilinear coordinates read along the earth‘s surface, u,v,
w are the components of the velocity vector in the directions x,y.z respectively,

' zo-_w—u’6,—v’b,,
where '5’ is vertical velocity in a Cartesian coordinate system; J (x,y) is a func-
tion describing relief of the underlying surface;
' a - “ a --"l
1'17’ 1" 0
are the tangents of the slope of relief to the horizon; Tl is a value proportional

to air pressure; 8 ', q' are the deviations of potential temperature and specific
humidity from the background values: 00 . 00

Ox=1-‘-, 8’=-3;

are the horizontal gradients of background potential temperature;

00 ' .- 0°

0: ’1? Q: - '67

are the horizontal gradients of background specific humidity; S is the stratifica-
tion parameter; A is the buoyancy parameter; 1, is the Coriolis parameter;

Pro. 9*; s- 's .(¢-‘.‘. 9. 0,. Q’ll-

are the coefficients of turbulent exchange in the directions a. y and z respective-
ly.

32

rosorncmussoutv
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY

The system of equations (l)-(7) was derived under the condition that the meteor-
ological elements have the representations

u-U+u’. u-V+o’ w-W+w o= 6+0’. q-Q+q'. a-ﬂ+aﬂ 0)

where the capital letters denote the background values, assured to be known func-
tions of space coordinates and time, whereas the letters with a prime denote the
deviations of the meteorological elasents from the background values.

The interaction between an air mass and the earth's surface is taken into account
using a model of the surface layer

”15?- = u. ms). 2-3? = '1». s. (a) (1» = 0. v. 2». =0" m. (9)
‘i f," = “if: (5. a0)! ? - 1'0 = 35.]. (a! it). E: -Z—' 50:1,.“ (10)

 

. . h _ o
-:“‘:' (-:,\,='-—.—':'(:3, 0:11.”. :,.=T. L— . '

(11)
where IVI - (u2 4- v2)”2 is the absolute value of the velocity vector; u* is fric-
tion velocity; 8*, q* are the scales for potential temperature and specific humid-
ity; )L is the Karman constant; 20 is the roug ess parameter; L is the length scale;
5', is dimensionless altitude; (i - u, ) are continuous universal functions
(a specific representation of these ffunctions from [7] is used in the computations)
h is the height of the surface layer. The subscript h denotes the values of the
functions with z - h and the subscript 0 denotes the values at the roughness level.
The roughness parameter is assmned to be stipulated over the land, whereas over the

water surface it is determined in the course of the solution using the Chernok for-
(:0 - 0.035 ng)

The temperature at the land surface ‘10 is determined from the. heat balance equation

Un—r-"pf'c-zﬂo—FLJ451"": m— —-A)—F (12)

where
'dT‘

0‘): .".(k,— a.

is heat transfer through the soil surface. [0,, cs, 1:3, '1‘ are density, specific heat
capacity, thermal conductivity coefficient and absolute soil t-perature, Pia air
density. I0 is short-wave solar radiation, A is albedo of the underlying surface.
F is effective radiation. Equation (12) is solved jointly with the soil heat conduc-

tivity equation. Over the water the functions 1, 0 and qo are assumed to be stipulat-
ed in the form

fh-Idx. y. I). qo-0.622Fc-l0..)/ﬂ. (13)

33

FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
IN)! MI. USE ONLY

and over the land qo is determined using the formula
q‘.-0.522noF (Gd/P. . (14)

where fo(x,y,t) is a known function, ’20 is the relative moisture content of the
soil surface, 8 is the saturation elasticity of water vapor at the tuperature ‘30,
p is atmospheric pressure.

The system of equations' (l)-(12) will be solved in the region
D-uxl‘X. ly|<Y. h<z<ﬁ}-.

with the following boundary-value and initial conditions:

u'-o. v'-0. o'-o. q’-0 with t - o (15)

=’ — - ‘ ‘ .
" L... ”-V« 0—6.. 4:0. mu x::tX.y=.tY. (1s)

a ”"0. t"-0. n'-o. q"-0. m-O with: - H. (17)
u ' .

_._. Ut’_.-an' .
a: ‘ “em 3 - ".9. 3‘- ‘ do (d —O.),

00' _
w — 0D (9 " VJ. u' = 0 with l ' h, (18)

where a' (j - u. v. ‘8 ) are functions characterizing interaction between the arso-
sphere and the underlying surface. With stipulated universal functions they are
obtained from the surface layer equations [7].

The numerical method used for solution of the problen (l)-(18) was described in de—
tail in [12, 13]. Its basis is the method of splitting with respect to physical pro-
cesses [8].

In the modeling of the transport of pollutants in the atmospheric boundary layer the
initial equations are the semiempirical equations of turbulent diffusion. Atno-

spheric pollutants constitute a multicomponent mediu- and different components inter-
act with the atmosphere and with one another. As a result of chanical reactions
there can be appearance of new substances not present in the substances initially
ejected by the sources. He will asaune that the pollute t consists of n(n>l) dif-
ferent components and we will denote by E’- {cc} , a - c1} (1 - l, n) the volumet-
ric concentrations of the in urities and the backgaund values of the concentra-
tions of pollutants, and by s - [71.63: 0} (t - 1.11, it, - (x,y,z)) — the sources
of pollutants. Then the model of transport of pollutants can be described by the
following system of equations:

- -' ‘ -. ~ .. -e ~-e ~s
$+u-ﬁ-‘Fﬂ7d’i+(U-u,)-:‘i+8$=.\s—F,(zl), (19)

where

-o _
355—25, 'E--.|s,|(1=1,n)

34
FOIOWICIALUSEONLY
FOI1DFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

are the deviations of the concentrations of pollutant from their background val-
ues, FLxs' ’Lys, *Lzs are the'coefficients f turbulent diffusion in the direc-
tions at. y, s respectively, a), - diag {01, (i - In) is a diagonal matrix whose
elements are equal to the velocities of gravitational settling of substances (it
is assumed that each substance has its own rate of precipitation),

..
80““ 0 = 0 (bl = 17!. t $1),
is a matrix operator describing the interaction of different substances with one
another and their local changes. In a general case the matrix elements B(x,t) can
be dependent on the values of the fields of meteorological elements and on the
concentrations of pollutants. If 311(iit) '49 (1,3 - l,n, i 5‘ j). the pollutants
do not interact with one another, but if B(x.t) - 0, the pollutants will be called

passive. We also note that the sources can not only eject pollutants, but also ab-
sorb them.

In evaluating the effect of pollutants on a specific physiographic region it is of
practical interest to evaluate the contamination of individual sectors of the
ground surface differing with respect to physical properties (water bodies. forests.
soil. etc.). Accordingly, one of the parameters which must be determined is the
quantity of pollutants entering from the atmosphere onto a specific sector of the
underlying surface. It is known that the distribution of pollutants, especially in
the lower layers of the atmosphere. is essentially dependent on stratification,

wind velocity and other characteristics of the surface layer [1, 2, 15]. According-
ly, the interaction of pollutants with the underlying surface will be taken into
account in parameterized form.

He will write the equation for the balance of pollutants at the roughness level
[12]. Assuming that each of the components of the pollutants interacts with the
ground surface independently of the others, we obtain

5h . ~ _ ___
': 7 r W..t.= M. -/...(x..\-. n (i = I. n). (20)

where #810 - 1,n) are values having the dimensionality of velocity and character-
izing the interaction of pollutants with the underlying surface. It is easy to see
that the condition ﬁ 31 - 0 corresponds to reflection of pollutants from the ground
surface, ﬂ“ 1 - 00 is the total "absorption" of the pollutants, O<ﬁ <00 is an in-
termediate situation of partial reflection and absorption. If the pollutants inter-
act with one another, in the right-hand side of (20) in place of Psici there will

be expressions of the type n
Fatback.

where ,9 a“((iJc - l_.n')arr- coefficients determinim_the regime of interaction of dif-
ferent substances. The functions f.1(x.y,t) (i- 1,n) in (20) describe the sources

of impurities at the roughness level. In most cases the functions describing the
local transformations of pollutants and the distributions of sources have a subgrid
scale and therefore it is desirable that they be smoothed first taking into ac-
count the parsmeters of the grid region and the properties of the underlying sur-
face. This smoothing procedure is natural for a discrete model. which in essence

makes it possible to compute the characteristics of fields averaged by grid region
units.

35

FIMICMWWCJAI.USEtoNlN
MWWWLY

We will assume that in the surface layer there is an analogy between the distrib-
utions of pollutants and potential temperature [11]. In such a case for the para-
meterization of the transport of pollutants in the surface layer it is possible to
derive formulas similar to (9)-(ll). Taking this assumption into account and as a
convenience in exposition omitting the subscript denoting the fora of substance.
from (10) for the scale of the pollutant c, we obtain the following expression:

(”-6.-

. h‘.
('=W (:.-.'.—L. (21)

Substituting (21) into (10) and differentiating the derived expression for z. and
then assuming 2 - h. we obtain - -

hi __ To C.) (
a - m ”a" - (22)
Taking (11) into account. equation (22) can be written in the form
. 0‘ _ .
.__ .5; u. - our. -¢'.). (23)
where -. .TI’ ;. ..
IT“:

0- = '
' 7s ”a. Elia (gt. a!) '

Equation (23) can be used as the lower boundary-value condition vertically with z -
h for equation (19). We note that in formula (23) for the time being there are no
terms containing the functions p. and a". from (20).

Now we will write an equation of type (23) in a more general form which contains the
functions #8 and 5s and at the same time the relative position of the height of

the source of pollutant d and the height of the surface layer h is taken into ac-
count. We will examine two different cases.

a) The source is situated above the surface layer, that is, d; h. Assuming a con—
stancy of the fluxes of pollutants in the surface lever

. ' - " k
[Hgéiia-Idt: "ﬁll-.1)

and using formulas (20) and (23), we obtain

—l =———— ti=3.--)- . (24)

b) The source is situated below the height of the surface layer. that is, ds h.
writing formula (23) for the height 1 -d. we obtain

0.: '

3; u. -ao(€,-"o)'

Taking into account that

 

0" _.., 0—": =v 0‘ I
"Wits“.- ‘ ﬂ .‘IIl ‘7; H"

36

FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and using equations (20) and (23), we arrive at the expression

a ~‘I '4 -

'55; _“=G‘n"fs)(?.—3+“O’u) 0.. (25)
where Vsh and Vsd are the coefficients of turbulent diffusion for a pollutant at
the altitudes z - h and z - d respectively. The values of the functions V“ and
Vsh can be obtained using the equation

- 21-3.
.,(2) — ’0‘". (26)

where 9“ (a) is a continuous function dependent on stratification. In order to
make-computations use is made of the function if (g) in the following form [7]:

 

.. i' 3 -I : 2'
r..t=)(T)" an... =H<~<~ <27)
. 73(5) when S’sE‘O '
"0”“): I+P,‘: ' Osisi"
I when
(11.4.3)); E" Es?
‘ ’ when

where ".. (5) = U — 1: E)" ". 1W)" ‘35- 3' z " 3-21! 30 = 6.3%

-r

= I, E=+.
Formulas (25) and (26) were derived under conditions of stationarity and horizontal
uniformity. Since the diurnal or annual variation is being considered. it can be
postulated that the quasiatationarity condition is satisfied. If d>h and the di-
mensions of the cloud of diffusing pollutant are much greater than the intervals
of the grid region in horizontal variables. it makes sense to assume a horizontal
uniformity within the limits of one elementary unit of the grid region. If d< h,

it is also possible to consider the plane sources to be locally uniform. for ex-
ample. the residential sections of a city, duet-covered sectors of the earth's sur-
face. etc.

The remaining boundary-value conditions for concentrations of pollutants are stip-

ulated in the following form:
as

V7=0 with z I H, (28)
c - cback with x - 1X, y .- tY, (29)
C ' check with t "' 0. (30)

where Cback is the background value of the pollutant concentration. In the absence
of information on the background values at the lateral boundaries we will use the

condition
P8 3—3-0.

where n is the external normal to the boundary of the region.

37

FOIOFHOALUSEONLY
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

A serious prohla at the present time is the method for stipulating the diffusion
coefficients in horizontal directions. Some methods for describing transverse dif-
fusion are given in [1, lo, 6, 16]. For example, in [1, 6] for computing the trans-
verse coefficient for diffusion of a pollutant from a point source use is made of
the formula

:s,.= w. + "3)., ‘ - (31)

where 0’2 is the dispersion of disturbances of wind direction, averaged over a
quite grgat time interval, 1' is the distance from the source, k0 is a parameter
determined from the characteristics of the surface layer, u is wind velocity.

In (31) it is postulated that the direction of the x-sxis coincides with the direc-
tion of the velocity vector. We are interested in the distribution of the concen-
trations of pollutant averaged by grid region units. For the modeling of smaller-
scale processes use is made of a special method, such as in [17]. Since the wind
direction can vary at each point in the grid and the sources can be distributed
over the entire region, with the use of formula (31) we' will limit ourselves,
adhering to [6], to a stipulation of some mean 0", value. For this same reason

we will also assume that P“ - P'Xs' when the region containing the pollutant as-
sumes sufficiently great dimensions vertically it is necessary to take into ac-
count the influence of the vertical shear of the velocity vector on turbulent dif-
fusion. The author of [16], for an zmn' boundary layer with a constant turbulence
coefficient, obtained an expression taking into accent the additional increase

in the coefficient of transverse diffusion,

'2
II” = 0,?” T" (32)

where u8 is the velocity of the geostrophic wind in the x direction.

In the numerical modeling of the propagation of pollutants additional requirements
are imposed on the finite-difference approximations and on the methods for the so-
lution of equation (19). Since in a physical sense the concentration is a nonneg-
ative parameter, it is desirable to employ so-called "monotonic" schemes which
make it possible to obtain nonnegstive solutions. In order to develop a comma-
tion algorithm for the solution of equation (19) we will apply the method of
splitting with respect to physical processes and in each small time interval Itj,
tau K5 " 0. 1,...) with the length A t we will examine a scheme consisting of

t

ree stages:
1. Transport of pollutants along paths

-. do Our
~32 -"%}+75+7=' <33)

2. Turbulent diffusion of pollutants

a; o 5.0,32 0.3; .
7=ﬁ9111?3;"1‘0, +3; '1 C-‘l (31‘)

FOIOFII'IGALUSEONLY
IKHICINNCIAI.USEioNlN

3. Local transformations of pollutants and influence of sources

—
.0

dc ‘ - ' .
7+B$=Fr (35)

Such a representation of the model of transport of pollutants considerably sim-
plifies its application when using an electronic computer. In the first two stages
the equations are solved for each substance independently of the others and in

the third there is a mutual adaptation and interaction of all the substances. Ac—
cordingly (35) can be regarded at each point in the integration range as a system
of ordinary differential equations whose coefficients are psrametrically dependent
on space coordinates. The examination of all the interaction and transformation

of pollutants of all processes in an individual stage makes it possible to carry
out experiments with different variants of description of the operator B(x,t) and

the vector of the function F;(§;t) without changing the structure of the model as
a whole.

The solution of each preceding stage at the time t - t3+1 serves as an initial con-
dition for the next stage at the moment in time t - t . The boundary-value condi-
tions for equations (33) and (34) are obtained from t e conditions (23)-(30).

The first stage is basic in the transport process and the most complex in its real-
ization. There are several methods for solving equation (33). A review and compar-

ative analysis of the most commonly used of these is given in [5, 15, 17-19]. Be-
low we will describe an algorithm based on a modification of the scheme in [15].
This scheme has a law of conservation of the pollutant and has a second order of
approximation with respect to space and time. In this scheme monotony is attained

by the introduction, using a posteriori information, of a "monotonization" nonlinear

operator of the divergent type which does not impair the order of approximation.
The schemes for solution of a transfer equation with nonlinear monotonization were
examined earlier in [19].

Using the method of splitting in space variables, we will write a finite-difference
approximation of equation (33) in the direction of the x coordinate. The approxima-
tions are obtained in the y and 2 directions in a similar way.

As a simplification in the exposition we will examine the principal element of the
scheme in the example of the one-dimensional equation

3-H" %“}=°' (36)

derived from (33) by means of splitting in space variables. Adhering to [18], we
will write for it a finite-difference approximation having monotonic properties.

Selecting the orientation of the grid overlay in dependence on the sign of the u
function, we obtain a scheme consisting of two expressions:

39

FOI.OIIIC1AI.UBEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIALUSEONLY

3!" = ‘1'- “HI: (3“) -- % [0 (l - 0. "mam-rm (It!) -

— a.(l - a (11.3];- ) 5.4/2 (113) + U - 4."l-I(2X°n-°) AMI! (“3" +
+ ‘% 1" RM) [U - ’.41+I5:)Aa+m(“9)-(l - G. 11.-.") 51-1): (115)] —

- 0. RUM-1m! -- a, “(412)331-1120” -
— (l — syn—3], ) 31-3,: (“8)I} , ecuu It a 0;
. . - 37
s{+L— s; — 951;”: (su) — 144°“ — ash-ma) 61w: (“5) — ( )
— 0(1 - 0; u:-m)¢1—m (‘1‘) + (1 — 9 ”1+”: )(° - 3051-51110“)! +
+ 3% l°c R( 7.x)!“ - ﬂan-3.2 ) 4H4]: (“5) - (1 - oalh+nn)41+m(ﬂ8)l -

‘ “RUM-1)“! - 'aﬂl+nn)51+an(l$)-
‘0 - ’9 “l-m ) 51-1/2 (1:3)". em u (0,

 

 

where
M M 'M N M
O = -— o = = —— =— _—
‘1' ' M... ' 5' ”m' a, ”'4' °‘---“I.2'
A: .u . ‘
e=— 9.: A- =ll$=l8-u$-
5 ”Ii-3. 5,4“ l Ill: ( ) ( )1 ( )‘ In

AH-llz (HS) = (Mm — (as),
0‘1. 0‘2 are nonnegative coefficients assuming the value 0 or 1.

Depending on the values of the coefficients 0‘1 and 0‘- ve obtain the following
schemes: 0‘1 - 0, O! 2 - 0 are schemes of directed dif erences of the first order

of accuracy, 0L1 - l, 012 - O is a nonnanotonic scheae of the second order of ac-
curacy [19]. “1 - 1. 0‘2 - l is a monotonic scheme of the second order of accuracy.

6:

 

and the monotonic behavior conditions with 0! 1 I 0‘2 - l are determined by the in-
equality ‘

o. _
‘ 4-85-.“ (38)

R(n)='ﬁf'r:'r . . (39>

for any '1 value stipulated st the points of intersection of the grid region by the
expression '11 . A144” s/A 14/28. With a specific numerical realization the
grid function R011) can be determined by the expression

RU“) = ( 53.01 -’ $.l —‘l$;- Sl-I I).'”31+1”-‘$Ipl +i5; -' 51-1". (40)

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(MHHCIAI.USE(N‘LY

If the denominator in (40) is equal to zero, than R(111) also can be equated to
zero.

We note that if the grid is nonuniform in space variables, the scheme (37) is of
the first order of approximation. The turbulent exchange equation (39) is solved

in the second stage by the method of splitting in space variables with the use of
implicit approximations. In the third stage the system (35) is approximated in time
at each point of the grid region with not less than a second order of accuracy.

The structure of the approximation is determined by the method of stipulating the
operator B(§;t). Since the number of substances in solution of practical problems

is not great, the accomplishment of the third stage is by means of modifications
of standard algorithms for solution of systems of ordinary differential equations.

The essence of the modifications is an allowance for the difference in the charac-
teristic time scales of interaction of different substances.

Using the model described above, we carried out a series of numerical experiments
for the purpose of studying the processes of propagation of pollutants in the at-
mospheric boundary layer. In all the computations the components of the velocity
vector and some characteristics of the surface layer were obtained using a model
of atmospheric dynamics with the following values of the input parameters:

1750m x- -68h h-SOqu-A Ilokm
100m,’if zéZOOmand Az-130mwit zBZOOm,

0.035 m/(sec2'°C). 1 - 10‘4 sec'l, iLx - fly - 2000 m2/sec,
3-10-3 C/m, :0 - 0.01. cp - 0.2a cal/sec, a3 - 0.56.
b3 - 0.08, "back - -5 m/sec.

H
A}:
2.
S

 

II ll It 70 “hours

Fig. 1. Normalized value of maximum concentration of pollutant at level 2 - 50 m
with and without allowance for parameterization. l, 2, 3. 6 were obtained with al-
lowancc for the boundary conditions (26) with values ’93 - 10.6 m/sec. 0.5 m/sec,
10"3 m/aec. 10'3 m/sec respectively and the curves 4, 5 without allowance for para-
meterization (with ,ﬂs - 0 and ﬂ s - 0.5). The curve 6 corresponds to a solution

with the coefficient ’Lys, computed using formula (31).

The moment in time t - 0 corresponds to 0600 LT. The coefficients of vertical tur-
bulent exchange in the interval h< 2‘“ were stipulated in the form V1(z) - V10.)
(1 - u. v, , s). and the coefficients of horizontal turbulence were assumed to be

equal for all stubstances. The relative humidity and temperature over the water
surface were stipulated using the Hagnus formula. '

61

FOIIOFFIJAI.U§E(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     

      

     

 

      

o u 9': it I it n “n

Fig. 2. Isolines of normalized concentration of pollutant at level a - 50 m in
plane (at, y). 3a .6) solutions for time t - 12 hours with values ,8, - 10-5 m/sec

and be ' 10"3 m/aec; c. d) same for t - 18 hours. The isolines at the center are
the maximum values of the concentration 109. 3, 93.1. 107. 6 and 76.1 respectively.

 

o 10'» nu

Fig. 3. Isolines of normalized concentration of pollutant with value 3- 0.5 value
at level 2 - :0 (a,b) and at altitude z - 50 m (c. d). a. c correspond to the mo-
ment in time t - 12 hours. b, d) time t - 18 hours. The isolines at 'the center cor-

respond to maximum values of the concentration 1.10, 2.7. 42.4 and 76.8 respective-
ly.

He will cite examples of propagation of a single-component passive pollutant from
a continuously operative point source situated at an altitude z - 250 m at a

point with the coordinates x - 56 km. y - 36 km. Integration in time was carried
out in an interval equal to 210 hours. We recall that for a passive pollutant
B(x, t) - 0. Figure 1 shows curves of the concentration of pollutant at an altitude

z - h, normalized to a maximum value, in dependence on the parameter ,9, and the
method for stipulating the lower boundary condition vertically for equation (19).

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The curves 1, 2, 3, 6 correspond to solutions with heundary conditions in para-
meterized form (25) and the curves lo, 5 correspond to conditions without para-
meterization. It follows from this figure that at an altitude z - h with all
values of the ﬁ parameter the maximum value of the normalized concentration of the
passive pollutant with parameterized allowance for the boundary condition is

found to be larger than with stipulation of the conditions without parameteriza-
tion. This can be attributed to the fact that the surface layer exerts a screen-
ing influence on the propagation of pollutants. It can be seen that this influ-
ence is essentially dependent on the turbulence characteristics in the surface

layer. Curve 6 corresponds to solution of a problem with a transverse diffusion
coefficient determined using formula (31).

 

m__ =7)”. -. .2., ..‘
I": ”8) E1 ,@
. a L—ﬂ-‘Q' . ' ' ' ,
0 ,3 40)
‘m

'a u n “pull :0 n ”"J

Fig. 4. Isolines of normalized concentration in planes x,z (a,c) and y,z (b, d)
with 3, - 10"6 m/sec. for times t - 26 hours (a,b) and t - 27 hours (c.d)..

Such a method for stipulating horizontal turbulence does not lead to significant
qualitative changes in the distribution of a pollutant in comparison with the dis-
tributions obtained with constant turbulence coefficients. This was evidently
caused by the poor resolution of the nuserical model in space variables, not mak-
ing possible a detailed description of small-scale diffusion processes. At a ,dis-
tance of several hundred meters from the source the dependence of the solution
on the method for stipulating the diffusion coefficients is significant. The re-
sults of computations cited in Fig. 1 also demonstrate the dependence of the dis-
tribution of a pollutant in the boundary layer on the ,9, parameter. It was found
that the 3s parameter need only be stipulated in the interval 10'5(ﬁ3<1. Be-
yond the limits of this interval the computed distributions of pollutants are
slightly sensitive to changes in the ,8. parameter; it can therefore be assumed
that in the model the value ﬂ, - 1 corresponds to the cgse of complete "absorp-

tion" of pollutants by the earth's surface and ﬂ. -. 10‘ corresponds to complete
"reflection."

Figures 2-1. show the two-dimensional sections of the fields of concentrations of
pollutants, normalized to the maximum value, for different values of the B. par-
ameter at different moments in time. Figure 2 shows the fields of the normalized
concentration at the altitude z - 50 m in the plane (x,y) for the moments in time

t - 12 hours and t - 18 hours with different values of the pa parameter, and in

Fig. 3 we have shown the concentration with #8 - 0.5 m/sec at the level z - 20
and z - 50 m.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICMHN(JAI.U§IZCMHLY

Figure A shows vertical sections of the isolines of concentrations in the planes
(x,z) and (y,z) for t - 26 hours and t - 27 hours with a value of the [35 para-
meter 10‘6 m/sec. In all the figures 2-4 the isolines with the number 1 corres-
pond to the minimum concentrations.

Constructively the realization of the model of transport of pollutants in the
boundary layer was accomplished within the framework of a base model for study of
the influence of the results of man's activity on the atmosphere. One of the as-
pects of this base model is discussed in [9]. The joint modeling of atmospheric
dynamics and the transport of pollutants has a series of advantages because with

such an approach it is possible to take into account the inverse influence of fac-
tors of anthropogenic origin on the atmosphere at local and global scales.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Berlyand, M. Ye., SOVREHENNYYB PROBLEHY ATHDSPBRNOY DIFPUZII I ZAGRYAZNBNIYE
. ATHOSFERY (Modern Problems in Atmospheric Diffusion and Atmospheric‘Contsmin-
ation), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdet, 1975.

2. Byzova, N. L., RASSEYANIYB PRINBSI V POGRANICHNOM SLOYB ATHDSPERY (Scattering
of a Pollutant 1n the Atmospheric Boundary Layer), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat,
1974.

3. Vel'tishcheva, N. 8., "Modeling of Contamination of the Urban Atmosphere From
a Series of Continuous Uplifted Sources," HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteor-
ology and Hydrology), No 3, 1975.

4. Garger, Ye. K., "Transverse Diffusion in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer,"
TRUDY IEH (Transactions of the Institute of Experimental Meteorology), No 15
(60), 1977.

5. Gol'din, V. Ys., Kalitkin, .. I. and Shishova, T. V., "Nonlinear Difference
Schemes for Hyperbolic Equations," ZhVH-HP (Journal of Computational Hatha-
matics-Mathematical Physics), Vol 5, No S, 1967.

6. Yeliscyev, A. 3., ”0n Horizontal Scattering of a Pollutant in the Atmosphere,"
TRUDY GGO (Transactions of the Main Geophysical Observatory), No 172, 1965.

7. Kazakov, A. L. and Lazriyev, G. L., "Paraneterization of the Surface Layer of
the Atmosphere and the Active 8011 Layer," IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATHDSPERY I

OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and
Ocean), No 3, 1978.

8. Marchuk, G. 1., CHISLENNOYE RESHENIYE ZADACH DINAHIKI ATNDSFERY I OKEANA

(Numerical Solution of Problems of Dynamics of the Atmosphere and Ocean),
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1976.

9. Marchuk. G. 1., Penenko, V. V., Aloyan, A. Ye. snd Lazriyev, G. L., "Numerical
Modeling of the Hicroclimste of a City," HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteor-
ology and Hydrology), No 8, 1979.

66

FIHICIHWCJAI.USI§CNHLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

METEOROLOGIYA I ATOMNAYA ENERGIYA (Meteorology and Atomic Energy), Leningrad,
Gldrometeoizdat, 1971.

Monin, A. S. and Yaglom, A. M., STATISTICMESKAYA GIDROMEKHANIKA (Statistical
Hydromechanics), Part 1, Moscow, Nauka, 1965.

Penenko, V. V. and Aloyan, A. Ye., "Numerical Method for Computing the Fields
of Meteorological Elements in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer," METEOROLOGIYA
I GIDRDLOGIYA, No 6, 1976.

Penenko, V. V., Aloyan, A. Ye. and Lazriyev, 6. L., "Numerical Model of Local
Atmospheric Processes," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No b, 1979.

Yaglom, A. M., "Turbulent Diffusion in the Atmospheric Surface Layer," IZV.
AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKEANA, Vol 8, No 6, 1972.

Bram van Leer, "Towards the Ultimate Conservative Difference Scheme. 2. Mono-
tonicity and Conservation Combined in a Second-Order Scheme," J. COMPUT.
PHYS., V01 14, 1974.

Csanady, C. T., "Diffusion in an Ekman Layer," J. ATMOS. SCI., Vol 26, No 5,
1969.

Egan, B. A. and Magoney, J. R., "Application of 3 Numerical Air Pollution

Transport Model to Dispersion in the Atmosphere Boundary Layer," J. APPL.
METEOROL., Vol 11, No 7, 1972.

Fromm, J. 2., "A Method for Reducing Dispersion in Convective Difference
Scheme," J. COMPUT. PHYS., Vol 3, 1968.

Liu, C. Y., Goodin, w. R. and Lam, c. M., “Numerical Problems in the Advec-
tion of Pollutants," COMPUTER METHODS IN APPLIED MECHANICS AND ENGINEERING,
1976.

45

ROI OFFICIA1.lEﬂE(NVLY
INJIlOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

UDC 551.594.21
CORRELATION BETWEEN THE ELECTRIFICATION OP THUNDBRSTORM CLOUDS AND PRECIPITATION

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I CIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received
12 Jun 80) pp bb-Sl

[Article by B. I. Zimin. candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, Central
Aerologicsl Observatory]

[Text] Abstract: This is a review of field inves-
tigations of the thunderstorm process carried
out during the last 30 years in different geo-
graphical regions of the earth. The author gives
the results of 10 years of observations of thun-
derstorms in Holdavia and the Crimea carried out
using radar, thunder recorder, lightning photo-
recorder and a pluviographic network. The re-
sults obtained by the author confirm the re-
sults obtained by other researchers on the pri-
mary role of precipitation in the mechanism of
electrification of thunderstorm Cb and make it
possible to establish a statistical dependence
between the intensity of precipitation and the

'dimensions of thunderstorm cells, on the one
hand. and the intensity of lightning discharges
(frequency of lightning) on the other. The great
number of measurements, especially accumulated
in the temperate latitudes, gives basis for as-
suming that the electrification of thunderstorm
Cb is related to the growth of solid particles
in these clouds.

The mechanism of electrification of a thunderstorm cloud still remains one of the
unsolved problems in cloud physics. Despite a great number of experimental and
theoretical investigations in this field (see book by B. J. Mason [10]. N. S.
Shishkin [16]. l. M. lmyanitov. et al. [5], V. H. Huchnik [12], J. A. Chalmers
[15]), up to now there is no unanimous opinion concerning the principal reasons
for the electrification of a thunderstorm cloud. However, most researchers feel
that the principal mechanism of electrification of Cb is related to the formation
of precipitation particles in a cloud and the gravitational separation of par-
ticles of different sizes.

66

IN)! OFFICIAI.I!NZ(MVLY
FOR 0f1ﬂ€1Al.USEiNNLY

Review of Studies

In the clarification of the principal processes of separation and accumulation of
an electric charge in thunderstorm clouds an evaluation of the correlation be-
tween the electric and meteorological parameters of Cb can be of considerable as-
sistance. In a number of studies attempts have been made to establish a correla-
tion between the lightning activity of a cloud and the strength of the electric
field in the atmosphere, on the one hand, and the vertical thickness of a cloud,
precipitation and radar reflectivity, on the other [1, 7, 9, ll, 16, 30, 48. 57].
The results of these studies indicate the existence of a direct correlation be-
tween the electric and meteorological characteristics of a thunderstorm cloud.

The extremely detailed investigations of J. Kuettner, carried out in the 1940's
in West Germany on the Zugspitze (elevation 3 km above sea level),indicated that
in 93% of the cases of observations in thunderstorm clouds there was a predomin-
ance of solid precipitation elements. The central region of thunderstorm activity
coincided with the region of most intensive precipitation [30].

During the last 30 years many new data have been obtained for different geograph-
ical regions confirming the reality of the assumption of the presence of a correl-
ation between the electrification of a thunderstorm cloud and the precipitation
formation process. Among these we should note the results of investigations by

V. H. Muchnik in the Ukraine [12], S. Reynolds and M. Brook, and also P. Krehbiel,
et a]. in New Mexico in the United States [28, 29, 48], R. Kidder in South Africa
[26], H. Larsen and B. Stansbury in Quebec, Canada [31], H. Biser in Florida [24].
G. Kinzer in Oklahoma [27], H. Sand, D. Husil and R. Schleuaener in Colorado [50]
and others [14, 25, 37, 46, 51, 55].

The results of investigations by the above-mentioned authors convincingly support
the existence of an effective precipitation-forming mechanism of thunderstorm
electrification. At least in the temperate latitudes it is possible to trace the
correlation between the electrification of a thunderstorm cloud and the formation
and growth of solid hydrometeors in CI).

An example of extremely correct observations is the investigations of the local—
ization of lightning carried out by Kidder [26], Krehbiel, et a1; [28, 29]. In
determining the coordinates of lightning discharges of the cloud-to-earth type
Kidder used the base observation method employing cameras and cathode direction
finders. The registry of lightning was accompanied by radar observations of clouds
and precipitation. Circular-scan cameras were set up at the corners of a trapezium
at a relative distance 25-60 km. The error in determining the bearing of lightning
was tO.S°. A comparison of the results of registry of lightning with maps of the
radio echoes of clouds indicated that lightning was observed in the zone of heav-
iest precipitation and closer to the leading edge of the precipitation.

in order to localize the discharges of lightning and its individual strokes. the
number of which in one lightning event could attain 6, Krehbiel, et al. investigat-
ed a thunderstorm over a polygon equipped with a radar and eight instruments for
measuring electric field strength. It was established that the centers of the
discharges were at altitudes 4.5-6 km (with a temperature -9 - -l7'C) and coincid-
ed with the precipitation formation'cells.

47
FORiOFFICIAI.lEiE(NVLY
FOIiOFFKJAl.USE(H'LY

The correlation between lightning activity and the formation of solid hydro-
meteors is indicated. in particular, by the results of aircraft investigations
made by D.Fittszhera1'd [14], U. Sand, et a1. [50] and E. Pybus [46], who regis-
tered the greatest electrical (lightning) activity during flight through cloud
zones with maximum radar reflectivity, where the falling of graupel and hail was
observed.

The results of measurements of the altitude of the upper boundary of the radio
echo of clouds in Leningrad [8, l3], Dnepropetrovsk [12], New Mexico [48] and
Florida [24] indicated that the peaks of thunderstorm clouds are in the region of
negative temperatures (usually below -20°C), which also is evidence that the el-
ectrification of Cb in the temperate and subtropical latitudes is usually observ-
ed when solid particles of precipitation are present in the clouds.

0n the basis of the correlation between lightning and the quantity of precipita-
tion established by L. Battan in observations of thunderstorms in Arizona it was
possible to estimate the quantity of precipitation corresponding to one lightning
discharge (3'10“ tons of water per discharge) [18]. A similar estimate was made

by G. Kinzer for thunderstorms in Oklahoma, according to whiih the mean mass of
falling precipitation per one lightning discharge was 1.6~10 tons [27]. The cor-
relation between the frequency of lightning and the intensity of precipitation
during observations of thunderstorms was noted by N. S. Shishkin in Leningrad [16],

E. Parczewski in Poland [65], V. H. Muchnik in the Ukraine and in the Valday [12].

N. S. Shishkin expressed in analytical form the correlation between the frequency
of lightning and the intensity of precipitation and the correlation between the
total number of lightning events and the quantity of precipitation falling from
thunderstorm clouds [16].

J. Latham evaluated the role of precipitation formation in the electrification of
thunderstorm clouds [32] and demonstrated that with an intensity of precipitation
greater than 0.25 mm/min there can be a charge accumulation in convective clouds

which is adequate for the development of thunderstorm phenomena.

B. J. Mason. on the basis of a critical analysis of the results of investigations
of atmospheric eleccricity carried out primarily in Western Europe and the United
States in 1950-1970 [6, 15, 17, 20—22, 30, 33-36, 38, 43, an, 47, a9. 52], devel-
oped a scheme of electrification of a thunderstorm cloud when there is collision

of cloud particles (crystals and droplets) with polarized charged grains of grow-
ing graupel [39]. According to this scheme, the strength of the electric field,

beginning growth from a value 0.5 KV/m (in accordance with the fields measured in
cumulus clouds not yielding rain), gradually, over the course of 400 sec, at-

tains values 10 KV/m. Then in 120 sec it increases to 420 KV/m, after which the
growth of the field is slowed down since the effect of the electrical forces on
the charged particles and stray currents augments and counteracts an initial charg-
ing current. The increase in electric field strength ceases upon attaining #50 RV]
m 9 minutes after the onset of falling of precipitation.

'Since the mechanisms of induction charging are self-limiting and cannot generate
macroscale fields with a strength more than 500 KV/m, Mason assumes that the ini-
tiation of lightning can occur in local regions of a cloud of lesser volume with
a stronger field or with streamers, beginning from a coronal discharge at the
surface of the precipitation particles [39].

68
IWDR OfflCIAl.lEﬂ§(ﬂﬂl¥
FORiOFﬁKJALIINECHVLY

According to the results of Mason's computations. the electric field strength at-
tains 650 KV/m (after which there is a lightning discharge) with the intensity of
precipitation attaining 0.6 mm/min. The separated charge in a cell with a radius
of 1 km will be 12.5 Klux, in a cell with a radius of 2 km -- 50 Klux, in a cell
with a radius of 5 km -- 312 Klux. Assuming that in the first case the lightning
discharge neutralizes 10 of the 12.5 Klux of the separated charge, Mason finds
that the field strength almost instantaneously decreases to 90 KV/m, and then be-
gins to be restored. With a constant intensity of precipitation of 0.6 mm/min at
the predischarge moment the field strength would be restored to 620 KV/m after

36 sec. If on the average for a size of the thunderstorm cell R - 2-3 km the
lightning would neutralize 20 Klux. the field would decrease to 270 KV/m and would
be restored to 420 KV/m after 20 sec. In a large cell R . 5 km a lightning dis-
charge of 30 Klux would decrease the field to 405 KV/m and its restoration would
require 5 sec. Thus. the intensity and frequency of the lightning discharges in-
crease with an increase in the size of the thunderstorm cells.

According to V. M. Muchnik [12], the formation and separation of electric charges
adequate for the development of lightning will occur only in the processes of
growth of solid hydrometeors (graupel and hail).

Contradicting the opinion of a dominant role of precipitation in the electrifica-
tion of a thunderstorm cloud, B. Vonnegut and C. Moore deny the correlation be-
tween thunderstorm phenomena and precipitation and assume, in agreement with G.
Grenet [23]. that the principal charge carriers are cloud droplets and the separ-
ation of electric charges occurs as a result of convective movements within the
cloud [61. 53, 56]. On the basis of observations in New Mexico, the correctness of
which has been questioned by B. J. Mason [39] and V. M. Muchnik [121,they conclud-
ed that precipitation is not the cause of lightning. but its consequence. The role
of convection in this scheme essentially involves the transport and distribution
of light ions on cloud droplets and the growth of precipitation particles occurs
as a result of the electric coagulation of droplets.

The assertion of the adherents to the Grenet-Vonnegut scheme or the convective
theory of a thunderstorm that precipitation is not mandatory for the generation
of lightning contradicts numerous observations in different regions of the earth
and seems poorly validated.

It should be noted that in this same New Mexico similar observations of thunder-
storms, made by S. Reynolds. M. Brook and others, led to directly opposite con-
clusinns [29. 68]. Nevertheless, the discussion initiated at the International Con-
ference on Atmospheric Electricity in Montreux in 1963 [38, 41, 54, 56) between
the adherents and opponents of the precipitation-forming mechanism of electrif-
ication of a thunderstorm cloud has not ended. It was renewed at the Fifth Inter-
national Conference on Atmospheric Electricity in 1976 and is continuing on the
pages of scientific journals [40. 62].

Some Results of Investigations of Thunderstorm Clouds in Moldavia and the Crimea
in the course of 10 years in Moldavia (from 1967) and in the Crimea (from 1968 to
1970) we carried out observations of thunderstorms from May through September

with the use of radar stations, pluviographic network, thunderstorm recorders
(lightning counters) and lightning photorecorder [2, 4]. Observations have shown

49

FOI:0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FIIICINHCIAI.USE(H‘LY

that in both Moldavia and in the Crimea lightning was observed only from clouds
the altitude of the upper boundary of whose radio echoes exceeded 6-7 km. Hith
an increase in the altitude of the radio echo the number of lightning events in-

creased [3]; These observational data agree with the results cited in [8, 12, 13,
48, 51].

 

Z 0 t» computed

  

2 :9 w e :m’

Fig. 1. Distribution of areas of thunder- Pig. 2. Correlation between actual and

storm cells. computed frequencies of lightning
(min'l) from thunderstorm cells.

On the basis of observations in Moldavia data were obtained on the size, lifetime
and lightning activity of thunderstorm cells. The thunderstorm cell was determined
by the area bounded by closed radar reflectivity isolines, equal to 103 mm6/m3.
The legitimacy of such a determination method was validated by our observations

using a radar and a lightning photorecorder. These observations made it possible to
localize a thunderstorm cell with an accuracy in azimuth of 1' [4].

Figure 1 shows a histogram of the frequencies of recurrence (with respect to the
number of cases) of areas of thunderstorm cells on the basis of data from 775 cases
of radar measurements in 196 Cb. The areas of the cells were determined from con-
ical horizontal sections of clouds at the level of the altitude of the zero iso-
therm by planimetric measurements on sheets plotted from photographic images of
zones of increased radar reflectivity. On the basis of the areas of the cells, ap-
proximated by circles, it was possible to determine their size (diameter),

The horizontal extent of the thunderstorm cells varied from 2 (weak thunderstorm)
to 10 km (strong thunderstorm). The mean size of the cells was 5 km. The vertical

extent of the cells. according to data from radar observations. exceeded 6 km and
attained 14 km.

Thunderstorms in Moldavia have a predominantly frontal character and continue up to
6 hours or more. However, the life of individual cells usually did not exceed 1
hour and thunderstorm phenomena ceased 10-20 minutes prior to the ending of the
falling of rain to the ground (the elevation of the hilly plain of central and

50

FINI¢ﬂﬂﬁCJAI.US£1ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

northern Moldavia, where the observations were made, does not exceed 300-1000 In
above sea level). New cells most frequently were generated on the right flank in
the direction of cloud movement. The number of thunderstorm cells attained 6. Uni-
cellular thunderstorms generated 0.2-5 discharga(s)/minute, and multicellular
thunderstorms generated up to 50 discharges/minute.

Our observations of precipitation from 500 Cb over an area up to 3,000 km2 with a
density of the pluviographic network of approximately 1 instrument per 30 lull2 in-
dicated that in 902 of the cases thunderstorm phenomena were noted in those clouds
from which rain fell with an intensity of more than 0.1 Illa/min. The maximum inten-
sity of precipitation from thunderstorm clouds usually did not exceed 3-4 lam/min.

Our investigation of the correlation between the rainfall intensity in the pluvio-
graphic network and the frequency of lightning from a thunderstorm cell, whose
dimensions were determined by the radar method, indicates presence of a dependence

in the form
l"up ’ H: u -200 R “(P ' P0)

f =
light _
“t - 0° R0 Rlow

)

where flight is the frequency of lightning, min'lg H" is the altitude of the cloud
radio echo, kn; "t = -200 is the altitude of the isotherm -20°C, km; H: g 00 is the
altitude of the zero isotherm, km; H10" is the altitude of the cloud base"; R is
the radius of the thunderstorm cell, km; p is the intensity of precipitation, mm/
min; 0‘ is a correction factor dependent on the period p of averaging; Ro - 1 kn;

p0 - 0.1 uni/min. with Hup< Ht .. -200 and/or pgpo flight - 0.

For findingot we constructed a graph of the correlation between the frequency of
lightning observed from specific thunderstorm cells (flight act)» and the frequency
of lightning computed using formula (1) on the assumption that at - 1 (flight comp)
from 31 cases of simultaneous registry of precipitation, the number of lightning
events from unicellular thunderstorm clouds and their radar parameters (see Fig.
2). The averaging interval for flight act was 15 minutes. During this same inter-
val we selected the maximum p value registered by the pluviographic network. The
least squares method gave flight act - 1.3 £118“ comp. Accordingly, (it = 1.3.

The falling of hail (diameter from S to 50 m) was observed from thunderstorm Cb
with an altitude of the upper boundary greater than 8 km, and as a rule was accom-
panied by showers. A comparison of the lightning activity of 22 hail and 23 thun-
derstorm clouds which we carried out in Moldavia indicated that on the average

the lightning activity of hail clouds was greater than the lightning activity of
those thunderstorm clouds from which the falling of hail was not noted. The great-
est lightning activity was registered during the falling of hail. Our data on the

increased lightning activity of hail clouds agree, in particular, with the results
obtained by American researchers in Montana [19].

Thus. the results of observations of thunderstorms over a period of many years in
Moldavia and the Crimea indicate a close correlation between the precipitation
falling from Cb of a considerable vertical thickness and the lightning activity

a
The values iit . _200. "t . 0°: H10" were determined from radiosonde data.

51

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(MVLY

of Cb. These results confirm and supplement the results obtained by many other re-
searchers in different geographical regions.

Summary

1. The formation and develounnt of the thunderstorm process require not only the
presence of a considerable vertical thickness of Cb, but also quite heavy precip-

itation from these clouds. Lightning will not occur in the absence of even one of
the enumerated factors.

2. Usually the frequency of lightning for one thunderstorm cell does not exceed

5, but sometimes can attain 12 min-1. The greater the linear dimensions and number

of the thunderstorm cells, the more intense, as a rule, will be the thunderstorm
phenomena.

3. There is a statistical dependence between the intensity of precinitation and

the extent of the cells, on the one hand, and the frequency of lightning, on the
other. This dependence is conveniently expressed by (l).

4. There is serious basis for the assumption that the mechanism of electrification
of thunderstorm clouds, at least in the temperate latitudes, is closely associated
with the processes of formation and growth of solid hydrometeors.

The author expresses appreciation to the engineers and technicians of the Moldavian
and Crimean Antihail Expeditions for the assistance which they provided in obtain-
ing the experimental data and is extremely appreciative to I. P. Hazin and s. M.
Shmeter for useful advice and discussion of the results of the work.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Gashina, S. 8., lmyanitov, I. H., Kamaldina, I. 1., Sal'man, Ye. M. and Chub-
arina. Ye. V.. "Correlation Between Radar Characteristics of Clouds and Their

Turbulent and Electric State," TRUDY CGO (Transactions of the Main Geophysical
Observatory), No 173, 1965.

2. Zimin, B. 1., "Regulation of Development of Thunderstorm Activity of Convective
Clouds With Modification by Ice-Forming Aerosols," TRUDY TaAO (Transactions of
the Central Aerological Observatory), No 136, 1978.

3. Zimin. B. 1., "Correlation Between the Thunderstorm Activity of Clouds and Their
Parameters Determined Using Data From Radar and Pluviographic Measurements,"
TRUDY TsAO (Transactions of the Central Aerological Observatory), No 132, 1978.

6. Zimin, B. 1., Tanner, K. T. and Tychina, R. P., "Experience in the Photographing

of Lightning Together With Radar Observations of Thunderstorm Clouds," TRUDY
TsAO, No 132, 1978.

S. lmyanitov, I. M., Chubarina, Ye. V. and Shvarta, Ya. M., BLEKTRICHBSTVO OBLAKOV
(Cloud Electricity). Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1971.

52

FOR OFFNJA1.USE(M‘LY
7.

8.
9.
10.

11.

12.

13.
14.
15.

I6.
17.
18.
19.

20.

FOR‘OFIIC1A1.USEIMNLY

Kachurin, L. c. and Bekryayev. V. 1., "Investigation of the Process of Elec-
trification of Crystallizing Hater," DOKLADY AR SSSR (Reports of the USSR
Academy of Sciences), 130, No l, 1960.

Kolokolov, V. P., "Correlation Between Thunderstorm Activity of a Convective
Cloud and Its Vertical Development,” TRUDY GGO (Transactions of the Main Geo-
physical Observatory), No 277, 1972.

Kotov, I. F.. "Radar Characteristics of Thunderstorms and Showers," TRUDY 600,
No 102, 1959.

Kramich, K. P. and Solov'yev, V. A., "Some Different Characteristics of Thun-
derstorms and Showers," TRUDY 680. No 120, 1961.

Mason, 8. J.. FIZIKA OBLAKOV (Cloud Physics). translated from English. edited
by V. c. Horachevskiy and Ye. S. Selezneva, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1961.

Huchnik, V. H., "Detection of Thunderstorms by Radar Using Data on Maximum
Rainfall Intensity," HETEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology),
No 10. 1963.

Muchnik, V. H., PIZIKA CROZY (Thunderstorm Physics), Leningrad, Cidrometeoiz-
dat, 1974.

Sal‘man, Ye. M. and Zhupakhin, R. 8., “Some Results of Radar Investigations
of the Vertical Structure of Showers and Thunderstorms," TRUDY 660, No 159,
1964.

Fittszheral'd, 0., "Methods for Measuring Cloud Electricity," PROBLEHY ATMO-
SFERNOGO ELEKTRICHESTVA (Problems in Atmospheric Electricity), Leningrad,
Gidrometcoizdat, 1969.

Chalmers, C. A., ATHOSPERNOYE ELEK’I'RICHBS‘IVO (Atmospheric Electricity), trans-
1ated from English, edited by I. H. Imyanitov, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat,
1974. .

Shishkin, N. S., OBLAKA, OSADKI I GROZOVOYB ELEKTRICHESTVO (Clouds, Precipita-
tion and Thunderstorm Electricity), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1964.

Autdermaur, A. N. and Johnson, D. A., "Charge Separation Due to Riming in an
Electrical Field," QUART. J. ROY. METEOROL. 8°C., Vol 98, No 616, 1972.

Battan, L. J., "Some Factors Governing Precipitation and Lightning in Convec—
tive Clouds," J. ATHOS. SCI., Vol 22, 1965.

Baughmann, R. G. and Fuquay, D. M., "Hail and Lightning Occurrence in Mountain
Thunderstorms," J. APPL. HETEOROL., Vol 9, No 4, 1970.

Brook, H., "Laboratory Studies of Charge Separation During Ice-Ice Contact,"
RECENT ADVANCES IN ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY, Pergamon Press, 1958.

53

POI OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

35.

36.

FOI‘DFFKJAI.U§E(MVLY

Brook, M., "Thunderstorm Electrification," PROBLEMS 0? ATM. AND SPACE ELEC-
TRICITY, Amsterdam-L.-N.Y., 1965.

Eigin, M. and de Maeyer, L.. "Self-Dissociation and Protonic Charge Transport
in Water and Ice," FROC. ROY. SOC., Ser. A, Vol 247, 1958.

Grenet, 6., "Essai d'explication de la Charge Electrique des Nuages d'Orages,"
ANNALES DE GEOPHYSIQUE, 3, 1967.

Riser, H. 9., "Thunderstorm Studies in South Florida," PROC. 14TH RADAR
HETEOROL. CONF., Tucson, USA, 1970.

Israel, H. D., "Die Bedeutung das Niederschlages fﬁr die Cewitterelektrizetdt,"'
HETEOROL. RDSCH., V01 23. N0 4. 1970.

Kidder, R. 2.. "The Location of Lightning Flashes at Ranges Less Than 100 km,"
J. ATHOS. TERR. PHYS., Vol 35, No 2, 1973.

Kinzer, G. D., "Cloud-to-Cround Lightning Versus Radar Reflectivity in Okla-
homa Thunderstorms," J. ATMOS. SCI., Vol 31, No 3, 1976.

Krehbiel, P., Brook, M. and McCrory, R.. "An Analysis of the Charge Structure
of Lightning Discharges to Ground," J. GEOPHYS. 838., C 84, No 5, 1979.

Krehbiel, P., Brook, M., McCrory, R. and Tarbox, 0., "Lightning Charge Loca-
tions Relative to Precipitation in a Thunderstorm," PROC. INT. CORP. CLOUD
PHYS., Boulder. USA, 1976.

Kuettner. J., "The Electrical and Meteorological Conditions Inside Thunder-
clouds," J. METEOROL., Vol 7, No S, 1950.

Larsen, H. R. and Stansbury, E. J., "Association of Lightning Flashes With Pre-
cipitation Cores Extending to height 7 km," J. ATMDS. TBRR. PHYS., Vol 36, No
9, 197a.

Lathan. J., "A Quantitative Assessment of Precipitation Mechanism of Thunder-
storm Electrification," J. METEOROL. SOC. JAPAN, Vol 49, No 5, 1971.

Latham, J. and Mason, B. J., "Electric Charge Transfer Associated With Temper-
ature Gradients in Ice," PROC. ROY. SOC., SER. A, Vol 260, No 1303, 1961.

Lathan, J. and Mason, 3. J., "Generation of Electric Charge Associated With
the Formation of Soft Mail in Thunderclouds," PROC. ROY. SOC., SBR. A, Vol
260, No 1303, 1961.

Latham, J. and Mason, 5. J., "Electrical Charging of Hail Pellets in a Polar-
izing Electric Field," PROC. ROY. SOC., SER. A, Vol 266, No 1326, 1962.

List, R., DISCUSSION. PROBLEMS OF ATMOSPMERIC AND SPACE ELECTRICITY, Amster-
dam-London-New York, 1965.

IND! OFFICIAL lEﬂBIHVLY
FOI10FFKJAI.USE(MMLY

37. Marshall, J. S. and Radhakant, 8.. "Radar Precipitation Maps as Lightning In-
dicators," J. APPL. METEOROL., V01 17, No 2, 1978.

38. Mason, B. J., "Charge Generation in Thunderstorms," PROBL. ATMOS. AND SPACE
ELECTRICITY, Amsterdam-L-N.Y.. 1965.

39. Mason. B. J., "The Physics of the Thunderstorm," PROC. ROY. 8°C., A 327. No
1571, 1972.

40. Mason, B. J., "In Reply to a Critique of Precipitation Theories of Thunder-

storm Electrification by C. B. Moore," QUART. J. ROY. METEOROL. 5°C., Vol 102,
1976.

41. Moore, C. 8., "Charge Generation in Thunderstorm," PROBLEMS OF ATMOSPHERIC AND
SPACE ELECTRICITY, Amsterdam-L-N.Y., 1965.

42. Moore, C. 3., "Reply (Theories of Thunderstorm Blectrificstion)," QUART. J.
ROY. HETEDROL. SOC., Vol 102, 1976.

43. Muchnik, V. M., "0n the Influence of the Electric Field Upon the Processes
in Thunderstorms," TELLUS, Vol 17, No 4. 1965.

44. Muller-Hillebrand, D., "Charge Generation in Thunderstorms by Collision of Ice
Crystals With Graupel Falling Through a Vertical Electric Field," TRLLUS. Vol
6. No 4, 1954.

45. Parczewski, B. L., "Intensity of Precipitation and Frequency of Electric Dis-
charges in Thunderstorms." ACTA GEOPR. POLONICA, Vol 7. No 314, 1959.

46. Pybus, E. J., "Severe Storm Spherics Stroke Rate," PROC. 14TH RADAR METEOROL.
CONF., Tucson. USA. 1970.

47. Reynolds, 5. 6., "Compendium of Thunderstorm Electricity," US Signal Corp.
Research Report. Socorro, 1954. -

48. Reynolds, S. E. and Brook, M., "Correlation of the Initial Electric Field and
the Radar Echo in Thunderstorms," J. METEOROL., Vol 13. 1956.

49. Reynolds, 5. 5.. Brook. M. and Gourley, M. F., "Thunderstorm Charge Separation,"
J. METEOROL., Vol 14, No 5, 1957.

50. Sand, u. R., Muail, D. J. and Schleusener, R. A., "Location of Updrafts in Re-

lation to High Reflectivity Zones," PROC. FOURTH COMP. HEATHER MODIFICATION,
Fort Lsuderdale. USA. 1974.

51. Saunders, P. M. and Ronne, F. C., "A Comparison Between the Height of Cumulus
Clouds and the "eight of Radar Echoes Received From Them," J. APPL. METEOROL.,
Vol 1, No 3, 1962.

52. Scott, H. D. and Levin, 2., “The Effect of Potential Gradient on the Charge
Separation During Interactions of Snow Crystals Hith an Ice Sphere," J. ATMOS.
861., Vol 27, No 3, 1970.

55

FOR OFFICIAI.IEEZ(HULY
53.

56.

55.

S6.

57.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vonnegut. 3., "Possible Mechanism for Fomtion of Thunderstorm Electricity,"
PROC. CONF. A‘l'HOS. ELEC. GEOPHYS. RES. PAIR, V01 102, 1955.

Vonnegut. 3.. "Thunderstorm Theory," PROBLDlS 0P ATHOS. AND SPACE EECTRICITY,
Ansterdan—London-N.Y'., 1965.

Weinscetn, A. 1., "Case Study of a Seeded Storm System." J. REC“. £005.. Vol
’0. No 4, 1970.

Workman, E. J., “thunderstorm Electricity," PROBLB‘IS 0F ATHOS.AND SPACE ELEC—
TRICITY, Amsterdam-L.—N.Y., 1965.

Workman, B. J. and Reynolds. 8. 3., "Electrical Activity as Related to Thunder-
storm Cell Growth," BULL. AMER. METEOROL. 800., Vol 30, 19109.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI¢DFFKJAI.USE(IVLY

UDC 551.574.h2(57)

INFLUENCE OF HIGHLANDS IN THE ASIAIIC TERRITORY OF THE USSR ON THE THICKNESS 0F
GLAZE AND RIHE DEPOSITS

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received
5 Jan 80) pp 52-57 ‘

[Article by L. Ye. Lomilina, candidate of geographical sciences, All-Union Sci—
entific Research Institute of Electric Power]

[Abstract] This article is devoted to a study of the influence of highlands on
glaze and rime deposits in the Asiatic territory of the USSR. The study was lim-
ited to areas with elevations not greater than 600-700 m. These areas are located
in the southern part of western Siberia, in Kazakhstan and in Central Asia. This
investigation is essentially a continuation of the author's earlier study in
HETEOROLOGIYA I CIDROLOGIYA, No 2, 1977. These studies make possible a quantita-
tive evaluation of the influence of highlands on glaze and rims deposits over the
entire lowland-hilly territory of the USSR. Six different varieties of relief
were considered: 1) plain -- flat or dissected by river valleys, gullies or
ravines with local relief not greater than 100 m: 2) windward slopes of highlands
with local relief of more than 100 m; 3) leeward slopes of highlands with local
relief not greater than 100 m; 6) the peaks of such highlands; 5) river valleys
in regions of highlands with local relief of more than 100 a, open for a glaze-
carrying flow; 6) river valleys in highlands not exposed to a glaze-carrying flow
with local relief of more than 100 m. Emphasis is on plains, windward and leeward
slopes. The observational data used in the study were collected over a period of
20-24 years at 40 meteorological stations. It was ascertained that glaze deposition
is dependent on elevation, slope exposure relative to the prevailing wind and on
synoptic-climatic conditions in the region. Expressions are derived which can be
used in preparing maps of glaze loads and for determining possible glaze loads

when planning electric power transmission lines. Figures 2, tables 2; references:
7 Russian.

57

FOR1OFFKJA1.USI(IVLY
ltlltlﬂﬂClAl.USllﬂNlY

UDC 551.465.4S(261)

MODEL OF CIRCULATION OF A BAROCLINIC OCEAN UNDER INFLUENCE OF THE WIND AND HEAT
FLOW FROM THE ATMOSPHERE

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received
16 Dec 80) pp 58-70

[Article by V. E. Ryahinin, USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Text] Abstract: A two-layer model [11. 22, 24] is de-
veloped for the case of an ocean of finite
depth and nonstationarity. The boundary value
problem is determined using five different var-
iants.of boundary conditions at the eastern
shoreline. The temperature and current velocity
fields are computed on the basis of a stationary
solution. The role of the wind-and heat flow in
the formation of oceanic circulations and the
nature of the distribution of water masses is
evaluated.

One of the fundamental problems in the theory of a baroclinic ocean is a determin-
ation of the role of the heat flow and wind in the generation of a stationary
macroscalc circulation and its principal components: oceanic circulations. The
numerical modeling of the density field and currents in the world ocean (for ex-
ample. see [2. 12. 14, 17, 18]) is a promising direction, but it continues to be
held back by the limited capabilities of computers and the difficulties in stip-
ulating correct and detailed boundary conditions. In this connection it is of in-
terest to clarify the principal features of these fields using simple analytical
models.

To a large extent this problem has already been solved by models of circulation
caused by a nonuniform field of tangential wind stresses. Thus, at least quali-
tatively. the following criteria characteristic for the North Atlantic were re-
flected: deepening of the main thermocline in the middle latitudes and the west-
ern part of the ocean. zonal decrease in temperature from west to east in the
subtropics and presence of a region of decreased temperature and thickness of
the baroclinic layer along the northwestern shores of Africa, the correspondence
of the total (from the surface to the bottom) discharge of the Gulf Stream to
that computed from the wind field, and also some other effects. At the same time,
all the precise solutions obtained in this way corresponded to a hydrostatically
stable distribution of water density existing only with a heat inflow to the ocean
in regions to the south of 32°N.

58
FOR OFFICIAl.lﬂiE(NVLY
FINICMNNCIAI.I£§EI(NQLY

0

However, a negative heat flow exerts a considerable influence on ocean circulation
and can serve as a factor in the formation of water masses [26]. In the opinion of
A. S. Sarkisyan [16]. the sign of vorticity of macroscale oceanic circulations is
determined by the direction of the climatic flow of heat between the atmosphere

and ocean. However. some authors ([7. 22]) feel that the role of the wind in the
generation of ocean currents is still more important than the role of the heat flow.

Attempts at simultaneous allowance for the wind and heat flow of an arbitrary sign
have been undertaken in a number of two-layer models. Among these those of the
greatest interest are the so-called ”generalized two-layer models of the type in
[6-6. 11. 22. 24]. Precise solutions of a system of equations for the dynamics of
s baroclinic ocean Ill. 22. 26]. whose vertical structure is characterized by the
presence of a homogeneous layer at the surface. are known. The authors of [24]
identify it with the region of 18’ water. thus formally describing the density
profile characteristic for the center of an anticyclonic circulation. An important
property of these solutions was the existence of a region where the homogeneous
layer disappears and the thermocline emerges at the surface. The corresponding ad-
vectiun of heat by geostrophic currents compensates the outflow in the northern
part of the basin.

Among the shortcomings of the discussed models is the neglecting of heat advection
_by drift currents [11. 24], its inadequately precise computation in [22] (see be-
low), and failure to take into account the influence of final ocean depth and water
transport into the abysssl region. In addition, as will be demonstrated below, the
choice of boundary conditions at the eastern shoreline. and especially the assump-
tion of a constancy of thickness of the homogeneous layer there [22. 241.1ead to
results contradicting observational data.

We formulated a hydrodynamic model generalizing the models [11. 22, 24] for

the cases of a finite depth of the ocean. nonstationarity and allowance for heat
advection by drift currents. He found and examined its stationary solution for
five different variants of boundary conditions on the eastern shoreline. The vel-
ocity components and temperature values were computed for fourteen levels.

Mathematical Model

The following parameterization of the vertical structure of the main thermocline
is used: from the surface to a depth D there is a homogeneous layer (HL). below
which the temperature falls to a constant value 3'0 at the ocean floor.

The equations of motion are taken in a geostrophic approximation; in addition, in
the upper layer the vertical shear of the current drift component is taken into
account. we employ the hydrostatics expression. continuity equation and thermal
conductivity equations. written for the deviations T of temperature from the bot-
tom temperature:

Tl 4 "TI ‘: VT, 1’ u'T’ = 17". (1)

59

FOIioFFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFIJAI.USE¢$VLY

Here the subscripts x. y and the primes denote the derivatives along the coordinate
axes. directed to the east, north and vertically downward, the subscript t denotes
the time derivative; u. v and w are the velocity components along x, y and 2. )L is
the coefficient of vertical turbulent thermal conductivity.

The use of (1) is equivalent to the use of such an equation of state of sea water
in which density is a linear function only of temperature. however, T can be re-
garded as some "equivalent" temperature, equally reflecting the effects of both
temperature and salinity.

The following boundary conditions are stipulated at the ocean surface with z - 5
(g is the level):

'1': 0. out = - 2'". wﬂ’ = - ‘-"". 20?. 1" =4 —- Q. (2)

where V is the coeffi ient of turbulent viscosity, p0 is mean water density, cp is
its heat capacity. t x), ’E(Y) are the components of the vector of wind shearing
stress :1! . Q is the heat flow into the ocean from the atmosphere.

At the ocean floor 80!. y) we uSe the condition of flow around relief

to = u H..- 4: 2-H. (3)

and the condition
'1' - o. (a)

If we limit ourselves to the case of an exponental distribution of water tempera-
ture in the thermocline.

74. 7'... exp [-k “'-'D']- (5)

then using the equation of hydrostatics it is possible to represent the pressure
disturbances relative to the hydrostatic disturbance in the form

I’ =°.\' + 5.3, gT.k" epr— m - on. (6)

where N is the barotropic component of the pressure disturbance, 0/1. is the coef-
ficient of thermal expansion of sea water, g is the acceleration of free falling.

Substituting (6) into the geostrophic expressions, we find expressions for the
horizontal components of the velocity vector. Then, vertically integrating the
continuity equation. we determine the vertical velocity. For finding a precise
solution of the thermal conductivity equation (1). we write expressions for u, v

and w in terms of To, N. k and D and we use (5). In the derived equation in the
form

IF 4: (2—0)) exp t—h (2—D) +
I [Fa—II"; (2—D) lcxpl—Qk (2—0) 1-10, (7)

F. = FM. in I).

we require that all F1 be equal to zero. This requirement is equivalent to the sys-
tem of four equations

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

Tu; T.,tD,+g.;;‘/"|I(N. r.) + 7310', D)|—t~okT.-

_ ,k’T..—.'=I,gf" T..(k"7‘., + 7.0,) = o.'_ (8)
1.. [-1, -- 3m, + my. k) = o. (9)
1mm mm. nay-"1., ”1.9,. co. (m)
‘1 = 0' (11)

where "D is the vertical velocity at the lower boundary, HL, I is a Jacobian of
two functions (at. y). f is the Coriolis parameter, [8- f" is its derivative of y,
assumed to be constant.

we will perform the following operations for determining "D: we will represent P in
the HL in the form
P=—9og('.-.-1,Tl,t)

and we will determine g . assuming a continuity of P with z - D:
;= _ 72'?— —2, mo + r').
we introduce the total flows in the HI. using the formulas

D Q
U: judx. v= jod: (12)
and expressing them using the equations of motion through To. D, g and 'L(x), 1:(Y)
we find the vertical velocity u”: H?
"'°'(T) am A

. - . , .. 0‘ .
11“.. T" 7. 37“,“ +11%? :,T..D,]13)

In contrast to models of "wind" circulation [8, 16, 20, 21 and others], in the
latter expression we retain all the terms on the right-hand side. Thus. the cir-
culntlnn of the main ocennic thermocline is related not only to the nonuniformity
of the wind field over the oceans. but also to the features of its thermal regime:
heat exchange with the atmosphere and advection by drift currents. These factors
cause changes in the thickness and temperature of the “L, which is indicated by the
integral heat balance equation

Ill-u " II7I(I‘. 7...) " gill-'07.,IIT... D It k'l 2: (11.)

I .
=Q—4kf°_ Til-.6171" .. :ln f.'l_
It follows from (9)-(11) that
k :—;—. .' (15)
where C Is an arbitrary constant.

Equations (8)-(14) are reduced to a closed system if “D is excluded from them by
means of (13) and with addition of the condition (3), expressed through the func-
tions To. D and N.

61

FOR OFFIClAl.lEH!(HULY
FOI<0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

We will write it in dimensionless variables:

.I. a?" . '. [H n, .. nf'fll-\.. H) l- "it"QILV. 0)_ ‘6] _ I. “It (H .. (16)

_ val/v: 7 3'9 0, , '.'/"D(::s§.\', -f9‘ :- :80," +09le =0.
I)”, ." :ﬁ3'D/“ILV, ") :- ;-lD°:‘E"/"I(D. 8)—=ID/ '“g‘ j-

— /.-;-'f-' |-.‘?" 8,— 2‘”&,] + x';"f"‘:0 — 7-11,Q : 0.

- II ' I l \ (17)
”‘3', 7-) :1 use +[ek17-‘Ifd0 +7'."f-"D' 1’];

(18)

in (16)-(l8) the same notations have been retained for the dimensionless variables
as for the dimensional variables. Only temperature 9- I‘ll} (the asterisk denotes
the scales of the variables) is denoted differently,

-.

"E = — % f0! ('1')
is the vertical velocity at the lower boundary of the Elanan boundary layer. we
will expand the expressions for the dimensionless parameters: #- (k*H*)-1 is

the ratio of the characteristic values of thickness of the thermocline and ocean
depth, -8 - paLTT*gt lf‘ZLk , where l. is the horizontal scale

r1 - k*L0*pc*/r"t*, 7k - r*k*t*/f*,
8- k‘zyt"

are parameters showing the extent to which the ocean temperature can change during
the characteristic time for advection by geostrophic currents. heat flow from the
atmosphere. wind effect and vertical turbulent exchange respectively, Y“ - k*D*

is the ratio of the scales of H1. and thermocline thicknesses, 5- p LIP" is the
Rossby number.

In addition to the generall acce ted values H1” - 5-10s an. L - 5le8 en, E* -
10-4 sec'l, [3 - 2-10'13 cm' -;ec' ,0 - l yen-’3. g - 10 curse ‘2, 0(1- - 2-10"
(°C)'l we assume t* - 1.5710 sec (galf-year), t‘ - l dyne-cm' , Q* - 4-10‘“
erg-cm‘zsec‘l. x. - l cmz-sec"1. '1" - 25°C. The characteristic thickness of the

baroclinic layer of one kilometer is distributed equally between the thickness of
the m. (0* - 5°10“ cm) and the thickness of the thermocline (k - Z-lp'5 cn‘l). It
is found that u- 0.1, 3 - 0.16, q- 0.0040. 2- 5- 0.0060, r- 1. p - 1.

Boundary Conditions and Method for Solving Equations in a Stationary Model
Several different investigations can be carried out on the basis of solution of
the system of equations (16)-(l7) with N - 0. For example, the authors of [24]
studied the meridional distribution of zonally homogeneous water density for

three cases: when l) the full baroclinic flow at the eastern shore is equal to
zero or when the boundary values D are stipulated. 2) constancy with depth. 3)

'62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINICHﬂﬂCJAI.USElJNlN

linearly increasing. In [11] the condition w - 0 when 2 . D was added to the sys-
tem (16)-(17) and the first condition in [2b] was used. The additional equation
led to a strong dependence of the results of computations on the x parameter; the
variant X - 0 was inadmissible. The two-parameter solution in [16] confirms that
in the ocean there is a surface with a zero vertical velocity, but its depth was
found to be considerably less than the depth of the inflection point on the den-
sity profile, being an analogue of the lower boundary of the H1. A superposition
of conditions 1) and 2) in [2b] was used in [22] in a study of the three-dimen-
sional pattern of the density field.

As indicated by the brief discussion in [11, 22. 24], the boundary-value problem
for system (l6)-(l7) was set only in [22], although the assumption of a constancy
of D at the eastern shoreline cannot be regarded as completely valid. Moreover. as
was demonstrated. for example, in [8, 23]. in circulation of the ocean an import-
ant role is played by the compensation of discharges of baroclinic currents trans-
piring in the deep abyssal region. It can be taken into account using the system
of equations (16)-(l8). which must be supplemented by three boundary conditions
for the functions 3, D and N.

The conditions of absence of total transport of mass and heat at the eastern shore-
line [9] are most natural:
n n

x::l. fud:=0, Karat-=0. (l9a,b)

They are frequently used in studying oceanic circulation of wind origin [9, 16].
Sometimes the condition for horizontal velocity is made more detailed: the inte-
gration domain is broken down vertically into parts, such as from the surface to
the point 2* and from there to the bottom. By analogy with [20]. showing that the
assumption that the total flows normal to the shore are equal to zero within the
limits of the baroclinic layer and below it (for example. see [13. 19]) is equiva-
lent to an absence of exchange between them, it can be assumed that such increased
detail leads to the absence of a coastal interaction of the layers lying above

and below the point 2*. In this study we will examine several variants of choice
of the point z . We will also discuss the 'hnment" condition proposed in [10] for
"multiparametric" models. As a comparison with [22, 24] we will also use a third
possibility: in addition to the conditions (l9a,b) we will stipulate the thick-
ness of the HL at the eastern shoreline to be constant. A summary of the conditions

is given below.

Variants of Boundary Conditions With x - l

A. D = const, 19a, 19b Analogue of variant in [22]
a. u = 0 19a, 19b z* - n

c. N - 0. 19a. 19b 2* - n + r1

n. N ,- o, u,- 0 19a 2‘; .-. D, 2; - o + k'1

E. \‘ when. 19a, 19b [10]

We will limit ourselves to an ocean of a constant depth. The wind stress and the
heat flow are stipulated in the following form:

63

INDR OIWWCJAI.IENE(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

= on + 0.8! sin (3- — a) .,m = 0.

. Q Q~ .= gnaw (1;; I :53; T 039 i. (20)

'h

where 90 is in degrees. Formulas (20) were selected by the author in such a way
that the wind stress is approximated by a curve in Fig. Zn from [7]; the "3 max-
imum in this case is obtained at 26°“ and the heat flow changes sign at 5’ ' 32'N
and attains values 0* and -Q* (scales) in the southern and northern parts of the
computation region.

In solving the stationary problem in system (16)-(18) it is possible to proceed to
new parameters. we will divide A, 5 , Q by 3 and use the notation

- s _ ~ ‘ ‘ ~ 'I ~-
l.—'T=":I.._ ng-“n 1I=T=""n
whered is the characteristic value for A, g and 5,. Since all the parameters

were very close to one another, )1. £1 and Q1 are of the order of unity: with
3-0.04 31-1, e1-1, alums.

Integrating (18) for x. we find an expression for N and substitute it into (16),
(17). The derived equations will be solved by means of expansion of the small para-
meter 5 in a series of powers. It is easy to show that in the zero approximation
60, Do, No - 90. Do, No(y) are determined by the boundary conditions at the east-
ern shoreline of the ocean. Hence follows the importance of a proper choice of the
boundary conditions. In the first and final approximation we have:

31“.".0 T1151”) 4! If“ B,H,B '1’ :J.\'o_.)D| a a:

 

.. _ (21)
=-' 9.11”” -‘<',., (2’ 0n“. " 3"]:R-H) " “J," '1 '* ’Iwch
till.- I) I ,|’_' 9%,“ I 3.“... 4} ’1‘. (I + —E' 00,-)J 'i"
:31] ‘ a 3
I \
: 4 IL. 9.. ""r (5‘ A: "‘ T in" = 'I ”a - VHIQ "
/ 3
ul. : 0"“ .
' ”F ’ 0"+1 Adv. (22)
'-.H
where
‘ 'a 1-20" 3(.\
L: I .. ‘1;— A. :3: -- 1-." Adv=";7-,‘“-mh-
.. (23)

= —”(f’9--_~ + 7/0.D\w-7§D.9.).
I

.I

The introduction of Adv requires clarifications. The transport of heat by drift
currents is proportional to the integral of z for the product of current velocity
and the meridional temperature gradient. In the case of temperature changing

slightly with depth it is more convenient to use the total flows of the drift
currents:

64

FOR OFF-10M. USE ONLY
40-5

5
5

UVIFN
#000
l

3 - 6. 7.9
4 3.0 3. 4 5

mt at least one condition is en
:neoue layer, 6) the homogeneous
:he thickness of the homogeneous
obtained only in variant "A").

. computations were obtained for
FKHICHﬂWCJAI.USELONLY

no information is required on the coefficient of turbulent viscosity. Drift currents
are concentrated in the surface region with a vertical scale of about a hundred
meters. The water temperature in this region differs considerably from the mean tem-
perature 69 of a water layer with a thickness of about one kilometer. Moreover,
whereas the temperature of the upper layer with a thickness of about a hundred
meters drops off to the north, 6?, being determined more by the thickness of the
homogeneous layer than by other factors,frequently increases to the north. This
means that the use of é9in (23) can lead to an error in the sign of heat transport
by drift currents. It was assumed in the computations that ((9 f)y - -l. The

noted effect was discovered for the first time in the numericalugomputations in
[17], and evidently was not taken into account in [22].

The system (21)—(22) is a linear algebraic equation relative to 691 x and D1 x‘
Solving it using Cramer's rule, we obtain the values of the indicated derivatives
and find the distribution of temperature and the thickness of the HL over the sur-
face of the model ocean area. The three-dimensional fields T. P. u. v and w are de-
termined from 6 and D using (5). (6). The formulas for the velocity components were
unwieldy and are not given in the article.

Analysis of Results of Model Computations

The variant "A" is an analogue of that used in [22]. The EL temperature field was
found to be plausible in the eastern part of the ocean (with high x). where it de-
creased monotonically to the north. The rate of the meridional decrease in temper-
ature was determined by the stipulated thickness of the ﬁt at the eastern shoreline.
with lesser thickndSses the dropoff was more rapid. A feature of this variant was
the existence of a point on the eastern shoreline at which the principal determin-
ant of system (21)-(22) changes sign. In the neighborhood of this point a heat bal-
ance is brought about due tc a strong jet current, the position of whose axis is
dependent on the D value at the eastern boundary. Here a first-order approximation
is unsatisfactory. An optimum value of thickness of the “L at the eastern shoreline
(750 m or 1.5 in dimensionless units) was obtained by trial and error. In [4, 5]

V. F. Kozlov obtained results close to variant "A."

Since by "surface temperature" in this model we understand temperature of some lay-
er. it is evident that with an increase in D the temperature should drop. This is
seen clearly in computations for variant "B." Whereas the temperature of the EL is
dependent for the most part on its thickness, the temperature below it agrees sat-
isfactorily with the experimental data cited by V. N. Stepanov [15] (see table).
The model shows a monotonic decrease in temperature with latitude at the eastern
shore. In the western part of the ocean. which is warmer than the eastern part,
there is a center of warm water with its center at 35°“ (Fig. l). The western
boundary of the thermocline in the western part of the ocean drops down at these
latitudes. whereas to the north of these latitudes the isotherms converge, simulat-

ing the emergence of the main thermocline at the ocean surface.

Below we will give a description of the main characteristics of the computed cir-
cuiation.

Since the principal temperature changes and change in thickness of the “L in the
model occur along the meridian. the circulation of the upper layers of the ocean
and also the total transport of waters for the most part are zonal. Heridional

66
FOR 051IC1A1.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

circulation, “caused by turbulent exchange and the influence of the atmosphere,"
becomes comparable with the zonal circulation at depths of about 1 1/2 kilometer,
which agrees with diagnostic computations made by V. A. Burkov in [2]. Circula-
tion within the limits of the “L is anticyclonic (Fig. 2). From the southern boun-
dary of the region to l7-20'N there are "branches of Trade Wind currents," where-
as to the north the circulation is closed by easterly currents and their vorticity
changes to cyclonic at a point corresponding to latitude 32'“. that is, specifical-
ly where the heat flow changes sign.

At depths of about 1.5 km the anticyclonic circulation of the upper layer is re-
placed by a weak circulation close to zonal, a circulation of a westerly direc-
tion; easterly flows are obtained only in the southern part of the basin to a lat-
itude 10”“. At great depths the equatorial currents turn to the west and westerly
transport becomes dominant. There is a weak meridional circulation of a northerly
direction. Vertical movements in the model qualitatively agree well with the com-
putations in [1]. In the central parts of the circulation there are descending
currents, on the periphery -- ascending currents. Not only the wind, but the heat
flow from the atmosphere is significant in their generation.

Variant "D" is, according to the results, very close to the preceding variant. In
contrast to variant "B." at the horizons l.750-2,000 m there is a change in the
anticyclonic circulation to a cyclonic circulation. which at great depths dies out.
The residual weak bottom circulation is directed to the east. The remaining fea-
tures are the same as in variant "B."

Variant "C" is less close to reality than the others. The thickness of the EL is
about 1.5-2 km and its meridional distribution in the western part of the ocean
(minimum at 35°N) leads to a considerable decrease in mean temperature. The re-
placement of an anticyclonic circulation by a cyclonic circulation occurs at
depths of about 2 km.

The combination of boundary conditions "8" best ensures the satisfaction of the
precise nonflowthrough condition at the eastern shoreline (see Fig. 4). The pat-
tern of the field of density and currents in this case is similar to variants "B"
and "D". although it is possible to note a shifting of the region of warmer water
to the south. :br example, at a depth of 2.000 m a temperature maximum (S.7°C) was
obtained at a latitude of lS'N. With an increase in depth the position of the max—
imum becomes more northerly (2,500 m -- 32°N, 3.000 m -- 38'N), which was caused
by an increase in the Coriolis parameter with latitude and accordingly a lesser
attenuation of temperature with depth in accordance with formulas (5) and (15).

An anticyclonic circulation is well expressed to a depth of 750 m; then downward
there is a zone of restructuring of circulation to cyclonic. The latter is estab-
lishcd from n depth of 2.000 n and is replaced by a weak barotropic easterly cir-
culation in the layer 3,000—4.000 m.

Influence of Heat Flow. Hind and Finite Depth on Distribution of Temperature and
Oceanic Circulation

we will examine these effects on the basis of variants "B" and "D," since their re-
sults were closest to observational data.

67

Ft”!(ﬂﬁﬂ(1Al.US€(HNLY
FOI‘OFIICIAI.[EHE(MVLY

 

Fig. l. Heridionnl sections of temperature along western (at left) and eastern (at

right) shores of model ocean. The letters correspond to boundary condition vari-
ants. The lower boundary of the HL with allowance for convection is denoted by a

dashed curve.

Computations show that a deepening of the thermocline and the center of warm water
in the western part of the ocean are formed for the most part under the influence
of the wind. In a case when the sign of Ekman velocity is replaced by the opposite
sign the western part of the ocean was colder than the eastern part and the ther-
mocline in the west was at much shallower depths (see Fig. 3). The HL emerged at
the surface further to the south than in a case with a real distribution of Ek-
man velocity. Here it must be added that the evaluation w; - 1 *l/90f*L

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN3R 051WCJAL.USEZCHVLY

considerably reduces the scale of Ekmsn velocity. which attains values 7 (1.4-10"
cur-sec“1 in dimensional units) [13]. The influence of heat flow is less, primarily
due to the smallness of the corresponding parameter. The effects of wind and tur-
bulent exchange dampen the heat flow effect so that with a change in its sign there
is no change in the direction of rotation of the circulation. In general, the wind
and heat flow are distributed over the North Atlantic in such a way that their
action together and separately leads to an anticyclonic circulation of the upper
layer of waters. The heat flow first of all determines the latitude of emergence
of the thermocline at the surface (D - 0). Since. in the opinion of the authors

of [3. 7, 25],the line of emergence of D at the surface can coincide with the
trajectory of the Gulf Stream, its deflection from the shore and further path are
associated with the distribution of the heat flow. The influence of advection of
heat by drift currents intensifies the action of the heat flow. Both these factors
change sign at about 30°N; to the south of this latitude the heat is carried into
the ocean, whereas to the north it is released.

 

1cnm .em see_

Fig. 2. Level (3). vertical velocity at the lower boundary of the HL (b), temper-
ature at level 1,750 m (c) and currents at horizon 750 m (d) for variant "D" (in
dimensionless units).

The model was very sensitive to ocean depth. With p.- 0 the mean thickness of the HL
was about 2 km. but with y.- 0.1 -- about 1 km, that is, with a decrease in depth
the thermocline is "pressed" toward the surface. It is evident that allowance for
an lnconstancy of ocean depth leads to a still greater dependence of the results of
computations on the H value.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICMHHCJAI.U5810NIN

 

Fig. 3. Heridional sections of temperature along uestern shore of ocean in cases:
a) nonallowance for wind. b) heat flow, c) drift advection of heat; d) changes in
sign of heat flow and Ekman velocity.

           

.. tt. -9 ..0
ii i!-
, 21 i!
: :‘ Ii
L1 =1 H
a C 'D IJE

Fig. 4. Zonnl velocities in eastern part of the ocean (cm/sec) at points corres-
ponding to latitudes 14' (solid curVe) and 61‘ (dashed curve) and corresponding
directions of vertical compensation movenenta in coastal boundary layer (arrows).

According to the studies of Johnson [20. 21] the divergence of zonal velocity in
the region of the east coast boundary layer is counteracted for the most part by
vertical movements. If. on the basis of this hypothesis, the qualitative distrib-
ution of vertical velocity in the boundary layer is determined (see Fig. 4), for
all variants of boundary conditions (except for "A") at 10—30'N there is an up-
welling of waters from a depth of 1.000 I to the surface. The meridional component
of wind stress in this case is not fundaaentally necessary.

70
FOR'OFFKJA1.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is well known that in the regions where the ocean releases heat the stratif-
ication of its upper layer is unstable. The density convection arising in this
case can attain great depths ensuring heat transfer to almost the entire water
layer. The corresponding increase in the thermal conductivity coefficient was
paraneterized in the computations using the formula

”conv-ZII-‘PHQi—Ql].

where p was selected in such a way as to obtain the X values characteristic for
convection. The results indicated an increase in the thickness of the EL in the
northwestern part of the ocean and the formation of a cold water mass in this re-
gion. In this case the thermocline emerges at the surface in the form of a rather
narrow frontal zone. In cases when the increase in the coefficient of thermal con-
ductivity to values characteristic during convection was not taken into account,
the region of emergence of the ther-ocline at the surface was quite elongated and
did not have a "frontal character." with no cold water mass being formed. Thus,
allowance for convection is a necessary link in the modeling of the baroclinic
layer in the ocean.

The author expresses appreciation to P. S. Lineykin and Yu. N. Volkov for atten-
tion to the study and useful discussions of the considered problems.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Bulatov, R. P.. Demin. Yu. L. and Poyarkov. S. 6., "Vertical Circulation of
Haters in the Atlantic Ocean." OKEANOLOGICHESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA (Oceanological

Research). No 28, 1975.

2. Burkov. V. A.. OBSHCHAYA TSIRKULYATSII MIROVOGO OKEANA (General Circulation of
the World Ocean), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat. 1980.

3. Kamenkovich. V. M. and Reznik. G. M.. "On the Theory of Stationary "ind-Driven
Currents in a Two-Layer Fluid." IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATMOSPERY I OKEANA (News
of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), V01 8.
No a. 1972.

4. Kozlov. V. P.. "Thermohydrodynamic Model of Ocean Circulation," 12V. AN SSSR:
FIZIKA ATMOSFERY I OKEANA. Vol 8. No 6. 1972.

S. Kozlov, V. F., "One Possible Generalization of Two-Layer Models of Oceanic
Circulation," lZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKEANA, V01 9. No 9. 1973.

6. Korotayev, c. K. and Shapiro. N. 8., "Generalization of a Two-Layer Model of
Oceanic Circulation." MORSKIYE GIDROPIZICHESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA (Marine Hydro-
physical Investigations). No 6 (67). 1974.

7. Kutalo, A.A., "Some Features of Circulation of Waters in the North Atlantic."
METEOROLOCIYA I CIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology). No 2, 1980.

8. Lineykin, P. 8.. "Influence of Ocean Depth on Structure of the Thermocline,"
TRUDY CIDROMETTSENTRA SSSR (Transactions of the USSR Hydrometeorological Cen-
ter). No 34. 1968.

71

FOR OIWNCJAI.lEi5(NVLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

FOR‘OFFMJA1.USE¢NMLY

Llneykin, P. 5., "Theory of the Main Thermocline," OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanology),
Vol 14. No 6. 1976.

Lineykin, P. S. and Maderich, V. 8., "Dynamics of Oceanic Circulation," ITOGI
NAUKI I TBKHNIKI. OKEANOLOGIYA (Results of Science and Technology. Oceanol-
osy). Vol 5, 1977.

Maderich, V. 8., "Model of Anticyclonic Circulation in the Ocean," IZV. AN
SSSR: PIZIKA ATMOSFERY I OKEANA, Vol 10. No 8, 1974.

MATEMATICHESKIYE MODELI TSIRKULYATSII V OKEANE (Mathematical Models of Cir-
culation in the Ocean), Novosibirsk, Nauka, 1980.

Ryahinin. V. 3., "Estimation of Thickness of the Main Oceanic Thermocline,"
OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanology), Vol 21, No 1, 1981.

Sarkisyan. A. 5., CHISLENNYY ANALIZ I PROGNOZ MORSKIKH TECHENIY (Numerical
Analysis and Prediction of Sea Currents), Leningrad. Gidroneteoizdat, 1977.

Stepanov, V. N., MIROVOY OKEAN (world Ocean), Moscow, Znaniye, 1974.

Frolov, A. V., "Tub-Parameter Model of a Stationary Thermocline in the Ocean,"
IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATMOSFERY I OKEANA, Vol 15, No 8, 1979.

Bryan, K. and Cox. M. D., "A Nonlinear Model of an Ocean Driven by Wind and
Differential Heating. Parts I and II," J. ATMOS. 801., Vol 25, No 6, 1968.

Bryan, K. and Lewis. L. J., "A water Mass Model of the "arid Ocean," J. 630-
PHYS. RES., Vol 86, No C5, 1979.

Johnson. J. A., "On the Wind-Driven Circulation of a Stratified Ocean," J.
MARINE RES., Vol 29, N0 3, 1971.

Johnson, J. A., "Upwelling Layers in a Steady, Hind-Driven Stratified Ocean,"
J. PHYS. OCEANOGR., Vol 3, No 2, 1973.

a
Johnson, J. A., "On the Eastern Boundary Conditions for a Stratified Ocean,"
J. MARINE RES., Vol 31. No 3, 1973.

Johnson, J. A. and Creegan, A., "An Advective Mixed-Layer Model With Imposed
Surface Heating and Wind Stress," DEEP-SEA RES., Vol 26A. No é,_l979.

Necdler, C. T., "A Model for Thernohaline Circulation in an Ocean of Finite
Depth," J. MARINE RES.. Vol 29, No 3, 1967.

Niiler, P. P. and Dubhelday, P. S., "Circulation in a Hind-Swept and Cooled
Ocean," J. MARINE RES., V01 28, No 2. 1970.

Veronis, 6.. "Model of World Ocean Circulation: II. Thermally Driven, Two-
Layer," J. MARINE RES., Vol 34, No 2, 1976.

Worthington, L. V.. "Negative Oceanic Heat Flux as a Cause of Water Mass For-
mation," J. PHYS. 0CEANOGR., Vol 2. No 2, 1972.

72

FOR10FFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAI.UGI:CNVLY

UDC 556.(16:53)

SOME METHODOLOGICAL PROBLEMS IN APPLYING THE MAIN COMPONENTS METHOD IN STUDIES
0? RIVER RUNOPF FIELDS

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA l CIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 Omanuscript received
30 Sep 80) PP 71-77

[Article by V. L. Sklyarenko, candidate of geographical sciences, Institute of
Biology of Internal Waters]

[Abstract] The author examines a number of methodological problems involved in use
of the main components method in an analysis of river runoff fields and its combin~
ation with some other procedures for the compression of data on multidimensional
objects. By the term "analysis of river runoff fields" is meant the finding of base
functions of runoff fields and the classification of rivers on the basis of the
nature of variations of their runoff. Particular attention is devoted to the legit-
imacy of use of natural orthogonal functions of river runoff fields as criteria in
the classification of rivers on the basis of the degree of harmony of variations of
their runoff with time. It is shown that in a general case the use of these vari-
ables for solution of this classification problem is invalid. A new interpretation
of extremal properties of the main components is given. Also dealt with is the
classification of rivers on the basis of such criteria as the coefficients of cor-
relation of rivers with one another and the Euclidean distances between rivers.

The specific problems involved in application of the main components method to such
data are discusSed. The problem of what criteria to use in the classification of
rivers and whether the main components method should be employed in such a case is
dependent on the formulation of the problem, the volume of initial data and the
capabilities of available computers. Almost everything dealt with in this article
can be used in an analysis not only of river runoff fields, but also any other phys-
ical fields. References 7: 6 Russian, 1 Western.

73

INJI‘OFFICIAI.IISEI(MNLY
FOINOF‘ICIAI.USE1DNIN

unc 556.(048+16)
EVALUATION OF PARAMETERS 0F PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS FOR RIVER RUNOFF

Moscow HETEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received
17 Nov 80) pp 78-86

[Article by A. V. Khristoforov, candidate of geographical sciences, Moscow State
University]

[Abstract] The construction of joint confidence domains simultaneously for all par-
ametcrs of the probability distribution for characteristic water discharges to the
greatest degree reflects the real possibilities for extracting information from
observational data for runoff and serves the purpose of hydrological computations.
The application of the confidence evaluation approach makes it possible to obtain
the maximum admissible values of the distribution parameters which do not contra-
dict the observation series and accordingly can be taken into account in the com-
putation of hydrological characteristics. For the case of a three-parameter gamma
distribution the author proposes a method for constructing a joint confidence do-
main of the values of all three parameters: normal runoff. variation and asymmetry

coefficients, taking into account the interrelationship of these parameters and the
accuracy in their determination. Practical examples of application of this method
are presented. Particular attention is devoted to the maximum admissible values

for the ratio of the asymmetry and variation coefficients. The method of joint
evaluation of the parameters of the probability distribution for runoff characterb
istics can serve as a useful supplement to the results and conclusions presented

by A. V. Rozhdestvenskiy in the monograph OISENRA TOCHNOSTI KRIVYKH RASPRBDELENIYA
GIDROLOGICHESKIKH KHARAKTERISTIK (Evaluation of the Accuracy of Curves of the Dis-
tribution of Hydrological Characteristics), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1977.

Tables 3; references: 13 Russian.

76

FOR 0F?KJAI.USE¢NVLY
FORIOFHKJAI.USE(NVLY

UDC 551.482.212.1
STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS 0? RIVER BOTTOM RIDGED RELIEF

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received
26 Nov 80) pp 87-91

[Article by D. l. Grinval'd, professor, V. I. Nikora and T. V. Boyko, Odessa Hydro-
meteorological Institute]

[Abstract] The hydraulic resistance of a channel is determined for the most part by
bottom waves - ridges of different size. But since the characteristics of these
ridges vary randomly along the length of a river, sand waves of different scales

are observed and the problem arises of determining the characteristic dimensions

of the ridges: length and height, being representative characteristics of ridged
relief in the investigated reach. Since solution of this problem will facilitate
solution of the problem of hydraulic resistances of alluvial channels, the authors
attempt to determine the dimensions of ridged relief by the correlation and spectral
analysis method. A mathematical model of ridged bottom relief is proposed. This mod-
el was checked by computing the correlation functions and spectral densities of the
longitudinal profiles of the bottom obtained by echo sounding for the Danube, Rioni
and Turunchuk Rivers. 0n the basis of the nature of change in the correlation func-
tions and the corresponding spectral densities it was possible to classify them
with an indication of the difference between groups. It was found that the spectral
density curves have clearly expressed peaks: in the region of large wave numbers

the spectrum has the form of a power function; as a rule the exponent is equal to
-3. Figures 2; references 7: 6 Russian, 1 Western.

75

FOIIOFEKJAI.USECHNLY
FOI10FFKJAI.USE(M¥LY

UDC 556.535.6
COMPUTATION OF TURBIDITY PROFILE IN FLOW WITH TRANSPORTED SBDIHENTS

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received
14 Oct 80) PP 92-96

[Article by Ye. P. Anisimova, I. I. Ivlev and A. A. Speranskaya, candidates of
physical and mathematical sciences, Moscow State University]

[Abstract] On the basis of data from field observations the authors define the con-
ditions under which it is possible to apply diffusion theory for computing the ver—
tical distribution of turbidity in a river of the lowland type with transported
sediments. The measurements were made during summer in a linear river reach 255 m
in length, with s width of about 20 m and a depth of about 1 m. The mean current
velocity was measured with a small current meter, fluctuations of the longitudinal
and vertical velocity components were determined with a thermohydrometer. The mean
turbidity value and turbidity fluctuations were registered with a photoelectric
turbidity meter. A synchronous record of velocity and turbidity fluctustions was
obtained with a loop oscillograph. The turbulent fluxes of momentum were computed
from records of the fluctuation parameters. The mean current velocity during the
measurement period was 30 cm/sec. At the observation point the distribution of mean
velocities across the river remained constant. The form of the vertical profile of
mean velocity did not change in the investigated reach with transition from section
to section along the flow. Samples were taken at these same horizons parallel with
the turbidit measurements. Host of the particles in the stream were silt with a
diameter 10‘ cm. The distribution of sediments remained constant in size at all
horizons except for the thin layer near the bottom. The mean turbidity in the inves-
tigated flow was 40-60 mg/liter; the distribution did not change with transition
from one section to the next. The turbulent viscosity coefficient and the coeffic-
ient of turbulent diffusion of the admixture were computed. It is shown that with
allowance for the real relationship of these two coefficients it is possible to

compute the mean turbidity profile in a natural plane open flow with transported
sediment. Figures 6, tables 1; references 11: 10 Russian. 1 Western.

76

INDI‘OFIWCIAl.lEIZCMULY
FORlOFFTCLAl.USE(NNLY

UDC 551.584.3/5:632.11:582.949.27

REGULATION OF PHYTOCLIHATB AS A MEANS FOR SUBSTANTIATING THE COMPONENTS FOR
COMBINED SONINGS

Moscow METEOROLOOIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received
30 Jul 80) PP 97-101

[Article by A. T. Ksendz and L. P. Savchuk, candidates of agricultural sciences,

and Vi N. Pokryshchenko. All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Volatile Oil
Crops

[Abstract] In the southern regions of the Ukrainian SSR great areas are occupied by
heat-loving volatile oil crops. In the Crimea the greatest area is devoted to clary
sage which yields a valuable volatile oil for perfumes and raw material for medi-
cines. This is a biennial crop whose flower clusters are gathered only in the sec-
ond year of growth. During the first year the flower clusters form only under def—
inite weather conditions favorable for sage and when the fields are kept free of
weeds. The irregularity in flowering and the great expenditures of manual labor in
care of the crop and periodic damage to the sprouts by dust storms during the first
year of growth make the cultivation of sage in clean cultivated fields unprofit-
able. The authors propose the "combined" cultivation of sage. Simultaneously with
sage. in the first year there is cultivation of crops for green fodder or hay,
which makes it possible to slow down the development of sage so that by autumn the
"rosette" will have formed and strengthened and in the second year there will be

a full yield of flower clusters. Accordingly, a field occupied by a combined crop
gives an annual yield (in the first year a crop of green mass or hay, and in the
second year a yield of sage flower clusters) and at lesser cost. The article gives
the results of a study of the phytoclimate of such sown areas with sage being sup-
plemented with winter rye, oats and winter bean-cereal mixtures. Such a cultiva—
tion method is recommended not only for combined sowings of different crops, but
also for different varieties of the same crop and also for other combinations of

plants for the purpose of increasing their productivity. Tables 2; references:
7 Russian.

77

FOR OIIICJAI.IEII(NULY
FOI‘OFTICJAI.UEIZ(MULY

UDC 551.551.8

INVESTIGATION OF HEAT FLOWS IN Thé ATMOSPHERIC “BARF“ATER LAYER UNDER THE ATLANTIC
TROPICAL EXPERIMENT PROGRAM

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received
11 Dec 80) pp 102-109

[Article by Yu. A. Volkov, L. c. Yelagina and B. H. Koprov, Institute of Atmospher-
ic Physics]

[Abstract] The principal objective of the Atlantic Tropical Experiment (GATE) mas
an investigation of the mechanisms for the accumulation and transformation of en-

ergy by the atmosphere and ocean and its transfer by movements of different scales.
Using GATE data, the authors have formulated an improved model of circulation of
the tropical atmosphere. Data were also collected for validating methods for the
parameterization of microscale processes in model computations, that is, for find-
ing their relationships to the macroscale characteristics of the atmosphere and
ocean. The solution of these problems involved the implementation of special in-
vestigations for checking existing methods and developing new methods for determ-
ining vertical turbulent fluxes of heat, moisture and momentum. In addition, a
study was made of the physical mechanisms for the formation of heat flows at the
ocean surface and their difference from similar processes over the land. The most
important result of the experimental program for investigating the heat flows was
a quantitative determination of the heat balance at the ocean surface. It was
found that the ocean assimilates about half the flux of solar energy intersecting
its surface, which is appreciably greater than the evaluations made earlier. This
emphasizes the role of the ocean as a heater in the global heat engine. The sec-
ond half of the flux is returned to the atmosphere in approximately equal frac-
tions in the form of effective radiation and the turbulent flux of latent heat.
Another important result was the difference in the spectral composition of the
turbulent fluxes of heat and moisture. The first are lower-frequency or greater
in scale. This is a possible explanation of the difference in the heat and mois—
ture exchange coefficients discovered in the TROPBKS, ATERS and GATE experiments.
The article gives details concerning the method for measuring turbulent fluxes,
the characteristic values of the measured parameters, spectral characteristics,
turbulent fluxes and their parameterization. By means of a comparison of the en-
ergy fluxes at the upper and lover boundaries of the atmosphere the authors eval-
uate the contributions of the atmosphere and ocean to the total meridional trans-
fer of energy. Figures 5, tables 1; references 24: 14 Russian, 10 Western.

78

FOI¢0FFKJAI.UBE13WLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509.2:681.14

SOME APPLICATIONS OF THE 'WEATliERMAN-ELECTRONIC COMPU'I'ER' DIALOGUE SYSTEM IN
PROBLEMS OF ROUTINE DATA PROCESSING AND NUMERICAL WEA'I'I'IER FORECASTING

lioscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received
2 Dec 80) PP 110—114

[Article by A. A. Bagautdinov. V. P. Krysov, '1'. H. Pakhomova and P. Yu. Pushistov,

candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, West Siberian Regional Hydro-
meteorological Center]

[Abstract] During recent years ”weatherman-electronic computer" dialogue systems
have come into extensive use. This article gives concise information on the dia-
logue system developed at the West Siberian Regional Hydrometeorological Center.
In developing this system the following factors were taken into account: already
available and projected apparatus; features of the system routinely employed in
data processing and the models and schemes in use for numerical forecasting. The
variant described here is based on a "Vesna" computer and a "Videocon-MO" dis-
play (image field 200 x 150 mm, number of lines -- 16, number of symbols in line
-- 80), as well as an appropriate mathematical support system. This mathematical
support makes two operating regimes possible: output of information to the dis—
play screen with subsequent continued calculations in conformity to the main pro—
gram; output of information to the display screen with subsequent input of in-
formation from the display. This variant is being used on an experimental basis
with multiple checking of routine meteorological data for short-range numerical
weather forecasting for the northern hemisphere and for a limited territory and in
carrying out tests of a hydrodynamic-statistical model for local forecasting of
the diurnal variation of meteorological elements at a point. The article gives

a detailed description of the algorithms and some results of use of the dialogue
system in these two problems. Figure l is a block diagram of the multiple check-
ing program used in combination with the dialogue system; Figure 3 is a block
diagram of the algorithm for the model for local forecasting in combination with
the dialogue system. The execution of the program is illustrated in the example
of specific observational situations. Reliable conclusions concerning the ef-
fectiveness of use of the dialogue systen and the improvement in forecasts pre-
pared with its use can be drawn only after one to three years of experimental use.
Figures 3; references 8: 7 Russian, 1 western.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

UDC 551.(5+667):556.6l(268.2)

EXPERIENCE IN SCIENTIFIC-OPERATIONAL HYDROMETEOBDLOGICAL AND ICE DATA SUPPORT FOR
"INTER VOYAGES IN THE ARCTIC

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GlDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (manuscript received
21 Oct 80) PP 115-117

[Article by V. A. Voycvodin and A. I. Hurzin, candidates of geographical sciences,
Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute]

[Text] Abstract: The article deals with the prob-
lems involved in the structure, organiza-
tion, makeup, methods and special features
of scientific-operational and hydrometeoro-
logical support for arctic navigation in the
southwestern part of the Kara Sea and the
Yenisey estuary during the winter season.

In accordance with the resolutions of the 25th CPSU Congress on measures for the
lengthening of the navigation season on the Northern Sea Route, since 1978 there
has been yearbround navigation in the western region of the Arctic. This-was pre-

ceded by the winter navigation of transport ships along the route Barents Sea-
Dudinka (beginning in 1970) and the movement of ships during the winter-spring per-
iod to the Yamal Peninsula (Cape Kharasvey) with unloading on the shore ice (for
the first time carried out in 1976). These voyages revealed the practical possibil-
ity of winter navigation on the mentioned routes of ships of the ice classes ULA

and UL in the wake of powerful icebreakers.

In the 1960’s navigation in the lower reaches of the Yenisey, the Yenisey estuary
and the southwestern part of the Kara Sea on the average ended in late November.

Beginning in 1970 the Murmansk Marine Shipping Administration began to carry out
regular winter voyages, as a result of which in individual years the navigation
season ended three or four sonths later than the average time. and in recent years
it has become year-round [6]. From the stage of experimental voyages of individual
ships the winter navigation has progressed to the stage of planned transport of
cargo to Dudinka and the return transport of the production of the Noril'sk Com-
blue, as well as the transport of cargo to a number of places in the southwestern
part of the Kara Sea.

In order to support winter voyages, since 1970 there has been a scientific—opera-
tional group whose principal task has been supplying of ice and hydrometeorolog-
ital data for winter navigation, study of the natural conditions for navigation

80

FOR'OFI1C]AI.USIJONLN
FOR OFFICJAI.U8513NLY

and their influence on the passability of icebreakers and transport ships through
the ice.

The scientific—operational support includes: preparation of meteorological fore-
casts with an advance time of 1-3 and 8-10 days, long-range ice forecasts of the
thickness of ice with an advance time of 1-2 months, ice forecasts of the distribu-
tion of ice with an advance time of 1-10 days, forecasts of the compaction of ice
with an advance time of 1-3 days, navigation advisories, formulation of forecasts
of depths in limited sections of the route with an advance time of 1-3 days, and
systematic collection, processing and analysis of data on the state of the ice
cover and on level variations in limited sections of the route. In addition, the
work program provides for every possible provision of information to the directors
of sea operations and captains of ships on the actual hydrometeorological and ice
conditions on navigation routes, organization and implementation of ice aerial re-
connaissance and other generally adopted types of support [2-5].

The scientific-operational support of winter navigation has its specific features
in comparison with the support of navigation in the summer navigation period. In
particular, the support of winter navigation transpires against a background of de-
teriorating ice and hydrometeorological conditions, with the universal formation
over great areas of ice which increases rapidly in thickness (as a result of which
the compaction of ice occurs to all intents and purposes in the presence of winds
of all directions), negative air temperatures to -55°C and under polar night con-
ditions (extremely limited visibility).

The support of winter navigation occurs in the absence of sufficiently reliable
and tested methods for the prediction of ice conditions in the sea section of the
route (distribution of sea ice under the influence of dynamic and thermal factors,
ice compaction, etc.). All this imposes increased requirements first of all on the
organization of clear receipt and analysis of all types of operational information,
including data on ice passability for icebreakers and transport ships.

a) Hydrometeorological and ice forecasts. Long-range ice forecasts of the thickness
of ice in the southwestern part of the Kara Sea are prepared as a result of comput-
ations using theoretical and empirical dependences. The basis for these dependences
is allowance for heat exchange of ice with the surrounding medium and also the in-
fluence of dynamic factors on the process ofice growth. The computations are made
on an electronic computer of the "Minsk-320" type.

Forecasts of ice compaction occupy an extremely important place in the scientific-
operational support of winter navigation conditions. The significance of predic-

tion of this phenomenon is attributable to the fact that during winter more than
502 of the total extent of the navigation route is situated in compacted ice. At
the same time, as indicated by the experience of winter navigation, when there is
compaction even powerful modern icebreakers experience difficulty when operating
in one-year ice. In addition, during winter, when there is ice compaction, there
is an accompanying phenomenon of adhesion of pulverized ice and snow to the hulls

of icehreakers, the formation of so-called "ice cushion." These factors consider-
ably reduce the technical possibilities of icebreakers. This leads to a sharp in-
crease in the necessary material expenditures on the conveying of ships.

81

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!‘0FF1C1AI.[EIE(HVLY

For this reason the timely prediction of these phenomena favors an optimum choice
of the route for the convoying of ships and a more rational organization of opera-
tion of the fleet.

The mechanism of formation of these phenomena is still inadequately studied, as a
result of which the level of their prediction is low.

Meteorological forecasts are of great practical importance in supporting winter
navigation. This type of forecasts. in addition to being of independent importance,
is the basis for the preparation of different kinds of ice and hydrological fore-
casts. On the basis of a wind forecast (prediction of atmospheric pressure) it is
possible to prepare forecasts of the distribution, compaction and thinning of the
ice. The forecasting of air temperature is the main component of forecasts of ice
thickness. The prediction of wind velocity and direction will be a basis for pre-
paring forecasts of depths along limited sections of the navigation route (Tutu-
shinskiy sand bar and Sopochnaya Karga regions).

Forecasts of wind-induced level fluctuations in the Turushinskiy sand bar and Sop-
ochnaya Karga regions make it possible to plan and organize the operation of the
icebreaker fleet correctly, as well as the loading of transport ships at Dudinka.

b) Special features of the organization and implementation of ice aerial recon-
naissance during the polar night. Ice aerial reconnaissance at the present time
is the principal means for the collection of information on the state of the ice

in arctic seas. During the period of support of winter navigation use is made of
two methods for aerial reconnaissance: visual and instrumental.

The planning of aerial support is accomplished in such a way that observations by
the indicated methods supplement and control one another, which in turn makes

possible the most complete use of the positive properties of each method and com-
pensation of their inadequacies.

The principal tasks of visual observations are:

- nighttime and twilight determination of continuity, degree of compaction, hum-
mocking, snow cover and other ice characteristics;

-- determination of the system of channels and leads, and also search for the op-
timum variant of navigation;

- direct convoying (air patrols) of individual ships and grolps of ships under
complex ice conditions.

The instrumental observations have the purpose of:

-- mapping of the position of the boundaries of zones with different ice character-
istics, in particular. the edges of inclusions of residual ice, and also shore ice;
- determination of systems of major channels and leads;

- determination of the nature of ice drift on the basis of data from successive
surveys in polygons.

The operational detection of such an important characteristic of the state of ice
as compression is still impossible by the instrumental method at the present time
due to the low resolution of the radar station (50 m). This makes difficult a

82

FOR OFFICIAI.lEﬂ!(HVLY
FORIOFFKJA1.US£(NNLY

clear identification of zones of compaction and hummocking of ice. The process—
ing of EFRU films (elcktronnoye fotoregistriruyushcheye ustroystvo -- electronic
photoregistry unit) to a definite degree will help in the detection of these zones.
These films are obtained as a result of a radar survey. The detailed analysis of
the film requires several hours, which considerably reduces the routine use of the
collected information.

The implementation of a visual ice reconnaissance during winter involves a number
of difficulties and specific features. This type of reconnaissance under polar
night conditions is accomplished by means of lighting with the aircraft's landing
lights, but sometimes only with illumination by the moon. Under such conditions an
evaluation of the dynamic state of the ice cover is considerably complicated. Never-
theless. using a number of criteria (fresh traces of humumcking, layering, rate of
ice closing in behind the ship's stern, etc.) the ice reconnaissance hydrologist
gives a quite objective pattern of distribution of the force of compression of the
ice in the investigated region.

It should be noted that in the support of winter navigation the greatest effect from

visual aerial reconnaissance is given by air patrols over the convoy. It has been
repeatedly noted that when escorting convoys when there is limited visibility the

icebreakers frequently over a long time move parallel to the broad channels or

leads, at some distance from them. In this case an air patrol considerably increas-
es the rate of convoying of ships at nighttime. in this process making the maximum
use of fresh cracks, channels and weak sectors of ice breccia which are hidden from

the iccbrcaker by the darkness and steaming from the ice. As indicated by observa-
tional data, the rate of conveying of the ships in continuous. compacted ice increas-

es by a factor of 6-7 when the convoy is being guided by an aircraft operating by
the patrol method.

The air patrol method gives the greatest effect when there is compaction of the ice
because ordinary compaction is a local phenomenon and upon discovering a zone of
rompaction the hydrologist almost always finds a way to bypass this zone.

c) Organization of navigation under polar night conditions. The organization of nav-
igation during the polar night period is characterized by a number of special fea-

tures:
-- the captains of the icehrenkers ensuring the convoying of ships are required to

adhere rigorously to the recommended navigation courses, clearly implement the in-
structions on the time for cessation of movement in expectation of an improvement
in ice conditions and cessation of ice compaction and also at the proper time carry
out the recommendations on the change in navigation course and maneuvering around
zones of heavy ice and zones with intensive compression;

-— when issuing recommended navigation courses from aboard an ice reconnaissance
aircraft it must be taken into account that under the specific conditions of the
polar night different maneuvers and tactics of icebreakers and transport ships are
extremely complicated;

-- the phenomenon of adhesion of an ice "cushion" to the icebreaker hull can create

the effect of a sudden braking of the icebreaker. which is in the lead. up to its
complete stoppage, which can result in an overriding or collision with the convoyed
ship;

83

FOIlofFIJAl.USEINVLY
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

-- in the issuance of recommendations it must be taken into account that in sec-
tions of the path situated in the mouth regions of rivers the probability of ice
adhesion is increased;

- steaming of the surface, blizzards, and darkness of the polar night have the
effect that it is not always possible to determine the character of movement of
the conveyed ship.

The singular nature of operation of the fleet is also manifested during movement in
shore ice, through a channel broken by an icebreaker. 0n the basis of available
experience of winter voyages specialists have formulated definite optimum criteria
for use of a channel during winter. In particular, the use of one channel is feas-
ible over the course of 10-15 days and then due to pressure from below and shifts
in the neighborhood of the channel brow and freezing together of the ice the ad-
vance of ships and iccbreakers is made difficult. For this reason it is better to
break a new channel through "virgin ice." During the period when the channel is be-
ing used each two or three days it must be "upgraded," that is, the icebreaker must
pass through the channel at the mentioned interval.

The duration of use of a channel is dependent as well on its correct use. For ex-
ample, movement must be accomplished along the axis of the channel and the route
must be traversed with smooth turns (without abrupt changes in direction).

As a result of detachment of part of the shore ice under the influence of the wind
and tides ice compaction is sometimes noted even in the neighborhood of a channel
broken through the the shore ice. In this case it is recommended that a channel be
broken through in another place. An important role in supporting the convoying of
the ships through the channel is played by divers who in the course of ice morpho-
metric investigations determine the character and degree of pressure from below

in the region of the channels which are freezing together and the process of adhe-
sion of ice to the icebreaker hull and provide other valuable information. The or--
ganization of navigation under polar night conditions provides for a multisided an-
alysis of the unfavorable effect of natural factors on icebreakers and transport
ships.

Despite the noted difficulties of a scientific-operational, hydroneteorological and
ice data support system for winter navigation in the Arctic, this is important in

the long run, having great importance in the national economy.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Gorbunov, Yu. A., "Scientific-Operational Support of Sea Operations in the East-
ern Region of the Arctic During the 1959 Navigation Season," PROBLEHY ARKTIKI I
ANTARKTIKI (Problems of the Arctic and Antarctica), No 5, 1960.

2. Dubovtsev, V. F.. "Scientific-Operational Support of Navigation in the Western
Region of the Soviet Arctic in 1959," PROBLEMY ARKTIKI I ANTARKTIKI, No 5,
1960.

3. Kupetskiy. V. N., "Scientific Support of Navigation in the Eastern Arctic in
1970," IZVESTIYA VSESOYUZNOCO GEOGRAFICHESKOGO OB-VA (News of the All-Union

Geographic Society). Vol 103, No 4, 1970.

84

F0! OFFICIA1.USEGMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Kupctskiy. V. N., "Scientific Validation of Navigation in the Eastern Arctic
in 1972," IZVBSTIYA VSESOYUZNOGO GEOGRAPICHESKOGO OBSRCHESTVA, Vol 106. No 1,

1974.

S. Kupetskiy, V. N., "Scientific Support of Navigation in the Eastern Arctic in
1976," IZVESTIYA VSESOYUZNOGO GEOGRAFICHESKOGO OB-VA, Vol 108, No 6. 1976.

6. Murzin, A. I. and Romanov. A. A.. "Special Features of Ice Convoying of Ships
During the Polar Night," PROBLEM? ARK‘I‘IKI I ANTARKTIKI. No 50, 1977.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICHHWCIAI.lEHE(MULN

CATALOGUE 0? ICE ENCRUSTATIONS IN TEE BAYKAL-AHUR RAILROAD ZONE, ISSUE I:
ICE ENCRUSTATIONS OF THE UPPER PART OF THE CHARA RIVER BASIN (KATALOG NALEDEY
ZONY BAH, VYPUSK I: NALEDY VERKBNEY CHASTI EASSEYNA R. CHARY), LENINGRAD,

GIDROMETEOIZDAT, 1980
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 118-119

[Review by N. I. Tblstikhin. professor, meritorious worker in science and technol-
ogy. doctor of geological and mineralogical sciences, and 0. N. Tolstikhin. doctor
of geological and mineralogical sciences]

[Abstract] One of the characteristic natural peculiarities of the Baykal-Amur Rail-
road zone is the formation of ice encrustations -- masses of layered ice forming
in winter due to atmospheric. surface and ground water on the surface of rocks,
soils, ice and also in large cavities in the earth's crust. This phenomenon is
observed widely in the mountainous regions of Siberia, Northern Urals and in the
Northeastern USSR. They constantly represent a problem for engineers and in the
construction of transportation facilities, bridges, residential areas and indus-
trial complexes. Ice encrustations greatly increase the costs of construction work
and the use of transportation lines. 0n the other hand, agriculturalists have
learned to use ice encrustations for increasing the productivity of meadow areas.
As a result of interaction of many complex natural conditions ice encrustations
provide much information on such matters as permafrost conditions in the regions
where they occur, ground water resources, composition and formation of surface
waters. The reviewed book covers all aspects of this subject. It covers an exten-
sive territory in the upper part of the Chara River basin. Numerous maps, tables
and photographs support the text. The book is based on the statistical processing
and analysis of a broad spectrum of parameters predetermining the conditions for
the occurrence of ice encrustations, their relationship to relief elements and
absolute elevations. as well as the interrelationship of the geometrical para-
meters of ice encrustations. Expressions have been derived which can be used

with a high degree of reliability to estimate the volumes of ice encrustations on
the basis of the results of interpretation of aerial and space photographs and
accordingly compute the natural resources of ground water. using the possibilit-
ies of remote research methods. This is only the first "catalogue," and it is hop-

ed that others will follow. The book will be of exceptional value to specialists
working in the zone of the Baykal-Ammr Railroad and far beyond its limits.

86

ﬁOItMHﬂCIAI.USE¢NVLY
well known in the USSR and abroad. During 1957—1959, during the IGY period, 6. V.
Gruza participated in the Third Soviet Antarctic Expedition. Until 1970 being a
specialist at the Central Asian Regional Scientific Research Hydrometeorological
Institute, he directed work in the field of aerology, the creation of statistical
short-range weather forecasting methods and the development of automated schemes
for the prediction of temperature and precipitation in Central Asia. These inves-

proccssing and storage of hydrometeorological data, created automated data recov-
ery systems. carried our investigations of the statistical structure of modern
climate and long-range weather forecasting with the use of the group analogues
method, etc. Through energetic efforts and scientific innovations he created an
automated system for the collection, processing and monitoring of meteorological
data and a centralized system for the storage of aerological information arriving
in communication channels. He laid a scientific basis for systems of hydrometcor-
ologlcal data banks and the centralized synoptic archives on magnetic tapes which
he developed is used extensively by many researchers. Georgiy Vadinovich has pub-
lished more than 110 studies, including monographs, study aids and reviews.
Figures 1.
FOIiOFﬁKJA1.USE(MULY

AWARDS AT THE USSR ALL-UNION EXHIBITION OE ACHIEVEMENTS IN THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8. Aug 81 pp 120-123
[Article by M. M. Kuznetsova]

TText] The Main Committee of the USSR Exhibition of Achievements in the National
Economy has given additional awards to participants in the specialized exhibition
"Agrometeorological Support of Agriculture in the Nonchernozem Zone" and the
special exhibits "winners of Socialist Competition" and "Artificial Modification
of Meteorological Processes and Extinction of Forest Fires" presented in the
"Mydrometeorological Service" Pavilion.

A First-Degree Diploma is awarded to:

-- The All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Agricultural Meteorology: for the
development of a system for the agrometeorological support of agriculture in the
Nonchernozem zone and creation of a complex of methods for quantitative evaluations
of the state of sown crops and predictions of the yield of agricultural crops on s
urified methodological basis of applied mathematical models of the productive pro-
cess of these crops and the development of methods for prediction applicable to the
peculiarities of crop cultivation on drained lands, which made possible a more efr
fective, and in greater volume. servicing of agricultural production in meliorated
lands.

—— The Murmansk Territorial Administration of Mydromsteorology and Environmental
Monitoring: for the successful and timely supplying of hydrometeorological inform-
ation concerning all unfavorable hydrometeorological conditions to all the prin-
cipal branches of the national economy, Party and government agencies.

The administration successfully supported the fishing industry and thereby saved 28
ship-days of fishing time; the navigation of ships on recommended courses provided
a saving of running time at sea of 92 ship-days.

The administration improved the system for the transmission of warnings concerning
dangerous and especially dangerous phenomena, making it possible to reduce the time
required for transmission to users by a factor of 10.

- The Latvian Republic Administration of Bydrometeorology and Environmental Monitor-
ing: for work on study of the hydrometeorological regime. hydrometeorological sup-
port nf the national economy and monitoring the environment in the republic. The
economic effect from support of the national economy was about 20 million rubles.

88

INJR‘OIWNCJAI.IIEEZ(MVLV
FOR OFFNJAI.US£IDNLN

-- Transbaykaliun Territorial Administration of Hydrometeorology and Environmental
Monitoring: for attaining high indices in implementation of the plan for economic
and social development and socialist obligations in 1979, for broadening and in-
creasing the effectiveness and quality of hydrometeorological support of the
national economy and population of the country.

A Second-Degree Diploma is awarded to:

-- The Estonian Agrometeorological Laboratory of the All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Agricultural Meteorology: for the developed method for computing the
potential yield of agricultural crops. for formulating recommendations on the spe-
cific allowance for agrometeorological information in the programming of yields
for planted and fallow earth, this making it possible to obtain additional produc-
tion valued at 12 rubles more per 1 m2 of hothouse area.

—- Northern Territorial Administration of Hydrometeorology and Environmental Mon-
itoring: for formulating agrometeorological recommendations for the carrying out
of top dressing of winter crops, preparation of the soil and seeds, prediction of
the anticipated times of maturing of grain crops and mean oblast yield. The econ—
omic effect from use of the recommendations in agricultural production of Arkh—
angel'skwyn and Vologodskaya Oblasts and the Komi ASSR during 1979 was more than
22 million rubles.

-- Lenino-Dachnoye Agrometeorological Station of the Central .olga Hydrometeorolog-
ical Observatory: for routine agrometeorological support for crop cultivation

in five regions of Moscow Oblast, the preparation and introduction of new forms

and types of routine materials, the use of which in 1979 made it possible to ob-
tain an etonomic effect of more than 1 million rubles.

-- Northwertern Territorial Administration of Mydrometeorology and Environmental
Monitoring: for high—quality hydrometeorological support of vegetable production
at five specialized production combines of Leningradskaya Oblast, the formulation,
with allowance for agrometeorological conditions, of recommendations on the norms
and times for the irrigation of fields, for recommendations on the use of frost
warnings in the transplantation of seedlings on open ground, this making it pos-

sible to safeguard the seedlings and obtain additional vegetables valued at more
than 300, 000 rubles .

-- Klrovskaya Zonal Hydrometeorological Observatory of the Verkhne-Vblzhskoye
(Upper Volga) Territorial Administration of Hydrometeorology and Environmental
Monitoring: for carrying out investigations of the hydrological regime of melior-
ntod lands in Kirovskaya Ohlast and timely warning of the catastrophic flood of
l979. making it possible to safeguard drainage systems, goods and equipment valued
at about 7 million rubles.

-- Bryansk Agrometeorological Station of the Territorial Administration of Hydra-
meteorology and Environmental Monitoring of the Central Chernozem Oblasts: for
high-quality hydrometeorological support of agriculture in Bryanskaya Oblsst,
direct participation in investigations for more precise determination of the ag—
rometeorological parameters of conditions for the growth of new varieties of
potatoes and rye, study of the microclimate of irrigated lands.

89

FOR¢OFFKJAI.USL(NNLY
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(MVLY

-- Scientific Research Heather Ship "Musson" of the Odessa Division of the State
Oceanographic Institute: for attaining high indices in carrying out socialist ob-
ligations in 1979. overfulfilling the plan for expeditionary work by 152 and a
saving of 77.3 tons of fuel. The economic effect from the use of recommendations
on the navigation of ships was more than 200,000 rubles.

-- Scientific Research Ship "Mikhail Somov" of the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific
Research Institute: for attaining high indices in the implementation of socialist

competition and under complex conditions supporting the freight and transport op-
erations of the 24th and 25th Soviet Antarctic Expeditions.

-- Vest Siberian Regional Scientific Research Institute: for high-quality support
of the national economic organizations with hydrometeorological and specialized
information on environmental monitoring; creation of new methods for predicting
hydrometeorologicnl elements and phenomena, preparation of aids, regime-reference
and norm-setting publications for the national economy.

-- Ul'yanovsk Hydrometeorological Observatory of the Privolzhskoye (Volga Area)
Territorial Administration of Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring: for
achieving high indices and implementing socialist obligations by the 110th anni-
versary of the birth of V. I. Lenin, as well as high-quality hydrometeorological
support of agriculture in Ul'yanovskaya Oblast. The economic effect from the use
of frost warnings during spring was 500,000 rubles, with an additional economic
effect of more than 500.000 rubles from the use of information by "Ul'yanovsken-
ergo." "Ul'yanovskavtodor" combine and "Volzhskoye 0b"yedineniye Ordena Lenina
Rechnogo Parokhodstva" (Ul'yanovsk Electric Power. Ul'yanovsk Highway Enterprise.
and Volga River Navigation Enterprise).

A Third-Degree Diploma is awarded to:

-- Lithuanian Agrometeorological Laboratory of the All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Agricultural Meteorology: for carrying out microclimatic investiga-
tions in the Southern Baltic Region, directed to the validation of the effective-
ness of meliorative measures in this region and study of the influence of regional
microclimate on the yields of agricultural crops for the purpose of their rational
distribution.

-- Stende Hydrometeorological Station of the Latvian Republic Administration of
Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring: for supplying the Talsinskiy Agro-
industriai Complex with timely frost warnings. recommendations on the times and
norms for the irrigation of cultivated pastures, making it possible to obtain an
economic effect of about 40.000 rubles per year.

A number of workers of the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environ-
mental Monitoring were awarded the Diploma of Honor and medals of the USSR All-
Union Exhibition of Achievements in the National Economy.

A Diploma of Honor is awarded to:

I. G. Gringof. I. P. Pedoseyev (All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Agricul-
tural Meteorology). A. A. Fokin (Central Design Bureau of Hydrometeorological In-
strument Making). 0. N. Vidyakina (Murmansk Administration of the Hydrometeorolog-
ical Service). A. A. Pastors (Latvian Administration of the Hydrometeorological

90
F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE(NHLY
FOR10FFNJAL.US£(MVLV

Servlco). Ye. M. Chcsnokuvu (Transbaykal Administration of the Rydrometeorological

Service), N. M. Nefed'yeva (Ukrainian Aviation Meteorological Center). N. A. Bara-
banova (West Siberian Scientific Research Institute).

[Note: In the following listings the abbreviations used are as follows' ARMS -
Administration of Rydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring; MGO - Main Geo~
physical Observatory; SRI - State Hydrological Institute; ARD - antihail detach-

ment; AUSRI AM - All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Agricultural Meteorol-
osy ]

A Gold Medal is awarded to:

A. N. Polevoy (AUSRI AM), L. I. Borovaya (Murmansk ARMS); N. Ye. Zakharehenko (Lat-
vian ARMS), G. V. Bespalova (Transbaykal ARMS).

A Silver Medal is awarded to:

Z. A. Shostak, A. C. Prosvirkina, V. P. Geogiyevskiy, L. S. Kel'chevskaya (AUSRI AM),
S. V. Zavileyskiy (SNI), Ye. N. Romanova, D. D. Stalevich (M00), Rh. 6. Tooming (Es-
tonian Agrometeorological Laboratory AUSRI AM), D. I. Berezin (Belorussian ARMS),

V. I. Vorob'yeva (Northern ARMS), A" D. Bogachev, A. I. Dokuchayev, V. N. Chub (Cen-
tral Design Bureau of Rydrometeorological Instrument Making), L. K. Konstantinov
(Lenino-Dachnoye Agroneteorological Station of the Central Volga Rydrometeorological
Observatory), L. P. Dugina, N. B. Moskaleva (State Committee on Rydrometeorology),

S. P. Koznov and M. I. Degtyareva (Northwestern ARMS), Ye. V. Yermilova (Kirovsk-
oye Zonal Hydrometeorologieal Observatory of the Upper Volga ARMS), T. F. Dubro-

(Transbaykal ARMS), M. M. Danilyuk (Transcarpathian ARMS). M. M. Danilyuk (Transcar-
pathian cblast Hydrometeorological Bureau of the Ukrainian ARMS), L. V. Belokurova
(Ukrainian Aviation Meteorological Center), 6. K. Volkorezova (Kolyma ARMS), A. N.
Skornyakov (Scientific Research Heather Ship "Musson"), M. Ye. Mikhaylov (scientif-
ic research ship "Mikhail Sonov"), M. A. Cherkesova (Rest Siberian Scientific Re»
search Institute), L. Ye. Daranov (Ul'yanovo Rydrometeorological Observatory of

the Volga ARMS), M. Ch. Zalikhanov (High-Mountain Geophysical Institute), G. L.
Ayrapetyan (Armenian AND), V. V. Spasibo (Moldavian ARD).

A Bronze Medal is awarded to:

V. C. Prikhot'ko, T. A. Concharova. V. M. Pasov, A. D. Pasechnyuk, L. I. Polevaya,

l. I. Yanshina, V. N. Matukhno, T. F. Serova, Ye. V. Abashina, A. D. Kleshchenko,
V. F. Nikitin, A. A. Kryuchkov, Yu. A. Khvalenskiy, I. I. Vasyutkin, 0. A. Dakar-

uva (AUSRI AM), I. L. Kalyuzhnyy, V. P. Yemets (SRI), I. A. Beresneva, N. 6. Cory-
shin, Ye. V. Orenburgskaya (NCO), A. I. Bagdonas, I. A. Ignatavichene (Lithuanian
Agrometeorological Laboratory AUSRI AM), A. I. Strashnaya, A. G. Novikov, N. L.
Sakharova (USSR Nydrometeorological Center), Kb. I. Myaetalu (Estonian Agrometeor-
ologicnl Laboratory AUSRI AM), 0. T. Prokhorenko (Ural ARMS), V. M. Zhukovskiy,

G. N. Spiridovich, L. Ye. Podymako (Belorussian ARMS), N. I. Kontsevich, G. A. Yel-
uvikova (Northern ARMS), V. c. Naumov, A. A. Shulepov, Yu. P. Lanin (Central De-
sign Bureau of Hydrometeorologieal Instrument Making), A. R. Baiode (Stende Hydro—
meteorological Station of the Latvian ARMS), V. S. Shkreba, A. Ye. Prudnikova

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Lenino-Dachnoye Agrometeorological Station of the Central Volga Hydrometeorolog-
ica] Observatory), V. A. Kolgin (Central Volga Nydrometeorological Observatory),

v. M. Baskakov, Yu. M. Felyshin, N. I. Tayurskaya, N. B. Sazhina, K. K. Smirnova
(Northwestern AHMS), A. A. Sibiryakova (Kirov Zonal Nydrometeorological Observac
tory of the Upper Volga ARMS), T. I. Ivanova (Bryansk Agroneteorological Station
of the AHMS of the Central Chernozen Oblasta), A. .. Dolinov, P. T. Morozov, Ye. I.
Belentsova (Murmansk ARMS), D. V. Agalaknva, N. G. Ul'yanets, A. N. Nizhnik (Lat-
vian ANMS), T. N. Lysenko, N. P. Yakovleva, A. I. Golobkov (Transbaykal AHHS), V. V.
Lashchenko, M. S. Sergeyeva (Ukrainian Biological Station), L. P. Ukhaneva (Cherk-
assy Oblast Hydrometenrological Bureau of the Ukrainian ARMS), M. N. Kashchavka
(Mironovskaya AgrometeorologiCal Station imani V. P. Starchenko of the Ukrainian
ARMS), A. N. Velichko (oblast Zhitomirskoye Hydrometeorological Bureau of the Ukrain-
ian AHMS), N. s. Shul'gin, A. M. Grishchenko (Kolyma ARMS), V. G. Goroahankina,

V. T. Proshin (Scientific Research Heather Ship "Musson"), M. Ya. Taakin, A. P.
Zinger (Scientific Research Ship "Mikhail Somov"), V. S. Gromova, A. D. Drobyahev,
T. Yc. Kovaleva (Nest Siberian Scientific Research Institute), A. K. Filaretov,

L. N. Zupryagnycva, T. N. Mayskaya (Ul'yanovo Nydroneteorological Observatory of
the Volga AHMS), M. T. Abshayev, A. S. Zhikharev (High—Mountain Geophysical Insti-
tute), M. S. Payer, L. P. Manukyan (Armenian AND), N. G. Shtul'man, N. B. Senenov
(Northern Caucasus AND). V. M. Marlin, N. I. Kizilov (Moldavian AND), 0. c. Sychen—
ko (Oblaat Hydrometeorological Bureau at Vorushilovgrad of the Ukrainian ARMS).

The total number of participants from the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology
and Environmental Monitoring was 282. In radition to workers of the State Committee
on Nydroncteorology and Environmental Monitoring. the Main Exhibition Committee

of the USSR All-Union Exhibition of Achievements in the National Economy for the
pavilion "Hydrometeorological Service“ presented awards to other organizations tak-
ing a direct part in the work on a number of themes.

92

F0810W11CIAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONFERENCES. MEETINGS AND SWINARS
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 123-125
[Article by I. M. Shenderovich]

[Text] An international scientific and technical seminar on the theme "Means and
Methods for Safeguarding Sensors and Measuring Instruments Against the Influence
of the Environment" was held at the Institute of Meteorology and Hydrology in
Bucharest during the period 8-13 December 1980. The seminar was attended by rep-
resentatives of the Hydrometeorological Services of Hungary, German Democratic Re-
public, Romania, USSR and Czechoslovakia and the following reports were presented
and discussed: "Protecting Hydrometeorological Instrumentation Against the Influ-
ence of Ambient Factors" (USSR), "Technical Means for Protecting Hydroseteorolog-
ical Instrumentation Developed at the Scientific Research Institute of Instrument
Making" (USSR) and "Design Improvement of Meteorological Instrumentation at Auto-
mated Mountain Meteorological Stations for the Purpose of Ensuring Performance
Under Rime and Icing Conditions" (Romania).

The first report examined theoretical problems. It dealt with an analysis of the
nature of the influence of ambient factors on the performance of hydrometeorolog-
ical instrumentation (IIMI). the principles for the classification of factors and
methods 'for protecting HM! against the influence of these factors. The report also
dis:usses the problems associated with carrying out of tests of HM! simulating the
influence of external factors and the processing of the results of tests and the
planning of an experiment. Particular attention was devoted to the need for creat-
ing control-checking equipment by means of which it would be possible to carry

out many-sided laboratory tests of existing and newly created means for protecting
HMI.

The second report gave the results of development work at the Scientific Research
Institute of Instrument Making of the State Comittee on Hydrometeorology and En-
vironmental Monitoring in the field of creation of means for protecting HMI
against the influence of ambient factors. In particular, it described the means
for protecting “Ml against the influence of changes in temperature. humidity, ic-
ing. snow and liquid precipitation. Most of the devices described in the report
are protected by USSR Author's Certificates (patents) and this hydroneteorological
equipment is in standard production.

The. third report gave an analysis of the characteristics of an automatic meteor-
ological station created in Romania and intended for use in mountainous regions
and presented the results of improvement of meteorological sensors and developed

l

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F!”l¢DFFIClAI.lﬂHE(HVLY

for the purpose of ensuring their performance under conditions of icing, snow
drifts and increased humidity.

In particular. for the installation of air temperature and humidity sensors it is
proposed that use be made of a meteorological booth of a cylindrical configuration
constructed of metal. The diameter of the cylinder is 100 cm. The booth has no bot-
tom and in its upper part there is a gap for ventilation. protected against the
entry of liquid and solid precipitation by a conical cover. Tests of this model

of a booth, installed at three mountain stations, indicated that during the

winter there are virtually no snow accumulations within the booth.

In order to prevent ice formation on the wind sensors. in the anemometer employed
in the station there is a propeller-type wind sensor with flexible blades which
in the case of high wind velocities are somewhat deformed. This ensures the de-
struction and casting-off of the ice crust from the propeller. In another variant
of this anemometer the blades of the wind sensor are protected by rubber covers
which prevent ice deposition on the propeller. Performance of the radio trans-
mitter under conditions of increased humidity was ensured by its preliminary im-
mersion in molten paraffin. The use of the measures enumerated above, as indicated
by tests, made it possible to create stations with fault-free operation.under
mountainous conditions during winter for a period of eight months.

In discussion of the reports it was noted that it is timely to develop the theor-
etical aspects of creation of effective means for protecting HHI from the influ-
ence of ambient factors and there is a need for further work in this direction.

It was also noted that at the present time there has been by no means a complete
solution of the problem of protecting HHI against the influence of ambient fac-
tors, for the most part from icing and snow drifts. Most frequently this influence
is manifested in the autonomous operation of meteorological sensors (unserviced)
in mountainous regions and during winter. In addition. at the seminar there was

a discussion of the problems related to checking of the constancy of the metrolog-
ical characteristics of HMI in the case of use of different protective means. In-
formation was given on some methods for contending with the icing of meteorolog-
ical instruments on high towers in the CzSSR by means of electrical heating and
protective housings from the GH-6 shipboard hydrometeorological station produced
in the USSR.

A ﬂ‘zolution passed at the seminar noted the timeliness of further development of
the heoretical aspects of methods for protecting HHI against the influence of am-
bient factors and the need for creating new protective technical devices.

During the period of the seminar the Institute of Meteorology and Hydrology (Roman-
ia) organized a visit to three serviced meteorological stations situated in a
mountainous region (Southern Carpathians, Brasov District). The purpose was to fam-
iliarize the seminar participants with the operation of stations under winter con-
ditions.

In addition to the agenda, the seminar participants were familiarized with the de-
sign and plans for the introduction of an unserviced automatic hydrometeorolog-
ical station developed in Romania and the design of a portable automatic hydro-
meteorological station developed in the Hungarian People's Republic.

94

FOR!OFFTC1AI.IEHE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a result of introduction of the first station, plans have been laid for auto-
mating hydrometeorological observations in the mountainous regions of Romania and
ensuring transmission of data to users. A zonal system for operation of the sta-
tions is used. A number of stations (8-12) are tied in to a zonal center (there
should be 5-6 of the latter). In turn, the zonal centers are tied in to a common
center located in Bucharest. The stations are connected to the zonal centers by
telephone line or by radio channel. At each zonal center plans call for the use
of electronic computers which will ensure calling of the appropriate station, in-
terrogation of its sensors, selection of hydrometeorological information and its
conversion into the HMO code and into physical parameters. The zonal centers
have teletype communication with six prognostic centers and with the common cen-

ter, at which two electronic computers are used, these being connected by telecom-
munications with other European countries and the HMO European center.

The station was developed so as to sit on the ground and has 100 inputs for the
connection of sensors, of which 7 inputs are for evaluating the state of operation
of the station itself, including checking of the power voltage. The power supply can
be provided either from an a-c network or from storage batteries. In a standby re-
gime (between measurement times) the station requires 30 mA. It operates for the
most part by interrogation, but it has, in addition, a programming unit which en-
sures operation in accordance with a program. The station can be installed in a

room or in a booth with the ambient air temperature from -60 to +50°C.

It is proposed that instruments of foreign and Romanian production be used as the
meteorological sensors.

The station has undergone certification tests. Plans call for the construction of
70 stations during 1981-1986. During this same time it is proposed that the entire
system he put into operation step-by-step.

The Am-lo Hungarian automatic meteorological station, whose standard production is
planned for 1981, is intended for operation in different branches of the national
economy (meteorological network, communal facilities, servicing of airports, exped-
itions, etc.) since the design of the station makes possible its use both in sta-
tionary and mobile modes.

The station measures meteorological parameters in the surface air layer (up to 9 m):
air temperature and humidity, wind velocity and direction and atmospheric pressure.
Up to eight sensors can be connected to the station.

The station includes a group of sensors and a commutator mounted on a support, a cen-
tral unit and a cable with a length up to 250 m.

The central unit controls the operation of the entire station, converts frequency-
pulsed signals arriving from the sensors and stores information until the next meas-
urement. By command of the operator this information can be displayed or sent to the
peripheral collection devices with subsequent transmission of data (print-out unit,
teletype. puncher, etc.).

The AM-lo station is intended to operate with changes in ambient air temperature
from —25 to +5506.

95

FORiOFFﬂﬂAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘DFFKJALIINE(MVLY

NOTES FROM ABROAD
Moscow HETEOROLDGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 125-126

[Article by B. I. Silkin]

[Abstract] Specialists at the United States Environmental Protection Agency have
completed a series of studies of air quality in Alaska. It was found that in this
little-developed state there has been a considerable deterioration of air quality
as a result of anthropogenic influences. Most important is CO contamination in
Fairbanks and Anchorage. With little industry, 96 and 852 of this contamination
is generated by the automobile. The contamination is worst during the winter when
the levels are the equal of the largest cities in the United States. Graphs con-
structed for both cities reveal a clear correlation between the CO content and
the degree of air cooling. An equally important factor is the peculiarities of
high-latitude meteorology. There the processes of nighttime cooling of the un-
derlying surface are particularly intensa, which leads to the appearance of an
inversion in which the cold air masses lie below the warm masses. This prevents
the scattering of accumulations of contaminating agents, which cannot penetrate
above the inversion layer. Relatively small masses of the lower air layers subject-
ed to contamination accumulate a considerable quantity of carbon monoxide. Under
certain conditions the heat radiated by buildings and heated exhaust of vehicles
can disrupt the inversion layer and favor the mixing of the contaminated atmosphere
with its cleaner layers. At Fairbanks, however, even this is inadequate for dis-
rupting such a layer at an altitude of 100 meters. It was concluded that with a
decrease in air temperature the danger of its contamination with C0 increases,
but it has also been established that this is correct only to a definite level.
The threshold or critical level of this correspondence sets in at about -18°C.
Below this level the CO concentration has a tendency to remain constant.

***

West Germany is about to return to the field of research and exploration in Ant-
arctica. German scientists had worked on that continent in 1873, 1901, 1911 and

1938, as well as in 1975 when a West German research vessel studied krill and
other marine organisms in the Antarctic Ocean. The site selected for the first

Antarctic station is on the shores of the Weddell Sea. Up to 45 specialists will
work there beginning in late 1981. From there treks will be made into the inter-
ior for up to a thousand kilometers. An Antarctic center has been established at
Bremerhaven. The center will have a special scientific research ship adapted for
expeditions to the high latitudes. Polar specialists will also be trained there.

96

FOR 0!1ﬂ(1A1.lEIE(N§LY
lNJR‘OFIIClAI.lEﬂ£(MQLY

OBITUARY 0F PAVEL SAHOYLOVICH LINEYKIN (1910-1981)
Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 126-127
[Article by specialists of the USSR ﬁydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] Professor Pavel Samoylovich Lineykin, doctor of physical and mathemat-
ical sciences, died on 2 May 1981 at an age of 72. It vas in the 1950's that he
wrote a series of papers which laid the beginning for a new long-range approach

to study of macroscale circulation of the ocean and clarification of the mechan-
isms of formation of the main ocean thermocline. This direction is at present one
of the most productive in theoretical oceanology. The results of the first stage
in these investigations were generalized by P. S. Lineykin in a monograph entitled
OSNOVNYYE VOPROSY DINAHICHESKOY TEORII BAROKLINNOGO SLOYA HORYA (Fundamental Prob-
lems in the Dynamic Theory of the Baroclinic Layer in the Sea) (1957). which be-
came one of the classics of modern oceanology. The principles of the theory of the
main thermocline laid by P. S. Lineykin and constituting his principal scientific
heritage served and continue to serve as a basis for the solution of practical
problems. In 1967, under the direction of P. S. Lineykin, specialists in the Lab-
oratory of Marine Dynamics at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center developed inves-
tigations in the field of hydrodynamic modeling of macroscsle and local processes
in the ocean directed to the creation of specific computation and prognostic meth-
ods. In this direction substantial results were achieved, expressed in the formul—
ation of practical methods for computing and predicting many elements of the sea
regime. 0n the initiative of P. S. Lineykin it was possible to develop investiga-
tions of the interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere directed to improve-
ment in methods for long—range weather forecasting. The final subjects on which he
worked were: determination of the thickness of the baroclinic layer in the sea and
further investigation of the main thermocline, including preparation of a large
monograph on the theory of the thermocline.

97

FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICJAI.1EHE(HVLV

MEMORIAL T0 GRIGORIY IVANOVICH SHAHOV (1891-1956)
Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 127-128

[Article by V. I. Aleksandrova, I. V. Bogolyubova, A. V. Karaushev, K. N. Lisits-
yna. H. Ya. Prytkova, K. V. Razumikhina and Ye. S. Semenova]

[Abstract] Professor Crigoriy lvanovich Shamov, doctor of technical sciences, was
born on 12 February 1891; this is the 90th anniversary of his birth. An outstand-
ing Soviet hydrologist, he was a specialist in the study of fluvial sediments and
the silting of reservoirs. Beginning in 1937 and to the last days of his life
(October 1956) Grigoriy Ivanovich worked at the State Hydrological Institute,
heading the Sediments Laboratory. These were the years of his greatest creative
activity. The monograph ZAILENIYE VODOKHRANILISHCH (Silting of Reservoirs) was
published in 1939 and is widely known to specialists. For the first time it gen-
eralized Soviet and foreign materials on the silting of reservoirs, defined the
laws of this process and provided a method for computing the silting of reser-
voirs. The Shamov method has still not lost its importance and is now included

in the "Instructions on Computation of Silting of Reservoirs in Construction
Planning." Shamov made a major contribution to hydrology in his studies of the
runoff of river sediments. In 1949 he published the fundamental work STOK VZVESR-
ENNYKH NANOSOV REX SSSR (Runoff of Suspended Sediments in the Rivers of the USSR);
this was followed in 1951 by his work GRANULOHBTRICHBSKIY SOSTAV NANOSOV REK SSSR
(Granulometric Composition of River Sediments in the USSR), and in 1954 by the
study aid for colleges RECHNYYE NANOSY (River Sediments). This book. which is in
essence a monograph on sediments, deals with the formation, regime and territorial
distribution of the characteristics of the runoff of sediments and their granulo-
metric composition, the problems involved in the method for measuring the dis-
charges of sediments, determination of their grain size. Shamov described methods
for computing movements of sediments in rivers and silting in reservoirs. The maps
of turbidity and grain size constructed by c. I. Shamov have for more than a quar-
ter-century served as a basis for planning work in the field of hydroengineering.
His formulas for computing the movement of entrained sediments, due to their sim-
plicity and reliability. are extensively used in engineering practice. 6. I.
Shamov formulated the fundamental principles for the distribution of the network of
stations and posts for studying the runoff of river sediments. Although 25 years
have passed since his death. the work of G. I. Shamov continues to exert an in-
fluenre on Soviet hydrology.

COPYRIGHT: "Heteorologiya i gidrologiya", 1981

5303 - END -
cso: 1866/2

98
I“)! 0!!ﬂ(1Al.lﬂiE(MVLY