FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10564
4 June 1982

USSR Report

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 3. March 1982

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nor:

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY
No. 3, March 1982

Translation of the Russian-language monthly journal METEOROIDGIYA I
GIDROLOGIYA published in Moscow by Gidrometeoizdat.

, CONTENTS
*Variability of Temperature and Circulation Regimes in Northern ﬂs-isphere

Atmosphere....................................................................

*Influence of Temperature Stratification on Adiabatic Fluctuations in Polytropic

Atmosphere....................................................................

Major Temperature and Precipitation anomalies Over European USSR. Western
Siberia end hukh‘canl.0.OOIOOOO'COOOIOOICCIOIOCU.00....OCOOOCOOOOIOICOCOO...O

*Interaction Between Subclou? and Cloud Layers in Tropical Cyclones and
Intertropical Convergence Zone................................................

*Investigation of Cloud Cover Dynamics in Tropical Zone_Using Two-Dimensional
Spectral Analysis.............................................................

*Hodels of One-Dimensional and Joint Distributions of Non-Negative Rsndon Values.

*Dissipation of Kinetic Energy in Cyclone Over 0cean..................1..........

*Prediction of Hater Salinity in Gulf of R13. Bottom Horizon.....................

Status and Prospects of Numerical Hydrodynamic Investigations of Fluctuations of
‘ Levels in Arctic 5988........o........oo.o.u.-......................o....a....

*Description of River Runoff st Several Points by Multivariate Canonical
Expansion Method..............................................................

ste of Surface Generators of Ice-Forming Aerosols in work for Artificially
Augmenting Precipitation in Hountsinous Regions...............................

*
Denotes items which have been abstracted.

15

16
17
18

19

20

30

31
FORIOFFKJAL.USEIDNLY

Evaluation of State of Agricultural Crops Prom Satellite Data 32

*Bvaluation of Spectral Resolution of Optical Apparatus for Measuring Minor
Gas Components in Atmosphere................................................. 62

*Possibility of Determining Atmospheric Telperature Profile by Acoustic

sounding-o..............oo.......oo.c....o....o......o....o............o....o ‘3

*Insdvertent Influence of Major Cities and Industrial Centers on Precipitation.. 66
*Revlew of Monograph 'Gidrologicheskiye protsesay i ikh rol' v fornirovanii
kachestva vody' ('Hydrological Processes and Their Role in Forming water
Quality'). by V. A. Znamenskiy. Leotngrsd. Gidroneteoizdat, 1981. 248 Pages.. 65
*Conferences, Meetings, Seninars................................................ 66
*Notes Pros Abroad.............................................................. 67

*Obituary of Yekaterina Nikitichns Blimva (1906-1981).......................... as

*Obituary of Sergey Ivaaovich Sivkov (l901-1981)................................ 49

* Denotes items which have been abstracted.

FOIlOFFﬂJAl.UBB(IﬁLY
UDC 551.526.3+551.Sl3(215-l7)

VARIABILITY 0F TEMPERATURE AND CIRCULATION REGIHBS IN NORTEERN HEMISPHBRB
ATMOSPHERE

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 3, Mar 82 (manuscript received
1.7 Jun 81) pp 8-20

[Article by G. V. Gruza, professor, L. K. Kleshchenko, candidate of geographical
sciences. and T. P. Timofeyeva, All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydro-
meteorological Information-world Data Center]

[Abstract] A joint analysis of the long-term changes in a number of key character-
istics of state of the atmosphere was wade. The spatial and tenporal.changes in
global and local parameters of the temperature and circulation regimes of the
northern hemisphere were studied using data for the period 1959-1979 on the basis
of the mean monthly fields of temperature and pressure at sea level and the geo-
potential field at the 500 gPa surface as interpolated at the points of inter-
section of a geographic grid with a 10’ interval along the parallels and a 5' in-
terval along the meridians. The investigation was limited to the latitude zone
30-80'N. In applying the empirical-statistical method it was not only the initial
fields which were analyzed, but also the fields of their anomalies, the fields
of zonal and meridional components of the horizontal gradient and the modulus of
the vector gradient. This analysis indicated that there is a complete noncorres-
pondence between regional and global climatic changes, revealing an exceedingly
complex pattern of climatic changes resulting from interaction of factors of
global and local scales acting in unison over extensive regions of the earth only
under exceptional conditions. This in-depth study clearly suggests that the long-
term changes in the temperature and circulation regimes are characterised by a
great diversity. have a complex and unstable character. During the 30—year period
studied there are no linear trends in these changes. However, in the 1970's it

is possible to see a transition from cooling to warming in mean hemisphere tem-
perature and some increase in anomalousness of processes at the earth's surface
manifested in an increase in the gradients of temperature and surface pressure
anomalies. Figures 4, tables 3; references 22: lb Russian, 8 Western.

FIIICIHWCIAI.USEIITLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551 . 509 . 313+551 . 524

INFLUENCE OF TMERATURB STRATIFICATION ON ADIABATIC FLUCTUATIONS IN POLYTROPIC
ATMOSPHERE

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 3. Mar 82 (nanuscript received
.12 Jun 81) PP 21-29

{Article by 0. K. Gorbunova and V. H. Kadyshnikov, candidate of physical and nathe-
natical sciences, USSR Bydroneteorological Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] This is essentially a continuation of earlier work by one of the auth-
ors (V. H. Kadyshnikov, "Small Oscillations of a Polytropic Atmosphere and Filter-
ing Role of the Hydrostatic Approximation." WROLOGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA, No 11,
1979). Now. using the solution obtained in that article. a study is made of the
dependence of the spectrum of oscillations in its different parts on r , which is
the principal characteristic of a polytropic atmosphere (1’ is the temperature
gradient of the main state). The dispersion expression determines two families

of frequencies: 8+ gives acoustic waves and 3. gives gravitational waves. The
dispersion expression contains two key variable parameters.“ and ,3 , and their
behavior is examined in detail. In three cases, l)B)l, ﬁ>b. ﬂ», 0! 9‘ 0. 2)

a 4 l. 3) 0C ) 1. at) b, at>£. using asynptotic formulas for confluent hypergeo~
netric functions, a solution of the dispersion expression can be obtained in ex-
plicit fora. Case 1. corresponding to long waves, gives a solution for both acous-
tic and gravitational cases; case 2. also corresponding to long saves. has a so-
lution only for gravitational waves; case 3, corresponding to short waves, has a
solution for both types of waves. With this taken into account, it was then pos-
sible to study the frequency spectrum of the equations of hydrothermodynamics lin-
earized relative to a state of rest with a polytroplc temperature distribution.
After investigating the dependence of frequencies and group velocities on the ver-
tical tenperature gradient of this state and on the vertical variability of dis-
turbances it was possible to demonstrate that with an increase in stability and

a decrease in variability there is a decrease of acoustic frequencies and an in-
crease in gravitational frequencies. It also becones clear how the velocity of

propagation of both types of atmospheric disturbances changes. Figures 2: refer-
ences: 6 Russian. '

summon“
UDC 551 . 509. 316+551 .524 : 551 . 577 (67) (571.1) (575)

MAJOR TEMPERATURE AND PRECIPITATION WIBS OVER EUROPEAN USSR, WESTERN
SIBERIA AND KAZAKHSTAN

Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian “0 3, Mar 82 (manuscript received
18 Jun 81) PP 30-38

[Article by O. V. Batyreva, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences,
and L. Ye. Lukiyanova, candidate of geographical sciences, USSR Hydrometeoro-
logical Scientific Research Center]

[Text] Abstract: The article gives a classification
of growing seasons on the basis of the ratio
between large positive and negative anomalies.
The value 1.26 was adopted as the criterion
for a major anomaly. It was possible to define
four classes of growing seasons and an attempt
is made to predict these classes by means of
linear discriminant analysis. Evaluations of
the probable success of the classification
surpass the evaluations of a random classifica-
tion. The mean probable success (guaranteed
probability) is 0.70 (for a random classifica-
tion 0.56), whereas the probability of a pre-
cise prediction of the class is 0.68 (for a
random classification -- 0.25). The hypothesis
of nondependence of the actual 2and pragmatic
classes is refuted using the 1,2 test with a 5!
significance level.

The problem of long-range forecasting of major temperature and precipitation
anomalies is one of the most important and difficult problems in nodern meteor-
ology. It has been dealt with in a great number of studies [1. 2, 13] in which
the authors develop primarily synoptic methods for the long-range forecasting
of large anomalies. As criteria for discriminating major anomalies use is made
either of the excess of the 0' value over a large part of the territory or the
excess of some absolute value of the anomaly (for example, for temperature,
etc.). In other studies for defining the types of anomalies use is made of the
anomalousness coefficient K proposed by N. A. Bagrov; It" and K. are considered
separately for positive and negative anomalies. The anomalousness coefficient
includes all the values of the anomalies in the considered territory, both

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR<ﬂHHKJAL.USIZONLY

large and small. However. in studying large anomalies it is possible that anom-
alies less than some critical value will not be taken into account at all. In
a study by Aristova [3] the anomalousness criterion used was the fraction of
the considered area for which the anomaly exceeds a stipulated level. Unfor-
tunately, only whole values multiples of 6(0', 20'. 30’. -o'. -20'. -3a’ etc.)
are considered as such levels and intermediate levels are not considered in

the corresponding intervals.

In this article as a criterion for defining a major anomaly we used the value
l.2<7. In the normal distribution of a meteorological element the probability
that this value will be exceeded is 0.12 for an anomaly of each sign (a total
of 0.26). that is. approximately about 1/4 of all the cases. Then for a char-
acteristic of anomalousness of the territory it is possible to take the index
v. that is. the relative number of stations for which the anomaly exceeds the
level 1.20’. In this way it is also possible to characterise the anomalousness
of a stipulated period of time (number of months for which the anomaly A;>
1.2(x). Like K+ and K. it is necessary to compute v+ and v_ separately for pos-
itive and negative anomalies. The v value in part corresponds to the mean num-
ber of "surges" beyond a stipulated level. However. in the theory of surges

n "surge" is an event in which the random value for the first time intersects
a stipulated level and therefore the frequency and duration of the surge dif-
fer. The application of the theory of surges in meteorology is discussed. for
example. in [8. 9) and elsewhere. The proposed v value includes all cases of
exceeding of the level 1.217. regardless of the preceding and adjacent values
of the meteorological element. that is, both the frequency of the surge and
its duration are taken into account.

In the analysis of the anomalousness of precipitation and temperature anomal-
ies we used mean monthly data from 1901 through 1978 -— for temperature for 20
stations located in the territory of the main agricultural regions of the 088R '
(European USSR. Western Siberia. Kazakhstan), for precipitation [10] -- the av-
eraged values for 20 economic regions. The computed temperature and precipita-
tion anomalies were normalized for thetr value and maps of major anomalies ex-
ceeding 1.20' were constructed. The maps were analyzed from month to month in
their natural sequence. which made it possible to prepare a catalogue of the
most significant anomalies.

It should be noted that in most studies [13] an analysis was made of large anom-
alies for individual months with a discreteness interval of the data of one
year.

An analysis of monthly maps of anomalies in their natural sequence made it pos-
sible to detect the characteristics of individual anomalies. common for both
precipitation and temperature. As a rule, on each map somewhere there is an
anomaly with }I.Za. Among the 936 maps of anomalies (78 years it 12 months)
there were only 116 on which not at a single station did the temperature anom-
nly not exceed 1.20'and only 51 such maps of precipitation anomalies where
there was not an anomaly with > 1.2a and this was true of all economic regions.
However, anomalies with >’1.2cf rarely persist at one and the same point or in
one and the same region for more than two months. The greatest duration was
five months for precipitation and six for temperature. As a rule. the centers

1.

lilt(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂi(ﬂVLY
3f the anomalies appearing initially at one point or in one region during the
subsequent months move into adjacent regions, frequently increasing in area

and withdrawing considerable distances from the initial center. The total dura-
tion of the large anomalies of the same sign, with movement taken into account,
can attain 7-8 months and even a whole year. Usually the larger the anomaly is
In area. the greater is the area occupied by centers of the same sign and the
greater is the duration of this anomaly.

It is asserted in [1, 2] that a large value of the anomalousness index corres-
ponds to a predominance of an anomaly of one sign and large K+ and K. values
are rarely noted simultaneously. We feel that this is not entirely so. There
were 50 such precipitation anomaly maps on which there were not less than
three centers of different signs simultaneously. A typical example is the sum-
mer of 1972 when there were very large precipitation anomalies of different
signs simultaneously in different parts of the considered territory: a strong
drought in the northern and central regions of the European USSR and excess
nuistening in the western regions. During the warm months there is an inverse
relationship between the temperature and precipitation anomalies. whereas in
the cold months there is a direct relationship. The number of major positive
precipitation anomalies in all months of the year is greater than the number
of negative anomalies, which corresponds to data on the asymmetry of precipit-
ation [a]. In summer positive temperature anomalies are encountered more fre—
quently than negative anomalies, and in winter. vice versa. which also corres—
ponds to the asymmetry values [5]. The mean frequency of recurrence of major
temperature anomalies is 20-221; for precipitation it is 18—20%. An increase
in the total number of major anomalies has been clearly noted during the last
decade (since 1970).

The maximum frequency of recurrence of major temperature anomalies, 251, was
observed from 1931 through 1900 and from 1971 through 1979. The maximum free
quency of recurrence of major precipitation anomalies is 23% and falls in the
1960's and 1970‘s. This conclusion agrees well with the results in [6, 7, 16.
15]. where the authors noted an appreciable increase in anomalousness in the
1970's both for the territory of the USSR and for the entire northern hemi—
sphere. The spatial differences in the frequency of recurrence of major anom-
ulies are not very great (from 18 to 262); the anomalousness of the northern
regions is somewhat greater than in the southern regions. There is a very small
number of major negative precipitation anomalies for the 19th region - Trans-
caucasia (112). The frequency of recurrence of values J>1.2¢f on the average

is somewhat less than for an independent normal sample (261). which is attrib-
utable to coherence in time and deviations from normality. The frequency of re-
currence of major anomalies of different duration corresponds well to the
evaluations of the probability of a surge beyond the level 1.2cr for a two-
dlmonslonal normal sequence, which, according to [8. 9], can be evaluated as
0.08-0.09. The differences in the character of the anomalousness between indi—
vidual months of the-year are also small (from 18 to 231) and correspond well
to the asymmetry and excess values. Since an analysis of individual anomalies
Is difficult due to the great differences in their duration and geographic po-
sition, first we analyzed the generalized characteristics of major anomalies as
n whole for the entire territory and for a long period of time (year and grow-
ing season).

FOH.0FFHJAl.lﬂﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL 05h ONLY

A

a a e a a a a u £ *

.4
~..

    

"L-hh—ﬂ—L-nh—J—H—ﬂ—l—u .
”summary; ”550A!!!”

Pig. 1. Ten-year moving averages v+. Pig. 2. Classification of growing sea-
v_, v2 of precipitation. sons on basis of character of anomalous-
ness of precipitation.

In order to define the climatic characteristics the values v+, v. and also
their sums v; for temperature and precipitation were su-ed both for the en-
tire year and for the growing season (from April through September) and we
constructed graphs of the temporal variation of these indices and also their
five- and ten-year moving averages. Year-to-yaar variations are 15-20: of the
annual sums v+, v- and v» . There is a general increase in the total anomal-
ousness of precipitation in the 1930's up to 1936, after which there is a
decrease to a minimum in 1942. A general increase in the anomalousness of
temperature and precipitation in the 1970's with sharp variations for indi-
vidual years was characteristic. The moving averages graphs make it possible
to define quasiperiodic variations with periods of 15-20 years. As a rule,

the v+. v- curves vary in antiphase, although there are periods of a simultan-
eous increase in anomalousness of both signs. For example, all the moving five—
and ten-year periods. including the 1970's, give an appreciable increase in
the annual and semiannual sums v+. v. and v: simultaneously (the total anom—
alousness of precipitation during recent years exceeds by approximately 202
the values encountered earlier). For temperature this characteristic is ex-
pressed to a lesser degree. Examples of the graphs are shown in Pig. 1.

Since major temperature and precipitation anomalies are most important for
agriculture when they occur in the growing season. the breakdown of all the
years into classes on the basis of the character of the anomalousness was
carried out using the sums v+. v_ and v, for the entire growing season. A
classification of all the growing seasons from 1901 through 1978 was carried
out on the basis of the ratio of the total number of major positive and nega-
tive anomalies. The values of the sums v+ and v- for the growing season for
all years from 1901 through 1978 were regarded as the coordinates of a point
on a plane in a Cartesian coordinate system and were plotted on the graph.

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(HWLY
The number of the year in the 20th century to which the corresponding values
related was plotted near each point.

The distribution of points for precipitation is shown in Pig. 2. The separa-
tion of growing seasons on the basis of temperature was carried out in a sim-
ilar way, with the single difference that the Ev+ and 2v_ axes changed
places. Although no clear separation into groups could be detected in the
figures, nevertheless it was possible to define some clusters of points in
definite regions of the plane and draw the boundaries.

For example, it is possible to define four groups of points corresponding to
four classes of growing seasons differing with respect to the ratio of the
number of major anomalies of different signs. First, it was possible to define
years for which the number of major anomalies of the same sign appreciably
exceeds the corresponding number of anomalies of the other sign (on the aver-
age by more than the standard deviation '3" of the corresponding value). Thus.
we define two extreme classes -— first and fourth. The arid years for which
£v_ > Zv+ entered into the first class for precipitation. whereas for temper—
ature - the anomalously hot years when 2v+ > 2 v_. In the fourth class the
moist periods with Ev+>$v_ enter for precipitation (and accordingly, for
temperature, the cold years when 2 v->2v+). The "middle" classes (second and
third) are characterized by approximately equal values of the sums v+ and v-,
whose difference, as a rule,does not exceed the standard deviation of the
corresponding value. The second class includes years with small 2 v4. and 2 v-
values (less than the mean values), whereas the third class includes years
with large values (greater than the means). In the first stage the separation
into classes was carried out separately for temperature and precipitation.

The lists of the corresponding classes are given in Table l.

The cited lists show that the defined classes for precipitation and temperature
partially correspond to one another, that is, about half the growing seasons
fall in one and the same classes. The best correspondence is attained for the
first class (dry and hot) and a worse correspondence for the fourth class.

In actuality, as is well known, hot and dry years are characterized by a pre-
dominance of anticyclonic weather, whereas major positive anomalies of pre-
cipitation in smer are associated with an intensification of cyclonic activ-
ity and the transport of moist air masses from the Atlantic; major negative
temperature anomalies are associated with the intrusion of cold arctic air
from the north.

If the moistening conditions during the growing season are considered, it is
necessary to take into account temperature and moisture anomalies simultaneous-
ly. For example, D. A. Ped' [12] proposed an aridity index which represents the
difference between the normalized temperature anomaly and precipitation. All
the droughts known in history were accompanied by major anomalies of both pre-
cipitation and temperature (droughts of 1921, 1936, 1972, 1975, etc.). Thus,

In order to characterize the moistening conditions during the course of the
growing season it is possible to consider the values w- - v, (precipitation)

+ v+ (temperature), w+ (precipitation) + v_ (temperature). These values in

turn can be divided into classes on the basis of the same principles as

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFT-1"“. US}: ONLY

temperature and precipitation separately. The cited list of classes to a
high degree corresponds to the classes of teaperature and_precipitation.

Table 1

List of Classes of Anonalousness of Temperature, Precipitation and the
Generalized Index v (the Table Columns Give the Years of the 20th Century. For
Example, 01 Should be Read 1901, 65 -- 1905. etc.)

 

 

Precipitation Temperature Generalized wind index

0| 02 0| l5 0| 03 06 02 0| 0") 03 . 02
M (1" 06 '2! 2" 05 09 04 06 07 I3 04
07 08 I2 '26 2| N) If) 07 (‘8 10 23 09
0‘.) l I Ii! '28 2| 22 I7 08 20 I8 29 II
lo I!) H 3| 3| '15 23 II 2| 2‘) 31 l2
l7 2.1 I6 3'! 3'2 27 29 I2 24 25 34 I4
18 '24 ‘27 5H 36 I!) 3| 1;! :5 27 4G 15

20 23' .H 45 37 ' '| 39 I4 37 J) 49 16
2| II) .18 53 38 35 4‘.) l6 3 32 50 I7
'2‘.) 35 41; 5| 40 43 50 I8 39 3-" 52 I!)
35 «I -I7 56 dli -|| 5‘) I9 40 43 68 26

:0 41 49 .53 4s m .54 25 as 49 73 2s

39 42 N 60 5| GI 62 23 5| 3' 77 ' :0
5| 43 f" 61 53 64 I35 4 l 55 54 '4 I
:35 44 57 69 55 68 73 i2 57 50 42
63 48 7'2 70 57 70 76 45 66 GI 45
58 59 73 77 ('0 7| 77 ‘7 67 62 47
7| 6|) 74 66 74 50 7| 04 56
75 6'2 76 67 58 72 85 58
6| 78 72 60 75 80
' 65 75 (if) 74 60
66 78 70 70

67

 

 

Table 2

Mean Eik and Maximum djk(nax) Distances Between Classes

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

_ - ____Initial_mntL ‘
_ x I x: l xu l l I n l m
Precipitation
.1“ l 0.71 0,02 0.84 0,35 1,04 1.03
4......“ ms 1,13 L24 1.60 1.13 1,35
Tenperature
an. I 1.2:; om 1.28 on: 0.81 0.33
"4"?“ - 1.59 1,32 1.56 0.82 m9 mo
8

FOR(NHWCJAI.USE|MNLY
Anomalousnes:

I II
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It should be noted that the defined classes make it possible to describe only
the general character of anomalousness during the entire growing season and
for the region as a whole (region of the European USSR. southern part of
Western Siberia, Kazakhstan). The classification does not take into account
the location of the centers of positive and negative anomalies within the re-
gion and their change during the course of the growing season. Allowance for
all these differences would lead to a far greater number of classes, which
would make difficult their prediction. Nevertheless, the classification cor-
responds fairly well to the separation of years obtained by other methods.
All the best known droughts fell in the first class. The only exception is
the summer of 1972, which with respect to precipitation fell in the third
class, not the first. since there were no major negative anomalies over the
entire territory: a drought occurred primarily in the northern and central
regions of the European USSR, whereas in the western regions at the same time
there was a considerable positive precipitation anomaly. However, with respect
to temperature and the w index 1972 fell in the first class.

It is of interest to give a prediction of the defined classes on the basis of
an analysis of the preceding conditions in the atmosphere. The longest series
are for the temperature field. It was selected as a set of criteria for making
the classification. Since the years entering into each class were known in ad-
vance, we carried out the procedure of "learning with a teacher," that is.
breakdown of criterion space into regions beat corresponding to stipulated
classes. The teaching sample represented the temperature field expanded in
natural orthogonal components: The first eight normalized coefficients of the
expansion were taken as criteria in the discriminant analysis. Linear dia-
criminant analysis was used on the assumption of a normality of the distribu-
tion of criteria and the equality of the covariation matrices of the classes.
Although these assumptions, strictly speaking, are not satisfied, nevertheless,
as was demonstrated in [10], the advantage of use of quadratic discriminant an-
alysis is not maintained with a changeover to independent material. In this
case, since the breakdown was made into four classes, the samples for evaluat-
ing the covariation matrices of the four classes were too small. Accordingly,
we used one covaristion matrix for all classes. A linear parametric algorithm
was used; the vectors of the mean criteria in space were found for each class
and the corresponding linear discriminant functions were constructed.

As indicated in [11], the linear discriminant functions for normal objects with
equal covariation matrices correspond to the classificator for the minimum dis-
_tance from the class "standard" (the standards are the mean fields for each
class). Since the expansion coefficients are statistically independent criter-
ia, the distances d k are determined as the sum of the squares of the normal-
ized expansion coef icients.

Table 2 gives the mean and maximum distances djk between the class standards.
This value (the Hahalanobis distance) serves as an indirect evaluation of clas~
sification quality. Table 2 shows that the minimum distances were obtained for
the prediction for January. The classes of temperature anomalousness are less
different in the space of the selected criteria than the precipitation criteria.
1hc distance between the first and fourth classes on the average exceeds the
distance between the other classes (by approximately 0.4).

10

FIHIIHHHCJAI.USB(NVLY
It Is of interest to check the significance of the determined distances be-
tween classes. For this we will assume that the entire criterion space belongs
to one and the same multidimensional normal set with a zero vector of the means
and a unit covariation matrix. These conditions are well satisfied for the nor-
mal coefficients of expansion in natural components. We will find the critical
distances between the means of the classes which would be obtained if the class-
es were formed randomly. The Mahalanobis distance between the j-th and k—th

classes is I 3
I Z" 3 .\
d]. 1: (Pl " :13, s ”I (P; — ”k) = ‘§(1T - f ’ (1)

where 14-3, £1 are the vectors of the mean classes, 8 is the covariation ma-

trix. Agi, Ah are the mean values for the j-th. k-th classes of coefficients
of the xpansion, djk has the distribution

where x2 is the 2&2 distribution with 8 degrees of freedom. The parameters in
the parentheses have the dispersion

244,—)

n I
where n is the number of the class. Assuming the number of years in the class
to be 20. we find that the dispersion of each term 2/20'1 is approximately
equal to 0.1. Since the dispersion Djﬁ - 2k - 2.8. then the dispersion djk
-0.1-2~8 . 0.16, and- the standard deviation o’(djk) - 0.1:. The mean value djk
is approximately equal to

 

2o’(—§-)7;zz0.1‘8=0.8. (2)

Table 2 shows that the maximum distance between the classes in many cases ex-
ceeds 102 and even 51 of the critical distribution value xg (06), equal to

1.33 and 1.55 respectively.

We evaluated the quality of the classification for all the teaching sample
from 1901 through 1978. The evaluation was made in the following way: with
precise falling into a class the evaluation of the forecast was equal to 1;

when falling into the adjacent class -- 1/2. and in the opposite case -- 0. A
purely random forecast of the equiprobable classes with such an evaluation
matrix has a probable success (guaranteed probability) of 0.56. whereas the
probability of precise falling into a class is 0.25 (each matrix “box" corres-
ponds to a probability of entry equal to 1:16). The classes which we defined
are nonequally probable and therefore the probable success of a random fore-
cast is dependent both on the natural frequency of recurrence of classes and
on the frequency of forecast of each class. We computed evaluations of random
forecasts with the actual probabilities taken into account; they do not ex-
ceed 0.58-0.59, but the probability of precise entry into a class for a random

forecast does not exceed 0.27-0.28.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

, Table 3 gives evaluations of the probable success of the discriminant analysis
and also the frequency of precise falling into a class. Table 3 shows that the

evaluations everywhere exceed the probable success of the random classification.
The mean probable success p is equal to 0.70. The probable success of the class-

es for temperature for January is somewhat lower. Falling into a class in
most cases exceeds by almost twice the corresponding number for a random class-

ification and is about half of all the cases. The mean probability of a precise
falling into a class is 0.78. With an increase in the advance time of the fore-
caSt the quality of the classification does not change significantly.

The next step was a classification on the basis of the minimum distance from
the standard for the sum of the squares of.the difference in the normalized
expansion coefficients for two. three or more months. Although the expansion
coefficients for the successive months have some coherence. it is not great
and it can be neglected. The expansion coefficients for the different months
can serve as new criteria for the classification. The combining of two, three
or more months as prognostic criteria will make it possible to improve the
evaluations of the classification up to 832.

Table 6

Conjugation of Criteria

Fact ' Forecast

I II III' IV
I 6 S 5 3
II 6 12 2 4
III 6 2 10 2
IV 3 2 6 8

The hypothesis of a nondependence of the actual and prognostic classes was
checked using the x? test. The matrix of conjugation of the criteria for the
forecast for October is represented in Table 5. The computed values of the cri-
terion were highly significant (26.96). whereas the 5% critical value was

X g (0.05) - 16.56. In this case the matrix of conjugation of criteria was con-
structed for predicting the classes of anomalousneas of precipitation for Octo-
ber, having the evaluations p - 0.69 and p11 - 0.46. As indicated by the conjug-
ation matrix, the frequency of recurrence of prognostic classes approximately
corresponds to the actual frequency of recurrence. The best probable success

is for the "middle" classes (second and third) and the minimum success is for
the first class. The falling of a forecast into a class opposite the actual
class (first and fourth) is rather rare (6 cases in 78). The conjugation ma-
trices for the other months have a similar character. The hypothesis of inde—
pendence of the actual and prognostic classes in most cases is refuted. The
probable success of a random classification was also checked using statistical
modeling. The actual classes. defined on the basis of the character of anom-
ulousness (Table l). were compared with the classes formed randomly (from a
table of random numbers) and selected sinply in chronological order. The evalu-
ations of the probable success of random classifications were in the range:

12
FKIICIHHCIA1.USE(NVLY
p = 0.55-0.59. p 1 - 0.21-0.2‘, which is close to the theoretical evaluations
and is appreciab y inferior to the quality of the classification for the tem-
perature field.

Thus, the temperature field of the northern hemisphere can serve as a predictor
for determining the general character of anomalousness over the course of the
growing season.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Apasova, Ye. 6., "Anomalousness of Mean Monthly Air Temperature Over the
European USSR, in Western Siberia and Northern Kazakhstan During the Cold
Half-Year." TRUDY GIDROMETTSENTRA SSSR (Transactions of the USSR Hydro—
meteorological Center), No 93, 1972.

2. Apasova, Ye. 6., "Determination of the Degree of Anonalousness of Mean
Monthly Air Temperature Over the Territory of the USSR." TRUDY VNIIGMI-MTsD
(All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Mydrometeorological Information-
Horld Data Center), No 13, 1976.

3. Aristova, L. N.. "Secular Variation of Degree of Anonalousness of Tempera-
ture Regime Conditions in the Northern hemisphere and Evaluation of Its
Stationary Character," TRUDY VNIIGMl-MTsD, No 68, 1980.

4. Botyreva. 0. V. and Lukiyanoya, L. Ye.. "Statistical Distribution of Point
and Area-Averaged Monthly Precipitation Sums." TRUDY GIDROMBTTSBNTRA $888,
No 226. 1980.

S. Batyreva. 0. V. and Lyakhova, T. L., "Characteristics of the Statistical
Distribution of Mean Monthly Temperature by Points," TRUDY GIDROMBTTSBNTRA
SSSR, No 211. 1978.

6. Gruza. G. V. and Ran'kova, 8. Ya., "Some Characteristics of the Temperature
Regine in the Northern Hemisphere and Features of Current Climatic Changes,"
TRUDY VNIIGHI-HTsD, No 68, 1980.

7. Cruza. 6. V., Kleshchenko, L. K. and Ran'kova, E. Ya., "Changes in Air Tem—
perature and Precipitation Over the Territory of the USSR During the Period
of Instrumental Observations," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No l, 1977.

B. Kagan, R. L. and Pedorchenko, Ye. 1., "Computation of the Statistical Char-
acteristics of Surges of Random Functions." TRUDY GGO (Transactions of the
Main Geophysical Observatory), No 268, 1970.

9. Kagan. R. L. and Fedorchenko, Ye. 1., "Computation of the Probability of a
Surge of a Normal Series." TRUDY 660. No 348, 1974.

lo. Lukiyanova, L. Ye., "Use of Discriminant Analysis in Predicting Seasonal
Precipitation." TRUDY GIDROHETTSBNTRA SSSR, No 211. 1978.

ll. Nil'son, N.. OBUCHAYUSHCHIYBSYA MASHINY (Teaching Machines). Moscow, Mir.
I967.

13

FOITOFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
12.

13.

110.

IS.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ped'. D. A., "Index of Drought and Excess Hoistening," TRUDY GIDRMET-
TSERTRA SSSR, "0'156. 1975.

"Synoptic Conditions for the Forming of Major Anomalies of Mean Monthly
Te-perature in the Southern European USSR and Western Siberia and in
Northern Kazakhstan." TRUDY GIDRGE‘ITSENTRA SSSR, No 72.1972.

Van Loon, ll. and Hilliam. J.. "The Connection Between Trends of Mean Ten-
perature and Circulation at the Surface. Part I. "inter." HON. HEATHER
new, Vol 104. No a. 1976.

Yamanoto, R. Hoshiai, M. and Ivashina, T.. "Change of Surface Air Temper-
ature Averaged Globally During the Years 1957-1972." ARCH. HE‘I'BOROL. GEO-
PIIYS.. BIOEDIA‘I‘OL., 25, No 2, 1977.

110

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 551.515.22+551.576+551.513.5

INTERACTION BETWEEN SUBCIDUD AND CLOUD LAYERS IN TROPICAL CYCLONES AND INTRTROPICAL
CONVERGENCE ZONE

Moscow METEOROWIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 3, liar 82 (manuscript received
18 Jun 81) pp 39-105

(Article by Ye. A. Agrenich and A. P. Khain, candidate of physical and mathematical
sciences, USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] The method developed by J. Ogura and ll. R. Cho (J. ATMOS. 801., Vol 31.
1971.) was used in a somewhat modified form in order to determine the height of the
mixing layer. its structure and vertical mass flow in cumulus clouds _at the level
of their base. Under disturbed weather conditions the authors examine the layer
under the clouds. whose thermdynanic structure is similar to the structure of
the mixed layer under undisturbed conditions. In the formulated problem it is as-
suﬂed that in the subcloud layer the dry static energy a. and the mixing ratio qI
do not change with height. It is assumed further that the transitional layer has
an infinitely small thickness (the level of the cloud base coincides with the
upper boundary of the nixed layer). Ogura and Cho concluded that computations
with k - 0.1 and 0.2 (k is .an important proportionality factor used in a key for-
mula derived by D. K. Lilly in QUART. J. ROY. METEOROL. 806.. Vol 910, No 2, 1968)
but with d - 0.5 (Otis a variable parameter) (which assmaes the presence of "warm
roots" of clouds in the subcloud layer) the results are entirely realistic for weak
tropical disturbances. The method was used in computing the mass flow in clouds
and other characteristics for GATE phases 1 and III. The same method was applied
in studying tropical cyclones Inez, Hilda and Daisy. It was found that the para-
meter k - 0.2 is not suitable for regions of a tropicalcyclone close to the cen-
ter. For tropical cyclones the results obtained with k - 0.7 are satisfactory.
There is clear evidence that there are "warm roots" in clouds. Figures 1. tables
3: references 8: 3 Russian, 5 Western.

15 ,
rosomcutustom
FOR'OFFKJAI.USE(HULY

UDC 551.576.1+551.509.316(-062.5)

[Art:c1e by A. V. Kislov, candidate of geographical sciences. Moscow State Univer-
sity

processes and in the tropical zone is virtually the sole source of global neteor-
ological infatuation. By appropriately selecting the discreteness and resolution
of space photographs it is possible to investigate neteorological phenonena at
.different scales. The investigated region virtually encircled the globe and was
.bounded on the north by S‘N and on the south by 20's. The basis for the study
was satellite cloud cover photographs, with visual interpretation of cloud cover-
age in each 5‘ square for each day from 1 November 1977 through 8 March 1978. The

1y uniforn underlying surface. The investigated region was divided into five lat-
itude zones. In each such zone (containing H - 64 5' squares) the structure of
the cloud cover was studied for a period (N . 128 days) and a matrix of initial
data X(N, H)was stipulated. These data were subjected to two-dinsnsional spectral
analysis (separately for each latitude zone) after carrying out filtering of the
low-frequency conponents. As a result of this analysis it was found that in the
equatorial and tropical_zones there are synoptic disturbances of the easterly
waves type with a period of 3 days and a length in a zonal direction of about

dimensional spectral analysis for investigating stationary randon fields. Figures
1; references: 6 Russian, 5 Western.
UDC 551 . 509. 3164-551 . 5210

MODELS OF ONE-DIMENSIONAL AND JOINT DISTRIBUTIONS 0P NON-NEGATIVE WW VALUES

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLDGIYA in Russian No 3, Mar 82 (manuscript received
2!. Jun 81) pp 50-56

[Article by A. S. Harchenko, professor, and A. 6.~Semochkin, Computation Center.
Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Abstract] A great number of different distributions dependent on one, two or a
greater number of parameters are used in approximating the probability distrib-
utions of non-negative hydrometeorological elements with values in the range
(0,00 ). As an alternative, the authors here propose models of one-dimensional
and joint distributions. The principle for constructing these was outlined by

A. .. Harchenko, et al. in HBTEDROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 9, 1980. These are
mixtures of distributions stipulated on the positive seniaxis. The best variants
are mixtures of two two-parameter distributions, that is, distributions dependent
on five parameters. Here the authors examine two gamma distributions with differ-

ent densities 1‘ ; | _.;

:‘I '. u 1’ ' I ,
r an v—,————----.. r;.(z -._.._-..,
I ,|| I. (5-) ) ‘;:' (7:) (1)

and it is demonstrated that a family of distributions of the type

I' (Z)=" m (ZH'VI’: (Z).
0<0<1, gen—u,

where p1(z) and pz(s) correspond to (1), contains distributions with any prestip-
ulnted mean value, dispersion and virtually any asymmetry. The described method
for selecting the five parameters of the nixed distribution in principle is the
same as in the article cited above but it takes into account new effects attribut-
able to the fact that the p1(z) and p2(z) distributions are stipulated in the in-
tervnl (0,00). models of time series with marginal distributions of this type

are examined. As an illustration of application of the method the article gives
approximating expressions for the correlation functions of the wind velocity mod—
ulus at several stations in January. The method was also successfully used in
approximating the distributions of river discharges and the quantity of precipita-
tion. Figures 3; references: 7 Russian.

(2)

l7
FOI'OFFKJAI.USI(IELY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unc 55l.515.1+551.466.:
mssmmon or xrmxc mam m crews: oven 0cm

Moscou.METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 3, Mar 82 (nenuscript received
15 Jun 81) pp 57-64

[Article by K. A. Rogachev, Pacific Ocean Oceanological Institute]

of the near-water layer, dependent on the stage of development of wind vaves. This
“system of equations in essence is a nonstationary Iodel of the boundary layer of
a weather systen over the ocean. By stipulating the initial dynamic velocity v.
and phase velocity of waves c. it is possible to determine evolution of principal
boundary layer characteristics. The described systen is very sensitive to 7*0
changes. Rich a dependence of the dissipation of kinetic energy on the regine of

a change in dissipation related to the generation of wind waves. Due to the non-
stationary character of the problem. because of the v.0 variability there is a

sipntion of kinetic energy it can be seen that the wind-wave correlation is impor-

tant in any change in wind kinetic energy. Figures 2; references 16: 5 Russian.
9 western.
UDC 551.66.062.5(261.244)
PREDICTION OF HATER SALINITY IN GULF OF RIGA'BOTTOH HORIZON

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 3, Her 82 (manuscript received
1 Jun 81) pp 65-73

[Article by Ye. N. Zakharchenko, Latvian Republic Administration of Hydrometeorology
and Environmental Monitoring]

in the bottom waters of the Gulf of Riga and developed a method for predicting sal-
inity in the bottom horizon. Salinity is governed by the volunes of river water
entering the gulf and water exchange with the Baltic Sea. Conditions vary with sea-
son. For example. during spring-summer there is a horizontal inhomogeneity. From
the head of the gulf the salinity increases toward the central, deepest part and

in the western sector, closest to Irbenskiy Strait, which communicates with the
Baltic. The bottom horizon was regionalized on the basis of bottom hydrological
characteristics, including salinity, into four parts: I) closest to Irbenskiy
Strait. II) shallovest sector; III) deepest sector; IV) most distant from Irbenskiy
Strait. The amplitudes of the month-to-month and year-to-year salinity variations
are approximately identical and can attain 1.0-1.50/00; these variations for the
most part are attributable to variations in the intensity of water exchange with
the-Baltic. A series of equations (summarized in Table l) was derived for predict-
ing bottom-layer salinity for May and August. The article gives an example of such
a forecast, 1979 and 1980 being used as test years. It was found that there is a.
definite correlation between wind over the sea, level in the Gulf of Riga and the
latitudinal component of the current vector in the lower layer of Irbenskiy Strait.
The restructuring of currents in the lower layer of the strait lags by 26 hours
relative to wind restructuring over the sea. The clarification of the mechanism

of water exchange through the strait made it possible to predict water salinity

tn the bottom layer in the gulf 1-1.6 months in advance. The derived formulas can
he used in planning fishing operations and in evaluating biological resources.
Figures 3, tables 2; references: 17 Russian.

19
'roaommustoutv
FIN!(HHU(1AI.USE(MVLY

UDC 551.461.2(268.4/.5)

STATUS AND PROSPECTS OF NUMERICAL HYDRODYNANIC INVESTIGATIONS 0P FLUCTUATIONS
OP LEVELS IN ARCTIC SEAS

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian 30 3, Mar 82 (manuscript received
25 May 81) PP 76-80 ,

. [Article by N. V. Hustafin and A. Yu. Proshutinskiy, candidates of geographical
sciences, Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute)

[Text] Abstract: This is a concise review of numer-
ical hydrodynamic investigations of the for-
motion of fluctuations of level in arctic
seas. The authors deal with the tasks in
improving models and combining numerical
experiments with in situ observations. It
is emphasized that the development of oper-
ational level forecasting methods must be
based on the joint implementation of numer-
ical hydrodynamic and physicostatistical
investigations with practical experience
taken into account. It is proposed that an
integrated system be created for numerical
hydrometeorological forecasts under the con-
dition that arctic administrations of the
State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Envir-
onmental Honitoring be supplied with modern
electronic computers.

Introduction. A study of level fluctuations -- an integral indicator of the hy-
drological regime and an important element of oceanic dynamics -- is a compon-
ent part of oceanological research. The practical aspects of study of level
variability are extremely timely. such as for improving the service for level
forecasts in the Arctic. Together with the ice and weather services it is the

basis for the hydrometeorological support of navigation along the Northern Sea
Route.

At the present time the study of level fluctuations on the basis of in situ
data ls combined with hydrodynamic modeling and numerical experiments. It is
noteworthy that the latter became not simply a feasible, but also a necessary
element of oceanological investigations. Such an approach not only broadens
the possibilities of a scientific analysis, but also reduces the costs in

20

IOI:OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
carrying it out. Applicable to the problem of studying level fluctuations in
the Kara, Laptev, East Siberian and Chukchi Seas by means of numerical hydrody-
namic modeling, it is for the most part the following problems which are solv-
ed:

Investigation of the role of different factors forming level fluctuations under
specific physiographic conditions in the arctic region as a whole and in each
of the seas separately.

Development of methods for computing the level and its extremal characteristics
for supporting hydrotechnical, industrial and communal planning and construc-
tion and also the planning of new types of transport ships and icebreakers.

Study of the regime of level fluctuations. The possibility of computing the
characteristics of the phenomenon in regions inadequately or completely unsup-
plied with in situ data is acquiring particular importance.

A rough evaluation of the future regime and study of changes in the dynamics of
level fluctuations of seas where the local geographic characteristics change
as a result of implementation of major national economic measures (construc-
tion of dams, protective dikes, withdrawal of river runoff. etc.).

Developing methods for predicting level fluctuations for supporting navigation.

Review of investigations. The need for numerical hydrodynamic investigations of
level fluctuations of arctic seas was indicated as early as 1966 in [4]. Some
of the problems formulated there have now been solved. He will examine the sta-
tus and results of numerical hydrodynamic investigations of level fluctuations
in arctic seas, carried out at the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research
Institute during recent years.

The extensive continental shelf (76-992 of the ocean area) and the relative
shallowness of arctic seas favor the formation of considerable wind-induced
level fluctuations. The tidal component of fluctuations was relatively small
(numerical computations of tidal movements in arctic seas were earlier made by
A. V. Kopteva (1959), B. A. Kagan (1968), K. D. Tiron (1975)). A still lesser
contribution, as indicated in [2], is made by the steric component of level
fluctuations. Accordingly, the first stage in the investigations included the
aperiodic level fluctuations and dealt with the following problems:

Study of the applicability of existing hydrodynamic models for computing wind-
indured level fluctuations in arctic seas.

Numerical realization of models and their calibration using in situ data for
the investigated region. -

Quantitative evaluation of the role of the wind, atmospheric pressure, bottom
relief and shore configuration. the earth's rotation and river runoff in the

formation of aperiodic level fluctuations in arctic seas on the basis of devel-
nped numerical methods for analysis of the phenomenon.

21

FOI!0FFKJAL.USE(HNLY
.vnua vac anon
locum ouuosaaoauo no uvﬂauu mcuusano aw can} ovosuoa vac nuance uo auouso
Ion mo acuuu=->m .Auuncav mawuouoa no auuunwuouuauuso unowuouuouo adds new
Icununo you unowunsunn adunocau Hook ow Hmong mo nooauuuonaou Hence no nuanom
.ncouunauow ousauona mo huouuanuuu can usoEUDoa uo «us»

no ouoaumouuoau H0>¢H uo «auto can acouaaaua mo oocaucaauv mo acuuwuwihouon
.anouwou Hoooa nu nouaachu “ova:

mo coauowauoooua vouwouov can unoﬁuuauuouu Ho>oa uo oowuawuououuuzo 03“»

non usu mo coaunusoaou nu unooo woouu censoaoao consonants“: ouncuovuaaou

uo ucoanoao>uv cu ouo>uu bonus mo wwonsu mo acuusnauucoo uo coauowuuoo>un
.ousuoouuw Hauuoou aﬂoau ~o>uH «cashew cu szuuo: coauoa mo «cow»

nose» Hones cu aucuuvuum ousuuounv ouaoooun uuuosnuoauo no ouou uo aouuuaud>w
.noawou ca unoaoaunn

nauavounucuz uo uncanoao>uv ca coauouon ¢.:uuuo mo «Hon mo nouuuniahouon
63¢ uuuouo cu 38.03am 30:25:?!»

no wcaauou :H coauonouumuoo ouoso can umuaau acuqu mo uHou no nouuanuu>n
.nvowuon hauouo ow madman Ho>oa mo ououoouun unashOu an noon caosu

Ion unannoxo “can: mo oHou mo nouuucuauouun .Havoa «:0 ed and» Had an haoooo
Izouaaﬂua unequasuoaau H0>Uu mo uaoauouonaou mo zuuaunanuou no coauomuuno>uu
.ocouwou Hooou mo Haves uduouocaﬂuv

uoauzu so“: nun uuzo mo Hovoa Hucowucoaqvloau mo unwuaooo .uowuouooou Haw»
Iona ucououuuv saw: uncanny van» mo unuaaaoo mo Nuanwnuaaoa mo :ouuunashmuon
.010» no uaounoo canvaa co noouuavnoo annuaaon no aowuaoadou wad couuoouom
.nulv auwo ca «0 manna on» no coocovuonov mo coauuunudlo .oaovOE HdQOHQGOEdv
noounu van uoau a“ :oauowuu IOuuon waauoaaou you oonovcomov mo acuuadaauOuon
.uuuw sown :«

moan: coaununwauo .uvaouu ounooouo ouuosomoauu uo.co«uauoauouu« you ovosuoa
no coauooaom .aoa sumo :« uuuouu van: wouuaaaoo new avozual no ucoamoao>on
.auuv ouuu a“ mo owns: an» :o cocoovaaaov «0 now»

nouauaoo .oouuoguu vows dquucomnou wuwuoaaoo you mocovcooov no couuuaaauuuoa
.mcowuouou Houauhnucu Bony auuv saws :oouuon

lace up auaoaou no couuaoao>m .osovoa Honouanoauvloousu and nonu cu madman
Homes 5:: uaunomgo ad nouaoaosa vooovaanvawa mo unwauou mo aoaunnauoopan

cusaﬁg: «.
:couuomum ouamusm u

A..00ﬂulﬂuﬂum=v
=usuunauoum:
A:QU“E§-.V

A:mug:-.V
.uxoum-p
A:u:o«vuuo:v
.ov~u°..
A=naao«noo:v
:uuaoauo¥=
Accuoﬂ Hog-cw
:uo>.Hu¢=

A=owcanonm:v
passage:

Auuwp—H Haas-.V
=o>wnosuohunom=
.«=>uu«=ouw oaaxvagn=
A:=o«uu«um ﬂauuon=v
:udv a «manage:

A=vsz-V =H0U0>3
«:Huua
unsuo>oa a: umwooua:

£33.. ..;o..=2_o..o
.1389. .. .33...
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

investigation of the regime characteristics of wind-induced level fluctuations
in regions not supplied with observational data.

Two- and three-dimensional models of storm surges were used in solving these
problems [11, 12]. The realization of models for arctic seas was described in
[6-8]. Table 1 gives a list of the principal numerical experiments carried out
as a result of investigation of the features of level fluctuations observed

in arctic seas. In the first approximation a study was made of the most signif-
icant level fluctuations during the navigation season when the influence of the
ice cover can be neglected. In order to satisfy the requirement of adequacy

of the results of computations and data from in situ observations the modeling
of wind-induced level fluctuations was accomplished simultaneously for the en-
tire shelf zone of arctic seas. The criteria of agreement between computed and
observed level values were the statistical evaluations used in numerical hy-
drodynamic weather forecasts: mean computation error, mean absolute error in
computations, mean square error, computation quality parameter and correlation
coefficient between the computed and actual level variation. A comparison of
the results of modeling with observational data was carried out at 35 points
located on the coast and on islands of the studied seas.

ihble 2 gives the mean statistical quality characteristics obtained in the mod-
eling of 10 synoptic situations causing the most significant level fluctuations.
The presented evaluations are evidence of the accuracy which at the present

time meets the requirements imposed on computations or’prediction of wind-in-
duced phenomena [9].

The developed methods for computing level fluctuations in arctic seas can be
used for prognostic purposes when there is a reliable prediction of the surface
field of atmospheric pressure or wind. Experience shows that for computing a
situation with a duration of 36 hours it is necessary to expend 40 minutes

with a "Minsk-32" electronic computer. The collection and processing of initial
data require 40 minutes and the preparation of the collected information in a
form convenient for analysis requires 20 minutes. It is desirable that the
making of forecasts by hydrodynamic methods be carried out in combination with
numerical forecasts of meteorological and other hydrological elements. This
will make it possible to reduce the random errors in the transmission of data
and reduce time consumption on preparatory work.

1hc advance time and accuracy in predicting wind-induced level fluctuations with
use of the considered methods is dependent for the most part on the correspond-
ing characteristics of prediction of the fields of atmospheric pressure and
wind. In actuality, using as a point of departure an analysis of the equations
or motion employed in computing wind-induced processes, it can be concluded

that the level errors must be dependent not only on the errors in meteorolog-
ical parameters, but also on the absolute velocity. direction and duration of
the wind effect. An analysis made it possible to explain why in the computations
of wind-induced phenomena for real situations the best results are obtained

when modeling the most significant level fluctuations. First, considerable lev-
el fluctuations are caused by pressure formations with large horizontal'gradi-
cuts of atmospheric pressure, and in this case the errors in computing wind
velocity and direction are usually minimum. Second. the wind in the case of

23

FIIICH"HCIULIJ§IE(HULY
great level fluctuations operates along the effective direction of wind-in-
duced fluctuations and an error in wind direction in this case of even 30°
causes an error in level of not more than 20 cm. Third, the duration of opera-
tion of strong winds usually does not exceed 6-12 hours, which also does not
lend to significant level distortions.

In the modeling of insignificant level fluctuations caused by low—gradient pres-
sure fields the relative errors in the computed levels sharply increase, for the
most part due to an increase in the errors in determining the direction of the
prevailing wind as a result of the nonrepresentativeness of blurred pressure
fields resulting from the thin network of meteorological stations in the Arctic.

Thus. an evaluation of the accuracy of numerical hydrodynamic methods for com-
puting wind-induced level fluctuations with the existing accuracy in determin-
ed and computed meteorological fields must be carried out using data on the
mvximum level fluctuations. Accordingly, the statistical evaluations of the
quality of modeling were ranked using the magnitude of level fluctuations. It
is desirable to formulate the requirements on the accuracy of meteorological
forecasts in different regions, upon attaining which a numerical hydrodynamic
prediction of wind-induced level fluctuations is applicable.

Within the framework of the developed methods an attempt was made to obtain re-
gime characreristics of wind-induced phenomena of practical importance. One

of these is the extreme level fluctuations which are possible once a year or
once in 5. 10, 20 and 50 years. Maps with such characteristics were prepareJ for
all the studied arctic seas and were included in a scientific-practical manual
prepared for publication. A comparison of the computed extremal level values
determined by hydrodynamic modeling and the results of computations of the ex-
tremal levels at shore stations, carried out using observational data and using
the method described in [1], gave satisfactory results. For a number of points
along the shore the data computed using the model were too low by 20-60 cm.

This must be expected because in the developed method the computation of extrem-
nl levels did not take into account the movement of pressure systems. Within the
framework of the created method it is evidently necessary to develop procedures
for taking the movement of pressure formations into account in order to make
allowance for possible resonance phenomena and also to take into account the
interaction of wind—induced phenomena with tidal level fluctuations.

A definite step has been made in this direction. In particular. with the partic-
[nation of Ye. N. Uranov there was a classification of atmospheric processes
evidently causing considerable level fluctuations in the Kara Sea. This was

done on the basis of a joint analysis of three interrelated synoptic fields
(surface atmospheric pressure. air temperature at the earth's surface, field of
altitudes of the SOO-mb surface). Such an approach made possible an indirect al-
lowance for cyclogenesis processes. variability of the trajectories of pressure
formations and the influence of thermal factors on the formation of surface-
level wind fields. As a result of the computations it was possible to define

six types of level fluctuations; the modeling of standard processes was carried
out. the sea area was regionalized on the basis of level reaction to the exter-
nal atmospheric effect. Parallely, using a two-dimensional model, a series of
computations were made of tidal movements in the Kara Sea. Thus, within the

24

FOR!0F11C1AI.USEGN§LY
framework of a two-dimensional formulation of the problem the prerequisites
were established for modeling the interaction of tidal level fluctuations
and wind-induced phenomena. Similar studies are now being made for other arc-

tic seas.

. .~.-.... .

 

Fig. 1. Sketch lap of relief of free surface (cm) of Arctic Basin caused by
thermohaline circulation (conputations using A. S. Sarkisyan model).

An attempt has been made at determining the water surface slopes of arctic seas
and the Arctic Basin employing the A. S. Serkisyan model [10]. The figure rep-
resents the topography of the free surface of the Arctic Basin caused only by
thermohaline factors. The results as a whole correspond to current concepts
concerning the circulation of waters in the considered region [5]. However, for
determining the variability of level fluctuations caused by the redistribution
of density it is desirable to solve the nonstationary problem.

Prospects for improvement in research. Further work on hydrodynamic investiga-
tions of level fluctuations in arctic seas provide for an improvement in the
models and a combination of numerical and in situ experiments, including level
observations in the open sea. Plans call for investigating. and in the models
taking into account the interaction of wind-induced and tidal level fluctua-
tions in the presence and in the absence of an ice cover with different char-
acteristics of the latter.

The modeling of level fluctuations of arctic seas, communicating on the north
with the ocean, must take into account the influence of so-called "external

25

IOIIOIIICIAI.I!II(NULY
Iluations of Quality of Modeling of Wind-Induced Level Oscillal

_ — I

A IAI 0’ e R
For-points with level oscillations iron 0 to 50 ca

0.0 7.3 9.6 0.52 0.65 m
0.0 7.1 0.2 0.50 0.67 Th1

For points with level oscillations tron 51 to 75 cm

0.0 10.0 13.0 0.68 0.78 '
0.0 10.1 13.2 0.50 0.78

For points with level oscillations from 76 to 100 ca

0.0 12.1 15.0 0.32 0.85
-1.0 12.6 16.1 0.45 0.80

For points with level oscillations nore than 100 on

0.0 14.0 18.9 0.20 ‘ 0.93
4.0 16.2 21.5 0.40 0.87

p are the mean observed and cogputed level oscillation values;

the mean computation error; IAI is the mean absolute conputat:
tion error; 5 is a paraneter of computation quality; R is the c:
computed and actual level variations.
surges" -- long waves generated by anemopressure conditions over the Arctic
lusin. Propagating over the areas of the seas, they exert a substantial effect
on the formation of wind-induced and tidal level fluctuations, especially in
the shallow-water regions. There is definite experience in their investigation
for the most part for the North Sea [13]. Particularly important is allowance
for a wave surge in computations and predictions of wind-induced level f1uctu~
utlons in those regions of arctic seas where there are extensive zones with
shallow depths and with shoals along the coasts. In regions with a sharp strat-
lrlcatlon of waters. including at shallow depths, it is necessary that baro-
rlinic effects be taken into account.

In order to achieve a high accuracy in hydrodynamic computation methods it is
necessary to combine numerical and in situ experiments. However, a solution of
this problem meets with considerable difficulties associated with the great
cost of the latter. the inadequacy of transport and technical facilities.
Nevertheless, there must be an optimum minimum of observations, carefully
planned in accordance with specific models. They must include the registry of
levels. currents, atmospheric pressure and wind in regions not covered by ob-
servations. including the open sea, and also aerial reconnaissance of ice. Such
observations are also important over the area of the Arctic Basin. In order to
rulihrnte local models with a high resolution (for example, for supporting
drilling work on the shelf) there must be multisided observations in relative-

ly small polygons.

Development of methods for predicting level and possibilities of their adoption
in operational work. The problem of increasing accuracy and lengthening the ad-
vance time of level predictions both at the traditional times of arctic naviga-
tion and during winter has become extremely timely. With the improvement of
exiSting and creation of new methods for predicting wind-induced level fluctua-
tions it is necessary to be guided by what we regard as a highly important
principle: close integration of numerical hydrodynamic and physicostatistical
investigations. In this process it is necessary to take into account the many
years of practical experience of forecasters.

The methodology, that is, the fundamental scientific basis of prognostic
schemes. must evidently be unified. But the specific methods for predicting
levels for individual seas and even different regions may differ as a result of
allowance for specific physiographic features, as well as regional and local
characteristics of the regime of level fluctuations. Precisely in this direc-
tion specialists are bringing about a further improvement in methods for pre-
dicting levels in arctic seas. The role of allowance for the regularities of
tho hydrometeorological regime in the development of corresponding forecasting
methods within the framework of a definite conceptual model was indicated in

I‘ll.

I: In desirable to create a unified. integrated system (with a data bank), in-
vludlng numerical hydrodynamic and physicostatistical models,for the purpose

or computing and predicting level fluctuations. currents, waves, continuous,
rumpressed and rarefied ice in any regions of the Arctic. An automated ocean-
uluglval complex must be linked to a corresponding meteorological complex which
mlnld ensure the preparation of numerical forecasts of the distribution of

27

INJI‘OIINCIAI.IEIB("ULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

atmospheric pressure and wind for arctic seas and the adjacent area of the ocean
with an advance tine of 5-10 days. The creation of such a system will accelerate
the introduction of objective analysis and prediction of the entire complex of
hydroncteorological conditions which are regarded as an organic part of the uni-
fied process.

3.

5.

l0.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Dvorkin, Ye. N., "Method for Conputing Levels With a Rare Frequency of Re-
currence," TRUDY AANII (Transactions of the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific
Research Institute). Vol 306, 1972.

Dvorkin, Ye. N., Zakharov, Yu. V. and Hustafin, N. V., "Reasons for the Sea-
sonal and Long-Tern Variability of Level in the Laptev and East Siberian
Seas." TRUDY AANII, Vol 369. 1978.

Krutskikh. B. A., OSNOVNYYB ZAKONOHBRNOSTI IZHENCHIVOSTI REZHIHA ARKTICHESKIKH
HOREY V YESTBSTVENNYKH GIDROLOGICHESKIKH PERIODAKH (Principal Patterns of Var-
iability of the Regine of Arctic Seas in Natural Hydrological Periods). Len-
ingrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1978.

Hustafln, N. V.. "Problems in Investigating Level Fluctuations of Arctic Seas,"
PROBLBHY ARKTIKI I ANTARKTIKI (Problems of the Arctic and Antarctica), No 26,
1966.

Nikiforov, Ye. G. and Shpaykher, A. 0., ZAKONOHBRNOSTI FORMIROVANIYA RRUPNO-
MASSHTABNYKH ROLEBANIY GIDROLOGICHBSKOGO REZHIHA SEVERNOGO LEDOVITOGO OKEANA
(Patterns in Formation of Large-Scale Fluctuations of the Hydrological Regine
of the Arctic Ocean), Leningrad. Gidroneteoizdat. 1980.

Proshutinskiy, A. Yu., ”Computation of Hind-Driven Level Fluctuations in the
Shelf Zone of Arctic Seas," HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and ﬂy-
drology), No 8. 1978.

Proshutinskiy, A. Yu., "Some Results of Numerical Modeling of Hind-Driven
Sea Level Fluctuations in the Leptev Sea." TRUDY AANII, Vol 361, 1979.

Proshutinskiy, A. Yu., "Analysis of Results of Modeling of Hind-Driven Level

Fluctuations in the Shelf Zone of Arctic Seas," TRUDY b-y KONFBRENTSII HOLOD-
YKH UCHENYKH LGHI (Transactions of the Fourth Conference of Young Scientists

of the Leningrad Hydrometeorological Institute), Leningrad, 1979. (Manuscript
deposited at the All-Union Institute of Scientific and Technical Information,
10 December 1979. No 4195-79).

RUKOVODSTVO P0 KRATKOSROCHNYH.PROGNOZAM POGODY (Manual on Short-Range Heather
Forecasting), Part 1. Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1964.

Swrklsyan, A. 8., CHISLENNYY ANALIZ l PROCNOZ HORSKIKH TBCHENIY (Numerical
Analysis and Prediction of Sea Currents), Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat, 1977.

28

FIIIIIHHCJAl.lEiB(IULY
11. Heaps. N. 8., "0n the Numerical Solution of the Three-Dimensional Hydrody-
namical Equations for Tides and Storm Surges," Hm. 80C. ROY. SCI.. Ser 6,
Vol 2, 1972.

12. Henry. R. P. and Beeps, N. 8.. "Storm Surges in the Southern Beaufort See,"
J. FISH. R88. BOARD GAIL, V01, 33, N0 10, 1976.

13. ' Timernan, 8.. "0n the Importance of Atnoepheric Pressure Gradients for the

Generation of External Surges in the North Sea." DEU‘l‘SCllB HYDROGRAPHISCHE
ZEITSGIRIPT, 3d 28, No 2. 1975.

29

FOI‘OFHKJAI.USEIHNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 556.16:556.072

DESCRIPTION 0? RIVER RUNOFF AT SEVERAL POINTS BY MULTIVARIATE CAMNICAL EXPANSION
METRO!)

Moscow mmkmocna I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 3. Mar 82 (manuscript received
25 May 81) pp 81-87

[Article by I. V. Busalayev and S. K. Davletgaliyev, candidates of technical sci-
ences. Kazakh Scientific Research Institute of Electric Power and Kazakh State
University]

[Abstract] The canonical expansion method is» proposed as a promising nethod for
systenic nodeling of river runoff. A nodel based on this nethod sakes it possible
to reproduce the entire correlation nstrix (correlation functions of all orders
are retained in the nodeling) and it requires a lesser nunber of paraneters than
the corresponding autoregression Iodel. An advantage of the method is that any
month can be taken as the initial month. Such a nodel does not require the un-
wieldy three-step procedure of identification, conputation and checking of cor-
respondence, as required in two-tern nodels. With relatively snall values of the
variation coefficient it is possible to reproduce a one-dinensional distribution
function and ‘Y-distributed randon nusbers can be used directly in the nodeling.
The linear operator of the canonical expansion can also be used effectively in
predicting river discharge on the basis of extrapolation of a random process. It
is shown that the nethod can also be employed in the nodeling of correlated hy-
drological series simltaneously at several neasurenent points on the basis of
multidimensional canonical expansion theory. The model was investigated in the
example of nonthly water inflows into the Bukhtarlinskoye and Shul'binskoye Res-
ervoirs. It was found that the cross-correlation and autocorrelation natrices

of the neon monthly water discharges of the observed and nodeled hydrological
series are in satisfactory agreement. Tables 2; references 10: 9 Russian, 1 Heat--
ern.

30

MWMONLY
UDC 551.509.6114

Moscow METEOROLWIYA I 610801.061“ in Russian No 3. ﬂat 82 (manuscript received

[Article by A. G. Laktionov, candidate of physical and mathematical aciencea, Inst-
itute of Applied Geophysical

tering of an adnixture in a cloudleae atmosphere is satisfactorily described by
six types of weather (A, B. c, D, B. G) differing with respect to both the degree
of atmospheric stability and turbulent fluctuations of wind direction in the hori-
zontal plane. Formulae were derived and graphs conatructed for obtaining the ap-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 528.77+633(677.72)
EVALUATION OF STATE OF AGRICULTURAL CROPS PROM SATELLITE DATA

Hoscov HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 3, Her 82 (manuscript received
26 Aug 81) PP 95-101

[Article by G. I. Borisoglebskiy, candidate of geographical sciences, and V. V.
Kozoderov, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, State Scientific
Research Center for Study of-Natural Resources]

[Text] Abstract: The possibility of an evaluation
of the dynamics of development of agricul-
tural crops on the basis of their images
on space photographs is examined. The ar-
ticle gives some results of determination
of the structure of agricultural fields
and the state of winter crops over the
territory of xhersonskaya Oblast on the
basis of satellite images of average
resolution._

The spatial inhomogeneity of the spectral brightness of agricultural fields
during the growing season is governed for the most part by nonuniformity in
the developnent and state of agricultural crops. This nonuniformity determines
the field of reflected radiation registered from space vehicles.

The method for evaluating the state of agricultural crops on the basis of space
images involves an allowance for differences in the reflected field of radia-
tion from agricultural fields.

The state of agricultural crops is characterized by many parameters. including
the quantity of vegetation mass (degree of coverage of the soil surface by a
grass stand). Since the soil and vegetation cover have different spectral
brightness coefficients, with a change in the quantity of the vegetation mass
the brightness coefficient of the soil-vegetation system also changes. Accord-
ingly, using the value of the brightness coefficient of the soil-vegetation
system it is possible to judge the state of the vegetation cover [1, 4].

In this article. in the example of Khersonskaya Oblast, we will examine some -
relationships between the state of agricultural crops and their brightness
characteristics. some results of processing of space photographs are given

32

IOI‘OIFKJAI.USE(NULY
and these results are conpared with data from expeditionary investigations of
the state of sown crops.

 

’ a
e ‘
d
1? ‘ i
I I
a, u u m, ?“ ”(sump u usumsum
Fig. 1. Spectral brightness coef- Pig. 2. Dynamics of percentage con-
ficients for snow (1), vegetation (S) tent of bare fallow (1), green vege-

covers and chernozen soils (2-6) in dif- tation (2) and yellow vegetation (3)

ferent states. 2) sticky soil; 3) soft for Khersonskaya Oblast in 1980 (ac-

plastic soil; 6) hard plastic soil. cording to data for Nizh. Serogoza
station).

First we will examine the principal seasonal features of change in the reflec-
tive properties of the soil-vegetation systen.

As indicated by observations. noistening of the surface soil layers changes
most significantly in the early spring and late autumn. After disappearance
of the snow cover the soil surface layer undergoes transition fron a sticky
(overmoistened) to a soft plastic state and then into a dry state. Depending
on the geographic region and weather conditions the duration of dessication
of the soil surface layer is usually 2-6 weeks. During this period there are
substantial changes in the reflective properties of the soil surface layer, as
is easily noted from the curves of spectral brightness coefficients (Fig. l)
of chernoten soil [2, 3] typical for Khersonskaya Oblast. During sunner the
soil surface layer is primarily in a dry and soft plastic state and its re-
flective properties do not change significantly (Fig. 1), although they can
vary briefly, depending on the falling of precipitation.

During spring and autunn a considerable percentage of the lands in Khersonskaya
Oblast (about 702) is in a plowed state and therefore the changes in the re-
flective properties of the earth's surface during this period are dependent for
the most part on the degree of noistening of the soil surface layer (transition
from curve 2 to curves 3-4 in Pig. 1). Pron the time of dessication of the soil
surface layer (to a soft plastic state) and renewal of the vegetation growing
season, which by the calendar almost coincide with one another. the changes in
the reflective properties of the underlying surface occur for the most part due
to an increase in soil coverage by a grass stand (curves 6 and 5 in Pig. 1).

Table l, in accordance with the curves in Fig. 1. gives the values of the bright-
ness coefficients of snow, soil and vegetation covers, corresponding to the sea-
sonal dynamics of their state. It follows fron the data in Table 1 that the snow
and vegetation covers differ substantially iron the soil cover with respect to
the values of the brightness coefficients. The variations of the brightness
properties of chernozen soils are less great, depending on the state of the

33
FIIICNﬂWCIAl.USIICHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

surface layer (from sticky to hard plastic). These features of the reflective
.properties are manifested in a corresponding way on space images as well, but
for a quantitative interpretation of data from space measurements it is neces-
sary to know the spectral response functions of the satellite apparatus. Never-
theless. in,a first approximation the data in Table 1 make it possible to carry
out a classification of the elements of space images on the basis of the photo-
tune of individual photographs.

Table 1

Integral Values of Brightness Coefficients for Four Channels (43) of
Satellite Apparatus

‘ A}

No of curve .

in F180 1 005-006 006-007 0a7-008 0.8-1.0
1 0.57 0.56 0.55 0.52
2 0.028 0.037 0.0‘6 0.058
3 0.054 0.078 0.11 0.13
4 0.090 0.11 0.14 0.17
5 0.066 0.057 0.19 0.32

Now we will examine changes in the percentage ratio of areas in thereonskaya
Oblast occupied by plowed soil, green and brown (mature) vegetation cover. The
'corresponding results, computed on the basis of the structure of sown areas

and the phases in development of the principal agricultural crops, are given

in Pig. 2. These data will be used henceforth in computing from the images on
space photographs the areas with different states of agricultural crops. Figure
2 shows that during May it is possible to define at least two classes of objects
differing substantially with respect to reflective properties: dark, correspond-
ing to plowed soil. and light. corresponding to vegetation. The differences in
phototone observed on space photographs are caused by the nonunifornity of the
soil and vegetation covers: the difference in the projective coverage of soils
by vegetation, different phenophases of agricultural crops, etc.

He will also examine the principal phonological characteristics of development
of agricultural crops in the territory of Khersonskaya Oblest for the purpose
of taking these characteristics into account in the analysis of space photo-

graphs.

Hinter crops and perennial grasses end their cycle of development earlier than
other agricultural crops. During the period of earing of winter wheat the sta-
growth process is still transpiring in early spring crops, whereas late spring
crops are in the phase of appearance of sprouts - onset of stem growth. As a
result of differences in the development phases these groups of crops during
the period of formation of the grass stand differ appreciably in the quantity
of vegetation mass. For example, on 28 Hay 1980, according to observational
data for the meteorological stations of Khersonskaya Oblast, the height of win-
ter wheat in the eating phase was 70-80 cm and the height of early spring grain

35

FOR‘OFFKJA1.U§EIMVLY
crops in the phase of stem growth was 25-50 cm; the height of late spring crops
(in the sprouting phase) was about 15 cm. During this period the color of the
grass stand for all crops was green. As a result of the different height of the
grass stand. that is, the different quantity of vegetation mass and the differ-
ent degree of coverage of the soil with vegetation,the agricultural fields oc-
cupied by these crops differ in brightness, which makes it possible to dis-
tinguish them on space images on the basis of optical density.

The differences between crops, according to mean long-tern data. at the times

of onset of the development phases during their growing season, are given in
Table 2.

Table 2

Difference (in Days) in Onset of Phases of Development of the Principal
Agricultural Crops

Pairs of crops Development phases
sprouts stem extension earing milky gold
ripeness ripeness
Winter wheat - spring 19 6 5 6
barley
Spring barley - corn 27 -- 40 -- 60
Sunflower - corn lS - -- -- 13

It can be seen from the presented materials that winter wheat differs substan-
tially from late spring crops with respect to the times of onset of one and the
same development phases.

The differences between wheat and spring barley in the initial period of devel-
opment are greater than during the maturing period. For example. the differences
in the times of onset of the phase of stem extension (onset of stem growth) for
these was 19 days, but for the phase of gold ripeness it was only 6 days. The
differences in the height of the grass stand as these crops mature also de-
crease. Accordingly. on space images there are considerable difficulties in dif-
ferentiating them during the maturity period.

Late-maturing crops (sunflower. corn) with respect to the state of the grass
stand differ to a considerably greater degree from the group of early spring
crops in the second half of the growing season. Sunflower and corn differ sub-
stantially from one another primarily with respect to the color of the grass
stand and only during the maturing period.

Thus. using a phenological calendar it is possible to predetermine the periods

most convenient for the recognition and evaluation of the state of agricultural
crops on the basis of data from remote measurements.

a

35

FOR1DFFKJAI.U§B(HVLY
FOI‘DFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

 

4:

Fig. 3. Temporal variation of spectral brightness coefficients of soil-vegeta-
tion system. a) for winter crops, b) for spring crops.

Figure 3, in accordance with the data in Figures 1 and 2. gives the tenporal
dynamics of the spectral brightness coefficients of winter and spring crops.

The results of the computations in Pig. 3 correspond to the description of

the state of grain crops given in Table 3. In the computations we took into ac-
count the percentage contribution of vegetation and soils to the overall bright-
ness of the soil-vegetation system. The corresponding weighting function was

the projective coverage, equal to the ratio of the area occupied by vegeta-

tion to the total area occupied by the vegetation and soil.

A comparison of the curves in Pig. 3 makes it possible to conclude that the
differences between the brightnesses of these objects in the visible spectral
region (3- 0.5-0.7}; m) are small. The differences are appreciable only with
transition from the vegetation to the soil cover. In particular, a poor state
(low projective coverage) is virtually indistinguishible from a good state
(almost continuous vegetation cover) in the visible region on the basis of

brightness criteria. In the near IR region (2)»0.7frm) these differences are
more significant.

' I
~, /
%_..,...~::m.

IM '1! U I?! r

 

Fig. 4. Histogram of optical densities of space image for Khersonskaya Oblsst
(28 Hay 1980). 1) winter: 2) early spring; 3) late spring; 4) soil; 5) water
bodies.

36

FOI!OIIIJAI.USE(IULY
The described preliminary stages in establishing relationships between the state
of agricultural fields and their brightnesses make it possible to proceed to a
solution of the problem of evaluating the state of agricultural fields using
data from space images.

A distinguishing characteristic of satellite images with an average resolution
(about 250 m) is the small linear dimensions of agricultural fields, which
makes difficult the tie-in of individual fields to data from field measurements.
Accordingly, in the processing of satellite images with an average resolution

it evidently is necessary to take into account not individual agricultural
fields but a group of fields within the limits of individual districts, regions,
etc.

The algorithm for the processing of a satellite image involved the following.
The entire data bank of optical densities of space images was quantized into

classes corresponding to different agricultural crops (feature recognition).*
The next stage in the processing is the discrimination of optical density class-
es corresponding to a different state of the grass stand of a particular crop.

A determination of the boundaries (threshold levels) between optical density:
classes was carried out using characteristic breaks in the histogram (Fig. 4).
The histogram represents the ratio of the number of elements with a particular
optical density to the total number of optical density elements of the sector
of the image being processed (in our case - the territory of Khersonskaya 0b-
last).

The presence of well-expressed peaks (modes) or so-called breaks (change in his-
togram slope) indicates the presence of natural formations with different re-
flective properties. Intuitively it can be postulated that over the considered
territory the natural features represented on this histogran (Fig. 6) include
a water surface, plowed soil and fields with different projective coverage of
the soil. 0n the date of the survey, 28 Hay 1980 (Fig. 5a), the following
groups of agricultural crops differed considerably with respect to the height
of the grass stand: winter, early spring and late spring. A knowledge of these
facts and the differences in the spectral variation of agricultural crops con-
sidered above made it possible, using the breaks on the histogram in Pig. 6.
to define 5 classes of objects differing significantly in brightness: winter,
early and late spring crops, plowed soils and water bodies.

The threshold levels obtained on the.basis of the histograms in Fig. 4 were
used in quantizing the optical density of the analyzed image into individual
classes (Fig. 5b), that is, the entire image, in accordance with the histogram.
was represented in the form of 5 optical density classes.

A comparison of the actual data on the structure of sown areas in the Kherson-
g51y_pglyggng_gbtained by an expedition of the Geography Faculty at Moscow

*
We will assume that there is a mutually unambiguous correspondence between

the optical density of the processed photograph and the registered brightness.
In the absence of such a correspondence it is necessary to make a brightness
correction of the images. We will not examine this problem here.

37

INJI‘OIIICIAI.IEIE(HULY
:rain Crops Correspondi

projec- developnen
tive cover-
age

0.1 Moist a
seed 3:
State University and the results of quantization of image optical densities in-
to classes indicates that there is a correspondence between then (Table 4).

Table 4

Structure of Agricultural Fields for Fragment of Khersonskaya Oblast on
28 Hay 1980

Land use areas Area, 2
results of quantization of according to data of

optical densities Moscow State Univer-
sity expedition

Hater bodies 8 8 -
Plowed soil 12 15

Late spring crops 16 20

Early spring crOPa 2° 11

Winter crops ‘4 ‘6

Table 5
Evaluation (units) Area 1
9

results of quantization of according to data of
optical densities _ Moscow State Univer-

sity expedition

Above average (a) 22 24
Average (3) 62 51
Below average (2) 36 25

The detersination of areas with different fields from space images is dependent
to a considerable degree on the correctness of discrimination of the threshold
levels of optical densities from the histograms. These should be selected on
the basis of a priori information, standard measurements, etc. As already stat-
ed above, for this purpose we used histograms of the distribution of optical
density and a priori information on the phenophases of development of agricul-
tural crops.

The sectors with groups of agricultural crops similar with respect to reflect-
ivity, defined on the images, are also nonuniform with respect to optical den-
sity. In this case the optical density of the image is dependent on variations
in state of the crop: the greater the degree to which the vegetation cover
conceals the soil, the less is the optical density on the positive images. This
fact can be used in discriminating areas having a different state of agricul-
tural crops on the images. A further interpretation involves a determination of
the quantitative relationships between the image optical density and the state

39

IOI'OIIICltl.lIIL(IUlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of a particular crop (the quantity of vegetation mass or some other parameter).

 

Fig. 5. Fragment of space image with average resolution on 28 Hay 1980 (a) and
results of image processing. a) structure of agricultural fields (1 -- water
bodies, 2) plowed soil, 3) spring crops, 6) winter crops); b) state of winter
crops (1 -- above average. 2) average, 3) above average, 4) other land use

areas.

40

momtuwsromv
Figure 5c gives an analysis of the state of winter wheat for the selected frag-
ment of Khersonskaye Oblast. The image optical density of the selected sector.
fed out to a color display, was uniformly divided into three parts correspond-
ing to the mean state of winter wheat and states above and below the means,
which approximately corresponds to a projective coverage of less than 601.

802 and more than 802. The selected iasge density gradations corresponded to
those threshold levels which were mentioned above. Then by program all the
analysed fragment was represented in gradations of optical density in accord-
ance with the threshold levels. Thus, on the basis of a specialized complex

for the digital processing of images it was possible to compute areas with a
different state of winter wheat. The results of an analysis of the space image
are given in Table 5 together with the actual data obtained by an expedition

of the Geography Faculty of Moscow State University on the state of winter
wheat during this period. Table 5 shows that there is a definite correspondence
between the results of an image and actual data, which indicates the possibil-
ity of using the described semiautomatic processing scheme for evaluating the
state of agricultural crops over great areas.

To be sure, there is definite arbitrariness in the choice of threshold levels
of optical density when using the described method for evaluating state. These
levels. and also the interrelationships between density gradations and the
quantitative indices of state must be found on the basis of siaulated models

of interaction between radiation and the soil-vegetation system with the use V
of a priori information. There are considerable difficulties in making a bright-
ness correction of space images. However, the preliminary results of analysis
of natural phenomena cited above and the results of processing of satellite
images make it possible to conclude that there are real possibilities for eval-
uating the state of agricultural fields using space survey data with apparatus
having an average resolution.

BIKLIOGRAPEY

l. Belyayeva, I. P., Rachkulik, V. I. and Sitnikova, M. V.. "Correlation Be-
tween the Brightness Coefficient of the Soil-Vegetation System and the
Quantity of Vegetation Mass," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology
and Hydrology). No 8. 1965.

2. ISSLEDOVANIYE PRIRODNOY SEED? S PILOTIRUYEHYKH ORBITAL'NYKH STANTSIY (In-
vestigation of the Environment From Manned Orbital Stations), edited by
K. Ya. Kondrat'yev, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1973.

3. Kondrat'yev. K. Ya. and Fedchenko, P. P., "Possibilities of Using Reflec-
tion Spectra of Soils for Studying Their Properties," ISSLEDOVANIYB ZEMLI
IZ KOSMOSA (Investigation of the Earth From Space), No l, 1980.

6. Rachkulik. V. I. and Sitnikova, M. V.. "Some Problems in Determining the
Biomass of Desert Pastures and Fields of Agricultural Crops ," METEOROLOG-
IYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 6, 1976.

61

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NMLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551 . 508 . 953

EVALUATION OF SPECTRAL RESOLUTION OF OPTICAL APPARATUS FOR MEASURING MINOR GAS
COMPONENTS IN ATMOSPHERE

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA in Russian No 3, Mar 82 (manuscript received
1 Jun 81) pp 102-106

[Article by A. V. Polyakov and Yu. H. Timofeyev, candidate of physical and mathe-
matical sciences. Leningrad State University)

[Abstract] Great difficulties are encountered in studying the spatial-tenporal
variations in the content of minor gas components in the atnosphere. This dic-
rates the creation of special optical instruments with a high or ultrahigh spec-
tral resolution. In order to ascertain the required resolution of the needed in-
strunents, as well as for evaluating already existing instrments, the authors
exanine a sinplified model of transfer of solar radiation on oblique trajector-
ies (neasurenents from satellite. aircraft or balloon) and have constructed nomo-
grans (and expressions supplementing them) which make it possible to solve this
problen in a broad spectral region (l-lOOpun) for a large amber of minor gas
components. The rules for using the nomograms are given. The procedures for de-
ternining Av“ and Ava t are defined (Avdet is the spectral resolution neces-
sary for detecting a specgral line with a known half-width and intensity for a
stipulated altitude corresponding to a minor gas component with a known concen-
tration; AVopt is the optinun spectral resolution in line measurements at a
stipulated altitude). By way of illustration, a table gives the Ndet and AVopt
values for different altitudes applicable to the conditions of a satellite exper-
iment. Figures 2, tables 1; references 9: 7 Russian, 2 western.

42

MWWMY
UDC 551.501.796+551.501.724
POSSIBILITY OF DETERMINING ATMOSPHERIC TEMPERATURE PROFILE BY ACOUSTIC SOUNDING

Moscow HBTEOROlOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 3, Mar 82 (manuscript received
1 Jun 81) Pp 106-110

[Article by A. Ya. Bogushevich and N. P. Krasnenko, candidate of technical sci-
ences. Institute of Atmospheric Optics, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sci-

encesl

[Abstract] At present it is possible to determine the temperature profile only by
the combined radioacoustic method, based on the scattering of electromagnetic
waves on periodic inhomogeneities of air pressure created by an acoustic packet.
A new method for measuring the temperature profile is proposed here. Data on the
temperature profile can be obtained by using a bistatic sounding geometry and by
measuring the time of propagation of an acoustic pulse along its trajectory. In
this method, assuming a stationarity and horizontal homogeneity of meteorological
fields at the measurement scales (0.3-6 sec and 30-300 m), the entire boundary
layer is broken down into n layers (altitudes 81-89) and a piecewise-linear ap-
proximation of the temperature profile is used. It is shown that by successively
measuring the sounding altitude Bliit is possible to determine the temperature
profile. The most significant-factors exerting an influence on the accuracy in
measuring temperature are: wind, acoustic noise, sound refraction, variation of
the Q coefficient, finite character of the dimensions of the scattering volume
and turbulent fluctuations of meteorological fields. The principal systematic and
random errors associated with these influencing factors are individually analysed.
The influence of the wind, for example, can be taken into account by employing
compensating geometries; wind refraction corrections can be made by the same pro-
cedure. A correction must be introduced for real humidity at the ground level. In
general, it is easy to compensate for the systematic errors. Fluctuation errors
are more important and the most important of the fluctuations is noise, resulting
in fluctuations of signal arrival time. A formula is derived to take this into ac-
count. The article examines a model with an atmosphere with standard profiles of
meteorological parameters and a Kolmogorov turbulence spectrum. There are opti-
mum frequencies for acoustic sounding and optimum spacings between the antennas
of the bistatic sounder with which the random error in determining temperature

is minimum. In a particular example it is shown that in a suburban area the mean
temperature profile could be measured by the bistatic acoustic sounder to alti-
tudes 300-500 m with a good accuracy. Figures 2; references 7: 4 Russian, 3 West-

ern .

63

momdnmomx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 551.577.53

Immrsu'r INFLUENCE OF MAJOR CITIES AND INDUSTRIAL CENTERS 0N PRECIPITATION

Hoscow HETBOROIDGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA in Russian No 3. Mar 82 (manuscript received
15 Jul 81) PP 111-119

[Article by I. V. Litvinov. candidate of physical and nathemtical sciences, Insti-
tute of Experimental Meteorology]

[Abstract] Precipitation zones are known to develop lore frequently over a city
than in the suburbs. There is also an increase in the number of thunderstorms
over cities and an increased frequency of recurrence of days with precipitation.
as well as the frequency of extrenal precipitation and the duration of precipit-
ation. However. this pattern is notualways observed: Leningrad. Moscow and De-
troit, for exasple, do not entirely adhere to this generalisation. The review of
the literature presented in this article sakes it clear that cities and industrial
areas do exert an influence on precipitation suns both directly over built-up re-
gions and nearby. It is the heat release of the cities and the structure of the
built-up area which exert the greatest influence. It is not entirely clear how
ice-forning nuclei of anthropogenic origin exert an influence on precipitation,
but they do not alter precipitation suns by more than a few percent. However. ur-
banization does not exert an influence on the quantity of precipitation falling
over extensive territories because city areas account for but a tiny percentage
of the total area of a country, even in Europe. Over large cities and industrial
areas this precipitation increase lay be 302, but the overall effect for the land
is no more than a few tenths of a percent. During the last 100 years in Europe
there has been only an insignificant increase in precipitation in the northwest
and a decrease in the southeast. Nevertheless. there is an anthropogenic effect
on precipitation and this must be taken into account in climatic studies and in
investigating the results of artificial modification in the neighborhood of

large cities and industrial centers. Figures 2; references 89: 38 Russian, 51
Hestern.

5b

EOR‘UIIICIAI.USIIINLY
REVIEH OP MONOGRAM! 'GIDROLOGICHBSKIYB P3078883? I IKE ROL' V PORNIROVANII KACHESTVA
VODY' ('HYDROLOGICAL PROCESSES AND THEIR ROLE IN FORMING HATER QUALITY ). BY
V. A. ZNAHENSKIY, LENINGRAD, GIDRMETBOIZDA'I‘, 1981, 248 PAGES

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 3. Kat 82 pp 120-122

[Review by A. V. Karaushev, professor]

torying and monitoring vater quality. Mathematical models have been proposed which
can be used in solving ecological problems and in developing schemes for the multi-
sided use and conservation of water resources. The book has an introduction. five
chapters and summary. The introduction enunerates the principal problems examined
by the author. Each chapter gives an evaluation of the present status of the con-
sidered matters. The first chapter is a detailed examination of water exchange
processes in water bodies. The second chapter examines the hydrodynamic structure
of flows in water bodies. The third chapter is devoted to the influence of water
exchange and dynamic structures on the transport and distribution of dissolved
substances. The fourth chapter gives. the author's ovn nethods for the hydraulic
sodeling of the processes of transport of water masses and dissolved substances,
including the results of numerous experimental investigations. The fifth chapter
gives proposals on use of such methods in solving problem in the rational use
and conservation of waters, monitoring water quality and establishing norms for
the admissible discharge of waste waters into water bodies. in the developnent

of mathematical models of water quality and in planning the multisided use of
water resources. The book will be highly useful in solving nany problens in the
national economy.
NR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

CONFERENCES, MEETINGS, SEMINARS
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian Mo 3, Mar 82 pp 123-125

[Article by P. Yu. Pushistov. A. A. Zhelnin and V. P. Gridasov]

[Abstract] An international symposium "Current Problems in weather Forecasting"
was held in Vienna during the period 23-26 June 1981. It was organized by the
Austrian and American Meteorological Societies. Representatives of 14 countries
discussed theoretical and statistical aspects of short-range weather forecasting.
intermediate- and long-range weather forecasting. This brief summary of the sym-
posium gives the content of reports by American, British, Austrian, Heat German
and other specialists, with a few lines or short paragraph being devoted to each

report.
seats

A national conference on "Problems and ways to Develop Methods for Observing Mois-
ture Supplies for Crops" was held at Cherkassy during the period 8-12 September
1981. It was sponsored by the State Comittee on Hydrometeorology and Environmen-
tal Monitoring and the Scientific and Technical Society of Agriculture. The con-
ference revealed that during the last decade great advances have been made in
determining soil moisture content and in ascertaining the parameters of moisture
supply for agricultural crops, including the use of remote methods for measuring
moisture. such as $8? radiometry and aerial gamma surveys. Portable multiparameter
hygrometers are being readied for production (these are based on measurement of

the electric parameters of the soil); some stations now have neutron hygrometers;
more attention is being given to computation methods; the drying of soil samples

in a thermostat is being replaced by high-frequency drying. There are still no
adequate methods or instruments for replacing the thermostat-weight method for
determining soil moisture content: neutron hygrometers. aerial gasmmxsurveys, SH?
radiometry and computational methods all have their shortcomings. Different organ-
izations are striving to upgrade these methods or combine them for achieving better
results. The reports and communications presented at this conference are to be pub-
lished in the Transactions of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Agri-
cultural Meteorology in 1982. The next such conference will be held in 1986.

66

IKHI¢IHNC1AI.III£(I€LY
NOTES FROM ABROAD

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 125-127

[Article by B. I. Silkin]

[Abstract] In the journal NEH SCIENTIST, Vol 91, No 1267, 1981, it is reported that
Doctor Stanley Shannon and his colleagues at the Illinois Hydrological Administra-
tion have completed a cycle of studies of the interrelationship between aircraft
flights and weather conditions on the approaches to O'Hare Field. Since the 1960's
these flights have caused a 102 increase in cloud cover over an extensive area
along these routes. This has resulted in a definite cooling in Illinois and an in-
crease in precipitation. 0n the other hand, at nighttime the temperatures remain
higher and the winters have become warmer.

***

NEW SCIENTIST, Vol 91, No 1274, 1981, reports that by making use of satellite data
R. Orville and B. Vonnegut have compiled a map of the global distribution of light-
ning discharges. This phenomenon is virtually absent in the high latitudes and
quite rare in the middle latitudes, being most common in the equatorial regions of
the land. It still remains a mystery why lightning is so rare over the oceans.

tit

In another issue of NEW SCIENTIST (Vol 91, No 1267,1981) it is reported that a
specialist at the Atlantic Richfield Company, R. Currie, has proposed a method for
superlong-renge forecasting of meteorological conditions on the basis of cycles

of the lunar tidal effect, making use of maximum entropy spectrum analysis. It ap-
pears that there is a correlation between the 18. 5-year cycle of the maximum of
the lunar-tidal effect and arid years in the Western United States (although in
individual cases the drought coincides with the 22-year double cycle of the maxi-

mum in spot-forming solar activity).
ace

NEW SCIENTIST. Vol 91, No 1267, 1981, reports that world Data Center A on Solar-
Tcrrestrial Physics at Boulder was threatened with complete shutdown as an econ-
omy measure, much to the dismay of the world scientific community. Now it has been
decided that part of the work will be contracted out, which will result in higher
user cost.

- b7

FOI1OFIIJAI.UCB¢MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OBITUARY 0P rmmm NIKITIC’HNA BLINOVA (1906-1981)
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 127-128

[Article by staff of the Board of the USSR State Cosmittee on Hydrometeorology and
Environmental Monitoring and personnel of the USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific
'Research Center]

[Abstract] Yekaterina Nikitichna Blinova, corresponding member, USSR Academy of Sci-
ences, died on 15 Decewer 1981. She was head of the Division of Planetary Atmo-
spheric Dynamics and Hydrodynamic Long-Range Heather Forecasting at the USSR Hy-
drometeorological Scientific Research Center. First working (1934) at the Main Geo-
physical Observatory, she later (1963) moved to the Central Institute of Forecasts.
Her entire career was devoted to the field of long-range weather forecasting. As
early at 1943 she published the major monograph GIDRODINAHICHBSKAYA TEORIYA VOLN
DAVLBNIYA. TWBRATURHYIGI VOL“ I TSBNTROV DBYS'NIYA A‘mOSPERY (Hydrodynamic Theory
of Pressure Haves, Temperature Waves and Atmospheric Centers of Action), which out-
lined the first theory of numerical, long-range weather forecasting. In her doctor-
al dissertation of l9b6 she described how theoretically it was possible to repro-
duce the really observed distribution of meteorological elements. She inspired oth-
ers to follow her in advancing the development of the hydrodymmic theory of cli- -
mate and long-range forecasting. The basis for these investigations was the spec-
tral approach, applied widely thereafter in many linear models of climate, general
circulation of the atmosphere and long-range forecasting. She supervised the first
operational preparation of several variants of long-range forecasts. Ye. N. Blinova
then proceeded from linear to nonlinear schemes and application of primitive equa-
tions of dynamic meteorology. During recent years she developed a method for long-
range forecasting on the basis of discrimination of the "main oscillations" and pub-
lished an algorithm for solving prognostic spectral equations. A model was proposed
in which the changes in meteorological elements with time are computed simultaneous-
ly with the climatic background. All this represents but a fraction of her contrib-
utions to this field. She was active in the CARP program, being a member of the
Soviet con-ittee on this program and chairman of the subgroup on numerical experi-
mentation. Figures: 1. '

108

MWWMY
OBITUARY 0P SERGEY IVANOVICH SIVKOV (1901-1981)
Moscow HBTWROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Malian No 3, Mar 82 p 128

[Article by a group of comrades]

[Abstract] Sergey Ivanovich Sivkov. docto‘. of geographical sciences, an outstand-
ing Soviet specialist in the field of actinonetry, died at age 80 on 28 Hay 1981.
He began his work at Kursk Observatory, advanced through the ranks and served as
its head during the years 1928-1930. Thereafter he was director of the Tien Shan
High-Mountain Observatory and Eros 1935 through 1950 was head of the Karadag Af-
filiate of the Actinonetry Institute. On two occasions he vintered at polar sta-
tions in the Arctic. Subsequently he laid aside administrative assigmnents and ded-
icated himself exclusively to scientific research. His publications, 54 in all,
dealt with such setters as methods for couputing actinoaetric fluxes and inves-
tigating instrunent performance. Huch of his work is still of practical importance
in the operation of Soviet and foreign actinomstric services. During his work at
the Main Geophysical Observatory he wrote (1968) a monograph entitled HETODY RAS-
CHBTA WISTIK SOLNECHNOY RADIATSII (Methods for Computing claracteristics
of Solar Radiation) and thereby earned the academic degree of doctor of sciences.
His final area of research and publication was the investigation of cloud cover
and radiation. . -

COPYRIGHT: "Heteorologiya i gidrologiya", 1982

S303 - END -
C80: 1864/9

49
“WINE“?