FUR “FUN IAI. "St. UNI.\

JPRS L/10580
I0 June 1982

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 12/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nor:

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
amtion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion marl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical noces vithin the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGﬂ' LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
PWIERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDMIDE REPORT
TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLxcx, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(POUO 12/82)

Coureurs
ASIA
JAPAN
Expansion of NHK Overseas Services Planned
(THE DAILY YmIUH, 8 W82) .00....OOOIOOOOOOOOO‘OOOI
SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA
MAURITIUS

Briefs
Teleconununications With Reunion

WEST EUROPE
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Briefs
European Agency New Satellite

IvRANCH
Thomson Outlines Computer Strategy: New Technology Center

Created
(ZERO [m INFOWTIQUE, Mar 82) 0.0.0...OOOOIOIIOOIOOOOCCO
FOR OFFICIAL USU-Z ONLY

FRANCE

Police Counmications Network Allows Integrated Transudssion
(Jean-Claude Fabre; AFMEBS D'AUJOURD'HUI, Apr 82) ........ 8

ITALY

Development of New Optical Fiber 'x-Bl' Announced >
(Giovanni Camera; mum {ELLA SEEM, b May 82) ........ 12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF" 1M. USE ONLY

JAPAN

EXPANSION 0? NHK OVERSEAS SERVICES PLANNED
011100959 Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIUR'i in English 8 May 82 p 2

[Text] The government plans to beef up Radio Japan. the nation's inter
national wireless service run by NHK (Nihon Hoso Kyokai; Japan Broadcasting
Corporation), to meet the growing demand for homeland news from the many
Japanese living abroad, it has been learned.

The plan is also part of a government atteapt to help ease trade and other
strains with Western countries through sending Japanese messages directly
to their peoples.

Increased transmission power and expanded broadcasting hours as well as
the establishment of another relay station abroad is envisioned in the plan.

Radio Japan is an official broadcast beamed to 18 segmented regions of the
world in 21 different languages including Japanese. and it is on air for a
total of 37 hours (over all regions) a day.

Much of its content is independently produced by mm, a semigovernmental
institution, but the governmnt shares roughly one quarter of the 6 billion
yen a year required for international broadcasting.

The idea was fueled when Radio Japan won renewed recognition as the only
news source for Japanese residents in Poland during the upheavals late
last year.

The programs sent to Poland were relayed by a Radio Japan station in Portugal.
It is the only overseas relay station maintained by NHK and its daily
operation is limited to one hour.

The government wants to establish at least one more relay station abroad.
Among the sites being considered is Panama because of its optimal location
[or coverage of North and South America.

The reinforcement plan also calls for international broadcasting at least
twice the present power along with an extension of broadcasting hours.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1(1AI. USE ONLY

Its broadcasts are sent from the Yauata transmission station of Kokusai
Dcnshin Denva Company (Rob) in Iharaki-Ken. Its 12 transmitters are weak
by international standards. only up to 100 kilowatters as against 500
kilowatts of the United States, Soviet Union and Quinn.

The government plans to send fact-finding missions to Britain. France and
other Western nations this coming autun before finalizing the plan.

COPYRIGHT: DAILY YOHIURI 1982

C50: 5500/2235

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

TELECOMMUNICATIONS WITH REUNION--On 5 May. at Port Louis. Cable and Wireless
began operating a new numeric microwave network between Reunion and Mauritius.
Th. system was installed by Cable and Wireless of Mauritius with the assistance
of the French Postal and Telecomunications Service. [Excerpts] [Paris HARCBBS
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French 1!» May 82 p 1291] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux
et Cic Paris 1982]

C80: 5500/5809

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3R1 BPS

EUROPEAN AGENCY NEH SATELLITEnThe European Space Agency, of which the UK
is a partner. is about to eubark on a major new spacecraft programnan
unmanned " remote sensing satellite"--which can study the earth's mineral
and other resources and monitor their use. The coat of the program is
expected to be at least 100)! pounds covering both the first satellite,
ERS-l and, eventually, a series of further satellites. ens-1 is expected
to be ready for launching by 1987. Much work on the program still has to
be done, including determining who the contractors to the programme will
be. The countries participating will include the UK and Belgium, France,
West Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Norway and Canada, with
Denmark and Holland also likely to join in. The finance available so far
will enable the definition phase to begin soon, in which the program's
scope will be settled. The final step--hardware development—will be
taken at the end of next year. [Text] [PMleSlS London FINANCIAL TIMES
in English 21 May 82 p 8] [COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd, 1982]

('80: 5500/2235

l;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()Fl-‘K'IAI. [Isl-Z ONLY

FRANCE

mouse“ ”LINES CQIPUTER STRATEGY: NEH TECHNOLOGY CENTER CREATED

Paris ZERO UN INl-‘CRHATIQUB in French har 82 pp 27-40

[Excerpts] The Enterprise Information and Comnication Systems Group (6163)
at Thomson-CS? has set itself the goal of increasing its turnover four-fold in
five years

Led by Jacques Imbert, general director, and Francois Duffaux, assistant
general director, the grOup combines the activities of SENS (Electrical,
Mechanical, and Signals Company), of private telephone systems, and of
office automation, together with Thomson-CSP's "systems".

At the end of 1981 the group's total turnover should equal 1.5 billion PP
based on 18 percent to 20 percent growth in 1982 and on even stronger growth
in the years to follow (thanks notably to the startup of new telecopy product
lines and office automation systems.) If these projections are correct the
figure would reach 6 billion F? in 1986 (representing 25 percent of the French
market), half of it going to exportation.

Three development options have been selected: personal computers for pro-
fessional use; integrated office automation products and systems; and real-
time miniprocessors.

Personal and Professional at the Same Time

For professional personal computers, Thomson's Xavier Thevenet (of the office
data processing department) is now in charge of installing a network of
distributors and licensees for the launching next March of Micromega, the
group's first microcomputer, developed by the company's American subsidiary.
Fortune Systems Corporation.

Software for this product will be developed either by the SSCI members of the
Thomson group or, for certain sector applications, by the licensees involved.
Expectations are high for this slot, which is growing rapidly (50 to 100 per-
cent per year at present) and which meets the needs of small management systems
whose prices range from 60,000 to 80,000 FF.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1‘11“. NSF. ONLY

For office automation and distributed data processing, about which Jacques
Imbert states that "our vocation has just been confirmed in writing by the
Ministry of Industry", GICE's director :st: "We will thus be one of the main
axes of French office automation." Meanwhile Thomson has just put on the
market the two 3 4000 and T 4000 lines of Corail terminals, which cover the
main features of distributed data processing and of office automation.

These terminals combine products developed by DA? and by Convergent
Technologies, an American firm (ABS and IRS single- and multi-terminal
systems). It is well known that this agreement with the American partner had
received the upstream attention of public authorities.

Processors as Hell

The components of this Corail system, "first elements of an ambitious line",

so called because they can be integrated into Thomson's autonomous local
information networks (Rail) within the same establishment, are compatible

with IBM (by 3276 emulation) or with CIT-EB «Questar emulation); they are
independent or interconnected, programmable or not (various languages
available), outfitted with high level text editing software, and they offer

a complete range of possibilities within a price range of 30,000 to 150,000 FF.

With Corail, Thomson hopes to reach a turnover of 300 million F? in 1982.
essentially from large SSCI (60 percent), public administration and enter-
prises (40 percent). regional service companies (15 percent). and PHI (5 per-
cent).

Abroad, Thomson's export structure is aiming for 15 percent of the turnover
in 1983 and 30 percent in 1985.

Real-Time Less Likely

The last development strategy is real-time miniprocessors. The group's
prospects are least secure in this slot. The first order of business is to
pursue the internal development of the Mitre-Solar lines. Three products are
to be introduced in March: top of the line Mitre 625. custom designed for
transactional management; and two Solar products. the bottom of the line 16/30
on a single card for process automation and control, and the new top of the
line 16/85 equipped with a foreground processor for real-time scientific
processing.

Next and more important is to bolster the Mitre-Solar lines "which remain
competitive" (to quote Mr Imbert). with 32-bit devices whose compatibility
would be assured at the software level. But in order to guarantee the
staffing and development of the Echirolles plant. SENS "must have immediate
access to the specific 32-bit computer market. particularly in the field of
industrial science."

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition, after condemning the agreement with Systems under pressure from
public authorities, Thomson must within a short delay, at the urging of the
latter, enter into negotiations with ClI-HB to examine terms of fabrication
and marketing by SENS, of the Mini 6 with 32-bits (originating at Honeywell
and not yet being manufactured by CIT-RB), in order to fulfill the intent of
entering into chi... market.

In the longer range, around the SENS end CII-HB research resources combined
for the purpose and reinforced by various research teams, the Dieli is
considering the creation of a national society for industrial development,
which would study and implement design proposals for future minis around 1985.

Optimistic Future

The National Symposium on Research and Technology, opened by Francois Hitterrand
on 13 January, may not always have kept its premises but it did show the
determination of the government to get out of crisis by significantly in-
creasing research, which according to the President represents (one of the
crucial keys and perhaps the only key to renewal."

Two New Paris Centers

Soon after the symposium ended, the Council of Ministers announced the creation
of the Center for the Study of Advanced Systems and Technologies (CESTA) which
will be located on the premises of the former Ecole Polytechnique. Its main
goal will be to bring its contribution to the development and dissemination of
new technologies, while analyzing and preparing the ground for their assimila-
tion into the social, economic, and cultural structures of French society.

To this end, CESTA will have four major tasks: study and research (with a
scientific projection structure to be established); assistance for technologic
options; training; execution, and dissemination. Specifically, CESTA will
provide liaison with regional and national associations established as a
result of the symposium, in order to ensure the best use of the body of
analyses and proposals which will accrue.

The following week, still before the Council of Ministers, Jean-Pierre
Chevenement specified, in connection with the creation in Paris of the World
Center for the Development of Data Processing, which will be presided by
Jean-Jacques Servan Schreiber and will operate under the supervision of the
Ministry of Research and Technology, that the Center, "crossroads for ideas
and knowledge in microprocessing, will have significant resources and will
associate the best international specialists in this field with French
researchers. It will set the conditions for creating a mass-circulation
personal computer and will organize experiments throughout the world, parti-
cularly the Third world. It is one of the elements of industrial and
technological renewal in our country."

COPYRIGHT: Ol Informatique, Paris March 1982

11,023
C80: 5500/2181

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

POLICE can-[UNICATIONS NETWORK ALMS INTEGRATED TRANSMISSION
Paris ARHEBS D'AUJOURD'HUI in French Apr 82 pp 16-17
:Article by Lieutenant-Colonel Jean—Claude Pabre: ”The Saphir Network']

:Text3 To raise the efficiency of its operations, the Gendarmerie inaugurated in
1981 a data transmission network. This network. which serves 350 subscribers and
which will be serving more than 10,000 subscribers by 1986, provides telephone
and data-processing interconnections extending as far as to include vehicular-

borne terminals.

The Saphir network, although it might appear to be merely a communications facil-
ity supplementing existing radio networks and subnetworks, differs profoundly
from them as regards:

--Its universal data-transmission function;

--Its technical innovations: The combination of telephony and data transmission
on the same radio channel; its method of traffic management within a cell made up
of several radio systems:

--The originality of its mobile radio teleprocessing terminal:

--Its potential for evolution towards a teleinformatics system in which the inte-
gration of telecommunications and data processing techniques will be even closer.

National and Departmental

The department is the elementary data-distributional zone. Its headquarters. the
office of the departmental Gendarmerie group, in which is insta11ed a packet
switcher. is the switching hub where radio channels and PTprrovided specialized
facilities terminate.

The point of termination of these facilities creates a demarcation between data
transfer speeds and between interchange procedures. and thus establishes a separa-
tion of the Saphir network into two subsystem levels.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first of these levels--a nationwide, wire, grid-network subsystem--serves, by
means of PTT-provided specialized links, the General Directorate of the National

Gendarmerie, the Inspectorate of the National Gendarmerie, all its-regional com-

mands, legions and departmental groups, certain technical services and the seven

principal airports.

The second--consisting of many radio subsystems, one per department and indepen-
dently operated-~makes use of the equipment and frequencies currently used for
telephone communications and links the Gendarmerie's companies, brigades and cer-
tain of their vehicles.

Subscribers equipped with different terminals are interlinked by way of a branched
structure of point-to-point circuits based on the hierarchic organization of the
National Gendarmerie, or by way of multipoint links, the switching hierarchy in
this case being maintained through the use of an appropriate address system.

From One to Nine hddressees

The transfer of centralized-data bank file reference operations and of messages
between the two subsystem levels, regardless of addressee, is effected by means
of automation incorporated into the switcher and in accordance with two transmis-
sion procedures: Packet switching and automatic management of radio channels.
Radiotelephone communications are possible only within a department between sub-
scribers equipped with adequate terminals.

The security of transmitted information is assured by means of a reception proto-
col that is individual to each subsystem to which it is assigned in the radio sub-
system level, a procedure that regulates conflicts of access, an error detection
and correction code, and a protection against jamming. Continuity of service is
maintained by means of redundancy of sensitive components, emergency use of the
'switched public network, and the maintaining of telephone contact in the event

of total failure of the network.

All subscribers are equipped with several address mechanisms enabling them to

reach from one to nine addressees simultaneously on an individual basis, or to
effect collective transmissions on a nationwide or departmental scale by unit

groups or subgroups, or to effect broadcasts in accordance with the hierarchic
configuration.

The supervision of the network (operations, traffic, backup in case of malfunc-
tion, and maintenance) is provided:

—-At the national level by a control and metering center located next to the
frontal switchers linking the network to the external data bases;

--At the departmental level by the Gendarmerie departmental group's communica-
tions center.

Terminal equipment of the transactional type provides a simple operating mode
and functions according to the masking technique so that it can easily be served
by nonspecialized gendarmes. The alphanumeric-screen terminals of the wire sub-
system and their associated printer are in a fixed-station configuration and are
used solely for the exchange of data.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Transmission

Packet switcher

Display console

Printer

Transmission

Radio equipment

Screen-type radio
teleprocessing
terminal

Printer

PTT-provided speci

TIT 7200 - 80-112K

SINTRA-ALPHA 15: l

LOGABAX LX 213 and

 

Rediotelephone cha
- simplex or duple

THP 623 - BRV 200

CSEE-TRT - Plasma
per line - dimenei
associated memory

Bloc 60 CPS - ‘0 c
FOR OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY

The radio subsystem terminals, which are of innovative design, are of two general
types, according to their function:

‘~0ne is a screen-type radio teleproceseing terminal, where displayed-text and
telephony interconnections are to be accommodated. In the vehicular version,
this terminal consists of an outboard display screen, a fold-back keyboard and
a separate unit housing the power supply and modes. In the fixed-station ver-
sion, all the components are grouped into a single unit containing a printer as
well:

--The other is a simplified radio teleprocessing terminal, where only telephone
interconnections are to be provided. -

This very heterogeneous network from the standpoint of its equipment, its trans-
mission facilities and transmission procedures, actually constitutes an entirely
homogeneous whole from the standpoint of the services it provides. It is thus
the gendarme's day-to-day working tool but at the same time an efficient command
system.

Biographical

An infantry reserve officer, Lt Col Jean-Claude Pabre entered the Gendarmerie in
1958. After several assignments, he was given command, in 1964, of the Saint-
Pierre-et-Miquelon Company, and, in 1968, command of the Vienna Company. He is
currently head of the Organization Methods and Data Processing Bureau in the
General Directorate of the Gendarmerie.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Revue des forces armess francaises 'Armes d'Aujourd'hui"

9399
680: 5500/2214

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

DEVELOPMM OP NW OPTICAL FIBER 'X-Bl.‘ ANNUNCBD
Milan CORRIBRB DELLA SBRA in Italian 4 May 82 p 15

[Article by special correspondent Giovanni Caprara: 'Hords Can Now Travel on
Light Beams loo Kilometers Long']

{Text} Turin--'x-8l' scunds as though it might designate a secret code. Actual-
ly. it is name of the new optical fiber which the CSBLT [Telecommunications Re-
search and Study CenterJ of Turin has designed. fabricated and, last week, exhi-
bited to the Milan Press Club at a well-attended conference. Intense curiosity.
lively interest, many questions, replies replete with foreign comparisons:
Everything seemed to convey the importance of the disclosure. “we have called

the new fiber the 'x-Bl.‘ explained Engineer Catania, head of the CSBLT. “because
it was developed around October 1981. We have not disclosed it heretofore be-
cause the result was exceptionally good and we wanted to repeat it several times
to be sure of it." This did away with the initial curiosity regarding the strange
denomination. Catania's quiet demonstration which followed responded almost
automatically to the unvoiced questions generated instinctively by the circum-
stances. ‘The CSBLT, with th backing of the SIP [Italian Telephone Company].

the SIRTI [Telecommunicationgfand other companies of the IRI [Industrial Recon-
struction InstituteJ-STET [Telephone Finance Corporation] Group, completed recent-
ly the development of a special technology for the fabrication of optical fibers,
thin glass threads 1/10 of l millimeter in diameter, with an extremely low attenu-
ation that practically coincides with the minimum theoretically possible val-
ues..." Little by little, the physiognomy of the x-81 emerged.

The new fiber has an important quality. namely. the low value of attenuation of
the signals transmitted through it. This means that the material of which it

is made is of a high degree of purity and that method used to fabricate it of
an advanced degree of perfection. "The degree of impurities these extremely
low-attenuation fibers will tolerate.‘ it was explained to us. 'is around a few
parts per billion for many of the metallic ions. To draw a comparison.“ we were
told, 'the finest optical glasses are made of materials with three times that
many inn .ities.‘ The transparency obtained with this new fiber is thus excep-
tional. Engineer Catania gave an example: 'Consider.‘ he said, "that an endo-
scope for medical use is made today with fibers having an attenuation of 3 do
per meter (the x-81 has an attenuation of 2 dB per kilometer): an endoscope made
with one of our fibers would be capable of exploring the bottom of the Mariana

12
FOIIOFFNJAI.USE(NQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Trench with a sharpness equal to that of an endoscope about 1 meter long.‘ An-
other important characteristic is the length to which it can be drawn. This
approaches 100 kilometers, with the possibility of transmitting 2,000 telephone
conversations simultaneously, meaning that a single section of it can be used
to interconnect two cities such as Milan and Turin, or home and Naples. Until
now, commercial-grade optical fibers have been available in sections of up to
10 kilometers, and copper cables up to 2 kilometers. Practically speaking--as
Engineer Ragone, general manager of the SIP “Italian Telephone Company] added—-
optical fibers, given their features and their low cost, are now on the verge of
competitiveness with copper cables and are being resorted to entirely for many
new installations. It should be added that, because of their nature, optical
fibers are not subject to many disturbances that are typical of copper circuits
and are not interfered with.by atmospheric disturbances.

All of this--like everything else--has a history. And we heard it told within
the walls of the CSBLT in a silent and efficient atmosphere typical of conven-
tual research centers. The same atmosphere, we might say, that we have savored
during visits to internationally renowned foreign institutes. And this compari-
son at first glance is borne out in the results being obtained. We do not want
to sound rhetorical, but in a nation whose research facilities are crumbling or
nonexistent, one has the sensation, upon entering the CSBLT. as in the case of
a few other such rare centers, of finally being able to breathe. Reading the

center is Professor Caressa, father of SIRIO the first Italian telecommunications
satellite.

We were told that the CSELT employs 630 persons, ‘00 of whom are directly in—
volved in research. The average age of holders of degrees is 33 years, while
that of holders of diplomas is 23 years. "Getting in' here is apparently not
very easy. One's degree must be virtually a summa cum laude; one's diploma must
be lower than 54 over 60. Only thus can one enter upon a career as a researcher
at CSELT, the growth of whose employees must be gradual--physiologica1, as En-
gineer Catania points out. Within the CSBLT, a research leader has around him
some 10 persons on average. Within the organization, the researcher is the
object of much attention. Attention centers first and foremost on motivation,
on providing a climate in which professionalism can operate, be fostered and

be recognized, on updating of knowledge, and on adequacy of compensation.

From this environment are emerging today patents and research that are competi-
tive on the international level, and this is fundamental to our economy and our
growth, especially now that the Reagan administration has practically decreed an
embargo on the advanced scientific and technological knowledge possessed by the
United States. At the CSELT, while a fiber of even better quality, the 'x-82,'
is being developed, intensive work is also being done in the field of microelec-
tronics, a field to which our future is closely tied.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Bditoriale del 'Corriere della Sera" s.a.s.

9399
650: 5500/2223 END

13
FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(MVLY