APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00800R000100060047-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040047-5

FOR OI'FIL'IAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8411

20 April 1979

IRANSLATIONS ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOP/{NT
(FOUO 6/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040M7-5
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Jpas L/841
20 April n

TRANSLATIONS ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY;
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
(rouo 6/79)

CONTENTS

ASIA
JAPAN

Reiaration of Ban on Message Switching Copyright Announced
(NIW KWO SHINBUN. 12 Dec 7a)ooeooentoo-oeooooooeeo

Trial Manufacture of New Magnetic Disc Medium Noted
(“I“EI amnlcs. 13 NOV 78,000.00000000030.00......

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Briefs
PANAFTEL Network

IVORY COAST

New Group TV Receiver Developed. Demonstrated
(HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MBDITBRRANBERS. 16 Mar 79).......

TUNISIA

Briefs
SAT Contract
New DP Center

WESTERN EUROPE

FRANCE

Telecou-l Satellite To Begin Operating in 1983
(Pierre Lansereux; AIR 6 COSMOS, 10 Mar 79)............
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

RELAXATION OF BAN 0N HESSAGB SWITCHING COPYRIGHT ANNOUNCED

Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHINBUN in Japanese 12 Dec 78 p 1

[Text] According to a release of ii November the
Hiniatry of Posts and Telecommunications (HPT)
decided on a policy to greatly relax the ban on
message switching which had previously hindered
the joint construction of on-line networks.

1his means that in the Data Communication
Promotion Law bill which HPT plans to present

to the next regular session of the Diet.

message switching will be classified into two
categories:

(i) that which is associated with data pro-
cessing. and (2) that which is conducted as
a business. The message switching which is
associated with data processing will be per-
mitted. when this is realized, the construc-
tion of large scale networks--for instance.
on-linc tie-up of city banks-~will be
facilitated and communication circuit costs
will be reduced; furthermore, duplicate in-
vestment in electronic computer facilities
can be avoided. and the spread of on-line
systems in Japan. which was hitherto handi-
capped under the Public Eiectrocommunication
Law. will be given an additional boost.

With rapid progress in the construction of on-line systems accompanying

the more intensive use of computers, it becomes imperative for these on-line
systems to have access to communication circuits. There are two types of
circuits in use--the public communication circuits and the special com-
munication circuits. Currently. those used principally by city banks and
individual businesses for company on-line networks are special communica-
tion cicuits. in the case of special communication circuits primarily for

1
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
7" FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

company use where electronic computers are used and data without any change
in content are transmitted. so-called message switching also becomes possible.

However. as in the cases of horizontal on-line tie-up of city banks or the
tie-up between different types of financial institutions, in concepts which
are now being considered. where more than two parties (firms) of different
contractual constituency make joint use of a special communication circuit,
absolutely no switching is allowed. On the other hand. although certain
parties. who can make joint use of special communication circuits. do have
recourse to individual case approval by the MP’l‘. operation is still severely
restricted by Article 55-11 of the Public Electrcolmaunication Law and Article
10-13 of the Administration Regulations of the same law.

The reason message switching is forbidden to this type of joint use and to
businesses dealing in computational work, such as computer centers. which
make third-party use of special comnication circuits. is that such message
switching conducts no data processing and is thzreforc considered cosnunica-
tion business. According to Articles 1. 2. and 5-2 of'Ehe Public Electro-
conunication Law, all domestic and international electrocormmmications are
defined by law to be the exclusive businesses of the Dendenkosha (Nippon
Telegraph and Telephone Corporation) and 111‘, respectively.

The mm: Comunicat lon Council (president--‘l‘adao Saito. professor of Tokyo
University) pointed out last fall that the banning of message switching in
data conunication, on the grounds that it is the exclusive domain of the
public electrocalmunication industry. was a mistake resulting from considera-
tion of the function of only a part of the data co-unication medium. It
was also pointed out that electronic corputer users. who desire free use

of commuication circuits. have also strongly protested that the Public
Blectrocomsnmication Law is one of the worst laws in existence.

Under such circumstances. the HPT. in response to technical developments in
comnlcation circuit utilization, have. following the addition of a chapter
(Chapter 3-4) on data communication to the basic law on data conunication.
namely the Public Electrocomlnmication Law (enacted in 1953), concerned
mainly with the telephone and telegraph businesses. drafted a currently
significant Data Comnication Promotion Law bill which determines the need
to expand the realm of joint utilization and to relax the restrictions on
message switching.

listen with this measure. however. although necessary switching accompanying
data processing will be permitted—for example. the transmittal of data
input from cash dispenser terminals of financial institutions via joint
use circuits to the electronic computer at a depositor’s bank--there will
still be strict restrictions as usual on message switching in the case of
added-value co-unication businesses, where message switching almost
amounts to n subleaaing operation.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the background or this relaxation on message switching by HPT, it is
believed there was some impetus from the increasing use of advanced data
communication technology equipment such as used on coming facsimile net-
works whlch do not fit into the concept of data processing as consider
In the Public Biectrnconnunicntion Law.

UDPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kugyo Shinbunshn 1978

5576
CSO: 5500

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JM

TRIM. MANUFACTURE OF NEW MEMO DISC HEDIIM NOTED
Tokyo NIKKEI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 13 Nov 78 p 05

lArticle: "Trial Manufacture By Sputtering of Magnetic Disc Medina With
25.000 391 Recording Density"]

l'l'cxt] Dendenkosha's Iharaki Electrocomunications.Lahoratory and the
Fujitsu Research Laboratory have jointly test produced a high recording
density magnetic disc medium with a recording density (050) of 25.000
lil’l (llnttori et 81. SHINGAKU GIHO (Con.Sc.Tech.Rpt). (WM-78406).

This magnetic disc uedium is a uniform thin film of gems-ferric oxide

l‘ armed on an alunite-treated aluminum alloy disc by means of reaction
sputtering. Sauples were made by two possible manufacturing processes:
One an indirect oxidation method consisting. of first forming alpha-Fe203
by sputtering in a strongly oxidizing atmosphere. then reduction by
hydrogen to R305, and final oxidation in air to gam-l-‘e203; the other,
a direct oxidation method where the hydrogen reduction stage is not
required. The magnetic film famed by the sputtering is chemically
stable and strongly abrasion resistant such that, similar to the painted
film disc, it can be used without a protective surface coating. and it is
known for its superior magnetic characteristics. The test disc medium
nude in this case had a medium thickness of 0.16 to 0.25 micrometers
(compared to l to 1.5 micrometers for type 3336-11 painted medium). a
residual magnetic flux density of 2500 gauss (coapared to 650 genes), a
coerc lvc force of 600 to 800 oersted (compared to 330 oersted). and a
square-shape ratio of 0.80 (0.75). Recording density is 900 to 1100
“(PM and reproduced power is 0.85 W p-p with a core width of 25 micro-
meters. 24 coil turns. and relative speed of 30 meters per second.

(:ol’YRlcm: Nikkei-McCrau-aill. Inc 1978

5576
(280: 5500

6
FOR OFP‘ICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

BR! BPS

PANAFTBL NBTHORKanperta recently completed a study of the problems plaguing
installation of the Pan-African Telecomnications System (PANAH'BL) link-
ing the 16 member countries of CEDEAO (West African States Economic Conunity).
11w Nigerinn news agency NAN reports that thus far four comtrisa--Nigeria.
l.lbcrio. Gambia. and Upper Volta—have completed work on the part of their
systems that provides the link-up with their neighbors. According to NAN.
the lost serious problems confronting the other can“) countries are a short-
age of funds and a lack of qualified technical personnel. The experts sub-
sitted their report to CBDBAO headquarters in Lagos on 7 March. It will be
examined at the next csotao aunit conference in Dakar in May. [Text] [Paris
HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET EDITERRANBENS in French 16 liar 79 p 686] 8061

(:80: 5500

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IVORY COAST

NEH GROUP TV RECEIVER DBVELOFBD. DWSTMTED
Paris HARCIIBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBBNS in French 16 Mar 79 p 691
[Article: "New Audiovisual Receiver for Group Television Reception"]

[Text] The African Television Company (CATEL) of Abidjan and the Yves
Houssin Agency of Paris have jointly deaonstrated their audiovile receiver
[or collective or group television-reception to the French Ministry of
Cooperation and the Television Broadcasting Company of France.

Development of this new product was financed in part by a loan from the

Md and Cooperation Fund. 1his project's objective was to reduce power
consumption to a minimum while utilizing a high-reliability technology.
Actually this development project is part of the research conducted to lower
the costs of group television reception. particularly when used for educa-
tional purposes. -

This was a working Jemonstration of the equipment. A series of tenure-
aents made during its operation showed that the receiver consumed less than
20 watts of power regardless of any variations in operating voltage. The
receiver includes a 61-centieeter screen and has low-frequency power in excess
of 3 watts. Its power can be supplied from different alternating current or
direct current sources. It is obvious. however. that solar energy would

be highly suitable for this equipment destined for Third Horld use.

It should be noted that this receiver can hardly be classed as an itea for
"general public" use. As a matter of fact. in many respects it falls into
the "professional" use category. The African Television Coepmy's broad
experience in maintenance aatters contributed greatly to making this receiver
nn extreaely practical and efficient itel of equipment in all respects.

By next year. Ivory Coast and Niger will have complcted their group television
reception infrastructure. In this connection. it should be recalled that
these two countries have long recognized it was essential to attach equal
importance to trensaission networks and receiving networks. As a result.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(:A‘l‘BI. has already installed and currently naintains more than 15.000 group
reception units in; ivory Coast. In Niger. to complete an initial educa-
tional network of 122 classrooms, approximately 300 reception units have been
ordered from CATEL and the Yves Houssin Agency who will use more than 10
kilowatts of photovoltaic cells to operate the television sets.

Incidentally. Amadou Thiam. the Ivorian minister of information, was in
Paris in February. There he reviewed certain projects connected with the
Ivory Coast's large-scale audiovisual equipment program.

' COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux ct Cie. Paris, 1979

80“
cso: 5500

7
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

BRIEFS

SAT CON‘I‘RACT--The Tunisian PTT [Postal. Telephone, and Telegraph Service]
recently awarded the [French] Telecoqunications Corporation (SAT) a
”million franc contract covering installation of composite-cable equip-
ment in the northern and southern suburbs of Tmis. low-capacity radio relay
comunicationa links. as well as low-frequency automatic carrier-current
communications link: throughout the country. [Text] [Paris means TROPICAUX ,
ET PEDITBRRANBENS in French 9 Mar 79 p 622] 8061

NEW DP CENTER--Sonetine in the latter half of March, Tunisian Priae Minister
llcdi Nouirs will inaugurate the National Automatic Data Processing Center's
subordinate lnterofficc Data Processing Center (CIATI). This new computer
center has very extensive capabilities that will be available to nost govern-
nent offices and national firms. The CIATI will not only offer them the
services of its new computer and its skilled personnel, it will also enable
then to faniliarize the-selves with a conputer center's operating and manage-
nent techniques and thus prepare the-selves, under ideal conditions. to
eventually asaule full control of their own systens. [Text] [Paris MARCHES
TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French 16 Mar 79 p 682] 8061

080: 5500

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN OFFICIAL USE UNLY

FRANCE

TELECGBI SATELLITE T0 BEGIN OPERATING IN [9'53
Paris AIR (v cosmos in French 10 .“ar 79 pp 33-35

(Article by Pierre Laneereuxl

[Text] The decision of the French government to begin operating the first
national satellite telecomunications system, Telecom-i, on 1 July 1983, which
was made at a restricted can": meeting at the Elysee on 20 February [979 (cf

AIR 5 COSNOS No 756) should in principle have been confirmed by the full
Cabinet on 7 March.

This was to happen at the very time when the Telecom-l system was one of

the main centers of attraction at the international colloquium organised in
Toulouse by CNS [National Center for Spec: Studies], DOT [General Telecon-
municatlons Directoratei, and TD!" [French Telecommications Company], on the
subject of ”Space Teleconunications and Direct Television Broadcasting by

Satellite." The other, equally important topical subject was precisely the
French plan for a direct television satellite, TDF-l, which will be the subject

of a eovernment decision next month, at the time or a consultation with Ger-
many (ct MR 6 COSMOS No 736).

A Profitable System
b‘hy a French teiecosnunicstions satellitei

The French data transmission network, which was already very dense, experienced

considerable growth (snore than 30 percent per year) tron 1972 to i976, and

. this growth is still continuing,although at a somewhat slower rate (27 per-
cent in 1977). This is mainly an analog network; the proportion of digitisation

is still only 10 percent, but the growth in digital connections is extremely

hill: (50 percent). Electronic cosmunicstion is rapidly being introducd in

the French telephone network, the Transpac network has been in operation since

the end of l978, and the first connections in the new Transmic numerical

data transmission network will be put into operation this year. Under these
circumstances, one night question the advantage of a new system of data dis-

tribution by satellite -. especially if one assumes that the satellites could
represent only a marginal transmission capacity in comparison with that of

the existing ground-based systems in our country.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Q

.It wae even eald In the peat that a country lllxe l’rance (thle had been eald
on the ecnle of turope) wee geographically too llnlted ln extent to make
such It eyeten really proﬁtable, Herve h‘ora, head or the New Producte and
Servlcee eectlon or the nor. correctly recalled at the Toulouee colloqulue.

In fact, llerve Nora eald, the DOT etudlea and the report drawn up by Wee
Cannac. preeldent of the Ilavae Bureau, at the requeet of the French govern-
uent, ahowed that the Telecoeol eyetee la proﬁtable and eeeentlal for the
devolopeent ln France or new toleco-Iunlcatlone eervlcee Ialtlne extenelve
on of “telmtlce” .. an appllcetlon thet Sllon Nora and Alaln lllnc have de-
“nod ee the ”eeeoclatlon of teleco-mlcatlone aatellltee wlth ground-baud
data-trane-leelon netwotke " In thelr rear-t on ”Deta‘TraneIleelon ln
Soclety," whlch waa euultted to the government leet year. For hle part,
Gerard Thery, dlrector general for teleco-unlcatlone, aleo recognleee that
"the uae of data tranenleelon ln aoclety le connected wlth the great devel-
opment of telecomnlcatlone. nt whlch aatellltee are one of the eaaentlal
conponente, alone wlth other trenaeleelon nethoda lllle ﬁber optlca and the
new temporal electronlc co-utatlon eyeteau.”

New ”Toleeetlca" Servlcee

The French eowernanntn declelon to carry out the Telecou-l progree wee
made, Gerard Thery explaine, ”became ol the leportance that the DOT attachee
to telmtlce. whether It la a queetlon o: 'doeeetlc' toleaetlce .. tele-
coplore for the general publlc, keyboard terelnele uelne wolce frequenclee,
and Vldeotex (an electronlc dlvectory) .. or 'proteeelonal' teleeetlca, at
the eervlce or French buelneeeee .. tlret the large ooepanlee, end then the
small end ledlue-elte buelneeeea (PHI) eleo.”

The DOT hae, In fact, undertaken the develop-ant of a large range or new aer-
vlcee aatlng extenelve nee or teleeatlcet the foorlet Data Traneeleelon Servlcc
(511) which will give acceee to warloue eeat reeervetlon eyeteee, whlch are
now lncoepatlble, (no. a elnele atandard ter-lnel: the smtuco: eervlce

for the autooatlon. proceeelne, and treneeleelon of all the docueente con-
cernzne the ehlpeent or eerchendlee ln natlonal or lnternetlonal co-erce:

the tuna. vldeotex eervlce for buelneee or the eenerel publlc; the Tnt‘l’Dl
syetee for the lnterconnectlon or text-proceaalne nachlnee: end vldeotrane-

nleelon, ln preparatlon for the operation of the future French vldeotranalle-
elon network.

All theee eervlcee can already be offered ln a relatlvely eatletactory Ian.
nor, by Ileana of the exletlne around-baud networte, eepeclally the Trenepac
network. Out the 061' bellevee that "dewelopuente new under way enable ne to
predlct thet thle wlll no longer be the caee a tee yeare tro- now, eepeclally
becauee or the need (or hleh-epeed traneeleelon to lncreaee the tonne of
data trenaeltted (requlred by raet telecopylne. oonterence calla, wldeocon-
terencee, etc.) and to reduce the delay In traneeleelon (reculred by lnter-
connected cooperate, data banke, bureaucratlc altelre, etc.). ae eell ae to

lncreaee the l'lexlblllty and aecurlty or the traneeleelon and to extend ac.
ceee to the new eervlcee.”

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thua Telecomi will be the firat French ayarea of “telenatlca” aatellitea.
it will make it poaaible, Gerard ‘l’hery aid, ”to roapond to the legitimate
dananda of the general public and of buaineaaoa by offering conaiderabla ndo
vantaaea uith reapect to flexibility of uaa and profitebility.“

The Telecon-l Hiaaiona

Tho Telecon-i ayate- viil have two principal taaiu, tho DOT announced: one la
concerned with intor-buaineaa connectione in France (thia ie the new one). and
the other la the (claaaical) taait of telephone and toleviaion tranaaiaaion
between the French aainland and the non [Ovaraaaa Depart-onto] and MI (Ovar-
aaaa Tarritoriea] .. with, in addition, the capability of trananltting the
telephone traffic of the African countrlea.

The tool: of interobualnaaa connectiona in Iainland Franco and Coraica will
make it poaaible to provide broad-band, high-apead digital connectiona (var-
yin; from a feu kilobita per oacond to aeveral negabita per aecond) at fre-
quenciea of ill-ll. Oil: between the varioua buaineaa altoa .. for exanple,
hemen hoedquartera and the branchea or the factorlaa. At the hegimlng,
theae will be ”cioaod" clrcuita (between oali-detaruinad uaera). But. Gerard
‘rhary aid, the 06‘! la aleo conaiderina accaaa to other networha of the am

kind later, or accaaa to a general telecomunicatlona network on the national
or even European level.

:iiahoaoned digital connectiona will facilitate the develop-ant of new applicoo
tiona requiring a brood bandwidth! videoconferencaa, feat teiocopyinc, trana~
fer of filea between canputera in a vary ahort tine, etc.

The eatabliahnent of nrmdobaaed atationa near the near viii, aoreover. make
it poeaible to limit ground-booed connections and junctiona aa such ea poa-
aibla, and thua to offer an eapecially reliable traneniaaion ayaten. in addi-
tion. multiple acceaa (by tile diatribution .- Neill) of a large number of
tround-baaed atationa to the cane TelecoIa-l aatelllta repeater will make it
poaaible to lncroaae the ayeten'a flexibility for ita uaerai inediate,
elauitaneoua accoaa to all correapondanta, nearly inetantaneoua nodification
of the capacity of the connectiona, eatabliahaent of ta-porary comctiona
by neane of mobile atationa (for exanple, for muaual denenatrationa. tan-
porary relief of one coeputina center by another, etc.).

Telecon-l viii alao be the ideal inatrwant for a data diatribution aervica
.. a ainale aourco broadcaatina infer-nation to aovaral rocoivera allultane-

oualy -- for axe-ole, for tolaprinting of mapapara, digital Minion
of photoarapho in color, etc.

Finally, "the Telecon-l aatellita viii free buainaaaea fro. the geographical
reatrictiona inpoaed by aroundobaaed networka,” the 061' announcoa, ”became
the company vill be able to act up one of ita unite coupletaly at will .. in-
cluding aitee that are difficult to reach or oven inpoaaible to aervico by
conventional wane (offoahore platform, etc.) .. aince a rate independent of
the diatanco can be applied, aa it already ia for the Tranapac natverit.”

1]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"In senerel. the rete structure will be studied in deteil," Gerard Thery
said, ”end the nor thinks it will be sble to otter the Telecos-l services

et nerltsdly lower prices then those tor two stsnderd speclellsed connections,
end with e such better quelity of service,tor ell the previously eentloned ros-

sons. Thus the users will pey e pro rets eeount for the tecilities they ec-
tuslly use.”

Tolecoe-l's clsssicel teleco-unicetions test et 6-6 Otis will sells it pos-

sible to cerry telephone end television treﬂic between the eelnlend end tho

DOM end TN. The connections will cover the I'rench deperteents end territories
in the Atlentic Ocesn end the lndlen Ocesnl Guiene, Hertlnlqus, Guedeloupe,

St Pierre end Hiquelon, Reunion, end Msyotte. ‘l‘hus tor these ccmectlons,
Telecoe-l will psrtielly replece the service now provided by the sstellltes

of the worldwide lntelset network, the 001' snnouncsd. but Telecoe-l will not
provide cover-ego for the deperteents end territories of the Pecitlc Oceen
region, like rehltl, which will continue to be served by the Intelset setellites.

Moreover, Telecon-l will note it possible to "terry the dcuestic telephone
tretfic in “rice, within the sones covered by the sstellite,“ the not emouncod.
This suppleesntery test or ‘l'elecou-l should slso tske over pert of the trertic
cerried up to now by the lntelset setellites. lispeoielly in certein com-
tries, lite leire, where hence hes furnished ell the specs teleco-uMcetions
coulpoent, soestlees with 'rench funds.

Extension o! 'l‘eleccQ-l ta Mrope

The director generel tor teleco-unicetions ssid thet he ”considered it indis-
penseble for the DC! to be sble to spend the french system to the site of
Europe, end (or TelecoI-l to be the sterting point for e new systen of Euro-
nen setellites sble to otter businesses loceted in Europe services sieiler
to those thet will be provided by the (co-peeing) hericm systees, lite the
$33 systee or the Setellite business Systee co-peny .. tor-ed by lﬂi .. end
the X-Tm systs- o! the Xerox Oorporstion.”

On this subject, Gererd Thery steted thet "everything possible will be done
to detine the stsnderds of service end the trens-lssion egreelents for the
TelecoI-l systee in close colleboretlon with the Europeen postel end tele-
cos-unicstions egencies. in order to obtein this result.”

The developeent or these setellite teleestics systees thus requires "the
esteblisheent or s strong policy o! :tendsrdiseticn. coordinsted on: the in-
ternetionel level, end not only on the nstionel level.“ lierve Nore steted.
"The stendsrdisetion o! eoulp-ent, networks, end services, end the egreeeents
(or eccess to theue networts end services, is ectuslly essentlel tor the
proper use of the tecilities thet hsve been set up,” thinks lierve Nore. Thet
is why it is deeended pore end lore strongly every dey by users ell over the
world .. who ere, Ioreover. pertsctly ewsre thet stenderdisetlon ls essentiel
to seine the- independent of the Ienufecturers. In the sbssnce o! stenderds,
the eenutscturers cen {sin e de recto eonopoly, beceuse then they control ell

the tutors in the develop-ent or equipeent end epplicetlons. It is in this

12
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sense that Simon Nora and Alain i'inc were able to speak of the satellite
cha!lcnac in their report, and it is in this sense that TelecoI-i represents
an nsscntiel tool for our national independence, Nerve Nora concludes.

A Secciiite in the Service of business

what can the Telecoe-i systen contribute to business? The question vaa raised
at tho Toulouse colloquium, and several businessmen gave their opinions.

According to Mr Kiefer of the ELF-Aquitaine group, Telecomi can be. useful
in creating self-adapting data networks linking nany correspondents (data
transmission), as veil as in transmitting the group's intornai correspon-
dence (bureaucratic affairs) or working documents like geographical maps in
color (high-resolution tast tolecopyins). Satellite connections vill also in-
troduct- nov factors in the discussions and the decision-akin; procedures
vithin the company (videoconference), or even become an instrument of the
command nctvorks (videophones). The satellite will also maize it possible to
reach isolated corrospondcnts. on off-shore platform or distant prospecting
sites, not only to lake professional comications but also to improve the
iivine conditions of the personnel in carrying private nessaaea.

For Mr Meunicr of the Renault coeoany, the satellite should nails it possible
to devolon interconnections between conputars (teleuatics), reduce travel
(toicconfcrencea) end the number of docu-ents exchanged anons offices (tele-
conyine). ss veil as to carry the coepany‘s nail (electronic postal service).
The Renault company is also interested in the prospect of a turopean exten-

sion of thc Tclecoe-l system, especially in beiciul and Spain, as veil as by
access to other telematic netvorks.

The French i’reaa Agency, one of the five crest world press agencies, which
has already been using satellite comections since l97l (60 comections),is
also counting on Telecon-i to improve the reliability, transmission speed and
coverage of this network. as well as for access to nev services (Videoteu,
Transpac, ctc.).said its representative, Hr Duresne.

in the name of the Scope-an Radio Broadcastinr Union (OER), hr iiaas. vho is
chaimn or the sroup responsible for satellites -- especially SB .. con-
sidered that TelecoIa-i could also be used to create video libraries for the
public, to broadcast inforuation progress in hotels, schools. and universic
ties, or to broadcast wide-screen prograaa in theaters.

in ccneral. the potential business users expressed a desire to see the Telecon-
i systen extended beyond the boundaries of aainland France, by bagging
compatible with the other space system -- but 1'0? has mained very evasive
concernins the prospects for co-patibility betveen the French 1elecoe-i sys-
tem and the Marican $38 ayaten, vhich will basin operating first, in Will

The businessnen also caphasiced the necessity of guaranteeins the security
and privacy of the transniasion . Hr Loabard or m stated on this point that
basic studios vere under my to design satisfactory coding methods. For its

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

Put. the hennea ccm thinha it ia ready to offer a coded eound eel-vice,
and it ia now mdertahins atudiee to encode inage broedoaating ea well. One
o! the tactora to be detined in thie field ie the enount of protected tine
that will be deuanded by the uaere in order to prevent the decoding of e
trananieaion.

Finally. it eppeared that cloee cooperation between the DOT and the ueere waa
neeeaaery to reaolve, to the beat of their oo-on intereata, the my quea-
tiona that buaineaaea nuet now face in prepering to use Telecon-l: theae quea-
tiona are concerned with ratea. billing (or aervicea, the equip-ant to be
lnetalled by the uaer, the lilita or the aervice provided by the DGT, the
intortacea with exieting equip-ant, etc.

No l-Ton Satellitea Launched by Ariane

Tho Telecou-l ayaten will be produced in collaboration between the 061‘ and CNB,
which have already prepared joint prelininary atudiee o! the project. The eie-
eion will be defined by the DOT, which will alao direct the progran, in
cooperation with CNB . The overaeeing of the epace part of the ayaten will

be entrueted to the French aeroepaoe induatry.

The ayeten will conaiat of three eatellitea. including two eatellitea in or-
bi: .. one in operation and one in ”active“ reaerve .. and another aatellite
in reaerve on the ground. The overall coat of the ayetee .. around 1.3
billion trance at 1970 pricea .. will be tinenoed by the French Po'atal and
ruomicationa Adninietration. The Teleconol ayaten ia acheduied to go
into operation on 1 July ma. The lirat eetellite will be launched during
the fourth quarter or 1982, ad the aecond during the (irat quarter of 1993,
according to the datea announced by the 061'.

The deeign of the TelecoI-i aatellite. eaid the 061', ”deliberately excludee
any large new teat with reapect to the pletton or the payload: it will be a
aatellite ot the £6 oleaa.” That would put the NAT” [Mechanieqhviatiom
end Traction1 Co-pany in a good poaition to nanutacture the Telecou-l eatel-
litea. becauee of ita experience with the European l6 eatellitea and their
mans derivativea. Aeroepatiale haa alao mounced ita Intention of telling
port in the conpetition to conetruct the TeleooI-l eatellitea. but with an
original deaign tor a “heavy,“ auper-redundant eatellite (cl. All in (:6!!!
No 73*). but the repreeentativee ot the DGT and can heve not yet apeciriad
mthet there will be a cell (or propoeala tron induatry for the nanutacture
or the Telecoml eatellitea. Por ita part, the Mon-GP [General Vireleaa]
group ia well placed to Ianuraoturo the payloade oi the eatellitea (electronic

teleco-unicationa equip-out), and Telepace will no doubt be aehad to provide
rho principal around-baud atetione.

Th. delinition or the exact epeciiicationa or the Telecon-l aateliite will
begin next April. For the tile being, the DOT la planning on eatellitea
weighing l.020 kg on launch and 550 kg in geoatetionary orbit at an altitude
of 36,000 In; any will be launched eeparately with the Ariana rochet. ac-
coming to the procedure (or double iaunchea. The orbital poeition or the

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eetellitee (deter-lined by the covet-ere et lad Clix) will ho to” ﬂeet, ebove
the Gulf oi Cuinee, for the eetellite in operetion, end 1° lien for the
reeorve eetelllte in orbit.

The Telecoeol eetellitee will be etebilieed ebout ell three ewee, with en
eccwrecy of 0.i° for welnteini their poeltion end pointing their bee-e.
[They heve en expected litetiee or 7 yeere, end will be equipped with e
eoler generetor hevin; e power or 900 wette (coneuaption 600 ii) end e peeeive
them! control eyetee.

Nelve Repeetere

l'he peyloed (or eech eetelllte will include 12 repeetere: eix 8.3-wett repeetere
et In“ (ill: for connectione between the eeinlend end the 001 end 1‘0! end con-
neotione with “rice, end eix 20-wett repeetere et 12-“ Oil: (or inter-
bueineee connectione end video broedteetlng.

The eix repentere et 6-6 Gilt will be divided non; telephony (three repeetere)
end TV(one repeeter)with the W end row. end telephony in “rice (two repee-
ten): the tomectione will be nede with e lein etetion in Ieinlend Frence,
equipped with e leue entenne 30 eetere in die-eter (lnteleet etenderd A .-
c/‘l' of 60.7 dl/K), end etetlone with entennee l2 netere in dieeeter (lnteleet
etenderd b -- G/‘l' of 31.7 db/K) in the 0G! end 1G1.

The other eix repeetere et l2-lh Gilt .. weing the reeerved bend et 12.542.”
Oil: for deecendlng connectione .. will be divided none the lnter-bueineee
digitel dete treneeleeione (five repeetere et 23 ii bite/e. in the eneloswe
or disitei node). The inter-booineee connectione will be eede with eeell,
eieplified etetione, hevin; entennee 3 eetere in dieeeter (0/1“ of 23.2 db/li),
lnetelled directly et the ueere' eltee.

By l9”, it ie eetieeted thet the trettic between Frence end the bill end Tm
will be 1,800 circuite. end the dete treneeieeion will be 123 ll bite/e.

COPYRlclil't Air in Coenoe, Perle, I919

sazo
so. 5300 m

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY