FOR OFFICIAL ['QE ONLY

JPRS L/10525
30 JUNE 1982

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 13/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Goverment.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0? 11115 PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

apes L/]

30 June

WORLDWIDE REPORT
TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
(FOUO 13/82)

CONTENTS

WEST EUROPE

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

European Space Agency To Develop New Satellite
(Michael Donne; FINANCIAL TIMES, 21 May 82) ...........

Countries Meet To Organize Satellite Organization
(Pierre Langereux; AIR ET 003405, 15 May 82) ..........

FRANCE

Newest Antennas for Receiving Direct Satellite Broadcasts
Shown
(Pierre mereuX§ AIR ET m, 17 Apr 82)....0eooooo

Various Scientific Missions hwisioned for SIGMA Satellite
(Pierre Langereux; AIR ET mw, 17 Apr 82) cocoon-coo

PI‘T Minister Criticizes Intelsat's Use of Extra Circuits
(Pierre Langereux; AIR ET (X33408, 21‘ Apr 82)ooeooeveooo

Briers
Fiber Optics Guidelines

-3- [III-W-ldo POE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY TO DEVELOP NEW SATELLITE
P31211515 London FINANCIAL TIMES in English 21 May 82 p 8
[Report by Michael Donne: "New Satellite for Europe"]

Frext] The European Space Agency, of which the UK is a partner, is about
to embark on a major new spacecraft programme--an unmanned "remote sensing
sntol!ite"--which can study the earth's mineral and other resources and

monitor their use.

The cost of the prograume is expected to be at least 100! pounds covering
both the first satellite, ERS-l and, eventually, a series of further
satellites. ERS-l is expected to be ready for launching by 1987.

Much work on the programme still has to be done. including determining
who the contractors to the programme will be. The countries participating

will include the UK and Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, Spain,
Sweden. Switzerland, Norway and Canada, with Denmark and Holland also

likely to join in.

The finance available so far will enable the definition phase to begin
scan. in which the programme's scope will be settled. The final step-—
hardware development-~will be taken at the end of next year.

(COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd, 1982

C50: 5500/2262

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

_ INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

COUNTRIES MEET TO ORGANIZE SATELLITE ORGANIZATION
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 15 May 82 p 78

:Article by Pierre Langereux: ‘26 Countries Preparing Final Agreement on Burc-
pcan Satellite Telecomunications Organization BUTBLSAT to Exploit acs Satel-
lites"

:Text An intergovernmental meeting attended by 26 member countries of the

CBPT European Posts and Telecommunications Conference], 20 of which countries
are already members of the Temporary BUTBISAT [European Satellite Telecommuni-
cations Organization](1), was held in Paris from 3 to 14 May to finalize and
prepare for signature the agreements relative to the definitive structure of
BUTELSAT, which will exploit the BCS [expansion unknown] satellites.

The Temporary Butelsat was created 5 years ago at the initiative of the CBPT's
Satellite Telecommunications Coordination Committee. The agreement putting in
place the temporary organization was readied for signature on 13 Hay 1977: it
went into effect on 30 June 1977 over the signatures of 17 members of the CEPT,
including France. The organization, which has had its headquarters in Paris
since then, was initially to have under it the DOS satellites for public tele-
communications services and the HAROTS [expansion unknown]. also known as the
MARECS, satellites for maritime telecommunications services, all to be built--
as well as the OTS satellite, which was also provided for in the agreement--
by the BSA [European Space Agency]. But the subsequent creation of INMARSAT
LInternational Maritime Satellite Telecommunications Organization] (see AIR ET
COSMOS, No 886) relieved the Temporary Eutelsat of exploitation of the MARBCS
satellites. The first MARECS satellite (MARBCS l) was launched on 19 December
1981 and was put into operational service on 1 May 1982 (see AIR ET COSMOS,

No 906). It will be operated by INHARSAT, as will be also the second HARECS

satellite (W5 2).

 

(1) As of 22 January 1982, the Temporary BUTBISAT had 20 member countries, all
sharing the BCS satellite operating expenses. Half the financing was pro-
vided by four countries-~Prance (16.4 percent), United Kingdom (16.4 per—
cent), Italy (11.48 percent) and Germany (10.82 percent)--and the rest by
the other participants: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Spain, Finland,
Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, Norway, Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden, Switz-

erland, Turkey and Yugoslavia.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Temporary EUTELSAT and the future definitive one. however, remain respon-
sible for the operation of the BCS satellites, in accordance with the special
agreement that was finalized for signature on 10 March 1978 and went into effect
on 14 September 1978. The agreement provides for the putting in place of a
European space telecommunications network--the Ecs--bo make available 10.000
telephone circuits linking the international switching centers of the CBPT
member countries. and two color television channels to serve the member organi-
zations of the 380 [Eurcpean Broadcast Union]. An agreement signed 15 May 1979
between the Temporary EUTBLSAT organization and the BSA provides that the BSA
will supply, launch and maintain in orbit ECS satellites built with BSA credits.
The total capacity of the BCS satellites is thus to be made available to
EUTBLSAT in exchange for fixed annual lump sum payments by EUTBLSAT to BSA.

These payments, however. will not fully cover the developmental and construction
costs of the satellites.

Initially, the agreement provided for the launching of the first satellite in
1982 and the second one a year later. But owing to changes in the launching
timetable of the Ariane rockets (owing in turn to aARECS 2 delays). ecs 1 cannot
he launched untii January 1983 and the second ECS satellite until the end of
1983 or beginning of 1984. This will probably delay the putting into service
of the ECS network, which was originally scheduled during 1983. In all, five
‘25 satellites have been ordered, based on providing a permanent service during
an initial period of 10 years. Recently, the Temporary BUTELSAT has decided to
modify these satellites, except for the first one, to include additional cir-
cuits designed for "multiservices' (high—speed digital transmission). This
capacity will be extended via circuits to be leased by BUTBLSAT from the French
PTT in the TELEOOM 1 domestic satellites, to c0nstitute an integrated 'nulti-
services" network operated by EUTELSAT.

COPYRIGHT: A. G C. 1982

9238
C50: 5500/2241

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NEWEST ANTENNAS FOR RECEIVING DIRECT SATELLITE BROADCASTS SHOWN

Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 17 Apr 82 pp 39,48

:Article by Pierre Langereux: “New Antennas for Reception of Direct Satellite
TV"

'Text5 The era of direct television via satellite has arrived. At the Compon-
Ents §how this year, six manufacturers were exhibiting their equipment--antennas
with frequency converters (from 12 GHz to 0.9-1.7 Gﬁz), and video-sound demodu-
lators--£or the reception of direct TV from the future satellites scheduled to
he launched in 1985 by France and Germany, and in 1986 by Great Britain and

Sweden.

These six manufacturers consisted of three French, two German, and, of course,
one Japanese.

DIELA [Management of Electronics and Data Processing Industries], a French 612
[Economic Interest Group] formed by Thomson-Brandt and Tonna Electronique. showed

a line of three antennas 0.7 m, 0.9 m and 1.5 m in diameter for individual or com-
munity reception. DIELA expects to mass produce 10,000 units per month of the 0.7-m
and 0.9-m versions. The electronics will be built by Thomson-Brandt at Angers and

the marketing will be done by Tonna, which specializes in antennas.

Portenseigne, a subsidiary of the Dutch Philips group, showed an antenna for TV
reception from the OTS 2 experimental satellite and a prototype of a l-m diameter
antenna for individual reception of direct TV. However, the firm will also offer
community antennas.

visiodis, a subsidiary of Cables de Lyon and hence of the French CGB [General
Electrical Company] group, showed its line of demodulators in conjunction with a
0.2-m antenna built by the German maker uirschmann and an SH? [superhigh frequen-
ch array by the Japanese firm CDNK [expansion unknown]! Under agreements signed
with the German firm. Visiodis will thus offer a line of individual as well as
community receiving equipment using 0.9-m, 1.4-m. 2.5-n and 3- or 4-m antennas.

HIS! :expansion unknownJ-Prance. a subsidiary of the German HIS! group, showed
for the first time in France (after Berlin last summer) a 0.6-m receiving antenna

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

installation enabling reception of up to 15 TV channels. Dubbed the "Orbit."
this installation is designed for small-scale (one to three households) community
reception.

FUBA [expansion unknownJ-Prance. a subsidiary of the German PUBA group, exhibited
a 0.9-m antenna associated with a demodulator for the reception of the 5 channels
of 8 European satellites (right-to-left circular polarization). The firm had
previously exhibited at the Hontreux Show (Switzerland) a 1.8-m antenna for
community reception.

OX Antenna Company. a Japanese firm represented in France. showed a complete line
of converters. demodulators and 0.7S-m. 0.9—m and l.2-m antennas for individual
and community reception. This equipment was already practically at the ”take
home“ stage, its mass production being already under way on a small scale in
Japan. But for the time being, this equipment is being based solely on the PAL
[Phase Automation Line?] standard. We note that DX also builds 4-GHz antennas for
reception from Soviet (Gorizont) satellites.

This rapid survey made on the occasion of the 1982 Components Show indicates that
most manufacturers are offering a line of equipment (for individual or community
reception) using quite similar technologies: Multichannel demodulators and light-
weight parabolic antennas based on aluminum (plasticated or not) reflectors in
all cases, since the manufacturers consider that plastic parabolas are still too
costly. All the makers also estimate it will take them 1 and 1/2 years to get
into mass production. Some, like Portenseigne, complain of the lack of a French
standard with respect to direct TV receiving equipment (analog or digital sound).
A single European standard, however. (including France) should, in principle, be
announced in September.

Prices for this equipment vary widely. Some (WISI, Visiodis) are not quoting any
prices. Others (PUBA, DIBLA) are quoting a price of around 3,000 francs for their
individual reception equipment (with a small-diameter, around 0.9-m antenna).
which is about the “official” price that has been quoted for a little over 1 year
by TOP [TELEDIPPUSION-FRANCEJ. Portenseigne, however. quotes a price of 3.000
francs I'per program' for a community reception equipment (with 1.8-m antenna),
which would thus come to around 10,000-12,000 francs. 0n the other hand. Japan's
DX is currently quoting a price of 25,000 francs for a complete community recep-
tion equipment (l.2-m antenna) and expects to lower the price of this same equip-
ment to 8,000-10,000 francs per unit for a production run of 10,000 units to be
launched by the end of 1983. As for the price of individual reception equipment.
Dx estimates it will be very much higher than the one being quoted by TD?!

COPYRIGHT: A. 5 C. 1982

9238
C80: 5500/2213

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
VARIOUS SCIENTIFIC MISSIONS ENVISIONED FOR SIGMA SATELLITE
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 17 Apr 82 p 40

:Article by Pierre Langereux: 'Hid-l982 Decision Due on French 'SIGMA' Satellite
Project"]

{Text} The CNES's [National Center for Space Studies] space center at Toulouse
is currently conducting a definition study for the new French "SIGMA [Arianee
Mounted Gamma Imagery Satellite] which could be launched toward the end of 1985
to coincide with the first demonstration flight of the new European rocket
Ariane 4.

The detai1e1 study of the SIGMA project is to be ready by June-July 1982, when a
decision must be taken concerning the building of the SIGMA satellite, which is

"competing“ with another equally interesting French project--that of the oceanic
altimetry satellite "Poseidon."

Assuming a favorable decision, the SIGMA project could be actualized following

a very brief developmental period (by the beginning of 1983). Integration of the
satellite could then be completed during the first half of 1985 for delivery at
the Kourou launching complex (French Guyana) during the third quarter of 1985.

It could then be launched in October or December 1985. The satellite would have
a nominal life of l and 1/2 to 2 years, permitting observation of some 270
sources.

The SIGMA project, which was proposed by the scientists of the French ABC [Atomic
Energy Commission] of Saclay and of the CBSR [Center for the Study of Radiation in
SpaceJ of Toulouse during the scientific seminar at Arcs (September 1981), con-
cerns the high-resolution and very-high-sensitivity mapping of outer-space sources
of gamma rays within the energy band between 20 and 2,000 keV [kilo electron
volt]. The recent successes obtained in the astronomy of high-energy electromag-
netic radiations, mainly by way of satellites (United States, USSR and France),
have in fact shown that violent processes are commonplace in most of the phenomena
that determine the dynamic and the evolution of the stars, the galaxies and the
universe as a whole. The study of these phenomena cannot however be truly effec-
tive unless the locations of these processes can be identified without ambiguity,
so as to also be able to study them at other wavelengths. Hence the importance

6
won OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the SIGMA missiOn, the aim of which is to improve by a factor of 10 to 100 (a
few minutes of arc versus a few degrees) the angular resolution obtainable until
now in gamma imagery, with a sensitivity of the order of several millicrabs

(1 millicrab at 200 keV - 6x 10-7 photons / cmz/sec/keV).

The SIGMA satellite's observation instrument will be a coded-mask telescope
having as a detector a scintillation camera derived from a camera used in nuclear
medicine. The camera's coded mask will consist of a mosaic of bits of tungsten
arranged in a basic pattern (blacks and whites coded randomly in the two dimen-
sions) which is reproduced cyclically to form the overall mosaic. The parallel
flux of photons emanating from a given gamma source will thus project the 'shad-
ow“ of the mask on to the scintillator within a very precise area (detectors)
where this pseudoimage will be recorded (after extraction of parasitic ”back-
ground noise“). An appropriate mathematical treatment of these pseudoimages
will subsequently enable the reconstruction of the direction of arrival of the
high-energy photons and (knowing the position of the satellite) the location of
the source of the radiation.

The CNES has proposed that this SIGMA satellite instrument be built through a
multilateral, especially European, cooperation. Talks are already under way with
Italy, who is also including a high-energy astronomy mission (x-ray astronomy)

in her new space plan (see AIR ET COSMOS, No 901). The SIGMA satellite, however,
would be built by the Toulouse space center under the direction of the CNBS, and
its platform by a French firm (HATRA [Mechanics, Aviation and Traction Company]
or AEROSPATIALE [National Industrial Aerospace Company]).

The SIGMA mission would also accommodate,as secondary satellite "passengers,“
scientific experiments that could be carried Out within the constraints imposed
by the primary experiment, such as, for example, experiment "Sursaut' (spectro-
metry of gamma bursts from 2 kev to 2 HeV) and experiment “CUBE“ (diffused ultra-
violet spectrometry, in the remote ultraviolet range of 900-2,000 Angstroms, of
outermost space).

The satellite could also serve as a technological test bench, using--function-
ally or experimentally--new equipment being developed for future missions: a
magnetic bubble memory for the recording of data aboard the satellite, a nickel-
hydrogen battery for the storage of energy during eclipses, etc.

The SIGMA satellite would weigh around 2 tons, of which 900 kg would be payload
consisting of the main telescope, the other scientific instruments and the tech—
nological equipment. The platform, weighing around 600 kg (stripped), would
accommodate the 500 kg of propellants needed for the satellite's attitude and
orbit control throughout the mission. It would use a very elaborate heat control
system (flaps and heat pipes), considering the very long duration of eclipses
(several hours per orbit during certain periods).

Based on its mission and on the initial orbit imposed by the launcher (geosta-
tionary transfer orbit), the SIGMA satellite could be placed in a circumterres-
trial elliptic orbit. Two orbits are being studied: One l3,000-200,000 km
(nominal), and the other 3,000-150,000 km (minimal).

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.Bxploration of radiation sources could be carried out by means of a heliocen-
tric pointing procedure (enabling the use of fixed solar panels). This would
yield. over a 24-hour exposure, a stability of 1 minute of are per 4 hours and
an absolute pointing precision of 0.5 degrees. The data stored in a 100 ubits/
sec memory would be retransmitted by way of an omnidirectional antenna to

earth stations at the rate 0E4 Kbits/sec (visibilit; 8 hrs/day). The satellite
would be controlled from the 6238's Toulouse space center.

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1932

9238
C50: 5500/2213

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PTT MINISTER CRITICIZES INTELSAT'S USE 0? EXTRA CIRCUITS

Paris AIR BT COSMOS in French 24 Apr 82 p 53
[Article by Pierre Langereux: 'Criticism of Intelsat by French PT? Minister“)

:Bxcerpts] The 12th session of the meeting of signatory countries to Intelsat,
held for the first time in Paris from 19 to 22 April, was opened by the French
minister of PTT, Mr Louis Mexandeau, who recalled France's role in the inter-
national space telecommunications organization.

The minister of PTT pointed out that France has always been convinced of the
advantage to Intelsat of putting the procurement of-equipment and services on as
broad an international competitive basis as possible to obtain the best availa-
ble quality and price. Mr Hexandeau expressed what he feels can only be the
Intelsat organization's satisfaction with the international cooperation that
characterized the building of Intelsat satellites 4 and S, as it will also be
with the choice of the Ariane launcher for the orbiting of Intelsat satellites

5 and 5A. The first launching of an Intelsat 5 satellite by Ariane has however
been delayed by delays in the delivery of the satellites.

The French minister of PTT, on the other hand, stated that he is not entirely in
agreement with certain orientations adopted by Intelsat. While fully apprecia-
ting "the priceless contributiOn being made by Intelsat to the development and
creation of space telecommunications networks in the disadvantaged countries,“
through the utilization of extra circuits in the international satellites, the
French minister of PTT is “not fully convinced that Intelsat should invest
specifically in this sector of activity.” According to Mr Hexandeau. two reefs
must be avoided by Intelsat: Investment in general-purpose satellites too close
to those designed for international service, and in too highly specialized
satellites. The first are rarely optimized to serve the needs of a country,

and the second can only respond very limitedly to a narrowly specified need.

The French minister deems it to not Intelsat's province to satisfy this or that
individual need: the solution to national needs must rather be sought within
other national or regional institutional frameworks, without prejudice, however,
to the interests of Intelsat!

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
similarly, as regards new services or services to businesses. the French minis-
ter holds that I'Intelsat should not have direct contact with customers for these
survices, since this is not its role.” These contacts, Mr Mexandeau says, are
(be exclusive responsibility of national administrations.

French experiments with Telecom 1 and the European one with Eutelsat demonstrate
clearly that a certain number of needs cannot be met efficiently other than at
national or regional levels. As an example, there is the interconnection with
terrestrial networks or the choice of frequency bands (variable according to
location). Intelsat can obviously provide a useful contribution to its members
in the form of interconnections among such networks; for example, between the
Americas and Europe. But here again, Mr Mexandeau is not convinced that Intel-
sat should invest too heavily in specialized services; in his view, “The organi-
zation should rather seek to maximize its profit on the vast gamut of services
it already offers."

Intelsat must devote itself primarily to meeting the challenge of the next
decade, the French minister declared. The constant high growth rate of inter-
national telephone and television traffic (+20 to 25 percent per annum) is going
to confront Intelsat with the saturation of its new Intelsat 6 satellites by
1993 or 1994, that is, even before they will have reached the end of their use-
ful life (10 years from 1986). Intelsat must therefore find technical and
operational solutions to meet this growth in demand, optimizing its use of fre-
quency bands and geostationary orbit, which are limited natural resources. And
if Intelsat can succeed in satisfying the demand, its revenues are assured and
Mr hexandeau will have no misgivings as to Intelsat's future financial sound-
ness.

The French minister, however, emphasized the fact that, for the first time in
ever 10 years, the tariffed rate for use of the Intelsat space segment will not
be lowered this year and will remain at its 1981 level (around $£,680). With-
out attaching undue importance to this development, Hr Mexandeau “nevertheless
sees in it a symbolic significance: Actually, it is an indication that growth
of its investments is outpacing the growth in Intelsat traffic," and the French
minister points out that "The international organization cannot properly ig-
nore the fact that such a trend must not be allowed to continue for too long."

rhis situation stems in fact from the very high cost of the program for new
Intelsat 6 satellites ordered from Hughes Aircraft (United States), in the
amount of $700 million covering the construction of the first five satellites,
an amount that could actually attain $1.6 billiOn with the 11 other satellites
covered by option. In this regard, Hr Santiago Astrain, director general of
Intelsat, stated to us that the first two Intelsat 6 satellites are scheduled
L0 be launched by the Shuttle (with IUS [interim upper stage]) and that the
'hree subsequent ones will be placed in orbit by the future European Ariane 4
launcher. These launchings have not yet been negotiated, however, with the
appropriate authorities. They will be negotiated within 1 year. Mr Astrain,

10
FOR(MHH(1A1.USEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the other hand, expressed serious concern regarding the very tight timetable
involved in the putting into service of the Arlene 4 launcher, the first flight
of which is scheduled for the end of 1985. at the same time as the delivery of
the first Intelsat 6 satellite.

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1982

9238
C80: 5500/2226

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

FIBER OPTICS GUIDELINES-~Since the creation in 1977 by the C81 [International
Electrical Engineering Committee; of Study Subcommittee SC463 on Fiber Optics,
which is headed by Mr Treheux of the CNBT [National Center for Telecommunica-
tiOns Studies], many international experts have been working to establish
international guidelines on optical fibers and their connecting components.

In 1978. the UTE [Technical Union on Electricity], the French counterpart of
the C51, decided to form the UTE/CE? [expansion unknown] Group 468 to work
closely with the C51. and Committee 93/8 to draw up French guidelines. These
two groups are headed by Mr Chiron, manager of the Thomson-CS? [General Radio
Company], and bring together all the professional organizations concerned.
Their work has been performed diligently and has resulted in the bringing forth
of some guidelines. The first of these-UTB Standard PR 93810: General Speci-
fication for Connectors for Optical Fibers and Cables-~has just been published
and is available at the UTE sales office: Service de Vents UTE; 12, Place des
Etats-Unis, 75783 Paris Cedex 16; telephone (1) 723-72757. A second standard--
UTE Standard PR 93850; General Specification for Optical Fibers and Cables-
will appear shortly. These two sets of guidelines provide. in particular. the
definitions and methods of measurements to be used to enSure quality control of
manufactured products. These guidelines will be supplemented later by detailed
specifications applying to individually defined products: Optical fibers for
telecommunications use, optical cables for aeronautics use. one-way connectors,
etc. [Text] [Paris am 31- cosmos in French 15 May 82 p 78] [copmcsn A'. a
c. 1982] 9238

5500/2241 END

12
EOR‘OFF1C1AI.USEGDNLY