APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOOOROOO‘I 0000001 1-8
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100050011-3

EOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/BHO
7 May 1979

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPNENTS
FOUO No. AGO

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050011-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as apprOpriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 6.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT MRS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WRSHIP 0F
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0P TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAI. USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPﬁS L/OMO
7 May 1979

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPMENTS

FOUO No . 460
Contests PAGE

BSA Plano 1b Launch 'No Earth oumatton Satellites
(Maurice Amnny; amt. 10 Apr 79).......................... 1

New Directions Outlined for Space Program
(Ptme tangent“; All s 008308. 17 an 79)..................... 3

hicnottn Mid-Ont Plant Mine Operating
(Hnurico Amnny; LB KINDS, 15 In: 79). 9

Tnnopace Company Propoud To Co-ercultze Mun: . '
(Pierre Menu; AIR 6 00908. 17 an: 79)..................... 11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BSA PLANS TO LAUNCH NO BART}! OBSERVATION SATELLITES
Paris [.8 MONO! in French 10 Apr 79 p 12

[Article by erice Arvonny: "Plans for Launch of No Renate Sensing
Sntellites"]

[Text] Reinhold Steiner. ‘51. will become director of the European
Space Operations Center (85°C) in Darastedt, PRC, this July. 3800 is
responsible for tracking and controlling all satellites placed in orbit

in behalf of the European Space Agency (BSA). Steiner is Swiss and a
chemical engineer.

The council of the European Space Agency aade no other important decisions
during its 3-6 April meeting held in SSA headquarters. In particular. it
could not reach agreement on the agency's 1979 budget. As happened last
year when the budget was not regularized until late Decenber. the agency

is going to have to continue to "live" on monthly allocations. This month-
by-month financing is scarcely conducive to sound management. This bud-
getary impasse is due to Italy's insistence that BSA aodify its method

of converting different national currencies into accounting units. This
issue was discussed by the council and the International Planetary Fund has
been asked to study the matter.

This budgetary problem does not completely stymie further progress in
Europe's space effort. As a matter of fact, a new program is gradually
getting underway. namely the remote sensing satellite program. In “arch.
the ESA approved an outlay of some 9 million accounting units (50 million
francs) for a 2-year preliminary study. Present plans call for the launch-
ing of two satellites. weighing 1.5 or 2 tons. in the mid-1980's.

These satellites will carry several types of devices. They will be equipped
with a side-looking synthetic aperture radar (SAR) similar to the one
designed for Spacelab. It will 2-0 able to "see" 30-meter objects through
clouds. There will also be an optical observation system for both the
visible spectrum and near infrared spectrum. Depending on the nissions.

it will cover a narrow field with a resolution similar to the SAR's reso-
lution. or observe a much wider swath. but with less precision.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Special consideration is being given to two possible nissions. ‘lhe LASS
(Land Applications Satellite Systee) uould be used for detailed observe-
tion of soils. The CMS (Coestsl Ocean Monitoring Satellite System)
would be used for surveillance of coastal ocean areas.

There is also another BSA ocean-related progrss. the eeritine co-unice-
tions progru. Eighteen representatives of the countries that will cost-
prise Innareat iinternationel Haritins Sstellite Organization] scheduled
to be established this smear. est in late March. By a large aejority.
they egreed that the future systee would consist of three Intelsat
[International ‘releco-micetions Satellite Organisation] spacecraft -
equipped vith repeaters specifically edapted to cot-unicetions with ships.
and three special Narece satellites built by BSA.

'03 OHIO!“ US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEH DIRECTIONS OUTLINBD FOR SPACE PMGBAM
Paris AIR 5 cosmos in French 17 Her 79 pp 40-42
[Article by Pierre Langereux: 'Prance. second Western Space Power")

[text] In its nesting of 7 March 1979. the Council of Ministers made im-
portant decisions concerning the direction of French space programs and the
develop-ant of the national space industry, confining the goals previously
defined in the interninisterial conittee neetings oi September 1977 and
February 1970, in the Council of Ministers session of 26 July 1978 and in

a cloud session at the Elysee Palace on 20 February 1979.

The new space sins of the French government are especially ambitious.
As Hinister or Industry Andre Giraud said. it is a matter of France be-

coming the second mum space power-after the United States! Nothing
less.

"the space effort by France over my years (1962) today enables it to
apply studies and research to projects of a cot-arcial nature," Andre Giraud
said. ”the Ariane launch vehicle. the "nelecon l" telecosnunications satel-
lite and the "ﬂl‘ l' direct-TV satellite project are already evidence of
this,“ the sinister stated. he the commique fro- the Blycee Palace
pointed out. this involves “loving from the construction of. prototypes to a
true French space industry organised to secure international barkets and to
create new high-skilled jobs."

In particular, the decision nade in favor of the national telecomunica-
tions satellite and the possible decision concerning a direct-telecast
satellite will have isportant consequences for the space and electronics
industries. "rhe proficiency acquired by French industry and thus its ex-
port credibility should, by 1982, result in an export turnover which would
extend the national effort and lead to a new growth of industrial activ-
ity,“ the sinister or industry believes. 'Space industry jobs resulting
tron these decisions could ultisately be estimated at esploying 1,000 to
2,000 persons.“

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This “change" will obviously lead "to asking isportsnt decisions win: re-
gard to progress and the need (or significant structural soditications,“
the sinister or‘ industry recalled. He had already announced his intentions
during his visit to the Toulouse Space Center several sonths ego.

Increased Powers of cars hdsinistrative Board

The minister of industry thus announced a four-point revision or cats [Na-
tional Center for Space Studies] structures: eliaination of the Space Ap-
plications Board: sodification or the composition and powers of the CNES
Administrative Board: noditication of curs manage-ant structures and its
relations with custosers: sodiiicetion o! sethods for interning supervising
authorities.

Elimination of the Space Applications Board results in giving the cues Ad-
ministrative Board a more important role as 'interninisterial govern-ant
advisor for space affairs.” with which sinistries concerned with space
policy will conunicate, and ”broader powers.” particularly ”to exaline any
proposed orientation of French space policy.” These changes will become
effective after the Council of State examines the proposed decree approved
by the council of Hinisters in its closed session of 20 February 1979.

The new cuss Adsinistrative Board will not include representatives appointed
intuitu personae from various ministries. but rather directors directly

concerned with space affairs through their duties, particularly as users.

The minister of industry will nominate the chair-an of the new administra-
tive Board and will be represented therein by the government co-issioner

(director of electronics and data-processing industries under the'ninistry
of Indutﬂ).

Three New cuss Directorates

This displacensnt of the center of gravity of French space activities. frets
research to industrial and conercial affairs, has caused C855 to ”nudity
its structures and to establish new relations with its cuetolers,“ in ac-
cordencs with ministerial directives.

The suprene hierarchy is not affected by these new measures: Hr Hubert
Curien rel-sins cuss chair-an - .d hr Yves sillard is still the general direc-
tor. assisted by Mr Pierre Morel, ass. ‘.stant general director in charge of
marketing research and scientific policy in general. sinilarly, the decen-
tralissd technical centsrs--the ‘Doulouse Space Center directed by hr J.-C.
Husson, the Guyanese Space Center directed by Mr A. Vienna and the Direr

torate of Launch Vehicles (Bvry) headed by hr P d'Allest-«are not affected
by the reorganization.

But the structures of the cuss headquarter“ in Paris have been regrouped
into three directorates corresponding to the new centers of activity:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Directorate of industrial and International affairs. assigned to

hr Jean-Gerard Roussel, will be in charge of formulating and monitoring the
establishment's industrial policy and handling all international affairs,
except for Buropean Space Agency (Isa) matters which are too closely

tied to cuss programs. This directorate must particularly promote French
space achievements for export.

The Directorate of Programing and Planning. to be headed by Mr Jean-Marie
Luton. will also be in charge of relations with French customers and with
the SSA.

And the cuss General Secretariat, currently under the direction of

Mr Roger Lesgards, retains its powers but will be combined with the newly
created office for Evaluation and Control of Project Costs. "Placed under
the authority of the general secretary and also at the disposal of the di-
rector of programs and planning, this office will necessarily participate
in formulating the costs of future projects and will have the necessary
means and procedures to assure permanent control and monitoring of costs
during the development of programs.‘I the minister of industry stated.

The main missions of the curs are new the following: to encourage French
industry to apply the practical knowledge and meahs acquired over 15 years.
particularly in the case of international markets: to develop close rela-
tions with public French space custosers ministry of Defense, 911 [Postal
and Telecosuunications Mhinietration]. 'ﬂr [expansion unknown). National
neteorological Service, civilian users of ground observation); intermediate-
term planning of activities for rigorous financial management of programs:
projection of long-term stakes and future space directions and suggesting

to govertuent authorities the means by which Prance will be able to partici-
pate: supporting basic research using space resources.

Establishment of 'rranspace"

The minister of the interior recalled that the 'Ariane" program is now en-
tering its final stage: construction of the first launch vehicle will
begin in April. The minister stated that the first flight remains sched-
uled for late 1979 (3 Novesber 1979 in principle), concluding that "Ariana"
is presently 'a technically and financially well-managed program” which
"is approaching the production and marketing stage.‘

In this connection, the minister of industry recalled that I'the promo-
tional arrangement set up in 1973 within the European Space Agency is
reaching maturity at the end of the series of five initial rocket launch-
ings. To prepare a production arrangement, the cues and administrations
have been working since July 1978 to define the framework of an industrial
company for producing and marketing the ‘Ariane' rocket and whose capital
would be distributed among CUES and French and foreign companies.“

Mr Giraud pointed out that the current proposals made by ones in regard to
this 'Transpace' coqany to France's European partners have met with "a fav-
orable reception.“

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 1.

[——

NOIWEI. ORGANIGMMME
DIRECIION Dll CNES-

pm

Key :

5e

6.

FOR CPFICIAL USE ONLY

 

(a non I979)

chairman, ﬂubert Curien
General director,

Yves Sillard

Assistant general direc-
tor in charge of research
and Iarketing, Pierre
Morel

'nop scientific advisor,
Jacques slalont

Advisor for relations
with Iinistry of defense.
Hubert Bortrneyer
Directorate of industrial
and international affairs,
Jean-Gerard nousael
International relations
at political and protocol
level: promotion of space
achievements abroad: for-
mulation and monitoring of
industrial policy

 

9.

10.
ll.

12.
13.
14.
15.

16.

New Table of CNES Managemnt (as of March 1979)

    

Directorate of planning and
program, Jean-Marie Luton
formulation of programs; rela-
tions with French space users;
relations with BSA

General secretary, Roger Lesgards
Financial and budgetary affairs;
Ianagenent data processing and
econonic service; personnel;
legal and contractual affairs:
public relations

Evry Directorate of Launch Ve-
hicles, Frederic d'Allest
Toulouse Space Center,
Jean-Claude Huseon

Guyanese Space Center. Altont
Vienne

Central Office for Financial Con-
trol of Projects

Toulouse Executive Financial and
Administrative Directorate.
Michel Bailiy

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Improvement of ”Ariana"

Continuation of the 'Ariane' launch vehicle program. the launching of heavy
satellites (direct-TV) and the launching of light telecossnunications satel-
lites (Teleccm 1) require that inprovsments be made in the launch vehicle.
Hr Giraud stated. "Plans have therefore been made to start a program aimed
at improving performance and reliability and reducing launching costs, by
means of possible recovery of the first stage or the rocket."

The minister of industry will admit a report before next April on the ap-
plication, cost and scheduling or this program.

It is planned that a 2.2-ton payload in a geostationary transfer orbit will
be reached by November 1982 and a 2.3-ton payload by mid-1983, in order to
take full advantage of the possibilities of double launchings of light
satellites and to be able to launch heavy satellites. The cost of this
project is estimated at approximately 360 million (1979 price) with a (lSt)
margin of risk.

Orbital Station and Minishuttle

It is also planned to continue this inrovement of the European launch
vehicle to achieve very swerior partormances--on the order of 7 tons in a
low earth orbit by the middle of the next decade-win order to be able to
launch future "heavy orbital stations“ to be used for processing materials
in space (was 'Hinos" project), as well asa “space transport vehicle,“ a
kind of minishuttle with a crew for bringing back the products .sade in
these space plants.

In order to achieve these ambitious missions. the "Ariane' rocket will have
to undergo significant transformations, particularly including the addi-
tion of extra solid-fuel boosters and replacement of the present second
stage by a new stage with cryogenic propulsion (like the present third
stage).

New "Spot" and "Hetecsat' Programs

”the program schedule of the French 'Spot' observation satellite provides
for an initial launching in March 1984, corresponding to the beginning of
the cospletion stage in May 1980," the minister of industry announced.

In addition, the minister recalled that a mission had been assigned to
Mr Mayor, director of the National Geographic Institute (IGN), to prepare
for coordination among satellite builders and future users with regard to
supplying data collected.

The 16" director must submit his report to the minister this month. A

structure for coastercial development of the respective data will be pro-
posed in this docusnt.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The minister of industry has also said that I'continuation of the European
program of 'ueteoset' geostationary seteorological satellites requires more
detailed talks with France's partners.” lThese negotiations will be con-
ducted by the minister of transportation-«tho supervises the National Me-
teorological Service. the trench developer of 'Heteoeat."

A detailed report will be submitted to the government on 1 June regarding
the advantage of the project and its modes of isplenntation, following an
in-depth study to be conducted by the director of the National Meteorologi-
cal Service. This consideration is related to the prospect of establishing
a European Organisation for Meteorological Services--s\:metsat-bringing to-
gether users wanting to use operational geostationary seteorological satel-
lites of the 'heteosat' series, whose development and construction costs
they would seen.

1’ 2.5 Billion in 1980 for Space

During the press conference on the results 4‘ the Council of ninieters meet-
ing of 7 March, the minister of industry also announced that French space
expenditures would reach I 2.4 to 2.5 billion in 1980, with approximately

1' 500 million for construction of the "Telecom l" telecommicetions satel-
lites and approximately P 100 million for development of the “TI! 1"
direct-TV satellites (if this project is approved in April): the remainder,
approximately 1.9 to 2 billion. would cover other CNBS activities for pro-
grams in progress and for the construction of the new ”Spot“ observation
satellite (already approved).

In the event that these three new progrus should be started at the same
time—Spot. Telecom l and ﬂ? l—this would result in a space budget of ap-
proximately P 5 billion by 1983-84, the sinister of industry said. or
twice the amount of French space credits in marison to 1980 and three
tines the amount in cowerison to this year. We should recall that cuss
expenses in 1979 will amount to P 1.654 billion or 13.4 percent more in
comparison to 1978 (P 1.459 billion). These expenditures are covered by a
subsidy of P 1.415 billion in 1979 with F 239 million in outside revenue
(see table).

The extent of resources, both material and financial, now being used from
1978 to 1980 by France in the "comrehensive" space sector-launch ve—
hicles, observation. telecossmanications, direct-TV and meteorological sat-
ellites, etc.-is almost dizzying. France's 'coeprehensive" offensive in
the space sector is unprecedented. lt unquestionably reflects a govern-
ment drive, which manufacturers will not deny, to place France in a

choice position among specs nations of the next decade.

COPYRIGHT: AIR IT (”SIDS Paris 1979

11915
C508 3100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRICASTIN ENRICHNENT PLANT BEGINS OPERATING
Paris LE MONDE in French 15 Mar 79 p 37

[Article by Maurice Arvonny: "Enrichment Plant at Le Tricastin
Has Begun Operations"]

[Text] The EURODIF [European Diffusion] Corporation, which is
constructing a huge complex for the enrichment of uranium by
gaseous diffusion at Le Trioaetin in Drome,.between Pierrelatte
and Bollene, has Just announced the beginning of industrial ser-
vices in one section of the plant. By the end of the year it
will be able to produce 2.6 million UTS [unite of work, in terms
of isotopic se aration, which measures the cost of the enrich-
ment operation per year. The plant will be completed in 1982;
it will by that time have a production capacity of 10.8 million
UTS a year.

The decision to locate the plant at Le Tricastin was made in
February l97h by the EURODIF Corporation, formally established
several months earlier from an economic interest group made up
of Belgian, Spanish, French, Italian and Swedish corporations

or organizations. Sweden subsequently withdrew, but Iran then
Joinod the group, and the present distribution of EURODIF capi-
tal is as follows: SOEEN [Societe Belge pour l'enrichissement

de l'uranium Belgian Uranium Enrichment Corporation]: 11.1 per-
cent; ENUSA _Nationa1 Uranium Enterprise, Inc. (Spain)]: 11.1
percent; AGIP Nucleare [National Italian Oil Company]: 12.5 per-
cent; CNEN [National Nuclear Energy Commission (Italy)]: 12.5
percent; COGEMA [Compagnie generale dee matieres nucleaires;
General Nuclear Materials Corporation]: 27.778 percent; SOFIDIP
[Societe franco-iranienne pour 1'enrichiesement de l'uranium
par diffusion gazeuse; Franco-Iranian Society for the Enrichment
of Uranium by Gaseous Diffusion]: 25 percent. COGEHA is a 100-
percent affiliate of the AEC [Atomic Energy Commission (France)],
whereas SOFIDIF belongs 60 percent to the AEC and ho percent to
the Iranian Organization for Atomic Energy.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Trioautin plant is made up of four units. The first handles
280 stages of separation and is already in service. The second,
with “00 stages, is about to go into service. And two other,
more extensive units will be operational by 1982. Each unit can
independently produce quantities of uranium enriched at three or
four percent of uranium-235, beginning with natural uranium
(which contains 0.7 percent of uranium-235). But after the plant
goes into full operation, there will be a different division of
labor, with the larger unite initiating the enrichment process
and the smaller ones completing it, or else recycling the par-
tially exhausted uranium.

The total cost of the plant should reach 15.3 billion francs by
the time of its completion. But we must add another 7 billion
for the construction of the nuclear power station being built by
EDF [French Electric Power Company] in the immediate vicinity,
which will include four reactors with 900-megawatt capacities.
The Tricastin plant will call into play 3,000 ae watts, supply-
ing power for the compresses which move the gee hexafluoride of
uranium) through the various stages of separation. This gas dif-
fuses through a permeable membrane, and since the molecules con-
taining uranium-235 have a rate of diffusion that is somewhat
faster, the quantity of gas that passes through the nembrane be-
comes very slightly enriched with uranium-235. Repeated thou-
sands of times, this process ultimately results in a tranium
sufficiently enriched to supply the power needed by the nuclear
reactors.

8117
cso: 3100

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TMNSPACB COMPANY PMPOSBD '10 macnuzs mums
Paris All! s cosms in French 17 Her 79 p 42
[Article by Pierre Lengereux]

[text] The government's framework, well suited for research and develop-
ment operations such as that or the new European “Arlene” launch vehicle.
is no longer appropriate tor carrying out the essentially industrial and
oomrcial operations required for mass rocket production by the European
aerospace industry.

Mr d'Allest, e cuss [National Center for Space Studies) official of the

”Ariana” program, said that a new "structure," sinultaneously providing for
'quick decision-making. marketing power, ﬁnancial sutonouy, flexibility of
operation and industrial continent." is nbeded to sell “Arlene." not only

in Europe but also abroad. in view of Alerican constition with the NASA
“Shuttle.“

Hr Andre Giraud, minister of industry, said that this is what recently
prompted the Ministry of Industry. other Prench sinistries involved and
the cues. in charge of the "hriane' program 'to define the framework of
an industrial company for producing and asrketing the ’Ariane' rocket and
whose capital would be distributed snong cuts and French and foreign coe-
ponies."

The French goverment has therefore authorized the cues to make proposals
and negotiate with outer European partmrs, governments and manufacturers
with regard to establishing a new Transpace cowany to produce and market
"Ariane' under a new agree-ent anong the European Space Agency (BSA) and
respective newer nations.

with regard to technical nanagenent of the production program. this will
be provided by the new oospany. On the other hand, responsibility for ad-
ditional improvements and developments. designed to stake the launch vehicle
pertona better in the future. will rennin with cuts. Financial risks or
benefits will be shared on a prorated basis according to capital invest-
ments. With regard to industrial organization. the arrangement set up for

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production of the first tease-produced batch of launch vehicles would be
retained, i.s., six first-level contractors-Wrench and other European col-
panies--subcontracting a percentage of their productions to various Euro-
pean businesses.

The sale of “Ariana” launch vehicles by Transpace would be carried out under
the same terns as those applied by NASA for American rockets: users would
pay the price of launching over a 3-year period. This procedure, in addi-
tion to the need to prefinance production of a launch vehicle (reimbursed
by insurance comanies in the event of an unsuccessful launching), will re-
quire borrowing to ample-ant the financing of stockholders (CNBS and
French end foreign Ianufacturers) of Transpace capital, which should be ap-
proxiaaLt-ly r 200 aillion.

cuss has therefore been touring European capitals since February to offi-
cially present the proposed establish-ant of this ”space transport many“
and its structure. Decision-asking process, legal framework, eethods of
financing, warheting structures. etc.

The Transpace coupany, Mr d'Allest explained, will have a ”light structure
suited" to its four Iain sissions: prefinancing and managing the program
for ease production of rockets; panting and marketing the launch vehicle
with potential custonsre: negotiating launching contracts with custolaers
(mppliers of payloads): carrying out launchings in series for customers.

Despite this structural develop-ant. Hr d‘allest pointed out that “Ariane'
would reaein a European program in accordance with the Space Agency's regu-
lations. and that there would not be any changes in industrial organization.

Establishment of the Transpace cospany should be an opportunity to eaintain
European solidarity, recently desonstrated during Intelsat [International
‘i‘elecouunications Satellite Consortia] negotiations with well-known sur
cess: despite the old habit of exclusively using mrican launch vehicles
and despite the terrific cometition of the "Shuttle“ Intelsat decided to
order an ”Ariana” rocket (with an option for a second rocket) for launching
"Intelsat 5" satellites beginning April 1981. Il‘he establishmnt of
Transpace is necessary particularly to develop this breakthrough—which
makes a hole in the Antican nonopoly on rockets for the first tine in 20
years.

Judging by the prospects of the nodal lission recently set up by BSA and
cuss. 'Ariane" will be the first rocket which Europe will actually uses pro-
duce: so to 50 rockets for operational lamchings during the 1981-90 decade
(cf. All! e cosms No. 753).

Establishing the “ariane' rocket in such a earket, which represents a turn-
over of P 7 to 8 billion, will definitely require an aggressive marketing

policy!

WWW: AIR 31' comes ferie 1979

11915 m
(:50: 3100 12

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY