APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040018-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L,’8382
9 April 1979

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE. AND SPACE DEVELOPENTS
FOUO No. 457

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources

are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT uws AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WRSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCET HERB!“ REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 8! RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ‘ONLY.
FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPHENTS

P000 No. 457
CONTENTS

trench, Mopean Space Program Seen on the lbve
(Philippe crazier; 1.3 mm scams, 5 Mar 79)

Planned Construction of ‘mo More Reactors Reported
(‘3 m8, 8 kb 79) 000.900.000.000...0.6.0.000000IIIOOOOO

Arlene launch Preparations Described
(Pierre Iangereux; m 5. 009108, 17 m 79)

Third Stage Problems Delay Launch
Qualification 0! Missile Range

ruture Market for Ariane Rockets noted
(Pierre Iangereux; AIR 1:. comm, 17 Feb 79)

Preparations for Ariane launching mtlined
(m m, 6 Rh '5) 000.00.000.00.00.000000000000000000000

W's Toulouse Space Activities Outlined
(Hem 1mm“; Am & cm, 10 Rb 79) eoesoeesossesss

workings of Private Nuclear m1 cycle Industries
(B. Kalthorf; WWW-WM, Feb 79) .........
you OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m. EURO?” SPACE ream sun 0" 1113 HIV!
Peria LB mum. Bowman in French 5 Her 79 pp “-1.7
[Article by Philippe Grazier: ”Space lnduetry is in Orbit"]

[Text] French-en and luropeene are firmly determined to no longer 'let Anericene
nonopolize apace. With the Ariane program they are venturing forth into the
induetriel world of apace, and under fevorable conditiona.

The epecc war haa indeed begun. It in no longer a queation of apecteculer
lendinge on the noon. or even of ecientific exploretione, but of induetrial
exploitation of apece. Thia Hedneedey. hinieter of Induatry Andre Giraud will
brief the full cebinet on France'e new apace soela aa determined in leet week'e
reatricted cebinet seating. Theae new goela will lean increeeed effort by both
Preach-en end Europeena in their colpetitien with Anericena.

To participate in thie new induetriel adventure. four require-cute heve to be
net: heve a launch vehicle. know how to build operational [co-arciel]
aatellitea. be able to proceaa and uee the date furniahed by theee aetellitee.
end dieplay political deter-inetion. Thie enterpriain; adventure ia of
European dinenaiona rather then of atrictly French dineneione. Thia neene the
fourth require-eat. political deter-nation or will. eppliee et ell technical
end induatrial ategea.

Launch Vehicle lequirenent

If everything goee well. the year 1979 ehould earl: the end of the Anerican
nonopoly of plecin; heavy payloede into orbit. Thenha to the Ariene. a
conventional leunch vehicle quite cenpereble to W'a Atlaa-Centeur. Ariane
capitalieea greatly on the experience acquired by Prence with ita aeriee of
Dianant leunchere: lO eucceeeful leunchea out of 12 ettelpte between 1965 end
1975. initially fro- the Be-aguir daeile baee end then. ea of 1970. fro- the
epace center in Kourou. Guinne. '

he explained to L! mum. W811 by Yvee Sillard, director general of the
National Center for Space Studiee (CUBS). ”Ariene'a inportence reata in the

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLI

fact that it enables Europe to become independent in launch matters and freely
pursue its own policy with raspct to applications satellites." The point is
that up to now. the United States has capitalized on its monopoly of launch
vehicles to pick and choose the satellites it would accept for launch: at
best. NASA has agreed to launch experimental-type satellites.

Hence with Ariana. Europe can now enter. at long last. the are of operational
satellites. but at a financial cost of some 6.5 billion current francs. nearly
two-thirds of which were furnished by France. Ariane recently received
valuable recognition when it was selected by Intelsat (International Telecon-
nunications Satellite Organisation]. This agency manages a world-wide communi-
cations satellite systen. Pros Early Bird in 1965 to the present-day

Intelsat 6's, all of its satellites have been launched by the United States.
Yet even before Arisna's first qualification launches-in late 1979 and at
various times in l980--the Intelsat board of governors representing national
telephone systens ordered one Ariana launch from the European Space Agency
(BSA). Ariana will, therefore. place into orbit. in July 1981. one of the last
three satellites of the Intelsat 5 series. The other two will, in principle.
be launched by NASA's space shuttle. the huge reusable space vehicle on which
the Americans have decided to focus all their effort by finessing on conventional
type launchers beyond 1980. and by devoting the fantastic sun of 22.5 billion
francs to its development (prose contractor: Rockwell International).

The Intelsat order was approved last Decesber and signed in Paris on 15 February.
It was coupled with an option for a second launch. This order has freed the
Arisne program free a serious handicap. namely an inordinately exclusive
European destiny. It won Arisne international recognition. Roy Gibson. BSA's
director general. told us: "Convincing Intelsat was a major objective for us.
we have achieved that objective but must now move ahead. increase production of
the present series of operational Arisnes. of course, and also develop new
versions with ilproved performance characteristics.” Versions with an increased
payload capability or the capability to launch two satellites silultsneously
(the Syls systes developed by Aerospatiale. Ariene's industrial architect).

Pierre Usunier, manager of Asrospstisla's space and ballistic systens division.
indicated: "Up to now. we have been working at a production rate of two
launchers per year. But to meet demand we could double this rate without
augmenting eur industrial facilities." At the European Propulsion Company (SIP).
the prime contractor for Arisne propulsion systems. Pierre Soufflet said it is
possible "to multiply Arisne's capabilities by two."

Arisne already has a significant point in its favor. It is more suitable than
the space shuttle for lifting a satellite into a geostationary or geosynchronous
orbit--the so-cslled ”24-hour orbit--sone 36.000 kilo-stars above the earth.
This is important because synchronous-orbiting satellites will represent a very
large part of the some 200 nonldlitsry satellites expected to be launched over
the next 10 years. A good 30 of these will undoubtedly be launched by Europeans
themselves. with. in addition, those they will sell to foreign customers through
Trans Space [proposed commercial organisation to handle Arisne progrss].

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Operational Satellite Requirenant

Europe ndnintedly lest eubatantially behind the Anericene end Soviete in thie
field. Thoee two countriee heve produced dozene of operational eatellitee.
indeed hundrede of then when you count the nilitery eatellitee which nonetitute
ebout two-thirde of all eatellitee currently in operation. With reepect to
nonnilitery operational eatellitee alone, Huahee. General Electric, RCA, Pord
Aeroepece. Pairchild Induetriee. end Lockheed already heve lore than 160 to
their credit. Nevertheleee, Burope need have no inhibitione in thie reepect.
It "can eenage." For era-ole. the two Syephonie [coenunicetione eatellitee]
are perforning eatiefactorily. They were developed under a bilateral Franco-
Gerean program approved in 1967 end placed in orbit in 1976 and 1975 by American
launchere. Further-ore. Ford Aaroepece did not heeitate to net Aaroepatiele'e
epace and bellietic eyetene divieion and Thoeeon-CSP to participate in develop-
eant and production of the Inteleat 5 eeriee of eatellitee.

To eeet European and international neede. two induetriel groupe were for-ed:
the H33“ coneortiun end the Buroeetellite group, e German chartered corporetion.

MESH: eetabliehed in 1965.

Henbere: Aeritalia of Italy. Britieh Aaroepece of Great lritain. BRNO-VPH-Pokker
of the PRC end hetherlande. INTA of Spain. and Metre of France.

Specialtiee: 500-700 kilosran eatellitee.

Projecte: Teleconnunicetione (tcs for 38A). naritine col-unicationa (Harace
for BSA). plua for Metre: SPOT earth obeervetion eatellite end. very likely.
Telecoa l.

Buroeatellite: eetabliehed in 1971.

Heebere: Aeroepetiale of France, ITCA of Belgian, and MB! of the tederal
Republic of Ger-eny.

Specieltiee: l.000~kilograe heavy telecoe-unicatione platforn.

Projecte: etudiee on direct televieion broadcaetins via satellite; Phebue,
H-Set. and TV-Set prograee.

Capability of Proceeeing. veins Date Furniehed by Satellitee

Satellitee offer practical applicatione poeeibilitiee and attractive nerket
proepecte. The principal applicationa and Iarkate are in the col-unicatione
field. The firet euch application wee in intercontinental col-unicatione: the
Inteleet eyetea wee eetabliehed for thie purpoee. Then cane the uee of eatellitee
for doneetic coenunicatinne: exieting landline and radio relay coenunicatione
linke were euppleeented by eatellitee in Canada in 1973 by Heetern Union and

in the United Stetee in 1976 by RCA and Coeeat General Corporation. Indeneeie
aleo inetalled ite own eyetea. Palapa. Other countries einply joined the lnteleat
club by leaein; tranepondere onboard ite eatellite.

3
ran orncm. us: ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Algeria was the first to do this and was followed by others. Jean Grenier.
Intelsat's Prench governor, revealed: "New applications for service are on

the agenda of every one of our meetings. As a result. lntelsat's gross receipts
for 1978 amounted to nearly 800 million francs."

Europeans have become fully aware of the prodigious expansion of the cos-unice-
tions satellite aerket in surope, a market "destined to become as large. indeed
even larger than the North American aerket before the end of the century.” So
Europeans decided they too would provide themselves with a regional coamunica-
tions satellite system. The European Space Agency's scs [European Communications
Satellite] will constitute that systea. Ariana rockets will lift this series of
satellites into orbit beginning in 1981. Butelset-a still provisional organi-
zetion--will operate the systee "soaswhat in Intelsat fashion, but for intra-
nuropean communications." to quote Francois Job, Butelsat's secretary general.
The MESH consortium is producing the IBS. Metre is responsible for the res
attitude control system and for integrating these satellites in its "clean
rooms.” those sterilized and pressurized laboratories in which satellites are
esseabled. Noel Mignot. the aeneger of Hetra's space division, told us: "He
have started a capital invest-ant program in Toulouse to give us additional
capacity for the asseably of equipment bays for the Ariana. the BCS and also
other natellites."

But the function of co-unications satellites is not solely to handle telephone
cells. They also have the capability-~constantly being improved-moi transmitting
aessages and ineges. of remote printing. and of providing teleconference and
date-bank services. In other words. these "a la carte satellites" will consti-
tute a privileged instrument for everything Simon Nora and Alain Kinc have
labeled with the neologisn "teleastique" [renote-controlled electronic data
processing].

As a matter of fact. a new generation of high-powered satellites are under
developaent in the United States. They will be launched within the next 2 years:
the Canadian Telesat and three American systems. The lost advanced of the latter
is the 838 (Satellite Business Systems) whose chief promoter and future user is
IBM. the giant of the computer industry.

In this field of "integrated" comications satellite. France has chosen to
go it alone with its Telecom 1 project that will benefit. however. from
experience gained with the 208. .'iei..;sm l's promoters claim "it will withstand
msgarison with the Ansrican 838." The system's definition study was conducted
jointly by cars and the General Telecommications Directorate (DOT). Total
system cost will be nearly 1.5 billion frencs to be financed mainly fron the
Telecousunications budget. Telecom 1 will particularly relieve congestion in
existing cos-amications systems within France proper without requiring additional
capital spending on these systems. It will also provide cal-Imitation links
with a certain nuder of overseas departments and territories. Jean Syrote,
DGT's director for industrial and international affairs. explained: "An
additional benefit to be derived from the Telecom 1 system is that it will win

I;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conaiderable recognition for our induatry. thereby enabling France to carve a
place for itaelf in the export trade.“ Satelconaeil. [a co-unicationa aatellite
counaulting aervice] foraad by cm and Prence-Cable-Bndio. recently replied

to a requeet for propoeela tron Colo-hie.

The aecond nejor field for the practical application of aatellitea ie earth
obaervation. Burope haa not yet fornulated a apecific progrel for aueh
eatellitee. Conaequently. laat year Trance approved ita own earth obaervation
eatellite. the SPOT project. at a coat of 700 nillion franea. Hill thia

project eventually be Europeanieed ea wee the heteoaat weather aatellite program?
The atulbling block here ia Iilitary oppoaition to auch a nave. Military
authoritiae are keenly intereated in M an evidenced by the following ce-ent
froa Pierre Sauliere. an adviaer to the einiater of defenae: "In the near
future, our deterrent would be blind without a aatellite. Conaidering ita

uaea. auch e aatellite can only be nilitary property."

The laat highly proniaing application in one around which Burnpeana end

Japaneae are currently "dancing a heaitation waltz." I refer to direct tele-
vision hroedcaating. "A aort of televieion tranenitter inatalled at an
altitude of 36.000 kiloaatera and capable of healing aeveral prograna.” ia the
way it wee deacrihed to ue by Maurice Ila-y. general eaneger of Televiaion Broad-
cuating of France (TOP). Prograle broadcaat by auch aatellitea cen be picked

up directly through anall epecial. individual or co-Inity. parabolic antennam
The advantage for countriea that are atill without any televieion aervicea ia
that such a eyatee enablea than to diapenee with all ground-baud radio relay
and ceble facilitiea. The advantagaa for a country like France are the eliaina-
tion of thoae infeaoua "ahedow areae" [unreachable by atandard TV ayatela] and
relief froa the aaturation of frequenciaa in current uae. There ia one diaad-
vantage. however. for the public—not for nenufacturerea-whoae aeta have to be
converted to receive aatellite telecaata. Recent atudiea aponaored by Buroapace
(European Space Reaearch Induatriel Group), along othera. indicate that by the
lete 19807a capital apending for direct TV boradcaating will exceed auch invent-
nant for conventional-TV broadcaating nethoda. The billiona of trance at atake
and the anticipated political and cultural influencea explain the conapicuoue
lack of any conaenaua on the BSA'a propoaed experi-entel TV aatellite. deaignated
ll-Sat. Bach country wanta to look out for nuaber one. the Ger-an TV-Sat project
being a particular caae in point. Nevertheleaa, in the abaence of a broader
conaanaua, develop-cut by two or three countriea of a count: heavy platfor-
within the Buroaatellite conaortiun would have the advantage of being nore
economical than purely national projecta. why. acne pcraona rah. couldn't
France and the no equip their own aatellitea with auitable electronic gear.-
Thonaon-CSP or ABC Telefunken-wthe cane way Air Trance and Lufthanaa uae aieilar
Airbua tranaporta but each bearing their reapective national colora? Such an
approach would retain the advantagaa of cooperation and eafeguerd Burope'a
chencea in the world narket.

ﬂea any headway nede on the direct broadcaat TV satellite prograe at the recent
Franco-Garner: eu-it neeting? Unqueationably. but not to the point of being
eble to nehe a deciaion on 7 March [at the cabinet aeetingl. A few nore eontha

5
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of studies and talks are necessary. The French Government has still not
answered "yes" to the two folloving questions: Is it in France‘s interest

to provide itself with s direct broadcast TV satellite system? Is such a
systel s eajor export item? while a decision on further Ariane development end
on initietion of the French Telecom 1 project use imperative. such is not yet
the case with the direct TV satellite question. In fact. this attitude was
suggested by the "Cannsc report" submitted s few weeks ego to Hstignon [prime
minister's office] and to tuc Elysee Pelace by its author. Yves Cemnac. presi-
dent of Raves.

In space related setters, francs must reconcile its deep concern for independence
in certein fields with the necessity of Buropesn cooperation. while st the same
ties finding work for its industry and sparing its budget. These sre quite a
few imperstive requirements demanding simultaneous solution.

Key Figures on French Space Effort

Spsce Budget for 1970: 1.66 billion francs.

Persons employed in spsce effort: ONES. 1.000; industry. 3.000.
Volume of apece-related business by principal industrial

firms in 1978 (millions of francs): Aerospatisle. 300*;

88?, 350*; Metre. 29S; and Thomson-03?. 200*.

*approximate

8061
CSO: 3100

6
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PLANNED oousrwcnon 01' M )0” REALTORS REPORTED
Peris 1.8 mm in French 8 Peb 79 p 32

[Article by 3.0.: "Frame Hill Construct No Additional Reactore"l

[Text] In a co-unication to the Council of ninisters on 7 February

Hr Giraud should recall the nechanisna according to which petroleua
products prices are set: the dollar's rate of archange in the past two
months, the price of unrefined oil and the profit nergin of the retailers.
the prices, with will be applicable as of 15 February, will be known only
a few days in advance, however, and the idea of creating a special "pool"
for purchasing oil at the free market price seen to have been abandoned.

A limited council, which not on 6 February at the president's office to exnnine
available French stocks of hydrocarbons, hes also decided that two nore
reactors should be built at the Gravelines site in the north and that the
construction of the second reactor at Cattenol in the Lorraine should be
speeded up. France is going to accelerate her nuclear progr. and intensify
her efforts to save energy. That was the result of the linited ministerial
council held on 6 February at the president's office and presided over by
Giecard d’Bstaing, which had been convened to canine French supplies
‘of petroleu products over the nediun and long tern range. ”The President
of the Republic," announced presidential spokesnan Hr aunt. 'has asked

that. in view of the uncertain outlook, the national effort nov underway

to save energy and to pursue the electro-nuclear installations program
should continue."

Hhile recent electric power shortages would have suggested the establish-eat
of new installations in the western part of France, Giscard d'Bstaing has
chosen the sites of Cattenoa in the lorraine and of Gravelinea in the north
for the installation of equip-ent as soon as possible. Of course, this is
ained at aaintaining eqloynent in two regions that have been particularly
hard hit by unenloynent.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run written USE ONLY

1!: was decided to construct two more installations at Gravelines on a site
which already nuders four others that will become operational in 1979 and
1980.

At Cattenon. the second 1300 megawatt reactor which should have been started
in 1980, will now start at practically the seas tine as the first during

the course of this year. The two reactors will not be put into service
before 1986 or 1987. That neans that in 1985 the nuclear portion of Premc's
energy supply will hardly exceed 20 percent, about 5 percent less than the
goals defined by a planning cosmission in February 1975.

However, this decision has already generated numerous protests. For
instance, Phillipe Saint-Herc, muber of the inforlation council on electro-
nuclear energy and s ciscsrdisn candidate at the 1978 elections, writes:
I‘l‘he government's decision to speed up the nuclear program significantly

is a serious economic and ecological error. Under the nantle of a state
secret the nuclear program runs the risk of becoling, on a financial plane,
a new Concorde."

The energy saving progress will also be started again. In a co-unicetion
to the Council of Ministers on 7 February, Minister of Industry Giraud
aentions the utilization of the "pool" during the last quarter of 1978.
based on fuel prices and which was established thanks to the devaluation
of the dollar. The $20 aillion francs that were thus ”collected" have been
fully transferred to the Energy Saving Agency. ‘lhis entity will require
(.20 million in 1979 to stimulate business-en to invest in the field of
energy savings. It is in fact in the industry sector that this effort has
been least effective. 0f the 15 million tons of oil or its equivalent,
which were to have been saved in 1978 (a figure below the objectives of
the planning conission), industry's share represented only 2 aillion tons
of oil or its equivalent. The agency will therefore offer a preniun of
I000 francs for each ton of oil saved for industrial investments;

The limited council at the president's office has decided. moreover. to

diversify the geographical distribution of hydrocarbon supplies and to
associate the oil coepenies with the objectives for co-erciel exchanges
with oil-producing countries and the imperative need for secure supplies.

9291
C80: 3100

8
FOR orncuu. use 0va
M OHICIAL US! ONLY

MIME LAUNCH. PREPARATIOIIS DBSCRIBBD

Third Stage Problems Delay Launch
Paris m: a oosins in French 17 Feb 79 pp 33-36

[Article by Pierre Langsreux: "Scheduling First Launch for 3 Noveder 1979
Is calculated Risk")

[Text] At its 17 January nesting, the Ariane Progran Board announced that
the first test flight of the Ariana launch vehicle had been postponed fron '
aid-June 1979 to 3 Noveder 1979. This postpone-ant stess directly free the
delay in development of the third stage with its cryogenic propulsion systen
as a result of the explosion on Novesbsr 1978.

‘lhis decision raises the question of why the first launch was postponed
"aersly" to 3 love-her 1979. inasmuch as by that date only the first two
stages of the rocket will have been regularly test-stand qualified. In

other words. why is CHIS [National Center for Space Studies] taking the risk
of not waiting until conpletion of the two qualification static firings of

the third stsgr-the mat criticslwbefore proceeding with the first launch
which is of such trensndous political and psychological inortance? Especially
after the failure of the Europe 2 rocket. a fiasco still fresh in everyone's
neeory! What would happen to the Ariana progrsn if its series of test

flights were to likewise open with a spectacular failure?

No Delay in Beconing Operational

Frederic d'Allest, CUBS Ari-1e progran nanager. explained the whys and
whereforss to the press at the first unveiling of Arisne in Guiana on

5 February. Allest said technical considerations had prowptsd the selection
of 3 Novemr 1979 as the date for Ariane'a first launch. lie nsintained

that CUBS had not let itself becone involved in any vainglorious elutahle
rivalry with the Anerican space shuttle whose first flight was likewise
recently postponed. In this case to 9 Rove-her 1979. This closeness of the
two launches is only a fortuitous coincidence-at least as far as the European
side is concerned-An that cuts had announced the new Ariana launch date 3
days before NASA sade its ennmnoenent.

9
m ontcm. use om
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After the accident to the third etage. the firat launch obvioualy could no
longer go on in lid-June ea planned. One poeeible alternative would have

been to await the third atage'e teet-atand qualification. But Alleat explained
thie would have eeent poetponing the first teet flight to March 1900. in

other worda 9 nonthe later then planned. Thie delay would have ueed up all

of the prograa'a contingency .nnda and tieetable. and an en inediate conse-
quence. Ariane'a operational availability would have been deferred to lid-1981
instead of end-1980 ea planned. Such a delay would have greatly dieadvantoged

Ariane in ita cometition with the epece ehuttle by dieappointing the Euro-
pcan launch vehicle'a firet cuetoeera.

Doubta About 'l'hird Stage

Consequently ms and ISA [European Space Agency] preferred taking a cai-
cuiated riak by adutentially deferring the firat two Ariane lamhee but
without delaying either colpletion of the teat launch eeriea or the launch
vehicle'a operational availability. ‘lhe operation conaiata in taking “I1-
nne precautione to enaure eucceeeful initial launchea under leee than ideal
conditiona. and in banking on the ebaence of any eerioua problee requiring
eolut ion during the lZ-nonth fliﬂut teating period.

ONES prefera to proceed. without exceeeive waiting. to launch the firet
Ariane so as to flight teat thoae eleeenta already qulified-mperation
of the f irat and eecond etagee. atege aeparation. release of the payload
firing. guidance and control. etc.-and thua cover a large part of the
rocket’s flight envelope. Even if thie eeane accepting a third etege ael-
function. an incident that could. however. preclude placing a aatellite

in orbit. that epectacular crowning event of any launch vehicle firing.

It ie alao poeaible. however. that everything will .run eeoothly. even with
the upper atage that will previoualy have undergone numerous pre-flight
teete. In fact. airs hea preacribed eandatory teete before the firat launch
(launch vehicle 10-”. Between now and June. it will have conducted two or
three other atatic firinge of the third etage in bettleahip configuration
plus two coeplete teat-bench rune with the new etage in flight configuration.
i.e. a etage replacing the one daeaged leet hovuber.

In addition. a review of the conplete launch vehicle'a flyability ie to be
conducted in June. ‘l'hie will allow the 8:? [zuropean Propuleion Cowenyl
to atill eeke eodificatione in the third atage—if and ea required-4n
June and July before ehipping it to Guiana for the firet launch. Thia
final project review of the launch vehicle and launch aite will penit con-
fimtion of the launch date and initiation of the pre-launch prograe.

The atagea of the firat Ariane rocket (Lo-l) are currently being aeaeebled:
the firet etage in Aeroepatiele'e Launcher Integration Site 6“.) in Lee
Hureaux near Parie. the second etage in wow plant in Breeen. Cereany.

10
FOR OFFICML US! ONLY
M OFFICIAL 08! ONLY

The vo-l lenncher‘e third etege to expected to errive et bee human ebnut
nid-l’ebruery end eeeenbly of the leuncher'e "upper pert" ie echeduled for
April. Pollowin. integreted electricel teetin; in April end my. the rocket
will be dieeeeenbled. pleced in ite conteiner. end delivered to cuts for
ehip-nt to Guiene by freighter eonetine between aid-July end eid-Ausuet.

The pre-lennch progru in preperetion for the firing of the Ariene 10-1

in Goiene will begin 15 Mutant 1979. It will leet 2-1/2 nonthe up to the
echednled 3 Moder 1979 lennch et 1200. plue or ninue 3 houre. ‘I'he overe-
tion will be eupported by ell of the Guiene Spece Center'e fecilitiee pine
the m end 38A trecking networke. It will involve none 1.000 pereone et
the epeoe center end et downrenge etetione in Ireeil end Aeceneion lelend
(0. s. eetellite treckin; center). including epproxi-tely lOO peyloed
technicime. ‘l'he w-l'e peyloed will coneiet only of e technologicel cep-
eule to nonitor conditione eboerd the leunchnr. After thie firet firing.
reetoretion of the Ariene leunch ped will teke about 2 nonthe end the pre-
leunch progren ior leunch vehicle Ill-2 enother 2 unthe. “the an leunch in
echeduled for l! Herch 1980. unleee e eerioue incident occure during the 19-1
leunch thereby forcing poetponenent oi the eecond flight.

Quelificetion of Hieeile Renee
Perie AIR & oosms in french 17 Feb 79 pp 35-36

[Article by Pierre Lengereun: "Technicel end Operetionel Quelificetion of
Hieeile Range”!

[Text] Reectivetion of the Guiene eieeile renge hen been undetvey eince lete
l917. Thin in e twofold teelz: technicel queliticetion end operetionel
quelificetion. J. P. loueevel. director of Ariene operetione in Guinne.

told no the objective of the reectivetion progre- in to bring Guiene Spece
Center fecilitiee beck up to accepteble etenderde end trein pereonnel. eoet
of then new. for the porpoee of leunching Ariene rockete. including ineertion
of their peyloede into orbit.

Technical quelificetion of the eieeile renge. epecificelly the fecilitiee of
the csc [Guiene Spece Center) in Kourou end of the three downrenge etetione.
on 1 Februery 1979.

‘I‘hie technicel quelificetion velideted the Infreetructnre end [quip-mt
Rennvetion Plen (PR1!) inlenented by cues to replece or nuderniee certein
csc fecilitiee-opoeition finding. telnetry. end co-unicetiou: oculpeentn
thet hed either reeched the end of their eervice life-lo yeere—or ware
inedequete to hendle the leunchin; of e rocket like Ariene.

For exeeple. under the me the poeition finding eyeten'e electronic dete
proceeein; equipsentncoeputer. eoftwere. end coneoleeuwee renoveted end
reconfigured differently—"dietribnted" dete proceeeinr-for ite new eieeion.

1.1
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL US! NY!

Tcleeetry equipnent wee alao coepletely replaced to adapt it to new. atendarde
(B—band). Co-unicatione fecilitiee have been eoderniaed and enpanded.

Operational Qualification in Late April

Operational qualification of the eieeile range began in January 1979 and

in expected to be coepleted thie May. with coeplete acceptance of the
nieeile range acheduled for late April.

Thin operational qualification ie being conducted in two phaaee: the firat
for the can alone. the aecond for all fecilitiea of the Guiana eiaaile
range that nahe up the Ariana Launch Iaae (OLA). Thia baae includea all
086 facilitiee in Kourou and the three downrange trajectory eeaaureeent
etetione--at Salinopolia and Natal in brazil and on Aeceneion lalend-oaa
well an the Ariana Launch Cowlex (ILA) in Kourou.

The [LA proper includee the launch pad coeplete with eervice tower (or
gantry). propellant etorage tenhe. and launch control center. ea well an the
vehicle aaaedly building with ite checkout facility. and the payload--
eatellitea and apogee eotora--preparation building.

‘Propellant Hock-09'

Qualification of the ILA ia beiu conducted with the Ariana ”refueling
each-up" (In). alao called "propellant loch-up." erected on ite launch

pad an the flight vehiclee will be. It wee thie iull-ecele "propellant
eock-up"—ainilar in all reepecte to a real rocket—that wee unveiled for
the firet tine on S februery to the prone end repreeentativee of the o‘er
etatea of BSA'a Ariana Progre- board.

The "propellant lock-up" will be uaed to develop and refine procedurae for
erecting the rocket in the air conditioned tower. and alao procedurae for
eenual and autoutic refueling of the leuncher'a fuel tanke. It ie alao
aployed for vibrational end clinetic environ-“tel teating of the coqlete
rocket.

The launcher'e firet refueling teat wee acheduled (or on or about 20 Iebruery.
Ae in the cane of an actual launch. the teat begina with the coqlete refuel-
ing of the third etage—firet with liquid oxygen and then with liquid hydro-
gen-Mao ea to faeiliariee launch crewe with theee cryogenic propellente being
used for the firet tine in a Buropean rocket.

Thie procedure in alao followed in filling. leat of all. the firat end
second ategee with atorable propellenteum end hag—that irrevereibly
"'contaeineta theee tanka becauaa there are no plane to deconteninete fuel
tanlun in Guiana ea in co-on practice for teat-atend rune.

12
m OHICIAL US! ONLY
IOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It ia planned to fill and drain the third etage five or air tines before
fueling the lower etagee. Thia ia done both auto-atically (nor-n1 procedure)
and eanually (backup procedure). The backup procedure for draining the third
atage--once the loel eupply linee have been dieconnectednwill alao he tented
by freely venting the tanha to allow propellante to evaporate in 18-20

houra. All theae oparationa with cryogenic fuela will. of couree. be con-
ducted with the tower withdrawn on an to avoid the rial: of explosion through
hydrogen accunulation. Plane call for three withdrawale of the 900-ton
service tower per week; it taken 3 houra to detach the rocket.

Final 5 hinutea

Refueling triala with the propellant nook-up are acheduled to be coapleted
by 15 April. The lockup. will then be ueed for "teeting the eynchronized
lnunch eequence" which correaponda to the final 5 einutea preceding ignition.

All nieaile range facilitiee are involved in theae teata. The launch aoquence
ia fully autonatic becauae oi the coqlaxity and nuber of operationa and
check. to be acco-pliahed at apecific tiaea. Sole 1,200 para-etere have to
be continuoualy Ionitored on the rocket up to lift-off. If all preacribed
conditions are net, the ignition order in iaaued auto-atically. ‘l'he faeoua
"red button" the director of operationa ueed to preae not ao long ago ia

now only an accaaaory. A cowuter nonitora all operationa at the epeed of
light. At the alighteat irregularity—a paraneter outaide preacribed Malta--
the coquter autoeatically halta the countdown which will then have to
"reatart froe tero." i.e. iron ‘4 ninutee. And thie ea long an all para-
wetere are not nominal. Gas in going to practice thia procedure during

a period of 3 waelu with the objective of aucceaeiully going through the
entire eynchronited launch eequence without incident at leaet three tilea.

The Ariane lockup will alao be ueed for ailulating countdowna laating l9
houral 'l'heee teate will alao be ueed to train crown to react quickly and
correctly in caae of an incident and thin up to lift-off. The counth
can actually be auepended at any tine up to 3 aeconde after ignition. that
in to aay only ‘ aeconde before lift-off (i.e. when rocket ie releaeed fro-
the area or catchea holding it down on the launch pedeatal). for era-ole. in
caae of inaufficient thruet (row the Iirat atage'a four Viking enginea (265
tone of thruat).

No decieion haa yet been wade about diapoaition of the ”propellant mcltwp"
after theae teata. Since it cannot be launched. it will either be ecrapped
or not back to France with the ehipping containare. but it will not be
exhibited at the Parie Air Show ea had once been diacmaed. A regular
nockup will take ita place.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Simlation Uith Aircraft. Sounding Rockets. Satellites

Silulstiona conducted by the Guiana nissile range to represent the rocket's
flight conditions esploy various seans such as wired ("csbled") sisulstors,
aagnetic tape recordings. or such nobile loans as aircraft. sounding rockets.
and satellites.

Two aircraft have been used: the Kourou Aero Club's Piper Chemkee and an
stante on loan fro. brazil. These aircraft were equipped with radar trans-
porders. telenetry and resote control transceivers to enable ground-based
antennas and radars to track the. and traneait signals.

Pour French solid-propellant sounding rockets are elso being used for opera-
tional qualification of the sissila range: one single-stage Dauphin rocket
and three two-stage lridan rockets. These are equipped like the aircraft to
specificelly test positions finding and safety systole. as well as support
facilities. An Bridan sounding rocket was fined on 23 Novednr 1978 to check
the 086's stats of readiness. The test was dee-sd satisfactory. A Dauphin
sounding rocket was fired on 7 l’ebruary 1979: this was the first csc launch
nade in the "Ariane configuration." Another Bridan is to be fired in early
June to test the nissile range's "downgraded configurations"--i.e. configura-
tion alloving nission to be acconlished but with less rsdundsncy-and train
crews in action to be taken in case of incident. a radar failure for exaqle.
The last Bridan rocket will be fired 30 or 35 days before the Arisne launch.
during the 1.0-1 pre-launch progras.

The Anerican 6808 C satellite equipped with two coded radar transponders

is also bo be used by CBS to qualify co-unications links between the (:86
and downrsnge stations in Ilatal and Ascension Island. This satellite flys
over several tines per day at a speed of 7.935 eaters per second and simlates
the Ariane rocket that will have to be tracked by the CSG and downrange
stations for 16 minutes (860 seconds) of flight until insertion of the pay-
load into a transfer orbit. The probl- is one of getting crews of the
different stations thoroughly trained to acquire and lock on to the rocket.
and then transfer it froa one to the other as quickly as possible: radar
operators on Ascension Island will have only 60-80 seconds in which to fix
upon the rocket and "parallax" their radars before the Natal radars have
finished their task. During tests. station eessages are routed by Intelsat
satellites via ground stations in the United States and Guiana to the
CSG‘s launch control center.

COWRIGRT: AIR 6 cosms. Paris. 1979

8061
CSO: 3100

1"
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
POI OWICIM. US! ONLY

mun MIT M 1mm ROCKETS NOTED
Parie All! 5 cones in French 17 Feb 79 pp 37.39

[Article by Pierre Lengereux: "A Nerket (or 60-50 Ioclute Over 10-Yeer
Period“]

[Text] A new Ierket reeearch etudy aede by 0'38 (national Center for Space
Studieel and 38A [European Space Agency] with the help of the luroeat coneor-
tin eetinetee there ie a "reeeoneble" eerket for ease ‘0 to 50 Ariana launch
vehiclee in the next decede (1901-1990) on the beeie of a worldwide nerket
for et leaet 200 eetellitee.

The mmtion need for thie eetieeta reet on two eein pointe:

e. The dewlopnent and launching of epace eyeteee in Europe. eyeteee elreedy
approved in principle and for which there ie a very high probability of
obtaining a for-e1 go-ehead during the next 3 yeere.

b. Export proepecte for European epece eyete- in the fete of Auricen coe-
petition.

Buropean Market for 31-30 Sete11itee

The European nerket'e ehere of thie eetieete ie 31-3‘ eetellitee. Thie ehere
ie thNe-fourthe or three-iiithe oi the entire eetieeted eerket. 1t includee
15-17 eetellitee for ”A. 9-10 for lrenca. and 7 (or other European prograee.

'l'hie eerket reeearch etudy eeeu-ee the following eetellitee will be launched
during the period 1981-1990:

a. M or three ESA ecientific eetellitee. the (int of which. Smear
[aetrono-y eatellite]. ie already approved and will be launched in 1981.

5. Three french obeervetion eetellitee. including the SPOT [Berth leeourcee
Obeervetion Satellite] now under develop-eat and echeduled for launch in
late l903-eerly 1906. end two other eetellitee of the eeee type to provide
continuoue eyetee operation and develop-eat.

15
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c. One or two observation satellites for 88A which is currently studying
euch projects as W8 and ms.

d. Thzee geostationary Heteosat weather oatellites to ensure constant
covezege throughout the next decade. The first of this eerie.. lieteoaet 3.
any be launched in 1902.

e. No technological satellites designed to test techniques and systens
for eeterials processing in space. a field that is likely to expand greatly
in the period 1990-2000. l'rence is already preparing such a satellite pro-
ject uith its liinos study.

f. Pour geostationary co-unications satellites: 308 (European Co-unica-
tions Satellite] 1. 2. 3. and b to be launched in late 1981. late 1982. 1985.
end 1906 respectively by BSA for the "lntsrin Butelaat” organization that
will operate thee co-srcislly.

g. Three mes [Maritine Co-unications Satellite] to be placed in geo-
stationary orbit in lid-1981 (liarscs I). early 1902 (Harecs C). and late
1982 (Harece D). on condition that Surope reaches an agree-ant with the
United States on joint use of these satellites.

h. Three national co-unicetions satellites for the French Telecon 1 pro-
ject sponsored by cars and the DST [Gmeral Teleco-unicstiona Directorate].
This project is now up for govern-ant approval (at a 20 Tebruary 1979
cabinet neeting). The first Telecos l satellites could be launched into
geostationary orbit during the second half of 1982 and in aid-1903.

i. Seven direct television broadcasting satellites for use in three auro-
peen national television systses. for emle. in Trance. Ger-any. the Scandi-
navian countries. etc. These satellites could be launched into geo-
stationary orbit beginning in 1903.

1. Three to four "other applications setellites" that would actually be
French silitary satellites. such as. for exasple. the sumo silitary obser-
vnt ion satellites currently under study. These could be launched beginning
in the aid-1900's.

Export proepects for satellites nede in Europe end/or launch services for
satellites nade abroad-mainly in the USA-are based essentially on the ear-
ket for geostationary point-to-point co-anicatione and direct television
broadcasting satellites.

Export Market for 11-22 Satellites

The co-unicetions satellite narltet outside Europe and the United States has
long been doninated by bericen industry. it will probably reeein such and.
therefore. be difficult for lurope to gain a foothold in this narket. lever
theless. French and European authorities eatieate they will launch soee S to

16
POI! omcuu. US! ONLY
'0R OFPICIAL USE ONLY

l0 geootationary oatolliteo (roe 1981 to 1983 for the eotabliahaen: of two
to four national or regional coaaunicationo oyoteae in ouch countriao ao

Iron. India. the Arab League. and certain South Aoorican countrieo. Coluabia
notably. and perhapo in lndoneaia aloo.

but the neat attractive proopecto are probably offered by direct TV broad-
coating ayoteao. According to CHIS end European oanufacturaro: "It io
certain that the operational deaonatration of ouch a powerful inotruaent

no TV broadcaoting via ootollito nay pooaibly accelerate exioting projecto
in a large nunber of countrieo. projecto that currently utill have a very
indefinite tioetabla." Thio could be the cooe in Europe the aooent one country
decidoo to uae ouch a oyetoa. but likewiae in Middle Seat countriao like
Saudi Arabia. in South Anerico and Africa. particularly in thooe countrioo
where the ground-booed infrootructure io otill nonexiotant or covoro only
liaitad territory. The aorta: reoearch otudy eatioatoo four to eight direct
TV broadcooting oatelliteo will be launched for the eotabiiohoent of two to
four direct broadcaeting ayotele in thee: countrieo after 1903.

The otudy aloo eotinateo two to (our oatelliteo will be launched for ouch large
international organizationo ueing opace coaaunicationo oo Inteloat and lnaaroat.
lnteloat hoe already ordered one launch of the Inteloat 5 ootollito by the
Ariana launch vehicle for April or July 1981 and holdo an option on a

oecond launch. lnaaroat will have ito own aatelliteo to be launched during

the next decade.

A 5.5 to 7.5 billion tranc Deal

In eualary. thio aarket reoearch otudy lioto a total of 62 to 66 eatellitea

to be launched between 1981 and 1990. including 17-25 coaaunicetiono oatel-
liteo and 11-15 direct TV broadcaoting oatelliteo that repreaent between

70 and 05 percent of the total oarketl Conaequently the aarket for Ariana
launch vehicleo definitely lieo. an expected. in opace coo-unicationo and
launcheo into geoetotionary orbit. The root of the aarket io divided aaong
three weather oatellitea. four or five obeervation oatellitea. two technolo-
gical oatellitaa, two or three ocientiiic opace reoearch oatelliteo. and three
or (our nilitary opace vehicloo.

Thia aarket of 62-56 oatelliteo actually reprcoonto only 36-66 launcheo. given
Ariane'o dual-payload launch capability that will becone available in 1903.
The oarket reoearch otudy eotiaateo there will be opproxinately 6 to 10 dual-
payload launcheo. but if we add an additional five or air launch vehicleo

on the baaio of a oucceoo probability of 90 percent-coaparable to the 0.8.
probability--then we obtain an eotiaated overall aarket for acne 60 to 50 pro-
duction oerieo launch vehicleo in the 10-year period froa 1901 to 1990. Booed
on an average coat price of 135-150 aillion franco per launch vehicle in thio
oorieo, thio oarhet of 50-50 vohiclea repreoento a 5.5 to 7.5 billion franc
deal (or European induatry.

COPYllGﬂT: AIR o COSHDS. Pario. 1979

823% 3100
17
I0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PREPARATIONS FOR 1mm HUNG!!!” WTLINED

Paris 1.! Home in French 6 Feb 79 p 17
[Article "Ariene Helrea ite Appearance in Guiana" by Maurice Arvonny]
[Tent] A co-ercial conpany would enaure the aalo of the European rocket.

Kouroun'l‘hia Monday 5 Pehruary [aic]. a white ailhouette will be outlined

on the flat aevannah of the Space Canter of Guiana. A juat-conpleted nodel
of the Ariana rocket launcher will nova out of ita aaaenhly tower. [or
Kourou, a aettlenant of 6000 people who live. nore or lean. on the 80 nillion
franca which the center injecta annually into the eoonony of Guiana. thin
operation ayﬁolitea the return to a lucky period. punctured by apectacular
launchinga. after five yeara of almer.

The aytola are nialeading: Thia Ariana that will be aeen fron afar in only
a ”nockup nodel." The rocket body in quite real and no are the tanka. but
the engines are of old vintage, need up by the experinanta and the entire
delicate electronic equipnant for navigation of the rocket ia niaeing. The
lockup will never fly. It will be aubjected to aaveral cyclen of filling and
enptying the tanka to eatablieh the met procadurea to he followed before
launchinga; than it will be taken bacl: to the tower and coqletely diaea-
aenbled. '

The firat real rocket launcher noat of whoaa conponenta have already been
conatructed. will then he aeaenbled. 0n 3 Invader, the 187 tone of propergol.
which it will contain. ahould pernit it to put a anall capeule full of nea-
auring inatrunenta into orbit. ‘l'hia firat ahot. known a qualification
launching, will be a "trial run."

Ordora Placed for Nine Nodela

Three further qualification ahota will follow in 1980. with real loada to

so into orbit. Then the operational phaae of the progran will begin: atarting
in 1981. Kourou ahould aee three or four launchinge annually. The European
Space Agnecy (38h) ia counting on aona 50 poaaible launchinga in the courae
of the coning decade.

18
roe orncuu. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Actuelly. only nine nodcln of the Arieno heve been ordered; four for quel-
ificetion ehote end five for connerciel leunchinse. But the number of ne-
tellltee ectuelly egreed upon. which Arlene will put into orbit, ie higher;
it will grow even larger ii. on 28 Februery. the Council of Minietere of the
French govern-ant should decide on the conetruction of netionel eetellitee
for teleconlunicetion end televieion. A new nation of five or eix rockete
will thue so on order during the current yeer.

For the preceding exeeplee e uneninoue decieion of the SSA council conpoeed
of repreeentetivee of ll aovernnente wee neceeeery. Thie nxocedure, quite
hornel during the developeent phone of the prosren requiring budgetery con-
cributione fron ell the perticipetins countriee, ney prove to he exceeeively
hurdeneone for eoee of the coenerciel rocket leunchnre whoee eele will cover
the Innufecturins cent. The Netionel Center for Spece Studiee (CRIS). which
in the prine contrector of the Arlene for the BSA. ie thue coneiderins the
fornetion of e collerciel coepeny. Trenepece, whoee ehereholdere. in eddition
to the cuts, will he the principel Europeen induetrieliete conetructing the
Arlene rocket leuncher.

Trenepece will relieve the SSA of the teeke of deelins with cuetonere end
ohteinin; henk credite. nettere not exectly within the experitee of the SSA
en en intornetionel body for epece developeent. however. none eeeber netione
of the esency eeen to heve reeorvetione with reuerd to thin nuggeetion onen-
eting from the French Hinieter of Induetry by wey of the cues. They feer

e dininution of the role of the 25A. Such e eolution would eleo poee the
problen of the leunchin; ped et lourou. which belongs to the ISA end in
finenced by epecific contributione fro- the Ielber countriee. The creetion
of trenepece end the definition of ite reletione with the BSA. in perticuler.
will require eoee conpliceted negotietione. Theee ought to be ternineted

quickly no on not to delay future ordere for rocket leunchere end leunchins
theneclvee.

9291
C80. 3100

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SD-2 ONLY

HATRA'S M10083 SPACE ACTIVITIES OUTLINE!)
Peris AIR 6 00905 in French 10 Feb 79 p 12
[Article by Pierre Lengereux]

[Text] The warm Coupeny just ennounced on 31 Jenuery 1979 thet this
sue-er it is going to cod’ine the grseter portion of its specs ectivities
and facilities for progrels in progress end those of the future. The new
mm spece center st Toulouse will therefore be directed towsrd three
sectors of sctivity: teleco-unicsdons setellites with the res (of the
BSA [F.uropeen Spsce Agencyl) end its derivetives; eerth observetion
sstellites with SPOT (of Frence) end its derivstives; end equipment
groups for the Europeen Ariene lsunchee. The spece division of mm,
whose genersl Inge-em reneine st Veliey. neer Peris. will henceforth
include two spece centers: Toulouse. to serve es generel contrector for
progrsns. end for systens engineering end sssenbly end Velisy for tech-
nology end equipeent.

Expansion in Two Stsges

The schedule for decentrelitetion contenpletes thst the SPOT end Ariene
project units will be trsnsferred iron Veliey to Toulouse this can
This involves 30 persons. of when 15 will be new enployees.

Constructim of the new mm center. instslled upon 6 hecteres in the
Montsudren 2 industriel zone. to be edded to the existing center. will
be effected in two steges:

The first stsge. to be opened for service during the second qusrter of
1980, coeprises three new buildings with floor specs of 7.000 squere
neters. of which 1.000 will be occupied by white roons end 1.000 by
shops. It is plsnned to begin construction in July 1979. This stege
represents en invest-ent of sbout ‘0 nillion frencs end crestion of
80 new jobs. of which 50 will be filled by locel hiring.

[Photo Ception] Cleude Cour-y. Chief of the Studies end Integrstion
Section of the Spsce Division of mm. will be the director of mm’.
new spece center st Toulouse.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second stage is contingent upon Ham's work load for the new pro-
grene now in the process of being defined. that is. the derivatives of
the SPOT and 303. It involves the acquisition of another lo hectares
upon which to erect 5.000 square netsrs of buildings which will include
an additional 2,000 square naters of white roone. Construction should
begin in July 1980 in order for coapletion to be achieved in the second
quarter of 1981. This stage represents creation of 100 new jobs. 80 of
then to be filled locally.

In total. the staff of the new HATM space center at Toulouse should
nueber 250 persons by the end of 1981. half of th- engineers end san-
agsnent personnel. and the other half technicians and other enployees.

Activities in Progress

mm was installed. in Iisrch 1975. in the Hontandrsn tone, near the
cuts [National Center for Space Studies] and the text facilities of-
SOPOHEA [Specialised aniromental Testing Service Coepany] at the in-
stigation of DATAR [Delegation for Territorial Developaant and Regional
Action] and the CRIB. The initial installation. upon 1.8 hectares.
asinly comprised a space asssnbly center of two buildings (2,500 square
aeters). including an assedly bay of 650 square neters. 8 aetere high,
for assenbling large satellites. The present crew conprises 35 specia-
lists whose average age is 30 years.

Aseenbly of tho ESA's 0T8 satellite in 1976-1977 brought together 60
specialists, half of then coning free: the European fins participating
in the progrsn. In 3 years four ors satellites (one sinulation nodel.
one qualification nodal. and two flight nodels) “ave thus been sass-bled
at Toulouse. representing aore than 150,000 nan-haurs of work. There-
after. the teens went to the Anerican launching field at Cape Canaveral.
Florida. for the three series of firings (Hay and Sept-her 1977. and
April-May 1978) which ended with the launching of the 0T8 2 satellite
on 11 Hay 1978).

mm has now reported its activity in the BCS European operational tele-
co-unications satellite prograa which includes a series of five flight
eodels, for two of which fir- orders have already been received; the order
for the other three satellites is expected this year. Asssnbly of the
first flight nodel. cos 1. will begin at Toulouse in the niddle of 1980:
launching by air Ariane rocket is planned for the end of 1981 (see AIR 6
cosmos. No 768).

Since 1976 mm has also been engaged in assdly of the equipnent
groups for the Ariane launches. Three groups have thus been coapleted:
one electrical neck-up (P0 1). one qualification aodel (P0 2). and one

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

flight model (L0 1) intended for the firat rocket which will be launched

on 3 Noveuber 1979. Three other equipnmt groups. intended for the
three other flight qualification firings (to 2.1.0 3. end no 6) era in
the course of conpletion and five additional groupe have just been
ordered for the firat eerie. of operational launchers which will be

ueed beginning in 1981. Theae eight groupe will be delivered between
now and 1982.

COPYRIGHT: AIR 81‘ COSMOS Parie 1979

11 , 706
080: 3100

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOI'I'ICIALUBEW

VORKIRGS OP PRIVATE NCLEAR FUEL CYCLE INDUSTRIES
Dueeeeldorf amnrsmrr-amacmx in Ger-en Feb 79 pp 82-84
[Article by h. Kalthoff: "French Private Induetry in the Nuclear Fuel Cycle"]

[Text] hecauee of the doeinant role of the etate end ite
inetitutione in France. it ie often overlooked that private
induetry hee eleo undertaken eignificent efforte in the
area of nuclear energy. Thie ie noet particularly true for
the initial etage of the nuclear fuel cycle, which ie a do-
Iain of private induetry fro. the procuring of ureniun ore
to the cowleted fuel elenent-with the exception of enrich-
nent, which ie in the hands of the etate. In addition. the
technologiee of cheeiatry and proceeeing have put their ex-
perience with proceeeea and plante at the eervice of etate
activitiee. France ie the only European country which in
eelf-eufficient in the area of the nuclear fuel cycle.

In contreat to the no. the French nuclear induetry developed out of nilitary
reaearch with the direct cooperation of the etate. which in 19‘: created a
co-ieeion epecially reeponeihle for atoeic energy: the Couieeariat e
l'Bnergie Atonique (cu) [Atonic margy Co-ieeion].

The leading poeition of the elk—including Cogenenand the no leee iepor-

tent role of the national electric conpany Electricite de France (EDP) lake

the etate often appear to he the eole decieive factor in the French nuclear
induetry. even in ite relatione with other countriee. But aeide fro. the role
of Frenetoee ae a reactor builder. French private induetry hae a large and
inportent ehare in the activitiee in the nuclear fuel cycle (Fig l). The ex-
perience of the different induetrial groups in the areae of geology. chenietry
and netellurgy has proved indiepenaihle for the develop-ant of a nuclear indue-
try which covere all phaeee of the nuclear fuel cycle froa uraniun ore to the
reintroduction of reproceeeed fieeionehle neterial into the cycle.

Thie "nuclear autonoey" ie elnoet a conpelling neceeeity for a country which
has neither ite own petroleun and natural gee nor any occurrence of coal worth
nentioning available to it. Since the l950'e. hut eore inteneively eince

23
1m omcm use on!
run VIILVW Wt: Will

1965. French private induetry haa becone atrongly involved in the fuel cycle.
and today producea all eateriale specifically for the fuel cycle of the pree-
euriced water reactor (which waa introduced in 1969).

in proepecting. eining and treeteent of uraniue the Coepagnie Prancaie dea
Retrolce (CF?) [French Petroie Coepany] and Pechiney Ugine Kuhleann (Pint)

have channeled their experiencee in proepecting and cheeicel treatnent of oree
into a canon eubaidiery firn. Hinatoee. which eince than hae drawn on guar-
anteed reeervee of 30.o00 tone of uraniue and hopea. on the baaie of inteneive
exploratory activity all over the world. to increaee theee reeervee fourfold
within the next 10 yeare.

The French chenical induetry hae developed the optieal procuduree for the
concentration of uranium iron the noet varied depoeite of ore in ite own
country--the depoeit of uraniun in France ie after all eetieated at 125.000
tone of uraniueo-and abroad. and thue offere iteeli ea a potent partner for
intereated exploratory or lining coupeniee.

Convereion o! uraniue concentratee into uraniue hexafluoride. the fore of
uraniue that per-ite enrich-ant in the gee phaee. ie pertoreed by Coeurhex.
which today hae a 25-percent ehere o! the world narket. In Europe. uraniu-
convereion ie carried out only in France and Great Britain. eo that [reach
induatry. along with that of Britain. providee an inportant contribution to
the proceeeing of uraniun (or the Ger-an electricicv bueineee ae well. In

the proceae. the atanderde of both Aeerican and Rueeian enrich-tot planta are
eatiafied. ea well ea the epecilicatione oi the centrifuge inetalletione which
are a product of cooperation between Ger-any. Britain and the netheriande.

For the enricluent facility Burodif. which in etarting up thie year under etate
nanagenent. Coeurhex offere the advantage of phyeical proxinityuboth are with-
in eight of each other in the Rhone valley at Pierrelatteuand therefore eini-
nal traneport and eieplified edeinietrative expenee.

It ie aleo worth eentioning that the uranyl nitrate which ie given of f in the
reproceeeing of irradiated uraniun ie converted to 076. which aleo eeete the
etrict technical etendarde of Anerican enrich-ant facilitiee.

Fuel eleeenta for preeeurieed water reactore are produced by Franco-beige de
Fabrication de Coabuetiblee ("70) [Franco-Belgian fuel Fabrication] in two
plnnte in Deeeel (Belgiun) and Rosana (France). Even if the capacitiee created
here are priaerily intended to aatieiy national deeand. Prench induetry etill
hae on intereet in playing a role in the internetional earkat along with the
aupplying of reactore deetined for car.

In the production of fuel elenente for water preeeurieed reactore. French in-
duatry profite iron the fact that by neane of the eteel producera Ugine Aciere
within the M group they have built up a coeplete line for the production of
zircaloy. rhia hae all the sore weight eince eirconiu alloye are claeeified
at the nonent in the United Statee ae ”uneitive lateriale." The inveeteente

2h
roe omcw. WE Olin!
FOR OFFICIAL 188 ONLY

carried out by FOR in the lent 2 yeare and the capacitiee created in thin way
are no longer only intended to aupply the French narltet. but eleo a lerge part
of the root of the Europeen narket. with airceloy preparatory nateriel for
ceein; tubee.

At thie tine a production facility ie under conatruction at Painboeuf (Loire)
which to to roll out the preparatory aatcriel which ie produced in the country
in the fore of tube belle into the final dineneion of the caeing tubea. etert-
in; fron I900. The capacity of thia plent of the firs of Zircotube. founded
by Wk (51 percent) and Pranatone (69 percent). will be built up to 2.500 tale
by 1982.

Thu epart fro. the arena of enrich-ant end reproceeeing. which are under atate
nenagenent. french induatry not only offere a coqreheneive eervice to ite

own national electricity bueineea. but alao euppliee ite European neighbora
with part of ite capacitiee.

 

figure 1: Centere of Private lueineee Activity in the french fuel Cycle

lnduetry
Key:
1. "union concentratee 6. Zircaloy input tubee
2. zirceloy 7. Zircaloy flat nateriel
3. zirconiun eponge 8. Inrichnent
6. Ureniua convereion 9. Zirceloy caning tubee
5. Zirconiun .lloye lo. Preeaurixed water fuel.

25
m 0"!an IBE OIL!
Kernfealdoién - 1978 erstmals kﬁtisch

an. 2):»: ”man h)!» ”3:." man-w ﬁzz-mu 8)::

J)________________________

9) Wan-aw

w myth.“ (Wm: 01mm. 12 m m nun

 

 

 

 

M4 13)” W w «our. 11 a 10)
W01 1" )W cum I,” “Illa kmﬁlm W h. 1.10
’ ‘ l6) ., w Mm n ‘ n
”or! W WW W sun. to! M an an
M 17 )w ma am am on; MW 31.12.11
oaana 0(th)
a“ haaa .ou m mam when W a u n
”-00“. m
Iva-sum Mn W Wm mum NC at an. ”I
Y“! MI W m MUM woo MM It I ll
um“ “0 M4” W mm 2.3.00“ 0.“ I. LII
me up. w m atom “Ma-ism van. a; a n
m m on m "1am mum.” was u a n
M“. (M
m 13)“ mom Mop name Out-name nu. I n.”
W Inna MOM W MM Mun-a “CI. to." n
Vow-w! Vat-m '0... w ”I“ Val-an W 90 um
MO- (WW
m4 19 ”W 'm W «8W. Uta-at W a u n
(an m «mm
M”! W cum W mum 'daaatoaona mam u a n
Ola _ Winona
”that! UM m W mm gnu-aw W 00 a n
Imam-ma w m m anon. W mama- O 3 7a
MW! W Ian-m. bun-mat “HM. Would“ MIMI I 4.70
W0 to W
me was Ian-near” m mum Micah-«ca Wuhan: I 1.70
MM“ W m W Cam AWN-ova M 9 12 ii
0.4 Uﬁu W
20) mammals-sum
non 1o)aao-m m tawn- aom 21)W wan-c 1a. a n
m m
wan-an I man can 22).” - 23km“ - can")
in
man 16 rm Guam 1% run-coat - «A ca 0. an
0" m as y m - 25)“. 25W M’V'D
m g... ' - - n
w 21”” on 11.00
M w baht. W lam one - t 2.7a
m vaa luau... 8 - - m - our")
m 2 m
') mom-warm
'1 Cw

mm
7) III-W 29)
W .mo-mamum‘mmuuwmunnn ”hummm

“Muumwmu ll "mm“umm‘muﬂhuwm
- am

Table l: Nuclaar Raactora much lacaaa Ctltlcal in 1978
(Kay on follovlng pan)

26
M ORIGIN: {BE ow:
FOR 0!!ICIAL US! ONLY

Nora: "ﬂucloar Roactoro which loco-o Critical in l918" follovo chronologically
fro. tho 1977 liot. To tho oxtont that roactoro aro includod in the now chart
that bocooo critical boforo 31 Docoohor 1977. thoy uoro not yot includod in

tho proviouo yoar'o liot (hocouao of o dolay in rocoiving tho information).

Roy:

1. Nooo

2. Country

3. Location

6-1790

5. Capacity (Grooo)

6. 0vnor or oooogor

7. Conotructor or oupplior
8. Pirot bocaoo critical

9. Capacity and oxporioontal roactoro
100 m
11. Prooouriood actor
12. Nucloar Pouor Plant
13. COR
1‘. Vinland
15. Boiling vator
16. Pronco
17. Italy
18. Canodo
l9. Crochoolovakia
20. Roaoarch rooctoro. :oro onorgy roactoro and critical oxporioonto
21. Cancor loooarch Cantor
22. Roooarch and dovclopooot rooctor
23. Tochnical Univoroity. Droodoo
26. Roooarch roactor
25. lnotituto for Nucloar Coorgy
26. (Argontina)
27. Radiography rooctor
28. Sofoty roooorch
29. 9) loloaood for continuouo production
“) Dodicotod
9“) P011 copocity
') tirot production of corroot

27
FOR 0!PICIAL UBI OIL!
avu va'aav‘nu we Vl‘ul

 

 

 

 

Kemreaktoren -_- 1978 stiﬂgelegt ‘5
“T; a» sum um um “mum“ )WQL—
‘ W w 10’“. “I“ w“ I" ”I.” In",

.4 ‘ «nu-u-u-Linnulan

Table 2: Nuclear Roactora shut Down in 1978

l. Nano

2. Country

3. Location

‘a ”P.

5. Capacity

6. Omar or unogor

7. Constructor or auppucr

8. Start of oparatlon (first crltlcality)
9. Shutdown

10. Sat-tn. pool

9337
cs0: 3103 £30

28
M OFFICIAL [83 ML!