FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10402

19 March 1982!

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

{FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
101'!

ms publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses vere not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIG’I HHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OE
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE OULY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
TELEcomuumnous POLICY. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(P000 6/82)

CONTENTS

WORLWIDE AFFAIRS

Briefs
Zinbabve,Romsnian News Agency Agrement

LATIN AMIGA

Comentary on 'PAIIA' News Agency Reported
(Pam, 22Peb 82) .0.0.0.0.00.00.00.00IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQO

USSR

Connunicatlions Facilities Exhibited at 'Svyaz'-81'
(G. Monina; BLEXTROSVYAZ', Dec 81) .....................

WET DJROPB
ITALY

Proposed Reorganization of Telecommunications Sector
(Marco Panare; IL mm, 22 Jan 82)..

UIITED KINGDOM

TV Satellite Plans To Be Announced
(Julian Haviland; THE TIMES, 25 Feb 82) ................

British Telecon Announces Plans for Satellites
(Blaine Williams; FINANCIAL TIMES. 2 Mar 82)

-a- [III-W-l‘o

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'BBC' TV To Start Satellite Broadcasting in 1986
(Kenneth Gosling; 13:: TIMES. 5 Mar 82) ....

New Joint Satellite Company To Be Formed
(3111 Johnatone; m miss, 5 Mar 82)
BRIEFS

ZIMBABWEJOHANIAN NW8 AGENCY AWuSaliebury. 25 Feb (PL)--aepreaenta-
tivea from the news agencies of Zimbabwe (21AM) and Romanian (AGERPRESS)
signed in this capital an agreement for the exchange of information. The
agreement was signed by the chairman of the Amalgamated Haas Hedia of
Zimbabwe Daviaon Sedan and the Romanian anbaaaador to this country Petre
Blajovici. Sadza said he hoped the signing of the agreement would go a long
way to improve the relationalzip between the two countries. In reply Ambaeaa-
dor Blajovici said the signing was a new atop forward to inprove cooperation
between the two countries. [Text] [PA2h2130 Havana PRELA in English 2020 CHI
2!. Feb 82] -

080: 5500/2130

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COMMENI'ARY OI 'PAJIA‘ RES AGENCY REPORTED
“232160 Havana mm in English 1840 err 22 Feb 82

[Text] , Havana.' 23 Feb (PL)o-The ilportance of the Pan-African News Agency
(pun) in the spreading of a correct and truly image of the peoples of
Africa was highlighted here.

A comentary carried by the daily GIANNA stated that the recent meeting of
the International Progran for the Development of Commications held last
month in Acapulco Mexico supported the carrying out of this project.

The PARA News Agency with headquarters in Dakar constitutes a kind of pool
of national agencies of nearly 50 countries of the African continent with
five regional centers of reception and distribution in Tripoli, Lagos. Kin-
shasa. Khartoum and Lusaka.

The article states that the PARA News Agency requested $1.5 million which
were granted mostly by the states of the Persian Gulf.

The 0.8. representatives to the Acapulco meeting stated their reserves on the
PARA News Agency because its constitutional principles claim that this news
agency will contribute to the liberation of the African people and will keep
a policy contrary to racial. apartheid, Zionism and all the forms of exploi-
tation and oppression.

To counteract this action the United States defends the private initiatives
and the transnationals of information and stated the purpose to carry out
parallel programs to those of the P100 linked, with the Agency for Interna-
tional Development (Am) and the private sector.

With this attitude the 0.8. is seeking to place the Third World in front of
the dilemma of choicing betveen autonomous development or continuing relying
on the 11.8. model, the article added.

However, Third World nations are seeking to develop their own connunicatims

and for this they need assistance, though they reject any assistance which may
becoee a link of dependency. it ended.

C30: 5500 [2130

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CONNICATIONS FACILITIES EXHIBITS!) AT '8VYAZ'-81'
Moscow BLZKTROSVYAZ' in Russian No 12, Dec 81, pp 14

[Article by G. Honina: "Commications Facilities in the Service of Man and
Society"|

[Text] The slogan for the Third International Specialized Show "Comnications
Systems and Facilities" -- "Svyas'-81" - determine the humanitarian nature of
the tasks which face scientists and specialists in this area today. Today's
ubiquitous comunicstions provide the most important means of information and
education, the means which make all peoples participants in the canon

affairs of mankind and which promote mutual understanding and cooperation
between governments.

The "Svyaz'-81" show, which was held 2-16 September 1981 in Moscow, was an
important step toward strengthening international scientific and technical
cooperation. This exhibit of the modern achievements of science and
technology in the area of creating and utilizing new systems and facilities
for processing, transmitting and receiving various types of information had
over 600 enterprises, organizations and firm from 23 countries as
participants. The show made it possible to find new paths and possibilities
of cooperation between various governments in creating and utilizing
couunications facilities, to expand and strengthen mutually profitable contacts,
to compare levels of development of conunications achieved by different
countries; it was a catalyzer for scientific ideas in research, design and
operating activity.

The largest exponent at the show was the Soviet Union. Over 3000 exhibits from
16 ministries and departments presented equipment - ranging from communications
satellites to domestic equipment and mail processing facilities, from complex
computer-based systems to components which provide the basis for modern radio
electronic equipment.

The editors of the journal ELEKTROSVYAZ' propose to publish a series of
articles devoted to the "Svyaz'-81" show - descriptions of innovations of .
domestic comnications technology, as well as thematic reviews of the trends
of development of individual electrical conunications subbranches. Presented
below are photographs of several exhibitions from the Soviet section of the
"Svysz'-81" show. [Photographs on following pages; key below]

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL l‘Sf. ()\L\'
I'OR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
l1)R OWWHCJAI.IJSEZ(NNLY

Pages 2-3: 1. Starting on the left, the narrow rack is a D-AVU-lo digital
delta-modulation transmission system designed to handle 50 subscriber lines

to a city-type automatic exchange over 10 pairs of a balanced type T cable
with conductor diameters 0.32, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6 and 0.7 ml; next is the IKM-3OS
primary digital transmission system which is used to organize trunk and
subscriber lines; this equipment can form up to 30 voice grade channels by
means of pulse code modulation, organize digital transmission channels without
occupying any telephone channels, fora separate signaling channels (up to

four per voice grade channel) and extract the digital stream at an intermediate
station by extracting some of the telephone channels.

2. The Blektronika-Svyaz'-11Ts digital radio relay system, designed to transmit
digital information at 8668 kbps, can be used to create links up to 250 km

long with an average repeater interval of 25 km; this equipment allows up to
three telephone channel insertions and extractions. It operates in the 10.7-
ll.7 GHz band with transmitter power of 0.2 or 1 H.

3. The VOLS-1H—120 fiberoptic communications equipment, designed for use on
local, intra-zone and mainline links. can be used to organize four digital

supergroups over individual fiberoptic circuits which are combined in a
single cable.

6. The APUS equipment for time-charge accounting of local toll calls is

designed to compute the tolls on telephone calls within a city telephone
system depending upon their duration.

5. The YsL emergency-rescue radio is designed to transmit radio telegraph
and radiotelephone alarm and distress signals automatically, and to provide

two-way telegraph and telephone communications aboard rescue vessels.

6. The Blektronika-Svyaz'-500 digital radio relay station is designed for
operation in inaccessible regions. The autonomous power supply system allows
the radio to operate unattended for at least 3 years. The section length is
200 kn, with an average repeater hop of 25 km. The radio operates in the

1.7-2.1 can band with a data rate of 2048 or 8&48 kbps and transmitter power
of 0.3 R.

7. The Halyutka four-channel radio relay station, which is designed for local
stationary or temporary links up to 300-400 km long along gas and oil

pipelines can also be used on local communications links. in transport and in
power systems.

8. The TsPFA-Ts digital color photofacsimile equipment is designed to
transmit color half-tone images over digital channels. '

9. IKH—30, IKE-120, IKH-éso, IKE-1920 hierarchical series of digital
transmission systems.

10. The PTTs-TsKS-lOO circular telegraph transmission panel, which is
designed to work as part of the operating equipment in message switching

6

INDR OFINCJAL USIZCNNLY
centers in the common-user network (Tats-T), permits the transmission of
urgent circular messages to terminal points connected over leased channels
to the message switching center.

11. Geys-l, Tsikloida and Sibir' radio receivers designed for use aboard
merchant marine and river fleet vessels.

12. The Interval equipment is designed to convert information transmitted
from tape-type telegraph machines to the format needed for reception on a
page-type machine.

13. The Kolos multichannel rural fixed-frequency radio system, which is
designed for duplex telephone communications with mobile platforms without
frequency adjustment. serves up to 25 dispatcher services.

14. The TT-lbb PH voice-frequency carrier telegraphy equipment is designed
to provide 166 two-way mainline telegraph connections by multiplexing standard
voice grade channels.

15. The Kadr-3PH four-head video recorder is designed to record and
reproduce the complete color television signal, sound accompaniment signals,
and for electronic display of videophonograms.

16. The Fonemofon speech synthesizer, which is designed to synthesize
Russian speech automatically, is used in mass information service systems
and in man-machine systems as a computer output device.

17. General-purpose telephone sets -- table model, wall-mounted and
souvenir' ("Retro").

18. The Veshchaniye digital broadcast system is designed for PC! transmission
of four high-class monophonic or two stereophonic signals, or eight information
broadcast signals over wire digital circuits and radio relay links in local,
intra-zone and mainline networks.

19. The Orbits-RV satellite broadcast distribution equipment is designed
to transmit audio broadcast programs and newspaper columns via satellite.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaa'", "Blektrosvyaz'", 1981

6900
680:5500/1018

7
FOR 0FFKJAI.US£(NNLY
group of experts led
Ginnfranco Mossetto, who has
At present, the traffic [all
the State

agencies by telepho
that control inter-a

coincide with the re
the countries on the Mediterr

n countries and allost all
anean. SIP is franchised by ASST to manage all urban

and local traffic; Italcable also on franchise from ASST, controls international

traffic to and from all countries not covered by the t M'

proposal is '

lention the St

agency administrative rules.

8
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table No 1: Who's Best
(Coefficients of productivity based on 1980) Source: ASST

Item SIP ASST
Income per worker“ 45.3 50.6
Investment per worker‘ 26.8 30.7
Average cost of a worker' 18.4 15.4
Nurber of administrators

for every 1,000 workers 7.4 6.5

* in millions of lire

At the Post Office and and State agency, De Hichelis's proposal has been greeted with
some dissatisfaction, although the positions taken are by no means unanimous. Despite
the concerted silence, some unofficial tendencies are beginning to emerge. At the
State agency, for example. an argument is being raised against the accusation of inef-
ficiency put forth by the State participation men, and they are doing so with figures
comparing the efficiency of SIP and ASST (see tables Nos 1 8 2). 0n the other hand,
the prospect of SIP and Ttalcable absorbing a large part of the personnel is looked
upon favorably, especially because colleagues in the State participation agency have
highcr salaries. However, an emerging concern is how this merger will take place

and what the State agency will have left to do. Up to a short time ago, a proposal
was circulating that would transfer traffic to SIP and ltalcable while leaving per-
sonnel and plant and line maintenance with the State agency. "We would decisively
oppose a solution of this sort," said an ASST administrator, "for at least three
reasons: the maintenance of lines and plant does not justify 12,000 workers; circuit
leasing returns about 1/7 as much as direct management (see table 3); if it is true
that the agency's task is to plan and control, it is not necessary to maintain opera-
tional structures." 0n the other hand, moving all plant and cables from the State
agency to STET [Telephone Finance Corporation] would mean a great outlay from STET.
Indeed, it comes to about 3 trillion lire. 'ﬁhe solution might be to transform the
State agency into a State participation company," said Giovanni Pinto, a deputy
administrator of Italcable, "and then put national service under SIP and international
service'under Italcable. To do this, a legislative act would be necessary and suf-
ficient."

But the real obstacle that Do Michelis's plan must overcome is a political one. The
Postal ministry has always been a solid DC fiefdom, and the majority party will find
it hard to give up without a struggle its direct control over a structure like the
State agency. which has a business volume of 1.5 trillion lire a year and 12,000
workers, and give it over to State participations, which is falling increasingly
under the effective control of Socialist De Michelis. The leaders of the postal
bureaucracy are also putting up a lot of resistance. Reno Gaspari has the last word,
and he has not been inactive: "I examined a group of workers to examine the problem,"
said Gaspari, "and they have already reported to me. I will make my decision soon."

[“ables 2 G 3 and related inset follow]

’03 OFFICIAL USE OHLY
Table No 2: State Telephone Accounts
(ASST consolidated balances for 1972-80)

Items

(DO-00‘“ O‘UIOMN—

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- ____—___._L_
loo-“MWOIIIM

(AU-WM“ MIMI

”01-. M”. Nﬁl ll". "81-. I”. “21-. I”. Ala-I
'2 .8 .0 an ID '7 u '0 -

im W13}; mas 1&18‘1 '&w 12.?” 12.03 128:. 12.65.012.750
MOW} I... 23.8 23.. 244 a. $5
17‘? I“! me use ”4.4 427.2 0%.

4 81.8 111 1.7 .8
.933 .3an 1m £8 sad 1%: 312

    
    
   
  
   

    

      

 

. Total number of workers

. Number of administrators

. Active network development (in millions of kilometers of circuits)
. Income from traffic and leased circuits (in billions of lire)

. Cost of workers in service (in billions of lire)

. Investment (in billions of lire)

. Number of workers per millions of kilometers of circuits
. Income per worker (in millions of lire)

. Investment per worker (in millions of lire)

. Average cost of a worker (in millions of lire)

. Number of administrators for every 1,000 workers

Table No 3: How Much Leasing Brings In (1980)

No of circuits in ASST traffic 63,971

Income from subscribers (in billions of lire) 563.354

Income per circuit (in millions of lire per circuit) 8.87

No of circuits leased_to SIP 59,282

Income from leasing (in billions of lire) 78.446

Income per circuit leased (in millions of lire per circuit) 1.32
10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Column headings: 31 December 1972-80]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mossotto: Let's Divide STET Into Two Parts

There is also-something new in STET: the financing of IRI for the-telecommunications
sector. At the moment, the tone of discussion is gentlemanly, but the notes are
reaching a high pitch, and the prize is important. It involves a radical restructuring
of finances and especially the treasury management group's returning to the confines

of individual companies; they have hitherto been concentrated in STET. But how did

the companies in the group come to feel the need for recovering their financial auto-
nomy? Why did they not ask for it before? IL MDNDO asked these questions of Gian-
franco Mossetto, a professor of public economy at Ca' Foscare, in Venice, vice-
president of SIP since last August, and economic consultant to Gianni De Michelis,

the minister of State participation.

Question: How did the problem of restructuring STET come up?

Answer: The ministry of State participation and STET itself had been studying restruc-
turation for some time, but what really brought it up was the union dispute that is
taking place; among other problems, it raised that of straightening out the finance

structure and the subsidiary companies in order to make technological development more
effective. Also, we either keep up with the more advanced countries or quickly become
technologically dependent on foreigners.

Question: What does reorganization provide for?

Answer: The formation within STET of two divisions: a manufacturing and a service
division. In the manufacturing division, three specific regroupings have been identi-
fied: electronics for telecommunications, civilian and military systems, and micro-
processors. In the service division, there would be SIP, Italcable, Telespazio and
all the companies that are closely linked to their activities.

Question: The hottest potato will be restructuring treasury services. Who wants
this, and why?

Answer: At present, all the group companies' cash flow comes from STET, even ordi-
nary administrative'funds. The restructuring plan provides for each company gradually
to take over its own management. All the companies in the group want this, as do the
ministry of State participation and even IRI.

Question: Hhat would be left of STET once money management is taken away? Controlling
expenses and especially the rate of expenditures of the group companies is a powerful
instrument of control and financial clout.

Answer: Typical financial tasks: planning, control of management, and financial
strategy.

Question: But what are the real, practical advantages of this operation?

Answer: Increased cash flow and easier access to credit for individual companies,
which will be the ones putting up the collateral. -

COPYRIGHT: IL MONDO 1982

8782 _
cs0: 5500/2106

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TV SATELLITE PLANS TO BE ANNOUNCED
PM251639 London THE TIMES in English 25 Feb 82 pp 1. 26

[Julian Baviland Report: "Satellite Television: BBC May Get Both ’Space'
Channels"]

[Text] Plans for a British satellite which would provide two extra television
channels for British viewed within five years are expected to be announced next
week by Mr Killian Hhitelaw, the home secretary.

The independent broadcasting authority suspects that 1: Hhitelaw has decided
to allot both channels to the BBC.

A campaign to persuade him to change his mind was begun with a letter pub-
lished in THE TIMES yesterday from Lord Ayleatone. a former chairman of the
IBA. who said the allocation of the channels required further public debate.

hinisters were surprised yesterday by the eleventh-hour challenge to their
plans. Both BBC and IBA has taken part in discussions begun last May. by the -
home office on the feasibility of direct broadcasting by satellite (known as
DB5). .

The BBC made clear from the start its keen interest in taking part. It would
want one channel for repeat programmes. and a second for a subscription ser-

vice which it believes would generate enough revenue from the viewing public

to cover the cost of both channels.

It also pressed the government to bring in early legislation, as did several
electronics companies eager to put up the money to develop and launch a British
satellite.

By contrast IBA's representative gave home office officials the impression
that. while interested in principle. they were for the present preoccupied
with plans for the introduction of the fourth television channel in November,
and of breakfast television in May 1983.

Senior figures within independent television admitted yesterday they may have
been slow off the mark.

12
FORIDFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The HA said yesterday it had put forward three proposals. There could be a
Pan-European programs service—with a nmer of nenber countries of the
European broadcasting union contributing and receiving—a subscription service

or a "best of British" service—made up of programmes from all four British
channels.

There were also dark hints from the programs companies that the BBC has no

experience. as they had. of running a comercial service, and ought not to
risk the cash of the licence-fee-paying public.

The BBC yesterday kept a dignified and contented silence. but staff said pri-
vately they would welcome coepetition fro. the IBA. but not at the cost of
delaying a service the public wanted. '

The solution, on which both sides seen nost likely to agree. would be a larger
satellite at a higher cost.

080: 5500/2130

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRITISH TELECOM WOWCBS PLANS FOR SATELLITE
P3021557 London FIWIAL TIMES in English 2 Mat 82 p 10
[Report by Elaine Williams: "l‘he Satellite Hay to Europe"]

[Excerpts] By the end of 1983 British Telecon plans access for UK companies
to satellites for private bminess commicationa to Europe.

Services such as electronic nail, teleconferences. high speed conputer data
and even conventional telephone calls will be offered.

For organizations-needing to send large volumes of infomtion over long
distances as quickly as possible satellites could be nore convenient and
cheaper than existing ovate-s.

But in order to assess the potential of such a service. British Telecon -
has plans to run 12 trials this year. Snell dish aerials perched on office
roof .tops will transmit and receive digital data signals via the orbital
test satellite, the forerunner to Europe's first co-micationa.,satellite
system.

The mem TIMES, however, was the first organisation in Europe to cooperate
with British Telecon and DEUTSCRF. BwDESPOSTB, the Ger-an teleco-unications
authority in running business trials on the orbital test satellite.

In Nave-her the satellite, linked the In". London headquarters to Frankfurt
where the international edition is printed.

For two weeks complete fascinile pages of the newspaper were transmitted
from London to 'Frankfurt for production and distribution by road and rail
across Europe and by air around the world.

As well as demonstratixg remote printing in Europe for the first tine-«an
important milestone for the European newspaper industry--it showed the

trelendous potential for businesses which need to transnit rapidly large
volumes of information around the world.

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The data signals representing words and pictures were trananitted from a

small dish on the roof of the FINANCIAL TIMES building. via the satellite
to a small dish provided by Dornier, the West German aerospace concern.
at the company's printers in Frankfurt.

Originally, it had been hoped that the November trials would have involved
transmitting pages of the newspapers to Stockholm, Paris and Rome. but
administrative and minor technical problems prevented this.

As well as saving money, satellites could improve the service to readers
and offer new types of services such as electronic mail for the newspaper--
all applicable to any type of business.

British Telecom expects that the total capital cost of providing a small
dish satellite service in Europe will be about 1001: pounds.

Agreemnt was reached two years ago to start the servicesfter the launch

of 36s, the first European cmications satellite run by Butelsst and
Telecon l, the French domestic satellite.

Coverage will range from the Shetlands to Gibraltar and from Sweden to Greece.
British Telecom has already announced a link up with satellite buiness system
to allow UK customers access to the private systal run by 838 throughout the
0.8. by the end of this year.

COPYRIGH': The Financial Times Ltd, 1982

(:80: 5500/2138

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'BBC' TV TO START SATELLITE BROADCASTING IN 1986 '
15051301 London THE TIME in mun 5 Mar 82 p 1
[Report by Kenneth Gosling: "1986 Lift-Off for 1w TV Space Channels on BBC")

[Excerpts] The BBC was given permission by the government yesterday to start
broadcasting television programs on two satellite channels from early in
1986. Making the announcement in the Col-sons Hr willian Hhitelaw, the home
secretary. said there would be opportunities in the future for independent
television to operate similar services.

One channel will be run by subscription. the other by a supplementary licence
fee, something the hose office proposed but which the BBC made clear yesterday
it does not favour. In the long term. it said, it intended both channels

to be funded nsinly from subscription channel income.

Viewers wanting either or both services will have to buy dish serials and other
- equipment which will cost initially 250 poundsoa figure expected to drop to
200 pounds when quantities are produced. The serial, two varieties of which
were shown at a press conference at the BBC television centre, will later be
replaced by a flat metal plate fixed to an outside wall.

The independent broadcasting authority, which recently made a bid for satellite
channels, welcomed the prospect of public debate on essential broadcasting
issues, including assurances to existing viewers that the service free the
four terrestrial channels would remain as good as possible.

This assurance had already been given by Mr Alasdair Milne unaging director
of BBC Television and director general designate, who said: "We are adamant
that we will keep faith absolutely with the viewers we now serve. There is
no question of taking program-es off existing networks and moving then to
satellite channels. We seek to provide additional services through a new .
means of distribution and the licence-payer will benefit in the longer ten."

In the Com-ans statement, Mr Hhitelaw said it was vital to make an early
start in an area of been international competition. The initial two satellite

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

channels would be increased to a maximum of five to be allocated as and when
the demand justified it. An announcement would be made shortly, he said,
about the future of cable television.

Television satellite channels could provide additional radio services, and
the ”C said it wanted to explore this facility for digital trans-ission
perhaps of high quality music services.

The BBC expects viewers to obtain the subscription service with something

like a credit card keyed into the equipnent in the hone to select the
progra-es the viaver wanted to watch; a new card would probably be purchased

annually .

In Manchester last night, Hr Colin Shaw, the independent broadcasting
authority's director of television, said he thought sane countries were un-

willing to see their television services threatened by invading satellite
services without putting up a fight.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982

080: 5500/2138

I.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NEH JOINT SATELLITE CWANY TO BE FORMED
51011303 London THE TIMES in English 5 Mar 82 p 15
[Report by Bill Johnstone: "Joint UK Satellite Set Up")

[Text] A new British company is to be formed to exploit the world market
for satellites. The company, called United Satellite Ltd, is being set up
jointly by British Telecon, Marconi and British Aerospace.

The announcement by the three partners comes in the sake of the government's
approval for s 150:: pound direct broadcast satellite system to be built by
the British companies and to be operational by 1986.

The partners are expected to have an equal stake in the company, although the
methods of financing the group have yet to be determined.

N. H. Rothschild, the merchant bank, is investigating the possibility of some
form of leasing being used to fund the British direct broadcasting satellite.

The companies have already investigated potential markets and the technical
and operational means to meet broadcasting and teleco-unications requirements.

The footprint for the British satellite vould take in part of Western Europe
for broadcasting signals if a sufficiently large antenna were used for
reception.

One-third of the British direct broadcasting satellite will be devoted to
broadcasting and the remainder to telecomunications.

The BBC will be given two channels and British Telecom will control the third.
British Telecon intends to release its international circuits on the satellite
to other satellite organizations.

The conplete system will consist of three satellites: one in orbit in operation;
one in orbit on stand-by and another on the ground.

COPYRIGHT: Times Neuspaper Limited 1982

C80: 5500/2138 m

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY