APPROVED FOR RELEA-E: ZOOYIOIIOI: CIA-RDPIZ-OOOBOROOO“000100504
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010050-4

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRB L/8243
25 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NESTERﬂ EUROPE
(FOU0 7/79)

U. S. jOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010050-4
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the

last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was

processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

“WW“! 0!" PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications any be ordered from the National Technical
Infomtion Service. Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recomnded that the JPRS number. title, date and
author. if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government hearts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.5. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.8. Government Printing Office, Hashington, 0.0.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword. author. personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell 61 Howell, Old
mnsfield Road. Rooster. duo, “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Globe Road, Arlington. Virginia 22201.
8. ﬂenpioat'e Accraawu Nn.

TMNSLATIONS 0N "ESTER" EUROPE. (F000 7/79)

detain; Ouaaiaation Near and Addteaa
Joint Publication Raaaarch Service

1000 North clcbe Mad
Arlington. Virginia 22201

la. Sooeeuin. Olaaalaatloa Nun and Mime l1. 'l’y'a ed Rayon e Period
Covered

he above

. Ahuvaa I a

The aerial report contains political/econoaic intonation on Heat European
energy, finance and trade policy nattcra as well an develop-ante and trends
in the doctrine. prosraaa and prohlena of the aajor conuniat partiea.
including their relationa with coauuniat partiea outside the Heat European
area. ‘

. or «do and 'ern-nt Ana aia. cocac'ipteaa

Political Science _lnternational Affaira _ Lune-hours
Sociology _Auatria Netherlanda
Propaganda _ Norway
leononica Portugal
znargy _8pain
lnduetry 3: Sweden

Trade Switzerland
Pinanco turkey

United Kingdo-

m. Idenlﬂeaa/Opea-liaded 7... Heat Germany

m. cosm Phil/Gave sc. SD. 10
Mutatiluy State-eat

For Official Uee Only.
Liaited Mar of Copiaa Available tron JPIS.

 

'0.“ “'0’.” 0.3V. 0"" TI.“ '0“ my .‘ RIHOOUCID “I‘m“ "new"
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8243
25 January 19

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(2000 7/79)

Conn-ms

FRANCE

Aerospstisde's Hitterrsnd Reviews Conpsny's Bosition
(m‘cm, 23 me 78) O.DOCODOOOOOOOIOOODOOOOOOOOOO

Transport Squadron's 1978 Activities Reviewed
(Am‘m, 23 me 78) 00.0.00...OOUOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Briefs
Government Helicopter Purcheses Down

HAL!

Modus rendi or we Terrorist Group Described
Roberto Chiodi; mallow, 8 Dec 78)

lbwership,~8tructure, Fiscal Policy or moor thicne
(suntan Col; 11. man am, 1h Nov, 19 Dec 78)

lending Business Proposes Prove Inaccurate
(Editorial, one Men; W8 am, 1% Dec 78)...

user 0M

Activities , Status of “are Political Groups in ms
(UN zmrﬁ m, 30 "0' 78) eeeeooesseeeseeeeeeoeeee

Government's Domestic Surveillance Regre- Reported
(w, 16 ’0' 78) I...0.00.0...OOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOIOIOO.

hnel Discusses wenploymnt, labor mm
(m, 30 '0' 78) DOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0....DO.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VRANCB

AEROSPATIALB'S HITTBRRAND REVIEWS COHPANY'S POSITION
Paris AIR G cosmos in French 23 Dec 78 p 11
[Article: "Aerospatiale: Great Call on Subcontracting"]

[Text] Jacques Hitterrnnd. president-director general of Aerospatiele
[National Industrial Aerospace company]. was the guest of honor on

13 Dcceﬂer 1978 of the Aeronautics and Space Public Relations club under
the presidency of Etienne Deum (Paris airport).

Opportunity for the French Economy

[Hitterrand saidzl "In a seemingly somber econo-ic situation,

aeronautics as usual is running against the tide and its intermediate-tern
future appears under a favorable sign. This situation denies to some
extent the presumptively pessinistic or skeptical opinions regarding

the contribution of the aerospace sector to the French economy. Despite
export orders which are not as exceptional as were those of 1977. the
internediate-tern prospects of the aerospace industry represent one of

the opportunities for the Prench econo-y."

Por Aerospetiale. which accounts for 140 percent of the French aeronautical
potential. prospects continue to be favorable but call for a certain
degree of prudence as regards helicopters, one of the rare sectors in
which French industry has reached the Alericsn scale. The space sector
will he streanlined following new orientations laid down by the sinister
of industry. Andre Giraud. For tactical missiles Aerospatisle has had

none successes consrsble to those of mm [General lbchanical Aeronautics
Coupany. Propulsion Section].

New Situation for Aircraft

Per fixed-wing aircraft the situation is basically new after the nether
prospects 3 years ago. To make the Airbus progran succeed. the
cooperation structures have been modified and a coherent policy has
finally been adopted. The start-up of the Iarketing of the Airbus plane
raises industrial production problems in entirely new terns. Pinally.
the decision to launch the A-3lo [new Airbus version] has been made.

1
NR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under these conditions Aerospatiale is in a position to implement a
policy of directing its industrial activities as a function of market
needs. It will resort to a large extent to subcontracting which it will
reactivate and the national company will thus retrieve its fundamental
role.

While striving to increase its industrial flexibility. Aerospatiale plans
to solve the problems raised by civilian production within the framework
of an international cooperation policy. It does not envision pursuing a
policy of civilian production outside the cooperation arrangement defined
by the European governments. In the Airbus program the existing partners
do not seek new partners. But neither are they opposed to participation

in the form of subcontracting agreements with an interest in development
and risks. Fokker is cooperating satisfactorily in the A-JOO B 2/6 model
program and naturally had its place in the A-Jlo program up to the point
where. having globalized the problems. the Netherlands brought these
prospects into question. At the present stage of the F-29 aircraft project
sufficient elements are not available to evaluate the chances of commercial
success of this project. At any rate. participation in such an undertaking
could be envisioned only within the framework of Airbus Industrie [Airbus
Industrial Company].

Recalling the priority given to the A-310 program. president Jacques
Hitterrsnd declared that the plans for jets seating 120 to 170 passengers
have not for all that been forgotten. New proposals will be submitted

to the users during 1979. When it is possible to make decisions. this
program will become part of the Airbus family.

Aerospatiale‘s Industrial Policy

President Jacques Hitterrand stressed the policy of Aerospatiale will
follow to face its new industrial responsibilities. Undoubtedly. since
early October 1978 the national company has come to the end of its policy
of cutting personnel who were reduced by more than 3,000 workers. The
policy brought down to 1,350 individuals the personnel in its research
department. But there is however no question of initiating a large-scale
hiring policy. The problem of the flexibility of adaptation of European
industry in the face of market variations has been raised. As a national
enterprise. Aerospatiale must furthermore generate activities. It must
irrigate the entire French industrial fabric by means of subcontracts.
This problem is not simple because it implies that one find appropriate
subcontracting enterprises. The president of Aerospatiale also mentioned
its linked subcontracting with nassault-Brequet.

In order to adjust to its work load. Aerospatiale could have to renegotiate
or abandon some subcontracting for which it has signed agreements. But it
plans to honor its commitments. It has already concluded new agreements on
the Falcon-20 program with Dassault-Breguet. It will get rid of marginal
or deficit-producing activities. But its commitments to its customers and

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

its responsibility as a national cnterpriae demand that it not relinguish
activities if no other industrial sectors are available to reactivate thea.

General Aviation: Decisions Under Study

Questioned about the activities of the national company in the field of
general aviation. Jacques Hitterrand recalled that develop-ents in this
sector do not do credit to the national company. Expenses are continuing
to be incurred for the Corvette (a program whose cost will have exceeded
1 billion French francs) and, as regards SOCATA [Air Transportation
Corporation] whose future may be built on the TB-lO program, the behavior

of the group regarding that company will be determined in the next few
months.

it is also in the next few months that a decision will be made on the
future of the Pbuga-90 aircraft project. Jacques Mitterrand recalled that
his company is very actively interested in a basic. modest training

aircraft for which it has submitted the 18-30 project to the Hinistry of
Defense.

Different Financial Results

Asked about the financial performance of Aerospatisle. president Mitterrand
indicated that it will appear as fundamentally different from the preceding
years. Hentioning the increase in the company's own funds to which those
allocated in the government budget just approved will contribute. Jacques

Hitterrand said that this improve-ant will not he as great as he would have
wished.

The president of Aerospstiale also noted the interest of a linked
subcontracting policy to overcome the difficulties of too specialized
products, but he indicated that he did not seek the establishment of a
holding company whose creation the government has announced for the
spring of 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Air 5 Cosmos, Paris, 1978

2662
CSO: 3100

3
roe orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

TIANSPORT SQUADRON'S 1978 ACTIVITIES RBVIBHED
Paris AIR & COSMOS in French 23 Dec 78 pp 24-27

(Article: "Distinct_keactivation of the Operations of the 61st Squadron
in 1978")

[Text] The 61st Transport Squadron based at Orleans-Bricy has a little
more than 600 members of whom 115 officers and 180 noncosnissioned officers
are flying personnel according to the following normal breakdown:

155 pilots, 55 navigators, and 85 mechanics. The ground mechanics
assigned to the squadron are relatively few. the near-totality of
troubleshooting and repair work of the first stage (which, in a fighter
unit. for example, are done at the squadron level) being performed in
Orleans by GBRHAS [Haintenance and Repair Group for Specialized Air
Equipment].

500 Paratrooper Jumps a Day

The crews of the three flight units ("Touraine." "Pranche-Comte," and
"Poitou") of the 61st Transport Squadron are trained to have the capacity.
in wartime as in peacetime. to carry out very diversified missions
involving at times tactical and at others logistical operations. They
range from attack air transport and air drops of light or heavy loads to
operations. planned or on demand, of passenger or cargo transport and
including humanitarian-type missions. Included in peacetime tactical
assignments are. naturally. the instruction of crews (approximately

15 percent of its annual activity) and the training of airborne troops
(none 25 percent of its annual activity). The latter is carried out
essentially in Pan and Toulouse for the llth Airborne Division but a

good part also takes place at Calvi. These training missions of airborne
troops are part of those which the 61st Transport Squadron conducts for
the general staff of the armed forces. All these missions were described
in great detail in issue No 656 of AIR 5 COSMOS. The account of
activites of the 61st Transport Squadron during the 6 most recent years
appears in the following table of services rendered:

1. _
roe orncm. use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Services Rendered by the 61st Transport Squardon in 1975-78

wwwm
Passengers Transported 112.200 127.600 102.000 119.300
Tons of Cargo Transported 10.750 6.550 7.500 13.520
Paratroopers 215.000 195.000 200.000 167.900
Tons of air-dropped equipment 1.750 1.700 2.050 1.650

While the number of paratroopers who. in the course of their training.
"jumped" froa the hold of Transall aircraft was lower this year than in
preceding years. this activity still represented on the average more than
$00 jumps per working day. which is significant.

Expressed in terns of hours of flight. the operations of the 61st Transport
Squadron in 1978 nearly reached the high level that they had evidenced in
1973 before they were harshly affected. especially in 1976 and 1977. by
the induced effects of the oil crisis of 1973-76. The table below indeed
reflects four very distinct periods: 1970 to 1972 witnessed the upswing

in strength with the gradual formation of the three flight units; 1973

to 1975 were the "record" years; 1976 and 1977 were years of low activity
for economic reasons; 1978 reflected a return to nornal activity.

Flight Hours by the 61st Transport Squadron in 1970-78

1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978
12.300 15.300 17.700 21.000 19.400 18.500 16.000 16.250 20.000

The year 1978 saw among other things the ferrying from France to Lebanon
of heavy equipment and rolling stock slated for UNIPIL [United Nations
Interim Forces in Lebanon]. These missions represented some 250 hours of
flight. Everyone knows additionally the important role assigned to the
0-160 aircraft during the recent interventions in Africa.

The carrying out of the various missions entrusted to the 61st Transport
Squadron within the normal framework of its peacetime activities calls for
the dispatch of a number of aircraft which may range from one to about

10. at times more. Under all circumstances the iamediate availability of
the aircraft has been excellent (over 70 percent) and the unit did not
have to interrupt any of its missions by virtue of technical hitches

involving one or more planes. The operational result can thus be
characterized as very satisfactory.

This pickup of activity by the Transall planes in the 61st Squadron in
1978 was obviously felt in COTAH [Military Air Transport Command] which
supervises all the 0-160 planes used by the French air force. The total

of flight hours in 1978 will reach 26,600 and it will be even higher in
the coming year.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tactical Sequential Navigation

In a hostile zone transport planes are particularly vulnerable: On one
hand the Transall has. like all cargo aircraft of this type, a radar
signal that is relatively easy to pick up because of the dimensions of
the aircraft. 0n the other hand it moves slowly on airborne attack
missions near the battlefield. The infrared radiation of its engines
attracts enemy short-range ground-to-air missiles. In addition. the

aircraft is equipped neither with a decoy launcher nor with a radar
collision detector.

The only remedy for it is very low-altitude flight and that is why the
French air force has always insisted that its transport crews follow very
advanced training in this field. COTAH has incidentally sought for
several years now to expand the range of the tactical use of the Transall
plane because of the attractive possibilities offered by some of its
equipment (Doppler radar hooked up to a computer; meteorological radar
with a very good definition).

Inspired by methods used by the PAS [Strategic Air Force] on the Mirage-IV
aircraft and by the PATAC [Tactical Air Force] on Mirage-I118 planes. an
autonomous "sequential" radar navigation technique has recently been
developed by CIBT [Transport Crews Instruction Center] and the 61st
Transport Squadron.

This method makes possible the execution, preferably by night to reduce
the vulnerability of the planes, of low-altitude navigation without visual
observation 150 meters from the ground under operational conditions
leading either to the air drop of personnel or equipment at the lowest
altitude permitted by the performance characteristics of the parachutes

of airborne troops (150 meters for the jumps of personnel in operations)
or to land on an attack air transport mission using a simple. natural
strip 800 meters long.

Demanding rigorous preparation of the itineraries on the ground and a very
strict division of work loads among crew members in the air, "sequential
radar navigation" has as its basic principle a follow-through of routes

by guesswork controlled by a navigational computer in tandem with a Doppler
radar which is frequently reset, by "sequences," on the basis of landmarks
yielding easily identifiable radar signals on the instrument panel. They
are then compared to photographs of radar displays programmed in advance.
The discontinuous use of the radar increases "electromagnetic discretion."

In practice, what is involved is following an itinerary with a set time of
arrival at an altitude of 300 meters above any obstacle located 9 km on
either side of the route and 4 km fore and aft of the aircraft's position
by navigation with such precision as to allow on arrival the use of a radar
beacon to carry out either an air drop without visual observation or a
breakthrough [through cloud cover] before landing on an attack field.

6
roe or? 1cm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The radar on Transall aircraft now in service indeed has available a
"beacon function" which enables it to pick up the signal transmitted by
this beacon to the exclusion of any other signal. The radar beacon
itself is a light, handy piece of equipment which is available to army
and air force units and is rendered operational in very short order.

A modification is now in the course of implementation on all the 6-160
aircraft of COTAH in order to make than capable of carrying this beacon.

Shortly. numeralization by a data processing system programmed from the
cartography of the entire French and European territory will make it
possible to have available radar coverage whose exploitation could be

effected in minimum time by the specialized centers developed by the
French air force.

This type of mission implies the specific and continuous training of the
crews for, in order for operations of this kind to be successful, great

skill is required considering the duties involved for each of the
crew members.

The technique is perfected by now. On two occasions. on 26 October and

b December 1978, the Minister of Defense and the press were able to
verify it. The success of these operations has demonstrated the validity
of this new technique of navigation without visual observation and the
efficiency of attack air transport free from the constraints of preparation
and regrouping related to air drops. The perfecting of this sequential
navigation does not however mean the definitive start of all-weather
tactical flights for military transport aircraft. There are still
numerous constraints and limitations. Low-altitude navigation without
visual observation cones up against arduous problems of air traffic
control for the training of the crews in peacetime. Yet. such training
would have to be insured on a regular basis to achieve the necessary
safety and precision of execution. In future, more modern navigational
equipment may make it possible to considerably lighten the task of

the crews while insuring for them high-precision navigation without

the radar on board transmitting signals whatever the zone of overflight.
The plane's radar would then become a complementary means of correction
and control. used more discreetly.

Hell-Planned Maintenance

Bntrusted with planned preventive and remedial maintenance, of the 48
Transall aircraft in service in the French air force, also charged with

the repairs calling for significant servicing facilities as well as daily
troubleshooting and repair work on aircraft of the 61st Transport Squadron.
CBRHAS 15-061 has more than 600 personnel of whom seven are officers and

366 are nonflying noncommissioned officers including 350 specialists. The
unit also has 35 enlisted men.

7
was OFFICIAL use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The major maintenance cycle of the Tronsall aircraft extends over 16 years.
The MA [Industrial Air Workshop] in Clormont-Perrsnd undertakes the

task every 6 years by bloc, each of the four blocs corresponding to very
specific portions of the airframe: (a) Central section plus upper cargo
section: (b) engine nacelles, leeboard, upper forward part and extreme
right wing: (c) lower cargo section plus fixed horizontal section;

(d) radome and extreme left wing. The operations to be undertaken on
each of the four blocs constitute a major inspection whose duration is

in the order of 3 months. For the AIA the annual checkup program involves
12 major inspections.

At each major inspection bearing on one of the four blocs designated above,
the MA also checks the three other blocs for a certain number of
operations of the fourth stage which could not wait for the subsequent
complete cycle. From one major inspection to the next the Transall aircraft
up to now used to fly three spells of operations of about 700 to 780

hours each (taking into account the assigned potential), interspersed with
two periodic inspections (minor inspections) lasting about a month on

the average which are effected by GERHAS. Between the end of each major
inspection and the first of the minor inspections, between the two minor
inspections. as well as between the second minor inspection and the
subsequent major inspection, GERHAS undertakes intermediate inspections
whose duration is in the order of 2 to 3 days. Over-all, each year the
AIA effects 12 major inspections while GEMS does 2!. minor inspections
plus 36 intermediate inspections as well as a certain number of safety

inspections. very specific ones, which never take much longer than about
10 hours.

This technique of maintenance by saspling is the result of the search for
upkeep at least cost. In the case of the Tranaall aircraft, the method of
judiciously dividing all the sections over the annual program makes it
possible to have a sound knowledge of the technical condition'of the
entire fleet by considering only three "entire" aircraft. This method
which makes possible great flexibility involves a constraint: Essentially.
all the aircraft have to be given the same assignments.

In 1977 each minor inspection had involved 296 systematic verification
operations (investment: 1,100 hours) plus 1,600 hours of special work
made necessary by the determinations made at the time of these systematic
operations. plus 1:00 hours of modification work and corrections after
flights.

What should be stressed is the very favorable evolution of the maintenance
cycle of the Transall aircraft: The assigned potential which used to be
150 hours in 1967 increased to 500 hours in 1973 with a 10-month cycle and
then to 720 hours in 1976 with a 16-month cycle. It will rise to 800-850
hours with a similar Ila-month cycle. As for the number of systematic
operations. it dropped from an average of 500 in 1967 to 296 in 1977.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WPICIM. USE ONLY

The potential of the Tyne engines. now of 1.800 hours. could increase to
2.000 hours. All the overhaul operations are perforaed by SOCATA.

Roch overhaul lasts 5 months but the goal is to reduce this time to 3’:
months.

0f the 1.3 Traneall planes in service. the one with the largest nuber
of hours of operations to its credit has chalked up 5.000 (involving
5.800 landings). The aircraft with the least nunbers of hours has 3.000
(with 2.200 landings).

The repair squadron of GEMS vill have overhauled some 2,430 planes in
1978 (involving about 7.500 breakdowns). This figure should be cowared

with the nuaber of various iteos of equipment on the Transall aircraft--
about 800.

COPYRlcﬂ‘l': Air 6 Cosmos. Paris. 1978

2662
cso: 3100

9
roe omcm. use our
mu OFFICIAL USE "NIX

mm:

BRIEFS

GOVERNMENT HELICOPTER names m-Mroepatiale ia worried; Govern-eat
purchase. of helicopters have declined greatly. Deliveries for export
mount to 78 percent of the total, and foreign order. now lake up 95
percent of the total ordera placed. Since the Pun and Gazelle [helicopter]
ordera. the Coverment has not put in an order. 'lhe French military has
not yet ordered the new Dauphin helicopter that ie adapted for surveillance

of the uritine economic cone. [Text] [Perla muons ACTUELLBS in French
8 Jon 79 p 13)

cs0: 3100

10
M OHXCIAL US! MY
VON OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

WINS OPBMNDI 0? "CC TBRRORIST GROUP DESCRIBED
Hilon L'BUROPEO in Italian 3 Dec 78 pp 18-22
[A-rticle by Roberto Chiodi: "Guerrilla warfare 'Reguletions'f]

_/_‘l‘ex_t/ L'BUROPBO publishes an exceptional
document: It is the secret bylaws of the
“fighting party.“ here are the rules on
recruiting. chain of co-and. security
regulations.

An avert-go of eight ”sissions" per day. Terroriss has for acne tine gone
beyond the guard level. and we are at the creeping guerrilla warfare stage:
150 initials counted fros the beginning of the year. a psychological stock-
pile that continuously increasea under the pressure of disappoint-ents.
anger. daily inpotency. But how are these nilitante of the fighting party
recruited and fitted into the organization? that “Regulations" sust they
accept. and how are the units they report to structured?

L'wnom found the answers in an i-portsnt document that cane to light during
a trial which ended in Florence last week. It is the "Regulations” which

one of the lore active and ranified of guerrilla actions. the Co-anist
fighting Units. adopted and applied for years. fie-hers of the unit that
killed fedele Calwosa. the public prosecutor of Prosinone. and two nen who

accoepanied his: at Patrice. were following these "Regulations."

The docunent was seized in April 1977 at a base frequented by two neebers of
the Fighting Units. An attespt was sade last January to free the: by an
assault on the jail at karate (police-an Pausto Dionisi was killed). At

the beginning of the trial. the ucc hit ll ”objectives" simltaneously (includ-
ing the ear-physician of the prison and the person who planned the new
Florentine Penitentiary). in order to denonstrate an operational capability
that was intact and widespread. before they were sentenced to 13 years in
prison each. the two defendants praised the "fighting party.”

but does this "party” actually exist? If it exists. it certainly has the
organisation accurately described in the "Regulations.” After a broad presiae
concerning errors co-itted (He do not say. War is the naster' as others do.

1.1
POI OFFICXIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFl’lClAl. USE ONLY

Nor. 'Revolution tonorrow' as we have done neny tines. 'l'hese pressure

tectics have disastrous effects) there is the basic statenent: "The naxinun
possible expansion nust be pernitted the irregular bands who will engage in
fighting in this phase. and later becone s regular any at the ties of war.“

In the present phase. this is the organization indicated in the “Regulations":
(1) Guerrilla General Staff;

(2) Central Guerrilla Units;

(3) Proleterian Guerrilla Squads:

(10) Press. Propaganda. Activities in the Movenent;

(5) Services.

"Iron 2 in particular indicates attacks; Iten 3 expresses conbat; Iron 6
expresses fighting on the line and pronotion of co-ittees. Every unit. like
every conrsdo. is on colbst status."

The latter statencnt shows that even the terrorist leaders are required to
personnally becone cos-itted in actions. But how does one "join" these
organizations? The answer is found in the chapter entitled "Rocmiting"
which also refers to pronotions: "The instrunent of organization is presence
in the love-ant. Recruits enter the organization froa below. This does not
nean that every tine contact is nde with a conrade who has certain abilities.
he is to be sent to cleanse hisaelf in the novenont. however. it is iaportant
that before every pronotion a period of tine lust pass to pornit verification
of the coarade's ability in terns of security. training and self-training

(we refer to a period froa 3 to 6 nonths)."

Before every pronotion. s higher-ranking conrade aust keep the candidate
under observation. carrying out an investigation on levels of security (his
origins. professional dedication. prior record). checking possible contacts
with the ener (and surveillance if necessary) and verifying his nilitary
capacity in operations which he nust carry out alone. At this point. he is
subjected to interrogation which should consider political honogenoity.
personnal initiative. and ”consequences of his joining up." After this long
period of exaninations. "The staff will decide whether the candidate is
accepted."

who are the senbers of this “Gunilla warfare general staff" and what are
their tasks? First of all. it not be said that “it has decision-airing powers.
conducts national relations and controls the organisation's budget."

Elections to staff are nado "through aethods of daocratic centralisn. not
because the individuals represent sectors or are good in the art of public
speaking." but for their ability to express and iwlsnant stated objectives.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL USE (INLY

Each member of the staff. in addition to understanding overall organisational
problems. must have a kind of specialization: “The unit commanders in military
practice; the comrade representing the 'scientific' function. an understanding
of technology and logistics: those involved in 'intelligence' must know infor-
mation; squad comrades must know relationships with the movement." The staff
remains in office for 1 year. It submits a resignation to the yearend
political conference. An executive commander is elected to the staff. Staff
members fight alongside units.

And here we come to I'guerrilla units." They have two fundamental objectives:
Attack and expropriation. They are entirely detached from the rest of the
organisation. and the commander is the only contact with the staff command.
Totally self-sufficient. they have bases and supply depots. and they must

have the characteristics of maximum capacity to act and mobilize. Its members
are those who particularly distinguish themselves in the squads.

Combat and self-financing are the main objectives of the "proletarisn squads.“
Hhile the units are completely manned by "regulars." the squads are composed
of irregulars under the leadership of one or more regulars. The latter are
responsible for training the squad in combat. political-military leadership,
and security checks. The liaison between the various squads and the staff
consists of the national staff which consists of all squad commanders (the
"Regulations“ warn: Avoid large gatherings: If meetings consist of more

than five persons they should be halved). Advance discussion by headquarters
staff is required for "armed action."

Regulars and lrregulars

The distinction between regular and irregular guerrillas should not cause
perplexity. It is one of the principal innovative characteristics contained
in the "Regulations.” destined to influence the personality. the identity of
the new terrorist. who in the "Regulations" is called "regular cadre.“ Above
all. he lives in conditions of semisecrecy. he maintains his own identity.

he has a legal residence and a legal automobile. he lives "separated from
areas of movement or in any case from areas that can be infiltrated." he
cannot be placed under surveillance as an individual (like members of the
brigades) "just because he exists; but only if he is caught in the act or

in possession of something illegal.“

Sooner or later. the "Regulations" read, "comrades will fall": Therefore,

it is important to avoid possession of political documents and illegal material
simultaneously. since it must not be possible to link a crime with another
person." This is so that a technical defense can be raised. that is. a trial
based only on crimes committed. Example: A "regular” is arrested during

an act of expropriation [robberi7 in a bank. The technical defense consists
of trying him only for robbery. not for subversive conspiracy: "Since jail

is not a 'second home' for us we pose the problem of liberating political
prisoners, and also that of obtaining light sentences."

13
ron orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is necessary to be attentive to all the elesents which in one way or
another can lead back to a "regular." here arises the need to "place filters
between oneself and all those things which. even though legal. can serve the
adversary for purposes of identification. froa physical description to social
status." And sore particularly: "we do not intend to reco-end the role

of a lou~level employee as the pinnacle of disguise. Certainly appearance
and dress must not be too eccentric. Care aust be taken to avoid use of the
family as a direct link in tracing us or at least not an ismediate link.
Separation. in order to be credible. nust be progressive and is carried out
on a case-by-case basis."

Unquestionably aembers of the unit who killed the Prosinone prosecutor.

Fedele Calvose. were following the latter "Regulations." Roberto Capone.

the student killed in the attack. lived in these conditions. He was detaching
hinself from his faaily. he had loosened contacts with the political sove-
nents to which he had belonged. He had adopted an unsuspected cover as an
employee in an architect's office on a salary of 300.000 lire per month.

And. in fact. the "Regulations" require the organization to guarantee ”fictitious
eaployaent and a budget that takes into account the creation of business
activities with sore or less false places of employnent." This for those
coarades who “are in a position where they lust socially justify the source

of their income." Nicola Valentino who shares Capone's apartment and is
sought for the killing. had not rented a place for nothing when he said he
wanted to establish a shop for the sale of coral.

After the rules of conduct the fundamental requiresents are: Political
homogeneity. fighting qualities. availability 26 hours a day. abilities lead-
ing to prosotion and leadership, objective determination. discipline. acceptance
of the hierarchy. Specifying military initiative. the "Regulations" single

out three "basic operational models: 1) operation without weapons--for example.
a skillful theft. surveillance. reconnaisance. street fights; 2) arned action
without drawing a weapon-for example. a burglary. atakeouta. terrorist acts.
propaganda; 3) action with use of weapon--for exanple. disarming. immobilis-
ing. kidnaping. theft. firefight and any other kind of attack. The regular
cadre aust have been involved at least once on all three levels of operations."
However. the irregular is required to have a fighting quality that is sufficient
on the second level: That is to say. operations in which use of a weapon is
expected and necessary are reserved for full-time guerrillas.

Regarding availability. it is not desired to ”create people's martyrs. not

to tolerate arachair revolutionaries." All guerrilla groups are always in
agreement on_this subject. “Sacred cows” must not exist in the red brigades.
In the GAP [Partisan Action Group] created by Giangiacomo feltrinalli. it was
the leader himself who led the more spectacular actions. All members of NAP
[Ar-ed Proletarian Nucle£7 played a direct role. however. the "Regulations”
provide that "the regular say be asked at any time to go underground." Be

is "conscious of belonging to a centralised and therefore rigidly hierarchical
organisation. Therefore. he disciplines himself according to its internal
rules. he takes no initiative without consulting his direct superior or. in
cases of emergency. the highest ranking person he can find."

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in return. the organisation guarantees medical. mechanical. and legal services.
and the possibility of escaping abroad. Particular attention is given to

legal services: "The comrade lawyer may from time to time adequately select
the line of defense only if he is politically in possession of the organisa-
tion's program: and only in this case can there be a valid exchange with the
comrade prisoners."

The strengthening of services is one of the immediate goals to be reached.

on the basis of the so-celled "network." The latter is differentiated in

"a real friend with awareness in the political area; and in the purely support
network. uninformed." This is a considerable difference above all because

of the different development that members in this sector may have: The
former. that is the aware network. is considered a privileged terrain for
testing cadres selected from the area. future candidates for irregular groups.
The latter. that is the uninformed network. can be established on the basis
of school . fasily friends. or whomsoever. because a relationship

of esteem or reciprocal confidence with a comrade, guarantees a service."

Some Cabinet-level Friends

These few phrases embrace the entire world of sympathizers. of those who
move around the organisation. who guarantee its survival and development.
In this kind of organization "entry from below" is not unplanned. Thus. one
enters by beginning to guarantee a service, a docussnt, information, a
suggestion. Perhaps this would be received from a friend who esteems us
and who could never by the furthest stretch of the imagination suppose that
the material will turn out to be useful to terrorists. This is probably
the sitstuion of the various "moles" who are believed to be holed up in
the ministries. Perhaps it is not ' matter of conscious spies. but merely
of "school companions." "friends of the family." who indulge in confidences
based on a misplaced trust. In order to avoid shocks. requests directed to
the network are made on a gradual basis. Finally. "a minimum of political
debate is guaranteed to network comrades."

Since the organisation puts down its roots in such a broad and deep way,
would it not be possible to trace back the branches so. as to identify the
regular cadres, the commanders and the political-military leaders? we have

already seen how many barriers (through exasinations. interrogations. tests
and security checks) must be overcome when a comrade wants to enter the
organization. But there are other rules that. at least on paper, are designed
to prevent infiltration. One of the principal ones is "compsrtmentslizstion."
the total separation between various units. bases and supply locations must
obey this rule: The least number of comrades possible must have access to
headquarters and. in regard to neighbors. these visits must be justified by
a social reason. It is recommended that a straw man be found for bases
where operations are planned and where comrades are hidden. working areas
are considered as highly mobile structures. Consultation and updating of
files. and technical work must be carried out in legal quarters where illegal
material is transported only at the IJIORC of use in a suitcase and all the

rest of the material needed ressins in place. justified by the legal activity
being carried out.

15
son orncm. use ostr
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Notes Yes. Telephone No

Eaphssis eust be placed on this attention that the draftera of the ”Regulations"
have dedicated to the erection of a "legal facade" which will serve as a

cover: Mention is expressly node of quarters and legal activities that can
serve to cover illegality. what could this cover be? The rear areas of a

shop. a lawyer's or architect's office. a bookstore. a private school? The
"Regulations" always carefully avoid any reference to real situations, to
localities or persons who could be traced.

Even the chapter dedicated to neetings stresses the criterion of secrecy.
Meetings of coerades should not include nore then four or five persons at

a tile. Meetings. which shall be "short. productive end secure." could also
be held in the open if the area guarantees good visibility or in public places
with two exits. Otherwise, they lust be held in "bases for that purpose
rented by the organization or in bones of conrsdes only if they are 'claan.’
or better in network sefehousea." The telephone is used as little as possible

and only to receive messages in case of eeergency. It is better to use notes
left in agreed upon places or other systees.

The "Regulations" recon-end studying a code to indicate places of appointment
in the presence of third parties. on the telephone, or writing. It is
recon-ended that a selection be node of three conventional nanes. for axe-ple,
the station, the bar. the cinema. which will correspond to three different
places prepared in advance. While saintaining the nolenclature, the actual
place should be changed at least once a month." An ideal place is the

heavily populated suburb, fer froe friends and enesies. Never wait sore
than 10 einutes.

The code will be useful for energency situations. Agreed upon phrases will
serve to indicate three degrees of warning: Prealars (renove doculents and
and illegal saterial froe the houses and saintain alert); slarn (cease all
activity); danger (separate and nove to other cities).

Conradeship but not Friendship

Even within the organisation, contacts between guerrillas are subject to
detailed regulations. "There lust be no relations of a personal nature.

These are tolerated among regulars of the sane unit, but it is advised that
each one release his tensions in localities not connected with the organization.
Relations. however. lust be limited to saintaining that level of coeradeship
and adaptation that is useful in action and work." In fact. in the pest,
personal relations had led to the "destruction of that 'gang of friends' of
which they were a neeber," the drafters of the document recall. "In fact.

there existed a creeping suborganization which advanced its own infernal debate

on everything. This was the first step toward personalise and added discontent
to discontent."

16
roe orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally. links to the masses: These must take place through the press.
propaganda, preeence in the movement. The unit that deals with this "is
coaposed of the squads and the area that they activate under the leadership
of the regular cells"; it proaotes debate on the subject of arsed struggle.
it selects and recruits new cadres. For this reason. it must adopt "a legal
facade that would link it to a political area.” As a consequence, it is
necessary to have a local newspaper. even if a national newspaper exists.

The final rules refer to the press and are along the seat alarsing: "The
editorial office of the newspaper lust be a point of explicit reference for

comrades in the area. The legal editorial office must work under the control
of a regular comrade."

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Riuoli mm.

6036
CSO: 3106

17
you orncm. use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

MEMBERSHIP, STRUCTURE, FISCAL POLICY OF LABOR UNIONS
Milan IL SOLE-24 ORB in Italian 14 Nov, 19 Dec 78
[Article by Salvatore Col]

[14Nov 73, P 3]

[Text] , The Italian labor burocracy today has swollen just
about as such as it dare swell: any fatter, and it would be
quite unable to function at all. Pros the figures we saw ear—
lier, though, we get the impression that the linit is about

to be declared obsolete, since the average number of new hands
coning aboard the apparatus is too high for any sudden drop

to zero, or, in other words, to the ordinary level of attri-
tion and turnover. As to where the new level may be set, there
is a total lack of any procedure for replacement that would
allow this burocracy to retain its functional agility, and at
the same tine innunize it against elephantiasis. Urgent adop-
tion of this mechanism is rendered additionally advisable by
the current slun in membership, after 10 years of steady rise
in the rolls.

Theoretically, organized labor in Italy has two possible ways

in which to atop the expansion of the labor burocracy: it

can update its own leadership through cadre training centers,

or it can sake at least sose of the union offices elective (in
other words, have people in jobs for specific terms, then ei-
ther re-elect them or pick somebody else). In fact, though, .
neither of these approaches will work: the first, because the
union training centers enjoy no prestige whatever, nor do they
command the necessary recognition to exercise a role of advance-

ment and updating of labor cadre. Almost all the labor training
schools nerely pass along the in-house line, and none has the

tools to foster high-level research and inforsation.

The second approach (making at least sose of the organization
management Jobs elective) is hampered primarily by the rigid

18
m omcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

cempartmcntallzntlon of the Italian labor movement into party
factions. Winning, in most cases, would he a matter of belong-
ing to one of those factions, rather that one of any real lead-
ership capability or management skills inside the apparatus,
particularly since the political parties always have been and
still are the main channel for coopting union officials.

Helping to make this approach even more unpromising is the very
strong esprit de corps that unites members of the labor buro-
cracy. As Bruno Manghi notes: "The union man can become,an of-
ficer of the consensus because he belongs to a protected elite.
Protected, because it is called upon to embody a legitimate and
honored institution. [Missing words or sentences.]...capacity
of the internal democratic mechanisms to jeopardize the leader-
ship role, meaning the high stability of these roles. This is
how the dominant pattern becomes that of the average politician:
the one who gives with the ebb and flow of events so as to hang
onto his consensus and his delegated power."

Moving ahead in our examination of the data on the burocracies,
it is worth while to devote a good deal of attention to the phe-
nomenon known as transfer (distacce): transfer comes about when

all or some of the individual‘s remuneration for union work comes
from his employer.

In addition to cadre transferred from production and set to work
in the work place, the union also has an equivalent number of
transfer people working outside the work places, within its own
burocracy. Specific data are available only for the CGIL, but
they will do to give some idea of how widespread the phenomenon
actually is. Of the 5,301 officials working full time in the
Federation Chambers of Labor, transfer people account for 1,510,
or 28.5 percent of the total. If we apply that same percentage
to the other two confederations, we can estimate that full-time
official transferred from production number around 2,700.

In the CGIL, 934 transfer workers are paid by the union (all fringe
benefits are paid by the company from which they were transferred),
while the remaining 570 are paid in toto by the company. The

CGIL tends to transfer out of production only politically know-
ledgeable cadre, and to look outside for its technical staff.
Transferees from production added to the technical staff number
only a scant 6.6 percent. Geographical distribution of trans—
ferees is also quite heterogeneous: it ranges from 186 in

Liguria (85.7 porcen t of union officials) to 109 in Lombardy

(12.8 percent) to $0 in Sicily (8 percent). Unfortunately, we
have no way of knowing where the transferees come from (industry,
agricultural services, civil service...), and it is difficult
therefore to understand the underlying causes for the wide dis-
parity from region to region, or the possible motivation that

19
POI! orncw. use omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I'lllllllll'
.0nnnnwn>a 00: ~QOOA wuowumao no auan Atv
.uowuuo Hnowauwomuh ﬁnd ucwnooooun wood QHOOIaocH ”ochsom

 

”can ouma nu own av mam ua<au a<aoa
a: an n on nn 0 A5 32.3.26
mom on nu an nu ma auuonm
mo ms nn «a nu u aaananao
«a o nu m nu v announwnon
«on an nu «a nu on awuan<
men oo un co nn an «gang-no
ea n nn H nu u ouuuo:
me o nn m nu H wunsun<
can on nu me nu an Aoaomv owaua
nu ms nu w nu ma nasal:
med v” nu ma un an nogouo:
nmv ooa nu on nu ma acaoasa
wno can un do w «an ocuaaounnauana m
an” ow nu ma u on causau aunoao>nausuum
mm ma a o nn 0 ounu< oau<nouwauoun
«mm con un mm a ooa oaona>
nmo oou uu mm un an ausannoa
man can on cm 5 oo «wanna;
n a nu uu n v nano<.v nc>
«on and nu an e nou onoauouu

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ndonhaan< ndauowmmo
auuu uououaua
auooa “woos :ouap an vwam aoz gown: oz» an can“
naaaowmmo pomucaaa uaawoauuo uouacaua

.QSOOH .vﬁdom .:£OOH .vwnom w z 0 H 0 N a

 

 

 

.aowcs 0:9 sou

«adv Hdﬂm Undxhoz vud nowuosvoum loam ﬁchuouncdha udowowmuo Ucdho>ooonQHawanHaoon
nownuv honed mo muonldzo Hanovwmcou JHOO 09 0:0 mo nmuaoo on» :0 vovw>oua cowvaihoucn
Ii
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

might lead a man to give up his own Job simply to hold a post
an a union official.

One bit of information comes through very clearly, though. In
the South, the percentages of transferees to the total apparatus
payroll are lower than the national average: of 1,386 officials
(both technical and political), only 245 (18 percent) are trans-
ferees. In casting about for an explanation of these figures,
we should mention the difficulties the union runs into in the
South when it tries to insert officials from the work places
into its internal official apparatus. Because of labor's lesser
aggressiveness by comparison with the North, and because of the
more recent emergence of industrial areas there, workers in the
Mezzogiorno who are able and willing to take on management jobs
in the union apparatus are far fewer than in the rest of the
country. The many union training schools that have sprung up in
the South, mainly because the CGIL wanted them, only rarely suc-
ceed in doing what they are supposed to do.

Further confirmation of this state of affairs comes to us from
the figures on turnover in the apparatus in 1976 as compared
with 1975. In northern Italy, political officials coming in
during 1976 numbered 262, of whom 205 (78.2 percent) were trans-
ferees from production. In central Italy there were 48 new poli-
tical officials, 37 of them (77.1 percent) from production. The
situation is different in the Mczzogiorno, where out of 60 new
recruits only 33 (55 percent) came from production. The remain-
ing 45 percent consists of students or unemployed graduates.

In today's labor burocracy “there is an increasing flow of edu-
cated people without satisfactory jobs, who see in the union not
only an ideal chance, but also a fairly stable job opportunity
with promise for self-fulfillment.“ (Hanghi.) This trend is more
marked in the South for the reasons cited, but it is substantial
even in the center and in the North.

for the long-run impact on the social makeup of the labor baro-
cracy, the phenomenon is beginning to cause some concern -- and
not without reason -- inside the confederations themselves.

U0 December 1978, p 31

[Text] When it comes to the more specifically sociological fea-
tures of union apparatus (social background, original occupation,
education), the unions are very cagey about providing informa-
tion. With a little patience, though, it is possible to work
out a reliable picture of their makeup, aware that the extrapo-
lations we are going to make will not give as exact quantities,
but will merely reflect reasonavly probable trends. The labor
organizations that are most generous with data in this area are
the CISL (Italian Confederation of Workers' Unions) and the UIL
(Italian Union of Labor). The CGIL confines itself to giving

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the age of its officials and the percentage of cadre who have
never been in the labor world and have come into the apparatus
over recent years. One last stipulation: the following fi-
gures still relate only to the political apparatuses involved
in the horizontal and categorical structures of the CGIL, CISL,
and UIL at the provincial level. For the CISL, we have some
figures on regional apparatuses, on the national category lead-
ership, and on the apparatus at the home office.

The CGIL's political apparatus consists of 1,703 officials under
35 years of age, 1,646 between 35 and 55, and 232 over 55. Among
that last group are 72 officials over 60. In the CISL 403 of-
ficials are under 30 and 918 are over 50. There are no data on
the remaining 421.

These figures reflect, albeit not in any homogeneous way, the
three phases of the history of organized labor over the last 30
years. The first generation of officials (those over $0) is
still numerous. These officials in most cases hold high posts
in the horizontal structures, particularly. The second age
group, the 35- to 50-year-olds, include the generation of offi-
cials who got their early start in the contract disputes of the
Sixties. The last group, those from 30 to 35: are the youngest
generation, largely made up of cadre who have taken part in and
often often had a leading role in the worker struggles of the
hot autumn. These officials are the "new blood" in organized
labor, and most of them are active in the provincial category
(vertical) structures.

0n the whole, the average age of the CISL cadre man is slightly
greater than that of his CGIL counterpart. This is particularly
true in the Mezzogiorno, where the CISL, inlike the CGIL, has an
average age in the apparatus than in the rank and file. The
incidence of CISL organization men over $0 in the South is 20
percant, while for the country as a whole it is only 15 percent.

In the South, with the exception of Apulia and Sicily, the CGIL
has a cadre group that is relatively younger than in the rest
of Italy, because in this area many of the provincial Chambers
of Labor have existed for only a decade or so. The union lead-
ership, nainly grown up in the immediate aftermath of World War
II, come mainly from the ranks of farm laborers, and are con-
centrated almost exclusively in Apulia and Sicily.

I.have skipped over the UIL because this particular organization
is a unique case. The UIL in fact does not have any of the cadre

trained during the late Forties which is still running the CGIL
and CISL today. Its burocracy consists largely of officials be-
tween 30 and 40, with around 10 years' executive experience. In
other words, the UIL officials embody the experience of the Six-

ties, enriched with the bargaining background of this last de-
cade.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 (INLY

Another datun the unlons, with the exception of the COIL, are
willing to release In the scholastic backgrounds of their offi-
cials. In the CISL 13 percent of officials have finished grade
school, 33 percent have middle school diplomas, and 22 percent
hold upper siddle school certificates, while another 3 percent
have college degrees. For the renaining 29 percent (519 offi-
cials) there are no data available. As one can see, the level
of education in the CISL burocracy differs sosewhat, though not
excessively, from that of the Italian population as a whole.

These figures vary greatly if we consider the educational level
or the CISL in the South. In this area, university graduates
account for only 5 percent, and upper-niddle-sohool graduates
only 35percent, while 29 percent have middle school diplomas

and 12 percent have finished grade school. The highest level of
education asong CISt cadre in the South is to be traced to the
non-union background of sany cadre people working in the provin-
cial labor unions (CISt'e provincial structures). It should
also be borne in nind that the widespread presence of the CISL
in the civil service allows this organization to have, at the
sane time, cadre cosing out of the laboring world and those with
high-school educations.

In the North, where the proportion of working-class people in
the CISL is higher, officials with college degrees account for
only 17.5 percent, while 50 percent of then have high school
diploeas.

A aisilar feature can be found in the CGIL as well, where, as
we already noted, a Very high percentage of new officials in the
South, such higher than in the North, cones directly fro- the
classroon.

An initial conclusion leads to the assertion that the intermediate
echelons of the hierarchies of the CISL and COIL do not differ
substantially in levels of education. levels higher than the
average for the nation as a whole are found sainly in the dou-
thern regions.

In this instance, too, the Ult's apparatus is a case apart. Be-
cause of its heavy nesbership anong technicians and office work-
ers in industry and in the tertiary sector, this organization
has no trouble finding officials in the working world (95 percent
of cadre) with a high educational level. The fact is that 40
percent of "It officials hold high school diplosas, and another
lo percent have college degrees. A great aany of these officials
have attended special institutes for skilled industrial workers,
technicians and clerical workers, and surveyors, while those with
backgrounds in the sciences are by no leans rare (around 20 per-
cent of the degree-holders). Another 37.5 percent of "It offi-
cials have siddle-school certificates. The high nusber of young
and well educated officials in the UIL should also be viewed as

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
aunt or profession

 

nxecutive, of independent neans
irker
|desnan

Lfied level)
Lized skills
laborer

hired hand

T 0 T A L

 

Council is the highest deliberative body in the labor a
large measure the following group of leaders: local so
:aries, provincial secretaries, secretaries general of a
Is, national presidents of the collateral bodies (Ehplog
Lning). The data shoun in the table cover 286 of tho 4]
=ils.

:ATO, February 1972, no 1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an effort to recover the organizational and political initiative
free the other two organizations.

While the school diplona is only partly an area of screening for
the internediate levels of the union hierarchy, it is a critical
factor in advaneenent to the upper reaches of the bureeracy.

In upport of this assertion one need only cite the following
figures. In 1974, out of 34 officials esployed in the CISL‘s
regional offices, nine (26.5 percent) were college graduates and
15 had high school diploeas. Moving up in the hierarchy, out of
73 officials working at CISL's central headquarters, 38 ($3 per-
cent) were college graduates and 27 (37 percent) had high school
diplonas. high levels of education were also found in the appa-
ratus of the Clst's category federations: out of 196 officials,
there were 44 college graduates (22.4 percent) and 78 high school
graduates (‘0 percent).

The cart and Hit have thus far provided no reliable data on their
regional and national apparatuses. It is fair to assume, though,
that these organizations would show trends identical with those
Just cited for the CISL apparatus, a trend that was borne out in
an inquiry conducted by Filippo Battaglia back in 1971.

The results of that survey show that even than, the percentage
of white collar workers and students with higher than average

education was very high asong the nesbers of the CGIL-CISL-UIL
executive councils.

i think that, in the light of all those data, we cannot but agree
with what Giuseppe Della Rocco wrote recently: "The high cultu-

ral level, the declining trend in the group of people of working

class backgrounds, the pervasive presence of white collar workers
and students, the prestige and the social relations surfacing in

the work of the union official place the full-tine nesbera of

that rank very close, on the level of social status, to the aid-
dle classes.“

To what degree does awareness of this status influence the beha-
vior and shape the line of the Italian labor love-ant? The sove-

sent is goinf to have to start cosing up with acne answers to
this kind of question.

COPTRIOHT: 1978 lditrice ll Sole-2k are s.r.l

6102
050: 3103

25
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR (II-‘FICIM. USE ONLY

3180*)"

[WING warm-ms WHOSE!) PROVE INACCURATE
Stockholm VIEWS MARI!!! in medial! 111 Dec 78 p 7

[lanterlal hy Olle Pahlen: “Hill the ‘l‘rends DeceiVe the Prognosticators
Main in 1979?]

[Text] The economic forecasts of the National Swedish Institute for Economic
Research [K1], the Federation of median Industries [81] and the SNS [Indus-
trial Council for :bcial and Economic Studies] have in recent years been wide
of the mark. if the margin of their error is the sane in 1979 Sweden will
mm a growth rate of about 3 percent. (The most optimistic estiute is

5 percent.)

:wcden'n reports of economic trends published this autumn reflect consistent
optimists for 1979. K1 expects a growth in the GNP of 10.3 percent. 81 is a
hit new conservative, hut still expect: '0 percent. last Monday the annual
report from man was put-lished and that organisation expects a growth in the
GNP in 1979 of not less than 5 percent.

These are very high figures. bong the own countries today only Japan is
expected to attain a GNP growth of snore than lo percent next year.

The Owedish prognosticators have not acct-mated a particularly good record
of forecasting in recent years. The autumn reports from XI, 81 and ass were
significantly in error for 1977 and 1978.

The diagram nhnwn the GNP forecasts. In 1977 Sweden's GNP fell by 2.5 per-
cent. But in the autun of 1976 all three reports forecast an increase. sus
had the mllcat urnor, Just 2.5 percentage points above the final outcome.

The promooticawra were clearly iupreaaed by 1917's decline in GNP. In the
ream-ante of autumn 197' I for the year 1978 both 81 and $108 predictions fell
Imlov the anneal zero line. instead, preliminary figures for 1978 shov a
umwth in uu- GNI‘ or :..2 percent. Kl'n prognosis as the closest, but was
still in error by are than one percentage point.

it is tapting to Judge the 1919 predictions on a basis of results frou recent
years. Before 197'! they were at least a couple of percentage points too high

26
ran omens. as: our
l-Uli ul-‘PICIM. UM: ONLY

and before 1978 they were a couple of percentage points too low. If it is
now time for another exaggeration, a "realistic" forecast for the 1979 ONP
should he about 1 pv'rcvnt.

There are, howeVer, some more or less special factors which indicate that
growth will be unusually high next year.

This past year the large inprovmnt in the balance of tradeuincreased
exports and reduced imports-wxplains a large part of the growth in the
GNP (and also explains some of the errors in predictions). 0n the other
hand the reduction of industrial inventory had a suppressing effect on the
GNP.

Next year the balance of trade will be basically unchanged compared with 1978.
Ian. inventory reduction will in large measure be completed. According to K!
the increase in inventory inVestmcnt will cause the GNP to grow by 1.3 percent.
without the inVentory effect the GNP predictions would be one to two percent
lower.

mrthennorc sun expects a marked increase in private consumption (following
decreases in 197’! and 1918 of a total of barely 2 percent). Kl's prognosis
amounts to 2.2 percent while :‘NE‘. believes that the increase will be as much
as 3.5 percent.

This will be attained through an increase in real spendable income of one to
two percent, and the effect of the tax package will give an additional one

percent. Furthermore a reduction in family savings of one percent is expected.

These high growth predictions should give new direction to the debate over
economic policy. To enter a period of high growth with measures to stimulate

the economy introduces the risk of causing a negative effect on the rate of
inflation and the balance of trade.

The balance of trade is not, however, seen as a problem by SNS. It depends
largely upon whether one supports official statistics. According to K1 the
total deficit in the trade balance for 1978 will be 7.2 billion kronor
(compared with lint! billion kronor in 1977). But according to statistics
utilized by ENS the Owe-dish balance of trade will improve substantially
this year.

Then naturally it does not make much difference if it worsens by one or two
billion next year due to an increase in the volume of imports by over 8
)wrccmt.

2?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1 )Prognour ooh mun
(2)389. W vdynﬂklnddng

 

Key:
1. Prognoses Ind results
2. GNP. Annual amount of change
3. Percent
‘0. National sledish Institute for Economic Research
5. Federation of Swedish Industries
6. Industricl Council for Social snd Economic Studies
7. Result

COPYRIGHT: Ahlen 3. Akcrlunds Tryckericr, Stockholm, 1978

9287
cm: 3109

28 .'
Pox onxcm. use out?
FOR OVPICIAI. 088 MY

HBSTGBRMANY

ACTIVITIBS. STATUS 0? 9110“ POLITICAL GROUPS IN PRO
Ila-burg STERN in Osman 30 ﬂov 78 pp 250-256
[Article by Uwe liner: "Protective hands from Pullach")

[Text] A hundred and eighty-seven extresist groups with
60.000 nenbers are using the PRC as a bettleground against
their native govern-eats. Rightwing radicals. in particu-
lar. can count on tolerance from Ger-an Officials.

The vocabulary is reniniscent of blood. boobs and Baader-Heinhof. "Revo-
lutionary life-and death battle." "Let us create revolutionary associations
and groups." "The apparatus of the state oust be destroyed with the dia-
lectic of the word and with dynanite." But it is not hose-grown terrorists.
it is Croatian nationalists who are thundering such sayings. And Turkish
rightwing extrenists or Persian leftwing fanatics are playing the seas tune.
They are all nisuaing the PM as a base for operations against those in
power in their own countries—the co-unist Tito in lelgrsde, the socialist
acevit in Ankara and the march lieu Pahlevi in Teheran.

of the approxinately lo nillion foreigners who live in the Heat Ger-an area.
about 60.000 belong to 187 extresist groups. according to the east recent
findings of the office for the Protection of the Constitution. They call
thesselves "Croatian Republic Party.” National Salvation Party.” or ”0on-
federation of Iranian Students." and terrorists actions like surder. san-
slaughter and bodily hurl. atteqts involving explosives and arson can be
laid to the account of their violent adherents. Just the Croatians operating
in west Germany are charged by the Pederal Criminal Police bureau (an) with
A nurders. 8 attespted laurders. 20 crises involving explosives. and 3 attacks
in Yugoslavia with a total of 16 deaths.

This does not include the death of 35-year-old Radonir Gazija of Sarajevo.
who lost his life on 11 Noveder in Constance in a "tavern brawl" (as the
police bulletin put it). shot by ushers of the Croatian "fascist-terrorist
underground." as the Yugoslavian esbasay in Bonn surnises.

Possibly the nssusption is jmtified. For 1,700 sanbers of the colony of
exiled Croatians in the PRC. which is 15.000 strong. advocate force as a

29
m omcuu. use our
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

means of political discussion. in the view of the Ministry of the Interior
in Bonn. and at least 100 of the extremists "tend toward terrorist acts."

But the existence of the criminal group of 100 would hardly have been noticed
by Bonn if Yugoslav security officials had not seized the presumed terrorists
Brigitte Nuhnhaupt. Sieglinde Hofaann. Peter Juergen Boock and Rolf Clemens
Hagner in May 1978. The government in Belgrade used the foursome. who were
imprisoned in Zebreb. as pledges for its demand. which had been issued in

vain for years. that Bonn should proceed more severely against the violent
Croatian exiles. That the four Germans were then finally released is connected
with the refusal to extradite eight Croatian leaders and the "unchanged
scandalous generosity toward violent Croatian criminals" which still pre-
walls. as a cabinet member in Bonn self-critically points out.

The attitude of Heat German officials toward extremist foreigners is as
loose as the police and the courts are strict in letting all those who have
been even marginally connected with terrorism. as occupiers of houses or as
helpers. feel the rigor of the law. and as the Bundestag and the Bundesrat
draw tight the meshes of the law to fight terrorism.

The Turkish fascist leader Alparslan Tuerkea was able to arouse his country-
men to murder unhindered: "Kill the coanunist dogal" Ten thousand fanatical
Ecevit opponents acclaimed the demagog at the end of October in Dortmund.
around 1.000 in Berlin. It is true that the Tuerkes strike force "Grey
Wolves" beat up those with differing political opinions in the Hestphalian
town of Beam and demolished union offices in aessian Russlsheis. but "in-
dications of illegal action are not known to the Federal government." ac-
cordong to the secretary of state for the interior. Andreas von Schoeler
(POP).

But not all foreigners are treated as generously as the right wing radical
Turks. Refugees from Chile. for example. are carefully investigated to
see if they could possibly endanger the basic free democratic order of
society. Only those who do not fail the test of political opinion are
allowed to enter. And representatives of black African freedom movements
who wanted to go to Bonn for an antiapartheid congress were only admitted
to the country after lenghty grilling. Even in the case of opponents to
the Shah among lranian students. officials register every activity with
painful precision. Report of the Office for the Protection of the Constitu-
tion: "In this report year. increasingly close links between Iranian re-
sistance groups and German 'K' groups were found."

Secretary of State von Schoeler does not wish to preceive the difference
in treatment for leftist extremists and rightist fanatics: ”The Federal
government always applies the standards and criteria of the law concerning
aliens."

Yet no one knows the bitter truth better than the Free Democrat Andreas
von Schoeler. Since the beginning of October a task force on “exiled
Yugoslav extremdsts" of the hinistry of the Interior has been working on

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a report about their activities on Ger-an soil. The chancellor had ordered
the dossier after he had repeatedly requested in the cabinet that the
Croatian leader Stejpan Bilandzicshould finally be "put on a leash." it is
true that the sea in Bonn had refused to extradite Bilandzic to Belgrade
because he was involved in a criminal case in Cologne. but they intended

to control his behavior in future. according to their promise to Yugoslavia.

But because Bilandsic continued to participate in issuing proclamations.
to give press conferences and hand out mocking poeus (sample: ”Hhen we
protest a dictator's away! we should not be surpressed this way"), the
chancellor wanted to know exactly what had been done in the PRC against
the violent ringleader. The result of the expert report is also the basis
for the ”rabid counterattack" (PRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU) from Belgrade.

Although Bilandzic--who case to the PRC illegally in 1958 from Yugoslavia--
had come into conflict with the police 17 times in all. and had even been
sentenced to 3 years in jail in 1964 because of a crime involving explosives.
the authorities persitted his privileges: he was allowed to study at the
Pedagogical College and rise to become director of a dormitory for foreigners.
he was even further educated in Cologne-Pore as a social pedagog after the
police had discovered an arsenal of military weapons in his house. And
although as early as 23 November 1965 all political activities had been
forbidden to him. he was able to travel unhindered to make proclamations

and attend demonstrations. to publish inflaanatory pamphlets. to acclaim
airplane hijackinga and other attacks against the hated Tito regime. A
tardy realization by the sinister of the interior in Bonn: "Bilandzic is

at this tise one of the soot important leading figures in extremist Yugo-
slav exile circles."

Alarsed by the list of the Crostian’s sins. Interior Minister Baum gave to
the appropriate colleague in Dusseldorf. Burkhard Hirsch. the urgent
"recosmendation" that he should institute charges against lilandzic because
of constant violations of the ban on political activity, and to take police
surveillance Ieasures as a precaution.

This appeal awoke no response. 0n the contrary: on 17 October the North
Rhine-Hestphaiian authorities issued his a new alien registration card and
a 2-year visitor's visa. The reason for this sounds like sockery: 'ﬁhis
decision assumed that the presence of Biiandzie did not jeopardize the
concerns of the PRC."

Bilandzic knew how to use his new freedom. he journeyed to a Croatian
meeting in Amsterdam. and collected money in the Croatian stronghold of
Chicago. until the Americana showed his the door after 5 days. There is

a plausible explanation fros the Dusseldorf Ministry of the interior of
why the Croatian was treated so generously. For years the Federal News
Service (sun) in Pullsch had worked closely with the Croatian exiles and
had placed protective hands over the esigrsnts. “And this made an impres-
sion on the authorities.”

COPYRIGHT: 1978 STERN

9337 ' 31
680: 3103 roe omcuu. use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"881' new

cavemen-rs nounsuc sunvrnunoa mam mourn
hamburg 81'an in (lemon 16 Nov 78 pp 73-78

[Text] The railway station post office in llunich is at hopfenstresse 10.
At 1 o'clock in the norning a blue Volkswagen bus with license plates

"fl-AH 2249" pulls into the yard of the post office. 'l‘vo son in leather
jackets climb out and diseppeer into the post office. Minutes later they
push a cert filled with bulging begs to the vehicle. “Deutsche lundespost“
reads the inscription on the jute bags with the bleclt, red and gold stripes.
'l‘heir contentsuthousends of letters from hungsry, Ronnie. the cssn and
Yugoslavia, addressed to persons in liunich and the surrounding eree.

'l‘he leather-jacketed teen load the nail into their car end drive off.

Their destination is l hiloneter away. In the courtyard of a house at
Schvenenthaler Stresse 91 the bags are unloaded and dragged into the
office building. llere resides the Munich branch of the "ﬂein Adsinistre-
tion for Speciel Data Processing," Bonn 2--sn agency that cannot be found
in the Munich telephone directory. The intonation officer of the which
postal ehinistration, Johann liaier, is also unaware-0'1 must pass on this
utter. I know nothing about it."

Bight hours leter the two neu-oit's 3 pnudrive the nail begs back to the
railroad post station. Their blue W-bus has been registered in the ne-e
of the lhnnich insurence representative, llsrald Becker. who told 8TB!!!

on the telephone: "1 have s red Sirocco."

Hmich is not an isolated instance. Bvery day in my west Get-nan necro-
polisee cuouflaged official vehicles transport letters to systerious
offices with n-es such as "Achinistretion of federal Property/Special
Property" or "Research Office for Foreign Affairs." These are branch
offices of the Federal Infernation Service (we), headquartered in Pullech
near Mulch. liere selected letters are read. letters sent by Best German
citizens to countries in the Best bloc. and letters addressed to west
Ger-en citizens. The sun lakes copies of the letters, registers senders
end recipients. All infomtion. Iillions of bits of date, are then for-
warded to the sun headquarters for evaluations.

32
m omcm use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Best helpers for the Intelligence Officers Are the "Negroes"

Junction points for postal traffic from the East bloc are the so-called
postal dispatch centers. Letters from the cm arrive in Braunschweig,

Bebra, llof. llambtnrg, and Berlin. Air mail from the Soviet Union lands

at the airfield in Frankfurt. Messages from the case, llungary. Ronania
and Yugoslavia are received in the nain post office in Nuernberg. Fran
the GDR alone more than 100 million letters arrive annually.

But not only mail is under surveillance. Anybody who telephones an East-
ern country or receives a call from there can be fairly eure--the 3ND is
listening. The intelligence agents have installed their listening devices
in the switching stations of the federal post offices. The "negroes"
(bureaucratic jargon) AO-centimeter-long boxes full of electronic equip-
ment which allow the listener to bug every conversation. From the long-
distancc switching centers, direct lines run to the control stations of
the IND. There bugging experts with expensive, high-quality headsets

sit and simultaneously listen in to four conversations. Everything that
seems to be of interest is recorded on cassettes.

And for the men from Pullnch just about everything seems to be of interest.
This is true to the motto of the chief of the 3ND division II) Section 2
(Acquisition Soviet bloc, control of post and telecouunications) who goes
by the cover name of Colonel Gerverth: "To survey extensively all that

we can get."

The material that Mr Garverth has processed into hot information seems to
be rather modest in this connection. For example, his section deemed
noteworthy a letter from a con citizen, dated 2 November 1976. It read
in part: "During the last maneuvers the Russians again acted like swine;
they stole potatoes. etc. But the comrades always maintain that the Ivans
are our best friends. You can believe me that we would gladly do without
such friends."

Or a letter dated 6 November 1976: ”Our supply has been satisfactory for
some time. but of course it's not as good as in the 'capital.‘ Of course,
one needs three times as much there because foreign diplomats have to be
shown the 'world standard' and the bosses also have to make a living."

But the acquisitioners of the we do not limit thensclves to such vignettes
that can be read in every newspaper when they compose the secret messages.
Quite consistently they survey correspondence and telephone conversations
between Germans east and west. Thus the department "Acquisition Soviet
bloc" reports of a 28-year-old kindergarten teacher duo since February of
[977 "has repeatedly had contact by letter and telephone with her fiance
in the PM" and describes in detail the difficulties that the young woman
has had in her attempts to get an exit permit from the cut.

33
roe ovncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICMI. USE ONLY

Such infornetion is recorded on special tones, preprinted with the title
"Confidential Report of an Information Senior-Official Secret." 0n the
upper and lower edges of the fern a red stuap with the inscription "C 10"
has been printed. This is to signify that the report has been gathered by
circusvonting the principle of nail confidentiality established in Article
10 of the Basic Law as one of the basic rights. It can only be broken

according to the so-ealled “6-10 lav“ under precisely established circu-
stances.

The bugging law in Paragraph 3 allows the DMD to open letters and listen

in to telephone conversations without probable cause. But only "for the
collection of intelligence about situations the knowledge of which is neces-
sary for the tincly recognition of a danger of arned aggression against

the Federal Republic of Ger-any and for the treating of that danger." And

Paragraph 2 stipulates that "knowledge and natarials [thus obtained] cannot
be used to the detrinent of individuals.“

law Is Circianvented Under Slogan of "Official Assistance"

Many ferns of the sun bear a second steep. This time it is green and bears
the words: "German Services Are lnforned." Behind these four sinple words
is hidden the second scandal of the bull's nillionfold snooping. For the nan
fron Pullsch, whose only purpose in life is the gathering of intelligence

in hostile and friendly foreign countries, send to their colleagues of the
Protection of the Constitution and the Military Counterintelligence Service
(MAD) news about the citizens they dean to be security risks.

but this is precisely what the legislators have forbidden. In ranenbrance
of the omniscient Reich Security Main Directorate of the Nari era espionage
abroad and counterintelligence at house were assigned to two independent
agencies. But bureaucratic usage has caused the blurring of these separa-
ting lines under the label "official assistance." And nobody has control
over what is happening in this twilight zone of the secret services. has
basic law and the 6-10 Act have long been shot full of holes.

The for-er vice president of the federal Constitutional Court, Halter
Scuffert. has long been convinced that there cannot be any legal postal
surveillance "that could Justify investigation by the bagload." But the
standard procedure in Bonn goes like thiso-the m in Pullach justifies

its requests for intonation by conpiling a list of "danger areas" that is
forwarded through the Bonn Defense Ministry to the Federal Interior Ministry.
The list as a rule contains the amber states of the Harsaw Pact. Pro-
there danger always lurks, naintsins the m's president. Gerhard Weasel,
vhose favorite ter- is "the swindle of detente.”

Causes for requests for "strategic surveillance and intelligence" have been
the election of the federal president in Meet lerlin and the conflict be-
tveen Egypt and Libya. The shopping list of the Pullsch taggers is then

3%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

given the blessing of the c-lO comittee of the federal parliament that is
supposed to supervise the breaches of the confidentiality of the mail and
telephone. This conittee is composed of Dr Friedrich Vogel (cw), chair-
man; llelnuth Becker (8P0), vice chairman; Dr waiter Althaner (csv), lleins
Penalty (SPD) and Dr Friedrich Hendig (FDP).

Once the danger list has been approved, IN!) acquisitioner serverth goes to
work. serverth. who likes to bicycle around the rullach compound, has his

own views regarding the 6-10 Act: "He make extensive use of the authority
granted."

It will renain a secret of the END what the following reports. selected by
Gcrverth'e acquisition section from the can mail, have to do with an armed
aggression froa the East against the mo countries. For instance: "H.
no longer thinks that our third request will be approved. Now only Loewen-
thal or the United Nations can help..." (A letter dated 15 November 1976)
Or: "But the comrades reacted very angrily to Biermann. host only know

that he does not think highly of the 329...." (A letter dated 20 November
1976)

Responsible for the illegal transfer of the BND's information to the Verfaa-
aungsschuts and the HAD are 3ND officers Dr Hernberg. Juettner and Piecing.
In Nllach the intonation from the mail and telephone surveillance is for-
warded to the "Personen-Bereichs Archiv" (human intelligence archive) and
to the “3P5" ("Sachbesogene Personenerkenntnisse fuer Tipgewinnung und
Anwerbung") (subjective personal identifications for information gathering
and recruitnent). In plain language: The 3ND distills from letters and
telephone conversations information about citizens who could be of interest

or persuadable for recruitment as informants-~both in the con and in the
Federal Republic.

As Far as the 6-10 Couittee of Parliament is Concerned the Spy ﬂorid Is in
Order...

How far the practice of Pullach has moved away from the theory of the law
is demonstrated by the almost naive co-entary of the Federal Ministry of
the Interior to the (:40 Act. The possibilities of the bill) are cemented
upon as follows: "This surveillance potential is, however, limited, since
no agency charged with the naintenance of internal security, especially
with defense against unconstitutional attempts, can make use of it. It
can be. used only by the foreign intelligence service within the framework
of its linited authority.” And for the pacification of the citizenry it
goes on to say that we surveillance can "only be authorized for specific

and exactly definable individual cases within the postal and telecomnica-
tions traffic."

As for as the five nembers of the Bundestag comprising the 6-10 Oouaittee
are concerned, the world of the spies is in order. emittee chairman

35
ton omcm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Friedrich Vogel (C80) says, "Should we hear of recruitment procedures we
would tell the federal government--you cannot do that." To be sure. the
inspectors have not yet personally inspected.

Dr Manfred Schuelar, chief of the Federal chancellor's Office and supreme
political boss of the DMD takes a more flexible view. He said to the STERN,
“Nobody can demand that the evaluators should close their eyes when they
come across information that is important to the Office of the Protection
of the Constitution and the HAD. Of course this information has to be
turned over as rapidly as possible."

Schueler does not consider the official commentary of the Interior Ministry
to the 6-10 Act "the spirit of the law, I do not even know the camaentary."

Even within the sun there have been sharp discussions regarding the massive
snooping. The favorite--because it is the only bug-proof place--for such
conversations on the Pullach compound has been a meeting "over a beer on

the Ladenstrasse" of the cantonment. But such internal rebellions have
changed nothing.

Two hundred fifty employees of the BNO department 1 D 2 are busy with the
control of mail and telephone. They steam open the envelopes or roll the
letters within the envelopes with the aid of a special device, pull the

letters out of the side of the envelope, and reinsert them after reading.

...But the Experts Are Preparing New Attacks on Hail Confidentiality

Among the secret service people there rages a dispute that has not been
solved to date, namely, whether a wooden or an ivory needle is better for
rolling out the letters. In the meantime BND technicians have brought a
machine into action that can light up the letter from Aunt Emma in Leipsig
to her nephew in Castrop-Rauxel. '

Newer and newer devices for electronic snooping are being developed in
Hunich's prestigious suburb of Stockdorf. A high fence and an iron gate
prevent the curious from entering the 'ﬁblecmnmunications Technology In-
stitute" and the "Federal Office for Telecommunications Statistics" at
wnnneystrasse 10, characterised by a tall antenna.

In the suburb wild rumors are aloft--even a rocket base is supposed to be
located there. In reality it is the tinkering shop of the END buggers.

Together with specialists from the army they work on new devices for an
attack on mail confidentiality.

In 1962, during the Cuban crisis, the American intelligence service CIA
had all letters going from Germany to Havana opened and read. Foreign
intelligence in Germany was at that time still firmly in the hands of the
Americans. when the case of the Cuban letters became known, a storm of

36
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

public indignation ensued. The CIA's coup was the last incentiVe to have
the Germans thcnIechl eubark on the nnooping into letters and telephones,

under the close supervision of parliament and a supervisory body. to be
nure .

The c-lo Canaittee was installed in office in 1968 just as the so-cslled
"Cbomittue of Three" which is charged by the lundestag approving and super-

vising all begging and control measures. The Cuban action was never again
to be repeated .

But even in 1978 "Cuba” is a daily occurrence. According to the cautious
estimates of an expert of the 8P0 fraction. at least I to 2 percent of
postal and telephone traffic is under surveillance. For the correspondence
from the one Germany to the other this means a daily snooping in up to
10,000 letters.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 STERN

92b0
690: 3103

3?
For orncm. use ONLY
POM "PI’IGMI. "SK DNIN

9881' 08W

PANBI. DISCUSS” WW, LABOR WET
Iledmrg STERN in Ger-en 30 Nov 78 pp 92. 919. 96. 98, 100, 102

[feet] At e foru- orgenieed by STERN in lie-burg e mien
repreeentetive. e profeeeor of econonice. en induetrieliet.
e henker. end e lehor nerhet enelyet took poeitione.
Aftelwerde they engeged in diecueione with politiciene.
econonic exporte end Journeliete. here ere excerpte

froe the ninutee:

Prof Arnin Gutoweki. preeident of the MA lnetitute for Bcononic Ieeeerch
in lie-burg: Ae fer ee 1 - concerned. the "eecred cow" of full emloy-nt
an be butchered. we would do well to recell the tine i-edietely efter
the [Second world] Her. In thoee deye everybody wee fully emloyeduend
even if the job involved nothing nore then to exchenge e deck of potetoee
for e few bed eheete. Everybody wee enloyed. but our country wee econo-
nicelly in ruine. In developing countriee. too. there eaciete ”full en-
ploynent.“ but only in the eenee thet there even children ere eent into
the etreete to go begging or my tredeeeen loiter ebout hoping to be
able to ewing e little deel now end then.

The Beet Bloc countriee. too. heve full ewloyeent. for if the govern-ent
an order whet people ere euppoeed to do. they will in feet work, though
frequently without such purpoee end not very efficiently.

All of thie cennot he whet we ere efter. The feeoue Englieh econoeiet
Keynee eeid: one-ploynent can be elinineted by letting people dig hole-
which efterwerde ere filled up egein. ‘lhet kind of enployeent. however,
hee been recognized ee noneeoeicel. For in the: one one could eieply
pey unewloyeent coweneetion end new people the digging of holee.

What we need in en econony which ie efficiently fully eeployed. And thet
could be ettelned if there were lore profiteble production poeeibilitiee

for the eeployere. when the profit incentive ie there, entrepreneute will
lnveet end creete new job openinge.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI’I’ICIM. USE ONLY

1 do not believe that the entrepreneur today has become a television entre-
preneur. who does nothing but sit in front of the television waiting for
the announcesent of an econosie upswing. he is tether able and willing--
if this were not no. we could throw our econonic order overboardo-to sake
use of all profitable production changes. In this sense. I as appealing
to the entrepreneurs to pool their creative and innovative forces and
really try to use all chances that exist.

But it would be onesided to appeal only to the entrepreneurs. In order to
test whether entrepreneurs are still entrepreneurs and whether our econm
is still functioning. we sust also appeal to the esployees. may ought
to let it be known for a longer period of tise that they will give entra-
preneurs the chance to produce with better returns. If the unions are
worried that in so doing distribution is shifted too such in favor of the
entrepreneurs. they should think about a systes of profit sharing with

the sisuitaneous sharing of the esployees in the risks involved.

Then the workers will have a share in the profit if there is investsant and
successful production. .In that case. however. a part of the risk will be
taken off the shoulders of the entrepreneur so that he is. indeed. able

to invest.

I an in favor of not giving in to fataliss. but rather to give the sarkat-
econosy path still another try. Our scone-1c order has proved itself for
so long that, i believe. it would be very. very hazardous to throw it
overboard just now even in the presence of an uneqloysent situation
which has existed for sose rise.

Dr Dieter Martens. director of the Institute for Labor Market and Vocational
Research of the Federal Institute for Labor in liusrnberg: Per 3 to 6 years
we have had an annual average of a million unemloyed. and the wildest

ideas are connected with this figure; for exane. the idea that there are
a sillion people of whos every single one has been unewloyed for lo years
and is unable or unwilling to find a new job opening. while all the other
21 million workers are not endangered and are esployed without interrwtion.

Reality looks different: Every year 5 to 6 sillion people are looking for
a new job opening in a new firs. either because they were dismissed. have
quit theuelves. are newcosers to the labor sarket as adolescents or sarried
wosen. or because they are forced to give up an independent profession.

if one adds those who find another position within their firs. we are talk-
ing about aosething like 10 sillion people who once or sore often during

the year change their place of ewioysent.

Between 2 and 3 sillion citizens go through the experience of unewloysent
every year in so doing--for a shorter or longer tise period. 6 mnrhs on
the average. A growing number-mow already a quarter of a sillion—are
unemlnyed for ever u year. Moreover. not all mewloyed are registered
statistically. The statistical key date figure of a nillion meqloyed.
therefore. does not convey the coqlets picture.

39
ron onrcm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL llSli ONLY

What are the cannon for the underemloynent? Until 1973. the nrﬂaer of
people fired and hired were approxiaately in balance. In 1976. the nuher
of disnissals for the first tine surpassed the nutter of positions filled
by about 600.000. and in 1975 this difference anomted to are than 1
aillion. Since 1976. the nuaber of disnissals and the nutter of positions
filled are again in balance on an annual basis. but the gap free the years
1971.497} has not been filled again. if our econoay had grown by 6 percent
every year for the past 6 years. this would have been sufficient to attain
full eqloynent once again. Unfortunately. however, the upswing in pro-
duction since 1976 is not strong enough.

we aust add that since about 1973 we have not shortened the general work-
ing tine in the federal Republic as such as we did in the preceding years.
Ilnd we continued along the ease lines as during the years 1950-1973--
durlng this tine we shortened our working tine by sore than one-fourth—
unesployaent would be lower than it appears to be now.

But the current unowloynent as the result of a gap in economic growth

in 1976-1975 is not at all the dominant problem for the future. Danograph-
era calculate that during the next 10 years the population in the no
will decrease by 3 aillion people. while the nuder of Geraan workers will
increase by l nillion. The demd for job openings. in other words. will
continue to go up. If. however. during the toning years we have econoaic
growth that is barely sufficient to keep the balance between disaissals
and nuaber of positions filled. this aeans that we will be shoring up
uneaploynent by this 1 million additional workers which the next 10 years
will add to the labor force: to the figure of 2 aillion. If the growth
rate of the econoay falls under 3 percent. the nudeer of mewloyed will
be correspondingly higher.

The so-called pill bend. that is the sharp decline in the nutter of births
in the sixties. will not produce an effect on the labor market until the
1990's. Not until then will labor be in short supply once again. if in
the aesntiae there is neither accelerated growth nor greater reductions
in the working tiae nor a aoderation in productivity progress.

Karl Otto Poehl. vice president of the Screen federal Bank: Just a few
years ago we had a problea in the no which caused us a great deal of
worry: the problen of the lack of aanpower.

Today one lust ash oneself the question: What has changed since that ties
that we now have to talk about uneaployaent as a permanent phenouaon or

at least the possibility of msqloyaent beconing a pernanent phenonnon.
in any view. the change has to do withthe fact that in 1973 we experienced

.1 great shock with regard to the entire world ecenony; a shock that actually
is cowarable only with the crisis in the world scone-y in 1932-1933. In
1973, we experienced the collapse of the international currency systea and

'60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a quadrupling of the oil price as the consequence of the preceding worldwide
inflation. mis led to the recession of 1975. whose consequences not only
in the Federal Republic-.but also in the Federal Republic—have not been
fully overcone to this day. The question is: Does one have to accept the
level of uneaployaent produced by the n tension? And are there trends that
suggest that this figure-as the result of a change in the developaent of
the population-will perhaps even grow? Surely these are serious probleas.
But i take the view that we should also not sake then sets draaatic then
they are.

During the fifitee and sixties we succeeded in coping with such greater
changes of this Itind. During the fifites we had to take in any nillions

of refugees free the Eastern territories. During the sixties we also success-
fully coped with the considerable structural change in agriculture. as a
result of which 1 1/2 Iillion people left and betane assinilsted elsewhere.

In other words. the fact in itself that during the next few years there

will perhaps be a deaand for an additional 1 nillion job openings. it see-

to ae. should not worry us too such.

The question of technical progress. too, we should not overestimate. ‘lhe
problen of technological unewloynsnt has been brought up again and again:

in the 19th century when aachines cane into being; in the twenties when the
assedily line was introduced; in the sixties when eutoaation see-ed to threat-
en jobs. But the result of all of this in the end was well-being and full
enploynent.

i do. howaver.‘ view with a certain amount of apprehension the fact that

we in the me. too. are eabarking upon a discussion which involves certain
features that are opposed to rationalisation. I believe that. anong other
things. we owe our econoaic upswing during the postwar period to the

fact that. in contrast to other countries. rationalization and progress in
productivity were welcend and positively accepted by all groups in the
m. it would be very regrettable if. as the consequence of unenloyuent.
there would be a change here-operhaps in the direction which we have ex-
perienced in Great Britain and which led to very negative results there.

Another aspect which is of inortance for the prospects of growth. and which
is responsible for the fact that we have experienced a slowdown of growth.
involves the currency exchange rates. Since the end of 1972, the value of

the German Mark has appreciated by approxinetely 60 percent against the dollar
and silent doubled in relation to the English pound.

if one considers the tremendous outcry that took place in the no when in
1961 the Conan Mark was revaluated by S percent--in those days people fore-
saw the ruin of the Gemn econo-y—one can perhaps surnise after all what
these enowus changes in the price relationships in the world uses for a
country which exports nore than a quarter of its total production. Connected
with this is“ fact that the Ger-an econoay today has just about the high—
out cost level of all industrial countries. The reason for this is not the

1:1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fact that wages increased faster in our country than abroad. That is quite
out of the question. on the contrary. wages clidoed faster in almost all
other countries during the past few years. 1here is hardly a country which
this year has such a low wage increase as the PRO. The reason for our top
position when it comes to costs is. of course. first of all the fact that
an export nation must calculate the wage level in dollars. that means in

other words in a cosparsble measuring unit. Here the enormous revaluation of
the Geraan hark makes itself felt.

Among other things. this has led to the fact that profits in the PRC are

a great deal lower than in constable countries. Heaeured against sales.
they are less than half as high as in the United States. Nevertheless. I
feel that one should not dramatite the problem of unemployment; for it has
turned out that at least a part of this problem can be solved throuu:
greater economic growth. An example of this is the United States. where it

proved possible to increase the number of jobs during the past few years by
5 million.

however. I take the view that this problem cannot be solved solely by using
the instruments of economic policy. but that policies affecting the structure
assume increasing significance. that the so-called problem groups must be
dealt with much more intensively-~unewloysent among the young, older em-
ployees. the physically handicapped-«hat this will perhaps be the most
important economic and sociopolitical task of the next few years and that

probably the success or failure of the political forces, too. will be
measured by their solution.

Prof Dr Rolf Rodenstock. president of the Federal Association of German
Industry: The elimination of Jobs through rationalisation is by no means

a goal of the enterprises. but rather the goal is to maintain the ability to
compete. Rationalization also brings with it a whole series of positive
effects which are not always seen correctly because it is said: Through this
or that technical inrovement. jobs have been eliminated again. In so doing.
it is forgotten that every rationalisation presupposes extensive prepara-

tions. developmt and planning phases. which require additional and. what
is more. qualified workers.

Through the building of new machines. new teoyment possibilities are
created. Thus it can be demonstrated that the production of investment goods
is more wage intensive than mass production which subsequently carried out
with machines. Here. then. rationalisation contains a plus effect.

“nose who clealn about insufficient demand. insufficient economic growth
and. as a result of this. insufficient possibilities of enloyment. should
keep in mind that it is precisely rationalization moves which frequently

create new demand. For demand is not a fitted magnitude . Demand. that is
the ability and willingness of the market to absorb. depends decisively on
the prices of the products. If. in other words. any. we are able to offer

1&2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’Oii iWI’llilM. [INK "NLY

substantially cheaper electronic installations through rationalisation, to
produce less expensive teletype machines, for exaeple, through the use of
aicroprocessore. there will also be an increase in sales and production.
In short. eore such products will be purchased. Pocket calculators are a
typical angle of this.

The develop-ant and production of new products--in short. innovation-that

is after all the decisive question for our econoey. Research and development
projects should be supported in every conceivable way in order to make use

of the enploynent and sales possibilities that are present here--beginning
with the solar cell to broadband col-unicetion. free the enormous progress

in the medical field to laser technology.

But in the area of the production of custoeary goods I still see chances

for growth. Those who speak of eerket saturation are always looking only at
certain standard consumer goods. Yet even there a certain demand for replace-
uent and inrovement exists. I would say that in the sector of housing
construction. the construction of private hoees and their equipment—es-
pecially if one thinks of the young people Just now entering their working
life--a large demand is present. There are any plans to mobilise this-

for exaaple. through investeent help. A great deal could be done here.

Besides we have the foreign nerket. The world population is constantly in-
creasing. If the share of German products in the increasing deuand could be
strengthened through advantageous production. through good development of
innovations. i still see infinitely nany possibilities. not last of all in
area of investment goods. If we produce at low cost and efficiently here.
there will be employment.

One more word on the labor market. Not a great deal is noticeable in the
way of an excess of workers. 1 would like to give an example from ly own
enterprise: in our Bbersfeld plant. 30 kilometers east of Munich. we

have been looking for 60 untrained workers for 3 months. To date we have
found only five--in spite of excellent transportation connections-mend those
were foreign female workers. lhe job listings in newspapers suggest that
there In evidently also a great shortage of skilled labor.

For thin renson. I believe that a shortening of the weekly working time
would have precisely the opposite effect from that hoped for. that is. no
increase in employnent. but rather less emloynent. If. for example. my
300 toolmnkers work less or would not be allowed to work overtime. then
there would be less eaployeent for the subsequent production and for work
on innovations. This must be very carefully considered in connection with
the shortage situation that exists with regard to skilled workers. so that
the baby is not tossed out with the bath water.

133
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Eugen Loderer. chair-an of the Hetalworkers Union: Tina and again it is
insinuated for the unions to have demanded that the ewloyee not have "his"
Job guaranteed. That is wrong. we know very well that it is not possible
for on ewloyea to keep the Job he has forever. that is until his retire-
nent. but he does have a claia to "a" job. For one oi the (undo-natal

rights of Ian is his right to work. And this right can be realised only
through lull eaploynent.

The progress of the Ger-an Labor Union Federation (DOB) aimed at the eli-
nination of unemloynant, grossly siwlified, are: Acceleration of qua-

litative econonic growth. technical change without social hardships and
reduction of working tine.

In our struggle for the reduction of working tine. we have already in
earlier decades done a great deal for the maintenance and creation of jobs.
It took us nearly ll years. to be sore precise free 1956 to 1967. to reduce
the workweek free as to 1.0 hours. The situation, therefore. is not that
suddenly a new variant lies before these in positions of responsibility.
like a nonster which one could not handle.

‘lhat costs and wages have increased 1 do not want to argue. Otherwise I
would virtually have to call into question Iy union experience and activity,
and I as not dreaning of doing that.

It is known that reductions in working tine always take place according to
plans involving a series of steps. I cannot ilsgine at all that when a
union demands the 35-hour week this could he realised at one stroke in the
context of the next change in the wage structure. Through the reduction of
the workweek plus the extension of the vacation provided for in the wage
agreement. we have-Jot the period of tile 1 have nationedniacreased the
amber of emloyed in the natal-processing industry alone by half a nillion.
Without these assures in regard to the reduction of the worktine. the eu-
ployoent situation. neasured by the incursions that have now been added,
nest likely would be very different. that is. a substantially higher nuber
of unemployed than we now have. The thesis that an increase in profits
would nutmtically bring about a reduction of uneqloyoent. it appears.
has not been confined during the last few years.

For us. of course. wage equalization is an integral part of the question of
the reduction of worktine. We do not think such of unpaid part-tine

work-which is what it would have to be called if it were done without wage
equalization.

All of this. however, has nothing to do with an additional cost burden for
the caployer side. Rather a part of the latitude that is available during
wage negotiations (or increases of the hourly wage is used for reduction
of worktiae. In so doing. a part of the wage increase is “paid" not in
cash. but in the for- of sore leisure tine. his we have also already
practiced in connection with earlier reductions in the workweek.

Mo
Ion onxcm. us: ONLY
P0" OFFICIAL "SK ONLY

Ever since unions have been in existence, the question has been raised:
"Hhat will the worker do with still sore leisure tine?" It was asserted
again and again that reduction of the workweek entails a great danger for
the worker, that the worker does not know whet to do with this tine. that
he would kill it in a bar; and whatever other figures of speech were used.
However” they are really appropriate only for the last century. for every-
one knows whet in fact hes been the result of the reduction in the workweek.

We now have the free Saturday. Not a single person is willing to sacrifice
it.

we have concentrated cultural end sports events on Saturday. Sunday,has
been freed for the churches. what all did not happen foraerly on Smday
sorningl I could do a song and dance about this based on ey experience with
sy own organisation. Entire new recreation industries have been added.

The stinulstion of dessnd as a result of are leisure tine is unsistsksble.
The positive effect of additional leisure ties on family life is without
question.

Today we no longer have such a prospering economy as during the fifties and
sixties. But where it is possible. we should nevertheless proceed with the
reduction in working hours in a seasure and reasonable way. I can isagine
that a reduction of working hours in the railroad and steel industry. where
we have experienced an acute and deep crisis for years. given a seasured
first beginning. could have extraordinarily positive effects for the en-
ploysent situation in this branch. ‘ihere would be fewer dismissals.

bet as drew a political conclusion: "e have firsly.esteblished forces in
the m; psrlissent and in the state parliscnts, and we have a governeent
that is capable of functioning. In spite of may difficulties which we do
not want to embellish at all, the «anode and political circustanoes are
on the whole stable. The no is not rocking along the edge of a precipice.
and it will not land there even as the result of further reductions in
working hours.

The Discussion

ilenri Nannen: In the first book of Moses in the third chapter, the 19th
verse begins with the words: "In the sweet of your face, you wall eat
your bread." Those who regard this as the biblical promise of full en-
ploysent do not have the context in mind. At issue is the eapulsion from
paradise. in which, as is well known. there was no work. work in the sweet
of the brow was a curse; it was God's punishment for teen, who had eaten fro-
the tree of knowledge. ‘

In the seantise. we have picked a good any fruits fro. the tree of scienti-
fic and technical knowledge. That has produced sore and sore work for us.
but prosperity as well.

“5
ran omcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

n.

how it looks as though this development is going to overwhelm us: More and
acre activities are being taken over by machines. auto-eta. counters. and

met recently also by sicroprocessors. and less and less work renains for
nan.

Now that work, as it were, becones a cousodity in short supply. it appears
to us suddenly as a blessing; it is no longer a curse. but a value in it-
self. And unemloynent has because the scourge of unkind.

New I ask myself. why in fact the right to work and why not the right to a
decent husen life with as little work as possible? Would it not be better
to nake purposeful use of the working power end working tin freed by
technology in the private or public domain so that ell of us would have
more tine for ourselves or for each other; seeming that we would succeed

in distributing equitably the renaining work, the renaining working ties.
as well as the fruits thereof?

Prof Kurt Hansen. chairman of the board of directors of Bayer so (bsyer.
Inc.): He should say in general: There exists a noral right to work.
what would life be without work? Inagine we were living in paradise,
with nothing to do. and would do nothing but less around. He would be
able to stand this kind of life for a week or two, or perhaps even three,
during a vacation. but certainly not for a lifetime. The good Lord gave
us a brain. It enables us to think. to do work. I believe we have the
domed duty and obligation to see to it that people think.

Now to turn to technical progress. The basic question actually is:

Does technical progress destroy jobs or does technical progress create new
Jobs? Ladies and gentle-en, basically we would be wretched use without
technical progress. Through technical progress we have increased life
expectancy iron 30 to 70 years within 100 years. Through technical pro-
gress we are hale and hearty in spite of our age. Through technical pro-

gress we have gotten rid of heavy labor. All these. after all. are ad-
vantages.

bet lac nention the reduction of working hours as the last point. Mr
Loderer, somewhere an end to the reduction is also called for. Enpressed
in the opposite way: I believe. everyone needs a certain mount of work.
Soaetuses it is a good thing to take an extreme as exasple. Let us usuae
that we would work only 3 days a week. Don't you believe that at least
50 percent of the people would take on a second job for the other 3 days?
But you don't create new jobs in this way. In New York. we have cases
where any plumbers hold down two jobs. During the first half they work
for the Heier coQany. the second half for the Jones cowany. He cannot
keep people free working. I said at the outset: Without work. nan is
unthinkable. '

1&6
FOR Oﬂ’ICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR IWPICIM. USE ONLY

Nannen: The electricians' union in New York at the meant in fighting for
the 25-hour week. with a guarantee of 5 hours of overtise.

Hansen: That approximately will be the end result!

Alexander Schoen. conissioner-general of the liaiaurg firn Rud. Otto
Meyer: Hr Loderer. when in agreement with the unions we reduced the
working hours from lob through is to 62 and finally to ‘0. we had extra
costs of between 20 and 35 percent. That was during the ease time
period when the reduction of working hours took place.

Due to the weaving of the famous net of social security. the additional en-
cunbrancee in terns of personnel costs today have risen to 70.80 percent.
Our piecework costs, with 19 Conan Marks the highest in the world. anoum
to approximately 8 marks of additional personnel costs. compared to 1.70
narks in Great Britain. on industrial country which in terns of its out-
put capacity nay be rated as being sinilsr to the PRC.

None of the gentle-en. Hr Poehl included. has taken a position with regard
to the question of how in the future these costs can be digested by the
national econoeyul won't even speak of the emloyers or the economy as
such--an economy which. as you yourself have said. is dependent not only
on domestic denand. but to the extent of sore than 25 percent on foreign
demand. Those who densnd a reduction of working hours lust also sub-
stantiate why these cost increases are defensible.

Prof Dr Eduard Pastel. minister for science in Lower Saxony: liven if we
do not shorten working hours further and continue to have only weak econo.
mic growth. as we are presently experienceing it. there will be a high de-
gree of labor shortage in the nineties. perhaps even by the end of the
eighties. This forces us. of course, to continue even at present with
rationalization neeeures. not only in view of the merciless international
coqetition in which we find ourselves.

1 would like to proceed to the second point. This point concerns scathing
which worries me and which will occupy us for a such longer period of tine.
l m referring to the growing gap between the educational system and the
mtcupot lon systen. If we continue with the present educational system--
and it is probable that this will happen-.we will. as the result of deso-
graphie develop-ents and the push into higher education. have almst three
tines as any advanced school graduates by the end of the century among

the neabers of the labor force plus 1 sillion graduates of advanced tech-
nical schools.

1.7
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It can then be easily calculated: Even if the ration of doctors and

lawyers is doubled, if the nuder of officials and employees in the higher
[civil] service is doubled. there will be five to six times as many gradu-
ates of advanced schools descending upon the economy. I ask myself whether

the occupation system in the economy and industry is capable at ell of
absorbing these people.

At any rate. it behooves us to think about this here today. This also
applies to the econou. I u not against higher education. but I believe
that we met think about how to find employment for these people. In the
advanced schools and as those involved in making science policy. we must
think about. how to reform the curriculua in such a way as to make these
graduates more flexible and more mobile in the way in which they can be
used than up to new.

I believe that we have a very difficult problem. that is, the onset of
qualitative unewloyment. which leads not only to resignation among those
concerned. but also perhaps to open rebellion, especially against the

state. which was instrumental in arranging this privilege of hiﬂer edu-
cation for them.

At the same time it is to be noted that with certainty during this time
period the number of graduates of the intermediate school. which at pre-
sent amounts to over 16 million among those gainfully employed. will de-
crease to about 10 aillion.

his meats. in other words. that precisely in the area in which these peo-
ple can be used we must continue to rationalise. For all sorts of reasons.

we will certainly not be able to afford to insert foreign labor once again
in increased measure.

"amen: That is a very inortant point of view, became the question arises
whether with growing academic education the demands do not also grow, so
that one day it will prove impossible to fill a whole series of professions.
Today it is already impossible to find a filling station attendant, one

has to pun gas oneself.

Dr Gerd Bucerius. owner of the "Zeit" publishing house and chairman of the
board of directors of the Bertelsmann corporation: The academicians do
not cause us any worry in the economy. Among Journalists. perhaps 20
percent have had prior academic training. No damage would be done if

this figure anomted to 50 percent. Even an account of the aurder in

the Ackerstrasse can be written better by an academician than by an un-
trained journalist.

1:8
FOR ONICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISR ONLY

But you may not count on the fact that we will give someone preference
because he is an acedenician. In administration. too. we have a whole
series of open positions with a gross income amounting to 1.0.000 to 80.000
marks. Nobody turns up. If you offer us people. who cone in and also
have an academic education. why not?

But the economy will net be prepared to change the employment systes for
no other reason than the fact that there is an increased supply of seeds-
micians. The law governing the operation of industrial enterprises
(Ietriabsverfassmgsgesatt) alone prohibits the preferential treatment of
academicians. So the young people who call upon society in order to re-
ceive a higher education will have to see whether afterward they can do
anything with higher education.

Hr Loderar. the connection bstwaen taming money and investing really can,
not be disputed. i am chairman of the board of directors of a large enter-
prise which works all over the world. with sales of several billion marks.
That means. of course. a steady stream of applications for investments.

The capable superiors want to expand the areas of their activity and de-
mand more nney. ‘lhe menagsunt puts these requests together and says:
This year we can invest 100 million marks. Shall we. or shall we not?

So what does the board of directors do‘l.-lt asks the group which wants to
invest: Are you going to earn it this year? If the answer is "no."

the chairman says: I an sorry. the investment will not be made.

i can assure you. Dir Loderar, that happens not once here or there. but
quite regularly. "here there are earnings. investments will be made.
when the earning quotas decline the way they have declined. investments
must grow smaller.

Leo Brawand. editor-in-chief of the WAC!!! MAGAZINE: I would like to
address myself to the demand side. to the question of reinforcing demand,
which would with certainty be one of the host inortant means of eliminat-
ing uneqloymmt or alleviating the problem.

Ludwig Erhard once said that he could not imagine a person all of whose
wishes were fully satisfied. who would not always find something else
he would like to buy. I believe that he was right in saying this. It
does not have to be a yacht after all. but it can be a rubber boat. a
snorkel, all of the products that are sold in the recreation sector. in
the sector which. as the result of the reduction of working hours. will
buco-e a constantly growing market.

1 am not so pessimistic and am anticipating positive effects for the labor
sarket. We have to think through: Do we went to tackle this problem in
principle on the basis of the market econow. or do we want to follow the
principle “divide more. regulate more, distribute more?"

1&9
FOR orncm use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I believe that in order to solve the unelploynent problem we need a kind

of armistice, a kind of declaration of principles in the debate over the
basic political order, so that the consular no longer salts hie eoney

away in a savings account, but knows: Things will go sensibly and steadily,

so I can proceed to realise my plan to build a house, so I can save for a
larger acquisition.

The entrepreneur nust know: Even 10 years from now I can in principle
still nenage on the basis of the principles existing up to now-of course.
with social inprovessnt of all possibilities.

If we get this declaration of principles through parliament. the govern-
ment. and in entirety, we will already be such closer to the solution of
this problem.

Nannen: Of course, we were unable to solve the problem. But I believe
we have ascertained one thing: that such questions met be solved only in
factual discussions, not in an ideology-laden quarrel. In this only
emloyere. emloyeee and politicians can work together. If everybody re-
presents only his own opinion as given and inovable. then we do not nuke
any progress.

COPYRIGHT 1978 STERN

8970
080: 3103 END

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY