APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-00050R000100020027-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020027-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8282

20 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 12/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00020027-9
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original intonation was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cles, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Covernnent.

PRWUREHENT 0P PUBLICATIMS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service. Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is reconended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author. if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government hearts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.5. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. 0.5. Government Printing Office, Washington, 0.0.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell 6 liowell. 01d
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio, 64691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North clebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
I. Irpnu No.

  

  
 

I ' t i ' .

5. rpm Nut

20 Pebrua 1979

  
 

BIBLIOOIAPMIC DAYA
MEET

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE, (pogo 12/79)

      

    
 

& Peder-in chaalutloo Kept.
o.

  

' . Pedal-in; Olgaanenea Nee-e and Addleu l0. onkee/Taakl'oek Unit No.
Joint Publication Reaoarch Service
1000 North Globe Road

Arl ington, Virginia 22201

 
 

II. Concert/Gnu No.

 
   
 

I). Spousal-u Org-«Station Nun and Mann IJ. Type oi Repon a Peciod

O'Cl

 
   
 
 

As above

(1 z
2.

l5. Supple-emuy Note-a

 
 
 

l6. Mullen-

  
 

The aerial report contains political/economic intonation on Heat European
energy, finance and trade policy nattere as well as developments and trends
in the doctrine. program and problem of the major comuniat parties,
including their relations with coununiat parties outaido the Heat European
area. ‘

        

  

    

. Key tande aed Dormer Aaelyeie.

 

7a. Deeeoipeoca

      
        

   

Politicel Science at International Affeira

Luxeahourg

   
           
        
 
   
     
       
     
 

Sociology _Auatria _Netherlanda

Propaganda _Belgiu __Norway

Bcononice _0eneda _Portuge1

Energy _Cyprua _Spain

luduatry ___Dennark _Sveden

‘rrede __Pinland _Svitzer1and

Finance .3!— France _Turkey
_Greece _United Kingdo-

m. Ideoliliele/Opee-Eadd to... _Iceland _x_weet Germany

_ltaly

     
 
  

  

m. COSATIFieldK-aoup 5c, 50. 10

It. Maine-liq Statement

For Official Use Only.
Limited Nut-oer of Copies Available From JPRS.

  
 
        

eons ne'er" cite. e-ln encore-soc ”'31.."

THIS FORM MAY BE REPRODUCED
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/8282
20 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(moo 12/79)

Comems ' ' PAGE

DENIM AHAIRS

Secret Sumit of International Terrorists in I oslavia
(Pine Buongiorno; mm, 21, 28 In 7) ............ 1

We Should Not Have Killed Moro
Yugoslav Trail

MOB

Profiles of Potential Political leaders in 1979
(sylvie Pierre-Brossolstts; L'msss, 6-12 Jan 79) 8

lhuroy, Rocard Force Anti-Mitterrmd Political Alliance
(Max-Olivier Giesbert; LB sown. 038mm,

8‘1“”) cos-osc-nsooossosococoon.oooososooooooosoosoo 16
Mitten-and heparin; Counterattack Against lhuroy, Rocard

(Andre Iassusur; vms mm, 15 Jan 79) 20
P8? National Secretary Delors Interviewed

(Jacques Delors Interview; vms Am, 15 Jan 79) 23
can for an End to 'Asphyxiation' of Research

(Jenn-ﬁance“ Delpsch; PAW, Nov-Dec 78) 25
'l-hergy Har‘ Scen Beginning for France

(Rancois wax-eta; mans mum, 8 Jan 79) 29
Briers

macs Answers Sought 33

Mmroy-Rocard 'mosone - 33

"ET cm

Aid to Southeast Asian Refugees Discussed

(”10 Re Mum; m, 7Nc 78) eososOs-osoovosdsoo 3h

- a -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY [III _ WE _ 15° P000]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

SECRET SUPMIT OF INTERNATIONAL TERRORISTS IN YUGOSLAVIA
we Should Not Have Killed Moro

Y :n PANORAMA in Italian 21 Nov 78 pp 64-67

[Article by Pino Buongiorno]

[Text] In a secret summit in Yugoslavia, whose actions are disclosed here
by PANORAHA, the representatives of terrorism in nine countries, including
the Red Brigades. have held a meeting for self-criticism. They came up
with a new coordinated world strategy.

It began with a brief, moving tribute to the memory of "Comrade" Haddih
Haddad. chief of "Special Operations" for the Popular Front for the Lib-
eration of Palestine. who died last March of cancer in an-East Berlin hos-
pital end is now regarded as the "brains" of international terrorism.

it concluded with warm embracing and a battle cry in unison, with clenched
fists raised on high: "Onward in the struggle for the world's liberation
from imperialism."

Between the invocation and the farewells there were 12 hours of uninter-
rupted discussion: profound analysis of the more spectacular revolutionary
activities, first place being given to the Via Fani Massacre and the assas-
sination of Aldo Moro, chairman of the Christian Democrats, by the Red
Brigades; a coldblooded resume of the successes and failures of recent years,
a critical review of a number of outmoded theories. and a mapping of the
most incisive sort of revolutionary plans.

It was a summit of Terrorism International. A decisive meeting for revolu-
tionary organizations all over the world. which, as secret theoretical
statements have indicated from time to time, are faced with a new phase of
"popular warfare" 10 years after the first revolutionary shots were fired.

PANORAHA is now in the position to disclose the entire agenda of this top
secret summit, which could mark a turning point in the escalation of tar-
rorism; these agenda are frequently harsh and inflamatory. as are the

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

political and military decisions. This reconstruction is based on informa-
tion gathered from informants of the Palestinian resistance in Beirut and
Baghdad and a lengthy report (nine pages typewritten in Arabic) that one
of the participants in the meeting wrote up in a form closely resembling
minutes. PANORANA has gained possession of this report, which is an ex-
clusive for PANORAHA, the Palestinian ALQODS PRESS of Beirut and AL HATAN,
a Kuwait daily.

First merely conjectured as a theory, then gradually confirmed by the
report of various terrorists that had been taken prisoner, there is not
only a theoretical but an operational collaboration (involving mutual
support and joint action) between the various clandestine groups of in-
ternational terrorists, for which the summit meeting provides incontest-
able proof.

Convened on 1 October in a small village of Yugoslavia. just a few miles
from the Italian border (the name of the place is veiled in absolute
secrecy). the summit meeting brought together nine representatives of
well-known revolutionary organizations. In order to enter Yugoslavia
quietly and avoid the surveillance of international security agencies,

the nine revolutionaries touched down at ports and airports halfway around
the world. taking long, tortuous routes. For example, the Palestinian who
participated in the meeting left Beirut by auto, traveled to Algiers, took
a plane to Paris. After a brief stopover in the French capitol, he took a
train and motorcar to the secret location.

All of the delegates used code names and met in a small apartment rented
in advance, carrying on most of the discussion in English with a consid-
erable admixture of French and Spanish. In addition to the Palestinian,
who belonged to an extremist group not affiliated with Yasser Arafat's PLO,
there were representatives of the Sandinista Liberation Front of Nicaragua,
a Japanese representative of the Red Army, a German from the Red Army Pac-
tion, an Irish representative of the IRA. an Algerian, s Spaniard and an
Argentine of unidentified affiliations--end of course a delegate of the
Red Brigades. The latter's code name was Stefano, a tall, athletic, vi-
vacious cultured person.

At the center of attention were the Red Brigades and their sensational
project of last 16 March. As came out almost i-aediately. in one of the
first discussions. the summit had importance as an occasion to analyze

the Moro incident from both its political and its military aspects. One
question that was put by the Argentine delegate, Rodolfo. was this: "To
what extent does a guerilla activity such as that of the Red Brigadee come
close to a full-scale revolution?"

After very lively discussion of this, the final decision was highly critical
of the Red Brigades and Italian terrorism in general. "when revolutionary
organizations engage in activities such as the kidnaping and murder of Hero,"
noted the Algerian representative, Bekr, "then they are getting ahead of

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

themselves and are in danger of blowing the whole thing. This is what
happened in Uruguay with the Tupamaros, and that is what is happening
in Italy with the Red Brigades."

Why? The response. which was freely admitted to be sensational, came
from Stefano himself. “Italy.“ he said at a certain point. "is a repub-
lic of such an open nature that it is easy for us to hit anyone. when and
where we wish. It frequently gives the impression of being shattered and
on the brink of disaster. But this is only a surface impression. Even
after Hero's execution the country gave evidence of real stability and
self-control. The political consequences of the anti-Moro action were
fully exploited by the Communists and the Christian Democrats in such a
way that the regime was not weakened in any way.“

When this type of self-criticism was applied to the situation in Nicaragua,
the representative of the Sandinista Army joined in, adding that as far as
his organization was concerned "there was inadequate reaction by the masses
to the high military level of the army. so that the power of Dictator
Anastasio Somoza remained for all purposes intact."

Both the action of the Red Brigades against Hero and that of "Commander
Caro" who occupied the Nicaraguan Chamber of Deputies and held the legis-
lators hostage, were regarded as "ahead of schedule." Commented Rodolfo.
the Argentine. "It is this type of operation that confirms world opinion
as to our being just terrorists."

Even though more than one person remembered the famous saying of the Brazilian
commando. Carlos Harighella--”To be a terrorist in our day is something that
brings honor to anyone fighting for what is good"--the nine commandoes de-
clared agreement that a revolutionary movement must be created that is linked
to the masses. "Terrorism is not our way, but that of imperialism, and we
have nothing to do with terrorism," said Rodolfo. "He are not mercenaries

or janissaries of the revolution. Re are revolutionaries of a given country.
seeking to inflict wounds on imperialism wherever we are. It is our job to
ignite revolution and lead it on to victory. Igniting revolution is a pro-
fession. after all."

To keep from making mistakes at a time when the situation threatens to become
bottled up. caused as much as anything by the "personalise of Carlos." that
invincible hero of some of the most sensational terrorist activities in rdL
cent years, which. as has been claimed by the Palestinian Qassim, "could very
2°11 transform the revolutionary left into a cult of personality, almost
another Che Cuevera but lacking his theorizing talents and his capacity as a
man of action," the moment has come, according to this council of interna-
tional terrorism that met in Yugoslavia. to begin establishing some cardinal
principles and to have two "control mechanisms" for commando activities.
"Only thus." the various delegates stated, "will it be possible in the near
future to decide who the true revolutionaries are, and who are merely simple
terrorists."

3
son orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first principle is that defined as the "double system." This calls
upon the organizations to balance their technical preparation against

their ability to control the results of their attacks on the state.
"Otherwise," Rodolfo maintained. "we can introduce into the political

arena certain forces that are extraneous to the revolutionary movement,
such as the secret services or the reactionaries. such as has happened

in Italy after Moro was killed. The action of the Brigades was perfected
and highly advanced at the military level. while its political effects were
to virtually turn people against the Red Brigades. Besides provoking a
wave of arrests. the operation was not operative in the choice of occasions.
in evaluation of the sociopolitical situation. or in the matter of managing
its effects."

A second principle is that which might be called "the autonomous revolu-
tionary capacity." According to the technical standards of the group of
commandoes who met in Yugoslavia. every organization must have "a capacity
to make autonomous political decisions and to put them into effect," to
have "its own financial and military resources," to be "independent of
other forces within and outside the country in which it is operating, but
not to be independent of the masses." In this sense, the Red Army Faction
man suggested. "It would be useful to continue the seizure of well-known
politicians or rich businessman in order to provide for a self-supporting
organization. But these operations should not become an objective that is
politically justified on the premise of confiscating money to give to an
exploited and oppressed populace."

For participants at the terrorist summit there is one other risk that

should not be run: that of thinking that "a second Vietnam" is possible.
Said the representative of the Japanese Red Army, internationalizing any
domestic revolution, as happened in Vietnan, is impossible. since today

the world situation is characterized by a peaceful coexistence between

the United States and the USSR. It is true that the Soviets give support
for reinforcing revolutionary enterprises. but such assistance will arrive
only when the internal warfare has already been decided. never as an impetus
that influences the victory in question."

So what will happen in the coming months? The nine commandoes arrived at a
unanimously approved decision. with respect to the summit meeting held in
West Germany in 1975, which established "the unity of revolutionary forces
against the united forces of imperialism" (in this sense, the kidnaping of
OPEC conference participants at Vienna on 21 December 1975 was a practical
application of this theory. with the direct participation of commandoes
coming from a variety of countries but under the leadership of Carlos),
the Yugoslav summit moved to adopt a new principle that might be defined
as "simultaneous revolutionary effort." The idea is to strike at the same
targets in several countries at the same time. This way. according to the
nine terrorists, not only will the principal enemy of the "proletarian
revolution" be nade fully visible to everyone, bringing the hesitant and
uncommitted into the conflict. but contact will be maintained with the

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L?

masses. Furthermore it will be possible to nake available "for the bene-
fit of the revolution" the high military-technical capacity that "organi-
zations such as the Red Brigades have already demonstrated to the entire
world." Here is a development of unforeseeable consequences.

COPYRIGRT: 1978 Aruoldo Hondatori Editors 5. p. A.
Yugoslav Trail

Milan PANORAMA in Italian 28 Nov 78 p 60

[Article by Pino Buongiorno]

[Text] After PANORAHA's disclosures. all the counterespionage centers are
on the alert.

Dozens of "operative agents" have been set loose in Europe. The most reli-
able "sources" have been "sensitized" in the Hiddls East. All of the coun-
tereapionage centers in Italy have been put in a state of alert. especially
on the northeast frontier. The collaboration of friendly secret service
organizations has been requested.

After last week's disclosures by PANORAHA on a sun-it of nine "delegates"
of worldwide terrorist organizations. including the Red Brigades. a meeting
held in early October in Yugoslavia, in a village thus far unidentified
close to the Italian border, the two new espionage and countereapionage
agencies, 5151)! [Intelligence for Democratic Security] SISHI [Intelligence
Service for Hilitary Security] have gone to work on the case.

The agency heads have a dossier of evidence on their desks. This contains
a tip-off supplied to then in mid-October by a Western European secret
service agency. This report, while vague and defective. does indicate that
"representatives of various terrorist organizations will seat in early
October at the border between a socialist and a capitalist country." A
quick investigation made at the tine did not uncover anything to verify
this "tuner," nerely indicating that "the scope of the investigation is

too extensive."

Now. in the light of new factors, better success is hoped for. "We have
also requested the asssistance of the Yugoslavs," an official of the secret
services told PANORAHA. "Not only are we trying to find the place where the

nesting was held, but also to identify who participated, especially the
Italian representative of the Red Brigades."

The earliest reactions of the Yugoslav adsinistrstion were negative, at
tines indignant. "Utter nonsense," was the reaction of Hirlto Kalezic,
official spokesman of the Belgrade government to the information gathered
by PANORAHA from qualified and highly reliable sources in the Palestinian
resistance movement in Beirut and Baghdad. Kalezic himself stated that

5
roe orncm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"the terrorists have never held their meetings on Yugoslav territory and
never will."

These statements were probably prompted by the fear of being involved with
international terrorism, even though the minutes of the summit, written in
Arabic, which fell into the hands of PANORAHA at Beirut, are quite clear
in explicitly affirming "the meeting was held secretly and was of course
unknown to the Yugoslav authorities."

But there are also denials that obviously contradict recent events in which
Yugoslavia was a major participant. In May of this year, for example, an
arrest was made at Zagabria, on a tip-off by the German police, of four
young men accused of being RAP terrorists (who were suddenly set free on
Friday, 17 November). On the occasion of the arrests the German author-
ities disclosed that "these four were setting up a secret conference on
terrorism."

Furthermore, Italian Interior Minister Virginio Rognoni, on an official
visit to Belgrade 3 and a November, confirmed the report that Yugoslavia
is the preferred hiding place for terrorists. "One of the objectives of
my trip," said Rognoni during an intermission in his meetings with his
Yugoslav colleague Franjio Herljevic, "is to obtain data for putting to-
gether a kind of 'internationsl map of terrorism,’ which will take note
of those countries where terrorism is most active and of those utilized
as a staging area, support zone, or meeting place."

But in addition to the involvement of the Italian police, as well as other
European police forces, in expeditiously blocksding what is regarded as
"one of the principal escape routes and thoroughfares taken by terrorists,"
the disclosure of the minutes of the Yugoslav summit permitted quite a
number of scholars and military experts to get a clearer picture of con-
nections between the various groups and to assemble new and very important
data on the future plans of the terrorist movements. "First of all,” says
Luigi Bonanate, an international relations instructor at the University of
Turin and editor of the forthcoming book, DIMENSIONS OF POLITICAL TERRORISM,
"on the basis of information reported by PANORAMA, the concept of the con-
spiratorial nature of international terrorism seems to fell into place.
Actually, there would not seem to be any one center providing guidance for
the various organizations in their respective countries, so much as there
is a common ideology and a common enemy, imperialism, which acts as a
cement for their coordination-and unity."

According to other experts interviewed by PANORANA, there is really nothing
novel about the decisions made by the nine commando groups after they had
established certain "control mechanisms" to guide future actions, when they
adopted as a guiding principle that of "simultaneous revolution" (i.e.. a
coordination of simultaneous activities in several countries to achieve the

same objectives), also identified in recent studies as "global terrorism."
This is a strategy, it will be noted, which is almost inherent to the

6
FOR orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

natural development of an armed struggle. The Red Brigades, for example.
gave indications of this as early as 5 April, in a statement of its plan-
ning council dated February 1978. published together with Comunique
Number lo on the kidnaping of Aldo Moro. The Red Brigades wrote at that
time: "The Red Army faction in Heat Germany. the NAPAP in France. and
those movements for autonomy which have social dimensions (the IRA and
the ETA). by virtue of the fact that they occupy a couson front and are
attacking the respective national counterparts of the same enenynthe im-
perialist bourgeoisie-~constituto undeniable reference points in our
struggle, with respect to which it is necessary to develop. as such as is

historically possible. a maximum of cooperation, mutual support and soli-
darity."

Having admitted that "this problem has been underestimated" thus far, the
Red Brigades document concludes: "Political integration does not signify
the internationalization of terrorism but signifies a constructive
confrontation and a constant search for tactical and strategic plans on

every terrain where the battle is taking place. this strengthening the
revolutionary efforts of European connunist organisations."

The "brains" of the Red Brigades planning council were 9 months ahead of
time in predicting what would happen at the Yugoslav sun-it in October--
the common line to be adopted by international terrorism.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Arnoldo Hondatori Bditore S. p. A.

7573
CSO: 31010

7
son orncuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

PROFILES 0F POTENTIAL POLITICAL LEADERS IN 1979
Paris L'EXPRESS in French 6-12 Jan 79 pp h7-h9
[Irticle by Sylvie Pierre-Brosselette]

Tex§7 Behind the big leaders (Giscard, Chirac, Mitterrand,
archais), behind the stars (Poniatovski, Lecanuet, Chaban,
Mauroy Rocard), 1979 will reveal some men with a future. Here
L'EXPRéEg presents four of them. The youngest is 32, the
oldest .

Combret: Giscard's File

"That man at least will be a minister one day,“ Valery Giscard
d'Estaing retorted sharply to a scoffer in 197% who was making
fun of the austere visage of Francois Ponge de Combret, one of
Giscard's favored colleagues. k years later, on 30 Rovember
1978, Combret became deputy secretary general of the Elysee
Palace. All reports on internal policy matters must go through
his turquoise-paneled office. The ministers have to get along

with him. Now, at 37, he is one of the most powerful and one
of the most played up to men in France.

"Instead of that, why not go to work for a while at the Rue de
Rivoli?" suggested Lucien Paye, head of the Court of Accounts,

to his first class official, Combret, who had come in to tell

him of his intention to get out of government and go into pri-
vate industry. The young ENA ational School of Administratiog7
graduate hesitated, then agree . The minister of finance at

that time was no other than Giscard d'Estaing, whom Combret
already admired. So, a little by chance, began a lengthy
collaboration.

8
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Combret has every advantage to please his minister: from a
good family, cultivated' reserved up to the point of being
unobtrusive, his'reliability and fidelity can meet any test.
And his apparent lack of personal ambition tea the best way
of getting ahead with Giscard.

In May 197%, shut up in the heat of Paris, Combret slaved'

away turning out mi es and miles of speeches that his presi-
dential candidate gave all throughout the four corners of
France. When elected, Giscard brought Combret to the Elysee

as a technical adviser. There, in a little, dark and low-
ceilinged office, he worked like a slave. with his face gray
with fatigue, dark circles under his eyes which peered out

from behind tortoise-shell glasses, Combret already reigned,

but in the background, over a gigantic domain: industry, re-
search, energy, commerce, artisans, agriculture, transportation,
posts and telecommunications, territorial development. He
didn't make Just friends. Because he wanted to decide everything.
And he can do it. His uncompromising nature led some industrial
leaders to call him the "incompetent technocrat."

He has remained a technocrat. He could say, like the minister
Pasquier, "I am a little like a file. The king opens me, con-
sults me, and puts me back whennnw I may be of use to him." He
has become a politician. Every 2 weeks he takes part in the
meeting of the Elysee, Matignon, and ministry of the interior
top people. Every week, he directs the team of Elysee advisers,
who have a vital role under Giscard. Every evening, at 1900,

he goes over the situation with the chief of state, along

with Jacques Hahl, secretary general of the Elysee.

The ministers are used to seeing the deputy secretary eneral
arrive in the courtyard of the ministry on his blue an white
bicycle. They know that from now on they will have to be deal-
ing with this 1.86-meter tall athlete, a man who turns down all
invitations to Paris dinners and on weekends plays soccer with
the Elysee staff.

Lajoinie: Marchais's Peasant

On 10 September 1978, at 2000 hours television viewers discovered
a new face. The face of the communist Andre Lajoinie, who had
Just given the closing speech at the PUMANITE fete at La

Courneuve. This is an altar at which the great men of the French
Communist Party are consecrated.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPI’XCIM. USE ONLY

 

Andre IaJoinie

On 15 December 1978, facing Jean-Francois Pcncet, the new
minister of foreign affairs appearing at the National Assembly
for the first time, it was Lajoinie who, speaking for his group,
denounced the Common Market expansion. On 29 December, it was
again Lajoinie, along with Charles Fiterman who represented

the PC? at Boumediene‘s funeral, with whom the French communists
had been on excellent terms. Already the rumor was circulating
in party circles that this trusted adviser of Georges Marchais
might reach the party secretariat, the communist holy of holies,
by April. And that in June he might even lead the PCP slate

for the European elections.

At the start of the career of this #9-year old Correze farmer
was a bludgeoning and a firm friendship with Waldeck Rochet.

The bludgeon attack came in July 1958, during a demonstration
against the Algiers Public Safety Committee, and left him

knocked out on the Brive pavement. After recovering from
surgery, he decided to get more deeply involved in the party,
of which he had already been an active member for 10 years.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He first became party administrator, then federal secretary

for Correze. There he was discovered by waldeck Rochet'who
brought him with him to Paris in 196%. In 1972 he joined the
Central Committeel h years later, at the 22nd Congress, he'

came into the Pol tburo, where he took charge of the agricultural
sector. In 1978, the party offered him a "concrete district,"
the third district in the Allior. This seat let him become the
real boss of the parliamentary group, while waiting to be
president in title, replacing~Robert Ballanger.

"To Live in the Country"

In the PC, people are now saying "Lajoinie is Waldeck." The
same peasant origins, the same stubbornness, the same good-
natured appearance, the same convictions: a marxism tempered
with the salt of French popular culture.

Lajoinie borrowed from Provencal the saying "to live and work
in the country " making it the byword of the party. He was

the one who patiently moved the party away from agricultural
collectivism to defend a policy of family run farms, guarantee-
ing small landholdings. Right before the legislative elections,
he was one of the few communist leaders invited to a "capital-
ist" table: in this case, by Credit Agricola. For if the left
had won he stood good chances of being given the portfolio of
agricul ure.

If the PC one day decides to go back to the Union of the Left,
Lajoinie will be one of those who will renew the ties with the
socialists.

Toubon: Chirac's Hussard

"I'm going to resign. What do you plan to do?" "Stay with
you." This scene took place in July 1976 at the Hotel Hatignon.
Jacques Toubon immediately decided to put an end to his adminis-
trative career in order to accompany Jacques Chirac in his
crossing of the desert.

Today, Tbubcn is 37 years old and is still unknogn to the general
public, but he holds a key position in the RPR [Rally for the
Republig7. The deputy secretary general of the movement, re-
sponsible for elections he has Just been named head of the
powerful Federation of ﬁaris, with its 20,000 members, 17

deputies, and five senators.

1.1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Why this new romotion? "Only Chirac himself can have authority
over personal ties who have been elected for 20 years and who‘
are loaded with daullist credentials,“ explains Toubon. "But
when I speak, everybody'knows that in reality it'is Chirac
talking."

Toubon is the most faithful of the faithful. The head of the
RPR has total confidence in him. And this has been so since
1970. Chirac was then looking, on behalf of the Claude Pompidou
Foundation, of which he was treasurer, for an ENA -trained
sub-prefect who would be willing to be president of the Founda-
tion. Toubcn was suggested. The young government secretary

of state and the young sub-prefect haven’t left each other's
side since then.

Untiring, somewhat cynical Toubon is ready to do anything so
that the RPB president will one day be settled in at the

Elysee. So he shows no mercy to those who drag their feet or
create difficulties. "we no longer have the Elysee or Matignon,

or the government," he says. "We just have to tighten the
screws even harder."

Right after the campaign for the presidency of the National
Assembly, in which the Chirac candidate, Edgar Faure, was
defeated, Toubon pleaded unsuccessfully for the exclusion of
Alain Peyrefitte, accused of having "ostensibly campaigned"
for Chaban-Delmas. A bout to be continued later?

Toubon lays two vital roles in the 893: heading the federations,
the str ke force of the movement- and preparing for elections,

in close liaison with Pierre Juillet and MarievFrance Garaud.

In the most recent legislative elections the RPR kept a gold-
edged district for him in Lyons, the Louis Joxe district, but
Chirac had to "offer" it to Raymond Barre. Toubon had to

settle for bein the substitute for Nicole de Hauteclocque in

the 15th arrond ssement in Paris. A seat that is being kept
quite warm for him.

For the moment, Tbubon is working on the 1979 elections -- the
cantonal elections first of all. There are two important

races: Calvados, where the Giscard partiamay take the presi-
dency of the general council from the R g and Correze, Chirac's
own fief, which is being threatened by the left.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Fight

But he is mainly getting ready for the big clash in June, the
European elections. Toubon expects to see in the majority
forces an oven harsher battle than the one fought for the
mayoralty of Paris in 1977. That doesn't bother him. This
time, he knows, the RPR may lose. So what!

"If we fail, we will start over again, " he says. Jacques
Toubon likes fighting. With Chirac, he gets his fill.

Fabius: Mitterrand's Favorite

"Do you know who expresses my ideas best? Laurent Fabius'"
Francois Mitterrand says. In a record time this recent social-
ist convert has become, at the age of 32, the favorite adviser
of the first secretary, his man of confidence, and one of the
most often heeded spokesmen of the PS [Socialist Part17.

 

Laurent Fab in:

In mid-October the National Assembly was completing its

discussion of the budget. The deputies were yawning, listening
to the droning of the speakers. Michel Rocard was expected to
speak for the PS. But it was Fabius who mounted to the podium.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OM OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He spoke in measured tones, with politeness and self-confidence.
The parliamentarians,'though quite blase, perked up their ears
to listen to this young man from‘a good family, speaking with
the most perfect urbaneness, attack the government. They saw
the slim figure of this newcomer, elegant and nonchalant,
standing with a red folder that he didn't even bother to open.
They were attracted by the clarity of his speech which, some
say, recalls the clarity of the speeches of Oiscard d'Estaing
when he was minister of finance. And they were surprised by
the severity of the charges leveled by this son of a leading
Parisian antique dealer.

"1 Feel Quite Ecumenical“

Fabius learned the art of handling figures and ideas in the
best schools, at the ENS [Kdvanced Teacher Training Schoo
and at the ERA. He could have had a university career. t
he preferred the Council of State. In 1976, barely 2 years
after he eined the Socialist Party, he became the head of
Mitterran 's cabinet. And with Jacques Attali his economic
adviser. The first secretary valued his capacity for work,
his gifts for synthesis. who studied difficult reports for
him? Pabius. Who accomganied him on his visit to the Elysee
after the elections? Pa ius once again.

Fabius, the man of reports the office man, in March 1978 was
given a position by the vo are. He replaced a noted figure
from Seine-Maritime in a sure district. There he stood, the
well born technocrat, a bit of a fashion-plate with the
communist Roland Leroy, the deputy from the ne ghboring dis-

trict campaigning outside of factory gates. In short, the
expert had become a politician.

Trained inside the Mitterrandist circle, he at first refused
to take part in his party's internal quarrels. He spoke not

a word in his statements against Michel Bocard or Pierre Mauroy.
The socialists in the past had to pay the price of their divi-
sions. They must, thinks Fabius‘ acce t their diversity in
order to preserve party unity. I fee quite ecumenica ,"
said Fabius with an innocent smile. But he added right away
that his thoughts on the problem of trends within the party
are basically the same as the first secretary's ideas. And
along with other socialists of his generation, he signed an
appeal for party unity, criticizing the ambitions of this or
that person. An appeal whose conc usion leaves no room for

lb
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ambiguity: Mittorrand is still the man who incarnates this
unity. In the struggle for' power, Fabius will be one of the
first secretary's most active and most faithful supporters.

There is a great temptation for the first secretary to groom
his successo himself, playing Fabi 3 against Rocard. lhe
former PSU nified Socialist shitty? leader, now I+8 years old,
will seem quite "ancient" by 19 988, ppeo la in the first score-
tary's entourage say with delight. pFor the time being g, Fabius
still refuses to take any part in these calculations. ”The

important things " he says, "have fallen to me by chance. But
destiny is contained inside chance."

7679
080: 3100

15
ma OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

HAUROY, ROCARD FORGE ANTI-HITTBRRAND POLITICAL ALLIANCE
Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR in French 8 Jan 79 pp 28-29

[Article by Frans-Olivier Giesbert: "The Socialist Party, A Dislocated
Tea-"l

[Text] here he is alone, once sore. on the fifth floor of the headquarters
of the PS [Socialist Party], Place du Falsis Bourbon [address], in his
small office which looks out on the gardens of the French Ministry of
Defense. Francois Hitterrsnd is getting ready for what will be one of the
toughest fights of his political career. he knows that it is his control
over the party which is at stake now. Hitterrsnd is going for broke.

Hith his taking stock over and over again, Francois Hitterrand retains a
csls exterior for all that. "At the congress, CBRES [Center for (Socialist)
Studies, Research, and Education] will obtain 25 percent of the votes,
Arthur Notebart 10 percent. It would be very surprising if I did not pull
16 percent." Figure it out: This adds up to a total of 51 percent. The
deputy fro- Nievre Depart-ant [Hitterrand] concludes fros this, scoffing,
that Pierre Nauroy and Michel Record cannot bring together the sajority

of the party behind than. why, then, grant concessions to then?

Francois Hitterrand was already asking this projection when he believed

that Pierre Heuroy, his number two sen for the past 7 years, would end up
willy-nilly cosing back to his side. Hitterrsnd keeps his despite the
"choice" of the Mayor of Lillie [Hsuroy] who has decided to strike an agree-
sent with Michel Rocard. It was last Hednesdsy [3 January 1979] at 1560
hours. when the third "conciliation" meeting of the PS executive began--

this rise in the absence of its first secretsry--thst things abruptly be-
case clear.

"You were wrong in believeing that I would go to sleep before you," Pierre
Hsuroy said right at the start to the followers of Francois Hitterrsnd.
"Now tell us what is at the back of your minds. 1 note so-e deviations

in your delcsrstions, a weakening in your position on Europe, for sxssple.
I still strongly advocate sn accos-odation with you, but I wonder whether
you are not in the process of preparing an alliance with CERES. Frankly,

16
ran omcm. use our?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for a few weeks now. because of the nationalist drawing back of the exe-
cutive of the ninority. because of its excessive dognatisn too. any under-
standing with it see-s impossible to me."

A Nofold Logic

It was Lionel Joepin who spoke then in the nane of the Mitterrand camp.
he reiterated the fornulse of the conunique that he had before his eyes
and that he read a few minutes later to the news-en. Jospin said that it
was necessary "to air“ the discussion. that is. to open it up to the ac-
tiviats instead of “stifling" it. Most agreed. Then he added: "In the
seentine what is a problem. Pierre Mauroy. are the positions of Michel
Rocard. not those of CERES.“ A coincidence? 0n the sane day LS mm
published a very long statement by Jean-Pierre duvenement [head of
CERES] who. after treating Rocard no a "right winger" and my other things
too. stretched out hie hand to Prancoiu Mitterrand. The Socialist Party
has decidedly entered a period of great turbulence where all realinenenta
have becooe possible.

How could the teen which carried the "leading party of France" so far crack?
th this mess? Undoubtedly because, for the past few nonths. a twofold
logic of rupture has been progressing among the Socialist. On one hand
Francois Mitterrand. who is toying with the idea of running. if he has a
chance. in the presidential election of 1981. unquestionably plans to
retain control over the party apparatus and to lead its policy-making.

0n the other hand Michel Rocard. who nurses the sane designs and who is
underrepresented in the organs of the .Socialist Party. wants to have
greater influence in the future party leadership.

how about Pierre Mauroy? his heart has vacillated for a long tine. 0n
the economic plane he is close to Francois Mitterrend. An advocate of ne-
tionalisation and planning. Mauroy is at rim bothered by the “rigidity"
of Rocard. Yes. but with Michel Rocsrd the Mayor of Lille has an old
friendship going back 20 years and Mauroy shares the suns convictions as
Rocard on many other points. Both favor decentralization. are very pro-
Europe. and they wish to see a great Socialist Party. less ”electoral"
but better ensconced strong the working class and with closer ties to the
labor unions.

Deliberately Messianic. Michel Rocard was determined to do everything in
order to "adapt." as he calls it. the line of the Socialist Party. Pierre
Mauroy. who is not ecuenical on his part. dreaded having a dispute with
Francois Mitterrsnd. But when he grasped that Rocard would go all the
way--even if he had to sacrifice his presidential anbitions by being in the
minority. abruptly leaving his old friend alone with the Mitterrand sen--
well then the Mayor of Lille. who had acted as "arbiter." nede up his mind.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

That is what underlay the other week the birth of the Nauroy-Rocard
alliance. The two men decided. together with Gilles Hartinet, Dominique
Taddei. Francoise Gaspard. and others. to submit four working papers for
the consideration of Francois Hitterrand and his allies. These were

four papers supporting a pro-European position and advocating [industrial]
self-management, which asked for a greater degree of "collegiality" in

the Socialist Party. They were already beaten back by the Mitterrand camp
on 20 December 1978.

Pierre Joxe said first: "Hhat is significant in your papers is what is
missing from them. For example. you mention not a word about United States
imperialism. Regarding the nationalizations, you adopt a very restrictive
position." Lionel Joapin then said: "Hhen it is not banal what you say
about our break with capitalise is in contradiction with our positions."

As for Francois Hitterrand he declared: "If you seek accommodation take
good note that i do not want people to be able to write in the newspapers
tomorrow that there is a Hitterrand position on one hand and a Mauroy-
Rocard-hartinet-Taddei position on the other. Re are not at the same is-
vel." Everyone knew on that day that the outgoing majority of the PS
executive would not agree on a position--at least initially.

Collection of Projects

"hat a proliferation now: Proposals are blooming all over, before the
April 1979 party congress. On one hand the Hauroy-Rocard-Hartinet-Taddei
bloc with the one and only paper advocating "unity, self-management, and
Europe.“ Paradoxically on the other hand the Mitterrand faction is broken
down into factions. First Louis Harms: filed his draft in which he assumed
the position of spokesman of Hitterrand-iat orthodoxy. On another level
Lionel Joapin and Pierre Joxe presented a unity-oriented and pro-European
paper, to be sure. but they were against an "alinement with a European
Socialist Party." Jacques Delors in his paper stressed the overlaps among
the factions rather than the divisions. The same goes for Charles-Emile
Loo, who also called for accommodation. In short, there was a whole array
of pov'tiona.

is the outgoing majority of the rs dead for good? Not necessarily. Hhile
a rapproachement seems to be taking shape between Francois Hitterrand and
CERES, it still remains possible that at the executive committee meeting
of ii February 1979 the first secretary might reach an understanding with
Pierre hsuroy and Michel Rocard. At any rate, that is the wish of Gaston
Defferre and of many followers of hitterrand who do not envision without
displeasure the prospect of being on the same team as Jean-Pierre Chevene-
meat. even Arthur Notebart. the last orphan of the SF10 [Preach Section of
the workers International (French Socialist Party)].

18
FOR 0P?ICXAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY

Finally. Pierre heuroy is also on the sun wavelength: "we do not have as
any divergences with one another. The Bpinsy line? I s- for it since I
drafted it. the others seek only to unify it. On my port I wish to
adapt it. No. it will be necessary to continue the sens Isjority sround
Francois hitterrsnd. There is no other alternative." The congress will
decide that.

COPYRIGRT: 1979 "lo Rowel Observeteur"

2662
080: 3100

19
ton orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”m Pmm 6011mm“ AGAINST “m1. mm
PM. VAWIB Am in honoh 15 Jill 79 pp 22.23
[Artiolo by Anaxo honour]

[rm] mm tho oocioliot party o «,1. or non hondodnooo m mum
thot of tho bluff. Initiolly lloooro Proncoio littornnd. Piorzo Homo:
uni Nichol llooud hod confinod thonoolvoo to ntuol intinidotion. Ilooovor
ooonoonltofooorioootootiono thothovohoontohonhyhothoidootho
linoo hotnoon tho too «no hovo not hoon oloorly anon uni o. now otogo
hoohomnootogothotio-xkodhythohouncoffmo. 'l'honoiooriok
thotthio otogovill nothoyonithodotootlz Pounoryl979Ihononoo
nootins of tho outooutivo oonnittoo rill xoooni tho noooipt of 'ootiono"
for tho hoto oonsnooo. (A 'oontrihntion' io o politiool ototonont po-
lininoqtoooonaoooondnotonhnittod forovotohythooonaooos
'ootiono' ontho oﬂnorhonduovotodonhythomoo).

Tho two oupo hovo odoptod diffonnt tootioo.

hoooroPiouoImmonanioholnoom. uhomoupportodhythoprinoipnl
{moo hohind tho 'oritiool mnt' (hooono Doniniqoo Moi. Gilloo
lortinot. um honcoioo Gum). hm ohooon to unit. hohind o oiulo
contrihation. 0n Hoanooaoy o liot no publiohod of ottioiolo ond nonhoro
of porlionont who hovo oo to: w to “an thoi: pooition popor. ‘Iho
liot oontoino M8 no-oo including 39 dopatioo. lo oonotomn. 25 fixot
ooontorioo of tho todonotion. 55 nonboxo of tho oxoontivo oonoittoo (out
of 131). ll nonhono of tho notions). ooontu-iot ond tho outoontivo ottioo
on! M offioioln of otho: m or oootiono in hulinooo.

mo liot io inpz-oooivo by ito loath no noll on by ito upmontotivonooo.
lrho oignotuoo afloat ounort to: thoir pooition hon tho noJoa-lty at tho
logo fodontionoa tho North. tho Poo-do-coloio. :11 of tho Button oo-
olition. o good portion of tho oonthvoot. inolnain Ariogo. mi tho noJority
of tho Porio :ogion.

luoulonmoﬂlooonioddthotnonomortioomwthotthoy
will hovo non thon 50 pomont of tho votoo ottho noxt cannon".

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But on ‘lhuzodny hr Mittomnd'o friouio oountond with on 'opponi‘ tor
omort for thoir tint mootnz-y. Publiohod on Pridny. it no oignod by
non thon 500 offioiolo. m liot io Juot on inpxoooivo on tho ono oﬂ'ond
by hooou many and Room: it inoiuaoo 38 doputioo. 13 oonotoro. #5 nonboro
of tho onoontivo ooonittoo. oto.

it tho oono tino hr nittonnd woo dioporoim hio tome bohinti o nunbor o!

pooitiono. 'lhio otrntoxy nyponzo to zoﬂoot tho principlo thnt tho non tooth
o ooob hon tho non offootivo o Job it on do.

Iivo oontributiono hnvo onouod non hr hittomni'o ootionoo

‘lho contribution oubnittod by I: Lionol Joopin io oupportod by noot of tho
mm. It opponno to apnoo tho pononnl viooo o! tho tint oooxotu-y.
ltho lotto: unionbtodly hopoo thot uhon tho tino ongoo it will bo nblo to
oorvo an o booio for o poooiblo oynthooio.

A oooond oontxibution on only oinod by ll: Louio loans. an animation
Ioontory on oonfidont of hr hittornnd. It io you nooh lottiot oriontod.
Out of tho uponionoo out tho loototn oountrioo, on“ othoxo. I: llonon dunno
hump thot homily dittou “on tho 'pooitivo globni boinnoo" to whim
hrhrotuiotxoquontiyxofou. Thiotuntothoioft.miohluoonnooazo-
ootiono ovon tron hr littounni'o ontoungo. in ninod nt fooilitnting n
poooiblo fotm onionoo botwoon tho lotto: my on! tho Como.

1ho contribution by It Gooton bottom in on not 0! oolidu-ity with tho
monotthoiinot oooiotnry (ovonthooghthounootthonoyorotlonooino
did not opponr on tho tint npponl for omen-t to: I: hittomnd).

Tho contribution oignod by hr Jun-Poul Rocha, tho notions). dolognto for
ooploynont. non; with 13 mioioin tron tho haoinooo oootor. in on nttonpt
todonyﬂtolhuroyvloomblooononopolyworthioooom. HrAlninnonnou.
thoﬁoml offiom foo-thin oootor. ioooiooonoqnintonoooethodopnty
{ton linoo.

‘iho loot contribution, tho yrinoipol ounor of which in I: Joquoo Doloro.
dooo not onnoto dinotiy tron It: hittornnd'o oixolo. Toxin tho pooition
thnt tho mount oplito within tho My own ortitioin. Kr Dolor wonohoo.
no ho uphino in on 1mm“ olooohoxo in thin ioono of mam m.
n monoiliotion for tho njority of thooo tho no loving tho oooinliot

My.

hr Dolom' opontonoouo otop hon not boon dioovovod by hr hittomnd. It in
poooiblo thot tho {int ooontnry of tho oooinliot potty oooo thonin n
noono by uhioh ho onn nnintnin n bridgo botwoon Hr loamy Ind hinoov.

mmonooofforooobotnonthotnoulpo won'tbofixnlyootobliohodmtil
thou in no on to tho oonniot thot dividoo tho Bouohoo-dn-lmono fod-
oxntion. tho lagoot fodoxotion within tho oooinliot party.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tho on: of tho pnoont oituotion io honoillo. ooooniing to ono of Mr Piom
Houny'o olooo onoooiotoo.

rho contribution oignod by hr bottom hon not lot! to unoninity in tho
Douchoo-du-ﬂhono. Aoido fro- tho toot thot thoy diooppm of it: littomnd'o
ohift to tho loft. o good any lmoillo oooiolioto m not may to hook
thoir for-or oolidu-ity with It loamy.

A swap of poroplo mood to It bottom hoo olnody oluotonod Aroma o
ym low by tho no. of hiohol Pout. ‘ntoir mboxn hovo ovon boon
otaoutlnnod by dofootiono i’zon tho louoillo loyor'o own cup. In foot

Hr chorloo-lnilo loo. o oontidont of tho uyor Ind notionol m:- of
tho oooioliot potty. folt it vino to ioouo o. oopmto ototonont. In mo of
otootofotnxththoroommboojoiniuottmwiththooodlooon
Monroy on! Emmi.

But will thio toot of otzvomth toko plooo? Don't o oolntion to found ot tho
not: om. or hofono. by which tho thxoo moat Moro of tho oooioliot
potty will onorgo on tho ouo tool?

Tho century would ho oquivuont to oolloctivo onioido. noon-ho o utionol
max-y.

‘l‘howobloninthovooko ohood iothuototindontvhovillnokotho
oonooooiono. A oo-iooion of 12 oonboro. nndor It: Gonna Joqnot. hoo boon
fox-nod to ta to honohioo tho pooitiono. Hr Joqnot hoo no illnoiono obout
hioohnnoooforouooooo unlooo ooaonouolonont in injootodintothopmoblon.

Snoh o now olonont night to o oonooooion by Ik- hittomnll to ollov mento-
tion of minority comm Iithin tho not loodonhip. But to tho «tent that
lobbyiu for votoo in not yot ovor. ouch o oovo «not ho ontioiyotod.

COPYRIGHT! 1979 'Vdom Outcome“

7779
080: 3100

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

my mum anon-rm mom Ilﬂ'llVIm

mu umm 40mm: in Punch 15 Jon 79 p 23
[Intonation with P3P notion). ooontory Jooqnoo bola-o]
[Tut] nuns Am. Io tho oooioliot potty dividod?

Jooquoo Dolonu I don't boliovo no. In odor for thou to to o oplit with
tho uJority o oitnotion would hon to oxiot in Ihioh {unusual
diffonnooo out-food wording tho oooiol plon or politiool omit”. I
don't fool thot thio in tho mo.

mama Wu lvon inootor oo hmopo io oonoox-nod?

Jooqnoo boloxou ‘l'hoxo 1o no doop divioion. jut nunooo of aunt-adios
oftho riot:- inhoxont in ono oronothorhnpoupropoool. widonoootthio
oon ho ooon in tho oppwonl eivon by tho oooioliot party to tho Joint
oppooltovoton thotloonodoloot mayhythoooomiotportioodtho
Dompooo oomnity. Connolly opookix I boliovo thot it in o qnootion of
oono iuividnolo trying to honlon thoi: pooitiono for muon- thot hovo
nothing to do with on: tum-onto). problono.

“mm amazes. I! thou ion’t om divioion. will thoxo to o 'oynthooio"?

Jooquoo Doloxon It in ohoolntoly dooixoblo thot tho oooioliot potty
oontimo on ito dynonio om. horyono ocuoo on thio point. I molt
oloin thot it [o oynthooio] io quito poooihlo hotnoon m m 12 Mann
1979 (tho «into on Ihioh tho oxoontivo conittoo mu ocoin). m. io my
I non-on“ toronootinottho oouittoo oflz thothoohoonoiootod
to dovolop o joint notion.

um am. Tho publio hoo o poor undoroundiu of Mt ﬂat in
going on. Thio oonld lood to o Iooo of ozodibility for tho oooioliot

Myoooo

Jooquoo Dolozoo 1t io tmo thot thou in o rink thot our ondibility will
olip. Thin io why I on min; thot I. novo quickly in on: couch {or unity.

23
FOR omcm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But tron thie viewpoint the eituetion he: etnightened out eonenhnt in
the leet 2 weeks: the petty leedoz-e heve tried hm! to denonetrete how
thie denoozetio debete hee been ueetul. It the dehete oontinuee to be
conducted within the miee of decency and if it confines iteelr to beaio
problem. it oen enrich the petty.

VAISUI mm: If theme in no made-entel dieooxd. ee you olein.
ien't the whole pmblee nothing lore then peg-none}. rivelxiee?

Jeoquee Delox-en I do not uieh to deliver e non). Judge-mt. But I note thet
theme en two typee of logic et work: thet of divieion end peeeion Ind thnt
of good eenee end xenon. ‘l'he tint type eypeere to {unveil in vien o! the
not thet yeople exe eoze concerned with neeenriu their etxewth end
omtim their when then emiu in true poiitioeJ. dehete over
mnduentnl ieeneo. It is thie trend of logic thet not be broken.

common-h 1979 "Idem eotuenee"

7779
680: 31.00

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPRIOIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

CALL FOR AN END TO 'ASPHYXIATION' OF RESEARCH
Paris PARADOXES in French Nov-Dec 78 pp 95-98
[Article by Jean-Francois Delpech]

[Text] Fundaaental research is at the heart of the probleaa of growth and
economic and political independence. for more than fifty years technical
progress has been largely based on the accumulation and application of know-
ledge. Is there any doubt then that it will still take a long tile to catch
up with the increased costs of energy and raw materials. to adapt to the new
ideas of international economics. to develop industries of high technology.
to respond to social demands?

Radical Innovations

in fact. if it is true that certain aspects of industrial innovation are not
directly linked to scientific development. it is not less true that the
develop-eat and exploitation of new technologies such as transistors and in-
tegrated circuits. optical fibers. sicroprocessors and lasers are the direct
results of scientific progress. Such discoveries constitute radical innova-
tions. They all open areas of possibility. and they could only result froa
fundaaentsl research of excellent quality. This. then. should play an iapor-
tant role in all policies of technological development. He sust increase

our scientific and technological capital as has bean done in other developed
countries. And France must keep her piece in this effort. Beyond the direct
econoaic interest. no one can deny that the brilliance of a nation is seesured
by. among other things. the quality of its men of science.

More than ever. it is necessary to develop scientific research to prepare for
the future.

A Crushing Casparison
in several years. after a brilliant beginning. france has fallen to the

bottoa of the great industrial nations in research. 1he cosparison of france
with its principal competition is crushing.

25
son orrtcm. use om:
FUR "PFICIAL USE ONLY

The simplest and least dehatahie indicator of the effort of a country in

this field is the nether nf researchers and engineers elployed in research

and development. including both the public and private sectors. These ata-
tistirs are kept by the one», which carefully maintains precise criteria
alluvian uluniilcant runparlsnns from country to country. year after year.

The graph below shows the nuaher of research workers. scientists and engineers

for each 100.000 inhabitants in the United States. Japan, Heat Gernany and
France for three selected years.

Number of researchers for each 100,000

inhabitants according to OEDc statistics
or 1963, 1968 and 1973

       

0)“
”.3.

The American erinrt continues to he preponderant. but Germany and Japan have
nude rapid progress in ten years and are now catching up with the 0.8. On
the other hand, after a good beginning. France has returned to a sort of
stagnation since 1968. in I973 Preach research activity was about 50 percent
of that at its competitors. Detailed statistics are still not available for
i977. but all indications are that France's situation is still deplorable.

So a rapid increase in the resources devoted by France to scientific research
appears to be essential: meanwhile she will not be self-sufficient.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tun lllntinct Punct ions

in fact. many factors haVe played a part in the stagnation of public invest-
ment in research in France during the past ten years. but here we have
observed. doubtless more now than previously. a Iarked split between the
fiscal authorities and scientific circles. and it is reasonable to expect that
the resulting lack of coaaunicntioa has had an unfortunate effect.

The fact is that science fills two distinct functions in society. as Plato
has already noted. Its object is the coaprehenslon of the perceptible world.
by observations and by the creation of ideas and concepts. but to this in-
tellectual and cultural aspect has been added the operational effectiveness
which cones with the knowledge of nechanisns. to the Verification of pheno-
mena. which sakes research today occupy a central place in technological
creation.

Reason and experience demonstrate that these two aspects are not in the least
contradictory. they both concern the sane thing. But it is easy to forget

or lose sight of the fact that they are temple-eatery. This is the error
connitted by nany scientists. sensitive only to a favorable outcoae of their
work. and nany fiscal authorities. caring only for the short term evolution
of the activities over which they have control.

To avoid this double trap one oust know how to abstain free all authoritarian
temptation. in both senses. The objectives of research should be established
at the outset by scientists. who understand the internal logic of their dis-
cipline. who only can forsee the possible developments and who know the
irreplaceable role of spontaneous creation; and by society. which finances
then and which should properly keep track of its own needs and policies.
social and economic. it is not reasonable to believe that all scientific
activity should have iuoediately eaploysble results. no sore than it is to
coapietely ignore all usefulness in the short or long tern. The only effect-
ive way is through a really open and deaocratic process which solves the in-
evitable conflicts: the examples of other countries deaonstrate the truth

of this.

On the other hand. the restiaulation of research activity in France will have
no change of attaining its goal unless scientists and society have the cour-
age to determine the objectives with mutual accord at the national level. in
science as in other fields. it is impossible to do everything. The 0.8.
carries out more than 50 percent of the world's research effort. however.
when one analyzes the Anerican system one is forced to conclude that it falls
short of covering without discrimination all the areas of science. A-erica
has decided to choose certain preferential areas of development on which re-
search tense work. all across the country. They cooperate closely while con-
peting with each other. This phenomenon is just as pronounced in Gernany

and Japan. France. whose contribution to the global effort in research hardly
exceeds one-tenth of that of the 0.8.. should know how to do the sane. given
her particular situations and traditions.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Necessary Awakening

A real notional awakening is therefore necessary. Our country still has the
chance to develop a base on which it is possible. st the price of a sustained
effort. to launch effectiVe scientific research. France. poor in energy and
national resources. but rich in Ien and ideas. cannot resign herself to
leaving to others the job of forging her future: she should hold her place

in scientific and technologicsl progress; it is her responsibility and it is
in her interests.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Conpagnie Europeenne d'Editions et Publications Periodiques;
30. rue de Bassano. 75008 Paris

9287
CSO: 3100

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

'ENERGY HAR' SEEN BEGINNING FOR FRANCE
Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 8 Jan 79 pp l7-l8
[Article by Francois lehrette: "The Noosef7

156.51 Let's imagine the worst: The king of Saudi Arabia is removed from
his throne by progressive elements. "or breaks out with the desert tribes.
who have remained faithful to their sovereign...the combat areas might be
called Ghawar and Abqaiq. where the most important oil reserves in the
Hestern world are located.... Socialist Iraq sides with the progressives.
The Iranian army either cannot or will not reestablish order. In short.
the Near East is in flames. The extraordinary chain-pump of oil tankers
coming to supply America. western Europe and Japan stops functioning.

"hat would happen in France?

Events in Iran set off this "absolute nightmare" imagined b a forty year
old engineer who works for the ED? LFreneh Electric Company . Mr Lionel
Taccoen. In a book with the unequivocal title. "The Energy "at has Begun"
(Flammarion). he surveys the world energy situation. from Nepal to the
United States.

If the tap is closed. it will be necessary to try to avoid "the dislocation.
not only of our economy. but of our society." Because without oil
everything stops.

French energy consumption amounts to some 180 million tons in petroleum
equivalent (tsp). of which 60 percent for petroleum properly speaking (65
percent coming from the Near East).

These supplies are at the same tile indispensable and ruinous. "Our country
is like a man who has a noose around his neck. As soon as our economy starts
up the consumption of raw materials. and particularly of energy. increases.
He can no longer pay the bill. The economy is choking to death."

In other words. even in the absence of a world crisis our energy situation
is. to say the least. uncomfortable. increased competition on the inter-
national market will make our dependence more and more painful. Indeed.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hr Tacceen observes. “In 1977 the national production of energy covered
26.2 percent of our needs. as against 24.2 percent in 197A.” but this is

a misleading index: "Almost the entire increase is from the rain. which
was abundant in 1977. and filled up the dams!”

Dependence is. thus. unchanged. while the structure of consunption continues
to develop as if the crisis did not exist: The share of energy consumed for
comforts grows at the expense of the share available for industry. The
French people consused. in 1977. 8 million tep more than they did in 1976

for their transportation. housing and services; and 2 sillion tep less for
industry.

This reveals a climate which is not at all propitious for economy of energy.
Mr Taccoen describes two stages of this process.

The first stage is painless: Her against waste. subsidies to economical
sanufacturing techniques, isprovements in insulation. This would make it

possible to realise "an economy of 10 percent of the total consumption of
the country."

To go beyond that it would be necessary to favor productive activities at
the expense of private consumption. Are the French people ready for that?

"No campaign of information on those subjects has ever been carried out,"
observed Mr Tsccoen.

within the present social context. a draconian redistribution of consumption
thus remains in the realm of utopia. "It seems very ieprobable." he said.
"that a rise in expansion can be obtained without an overall increase in

the consumption of energy."

It will therefore be necessary to acquire more of it while the market is
becosing more and more difficult. This isples a coherent strategy of
diversification. To be dependent for 60 percent of one's petroleum. 65
percent of which comes from the Near East, is too dangerous.

To be sure. within the last five years one can see a few favorable signs:

In our balance-sheet of energy resources, oil has decreased by 5 percent
natural gas has increased by 2.5 percent. That is not enough. We should
already have achieved a sore notable diversification of our purchases abroad.”
Beyond that. we must increase the proportion of our national production in

the balance-sheet of our energy resources. Our objective: To have increased
it free 25 percent to 40 percent by 1985.

“France is a middle-sired country, not well provided by nature with sources
of energy.”

Coal? "Consumption has greatly increased in the electric power stations. to
the detriment of oil. but other users reject it more and more." In any case.
if its importance must increase in the future it will be due to imports.

"Our collieries furnish 10 percent of our energy needs. and we will no longer
go beyond that figure. It will, rather, go down."

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He cannot expect such tron hydraulic power. The Rhone. the first French
river almost coepletely equipped in this nutter. furnishes only 3 Iilllon

ten a year. that is to say 2 percent of our needs. Only a few plants rennin
to be constructed.

Natural gas? The Lacq deposits can satisfy 4 percent of French needs. It
will begin to be exhausted in the eighties.

As for new sources of energy (solar. and. particularly. geothermal). they

"will still play a alnor role at the end of the century (free 2 to 5 percentf)"
Hr Taccocn warns: "No miracle invention. no providential new source of

energy will cone to our rescue."

There remains nuclear power. The present prograu calls for. by 1985, a

power. installed. of 50.000 segawatts. that is to say an annual production

of from 50 to 60 million tap. in spite of protest denonstrations. technical
difficulties and the excess of precautions (political and technical) isposed
during the last few years. this prograa should not be subject to a significant
delay: 1 or 2 years at lost.

"One-fifth of our energy will then be of nuclear origin. Can one expect
that it will then be nationalised?"

The question arises at three levels: supply. origin of the techniques
used. and mastery of the nuclear cycle.

Nuclear fuel (uraniue) enters only to s saall extent in the final cost of

n kilowatt. we have acne in our soil. and we buy sose from abroad. "It

is possible. without too such difficulty. to constitute reserves correspond-
ing to 6 years of consumption (as against 3 nonths for oil).

The reactors which are in the process of construction are licenced by the
Asericnn Hestinghouse Conpany. The licence agreement expires in 1982. The
cos-issioner of atoeic energy is confident that by then it will have acquired
French citizenship.

independence is also the faculty of disposing of one's own uranium without
external constraint. Ureniua oust be enriched before utilization (just as
oil has to be refined). This operation reeains a monopoly of the United
States and the Soviet Union: The central reactor of Fessenhein was started
up with fuel enriched by the Russians. But this very year the French
enriching plant. Burodif. in Tricastin in Drone Lpeparteentl. must be put
into service. "it will furnish. this year. sufficient charges to initiate
the reaction in six reactors of the Fessenheim type. or to leintain the
energy-producing reaction of twenty others. Two years free now. Eurodif will
produce enriched uraniue sufficient to Iaintain. siuulataneously. the
energy-producing reaction of eighty reactors of the Fessenhein type. France
has reserved for itself half of the production of that plant. which will be
enough for our share in 1985.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But what will happen to the share to which the Sher of Iran subscribed.
which brought in one quarter of the capital of Burodif?

The econouic advantage or nuclear development is double: First it makes
poasihle u reduction in inports. thus saving foreign currency; also nuclear
power is a product which can be exported. which brings in foreign currency:
"The sale of a single reactor is the equivalent of the sale of 200,000 cars."

"There will not be any physical shortage of energy," Hr Tsccoen sffirna.

"On this point I an in total disagreenent with the prophets of doom. we

have scarcely skinned the surface of available supplies of coal. natural

gas. uraniun and even oil. it is the extraction. the transportation and

the distribution of these fuels which cuase difficulties. The black gold
of the Near East. cheap and easy to exploit. is a happy accident.

comma: 1979 "Veleurn actuanco"

9357
080: 3100

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI’I’ICIAL USP. ONLY

MOE

BRIE-‘8

MACS MINI-118 MIR-oliational Asuemhly Deputy Raymond millet, in a
questionnaire dnLed 1 January 1979 and addressed to the minister of
defense [Yvon Bourgos , requested that the following question he an-
swered: l) Mctly when was the decision reached to establish n no-
tionnl low-altitude detection syston involving rear-equipped eircrsi‘t
[Equlvnlent to the 0.3. mong 2) In what section of the defense
budget would the hands for transforning the Breguet Atlantic aircraft
into an airborne warning system be included and how such would such
mnding involve? 3) ﬂow may such aircraft would torn the French]
Amos: [my [ism AIR a. cosmos in much 27 Jon 79 p

HAUROY-ROCARD MSOHEnPicn-c Heuroy hes ssid in private: "The Rocsrd-
Heuroy twosonc is finished: it's all washed up!" [Text] [Psris PARIS

MTG! in French 9 Feb 79 p 65]

C50: JIOO

33
ron omcm use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEST GERMANY

AID TO SOUTHEAST ASIAN REFUGEES DISCUSSED
lhahurg STERN in Ger-an 7 Dec 78 pp 246-2‘6

[Article by Mario R. Dederichs: "Refugees: Marks Made. The first Vietna-
Refugees Have Arrived in Lower Saxony-~But Generous Aid Missions in South-
east Asia Would Be More Beneficial]

lTextI Mr. Sunshine shone even more than usual. it was with pleasure that
Lower Saxony's Premier Erna Albrecht observed, in front of whirring fila
caaernn last Saturday. the entry of “his Vietnsaese" on the airfield of
hnnnoVer--163 refugees free the freighter "Hai Hang" blockaded off the coast
of Malaysia had Just been flown in by the federal Luftwaffe froa Kusla Luapur.
For each of the sanll groups of Asians. shivering in spite of the brown wolen
blankets. Mrs. ﬂeidi Albrecht initiated a round of applause. More than 100
curious observed.

however. Albrecht's lightning action did not receive universal applause. his
sinister of the interior. Egbert Hoecklinghoff. was presented with a particu-
larly difficult situation. The latter had only recently attended a conference
of provincial interior ainistera in Bonn and had voted for the decision that
the provinces. subject to further decisions of the federal cabinet. would
accept a total of 500 refugees froa Southeast Asia, distributing then accord-
ing to existing quota systeas.

when Alhrecht's press spokes-an ﬂilnar von Poser one hour later proclaimed

the lonely decision of his chief. one of the participants of the Bonn aeeting
consented: "Hoecklinghoff knew nothing of this. it just duabfounded his."

For the quota system devised by the federal council. according to which Lower
Saxony in recent years had only accepted "its" 9.2 percent of some 80.000
Germans from the east. "suddenly no longer played any part." To be sure.
Vietnamese refugees bring larger headlines than resettlers from Poland.
Col-ented a Far East expert in Bean's Foreign Office: "Apparently some people
are trying to garner glory."

Albrecht is now counting on the charity of the Lower Saxons. But -ven though
Iany offers for acceptance of the refugees have been received. a staff aes-
ber of the Friedland refugee camp is skeptical: "Hhen the people hear that

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a family or those people consists of 10 to 20 persons. charity ceases." And
Guenter "oelter. coordinator for Carltas of the transport of the Vietnamese.
ntrenues: "The real problems will begin when the Vietnamese are no longer
ntnndlns on center stage."

hernnne then the quvntlnu will Involve the integration of people with a com-
pletely different way of life, culture and language into the daily life of
the Federal Republic and the acquisition of residences. jobs and educational
opportunities. Albrecht's press spokesman in Bonn, Doberschuetz. admits
"that they do not fit in with us." howeVer. other federal provinces should
be "made aware" through a generous humanitarian gesture.

of course. Alhrecht's signals are not meant for Germany alone. Some 50.000
refugees from Vietnam. Laos and Cambodia are waiting in Malaysia and 150.000
in Thailand. and tens of thousands are prepared to flee. "The whole thing

is only made worse by the acceptance declaration," fears Juergen Kronenberger,

catastrophe relief administrator of the German Red Cross. "More and more
will follow."

hvcn though they "expressly did not wish to criticise“ Ernst Albrecht. the
Duesscidorf ministers Priedhelm Prathmann (SPD) and Burkhard Hirsch (FD?)
meanwhile recommended that the federal government attempt to persuade "a
country in the Southeast Asian cultural orbit" to accept the refugees--a
proposal echoed by the UN refugee commissioner. western countries can make
financial contributions to support the building of refugee villages and the
integration efforts in Malaysia. Indonesia, Thailand or the Philippines.
The Halaysian education minister. Datuk Muse bin “item. told journalists in
Paris that with the "apparently inhuman" quarantine of the "hai Bong" and
hundreds of boats from Vietnam his government is attempting to draw world
attention to the problem. The developing country of 12 million inhabitants
does not have enough resources to manage the problem of the exodus.

The 650 Vietnam refugees, transported last weekend in four flights of a
Luftwaffe Boeing 707 from Malaysia. are to be followed within a few days by
another 350 refugees from Thailand. however. it is not at all certain that
Lower Saxony alone will have to secure the future of these 1,000 refugees.
Prime Minister Albrecht, widely praised for his generous help, is aware that
once the Vietnamese have acquired valid residence permits they are free to
settle in any province of the Federal Republic.

The flrst recruiter from another province made a call to Priedland as early
as Sunday. A gentleman from hamburg's St. Pauli amusement district wanted
to know: "have you got a few cute orphan girls?"

COPYRIGHT: 1978 STERN

9260
CSO: 3103 8ND

35
roe orrtcm. use our