APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007I02100: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO“ 00040045-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040045-7

FOR Ol-FIL'IAL USE IIILY

JPRS L/8409

' 20 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N ENVIRIIIHENTAL QUALITY
(FOUO 11/79)

U. S. 10"“ PIBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00040045-7
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumatised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Goverment.

COPYRIGlT MRS MID REGIMTIONS 6013331316 WISH" 0F
MTERIALS REPEDIEED HEREIN REQUIRE, WT DISSEHDIA‘HON
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICI'ED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8409
20 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N ENVIRONHENTAL QUALITY

(Pouo 4/79)
Courems PAGE

ASIA
JAPAN

Nev Hater Pollution Control Steps Advised
(m JAPAN TM. 30 l“! 79).oeoooeoooooooeeoooeeoooone 1

First Conviction Under 1971 Pollution Criné Lev
(HAIRIGII DAILY NW3. 8 Her 79)........................ 2

Cite Ecological Suit Dian-ed by Court
(m ‘1‘,“ ms. 6 mt 19)..eooooeoeeoeooe-ooooooooeoe 3

Suit 1mm: Crude Oil Tremehipnent Station Rejected
(m: JAPM Tm. 30 "It 79)....000e00¢.0oonovoooooooooo ‘

USSR
International Conference on Environmental Education
(K. P. Hitryuehkin. L. K. Shepoehnikov: vesnux
moan: NM SSSR, No 2. 1979)........................ 6
WESTERN EUROPE
FRANCE

Dangers. Extent of Petroleum Pollution Described
(Pierre Nounou; u RECHERCHE. Feb 79).................. 13

- e - [III - ~IN'1' - 139 P000]
IN mm mm}! comm. STEPS ADVISED

Tokyo m JAPAN TIRES in English 30 Hit 79 p 2

[text]

magmumuomm
Hm Cm! Thursday
mood I momma
on m valor pollulon coolrol
llama-s lo be Illplemcololl
lot lilo Tokyo and la bays and
loolnlonoSn

Al meal. only the m
mnllonolpollllmslnwoslc
wanmmmcm
lllb mu. polluum does ml
«to because pollolm can
Wumocnpollmmsas
m lure ll llloy alum
tale “to: allot looms Inc
Mullen ol oolluloou by
dlullm

um new valet could
loom tulrlollons wlll be
low on loo volume ol
plum: dbl-llama by each
was plan to seal lllls
loophole.

The new measures are
mm to become clloulvo
blunt.

the am Central ol the
Eovlrooulonl Money wlll
allocate W m at
yollulaal «Ila-hams lo «a
pulmon- to be mono um
Newman mall-u

17am mlccllml pol-om
meals \llll all-role muon-
Icwls ol pollulaol mm lo
lmwloual was ohms.

my: moo-Who

' mm calcium lolmulas

(«maximum

com: The Japan Thu 1979

nan ‘

(Mn

mlulole COD lcnemlcol
oxygen moo) levels lot
"mummy“:

COD level: have been not
lonhlorsmloduslrlalmlo
mcmloooomemw
memo-aluminum

Redoubt goals lo be I-
lolnoa by lm out-ll as lnlerllu
mals lo he «Moved by ml
Mu- boell sol. la addillon.
mulcmuwmmm
plans lo ho hum allot June
m

f‘otll‘lslaooeJncmlgnllot
bread and modlooory loo-
lorlunasooonaololmlapmlo
moonlllolnlerlmtoalalm
ppmloﬂlppmwlhegoollor
plants lobe newly built al N lo
lwm.

Word mom m
muwaﬂocaleconmm

and waste water dlspooal
levels.

Under lhe ocv oollolloo
collltol mm W
plant oocnlots are mulloo lo
mmnaslewoletdlm
volumes and communal
lu‘olsol pnllolanls.

The "mm-moo calm
lawmollhuamlypesol
mam-lug mamas.

Pollulou dlsdnm volumes
olll he cowl“ py ll» 1.1m
lormula and moms Illa he

ww“whm. us.- 4‘
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wheat-mam
aim we the nut em?
vtetioorondetthetevmﬂeh
.ookeﬂectlnlm.
mmnummm

, Mcﬂﬂnﬂnﬂwm.

Iheleohueeldrhrhepmm

”unempladomtppoomll

It lined Nippon Aeroeil.

~ to Tokyo. 1
‘mltllooyenooouveupeoded
_ prison seduces to the un-

plan-I»
Thelotn'anploycel
- 41. due! or the
nonotoctorlng mtloo ol
thpoo Aeroell'e Yokkolcht
‘. Mary; mm Make. an
employee 0! the section;
lllroyokl Topeka. :7. a
. We. and o “gar-old
mm who no not toen-
. titled because he no, at that
-_ theonlnor. . ‘
Pmloent Judge Sahoro
My“ poled nut the
. mbqpllcoﬂetoudoeotsu
, magnum J

mm'

.WW

. Mﬂlﬂﬂ.

mum was caused by
themldeotlﬂed warm-m

were («and guilty at am»; to
properly euperrlse the
unnamed nun tho no at

mammogram-unen-

ohm
mmmmu

WhpﬂIhMem-

ployusondemployeesm.
«new

domaetothe
public by dtoclorglu
Mom
motions. ,

mm
‘ HIST ”"1011“ UNDER 1971 POLLUTIOU com W

Tokyo murmur DAILY I‘M in Wish 8 Hit 79 p 1

[Text]

_‘ innate-Modesto”: «womam Ato‘pomcwotuwwry
WWWML .mu'mwmm 066‘ 0! International Trade lad
MIWW' naouloctorlop plant to Industry am Wednesday that
all tarot ”crummy Yokhlchl. me Preteen“, on possibilities are now very Iltnt

etutnthuoctoeotoecmtog
onto. . , _

lie a“ suite 1975 ukty

_ "Noummmomw:

pompous go: have beep an»
muuyumeueo.

New he said.
more mm» ot tango
warning and «not! device at
ploushendllugmhdtemtals.
The ministry will Instruct the
Wrytotakeoswywy

precmnbosaposstbluteutd.

Despite the light sentence
we} to the mm: and as
car. mosmummtwu
mapptudtomenmums

pole wanna. observer:
unwmoay

Wounuercﬂmhoﬂy
Moonwalk:
thlngtottnootho’e
Industrial clrdee which no
triedthetrboetbmlrethehv
nMiectMapowuem
IMMmoetnelomulaud.
unm-rrsutd.oooinpthat
MWbemdem

'Inreotthelrsoctelmpoo-

:1 5-1:...)

a--.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ontnlo mu! M.
an the pun «that! an .6-
mutmmmumm

m 0 mar
Industrial complex an
my auction the haul
«Mann. '

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mazda‘s kw
”hangaﬂlglnrmh

‘vmmmhm.

The M II I a M
«MIDI’ONMIVO “WWII“
FOR OFPldkL USE ONLY

8011‘ AGAINST CRUDII 01!. TRANSSHIWEN‘I' STATIC)! REJECTS!)
Tokyo Till-2 JAPAN TIMES in English 30 Mar 79 p 2
[Textl

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00050R000100040045-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COPYRIGHT: The Japan Times 1979

050: 5000

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R0001000‘00‘5-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

0136 S77.‘
INTERNATIONAL calmer ON ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION
Moscow V3811!!! MIMI NAUK 883R in Russian No 2, 1979 pp 99-106

[Krticle by Candidate of Agricultural Sciences K. P. Nitryushhin and Candi-
date of Biological Sciences 1.. K. Shaposhnikov: "Education in the Pield of
Nature Conservationﬂl

[ﬁrs]- Nature conservation in our comtry is one of the nost inortant

state and national tasks. The neasures on nature conservation. which are
‘procleined by the USSR Constitution. and the decrees of the party and govern-
nent on the inplenentation of neasures to protect the enviroment and
natural resources are being actively inlensnted. Now it can be stated

with satisfaction that realistic results have already been achieved: ero-
sion processes have practically been halted. the pollution of watercourses
and the air has been reduced. the timber of nany valuable wild aninals is
increasing.

Nature conservation on our planet requires close international cooperation.
for in nature everything is interconnected and nany of its cowonents. re-
sources and factors which deternine the vital habitat (the clinate. the
circulation of substances and so on) are mum to all continents and court--
tries of the world.

In the interests of environmental protection the Soviet Union and other
socialist countries. since 1971. have been conducting joint scientific re-

search. which is included in the General Conpreheneive Progran of Coopera-
tion of the can Neeber Countries and Yugoslavia for the Period up to 1980
in the Field of the Protection and lqrovenent of the anironnent and the
Rational Use of Natural Resources. which Is Connected With This. The Coun-
cil on Questions of the Protection and Iqrovenent of the Environ-cot,

which determines the min directions of research in the field of ecology,
coordinates its developnent and organizes the exchange of know-how, has been

set up in the can Co-ission for the Coordination of Scientific and Tech-
nical Research.

Hithin the francvork of the UNESCO progrsn "Han and the Biosphere" research
has been conducted since 1969 at the institutes of the USSR Acadeny of
Sciences and the institutions of various depart-ants. The goal of this

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

program is to conduct .‘u different regions of the world neny years of con-
prehensive research on the influence of the activity of man on natural
processes in the biosphere. as well as the reverse effect of the changes
In these processes on man.

In recent years the Soviet Union has concluded bilateral agreements on co-
operation in the field of nature conservation with the United States. Can-
ada, France. Great Britain. the con, ltaly. Sweden and other countries.
Soviet specialists took an active part in drafting the section of the
Final Accord of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, which
is devoted to questions of environmental protection. In this section, in
particular. it is noted that "the protection and inrovement of the envi-
ronment. as well as the conservation of nature end the rational use of its
resources in the interests of the present and future generations are one of
the problem which are of great inortance for the well—being of peoples
and the economic developeent of all countries...."1 The need for a com-
prehensive scientific approach to environmental problees. the expansion of
national and international measures on its protection. the exchange of in-
foreation and the elaboration in the field of ecology of uniform scientific

concepts and. as far as possible. a canon terminology 'is stressed in the
Final Accord.

The proposal to hold in our country an Intergovernnental Conference on -
Questions of Ed ation in Nature Conservation became a new initiative of
the Soviet Union. the expedience of convening this conference. the first
of its kind, was recognized by any countries, and in 1976 the 19th Session
of the UNESCO General Conference (Nairobi. Kenya) unanimously adopted the
proposal. - .

The conference. which was entitled the Intergovernmental Conference on So-
vironecntal Education. was held'by UNESCO in cooperation with the Ull an-
vironnrntal Program (URI?) in 1977 in Tbilisi. Representatives of the
govertaeents of 66 UUBSOO eember states. observers from 2 states which are
not meebers of this organization. as well as representatives from 8 organ-
izations and progress of the UN system, 3 regional intergovernmental organ-
isations and 20 international nongovernmental organisations—in all 330

delegate representatives. observers and experts-wtoolt part in the confer-
ence.

cc CPSU General Secretary and Chairmn of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme
Soviet L. I. Brezhnev sent to the conference participants a welcome message,
in which he ewhasized that the further development of economics. science
and culture cannot be acconplishad without taking into account the conse-
quences of the influence of lean on nature. In connection with this the
inculcation of a cautious, attentive attitude toward the environment and
the extension of the knowledge and skills. which are necessary for its

 

1. mm, 2 August 1975.

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

protection and iqroveaent. should becons an integral part of the overall
systes of the enlightnent. education and training of personnel.

Chaimn o‘.‘ the Georgian 881! Council of Hinisters z. A. Pataridse greeted
the conference participants. lie said that the understanding and solution
of the problea of the interrelation between nature and nan are urgent for
all countries and therefore the reco-endstions, which the conference should
draw up. would be of great inortsnce for the entire world.

In a speech at the opening cerenony UNBP Executive Director Hosts! K. 'Dolba
stressed the isportsnce of nature conservation education as one of the '
Deans of attracting attention to pressing environ-ental problens. he en-
phasised that it is iqossible to anticipate an inrovenent of the condi-
tion of the natural environ-ant until broad groups of the population know
about the inortant links between environmental quality and the econonic
activity of Inn.

In his welconing speech UNBSGJ General Director Ando-Hahtsr K'Bou said
that "both as a result of its activity on the protection end i-provenent
of the natural environsent and owing to its achievements in the field of
education on this problen the Soviet Union has often played the role of n
trailblazer."

Aladu-Hshtsr M'nou indicated that the UNESCO neaber states had already
taken considerable efforts to include questions of ecology in syllabuses
.snd to develop teaching nanuals. The study of environnentsl problem
should be a conponent of the overall process of education in all its ferns
and at all levels. The UNESCO general director declared that the develop-
sent of education in the field of environ-entsl protection is an exception-
al field of activity for international and regional cooperation. since the
solidarity of all peoples and all govern-ents is a necessary condition for
solving probleas of environsentsl protection.

Corresponding Hedaer of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences D. H. mishiani, deputy
chairnan of the USSR State Co-ittee for Science and Technology, was
elected conference chair-an.

'me conference discussed the min environmental problems in the adorn
world. the role of education in their solution and the ways of developing
nature conservation enlightennent within the frssework of regional and
international cooperation.

In the lively discussion. as well as in the docunents prepared for UNESCO
and U88? such attention was devoted both to national problem. forns and
nethods of their solution and to worldwide global problens of nature con-
servation and the disseaination of knowledge in this field. “any speakers
noted that environssntal problem should be a cooponent of the general pro-
cess of education in all its ferns and at all levels of for-s1 (at acadesic
institutions of higher degrees) and infornal (using sass neana of inferna-
tion) instruction. The conference participants also indicated the need for

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the coordinated developaent of educational aeasures. scientific research,
develop-ant of educational anterisla. infatuation of the public, the train-
ing and retraining of the personnel responsible for the work in this field
and for the adoption of the appropriate legislative neasures. The questions
of disseainating knowledge on the protection of the natural environ-ant and
the rational use of natural resources at present. attract Inch attention
fro. specialists of various specialties in nearly all the countries of the
world. To a certain extent the extensive use of new methods of research,
particularly space technology. is prosnting this.

Corresponding Member of the USSR Academy of Sciences D. H. Ovishiani, the
head of the Soviet delegation. indicated in his speech that the goal of
education in the field of environ-ental protection is to give man the neces-
sary knowledge on how to use nature and its resources, how to control en-
vironsentsl quality. Today it is necessary to formulate the lofty goals of
education in the field of environaentsl protection precisely in this way,
since in a nuber of regions of the world the quality of the natural envi-
ronment has achieved a condition which treatens the health of people.

USSR Deputy Minister of higher and Secondary Specialized Education N. 8.
Yegorov told the conference participants about the principles and system

of training of specialists on questions of environmental protection in the
Soviet Union. ﬁle stressed that the higher and secondary specialized

school of the USSR in the process of training skilled personnel is faced.

on the one hand. with the problea of the nature conservation enlightenment
and education of students in the spirit of a considerate attitude toward
nature and the careful use of its resources and. on the other. by the prob-
lem of the vocational training of those who in the process of labor activity
will be connected with a direct influence on the natural anvironaant and
with nature conservation. In recent years the organisation of special na-
ture conservation courses has been included in the practical work of train-
ing highly skilled specialists at the higher school. In these courses
modern methods of natheastical aodeling. the prediction of the econoaic con-
sequences of production and so on are presented to the students.

I. P. Laptev devoted his speech to questions of the training of specialists
of broad nature conservation specialization. Ha‘told about the activity of
the nature conservation chair headed by his. which was created in 1970 in
the geology and gaopraphy department of Total: University. (The first such
chair was organized in 1968 in the soil biology departnent of Kasan' Uni-
versity.) The training of environsental protection specialists is also
being carried out at Tartu Iniversity, where the nature conservation study
center was organised in 1966. In 1972 the chair of the use of nature was
created at Rostov University.

Academician of the Georgian SSR Acadeay of Sciences V. Z. Gulisashvili told
about the imroveaent of the skills of specialists of various specializa-
tions. He emphasized that when preparing syllabuses of education on ques-
tions of nature conservation it is necessary to take into account the na-
ture of the production activity of the specialists.

9

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Uhile disclosing the strategy of nature conservation enlighten-ant in the
Soviet general educational school. Meier of the Acadeay of Pedagogical
Sciences 1. D. lverev dwelt on the social class essence of the attitude
toward nature as atatewide wealth and public property. Under the conditions
of a socialist society. where nuch is already being done to solve positively
the problesa of nature conservation. it is inortant not only to establish
cases of eserging conflicts between nature and the activity of san. but also

to analyse and explain to students fros Marxist positions the causes of the
esergence of such conflicts.

Soviet delegation nether l.. K. Shaposhniltov covered the activity of the
Co-isaion for lnlig'ntennent of the International Union for the Protection
of Nature and Natural Resources (1m) during the 27 years of its existence.
he conission developed and dieseninated in sany countries of the world

a general syllabus of the course "The Protection of Nature” for higher

educational institutions. as well as nanuala for the teaching of this subject
in schools. The co-ission organised and held the first European Conference
on Nature Protection Education (Switzerland. 1971). a number of seminars

and working conferences on this probles in various regions of the world.

An explanatory dictionary of tens on nature conservation in English.

French. Spanish. Gerun and Russian. which was prepared by the emission
with the participation of specialists of the Central Laboratory of Nature
Protection of the USSR Ministry of Agriculture and was published in Switzer-
land in 1977. was presented to the conference delegates.

The head of the Polish delegation H. Hihsjlow told about experience of work
and the outlined plans on education in the field of environ-natal protec-
tion in Poland. Representatives of other socialist and capitalist states
devoted their speeches to these questions. The delegates of a cider of
developing comtriea spoke about the difficulties which they have cone

across in organising nature conservation education (the shortage of spe-
cialists. the lack of textbooks coqailed with allowance for local condi-
tions). and noted the need to give then assistance in questions of nature
conservation education on the part of international organisations.

The conference drew up basic recouendations on the develop-cut of nature
conservation education. with which it turned to the states. as well an
international organisations (above all UNESCO and war).

In the conference reconcndntions a significant place is assigned to ques-
tions of the develop-ant of scientific research. Iiere it is noted that

research should pursue the goals of iwroving the systes. fonts and neth
of education in the field of environ-antal protection and should provide

for the dcvelopnent of an interdisciplinary approach to the problen.
Taking into sccotmt that only cosprehensive cooperation on the basis of
specific plans is capable of yielding the necessary inpact in the solution

of global environ-total problem. the conference race-ended that all the
states in confer-icy with their need outline plans of worlt on the

10

M OFFICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OPPlClAl. USE ONLY

inplenentstion of its recoundations and the dates of their fulfillnent.
and subsequently inforn the other UNESCO nenher states and the UNESCO
secretariat on the fulfill-eat of these plans.

Taking into account the imrtaue of disseninatins infatuation for educa-
tion in the field of environ-entsl protection. it was recon-ended that the
states uingle out free anon; the already existing organizations for nature
conservation a national center for the sharing of know-how and infornation
on n national and an international level.

The conference reco-ended that UNESW jointly with other institutions of
the UN systen support in every possible way the activity of various national
and regional organization on the developnent of an educational network in
the field of environmental protection. pronote the developnent of sylla-
buscs. projects and nethods neutrals. found an infornation bulletin. otinu-
late scientific research and develop a joint international progran with
UNESCU. ln order to develop educational literature international contests
should be held. outsoo stipends should be established and prizes should be
awarded.

The unaninity of the participants on the questions under discussion was
reflected in the Declaration of the Tbilisi Intargovernnental Conference on
mvironnental Education. It is noted in it that nature conservation educa-
tion and the dissenination of know-how should be ainad at all strata of
society and should enbrace people of all ageswadninistrators and special-

into. The goal of the disseninstion of knowledge in the field of environ-
nental protection is "tt- encourage initiative. the sense of responsibility
and the aspiration to build a hatter tomorrow."

in the declaration it is stated that the conference proposes that the
states develop theory and scientific research in the field of education on
environnental questions and calla upon then to cooperate in this field.

lhe iqslenentatiou of the decisions and reco-endationa adopted by the
conference will unquestionably serve the cause of peace and cooperation.
the nutual understanding between states with different socio-econonic
systess.

After the intergovernmental conference in Tbilisi nany USSR ninistries and
depart-cots. as well as public organization: discussed the reco-endationa
of the conference and outlined specific neesures to develop nature conserva-
tion education.

The Section on lnvironnntal Education. of which USSR Deputy liinister of
higher and Secondary Specialized aducation h. S. Yegorov was approved as
chairnan. was net up within the lnterdepartnental Scientific and “technical
Council for Coulee Problens of anironnental Protection and the Rational
Use of natural Resources attached to the USSR State Oo-ittee for Science
and Technology. ‘l'he' section was instructed to coordinate the scientific

and practical activity on nature conservation education in our country. lhe

ll

roe OFFICIAL USE: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coordination should provide for the mutual cowlenentariners of different
levels of education and the perforInnce c‘. ecological education among all
age and social strata of the population. on the basis of an interdiscipli-
nary approach to problems of environmental protection and the extensive use
of the results of research in accordance with the UNESCO program "lien and
the Biosphere."

The section has to analyse and evaluate the condition of education in the
field of the environment in the USSR and abroad and develop with the par--
ticipation of ministries and depart-eats proposals on the mrovement of
the eystea of nature conservation education in the country. here nuch at-
tention will be devoted to questions of the training and iqirovenent of the
skills of specialists. to the proaotion of the publication end the dissemi-
nation of the necessary scientific netth and international naterials.

One of the inediate tasks of the section is the preparation for and holding
of the first All-Union Conference on Environmental Education. which it is
planned to'convene in Minsk in 1979. The conference will tally the results
of the activity on nature conservation education in the USSR and deteraine
the ways of its development with allowance for the race-sendations drawn up
in Tbilisi. Representatives of various ministries and departments. as well
as of public organisations. scientists and teachers will participate in the
conference.

The section will perforn its work in close contact with the subdivisions of
ninistries and departuents. which are studying questions of the education

and training and personnel. the All-Union Znnniye Society. the All-Union

Council of Scientific and Technical Societies attached to the AUCC'IU and
the republic societies for the protection of nature. It should rest on

the various scientific councils of the USSR Acadely of Sciences and the
USSR Modesy of Pedagogical Sciences, universities and any M's. as well
as scientific research institutions.

in Septenber 1978 the USSR and Georgian SSR ninistries of higher and special-
ized secondary education held in Tbilisi the first All-Union Scientific
Methods Conference on the Increase of the Level of Training of Specialists
of Architectural and Construction Specializations in the Field of the Pro-
tection and taprovement of the Environment. The conference outlined spe-
cific neasures of this training at higher architectural and construction
academic institutions of the country.

Extensive work on nature conservation education has begun to be perfor-ed
within the framework of the activity of UNESCO. W. as well as various
nongovernnentnl international organisations. The neasures in this field
have been included in the prone. and budget of UNESCO for 1979-1980.
UNESCO and me have begun the fulfillaent of the operational plan of the
International Progra- of Environ-soul Education. which is intended for
up to I983.

COPYRIGHT: iadatel'stvo "hanks". "Vestniit Altadeuii nauk SSSR". 1979

7807
(280: $000

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DANCERS. EXTENT OF PETROLEUM POLLUTION 038031380
Porin LA RECHERCHE in Punch Fob 79 pp lid-l“

[Article by Pierre Nounou, chiot‘. Environ-ontol Protootion Servico. Notional
Center for the Exploitation of tho 0coon (CNBXO): "Pottolot- Pollution of
the 0coono"l

[Text] Alooot one yoor no the: ohipvrock of tho Anoco Codi: dovoototod

2l0 kilonotoro of Brotonooo cooot. xvon though ot tho ptooont the soot

oi the oitco out. to hovo roou-od thoir noml oppooronco. we do not know
as yet when the ocologicol holonco will bo to-ootohliohod in tho loot pro-
foundly offoctod otooo. lotto: ohip dooisn ond. ohovo oll. tho otrict
regulation of ohip troific any. porhopo, ovoid ouch trogodioo in tho futuro.

Unqucotionohly. noto votrioooo thon the ooooivo hut occidootol outpouu
of ouch block tidoo oro tho voolt yot otoody diochorgoo in tho ocoono of
hydrocorhono resulting fro- ln-on octivitioo. totoling oilliono of tono.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIILY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Priuary evolution (critical 8. niaaolution
period for the ecology) 9. Purification of polluted organiana
2. Secondary evolution 10. Oxidationa
(additional period of puri- ll. biuolution
ficatiou oi the aaa) 12. Ahaorption
J. Tertiary evolution (ra- 13. Diuolution
habilitation of urine Sedi-antation (nitrobial degradation)
environ-ant) 16. Hour
b. Evaporation 15. Week
‘ Voaicular drifta 16. Month
S . Spreading l7 . Year
6. Panentation 18. Tine
7. llaulaion (nouaaa) 19. )letabolia-
15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Every year several million tons of hydrocarbons are released in the earth's
oceans. No more than a small share of about six percent is the result of
accidental discharges due to shipwrecks or the use of hydrocarbons at sea

or on land. Limited in terms of time and space, sudden and unpredictable.
such accidents are spectacular and have a profound impact on public opinion.
Yet, an experience based on several thousand accidents and the study of the
most severe among the. shows that. in the final account, the ecological
damages they have caused have always been reparable or should be so under
acceptable conditions. The deliberate discharges. slow. imperceptible.
steady, caused by human activities are more worrisome. Their effects could
even lead to genetic or cancerogenic disturbances affecting marine animals
and even men. Such discharges account for over 90 percent of the annual
tonnage discharged at sea.1 They come from rivers, industrial or residential
discharges, ballast discharges by coastal refineries, flushing of holds and
tanks in marine transportation, the use of petroleum at sea, and atmospheric
precipitation of disc rges on dry land. The latter are estimated at
600,000 tone per year. This source deserves particular attention since

the hydrocarbons released in the atmosphere contain volatile aromatic com-

pounds which are frequently cancerogenic. benropyrene alone accounts for
1,600 tons.

Certain published statements notwithstanding, the natural release of hydror
carbons2 night total 50,000 tons per year, a tonnage still considered
substantial by geologists. bearing in mind proven reserves and drainage
length.

what happens to hydrocarbons Following an Accident?

A considerable amount of data makes it possible to characterize the cycle
of the hydrocarbons and the process of their shift to the various areas of
the marine environment. Such data come both from studies following various
accidents, observance within a national framework (Network of National
Surveyance of the Quality of Marine Environment, for example). or on an
international basis (Integrated Horld System of Oceanographic Stations,
United Nations Environmental Program, etc), and research programs (Inter-
national Oceanographic Decade Experiments, etc). Such studies enable us to
distinguish among three stages in the evolution of hydrocarbons in a marine
environment (Figure 1).

Initially (ranging free several hours to several days after a discharge),

a very rapid surface spreading occurs (Figure 2). along with a spreading in
the atmosphere (through evaporation following surface spreading). and dis-
persion in the marine environment (through dissolution or emulsificetion).
After an accidental discharge the amount of evaporated petroleum ranges
between 10 percent for petroleum or a heavy petroleum product (bunker C,
for example) to 75 percent (in the case of light fuel). In the case of the
petroleum discharged in the North See at the Bravo platform on the Bhofish
area exceeded 50 percent. Such processes depend on the physical properties

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’ﬂClM. USE ONLY

(deneity. viecoaity. eurface tenaion. vapor teneion . . . ) and chenicel
propertiee (conpoeition. reactivity) of the varioua conponente (are Figure
l) aa well ee the enount of available energy in the nediun. the type of
environ-ant, and the inteneiveneee of coeatal proceeeee. 'i‘he eource of
thie energy could be nechanical (winde. wavea. eoaetal currente). then-eel
(air and water tenperaturee and temperature of the diecharged petroleun),
biological (licrobial degradation) or chenical (photo-oxidation). The
petrolei- which waehea off on the beechea could be cleaned through the
eane nechenie-e. providing that the depoeit doee not apread in the ehape
of a cover on the eurface oi the eand.

Thia initial evolution of petrolet- producte eeparatee the releaeed pro-
ducte into two layera clearly dietinct by their phyeical-chenical
propertiee: the aurfece layera which conbina the lighteet producta whoee
mechanical propertiee. in particular, are quite different fro. the naee
diepereod in the water colt-n. 'thie etratification favore the eetablieh-
nont on tho aurface of the water of a til. which preeenta two major
inconveniencee:

It elowe down evaporation, and nodifiee the love-ent of the tidee and the
mechanical action of the wavee;

It retaina and concentratee through dieeolution a certain nunber of chenicel
Pollutante (organic chlorinea. detergente, peaticidee . . . ); through
polarized abeorption it retaine and concentratee other pollutente: chemical
(heavy netnle) or biological (bacteria. viruaee); through eolubiliration,
surfactant factore, whether natural (glycoproteina or polyeaccheridee)
are added to the urine environ-ent. According to J. D. Walker and R. I.
Colwell. the mercury concentration in the aanplee taken fro- the water eur-
face at Baltinore port would be 300,000 tinee higher than a concentration
in rub-adjacent watere theneelvee quite atrongly polluted. 'i'he pollutante
on the eurface could be removed fro. the ace and carried at dietancae
ranging Ero- a few netere to aevaral hundred kilo-etere through aeroeole
which develop on the water eurface (eee LA “mm, ho 87, "arch 1978.

p 209). In the‘ courae of thie tranefcr, helped by the velocity of the wind
and the agitation of the aea, the neat volatile fractione could affect
ecological eyetm far ineide the land and been-e contagioue to humane by
dcpoeiting thaneelvee on the crope (Figure 3).

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘3‘ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- zen-unlu- “WWI“, Low pollution zone

- Imam“ Who (iriution)
Strong pollution zone

 

Figure 2. Aerial photograph in the clear in which infrared and thermal
infrared have made it pouibla to draw nape of the apreadin; of the
petroleum cover. Theae aapecca which develop 2 (A) and 13 (I) daya efter
the wreck of the Amoco Cadiz illuatrate the prinery apreadin; phenomenon
cnuaad by vinda and currenta. (Band on CNEXO, m. and ION charta.)

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OHICIAI. USE ONLY

In the water coluan emulsion remains the dominant dispersion process.
It may assume one of the two main forms:

"Oil in water" (o/w) emulsion which forms on the surface and is sui sequently
dispersed by the currents and the turbulence of the waves. covering a
distance of -severel hundred kilometers from the spill point;

"Hater in oil" (w/o) emulsion. consisting of high molecular weight com-
ponents. usually known, following the l‘orrey Canyon accident, es "chocolate
mousse.” It may contain as much as 80 percent water, depending on the
nature of the oil. Natural or added surfactant agents may result.
according to their nature, in one or another type of smlsion. Thus. a
substantial crude oil fraction '(conteining hetero-atoms such as nitrogen,
sulfur, oxygen, and phosphorus). with strong surfactant characteristics
plays an important role in the dispersion of petroleim products. Should
they be very fine. the suspended particles in the ocean (oxides, hydroxides .

carbonates, and clays) play a role as well in this dispersion by stabilizing
the emulsions.

Is Sedimentation Advantagsous'!

The progressive elimination of light hydrocarbons through evaporation.
dissolution, or emulsificstion in water and the more or less intensive
stirring of the emulsified components with the suspended matter inevitably
drag the petroleum products to the see bottom; this sedimentation is '
unquestionably the major process in their evolution. The duration and.
consequently. the importance of the ecological impact of each such spill
depend on it. The speed of the mechanism increases with the abundance

of the sedimentation load (i.e.. of the suspended organic and mineral
particles in the medias) (in estuaries. fjords, and swamps . . . ) and
stirred up by the currents and waves (beaches, areas exposed with the low
tide, or intercoastal areas). After the wreck of the Arrow tanker in
February 1970, close to 300 kilometers of coastal area in Chedabucto bay
(New Scotland) were polluted by a bunker c layer. 'l‘ho intercosetsl sedi-
mentation is still covered at some points by heavy polymerized residue
resembling asphalt pavement which could be as nuch as 15 centimeters thick.
Even though the crew headed by J. ll. Vandermeulen and D. c. Gordon had pre-
dicted s contamination of the sediments covering several decades. the amount
of hydrocarbons in the organisms living on such sedimentation was quite
rapidly reduced to a' level below the danger threshold. Actually, it is no
longer possible to distinguish between the products spilled by the Arrow
and other substances permanently present in Chedabucto Bey.

Depending on the speed of the phenomenon, the deposit of hydrocarbons on
the bottom nay be more or less nefarious to benthic life at the bottom of
the ocean. Absorption by the sand or mud clears the marine enviromnt

from substantial quantities of the least soluble matter. i.e.. of the
heaviest and the least degradable; at the same time. this sinking slows
down the biodegradation and. consequently, extends the eventual tonic action
of such compounds.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Luckily Degradable Molecules

Host of the hydrocarbons kept in the water column and the sediments become
degraded within a period ranging from a few weeks to several months through
chemical or biological processes. Chemical degradation. photo-oxidation
essentially. is initiated by a primary photolysis which gives birth to free
strongly reacting radicals whose quick recombination results in a large
number of chemical compounds such as polymers, oxidation products, and so
on. These reactions are catalyzed by various agents such as heavy metals
or by emulsification with the help of surfactant factors which favor

the homogenizing of reagents within the same phase. The initial results of
the American studies conducted following the Amoco Cadi: accident confirm
the presence. in the areas surrounding the wreck, of a large number of heavy
aromatic oxidation products with condensed nuclei (alcohols, aldehydes,

and cetonas). whose chemistry would enable us to predict their appearance.

These results illustrate the importance of the degradation of hydrocarbons
spilled in a marine environment through photo-oxidation. Frequently the
resulting oxidized compounds are more soluble and, therefore. more accessible
to the micro-organisms. Occasionally, they are a.‘so quite toxic. 0n the
basic of theoretical considerations it has been calculated that a 2.5-
kilometer-thick film, or 2,000 kilograms per square meter could. in principle,
be eliminated in a few days of normal sunshine.

The presence of sulphuretad hydrogen. among others. confirms the simultan-
eous role played by micro-organisms in the course of such oxidation. The
bacterial degradation of hydrocarbons is, in fact. considered a predominant
process in a marine environment. Laboratory studies conducted under con-
ditions quite different from real life can provide no more than a very
approximate idea of its importance in situ: according to American researchers
who have minutiously followed the development of hydrocarbons following the
Arrow and Hetula accidents. it seems less effective than previously believed.s
However, the process varies according to the microbial strata and it is
possible that the micro-organisms may be less active in the cold areas of
Canada and Patagonia where the accidents occurred than in a moderate or
tropical zone. The nature of the products to be degraded is also influential:
biodegradetion is a specific feature of the molecular configuration of
hydrocarbons; thus. linear chain alhanes (paraffinic hydrocarbons) appear

to degrade best and the products of this transformation enable us to follow
the cycle of the petroleum products flushed at sea.

Actually, studying the microbian flora of several zones of oimilar
geemorphological configuration, such as Chesapeake Bay, on the eastern
coast of the United States, the port of laltimore, and Eastern Bay. proof
was obtained that the microbian flora of the permanently polluted areas
(such as the port of Baltimore) was different from that of the non-polluted
areas and was better adapted to hydrocarbon degradation. Other factors as
well influence biodegrading: temperature (Zobell has proved that some
bacteria could degrade hydrocarbons at temperatures as low as two degrees

20

[’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Centigrade), and pressure (recent experiments have proved that barophila
bacteria present in deep sediment could degrade hydrocarbons in the absence
of air as uell).

Theac propertioa led to an attempt to aeed hydrocarbon deposits with
bacteria. However, this method is far from being an operational means for
dealing with the problem conaidering the current state of our knowledge.
Furthermore. some bacterial strata only store and subsequently reject the
hydrocarbons without transforming them. This property is found all along
the trophic chain. Thus, at the site of the accident involving the Arrow
the plankton had absorbed aubstantial quantities of Bunker c in dropleta,
rejecting them 25 houra later with no transformation. The zooplankton,
marine fowl, and most molluaks and crustaceans ab.orb hydrocarbons without
degradation, rejecting them almost entirely after several days. retaining
no more than 3 to 10 percent in their tissues. However. studies undertaken
by Canadian researchere, following the shipwreck of the Amoco Cadiz, eon-
rirmcd that some organisms (birds, fish. Annelida. and Polychaeta) were
able to degrade some hydrocarbons absorbed through the activation of a de-
toxification enzyme, eryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase.6

 

Figure 3. Aeroaols moved by the wind could carry the petroleum as far as
cultivated land. In Brittany tempest winds during big spring tidee have
occasionally carried oil from the Amoco Cadiz as far as cabbage fields.
(Illustration NOAA/EPA.)

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Arc Belle of Tat on the Beachea Inevitable?

In a third very long period of time hydrocarbone which have not been degraded
in the courea of the firat two phaaea reach verioua compartmenta of the marine
environment either aa almoat ateble agglomeratee (tar belle) or aa accumula-
tiona, parhapa temporary, within certain living organiame, or elae aa
infiltrationa in moat of the looae aubatrata. The tar balla are clearly
viaible in the high eaaa, along the major exlea of maritime traffic and on
the beachea. They conaiat of very heavy hydrocarbona (up to GAO), oxidized,
nitrogenized, or aulfurized, of mineral camponente (35 percent), ferroue
oxidca specifically.

The difficulty, not to any tho impoaeibility. of eliminating from the marine
environment maaaive apilla of petroleum producta haa quite rapidly urged
mankind to try to accelerate the natural proceaaea of hydrocarbon diaperaion
at can with the help of phyaical or chemical agenta. of all the methods,
diapers ion uaing surfactant agents and, to a leaeer degree, leakage helped
by precipitating agenta. have been moat frequently uaed and conaidered moat
controveraiai. Diaperaion with the help of chemical eurfactant agenta aima
at evading the formation on the aurface of the water of a continuoua film
whose major inconveniencea we have deacribed. It energizea the breakdown
of the hydrocarbon layera in accordance with meteorological-oceanographic
factora, preventa the coating of marine, terraatrial, and air apeciea, and,
finally, bonefita biodegrading. However, the factual effectiveneaa of the
dieperaing agenta ia currently quite controveraial. Induetrial detergenta
uaad to emulaify petroleum apilled by the Torrey Canyon, l0,000 tone for
the treatment of 18,000 tone of petroleum, totally deatroyod the flora and
fauna of the tidea balance zone apreading over 150 kilomtera of Cornwall
court; today, however, ll yeara later, the environment haa been reatored in
its entirety. Furthermore, aurfactant agenta. increaaing the probability
that hydrocarbon dropleta may come in touch with particlea auapeaded in the
water column, could encourage aedimentation on the bottom of quite light
and volatile hydrocarbona which normally would have been eliminated from
the marine environment through evaporation or dieaolution. Thin ie con-
firmed by the initial reaulte of the follow-up conducted following the
Amoco Cadiz accident. Furthermore, the diaperaion agenta uaad along the
coast, particularly for cleaning the looae aubatrata could be uaad aa
vehiclea favoring infiltration in depth of petroleum producta which com-
promiaea biedegrading and contaminatea burrowing apeciea. Therefore,

yeara later, old and totally inert hydrocarbone are depoaited on the beachea,
an in Tregaatel, atill from the petroleum apilled by the Torrey Canyon.
Finally, after the surfactant haa been diluted in the marine environment,
the hydrocarbon molecular could be recombined through coalescence. The

uae of precipitanta leada to the aame dileuna: Do they eliminate the hydro-
carbona from the water aurface or increaae the impact of pollution on
benthic population living on or in the aedimenta?

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

«1‘. sites Are Not So Sensitive

The ecological follow-up of the cites carried out as a result of massive
spill-outs in different parts of the ocean (wreckage of tankers. breaks

of pipeline, or gushes in the course of operations at sea or along the
coast) has allowed us to determine their consequences quite specifically.
All studies agree on the following: Marine ecosystems destroyed by black
tides have always regained their original balance except. perhaps, in some
very adverse cases such as, for example, swamps whose loose soils are very
vulnerable to hydrocarbons. A rough prediction of the overall impact of

a massive spill-out and of the restoration capacity of the affected envir-
onment are possible on the basis of four series of basic data: the
specific properties of the spilled components (quantity and chemical
structure). the moteerological-ooeanogrsphic conditions of the spill-out
which determine the energy displayed in the course of coastal processes.
geomorphological characteristics and, finally. the biogeographic situation
and ecological condition of the polluted site. The initial factors
determine the physical limits of the spillage and, above all, its inediatc
toxic effects. The 9,000 tons of diesel oil (containing a high percentage
of aromatics) spilled in March 1957 following the wreck of the Tampico Maru
off the coast of Baje California (Mexico) killed instantly all forms of
intercoastal and subtidal life over some 10 kilometers of coast, whereas
the 10,000 tons of crude oil spilled out as a result of the accident of
the Argon Prime tanker, in July 1962. in the Guayamilla port, in Puerto
Rice, or the 5,000 tons of the same type of petroleum spilled at the Santa
Barbara site. in January 1969. caused far lesu damage.

Studies of the geemorphological characteristics of the coast and its
orientation in terms of the direction of hydrocarbon covers enabled h. 0.
llayes and his fellow workers to formulate, following the shipwrecks of

the Metula and Urquiola. a scale of sensitivity of sites to black tides.7
The ecological follow-up of the Amoco Cadiz accident on the cogst of
Brittany made it possible to verify the validity of the scale. Regional
geomorphology determined the size of the pollution: the rocky promontories
hit by the waves (vulnerability index: Vi-l) were barely affected, as the
petroleum accumulated in the protected bays behind the islet (Vi-8) (Figure
1.); the marshes of Grand Island (Vi-l0) were the most strongly affected.
Finally. the biogeographic and ecological characteristics determine the
stability and resilience of the polluted system. Stability means the
ability of a system to maintain its condition or to resume its initial
state of equilibrium following . disturbance; it makes it possible to pre-
dict the long-term evolution fol‘owing a disturbance as a function of the
capacity of the environment to face a spillage of chemical products; re-
silience is the speed at which the system resunes it balanced state. As

a function of the phases of the reproduction cycle of each species. the
danger each one of them faces greatly varies in the course of the annual
cycle. At the close of the winter season an inoffensive spill in terms of
high seas species could cause great damage to nesting marine birds, to
oysters, or to the larvae of crustaceans floating close to the water surface
(see LA RECHERCHE. No 92, September 1978, p 751).

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure A. Creneletcd beye (A) commonly found on the coast of Brittany and
loops (B) are preferred areas for hydrocarbon deposits.

A. The part of the beach open to the wind is polluted.

B. Identical phenomena pile up sand behind an islet connecting it to the
land and guiding the deposit of hydrocarbons. The photograph shove the
accumulation of petroleum (dark grey) on both sides of the loop base where
the beach (light grey) is less affected. (Plates by NOAA/ZPA.)

Stability and resilience also vary according to the spill-out erea. Thus,
in a polar environment, where organisms have a long life and a reproduction
period frequently spread over several months, a restoration of the initial
balance of the environment. following pollution, would take a longer period
of time. Furthermore, at such low temperatures the dispereion of the cover
and chemical degradation are slowed down. Conversely, in a tropical en-
vironment, where biodegrading is teeter, pollution has a lees durable
effect.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5. Looking at the hecatoaba of ahella. oyatora, and fioh following
the Amoco Cadiz ahipvrock in March, was it concoivablo that many apociea
would aurvive? The ahella in tho largo photograph had boon pilod up on
the beach by tho vavoa and tidoa but had cono Iron a for broader aroa.
(Platca by CNEXO and Lovay-Atlaa-Photo.)

The Imaodioto Impact Ia froquontly Dramatic

Studio: conducted an a rcault of the moat apoctacular accidenta at varioua
sites have dealt oaaontially with coaatal aroaa. It ia thoro that tho
impact of oil pollution ia boginning to be boat known. Gonorally apoaking.
tho imncdiato effect following the brutal ingoation of toxic hydrocarbona

by living organiaua or their coating with tho varioua apillod producta
reaulta in the alnoat inatantanooua and virtually total doatruction of all
life through poiaoning, ouffocation, or oophyxiotion (Figaro 5). Such
mortality triggcra ecological inbolancoa ouch aa tho incroaao of populationa

25

FOR OFPICEAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nl alum.- lollnwing the dieoppooroncu of the gracing epec lee (goetoropode).
Subsequently. little by little. the balance la reetored through a aeriea of
oacilletiona countering the denaity of the large trophic groupa (vegetala.
herbivoroua aninale. and cernivorea). The apillage of fuel nunber 2 aa a
reault or the wreck of a tanker barge in Buuarde Bey (Heaeechuaetta) in
1969 caueed the death of an enornoua maaber of fieh. nolluelte. and other
benthir invertebrate! in the coeetel areae of me llcrbor. triggering the
evolution of a great variety of benthic apeciea in the direction of the
only dominant epeciee of the polychaete worn (Capitella capitata) known for
ita reaiatance to pollution. The reetoretion of a proper environ-ant.
etarting with l970, hee becone total today. with the exception of a few
very reetricted areae in which eeee crab epeciee renain affected. The
50.000 tone of bunker c epilled in l969 in Chedabucto Bay (New Scotland)
polluted nearly 300 hilonetere of coaat and deatroyed eubetantiel quentitiea
of ahella. intercoaetal cruataceana. end algae. Pour yeera later the eco-
logical regeneration of the tone wee complete. Only a few apeciee of bivalvee
(Myn arenaria) have foiled to regain their fewer deneity. The wrecke of
pettolctwl tankera which have affected the coaet of Brittany have led to the
cone conclueiona: following the Torrey Canyon accident in 1967 1.0.000 tone
of old, heavy. and viecoua petroleun reached the Cotea du Nord ‘5 daya after
the accident which, ee wae the caae with the Anoco Cadiz. occurred in March.
Studiea node by the Roecoff biological atation proved that the growth of
large algae hed not been elowed down by nore than 10 percent the f iret year.
Few living epeciee were deatroyed, with the exception of eea birda which
euffered the higheet caeualtioe in the entire hietory of black tidee (eee
from 2). Other then auch caeualtiee today there ie no ecological aequel
to the accident. The wreck of the olynpic Bravery. in the couree of which
1.500 tone of very heavy Bunker fro. the machine tenlte were diacharged on
the rocka of the call ‘(uein Bay (Oueaeant laland) bad a linited ecological
inpact. and that of the boehlen (about 6.000 tone of Beacon Venezuelan
crude, containing practically no aroutice or light producta) which caueed
ninor danage to the nueaele. reached by the petroleum eeveral daya after
the accident. The etudiee launched by aeveral egenciee. following the
wreck of the Amoco Cadiz. made it poaaible, three nonthe after the accident.
to confin certain predictione for-elated in the very firet daye of the ac-
cident. totally in accordance with the general trende of the reaction of
the marine enviromaent to the black tidee (eee (re-e 3).

High Seo Accidente Are Leee Tragic

llhorcne occidental damgea to the coeetel watere and the coaet are elweya
quite aubetontial, accidente at high eea, fer leae frequent ao far, have had
quite negligible coneequencoa. Their etudy fecee a double difficulty. Seee
in which no chronic pollution by hydrocarbona occura are rare end the accur-
ecy of reference pointe in high an areae ia not alwaye adequate.

The spillage of 50,000 tone of hydrocerbona by the Argo licrchant. in
Dcccnber H74. in the center of a fiahing area, caueed a eubatantial

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ONICMI. "SB ONLY

nortality oeong codfieh or codfieh egge and herringe in the vicinity oi the
wreck but with no repercueeion on the overall affected populatione. ‘l‘hie
can be eeaily explained by taking into coneideretion the overall population
atoch. The follow-up of the ecological reeulta revealed that epproxieatoly
one year later all the populationa of conteeineted epeciee had been totally
reetored with the exception of acne bird epeciee whoee uortelity rate had
been quite low. Thia ere-pie ia a good illuetration of the way an impact
can be attenuated by natural factora euch ea the productivity of the en-
viron-out which wee at ita loweat level at the tiee oi the accident; weetern
winda and very etrong currente which blocked all intervention on the part
of the American Coeet Guard and which drove the hydrocerbona in an eaaterly
direction. The eurtece diapereion and. coneequently, evaporation were quite
rapid. The vertical diffuaion in the water colt-en wee quite lieited end
any accuulation toward the bottoe wea avoided. Natural conditione were
even better at the tine of the petroleu apill near Bhotialt, in the North
Sea, at a tile of very low prieery production. very low water teeperature,
reduced epewning activitiea. and low bioeeae in the water and the bottom.
The 12,000 tone of light petroleum epreed over eore then 6,000 equate
hilonetere. 'l'he reeulta of the work done by reaearchere tree the Nation
Reaearch lnatitute in largen (Norway) together with Deniah. Goran. and
Britiah reeearchera confined that the ecological damage wee einor. At
beat a alight eeell of petroleuo could be detected in tone fieh caught
during the eruption.

The proapccta of petroleun extraction in the high eeee. nevertheleae, has
encouraged acne govermenta to predict ita impact on the urine environ-
nent.

Thua. the Council on Envirotueentel Quality (080) of the United Statea
aupporta the hypotheeia of e eajor iepact caueed by petroleue extraction

in acne high aee ereae. off the Georgian and Alaakan coeata, and ao on.
particularly effecting certain high an epeciee which ligrete toward
coaatal watera tor apewning and reproduction purpoaea: their conteeination
at high aea could. by diaturhing their “3'0“" «4 hindering their re-
production, lead to a dengeroua diminution of the atoch. According to

the aeuae etudy, flounder. anelt. eond eele, end gobya are fiah epeciee
leoat vulnerable to hydrocerbone.

Thoae in charge of petroleum extraction in the North Sea have alao tried
to predict, on the beaia of varioue Iodele. the long-ter- conaequencee
affecting l’iahing. One cannot entirely ignore the varioua eifecta of a
chronic pollution which would dengeroualy effect the egga of cod. haddock,
flounder. whiting, and other gedoida. and eprete, luckily in email ereae.

Prediction of Long-Term Effecte
All theae fectora lead ua to puraue the atudy of the long-ter- eflccta of

a chronic pollution ceuaed by hydrocarbon, particularly in acne perta oi
the ocean. in the Cult of Texae, where fiahing hee dropped. and in

27

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWlCiAl. 088 ONLY

Louisiana. where every year l00.000 tons of patrolsun are spilled and
where oil is frequently found on oysters.

Thus, for several decades urine pollution caused by hydrocarbons has
triggered a considerable nunber of works and research projects. Unfortun-
ately. laboratory experinents are hardly representative of natural
ecosystens in which all sorts of interactions with the anvironncnt modify
the effect of a substance, either because of the organise being able to
escape or being unable to find food any longer. in order to eoepensata
for such gaps a new approach was tried within the 0893! (Controlled Boo-
systees Polluted Experiments) international progran. It consists of the
controlled pollution of natural acosystae fractions. limited through ap-
propriate neasurae. This eors global approach eakea it possible to bring
into play the sun total of ecological factors with a daternining influence
on long-term effects of accidental or chronic hydrocarbon pollution. Thus.
investigations on the scale of hundreds of cubic tasters of sea water. con-
ducted by ll. 1’. Lee. 3. U. 'l'akahaski. and J. 1‘. Person. in Bernicli lay
(British Colunbia. Canada) node it possible to duplicate the profound
changes in Bri-sry and secondary results observed as a result of certain
accidents.l Such axperinants, conbined with in situ observations, enable
us. today. to perceive better the eventual risks of a chronic hydrocarbon
pollution. The areas eost sensitive to this type of pollution are cur-
rently estuaries and ports. They-ware ertanaively studied by 019i experts
in Oriolton in 1975. Hall protected and characterized by specific dynanics,
such areas are the privileged sites for a great variety of coastal studies.
They are the apillways for substantial anounts of hydrocarbons fro. eeri-
tine traffic, refineries, etc, and are generally very polluted (free 800
to 3.500 ppm of hydrocarbons in terms of dry sadi-ant weight. in ”arrogan-
sett Bey. Rhode Island. for axe-pie).

Marine swesaps are also quite sensitive to hydrocarbon pollution. Generally
they are the centers of very intensive biological output, representing an
ieportant transitional area between earine and terrestrial ecosysteea.
Patroleue products discharged in such areas drop to bottons consisting of
substantial aeounts of suspended nattsr. Over long periods of tine they
my be protected free the air and free all biodegrsding. ‘lhey contaeinata
species which feed on the waste which has absorbed than. Substantial
dosages of this type have been caused to the nsngrove cos-unitias of

l’uerto Rico, following the Argea Prise accident, and in west Palnouth Day
after barges were run aground.

A Morrison Phenonenon: Fish Necroses

ingested hydrocarbons settle preferentially in the tissues containing
substantial lipidic reserves. the liver. the hepetopencrsas of invertebrates.
the gall bladder, as well as the plea-a lipoproteins. and all cutaneous

and nerve tissues. These various hydrocarbon accuulation types provoke.
dependim on the organisns. following the disturbance of the cellular
nechnnisns, nultiple disturbances in behavior. nutrition. reproduction. etc.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Frequently they result in cutaneous alterations such as necroses or tumors,
following the destruction of mucoue tissue.

According to the studies conducted by the Britons Halstesd, Hesrns, and
Sherwood. 12 percent of a sampling of 16.000 soles taken in San Francisco
Bay revealed an average of 33 tumors per individual fished in the vicinity
of petrochemical industry spillvays. Gardner. in l973. followed by Barry
end Yevich. in 1976, proVed the frequent preeence of neoplasms in shells
(Menidia menidia and Nye arenaria) contaminated by soluble and insoluble
Texas and louisiana oil fractions. or of gonadal end hematopoietic neo-
plasma in 29 percent of animals caught along the Maine coast. permanently
polluted by hydrocarbons.

Necroses could show up in the gonads. the central nervous system, the
intestines. the liver. end the spleen of fish and see mammals. They appear
to be caused by the simultaneous effects of hydrocarbons and other pol-
lutants such as cadmium and lead. We have no reason whatever today to
claim that the ingestion of important amounts of hydrocarbons could.
eventually. trigger cancerogenic effects in marine animals. not to speak
of man. However, some types of petroleum contain rather substantial
quantities of reputedly cancerogenic compounds (30 percent in the case of
the Amoco Cadiz petroleum). Furthermore, the strongest concentration of
benzopyrena detected in marine organisms (100 ppm in smoked fish. specific-
ally). even though still below the hydrocarbon dose sufficient to alter

the taste (200 to 300 ppm) could, nevertheless, reach 600 ppm in the
vicinity of heavily industrialised coastal areas. The risk of increasing
the contamination of man with hydrocarbons. based on see products, is,
therefore, real.

The current knowledge gained on the subject of hydrocarbons in the ocean
and on their impact on the marine environment emphasizes a fundamental
point: nature has one of the richest arsenals for defending itself against
the black tides. It has surmounted and will continue to surmount massive
spill-outs which, with the exception of accidental damages. frequently con-
siderable. yet limited in terms of time and space. have never had
irreversible ecological consequences. As in all the cases of previous
accidents, and all cases of future accidents, the 220.000 tons of petroleum
spilled out by the Amoco Cadiz were, successively and tirelessly, evaporated,
spread over the sea surface. dispersed within the water column. and de-
posited on the see bottom. This petroleum will stay there the longer the
more the substrate it has infiltrated are loose and protected. it will be
steadily biodegraded and destroyed chemically. In the course of this dis-
appearance, all ecological balances will be progressively restored.

Conversely. the impact of chronic pollution of the marine environment
remains largely underrated. what makes this threat even more worrisome
is that nothing allows us today to predict its imminent disappearance.
Supported by demographic expansion and economic growth, the growing size

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of urine pollution by hydrocarbene. ee euch accidental ee chronic . could
bring about, regerdleee of current or future regulation. nere eevere long-
tern coneequencee than thoee of e eeeeive epill-out. Acceleration malice
thie threat even eore epecifie.

For further Reading

On hydrocarbon pollution or the eeee:

"Recovery Potential of Oiled Merino Northern Environment," JOURNAL or m
FISHERIES 1228mm BOARD OF CANADA. Speciel Ieeue No 35. Hey 1978.

"Pete and Effecte of Petroleum llydrocerbone in Merino Organiene and 3co-
eyetene." edited by A. Wolfe. Pergenon Preee. 1977. '

"liffecte of Petroleue in Arctic and Suberctic Marine Environ-cute end
Organieue." Vole 1. 2. and 3, edited by c. Melina. Acedeeie Preee. 1977.

"Petroleum Hydroearbone in the Marine Environ-mt," edited by A. D.
Hclntyre and K. J. Hhittle. Vol 171. cum. Auguet 1977.

"Pan Ar Bed, see and Coeetel Pollution." Special leeue No 50, 1967.

J. 1.. Ilylend end B. D. Schneider. "Petroleum llydrocerbone and Their Effecte
on Marine Organieu. Populetione, Co-initiee and lcoeyeteee," "Proceedinse
of Synpoeiue on Sourcee, Effecte end Sinke of llydrocerbone in the Aquatic
Environment," Heehinsten, 0.0.. 9 Auguet 1976.

European Parliament hearing. "The Pollution of Coeetel Zoeee by hydrocarbon,"
Council of Europe. Streebourg, 1978. '

Detailed bibliography of reporte end publicatione on the Anoco Cadiz ie
eteadily reprinted and could be requeeted free the docucntetion «nice of
the Banque nationele de donneee oceanologiquee, con. duct.

Particularly noted:

The ROM/EM preliminary report: The A-oeo Codi: Oil Spill. April 1978;
I’roceedinge of colloquiu nueiber air of the cum. June 1978;

”Report by Heat Brittany Univereity (1311/1130), 1978;

"Report by the Senate Inveetigetion Cemittee,” 27 June 1978.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘0

2.

7.

8.
9.
10.

FOR OHIOIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES
"Petroleum in the Marine Environment," Notional Aooduy of Bctouou.
Hoohington. 1975; "Input of on in tho Morin. ﬂuviromnt," 68W.
report number 6. 1977.

R. D. wiloon ol: o1.. "Ocean Affair. Nuioul Board." Acodouy of Science.
1973.

J. D. Holkor and R. R. Coluoll. "Inpaot of Oil in tho Marina anﬁron-
moat.“ cssmp, report “WI 6, p 51, 1977. '

J. A. Calder at 01.. “The Amoco Cull: Oil Spill." p 21, 1978.

n. n. (:01on o: 4.1.. JOURNAL or 1w: mamas mum now or mm.
m. 15, ms. p 573.

"Anoco Cadiz," Proceeding. of Colloquiu No 6, CNEXO. 7 Juno 1978.

H. 0. Mayo: and E. R. Gundloch. MARINE TBCRNOLDGICAL SOCIETY JOURNAL.
to be publilhed.

L. d'Ozouvillo. E. R. Gundloch. and H. 0. ﬂay“. op. cit.. p 69.
JOURNAL OF THE FISHERIES RESEARCH WARD OF CANADA. No 35. 1978, p 5“.

R. P. Loo o: «11.. BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE. No 27, 1977, pp 119. 127;
R. Parson. ibid.. p 116.

COPYRIGB'I': 1979 Soctoto d'oditiono octontiﬂquu

5157
cs0:

5000

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVID FOR NIL-ACI: 2007102100: CIA-RDPOI-OOOGOROOO“ 00040045-7