APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP02-00080R000100010001-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010061-2

JPRS L/8254
30 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

I

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010061-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or atzitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT EARS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MUFFICIAI. USE ONLY.
d. A a «ratio

The report contains press and radio coverage on political, economic. military.
sociological, scientific and technological developments.

. 1' sanders-sunny... o-Deuri'rou

JAPAN

Political and Sociological

Military
Economic
Science and Technology

In. Heuilku/Opu-Eadcd Tom

11:. COSATl Field/Onto SC. SD, SK, 15C. 160, 181, 19?, 228

r mm” 5......“
For Official Use Only. "ﬁ“ ‘ , 45

Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS. “ can! "i N' ’1 '“'
TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN

(F000 3/79)
Comems

POLITICAL AND SOCIOWICAL

'SHUKAN ASABI' Reviews Chira's Life and Character
(YuJi Katsumata; summn AM, 15 Dec 78)

MARY

USSR Indochina Strategy Analyzed
(Takio Yamazaki; 0mm mom, Jan 79)

ECONOMIC

'YOMIURI' Blames 1-30 for Delay in Tonto Round 'h'ade Talks
(Editorial; mm mm rmz, 21 Dec 78)

SCMCE AND WHEY

Government, Business Leaders Plan Nuclear Complex
(MICE MY ”8’ 5 Jan 79) oosoooosooseoooosoo

Japan Atomic Industry Forum Reports on Nuclear Industry
(1mm Kooro 8mm, 7, 8 Dec 78)

Science Council Proposals on Genetic Engineering, Ocean
Research

(ASAHI surname, 19, 30 Nov 78)

PrOposals Detailed
'ASAEI' Editorial

m1 Handles Sale of Declassified 0.8. Documents for NTIS
(W “YO 83mm, 2" NOV 78) cos-0.00.00.00.00.

JNR Conducting Survey for Magnetic Ievitation Railroad
Route

v (mm: mm ms, lJan 79)
FOR urncuu. USE uuu

comma (Continued)

New Milling Machine line BOO-Meter-Per-Minute Ceramic
Cutter

(umm mom SBINBUN, 9 Oct 78)

Briefs
Ocean Observation Satellite
10 Test System
'SBUKAN ASAHI' REVIEWS OHIRA'S LIFE AND CHARACTER

Tokyo SBUKAN ASAHI in Japanese 15 Dec 78 pp 196-199

[Article by Yuji Katsumata:

[Text] The man known as Hasayoshi Ohira has been an
enigmatic politician. Though apparently intelligent,
he is not a clear-cut genius. One wonders ifhe is a
coward, yet when it is time for tenacity, he can be

tenacious. His well known hesitant manner of speech
is found to be surprisingly lucid when given careful

"The 68 Years of Hassyoshi Ohira, the Man")

attention. This man, however. has now become prime
minister. He can not remain an enigma. Let us try
to trace the path the man, Ohira, has walked.

Hasayoshi Ohira returned to his home in Setagaya in Tokyo the night of
November 27 following the decision that he should assume the positions

of president of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and of prime minister.
He spoke in Sanuki dialect, almost as if muttering to himself, to his wife
Shigeko and those awaiting him: "Something incredible is going to happen...’

That morning. Ohirs, making an effort to maintain his composure, had said,
"It would be ridiculous to get excited at the announcement of the initial

test.” The day before, when he appeared at the offices of the Kochikai

(the Ohira faction) in Toranomon he spoke to such top party executives as

Zenko Suzuki. who were calculating the Ohira votes.

"Tomorrow the long

awaited ship comes in. doesn't it?" he said, borrowing the words of

Kuranosuke Oishi spoken the previous night.

But the facial expression of the Ohira who muttered, "Something incredible

is going to happen..." was different from both the poker face of that

morning and the aggressive look of the day before.

“I don't know how to describe his expression. but it was, at any rate,
extremely stern." (Yoshiko Morita, chira's oldest daughter.)

Pew politicians have persc ally experienced the fascination of political

power and the difficulty of maintaining that power to the extent that

l
Ohira has. Even now. mention of Ohira evokes a persistent and irritating
association with Knkuoi Tanaka, though over the years the politician most
responsible for lighting the fire of Ohira's political life has been the

late Heyato Ikeda.

Ohira assisted Ikeda, during the Ikeda cabinet era. first as chief Cabinet
secretary, and then as minister of foreign affairs. Until Ikeda's pre-
cancerous condition caused resignation after the Tokyo Olympics. Ohira was
constantly at his side. representing the Ikeda administration. It was a
pained political regime, that arose in the midst of the turbulent conditions
following the riots relating to the Japan-0.8. Security Treaty and the
Asanuma incident [assassination in 1960 of Inejiro Aaanuma] in 1960.

The night Ikeda assumed office as president of the LDP. Ohira offered the
following advice: "To state the extreme, the cabinet formed in the morning
may fall by evening, but there is nothing to be done about it. It is the
people who will decide how long one will be permitted to stay in power.
Henceforth, it would be best to completely avoid such words as 'long-term
political control.'"

Ohira is a type who has already begun thinking of the eventual collapse of
an enterprise. its goals unrealized. even at the beginning. One can well
imagine the strain Ohira felt as he watched the drama of the "Fukuda col-
lapse." realizing that it was the result of the battle he himself had be-

gun.
As Child Apoligized for Mischief of Brothers

Though Ohira has ascended to the premiership. the general impression of him
has been rather the opposite of that of a "man of great destiny." "hen
newspapers forecasting the results of the primary elections appeared with
headlines reading, "Overwhelming Victory for Fukuda" and Ohira to Battle
Nakasone for Second Place” one LDP Dietman declared. "Ohira is, after all.
simply not destined to become prime minister or party head."

Ohira does not show strong leadership characteristics, nor does he have what
it takes to excite widespread popularity. His features may be called
fatherly or ox-like. His speech seems inarticulate, typified by his well
known halting delivery. During the last election, rumblings that, "It's

a big Job because we are trying to sell defective merchandise" were heard
even from Dietmen in Ohira's own faction.

what lifted such a man to Ohira's present position? There are many who find
the answer in Ohira's achievements in his persisting role as behind-the-scene
advisor. The Ikeda period hardly needs mention as a case in point. Further,
Ohira was "one in body and spirit" with Kakuei Tanaka. a younger man than he;
and he served the aloof Takeo Niki as finance minister.‘ And even with Takeo

Fukuda. Ohira devoted himself to being the power in the background as
Secretary General of the LDP.
It seems that this "Number 2 . can be traced back to Ohira's natural
instincts rather than to the predisposition of a politician of bureaucratic
origin to be ill at ease in some kind of post.

Ohira's elder sister. Huma Yamsda (74). recalls that as a child. whenever
his two brothers were scolded by their father for mischief. Ohira, who
himself had done nothing. would stand before his father Rikichi and apoli-
gize. Perplexed, Rikichi would say. "What's the matter with him. always
going around bowing and scraping...." Such behavior requires a willingness
to be self-deprecating. to bow one's head in order to calm a situation. This
may, in later years have a relationship to his submitting meekly to Shiina's
judgment when the Tanaka Cabinet fell, and to conceding power to Fukuda
during efforts to get the political situation under control after the "Hiki
ouster." Kenzo Kawano (former president of the House of Councilors). in his
work "Hy Term as House of Councilors President" ("Cicho icidsi"), wrote:
"Ohira's virtue lies in his aelflessness. He has a great flexibility. an

ability to drift with the current. This is clever. but it also lends
strength."

During his days as a student at Takamatsu College "f Commerce. Ohira became
a Christian. A schoolmate, Eliichi Hashimoto (chairman of Hitsui and Co)

observed Ohira on the street solicitating contributions with a charity pot
on a snowy night.

Unless one elbows through and attempts to push ahead he will. of course,
not be conspicuous. Tsuneo Kawahara, who attended the old system Hitoyo
Middle School (now Kanonji First High School) at about the same time as
Ohira. says, “He was inconspicuous.. Even his marks were not outstanding."

So inconspicuous was he that until recently there were those among his class-
mates at Tokyo University of Commerce (now Hitotsubashi University) who would
say, "Now that you mention it. I believe there was a fellow there named Ohira."

Ohira has, however. in his own way, left a strong impression on those who
were close to him. Bisuke Yoshinsga (Professor Emeritus of Hitotsubashi
University), who was 1 year ahead of Ohira at Tokyo University of Coamerce.
was sold on Ohira's ability to get things done. At the end of a course on
administrative law given by Tatsukichi Hinobe that had only five students,
Yoshinaga and Ohira discussed the possibility of giving a farewell luncheon
for the professor. Hhen Prof Hinobe readily accepted the invitation, Ohira.
feeling it would be a waste if only five students were there. placed a notice
on the school's bulletin board announcing ”A Luncheon with Professor Hinobe."

The result was a packed faculty lunch room, as more than 100 people attended
the luncheon.

Though not as flashy es Takeo Pukuds. who coined such phrases as ”Kyoran
bukka” [frenzied cosmodity-pricesl and "shows genroku" [a contemporary
Genroku era-noted for decadence], Ohira is not lacking in the ability to
coin new phrases. His "magnanimity and perseverance" (ksnyo to nintai) of
the lkeda era is only too well known, but even taking only the last 2 or 3
years we find such phrases as "ablutions" (misogi) and "governability" coined
at the time of the Hiki ouster. After he was chosen party president he
expressed his feelings with the words: '
"There are times when even 10 or 20 years have no significance; yet there
are other times when one instant is terribly significant."

Though a somewhat ambiguous phrase, when spoken by Ohira it seems somehow to
take on significance. One thing that evokes this feeling is the voluminous
nature of Ohira's reading. Even when saddled with the exhausting duties of

secretary general of the LDP, Ohira never altered his habit of dropping by
a bookstore once or twice weekly.

Though he claims to be so busy he can only skim, he is, in fact, a careful
reader. A classmate at Tokyo University of Commerce Chizuo Kamida (former

head, western Division Branch Office, Japan National Railways), has this
recollection:

"It was, as I recall, one of his law books. The points he wanted to remember

circled in red, word by word. They were not just underlined. Once I tried
doing the same, but it was so time consuming I gave it up."

Ohira sends books he has finished to the local municipal offices in Kanonji
City, where he is creating an Ohira Library. In the back of one of the
books there, Principles of Economics," is the following record:

First Reading: 1933, month date unknown
Second Reading: 1934, 17 September
Third Reading: 1936, 6 October afternoon.

It has been said of Ohira that, "He is not the type to push himself egres-
sively ahead" (Ohira faction Dietman, Hiroyuki Kurihara), but there is ap-
parently a side to his personality which includes a secret to success ob-
tained from his upbringing.

LDP member Hitoji Sakamoto once heard Ohira in deep reminiscence,

”I envy you, Mr Sakamoto. I had to borrow money fron people to get through
school, and my life has been such that I always had to be concerned with the
feelings of those around me."

In addition Zentaro Kosaka (former foreign minister), who went to the same
’ university and entered the political life, was told by Ohira:- '

"You were born with a silver spoon in your mouth."

Sakamnto is owner of major forest lands in Noto, and Kosaka is heir to
the Kosnka financial group in Shinshu.

Ohira was born March 12. 1908,'third son of a middle-class farmer in Toyohama-

the in Mitoyo-gan, ngawa Prefecture. It was usual on farms of the day that
children began helping with the work at the age of 6 or 7. The daily task
consisted of weaving straw plaits to be used in the manufacture of straw hats.
On days when there was no school the assigned quota was as much as one roll
(1.5 centimeters by 50 meters) of woven straw. '
After finishing Mitoyo Middle School in Kanonji City, Ohira turned to his
married aunt living in Takamatsu City for support and attended Takemstsu
College of Commerce. After graduating. he began work associated with the
Christian missionary effort. but after 1 year. stifled. he decided to proceed
to university.

"Of course, my family hadn't the means to send me to university. so along
with admission to the university I was to be lent school expenses by both
the Sakaide City Kamato Mutual Aid Society and the ngawa Prefecture
Scholarship Society in Takamatsu City. Hence it was through the good graces
of both organizations that I began university life." ("Personal History")

Sensitive to Jealousy of Friends

While in school Ohira passed the most difficult test of all the higher civil
service examination, placing among the top 30 (as Kamida remembers it), and
was the first Tokyo University of Commerce graduate in 6 years to go into
the Finance Ministry. There is. therefore. no question of his elite status.
But this was the pre-war period. It is not surprising that Ohira should
develop a complex of sorts as he looked about himself at the university to
discover that nearly all the students were children of the distinguished
families of the area.

After entering the Finance Ministry. Ohira was not particularly fortunate.
Compared to Takeo Fukuda, who consistently followed an elite course. Ohira
may even be called ill-favored. Three years after beginning service he was
ordered to proceed to the Asian Development Board, which was responsible for
the administration of occupied Inner Mongolia, and spent 1.5 years in the
treeless desert land of Chang-chia-k'ou. After the war he was transferred
to the Economic Stabilization Board, a conglomerate from all ministries.
Even after returning to his original ministry, he served twice as confi-

dential secretary to his senior from the same town. Finance Minister Shuichi
Tsushima.

Hence it was that when Hayato Ikeda, a high official in the tax division,

was appointed Finance Minister and designated Ohira confidential secretary.
Ohira held back momentarily. It just happened that Ohira was away on business
in Kagoshima. and he sent a telegram of actual refusal which read. "Though
deeply grateful for your kindness. my emotions are torn apart with confusion.
and I am unable to reach a decision." Ikeda's failure to acknowledge the
telegram and coercive letter of appointment became a turning point for Ohira.

It is difficult to enter the mind of Ohira, who rather than seeking to stand
out always tried to hide himself. There are too few clues.

If one persists. the word "jealousy," which Ohira often used, is perhaps a
clue. For instance, there is his statement, "Among friends, rather than
being congratulated. I was more often the object of jealousy." (his feelings
after removal from an important government office.)
FOR . USE "Nb!

The term "jealousy" is not one that finds frequent use among politicians in
normal circumstances. Is it because of my petty-minded suspicion that I
find in his statement a dark aspect in the heart of the man Ohira?

At the some time, use of the term “friend" such as when he said, "Among
friends, rather than being congratulated,...the object of jealousy," reveals
most directly the mindfulness that stems from this factor. Surely, "friends"
in the true sense of the word congratulate and not envy. It appears, however,

that Ohira includes in the term "friend" all people who have even theslightest
relation to him.

It is characteristic of Ohira that, almost without fail, the terms "friendship"
or "friends" will be woven into his writings and reminiscences. Apparently,
even the members of the Seirankai, who are unrelenting in their hostility

to Ohira, are covered by his term “friends."

whenever a word leaves Ohira's lips it has passed through two or even three
filters. A statement which might incite the other party is skillfully

eliminated by these filters. He once justified his faltering manner of
speech:

"As foreign minister, I had to speak while simultaneously considering the
reactions of other nations. Hence..."

But Ohira's hesitancy is not limited to his testimony in the Diet. his
"uh's" and "ah's" are perhaps best viewed as activity to fill up the time
required for words to pass through the filters.

Politician of Both Hardheadedness and Sense of Mutebility

Ichiro Nakagawa of the Seirankai, who stood against Ohira and opposed
normalization of Japan-China relations and the Japan-China Aviation Agree-
ment to the last. never hesitates to say, ”Ohira is deceitful." There is a
concern even among dovish members of the Diet who support Ohira that he may
indeed be capable of major falsehoods. The concern stems from failure to
dispel mistrust resulting from Ohira's noncounittal stance as Foreign Minister
in the Tanaka Cabinet vis-a-vis the Kim Tee-chung affair.

After 26 years of continuous work as a professional politician. Ohira has

at last reached the highest post. That he has made his way solely on the
basis of "sincerety," "selflessness" and "honesty" is contrary to common
sense.

On one occasion, when dealing with the Japan-Korea problem as foreign minister
in the Ikeda Cabinet. he asserted:

"My diplomacy is realistic."

We may conclude that in the depths of those narrow eyes there lurks an
ability for hardheaded calculation. Indeed, in a conve ‘ with such -
Saburo Shiroynma, Ohira more or less compared himself with Icyasu Tokugawa.
"In personality. he (Kakuei Tanaka) is in some ways like Hideyoshi Toyotomi.
I. on the other hand. am not like Hideyoshi. If anything, it is Tokugawa...
(rephrasing). that is. I tend to be unspectacular." (GENDAI, a monthly)

At home,'0hire is said (bv Dietnan Yukihiko Ikeda) to be. “Not a man given
to extravagance.” He is unhappy when lights are left one, and goes about
turning them off, whether at home or in his ministerial offices.

When he takes off a shirt, he is apt to say. "It's not dirty yet. I'll
wear it again tomorrow." 0n].Decenber, when chosen party president at the
convention, he was interviewed by press agencies until 2300 hours. Yet,

on the morning of the 2d, when he left home he wore the some shirt as the
night before.

Moreover, Ohira. who is so concerned and gives such circumspect care to
outward appearances, upon returning home becomes "almost embarrassingly
casual." His concept of home as the ultimate haven is unusually strong.

Ohira (to when home is so important) lost his oldest son (Masaki) (26 at
the time) to Behqets disease in 1964. He has written of that time:

"Common mortal that I am, I nearly lost all hope and passion for living.
He was irraplacable--nearly everything to me."

Ohira is apt quite casually to speak of "the evanescence of human existence."
We seem to have a prime minister the likes of whom we have not had before.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbunsha. 1978
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

USSR INDOCHINA STRATEGY ANALYZED

Tokyo GUNJI KENKVU [JAPAN MILITARY REVIEH] in Japanese Vol 14 No 1 (N0 154)
Jan 79 pp 34-43

[Article by Takio Vamazaki. international affairs researcher: ”Commentary
on Soviet indochina Strategy“!

[Text] liith the conclusion of the Indochina war which covered thirty years
after liorld liar ll. it was expected that a period of peace would settle in.
without any wars in Southeast Asia. and that peaceful coexistence would come
about among the three socialist countries of Indochina and the liberal coun-
tries of ASEAN (Alliance of Southeast Asian Nations).

in reality. however. Vietnam and Kanpuchea are continuing a fierce “proxy
Sino-Soviet war" (National Security Adviser Bzrezinski); and the si‘vution
has changed to one in which the Soviet Union. which is backing Vietnam. and
China. which is backing Kampuchea. are in fierce conflict in Indochina. from
which the United States withdrew.

iiith this kind of situation. China. while restraining Vietnam with a problem
of the overseas Chinese. strengthened its containment of the Soviet Union

by making a treaty of peace and friendship with Japan. But the Soviet Union
strengthened its support of Vietnam in order to roll back this containment.
and. at the same time. has aimed at closer relations with ASEAN.

in June of last year. Vietnam became affiliated with the Soviet-led COiiECON
(Council for Mutual Economic Aid); also. Party Secretary Le Ouan and Prime
Minister Pham Van Dong visited the USSR in iioventer. and ostentatiously

‘displayed the unity of the Soviet Union and Vietnam by issuing a Joint de-
c arat on.

how the Soviet Union is reinforcing the fighting power of the Soviet Pacific
Fleet which is based in its maritime provinces. There must be some purpose
to this reinforcement of military power. and it would seem related to the
strengthening of its support for Vietnam. But there is a concern that the
development of such a state of affairs will influence the security affairs
of our own country.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet Strategy Viewed from Post-war History

if the post-war history of the Asian Pacific Ocean is taken in sun-nary. the
Pacific Ocean was under the control of the United States for a long time
after the war. although the USSR supported the Chinese revolution and
extended the "communist sphere" to the Chinese continent. The United States
stationed many military bases in Japan. South Korea. Okinawa. Taiwan. the
Philippines. Thailand and other countries; and the security of the western
Pacific was maintained by American naval power. as represented in the
Seventh Fleet.

The Soviet Union changed this state of affairs and tried to push back even
more American power from Asia. The strategy the Soviet Union employed to
do this was to set up a rivalry between the United States and China. That
strategy was inaugurated at the time of the Korean war in 1950.

The Soviet Union avoided any direct intervention in the Korean war. and
wanted China. which had just established its Chinese communist government
the year before. to send troops into the Korean peninsula to fight against
the American army. Taking this opportunity. both the United States and
China entered into a state of bitter antagonism; but this was allowed to
happen by none other than the Soviet Union.

Also. the Vietnam war. which began in 1964. aggravated even more the Sine-
American antagonism.

In order to get rid of this Sino-American antagonism. the American scheme
to turn the tables in its own favor was the Nixon visit to China in 1972
and was the drive for the Nixon Doctrine which followed from the visit.

The United States withdrew 540.000 troops from Vietnam and reduced its mili-
tary strength elsewhere in Asia as well. however. with the retreat of Amer-

ican military power. a ”power vacuum" was created and the Soviet Union
stepped in to fill that vacuum.

Likewise. Nixon‘s visit to China became an opportunity which allowed the
communist parties of both China and Vietnam to become antagonistic toward
each other. As the hhan Dan magazine pointed out in August 1972. the Viet-
namese communist party has harbored a feeling of mistrust. which is hard
to uproot. toward the Chinese communist party which "gave an innertube to
a drowning bandit". It was none other than the Soviet Union which gave
enormous military aid to Vietnam. which further deepened its mistrust of
China. and helped it obtain its victory in 1975.

Having done this. the Soviet Union acquired a “base" of power in Vietnam
from which the United States had withdrawn. And Hanoi. which won a victory
in the Indochina ”liberation war" with Soviet aid. aimed at forming an
'lndochinese Federation“ with itself as the leader.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet Union strongly supported Vietnam in this. Pro-Soviet Party Secre-
tary Le Duan of the Vietnamese Conmmnist Party visited Moscow in October
1975. and issued a joint declaration with the Soviet Union. But. so as not
to give any room for Chinese intervention. it hurried with its unification
of north and south Vietnam and. at the same time. removed all people of
Chinese lineage from positions of responsibility in the party and the mili-
tary. This became the source of the present ”problem of the overseas Chin-
ese .

Taking off on this ”problem of the overseas Chinese." China unfolded a cam-
paign of criticism against Vietnam. Powever. in opposition to this, the
Soviet Union intensified its criticism of China. and. on June 29. Secretary
Brezhnev made a definite statement that Vietnam is an ”advanced base" in
which socialism can put its trust.

The Soviet-led COMECON had formally decided on Vietnam's affiliation the

day before. June 28. This was an indication that Vietnam. the important
place in Southeast Asia. would be committed to the Soviet camp. Undoubtedly.
Brezhnev's speech about ”advanced base“ was the result of these facts.

According to information from the United States Pacific Forces Commander
wiesner. it is said that the Soviet Union has already completely equipped
a Soviet missile base in Cam Ranh Bay. It is also said that a Soviet naval
base has been built on Cat Ba island. just outside haiphong Harbor.

in short. the Soviet Union has changed to a situation which literally makes
Vietnam. the important spot in Southeast Asia. an ”advanced base". This is
nothing less than a sound victory for Soviet military and diplomatic strate-
gy.

USSR Strategy Plans for Asia and the Pacific

Thus. the Soviet Union progressively pushed into the Pacific and post-war
Asia; and. with the retreat of United States military power. it acouired a
base in Vietnam. thereby reinforcing its containment of China.

it seems there are the three following broad aims to this Soviet strategy.
These are the elimination of American military power from Asia. the actual-
ization of China-USSR reconciliation. and control of maritime traffic

from their Far East bases to the lndian Ocean.

First. the elimination of American military power has shown great progress.
The United States military power already has been withdrawn extensively

from Indochina: and Thailand. which yielded to Vietnamese pressure. asked
for the withdrawl of United States forces stationed in Thailand. The United
States army pulled its presence out of Thailand in July 1976. Likewise.
American troops are supposed to be withdrawn from South Korea as well.
Consequently. the next important aim will be directed at the elimination

of American military power in the Philippines.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Secondly. the actualization of Sing-Soviet reconciliation is expected to be
achieved by reinforcing its containment of China. The USSR's greatest de-
sire is that China will yield to Soviet pressure and convert to the Soviet
line; and then. Sino-Soviet reconciliation will be complete. with that. it
would be possible to divert to Europe the 45 army divisions deployed along
the China-USSR border. Therefore. the USSR is reinforcing its containment
of China. By doing so. they anticipate that Soviet influence will gain
power within China and that China-Soviet reconciliation will come about
from the seizing of political power. Their containment of China has been
showing progress. Vietnam. together with Laos. is deepening its leaning
toward the USSR. especially since Vietnam has become an "advanced base" for
the Soviet Union. Therefore. the next aim is directed mainly at ASEAN.

Third. the “control of maritime traffic“ has become indispensable for sup-
porting not only USSR strategy toward Asia but its world strategy.

As for control of maritime traffic. they want to have under Soviet control
maritime traffic which goes through the Strait of Korea. heads south from
the South China Sea. goes through the Strait of Malacca to the Indian Ocean.
in other words. it is to eliminate American control and establish Soviet
control over maritime traffic from the Pacific Ocean to the lndian Ocean.

However. Southeast Asia is a great gateway for this maritime traffic from
the Pacific Ocean to the lndian Ocean. After all. whoever controls Southeast

azia can control maritime traffic from the Pacific Ocean to the lndian
ean.

Southeast Asia consists of the three socialist nations and the five liberal
nations of ASEAN. The USSR has acquired a base in lndochina. Therefore.
the Soviet Union will try next to expand its influence to all of the nations
of ASEAN from its base in Vietnam. That will contribute greatly to its
attempt to contain China to the south. to cause American military power to
pull back from ASEAN. especially from the Philippines. and to establish
Soviet control of maritime traffic under the protection of Soviet naval
power. which will use Soviet naval and air bases now in Vietnam.

whoever Controls Oil Controls the world.

in the above manner. the Soviet Union has aimed at control of maritime traf-
fic flowing from the Pacific Ocean to the lndian Ocean. But. as a Soviet
world strategy. that seems to have a close relationship with its strategy
that aims at controlling the petroleum shipping routes which go from the
oil-rich Persian Gulf to western Europe and Japan.

The Soviet Union has attached great importance to the indian Ocean where
petroleum shipping routes pass from the Persian Gulf to Europe and to Japan.
Since 1968. they have already put their naval power penmanently in the

lndian Ocean. and given it the duty of “checking“ the petroleum shipping
routes of the west.
. Manifesto

FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

.- . alarm”,
13:. was: .(I k.‘

2w)» ' (15)
(anal (19)

“monomerzmem
mineral! S V!
ruwu-izuexnmum

lggaties of friendship and coopeation
U

or declaration of friendship
and cooperation

. cancelled

Bangladesh
Malaysia
lran

Iraq

lndia

. lurkey

Libya
59m

. 2.0 million barrels daily

petroleum transport routes
4.1 million barrels daily

. Ethiopia

Angola

Somalia

18.0 million barrels daily

Soviet Union expands circle of friend-
ship and cooperation to all nations.
(from 1971. Non-socialist countries
are excluded.)

After that. the USSR made
a military aid pact with
South Yemen in 1969. and
aCQuired a naval base in
Aden and an air force base
on Suqutra Island. On the
other hand. South Yemen.
which had received aid
from the USSR. supported
the PFLO liberation move-
ment in Oman. a neighbor-
ing country. and threat-
ened the nonarchic govern-
ment of that country. It
also tried to threaten the
security of the Strait of
Hornuz. which is an im-
portant gateway for petrol.
eum shipping routes.

Also. in August 1971. the
USSR made a treaty of
friendship and cooperation
with India. which received
enormous Soviet support.
crushed Pakistan in the
third lndo-Pakistani war
and made Bangladesh inde-
pendent. In March 1972.
the USSR nade a treaty of
friendship and cooperation
with Bangladesh also.

Moreover. the USSR node a
treaty of friendship and
cooperation with Iraq in
April 1972. and supported
pro-Soviet former Premier
Baud with the change of
government in Afghanistan.
obtaining that country
for the Soviet sphere of
influence. They made a
treaty of friendship and
cooperation with Somalia
in 1974. completely equip-
ping naval and air aili-
tary bases in that coun-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

try. This became an important base for the Soviet indian Ocean fleet.

In April 1975. the USSR carried out ”OKEAN” maneuvers. using the world

seas as a stage. Likewise. they carried out naval attack maneuvers in the
lndian Ocean. deploying many ships and aircraft. Moreover. the USSR air
transported directly to Angola 20.000 Cuban troops for the Angola dispute.
which had intensified since the end of 1975. At the same time. Soviet

naval units escorted a fleet of ships. transporting to Angola large numbers
of tanks and heavy weapons.

The USSR. making a treaty of friendship and cooperation with Ethiopia in
May 1977. sent Cuban troops to Ethiopia Just as they did with Angola and
their naval power escorted a fleet of vessels to the Eritrean port of Mas-

Somalia. objecting to the USSR's assistance to Ethiopia. cancelled unilater-
ally its treaty of friendship and cooperation with the USSR in November 1977
and requested the evacuation of all Soviet military advisers and the return
of bases being furnished to the Soviet Union. To counteract this. the USSR
gave Ethiopia aid exceeding one billion dollars and 50.000 tons. And. they
sent 17.000 Cuban troops and 2.000 South Yemen troops to Ethiopia. and un-

folded a large scale assault against Somalia. Because of this. the Somalia
side. which had brought the Ogaden area under its control. caved into this

destruction. Somalia's President Barre suffered the degradation of a de-
feated commander.

The USSR. which lost the military bases at Berbera and the like because of

Somalia's treachery. is trying now to request substitute bases in Eritrea.
It is said that Ethiopia has already allowed a Soviet air base in Asmara
and a naval base on Dahlak.islands outside Hassawa Harbor.

Under these conditions. a siege strategy toward the Persian Gulf has inten-
sified since April of last year. This can be seen in the coups d’etat

that have occurred successively around the Persian Gulf areas. such as in
Somalia. Afghanistan. Yemen. Iraq and others. This also indicates how much

importance the USSR attaches to control of the petroleum shipping routes to
the western nations from the Persian Gulf.

The USSR is new supplying 80 million kilolitera of oil annually through a
pipeline to the Eastern mmpean nationa. except Romania. But it caema
that the oil production of the Soviet bloc has not progressed enough to
meet increased consumption. Therefore. according to some sources. if the
oil supply to Eastern European nations should stop in the 80’s. it would
mean that the Soviet control of Eastern Europe would collapse indisputedly.

from this. it seems that the USSR has been deepening its interest in Persian
Gulf oil. But the security of Japan. western Europe and the United States
hangs on the securing of the petroleum shipping routes leading from the
Persian Gulf to the western nations. So it can be said that whoever con-

13
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISP. ONLY

trois the oil of the Persian Gulf controls the world.
Strategic Value of Indochina.

Thus. the Soviet Union attaches great importance to Indochina from its

view of world strategy. especially control of maritime traffic from the Paci-
fic Ocean to the Indian Ocean. That is because the Soviet Union has dis-
covered the great strategic value of ind:.hina.

First of all. Indochina, together with the Malaysian archipelago. constitutes
the "rim~land“ of the southeastern part of the Eurasian continent. However.
since Indonesia and the Philippines are in the open seas off of this rim-
land. that area becomes an important gateway. tying together the shipping
routes of the Indian Ocean with the Pacific Ocean.

The shipping routes that go from the Pacific Ocean and pass through this
region to the Indian Ocean can be squeezed into the general classification
of the following four routes.

The first shipping route is the one that passes through the Strait of Malac-
ca. For the Soviet Union. this route is the shortest route tying the Indian
Ocean with the bases in their maritime provinces. In addition. Vietnam.
which has become affiliated with CONECON. and Malaysia, which has advocated
for Soviet “friendship and cooperation". are close to this shipping route.
Therefore. the Soviet Union has the advantage of being able to request bases.
as well as port privileges. from Vietnam and Malaysia.

The second shipping route passes through the Strait of Sunda.

The third shipping route is a route that leaves the Indian Ocean. and passes
through the Lombok Strait from the Strait of Makassar.

The fourth shipping route is a route that goes through the Indian Ocean.
passing through the Strait of Onbai from the holucca Sea.

These last three shipping routes are a greater distance than the first ship-
ping route. and need a mutual indochinese agreement as well. Therefore.
from the Soviet Union‘s perspective. it can be said that the first ship-
ping route is much more advantageous. and the possibility of securing it

s greater.

Escondly. Indochina has a great value from the perspective of containing
na.

The USSR has pressured China from the north. deploying a military force of
45 divisions along the Sine-Soviet border. in addition to this, indochina
has Joined the Soviet bloc. If the Vietnamese anny of 1.5 million men.
which is the strongest military power in Asia (if one excludes China).
decides to pressure China from the south. the containment of China would be

1“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

solidified even more.
Third. there are great undeveloped underground resources in Indochina.

It is said that there are promising undersea oil fields in the Gulf of Siam
and Gulf of Tonkin in Indochina. further. it is anticipated that there

are oil and natural gas deposits in the Red River delta area. Besides
this. there are mineral resources of uranium ore, coal. iron ore. zinc and
the like in the Phu Lang Thuong area.

It is said that. in exchange for project
aid. the USSR aims at the acouisition of
these underground resources. Toward this
end. it sent to Vietnam a vice-minister
level investigation team many times.

The investigation team. led by the vice-
minister of the Ministry of Geology.
prospected for oil and natural gas for
about one month last year in July.

According to another report. it was said
that the aim which the USSR had in push-
ing for Vietnam's affiliation with COMECON
was the control of its oil and mineral
Key: resources.

Vietnam's Mineral Resources

 

Fourth. Indochina is an advantageous

1. coal base to expand its influence to the

2. iron ore ASEAN nations.

3. zinc

4. tin After the "Indochinese liberation“ in

5. copper 1975. Laos and Kampuchea abolished their
6. gold monarchies and became socialist countries.

Laos deepened its leaning toward ﬂanoi.

but Kampuchea intensified its resistance
to Hanoi's leadership and. opposing Soviet-supported Vietnam. requested the
support of China.

Vietnam has aimed at a Southeast Asia under the leadership of Hanoi. and ad-
vocated for a "Southeast Asian Common Market" in June 1975. That concept

was extensive enough to include the ten nations of Southeast Asia. In short.
Soviet-supported Vietnam is trying to extend its influence to the ASEAN nations
in place of the Soviet Union. And. Vietnam has become a base for an ASEAN
assault by the USSR.

Hill Vietnam Become the Cuba of Asia?

On account of the USSR's strategy to make Vietnam an "advanced base“. China
has been put into a situation where it is threated from two fronts---the

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

north and the south.

China has experienced this kind of military threat three times: the first
was when General MacArthur insisted on attacking Manchuria during the Korean
war of 1950; the second was when the Soviet army assumed a posture of chal-
Ienging a full-scale battle by sending tanks to the front. Therefore,

this present crtata would be the third crisis for China.

This crisis materialized more last year. Namely. there was an incident in
which the Soviet troops invaded the Ussuri River border on May 9. In the
south. clashes by both parties---China and Vietnam~--have occurred frequently
at the China-Vietnam border. The Soviet navy carried out threatening man-
euvers between Luzon Island and Taiwan at the end of June. It can be seen
that Soviet naval power was “demonstrating" against China. by getting caught
up in the China-Vietnam dispute. Further. there was an incident in which

the navies of both China and Vietnam battled over Nanshan Island. about

which both China and Vietnam are in dispute and which both claim as its own
possession.

Under this state of affairs. China. putting up its full strength. has en-
deavored to organize an "anti-Soviet consolidated front". As is commonly
known. Vice Premier Teng Hsiao-ping expressed his "discourse on the big
three worlds” at the United Nations natural resources assembly in 1974.
That is. one must look for the source of all the evils of the world's wars

in the hegemony principles of such large countries as the United States and
the Soviet Union. who belong to the first world. But he made it clear for

the first time that the existence of Soviet socialist imperialism as the
more dangerous.

China has put Itself in the third world against this dangerous USSR. and.
involving the second world of the leading industrial nations. such as Japan
and others. has begun calling for an "anti-Soviet consolidated front“. In
short. it can be said that China's discource on the world became the yard-
stick to measure all acts as either "anti-Soviet” or “pro-Soviet.“

Vietnam's Prime Minister Pham Van Dong made clear his opposition to China

in a discource on the world that divides the world into five worlds at

a natiOnal assembly Just after the 1975 liberation. The first is the social-
ist bloc. led by the Soviet Union; and it has the greatest importance. The
second is Laos and Kampuchea. which must be added to the 'Indochinese Federa-
tion“; the third is all of the Southeast Asian nations that form the nucleus
of ASEAN. The fourth is the non-aligned nations. And last of all. the
United States. Hestern Europe. Japan and others are mentioned as the fifth.

In short. Vietnam's world perspective is a view which puts as its foundation
a confrontation between the USSR and the United States. whether something

is "anti-American“ or ”pro-American" becomes the yardstick for measuring
the suitability of all acts.

In other words. Prime Minister Pham Van Dong dealt a frontal counterattack

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

against the "discourse on the big three worlds" by Vice-premier Teng Hsiao-
ping. So. it is natural that the Soviet Union supports Vietnam.

The USSR allowed Vietnam to become affiliated with COMECON in June of last
year. Secretary Brezhnev made it clear that he would support Vietnam resol-
utely as "brothers" and declared that Vietnam is an “advanced base" which

socialism can trust. in short. the Soviet Union made clear its firm inten-
tion to add Vietnam to the Soviet bloc.

Under these conditions. China. which aims at forming an “anti-Soviet consoli-
dated front”. concluded a China-Japan treaty of peace and friendship on
August 12 of last year. The Soviet Union repeatedly objected and warned
against this Sino-Japanese treaty. which includes an "anti-hegemony article"
hostile to the USSR. This has become a frequent undisguised threat. and is

unparalleled as an intervention by a major country in the relations between
two other countries.

But the China-Japan treaty was finally concluded, was formally ratified in
October and became effective. The China-Japan treaty and the United States-
Japan Security Treaty mean that there will be cooperation through the media-
tion of Japan. The USSR, seeing this as the establishment of an “anti-Soviet
alliance“ by the United States. Japan and China. is increasing its vigilance.
This can be seen from the fact that Party Secretary Brezhnev had a conversa-
tion with First Secretary Tsedenbal of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary
Party in the Criuea on August 23. He declared that "recently. very negative
elements have arisen in the far East and Southeast Asia.“

The Soviet view is that even though the anti-hegemony article may have been
watered down. no basic change has taken place in the anti-Soviet character
of the China-Japan treaty. Therefore. the USSR predicted that the status
change important for Asia. which comes from the formation of this treaty.
namely. the balance of power. will collapse. In order to offset this. the
USSR has emphasized repeatedly that there is a need to change Soviet policy
toward Asia. it can be stated that the substance of this policy has been
able to bring about an important change in the Asian situation. as was
pointed out by Vice-chairman Kowarenko of the USSR-Japan Society.

So. the predicted ”roll back policy” of the USSR is asking to conclude a
USSR-Japan good neighbor friendship treaty in order to restore the balance.
and. secondly. is intensifying the military pressure against China. Third.
it is to make Vietnam the “Cuba of Asia“. and to try to assume the duty of
“lead soldier” in its approach to ASEAN.

This kind of movement has already shown itself. Until now. the USSR. along
with Vietnam. has not recognized ASEAN as an organization. However.
lZVESTlYA recognized ASEAN as an organization for the first time on July 13.
Vietnam's newspapers also advocated for a “Southeast Asian Neutrality Con-
cept.“ Prime Minister Pham Van Dong himself made of tour of the ASEAN coun-
tries. As China states. their aim is to try to expand their influence within

17
ton - use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ASEAN as a ”Trojan Horse.“

Moreover. so as to support Vietnam's move. First Assistant Minister Fillyu-
vin of the Soviet Foreign Ministry. while making a tour of the ASEAM nations
near thzsgxd of October. made a statement of support for the peaceful charac-
ter 0 N.

After this unified USSR-Vietnam approach to ASEAN. the USSR invited to the
Kremlin an administrative-level party delegation. led by Party Secretary Le
Duan and Prime Minister Pham Van Dong. It can be said without a doubt that
their aim was to reinforce Vietnam's "Cuba status."

USSR Has Built a Bridgehead in Indochina.

The USSR entered into its "roll back policy” as prediced. The Soviet Union
made a treaty of friendship and cooperation with Vietnam on November 3; and
with that. the USSR built a "bridgehead" with which to impede China's
inroads into the lndochinese peninsula.

The core of this USSR-Vietnam treaty of friendship and cooperation is the
article on ”emergency deliberations." whereby it was decided to mutually

support each other when either party, i.e.. the Soviet Union or Vietnam.

is exposed to a threat of attack. This artizle. which makes cooperation

important from a military viewpoint. has a high degree of strategic sub-

stance.

in June of last year. the Soviet-led COMECOM recognized Vietnam's formal af-
filiation. That indicated that Vietnam has already been included economically
in the Soviet bloc. However. to offset that. China made its China-Japan
treaty. Moreover. China nade clear its plan to cancel the 'Sino-Soviet Alli-
ance Treaty." The powerful "roll back policy" had begun with the Soviet-
Vietnam friendship treaty.

Now. full-scale hostilities by troops of both China and Vietnam. which began
in October of last year. have been repeated at the China-Vietnam border.
Also. their uncanny move. centering around a “dry season large-scale offen-
sive" has continued into the Vietnanekampuchea dispute. Kampuchea's Vice-
premier leng Sary. who made a speech at the United Nations in October of
last year. stated that Vietnam will use again several army divisions, sta-
tioned in foreign territories. in its dry season offensive. in this case.
Laos is clearly indicated as the foreign territory. It seems that about
four aruw divisions of Vietnamese troops are stationed in Champassak Pro-
vince on the southern extremity of Laos.

in addition to this, Vietnam includes in the 'Kaupuchean Liberation Front”
Kampucheans residing in southern Vietnam. amounting to about 150.000 men.

They have formed a “Kampuchean People's Liberation Anny” from among these.
and sent out into Kanpuchean territory well-chosen guerrillas and political
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

saboteurs. They are using this dual front stategy to intensity internal
disturbances in Kampuchea. In short. Hanoi is using exactly the same kind

of strategy against Kampuchea
a aazomumm

as they used for the conquest of
South Vietnam in the past.
6 (4)94’09
.- .
0)~arn

\
. 'V
‘ Q waves»-

  
 
 

 
 

in this way. if Vietnam uses Lao
territory for troop movements.
it is possible that China will
expand its troop movements into
Lao territory to counteract them.
China built 600 kilometers of
road in northern Laos. adjoining
Chinese territory. And, it would
seem that if they were to use
. this road. they could easily
maimmaenema anon enter Thailand and at the same
14‘ .......... time. threaten Vietnam from the

 

rear.
Key:
1. Chinese Roads in Laos 17. Du Dom Sai
2. China 18. Nam Pak
3. Yunnan Province 19. Vien Sai
4. Lai Chau 20. Houei Sai
S. Baun Neua 21. Sam Neua
6. ﬂat Sa 22. Muong Beng
7. Vietnam 23. Du River
8. Mengla 24. Laos
9. Phong Saly 25. Pak The
10. Hyo 26. Muong Son
11. Dien Bien Phu 27. Pak Beng
12. Burma 28. Mekong River
13. 8a Ten 29. Luang Prabang
14. Muong Khoua 3o. Jarres Plains
15. Huang La 31. Thailand

16. Luan Nam Tha

. Roads built with China's assistance
(600 kilometers completed)
_ - _Under construction

with this. there is a danger that the Vietnam-Kampuchea conflict will spread
to all of Indochina. engulfing Laos. If the USSR backs up Vietnam and China
backs up Kampuchea. there is a possibility that it will develop into a Sino-
Soviet clash. making Indochina the stage.

The ASEAN nations are exceedingly afraid that it will expand to such a situ-
ation. In particular. the feeling of crisis is very acute in Thailand.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

borders Kampuchea. In particular. if Kampuchea cannot withstand a large of-
fensive from the USSR-Vietnam union, and. if a pro-Soviet/pro-Hanoi govern-
ment appears upon the collapse of the Pol Pot regime, certainly this would
be the actualization of an “lndochinese Federation“ at which Hanoi aims.

Then. the pressure on Thailand would suddenly increase from the USSR and
from Hanoi.

Thailand is a cOuntry where two coups d'etat have occurred since 1976.
caused by the indochina shock. it is a country which renuested a complete
evacuation of United States troops stationed in Thailand. because of Viet-
nam‘s pressure. In the event that Thailand offers the air bases at U Thapao
and elsewhere to the USSR, because of pressure from the Soviet Union which
has solidified its "bridgehead" in lndochina, the Soviet Union would be able
to control maritime traffic passing through the Strait of Malacca by using
its bases in Thailand and Cam Ranh Bay.

However. the appearance of such a situation would not only threaten the
South China Sea route for transporting natural resources to our own country.
but would have such a great influence that it would destroy the strategic
balance in Asia and the Pacific.

COPYRIGHT: Japan Military Review 1979

9400
C50: 4105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

'YONIURI‘BLAHES BC FOR DELAY IN TOKYO ROUND TRADE TALKS
Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 21 Dec 78 p 2 ow
[Editorial: "BC Overly Stubborn"l

[Text] It is regrettable that the Tokyo Round Multinational Trade Negotia-
tions will not be concluded this year. and the European Communities (EC)
must take the blame for the delay.

The EC has been stubbornly negative in its overeagerness to protect its
markets. But what worries us the most is that the EC attitude may encourage
those favoring protectionism in the 0.8.

Japan, the 0.5. and the BC pledged twice to make all-out efforts to wrap
up the negotiations within this year. The first pledge was made at the

summit meeting of industrially advanced nations held in Bonn in July and
the second ut the Tripartite Ministerial Conference in Geneva last month.

Most Unfortunate Delay

Nevertheless. the Tokyo Round Negotiations will not be concluded by this
deadline. of course, everyone knew that it would not be easy to reach an
agreement to set the rules for world trade in the 19803. We admit the
task was big but still insist that it is unfortunate that the target date
will not be met. And the EC through its negative attitude has caused a
loss in prestige for the summit participants.

The BC is trying to shift the blame for the delay to Japan and the 0.8.
but this is not true. Pram the very beginning of the talks, the EC
assumed a negative attitude toward expanding the open market system.

Japan and the 0.8. issued a joint statement saying they had reached a
comprehensive agreement in negotiations so far between themselves. This

is encouraging, and certainly the EC will not cancel the Tokyo Round on
its own.
The key issue left unresolved is the contents of the "selective safeguards"
(emergency import restrictions). Between Japan and the 0.5. there is the

issue of how open to foreign companies should be government procureaent.
However. agreements can be found.

Therefore, it is our belief that the Tokyo Round Negotiations will be
virtually completed in January and signed in harch or April, but eVen with
this expectation, we cannot put our minds to ease.

Offspring of Recession

The protectionist sentiment in the BC and the 0.5. runs deep because of
the protracted recession in the world. high uneaployaent and the loss of

confidence by private 0.3. enterprises to change the structure of their
businesses.

in January the European Monetary System (EMS) will be inaugurated with the
objective of strengthening EC unity. however. the move toward greater
unity is not restricted to aonetary problems but also covers the field of

trade. Under the circumstances. we must appeal to the BC to asintain the
open market system.

In the debate in the ”.8. Congress on the Tokyo Round agree-ant next year.
we can expect protectionists to severely criticise Japan and the EC. and
demand restrictions on imports. Japan night forestall such deasnda by

taking drastic steps to allow foreign cospaniss to bid for our government's
procurement contracts.

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Yomiuri 1978

CSO: 0120

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GOVERNMENT, BUSINESS LEADERS PLAN NUCIJIAR COMPLEX

Tokyo MMNICIII DAILY NEHS in English 5 Jan 79 p 5

[Text]

Unearthed-391mm:
nun lulu-purpose bin:
W m (ii'i'R).
with a and, oi Ming
$0.000 liloniis. will be
M m technical
Win viii: in United

oiihe"smdyCo¢mliue0u
Imam u oi Nuclear
M” W by the
Weizmann“:

ﬁrm on Dec. 23 in:

Cm cum and
int. mid man can-
mutant-mun.
mummmm
neeilu vu chaired by

23

Prue-locum Minna oi
iiueUnlveuiiyoiTolyo.

Ii this nice! ice new
lnduniry combine II
mierllllud ihe nuclear
M vii in actually com-

"I!
been when namely- to:
”MAMMI
melt-t m (ice power
uneniin) are new in
operation with combined

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mum ”mummmw u~.muw«.mm

MWWMW «.mmmmu MW WWW

mm
. mmmmﬁ mum
mm -Mm “WNW W“M.mmu¢ww mmmH
JAPAN ATOMIC INDUSTRY FORUM REPORTS ON NUCLEAR INDUSTRY
Tokyo NIKKAN £06Y0 SUINBUN in Japaneae 7. 8 Dec 78
[7 Dec 78. p 5|

[Text] The Japan Atonic Induatry Forun (preaident.
Hiroai Ariaaua) collated a report titled ”Nearly Viable
Atonic Energy lnduatry." vhich reporta on the reauita

of atudy of the actual atate of the atonic energy in-
duatry for FY 1977. According to thia report. total
atonic-energy related a‘penditurea in the private aector
exceeded 1 trillion yen for the firat tine. and the atonic
energy aupplier induatry (mining and nanufacturing indua-
triea) alao had a credit balance for the firat tine in 8
yaara. aince FY 1969. however. the cunulative deficit in
the induatry aince FY 1956 haa reached 130 billion yen.
with little hope for liquidation of thia deficit in the
near future. Further-ore. eatinated future axpendituraa
in terna of coata in FY 1977 are 0.8 for FY 1978. 1.05
for FY 1979. and 1.65 or 712.7 billion yen for FY 1982.
Theae are grin proapecta and a aunnary of the aituation
ia given in thia article.

Trende in the Atonic Energy Induatryo-Tovarda FDR Cooperative Developnent

In the area of pouer reactors. a faat Breeder Reactor (FIR) engineering
Office uaa jointly eatabliahcd in Auguat 1977 by four fir-a. Hitaubiahi
Beavy Induatry. hitachi Ltd. Tokyo Shibaura. and Fuji Denki. which action
for-ad the foundation for cooperative technical developnenta of the FIR.
and work haa already atarted on aone prelininary deaigna for the "Honju"
FBI and other projecta. In nuclear fuela. a Connittee on Heaaurea to
Secure Uraniun Reaourcea with repreaentation fro. electric pover coapaniea
and non-ferrous natal nanufacturcre vaa for-ed in Feb 1978 to conaider note
efficient develop-ant of uraniun reaourcea. and further-ore. a Centrifugal

Separation Engineering Office nae jointly eatabliahed by ﬂitachi Ltd. Tokyo
Shibaura. and ﬂitaubiahi heavy industry to integrate R 6 D uork on centri-
fugea required in the conatruction of a uraniun concentration pilot plant.

25
FOR omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With respect to reprocessing of fuels. a consign-ant contract was signed

on Septeeher 1977 between the electric power coepenies and COOEMA. a French
nuclear fuel company. to reprocess 1600 tons of uranium over a 9-year period
1982-1990. A similar consignment contract for reprocessing was signed in
May 1978 with the British Nuclear Fuels Ltd (BNPL) firm. Other activity
includes the designation of radiation workers in November 1977 and the
opening of a Radiation workers Central Registration Center for centralized
control of personal radiation dosage on a national scale.

Trends in Expenditures in the Private Sector ~Cunulative Total About
5 Trillion Yen

Atomic energy related expenditures in the private sector (electric power
industry. lining and eanufacturing industries. trading companies) reached
1.026 trillion yen for the first time in FY 1977. with a cuauiative total
of 6.9157 trillion yen since FY 1956 when the study started. or about

5 trillion yen. of the total. the outlay by the electrical industry. which
builds and operates nuclear power generating stations. was 583.5 billion
yen. a 12 percent increase over expenditures for the previous fiscal year.
The expenditures of the lining and manufacturing industries. which supply
atonic power equipment. nuclear fuel recycling equipment. Rl-radioiogical
equipment. and related services was 640 billion yen. e 19 percent increase.
This breaks down into 406.2 billion yen for production costs (21 percent
increase). and 30.3 billion yen for research expenses (21 percent increase).
finally. the expenditures of the trading fires. which handle atondc energy
products. was 2.5 billion yen. a 19 percent increase over the previous
fiscal year.

Especially in the case of the electrical industry. where atonic energy
related expenditures were 583.3 billion yen. construction costs. which

are usually about 50 percent of total expenses. remained at 288.3 billion
yen. only a 2 percent increase. This is due to the fact that because of
the difficulties of site acquisition, starts on construction of nuclear.
reactors in FY 1977 was liaited to only the single theta No 2 reactor.
while operational status was achieved by only the lheta No 1 reactor. Con-

struction continued on all 10 nuclear reactors which were under conutruction
in FY 1976.

On the other hand. aside from construction costs. there is also a rising
trend in preparation. fuel. and operational and naintenance costs. Prepara-
tion cost. including an increase in R 8 D for safety and reliability. was
19.7 billion yen (41 percent increase). Fuel costs were 170.2 billion yen
(25 percent increase). including initial fueling costs for five reactors
scheduled for operation in FY 1978 and advances to COGZHA with which a
consignment contract for reprocessing fuel had been signed. Operating and
naintenence costs were 93 billion yen (31 percent increase). which includes.
in addition to the increased outlay for new reactor operation. the cost of
repairing power plant failures (‘1 percent increase). and a drastic increase
in various taxes (63 percent increase) such as business taxes on the

26
ran ornate. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL "SI: ONLY

Pukushias No l and No 3 reactors. the llnnaoka No 1 reactor. and the
Hihaaa No 3 reactor. all of which started operation in FY 1976. a nuclear
fuel tax in l'ukui Prefecture. the Electric Power Resources Developaent
Pronotion Tax. and others.

Invest-ant Ratio of Research Related to Atomic Energy-Nuclear fusion
Research Popular

The research invest-ant ratio defined no the ratio of research inveetnent
to sales was 6.3 percent. a slight decline fron the 7.3 percent for the
previous fiscal year. This is sisply the result of research invest-ant
rising clever than sales (21 percent against 30 percent). and it also
reflects a general decline in investment in research in all of the areas
such as in nuclear reactor nachinery and naterials. nuclear fuel recycling.
and Rl-radiological equip-ent. 0n the other hand. however. there has been
a definite rise in the research investaent ratio for nuclear fusion equip-
ment and in various testing equipnent. a 16.8 percent ceaparcd to 8.9 per-
cent for the previous fiscal year. In particular. the research inveat-ent
ratio for nuclear fusion is a very high 46.1 percent. which indicatee the
serious interest private industry has in the developsent of nuclear fueion
and critical plea-a testing facilities such as the Jr-eo.

Table: Atonic Energy Related Research Invest-eat Ratios in the liining and
Manufacturing Industries (Unit: nillion yen)

(l) '(2) ’)= a z a . :sm-m:

3 "-"§"$:;¢'2ns

   
 

“be '1

   

       
   
  

 
   
 

    
   
 
 

      
 
    
 
 

(3) ”one am: . m 'auu' mi 3.1
(9) "t-nm mu m u 9.6! m| u
(10) vacanl mu m m net m 1.:
(11) 333's: mm is 8.3 07.6! ml :1

 
    
   

   
   
 
 

 

 

   

(12) re . 3:! my on 1.1! as: m . u

(13) e n: 21".: mu m m 8.8:! s» | u

(1‘) RINK-292'): a,» m ms . - - i -

(15) ’,-'.'.'~:'.! tn: :3: - I _ - I .-
‘m . , .. .

~-—- —_

 

     

(16) e .‘ .wc lam I in mum. on; m
Key: '
1. Sector 9. Nuclear fuel recycling
2. Rxpenditure 10. lit-radiological equipment
3. Research expenditure 11. Power generating and transforming
lo. Research expenditure equip-cut
5. Sales 12. Construction and public works
6. Research Invest-ant Ratio 13. Hiscellaneous manufacturing
(R! 1977) lb. RI-radiological applications
7. Research Invest-ant Ratio 15. Contribution to atolic energy agencies;
(FY 1976) cost of inporting foreign technology

8. Nuclear reactor Ischinery 16. Total
and materials

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

l8 Dev 78. p 5|

lTuxt) Sales Trends of Atomic Energy Supplier Industries (Mining and
Manufacturing)

Sales for FY 1977 in the mining and manufacturing industries ran to 462.7
billion yen (30 percent increase over previous FY) as a result of a rise

in backlog of orders in FY 1976. This resulted in a credit of 2.7 billion
yen after total expenditures in FY 1977 of £40 billion yen. including plant
invest-ent.

Cost Reduction Policy Successful

This is the third tine since FY 1956 that a credit balance hes occurred.
The other years were FY 1963 (sales 12.6 billion yen. balance 2 billion
yen) and FY 1969 (sales dé.7 billion yen. balance the seas). if 12 years
is taken as the life of production and research facilities. then the
facilities amortization cost is estimated to be over 12.9 billion yen and
the credit balance can be roughly estiaated to be at the nest about 19
billion yen. The causes of the credit balance are the tine lag between
production and delivery and also the concerted cost-savings policies of

the various firas during a business recession. 0n the other hand. however.
there still exists a cusulative deficit of 130.7 billion yen since FY 1956.
the liquidation of which will be unlikely in the near future.

in particular. the increase in sales by the lining and manufacturing
industries actually represents very active delivery of equip-ant to nuclear
power stations. with sales to the electrical industry rising 39 percent
over the previous year. Export figures show a 59 percent increase over

the previous fiscal year to 19.5 billion yen, representing mainly export

of itens such as pressure vessels. steaa generators. heat exchangers. tur-
bines. and steel pipes to west German. the United States. France. Spain
and other nations. Sales to the govern-eat, askers. public and private
universities and hospitals also showed increases respectively of 15 per-
cent. 16 percent. and 28 percent over previous year figures.

by sector. sales by ushers in the nuclear reactor equip-ant and saterials
area were 266.8 billion yen (51 percent increase over previous year sales).
the nuclear fuel sector 50.5 billion yen (25 percent increase), Rt-radiation
cquipaent sector 21.6 billion yen (31 percent increase). In contrast. sales
in the construction and public works area. where seat of the work occurs in
the early stages of power plant construction. declined by 19 percent over
the previous year. this actually being part of a large decline over two
consecutive years 1976. 1977. This was due to the fact that lost of the
nuclear power plants under construction were already in well advanced

stages of construction and also because there were few new starts. For

exalpla. sales for FY 1977 were ‘6 percent below that for FY 1976. the best
year.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

backlog of Orders -66 Percent Increase

The backlog of orders at the end of FY 1977 was 1,921.6 billion yen. an
increase of 66 percent over FY 1976. This anounts to 6.36-years worth of
P1 1977 sales. the effect of a move up of orders by nuclear power plants
as one way to stimulate the economy.

8y sector. the backlog of orders received by the nuclear reactor equipment
and materials area was 1.662.8 billion yen. or 75 percent of the total

(110 percent increase over the previous fiscal year). followed by nuclear
fuel recycling with 2.069 billion yen. an increase of 65 percent over the
previous fiscal year. On the other hand. the backlog in the construction
and public works sector was 61.1 billion yen. a decrease of 65 percent over
the previous fiscal year. This simply shows that the effect of move up of
orders by the nuclear power plants extended only as far as the prime con-
tractor and not as far as the construction and public works industries.

Trends in Atomic Energy Related Exports by Trading Fires

with increasing sales by the mining and manufacturing industries sector.
trading fires also rang up an atomic energy related business of 680 billion
yen. an increase of 26 percent over the previous fiscal year.

Of this. domestic transactions amounted to 256 billion yen (65 percent

increase over previous fiscal year) and import business was 215.6 billion
yen (e 5 percent decline).

Export transactions amounted to 8.6 billion yen (equivalent to 66 percent
of exports by the mining and manufacturing industries) (an increase of 50
percent over the previous fiscal year). accompanying the increase in ex-
ports by the mining and manufacturing industries of pressure vessels.
turbines. steel pipes. etc. This is the largest amount of export business
ever handled by the trading fires. amounting to 80 percent of the cumulative
export transactions handled between PYs 1958 and 1976. The atomic energy
related business handled by these trading firns. however. only amounts to

a smell 1.8 percent of their total business. and in the future more effort
will be required of both equipment makers and the trading firms.

Estimated Expenditures of the Electrical Companies - Construction Starts
on Pour Units in FY 1979

Concerning construction starts on nuclear power plants. four are planned
for FY 1978 and three for FY 1979. As a result. expenditures for construc-
tion are expected to rise sharply from the 623.7 billion yen a year from
now (equivalent to 1.67 times actual construction costs in P? 1977) to

633.6 billion yen 2 years hence (1.5 times) and 893.9 billion yen (3.1 times)
5 years hence.

29
!OR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Nuclear fuel and operating and maintenance costs also seem to be on the

rise. The estimate for FY 1978 is 863.5 billion yen (1.52 times FY 1977
costs). which is expected to increase to 1.68 times or 954.8 billion yen
in FY 1979. and to 3.07 times or 1.751.! billion yen in FY l982.

Estimated Expenditures for Mining and Manufacturing Industries

Expenditures in the mining and manufacturing industries sector are estimated
to be 345.5 billion yen for FY 1978 (0.8 times FY 1977 expenditures). in-
creasing to 1.05 times or 455.6 billion yen for FY 1979. and 1.65 times or
712.7 billion yen for FY 1982. with respect to the expenditure levels
estimated for 5 years from now. those expected to be on the higher side

are for electrical equipment manufacture with a 2.12-fold increase and con-
struction with a 1.52-fold gain. Those expected to be on the lower side

are for shipbuilding-machinery manufacture, iron and steel. and the exclusive
atomic energy industries with less than 1.27-rinea gain.

Honey flow in the Atomic Energy Industry - 71 Billion Yen to Government
Related Agencies

The money flow involving sales by the mining and manufacturing industries
and business handled by the trading companies as revealed by the Atomic
Energy Industry Survey for FY 1977 is as shown in the following diagram.

Honey Flow in the Atoaic Energy Industry

- mu
zuttz.e4)
«uncut:

9.: :oagm
g 1 .- out)“;
Mot-.1418»

 

[key on following page]
30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:
1.

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.
ll.

12.

13.

FOR OFVICIAL "SE ONLY

lneoee froa electric power eales
National budget

lncoee

Electrical industry expenditures

Construction costs - direct costs (buildings. structures. aachinery
equipaent. aiscel.)

Nuclear fuel costs
Operating and maintenance costs

Electric power business (nine electric power coapaniee. Japan Atomic
Pater Generating Co)

Government (Motor Fuel Corp. Nuclear Powered Ship Corp. Atomic Energy
Res Inst. National Testing and Res Labs. National Univs end associated
research labs. etc.)

Public and private colleges. hospitals (public and private colleges.
hospitals. regional public agencies, etc.)

Trading companies
Transactions

Doaeetic business
laport business
Export business

Mining and aanufacturing industries
Sales (only that corresponding to last demand)

Expenditure

Reaark: Doaestic transactions of trading fir-a exclude 15 billion
yen which is business between nakers handled through the trading fir-s.

Sales by aining and aanufacturing industries excludes 81 billion yen
which is sales to ushers.

Oversees

[Note: All figures in flowchart are in units of 0.1 billion yen)

According to this flowchart. sales to governaent agencies were 71 billion

year

including direct sales of 67 billion yen froa the aining and aanufac-

turing industries and k billion yen delivered via the trading fir-a. Also.
sales to the electric power business was 439 billion yen. including 607 bil-

lion

yen through the trading fires and direct delivery of 22 billion yen.

31 .
FOR OPYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Further-ore. anlca to public and private colleges and boapitaia nae 12.3
billion yen. including 300 nillion yen via the trading firna and 12 billion
yen in direct deliveries.

0n the other hand. exports amounted to 215 billion yen and inporta to 20
billion yen. leaving an imbalance in atomic energy related trade of 195
billion yen for FY 1977 (approxientely 1 billion dollara). Direct overseen
aalea by the Iining and manufacturing induatriea amounted to 11 billion yen.
The total buaineaa handled by the trading firna amounted to 480 billion yen
uhich, from the atandpoint of money flow, conaieted of 261 billion yen in
doneatic buoineae. 215 billion yen in import bueineea. 9 billion yen in
exporta, and 15 billion yen in tranaactiona between aakere. which uaa
handled by the trading companies.

covvnxcun 'Niltkan Kogyo Shinbunaha 1m

5576
080: £105

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0018MB MID TBOHNOWY

SCIENCE 00010011. new on comm ENGINEERING, OCEAN “SEARCH

Propooalo Dotailod
Tokyo ”All! 9mm in Japonoao l9 Nov 13 p I.

[‘i'oxt] 'i‘ho Bclonca Council of tho Hlniotry of Rducatlon (prooidont Mooao
Yoohlnori) oont two propoaalo to hlnlotor of Education Sunado on Nova-bot 28,
ono on oaoouroo for oofo sono (DNA) roconbinotlon oxporlnonto by uniworolty
ond othor roooorch inotltutiono, and tho othor concomlns tho pronotlon of
ocoon ocioncoo roooorch. 0n tho oottor of 0M roconhination oxporinonto,
individual roooorch inotitutlono aro to adopt nooouroo to aoouro oafoty ln
occordanco with a nuldalino notico to ho ioouod ohortly. 'rhuo by next

fiocal yoor, at tho oorlioot. DNA oxporlnonto. which had boon frozen,
ohould ho roouood.

Uhilo DM rocoohination oxporlnonto. which ponit tho inoortlon of animal
DNA into hactorio, can ho of uoo in olucidatins aonotlc riddloo or nonu-
focturlns uooful nodicinoo. lotont rioho on tho othor hand ara a cauoa of
worry.- For thlo roaoon. thio typo of roooarch woo toopororlly ouopondod in
Japan. ‘l'ho roooarchoro thonoolvoo, howowor, undortook tho took of otudyina
oothodo to aoouro oafoty: in lino with thlo offort. an lntarlo draft. con-

, oiotln; of a noin toxt ond oxporinontal guidollnoo woo announced on July 21..
Thio docuoont io haood on tho following throo pointo to ooouro oafoty:

(l) lulldinu and focilitioo will ho conotructod in occordanco with the
donroo of riolr involwod (Phyolcol contain-oat); (2) the organlon into which
tho roconhinont on lo to ho inoortod nuot to o wool: atroln which cannot

ourwiwo alono in naturo (biological contolnnont); and (3) aolf-rogulotion
by tho roooarchoro tho-oolwoo.

‘l‘ho liiniotry of “nation aolicltad opiniono about thlo draft fro. l.205
inotltutlono, including univoroitioo ond othor portinont roooarch labor-
atorioo: roplioo waro rocoivod fro- 107 roooorch inotitutiono. A hroalulown
ohmd 52 (4'09 porcant) in fowor of tho doct-nt, 36 (33 porcont) urging

coutlon, ond 19 (l7 porcont) in fovot of roloxin; tho ruloo to focilitoto
roooarch.

33
ran omcm. csr om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Based on this reeponse the Science Council decided that the interim docu-

ment was generally acceptable to the concerned research institutions end
the proposal was sent to the minister with only a slight modification in

the wording to clarify the Ministry of Education‘s responsibility in deter-
mining experimental guidelines.

in the future, following the guideline notice to be issued by‘ the Ministry
of Education, a safety comittee will be created in each university to street
and approve plans for experiments by researchers end a safety official will
be appointed to monitor conformity to the rules in experimental undertakings.
A central con-ittee will also be established in the Science Council to
evaluate plans for recombinant DNA experiments in conjunction with the
distribution of scientific research grant money, and one can resume once-

suspended recombinant DNA experiments when approval by these organizations
has been obtained.

In the area of ocean sciences research, plans to utilize and develop the
seas, which abound in food and mineral resources, must be made and vigor-
ously promoted, even to advance research in competition with the developed
countries such as the United States, USSR, Great Britain, France, Heat
Germany, and others.

It is particularly important in the ocean sciences that the development of
research should involve the cooperative effort of researchers from various
fields. This proposal calls for a cooperative research organization centered
around the Oceanographic Research Institute of Tokyo University, the pro-
motion of international cooperative research, and strengthening the fleet

of research vessels, among other measures. The need to increase the number
of research ships with long cruise range is indicated.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbun Tokyo llonsha 1978

'ASAHI' Editorial
Tokyo ASA!!! SHINBUN in Japanese 30 Nov 78 p 5

Editorial: “Genetic Manipulation and the Scientist's Responsibility"]

[Text] It has long been believed that scientific and technological advance
contributes to mankind's happiness, but this is no longer the case. It is

now clearly recognised that this can be a doublevedged sword, sometimes at-
tended by environmental destruction.

Atomic power is one such example. But probably the most symbolic case is
the controversy surrounding gene recombination technology, which represents
the forefront of the biological sciences. This stems from the fact that

this new technology on one hand has hidden potential for greatly benefiting
mankind but also harbors the danger of producing monstrous organisms.

3“
son onrcm. use om
FOR - ... USE ONLY

with respect to how gene recombination research should be conducted by re-
search institutions at universities and elsewhere, the Science Council of
tho Ministry of Education completed and proposed to the minister of adu-
cstion on November 28 a set of "experimental guidelines." This estab-

lishes concrete standards for regulations which will put double and triple
checks on the progress of experiments.

This is probably the first case in which regulatory action has been taken
prior to the occurrence of a disaster, based only on a priori expectation
of a hidden danger. The fact that the issue was first brought up by the
very scientists who were engaged in this area of research, and that the

experimental guidelines were drawn in the spirit of voluntary regulation,
is to be appreciated.

Gene manipulation technology means the severance of DNA (dioxyribonucleic
acid), the real substance of genes, by menu of special enzymes and trans-
planting this unit into the cell of another organism. This makes it pos-
sible to create genes in combinations which do not exist in nature.

This new gene manipulation technology, sometimes called genetic engineer-
ing, not only represents the development of. a unique research tool for
elucidating life phenomena, but many practical applications are also ex-
pected, such as the synthesis of insulin for the treatment of diabetes.

0n the other hand, on the negative side, the possibility that new biologi-
cal disasters could occur, such as the appearance of new strains of cancer

viruses or pathogenic bacteria resistant to antibodies, has also been
pointed out.

This problem first became a major social issue in the United States, and
during the past year or two, experimental guidelines have been established
in the llnited States, Great Britain, France and West Germany. Our current

guidelines basically follow the same philosophy as those adopted in other
countries.

In substance, this involves a ranking system in accordance with the degree
of risk of the experiment, combining the requirements of "physical contain-
ment," where the research room is sealed off, and that of "biological con-
tainment," where the new gene is not allowed to survive outside of the re-
search room. In addition, the guidelines call for the establishment of a

safety connittee in each institution and a central comittee in the science
Comcil to monitor the experiment.

The establishment of these guidelines means that gene recombination experi-
ments, which had been frozen, will be resend, and we sincerely hope that
all parties concerned will strictly adhere to the guidelines. For this to
- happen, first of all each researchar's sense of responsibility is important,
but it is also necessary for the Ministry of Education to see to it at the

. 35
son OFFICIAL use om!
time when research funds are approVod that proper research facilities are
also iullt.

it is also Important to introduce the idea of public participation, as

practised in Europe and the United States. by including in the Central Con-
mittee, which is responsible (or overall surveillance. persons from outside
the biological sciences profession who can see problems free a wider social

viewpoint.

On this occasion. we would also invite the researchers working not only
with gene manipulation but with pathogen:c batoria and viruses in general
to reexamine the adequacy of controls in their experiments.

In any field, the researcher directly engaged in a new science or technology
is usually nost keenly aware of the latent risks involved. As in the case
of genetic manipulation, it will become ever more important for the re-
searchers thenselves to sound the alarm and apply the brakes.

COPYRIGHT: Asshi Shinbun Tokyo Honsha 1978

5576
C30: 6105

36
roe orncm. use our
MRI HANDLES SALE OF DECLASSIPIED 0.5. DOCUMENTS FOR NTIS
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHINBUN in Japanese 24 Nov 78 p 1

[Text] hitsubishi Research Institute (President nasaki Nakajina) will
conclude a domestic general agent contract with NTIS (National Technical
Information Service) of the 0.8. Commerce Department and will handle
sales in Japan of technical reports held by NTIS.

The documents held by NTIS cover 26 fields such as administration.
economics. civil engineering. atomic energy, and resource problems which
agencies of the 0.8. Government have commissioned. etc.. and studied.
Particularly since quite a few of the collected documents had been top
secret. the use of these documents has been growing yearly. Since few
agencies in Japan currently obtain 0.8. documents in a concentrated
fashion. hitaubishi Research Institute feels that these documents will be
used fairly extensively. It is also said that in the future the United
States wishes to collect at NTIS the results of studies which Japan has
done independently: consequently, there is a strong possibility that an
international exchange of technical information will be realized.

NTIS holds about 1.2 million reports, documents. etc.. researched by 300
governmental and civilian agencies such as the Department of Defense, the
Department of State. the Department of Treasury, the Environmental Pro-
tection Agency. ERDA, the trade commission, the NASA. the Stanford Research
Institute and the (BATTERU) Research Institute. This represents the
largest holding of technical reports in the world. NTIS was established

in 1974 in order to return the results of research to the 0.5. taxpayers
and it has been selling the reports at low prices; later, NTIS began
selling the reports to Britain. France. Belgium. Switzerland and Australia
as a means of acquiring foreign exchange.

Beginning 2 years ago, NTIS began to sell in Japan under marketing con-
tracts with nine firms such as Mitsubishi Research Institute. This
November, however, executive director Noboru Hakino of Mitsubishi Research
Institute visited the United States and concluded a general agent contract
with NTIS Director (S. Day). The sales record for Mitsubishi Research
Institute was already 90 million yen in 1976 and 160 million yen in 1977.
The estimate for 1978 is 260 million yen.

37
FOR - use on!
FOR . 088 on»!

Some of the reasons this annual rise in sales volume are: (1) Reports
which the United States had previously kept highly classified are being
released. and (2) it is easy to obtain the newest reports by the various
research institutes. In addition, 8118 is codifying. sunnarising. and
nicrofilning its documents. Furthermore. a system is in effect whereby
the reports received each week are categorized into 26 fields and summa-
ries are released. thus allowing the user to obtain the information he

wants easily. This, too. seems to be a major factor in the increased
sales.

The explanation given for Mitsubishi Research lnstitute's decision to
market foreign technical reports is that it makes various studies as a

think-tank and this move is "in conformity with the policy" of those
general studies.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1978
JNR MWCTING SURVSY FOR MAGNETIC LEVITATION RAILROAD ROUTE
‘i'oltyo MINER! DAILY NW8 an English 1 Jan 79 p 16

[Tue]
ha ambitious plan is atoot to gums, produce the tilt that Amrdlngloihc details olllie
itntt TokyoandOsalta byahlpho raise the cars. The llnear motor plan. liSS‘r cars hill run at a

speed. pollution-tree tromtt
system via the mountainous
area at the southern Japan hips
rcrdon. The s: item. expected to
be completed in about ten
years. will reduce travel time
mum the two cities to one
r.

As the iirst step to
materialize the plan. the
Japanese National Railways
tJNltl has entered into
negotiations elth local
authorities concerned to our
chaselandtoheusedturcon-
struction ol the transit system’s
experimental uuidca-ays in
Giiu. Alcht and .\iio pretee-
lures.

The transit system called
ilSS‘i' thigh speed sartace
transport). is near being
developed at the Jh’it's
research center in ilyupa City.
Mlyaeaithretecture. -

mesystememploysaltnear
motor and magnetic lorce.
htaanetaltaedonbothtinear
motor cars and rails oi the

propels the ﬂoating vehicles
iorward.

The JNit plans to make test
runs at linear motor cars on a
«to-kilometer experimental
gutdeway to be constructed in
the three protectures within six
yearstocotne.

Saltonai railways sources
said thattheplnn was madeas
a substitute mass transit
system tor the Toitaido

Shinitansen builct tine uhicb'

will need largescaie repairs in
thenearluture.

Local government authorities
and business leaders in Xaeoya.
which are eager to sponsor
Olympic games in im. place
their high expectations on the
reattaattonolthepian.

it seemsthat the Xagoya area
wants to use the "ultra-super
rapid transit system" in its
campaign to attract as many
Japanese and loreian people as
possible it the Olympic games
areheidtnh’apoya.

speed oi more than 300
itiiomelcrs per hour on the
projected Chuo Shlnltansen line
nhlch is designed to connect
Tokyo‘s Shinluitu with Osaka.
via Kolu in Yamanashi
Prefecture and Some in Alchi
Pretecture.

The train travel hours be
tween Toulo‘and Osaka could
be shortened to about an hour.
compared to three hotrsandlo
minutes by the Toitatdo
Shinitansen bullet train at
present.

TheJh'lttsnow conduction
geological survey in the
southern Alps district todecide
the new line's route between
Noiu and h‘altatsugasra. From
Nagoya. the line will run
through the Suautta mountain
range. via Kanteyanta and
reachOsaita.

The .ih'tt estimates that the
costs tor eanstmctlon ot the
experimental auidettay and
teatnutsottheJSSTcarsalone
tritiaoeedloottﬂtionyen.

30mm: "attach: Daily News, 1979
ISO: 1:120

39

FOR t use ONLY
NEH HILLIRG MACHINE HA8 SOO-HBTER-PER-MINUTE CERAMIC CUTTER
Tokyo NIKRAN KOOYO SHINEUN in Japanese 9 Oct 78 p 15

[Text] Niigata Engineering Co. (Tomio Nojima. president) and Sumitomo
Electric Ind. have announced that jointly they have materialized the
"HMGOV" production milling machine. a powerful. production type milling
machine that can cut at super high speed with high feed. with a ceramic
cutter, and that it will soon be put on the market. Sumitomo Electric

was in charge of the ceramic cutter, while Niigata Engineering handled the
milling machine. This is a revolutiomry production type milling machine
which can process at high feeds and super high speeds. It is able to cut
the surfaces of automobile engine blocks and other cast volume production
items at a cutting speed of 300 to 500 meters per minute with a feed of
300 mm per minute. The realization, on a practical-basis. of a milling
process using ceramic tools was of prime interest in the machine tool and
machine manufacturing world for many years and it is worthy of note that
production was achieved through the combined efforts of a machine tool and
a machinery company.

In carrying out the process, surface cutting of mass produced cast goods
such as engine blocks, this is generally done with a super hard alloy
cutter with a tungsten base, but in such cases, the cutting speed is 90
meters per minute, and the feed is $00 Ila/minute at best. A breaching
machine is also used, but the broaching machine itself involves several
problems: it costs several hundred million yen. broaching tools are 20 to
30 million yen. and these tools have to be purchased each time the working
profile is changed. For this reason. the task was to realize a milling
process with a ceramic tool having aluminum as a principal constituent.
capable of cutting at a super high speed of four to five hundred meters
per minute.

however, (1) ceramic tools are inferior to super-hard alloys in terms of
their toughness. so they can only be used in turning work, (2) highly
rigid, high horsepower milling machines are not available which can ope-

rate at high speeds with high feed, and these factors hamper making mill-
ing by ceramics practical.
In view of the above. Sumitomo Electric took charge of developing ceramic
tools of high toughness while Niigsts Engineering worked on the develop-
ment of the machinery itself. and while doing so, recently were finally

able to make the idea practical. A throw-away ceranic chip (8-90) (trade

name) with a transverse strength of 90 kg per square millimeter is used
for the ceramic cutter.

The cutter comes in two types-~for rough machining and for finishing. Both
of them have square negative-type octagonal chips set with three blades
per inch, and include the rough machining type "EMF with a lead angle of
65’ and the finishing type VPVP with a lead angle of 0'. The finishing

type is designed with a view to keeping the play of the blades within 10
microns in order to improve the tool life and the finishing process.

The silling machine for which hiigata Engineering was responsible is a
vertical production milling machine which can work at a stimum feed of
3000 mm per minute. Compared to conventional models of this type, its
rigidity is five times greater and its horsepower.more than three times

31
greater. It is designed so that it can accomplish high power. high feed
cutting simultaneously with the same machine using a super hard cutter.
Its main features are (l) a combination ofa cylindrical roller with a
main spindle shaft 200 mm thick and an angular thrust bearing. and by
means of a sturdy column it can perform powerful cutting with a ceramic
tool. with a rigidity five times greater than conventional production
milling machines, (2) it can operate quietly even when cross cutting.
under the effect of a large diameter flywheel that is attached to the
front part of the main spindle and can obtain good finishing (surface
roughness 3-6 8), (3) since it is of the head-traversing type, lining

is easy. (6) higher accuracy positioning is possible by means of a digi-

tal type vertical moving device. and (5) it is possible to select an
optimum feed rate.

As for marketing, the companies have agreed that Niigsta Engineering .
works will handle the milling machine and Sumitomo Electric the cutter,
and the price of the milling machine is expected to be around 35 million
yen. with the advent of this ceramic cutter-milling machine. we envision
high speed surface cutting of test materials produced in mass quantity.
along with reduction of required energy. At the same time. this is a very
rare case of a machine tool and a tool manufacturer joining together

to face the challenge of developing something on a single theme, and

through the success of both companies we expect increased joint development
tool and machine tool manufacturers.

COPYRIGHT: NIKKAN KOGYO SHINBUNSHA 1978

cs0: 4105
BRIEFS

OCEAN OBSERVATION SATELLITE--C;noerning acceptance of orders for the first
Marine Observation Satellite (HOS). Hitsubishi Electric Corp. and Nippon
Electric have decided to submit estimates, following a course of indepen-
dent engineering developmant. Of the practical satellites to be launched
by the national Space Development Agency, aside from engineering test
satellites. this is the first case of substantial satellite development
starting on the path of independent development of satellites without
cooperation with American manufacturers. It will pave the vay to launch-
ing "Hinomaru satellites" developed completely independently by Japan.
[Text] (Tokyo NIKKEI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 18 Sep 78 p 234] 6093

to TEST SYSTEﬂo-Ando Electric Co. Ltd. has made progress in developing
the ch-EOOO series to test system aimed in the direction of the super-
LSI age. Recently. they developed as first stage models the SSl/HSI Test
System DIG-8010 and the L8! Test System DIG-8030. The same company will
in the near future be making commercially available the super LS! Memory
Test System Ole-8020 for the second rocket. It also is in the process of
developing a super highspeed LS! test system. (Text) [Tokyo NlKXEl
ELECTROEICS in Japanese 18 Sep 78 p 236) 6093

cso: 4105 3ND