APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00880R0001000‘00‘3-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

apns L/e407
19 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL Scxeucss
(FOUO 12/79)

lL SL JC)"§1'FHJBLJ<JAJY(JOOS REEHEAJRC34 SIHR\VNCE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JFRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. times within itema~are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or sttitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGﬂ' MRS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WISH“ OP
KKTBRIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN mums THAT DISSBNINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 88 RESTRICTED MONICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OH’ICIAL USE ONLY

spas L/8407
13 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(P000 12/79)
CONTENTS PACE

AGROTBCIINOLOGY

Nutrtsnt Yeasts l'ron Hood Hydrolysstes and Vastly Deconposed
Pest
(us-swsms mozvmsm (PROIZVODS‘I'VO I PWBNIYB
PRODWJ‘OV PM“! DRBVBSNYKH OTKIIODOV), 1978) . . . . . . . l

BIWIROIHENTM. AND ”01.0616“. PROBLBIS

Work within cam in the Field of Measurements of Ionizing
Radiation
(NJ. Yudtu. ct IL; IMITAL'NAYA TMIKA. No 1, 1979 20

PUBLICATIONS

Dust Status and heltorsttve Husurcs

01.1. 0013110!ha PYL'NYYB BURY I AGROLBSMLIOM‘I‘IWB
HEROPRIYATIYA, 1978) ...........u..............nun... 27

Infomtion Processes in Neural Structures
(V.l.. Dunin-Bsrkovskty; MONTSIONNYYB PMSBSSY V
NEYRONNYKH STRUKTUW. 1978) ........................... 32

Table of Contents of Book 'PHARHACOLOGY OP SHORT-TERM WRY'
(Yu. S. Borodktn, V.A. Kraut; mecln
KRATKOSROCHNOY PMATI. 1978) ... 37
1’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AGROTECRNOLOGY

"(ERIN YEASTS PM HOOD HYDIOLYSATBS AND MY DBCOHPOSED PEA?

Moscow, LBS--SBL'SKOHU KROZYAYSWU (PMIZVODSTVO I PRIWIYE PIODUK'I’OV
PBRERABOI‘KI DRSVBSN‘DQI MOW) in Russian 1978 signed to press 6 Mar 78
pp 133-151

[Chapter 6 frost the book 'Les--Sel‘skonu Khozyaystvu (Proizvodstvo i
Prineneniye Produktov Pererabotki brevesnykh Modem)" (The wrest-4‘01:
Agriculture (Production and Utilization of woodworking Byproducts in
Agriculture” edited by A. Ya. Kalnin'sh. Izdatol'stvo “nesnaya Pro-y-
shlennost‘". 2,500 copies. 192 pages]

[Text] 6.1 Effectiveness of the Use of Nutrient Yeast in the National
Econouy

There can be no doubt that we must develop production of protein-vitamin
yeast if we are to reinforce the feed base of aninal husbandry. But the

national econouy's demand for yeast still significantly exceeds the poten-
tial for satisfying this denand.

As we Know, nutrient yeast is produced in our country by enterprises of
microbiological, pulp and paper, and food industry.

Hydrolysis industry (3) is the best prepared for practical solution of the
problem of supplying nutrient protein and vitanins to mini husbandry in
the Soviet mien. A number of isproveeents have been nade in recent years
in the procedures and apparatus of hydrolysis operations. Ithis has led
to significant improvaaents in the principal technical-economic indices
of hydrolysis plants, and labor productivity has risen at many of then.

But scene significant theoretical questions are still insufficiently resolved,
in particular: Assimilation of carbon-containing and other sources of
nutrition. yeast respiration, and the associated problen of processing
undiluted hydrolysates. obviously. by resolving these questions we can put
the internal reserves of yeast production to use.

Nutrient yeast is an effective protein-vitalin concentrate. It contains
readily assimilable protein supplying all of the essential aaino acids, and
valuable vitamins, enzynen, and hormones that i-prove metabolisn in the
aninal body.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use. ONLY

Proteins, or the amino acids saking then up, are the most expensive and
luast available part of the animal's {cod ration. we know that the nutri-
tional value of protein depends not only on presence of essential amino
acids but also their ratio. I! this ratio corresponds to the needs of the
organism, a relatively smell quantity of amino acids would have to be
introduced into the ration to ensure the organism's norlal vital activities.
It has now been demnstrated that consumption or foods in which the amino
acid ratio is extrmly wrong. and consequently their nutritional value is
low. may have a harnful effect on the body. since this creates a negative
nitrogen balance within it (8).

A comparison of the relative content of amino acids in different yeasts (25)
with the amino acid content of whole chicken eggs would show that the best
amino acid ratio, one caning close to that rscosnended by an no standard,
is possessed by osnophilic yeast grown in ”re-concentrated media, and
nutrient Cmdida tropical“ (Table 6.1) .

Table 6.1 Relative Amino Acid Content in Different Yeasts

  
   
  
 
 

 

Conan-rears Mae-eases: assess-cast
(so eves-«ans s venues-m

   

Awe-$1.1M“ u
i
_____ 3
T W .
n32... H 4.8 L2
Tpeosnw 12 , 3.3 on
Mennonite 13 2.7 0.05
Burn 14 4.9 0.”
Oesuausnu ( 5) 4.2 0.6
mama» nausea“ (l6) ".8 3.3
Key:
1. Minn acids 9. Nutrient
2. Essential amino acid content 10. ‘i‘ryptophan
(in relation to tryptophan) ll. Lysine
3. In whole eggs 12. Threonine
4. no standard 13. Methionine
S. In yeasts ld. Valine
6. Os-ophilic 15. Phenylalanine
7. Baker's l6. naucine + isoleucine

8. Brewer's

They are several tines superior to concentrated feed of plant and ani-al
origin in relation to vita-in content.

2
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! 01".!

Yeasts contain (lg/kg) :

a; (thiamine) 5-20

B; (riboflavin) 40-130
33 (pantothenic acid) 40-140
3:. (choline) 2500-6000
as (nicotinic acid) 350-600
35 (pyridcxine) ‘ 10-20

37 (biotin) 0.6-2.3
a. (inositol) ' 1500-4000
ergosterol (provitenin 0) 200-5000

The feed value or yeasts is intensified by their ash fraction, which contains
the following necrosis-ants (percent):

P 1. 5-3. 5 K 1-3
Ca 0. 1-1. 5 Na 0.04-0.4

and nicroelenents (lg-percent) x

Fe 10-300 Cu 0. 6-40
in 1-26 Zn 2-17
00 0. 02-2

The coeposition of yeasts also includes (percent): Lipids--2. cellulose--
0.5, and nitrogen-tree extracts-39, the latter being 18 percent carbohydrates
(7).

Scientific research and the practical experience of animal ferns have shown
that addition or yeast to anisal and bird teed increases productivity and
inroves the quality of mini products (ll). Introduction: of yeast into
the feed ration of young animals accelerates growth, inroves viability.
reduces epirooty, and isproves develop-ant of young animals. Addition of
yeast to the feed of animals, birds, and fur-bearing animals also increases
the ettectiveness with which conventional feeds are utilircd. it reduces

their conswtion per unit of production by 10-20 percent, and it coupon-
sates for sons of. the lacking feed of. animal origin.

Given the present feed consumption level per unit production, use of 1
ton of yeast would lake it possible to obtain an additional 700 kg of pork
(live weight) in pig breeding. and about 2 tons of additional seat or
15,000 eggs in poultry breeding (l7).

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P0“ OPPICIM. USE ONLY

6.2 Hydrolysis of Plant Tissue

Use of plant raw material for microbiological protein synthesis requires

hydrolysis of a cleicated complex of biopolyaers contained within plant
tissue. Catalysts are used to accelerate hydrolysis. hineral acids such
as. for example, sulfuric and hydrochloric are the most active catalysts.

hydrolysis can be performed with low concentrations (0.5-5 percent) of
aqueous acid solutions. or with concentrated acids.

hydrolysis is performed with diluted acids at l7$-l90'c and at pressures
corresponding to these temperatures.

The acid concentration is 0.4-0.6 percent. The RV [reducing agent?) yield
usually attains 46-50 percent of absolutely dry wood. One ton of absolutely
dry wood can produce 200-235 kg of yeast ((1). p 17).

Sulfuric and hydrochloric acids are used for the most part in concentrated
acid hydrolysis. Hydrolysis is performed at low temperatures without heat
consumption. In this case we observe insignificant breakdown of sugars,
their yield from processed raw material increases to 60 percent, while the
yeast yield rises to 280 kg/ton. uydrolysates formed with this procedure
are distinguished by a high sugar concentration and better quality.

One of the methods of hydrolysis using concentrated sulfuric acid in our
country is known as the Riga method. This hydrolysis method essentially
entails influence won mechanically macerated plant raw material by a small
quantity of concentrated sulfuric acid containing 75 percent monohydrate.
hydrolysis tesperature is 50-60'c.

Host researchers and hydrolysis specialists interpret hydrolysis basically
as transformation, by an acid, cr‘ polysaccharides contained within plant
tissue into a Ionosaccharide (1). In this case the organic nitrogenous
compounds, resin acids, and other compounds in the group of substances
extracted from plants are not taken into accoum (13). This grow of
substances makes up only 5-10 percent. But the significance of these
substances, both to the plant's vital activities and to processes occurring
in hydrolysis, is apparently not directly dependent on their quantity.

Some of these extracted substances participate in microbiological protein
synthesis. and for this reason we are not indifferent as to whether they
pass into the uxtractnthat is. the hydrolysate, or into the residue (lignin).

Substances known as extrectives contain heteropolysaccharides (plant resins).
which are much more difficult to hydrolize in view of the presence of
bonds differing from those fcmd in ho-opolysaccherides.

It is also significantly more difficult to hydrolira nitrogen-containing
compounds having peptide bonds.

‘
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Going on to the probless oi‘ hydrolizing plant tissue iron the standpoint of
transforming, into dissolved state, not only sugars but also other substances
ieportant to biosynthesis, we can confidently state that hydrolysis with
concentrated acids is sore profitable. Ii‘his advantage is especially notice-
able in hydrolysis of peat, which contains. as we know, up to so percent

huoic substances, which go into solution partially only when concentrated
acids are used in hydrolysis.

O

6.3 Chesical Composition 0! hydroly'sates Prom Plant Raw Material and Peat

soglmung his analysis of the chemical cosposition or plant tissue hydroly-
sates, the analyst would rightfully expect the. to contain a very cleicated
cosplex of. substances due to the chemical coqnsition of the plant cell.

1. I. Nikitin (12) points out that all wood substances in in the high
solecular weight class or coapounds. Schmtically classifying the chesical
cosponents 0: wood, he subdivided then into two groups:

l) The nest iaportant cowonents of the cell wall, which included cellulose,
hesicellofsose, and lignin, or 90-93 percent of the total less of absolutely
dry wood:

2) estractives, discussed above, eating up 5-10 percent.

Here we to look at a nature plant cell from the botanical point or view (9) .
we would see three cosponentsna more or less dense oederane clothing the
cell on the outside, living contents including cytoplasm and organelles
(nucleus, plastids, mitochondria, and so on), and vacuoles filled with
cellular fluid.

When plant tistue is hydrolyzed the integrity of the cells is disturbed,
and cellulose and hesicellulose none-ere as well as fragments of lipids,
nucleic acids, and proteins, included in the extractive group, end up in
the hydrolyaates. obviously enong these fragments of high molecular weight
suntances we should find those which are physiologically active.

The chemical composition of plant tissue (wood waste) hydrolysate' is
characterized by the following date (percent):

Dry matter 5.6-5.8
'i‘otal RV 3.06-3.48
Pentoses l . 3-l . 57
Colloidal substances 0.21-0.24
Rustic substances 0.70-0.85
(Ironic acids (LEO-0.330

'Hydrolysate fro:- the Bobruysk hydrolysis Plant.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

_ Volatile acids 0.26-0.34
Purtural 0.048-0.053
so“ mom-0.122
Total acidity 0.647-o.840
Ihotel nitrogen . 0.0315—0.0365
Mineral nitrogen 0.011-0.028
9205 after oosbustion . 0.011-0.028
9205 without codaustion ' ‘
honosaccharidea :

Glucose - 0 . 93-1 . 69
Mannose 0.50-0.65
Xylose 0. 72-0. 89
Arabinose trace-0. 28
llhamose trace
Galactose 0.01-0.4

Peat has a more coupler composition than does wood, and in contrast to it.
it contains many hmic substances which partly pass into the hydrolysates
upon hydrolysis with concentrated sulfuric acid, and partly settle in the
nonhydrolizable residue.

The chemical composition of peat hydrolysate is presented below (percent)
(35):

Dry utter 13.0
Colloids 7.77
llulic stbstances - 5.40
RV 5.04
RV after precipitation of. nonsaccharides 3.80
Acidity 3.25
Ash 0.48
Nitrogen 0.105
9205 0.02
Organic acids 0.144
Volatile acids 0.076
Purfural 0.0144

As we can see iron these data, peat hydrolysate contains polysaccharide frag-
ments. hunic substances, bitumens, fulvic acid, and extractives.

6.4 Preparation of uydrolytic Media for Biochemical Processing

The mleuness with which the ingredients of a hydrolysate are utilized
depends in many ways on the hydrolysis and inversion conditions. the
conditions under which the hydrolysate is neutralized, and the sort of
yeast culture. He know how great an influence iaprovenent of hydrolysates,
their neutralization in particular, has on the yeast yield.

6
FOR OUICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OIPICIAL USE ONLY

Various methods for neutralizing hydrolysatee have been proposed during
the time of existence of domestic hydrolysis-yeast industry. Lime neu-
tralization coupled with directed crystallization of gypsum has seemed
a firm foothold in plant practice. This neutralization method was

thoroughly analyzed by Korol‘kov, Bpshteyn, et a1. ((21), pp 141-166).

we now have neutralization methods that make use of milk of lime or annonia
water as the neutralizing agent, and a two-step neutralization method
using milk of lime in the first step ‘(to neutralize sulfuric acid) and
anmonia water in the second step (to neutralize organic acids) ((22), p 87) .
Fisher (20) suggested adding, to the hydrolysate prior to neutralization,
amniun sulfate in a quantity that would satisfy the yeast's need for
nutrient nitrogen by 60-70 percent; this significantly exceeds the quantity
of (nauzsou used in directed gypsm crystallization. Glushchenko (4) used
a stepped hydrolysatc neutralization method at one of the plants, first
employing milk of lime until a pH of 3.4-3.6 was reached, and then, after
settling of the gypsum and its decantation, amnia water until a pit of
4.2-4.6 was reached. The authors of these neutralization methods noted
that at pH 2.8-3.4, sulfuric acid is neutralized, and the subsequent decline
in acidity is associated with neutralization of organic acids.

All of these methods were tested by using them to neutralize undiluted
hydrolysates. Not one of then produced positive results: The yields of

yeast grown on substrates prepared by the indicated methods turned out to
be low.

We know that hydrolysates obtained upon hydrolysis of plant tissue by
diluted acids contain a significant quantity of organic acids (22). They
include volatile acetic, formic, and propionic acids, and nonvolatile
oxopentanoic, oxalacetic, and aldobionic acids. Hydrolysates obtained

upon hydrolysis with concentrated acids contain a somewhat smaller quantity
of volatile acids owing to decreased sugar breakdown. In particular, the
concentration of volatile acids in peat hydrolysate is only 0.076 percent,
which is about three times less than in plant tissue hydrolysate.

We know that the state and behavior of various substances in any medium
depend to a greater or lesser degree on the properties of the median,
particularly on its acid-base properties. An increase in the medim‘s
acidity or alkalinity often elicits or intensifies ionization of the sub-
stances, which in turn leads to an increase in their reactivity.

Acid-base reactions play a large role in many biochemical processes, the
specificity of which is often defined by a very narrow interval of media
acidity or alkalinity.

The classical theory of acid-base catalysis ascribes catalytic action
exclusively to hydrogen and hydroxyl ions. As an exasple sugar inversion,
acetal hydrolysis, and other reactions have been said to be catalyzed only

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

by hydrogen ions. But it was later established that reactions accelerated
by H and 08‘ ions are also catalysed by undissociated acid and base mole-
cules and other ions, for emle the "35+ ion.

Increasing the concentration of substrates being processed is the sole way
for increasing yeast yield at aristing plants. woday's marinas concentra-
tion of RV in industrial hydrolysates is 3-3.5 percent. As we know, an
increase in RV concentration is accompanied by a concurrent rise in the
concentration of harmful admixtuns-iurfural, orymethyfurfurel. and humic
substances.

llumic substances are a complex of organic substances of as yet unknown
structure. It is hypothesized that they are I'sugar breakdown products“
and that they are harmful to yeast. In fact (if we make an analogy with
the humic substances of peat). these are high molecular weight mired bio-
polymers containing nitrogen, phosphorus, organic acids, and microelements.

A method for preparing substrates resulting in an acid-base equilibrium in
the media: at which all organic acids are utilized and substances contained
within the composition of "humin" exhibit their action was developed with

a consideration for the existence of this coupler of humic substances, as
well as of presence of various organic acids in the hydrolysates of all
plant tissues and peat. with this purpose a fully definite quantity of
emonia water. necessary for binding of only organic acids. is introduced
into the hydrolysate (t-OO-90'C). 'l'he hydrolysate is additionally neutral-
ized by milk of lime up to pit 4.2-4.4 while blowing air through the
hydrolysate: it is kept at these conditions for 1 hour, after which it is
separated from gypsum by decantation. Cultivation of yeast in undiluted
neutralysates prepared in this manner showed that the yeast biomass yield
is 50-60 percent of the prescribed RV.

Because some plants prepare neutralysate for direct use in yeast and alcohol
production operations, producers became apprehensive that neutralysate
prepared in this fashion would contain too high a quantity of gypsum, which
would cause trouble in alcohol production. settling on the walls of the
fermentation columns.

Determination of gypsm in neutralyeates- prepared by various methods showed
that its content varies. The gypsum concentration in neutralysate prepared
by the method described above is within 0.21-0.22 percent, which is fully
permissible for practical purposes. ‘me following forms of neutralization
of undiluted hydrolysates were emioyed in an effort to develop a method
for preparing substrates:

1. Lime neutralization at t-80'c to pa 4.2-4.3, with mechanical agitation.
2. Neutralization coupled with directed gypsum crystallization.

3. Amnia neutralization up to pit 4.2-4.3 at t-80'c,- with mechanical
agitation.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. nixed neutralization-addition or annonia water as the nitrogen nutrient
for yeast in the following quantities-~30 percent of the nutritional nitro-
gen need, 50 percent, and 70 parcentuand additional neutralization with
milk of line up to pH 4.2-4.4 at a tenperature or BO'C, withair blown
through the hydrolysate (Table 6.2). After the gypsua concentration was
determined in all neutralysate samples by two methods (5,14), a graph was
plotted (Pigure 6.1). It was found that depending on the concentration 0:
volatile acids in the hydrolysate, curves 1 and 8, which represent the
quantity of gypsun in the neutralysate, determined by two methods, would
intersect at different points, corresponding to the acid-base equilibrium
at which all Ca“ ions bind with 8052’ ions, and organic acids bind with
“In." ions, forming amnion salts that can be assimilated by the yeast.

I
S
e~

m
%

M10901”? Mm,

&
‘1

new

&
N

(«um

Im)

 

(1)" owwwwwmwmm
(won/vermin Mum MILO“. '/. m We:
W1 ”Mum d/wed a name

Pigure 6.1 Neutralyeate Acid-Base Equilibriu- created
by Successive Introduction of. Antonia Hater
and Milk of Lime into the llydrolysate until

pH 4.0-4.2 is Reached: 1—Quantity of
gypsum dissolved in neutralysate, detarnined
on the basis of. Ca2+: quuantity of gypeul
dissolved in neutralysate determined on the
basis o! 503'

Key:
1. Gypsum quantity dissolved in ncutralyeete, percent
2. Quantity of mum introduced, percent of. that satisfying
yeast nitrogen demand

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

Tobie 6.2 ”feet of liydrolyooto Neutrolitotion Method
0n tout Bionoeo Yield

Neutrolirotion Method

Yeast Yield.
0 IN

Blowing oir through hydrolyoote for

1.5 houre. Stopped noutrolirotion with
milk of line up to pl! 3.0 and with
euonio voter up to pa 4.2

slowing oir through hydrolyuto (or

1.5 houro. Neutralization to pa 4.:
coupled with directed gypou cryotol-

liution

lnitiol introduction of ononiun
ouliote in o guontity anti-tying tho
yooot'o nutrient nitrogen need by
70\. and further noutroliootion with
milk oi line to pit 4.2

Introduction of nutrient nitrogen in
the tort: of o-onio voter ot 70s or
demand, and odditioml neutroliu-
tion with oil): of line up to pa «2
while blowing air through hydrolyeoto
Introduction of nutrient nitrogen in
tho tor- ot o-onio voter ot 70\ of
dound. ond additional noutroliution
with Ill): of line to pH 4.2 while
blowing air through hydrolyooto

 

Note: An ouophilic polyploid etroin o! Candid: tropical“
yooet no onloyed.

no on emlo tho concentrotion o2 volotilo ocide in tho hydrolyootoe ie
0.15-0.25 percent when tho hydrolyooto av ooncontrotion is 3.0 percent.
“venom-e thotBOIgnitrogon it roquiredtoproduco lgdryyoootond
tho yout yiold is so percent of the RV concentration. we would need

l.SISOI0. 5-60 lg or 70 ng m, to grow 1 .g yeast when only holf of tho
roguirod quontity of nitrogen in eupplied. "hen the concentrotion o: volotilo
acids in the hydrolyooto is 0.25 percent (corroctod (or ocetic ocid). their

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
neutralization would require about 146 mg ammonium hydroxide in the
reaction

CH.COOH + NHDH .a CHﬁOONH. + 11.0

or '70 ng m,. Thue an equilibrium would be reached in the plant tieeue
hydrolyeatee obtained in the production condition: or the Bobruyak plant
by adding a quantity of autumn hydroxide equivalent to so percent of
the yeaat'a nitrogen demand.

Analyaie or nitrogen-containing conpounde in hydrolyeatee revealed that
only preliminary introduction of anemia water coupled with aubuequent
additional neutralization to pH 4.2-4.4 with milk or line would eneure

preeervation or nitrogen-containing coapounde in the hydrolyeate (Table
6.3).

Table 6.3 lose or Amonia in Different Neutralization Methods

 

 

  
 
 

(1)

In eelnu-uu-

N", ”I!“ ‘3 (6)
3 '9

as.
70!. N 00 30 ell 4.: an
8096 NH,+ CeO 0 p" 4.9 9.0 66.0 +8‘
”.6 Nth-{>00 . pH 8.2 35.0 #0.! +8.”
Ilmneean neﬁvpanmul (7) In: 0.0 -II.J
C unmanned Immanuel mm 6.0 0.3 -a.o
ea
humus games" (9) ".3 - -ll.3

 

Note: I'Iiydrolyeate nitrogen content increases due to its
releaee through anemia breakdown.

Key:
1. Porn 0! noutralitation 6. Up to
2. N. leg per loo al 7. Line neutralization
3. Introduced into hydrolyaate 8. Coupled with directed gypeu
4. Substrate total N cryetelliration
5. Change in N content 9. Acid hydrolyeato

when two-step neutralization is eeployed. nitrogenous cos-pound. are loot
irrevereibly tirat with hill: of line and, after separation or gypeu- with
anonia water, together with the eeparated gypom. Such nitrogenous
FOR Oﬂ’tCIAL USE ONLY

coepounds include asino acids, nucleic acids. and high solecular weight
hunic acids. All of these cowomde are biologically active substances.

When «Innis is introduced first. amnia nitrogen binds with the husic
acids. possibly transforming then into aside acids ((2). p «4).

‘mus the order in introduction of neutralising agents has a significant
influence on the qualitative state of the obtained neutralysate used to
grow yeast. Hhen anionia is introduced first, the resulting neutralyaates
are not only richer in nitrogen mounds but they also contain physio-
logically active compounds which. as we know, are yeast growth stisulants.

6.5 Hicrobial Protein Biosynthesis in Concentrated Sugar Solutions

May's industry cultivates nutrient yeast in media having an RV concentra-
tion not greater than l.5-2 percent. In the opinion of many researchers
the extent to which the concentration of processed substrates could be
increased is linited by aerial oxygen fed into the innoculators.

Thus laboratory research conducted by P. h. Fisher (20) showed that the
concentration of sugar in the processed sediua and. consequently. its
initial concentration in the substrate could be increased significantly

(to up to 3-5 percent RV): for this purpose we would have to supply an
adequate quantity of dissolved oxygen to the yeast. The biomass yield.
expressed as a percentage of the consumed sugar, does not depend on its
concentration in the initial nedius, if the yeast is supplied with dissolved
oxygen during the ties of its growth. ‘lhe concentration of protein.
phosphorus. and ash in the yeast also resains constant. not depending on
the concentration of sugar in the nediul. ‘i‘okarev. Korol'kov, and Roslov
(17) point out two circustances preventing the processing of undiluted
hydrolytic adieu-their low biological quality. and the difficulty of
designing the yeast growing apparatus. In their opinion given the air
distribution systess eaployed at existing hydrolysis plants (airlift,
vibrational dispersion) in the yeast growing apparatus, the degree to which
Iedia undergoing processing are saturated with oxygen does not per-it
saintenance of a working concentration of yeast undergoing cultivation
above 30-35 Wilter (corrected for pressed yeast).

In the presence of a stepped systel for processing undiluted hydrolysate,
hexoses are utilised in the head yeast growing apparatus. and pentoses are
utilised in the tail apparatus. A yeast unit growth rate corresponding to
a 2.5 hour presence of yeast and nediu in the apparatus can be achieved

in the first cultivation step. The yeast growth rate in pentose sugars
(the second cultivation step) is nuch lower, corresponding to a presence of
yeast and liquid in the apparatus of 5 hours. we to the long tine yeast
must remain in the apparatus, given the sane bio-ass yield the two-step
cultivation nethod is not suitable. Specialists studying the processing
of undiluted hydrolysates suggest: 1) Initially aerating the starting

12
FOR OFFICIAL 053 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Ir'nlllue Int 4 hours (to remove volatile inhibitors and suturato the medium
with oxygen), and the begin processing the prepared nediwn at a high yeast
concentratiom 2) blow steal through undiluted hydrolysete. and then pre-
pare substrates from it: 3) artificially keep the liquid in the yeast
growing apparatus with a built-in flotation unit while concurrently
aaintaining the working yeast concentration at the prescribed level.

As we can see free this review. a satisfactory solution to the problem of
processing undiluted sedia has not been found as yet. The powerful air
pulping systeas installed in new yeast plants fail to produce the desired
effect of increasing the yeast bionaes yield, they sake it more difficult
to service such units. and they increase the cost of the end product.

It appeared obvious that we would have to initiate a search for another way
to process 4-6 and s percent sugar solutions for yeast production.

Back in the l930‘s-l940's Bngsl'gardt suggested the idea of substituting
oxygen. which is required for yeast respiration. by some chemical mound.
It is still difficult to judge whether or not oxygen could be cospletoly
substituted by cheeical mounds, but it is possible to regulate oxygen
oonsuption to achieve its sore-economical conswtion for biosynthetic
needs.

we know (9.l0) that potassiua plays a eajor role in sugar synthesis. Rubin
(16) noted that potassium increases protoplesn's hydrophilic properties.
increases its water retention capability, and thus ensures favorable condio
tions for synthetic processes in the cell. Potassiun ions have an influence
on osmotic pressure in the cell, activating the nutrition process.

Studying the properties of yeast cells grown in anaerobic conditions in a
esdiua contalning potassium ions, sartley (31) found that a potassium ion
concentration loss than 3.2 uh inhibits protein synthesis and causes cell
growth to slow down. He desonstrated that cells grown in anaerobic condi-
tions in potassiuI-deficient media can adapt to aerobic conditions only
after a significant quantity of potassium is added to the sedius. Otherwise
even if oxygen availability is mlinited. adaptation of cells to aerobic
conditions cannot be observed.

Studying plant respiration, ‘mrkova (18) noted that potassiun availability
has an effect on respiration intensity. I. potassiun deficiency usually leads
to an increase in respiration lntensity. while its addition to the nutrient
eedilsa reduces the rate of respiratory gas exchange. 'Ihe author explains
activation of respiration in the presence of e potassiua deficiency by
change in nitrogen setaboliee and tissue intoxication.

Any changes in the nature of setabolisa and growth accoepanying changes in
external conditions (tenerature. nutritional conditions. the mediu's gas
mention) are usually accoapanied by significant shifts in the intensity
of respiration. and aritificial intensification of respiration in the presence

13
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of delicient nutritional. tomerature. and other conditions would lead to

change in the nature or uteboliel that is not always beneficial to micro-
bial protein eyntheeie.

Arriving at a choice of conditions for nicrobiel protein eyntueeis in
concentrated eedia (undiluted hydrolyeetee) . we eugqeeted that the complete-
neea of sugar utilisation in euch nedia would depend in eany ways on the
potaeeim concentration. ‘1» teet thie hypotheeie we prepared synthetic
media having sugar (glucose) concentratione tree 2 to 8 percent. 9305 and
N sources were introduced into theee media in accordance with 0381‘ [All-
Union State Standard] norm. and varying quantities of poteeeiue were
introduced (27 so per gran abeolutely dry yeast wae taken as the non).
Potaeeiue was added in the tors: of the salt Kg . M types or yeeet
were cultivated in the prepared eedianniga he (27) and oeeophilic
cmdida tropical“ (28). the reeulte o! the experinente are emrieed

in Table 6.4. The data in the table ehow that as the quantity of poteeeius
added to the nutrient medium increeeee, the yield or yeast bioaase and its
total protein concentration increeee.

Table 6.4 affect or Poteeeiu on Developeent of amphilic Candida tropicctie
Yeast Bio-see

   

 

‘2’ J-emne ee-esenm. N

    

Ilenwoeeeeeee

“.63.”.

 

   

Bum zoom! (4) 80.0 8|

,7
can a n. - ( ms 86.6
Bone: mam“ 50.5 33.:

06cm mum ey. - —_ 9.0
non-em!” um I
m:
wanes-um PB (9) 00.0 ”.0 ’05
Key:

1. Index 5. mtal yeast protein
2. Index values. \ o. 'i‘rue protein
3. IN 7. Total yeast nucleic acid content
4. Yeast yield 8. RV utilized

Thus the pemability of. sugars and their assimilation depend on the enount
or escase potassiue (over the norm) in the eediun. -

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Presence of several eystews for penetration of sugars into the cell. differ-
ing in relation to associations with energy reactions. has been hypothesised
for sicroorganisns, yeast in particular. A significant role is ascribed in
this case to polyphoaphates in relation to yeasts (3‘).

van Stevenick (3S) experimentally showed that the quantity of polysaccharides
outside the cell membrane drops significantly when glucose penetrates into
the yeast cell. This penitted his to suggest the hypothesis that passage
of glucose into the yeast cell is associated with enzymatic phosphorylation
by polyphosphates serving as the phosphate donor.

P. Jungniokel (32) studied the influence of various factors in yeast respir-
ation on fornetion of polyphosphates and assimilation of potassium by
phosphate-poor Candida uttlie calls. He established that when sugar is added.
the poteasiua concentration eust be increased to permit both intensified
formation of polyphosphates end equalization of the charge by intermediate
products of the Krebs cycle. It was noted that after supplementation of

the nutrient Isdius with sugar the demand for potassiul and for acidification

of the medias increased sharply, while the concentration of orthophosphate
decreased.

Kurtf A. santarius (33) made mention of a decline in the total phosphorus

concentration in yeasts grown in solutions having a high sugar concentra-
tion.

Determination of polyphosphates in yeast grown in concentrated synthetic
nedia showed that their total content grows in proportion to the amount of
potassium added. The growth was greatest in the physiologically most
active acid-insoluble fraction (Table 6.5). Thus Stevenick's conclusion
that the permeability sugars exhibit in relation to the yeast cell is the
product of presence of polyphosphates in the cell was confined. It is
obvious that potassiuaa promotes fornetion of polyphosphates in the living
cell. thus intensifying permeability of sugars into the cell. the highest
glucose utilisation was observed when a sufficient quantity of potassiu
was introduced. The potassium depend differs for different species of
yeasts. Experiments have shown that Riga Picht'a yeast culture is the most
sensitive to a potassium deficiency.

similar data indicating that yeast has a high potassiu demand were obtained
with substrates prepared fros undiluted plant saterial hydrolysates.

‘Do obtain hydrolysatee with an RV concentration of 4-8 percent. industrial
hydrolysetes with an RV concentration of 3.1 percent were ates-ed under s
vacuua. Nutrient media with RV concentrations of 2, 4, 6, and 8 percent
were prepared from the steamed hydrolysate, and nutrient nitrogen and
phosphorus sources were introduced in correspondence with the RV concentra-
tions. Potassim was introduced in the for: of the salt £280., into the
control India at a dosage of 21 pg per gran absolutely dry yeast, and into
experiuental media at dosages 20, to. and 60 percent greater.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'OR ORIGIN. 088 ONLY

ceble 6.5 Concentration of Protein end Polyphosphetes in emphilio Yeast
rollowing Addition of Dinerent Quentities or votessiu to the
nutrient Medium

2)

hose. use.

 

Keys
1. Yeest recs 8. Acid-insoluble polyphosphetes
2. Potessiu concentretion. t 9. .9 9305 per gs dry yeest
or non 10. Wine
3. Yesst yield, t of RV ll. As ehove
4. Glucose utilisetion. t or 12. sg/ge
initiel ll. Rigs

s. mtel protein content, \
6. Wu]. 9205, \
1. Acid-soluble polyphosphetes

Yessts were grown in the prepered sedie end then enelyzed (or protein end
nucleic ecids. m neeh residue following yeest cultivetion wee enelysed
for residuel RV end eonoseccherides. ‘i'he erperieentel results ere sue:-
ired in ‘i‘eble 6.4.

It follows tro- the date in 'l'eble 6.4 thet yeast substretes with e higher
suger ooncentretion, up to a percent. could be echiewed end utilised. on
the sendetory condition thet excess nutrient potessiu is present. In this
case the essinilehility of sugers reeeins et epproxinetely the seas level.
while when extre potessiu is not edded suger utilisetion drops es the

RV concentretion increeses. lmotel yeest protein eleo increeses owing to
true protein, but the totel nucleic ecid content decreeses insignificently
es the quentity o! potessius introduced into the nutrient nedius rises.

16
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISB ONLY

The yeast bionass yield dropu insignificantly when the RV concentration

of the substrate is increased from 2 to 4 percent, but at n concentration

of 8 percent the biomass yield attains only 40 percent. Thus the sensitivity
of yeast to sugars is especially noticeable beginning with dissolved sugar
concentrations of 6-0 percent. In these cases the permeability and the
assimilation of sugars are activated by potassium.

6.6 Sons Problem in the Theory and liechnology of Microbial Protein
- Synthesis Using Peat Substrate '

One of the raw eaterials used to produce nutrient yeast is weakly decosposed.

so-called bedding peat. the reserves of which total billions of tone in the
Soviet Union.

Bedding post is a hindrance to extraction of fuel peat. and for this reason
organisation of integrated peat extraction has great national economic
significance.

It was about 30 years ago that we began concerning ourselves with the problen
of utilising weakly deconposed peat to produce nutrient yeast in the Soviet
Union. thus in 1936-1938 Sharkov and Skrigen (23) studied hydrolysis of

peat with diluted acids, and they grew nutrient yeast in the obtained hydro-
lysates. Production of yeast fro- peet could not be organized at that time
in view of the low yeast bio-ass yield produced free pest substrates. as

well as due to difficulties in separating the peat pulp into its liquid and
solid phases.

Further research on various eethods for and conditions of mineral acid
hydrolysis showed that one of the prospective methods for hydrolyzing peat
was to use snail quantities of concentrated sulfuric acid mined with
mechanical agitation. The hydrolysis reaction proceeds at a tesperature of
about lOO'C. owing to which the losses of nonoseccharides decrease signi-
ficantly and the obtained hydrolysetee have RV concentrations of 5-7 percent.

In contrast to wood. peat contains such sore hues. 'i'his sharply alters

the pattern of all processes involved in post processingo-hydrolysis, inver-
sion, filtration. substrate preparation. and yeast cultivation (29). The
theory and technology of. hydrolyeing past with concentrated sulfuric acid
were developed on the basis of the results of theoretical research conducted
by odinteov, Kal'nine, and others (6.13). the, coupler coeposition of peat
hydrolysetes. particularly the high concentration of hueic substances.
requires a sore cautious approach to preparation of emanates from than

for biological processing. The preparation conditions must satisfy two
require-onto: lupurities toxic to yeast lust be res-oved fro- the hydroly-
sate, and dissolution and naintenance of an optimal quantity of physiologically
active hmins, especially their high molecular weight traction-ohmic acid.
must be ensured. hu-ic acids revealed in peat hydrolysates in haste for:
attest to the difficulty of hydroiyring thee, and to presence of peptide

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL 088 ONLY

bonds within then. since amino acids begin to appear in the hydrolysetos
when the huoates are subjected to hydrolysis in harsher conditions (6!!
"280... t-l00°c, hydrolysis tine 18 hours).

It was established through laboratory exporiaonts that in contrast to wood
hydrolysetes. when peat hydrolyoatoe are subjected to considerable neutral-
isation (up to pit 4.5-5). nore huetee enter into-solution and yeast growth
is inhibited.

the best method was found to be coobinod neutralisation of hot hydrolysete
first with enonia water and than oil): of line up to pa 4.2-4.4 while
blowing air through the hydrolysete. But because hydrolysis. inversion. and
neutralisation are porforsed in apparatus not oade from acid resistant steel.
a heightened concentration of iron is revealed in tho hydrolysete in the
fore of iron ions. when nutrient phosphorus sources were added to tho
neutralysato. iron ions formed complexes with unhydrolised hunine and phos-
phorus; these couplexes could not be assieilated by tho yoest. as a result
of which its quality and yield dropped. In addition. separation of inverted
peat pulp into its liquid end solid phases proceeded with greater difficulty
in view of the colloidal properties of the pulp structure. and it was
accompanied by losses of sugars.

A method for neutralising pulp without preliuinary separation of the unhy-
drolisable residue was proposed (30). the essence of the eothod is that
following inversion. a fraction of the nutrient nitrogen required by the
yeast is added in the for-- of anonia water, and then the hydrolysete is
neutralirod with milk of line to a pl! of 4-4.: at a tespereture of Oil-85°C.
After the neutralized pulp is kept at this tasperature for 1 hour end air

is blown through, the neutralysate is separated by filtration. In on acid
environ-out, iron is present in hydrolysete in the fore a salt. while at

pH 4.2-4.4 it binds into a cowlex with hmine. which pass into the unhydro-
lisable residue.

smatratee prepared frost hydrolysetee contain about two tines oore iron

that do substrates prepared by the pulp neutralization method (0.2l and

0.12 percent respectively). Moreover the rate of filtration of neutralisod
pulp is twice higher than that of acid pulp owing to change in its structure)
the loss of RV with precipitant decreases by 12-18 percent: the residue is
not hydrophllic: outlays of electric power. steel. and water decrease because
the process occurs in one stop: when the pulp is neutralized the filtrate
becomes practically coqletely free of heavy petals: the substrate is
translucent and precipitate does not for. in it, and thus the 9205 conun-
tion does not exceed nor-s13 the rate of yeast reproduction is nor-e1) the
yeast quality is high (the protein concentration is 50-56 percent). Blowing
hot air through the pulp while adding enonia water and line until a pl! of
4.2-4.5 is reached leads to additional hydrolysis of huins and a signifi-
cant increase in the quantity of IN (a 12-18 percent increase).

18

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Peat hydrolysatee contain a broad assortsent of substances that serve as
nutrients for yeast. The set o! various organic acids (asino acids. uronic.

hunic. and so on) is especially rich. 'l'hie necessitated discovery of yeasts
that could utilise these substances.

The Latvian 38R Acadesy of sciences Institute of ﬂood Chemistry selected out
a polyploid yeast strain It changed its tors: depending on the nutrient
ccsposition and on other external conditions. but utilisation of all con--

ponents of the medium was complete and yeast quality was high (the protein
content attained 58 percent).

Because peat hydrolyeates contain additional nutrient carbon sources (various
acids and huic substances) not within the RV ccdposition. the quantity of
added potassius and phosphorus sources exceeded the nor: adopted in yeast
production by l0-20 percent. The yeast biomass yield from a quantity of

RV in substrates prepared iron peat hydrolysate and from inverted peat

pulp was 50-55 and 55-65 percent respectively.

The Institute oi Hood Che-istry proposed. theoretically grounded. and prac-
tically tested sethode tor preparing substrates tree plant tissue (wood
waste in particular) andpoat hydrolysates characterised by the fullest
utilization of substrate components in nicrobial biosynthesis.

‘me nethod or preparing substrates {roe undiluted industrial wood hydroly-
sates was tested at the bobruysk Hydrolysis-Yeast Plant. it produced
positive results. and it will be introduced here on an industrial scale.

The method of preparing substrates iro- peat was also tested in experi-ental
industrial conditions and placed at the basis or the equipment and production
conditions or a new plant in the Latvian 38R producing yeast fro- peat.

‘ihe new yeast strains proposed. Riga Pichia and osIophilic Candida. passed
the plant tests successfully. but they have not been introduced as yet because
not a single hydrolysis-yeast plant is now processing undiluted hydrolysates.

Cultivation of yeast in concentrated sugar nedia to which potassiun is added
in an amount exceeding the existing none is now a reality only at the
laboratory research level.

COPYRIGHT: lsdatel'stvo 'lnsnaya Proayshlennost'". 1978

11004
('30: 83‘4/0986

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

ENVIRON“: MID ECOLOGICAL PROBLDB

539.1.032621.3.089.68:006.032
m WITHIN cm In 1113 FIELD O! mamas 01' 10312130 RADIATIOI
Moscow IW'MYA mm in Russian lo 1. 1979 PP 25-27

5mm by u. r. mun end I. u. Kereveyev (um). K. Zhdenski (hungerien
People's Republic). 2. Retenovshiy end M. D exhinski (Polish People's Re-
public), a. Rothe (01m) end 1.. Kokte (cssa

ﬂex}? During the period following the publicetion 5 work on ensuring
the unity end correctness of neesurenents of ionising redietion in M
countries continued to deVelop successfully. In lWh-l976 the (IBM Pen-
nenent Cc-ission on Stenderdiution epproved the following sets of neens
or assure-eats es can stenderds:

the stenderd or e unit of activity of rsdionuclides within the nstionel
stenderds of the hungerien People's Republic, ODR, 088R end €883. for the
renge below 1 no. end within the UBA-h end UEA-s stenderd epperetus of
the 088R stete prinery stenderd, tor the range Ron 1 no end higher;

the stenderd of e unit of exposure dose of photon rsdietion within the ne-
tionel etenderds of the Hungerien People's Republic. ODR, Polish People's
Republic end USSR;

the stenderd of e unit of ehsorhed dose of hete-redietion within the ne-
tionel stenderds of the 00R end 088R;

the stenderd of e unit or ehsorhed dose of neutron redistion within the
088R etete prinery stenderd;

the stendm of e unit of neutron redietion flux vithin the 088R stete
prinery etenderd;

the stenderd of e unit of density of neutron redietion flux vithin the 0881!
stete prinery stenderd; '

the stunderd of e unit or power of ebsorhed dose of photon rsdietion (vith
1.25 MM! energy) within the netionel stenderds or the cm end 0888.

20
ml OFFICIAL ”SI ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Instead of the check schemes previously in effect new check schemes for the
means of measurements of the activity of radionuclides, exposure dose of
photon radiation and neutron radiation flux and flux density were approved
in 1978. The rules of keeping and applying cm standards envisage a pc-
riodic comparison of the national standards forming part of CM standards.
Other can members. which have the appropriate means of measurements. can
Join these comparisons.

Comparisons of the standards of a unit or activity of radionuclides were
made in 1971: with the participation of specialists from the following lob-
oratories. keepers of the national standards forming part of CM stand-
ards: of the State Administration of Metrology (OMKh) of the Hungarian
People's Republic (K. Zhdanski and A. Sereni). of the Administration for
Standardization. Metrology and Testing of Goods (WV) of the GDR (0. Rothe
and H. Oreipner), of the All-UniOn Scientific Research Institute of Hetrol-
0g imeni D. I. Hendeleyev (VNIIM) of the USSR (1'. M. Karavayev, A. Ye. Ko-
chin and A. P. Drichko) and or the Institute for the Production, Applica—
tion and Investigation of Radioisotopes (WWI!) of the CBSR (L. Kokta and In.
Sderadichka). Representatives of the laboratory of the Polish Committee on
8tandardisation and Measures (mm) (M. Dereahinshi and n. Psi) participated
in the comparison of the standards of n unit of activity of y-emitting radio—
nuclides.

ll‘he working standards of “Ink-sources of v-radiation 1370s No 396 and no
818--were used for a comparison of the standards of n unit of activity of
v-emitting radionuclides. The activity of 1 78s in these sources was meas-
ured gn the USA-h standard apparatus of the 0881! state primary standard

L2, g4 by the ionising method. In ASMV, OHIO), WW1! and PKIIiM the activity
of 1 Ce in the sources of warm was measured by the relative method by com-
paring them with similar internal sources or with ampoules with l37Cs solu-
tion by means of ionization chambers (in UVWR). The comparison results
are presented in table 1. where random and systaatic errors are nus-ed up
(for fiducial probability 0.99) according to the met od of the International
c ssion on Radiological Units and Meaﬁurements U . When the activity of
1 7Co was determined. the presence of 13 Cs achixture in sources. as well as
self—absorption and absorption in anpoule walls. were taken into account.

From the data presented it follows that the deviations of the values of ac-
tivity of 137Cs in sources measured in om, A8 , VIII" and WW“ from the
mean values amounting to 2.496409 and 3.h3h-lO Do do not exceed 13. that

is, much less than the evaluated errors or measured values. This means that
the systematic error of measurements by all the participants in the compar-
ison is greatly overstated. Thus, the comparison made permits a significant
reduction in the error of measuraente of the activity of v-emitting radio-

nuclides .

The comparison of the standards of a unit or activity of B-uittiu radio-
nuclides was made by means of 1376s and 9°Sr+9°Y solutions. The measure-
ments were made by the ivia-counting method on the standard apparatus of mem-
ber countries. For the determination of corrections for self—absorption

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the indicator extrapolation method was used in 0001, AM and UWVR. The

results of cuparieone are presented in table 2, where the total error is
determined by the method f the International Comieeion on Radiological
Unite and Heaeuremente [ﬂ for naucm probability 0.99.

 

 

 

    

 

 

    

 

 

 

Table 1.
[- .. lanrklm N I'M .klﬂllll h FII‘
| (l) _ ‘
' JW-N'OIMI Ann- M Alue- Onon-
.____._.......(31.
(MN. I .
M. M" . .
l-IIIIIIM .
H-lml'
"ml-N.
Key:
1. Laboratory 6. ABMV
2. Source 7. mm
3. 13703 activity, 109 no 8. m
h. Relative error 9. mm
5. can
Table 2
I 2.731109” Cl
I .Q'zmopm :m '
mo. -
| nﬂe r
““X .§12.| Ill.‘
4" nu . . "6.0
IIIIIHM "3.!
n-mw . IRS.)
”5.0
(Tea-MG). .' In.)
Key: _
1. Laboratory 6. Asm
2. Solution 131 7. mm
3. Specific activity of Ce. 8. W
”(1/8 9. Average
’0. Relative error
5. can:

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The results of canparisons showed that the reproduction of a unit of activ-
ity of B-unitting radionuclides by the national standards of the Hungarian
People's Republic. son, $88!! and 088)! (by the cm standard) is made cor-
rectly without significant unconsidered systanatic errors. The deviations
of the results obtained on individual standards from the mean values do not
exceed the limits of evaluated errors.

The work performed according to the plan of the (IBM Permanent emission
on Standardization in 1971-1973 contributes to ensuring the unity of meas-
urements and to increasing their accuracy. This work proposes the cost ef-
ficient methods of determining partial correction coefficients taking into
account self-absorption and absorption in ampoule walls (for y-radintion
sources), change in the efficiency of a detector during a change in photon
energy, attenuation and absorption of photons in the walls of ionisation
chambers, as well as determinations of coefficients taken into consideration
during the measurement of activity by the lmay-coincidence method. As a re-
sult of an analysis of the data published in the literature the most accu-
rate and reliable values of universal constants (photon energy, maximum and
average energy of B-particles. number of photons and B-particles per act of
decay, half-decay period and so forth) were selected and recomended for ra-
dionuclidee most often used in metrological practice.

The automated measuring apparatus developed in cm: and UWVR are of great
importance. They ensure the identification and measurement of the activity
of admixture radionuclides in radioactive sources of radiation and in radio-
active samples. A many-sided canparison of t e standards of a unit of activ-
ity of a-emitting radionuclides by means of 2 1»: solutions is planned for

1979 .

Comparisons of the standards of a unit of exposure dose of X-radiation with
10 to 250 keV generated voltage belonging to CM members were made in 19‘“:-
1915. The comparisons were made separately over the ranges 10 to 60 keV and
60 to 250 keV with the participation of OMKh of the Hungarian People's Re-
public (It. Zhdanski and I. 101120); ASHV or the 01m (0. Rothe and x. Helm-
shtedner); mum of the Polish People's Republic (2. Referovski. N. Derezhin-
ski and II. Pas); WIIH (V. I. Pominykh, I. A. Uryayev, G. E- Ostrcnuhhova d
R. F. Kononova); only over the range 10 to 60 keV, Chéim Lexpansion unknown
and the Center of Radiation Hygiene (Ta!!!) or the 0383 (A. Drabek and O.
x041).

Comparisons of the primary standards of a unit of exposure dose of X-ra-
diation over the range 10 to 60 keV were made by means of a free-air stand-
ard comparison chamber belonging to NH)! and forming part of the USE! state
standard of a unit of exposure dose. This chamber and the elect cal meas-
uring device of VIII)! with a control radioactive source or 908 were

transported to each of the participating countries.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Free-air ionisation chambers of the plane-parallel type vere used in all
national standards. The comparison of standards boiled down to the deter-
mination of the constant or the comparison chubsr of WI!“ by means of
the national standards or can nemhers. The substitution method was used
for this. Chambers were placed in the beam of X-rsdiation so that the
planes or the limiting diaphragm to which the measured values of exposure
doses pertained might be at the same distance true the anode of the X-rsy
tube.

Table 3 presents the relationships of the results of measuruent of the con-

stant of the comparison chsmher to the mean arithmetical value of the con-
stant for the CM standard.

 

   
   
 

 

Table 3
'._.... .. ...- ......... --.- .....
sl-v-umve any. (2) (3" h)
"'" d" :5?
sum in , g ,-
(1) ad I; .
M,o.n:.¢ .. 0.400 -
. MIG." l.00l :13; LO“) LO" 0.!“
; mm mm «in. Lee: mos n.
I Milt.) 9.”? 03'") LOO! h"!
..-- - - a- s—. 0-. ---ms»——~_ a
Key‘

1. Radiation conditions. “In Al 5. uses. m
2. Hungarian People's Republic. G00: 6. 688! -
3. ODR. A83" 7. W
'5. Polish People's Republic, mm 8. Teal

From the data or tahle 3 it follows that the amount or the unit or exposure
dose of cm members differs from the amount of the unit reproduced by the
can standard by no nore than 0.11. On the basis of an analysis of results
it use established that the cm standard in the indicated energy region is at
the present scientific and technical level. During subsequent comparisons,
in order to increase the accuracy. it is recon-ended that a free-air cham-
ber he used. determining by absolute methods the value of the rate of ex-
posure dose in every country by means of the national standard and compar-
ison chamber. not the constant of the chamber. as envisaged in $15-12 rec-

ommendations .

During comparisons over the range 60 to 250 Rev free-air chambers of the
plane parallel type (OM01. M and mm) and a cylindrical chamber (VIII!!!)
were used in all standard apparatus. has cavity chambers of om. AM and
mm were used as comparison standards. Chamber cavities were connected
with the atmosphere. The method of casparisons was similar to that for the
10 to 60 av energy range.

26
FOR OFFICIAL I188 OIL!
FOR O'PICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3: presents the relationships or the results or measurements of the

constants of comparison chambers to the mean srithnetical value of the
constant for the CM standard.

 

 

 

 

 

Table I:
have Ill'::::;'. ‘3‘.“ (“liq 52;; 68g
‘1) ' ‘2'! n ‘3). “Q 5:: is
“973.: 3'35. 5133. 323:3: HE:
0'“ 33W: ”'1” $223.». the) How
(1) :wm h”! 0.9» -. .. :
”010.! 0.9a: LMI cam .. ;
c n nan-z Hz: 7-33; :43: :-;::.
353 am: ..-.. 5:22: "2'!
. '°"°-':. m was H2: -.: |
"m“ 32355.3 120:0 nit-n 110w. . n
5 (9) . ....1.... ._.|
Key:
1. Chanber h. OUR, A810!
2. Radiation conditions, kV/mn 2. Polish People‘s Republic. mm
Cu . 088R, VIII"
3. ﬂungarian People‘s Republic. 7. cm
OHIO; 8. ASMV
9. mm

From an analysis or the results of couparisons it tollous that the amount
of the unit of exposure dose reproduced by the national standards of CM
nenbers differs from the amount of the unit reproduced by the CM standard
by no more than 11. which lies within the error of aeasuraments with nation-
al standards. Thus. the cm standard over the energy range 60 to 250 keV
is also at the present scientific and technical level.

The research conducted enabled the cm countries that took part in the com-
parisons to obtain useful information on the methods and means used in every
country. to unity the determination of some correction coefficients intro-
duced into the results or neasurenents and to increase the reliability of

reproduction of a unit of exposure dose or x-radiation over the 10 to 250
keV energy range.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

J. Yudin. M. P.. Karavwev. P. M.. and Ostranuhhova, G. P., Hummus
mm. 1972. lo 6.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL I!" ONLY

2. KAI-«cw. P. M” "I not” Aktivnoat: lukndov" [Foam-mu of ch.
Activity of lunch . Mum. Ind-v0 0mm». 1912.

30 “.m". 1'. ﬂ. 0‘ d... Imm'MYA mm, 1973. '0 10
5. "row Report.” 12. 1968. cope.
COPYRIGHT: Imtol'oevo amen-aw. 1979

11,539
C80: 1370

26

'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

0081‘ STORMS m MBLIOM‘I‘IVB MEASURBS

Moscow PYL'NYYB BURY I AGROLESMBLIORATIVNYYB HSROI’MYA‘I'IYA ("Dust Stone

end Agriculturel and forestry Melioretivc Measures") in Russian 1978.
signed to press 28 Feb 78. pp 2-6. 159

lAnnotnrion. introduction end table of contents [roe book by “.1.
noisilevich. lxdetel‘stvo "Roles", 2360 copies. 159 pesesl

[Text] ‘lhis book presents the theoreticei investicstions of the euthor end
other scientists on dust stores end wind erosion. 'lhe following questions
ere exesinedn the nature of dust stores. including criticel wind velocities.
soil erodibility. soil properties influencing the dovelopsent of erosion.
the influence of wind on soil end pleats: cleeoii‘icstion of wind erosion:
dust stores. their periodicity. duration end distribution: soil loss free
erosion end its pereiosible level. A clessificetion of wind-eroded soils

is presented. Reeeerch on protection of soil egeinst erosion end on the
effectiveness of forest-belts in that store control in the southern regions
of the country is described.

I n troduction

Duct stores, es en entrees manifestation of wind erosion of soils. erise
periodically in the steppe cone of the Moses cert of the 1883. During
dust stores. crops ere dengue. end the upper. soot fertile leyer of soil

is carried off. Perenniel pleating. dwelling end fen buildings. reilroed
treck end peved roads ere covered with fine dirt.

In order to work out e cosplex of soil preservation seesures which could he
applied in specific soil end clinsotic conditions. elong with knowledge of
the senersl lews of wind erosion developeent. it is necessery to know the
rcgionel feetune of these processes.

The first inforeetion on dut stores in the south of Russis wee obteined
in 177'! as e result of P. S. Pallss' travels (I. E. Buchinekiy. 1970).
Hind erosion here begins to once-pose lerge territories efter agriculturel
dewelopaent of bleek-eerth end then brown soils (the eholi tion of serfdoe

end colonisation of lends served es s significsnt ilpetm to the develop-out
of new lends in the south of Ruesie).

27
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OWICIAI. USE 031.?

After intenecduet stores in the south of our country in spring 1928. research.
chiefly of a geographic characten was conducted (D. o. 8vyatskiy. 1928:

A. V. Voenesenskiy. 1930: 8. O. Vorob'ev. 1930. 1932). A. V. Vosnesenskiy
was the first to sake a cap of dust store distribution in the territory of
the Uitrainet it shows regions of different depths of soil blow-off and

dmt deposition. Although these data were obtained by questioning local
specialists and population. they give an idea of the scale of dust etcrae.

Hatsriels on the distribution of wind erosion in the fore of dust stores.
its frequency and certain erosion control asuures in the Ukraine were
presulted in the work of 8. 0. Vorob‘ev (1930). He noted that the scat
destructive tomadcs in the Ukraine were in 1837. 18b8, 187?. 1892. and 1928:
the dust atorse covering large territories and easing snonoue soil losses.
£33 exam. in 1928 the area of territory encoapaesed by dust storm was

9 e

Attor c. N. Vyeotekiy. a. O. Vorob'ev felt it necessary to advance the spe-
cial probles of dmt store control. Along seesures directed at protecting
soil free blow-off. he noted the creation of forest belts in fields. spring
ploughing of fellow lands and autunn sowing of perennial grasses.

After the Great Patriotic Var. research into the effectiveness of agrotsch-
nical and forest aselioratisn seasune for dmt store control was begun.

Along the early postwar research. the work of s. s. Bobslev (191.5) devoted
to geographical patterns of wind erosion is noteworthy. S. 8. Sobolsv
desonstratsd the northern boundary of dmt store distribution in the Illa-sine
and distinguished territories with different intensities of wind erosion.

n. p. Ryshiltov (19nd. 1955. 1957) studied certain yearly factors of duet
store arisal on the Ukrainian steppe. Analysing data about dust store
attacks during the fall-winter period. he showed that. as a rule. after a
dry sutusn dust stores arise in the spring of the following year. Studying
forest sselioration ssthods for soil and crop preservation iron dmt stores.
D. P. ﬁrshikov noted the high effectivenss of windbreaking forest belts and
certain agrotachnical sethods.

c. It. Ksrasev (1956. 1957) conducted field experisonts on soil cultivation
and furrow planting of grain crops with a view toward increasing the harvest
and preserving soil froa wind erosion.

‘lhe woriaof c. I. Hatyakin (1937. 19 ). Vs. D. Panfilov (193?). Va. 1’.
Byallovich (1900). It. I. Vudin (1950 . A. R. Konstantinov (1950. 1951). D. 1..
Arnand (1961). is. A. Baal'ko (1963). A. a. Xonstantinov and 1.. a. Btrmer
(1965) and others have Id. a substantial oonstributicn to the theory of
field-protective forest cultivation. mess works served as the basis for
creating effective system of field-proactive forest belts in regions of
wind erosion of soil in the European part of the country.

later works confined the high soil protective effectiveness of forest belts
duing dust stor- (Yu. K. 1bleshek. 1960: I. ll. lliloserdov. 1961. 1970.
1971; P. 8. Zakharov. 1965: w. I. Do evich. et al.. 1969. 1972‘ II. it.
Laserev. V. D. Savichev. 1969. et al. .

28
M OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "3|! ONLY

In capitalist Russia ploughing of huge tracts of land and poor harvests

led to the frequent nrieal of dust stores. it the end of the last century .
droughts and dust stores in the south of the country attracted the atten~
tion of s nusber of scientists. tiers began a period of description or dust
stone and investigation of their nature.

As a result of research in the field of dynaaic geology conducted by N. A.
Sokolov (18815) on Russian sands. the nature and types of noveaent of sand
grains were studied and the initial wind velocities necessary for aovins
diffbrent-siaed grains were studied.

Subsequently changes in soil properties under the influence of wind. the
character of the sanifestation of wind erosion on agricultural lands. on
different fields and according to the season of year were studied (A. A.
Bychikhin. 1892: N. Sarsndinalti. 1890). During the sane period. the first
atteapts to classify dust stores on a aeterol cal basis were undertaken
(8. G. Popruahenko. 189M 6. c. Shsnbsrg. 1912??

At the end of the 19th century. iaportant investigations devoted to studying
the nature of dust stores and developing aeasuree of control were organised
by V. V. Dokuohaev and conducted under his direction. The soot significant
of these are the studies of c. N. Vysotekiy (189%). lie perfected detailed
scientific analysis of the nature of (black) duet. storms on the Ukrainian
steppe. He found that dust stores are neat dangerous in early spring when
winter crops have not yet taken hold. when fields are not yet protected by
vegetative coVer. G. N. Vysotakiy desenstrated the kinematics of an air
current in dependence on the relief and character of obstacles in its path.
and described the {emotion dynamics of wind-borne deposits with differ-
ent obstacles.

mess studies also have great significance at the present tine. Subsequently
the building of experimental constructions in forest-belts has aade it
possible to reach a nuaber of iaportant conclusions about the aechanisa of the

influence of forest belts on wind and on the processes of wind erosion related
to it.

An expert on agricultural sethods in the south of Rmsia. P. F. Barkov (1913)
noted that coapacted fields suffered sore fros wind than uncoapacted fields.
In this connection. peasants tried to cake the soil friable with barrows:
this increased the roughness of the soil surface and decreased the injurious
influence of the wind on the soil. P. F. Barakov linked the distribution of
wind erosion to agricultural practices. In his opinion. fields of sugar
beets especially suffer froa thc wind because the northern boundaries of the
deVelopins wind activity and swat beet cultivation coincide.

Laying down a bread progran of investigating the country's natural forces

as a basis for land evaluation in 1897, V.V. Dokuchaycv (cit it indispensibic
to conduct research into dust storas. Extensive investigation became pos-
sible only after the establishucnr of Soviet power.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0“ OFFICIAL 1388 ONLY

After enactaent of the decree of the 00 crsu and the USSR Council of Mini-
sters cf 20 March 1967 ”On Baergency heasures for Protecting Soil Against
wind and water Erosion." research on wind erosion and developsent of s
coupler of soil protection neasures intensified.

Along with research on field-protective forest cultivation in the Ukraine.

the northern cauoasue and the lower Volga region. work on study of the soil-
protective effectiveness of sgrctechnicel sethcds with use of a systea of
special soil cultivation and sewing aschines and squipaent developed by

the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Grain Paraing. the All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of Agricultural heehsnisaticn. the All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of Agricultural )bchinery and the Kazakh Insti-
tute of Rural Hechanisstion and Electrification and a number of agricultural
engineering works was expanded. As a result of investigations. the effective-
ness of soil protective cultivation on major crops was deaonstrsted.

In addition to this. devolcpasnt of the scientific basis of a couple: of
nossums directed toward soil protection against wind erosion requires

deep knowledge of the nature of wind erosion. the aechsnisas of the influ-
ence of wind on soil. especially in carrying out soil protective agntechni-
cal and forest amelioration aeasures. Research into the varicm factors of
wind erosion. analysis of diagnostics and classification of soils exposed
to wind erosion is no less urgent.

Solution of these questions. to which this book is devoted. is especially
ieportant for the southern regions of the European part of the IBSR where
intensive nanogeaent of agricultural production requires wide application
of a couple): of seasuros for protecting soil iron wind erosion.

Contents

Inmucum.0.0.0000.UI0.00..0.0009000...00.00.000.090...000.00.000.00.D003
“‘tm of “I. anbility of .011 w undCOOOOUOOOOOSIOOOOOOOOIOOOOI'QOOO?
Guam v1“w1“1u.'0000500000¢0|0¢¢000.000.00.00...IOOOOOO'QOOOOQIOO?
swbili” of .011 by “MtOOOOCI0.00.0I.OOOOOOOOOCOOOOIIOOOOOOQDOIOIOD18
Soil properties influencing the develop-ant of wind erosion.............29
Th0 innuCHCO of “ind on .011 m wcm‘ml pnnweeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeu1
affec‘ of '1“ on .oilOOOOOOOOOOOOIO0.0.00....00000DOOOOIIOOOIIOODOOOOOOui
Effec‘ of "1“ on “meat“ plmuOOO.ODOsOOII000.0.00.000000000000001‘7
Influence of seasonal wind erosion on agricultural plants...............l&9
"ind .mion in w “mug of the Mn.0O...I...ODOOOOO‘OSOOOOIOOOOOO$
clmttic‘uon 0f "1“ .m‘on.COOII.OI0.000sCOD...OIOOOOOOOIOIOOOOOOSOQy‘
Dust stern. their periodicity. duration and distribution...............56
Reuomiuuon of "1M .mionOlOO0.0.0.000e.DO...OOIOOOOOOQOOOOOOOOOOO“
Soil loss Ros wind erosion and their persissihle levels..................7lo
Classification of wind-eroded soils.......................................82
Research on asthods of protecting soil fro- wind erosion..................9'b
1he influence of surface roughness. vegetative cover and harvest
residues on measureaent of wind velocity in the ground layer of
”1°‘mmneeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeesssseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeee95
80n-pmmuv. cmunuonOOOC00.00000.0000000000000'OOOOO0.0.00.0.0...”
Protection of landplwghedinsutuan aainst wind erosion.............io9
Effectiveness of cysts-s of forest belts in dust store control...........lii

30
[708 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P0“ (WFH‘JM. ESE ONLV

Influunoo of system of noil-protootivo foront boltn on hind volocity..112
Soil-protootivo proportion of inolatod fomnt bolts and their

ay.“”.|00|000..0l..0...UCUOCCOOOI‘I0.0.0.IOOIOCOOCOIOOIOOIUOCDCD‘OC126

Principlen- oi‘ calculating lntorbolt diatancoo in the synta- of
open fomot bolts on different lands exposed to wind omion.........133
Sou-protective effootivonu of forest bolt onions during dmt

a“m......tllIOCI0.0...l.COOOIO.ClO0OI.OIOO.I.IOOOOOOOIOIII00000000135

Bﬂ‘octlvenm of a couple): of soil-protective agrotaohnical and
fon't “liomuon ”M.OOIOOOOOOIOOOOOUQIOOOOOOIIOOOIOIOO00.0.0.1“;
comlmiom...DID...OOOUODOOOIvthOIODQIOOOOOOOIDOOOOODIIOIOOGIOIOOOOOOOOII‘S

alblioBmWOIOIOQOOOO.IOIOIDDCIOOOOOIDOOOOOOOOOIOIOOOOIC00.000000000000011‘8
COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'atvo ”Roles". 1978

9380
080: 1870

31
FOR OPFICIAI. US}: ONLY
FOR OHICTAI. US! ONLY

I’lmlJCATlONS

INFORMATION ”0038883 IN NEURAL STRUCTURES

Moscow iNi’OllilATSiONNWR ”01888“ V NBYRONNYKII STRUKTDRAKH in Russian
1978 signed to press 26 April 1978 pp 2. 3-6. 165-166

lAnnotsHon. foreword. introduction and table of contents free book by
V.i.. Dunin-Barkovskiy. isdetoi‘stvo "hooks". 1.300 copies. 167 pages]

Hut] The book gives an sccount of the results of theoretical investiga-
tions of tho sechsnisas of neural activity. The book is closely related
in content to the works of Brindley and Herr on snslysis or the functions
or central nervous structures. particularly the cerebellum

The first four chapters set forth the i‘undeaental concepts of neurophysiol-
ogy and neural network theory which ‘are the basis of the current theories
to which the second half of the book is devoted.

Iiere the concepts and sethcds of intonation theory are used to interpret
functions and evaluate the oi‘i‘ectiwenss of concrete neural stmctms.
Brperieental data are interpreted and new oxperiaents are proposed on the
basis of theoretical analysis.

The applicability of selected principles of neural cronisation to solving
probless in the creation of artificial intelligence is explored. The
properties of the neuron as a Notional eleaont of the cosputing stmcturee
or the organise are enuserated and a variant physical sodel of the neuron
which provides the ease functional capabilities is proposed.

111s book is intended for specialists in theoretical and orperisental
neurophysiology. -

Fifty one figures. 2 tables. bibliography or 21? titles
Editor-in-chietl Doctor of Biological Sciences. 1.. ii. Ohaylakhyan
Foreword

In recent years the concepts and sethcde of informtion theory have been
penetrating into any branches of science. In particular. the present.
book shows how the concrete principles or this theory are beginning to be
successfully applied to neurophysiolog. Until recently. analysis of
intention tnmaission along the neural conductors was basically liaited

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

to studying the connection between nerve centers and the mechanism of
stlaulue transmissions.

The aonograph ccuended to the reader's attention was written through

the prograa of theoretical biological research conducted at the Institute
for Interaction Tranaaiseion Prableas of the USSR Acadeay of Sciences.
1ho goal of these works is in-depth analysis of biological processes with
a view toward understanding and applying principles discovered in nature
to the creation of coaplex artificial inforaation systcas.

In the nenograph interaction on cell biophysics is systeastised which is
indispensible for current. analysis of werlcs on cell oysters. Description
and classification of known types of neuron aodels are given. starting
with the classic sodel of (Hak-Kalloh) and Pitt. A significant nuaber of
widely used aodels have been crested by the author and his coworkers at
the Institute of Infcraation ‘l‘ramaiseion Problem of the USSR Acadeay of
Sciences. Critical analysis of the basic results and the significance
for neurophysiology of the foraal neuron and finite suteaat theory is
presented. Analysis of the properties of hcacgeneous neural eneeables
concludes the part of the book not directly related to application and
developaent of interaction theory aethods. Next. the basic sethods

and results of applying interaction theory to analysis of neural networks
are described. Then the general nethods and concepte developed in the
beginning of the book are applied to analysis and interpretation of
diagram and principles of the work of the cerebelleuanthe brain struc-
ture which has been studied in greatest detail. The achieveaents of
theoretical analysis of the nervous systea are preemted in the fare of
the so-cslled principles of neural organisation. ‘lhe concluding chapter

of the book is devoted to analysing the potential applications of neural
networks in technology.

Systeastisation of neural aodels. developaent of theoretical interaction
aodels of neuron neaery. analysis of the neural organisation of the care-
bellua and developasnt of ideas for creating artificial analogues of
neural disgrace auet be regarded as the scat substantial of the author's
results published in the book. It is well that abstract constructions
are coapleeented in the book by concrete analysis of concrete structures.
In this way. a nuaber of new experiaents have been foraulated and the
results of their probable outceae have been analysed.

ceabined in the book in reasonable proportion. ‘ihe works which also up
the contents of the book were reported by the author and diseased

with interest at seetings of the biological, technical, and physica-
aatheaatical seainare of the IBSR Acsdeay of Sciences Institute of Infor-
nation Transaissien Probleas and before other audiences.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8|! ONLY

The present book makes it possible for a large circle oi‘ specialists.
graduate students and uppsrolaes undergraduates in technical physical
and theoretical biological opooialties to beoose acquainted with inter-
esting current research on theoretical neurophysioloa.

Associate heaber of the USSR
heads of Sciences
V. I. ui‘orov

Introduction

As is known. the current level of understanding of the physical and chenicel
seohanisn of heredity and biosynthesis has bscoae possible thanks in
particular to the greatest theoretical-experiasntsl (hendel) and erperiaentsl
ilatson. Crick. Gaaov and others) discoveries. Now sose progress has

been noted in another area oi‘ fundamental biological problem in the field
oi” neural activity seohanisas.

At the present tine English investigators 0. Brindley and D. Harr have
obtained theoretical results which shed light on the principles of the
work of the central nervous structures. particularly the cerebellua.
hoe these works it has booosc clear in general outline how aeaory night
be organised in aniaale and an. Hers current theory draws on the store
of knowledge gained iron the achieveaents in neurophysiology over the
last 100 years: I. Pavlov'e analysis of conditioned reﬂexes. (Boson-i-
Kakhalya)‘s neural network. Sherrington's. Eccles'. Kats' and Hodgkin's
accoaplishaents in the field or the physiology of the processes of
stiaulation. The theoretical acooaplishaents of predecessors also

laid the groundwork for this theory: (Rosenblat) 's peresptron. Robb and
(Iseki) 's neural enseable. (8hennon)'s inforaation theory. (Gabor)'s
holography and any others.

This book describes the basic aocoaplishaents and basic problem of the
given science in order to attract specialists of different fields to
this work. Since the scope of this book and the author's resources are
very limited. this account is extreaely ooapressed in place . and the
reader is assqu to be independently faailiar with the problem touched
upon. Here it is undoubtedly necessary to present the author’s own
works in the given field in greater detail. That the problea is great
and the creation of ﬂundaaentsl guiding principles is a thing of the
future can only be partial Justification oi' the book's possible defici-
enoies.

The first three chapters are basically review. Here the author tried
not to repeat well known things. unless they in soae way ceased to his
to be especially iapsrtant and conversely tried to direct attention to
questions usmlly analysed in less detail. To a significant degree.
the fourth chapter is based on the author's earlier published works

36

FOR OFFICIAL 083 MY
NR OFFICIAL USP. ORLY

In Chapter Flw clnwnlu Information theory and the lumen of hole-
grnnhy are presented soaewlvat differently than is usuully accepted.
(hunter nix in one ol‘ the central chnptero of the book. Here the so-
csliud operational theory of the cerebellua. which was started by the
works of Brindloy (1%“). Hart (1969). Bleafield and Man: (1970). is
analysed in detail. In the seventh chapter an attempt is ends to
syotcsatise the basic results of theoretical analysis of neural system.
Chapter sight is devoted to the problem of the boundary between neuro-
physiology an. artificial intelligence technologies.

The book is into -ded for specialists in theoretical neurophysiology

and those who seriously want to study the questions touched upon. The
Mlest and nest sueoosefull coverage of the basic questions of centen-
pornry science say be found in Griffith's asnegraph (Griffith. 1971).
For work in the given field. physicists unfamiliar with the subject

say basin reading with the chapters of Feynan's lectures on physics
(Ryan et al.. 197?, Vol 3, she 35. 36) devoted to the physiology 'ef
vision and the books or P. G. Kestyuk (1977a) and D. (Vuldridsh) (1965).
It is also extremely useful to beeose acquainted with biochemistry through
c. ﬂatson's (196?) or A. (lanindsher)‘s (2974) books and with neurophy-
siology tm'ouah G. (Soa'on)'s (1975)- It is useful for biologists to
acquaint thousolves at the outset with (Eshbl)'s (1958) and H. Arbib's
(1968) books.

The author has been lucky in having among his teachers and colleagues

H. L. 'l‘setlin, F. V. Severin, h. H. Renard. and 8. V. Rosin. Contact
with these brilliant scientists. untiaer deceased. has greatly influenced
the contents of this hook.

Everything written was nest fully discussed with A. h. Chetnycv and L.
N. Chaylakhyan. the scientific editors of the book. This book would
not have been written without the help of A. Ya. Dmina-Barkhevsksya
and the constant attention of L. V. Dunin-Barkovskiy.

’Ihe author gives thanks to V. I. Siferov for the foreword and to any
friends and colleagues for scientific discussions and support.

Con ten ts

FomuotdeDeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeelee-eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeete'

J
InmucuonOCDDDICOODODOOOCOJDOO0.00.0.0...IOIO‘IDIOOOOOOOOOOIIDOOOOOOS
cmpur 1. W’oloy or m mmnOOOOIIIO'IDOOOCDOIIO0......l0IODICI?

1.1 Cell physiology ofhigheranisals.................-..............?
1e2 Electrocholical W‘iolou of thoneurﬂn.....-....n.............10
1.3 Biocheaical physioloy oftheneumn............................l?
Clutptor 2. Models oftheneuron......................................2&
2.1 The stimulated sesbrsno equation. "conplete" neuron node]. .... .21}
2.2 Point-inpulse nodal. The randes walk equation. Impulse
Butlauw...OOO'OIOOOOO‘COOOCOCIUIUOOOOO0.0.0.0....IOOOOOOOIOOOI027
2.3 For-31.“.ln of”mmOIOIIlﬁoilclOIIOCOOQIIOCIIOIOOOQCOOOIOIC31
2.1580“ probability-«isle of the neuron...........................35
2.5 M918 "tu‘swimm“‘ymweaODIIDOI.OODIOOOO.IOIOOOODUDOOOOOOO%
2.6 Physical aedols ofneurons......................................38
Chapter 3. Theory of finite outcasts and networks of formal neurons.. so

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI’FICIM. USE ONLY

313°” inform]. “mu on Butonﬁtﬂ...".n........................u0
302 rim“nuuquOOOOOOODOODOIIOOOIOIII000000000000I0000000|00000Qu1
303m°11n8ﬂn1t°sum“00000000000000.000000000000.0000000000000u5
3.15 Turing's nchine. Fornal and real coaputabilityu...............1+9
hapterb. Homogeneous neural networks................................52
1': General assunptionaa statistical physics and neurophysiology... ..52
u
u
I;
u

C

.1
.2 Biatability and aultiatahility of the neural network.............5b
.3 Frequency characteristics cftheneuron pccl.....................56
.1; Sons properties of the neuron pool in ccasunication...’...........6!+
as A. "o Chouycv'alodel...”...........................,............70
.6 Activity waves in hem]- netuorHOOOOO'0.00000000000000030000000071
Chapter 5. Information theoryendneural networks...”................73
5.1 Fundamental detersination of construction........................73
502mubn1ty1nf°mu°m anuu0000000000000i00000000000000000076
5.? Large international system and the theories of Vinoa-ad-
Kouon)000|00h0000000000000005.0000I00000.0000000000000000500.00...“
5.15 Redundantenoodine. holographyandnemery.......................88
Cup“: 6. mutton“ “no” of the cenullmOOO‘OIOOOIOOIODOOI00.0.93
601 Infomtion on the ametm of the cerebonul...u......nun-.915
6.2 Functions of the cerebellum in Brindley's hypothesis.............98
6.3 Basic operations of the cerebellarcortex“.....................101
6.1+ Evaluation of inforaation capacity of the cembellus............103
6.5 Spatial organization of cerebellar afferent: and inhibitory
lnurmmml...0000000053000l0000000000OOOODOIOOOOOOOOIIOOOOOO000119
606 meow Md.mrimnt00000000000000l0l000000000000000090000IOOOD129
6.? ower wears-68 ofmc.mu11m0000000.00000000500000000000.0001»
Chapter 7. Sons principles of neural organisation....................13?
70180” mvenal pnncip19300000000000l0000.00.000.00000 40000000013?
7.2"atwom"1w1mmu°nCl000000000000000.....‘00..0000000000000139
703 Netuom "1msululmcomuuonCO00'00000000000.0070000000001a2
Chapter 8. Evaluation of resources of neural diagram................1b3
8.1 Application of structural and functional approaches to
analyst. of “oz-Vow wuv1w000000000000.00000.00000000000000000001u3
8.2 Properties of the neuron as an eleasnt in a cesputing
diam. of u”bmn00000000000000000000'00000000000OOIIOCCOOOOOOO1u5
8.3 One constructive cysts. of neuronlike elenanta..........._. ......1h6

Appendix. Deduction of Gol'daan'a equation...........................151&
Blbliomw0050.0000000000000-0000000000'00O000.6000000'Ilt00500000001%
COPYRIGHT: Indetel'atvo "Nauka", 1978

9380
080: 1870

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

TABLE OF CONTENTS OF $00K 'PNARMACOWGY 0F SHORT-TERM MEMORY'

Hoseow FAWOLOGIYA KRATKOSROCHNOY PMATI (Pharmacology of Short-Term
Memory) in Russian 1978 signed to press 27 Mar 79 p 2, 231-232

[Annotation and table of contents from book by Yu. s. Borodkin and V. A.
Kraut, Heditsina, 5.000 copies, 232 pages]

[Text] ‘Ihe monograph describes mechanisms and neurophysiological processes
of short-term memory. functional organizationof various systems and cerebral
structures in the control processes of the shut-tern memory and the signi-
ficance of the synaptic function modification when effected by cholino-.
adreno- and serotoninergic drugs as related to short-term memory.

Host of the book is devoted to the description of the neuropharmacological
study of systematic organization of control processes of short-term memory
using modern electrophysiological methods and correlative and factorial
analysis. The basic principles of the neurodynnmics of excitability in vari-
ous cerebral systems and structures have been established by experiment-
electrical stimulation of these structures and systems improves or iwairs
formation of memory. For the first time, effects of biologically active
substances on short-term memory have been determined; these include deriva-
tives of etimizol, synthesized in the Department of Pharmacology, Institute
of Experimental Hedicine of the USSR Academy of Hedica1 Sciences. Neuro-
physiological and biochemical relationships of cerebral systems in memory
processes, as voll as theoretical propositions and the hypotheses concerning
the intimate nature of engram formation of both short-term and long-term
memory. are discussed.

The book is intended for pharmacologists, neuropathologists. psychiatrists
and neurophysiologists.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
Preface 3
Introduction 5

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

PART I

Controlling Hechnniena of Short-Tern Henory
Chapter 1. Physiological Basis of Short-Tern Kenory

Neurophysiological Correlates of Short-Tern lie-cry
Role of motion and Hotivation in Short-Tern lie-cry Processes

Chapter 2. Synapse—Short-Tern Menory Forning Apparatus
Structure and Function of the Synapse
Role of the Brain Synepm in Short-Tern Henery Processes
Brief Findings on tho Pharmacology of brain Synapses

Chapter 3. Neurophysiological Aspects of Short-Tern henory
Effect of Cholinergic Substances
affect of Andrenorgic and Serotoninergic Substances
affect of Stinulators

Conclusions

PART II

Page

15

19
19
37
42

66
‘6
$9
68

73

Functional Organization of Cerebral Structures in Controlling Short-Tern

Menory

Chapter 6. Cerebral Structures Involved in the Control of Short-

‘l‘ern Mallory ‘
Role of Individual For-etione
Structure Interaction

Chapter 5. Neurodynsnics of Structures Providing Short-Ter-
-Msnory es Bffected by Phernecologicel Agents
Functional Efficiency of the Brain when Influenced l y
Agents Improving Short-Tern lienory

Functional Efficiency of the Brain when Influenced by
Agents Inpairing Short-Tern Honory

Functional Efficiency of the brain ”hen Influenced by
Agents That llnve No affect on Short-Tern tie-cry

Chapter 6. Neurodyn-ics of Structures Providing Short-Tern
¢ Henry when Individual For-atione Are Stimleted

Electrically

Functional Bfficiency of the Brain When Stinulated so as

To Iqrove Short-Tern Plenary
\‘ -

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

76
76
108

120
120

135

166

155

155
VOR ONION“. USE ONLY

Functional Efficiency of the Brain when Stimulated no no
to tupatr Short-Term Memory

Chapter 7. Neurophysiologlcal and BLochIILcnl Bases for
Interactions of Cerebral structures in Short-
Teru Neuory Process

Chapter 8. Nourophamcology and the Search for 'Heuory
Molecules"

Conclusion.

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'otvo "Hedttotna". Moscow. 1970
cso: 1870 END

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY