APPROVED FOR RELEABE: ZOOTIOZIOO: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOOOROOO‘I 00000000-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040050-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE MLY

JPRS L/8414
23 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOUO No. 631

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040050-1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
lest line of s brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-ere as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
ciea, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT [ABS AND REGULATIONS WERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUC- REREIN REQUIRE 'l'llAT DISSBHINATION
0F TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOPFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE GIL!

mas L/NM
23 39:11 197

TRANSLATIONS (N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

V000 No. 631

Cou'rws P

DUN-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

EEG Food Allotments to African Nations Reported
(muss moment): 31' 11mm, 16 m 79)

Book on Herxien in Africa Reviewed
(Jean-Pierre N'Diaye; JBUNB-AFRIQUB, 21 Mar 79) .........

Motorisation of Africa, Population Statistics Reported
(mm TROPIGAUX 31' mm, 16 Feb 79) ooooooeo

Briefs
- lyorore'e Dislike of W
Possible Zaire Invasion Prom Angola

0M0

Situation on he of Third PCT Congress Noted
(Joa.am3° “mg m mm. 21 HI? 79) 00000000....

ETHIOPIA

“rim, 0mm Pooplee' Struggle for Independence Mod
(sm- nus. Interview mm np'mm,
26 JIIIOI 90b 79) oeeeooooooooeeoeooeeooeeaoeeeoooooooeooo

Briefs
Nile Dans
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cmm'rs (Continued) Page
was

Regina's Fate To Be Determined Within Next Few Hooks
(Joe-muse mm JBUNB Among, 21 m 79) 29

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

SEC FOOD W TO AFRICAN NATIONS 113mm

Paria HARCﬂBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS in French 16 Her 79 p 679

[Text] The European Col-ission has just adopted its proposals concerning
food aid programs for grains. powdered milk and butterfat for 1979. In its
distribution. it has given priority to the poorest countries end those

now experiencing political difficulties or facing natural disasters. The
proposed distribution involves a total of 720.500 tone of grain. 150.000
tone of powdered tail]: and 45.000 tone of butterfet. The cost of these pro-

gress is en estieated 560 nillion accounting units. including about 57 oil-
lion for transport end distribution costs.

With regard to grain. the Council did not agree to include in the 1979
budget credits corresponding to an increase in the volue of aid (1.135.000
tone) proposed by the Co-ission. but pledged to raise to that level the
Co-unity's direct contribution on the occasion of the renewal of the food
aid convention linked to the negotiation or the international wheat agree-
Ient. Once these negotiations are adjourned. the Couieaion intends to
propose to the Council that it provide for the anticipated increase and
that it include the credits for the purpose in a future supplenentary

budget. It also proposed increasing the butterfat program to 55.000 tons.
in keeping with its initial proposal.

These increases vould make it possible to taste a greater contribution to

growing needs. particularly of the poorest countries. Regarding grains.
the international co-unity is still far fro. achieving the objective of
10 sillion tons reco-ended in 1976 by the World Food Conference. For its
part. the Co-iasion has noted a great increese in requests addressed to
it: 3.226.000 tons this year conpared with 2.68 nillion tons last year.

Likewise. the denand for butterfet is growing. particularly in connection

with the increasing importance of projects to develop the dairy industry.

such as the one set up by India (Flood II). The proposed allocations are.
based on a coebinetion of 'three criteria: level of food needs. per capite
incoee and the deficit in the belanca of payments. -

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Grain: A total of 360.000 tone ia allocated for international organizations
or inatitutiona (world Food Program. WA. UNIICR. and ac on) and 526.300
tone for countriea. with the largaat quantitiea going to Southeaat Aaian
countriea and Egypt. Sosa 56.200 tone are kept in reearve.

Powdered ailk: 66.800 tone to organizations (including 30.000 tone to the
world Food Prograa and 25.000 tone to nongovernaental organization);
direct allocationa. 78.500 tone (including 31.000 tone to India).

Butterfat: organizationa. 13.200 tone; direct allocationa. 31.300 tone. aoat
of vhich go to Southeaat Ania and the Middle Beet.

In the following table. we have ahovn only the allocationa going to African
nationa.

BBC Food Aid to African Netiona in 1979 (in tone)

Powdered Milk Butterfat Grain

Benin 2.500
Cape Verde 300 250

Coaoro lalande 2.500
Congo 1.500
Djibouti 350 3.500
Central African Empire 170

Egypt 5.000 2.800 90.000
Ethiopia 15.000
Ghana 200 2.000
Guinea-Biaaau 600 175 3.500
Guinea 3.000
Gaabia 2.500
Upper Volta 2.000 250 5.000
beaotho 100 100 3.000
Madagascar 500 16 . 000
Mali 300 105 1.000
Mauritius 700 100

Mauritania 800 500 6.000
Mozambique 1.000 250 16.500
Niger 2.000
Manda 200 1.000
Sao Tone-Principe 50 x 200 1.000
Senegal 1.860 9.000
Sierra Leone 1.000 200 2.000
Soaalia 300 13.500
Sudan 500 6.000
Tanzania 2 . 000 ' 600 6 . 000
Chad . 800 100 2.000
Zaire 8.000
Zeabia 1.500 500 10.000

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STABBX: Transfer to Cape Verde

The Commission agreed to grant the Republic of Cape Verde a nonrepayable
transfer of 367.712 accounting units for the 1977 fiscal year. The Republic
of Cape Verde has been hit since 1971 by an exceptional drought vhoee nain
effect hae been a dranatic drop in its only export product: bananas. Since
it has been unable to export during this long period. the nor-a1 STA!!!
[Export Receipt Stabilisation Systenl rules (providing for conpenestion for
losses of receipts conpared with an average level attained over the four
preceding years) pernitted no action.

At the EEC-AC? (African. Caribbean and Pacific countries (associated with
the 880)] Council in April 1977. the Con-unity declared that under sinilar
circumstances. it was willing to seek the nest favorable possible inter-
pretetion of the Convention. For the 1976 fiscal year. for exalple. it
had already, in an analogous case - Guinea-Bissau -- reconstituted the
frane of reference by excluding the 13 exceptional yeare having existed in
that country and by using exports of previous years as a basis.

In the present case. the reconstitution of the reference period vas achieved
on the basis of exports in the course of the nor-a1 years fro. 1967 to 1970
and the unit values for 1973 to 1996 [sic].

The transfer benefiting Cape Verde brings the tots1 anount transferred for
the 1977 fiscal year to 31,672,921 accounting units.

COPYRIGHT: lane Horeux et Cie.. Paris. 1979

11.666
680: 6600

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

300K 011 ms}! IN AFRICA REVIEWED
Perie JBUNB AFRIQUB in French 21 Her 79 pp 61-62

[Review by Jenn-Pierre N'Dieye of the book "Hegel, Herr. Bngele et lee
Problenee de l"Afrique Noire." by Andy Aly Dieng, Bditione Senkore. Perie.
1979. 160 pegee]

[Text] The Senkore publiehing houee in Deker. eetebliehed end pronoted

by Senegeleee linguiet end eociologiet Pethe Diegne. hee juet bought e
publiehing fir- which ie putting out eeverel collectione. .

It ie the purpoee of the Cebrel-Penon collection to pronote ideological
confrontetione end debetee. The firet work in the collection. "aegel.
Herr. Engele et lee Problenee de l'Afrique Noire." ie written by Anedy Aly
Dieng. It in intereeting fron more then one etendpoint, firet of ell, by
virtue of the feet thet it ie e critical eurvey of e body of thought in-
tended to be univereel in neture.

Culturel Prej udicee

It in eleo intereeting beceuee of the pereonelity of the euthor. who for

neny yeero. both before end efter the independencee. eeeuled leederehip
reeponeibilitieo at the heed of the FEM? (Pederetion of Studente fro.

Black Africa in Prence). lieving returned to Africe over 10 yeere ego, it ie
beeed on the Africen context end in the fece of the evolution of the con-

tinent end the world thet he triee to bring up concepte end theoriee once '
egein, to reeveluete then within the frenework of eutononoue reflection.

The goel he hee eet for hineelf ie ebove e11 to initiete diecueeione no

ee to etieulete thought. The firet queetion in why Herxien. which ie
intended to be univereel in neture. bee neither been eble to interpret

nor integrate correctly the peet end preeent Africen hietoricel experience.
The euthor triee to eupply eeverel ele-ente in reeponee to thie inportent
queetion. In hie opinion. the flew etene firet of e11 fro. the Buropeen
Herxiete, who heve euffered fron oerioue hendicepe: very tengible cul-
turel prejudicee, perticulerly, noted enong the French. who ere nerked

h

POI OFFICIAL 083 01“.!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by "ossinilationism"; remoteness from the African context. and so on. Cul-
tural chauvinism is a fact that not only does not spare Western Marxism.
but strongly penetrates it.

As for the African Marxists. despite their more intimate knowledge of their
societies. the "Marxist banner" has been able to conceal divergent class
interests among them. Moreover. under the influence - and sometimes the
control -- of Western theoreticians. they have long marked time in the
European centricity spread by their brother parties. Actually. does this
flew in European Marxism in the face of realities outside of Europe --
which also illustrates the depth of Chinese-Soviet differences — not go
back to Marx and even Hegel?

“hen Marx borrowed the dialectic from Regal. did he completely free himself
from the overwhelming weight of the ideology of his time. embodied by Regal.
the greatest philosopher of the triumphant and imperialist European bour-
geoisie‘l Amady Aly Dieng recalls the violence with which Megel ejects Africa
from history and culture. According to the German philosopher. ancient
Egypt is not a part of Black Africa.

Did Marx make any attempt to rectify this image? Actually. bent on the
study of Hestarn capitalism. he was not interested in the problem and only
studied it from the standpoint of the slave trade and slavery as a basis
for the primitive accumulation of capital.

Flaws in Marxism

Hhile Marx. in his materialist conception of history. did not in principle
exclude any part of mankind. the thought which was intended to be universal
did deny Africa its place in history. History. according to these thinkers.
begins only with writing and the class struggle.

Amsdy Aly Dieng is astonished to discover that the real anti-Regal, the one
who restored the completely reversed image of black African civilizations
was not an African Marxist. This fact is highly significant! Supported
by this observation. Amsdy Dieng restores to the concept of civilization
its exceptional dimension in history and reestablishes the importance of
the fight of Shaykh Ants Diop in the great fight to move back European
centricity, situate the foundations of black civilisation in ancient Egypt
and give African languages their rightful place. Closing examining certain
aspects of the Black nature [negritude]. especially from the angle of
philosophical theory, Amady Dieag categorically refutes it. denying it the
properties of coherence and the seriousness of a doctrine. Me exposes

in it the variants of the ethnophilosophy put together by the Belgian
missionary Placide Il'empels in his book "Le Philosophie Bantoue," which was
published in 1955 and reprinted with a preface by Alioune Diop. Hith ex-
cessive vehemence. he attacks the editor of PRESENCE AFRICAINE for his
appreciation of Greek and Latin civilization and his definition of the
concept of civilization: "a soul. a conscience. a faith."

5

' son orncru. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

African Philosophy?

0n the other hand. it is strange to note that Leopold Seder Senghor, one of
the founders of the concept of the Black nature. is only asntionsd in pass-
ing. especially since the author admits that he is. and l quota. "the most
consistent theoretician of a certain conception of Black civilizations and
that his views are debated and greatly discussed by the intellectuals of our
generation.“ But Dieng explains hiaaelf: "Many works have been written to
glorify or criticite his positions."

Anady Dieng therefore has an opportunity to pose the problems of philosophy
in Africa. Is there an African philosophy? The answer is that there is not.

He then relates the conclusions of the First Congress of African Philoso-
phers (1973). which he takes as his own: what has heretofore been called
an African philosophy is in fact a vision of the community world. whence

a warning about the ethnophilosophy that would lead to a new division of
work on the basis of ideas. The Africans would then produce the material
based on monographic surveys and actual experiences. aaterial that would
then be treated again within a conceptual framework that would be increas-
ingly refined. This is a serious danger. From this standpoint. the "devel-
opnent of a fruitful thought." necessary to the progress of the continent.
requires independence and democracy as conditions.

Regarding the professorial approach that is intended to be scientific. one
sometimes regrets the heaviness of the style. an almost scholastic aridity.
The fact nevertheless reasine that the interest of this book lies not only

in its clarification of the flaws of Marxian, but in the detailed narration
of the debates of intellectuals on fundamental points: the role of philo-

aophy. the teaching of mathematics, the role of the university and systela
of education in the development of Black African societies.

These debates revolve around two conceptual poles: Marxian and the nature '
of being Black (as a fore of philosophical theory) and lead to one strong
point: the need to develop national languages.

Objectively presented and well-documented, these accounts make it possible
to dig out the main issues as well as the criticisms fornulated by the
author based on his own choices.

Providing long excerpts froe the works of philosophers such as Hountoudji.
Hertien Towa, Tidiani Serpos. Alasaane Ndaw. and of precursors such as
Cabral, Shaykh Ants Diop. Mahjmout Diop. of mathematicians such as Souley-
mane Niang and intellectuals fro- the Diaspora such as Aime Cesaire and
Carlos Moore, the work of Amady Dieng gives one an idea of the trends of
thought that drive the African universities in their aspiration to forge
conceptual tools for analyzing the dense reality of the African peoples
facing an organised world.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

11,666 6
cso: “00
FOR omcm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

MOTORIZATION OF AFRICA, POPULATION STATISTICS REPORTED

Peril W TROPICAUX BI mtmms in French 16 Feb 79 pp 398-600

[Text] Fran 1972 to 1977 the rete of increase of Atricen populetion end
of the nude:- o! eutonohilee wee ee follows:

1) including South Africa

PopmttonQ0000000.0.00.00000900000000000+320‘ ”rent
Nuﬂer of eutonobilee....................+33.3 percent
(or which pereonelcere were +31.8 percent. co-erciel N0 percent).

2) without South Africe

PopuuttonOOOCIO...DO00.000.00.00...IOOOO+33029 ”:cut
“do: of .utombiluooeeeeoeeoeoeeeeeeee+37e9 9.:cut
(of which pereonel cere were +£53.29 percent. conerciel “0 percent).

These figuree ehow e perceptible link between populetion increeee end the
amber of eutonohilee.

During the eene period. the rete of. notorieetion evolved in the following
feehion: '

1) including South Africa

Pereonel cere............................-6.31 percent
cmtct“ c.r.eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeee+1e30 Pucut

2) without South Africe

Pereonel cere............................mchenged
Co-erciel cere..........................+5.16 percent

South Africe ie not reeponeible for the increeeed nuﬂer of cere in
Africento the contrery. Thie increeee ie due lergely to en increeee in
co-erciel vehiclee. ‘l'he develoth of notorizetion in Africe 1e thue

e type of induetriel develop-eat end not. ee populer nyth vould heve it.
e "coneuner" develop-lent.

7
FOR OFFICIAI: US! ONLY
‘ In 12 countriee there are more than 100,000 vehicles.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“the rate of notorization renaine much under that noted in developed coun-
triee (nore than 600 vehicles for every 1,000 inhabitants of the 0.8.).
Hith a total of 7.228.668 vehicles in 1977 (10,126,220 without South Africa)
the African continent as a whole had a rate of notorization of 15.36
vehiclee per 1.000 inhabitants (8.94 vithout South Africa). It is true
that diverse conditione prevail in the various countries.

or theee 12 coun-
tries. eight have a rate of notorieation nuch greater then the African
everage as conpared to A whoee rate ie nuch lover. South Africe'e share
in the total fleet continuee to decrease as it now has no nora then 43.5
percent re cenpared to 66 percent in 1972 and nore then 50 percent a dozen
yeare age.

Grouping the number of automobiles by principal countries (The rate of
notorization per 1.000 inhabitants in parentheeie):

South Africa....oo....................3.162.§28 (118022)
"183:1.eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeee 633,722( 7037)
Algeria............................... 502.500 ( 30.02)
Horocco......-........................ 380.771 (20.69)

Libya.................................

Kenya............._....................
Zaire
Tmieia...............................
Ivory Coaet...........................
z“1.00000000000000000800.0.8.0000...

Ghana

'eeeeeeeeeeeeeee

315.169 (120.7‘)
284.588 ( 7.3.)
163,110 ( 10.7 )
156,096 ( 5.9k)
155.566 ( 26.55)
146,663 ( 20.36)
139.241 ( 26.52)
100.216 ( 9.68)

Grouping car fleete by geographic zonee gives the following results. in
decreasing order:

South African”......................3.162.428
mar.b0000000000000000000900000080.801.038.817

English speaking Heat Africa........ .. 802.908
Libya-Bsypt....o.i.................... 598,757
Englieh epeeking Beet Africe

including Zadia 1.36.222
French speaking Heat Africa. .... ...... 369.669
French epeelting Central Africa.

Zeire. Burundi and Ruenda........... 368.586
Southern urica not including

south “r1“.OIOQCOOOOIIOOOOOIOCOOOO 176.256
Indian 0cean.......................... 170.179
Theaorn of Africe.................... 61.993

Other intermediate groupings can be made without particular significance.
Nevertheleee. it ie not vithout intereet to note that in 1977 in Southern
Africa. including Rhodesia, there were 3.5 million vehicles. in Berth

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Africe 1.6 eillion vehicles. in both English end French speeking ﬂeet
Africe there were shout 1.2 sillion vehicles end in the rest of Africs
ehout 1 eillion.

Pros the end of 1976 to the end of 1977. the nest eerked characteristic.
of the evolution of the Africen eutonohile eerket hes been the incursion
of Jepsnese eenufecturere into esrltets treditionslly {evorehle to Buropesn
producers. To this edvsnce cen be edded the recovery of French nenufsc-
turers whose cowstitiveness es such on the technicsl level es on the
eerketing level. hes been reeerksble.

Our etudy covers the stetisticel yeer 1977 rether then 1978 whose figures
ere not yet s11 in. without getting into predictions. it cen still be
cieined thst these cherecteristics of 1977 will not he euch chenged during
the pest yeer. es will no doubt be confined in our next report.

For both short end long tern. however, s new nerket picture is energing.
e picture which will be determined by the following elenents:

Ae e sort of responee to the Jepsnsse offeneive. technology trensfers to
Africa fron Europe. notehly those concerning setting up einifectoriee
for seedling. or pertiel nsnufecturing. could be intensified in the
toning yeers. These trensfers ere generslly eccoqenied by msuree to
protect the nerket of inplentetion. During the sens ties the level of
production below which coepetitiveness is shridged is rising end nelting
it ever sore difficult for locel unite to schieve eutonoey.

The slowly growing intereet in Africe of nnufecturers not now in the
eerket will eventuelly ceuse prohlees for Europeen end Jspeneee nonu-
fecturers.

The incrsesingly nerked differentistion of Africe'e two principel types
of politicsl regins es well es the etrstegic destehilitetion of hue
sections of the continent will not be without consequences for the Af-
ricen eutonohile urket.

In the sens wey. continued coexistence of opposing econoeic end politicel
principlee within the use region or regionsl grouping. lesde to e View
of the Africen eutonobile eerket thst should telte into scouunt my sis-
nents et the sens tine, one not excluding enother. An entrees diversity
in the nerket could unfold. es touch on the quelitetive level so on the
quentitetive level.

9
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

 

 

«as 36 8n.3~
“a.“ o~.o -~.nno
co.” ao.n o~a.-
n~.a an.n ooh.»
~o.o on.~ ~n~.~«
oo.o nc.n o-.oo~
Ho.c~ on." con.~o
o..cu no.0 ou~.nou
nn.u~ an.o non.oo
-.u~ no.3 Haa.wn
nu.~u we.“ o-.o
~o.nu ac.o oou.o~
«min 3.5 2&3
on.o~ nu.~u noo.oc~
«0.9“ sn.¢~ -~.onn
nu.n~ mn.c~ c-.nn
~n.o~ n~.~n ~o~.on~
nn.o~ Ho.o~ oem.nna
n~.a~ -.~ enn.-
~o.on nm.o~ oon.«om
o~.nn n~.~« woo.on
9.3 8.5 28.3
oo.no n.ao coo.n
Ho.oa «n.an u.n.u
-.n~« aa.no one.~ou.n
on.oau non aoa..~n
un.e- n.9nn n»o.oo
annoy mmmmmmmn noupu
008E

.ullummmmmmummWIl.

coo.” nun

gonouau> no non-s:

ano.~u a~o.oo

~ «-.-~

~ ono.a~

p ooo.~

p nun.n

N oon.ne

p oou.-
o~o.o «oe.no

p «no.~n

~ ooe.n~

~ nﬁJ

w nun.o~
n~o.n o.n.o
aoq.n one.me
-a.o oo~.o~«
So; 20.2
nu~.~ «on.~c
noe.n noe.oe
onw o-.n«

p coo.oo~
ono.~ “an."

s coo.e~

~ “no

n ohn.~
~oo.~s o-.~c¢
can." non.on
nuo on».a~
.635

 

 

n~o.no~
oao.oon
oeo.nn
oo~.~
oeo.oa
enq.on
eon.oq
ma~.«o
ooo.un
-o.n~
«no.e
nuo.on
~o~.«~
nwu.~a
one..ou
onn.o~
Noo.oo
o.o.nou
~uc.¢
ooo.nnn
~uo.o~
oom.o«
avo.~
Noe.o
oe~.eo~.~

onNJNN
Snﬁo

non!— ugnou no 3:533 0.31.3

aoa.an
nao.na
ooc.o
oon
onn.~
onn.o~
o«~.o.
ne~.na
“an.“
onu.n
own
o-.n
cao.~
can."
oo<.o~
vac.”
on~.n
unn.n
duo
nnu.¢u
ona
can

an

ac”
an~.o~

«SJ
nan

3A0? 33. ouclbuum 3
Huang
03.308»:- uo neg:

guanou

 

058

3.83..
gauge:
son-«n;
ouch

SIG

neona<

nun-u
noon-loo
283 9:0 mm

gauu< 590m
Chou.-
63.5.8

can hogan an «0 av 4.033.338 no .330 9:33.58. 8" 332500 33.64
«on: no noun-uncuo: 2F

10

M OHICIAI. US! ONLY
FOR ONICIM. US! ONLY

36 «3.0 80.33 p 0863 08.8 8063 can .328
no 0335.8 31—8.—

8" 8“ 89.8 ~ 89.3 899. no 22 .58
3n «8 9.6.31.3 03.8 "2.2."... 2368.8 8%? 22 $9.38 3...
non 8n 8228.2 98...... 8°68." 8o.o8.= 8a..“ 2.: .83.:
«3 Sn 98.2....6 a 98.03; o8.3~.n 8a.: :3 .5833

an «86362 ~. 80.818 «3.835 96.3“ 22 .838 .338

no
Illllll'l
Snug on» no 3»!— uoauo Jug 683g

3.” ha. 80 . moo .u n 08 .ONQ can .sao; Ono .aun 3::
snow 0:05»; Manon.
3.3 Nada 086cc.“ ~ m8.hmn.¢ onhgnoﬁ Gunfnnn an:

Even Bail #1009
ﬂ
«ho.— ucgooa an 8,335.3

   

8o 8 So man u 3o 3 a «8 one 3:5
5:8 «92.33 33.

and" 9.3 .362; Soﬁa” ~3.o-.~ 03.8.... . «3.3. 8.3!
53m 5:. 38
SA 86 322 sad «8:: 2a.: “3.8 .2923
BA 8." R»; nu oan 8a.... SN... «3.5...
and on." 3%: Sn 98... 9.22 9.9.... a:
84 an.” 31% H3 :86 9.0.... can... .36
3.~ 3... an}: ~ 0&6 8.} 8m.» :32:
86 3.” So; k and... 3%. 8."; 3.118
3.... on." 2...: u 3»; 8a.... 8%... 8un
96 9..” maﬁa ~. 3%: §.o 8N.» 32> use...
96 34 3‘8 u Sui" «8.2 98.2 81.»
2..” “8.“ «3.3 nun ~86 313 SN.“ «.63..
R... an." cons... 96; 33.8 n85" 8.12 .33..
8.. awn n3.n~ «on ~34.— Soéu on»... 53..
8.... a.~ “8.: 93.. 03.8 n93." 28.3 353d
36 8.. 3a.? 8.3 “8.3 ”SJ... o8.“ noon-no.5.
86 aa «862 Suﬁ «3.3 :13 Rain 83
2.0 Rd 3......“ ~. «3.» 58.2 23” 3:8
8.. noé «8.2 mm... 8o.~ ~86 one.“ 3.33.5.
3.5 8.... «2.2 p nan... Sui «3.4 825 :82! 1.350

Rant Moron: at c1... Pads, 1979

COPYRIGHT :

FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

(.500 -

8860
630 2
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Im-AMOAN muss

BRIEFS

W's mean or Mink-Tanzanian President Julius ﬂyrere's ”pet peeve“
is General Ja'i‘ar ”may”, 0A0 president, and not Eden KodJe, the secretary
general. Nyerere apparently suspects Nwayri or conmsing his 0A0 iunctions,
vhich should prlosxpt his to be strictly impartial, vith his status as chief of
state of Sudan that maintains cordial relations with Idi Anin Deb's Uganu.
[Text] [Paris mm: AIRIQUE in hench 21 hr 79 p 30] 809‘]

P0881818 ZAIRB INVASION mu ANGOLA-4t is not out of the question ibr Zaire
to be once again invaded tron Angola despite the detente which Presidents
hbbutu and Note are parading. ms is the opinion of a few of NA‘N's [North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation] experts. The incessant acts or sabotage car-
ried out by um». rebels have prevented the reopening of the Bsnguela rail-
road (a condition imposed by Angola to prevent attacks against Zaire). In
addition, a resurgence of the am [Angolan National liberation Front] torces' -
military activities in northern Angola could provide W with a pretext
for supportim a nev incursion into Sheba. [Text] [Paris m APRIQUE in

French 21 m- 79 p 301 809'»

can: M00

12
m ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I188 ONLY

COMO

SITUATION ON m 01' MRI) POT commas NUI'ED
Paris mm: UNIQUE in French 21 hr 79 pp h3-h5
[Article by Joe-Blaiss Alina: "For Whom Does the Bell mom"!

[Text] Planned for several years, the third extraordinary congress of the
PCT [Congolese Labor Party] is to open in Brazzaville on 26 March. Provided
that between now and then unexpected events do not cause its defensnt for
the nth tine. Didn't M Marien N'Gouabi decide to convoke the PCT's suprele
authority a few months before his death? His mysterious assassination on

18 krch 1977 led to the shelving of the party's activities. It was said
that the late president intended to proceed with a purge of the [party]

apparatus .
Reopening the Case

If it is atfiraed today in the Congolese capital that the PC‘r's casing assises
"will inortalise Ihrien R’Oouehi forever," it is added Just as forcemlly
that the courses will be "placed under the emblem of ideological clarifica-
tion." It is certain that the ghost of the former chief of the Congolese
state will continue to hover over the work of the delegates to the congress.
The congress will further-ore probably demand the reopening of the case of
Marien N'Gouabi's assasins. In the course of several usetims held recently
in different towns of the Congo, duands from demnstrators have already
pointed in that direction.

'lhere has Been no Final Decision

Coaing from Nairobi where he represented his country at the council of unini-
sters of the 0m, Theophile Obenga, Congolese minister of foreign affairs at
a press conference held on 2 shrch at the Congo's embassy in Paris, envisaged
this possibility not without ease hulor: ”You know," the minister-historian
declared in reply to a question, "19 years after President Kennew was
assassinated, there is still talk of reopening the case of his assassins."

While awaiting the opening of the congress, Brazzaville is at fever pitch.
lbs Congolese are wondering whether the 5 rehruary 1979 nesting of the Pcr's

13
ms omcnui use our
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

central comittee which culminated in the ousting of Gen Joachim Yhombi
Opango was the prologue of a scenario, the main portion of which will be
performed during the assizes of 26 March. Nothing in fact has been decided
with respect to the distribution of responsibilities. And the provisional
nature or the present institutions is emphasized. But power does not a
priori seem likely to slip away from the trio made up of Sassou Nguesso,
'lhysere Tchicaya and Sylvain Ooma. It is true that the lack of unity at
the country's leadership level contributed considerably to perpetuating
instability.

No Stone Left Unturned

In its last issue, L'EVEII. COMOLAIS, the opposition's newspaper, warned:
"It is not by changing presidents every 2 years, it is not by convohing
regular or extraordinary congresses of the sole party that the Congo will
emerge from its political, economic, social and cultural chaos. What the
country needs is a goverrnent of national union to conceive a new state

policy. “

'lhe present leaders may retort that the next congress will make it specif-
ically possible for the country to start out again on new bases. Alreatw
no stone has been left unturned to explain to public opinion that President
N'Gouabi's succession was an error. The national daily W‘s couentaries
reveal the damage done to thrien N'Gouabi's successors. "‘ihis parasitic
stratum, one of whose supporters led the country until 5 February 1979, was
far fras representirg continuity of President Marien N'Gouabi's work," the
paper wrote in its 2 February issue. he allusion to Joachim Yhoanbi Opsngo
was barely veiled and, again according to mm, the 5 February transfer or
power should nuke it possible for the Congo to emerge from that long lab-
yrinth in which those nostalgic for tyranny had placed them for nearly 2
years." he know that General Yhmbi acceded to power ,in lurch 1977.. .

Bhlfeasance

The point is quite naturally reached of asking questions as to the ﬁxture of
the former president. "No conflict exists between Sassou Nguesso and Mi,"
Obenga confided to us, even adding that the former chief of state was me to
go where he pleased. Col Sassou Nguesso, of course, paid houage to his
predecessor who had moreover been readmitted to the PCT's central comittee
from which he was excluded a few years ago. Some people affirm, however,

that Yhoabi Opango is under house arrest even if the official version uses
the tern to protection.

It is in any event significant to note that the daily mm drew up a strong

indictment against the former president who is reproached for a series of
acts or malfeasance ranging from enbeszling 1600 million CPA [African Financial
Calamity (Ionetary unit)! francs, a gift to the Congo from Algeria, to the
purchase of a 17 million CPA franc piece of land, to the creation on his wile
estate of a zoological park whose maintenance amounted to. . . 200,000 CPA
francs a day. ’

1h
roe 017mm use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Inevitable

The paper moreover published a photograph of the angry demonstrators who
undertook a march heading toward that estate but which a party neuter was
able to contain before they passed through the entrance gate. Assertim
that the list or unscrupulous actions was so long that it could not be

published in toto, mm noted: "He did not wait months or years before

acting mm.”

Everything is going on as though this cupoign were orchestrated for the
purpose of preparing public opinion for the inevitable. It is doubtless

no coincidence that, alongbwith the press campaign, people readily recall
today the existence of a lock list or property wrongfully acquired" which
President ll'Gouabi considered ”the most important element of the radicalis-
ing novenent.“ 8o during the coating weeks there is a risk of seeing violent
stores rage on the banks of the Congo River.

The politician's policy and the settling of accounts will not be the only
dishes appearing on the menu of this third extrsordinary PCT congress. There
is also the economic situation concerning which Mimi's editorialist painted
a particularly dark picture. "We ourselves have sinned through excessive
phraseology," the Journalist confessed. Hill the politicians take this
evidence into account? -

comm: Jeune Afrique. mm 1979

809”
can: “‘00

15
ran omcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

ETHIOPIA

IIORB, cacao HOMES' STRIBOLB 1m W3 mum!)
Paris Ala-Haw AIo-‘ARABI in Arabic 26 Jen-1 Feb 79 PP 27-29

{interview with Seyun ”use, official in charge of the Tigre Peoplee'
beraticn Front and Taha Idi, official in charge of the Orcno Libera-
tion mm. by me al-Harith; date and place not 3mg

[Text] Khartoun—The reports of the reconnaissance centers of tho Eritrean
fronts are unanimous that the waves of the Ethiopian offensive supported
by Soviet weapons and expertise have begun to vanish without achieving
their fundaaental goal of turning the Eritrean revolution into a forgotten

quantity.

The results produced by the Bthiopian counter-offensive, even though
serious and constituting a military setback for the Eritean revolution.
have further motivated the revoluticn's three factions to continue positive
negotiations to reach a basis that would guarantee the mini-u: degree of
their mity in the battlefield or in the negotiations aroan. The diplo-
antic efforts continue, despite everything, to explore a practical means
to gather Ethiopian and Sudanese representatives around a round table to
find a settloaent to solve Britroa's problem.

One of the nest inortant plans projected in this regard is s self-rule
plan for the Eritreans within the framework of s confederal unity with
Ethiopia—a plan that would secure for Ethiopia naval outlets vital for
its econouy and its national security. It has been said in this regsrd
that al-Sharif al-nindi, the Sudanese opposition leader, is engaged in

a serious mediation. supported by Arab sides that are also continuing
their exploration and aediation efforts. through direct contacts vith the
Ethiopian regilo and with the Soviet Union and Cuba.

It has also been said in this regard that achieving unity of the revolution
factions is a lust condition before turning fro: the battlefield to the
field of negotiations.

There are Arab sides that encourage the unity of the revolution factions.

16
ron orncm. use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not for the purpose of negotiations with the Ethiopian regime. but for the
purpose of exhausting this regine and of contributing toward toppling it,
cosndiering that it has turned Ethiopia into a base for the Soviet Union-
a base that poses extreme threats to the petroleun transportation routes
and a serious threat to the Ioderate regines in the area. in addition to
upsetting the balance of powers.

Though the Eritrean factions derive their basic support and weapons from
Arab aides. the absence of any Arab understanding on a united approach
touard the ‘ use constitutes the factor that prevents the revolution
factions from reaching real unity or e co-on action program forming a
framework for the politiul and national goals.

0n the basis of this, and unless fundanental Arab changes occur. there
amy be no foreseeable end to the fighting in Eritrea.

But what is the current situation in the battlefield?

The waves of the Ethiopian offensive have reached the linit. have realized
any of their goals and have led to a wave of human emigration that has
escalated the Eritrean revolution's difficulties and has begun to deprive
it of one of its iwortant sources of house and economic support. The
initial surveys indicate that the nubar of refugees displaced by the

silitsry operations ranges from 200,000 to 600,000 people, most of them
moving to Somalia and Sudan.

But there are positive aspects that have begun to make up for these negative
aspects. The conditions of the Ethiopian forces have moved from the phase
of deployment and concentration in the strategic points to the phase of
dispersion and of being strung out. especially since some of these forces
have regained a number of Eritrean towns. This increases the burdens of
these forces and exposes their flanks constantly and more extensively to
the attacks of the revolution factions that still control many of the
co-unicetion links. Reorpnisation of the revolution forces vill make

it possible to re-iwose a new blockade on the Ethiopian Am in the towns
that it has regained and to hit its co-unicetion lines in a long-drawnout
war of attrition about which the Soviet aid may not be able to do such.

There is another positive aspect represented in interesting domestic devel-
opnents in Ethiopia itself. Escut reports have indicated that mobilisa-
tion of the major part of the Ethiopian forces for the battle of regaining
the [Eritrean] towns has diminished the grip of the army on the provinces
demanding self-rule, and has encouraged two local arud revolutions to
spread and to pose a threat to the Ethiopian Army's rear lines and, con-
sequently, to pose a threat to the Dirge (The Ethiopian Revolutionary
Council). Horeover, this mobilisation has encouraged the Ogeden inhab-
itants to rebel against the Ethiopian occupation.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The two Ethiopian arned revolutiona that have benefited free the Ethiopian
Arny' a predicanent in Eritrea are alnoat unknown to the outeide world.
They are the revolutiona of the Tigre people and the Drone people. who
find eupport fron the Ethiopian Denocratic Union Organization. which hae
carried area to topple Hangietu Marian'a ragine in Ethiopia.

The Tigre Paopla‘a Liberation Front ia one of the arned ortanitationa
fighting againat the Ethiopian ragine aince the beginning of 1975. This
front ia fighting for a denocratic national ayeten that recognirea the
righta of the nationalitiee living in Ethiopia to deternine their future.
The Tigre people launched their arned revolution after the failure of
ell the political etrugglae that had reaorted to weapona previoeuly to
achieve the Tigre people'a goala of eatebliahing a democratic national
rule that would raepend to their aepiratione and neede and would eave
then free the Anharic nationality'e monopoly of power in Ethiopia.

The Tigray Province in located in northern Ethiopia. end ite capital in
Alton. It ia bordered from the north and northeeet by Eritrea, from the

south and aouthweat by the Ethiopian province of Hello. and fron the
west by Sudan.

The tigray population in nearly 5 million who apeek the Tigrinye. in ad-
dition to a nuaber of local dialecta, and to Saho. They are tied to the
Eritrean people by language, phyeical appearance, hebita and cuetona,
blood relatione and religion.

The Tigre people include both Chriatiana and Hoalena, and the origins of

a large part of than go back to the tribee that enigrated fro- the aouthern
part of the Arabian Peninsula. euch an the Sebeane and hinyaritea. The
Tigre rely on agriculture nainly, and fernara conatitute 80 percent of

the population. but they use primitive neana of cultivation. The farnere
also breed liveatock, in addition to their work in agriculture. Thia in
why hides are anong the nain goode exported by the Tigre people to the
outaide world. [Alao found are] varioua kinda of ninerala, euch ea iron.
gold, copper aulfatea, potaaeiua and unganeae. Potaaaiun wee previoualy
exploited by a 11.8. fire in cooperation with the Ethiopian govemnent.

‘ Bi'vide and Rule

The Tigre people, like all the other nationalitiea found in Ethiopia,
were aubjected to all forno of oppreaaion and exploitation by the Adura
kinga. Their property and wealth were aeired, and their hietorical
veatigea were deetroyed. Nueroue atteqta were eade to deetroy then

an an entity. The etarvatione that afflicted the Tigre people cauaed
thousanda of their nulbere to perioh. and led to large-ecale migration
to the neighboring countriea. with the eacalating Amaric oppreaeion and
peraecution of the Tigre people, the Tigre atudent covenant began ite
underground atruggle in 1972. It rained nperoue elogana calling for
inroving the eocial conditiona of the far-ere and for raining their

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

standard of living. Little by little, the student move-ant was able to
fern an underground popular organization led by the students and struggling
against the feudalist and ecclesiastic regine of the late nuperor Rails
Selassie. This organization also struggled for a denocratic national
governsent in Ethiopia that would give the Tigre people their right to
self-deternination, because the governaents ruling the Tigre were appointed
against the people‘s will. The Tigrs people's struggle intensified until
the underground organisation declared inception of the armed struggle on
18 February 1975. when the organization's first group proceeded to fight
the regine iron the countryside. The organization's nane at the ties

was the Tigre Students Hove-ant.

On that date and in the wake of a congress held by the organisation. its
new nass becane the Tigre People's Liberation Organization. It launched
its first two arsed operations on that date in Aksm. the capital, and in
the town of (Shiri) in the northern part of the country. During those

two operations. the organization was able to get hold of large quantities
of weapons after having started its arned struggle with only foru rifles.

Afterwards, the Tigre people's revolution began to strengthen its coordina-
tion with the Eritrean revolution. Before the Ethiopian peasant narch pro-
ceeded to strike the Eritrean revolution in the middle of 1976, the
Ethiopian authorities were able to recruit large numbers of the Tigre
people's farmers to take part in this march.

However, the Tigre People's Liberation Front proceeded inediately to ex-
pose the goals and dangers of the peasant larch, especially since this
match was intended to use the Tigre people for jingoistic regional
pumou.s

The crux of the front's activities at the tins was to try to persuade the
farmers to refrain fron taking part in the march. because the Ethiopian
regine's main goal behind involving the Tigrs people in the earth directed
against the Eritrean people was to entrench hostility between the two
people, thus enabling it to control the general conditions in the enirs
through the conventional principle of colonielist donination, naaely

the principle of divide and rule. Through its instigetory campaign, the
front was able to persuade large nunbers of far-era to flee with their
arms to the countryside and to refrain free taking part in the earth. The
far-ere who were convinced then Joined the front's military training
canps. These people then engaged in their husbandry while carrying eras
as nilitias under the front’s control. The front thus started to grow
and expand, and has now become one of the sajor forces affecting condi-
tions in Ethiopia.

Interview with Ssyua Hues

AL-HATAN AL-‘AMEI correspondent has conducted this interview with Seyun
Muse, the official in charge of the front's foreign relations. with the

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

sin of shedding-ore light on the tront's goals and political prograa:

[Question] You are criticized for having resorted to arms after the change
that took place in Ethiopia at the end of 197A. thus blocking the path in

the face of the Dirge (The Revolution Couand Council) to settle the issue
of the nationalities?

[Answer] We bscslas firsly convinced that the Dirgc does not represent the
"Ethiopian peoples“ nor the Tigre people. Since easuaing power. the Dirge
has resorted to area as a nasns for settling the nationalities issue.

It has been even more violent in this regard than its predecessor, Bails
Selassie. It is no longer secret that there weren't in Ethiopia socialist
parties capable of attaining power. The slogans that the Dirge raised
were for no purpose other than to deceive and mislead the Ethiopian
peoples. These slogans were raised lore conprehensively and clearly
after the United States stopped its large aid for the Dirge. thus for-sing
under those conditions the visa for the Soviet Union to enter Ethiopia.

He Deland Democratic Rule

[Question] Don't you think that under the present conditions the Dirge is
capable of reaching a desocratic solution for the nationalities issue?

[Answer] The Dirge regise is a nercenary regise that cooperates with
foreign countries to inplesant its private interests. It is e dictatorial
silitary rsgina and, therefore, cannot reach a sound desocretic solu-

tion for the nationalities issue.

[Question] Are you struggling for the Tigrsy's independence from Ethiopia?

[Answer] Our goals are clear. Hears struggling for the establish-ant
of a denocrstic national rule in all of Ethiopia that recognizes the
right of nationalities to self-determination. so that the Tigre people
say adopt a desocratic national rule in their country-a rule that will
achieve their aspirations for Justice. freedo- snd progress.

[Question] that is your position vis-a-vis the issues of Eritrea and
western Soulia?

[Answer] We support Eritrea's independence. He also support the right

of the Sonali people in the Ouden to deter-nine their future. They shou‘d
have full freedo- to join Ethiopia or to set up their independent state
in the Ogaden.

[Question] Do you coordinate with the other parties in the Ethiopian
resistance?

[Answer] Our relations with the Eritrean revolution are historical and
deep-rooted. we have also been coordinating for not a short ties with the

20
1’03 ONICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

western Soeelie Liberetion kont end with the Orono People's Liberetion
Front. He ere exerting efforts to bolster our reletions with these factions.

Revolutionary Petty end Liberetion Front

[Question] It hes been reported thet you cleshsd recently with the
Bthiopien Peoplee' Revolutionary Perty end with the Bthiopien Deeocretic
Union?

[Answer] The Revolutionery Perty does not recogniu the Tigre People's
Liberetion Front beceuee it considers us e regionel eoveeent. We ere
struggling for our rights end we refuse to recognise the Bthiopien borders
es delineated by colonielise efter World Her I! becsuse these borders did
not reflect the will end rights of the peoples. Our struggle for our
rights hes hed e negetive effect on the Bthiopien Deeocretic Union be-
cnuee this orgenisetion’s leadership represents the treditionel feces
eeong the Tigre. Prince (Hengiehe), for exswle. wss ruler of the Tigre
during Eweror Beile Seleesie's ere. Conseq. retly. he rejects the growth
of e rigre liberstion noveeent thet surpesses n." custodienship.

we Arrested 0.5. Pilot
[Question] Hhet wee your letest eilitery operetion?

[Answer] He were recently eble to erreet e 0.8. pilot end the heli-
nopter he wee flying. During the locust control ceepeigt lemche‘d by the
regine, e spreying eircreft belonging to the nest Africe Coweny lended in
Teeben eres beceuse of e sudden dsesge. The front's rewolutioneriee sur-
rounded it ee e preceution. shortly efterwerds. e helicopter of

the Ethiopian Air Force, which cent to help the first sircreft, lended.
He took control of the two eircreft, which were cerrying three Bthiopien
engineers end e 0.5. pilot. A week leter. we releesed the Bthiopiens end
the spreying eircreft end kept the 11.3. pilot, nened George (Croyce).
under erreet. lie is 36 yeers old end we heve found out thst he fought in
Vietnee for 2 yeere.

Isreeli end South Koreen Role

[Question] Does this eeen, in your opinion, the: the United Stetes is
still edwencing eid to the Bthiopisn regiee?

[Answer] Our inforeetion confirms thet South Koren end Iereel ere still
edwencing eid to the Dirge. This would not be done without the epprovel
of the United Stetes. Moreover, the United Stetes itself supplied the
Dirge in the middle of lest yeer with military equip-eat velued et 30
eillion dollers. including spere perts for the P-S eircreft end for
tents. We view this 0.8. eid in the sees wey thet we view the Soviet
eid to the Dirge regiee. He consider it eid in the interest of the
nilitery clique end egeinst the interests of the Bthiopien peoples.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe onrcm use om!

[Question] um are the countries that assist you?

[Answer] we seized the weapons that we have in our possession in the
battles we weged'against the eneny. There is no country that advances
aid to us. we are now asking contacts with sons Arab countries in the
hope of getting their support. Re have great hopes that these comtriss
will respond to our request for aid. we had previously paved the way for
these contacts through visits to eons Arab capitals, where we found con-
siderable response.

This In Orono

The Ore-o tribes for-- the biggest distinctive nationality living in Ethiopia
at present. These tribes have given their nene to the areas in which they
live. The area of the Group territories secure to 600,000 square kilo-
meters. They are bordered free the south by Sonalia and Kenya, iron the

east by Afar (Djibouti at present) and the Ogaden and from the west by
Sudan.

The population of the Orou is 15 million, 90 percent of when live in
cultivating vegetables and net. The rest nuke a living fron livestock
breeding. The biggest two Orono tribes are the lorane and the (Bareretta).
In addition to these two tribes. there are several snall tribes, including
the (Addre) tribe in the east, i.a. in Harar. the Mao tribe in the west,
i.a. in Hellegga province. The Oronoe speak their own local unwritten
language. A large part of then also speak Maric, in addition to

Arabic and sons of the European languages prevailing in the neighboring
comtries. The illiteracy rate along the Drones reaches 85 percent.
Hoelens constitute 75 percent of the Oroeoe, but few of then know Arabic.
Alnost 22 percent of the Oronoe are Chriuians, and the rest are pagans.

The Anhara were able to occupy the Oracle in successive periods which
started in 1877 and ended in 1933. Before the Adueric occupation, the
Ore-o territories were divided into provinceeruled by sultans, and their
political system was very einilar to the ripublicanjypten. contrary to
the nonarchic systea established in Ethiopia. Every province elected its
sultan. and the eultons then net in the fern of a general assembly

which 4n turn elected the president of the Ore-es. This system was
csllec the (Cede) systen,- and the president's election often took place
in (Hedslawe) in Bale Province. '

The Anhara were able to occupy the Orono territory during the last quarter
of the 19th centruy and the first half of the 20th century.

However, the Group people did not sun-it to the Aineric occupation, and
started to fight~this occupation fron the outset, and are still fighting
to regain the unity and independence of their territories. In an inter
view with Ab-IlATAR AL-‘AIABI, Tahe Idi. the official in charge of the

Orono Liberation Front which leads the Oro-o people's struggle, said in
this regard:

22
170! OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
IO! OIPICIAI. 093 OBLY

Beginning of Uprieing

Our people heve veged nuneroue etrugglee eince 1873 egeinet the Bthiopien
end Buropeen occupetion thet hee colonized our country.

in 1928. the vell-hnovn end nejor uprieing took piece in the province of
Hello. To euppreee thie uprieing. the Anhere eought the help of the
britieh Air Iorce preeent in one of the beeee in Aden et the tine. Riniler
uprieinge took piece in verioue perte of the Orono territoriee in 1962.

end the eene nethode need to euppreee the hello uprieing were need to
euppreee theee uprieinge eleo.

In 1936, the Orono people living in the veet were eble to net up their
etete in the provincee of Hellegge. Ji-e end lleo. the Leegue of Netione
wee eeked to recognize thie etete et the tine. The neeeege denending thie
recognition in preeent in the Iritieh Foreign Office nov.

In 1961 end efter the defeet of the lteliene in Bthiopie end Britree end
the victory of the elliee. the Orono people in llerer end in Addie Abebe
eeked the britieh government to give then independence end not to link
then to the eccleeieeticel regime of Bnperor lleile Seleeeie. hut lritieh
colonieliee entrenched Heile Seleeeie'e occupetion end rule over the Orono
country. It then becene evident to our people thet independence cennot
be grented through the eo-celled internetionel legitinecy, end they thue
eeberked on novenente egeinet Bthiopien colonielien. 'l'hey proceeded vith
their erned etruggle in 1960 under the leederehip of the leedere of the
rurel ereee end provinces. The erned etruggle in the countryeide wee
ecconpenied by politicel eLruggle in the citiee. eepecielly in Addie Abebe.

The politicel etruggle in the fore of mderground end open novenente wee
led at the tine by Gen Tedeeeo Birru end Lt lie-o (Miner). However.

the developeent of the politicel etruggle novenent end ite polerieetion
of breed populer neeeee nede hperor lleile Seleeeie erreet the two eiore-
nentioned leedere. After e period of detention. Beile Seleeeie executed
Lieutenent Memo by henging. Iieenvhile. Gen Tedeeee Birru wee kept under
detention.

After the Dirge took over power in 1975. Generel l'edeeec wee releeeed in
the hope thet he vould pley e role in pecifying the populer reeietence thet
hed geined etrength et the tine in lele eren. liovever. the Dirge felt

thet Tedeeee wee pleying e role euinet it. end eo the gencrel vee
eeeeeeineted.

leeue In One of Independence

when their etrugglee experienced nuneroue eetbeclte on e reeult of lieile
Seleeeie'e eqloyeent of Britieh end lereeli expertiee to wipe out their
reeietence novenent. the Green people eterted underground ectivity in
1971 under the one of the Orono Yeople'e Liberetion Iront. Thie ectivity

23
POI. ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR Ol’PlCIAl. USE ONLY

resulted in again touching off the arned struggle in the area of (Shcrsher).
located in llarar Province. in 1973. However. the popular soveaent that
started at the tile throughout Ethiopia to overthrow hails Selassie led.

as is well-known. to the arsv's ssisure of power under the slogans .hat

had been raised by the popular nova-ant.

The first step that the Ethiopian Military Council adopted at the tile
was to issue its well-known so-called agrarian raforn law. As a result
of these changes. the organisation [presuaably Oroso Front] was forced to
reconsider its strategy so as to expose the real intentions of the new
regina. Shortly afterwards. it becane evident to the organisation that
the Dirge'a slogans and resulutions were nothing but an act to isolate
the organization and the other liberation sovenents free the nasses.

The popular organisations then held a general congress to decide to con-
tinue the arsed struggle for the unity and independence of the Oroao
territories. The new start case in October 1976 on tho basis of a clear
progran considering the issue not an issue of land distribution but an
issue of the Orono's independence and of the right of the nationalities

to self-dctsrnination. In that period and until the beginning of 1976. our
work concentrated on political instigation and on exposing the Dirge's
misleading slogans. The front'a second congress was held at the beginning
of 1976. and it was decided in this congress to entrench the 197‘ progran.
It was also decided to begin the arsed struggle side by side with the
political action. Our military operations that started at the tine have
continued until the present. and are intensifying clearly day after day.

Our Opinion of Dirge Regine

[Question] You have not given the Dirge rsgine a chance to seize sure of
its intentions regarding a solution to the nationalities issue?

[Answer] Us gave the regime nunsrous chances, until we becane certain
that Hails Selassis's regine has been replaced by another regine whose
colonialist concepts are not different iron the preceding regine's. The
fundauental issue that toppled hails Selassie's regiss was the nationalities
issue. The actions of the new nilitary regi-e have cone to underline its
inability to solve this problen. 0n the contrary, it has becone certain
to the various nationalities that the Dirge regine‘s dictatorial actions
are worse than Bails Selassie's regise. This fact has batons well-known
to the entire world. when we struggled in the past, Bails Selassie’s
regine would take us to prisons, then try us and issue its death sentences.
The new silitsry regime, especially hengistu's regitae, kills without any
trial. The socialist slogans raised by the Dirge are nothing but a

cover for the Soviets, and are only intended to confuse world public
opinion and to get Soviet support to inleosnt the regile's expansionist
policies at the expense of the legitinste rights of the nationalities.

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Policy of Gaining Tina

[Question] Hengistu'a region is urging the nationalities to reach agree-
meat on the basis of a denocratic national oystea that recognises the
nationalities' right to self-determination within the franework of
Ethiopia. "hat is your position?

[Answer] hengiatu'o aia behind this call is to mislead public opinion

so as to gain tins and inpleaont his policy, as I have already pointed
out. we are certain, and this is node obvious by the Dirgo's policy. that
the Dirge cannot settle the nationalitioa issue in Ethiopia on the basis
of the principle of the right to self-deteraination. Even if this is
done, we have historical rights which we cannot concede. The Group
people. and not tho Dirge. aro tho ones to dotoruine their future and
destiny. In any case. we will not abandon full independence.

[Queetion] In light of tho recent develop-onto in Ethiopia and in tho
area in the past 2 years. especially the devolopaonta that have node the
Soviet Union a major force in Ethiopia. don't you fear that you will fall
into tho axis hostile to tho Soviet Union?

[Answer] First. the Soviet Union in supporting our enemy with all kinds
of heavy weapons. tanks and aircraft. Host of tho experts-end technicians
in Ethiopia oro Rmaians and Cubans. The Cubans have ailitary bases

in the ﬂare-sis area in ﬂour Province. in Shoshaaani in Arusi Province
and in Addis Ababa.

In light of this, do you expect us to heap praise on the Soviet Union
just because it raises socialist slogans. The Soviet Union has turned
into a najor force hostile to our people and to their legitiaate struggle.
The Soviet Union is supporting a colonialiet region that has usurped our
people's rights. we will fight this support the seas way we are fighting
the Ethiopian regime itself.

As for our being or not being afraid to fall into the traps of the forces
hostile to the Soviet Union. this is a clear issue insofar as we are con-
cerned. Our position toward world inerielisn is clear. This iqerialisa.
like colonialis. and racial, supports the Ethiopian ragile, which has
usurped our rights. Our position. which rejects Soviet intervention.

is the seas position that rejects the inerialist policy in the area and
in the world.

[Question] Do you believe that the Group have the coaponente for estab-
lishing an independent state?

[Answer] Certainly. The Ethiopian econoay is built on the econon of
our country. In addition to the wealth in coffee produced by our lands.
there are vast mineral resources and fertile cultivable lands. Us also
have a people whose relations with their neighbors in Soulia. Djibouti.
Britres and Kony are worn.

25
ron onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY

We Support Britrea‘e Independence

[Question] [that is your position towsrd the Britrean issue?

[Answer] We support the full independence of Britree.

[Question] And whet is your position toward the western Soeelie issue?
[Answer] we support the Ogeden people's right to aelf-deter-inetion.
[Question] 0n when do you rely for arnaennt end supplies?

[Answer] Re depend fundeeentally on ourselves and on what aid our
people offer us.

[Question] Hhet are your foreign relations?

[Answer] Re have firm relations with the liberation orsenisations in the
area. eepacielly with the Britreen end Soneli liberetion fronts.

[Question] It is seid thet your relations with the Ethiopisn Peoplee'
Revolutionery Perty and with the Bthiopien Denotrstic Union ere bad?

[Answer] Correct. The Ethiopian Peoplee' Revolutionary Perty does not
recognise Oroeo'e or Britree's independence. This party's conflict with
the resins is a conflict for power. The Ethiopian Deeocretic Union's
position is not euch different. despite the big difference in the policy
of the two orsenisetione.

we have Fond Areb Smothy

[Question] Do you have relations with the Arab world?

[Answer] He heve found greet emathy from nun-w- ent :ountriee. end
we have received great encourepeeent froe these countries end froe aoee
African countries. But so far, these countries heve not advenced eny eid
to us.

[Question] Can we know the approxinete nunher of your fighting forces?

[Answer] The Green population is 15 eillion people. as you know. So you
an nske your own eetieete..

COPYRIGll‘l': 1979 AL-HATAN AL-‘AMBI

8496
080: “02

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

BRIBPS

NIL! DAMS-4n exchange for the use of novel facilities at

Heeeeve. Meet end the Dehlek Ieiende. the USSR ie to build about 20

due elm; the uppet line Nile. Thie project. intended to irriute
cropiende. rieke cutting into Egypt‘e vetet eupply. [Text] [Perie
VALBUIS Am in French 2 Apr 79 p 35]

(:80: 6‘00

27
rd: omcm. use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RBODISIA

alum

SECURITY FOR ELECTION-Jar tho alacuona. 1: 1a «tinted that Medan
Sacurity rot-co strength will «cut! 60,000 nan. a {ism-a navar baton attain“.
Hora than 7.000 In in thn 50-59 ago-brunt will be utilized for urban
pone. fox-cu. that: role will ha to procact tha balloting placan.

[33“;th [Pat-1a W “0?th 31‘ mums in French 6 Apr 79

p 89

(:80: “00

28 .
you ovrtcm. use on!
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

ZAIRB

mm'srmro sanmmmwxmmrmvm
Paris JEUIIB mucus in French 21 [hr 79 pp 107, b8
[Article by Joe-Blaine Alimaz‘ "The Great Upheaval"]

[Text] The changes President )bbutu decided upon last 6 March caused aston-
isment because of their broad scope. ihe reshuffling of the government did
in fact lead to the no less significant reshuffling of the National Security
Council and of the NPR (Revolutionary Popular lbvement, the sole party).

For many observers the outstanding fact of that "great upheaval" was the
strong comeback of Nguza liarl I Bond who in addition to recuperating the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs also made a well-noticed return to the political
bureau. That was an unheard of achievement in African political annals.

Less than 2 years ago the fate of Karl I Bond seared sealed forever and his
nature was most uncertain. Contrary to all expectations, General Mobutu has
Just released him from the dungeonsby entrusting to him once again a position
which contributed to creating his prestige.

809-: people will not fail to seem that unexpected return the pressure of
the Western countries which intervened 18 months ago in behalf of Karl I Bond

who had previously been condemned to death. But it say be imagined that a
burst of nationalism had some bearing an the decisions of the Zairian presi-

dent who if necessary gives proof of some courage.

Zaire's economic situation is hardly brilliant at this time. Some of its
Hestern partners quite simply believe that the country can no longer recover.
last 6 March a group of 'American experts reconended to the House of Represent-
. atives' subcommittee on foreign affairs that it request the Washington govern-
ment to withdraw its support of President )bbutu's regime. According to the
Americans, Zaire's foreign debt amounts to over $3 billion.

Actually, everything leads one to think that the fate of the present Zairian
regime will be decided in the course of the next few weeks. to those who
recouend dropping General lbbutu, Richard Noose, undersecretary of state for
African aft‘airs, retorts that American interests require continuing aid to

. 29
ron orucm. use our
70R OFFICXAL USE ONLY

Zaire. He nevertheless notes that the United States will go on exerting
pressure to bring about reforms in Kinshasa. The recent reshuffle nay to

a certain extent fit into this context. It was not by chance that it
occurred on the eve of the Zairian president's meeting with the am
[National Council or French Employers] as well as on that of the Washington
negotiations and the meeting of Zaire's main creditors in Brussels. General
Mobutu no doubt wished to prove his determination to put his house hack in
order. 'mis would for example explain the designation of the former governor
of the Bank of Zaire, Borossa Hembsa "homo who is considered a strict manger
as head of the uinistry of Finance.

But the 6 March reshuffle also seems to be an internal policy operation.

Karl I Bond's return is in tact accmanied by that of other "barons," such
as Sakcnbi Inongo, tamer minister or national orientation and toner gov-
ernor or Kinshasa, who after an extended Journey across a desert, is taking
charge of the MR [Youth of the Popular Movement of the Revolution]. Lyon
more spectacular seems to be the rehabilitation of mngul Diaka who has become
minister or higher and scientific education. Mmgul Disks, together with
“stems use Zeng, the new minister of territorial administration, represents

the province of Bandundu, an area traditionally hostile to General Mobutu.
This means the Zairian president paid attention to regional balance. lb such

an extent that an obserVer could state that for the first time "no region is
inadequately represented in the government.“

The Priority of Priorities

So everything is happening as though national reconciliation has become the
priority of priorities. A policy already outlined a few months ago when
other "historic leaders," such as Bomboko and Nendaka, were reintegrated
into the MPR's political bureau after being properly elected to parliament
whose tanner president, Bo-Boliho tokenga, was named prime minister. His
record as a trade unionist and his connections with international trade
union circles certainly had something to do with his promotion. It remains
that the opening up still shows its limitations for ease "historic leaders"--
Kashumra and Kenitatu, for axe-plenif they have returned to the country
they haVe still not been readmitted to the national political circuit.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique. GRUPJIA 1979

809"
cso: MOO END

30
son onrcm use ONLY