APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100020030-5
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100020030-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8285

2 3 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 11/79)

ll S.J()NNT PlﬂﬂJ<DAJWCNNS RESEJARCJi SERN/NCE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100020030-5
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro. English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the origiMl phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and aaterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was smrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanas rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or name preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parantheseo were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT [A95 AND REGIMTIOHS GWBRNING WISH” OF
MATERIALS REPRODIKII HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 88 RBSTRICTED MOPFICIAL USE ONLY.
. h No.1. larlpim’e Aeeeaeuon No.

. TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - PhYSlCAI.
SCIEﬂCBS AND TECRNOLOGY (P000 11/79)

__'
ol'ellm-Ing Omaeuuuun Nana and Adem
Joint Publicationa Raaearch Service
1000 North clebe Road ll. Camera/Gone No.
Arlington, Virginia 22201

'2. Sponaavlag Organization Nana and Menu '3. 319:3: Report a: Pound
V

Aa above

. A-matla

The report conteina intonation on aeronautics; aatronony and aatrophyeico;
atnoepharic aciencee; cheliatry; earth aciencaa and oceanography; electronics
and electrical engineering: energv converaion; uteriale; mathematical
aciencea; cybernetica. coeputera: aechanicel. induatrial. civil. and narine
engineering; nethode and equip-em; lieaile technology; navigation.
coumicationa. detectiomand counter-eaaurea. nuclear ecience and technology;

ordnance; phyaica; propulaion ané fuels; epace technology; and acientiete
and acientific organization in the phyaical eciencea.

. I" Vania and ocean! Aeelyeue. e» Daeuiﬂeea

USSR Blectronice Hiee'ile Technology
Aaroneutica Electrical Engineering Navigation end

Aetronoey Snergy Convereion Co-unicationa
Aetrophyaica Hateriale Detection and
Atnoapheric Sciencea Hathaaatice comtemaaurea
Cheniatry Rechanical Engineering Nuclear Science and
Conputere Civil Engineering technology
Cybernetica lnduatrial Engineering Ordnance

earth Sciencea Marine engineering Phyeica

Oceanography Hathoda Propuleion and Fuel:

'7‘» Hemline/Whine“ have ““1”“: . Space r.chn°1°‘y

17a- COMTI fwd/Gm 01.03.!“,07.08.09.10.11.12.13,16.l6.l7.18.19.20.21.22
"- Ava-label", Seueoeea 2|. Ne. oi Pun

for Official Uae Only. Linited 1'23
Nun-bar of Copiea Available Pro. JPRS

cea- ~vwan IIICV- W” 1’88 '03“ HAY IE REPRODUCID

     

VICM3‘ NIH-.Il
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.TPRS M8285
23 February 19 79

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

(P000 11/79)
CONTENTS PAGE.

MICE, coma-ms AND WIN TECHIOWY

Developing en thted Control System for Motor Trsnsport
(MAYA smnmwmu 81m HEAVEN!“
swomn'mmmmm, 1977) . 1

Aspects of the Developent of ASUP's

(1.x.ammo;Awmmmnznwwmmaasnmmurunuyumnm
I m mum' 19(6) 0.00.000000.00....00000000000090g 23

ommsrcs, Amt!!! AND SPACE

hesibility of Large BedioteleecOpes in 8 co Mined
(K096088161: IBSIEDO‘IMm, .1978?!I

eeeeeeeeeeeeeessssesse 38

Structure of the Submit Deposits of the Osspien Syneclise
(A. V. Yegorkin; et el.; macaw/m 030mm
10mm, "0 n, 1978) eesveeosevoeeeesneeseeeessesvcov 57

$18108

State of the Art or and Prospects for Research on Artificiel
ﬁrth Setenite user Detection and Rsnging Equipmnt
(K. Goal; 0mm momma, 610

A Study Concerning the Use of Luminescent Screens of Zns,

eds-Ag, or Ii tor the Recording of Need Inn-cred user
Radiation

(In. A. Drozhhin, et e1.; xvsnrovsxs ansxmaanrxn, Nov 78) 76
annacmrnls

E's-mm Complexes in Collective-Use Computer Systems
(3. A. Yelmhnytis; W'm WY v
WW’MSMW POL'ZWANIYA, 1978) 81
- n - [III - USSR - 23 s t ‘1' 8000)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mam (Continued) Page

Model with Analog Computers
A. s. Urnayev, S. V. Yenel'yanov; 051K”!
mmovmm an AIM nonsmst'm
W, 1978) OOOOOIOUOIIIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOIOO %

Autonated Control Systens and Adaptations _
(I. H. Bobko; Ammmamm 8mm UPRAVLEIIIA
Immam, 1W6) Ob...oIODOOIODOOODIOOOIOODO ”

Autontion of Classification Yard Operations
(Amman 0mm ammovocnnm
WSIYAMI (mm MOE). 'L'RUD!
VSESOWO MWISSIEDWATE'SKNO
ﬁgs WWW MSW, No 575,
I0000.00...IIOOOOOOIOOIODIOOOOII000.00.000.00. 97

Failure and Restoration Processes in Data Transmission
System
(v. P. Altarev, et al.; marssssv arm I
VOSSTAIOVIEII! V SIM PD, 1977) 101

Bigh-i‘enpersture nuclear Fuel
(3. s. Kotel'nokov, et 51.; wsommmmom
mmmo, 1978) 103

Optical Processing of Information
(8. B. Ourevich; OPI‘IchAYA OBRABOI'KA W311,
1978)OIOOOIOIIODOOODIOODIDUO-DOOOOOIIOOIO0.0.00.0... 1”

Spectroscopy of Gas Discharge Plans.
(0. A. Origench; smxoms GWOY
m, 19,6) OOOOOOODOOOCOUOIIIDIOIOOIOOOIOOIOI'... n5

Autmstic Control of Vibration Tests
(A. a. Oetnanov, et al.; summon:
mmm Wsmsnm 18mm, 1978) 117

Recognition of Speech Signals by Their Structural Properties
(3. v. endomvicm, et a1. ; mmmum
ammo! smmov P0 IKE smmcruaxm SVOYSNAM,
1m) 5......CC...UGO....0I.00.0.0000000000000000000 n9

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOS. commas AND AU‘IODWHON mm

mm AN Amman comm mm FOR 1010!! TRANSPORT

ﬂocco’d MAYA Avmmmvmn 318m WWI“ Ammnnmm
mm): (Auto-nod Control Syotol tor tho Kotor ‘l‘ronlport sootor of
Industry) in union 1977 oimod to prou 22 Jun 77 pp 2-6, 18-21, 37-56

(mama, m1. at contonto, introccotion ond morptc no. book
m. A. W, chctol'otvo I"l‘r-cnoport", l3.000 copioo. 112 pogoo

[rm] m. otudy u dovotod to tho «ham or ilprovins control of
col-on ocrrior tronoport coin; o brunch mtcnotod control ontou. In it
oro conoidorod ocno of tho ociontil'ic, uthocoloacol And cranniutionol
principloo for dovolopin; on A!!! tor- o ooctor of inmotry. Con-iconolo
ottontion io (mood horo on tho tooko and function o! dot. procouing
ontorpriooo. Imortont functional ouboyoto. of o brunch A80 oro ore-ind
in detail: "Oporotionnl control", "hrturo Soctor Dorolop-ont', ”fochnicol
And moronic Planing" ond "htoriolo And lqripont Supplf.

Tho book io intondod for ociontitic poroornol, A80 dooi‘noro. ominous
oconodoto and toohniccl onginooro or tho notor tromport inhotry.

contonto Pogo

Introduction 3
Choptor l. Ignoring Control of Oo-on Corrior lbtor Tnnoport

on the ionic at but. Procoooing Enterpriooo 7

l. Conn curior actor tronoport u a control objoct 7

2. Dot. procoooin; ontorpriooo — tho tochnicol bore for

inrovilu control of co-on ccrrior actor tronoport l7
Choptor 2. A Emu Antonotod Control Syotou for Cc-on Corrior

Motor ‘l‘ronoport 21.

l. Gonorol corruption: in constructing on mounted control
opto- 91.

2. Progra- ond uthonoticd oottvcro for c brunch «touted
control oyoton 37
3. Bot. mpport for o branch outcutod control systo- Id.
1.. arm for o brunch mtontod control onto: 51

1

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
- . —--_‘—-— vv- vuuo

Ghoptor 3. Sword subsyotomo or o Brooch Autontod Control

arm- 56

1. "Oporotionol. control." ouboyotom 56
2. "l'oohniool ond hommio Pumiu' suboystom 61.
3. ”futuro Sootor Dovolopmont" suboyotom 73
In ”control of llotoriolo ond nap-out amply" ouboyoton 80
Comluoion 89
Appondix 92
“bum 108

Introduction

Motor Tronsport is o wry Mortont link in tho country's unified tronspor-
totion syotom. Its toportonoo to tho notionol ooonow 1o box-no out by tho
toot thot mono thon 80 poroont of tho mum. oonvoyod by m tormo of tune--
portotion 1o oorrlod by motor tronsport.

Andysio of tho tnond town-d dovolopins tho country's noun-1:1 otnngths
shoots thot tho roto of growth in tho so)». ot ship-onto by motor tronsport
ond 1to mlo in tho country's mttonol ooonoq on moving stoodny.

Tho primiplo problomo toning tho country's tronoportotion oystom m donnod
1n "Boon Dinotiooo tor tho Dosolopmont of tho 0333 Notion]. Room to
1976-19” vdth tho gool of moro oomploto ond timothy utiohotion of tho
ooodo of tho notions]. ooonoq ond tho populotion tor tronoportotion, oooolo-
rotion of tniﬂtt chip-onto ond poooongor trovol.

It is ontioipotod thot tho {amt tumour of .11 forms of tronsport will
be 1mrouod by opproﬂmotoly 30 poroont on: tho posooncor tumour o:
oo-on condor tronsport by 23 poroont.

A snot significant” is givon horo to col-on oorrior mtor tronoport. In
portion”, thoro to o con for “on inoroooo of opprozdntoly 1.2 percent in
tho Insight tumour of ntor tron-port, pnforontiol dovolopmsnt of coupon
oorrlor motor tronoport ond oomliohmont or o 1.5 poroont inorouo in st:
{night tumour and o 28 poroont growth in tho poooongor tumour of motor

tronsport'J»

Purthor oonoontrotlon of motor transport foollitioo into lorgo-ooolo motor
tronoport ontomrlooo v1.11 bo mrthor :Iqolomontod in tho Tonth Five-You-
Plon. Contronsod Intuit ohtpmont by oo-on corrior tronoport U111 bo ox-
pondod, tho oporotiu tho o: truoko during 5 a. hour period will be in-
orooood ond thoro V111 bo o mrthor oxtonoton of intonity motor tronopoxb
“bion-

A ounuicont phco um bo ooounod to cocoon oorrior motor transport of tho
Damon Podorotion 1n woo-puma; tho polo oot by tho 25th cm Gongs-o».

1° "0ono noprovloniyo may: norodnogo Buoy-yo": am no 1976-1960
8041' auto mmctiono for Dovolopmont of tho 0338 Motion]. Boonoq in
1976-1990]. lbooov, Politisdot, 1976. p 61.

. 2
Fa! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fUK Ul‘l'lb'lﬂb Ubl‘. UNLX

The increece in the volume of chipeentc in the m Ministry of Motor
Treneport eyetee ie being echieved by new of growth in the fleet of trenc-
port equip-mt. develop-cut end technioel wequippim of the enterpriee pro-
duction beee end improve-cut of the for» end uethode of nenegeaent beeed
on the uee of counter emipnent end ”We.

Heving eveilehle oentrelieed eeteriele end finenciel reeourcee, the eector
hee the full oepebility for exteneive uee of econclic end netheeeticel
eethode end oomutere in orgenieing optim- nenegeeent end plenning of the
work of ite lubeectore including probleee of long-tore development end the
diepoeition end epeoielisetion of the fleet to confor- vith the require-onto
of the netionel econoq.

Although the indirimel eeeeuree teken up to now for inroving there or
other eepecte of the opereticn of the eyetee'e coutml equipeent here yielded
e oertein benefit. they heve been uneble to eolve ell of the problem of
clinimting the deficienciee in plenning end nenegemnt. ‘l'he uee of econo-
mic end Interiel eethode end ooqmtere for eolving locel probleee of eenege-
nent end pleming ie not eble to produce the one effect ee e oyetene

epproech to imrovim eector nenegenent.

A eyeteee eppmech to ueing eocnc-ic end nteriel eethcde end ocqutere
predeterIinee the ccqlete eolution of the problem of inroving nenegeeent
including the develop-ht of e eethodology for optim- plennim of freight
chip-ent for the netionel econow end of peeeenger treneportetion, the
development of ector treneport enterprieee end their production beee, the
iQrcveamt of the eeotor'e ecomeic eeoheniea, the production of e eore
efficient orgenicetionel etxucture for mugeunt end the technicel equipping
end ooqreheneive preperetion of the plent end pereonncl for work under A30
conditione.

Amng the new mount problem, the problem of inroving the technicel
end econoeic infer-etion eyetee hee e perticuler urgency. Even now more

then 100,000 people ere engeged in proceeeing infer-etion in the eree cf
eector nenegeeent. In the proceee they epend neerly helf of the tine on the
eiwlcat technioel operetione. are growing coqlexity end ecele of proﬁle-
tion ere caning en uninterrupted growth in the encunt of infomtion pm-
ceeced which ie neoeeeery for oer-tying out the proceee of controlling
production Ihile ct the cue tile there ie en increeee in deeende for quelity
in the inforletion end epeed in ite trunnieeion through the entire hiererchy
of eector eenegeeent.

For this reeeon it ie pointed out in "Beeic Direction for Developmnt of

the W! Netionel Boonow in 1976-1980" thet there in e need for cerrying

out further development end increeeing the efficiency of ASU'e end counter
centere end Iubeequently ccebiniu then into e etetewide eyeten for collecting
end proceeeing eccounting, plenning end nnegeecnt infomtion.

Streeeing the inortenoe of continued imrovenent of the process of control-
ling co-on oerrier treneport. uhich includee motor vehicle treneport, it
diecueeee "expending the edoption by trencport of equip-em. for mtoeetion.

3
FOR OFFICIAL use ouu
roaote control and automated control oyoteao tor ohippin'g and indootrial
procoooee".

Succosotul aecowlirhaont ot the taoko at hand roquiroo the oclution or a
mater ct booic problem: the choice of the loot etticient directiono tor
BU production and development. the oetahliohnont ot a concentration at
oomtor tacilitieo, tho detenination ot aoro otticient nothodo tor incroao-
in; tho ottectiveneea ct counter equip-out nae and the devolopnont ot
unitiod principleo and a general methodology tor planning, the work record

ct tho ooawter centers and co on.

In this comection, during tho dovolcpmont ot tho A30 tor Motor transport
ooao ct the rolationohipo ouoting between the pertonnnco ot aoounod control
taoko and the characteriotico ot technical and econonic intonation tlcwo
WP. 8‘30”“.

Analyoio ot the intonation and ot tho oquipaont and nothcdo tor procoooing
it vouch make up the otructuro ot ooctor control hao nado it poooiblo to
conclude that tho syoton tor actor transport control hae oubotantial detects.
with then not be grouped mainly tin leg and prolonged periods tor intona-
tion procaooing, divorgonco and lncoqarability ot the dittorent tone ot
intonation (plamim. accountiu. otatiotical and oo on), deterioration,
mutilation and looo of intonation in individual control unito, overloading
ot control oquipnont with ditterent intonation, parallelism in pneeooing
one and tho oaao intonation in ditterent control units. tho lack ot a
unified ton of documentation adapted to automatic data proooooing conditions,
tho lack ot etticient aoano ot aonitorim tho validity of intonation and

Inadequate corrolation ct current and tutu-e chip-ant plano with applies
and equipnont ae woll as inoutticient ﬂexibility at lounge-out have not
ponitted active reorganisation and guidance ot the work ct enterpriooo and
crganiaationo toward accoqaliohing tho goal that hao boon act with allowance
aade tor changing cirouutanceo. no result has boon til-proactive idle tino,
inefficient uoe of motor transport and an increase in the deterioration of

The indicated deficiencies conatitute an objectivo bacio tor the etticiont
use ot now planning, orgamoational and Ianago-ont nethodo in motor trans-
port baoed on the extensive nee ot nodern data acqoioition, processing,
otorage and output equip-ant. For thio roaoon, in accoqliohing the taoko
ct ignoring the transportation proceoo, whoring oervico ot the national
ecomqy and tho population thmgh treight and paosemer transportation and
mrther iqrovin; the ace of rolling stock tor notor transport, one at the
leading plaoeo 1o aaoignod to the mtcnated control oyoten being developed
within the tranowork ot the m Ministry ct Motor Transport (ASU—lbtor
Tranoport) mien encoopaoaoo all Ianagoaont lovelo.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The efficiency of ueins ooeputere in eotor treneport liee mm in the
immanent of the ehippins prooeee, reduction of unproductive idle tine

of notor vehiclee, inroveoent in their nileege end inoreeee in lebor produc-
tivity including thet of Ienegenent.

Aeoueuleted werienee in the develop-mt end operetion of mu end'oomuter
oentere in man when oerrier motor treneport ehowe thet eolvins ell of
the eontrol problem of rotor treneport within the eeope of the development
of e eingle eyetee ie preotioeny imoeeible «he to ite extreee «aplenty.
The trend thich includee developing mm for the individuel unite of e no-
tor euoh ee the oentrel eteff of the ninietry, the treneportetion eddni-
etretione end the notor vehiole repeir plente end eeeooietione ie the beet
eolution. In addition W'e nre being developed for induetriel prooeeeee
end eutoneted diepeteher oontrol eyeteee for hueee end texie (Ami-A end
ism-r). In the future they will be en integrel pert of the Stntewide
Autoneted Anton: for Dete Collection end Prooeeeing for Accounting. Fleming
end heme-lent of the hetionel Boom (ems).

Ae e reeult of the operetion of the trench entonted control eyeten, existing
fame of actor trenepor-t armament will he reguleted. efficiency in ohtein-
in; end prooeeeing different dete will be ensured. underutilited uteriel

end lobor neutron will be reveeled end the rhyth- of notor treneport opere-
tion will. be inrowd.

Thie etudy is devoted to ooneideretion of the problem of develop-ent end
operetion of e brenoh mtoaeted eontrol eyetee for oouon oerrier motor

treneport.

[haerpte]

For the peet 10-15 yeere e viseme network of couputer centere lumbering
lore then 3000 on Jenner: l. 1975 hee ell-em been deveIOped end in operetion
end oontimea to new eteedily.

It is entioipeted thet 200 oouputer oentere for the atoms republioe,
kme, ohleete end e umber of lerge oitiee will be developed within the
free-work of develop-out of the 00d: teehnioel beee end the Stete Network

of Comter centere (mm) done with epproidnetely 25,000 lultiple- end
eingle-ueer ooquter oentere for enterprieee end orgeniutione of the country's
netionel eoonow.

In the 3938 llinietry of heneport eyeten lore then two dozen multiple-deer
counting end dete proceeein; oentere ere elreedy in operetion with e pool
or oomtere metering 70 unite end 63 ooqputer feoilitiee with e pool of
lore then 6000 oemtere. [hiring the Tenth Five-fur Plen it hee egein

been pnopoeed to develop epproxiletely two dozen more multiple-deer counting
end dete prooeeein; centere end 15 counter fecilitiee, to put into open-
tion 120 oomtere end eround 10,000 keyboerd oelouletore. The eelection of
the noet edvenoed teehnicdl equipment for deto eoqmleition end proceeeing

ie entioipeted for orgenising new end ”equipping exieting coqmtor feeili-
t1..e

5
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
Por the characteristics of the "Data Processing" sector, in addition to the
meter of workers and the rate of production growth, it would be advisesble
to use such a criterion as the increase in production machinery and capital
investments which sake it possible to evaluate the sector's progress. Thus,
cccording to accounting data the average annual rumba:- of workers in data
processim enterprises in the country at the beginning of 1976 stood at

0.6 million people (in the m Ministry of lbtor Transport—around 1.500

people) .

luring the 'Dsnth Piveufoar Plan the m Ministry of Motor Transport spent
acre than 60 million rubles for capital invest-cut on the development and
adoption of mtoraated control syetsas and computers with a period for in~
vestasnt recovery of up to three years. The volume of expenditures on A30
and ooquter center develop-ant in the Tenth Pies-Year Plan is projected
to increase by alacst 1.5 tines.

It not be thasised that the avorage daily load of the counters in the
country in 1375 averaged 11 home instead of the econoaicany necessary
lh-lB hours. The average daily load of coqruters as a Me in the Ministry
of lbtor Transport in 1975 amounted to 13.9 hours and in the cm to more
than 18 hours.

2. Program and Mathematical Software for a Branch Auto-ated Control System

Until recently the tern I‘Iathelaticail. support" was used extensively for
autoaated control systems and understood to mean a collection of ntheeatical
and logical methods, proble- solving prograus and software for operating a
hardware systea.

In the literal sense the ten I‘aathe-atioal carport" does not correspond to
its own subject latter. It vould be more accurate to use the ter- “program
and natheaatical support'. In foreign practice extensive use is nde of the
terns "human" and "software". 1n. jargon word "sheleﬂd" [ pieces of
iron 7 Ihich exists in the field of designers and engineers corresponds to
the first ten. ‘Ihe second ten aeans "soft objects" and there is no mssian
equivalent. In general the translation of these tens is as "technical
equip-out" and “aethods and precedrrss for its use".

At the present Iaoaent the concepts of pregm and mathematical software one
being adopted by govern-snt standards. he first concept is defined as a
set of program for ineaenting objectives and tasks on W's and operating
the ram. hardvare system The second is defined as a set of oatheaatical
aethods, models and algoriths for solvim problems and processing data by
mans of the oomter hardware in the A50.

5. D. 6. miner-in, “Nauchno-teldmicheskiy progress 1 upravleniye" (Scienti-
fic and neering Progress and Management, momma m,

Mlprl”.

(.
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l'he inortenos of eethseetioel softwero is borne out by the eherp mm...
in expenditures for its developeeny in oomerison with the outleys for the
developnent of herdwere (teble k).

I
0

On Reuters , 70 g 50 50 1.0

W

103g 100 m I00 M 1m

me 0A3" for Kotor Trensport uses third-generetion ooqruters, unified system
electronic coqruters (Yes mm) besed tschniceny on integreted circuits.
In Isa 8100s there is e lerge eein usury, e very diversified useﬁlege of
peripherel units mich eocoqlieh the een-eschine interfece end more exten-
sive cepebilities for use then seeond-genereticn counters.

Under OASU opsreting conditions uhsn e lerge group of different production
end econquo techs of motor trensport control ere being executed, the role
end significance of progre- end letheeetioel softvero ere enceptionelly
greet. In figure 7 the coebined structure of program end nthsmtioel soft-
were of the GAS" for Motor ‘l‘rensport is shown.

Included with the gsnsrel progre- softwero is e set of progrens, descriptions
end instructions intended for eutoeeting lebor-intensive production stegee

in progrell processing end else for orgenising end monitoring the computing
process on e leohine during opsretion.

Corresponding to the functions end the progress being executed, the entire
set of progrsms which one pert of the gsnsrel progren softvere my be broken
dam into four groups: system control progrees. system processing progrens,
eurdliery progrm and rseote control. processing progreu.

System progrens ere intended to provide for the efficient functioning end
operetion of the computer itself. Sets of system progren which ellow e

shero incrseee both in leber productivity end in the productivity of the

counter systse itself heve ecqrired the designetion oporeting system.

The per-ts of systse progras which ecooeplish the ooordinetion end lost
efficient cpsretion of the oolputer systee units ere celled control progrens.
Another pert of the opsreting system incorporetss progress to essist the
progreuer in developing end deNgging new progreu. They ere celled pro-
ceesing progra-

3. A. A. Kodin, "0n the Development of ASU's for Industry end their Economic
Besie," in new i prektike oprsdeleniye effektivnosti kepitel'rwkh
vloshsniy 1 novoy tskhniki" [Methods end Prectice cf Detenining the
lffectivensss of Cepitel Invest-onto end New Teohnolog 7, lbscow,
um. 1969, p 1. . '

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nxcm. use 0““

N30
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

Icy (cont.)

3). Deacnetration teete to. Intonation retrieval cyeteae
31.. Simlatore 1.7. Inforeation and reference eye-
35. Bpeeial program-aathenatioal teae

eoftware 1.8. Algorithm for optimisation
36. Algorithm and pmblea eolving problem

aodele , 1.9. Algorithle for engineering and
37. control of preparation. for technicd problem

the vehicle repair prooeee 50. Algorithm for ecientific
38. Technical and eoom-ic plan- probleee

ning 51. Algorithm for economic prob-
39. control of chipping proceee leae
to. control of technical Iainte- 52. Applied program packagee for

name end repaire Wm operating eyetee
#1. Control of nteriale and function

equip-mt eupply 53. Applied prograa packagee for
A2. Control of capital oonetmo- branch W problem

tion Sh. Applied progran packagee for
1.3. control of eoientifio reaeearch eoientific. engineering.

and planning and deeign technical and econouc prob-

vork eae

Mo. Control of financee
A5. Control of pereonnel

ayetea progralee, by thie aeane. eeteblieh the prerequieitee for efficient
nee of the counter eyeten'e hardware but are not intended for direct date
prooeeeing of 0A8!) eubeyetea probleae.

It ehould be noted that the control program ineaent the following mnctione:
planning counting prooeeeee, providing a neana of external oontrol, organi-
sing dialog with the operator, ccntrollim mung prooeeeee, dietributing
the ooawter eyetea'e reewrcee and controlling the exchange of data between
the core and external aeoriee.

me proceeeing prograae eeccqlieh tranalation from hive level langugee to
machine languagee, packaging of program froa indium progra- mm”

written in varioue languagee, input of external data media and debugging of
progrue for ueere.

The auxiliary program are intended for checking the functioning, debugging
and neohanioal operation of the ecquter eyeteal unite. Cheeke are intended
to reveal the working capacity of individual unite and monitor-1m operatione

are for ccqreheneive checking of each ante. after the annual or animal
preventive uintenance work hae been done.

The need for different ueere mo are 0‘30 for Motor Rampart clients to

nee the cceputer neouroee eimltaneouely hee requiree aaking provieion for
the ocaputer to operate in the tin aharing mde. 1hie ooquter operating
anode per-ite ueere to have aimltaneoue acceaa to the counter mten direct-
ly fro: their on plaoee of work at a dietance from the oomter. the data

9
you orncm. use ouu
treneniseion process is oerried out by neene of telephone, tolegreph or
speciel conunioetions chennols.

The systen opereting node by new of which distent users ere linked with
the corputor by oo-rnicetions chennels is celled the reento processing node

end is upper-ted by specific progrene.

The set of progrene which provides {or the operetion of route processing
system is celled the public telecc-rnicetione sccess node. The besic
epplicetions of the public teleccuunicetions ecoeee node ero dete ecqrisi-
tion. ocnrnicetione exchanges end dete crrey processing.

Dete ecquisition end co-rnicetions exchenges do not rowire the use of
spooiel epplisd progreu end ens ecccepliehed by progru control of the con-
mnicetions.

During dete ecquisition ”note actor trenepcrt enterprises send dete to the
computer in the torn oi‘ nsseeges which ere ecumletod in the counter end
then processed. During oonmicetione eacchenges route notor trenspor-t en-
terprises roley inter-notion to the ocmter rdrich sends those co-rnioetions
to one or severel notor trensport enter-prises.

Provision is ado {or processing reference inquiries by nsens or e coo-emi-
cetione control progren end speciel progress. no interaction wested is
received by the conunicetione control progren end propered {or processing.

The processed intonetion conteined in the co-rnicetions is trensterred to
e progren {or oo-micetione control for trenonioeion to the epproprieto
notor- trenspcrt enterprise.

Progrening systens are intended to signify the work of tho progrener end
rsloese him tron the need to present probloss in uchine lenguego by the in-
put of e opoeiel higher level lenguege. ‘l'ho programing cysts. consists of
two ooeponent per-ts: the input lenguego of the progre-eing oysters end the
progren with provides the trensletion tron the input lenguego to tho nechino

lenguego .

00301., PL, mm end NW ere the priesry lenguegos for eutoneting
progreneing during tho development or progren eoftwero for tho 0580 for-
notor Trenspor-t.

The progren system for technioel nintonence is intended for debugging the
technicel operetion of the counter end other herdoero in the OASU linked
to the center. The test progrens reeks it possible to detect heliunctions
in the comater's herdwere, to identh tho locetione of eellunctions end
to lake intonation sbout tho neturo of e nelmnction eveileble to service
personnel. no progress ere designed for individuel ocwutor units end ero
besod on the esauption thet the rosult of progren oporetion with e teulty
unit will differ i’roe the result of output on e unit in good working order.
The progress opereticn consists of uninterrupted comer-inn of the renalts

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with thoee obteined on en opereting unit known to be relieble end with'
dieorepenoiee in the output roeulte in the dete print-out union indicete the
locetion of tho progree in which the dieoropency occurred. me locetion of
e Ielmnction m be determined by reeene o! thie intonation. It the defect
ie each thet tho progru ee e mi. dooe not opereto, tho eeeroh for lemme-
tione ie con-led to tho herdwero.

The monitoring operetione ere intended {or comreheneive checking of the
eyeteer'e mnctioniu etter epproprieto preventive neintenence hee been done.

The eyoten progreee which ere port of the gonerel progree ooi‘tvere ere in-
tended to eeteblidl conditicne for the noet efficient operetion of the con-
puter eyetee herdnre. Imlolenting direct dete proceuing on ectuel prob-
leae ie not one 0! their mncticne.

Direct proceeeing or the dete problem or OASU eubeyeteere ie cerried out

by neene of eo-oelled epplied progre- directed towerd eccenpliehing teeke
or e pertieuler type ouch co the teeke or the control eubey-eteer for euppliee
end equipmnt, the eubeyetee for plenning the ehipreent of freight end peeeen-
gere. engineer-1m end technicel teeke end eo on.

A eet or epplied progrele end nethode {or eolvlng ectuel problem end their
elgorithne ccnetitutee epeoiel ecrtnre for the OASU for concn cerrier no-
tor treneport. The group of progreee need for eolving e perticnler cetegory
of probleu. together with the docureentetion neceeeery tor ite cot-up end

cporeticn ie eepereted into e peckege ct epplied progrene. Applied progrere
peokegee ere proceeeed ueing en (3 Yes cpereting eyotea, ere oriented towerd
eolving e ccqeretively nerrov gmp or problem end heve coneidoreble veri-

ety. Applied progren peckegee ere erbitreril: subdivided into three groupe.

Applied progree peokegee \drich extend the oepehilitiee of the oporeting eyotere
provide for the operetion or to: "We of different oonfigureticne. Aenng
then ere peekegee relioh oer-r: out the reel-tine cpereticn c! the eyeten,
re-Ite peckege procuring, dielog onto-e end the operetion of conventionel
mltieechine eyeteee. Applied progre- peckegee for eolving ecientitio, emi-
neering end other problem provide for different ueee of dieplnye, plotter-e,
netrix proceeeing, dittoront typoe of einrletion end eo on.

Applied progren peokogoe tor OASU'e ehould include combined eyetene for
proceeeing tho dete bole. en intonation retrievel oyeten end the epecilic
eector problem.

The ace of nicroprogrere control ie e teeture of the intornel etnrcture of
the Yes coeputer. It ie beeed on the principle thet eech inetructicn, the
eulloet indivieiblo pert of the progren to the progrerrner, is interpreted
daring technicel inlernentetion in the couputer by e leicroprogree. mien ie
e eequence of reicrcooereende. mo operetione enouted by nicrcccenende ere
extrenely eilple end their rerreber ie wite eaell. Ae e rule. nicroopere-
tione ere cerried out on individrel bytee end eo, tor inetence, e Iicropro-
gre- {or adding two {lootiru point mnbere ie inturpreted in the for: of e

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICMI. USE ONLY
eeriee of eiorooperetione on bytee cowoud of the eddende.

Exteneive emerience in developing end operetin; A30“ hee ehown thet e
oomter eyetere my echieve efficiency in obteining the reenlte of dete pro-
ceeeing by ueore end the soot oleete loeding of ell W" only men the
e‘reileble reeourcee ere need by eeverel ueere et the eeee tine, thet ie with
the nee of the ehered-tiee operetin; node.

Reeote pecke‘e proceeein; ie the opereting erode for e remote prooeeeing eyetove
which ie aoet cccepteble for the trench A30 for notor- Treneport end et the
use tiee ie eufficiently eique. with thie node the an coming in from
dietent ueere' etetione ie pleced in order end proceeeed by neene of progrene
found in the lihrer-iee looeted in the extcrnel etorege Indie. ‘Ihe prooeeeing
reeulte will be treneeitted to the ueere' eteticn of the eddreeeee.

The requeet-reeponee node of counter operetion ie celled for then very
eieple probleee ere being eolved “rich require efficiency in obteining the
reeulte of the proceeeingo me infomtion-roference eyetee (813) of the

linietry eteff ie en exemle of the nee of e roqueet-reeponee node in e
brench A30.

In the future there ere plene to tree the dielo; erode of ocqruter operetion
in the 0‘30 for )btor Tron-port not only (hiring deeigniru end debugging but
eleo during the eolution of very coquiceted problem of the ow for Motor
‘l'reneport eubeyetee "Operetionel Control".

With the eutontion of production prooeee control in mtor treneport enter»
prieee end motor vehicle repeir plente. the inportent criterie of coeputer
on ere the eyetee reeponee tine end the rereber of ueere. for exemle in

motor trenepor-t control eyeteere for true (A3004) end texi (row-r) trenc-
portetion.

The progrene need in there mu ere not very comlex. The deunde reede on
the eyetee'e reeponee tile ere eueptionelly eevero end the meber of control
objecte (bueee or core end we.) ie celcrrleted in the hundrede end thcneende.
arch eyeteu in which the eyetere'e reeponee tine ie e detoninin; fector- ere
celled reel-tine operetin‘ eyeteeo.

Efficiency in dete proceeein; end the oepebility of eervicing e coneidereble
umber of ueere ere echieved are to the reletive eieplicity end the eeell
mulber- of operetin; progress.

It ehould be noted thet one of the eeye of reducing errpendituree on A5!) for-
)!otor Treneport develop-rent which ie decor-Vin; of eerioue ettention ie eten-
derdieetion of progre- eoftvero einee expeneee for developing progrenim
eide eeke up e eimifioent ehere of the overell A80 development coete.

A typicel progren coneiete of the prom mcleue, the proceduree need, the
dete deecriptione. the informetion teblee end the instruction peneetere.

12
FOR OFFICIAL L'SI. ONLY
‘l'he pregren nucleue ie mndenenteuy e prey-en containing otetenento (or
eceeeeins tho etenderd preeoduree in uee. 1n. nueleue ie presumed ee-
eordins to the mlee for prone-ling etenderrl progrene end ie included in
the litres-,7 of etenderd prone-e free: uhioh it ie reed-out with e eupor-
vieery progren.

The preeeduroe ere port of the librery of etenderd mbprogreu. [Joe of end
eeceee to euhproarene ie govemd by mlee edepted for deeigning progrene in
eethonetieel oemuter eefture.

Dete deeeriptione ere interaction ehout tho eeepeeition, etruotum end
oontonte of the err-eye being proeoeeed. In eeeerdenee with the deeeriptiene
tho progren eheeeoe end preeeeee-e e routine dete itee in line with ito
ehereetorietice.

Progren operetin; eenditione ee epplied to eetuel eituetione ere recorded in
the interaction tehlee.

Inetruetion pore-etere ere ole-ente oxternel to the prey-en. 1hey ere in-
eerted in it prior to etert-up. vein; the inetruetien perenetere, the pro-
;ree eomutee the needed inferntiou teblee end errey dooeriptiene, eoeeeeoe
the ewe end then eelvee the problem

3. Dete Support of e Breneh Autonted Centre]. Sylton

Dete eupport of e trench A80 ie underetood to seen e eet of four for Mb-

nittin; dete, deal-eat turnover, ceding eyeteee. onenieetion eethode, ete-
rege end eoniterin; of dete erme which provide on interdependent eolution
for ell eete of pmhlene ineluded in the 0‘30 for lbtor ‘l‘reneport.

Develop-em. of tho 0B0 dete heee ie e lehor-eonnwtive prooeee end invelvee
eolving the following problem: procieo definition of the problem eelved
in the 0A3". deter-inin; their oonfonity to the eyetee'e function end iden-
tifying their dete interfeee. detereininc the entry eeureee of tho dete, tho
eeene of ite tren-ieeion end the rote of preeentetion to tho Steto Comte:-
Contor, ergeniein‘ dete eeqnieition, eyeteeetiutien, etorego end retrievel,
developing e coding oyetel end lethede of fer-ileum indieee booed on e
unified eyetee for eleeeifyin‘ end ceding then. developing eethode for ergo-
nieing deemente. conetruetiu en efficient eyeten for doeueent tumevor,
eeleotin; pertieuhr typee of dete nedie end developim the otmcturo of the
dete recording eediue, orgeluein; unified nothede for eottin; up dete ewe,
determining their eeepoeition. interfoeee. eteme end retrievel in the
teeie of counter ueo end deter-min; neene of neutering the dete.

It ie euetoeery to eubdivide dete euppert into the intornel end the extomel.

In extomel dete eupport it ie neeeeeery to identify iteee by neene of lieted
nfenncee. eleeeifiere end dietioneriee of iteee aiich enev one item to be
dietin‘uiehed free enethor. vein; epprepriete unite ef neeeure-ent deeerip-
tione of the propertiee of en itee ere produced. ﬁner-ice]. dete ie

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
represented in conventionel form and en eccepteble set of words is estsblishod
for velues in text form. Date representeticn consists of the loeding of
domnts which uetisfy the requirements for their cosputer processing.

In internel dets support the conversion of externel dets repzeecntstion to
nechine fore (during dets input to the comrter) end beck to externel form
(during output frce the cosputer) occur-s.

Uning eveileble dets support- for the 0130 it is expected in the future to
develop e dets benk mich will be e centralised eutoested system for secure:-
lstion. atorsge. retrieve]. end trensmission of dets (plenning, normetive,
eccounting end reference) necesssry for calving the problems of ell the
cpereticnel sr‘bsystems of brench eutometed control systees.

Dete clessificetion end coding is en isportent pert of dete support mich
«sites it possible for eutoeeted systems to correlste the dete of the OAS”
for Motor Trensport both for higher end for lover control units end, in

eddition, esteblishes e single form for dets trenslstion to the interns].

nechine lengusgs.

All of the informetion in the R988 OASU's for Motor ‘l‘renspor-t is clessified
sccording to the following cherecteristics: rslstionship to the Stete
Counter Center, stsbility end use in control processes.

Regsrding reletionship to the Stste counter Center, dets is subdivided into
input entered from different externel sources, intensdiete cbtsined es s
result of processing in the count» end used for solving problems of e
specific subsystem or severel subsyetems end output produced by subdivisions
of the ministry steff end by republic sssooietione.

As regerds stebility, the dets is divided into ccnstent, relstively ccnstent
end vsrieble-

Hith constent dets is grouped dets urich is not chenged over e period of time
(indices of specific weight of different types of fuel end eeterisls. fec-
tcrs for converting from one set of units of meesursunt to enother, tebles

of reciprocels).

With roletivsly constent dets is clusified dets rdrich is left unchenged for
s relstively long but finite period of time sfter touch it is updeted.

with verieble dets is grouped dets whose velue is brought up to dete syctem-
sticelly.

Depending on its use in control processes ell dets is subdivided into
plenning, operetiu, scccunting, normetive end reference.

With plenning dets is included the plenning dets for e specific period on
ell cccupsticnel indices of the ministry derived from the plenning end eco-

nomic muugsmsnt of the ministry end the plenning depertments cf republic
sssocietions.

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
with opereting dete ie grouped dete which met be collected end proceeeed
with pertiouler epeed end which cherecterieee the working conditione of
einiet enheeetore over e epecitic period or time (e dey. 5 deye. 10 due,
e month end, ee e rule. errivee vie oommioetione chennele.

Acmnting informetion cherecterieee the ectuel working conditions ct lini-
etry eubeectore over e epecitic per, d or tine end ie cent by ueil in ec-
eounting for-e eetehliehed by the I: .8 Ministry of Finence, the USSR Centrel
Stetieticel Abinietretion, men Ooeplen, I583 Goebenk end othere. 1hie
infomtion ineludee dete on the execution of the plen of operetione in
motor treneport, cepitel eonetmetion. uteriele end equipment eupply, lebor
end eo on.

home developed end epproved tor occupetionel indioee or e ninietry end ita
eubeectore ere cleeeii‘ied with nor-etive dete.

Reference dete enooweeeee dete heving e reletively conetent neture: dic-
tioneriee, reference booke, oonetente end eo on. A dictionery coneiete or
conciee liete of eeperete cleeeifier itene end ie ueed {or printing the texte
on output (one. hereuncee end conetente ere referred to in eolving the
eyetee'e problem.

The developnent or the cm for Rotor Treneport hee required errenging the
ecomnic dete end coding the technioel end econoeic indicee ueed in the OASU
for lbtor ‘l'reneport.

‘l'he etmcture or e technioel end econoeic index coneiete or en index-heme
end e eubeoript.

The index-heme ie e tern (word). phreee or mlnbemoad eyebol mich cherec-
terieee the ecomeic contente end eeening of en index end mich givee it
e quelitetive definition.

The eubeoript ie the mentitetive velue of the index (e nutter) obteined ee
e reeult of oowiling the dete of reel unite or weight, neeeureeent end
comtetion. In the proceeeing operetion the index-nun ere the object or
logieel end the eutecripte of oomtim operetione. A eet or index-hence
without euteeripte ie not en index. Thee. e quelitetive end e quentitetive
velue comepond to eech technicel end ecomeic index. Soee of the queute-
tive veluee of the index chereoteriee ite beeic economic eigniticenee end

othere eqlify thie eignitioence to en extent end ere mppleeentery index-
m.e

The etructure or technicel end economic index P any be preeented w the
tori-Ale

. P d (30 Ge x)
where 8 ie the nein index-nee” of the index;

Q ie the euppleeentery index-heme of the index end
I ie the quentitetive velue of the index (the eubecript).

15
ran ontcm use our
Pom characteristic”
Volume
umber
cm

801mm inportmco

Po rcont of inlmntation

Other.

Pmcou

Shipments
otion

lemntction

Contraction

Repairs

1:11. that

001m

17.

18.
19.

20.?

21.
a.
23.
21..
25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

31-
32.

.16

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key: (oont.)

33. abject 1.8. Chemterietice of the index
3’00 MO‘W “9e Plenning

35. hemhlio eeeccietion 50. Pectuel

36. loin edeinietretion 51. Production nor:

3?. Treneportetion amount 52. Othere

38. interprieee 53. atheyeten (code)

39. Othere 51.. Dccunent

1.0. Tile 55. Imut

1.1. on 56. Output

#2. Five due 57. Internediete

1.3. '1‘»: doye 58. Layout

1.1.. Month 59. Section of the document
1.5. Querfer 60. Requieite

A6. feer 61. Infomtion item in leyout
‘07. 0th."

At the beeie of clueifioeticn of technicel end economic indicee liee e
mltidineneionel principle mich includee the ettribution of two choreoten-
ietioe to eech index: the economic end the dete proceeeing. 'lhe principle
of oleeeificeticn ie ehcun in figune 8.

The man OASU for Notor ‘l‘renepcrt ie coneidered to be e component pert of
the Stetewide Auto-eted 8yete- fcr Control of the Neticnel Booncqy (OMS).
In thie connection the OB!) for Hctor Treneport met be interoomeoted with
the enelcg eyete-e of can Oceplen, 3833 Gceplen, the 0833 Control Stetie-
tioel Ahinietretion. the mm of linietriee end depertnente of eectore of

induetry end elec with new. for treneport end territoriel treneport control
of e eeotor of induetry (BU-w).

‘l'he dete proceeeing interfece of the problem of OASU for lictor Treneport
with the cutouted eyeteee of nrioue levele of nenegelent ie eccenpliehed
by the develop-ent of e unified eyeten of clueificetion end coding of dete,
the creetion of e eterMieed eyeten of dccunmteticn end the efficient
dietributicn cf the infcmticn flov between the nenegenent levele.

The dete proceeeing interfece cf the OB!) for Motor Treneport with the higher
level control eyeten 003 ie eoooqliehed by e unified eyete- of cleoeifice-
ticn end coding through ell-union oleeeifiere of technicel end economic dete

end with e lower level eyeten euch u Bil-TU through eyeteI-wide end epeciel
cleeeifiere.

Retionel ccnetruotion end efficiency of 0‘86 operetion ie determined to e
ocneidereble extent by the internel dete support, euch co the orgeruuticn
end etructuroe of dete erreye (filee). hie ie expleined by the feot thet
lei-3e volunee of eccnceio dete regiire euiteble orgeniteticn of their date
We

17
you ontcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aoedelnicien V. H. Glushkov considers the besic systems end engineering
problem in A80 design to be e problem of optimm construction, efficient
processing end couprehensive use of the dete erreys in the oysters, since it
is precisely the dete err-eye stored end processed in the ASU mich link ell
of the system units end the problems being solv..‘ in the dete processing
plen. The orgenizetion of dete erreys is celled on to cerry out the exohengs
of dete between the externel files end the min memory. to eccomlish ef-~
fioient eccess to the dete end to correct it.

On the orgenisetion end structure of the dete err-eye depend the reliebility
end efficiency of the results produced by the system end consequently the
effectiveness of control es e mole.

All of the dete used during problem solving in the DASH is combined into
dete erreys which ere s set of dete rocoroed on specific recording nsdie
end orgenised in e strictly rsguleted order. is e rule, erreys ere similer
in their significence end function. Most often the erreys ers ooqaosed of
symbols (word blocks) «rich ers e logiceny coqlste group of sequentially

srrenged timbers or elphemmsricel chereoters which describe e perticuler
it‘s

me individuel numbers or elphenunericel chereoters entered in the record
ere the elements of the record. Owing to the limitetions of the min memory
the dete stored in the extor'nel eeeory is drevn from specified portions
known es infometicn blocks. 0n megnetic tepe (ML) one block represents one
sons end mey heve different contents. 0n punchcerds it corresponds to e
cerd end on punched tepe to one cherecter.

Proceeding from the «position end structure of the dete support end its
beeic rsquireesnts it mey be cleinsd thet the mein problem of 0A3!) dete
support is the problem of in-line processing of dete erreys, thet is repid
retrieve]. end output of the needed dete.

The tech et hend is implemented most efficiently by developing en «touted
dete benk in the brench A30 (m 0160). The eutometed dete berit should be
e self-conteined subsystem in the processing pert of the DASH end should
any out centrelised ecmmletion, storege, updeting, rstrievel end output
of em stored informetion by eutometed eeene.

Professor 8. I. Volkov understends e dete benk to be en orgenisetionel end
technicel systee which ellows storing lergs erreys of dete in strictly
systemetized order end ukes possible rendcm ecoess end output of em stored
dete in the form of individuel dete itesrs or the ccmbinetion of e set of
dete obteined by eutometed meens for output of needed informetion for ectuel
control purposes to users of very diverse designetion.

The need for developing e unified dete bees uhich provides for source dete
ectuel problees of ell the functionel subsystems of 0M for Motor Transport.
the exceptionelly lerge volume of dete subject to storegs, updeting end pro-
cessing. the limted oepebility for- storege of lerge volumes of dete in the

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

system's individuel control units, the requirement of different control
depertlsnts for ecquiring one end the sens dete, the necessity of integreting
dete processing procedures end the cspsbilities of third gsneretion con-
puters hsve predetermined the develop-mt of en eutoeetsd dete benk in_the
trench A80 for notor- ‘l‘rensport.

At the besis of further developnent of the GAS!) for Motor ‘Prensport lie
ccnceptuel consideretions which esteblish the principles of extensive inte-
gretion of individuel ”We developed previously in the sector end which
predeterune the construction of the technicel bees of dete processing en-
terprises on the besis of en eutcseted dete benk system.

In this csse dete processing enterprises will have to be collective-use
cowuter centers using mltinchine ccmuter systems. A most inst-tent con-
dition for the opsretion of en eutoneted dete benk is the fulfillment of e
msber of roquirsnmts.

The first requirement consists of registering the index once end seking
rspeeted use of it for solvirc the lead“ nulber of different problems.

After en index is entered into the systen it cen be used in ell problems of
funetionel 0A3" subsystees there it is eppliceble. Strict reguletion cf the
storege, updeting, trensuission end use of eny index nekes it possible to
elisinste duplicetion of informstion \hich occurs neturelly during locel
problem solving. In sddition. precise fulfill-cut of this rsquireunt cells
for centrelisin; previously segregeted indices in the dete benk end setis-
fyiru the needs of different control units for the required dete.

The second require-rent lies in the feet thet e minimum of source indices
lust be stored in the dete benk which cen be used to obtein by Istheneticel
neens eny required number of secondery (derived) indices unless the use is
such thet rspseted ecquisition of derived indices requires lerger expendi-
tures then their store‘s end retrievel in en eutcneted dete benk.

The third requirslsent is provision of the cepsbility of simlteneous eccsss
by severel users to the sutonsted dete benk.

Dsts in the “D's dete collection will be kept current by heving the newest
informstion eveilsble st ell tines, the degree of newness to be detenined
by the degree of its usefulness to the user.

In edditicn, there not be setisfecticn of requirements for the cepebility
of using dete fro: verious errsys in different conbinsticns, the cepebility
of recrgenising dete errsys without chenging the neintensnce progress end
the cepebility of nn-nschins interfecing. ﬁre oolplexity of developing en
amounted dete benk is responsible for its configuretion which is e series
of diverse elenents: s set of technicel end economic dete erreys, of methods
end neens for crgenisin; these srrsys, of nethods for sccunmlstins, updeting
end retrieving the dete, of forne end neens for its representeticn end e
system of speciel progre- scftlere which entcnetes the herdwero opereticn on
at. (lite.

19
ron OFFICIAL use ormr
For this rseson efficient ABD operstion in e brench A30 may be achieved when
there is the best oombinetion of structurel elements end operetion execu-
tion procedures es epplied to the eotuel roquiremsnts of the specific neture
of the problems being solved.

stenderoisetion of the documntetion which ellowe expenditures to be reduced
to the minimum for ooeposing, collecting, processing end correcting the
dots conteined in these comments is en indispensible condition for normel
operation of the DASH dete benk.

Auto-eted dete benks whose development is projected for the Tenth Five-Jar
Plen in dete processing enterprises of canon cerrier motor treneport rust
ecoomlish: repid retrievel of dete (ﬁring the solution of A80 for Hotor
Treneport problems, minimisetion of mechine time use for correcting end
updeting dets, eliminetion of dete duplication in the err-eye which consti-
tute the dete bese. preservetion of the integrity of index velues during
their use in solving different problems, e high degree of reliability in
operetion end flexibility.

Thus, the development of en eutometed dete benk for the OASU for Motor Trens-
port is one of the min urections for further development of e second-phese
OASU for col-Ion oerrier motor trensport.

lo. Herdwere for e Brench Automted control System

An OASU is besed on the use of edvenced computer equipment thich mekes it
possible to oerry out timely end high-performence dete collection, processing
end output to control depertmsnts. me eseemhlege of units which implement
the processes of dete collection, trensmission, storegs end displey is the
herdwere systee (m).

At present, third generetion Yes M's (Yes BUM-1033) heve come to repleoe
the second gensretion corputsrs (Urn-MD) used in the ow.

The defining principle mich cherecterises Yes M's is e microelement com-
ponent bese, integreted circuits much meke it possible to echieve higher
operetionel end technicel-eoonomic indices in coeperison with first gen're-
tion (tubs-type) end second generetiOn (trensistorised) oomters.

Yes EV)! models ere progrem-coqaetibls. This msens thet e progrem designed
toeoooquishenectuel teskwberunonervmodelofthe system.

On the besis of progrem ooupetibility, e unified progrening system is being
developed mich provides for the control of ell herdwero, for entometion of
progre-ing end for eccumletion of s librery of problem-oriented progrem

”cm. s

Perellel processing is the beeic opereting mode of Is: “We in which soverel
units of e single esohine or severel interfecing mechines es well so e con-
sidereble mmber of territorielly remote users end subscribers operete

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

simultaneously with problems releted to one degree or enother. ..
Since the Unified System of Electronic Counters [Yes BVMO] includes high-
performence comters end the edopted logic structure tekes into eccount

the requirements for construction or lerge collective-use counter systems,
e Yes BVM setiefies the requiremnte of the brench A30 for Motor Trenspor-t
both from the point or view of hnrdwere provision end else from the point of
view of efficient service to renote users over e'widespreed eree.

The list of externel end peripherel Yes BVM units includes 39 types of exter-
nel estuaries, 32 types or 1/0 units, 12 types or units for direct commice-
tion between the operetor end counter, u. types of route dete processing
units end 13 types or dete preperetion units.

Bgripment to interfece the couputer with comnicetions chennels is needed
to inclement the principles incorporeted in the OASU for Motor Trensport end
cherecterietic of “30's es e potentiel system for collective-use ct ccepu-
ters. 1he cepebility ct trensnission both free the coeputer end to the com-
puter on cousinicetions chennels with severel mute users working with the
coeputer simlteneously is the ides of remote processing. Remote processing
is e method or dete control in Mob the dete processing system, the col-
lection or hsrduere end sottwnre for processing, uses the recilities of
comnicetions equipment.

In the future there no plens to use e complete set of date processing equip-
ment oriented towerd collective counter use by remote users in the OASU

for Motor Trensport.

In view or the considereble territoriel isoletion of the control objects
which ere the sources for origineting informetion in the DASH for Motor
Trensport end the need for centrelised processing of this intonation in

the Mein counter Center for the seke of eccoeplishing opereticn control
functions by the ste“ of the MR Ministry of Motor Trensport, the subject
of dete collection end trmeission on comnicetions chennels with its
reliebility meintnined is essuming e perticuler eignificence.

It is plnnned to equip ell mltiple-user dete processing and comting
centers of the A30 for lbtor Trensport with third generetion coeputers

which will be interconnected es well es linked with the Mein Counter Center
by con-miceticns chennele.

Such e mltimechine system will operete through the use of Yes SVM dete
trensmieeion equipment (APO).

Initiel dete processing consists of collecting end trensferring dete from

s source document to e dete recording device, thet is registering e disorb
dered dete errey in e suiteble recording medium. errenging the received dete
eccording to defined symbols end executing logical end metheueticel operetions
on the crested dete arr-eye.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the future there ere plene to uee the 390-9000 eutoneted dete preperetion
eyetcn uhich ie intended for eetting up eource dete on mnetic tepe end hee
the cepebility ci‘ eacecutim the operetione of eorting, merging. editing end
checking dete tor velidity.

‘lhe arc-9000 eyeten coneiete of e niniccqwter with memories on tic
t e end dieke, e diepetcher terninel, eeverel opcretor terninele Eup to
32 end eenreJ. edditionel unite.

‘l'he sen-9000 eyeteu ie oonetructed on the beeie or e third generetion computer,
the ANT $6000. end includee 8 to 32 keyboerd tenninele for dete input.

The eyeten pet-mite e eherp increeee in productivity end reliebility or dete
eet-up on recording nedie end eliminetee fro- the production proceee tredi-
tionel dete preperetion unite for punchcerde end punched tepe. Hegnetic

tepe ie the principel recordim Iediun.

The opereting functione of the 90-9000 ere ee follow. Operetcre enter the
dete in docueente tron keyboerd teninele into e pnoceeecr in uhicn it ie
proceeeed by epeciel progrene end then recorded on uptetic dieke. Dete
for calving epecitic problem Reich ie etored on e diek leg be trenecribed
on ”pectic tepe by e eupervieory inetruction for eubecquent nee in e com-
puter. In eddition, the 890-9000 eyeton m he need for initiel proceeeing
of eourco dete end control of dete «Mp operetione.

comm: Iedetcl'etvo "Treneport". 1977

891.5
can: 1870

. 22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CYBERNETIOS. COMPUTERS AND AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

ASPECTS OF THE 0895me O? ASUP'S

Novooibirek AVTOHATTZIROVANNYYE sxsnm OPRAVLENIYA I I!!! ADAPTATISYA
(Autosetod Control Systooo end Adeptetione of Then) in Rusoien 1976 oigned
to prose 23 hey 1977 pp 80-105

[Sections 1 end 2 iron chspter 5 oi book by 1. . . bobko. Neuke. 3,600
copies. 112 peges]

[Text] Chepter V. Precticel Aepocto oi the Develop-on: of Autonoted
Enterprise Control Systeoo

Beginning in 1961, the opererions with roopect to the epplicetion of col-
putero in control were beeicelly perfornod elong the line of solving
individuel probleens. A nubor of progreeo hove been developed which is-
pleoent the oothode of lineer progre-ing beoicelly for optiniution of the
producton plenning. heuling. oeteriel end technicel supply. end so on.

Hovever. tho gethoring of the initiel dete woo et the solo tile coepliceted.
They were not highly relieblo. the operetiveneoo of obteining then use very
lou. there use no centrelisetion in the intonation system. which in
prectice reduced to zero tho results of inple-enting the optiniution oethodo.

Hark hes been oterted on solving eccounting probleeo ouch eo eccounting for
lsbor end the celculetion of vegeo. the personnel eccounting. the eccounting
for novooent of oetoriel vsluoe in the verehouoes. After obteining the
firet reoulto on the boois of the developed progrsn, it beceoe obvious thet
it becne neceeoery to creste e united infomtion beoo of the enterprioos.
This beee not. on the one hend. couplotely describe e11 of the prilsry
production resources in order to teke then into eccount. plen end control
then. 0n the other hend. the promo. of the orgeniution of thio infome-
tion bsoo vee converted to e opeciol eree of resesrch which pursued the

goel of cresting e united lethodology. opeciel ooftvero end orgenisetionel
equipment toting into eccount the opeciiic cherecteristico of the vsrious
enterprioeo. 1n eddition. the intonation beoe itoelf oust correspond to
the requireoonts of ssving eooory in tho cooputor. oisplicity end speed of
ecceoo to the intonation ole-onto. the operetiveneoo of updating the date
end high relisbility of the intonetion.

23
roe onicm. use my
Theee prerequiaitea aleo provide the baeie [or the conetruction principleu
of the automated control eyetema.

il. larnaul Automated Control Syetee
Development Stepe

The work on creatingautomatedcontroleyeteauin the Siberian divieion of the
USSR Academy oi Sciencee in 1966 vae concentrated on the development of the
methode of controlling an induetrial enterpriee by computer. According to

the propoeale of forler director of the lerneul Radio Plant 3. V. Doktorov.
thie plant became the baae for introducing an experimental vereion of the
automated control eyeteu in l967. Then. after organization of the computer
center at the plant. the plent collective act to work on developing the beeic
vereion of the automated entarpriee control eyetem which. by euggeetion of the
ecientiete at the Siberian divieion. vae called the Barnaul euro-ated control
ayetau.

The Inrneul automated control eyetee vee built ae e reeult of cloee creatiVe
cooperation of the ecientiete of the ecientific divieion of the USSR Academy
of Sciencee and the engineering and technical vorkere of the Iarneul Radio
Plant. in Deceaber 1971. it vee put into operation. The Siberian divieion
traneferred all of the right. to further exteneion of thie eyetee to the
other enterprieee to the Bernaul Radio Plant. At the preeent tine the
Barneul automated control eyetem ie in operation or being introduced at more
than 150 enterprieee of the country.

in 1973 en aaeoeietion of ueere of the Bernaul automated control eyetem vae
created. the beaic purpoee of which vee the plan development of thie eyetem
by the efforte oi the uaere and the development of the etrategy of adaptation
of the eyetee to the third-generation coeputere.

Beeic Organization Principlee

A number of principlee have been advanced vnich eerve ae the procedural baeie
for creating the Barnaul automated control eyetem:

The ehop-by-ehop etructure of the proceeeing of the production end eateriel
and technical infor-ation:

The creation of unified date filee coneidering the ehop etructure of the
enterpriee;

The module principle of organizing the eoftvere with coordination to the
eyetee;

The poeeibility of continuoue developeent of the eyetem:

The introduction of rigid monitoring of the operation of the automated
control eyete- into the eyeteo for vhich errore or nonoperativeneee of the
operation of the eyeten create dieadvantegeoue conditione for certain cate-
goriea of enterpriae workers. the principle per-ite the eyetem to maintain
iteelf on a high operating level without input iron the directore.

2%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These principles were inplenented in practice in the Barneul ayeten. and

conditions were created for good operation of it at the enterprises of various
profiles.

The Barnaul systen provides for servicing the enterprises with the information
by calculating the resources for the plan. production accounting. with respect
to all types of settlements. calculation of wages and enterisls. end opers-
tive-production planning. In addition. on the heels of the PERT nothode. the
systen provides for operation planning when putting new products into pro-
duction. The control of the neterial end technical supply was decided on the
production level and with respect to the neterial and technical supply
administration at the warehouses. In the Barnaul autonnted control oystee

the prohlene of personnel Ianagenent. lehor accounting and calculation of

wages with respect to all categories and types of payments are solved as
autonoeoue nodules entering into the systee.

The inforestion base of the autosated control ayatee includes nodole of linear
progressing. dynasic progressing. operations research to find extra-a to
solve the prohlees of operative-production and annual planning.

Irief Description of the larnaul Autoeeted Control System

The prinary docunentetion of the Iarnaul autosated control -yaton can be broken
down into two groups.

The first includes the docueents on the basis of which the pereanently stored
inforeation files are torsulated. These include the process-nornstive chart
which is in the for- of a list of all nor-stive indexes for each of the
objects of labor. a nunher of the all-plant docusents-the nonenclature and
price list for naterials. the overlap factors end other general plant re-
terence docunente.

The second group includes the current intonation docuenta which either

cone daily or once every calculeted period or randonly on occurrence. The
basic docunent carrying the current internatioo is the shift report of the
section which is filled out every shift in each section. The current in-
forletion docunenta include the "nor-stive variations.” "the tshlo of failures
per operation." ”the variation in personal accounts.“ the docueente to

correct the plen and the budget dete which are filled out as the inforestion
erisee.

The set of pernsnently stored infornation files (using nagnetic tapes). the
flows of current inforletion and the software are colhined by the operation

systen into an integrated data processing systen which is the interaction
best of the enterprise.

As a result of operation of the lernaul auto-ated control systen. a napping
of the course of production. reserves. the process and organization is
created in the conputer aslory.

25
ton omcuu. use our
For operative production control. the analysis of the course oi the production
process. accounting. mutual calculations between services. calculations with
industrial workers and estimates of the activity of the subdivisions the
computer puts out the required documents which go to the various plant
servicesdsily.snnthly and quarterly. A number of documents can be printed

out on request.
Development of the Barnaul Automated Control System

in addition tosolvingthe basic control problems. the bernaul automated control
system has created an iniorsation base (or the enterprise which make it pos-
sible without significant expenditures to include in it the programs that
isplesent the optimisation techniques. the methods of statistical analysis.
simulation models. and so on.

As some examples let us consider the operations with respect to syntems develop-
sent.

The barnaul Radio Plant. using methods of linear and dynamic programming.

has included a number of standard progress in the systems software. and it

has solved the problem of optimizing the annual enterprise plan in the
automatic mode. As a result of improving the enterprise plan by the optimiza-
tion procedures. the following has occurred: from the use of optimization

the enterprise has increased the production volume by 6 to 8 percent in

1974 and l975. At the same plant operations have been cospletsd with respect
to inclusion of a set of optimal operative-production planning programs in

the data processing system. These operations are being perforsed jointly
with the institute of economics and organisation of industrial production

of the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences under the direction
of N. l. Hironosstehiy. The basis for this complex is the differentiated
planning system (or which its own optimization method with its restrictions
and optisisation criteria is implemented for various groups of parts.

After the Barneul Radio Plant. the Altay Tractor Electrical Equipment Plant.
which was one of the first to introduce the Barnaul system. performed a
set of labor and wage classification operations. it organized incentive and

competition progress in order to improve the productivity of labor among
the workers.

The set of programs was written for complete labor accounting and all types
of wage calculations.

Under these conditions. the operations with respect to the personal plans

for the workers for labor incentive and competition acquired defined signi-
ficance. The A21! [Altey Tractor Electrical Equipment Plant] (a plant of
communist labor) increased its productivity of labor by 17.5 percent through-
out the entire enterprise in 1973. and its experience has been taken under
review by the state cmmmittee on labor and wages and the Secretaristof

the All-Union Central Trade Union Council for adoption at the other enter-
prises of the country. The experience of the Altay Tractor Blectricsl

26
FOR OPPICKAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Equipment Plant alao denonatrated that the automated Bornaul ayaten ia
capable of being adapted to the naaa nature of production.

The Neptun Odaaaa Plant. which aakea use of the peculiaritiea of the Barnaul
autonated control ayaten. haa perioraed a number of enterpriaea with reapect
to iaproving the control atructure under the conditiona of the autonated
control ayetela. Thua. for example. the control aervicea. with the exception
of line Ianageaent. have been reken out of the bnaic production ahopa.

Bone oi the enterpriaea are uaing the aethoda of atatiatical diagnoatica
and forecaating in the larnaul autoneted control ayateo. which pernita the
creation of integral quality control aubayatena.

Under the conditiona of the operating auto-ated control ayatee, there ia a
poaaibility of organizing the preventive control on a higher level. The
coaputer prograaa inpleeenting the preventive control eating uee of the
operative data iron the enterpriae aubdiviaiona. accu-ulate atatiatical data
that are required when aolving technical-econoaic planning and other probleoe.

The prograaa for operative control of the production proceaa aection to
obtain production of a given quality have been written. The output production
quality ia predetermined by certain input parenetera. Accordingly. the
problem arieea oi eatabliahing goala. that ia. the aearch for the eat of
valuea of the input para-etera which under nornal proceaa conditiona will
enaure that a product of the required quality will be obtained. The ainula-
tion on a coaputer ueing atatiatical data that are the reaulta of aeaauring
the proceaa para-etere under noraal operating conditiona over a aufficiently
long tile interval per-ita ua to obtain the required eatiaatea which are
cloae to optiaal. Furthermore. the problea of Iiniairing the deviation of
the input para-etera iron the target veluea ia rolved operatively conai-
dering the reatrictiona exiating at the given point in tiae on the rev
eaterial raaourcea. the equipment load. and ao on. Sanetiaea the calculated
valuea of the input pare-atera do not provide for obtaining a product of

the required quality. which ia eatebliahed by the coeputer uaing the fore-
caating algorithla. In thie caae. additional leaaurea are taken or. if
poaaible. certain reatrictiona on the variablea are renoved. and the cal-
culation ia repeated.

Introduction.

The tranairiootoautoeated control ayateaa ia not the introduction of new
equip-ant. The eutoaated control ayaten touchea on the intereata of the
entire collective of the enterpriae. beginning with the plant director and
ending with the workera. The entire collective participatea directly in the
auto-ated control ayetea. The autonated control ayete- requirea that the
collective obeerve defined inatructiona. changea in control atyle. and certain
new (area of interrelationa.

The introduction of the lernaul auto-ated control ayeten at the larnaul
Redio Plant and than at other enterprieea took place cooperatively eeaily.

2?
roe crrxcm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

in epite of the fact that the eyetem wae one of the firet in the country.
The following meaeuree and peculiaritiee of the eyetem have promoted thie.

The plant developere haVe participated directly in the development. planning.
deeign end introduction of the eyetem. Many of the algorithma and eepecielly
the eolutione taking into account the paychological factor were propoeed by

them. and ae a reeult of their propoeale. enormoue experience in the practical
production management hae come about.

The Barnaul eyetem wae constructed by the principle of the hierarchical
etrutture of the enterpriee. The ehop-oy-ehop principle of data etorage and
proceeeing hae made it poaeible to teat the eyetem not directly at the entire
enterpriee. but only in one ehop, after which the eyetem wae introduced
eucceeeively by the planned procedure with reepect to all of the ehope. end
thie ie how it wee brought about in ell of the enterprieee.

All of the primary information ie connected in one way or another with the
earninge of the plant workere. Special programe have been written which
eneure convenient form and feet output of information on the earninge of
the workere which createa an automatic control eyetem that eelf-eupporte
the conditione on a high operating level and enauree reliability of the
primary data.

lnaemuch no the Barnaul automated control eyetem wee conetructed by the
principle of the data proceeeing eyetem and permite output of in practice
any information on the couree of production. at firet proviaion wae made for
output documente traditionally required by the adminietrative pereonnel.
Then the need for theee documente wee eliminated. and new onee bearing more
valuable information appeared. Thie eucceeeive modification of the documente
carrying the traditione and ueing the cuatomary forme of operation aroueed
no objectione on the part of the plant workere, but. on the contrary. at-
tracted them to active creative activitiee to improve the management methods.

A great deal of eignificance wee attached in the introduction proceee to the
fact that the expendituree of machine tine and labor of the pereonnel on
operation and maintenance of the eyetem are low. Thie problem hae been
given epecial attention in the filling out of the primary documente. the
information baee and optilieation of the data proceaelng algorithma.

Effectiveneee intimate

The coat benefit received by the enterpriee ae a reeult of introducing the
automated control eyetem depende on the gain received by the enterpriee

from the automated control eyetem and the expendituree on the development
and operation of the eyetem. The gain or the effect which in offered by

the automated control eyetem ie determined by the number of problems en-
compaeeed by the automated control eyetem. The more control functione per-
formed by the computer. the higher the level of automation, which meane.

the lower the labor expendituree with reepect to control. Another important

28
ron orncm. use our
FOR OFPICIAL 088 ONLY

factor ia reduction of the labor expenditurea on the developnent of the
autonated control ayaten. ita operation and maintenance. Theae include the
erpenditurea on accquiring and maintaining the technical meana.

The coat benefit free the autonated control ayatema at the enterprieea ie
eatiaated by the correaponding procedurea. However. these proceduree include
only the enterpriae indarea which can be quantitatively evaluated (the
reduction in loaeea. increaaa in output capacity. reduction in number of
peraonnel. end eo on). A very important factor in the effectiveneea of the
autoeetedcontroieyaten ia the qualitative effect of the ayatea on the
control functiona. for exaaple. the increaee in value and operativeneaa of
the information for decieien eaking. the creative activity of the people
participating in control and the etability of the aduiniatratiVe functiona.
The automated control ayaten arerta a great deal of influence on the control
quality which. in our opinion. ia much more inportant that aoma of the
quantitative reeulta of autoeation. Unconditionally. the qualitative effect
free autoaation of control will ultimately be expreeeed in the quantitative
indexea which frequently are very difficult to trace. and for which it in
difficult to conatruct a ayetee of reiatiena. Senetiaea it in difficult to

ahow where the effect coeea fror-froe the automated control ayatea. or
free certain other aeaaurea.

however. in epite of definite imperfection of the exiating methoda of cal-

culating coat benefita. it ie poeeible to obtain nininue eetinatee on the
baeia of them.

At the enterprieea that have introduced the Barnaul automated control ayatem.
auch eatimatee have been Iade during acceptance of the ayaten by the atate
coeaiaeion for induatriel operationa.

At the Barnaul Radio Plant. according to the economic eervice calculationa.

the direct coat benefit of the barnaul ayatea after the firat year of operation
wee more than 600.000 rublea per year. The time required for the ayatem to

pay for itaelf waa 1.3 yeara. Approximately the name figure wee obtained

at the Novoaibirak Blektroaignal Plant. At the Sibael'aaah Siberian Para
Machinery Plant thie ayatem waa introduced in 25 ehopa. A benefit averaging

30 to £0.000 rublea each year waa obtained at each chop.

Thua. after introducing the eyetem. in every enterpriae the direct coat
benefit waa on the average of 500.000 to 600.000 rublea a year with a time
1.2 yeara required to recover the inveetnent.

Attention muat be given to the fact that the coat benefit data have been
calculated only in a atartup eituetion which baeically leada to implementa-
tion of the information planning goala. However. thie type of conplex
providea an information baae aleo for eolving the problene of optimizing
the annual and the operative-calendar planning. atatiatical analyeia. and

re. which. in turn. give a benefit without eignificant additional expendi-
turea.

29
P03 OPYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Hhen estimating the cost benefit of the Barnaul autonsted control system,

it is necessary to recalculate the fectors as a result of which the enter-
prise will either receive s direct or indirect effect and also the factors
influencing the reduction of expenditures on the automated control system.

The automated control system realizes a quite clear production accounting
with respect to each operation pert. Under the conditions of the automated
control system. these accounting data sre easily related to the personal
responsibility and earnings of the plant workers. Therefore the production
losses dropped sharply inediately after introducing the automated control
system. Thus. when introducting the eyotem in the first shop of the Berneul
Radio Plant. the losses dropped from 20 to 0.6 percent.

Timely. sveilable deta on the labor normetives. the work assignment. date

on the results of the lehor of each worker. end daily information on earnings
by the workers and also without advance wage celculstions have led to signi-
ficent improvement of the productivity of labor of the workers. This is
observed on introducing the Barnsul system at every enterprise and every
shop.

It is quite obvious that the clearly functioning information base of the
enterprise provides the optimization algorithms with the initial data.
Under these conditions the optimiestion procedures operate not as one time
problems. but they are built into the dste processing system and can func-
tion in the eutomatic mode. The same information base provides for simula-
tion on different control levels.

In estimating the expenditures on the crestion. operation and maintenance
of the Bernaul automated control system, let us note the following.

The realiestion of the principles of assigning information with respect to
the deviations, the minimization of redundancy in the primary data. the
possibility of cresting s branched dste storage system in the computer memory.
new organizstion of the primary dets gsthering--sll have resulted in a shsrp
decrease in expenditures on primsry document circulation. The number of
volumes of primary documents hsve been reduced by en order.

At the lerneul system, the deta compression elgorithms have been implemented,
and the structure and composition of the information files have been selected
on the basis of deep preliminary preparstion and enslysis. This has made

it possible sharply to reduce the expenditures of machine time on the
operation of the entire system.

The shop-by-shopprincipleof constructing the Barnsul automated control
system has ensured a comparatively simpler structure of the information

files and reduced the volumes of data during the operative data processing
of each shop.

The above-presented fsctors which are stimulating improved productivity of
labor both in the subdivisions and on the pert of each worker. coebined with

30
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .

tho possibility o! calculating tho production plan. distribution of tho

plan with rospoct to tins in parts. aro croating conditions for rhythmic
oporation of tho plan as a wholo. Tho improvomsnt of tho rhythmicity has boon
notod by tho ontorprisss that hava introducod tho Iarnsul automatod control
systom.

Tho systom providos all of tho data daily on tho courso of production prosontod
in convoniont for. for uso by tho computar. This includos tho primary data

and tho calculatod gonorslisod indoxos. During oporation of this systom.

tho roquiromsnts of tho adminirtrativo porsonnol for information change:

tho intorost in sons of tho traditional data drops. and now roquosts for
gonoralissd information on production obtainod aftor computor analysis arias.

Inasmuch as tho systom providos tho computor with all of tho primary informa-
tion on production. in tho computar momory thsro is an information napping

of tho courso of production. and at tho samo tins conditions aro croatod for
good sccsss to tho information portoining to tho activitios of cortain
catogorios o! pooplo. This croatos conditions for incroasing tho interest
of tho plant vorkors in roliahility of tho doto. oporativonoss and clarity.
This intorost dooo not contradict tho gonorsl intorosts of tho ontorpriso.

it is possiblo to talk about an atmosphoro of croativity and significant
raising of tho lovol of qualifications of all cstogorios of uorkors.

Tho oporation systom of tho automatod control systom compilos tho oporating
programs in such a way that in ona oxaminstion of tho basic information filos
all tho control probloms uoro providod (or. This has also roducod tho
oxpondituros of machino timo on oporation and maintonanco of tho systom.

The solcction of tho tochnical moons and functional probloms is tiod with
tho Iain goal of tho ontorpriso-tho basic production control.

Thus. uhon dovoloping tho barnaul automatod control systom, tho basic factors
uoro takon into account uhich influoncod tho gonoral offoctivonoss of tho
systom indopondontly of vhathor thoy can bo ostimatod quantitativoly.

$2. Sigma Automatod Control Systom-Purthsr stolopmsnt of tho barnaul
Automatod Control Systom

Tho barnaul automated control systom was implemontod on tho “-220 computer.
tho production of cooputors of this typo has boon stoppod in tho Soviet Union;
thoroforo tho quostion of tho dovelopmont of tho autonatod control system on
a third gonoration computer has como up.

Tho Sig-a automatod control systom has boon dovolopod for industrial ontor-

prisos of tho machino building and instruont making branches vith difforont
naturo of production (from mass to individual) with a largo nomonclaturo of

P.::.. in-houso manufacturing comploxos. Iatorials and procured intormodiato
pr ucts.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Sigma automated control system is based on the Yes 1020 computer and
versions of it. Considering the capabilities of the Yes 1020. the system

can service enterprises having up to 30.000 workers. up to 250.000 production
units (parts. assemblies. products). up to 50 basic production shops. up to
10 different subdivisions (branches, camplexes. production facilities).

With the more powerful technical means the Sigma automated control system

can be used at larger enterprises. The enterprises having smaller volumes
can use the Sigma system in the group mode.

The Signs automated control system has been developed in several steps. The
first step provides for automation of basic production and it it implemented
as an automated information control system. In the subsequent steps. work
vill be in the direction of expanding the automated control system (encom-
passing the material and technical supply. marketing. auxiliary production.
all of the types of bookkeeping activity. personnel accounting. analysis.

and so on) and development of the new following functions of it: improvement
of the structure of the production facility and the administrative agents;
application of optimization methods in the case of long range and operative
planning of control; the methods of mathematical statistics for diagnostic
and forecasting problems. quality control problems. optimisation of the
technological process. and so on: the economic methods for improving the
organisation and efficiency of production. improving the conditions of labor.
simulation models for selecting the basic administrative decisions. playing
out the production situations. the statement of business games in the dialog
mode; the coordination of the operation of the automated production control
system with the automated tecbnologicalprocess control system. on the

one hand. and the automated 0K8 [experimental design vorkT] automated control
system. on the other hand.

These operations are supported by the information base of the Sigma automated
control system developed in the first step.

Structural Principles of the Information Base

The information base of the Sigma automated control system must provide

not only for the accounting and information planning problems. but also

all of the new problems uhich will be included in the Sigma automated control
system in the subsequent steps of its development.

The composition. structure and organization of the information base exclude
to the maximum the duplication of information both by elimination of parallel
flows of it and successive repetition of the data; they ensure reliability
and operativeness of the information. simplicity of access to the informa-
tion elements. and informativeness of the data.

The computer includes the primary information. that is. the data on re-
sources snd the production process. All of the data processing (accumulation.
accounting. summaries. comparisons and other conversions) are performed by

the computer. This relieves the enterprise personnel from routine operations

32
m. omens. use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which. as a result of monotony in the case of manual processing. have no
high reliability. on the other hand. minimisation of the redundancy of the
data in the conputer meoory takes place. and various control problems are
supported with unique data. The cowosition of the primary data is de-
termined by the initial information describing the object (the basic pro-
duction facility. resources. organisatienal structure).

with the development of the operations with respect to the automated..con-
trol system. the conposition oi the problems requiring the primary data
changes. which leads to periodic rearrangement of all of the information
base. The information description of the object permits provision of date
not only to the problems provided for by the plan. but also 'those which

can occur subsequently. This makes the autonated control system a constantly
developing and improving one.

The primary data include intonation that is essential to control of the
target. The infonstive data are selected. The comrosition of the primary
data of the Sigma automated control system includes data on resources.

the technological process itself. the organization of production and the
production process.

The primary interaction is broken down into stored and dynamic infonntion.
The stored data are entered in the long-ten memory of the computer for
permanent storage. The dynamic data flovs carry the changes occurring in
the production process. and they are used to provide the control data and
to up date the stored intonation files.

The information base is organized so that the maximum amount of primary
data will be stored in the long-ten memory. and the dynamic data will re-
flect only the changes occurring in the production facility. This signifi-
cant unloads the co-unications channels. the slovly operating input
devices and it reduces the volume of primary data document flow.

The efficient subdivision of the primary intonation into stored and dynamic
data creates conditions for implementation of the principle of assignment
of intonation by deviations.

The documents providing for recording of the primary information are con-
venient for computer input and examination by the enterprise personnel.
Later. the possibility of data input from a language close to natural
language will be acquired.

The Sign automated control system includes rigid monitoring in which the
errors in the primary data or the nonoperativsness of the data input and

in the operation of the entire system create disadvantageous conditions for
certain categories of enterprise workers.

The organisation of the date floss. the planning of the primary docuents
and creation of special programs based on this principle will permit use of

33
roe ontcnu. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the personal interest of various categories of administrative personnel and
workers to ensure high data reliability. operativenoss of the data, and
"viability" of the entire system.

In addition. the system provides for special programs to monitor the input
data.

The structure of the information base of the Sigma automated control system
corresponds to the hierarchical structure of the entorprise_control. The
shop by shop principle of storage and data processing at the Barnaul
automated control system has completely justified itself. However. in order
to expand the possibilities of the Sigma automated control system. in
addition to the shop information files and all-plant (nomenclature-price
list. and so on) provision has been made to create a special filo on the
composition of the products reflecting the required intershop relations.

within the framework of the hierarchical enterprise control structure. the
information files are unique for providing for the solution of sets of
different problems. The information files are centralized by the correspond-
ing scheme, including the normative and accounting and the planning data.

The formation of single files and sets of problems based on these files

is realized by the formal procedure with the application of recognition
methods.

"hen formulating the permanently stored information files, use is made of
the data compression methods making it possible significantly to reduce the
site of the files and the access time to the long-term memory. However,

it must be considered that the effectiveness of the various compression
aethods depends on the structure of the files and their use conditions.

It is necessary to perform a preliminary analysis of the expediency of using
one compression method or another, and in some cases, to change the file
processing conditions or create additional procedures for improving the
effectiveness of the compression technique.

"hen solving certain problems. it can become necessary to create auxiliary,
intermediate information files beginning with the basic ones. however,
when introducing changes in the data, it is necessary to be oriented toward
the basic files. The changes are made at the time of use, that is. in
parallel with the functioning of the operating programs.

The structure of the information base. the composition and organization of
the software for the automated control system depend essentially on each
other. when planning the information. this dependence is taken into account.

Software Characteristics.

The software for the Sigma automated control system uses the general software
of the integrated system of computers.

3%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Cobol. arc. Assembler and programsing means adopted in the integrated
system are used as the automated programming means. The operation systems
ar~ supplemented by the required programs controlling the packages of
opt-‘rating programs of the automated control system. In organizing the
operation of the programs provision is made for one-time and successive use
of the stored data files.

when planning the information base and the structure of the automated control
system software. the methods of statistical classification were used. Let
us give attention to the two main principles in the software of the Sigma
automated control system: the strictly modular structure and adaptiveness.
These principles provide flexibility in the system and the capability for
develor sent. '

In the software, just as in the Barnaul automated control system. provision
is made for the procedures of maximum possible monitoring of the input data.
The operation systems and complexes of operating programs will he developed
in order to provide the time sharing and control systems with means of
representing the data.

Application of Optimization Techniques

In the Sigma automated control system provision is made for the application
of optimization methods first of all in the problems of annual and operative-
production planning.

In the problems of annual planning. use is made of the algorithms already
available for the selection of the version of the annual enterprise program.
These missions haw already been approved at the Barnaul Radio Plant within
the framework of the Barnaul automated control system.

In the problems of optimizing the operative-production planning it is pro-
posed that the method of differentiated planningmd stochastic methods

in scheduling problems he used. The nomenclature of the parts planned in
production is broken down into groups. For each group of parts. its own
method of optimal operative-production planning is used with different
restrictions and rigidity of optimization.

Application of Statistical Methods

Hereafter, it is proposed that statistical methods he used to analyze the
technical-economic indexes and for operative decision making. First of all,
these are the statistical monitoring and analysis of the time series formed
by the values of some of the technical-economic indexes. The statistical
processing of the observation series will permit objective estimates to be
obtained for analysing the activity of the enterprise.

For the indexes having statistical stability. it is possible to use statis-
tical methods of predicting future values of the time series.

35
ton onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The presence of the developed information base of the automated control
system will create favorable conditions, reduce the expenditures on imple-
menting the production quality control subsystem.

The accumulation of statistics in the information files of the automated
control system will permit the solution of the problem of selecting the
process conditions close to optimal.

Simulation Models

The Sigma automated control system provides for creating simulation models
for the functioning of the enterprise and its subdivisions taking into ac-
count the economic laws. the technical base. the social aspects of control
and also the principles of interaction of the enterprise or association
with the economy of the branch of the national economy as a whole.

The simulation models in the Sigma automated control system permit the
analysis of the economic index of the enterprise as a function of the
organization of production. the technological process, and various administra-
tive solutions. The business games playing out the various situations on

the basis of these models permit the selection of the best versions of the
structure. the process and the organization of production and prediction of
the consequences of the proposed reorganizations.

General Structural Design

The Sigma automated control system is constructed as a united enterprise
control system which combines all of the control problems (accounting,
planning, analysis. operative control, forecasting, and so on) in a centralized
data processing system on the computer.

The structure of the system permits constant development or it. The system
can easily include new problems. new improved methods of solving problems.

The Sigma automated control system is constructed as a multilevel control
system.

Practical Implementation

The operations with respect to creating the Sigma automated control system
were started in 1974 after a special resolution of the State Committee of
the USSR Council of Ministers on Science and Engineering.

In addition to the computer center of the Siberian Department of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, the development project included the Altay Polytechnical
Institute imeni I. I. Polzunov, the Barnaul Radio Plant and Hachine Building
Plant, the Altay Tractor Electrical Equipment Plant. the Institute of
Economics and Organization of Industrial Production of the Siberian bepart-
ment of the USSR Academy of Sciences, the Nllsistem [Systems Scientific
Research Institute] of the Ministry of Instrument Making. the Novosibirsk
National Economy Institute. the Odessa Neptun Plant.

36
For orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1974 the first volune of the operating plan for the Sign automated
control system was developed which included the structural principles of the
system. its coeposition and structure. the substantiation of the selected
structural design. the prieery inforestion. all of the calculation algorithm.
the instructional material with respect to introduction. operation and
Isintenance.

This volune contains the necessary uteriels for preparing the industrial
enterprises for the introduction of the Sign eutouted control systea. it
is the production part for writing the operating progreu.

The first volune of the operating plan for the Signs autooated control system
was transferred to a nueher of enterprises end branches for preparation for
introduction.

The couission on standardisation of automated control systems under the
stste cos-ittee oi the USSR Council of Ministers on Science and Engineering

investigated this operating plan. approved it end reco-endcd it as the
standard planning solution.

In 1975 a package of progr-s was developed for the first pheae of the Signs
sutoaated control system esde up of four cooplexes: l) the control of the
intonation base of the enterprise; 2) the control of basic production;

3) dete output on request; 6) the adaptation nodule. The description of
this package is the second volt-e of the operating plen.

In January 1976. the emission of the Siberian Division of the USSR Academy
of Sciences accepted the iirst phase of the Signs auto-ated control syste-
for experimental operation at the Barnaul Radio Plant. the Bernaul Machine
Building Plant and the Altsy Tractor Electrical Equipeent Plant.

In July 1916, the state interdeparteentel co-ission accepted the plan for
the Signs automated control system in the second phase. The second phase

has the following complexes to supplenent the first phase: 1) control of
eaterial and technical supply; 2) couplets calculation of vages; 3) the
personnel cmlex; lo) preparation for the production of new products; 5) tech-
nical preparation of the production facility; 6) optieizetion of annual
planning and 7) procedural laterials for introduction.

All of the docueentation for the Sign automated control system has been

for-ulated in a edition of three volunee of the working plan. The coordination
plan for further developeent of the Sign auto-sted control oysters exists.

COPYRIGICT: lsdatel'stvo "Neuka". 1978

10365
650:1870

37
ron onrcuu. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GIOMSICS. ASTRONOMY AND SPACI

”ASIDE!" OP um MDIOTBLBSCOPIS IN SPACE MINI!)

Noacow K031101138“?! ISBISDOVANIYA in Ruulan Vol 16, Ienue 6 (Nov-Dec)
1978 pp 9230-236

(Article by V. I. Buyekee. A. S. Ovuichave. 1.. A. Gorehkov, c. A. Dalgo-
polov. Yo. I. Danilov. n. l. Zeheon. N. s. Kardaehev. V. V. Klinaehin.

V. I. Konrov. N. P. Nel'nikov. G. S. Nari-anov. 0. P. Preilutekiy. A. 8.
Pehennikov. V. G. Rodin. V. A. Rudakov. A. I. Savin. R. z. Sagdeyev. Yu. P.
Senenov. A. G. Sokolov. V. I. Uaynkin. K. P. Peoktietow, c. S. Teerewekiy
and l. s. Shhlovakiy: "Unlinited Accumulating Spaceborne Radioteleecope”)

[Text] 11. Deeign Peaturee. Syeten Control and Placnent in Orbit.

A teaeible plen ie emined for attaining a epaceborne
radioteleacope with a conpoeite ephericel reflector
which providee e mlti-been operating node. The accu-
nuleting. and in thin caee efficient at each intermedi-
ate etege. nirror ie conpoeed of 200-. nodular. The
nodulee coneiat of a three-dineneional etrut framework
with (lat hexogonal nirrore neaauring ~4 I inatalled
on it. The preciee geonetry of the antenna'e enrtacc
ie eneured by autonolouc augment of the nirrore re-
lative to the framework. ae well an by alignment of
the connected nodulee. Preeented ae being feaeible ia
the creation of epacaborne radioteleecopee with die-
netera of up to I0 In. operating in the wave band of

l n - I n. Peaeibility evaluatione were made concern-
ing delivery and conatruction of the etrncture in en
eaaenbly orbit. The aatinated expendituree on the de-
velop-ant and creation of a epeceborne radioteleecope
with a die-tar greater than I h torne out to be leee
than the creation of antennae ayetena of the cane aize
on Barth. The etate of technology today ellowa one to
proceed to develop-ant and creation of a 200- nodule.

3 Portion of a report preeented to the 28th Congreee of the International
Aatronantical Pederation in Prague, Caechoalowakia in Septenber. I977.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the previous work [I] the subject concerning the merit of creeting e
specsborns rsdiotelescope consisting of s primsry noduler eccumuleting re-
flector. en eutonomous secondery correcting reflector. es well es en suto-
nomous controlling spece eppsretus wss discussed. Thoroughly enelyeed were
the pertinent estrophysicsl tesks end investigsted were the new nethodo-
logicel cepebilities which ere opening up in the eree of estrophysicel ob-
serVetions through the use of one or sewerel lerge-scele rediotelescopes
plsced into distent orbits. In this erticle. problems essocieted with the
rselieetion of cresting e design for en unlimited eccumuleting rediotele-
scope ere exemined: the composition of the besic entennee modules end their
coupling (section I). control of the combined construction (section 2). end
its plecement into orbit (section 3). In eddition. in section 3 preliminery
estimetes of the cost for development end creetion of such structures is
presented.

I. Construction of the KRT [speceborne redioteleecope]. The primery ele-
msnt of e KRT is the reflecting entenne. The structure of the reflector
must retein its rigidity end stsbility under the influences of grsvity end
light pressure. The required pointing eccurecy effects the limitetion of
both the frequency end rigidity therecteristics of the reflector. These
limitetions end the opereting conditions of the entenns determine the mini-
mum possible weight of the structure.

We shell exemine two feesible construction types: s solid supporting shell
end e strut supporting fremework to which the reflecting surface is et-
teched [2-5]. Interest is also shown in the construction of e type of
solid surfece with ettsched rigid ribs. but et the present time there ere
no suitsble design solutions sccopteble for speceborne entennse.

The celculetions performed showed that under the influence of light pres-
sure on the reflector. the meximum vslue for the totel deformation loed
(normel component) ney be determined by the formule:

gun-0.239%. (1)

where 8 is one hslf the centrel engle of the segment in the redien, end q.
is the specific light pressure.

From s condition of the reflector's totel stebility the on value should
be less then the criticsl losding on the shell which is equgtxto [6]

P.-0. l55.6.'/R.'. (2)

where an end 6, ere the cited module flexibilities end shell thickness,
respectively. end it. is the reflector's curveture redius.

Fro. the specificetion (2) the thickness end corresponding minimum mess of
the reflector mey be determined, which st smell sngles 8 amounts to:

M-3.9r.'va./I'. (3)

39
FOR orncm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 9 ie the deneity of the ehell'e ueteriel. 2 ie the flexibility of the
nodule'e neteriel end r.-R. ein 8 ie the rediue of the reflector'e eperture.

For e duel-netted etrut ehell with e beeic eleeent which eppeere ea e tetre-
hedron the cited cherectcrietice eey bo recorded in the following eenncr [7]:

 

 

Mm.» new ' (’0

where h. ie the hoight of the beeic tetrehedron. a. ie the eagle between
the tetrehedron'e height end ite edge. P. ie the eree of the etrut croee
eection end 9 ie the deneity of the Interiel.

In thie ceee the mini-u: heel of the reflector enounte to:

O
1.125%??- ¢.+ar.'p.. (s)

where or in the unit eree neee of the reflecting eurfece.

In etrut-type conetruction the mini-Mn leee any be deter-ined eleo from the
condition of etebility loee for the eeperete etrute. The nexinnn etreee
on e etrut in netted conetruction will equel:

Ah-QeUI/‘ih. (6)

where l in the length of the net'e etrut.

Ae ie known. the velue of criticel force for e thin-veiled tubuler etrut
equele:

N.-n’£P.d.'/8l‘, m

where do ie the die-eter of the etrut.

Pro- the expreeeione (6) - (7) the nini-ul croee section of the etrut end
the eeee of the enpporting etructure eey be determined:

”Micah/KM, (a)

where e4d./l ie the reletionehip of the etructure'e eicee under folded
end ope ed conditions.

do the celculetione chow. when directing end etebilieing the reflector the
fundenontel control cycle Tc of the eyeten will be deter-ined by the lceet
of the following veluee:

2

 

T.-qn-T‘MO/3. (9)
Tg-V'MAOIQewé’. ('0)
#0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where T* is the orbital period of rotation and do is the precision of the
rsflector's direction.

In high orbits the determination is made by the expression (I0).

So that during the creation of tho control system there should arise no
serious difficulties. the T. period for natural skew-symmetric reflector
oscillations should be an order of magnitude less than than the Te period.

The largest period of natural skew-symmetric oscillations for a solid
spherical segment is determined by the approximation formula:

. _
nan-bus. ( ' U

which was derived through the use of the energy method [6].

From the condition T.s0.ch we derive:

. —
2- mom". (:2)
h.
Minimum mass of the solid structure will equal:

The period of natural oscillations of e strut-type structure is determined
by the expression:

73-0.52'e.'6093 50' ( '6)

when D, is the resultant cylindrical rigidity of the supporting structure.

Taking into account that I: should be £0.1Tc. we obtain the minimum mass:

”_ r, 3-10"'r.’A0h.'£
“ "m ('5)

Ol‘ l

” 375" cosh: H" 9' (no)

 

for the value Tc from (9) and (lo), respectively (r. is the radius of the
orbit).

Depending on the conditions for orbital insertion, the maximum value of h.
for a strut-type structure amounts to approximately IO m. The value of

for the collapsible strut-type structure under development at the present
time does not exceed 0.02. The dependence of mass for such structures on
the diameter is presented in figure I for the following values: B-I.S°IO“

ul
ton ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

na.o-I.b°|0"kg/m’. pt-0.l kg/m’. 8-|S° and Ae-l° [8.9]. From the graphice
it in apparent that beginning with r.-500 m the mere of a eolid etructure
axcaede the maae of a etrut-type etructure by more than a factor of IO’.

Strut-type atructurea which coneiet of a threa-dimenaional framework to
which the reflective eurface ie attached are more rational.

Depending on the minimum wave length the reflective eurface may be fabricated
from a metallic meeh or from panele manufactured with a high degree of ac-
curacy which allowe for the control of their poeition relative to the frame-
work.

The application of collapeible etructuree allowa one to reduce to a mini-um
the fabrication operatione in orbit. However. the manufacture and aimul-
taneoue development of a collapeible etructure with a diameter of a kilo-
meter in the near time frame in ecarcely poeaible. Baeed on the proapecte
for tranaportation devicee the rite of an antenna module which can be com-
pletely inaerted into orbit hae been eelected ae being equal to 200 m.

The modulee are ineerted into orbit in collapeed form. they automatically
unfold and dock to one another. Therefore. it ie poeeible to increaee the
dimeneione of the reflector of an operational antenna. The module'a frame-
work coneieta of a heavy-duty etructure and an operating reflector area to
which ie attached the reflecting eurface.

From the relationehipe preeented above it ie apparent that the minimum meee
and maximum rigidity are achieved at the greateet etructure height. There-
fore. a heavy-duty framework in fabricated in the form of a collapaible
double-latticed ehell with the maximum etrut length determined by the cape-
bilitiee of the traneport devicee. In thie core the height of the atructure
will equal IO m. which will allow one to increment the antenna'e reflector

to a diameter of approximately 20 km (eee figure I). In the future. increae-
ing the eizee of antenna more will begin to grow very rapidly.

The eurface of a heavy-duty framework may coneiet of triangular celle meas-
uring as m. Ineide each cell in inetalled a working eurface which functions
ae a eingle lattice etrut-type etructure with triangular celle meaeuring
nearly 2 m (figure 2). The etrute of the working eurface have a diameter
one-tenth that of the etrute of a heavy-duty framework which in a reault of
the packaging conditione for the working eurface between the connectiona of
the heavy-duty framework.

A heavy-duty framework it made from thin-walled tubing with a croee aection
of 75 and a thickneee of 0.5 mm. The quantity of etrute for a heavy-duty
framework of a eingle unit amounte to I300. and the framework’r more in 6 T.

in the event that precieion panele are inetalled on the working eurface and
they allow for control relative to the framework, then the mean of the re-
flecting eurface will approximate the mean of the framework.

he
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure I. Dependence of RR! Antenna line on Die-eter

Key:
l. Strut-type conetruction d. Linitetione by frequency
2. Solid eupporting ehell cherecterietice
3. Propoeed etructure 5. Liuitetione by etebility

Depending on the neeeureuente end opereting conditione of the entenne the
joining of the nodulee to one enother any be either by rigid or tolerance
control of reciprocel poeition unite. The nodulee of euch e etructure uill
he ueeful for reflector entennee with e dieueter of up to 20 kn. opereting
doun to the mini-u- vevelengthe.

During entenne operetion min- dietortione from the reflecting eurfece
ehould be no sore then mo of the uinim opereting frequency. Surfece
dietortione will he coapoeed of technicel mufecturing errore in the etruc-
ture, teaporeture defornetione end deforletione erieing fro. grevitetionel
forcee end light preeeure.

Anticipeted technicel errore epecified through nethcneticel modeling may be
deter-ined from the following expreeeion [l0]:

6.-0.02+7- 10" (Zn/0‘. ( I7)

The firet ter- of thie expreeeion ie determined by the eurfece opereting
errore. end the eecond by errore in the heevy-duty framework.

reapereture deforuetione for the etructure which hee been nede from conten-
porery uteriele will not erceed the velue:

d.-2~10"r.- ( 18)

1‘3
ran orncm. use om:
FOR OFPICIAL 038 ONLY

”qu In! pol,» (8)

Aygﬂmmm

I- ﬁtxAVAVWAVA

Avgwmgmm
ﬁﬁﬁa’iVK’ﬁ’bWYA

AVAWAVAVAWKWA‘FRSFA‘YA

K???

.6

     
 
 
         

gmggvmﬁmmv

' .gxammmw

“mm ”63‘"'
\Tz‘aeaisW/L

 

tummy:
nvcuxa
‘0 l"' /

9)

    

Pinon 2. Construction of the Autumn Ptmvork
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

here u. is the gravitational constant. K is the relationship between the
weight of the reflecting surface and the weight of the framework.

Deformationa from the influence of light preaaura may equal:

_ . Mouw.‘ (20)
o. 1.5 “H—mr-

These relationships and the total surface surface distortion are presented
in figure 3. From the graph it is apparent that within the limits of a
single module the error amounts to approximately 8 mm. In a kilomater an-
tenna the error amounts to approximately 23 mm. that is without control of
the surface the antenna may operate on a wavelength of approximately 0.5 m.
To work on the shorter anelengths control of the plates relative to the
framework is required.

10’

  

10'

10' In 10’ r,.u Ia'
Pigure 3. Deformations of the Antenna Surface

I. Technical errors in manufacture 3. Gravitational deformations

of the reflector surface 6. Temperature deformationa
2. Technical errors in manufacture 5. Total deformations
of the heavy-duty framework

In an antenna with a diameter of 10 km. the surface error will reach I m.

To compensate for such an error the control range of the plates is insuf-
ficicnt and in this case it is necessary to implement control of the modules'
mutual position.

The control system of the modules' mutual position should provide for the
exposure of no lest than three reference points for each nodule in the at-
signed position with an accuracy of :20 mm. To achieve this objective.
within the system there must he no less than 3n - 3 actuating mechanisms
(n is the number of modules). to accomplish control through each mechanism

'65
FOR 057mm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

independently the total quantity of kinematic connectors amongst the modules
should be equal to in - 6. This may be achieved through the installation
amongst the modules 3n - 3 of connecting elements which are composed of four
cylindrical hinges installed in two mutually perpendicular surfaces. as well
as a unit capable of changing the length of the connecting element. Such
elements are installed between each pair of modules and at the same time

two connectors are installed amongst each of the extreme modules.

when increasing the diameter of the antenna's aperture to a sire greater
than 20 km. deformations from gravitation forces should increase sharply.
Under such antenna dimensions the frequencies of the inherent oscillations
will become lower than that permissible.

Increasing the sire of the antenna to a value greater than 20 km requires
a corresponding increase in the height h. of the supporting structure, that
is it requires already a three-dimensional increment in the structure.

6. Questions concerning control of the radiotelescope. we shall also exe-
mine certain questions connected with control of the XII. The control system
should provide for the cooperatiVe functioning of all parts of the KRT, in-
cluding orientation of the focus axis for the primary reflector. its fully
solid angle turns. attitude stabilisation of the receivers and control of

the objects within the coordinate system which is tied in with the primery
reflector. as well as correcting the tar orbit.

within the sphericsl primary reflector the orientation accuracy of its focal
axis should be no worse then l'. The gravitational moment acting in the
central field is proportional to the difference between the polar and equa-
torial inertial moments [II]. In the proposal, in which the primary reflec-
tor is a uniform spherical shell with a thickness 5n and a density p“. we
arrived at the conclusion that the gravitationsl moment amounts to:

3.17a‘oepslls “3 2° (2 I )
&s’ m. 3/2 .

 

 

”‘-

where'éh is the angle between the focal axis and the orientation towards
the center of the earth.

we derive the moment for the forces of light pressure by integrating the
light pressure along the surface of the antenna (see [[1]). For s solid
diffusely dispersed shall we obtain:

”v-We.'o‘8%°(x)s (22)
where K is the angle between the focal axis and the direction of the solar
arrays;

0(x)- jz-sim 2x sign(cos w) + a- (i - ai-sin' 5/2) sin 3:.

us
ton onrcm. use ONLY
P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Orientetion end etebiliretion of the kiloneter reflector ney he ecconpliehed
through eewerel reection control enginee with e thruet for eech of epproxi-
netely I kg. Theee ere inetelled elong the entenne'e periphery. In thie
ceee the controling enguler ecceleretion enounte to l0"&10" eec". end
then within the orientetion eyetee there ney occur unidirectionel oecille-
tion cyclee.

Fuel expendituree during theee unidirectionel cyclee ere proportionel to
the perturbing Ionent [ll] end uounte to:

- E'L'“ L <23)
Ge 3 " ‘0 2 00‘).

where l in the epecific inpulee of the engine. t ie the tine of operetion
end g in the ecceleretion of the grevitetionel force.

In ueing ion enginee with e epecific inpulee on the order of 10‘ eec [l2]
the deily fuel expenditure for conpeneetion of the eonente of color preeeure
forcee for e kilo-eter entenne eeounte to epproxinetely 0.25 kg (for P/D-I).
end for e ten-kiloeeter entenne - neerly I25 kg. The electric power cepe-
city (or enginee with e epecific thruet on the_order of 600 wette/gren
ehould for e kilo-eter entenne eeount to epproxinetely 15 kw. end for e ten-
kiloneter entenne - epproxinetely I500 kw.

Anelogoue to the preceding we find thet the fuel expendituree for the con-
peneetion o! the grewitetionel noeent enounte to:

3ar.’|l.0.p. “ll 20 (2‘ )

o.-————‘

8r.’l cos‘ 3/2 '

For e kiloeeter entenne with e neee “-200 T, loceted in etetionery orbit.
the deily tuel expenditure will equel epproxinetely 6.6 kg. end the elec-
tric power cepecity of the ion enginee ie epproxinetely 200 kw. Por e
ten-kilometer entenne theee pereeetere grow to 6.6 T end 200 uwt. reepec-
tively.

deving eccepted thet turning the entenne followe e nor-e1 progren (ecccler-
etion - inertiel notion - hreking). we derive the following expreeeion for
the velue of fuel expenditure which ie required to turn the entenne et en
engle a. over e tine t [II]:

6.—%(i-Yi-na'6.por.'/p“). (25)

where 9 ie the thruet of the controlling engine.

To turn e kilometer entenne to u*-180° neerly 2 kg of fuel ere required
deily. To turn en entenne with e diameter of 10 kn over the eene eagle
epproxinetely [.5 I of fuel ere required deily.

a?
ran onrcm. use our
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

9. ahall evaluate the expenditure of fuel in etabiliaing the poeition of
the receiving devicea. For example. in placing the RR! in geoetationary
orbit there ariaee an acceleration differential between the receiving de-
vice and the primary reflectors

a--,&.~<ar.(u.)-v.'). <26)
0

where 1 ie the vector connecting the centere of mere or the primary re-
flector in the device being examined.

For a tar with a focuaing diatence of 6005‘000 m the acceleration of the
receiving device will reach 6-]0“§6°l0" cm/eec‘. while uaing ion enginoa
with a epecific impulae of l0~ eec [12] to compenaate for theee perturbationa
daily fuel axpanditurae will be required in the amount of 6°I0"46'|0" from
the object'e maae.

The engine eyetem of the receiver device ehould eleo provide for the highly
accurate tracking of the aatronomical aourcea being etudied with variable
perturbatione in the attitude of the primary reflector. lheee perturbatione
(under conditiona of unidirectional oacillation cyclea with an angular ac-
celeration on the order of 10"+l0-' eec" and a etabilieetion accuracy of
the primary reflector on the order of I') require a total velocity incre-
ment of 0.06 end 0.6 mleec per day for one-kilometer end ten-kilometer
reflectora. reapectively. Puel expenditurea in this care amount to
2°l0"+2-IO" from the object'a original maaa, that ia eignificantly leaa
then providing for motion of the receiving devicea along the aeaigned tra-
jectory.

we ahall aleo examine the poaeibility of tranefering the RR? from a low
orbit to an interplanetary orbit which ia required following assembly of
the K81 to obtain a naceaaary interferometric beee B (aee [1]). From the
analyaia propoeed above it followe that a KR! with a diameter of I km may
be aaaembled at an altitude no lower then 1000 km. and with a diameter of
10 km - no lower then geoatationary orbit.

Placement into the operational orbit may be provided only by small-thrust
enginea becauae of the low level of rigidity of the antenna atructure. We
ahall evaluate the characterietica of the engine ayatem which is required

to accelerate the mar from ite initial circular orbit to parabolic velocity.
Uaing the equation for the movement of a body which ie moving along a apiral
trajectory at a conetant thruat [13]. one may evaluate the fuel expenditurea
by the enginea and the acceleration time of the teleacope to parabolic ve-

locity. The epecific impulae of the engine wee aeaumed to equal I-lo~ eec.
and the booat acceleration for an antenna with a diameter of 1 km in IO" 3
(the limitation ia the reault of the engine'a energy requirementa). and for
a eyetem with a diameter of no km - 3'10" g (the limitation in the result
of the rigidity retention conditiona of the structure). The calculated time

valuee for acceleration and relative fuel expenditure are preaented in the
table below.

RB
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Basic Characteristics of the Engine System

        

   

 
   

Altitude of initial

orbit. thousands of
km

Acceleration Relative fuel
expenditure.

Diameter of
antenna, km

       

 

36
(Geostationary)

5. Placement into orbit and the possibilities for realization of the
project. The technical-economic evaluations were presented with the ob-
jective of determining a rational plan for creating a radiotelescope in
orbit end explaining the technical feasibility of the program.

To explain this influence on the primary technical-economic characteristics
of the program for the creation of KRT telescope parameters and space rock-
et devices which are used to place it into orbit it appears advisable to
restrict it by an approximate determination of the weight and cost expen-
ditures based on use of specific weight characteristics and costs without

a detailed analysis of the different variants. The derived quantitative
evaluations should be considered as extremely preliminary and character-
izing different variants more in their relationship than by their absolute
properties.

As a result of this preliminary examination the following plan for creating
a radioteleacope in the orbit of an artificial earth satellite. the follow-
plan was selected:

I) Placement of the individual components and elements of the telescope
(in a transportable package) into low orbit in "train" with the aid of a
special orbital tug;

2) Transport of the "trains" into the operational orbit with the aid of
an interorbital tug with a nuclear electric rocket engine;

3) Assembly of the telescope in the operational orbit.

In the telescope's assembly stage the participation of man is envisaged.

To accomplish this at the beginning of the assembly a similar plan exists
for placing a high orbiting station with a crew of 10 - 15 men into the
operational orbit. Another promising rariant is the use of specialised
automatic robots which may accomplish the assembly and operation of the
KRT upon commands from the earth. The station serves also as a basic faci-
lity for assembly of the antenna. Delivery and replacement of the crews,
as well as providing for their life support requirements is accomplished
with the aid of expandable or reusable intra-orbital piloted spacecraft
using chemical fuel (depending on the height of the operational orbit).

1&9
roe orrrcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the operational phaee of the teleacope periodic delivery of expend-
able conponente ia propoaed (baaically fuel for orientation, pointing and
aaintonance of orbital fornation) alao with the aid of nuclear powered tuga.

It ehould be noted that when creating teleacopea on relatively low orbit:
(up to aeveral thouaanda of kilometere) the uee of direct (without tuge)
place-ant of the aeparate conponenta into the operational orbit or the
application of intra-orbital tuga with chemical fuala nay turn out to be
more rational. Pron thie point of view. the quantitative evaluationa pre-
aented below for a teleecope with an antenna reflector diameter of one kilo-
neter at orbital altitudee of up to eeveral thouaanda of kilo-etere may

turn out to be aoeewhat ovaratated. which. by the way. doee not affect the
generality of the conclueiona which have been nade aa a reault of our evalu-
at one.

During the evaluatione for each Variant rational parametera for a reueable
low-orbiting tranaporter and intro-orbital tug, a plan for providing cargo-
paaaenger aervice along the route ”earth-high orbital atetion-earth”. the
optimua altitude for the circular operating altitude of the teleecope were
aelocted - all dependent on the diameter of the unfolded teleecope reflec-
tor. The total expendituree 8 on the creation and operation of the fully
aaeembled teleecope, which incfuded the development coata for the teleecope
and the creation and operation of the apace rocket facilitiea neceaeary for
it. including their flight deaign development. the nanufacturing coats of
the teleecope. the apace rocket facilitiea and the coat for placement in
orbit and aeeembly, the coat for operation of the K81. including cxpcnditurea
for aupplying it with expendable componenta and the functioning of the com-
mand and meaauring complex over a period of ten yeare were examined no the
criteria. In that caee, if it turna out that the parametera of a low-9r-
biting reusable tranaporter correapond to the mace of a uaablc cargo less
than 30 I. the expenditurea for developing euch a tranaporter were not con-
sidered. The following linitatione were alao accepted: I) the tine for
creating the teleecope to the beginning of ite operation ehould not exceed
five yeara with a launch rate of low orbiting tranaportera no oftener than
once every three daya; 2) the weight of the intra-orbital tug without a
uaeble payload and fuel doee not exceed the weight of the unable cargo of a
eingle low orbiting carrier; 3) crew exchange for the high orbiting etation
ia performed every aix montha.

Taking into account the neceaaary change in the rigidity (and coneequently
weight) characteriatica of the antenna when changing the altitude of the
operating orbit according to the conditione for allowing acceptable defor-
natione of ite reflector an a raault of the influence of the earth'a gravi-
tational field.

The reeulte of the calculatione are preaented in figurea b - 7 in the form
of grapha.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

1 . .Jneulnnquyllr I.‘

\’\N\ \

(WM

 

0700 0000000
”,nuwnxn (l0

 

Figure 0. Change in the "eight and Coat Expendituree on the
Creation of a Radioteleaeope with a Dianeter of
I kn Dependent on the Altitude of the Operating
Orbit

Diatribution of the tote]. m weight G: with e I In diaeeter on
the teleacope proper, and provieion for ita delivery. aeaenbly
and operation

Analogoua diatribution of the total coat 8; (3)

Bepreaentative unit 8. Creation

Operation 9. Development

Delivery and Aeaenbly IO. Thouaanda of kilonetera
Teleecope

Figure 5. Veriation in Height and Coat zxpenditure on the
Creation of a Radioteleacope with an Antenna Diameter

of IO kilo-etera Depending on the Altitude of the
Operational Orbit

[Key continued on following page]

51
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:

I. Distribution of the totsl KRT weight 68 with e diemeter of IO km
on the telescope proper, provision for its delivery, eseembly end
operetion

2. Anelogous distribution of the totsl cost 82 (3)

The figures be end 3e illustrete the chenge in the totsl weight of at end
the cost 8 for s redioteleecope depending on the eltitude of its operating
orhit h wi h diemeters of the open sntenns corresponding to I end 10 km.

As s representetive unit of cost (figures 5.5 shove) the cost for place-
ment into geoeynchronoue orbit of en sntenns weighing 1 kg with en unfolded
diemeter of I hm (without considering the costs for development, fsbrice-
tion end operstion) wee selected. The repr'eentetive unit which wee selec-
ted on the besie of eccomodetion to the core rison of the derived results
with the results of the other investigetions connected with the study of
the problem of plecing useful peyloeds of verious types into high orbits.

The weight 6 which wee cited for e low circuler orbit 8-220 km end direct-
ly cherecter zes the full cergo flow elong the route "eerth-low orbit"
(elements. tugs. treneport ships. fuel. etc.) is provided with the eid of e
reuseble low orbiting trensporter.

In figures Ab end 5b for the seme sntenns diameters the distribution of the
totsl KRT weight 6; on the telescope proper (the sntenns end supporting
elements). provision for its deliver end essembly (mess of the tugs. fuel
or fuel components for s high orbitel stetion. trensport epperetus, feci-
lities for their orbitel insertion. etc.). es well es for the operstion
(fuel mess. supply fecilities. etc.) ere illustreted.

The distribution of the totsl cost 5: on the development. creetion end op-
erstion is shown in figure 6c end 5c.

Prom figures be end 5e it follows thet for esch telescope size there exists
en optimum height for the opereting orbit in which the totsl cost expendi-
tures on its development. creetion end operstion ere minimized. A chenge
in the fsctors 6 end S; which were mentioned ebove end which were selected
for the optimum §ltitudes reletive to the diemeter of the unfolded sntenns
D, ere presented in figure 6.

The eveluetions presented show thet in the development end creetion of lerge
speceborne rediotelescopes with unfolded diemeters of from I to lo km the
expenditures required ere within the renge (l.5§12)-IO‘ representetive unite.
Accepting the velue for the representetive unit of 500%750 dollers (see. for
exemple [l6]). end expenditures in ebsolute units one may eveluete in billions
of dollers the corresponding diemeters of e deployed entenne.

The expenditures for eech ten yeers of operstion for such telescopes may be
evelueted es 3&8! from the costs of their development end creation.

52
you omcuu. use can
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

A comparison of expenditures for the development and creation (without
taking into account operations) of space and ground telescopes as a result
of present day work and data [IS] (figure 7) allows one to consider that
the creation of apacaborne telescopes with a diameter of the opened antenna
at several kilometers will cost less lthan the construction of a system of
ground-based radiotelescopes over the sale effective area. A similar con-
clusion was also arrived at in the work [36] where it was noted that in a
antenna with a diameter of approximately 5 km the creation of a spaceborne
rediotalescope will be cheaper by a factor of two than the construction a
ground-based system with the very same equivalent diameter.

:g-Iofwd (a) mo!“

 

Figure 6. Variation of the Height end Cost Expenditures
in the Creation of a Radiotelescope Relative
to the Antenna Diameter for the Optimum Orbital
Altitude (in which the expenditures for devel-
oplent, creation end operation are minimized)

Key:
I. Corresponding distribution 5. Operation
of total weight 6. Delivery and essembly
2. Corresponding distribution 7. Telescope
of totel cost (3) 8. Creation
6. Representative unit 9. Development

53
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Z 0 I I A9

Figure 7. Couperison of the Costs for Greeting
Speceborns end Ground-besed Redio-
telescopes

Key:
1 e 0011".
2. Systen of ground-besed rediotelescopes ("Cyclops" (Isl)

Conclusion

Cosnic spece. with ell the difficulties of working in it. presents e nun-
ber of unique possibilities for estrononicel reseerch unetteineble under
eerth conditions. The celculstions perforeed show thet specehorne redio-
telescopes permit the investigetion of the universe within very hroed
linits. cleer to the curveture redius of spece. In so doing. the nost
ilportent probleee such es how did life develop in the universe. end the
fornetion end evolution of e number of celestiel objects (sters end plene-
tery systees. gslexies end quesers) ney he resolVed. Such possibilities
ere tied in with the feet thet under conditions of weightlessness end the
distence tron eerth entenne structures of greet sise ney he crested. one
ney evoid the high level of eerth-ceused redio interference end the influ-
ence of the eteosphere end rediotelescopes eey he dispersed et distences
on the order of the size of the soler systen.

It is inportent to note thet the solution of technicel problems in the
crestion of rat coincides with the prinery direction in the develop-ent of
spece technology et the present stege. substetieting the necessity for using
reusehle trensport creft end the principles for creeting very lerge struc-
tures in spece. Very siniler require-ence erise when discussing projects
for the creetion of lerge soler electro power stetione in spece end lerge
reseerch stetione. Apropos these projects (or the creetion of RR? it is
necessery to resolve e nunber of couple: technicel problens:

- delivery into spece end esseebly of lerge structures. end towing then
into neer soler orbits;

-- creetion oi eutonetic control systees which provide for the control

5"
m orucm. use om
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the m reflectora prieary aurface and the nutual poaitioning of the
receiving device. with accuraciea defined by the operation of the 1m in
the nillineter radio wavelength”

- preciae coordinate eeaaureeenta for the m. a preciae tine coupler
for the radio eisnale and the traneniaaion of wide band aignale and their
proceeeins.

All of theae queetion are already being reaolved at the preaent tine.

The evaluatione perforaed ahow the principal poeeibility for the creation

in near earth orbita of epaceborne radiotcleecope retlectore with a die-
eeter of up to 20 In and erected from auto-etically deploying antenna
nodulee ueaeurins on the order of 200 a. For the operation of auch anten-
nae in the ehort wave portiona of the radio band (to the nillieeter uave-
banda incluaively) the creation of ayetene for eutoeatic control of the
coin reflector auriacc ia required. The apecific can of auch antennae will
elount to 0.260.! kg/e'. The total coet tor the creation and placement
into orbit oi a KR'I' nay coat I+I0 billion dollare for antennae with die-
aetere of ”IO Ito.

The creation and devlopnent of nodulee for an eccueulating apaceborne
radioteleacope. that ie a Rat with a reflector diameter on the order of
200 I one nay coneider it a teak the aolution of which it ia edviaablc to
enter upon at the preaent tine.

BIBLIOGIAHH

I. Buyekae, V. 1.; Gvuichava, A. 5.; Gorahltov. l.. A.: end othere. KOSHICII.
158130., Vol I6. No 5. p 773. I978

2. Pager, J. A.. and Carriott. R.. Trana. 1m, Ap-I7, No 6. p 652. I969

3. Gveaicheva. A. 8. coll. "Proektirovaniye netallicheekilth Itonatruktaiy"
[Deeizniu Iletallic Structuree], ‘l‘eIIIlS Goaatroya 8888, laeue I0 (I8).
I969

Io. Crawford, R. 1n; IIedgepeth, J. 3.; and PreiawerIt. P. 11., AIM Paper,
No I267. p I. I976

5. Healer. 'l'., ASTROII. and A3308” Vol I6. 9 56. I976

6. Vol’nir, A. 8. "Uetoychivoet' detonirueaylth aiaten" [Stability in
Deformation Syeteee]. Koacow. Nauka. I967

7. Sevel'yev. V. A. "Ketallicheakiye konatruktaii" [Metallic Structurea].
Hoecow, Stroyizdat. I966

8. ‘rroatyanekeye. Ye. 3.. ed.. coll. "Plaetiki Itonatruktaionnogo naznacheniya
(reaktoplaety)" [Plaetice in Conatruction Rolee (Themaettin; Plaetica)].
Hoecow. Khiliya. I976

55
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
9.
I0.

ll.

I2.

l3.

lb.

IS.
I6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

roger. J. A.. AIAA Pop". No 238. p 5. I976

evantchava. A. 8.; Lombatdo. I. V.; and Savol'yov. V. A. "Statioti-
chookty analix oluchoynykh oohibok foray ootchotykh aforichookikh
oboIochok" [Statiotlcol Analysis of Random Erroro in the Porootion
of utttcod Solution Slum]. Sunny Ioport at the 6th All-Union
Contotonco on Roliobility in Structural Nochonico. Moscow. I975

Rauohonbokh. 3. V.. and rotor'. Yo. N. "Upruvloniyo oriyontotutyoy

koouichookikh opporotov" [Orientation Control for Spacecraft]. Moscow.
Nouko. I976

Grinnin. 8. 0.; Lookov. L. V.; Koxlov. N. N. "Bloktrichookiyo
rokotnyyo dvigotoli" [Bloctrtc Rocket Basin-o]. Hoocov. Hoohinootro-
yoniyo. I973

lolotokiy. V. V.. and Yogorov. V. A. 108M163. ISSLBD.. Vol 2. No 3.
p 392. I966

Koollo. D. 8.. and Noelle. N. a. "Rauntohrtfohrochuns. Vol 20. p 57.
I976

"Project Cyclops". Anon Roocnrch Cantor. NASA. I97I
Shooffor. N. SPAcnPLIGaT. Vol 18. no I0. 9 363. I976

COPYRIGNT: Isdatel'otvo "Nouko." “Koouichookiyo isolodovoniyo“. I978

9082

C80:

I870/330

56
you ontcm. use om!
UDC 553.98:551.7.022.6(‘70.6‘+574.12)
STRUCTURE OF THE SUBSALI DEPOSITS 0? THE CASPIAN SYRBCLISE
Moscow NBPTBGAZOVAYA GBOLOGIYA I GBOPIZIKA in Russisn No 11. 1978 pp 22-26

[Article by A. V. Yegorkin. B. H. Chernyshev. V. N. Belokopytov, B. c.
Danilova and V. P. Koloniyets. NPO Union of Geophysicists]

[Text] The Caspian syneclise offers significant interest due to the dis-
covery of oil and gas deposits in subsalt deposits on its periphery. How-
ever. further expansion of operations is restrained because of the acquisi-
tion of conflicting information on the geologic structure of the subsalt
couple: in its internal areas.

In this paper we interpret new data acquired as a result of deep seismic
soundings obtained in regional profiles of Blists-Busuluk and Saratov-
cur'yev (Pig 1).

 

Figure 1. Diagrsn of the Profile Layout.

Key:
1. Kusbyshev 6. Blists
2. Orenburg 7. Astrakhan'
Ursl'sk 8. Volgograd
3. Ural 9. Ssrstov
6. Gur'yev 10. Volga

5. Caspian Sea

5?
ran omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The spacing between seismic stations in the profiles was 8-10 km. and
150 km between explosion points. The powerful explosions carried out
across 500 he provided high-intensity waves of various types.

The predominant frequency on the seismograms was 2-4 He. Three components
of dislocation were registered: a vertical and two horizontal. The reli-
ability of the construction of seismic boundaries is achieved as a result
of interpretation of a wide class of waves: longitudinal and transverse
(reflected. refragmented). transmitted and reflected composite waves of
type PS. The advantage of this study as opposed to earlier ones lies in
the use of polarisation analysis of PS waves, which enabled us to obtain

a high-grade curve of the ratios of the velocities in the layers separated
by the boundaries of the exchange. to follow the surface of the layers with
reduced layer velocities.‘ On the whole. this significantly increases the
possibility of geological interpretation of the seismic sections.

Seismological sections were constructed from acquired seismic data and
correlation of the available geological materials (Figs 2 and 3). The
error in computing the depth of the occurrence of the seismic horizons
in these figures is about 15-7 percent. The regional seismic boundaries
are traced: s-surface of salt complex; 176-probsble base of the salt;
Trl-roof of the carbonate complex in the subsalt layer; 1T2-intsrface of
the carbonate subsalt coupler; 1I3-roof of the terrigeneous layer. lying
on the basement: B-surface of the crystalline basement.

The observed boundaries 1T and 1‘; are autochthonous. They occur near the
roof and base of the subealt part of the section.

The seismic horizon confined to the surface of the salt complex is con-
structed from the composite and refracted waves. The horizon is indicated
in the sections as based on earlier studies [8] because of the complexity
of the relief and the insufficiently dense network of observation points.

The horizon Ls was separated for the first tine solely by composite waves.
It lies between the earlier known horizons S and III. The seismic hori-
tons. located on the level of horizon 1YC. during similar studies conducted
previously were not recorded.

The waves corresponding to horizon'trc, reliably separated in an over-
whelming majority of seismograms. are characterized, usually. by a uniform
anomalous polarization in which they differ from neighboring waves. In
large areas of the central depression of the Caspian syneclise the boundary
of 1T6 is anomalous.

'In the text the boundaries which correspond to surfaces of the layer with
a higher layer velocity than the overlying stratum are called normal;
with the opposite velocity relationship. they are called anomalous.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BO -f 630

uzuluk profile.
31 fornations.

l
I. .
\ maﬁﬂﬁa

g the Ellota-B

ﬁgure 2. Solenogeolo
a-tetrigeneouo daposito‘ b-cnrhonaco deposits. c-hydrochenic
surfac- oi the fold-structure stage; e-aurtace of
t—burins stratum; do the
1 rtaln;

); 1-valuu of boundary an
[a]; krpooitlon of

rota; to

 

oi

D.kn ‘
g the Suratov-Gur

b-Caepinn syneclioe. l-Eleon—Chelka
IV-Gur'ycv rice; bore hole:
kiy, 253-

l-Kolokol'tsovs
1-1090” y. S—Zapadno-

‘yev profile.

Figure 3.
I-Voronezh anticltoe, rskiy trough.
Il-Arolsor rise.

the profile

n-occutrtn; 1o (9-Vol'novsk1 .
6-Peakovntokty,

l—Severo-Ltocvskty,

59
FOR orncm. use omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0
A...

I . 1.."
‘:.|.I' 01‘ :‘Ft':':'. . n' '
‘ v.0... “3.3.. 0.. .3 . o .

zww-f "

 

results of deep anionic noun nation studies: l-deep
faults; II-ochor faults: reap-rated by “ionic data. b-propoud; n-bore
holes: o-occurring in the profile (so-1 Aroloor. 30. 17, 32-Zapadno-
Toplovokiy. 535-Sobolovokiy). b-ruovod from tho profile (208.l-Sukhocinakiy.
l-Grolyochimk, l-‘replovokiy. 629. lOO-Sobolevokiy). c-recomnded to drill.
A-Korpinsk arch. B-cio

Donet- trough, c~Coopion oynecliu: l-Sarpimkiy
trough. lI-Araloor tin; Ill-Bl'ton-Chollunkiy Rough, D-Volso-Unl'ok
anticliu: IV-Drol'ok nose, V-Buzuluk bum. VI-Solobovskiy ohclf.

 

Romskiy); b-ronovcd from the profile (Ii-Shanna
k-rraktovakiy, 80-1-81":

ov, ZS-Rtunokucskiy).
are the on. u in Figure 2.

kiy, 12-Novo-Kuvanakiy.
The twining synbols

60
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The regional seisnic boundaries 7T1 and 1T3 are also distinguished by
composite waves. The first of them is normal and the second is anomalous.
horizons 17 and B are exploratory. Their certainty is confirlad by inter-
pretation of waves of the different types.

The seismic survey of horizon 1rd has special significance since it is
located higher than horizon'TT1 and. as opposed to 1T1. it usually corre-
sponds to the roof of the layer with lowered velocity.

Study of available materials [8] shows that horizon 1T1 and reflection
horizon 771. which were separated in our sections. are identical (see
Pi s 2 and 3). The independence of the hypsometric position of horizons

c and 1f; also established this in which the latter. as traditionally
considered, represents the surface of the subsalt bad. Through a coapari-
son of drilling and seismic prospecting data [b.6.7) it was discovered that
horizon 771 corresponds to surfaces of different ages and different litho-
logic relations of strata and is found higher or lower than the interface
of the salt and subsalt complex. and fros this originated the hypothesis
that horizon 77c is confined to this interface.

This is actually borne out by the data of bore-hole l-Sukhotinskiy in the
Karakul'skiy arch. and also by the bore hole located in the Gremyachensk
and Zapadno-Teplovskiy areas. At the seas time the facial replacement of
the subsalt carbonate rocks by terrigeneous one along the line from the
borders to the center of the syneclise completely explains the anomalous
character of the LS boundaries. Therefore. there is a complete basis for
the assumption that under horizon L8 in the central part of the syneclise
lie terrigeneous sediaents. According to our data they possess a layer
velocity “77'3‘9 km/sec. while the salt layer has v,-6.S km/sec. This does
not conflict with the latest conclusions [1], in agreement with which core
hole SG-l-Aralsor, drilled in the central depression of the syneclise at a
depth of 6630 m. uncovered subsalt terrigensous deposits.

Approximately at these same depths (6.5-6.6 km) in the sections along the
line Blista-Buzuluk, horizon LS was located, taken by us as the roof of
the subsalt stratum. The position of horizon LS in this region coincides
with the level of occurrence of horizon XX HRNP [expansion unknown] [2].

The correspondence of the chosen horizon L8 to the interface of the subsalt
and salt strata is indirectly borne out by the resolution of the straight-
forward problem of gravimetry of deep sections along the Blista-Buzuluk

and Saratov-Gur'yev profiles [3]. Judging by these calculations, the depth
of occurrence of the base of the salt in the buried section of the sync-
clise along the profiles cannot exceed 6.7-7 km. This also agrees with
recently received data and with other investigators [5].

Thus. a series of independent materials suggests that in the central de-
pression of the syneclise the surface of the subsalt bed is found signifi-

cantly higher than the assuaed earlier level.

61
you orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The underlying seismic horizon 171 in the area of the entire buried part

is normal and is registered within the aubsalt stratum. we then suggest
that the boundaries being investigated occur in higher velocity deposits.
According to our data, this stratum has a layer velocity v1r-S.S km/eec.

It is mainly composed. apparently. of carbonate rocks. The stratum of low-
velocity sediments. lying between horizons TTC and 1T1. we determine to

be the upper terrigeneous aubsalt complex.

The seismic boundary 172 has a high boundary velocity (v,-6-6.2 kn/sec)
and, similarly to boundary 1T1. is characterized by a normal polarization
sign corresponding toWﬂ'c waves. This boundary apparently separates a
single high-velocity complex of rocks into two strata. where the upper
(vyr-S.S kmleec) is composed of carbonate and terrigeneous rocks, and the
lover (v1t-6 km/sec) is essentially carbonate.

The bass of the aubsalt carbonate complex is represented by an anomalous
boundary 1T3. The underlying seismic boundary (3) characterizes the sur-
face of the basement. The stratum of rock, confined to the interval be-
tween boundaries 773 and B has a layer velocity v1r-S.6 kmlsec. In rela-
tion to the enclosing layer, it is a low velocity layer. This layer is
most likely represented by terrigeneous deposits of Proterozoic-lover
Paleozoic age. and so it separates out as a lower terrigeneous aubsalt
complex.

The surface of the crystalline basement (boundary 3) in the buried part of
the syneclise is determined by composite and refracted waves. The depth
of its occurrence basically agrees with the depth in other profiles.

Thus. judging by the seismic data. the aubsalt part of the section in the
central regions of the syneclise is divided into three lithologic-strati-
graphic complexes: upper terrigeneous. carbonate and lower terrigeneous.

The sufficiently certain tracing of the seismic boundaries of the border
zone of the inner depression of the syneclise shows the continuity of geo-
logical growth of this region. Evidently, all the layers of the sediments
which accumulated on the periphery of the syneclise, received one or the
other distribution in its central part.

The presence of complexes of aubsalt rocks of great thickness in more
accessible than expected depths increases the prospects of oil and gas

explorations in aubsalt deposits of the buries part of the Caspian syne-
clise.

BIBLIOGRAPKY

l. Bogacheva. H. 1.; Vasil'yev. Yu. H.; Volkova. B. 0.; et s1. "Stratig-
raphy and Lithologic Features of the Arsleor Superdecp Bore-Hole Sec-
tion." TRUDY HINKR GP. Vol 100. 1972.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

lo.

5.

6|

7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vesil'ev. Yu. H. "Stratigraphic Position of the Seismic Reflecting
Horizons," TRUDY HIM GP, V01 100, 1972.

Yegorkin, A. V.; Popov, B. A.; Faytel'eon, A. SH.; et a1. "Coshined
Interpretation of the Grevisetric beta and Deep Seienic Studies,"
PRIMAYA GEOPIZIKA, No 88, 1977.

Yenikeyev, P. 11.; Ivanov, Yu. A.; and Bventov, Ya. S. "Basic Direc-
tions of Studies and Problem for Further Study of the Subsalt Conp1ex
of the Caspian Basin," CEOLOGIYA NEPl'I CAZA, No 12, Moscow. Nedre.
1973.

Kontsenebin. Yu. P., and nedik, L. V. "Nature of the Gravitational
Anomlies of the Caspian Basin." NEHBCAZOVAYA GEOMGIYA GEOPIZIKA,
No 8. Moscow, VNIIOBNG. 1977.

Kopytchenko, V. H. "Geology and Exploratory Methods for Deposits of
Oil and Gas in the Subselt Reef-Originated Structures of the Northern
Border Zone of the Caspian Basin," NBPTBGAZOVAYA GBOLOGIYA GBOFIZIKA.
No 11. Hoecou. VNIIOBNG, 1977.

Xunin, N. Ya.; Iogsnson, 1.. 1.; end Lyekh, L. 1. "Analysis of the
Accuracy of the Seisnic Construction Along the Subsslt Horizon of the
Caspian Basin." GBOLOGIYA NBPTI GAZA, No 8. Moscow, Nedra, 1977.

Ponenko, K. 3.; Denent'yevs, I. 6.; and Dekhnich, A. V. "Structures
of the Subsslt Bed of the Caspian Basin," GEOLOGIYA mam GAZA, No 6,
Moscow, Nedrs. 1972.

COPYRIGHT: WHOM, 1978

9351

cso:

1870

63
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OVPICIM. USE ONLY

PHYSICS

STATE 0? THE MT 01’ AND PROSPECTS POI! assumes 0N MIYICIAL mm SATELLITE
LASER DETECTION AND RANGING EQUIW

hoscov WANTOVAYA BLEERDNIKA in Russian Vol 5 No 11 pp 21.28-21.31. Ianuscript
received 6 Feb 78

[Article by K. Canal. Prague Polytechnical Institute. Prague. CSSR]

[Text] A brief history is given of artificial Earth satellite laser detection
and ranging, the specifications for laser rangers ore formleted, end a de-
scription is given of laser ranging systems in existence at the present tins.
of the Smithsonian Observatory. NASA and lnterhosnos type.

The technique for neasuring distances to Earth satellites suggested and in-
plenented by 6.6. Plotkin in the first half of the 60's has proven to be very
effective for the purposes of geodesy. geophysics and astronomy. The first
generation of laser rangers nade it possible to gain a neasurenent accuracy
of as such as 1 l n. An accuracy of about 10 cm can be obtained when using
laser rangers of the second generation. and of less than 3 cm with third—
generation. Satellites of the Beacon, Gees and Diaden type have made it
possible to get a mint: meesurenent precision of 10 cn, and of the Starlett
and Lageos type, of 3 cm. The main sources of errors can be divided into

two groups. in addition to errors associated with the location and design
of reflectors in satellites. propagation of the bean in the atmosphere. and
the value of the absolute speed of light, there exist laser ranger instrunent
errors. including errors caused by the finite length of the laser pulse. in-
stability of electronics, tine maintenance and the calibration technique.

The key require-cuts for a laser transnitter are short pulse length. high
energy (power). end reliability of performance in individual instances. A
Q-avitched ruby laser set all the requirements for a first-generation trans-
mitter. This utterly sinple system generates e pulse 20 us in length with

a nean power of l w, but even the use of systsns vhich determine the center of
monentun and of systens with melon} has not made it possible to use this laser
in a second-generation ranger. For the purpose of elininating errors caused

 

*The basis of this paper is a report requested for the Third International
Conference on Lasers and Their Application. Dresden. 1977.

6k
roe orncm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the long length or the pulse. it is possible to use aethods for forming
nanosecond pulses. such as tapping the energy stored in the cavity. or cutting
out a pulse fro: s longer one. If a determination is made of pulse centers

in addition. then lasers with a pulse length or a few nanoseconds satisfy
second-generation requirements. Third-generation laser transmitters at the
present time utilize the principle of mode synchronization and high-speed
shutters. The ruby laser is very simple and reliable. but also of interest

is the utilization of the second harmonic of a garnet laser and of CO lasers.
which are capable of operating under complicated weather conditions. In this
paper certain data are presented on the main satellite ranging systems in
current use. the Smithsonian, NASA. cuts and Interkoamos.

Introduction

The launching of the first Soviet satellite marked the opening of a new era
in science. one of the main trends of which has been space geodesy. At the
first stage satellites were photographed against the background of the stars:
here the method of cosmic triangulation has made it possible to determine
chords a few thousand kilometers long. for the purpose of arriving at the
shape and dimensions of Earth with high accuracy. The results of satellite
observations have also been used in geophysics. astronomy. etc. Because of
atmospheric turbulence and the errors of the instruments used, the accuracy
in measuring distances had not exceeded 10 to 100 m. The appearance of lasers
made it possible to measure directly the distances to satellites [l]. by com-
bining laser and photographic observations or by using laser methods alone.
The "Great Arctic-Antarctic Chord" [2] and "Standard Earth III" [3] projects
utilized laser measurements with success.

The key requirements for a laser transmitter are a short pulse. high power and
low beam divergence, and the ranging set should have a moderate size and high
reliability. The pulsed lasers which have appeared [6] satisfy these require-
ments. For example. a moderate-size (as compared with a microwave transmitter)
ruby laser emits a pulse 10 ns long with an energy of l J and 3 mred divergence;
with a l H: repetition rate the system provides about 105 bursts. Por the
purpose of amplifying the operating signal. in satellites have been installed
corner reflectors [l]. which amplify the reflected signal by a factor of 10.

1. Energy Balance of a Laser Ranger

The energy balance of s ranger is determined by the ranger equation. The
magnitude of the reflected signal a: the point of location of the laser is
determined by the expression BlDﬁQ‘ . where B is the energy. D is the
diameter of the beam. 0 is the angular divergence. Key first-géneration
rangers are described in u.L. Kokurin's survey [5]. In fig 1 the ranger
equation is presented in graphic form by using the parameters of the Inter-
kosmoa ranger [6].

2. Satellites with Corner Reflectors

The optical characteristics of satellites with corner reflectors are given
in table 1 [7-10]. The Geos. Beacon. Diadem and Interkosmos-l? are multiple

65
FOR orncm. use om:
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

purpose satellites. The large nuﬁer of different instruaents on these
satellites has hindered a determination of the center of mass in relation to
reflectors with the degree of precision needed for special investigations.
for the purpose of obtaining data nesting second-generation requirements.

it is necessary to malts not less than 10 neasurements over a 10 s period.
The Starlett and Lageoa satellites were protected from such interference

as the influence of the atmosphere end the light pressure of the Sun. These
are spherical satellites with high specific weight: Starlett--icosshedron;
composition: uranium-238. 1.5 percent molybdenum; specific weight 18.7;

ms 35.5 kg; nusber of reflectors 60: launched 6 Feb 75. Lageosusphere,
60 cm diameter; mass 400 kg; number of reflectors 640; launched lo May 76.

 

figure 1. Graphic Representation of Ranger Equation for the lnterkosmos
Laser Ranger: Energy 1 J; inlet aperture of receiver's
telescope 0.07 a2; bees divergence of laser transmitter 0.6
end; nominal atmospheric transmission 60 percent; quentun
yield. taking into account all losses of receiver. 1.5 percent
[6]; sndistance to satellite; N-nunber of photoelectrons;
ratio of effective area of satellize and angle gf divergence
of reflectors equal to 107 (1). 10 (2) end 10 (3) nzlsegnent

Key:
1 . 'nterkosmos-U

3. Causes of Brrors

At the present tine instrument errors are determined by the following factors:
length of the laser's pulse. the recording unit, and reflectors. The first
factor: Por the purpose of creating a simple laser transmitter only a multi-
node laser is used; therefore. it is necessary to operate with a long pulse
with an unspecified been structure [11,12], which increases the error. The
second factor: Vith a not too great number of registered photoelectrons there
occurs distortion of the form of transaitted signals and of reception signals

66
roe omcm. use our
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[6.13.16]. The shapes of signals obtained by aeans of a computer [15] are
shown in fig 2. The third factor: Reflection fro- aeVeral reflectors results
in signal interference and additional indeterainacy. With a long pulse rise
tile. for the purpose of reducing the error. instead of a constant discrimina-
tion threshold systems have been caployed successfully which determine the
aiddle of the leading edge of the pulse or which determine the center of
energy of the pulse [13.10.16]. but, as is obvious from figs 2 and 3, this

is possible only with high signal levels. The first and second factors. as
well as the week anticipated signal from Starlett and Lageos (cf. fig 1),
definitely reduce the problea's solution to shortening of the laser pulse.

A laser with a pulse length of 6 to 5 ns and a device which determines the
center of energy of the pulse can be a compromise solution for second-genera-
tion rengers. In fig 4 [9] is illustrated the anticipated improvement in
precision when using a laser pulse with a length of 5 ns.

h
3.... . 0cm meme or Queue tar -
owe-sees w (mm... :v "manure-IO 3-1;;
pecttonas. Iatr- ms Mel). '
“I IO‘ I'm 5)

Table 1.

 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   

  

858 I.” 2.9
854: 2.9 L47
0505 l (A) 0.020
650$ ll (8) 0.127
68% III (C) I0
LAGEOS 0.0041
APOLLO II. H 0.040"
APOLLO I5 2.3040“
STARLETT 0.24
'IIMATION Ill 0.00!”
rescue-snap 2)
Mmpaocnoc 3)
Key:
1. Satellite 6. Relative reflect eggnala fro-
2. Geostatsionar satellites. 10"1 I“ lsegnent
3. Interkosaoa 7. Zenith
4. Orbital range. thousand 8. Elevation 05'
meters
5. Effective ares (angle of

diver ence of reflectors).
106 ll [segment

Let us consider the various causes of errors in detail. Let us assume that
the laser has a pulse length of 6 ns. that an appropriate target is used in
calibration. a corner reflector, for example. and that 100 measurements are
ads (which ensures a precision of i 0.5 an). Taking into account errors
introduced by the atmosphere (1 0.6 ca) and the precision of the calibration
instruments (1: 1.5 CI), we get a precision of 1 1.7 ca.

67
ran orncm. use ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

bf Reflected 813ml Obtain:
n1 masher of registered phn
tomlt1p110r, Io - <1 > [1

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

I
l
n

  

Figure 3. Calibration of Laser Banger by Keene of a Target. in Deter-
nining Riddle of the Leading Edge of Pulsea (l) and in
Deternining the Center of Energy (2) (Santiago de cube.

5 Jun 77; 20 neesurenents for each point): y' - x/c :
y"—nsen error of y' .

 

Pigure lo. Conparison of Reeults of Satellite Ranging (Ax—erro'.) for
Iirst- (20 na, a and b) and Second- (5 na, c'; Generation
Rangers with a Conetent Discrinination Threshold (a) and
While Deternining the Center or mergy (b and c)

The accuracy of deternining the center of energy vith a single neasurenent is
10 on. I! it is assuned that during a period of 10 s the satellite does not
experience considerable disturbencee. then with 10 nessurenents during this
period the confidence interval equals 3.3 on. Non-systenatic errors intro-
duced by the laser ranger's electronics equal. in NASA's experience. lo on

69 '

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
f0l OPPICIAL USE ONLY

(the loran c tining service. for exanple. enables referencing of 1 5 us.
which results with a satellite speed of 7 kn/a in indeterminacy of 3.5 cm).
The atnospheric model employed by NASA. based on the temperature. pressure
and humidity at the observation point. it is true. gives an error of 0.5 cm
[17.18]. but we will use 3 cm as a precaution. The indeterninacy introduced
by a first-generation satellite equaled 9 CI. and with 10 measurements the
reliability equaled 2.9. Taking into account all the errors presented below.

we get a maximum total error on the order of 7.7 on. which meets the require-
ment for second-generation rangers.

‘. Laser with a Short Pulse

For the purpose of Q switching of a laser it is possible to utilize electro~
optical shutters. revolving mirrors or coated filters. The length of a laser's
pulse is fundamentally lindted by the lifetime of photons in the optical ca-
vity (19]. An ordinary pulse under multimode conditions has a length of is
to 30 ns. which depends on the geometrical paraneters of the optical cavity.
the Q and the gain. A conbination of electro-optical shutters and revolving
mirrors with coated filters [20.21] eliminates the appearance of a spurious
pulse. makes it possible to increase the gain and, consequently. to shorten
the pulse. Even if a semitransparent mirror reflects eight percent. the
energy and output are raised to a level which destroys a ruby: therefore. in
ruby lasers it is difficult to expect an output higher than 200 HH/cmz.

At the present time there are two variants for obtaining pulses with a length
of a few nanoseconds. Both variants are based on chopping a giant pulse inside
the laser cavity by utilizing an electro-optical shutter inside and outside

the cavity. It is possible to control electro-optical shutters by means of

a spark gap or an electronic high-voltage shaper. with the variant whereby

the cavity is "opened." the length of the pulse is equal to the time the radia-
tion passes through the length of the cavity and theoretically it is possible
to tap almost all the energy stored in the cavity. A disadvantage is a possible
avalanche-type pulse rise. resulting in damage to the ruby. With the second
variant the rise time and the maximum length of the pulse depend only on the
speed of response of the electro-optical shutter and control circuits and it

is fairly simple to obtain a one-nanosecond pulse (according to some data [22],
even a pulse with a length of 100 pa). The reliability of this equipment is
high. and they have been used. for example in [9.12]. A disadvantage is great
losses of energy and the necessity of using boosting amplifiers.

Two variants are employed also for the purpose of obtaining sub-nanosecond
pulses. The first variant consists of obtaining them by means of the electro-
optical shutters mentioned in the paragraph above. The second variant is a
laser with node synchronization. In both instances it is necessary to use
several amplifiers. node synchronization can be obtained by the active or
passive method for ruby [23-25] and garnet [26]. A garnet laser with active
node synchronization has a pulse length of 100 pa. and of 20 pa with passive.
For the time being passive shutters are being used for a garnet laser only
under laboratory conditions; passive shutters have been used more extensively
for ruby; for example. the Quantel firm [23]. using a passive glass shutter,

70
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has cone up with e ruby laser with an energy of 2 J, a pulse length of 1 ns

and a repetition rate or 0.25 Rx.
ing. has developed a garnet laser with similar parameters:

0.25 J. 0.3 ns

and 3 Hz in the green bend.

Table 2.

 

5)

   

g? 8)
EE ﬁrmware.”-
is

      

   

"amp-«nu can. "Ml. an a)?“
n" ' num- anno- IO".-

  
    
 

IOOO n.

 
  
  
  
  
 
   

 

Buysnum 10)

Asmara-s 11)

C
Bum-sauna n so
mantras 12)

   
    
    

m. #:"11
me on
Slsrleu Static“

and"! amen
or mama e or are.“
no 1'ng 9) M Ayn

   

    
        

 

1. Program 7. Number of stations with two rangers
2. Interkosaos 8. Guidance systems
3. Nulber of active stationa 9. All reflectors on Moon
6. Proposed number of ata- 10. Visual
tions for 1977-1980 11. Autonatic
5. Satellites Iaasured at pre- 12. Visual and automatic
sent time

6. Proposed satellite leasure-
acute {or 1977-1980

‘
§=t

70

 

Pigure 5. Results of Pinding of the Lageos Satellite by the Smithsonian

Observatory (Arizona) [30] (0-a1titude of satellite above
horizon; curve-calculated signal aaplitude)

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Silvania firm. saploying active switch-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6. Location of Rangers of Interkosmos Program (July 1977)

Key:
1. Santiago. Cuba 6. cssn
2. La Par. Bolivia 7. Bulgarian People's Republic
3. avenigorod, USSR 8. Cairo. Egypt
6. Simeir. USSR 9. Kawalur, India

5. Polish People's Republic

The pulse repetition rate is determined on one hand by the desired accuracy,
and on the other by the energy capabilities of the laser transmitter. whereby
the requirements for reliability are taken into account. For the purpose of
obtaining satisfactory precision it is desirable to make measurements once

per second. lurthermore at work is the practical limitation of the impossi-
bility of in general obtaining in experiments [27] a degree of accuracy greater
than one tenth of a single measurement1 The isror in measuring the range of

a pulsed optical system depends on N' lz'n'l , where N is the total

number of photons and n is the number of averaged measurements. For ruby the
effective repetition rate equals from 1 [6] to 1/30 H: [14]. Increasing it
involves great ditticulties in cooling the ruby. In a garnet laser the re-
petition rete reaches 3 as [28.29].

5. Current Satellite Laser Systems

The number of stations and their chic! characteristics are given in table 2,
taken from the paper by M.R. Paarlman and G. Geygnebet and the author in [8].
There also mention is made of development prospects on the whole. From the
information available to this writer for June 1977 the plane are being

72
ran omcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

successrully fulfilled. In fig 5 is illustrated finding of the Lageoa
satellite by the Snithsonian Observatory [30] in Arizona (1 J, 6 no). The
location or Interkosnos rangers is shown in fig 6 [31-33].

Conclusion

Discussed above is the feasibility of measuring distances to artificial
satellites. whereby the problem is analyzed basically tron the vieupoint

of the design of a laser transmitter. Analysis has shown that for second-
generation laser rangers it is sinplest to use nanosecond lasers uhile making
a deter-instion of the center of energy when registering signals. A sub-nano-
second 1sser is needed for third-generation rangers.

Accuracy (in on) of Laser hanging with a Pulse Length of A ns

Calibration

Ranging accuracy (lO/JIO)

Systen instability

Tine referencing

Atnospheric correction

Correction for reflectors
(MA—o)

Total r.m.s. error

a

“N UU§UH
.
‘00 OUIOUN

Bibliography
1. Plotkin, “.8. In "Quantum Electronics III." Dunod, Paris, 196‘. p 1319.

2. Zhongolovich, 1.0. In "Nablyudeniya iskusstvennykh sputnikov zenli"
[Artificial Earth Satellite Observations]. No 12. 1972. Publication of
Scientific Results of the Interkosnoe Community, 1972, 61.

3. "Standard Earth 11!." edited by E.H. Caposchkin. Smithsonian Astrophys.
Obs. Spec. Rep. No 353.

a. Belluarth. 3.". In "Advances in Quantum Electronics," edited by J.R.
Singer. Columbia. 1961. p 323.

5. Kokurin, Yu.L. KVANTOVAYA ELBKTEONIKA. ;. 1189 (1976).

6. Hssevitch. A.C.. Abele. K.. Alnar, J. and Dericek, I. In "Proc. Intern.
Symp. on the Use of Artificial Satellites for Geodesy and Geodynanics,"
edited by c. Veis, Athens, 1973. Publication of the National Technical
University, Athens. Greece, 1974, p 81.

7. Lehr, C.C. "Laser System of Extended Range," Smithsonian Inst., Contract
NASA-2016, 1972.

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8.

9.

10.
ll.

12.
13.
lb.
15.
16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.
2b.

25.

"mar tracking Inatrunantatton. I’roceedinge oi the Second Workehop Held
at teculty of Nuclear and Phyeical Engineering, Technical Univereity of
Prague. Prague. 11-16 Auguet 1975." edited by 8.0. Weiﬂenbech and R.
Banal.

KcOuniul. '11... Carrion. W.J.. Ceudill. 1.0.. Grant. Ch.R.. Johneon, Th.8..
Preno. D.A.. Spedin, 2.1.. end Mneton. 0.0. In [8].

“even. 1’. BULL. “TRON. INST. CW“. 39. 18 (1975).

Korobkin. V.V.. Leontovich. A.H., Popova. 11.11. and Shchelev, H.Ye.
2m, g. 10 (1968).

Anherteunyen. R.V.. Beeov, 11.6., Zuyev. v.s., Rryukov, P.G., Letokhov.
v.3. end Shetbereelwili. 0.). mm. H.- 272 (1967).

Peerlnen, 14.11.. Lehr. 6.6.. Lenhee, um. and Hahn. J. In [8].
Plottin. R.R.. Johneon. ‘1'.8. and Kinott, P.O. In [6].

Lchr, c.c.. Teieng. c.n.n.. Mendee. G.H. end Bldred, R.J. In [5).
Renal, K. and Vrbove. M. In [8].

Lehr. 6.6. "Lieite to the Brror Reduction That Reeulte from Averaging
Large Nunbere of Optical-Radar Heeeurenente." Center for Aetrophyeice,
Preprint Seriee No 636.

Alley. 0.0. In [8].

Herini, 3.". end Hurny. (2.10., Jr. "Correction on Leeer Range Tracking
beta (or Ateoepheric Refraction et Blevetione Above 10 Degreee," GSFC
x-Docunent x-591-73-351. Novedeer, 1973.

Vuyleteke, LA. J. APPL. ms., .33.: 1615 (1963).

Renal. K.. Jelinkove. u. and Rrejicek. V. "Improving on Leeer Tranenitter."
Peculty of Nuclear Science end Physical Engineering, Prague, Report No
77/1.

Roechner. R. "Solid-State Leeer Engineering." Springer Verleg, Rev York.
Chap 8. 1977.

Kechevirth. J.P. LASER FOCUS. 13. 81 (1977).
Quentel Leeer Syeten (proepect).

Kubecek. V. and Renal. K. In "Proc. of 3. Internationale ‘regung Leeer
und mre Anvendungen." Dreeden, mm. 1977. p 638.

Jelinkove. 8., Renal. R.. Novotny. A. and Vrbove. H. 1333 J., 03-10.
726 (1976); on. gum. mumm. 1, 620 (1975).

715
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I0! OHICIAL USE ONLY

26. m1, K.. Jelinkove, II.. Novotny. A. and Vrhova, )1. "High Brightness
mum anillator." Faculty of Nuclear Science and rhyeical Engineering,
rregue. Report No 77/6.

27. Lahr. 0.6. "Linite to the Error Reduction That Raeulta from Averaging
Large Numbers of Optical Radar Heaauranente." Center for Aetrophyeiee,
Reprint Seriee No 634.

28. Brickeon, 3.6. and llarper. In!" 1383 3., 93-11, 160 (1975).

29. Wilaon. P.. Seeser, ll. and Notterp. K. "The New Nd:YAG Later-Ranging
Syatee tor the Sate11ite Obearvation Station at Rettzel," presented at
the 3rd International symposium for Geodesy end Phyeice of the Earth.
Rainer, 25-31 October 1976.

30. Peerlnen. “.11.. Tharp, J.H.. Arnold, ILA. end Vonbun, LO. "Lesaoe
Orbital Acquisition and Initial Aeeeeeaent," presented at Working Group 1,

Open Meeting of the 19th Intornetione1 Meeting of Cooper, Phildelphia,
June. 1976.

31. Maaevitch, LG. and ﬁnal. K. In [8].

32. Haaevitch, A.G. and ﬁnal. K. "Interkoenoa Laaer Radar Stations,"
Cooper, Philadelphia. 1976.

33. Abele, H.K.. Allin“, 1.. Canal, K., Dobecheveh, V.V., 111, 11., Knveinonko.
‘l‘.V., Lapuahka, K.K.. Lozinakiy. A.H.. Herein, K., Heeevich, A.G. and_
Tatevyan. 3.1:. In "Po program Interkouoe" [0n the Interltoeloe Program],
edited by 6.8. Narinnov. 1976, p 176.

comma-r: Indetel'atvo Sovatakoye Radio, KVANTOVAYA mm, 1978

8831
cso: 8166/0727

75
Fox orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSICS

A STUDY CONCERNING m USE OF LUKINESCBNT SCREENS 017 2:18, CdS-Ag, 0R Ni
FOR 1118 RECORDING OF PULSE!) INFRARED LASER RADIATION

Hoscow KVAMOVAYA Bmmrn in Russian Vol 5. No 11. Nov 78 pp 2451-2453
Innuecript received 6 Feb 78

[Article by Yu. A. Drorhhin, L. H. Zsytsev. L. N. Iveshnevs. V. H.
Klyuchnikov, V. Ye. Prokopenko and V. s. Trachuk, All-Union Scientific
Research Institute of Optico-Physicsl Measurements. Moscow]

[Text] 1. Introduction

The quenching phosphors ZnS, eds-Ag and Ni are snong the most promising re-
cording sedia for visualization of the spatial radiation pattern of lasers
in the infrared renge of the spectrum [1-3].

Inssnuch ss phosphors of this kind have no memory. s prohles in recording
pulsed laser radiation on luminescent screens made with these materials is
retrieving the information.

The asth of recording infrared radiation on luninsscent screens with
continuous ultraviolet intensification is employed for visualization of
radiation fields of continuous-enission lasers [1%]. Recording the radia-
tion of pulsed lasers by this method yields only low-contrast low-resolu-
tion quench patterns [5]. The nsin limitations here are the insufficient
intensity of screen glow and the difficulty of synchronizing a photographic
or kineuetogrsphic attachment with the recorded radiation pulses.

In this study the problems of synchronizing and of ensuring a high inten-
sity of screen glow were solved by exciting the screen with ultraviolet
pulses synchronized with the infrared radiation pulses. The photographic
attachment operated in the driven mode. Short frame exposures, determined
by the duration of glow of the luminescent screen, had made it possible
to realise conditions for obtaining infrared quench patterns with a high
spatial resolution [6].

In this study were examined the recording characteristics of luminescent
screens on Zns. CdS-Ag. or Ni at wavelengths up to 10.6 pm.

76
FOR 057mm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Apparatus for Measurement of the Recording Characteristics of Lumines—
cent Screens

A schenetic diagram of the experinental apparatus is shown in Figure 1.

As the source of near-infrared radiation served a 608-301 generator (1) on
neodymium glass (A- 1.06 pl) operating in the free-emission node. The
duration of a recorded eicroeecond pulse was measured with an Six-IX high-
speed camera (2) which had a mirror sweep and operated in the frame-by-frane
node. The laser radiation was passed through a set of light filters (3)

and then ainsd through a bean shaping optical systen (lo) at the window of
the SR camera.

3m cos-301 '-
an ID
my“
213 :2: IPK-lZO
I

Figure 1. Schematic Diagrsas of the Apparatus for Studying the Recording
Characteristics of Luainescent Screens (a) and of the Synchroni-
zation Systen (b)

    

- II

Pulse excitation of the luninescent screen was achieved by means of an
IFK-lZO flash tube (5), its ultraviolet spectrun having been notched out
by UPS-2 and UFS-lo light filters (6). The energy of a recorded pulse was
determined with en Im-Z calorimeter (7). Its shape and duration were
determined with an F0 93-111 photodiode (9) and on an 81-17 oscillograph
(8). The duration of an intensifier flash was varied from 50 ya to 2.5 as.
its energy renaining approximately 5 J.

Synchronization of an ultraviolet intensifier flash with a recorded infra-
red radiation pulse aas ensured with the aid of a delay systes controlling
the 65-26 pulse generator.

A glow pulse iron the luminescent screen (10) spread over the focal arc of
the SPR-IK ceaera coincided in ties with a quenching pulse, as a result of
synchronization, while the visualizable pattern was recorded with a photo-
graphic attachnent (11) operating in the driven node.

The delay of ultraviolet intensifier flashes could be regulated from 1 ya
to l a, asking it possible to record various phases of the phosphor quench-
ing process.

77
you crncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following cryatullinc plwsphoru with the peak intensity of glows at
about he 0. 56 we wavelength were examined in this study: Znso 5CdS

-3 10' Ag. 3 10' Ni. The phosphor was deposited on a thin (6 m thick;
Terylene film which had been precosted with a 5-10 In thick aluminun layer
serving as a nonselective heat absorber. The phosphor file was about 30
p- thick.

3. Analysis of the Cturacteristics of Luainescent Screens

The study of luminescent screens on a thin Terylene file has revealed that
during recording of radiation at the 1- 1.06 pa wavelength for pattern
visualization there occur two quenching nodes staggered in tine (Figure 2).

I

Figure 2. Recorded Trace of Quenching of a Luninescent Screen

The first quenching node is inertialesa (Figure 2b), the quenching pulse
here coinciding here in tine with the recorded infrared radiation pulse
(Figure 2a) and the duration of quenching corresponding to the duration
of that pulse. Characteristics of the luminescent screen determined by
the first quenching component have been plotted for radiation pulses
loo-600 pa long. The sensitivity threshold of the screen was in this
case 30 I 5 Ill/c32-

The conversion characteristic of such a luminescent screen is shown in
Figure 3. The nuaiaer of screen gradations. determined by the nunber of
noise spikes along the conversion characteristic plotted to a logarithmic
scale, is I)" v20 over the entire range. The resolving power of this screen
was R - 16-15 In' 1and its tine constant, deter-ined by the quenching
relaxation tine. was tr” 50 pa.

The second quenching node is inertial. the quenching pulse here being
shifted relative to the infrared radiation pulse by a tine “c the length
of which depends on thernophysical properties of the screen material.

The screen character stics corresponding to the second quenching component
were: 80 - 70 III/cu . m-6-8, R-lZ-llo and and tr" 0. l s. The conver-
sion characteristic of this screen is also shown in "Figure 3.

78
was orncm. use omx
FOR C WICIAL USE ONLY

     

ﬁlms/WI
J I c:-2

Figure 3. Conversion Characteristic of a Luminescent Screen Corresponding

to the InertialessZQuanching Hode (l) and the Theml Quenching
“ode (2): 8, chn

For the purpose of explaining the nechanisn of these different quenching
nodes. additional tests were performed at the 1 - 1.06 yn radiation wave-
length. These tests. perforled with phosphors on bulky l Ila thick sub-
strates of acrylic glass. revealed the sane first quenching node but a
different second quenching node with the sensitivity threshold there higher
(up to 0.5 J/cuz) than in the case of screens on thin 'rerylene substrates.

Recording on screens on thin ‘l'erylene substrates without a layer of heat
absorber (aenitransparent aluninua layer) revealed that the second quench-
ing node had vanished while the first one had reneined without change.

The energy characteristics of screens were neasured at the wavelengths
7&- 0.69 )ll (oat-20 laser in the free-eniseion node, with a radiation
power of approxinately 10 Id!) and )t- 10.6 )n (LG-25 laser in the con-
tinuou node. with a radiatiog power of app oadnately 10 H). The sensi-
tivity threshold was 0.1 J/cn and 0.3 .1] respectively.

A comparison between these data indicates that the nechanisn of the first
quenching node is not a thermal one and is characterized by selectivity.
The nechanisn of the second quenching node is thernal.

With regard to the thermal nechanisn of quenching of s luninescent screen,
it is interesting how the paraneters of the quench pattern change depend-
ing on the nanner of ultraviolet intensification. When the phosphor is
excited continuously. the? the sensitivity threshold of the screen is
rather high (Bo~10 U/CII ) In the case of pulse excitation. on the
other hand, the high intensity of ultraviolet excitasion lowers the
threshold sensitivity of the screen to Bo~100 u/cn .

The main advantage of visualization of infrared radiation with the aid
of pulsed ultraviolet intensification is that this method ensures a much
higher resolution of the recorded quench pattern: RI 12-14 ll.1 (co-pared

79
iron orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 053 0““

with 2-3 .4 in the case of continuous intensification [5]). This means
that during visualization infrared radiation on luminescent screens with
quenching there occurs. depending on the runner of information retrieval.
a redistribution of the recording characteristics of the screen.

1.

2.
3.
‘0

5.

66

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Levshin, V. I... Nitrofanovs. N. V., Tinofeyev, Yu. P., Pridnsn. S. A.
and Shchayenko. V. V.. TRUDY HAN, V01 59. 1972 p 61..

McGee, I. D. and Hsilos. I... 1838 J. 08-1. 1967 p 31.
Bridges. I. J. and Burkhart. E. Q., [BBB J. (18-4. 1967 p 168.

Bazhulin. A. 9., Irisovs. I. A.. Ssaorov, V. P.. Tincfsyev, Yu. P.
end Pridnsn. S. A., VESTNIK mun NAUK $588.. No 12, 1973 p 15.

Klyukin. L. H. and Klyuchnikov, V. 11.. KVANTOVAYA BLEK‘IRONIKA, Vol 3.
1976 p 1095

Khripchcnko. I. A., 12V. V02, RADIOPIZIKA. V01 3, 1975 p 1025.

COPYRIGlﬂ': Izdstel'stvo "Sovetskoye rsdio", "Kvsntovsye elektroniks", 1978

2415

680:

8164

80
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

TERMIIAL COMPLEXES Ill COMMIVE-USB comm SYSTDB

Moscow WAL'IIYYB WY V “CRISLITBL'IYKH 81m KOLLBCI‘IVNOGO
POL'ZOVAIIIYA in Russian 1978 signed to press 2 Feb 18 pp 2. 102-103. 108-110

[Annotatiom conclusion. list of abbreviations and table of contents from book
edited by E. A. Yskubaytis, Izdatel'stvo ”Statistika", 18,500 copies. 109 pp]

[Text] Authors listed on reverse of title page: V. V. Pirogov, L. P. Bogo-
molov. s. F. Gaysterov and I. P. avirskiy.

The book reflects a modern trend in the developent of hardware complexes for
autonated control systems: hierarchical multimachine collective-use computer
systems. The main modes of operation of minicomputer terminal complexes in
combination with a central computer in the performance of data processing
tasks are discussed.

The book is intended for specialists in the study. planning and use of com-
puter systems. and for students in the corresponding majors.

Conclusion

The terminal complexes whose stmctLu-es are presented in this book are the
main connecting link between powerful modern computer systems and the con-
stantly increasing number of users. The effectiveness of construction of
terminal complexes determines the effectiveness of operation of the entire
computer system. The constant improvement of computer hardware and the
expanding range of components demand a continuous search for ways of improv-
ing the efficiency of its use in all areas. In this- connection. the design
of terminal complexes oriented to the performance of user tasks and capable
of distributing the functions to be performed between the computation caps-
cities of the terminal complex itself and of the computer system to which
they belong will make it possible to attain important results. This entails
particularly the assurance of effective user access to computer system re-
sources and also the attainment of better technical characteristics for the
operation of the computer system as a whole.

81
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Vi)“ ()PFlCIM. “Sb! ONLY

Minicomputers must be considered a natural way of implementing terminal
complexes. since they make possible the most economical matching of user
requirements to the capabilities of modern computers. At the same time,

in view of developmental trends in the statewide and international computer
networks. terminal complexes using macrocomputers will be developed and put
into operation in the near future.

The extensive practical use of microcomputers and microprocessors will have
considerable importance in the design of terminal complexes. Their emergence
has brought about fundamental changes in many aspects of structure in the
design of an extremely wide range of computer systems. The authors do not
consider it possible at present to forecast an expected terminal complex
structure based on microprocessors, much less to give technical parameters
and operating characteristics of such terminal complexes. However, realiza-
tions of certain logical terminal mnctions, particularly interface functions.
with microprocessors are already known. The practical experience of their
use will make it possible in the future to determine the design character-
istics of terminal complexes based on microcomputers and microprocessors.

The book devotes considerable attention to the structural characteristics of
terminal complexes in hierarchical computer systems. since the Institute of
Electronics and Computers has accumulated experience in designing these during
the development of the Latvian 88R Academy of Sciences experimental computer
system. In this connection. the authors express their gratitude to the staff
members of the institute who offered technical material on the experimental
computer system of the Latvian 88R Acadew of Sciences that was used in this
book, and who have offered valuable consents during the manuscript stage.

List of Abbreviations

m Avtomatizirovannoye rabocheye mesto
Automated work place
APD Apparatura peredachi dannykh
Data transmission device
AP Abonentskiye punkty
User stations
VZU Vyzy'vnoye ustroystvo
Calling unit
V5 Vychislitel'naya sistema

Computer system

vs KP Vychislitel'naya sistema hollektivnogo pol'zovaniya
Collective-use computer system

a

DSM Dialogovsya sistema modelirovaniya
Interactive simulation system

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Dialogovoye rabocheye mesto
Interactive work place

Zapominsyushcheye ustroystvo
Memory unit

Informatsionnyy protsessor
Information processor

Konutatsionnaya sistema
Switching system

Iiszluashinm interteys [sinetrichnyy]
[Synetrical] inter-computer interface

ml'tipleksor peredschi dannykh
Date transmission multiplexor

Neposredstvennyy dostup k pmati
Direct access to memory

Osnovnoy prot sessor
Main processor

Psket modelinwushchikh program
Package of simulation programs

Programirwswye mini-mashinnyye terminaly
Prone-sable minicosputsr terminals

Postoyannoye zapominayusncheye ustroystvo
Read-only memory [non]

Raspredelennyye mini- 1 mikromsshinnyye komplew
Distributed mini- and microcomputer complexes

Raspredelennyye progrsmnyye sistm
Distributed programing systems

Sistema upravleniya
Control system

Swasnoy protsessor
Communications processor

Sistema avtomstizatsii proyektirovaniye
Automated design system

Terminal ' nyy konpleks
Tenninsl complex

83
ron orncm. use any
Terninnl'nyy interteysnyy protsessor
Terminal interface processor

Terninal'nyy nini-nashinnyy kompleks
Terminal niniconputer complex

Terninal'nays nini-nnshinnaya stsntsiys
Miniconputer terminsl ststion

Terminal 'nyy protsessor
Terninsl processor

Ustroystvo svyazi s ob"yekton
Device for interface with a process

Uzel vychislitel'noy seti
Node of s computer network

Ustroystvo preobrnvovsniye telegrstnykh signalov
Telegraph signal converter

Ustroystvo ushchity ot oshibok
Error protection device

Tsentrel ' nyy protsessor
Central processor

Tsentralisirovsnnyy bank dannykh
Centralized dsta bank

Rsboch elektronno-vychislitel'nnys mshins
Working conputer

Experimental'nays vychislitel'nays sisteIna
Experimental computer system
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Terminal Complexes Based on Hacrocomputers. . .. .... . .. . .. ...
2.1 Brief description or macrocoaputer resources....................
2.2 Single-processor terminal conplexen.............................
2.3 Multiprocessor terminal complexes...............................

Chapter 3. Terminal Couplexes Using Minicommters.....................
3.1 Minicomputern an a base for ainicomputcr terminal. complexes.....
3.2 Organization or interfacing with minicomputer complexes. ........
3.3 Cannon software for minicomputer terminal complexes. .... ..
3.10 Examples of use of minicomputer complexes.......................

Chapter 1:. Generation of Terminal Complex Configurations. . ... . .. ... . ..
10.1 Formulation of the problem of generation........................

11.2 The programing system of the generating apparatus.
L3 Examples of interactive generation of terminal complex
cong1mt1°DIOOOOOOI'OOOOOOOOOOIQIIIIDDOOOIOOOOOOOOO0.00......
Conclusion

Bibliography
List of Abbreviations

COPYRIGﬂ': Imtel'stvo ”Statistika". 1918

81080
C80: 1870

85
FOR OFFICIAL use own

1!:

19
2h

35
£8

55
68

93
102

101‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

MODELING um! ANAIDG 0019111398

Hoscou OSNOVY mDBLIIOVANIYA NA ANALOCOVYKH WOlISLITn'm warm
(Fundamentals of Hodeling on Analog Computers) in hassian 1978 signed to
press 6 Apr 78 pp 2-6

[Annotation and table of contents fron book by A. S. Urmayev, S. V.
Yemel'yanov, editor, second edition, revised and expanded, Izdstel'stvo
Nauka. 39,000 copies. 272 pp]

[Text] This textbook presents in a systematic manner the fundamentals of
programing analog computers for solving engineering and technical problems.
This book presents the principles of operation of the analog computer and its
principal operational units; the author presents general methods of program-
ming analog computers and examines methods of solving specific classes of
problems. The material contained in this textbook is illustrated with a
large number of examples and contains a substantial number of problems for
independent solving.

This textbook is intended for students of all specializations at higher
technical schools and can be utilized by instructors in engineering and
special departments in preparing lectures and practical classes for courses
focused on utilization of analog computers. This book can be of use to
engineers and technicians who use analog computers in their work.

The first edition of this book was published in 1971..

Contents Page
Edi tor 's Foreword 7
Author 's Foreword 9
Introduction ll

Chapter 1. Analog Computers and Modeling

1. Introduction 13

2. ‘mo Types of Analog Computer 16

3. Questions 18
86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Structural Analog Coaputers

1.

Composition and Function of the Principal Parts of Analog
Computers

Operational Anplifier

Addition Unit (Adder)

Integration Unit (Integrator and Integrating Adder)
Exanples of hthenatical Description of Structural Diagrams
of Analog Cosputers Consisting of Linear Unite

Program Control Unit (Circuitry)

Nonlinear Function Unite (Function Generators)
Phltiplication Unite

Function Reversing, Performance of Division and Root
Extraction Operations

10. Several Analog Coawter Diode Units
11. Differentiation Unite

12.

Problsns and Questions

Chapter 3. Accuracy of Analog Conputere

1.
2.
3.
4.

Sources of Analog Conputer Errors
Errors of Operating Unite
Q-Pactor of Analog Coaputere
Questions

Chapter lo. General Problems of Progra-ing Analog Conputers

1.
2

3e
‘9

Programing Language and Stages
Scaling Dependent Variables
Scaling an Independent Variable
Questions

Chapter 5. Reproduction of Solutions of Ordinary Differential

1.
2.
3.
lo.
5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

Equatione on an Analog Conputar

Conputation Capabilities

Stability of Differential Equation Solutions

General liethod of Programing Analog Computers for
Equations Solved Relative to a Higher-Ranked Derivative
Programing Analog Coeputere for Equations Not Solved
Relative to a ﬂigher-llanked Derivative

Programing Analog Counters for Equations Containing
Derivatives on the Right-Hand Side

Sensitivity of Solutions to Change in Parameters

Forms of Obtaining Differential Equation Solutions on an
Analog Conputer

Scaling Dependent Variables According to the Scale Problem
Method. Example

Questions and Problem

87
FOR OFFICIAL use 0qu

19
22
24
29

33
39
42

43

(do
48
S3
510

57
60
66
67

68
78
86
87

89
91

96
102

106
108

110

113
118
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6. Reduction of Boundary Value Probleas to Cauchy‘s

1.
2.
3.
lo.

Problem

Boundary Value Problels

Test Methods

Linear Boundary Value Problems (Method of Corbinationa)
Questions

Chapter 7. Reproduction of Solutions of Differential Equations

1.
2.
3.
4.
So

6.

in Partial Derivatives on an Analog Computer

Equations in Partial Derivatives

Expression of Derivatives Through Function Values
Approximation of an Equation in Partial Derivatives by

a System of Ordinary Differential Equations

Example of Programing an Analog Computer for Investiga-
tion of Ronstationary Temperature Distribution
Interpolation in Reproduction of Solutions of Equations in
Partial Derivatives

Problems

Grapter 8. Reproduction and Investigation of Specified Functions

1'
2.

of oz. Independent Variable on an Analog Computer

Problems Connected With Reproduction of Functions
Reproduction of lultiply Differentiated Functions
Specified Analytically

Reproduction of Functions Specified in Tabular Porn.
Graphically or by a Complex Analytical Expression
Reproduction of Discontinuous and Piecevise Functions
Exalple of Preparation of a Complete Analog Computer
Program for Reproduction of a Specified Function
Examination of Specified Functions with the Aid of an

Analog Computer
Problems

Chapter 9. Elements of Continuous Logic

1.
2.

39
‘0

Boolean Algebra of Selection

Conditional Operators of Appropriation and Their
Realization on an Analog Conputer

Several Applications of Boolean Algebra of Selection
Problems

Chapter 10. Gradient Method and Several Related Methods of

1.
2.
3.

Solving Problems on an Analog Computer

Differential Equations of the Fastest Descent and Climb
Method of Implicit Functions
Solving Systems of Equations

88
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY

122
122
125
127

128
130

134
137

139
1100

162
143

149
152

161

163
168

171

176
180
18'}

187
193
200
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lo. Deteraination of Extra-a of hmctionala Hith Restrictions
5. Problem

chapter 11. Geometric Structure. on an Analog (to-pater

1. Geometry and the Analog Coaputer
2. Plane curve
3. Analytical Axononetry

Appendix. Brief Maoription of tho DIV-7 Analog Computer
Bibliography

Sydaola
Subject Index

COPYRIGHT: Glamya redaktoiya fizikolatenaticheak‘oy literatury
izdatel'otva "Nauka". 1976 a launeniyani, 1978

3026
C80: 1870

89
ma OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

AUTOMATED CONTROL SYSTEMS AND ADAPTATIONS

Novosibirsk AVTOHATIZIROVANNYYB SISTER“ UTRAVLBNI';A I m! ADAPTATSIYA
(Automated Control Systems and Adaptations of Then) in Russian 1976 signed
to press 23 Hay 1977 p 2-8. 112

[Annotatiom introduction and table of contents from book by l. H. Bobko,
edited by G. I. Harchuk. Nauka. 3.600 copies. 112 pages]

[Text] The development of projects for building auto-noted control systems
has posed a nunber of problems of a procedural nature connected with the
selection of the structural design of the systems, the organisation of the
information base and the solution of the problems of reproduction and cir-
culation of the systems.

This paper is devoted to the construction of automated control systems and
studies in the field of systems structure, information aspects and other
problems determining the efficiency of automated control systems. A special
role is played by the problems of creating adaptive automated control
systems having a base version which can be adjusted in accordance with the
parameters of a specific enterprise.

The book is designed for engineers, mathematicians, economists dealing with
the problems of control automation and also students in the higher courses
at the institutions of higher learning.

Introduction

The projects for the construction of automated enterprise and branch control
systems in the Soviet Union have received special development at the beginning
of the 1960's which has been promoted to a significant degree by the special
resolutions of the party and government with respect to these problem.

At that time scientific collectives were created or began to be shaped

capable of formulation and substantiation of the principle directions of

the creation of automated control systems permitting a sharp increase in
effectiveness of the control processes.

The works by L. V. Ksntorovich. G. I. Harchuk, V. H. GlushkoV, N. P. Fedorenko.
A. G. Aganbesyan and other great scientists set forth the scientific and

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

procedural principles‘of building automated control systems. It is im-
portant to emphasize that in a country with a socialist economy, the methods
of improving production efficiency are distinguished to a significant degree
from the methods of intensification of production in the capitalist world.

In our country. in contrast to the capitalist companies and monopolies. a
unified. planned national economy will permit consideration of such areas in
the methodology of automation of control as the national automated system.

an integrated network of computer centers of the country. the national
economic planning system. the methods of providing incentive for productivity

of labor under the conditions of the socialist and production relations.
and so on.

The collectives of the cybernetica institute of the Ukrainian SSR Academy

of Sciences. the Central Mathematical Institute of the USSR Academy of
Sciences. the Mathematics Institute. the Computer Center, the Institute of
Economics and Organization of Industrial Production of the Siberian Department
of the USSR Academy of Sciences. and others have made an enormous contribution
to the develop-ant of the scientific principles of control. the creation of
the nethodology of constructing automated control systems and the practical
implementation of the scientific results in production.

Various scientific research institutes and design organizations have been
created for the development and introduction of the automated control systems.
These institutions, in close contact. on the one hand. with the leading
academic collectives and. on the other hand. directly with industry. not

only have created and introduced a number of effective automated control
systems, but also to a significant degree have formulated and developed the
scientific areas in the matter of management and control.

The active period of the construction of information automated control
systems (the Eighth and Ninth Five-Year Plans) can basically he characterized
by the work in the following areas.

1. The creation of a technical base for automation of control. This is not
only the development of computers having large menorizs. high speed and a
capacity for performing the operations needed for the automated control
systems. This is also the development of the data transmission equipment
which must ensure communicableness of the information both inside the enter-
prise end within the framework of the interaction of the enterprise with the
branch and within the region framework. This is also the creation of new
peripheral devices ensuring effective interaction of man and computer,
production process and computer. This is also the creation of systems
which operate in the time sharing mode which not only are to improve the
productivity of the calculated resources, but also to improve the productivity
of administrative labor and the necessary conveniences in the work of the
personnel.

2. The penetration of computer engineering and mathematical methods into
the sphere of management and control require: changes in the customary forms

91
non onxcm. use ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPOZ-00860R0001 00020030-6
TOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and methods of operation not only on the part of the administrative per-
sonnel. but also on the part of the entire collective of the enterprise
or institution. Therefore the study of the social behavior of man under
the automated control system conditions. changes in his functions and the
general structure of the administrative agencies is one of the important
elements in automated control systems which have a significant effect on
the operating stability of the system. the reliability of the data in the
control documents. and the “viability" of the system as a whole.

3. Computers. computational mathematical and economic cybernetic methods
have had a significant influence on tho improvement of methods of solving
functional problems in the direction of their substantiation, operativeness
and quality improvement.

4. Inasmuch as the control problems are basically information processes.
the organization of the information management in automated control systems
has primary significance. The operation of the enterprise or institution
under automated control system conditions requires a specially organized
information base. The information system changes its structure. forms of
representation and composition. The expenditures of the automated control
system on information and computer time, which significantly influences the
efficiency of the system, depend on the proper construction of the informa-
tion base.

5. It is natural that the use of computers in control problems requires a
special statement and program execution of the control problems and the
problems ensuring efficient functioning of the information base. Accordingly
the demand has arisen for the creation of automated programming systems and
special divisions of algorithm theory.

6. The practical impleaentation of automated control systems differs
significantly from the introduction of new equipment at the enterprises
(new technological processes. new equipment and new products). The auto-
mated control system influences the function: and the operating style of
almost the entire collective. Therefore the procedures used in organizing
the development and introduction of the automated control systems, the
sequence and methods of solving the problems in this process also are be-
coming a special division of research.

7. The series production of automated control systems or an individual
approach to each individual enterprise is a problem of commensurate expendi-
tures on the creation of automated control systems and their efficiency.
The development of the standard systems is cheaper. but as a rule. such
systems offer little cost benefit at the specific enterprises. they are

not adaptable in general, or expenditures commensurate with the development
of the standard design are required for the coordination of the standard
systems. The path toward the creation of standard design solutions from
which 1| is possible to construct the specific automated control systems
also doev not solve the problem completely. It is necessary to create
adaptatitn systems by which it is possible automatically to adapt the base

92
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

version of the automated control system to the specific conditions and
require-eats of the enterprise.

8. Finally. the information autonated control systems have the purpose

not only of operatively. reliably and qualitatively informing the adminis-
trative agencies about the course of the production process. deviations from
the planned operating conditions. information processing. performance of
the necessary calculations and generation of defined planning and adainis-
trative decisions. but also ensurance of conversion to optimising systene.
the creation of information conditions for inclusion of the procedures for
optimizing the planning decisions on various planning and control levels.
the procedures for statistical analysis of the state of the production
process and the solution of the forecasting problena in the software for
the operating automated control systems. The most important role must be
played by the information autoeated control systems in creating simulation
models of the operation of individual production elements on various levels.
These nodela permit various types of reorganization in production to be

played and evaluated in order to improve the basis for such reorganiza-
tions.

The scientific areas connected with the creation 0‘ automated control systems
have been forned for the noet part in the process of realising scientific
results in specific systens. At the present time a large umber of auto-
mated control systems have been built in the country which are operating
efficiently both at the individual enterprises and in entire branches. Many
of them are operating successfully not only where they were first created
but also at the other enterprises of the country. These are. for example.
the widely known L'vcv. Barnaul. luntsevo, and Svetlana systems. the branch

control system of the USSR hinistry of Instrument halting and a number of
others.

A great contribution to the development and introduction of automated control
systems at the enterprises and branches has been made by the great scientists
of our country V. )1. Glushhov. N. P. Fedorenko. G. l. Harchuk, A. G.
Aganbegyan. V. l. Shurihhin. A. A. Stogniy, V. V. Shhurba. A. I. Kitov. A. A.
Hodin. S. A. Dumler. O. V. Korlova. N. P. Lspshin. and so on.

The purpose of this book is to generalize the experience in the creation of
procedural principles and the practical development and iaplementation of
automated control systena at the industrial enterprises, including the
methodology of constructing the infatuation automated control systeam and
the means of conversion to the optimizing automated control systems.

In the principal sections we shall consider the following problems.

a) The structure and composition of the automated control systen. The
breakdom of the automated control systems into functional subsysteas is
appropriate in the developeent and selection of the netth of solving
functional problems. During the process of implementing these problems on

93
ran orrrcut use OIILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the computer. this form of decomposition leads to excess expenditures on the
creation of the information base which is charged with provision not only

for the individual functional problems (planning. accounting. analysis.

and so), but the control system for the project as a whole. Here direct
ce-unications and feedback of the. control system are well ensured. During
the formation of the structure and the composition of the automated control
system. it is proposed that formal methods of statistical classification

be used. The expediency of this approach is confirmed in practice. a number
of basic principles of the construction of automated control systems have

been formulated.

b). It is necessary to attach great significance to the investigation of the
information base of the automted control systems. The creation of an ef-
ficient data gathering system will permit a sharp reduction in expenditures
on gathering the initial data of the automated control systems. significant
improvement of the reliability of these data and ensurance of operativeness.
The structure of the information files and the system for representation

of the permanent storage information essentially influenced the economy of
machine time. Therefore a special study has been made of the structures of
the information files. and the method of information conpression in the
computer memory has been developed and implemented. The necessity for
constructing the economical information bases has influence on the operating
conditions of the operation systems. The structure of the information base
as a whole must correspond to the multilevel nature of the control systems.
The observation of this condition will also lead to economicalness in the

information system.

c) with respect to the problems of the hardware for automated control
systems, recouendations have been developed for efficient allocation of
computer equipment and determination of the correspondence between the
requirements of specific automated control system and the cosputer con-

figuration.

d) A special role is played by studies in the field of creating adaptive
automated control systems. This problem has been investigated from the point
of view of automatic regulation theory. and a specific structural design is
given for the adaptive software for automated control systems. In the
adaptation system three levels are proposed. The first level presupposes
the creation of an adaptive data processing system which encompasses the
processes of the economic formation of the permanent storage files. the
reception and conversion of the current information and the sorting of the
initial data for the functional problems. The software on this level is
adapted to the intonation characteristics of the object. The second level
adapts standard problems to the specific nature of the object. The third
level is designed for implementation of the original specific problems.

e) A study is made of the problem connected with the improvement of the
control process. In this section an effort has been made to demonstrate

the possibility of the information auto-sated control system to provide for

91.
ron orncuu. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conversion to optinizins system end syste-e thet can be edjusted to the
plennsd operstins conditions. The optiniestion procedures for prospective
end operetive plennins ere cepsble of being built into the Bsrnsul type
infornstion sutonsted control syste-s. This is denonstrstsd in the-emple
of the Bernsul rsdio plent. The epplicstion of the netth of stetisticel
snslysis will per-it substentieted solution of the probless of diegnosis sud
forecesting. Under the conditions of eutoested control systems, the results
of the forecestin; probless ere used in operetive production control. The
intonetion eutoseted control systens heve led to the possibility and
necessity for rhorsenizstion in the control structure. A study hes been
nede of the proqu of using the nethods of eutonstic reguletion in the
steeple of lebor nornstives. The problens of the epplicetion of simulation
sodels within the Ere-swork of the operstins eutoneted control systems have
been investiseted.

f) The operstins experience end the results of creetion end functioning of
specific systems ere :enerelized.

The entire work is illustrsted end substentieted on the Berneul end Signs
sutoeeted control systems thet heve been built in prectice end which were
developed by the collectives of the computer center of the Siberien Depert-
sent of the USSR Acedeny of Sciences. the I! i OPP Institute of the Siberien
Depertnent of the USSR Acedsuy of Sciences. the Bernsul Iedio Plent. the
Odesse Neptune Plent. the Altsy Trsctor Electricel Equipnent Plent. the

API NV i 330. the NIIsisteI Institute of the USSR Ministry of Instrument
linking with the perticipetion of nunsrous enterprises end institutions--
users of the Bernsul end Sips eutossted control systens.

The euthors express their sincere epprecietion to the scientific director
of the Berneul end Sips projects. Acedeelicien G. I. Herchuk end else
Acede-icien A. 6. Agenbeyen for perticipetion in the scientific direction of
these operstions end sttrection of the collectives of the IE 1 OPP Institute
of the Siberien Deperteent of the USSR Acedeey of Sciences to thee.

Contents Pege
Introduction 3
Chepter I. Structurel Cherecteristics of Autos-eted Control Systems......9

SI. Conposition end structure of eutonsted control systens. . . . . . . . . . .10
i2. Inforlstion eutonsted control systusnthe bus for

operetive end nptinel solutions......................... .......16
$3. Colputer nedis in sutoneted control systems. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21
$6. Hultilevel control systens end nini-couputers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

Chspter II. Infomtion Principles of Autonsted Control Systems. . . . . . . . 32
SI. Principles of the oruniution of the information bese. . . . .. . . . . .33
52. Selection of the principel link in the euto-stion (the

besic production iscilitynbssic resources). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .39
53. Study of the structure of the infomtion files. . . . . .. . .. . . .. . .. .62
N. Problens of infer-etion conpression..............................66

95
roe onxcm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Psse

Chapter III. Adeptation Principles in Auto-ated Control System........52
51. Three conditions of sdaptstion in the autouted control systen

.ofn‘reseseeeseesessseeesessoeeelosseeessesseeeseessesssseses053

52. Basic principles of the construction of sdsptive software in
the auto-sted production control cysts. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .60

Chapter IV. Bone Problem of Control Processes.........................7l

51. Regulation of lehor nor-stives in the sutonstsd production-

control systole“..............................................72
52. leprovsnent of the sdninistretive structure under the

conditions of the sutonsted production control systen..........75
53. Optilizstion procedures end the ststieticel apparatus in

the sutonsted production control system. . . . . .. . . . . . .. .. . . . . . . . .80
96. Sieulation in sutonsted control systems”........................8lo

Chapter V. Prscticsl Aspects of the Developlent of Autonsted
Production Control Systens................................88
Sl. Bernsul suto-ated control syste-s................................89
52. Signs sutonsted control systennfurther development of
the Dsrnsul autouted control sync-u”.......................98
melaton...0000.000.000.00...OOOOOOIOOOiolOOIO‘OOOIDOOIOOIOOOODIIOIOOIO6

Bibliogrsphyn.........................................................llo

COPYRIGRT: Izdetel'stvo "Noah", 1978

10845
650: 1870

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PU 81. MAT IONS

AUTOMATION OF CLASSIFICATION YARD OPERATIONS

wacou'nvmrmmzu WMNIYA SOKTIROVOCIINYHI STARTSIYAHI (HETODY
338112!!!“ men). TBUDY VSES'OMNOOO MWISSLBDWATEL'SKOGO INSTITUTA
zaruzuooonommo TRANSPORTA (Auto-scion of classification Yard Operation
(Methods of Task Inplenantation). works of the All-Union Scientific-
Research Institute of Rail Transport) in Russian No 575, 1977 signed to
press 9 Jun 77 pp 2.3, 159-160

[Annotatiom foreward, and contents fron book edited by Cand. Techn. Sci.
V. A. Buyanov, Transport. 1300 copies, 160 pages]

[Text] The work sets forth problans of the technology, data base. and
software for the tasks of auto-sting classification yard operations includ-
ing the processing of initial data. calculations of sorting sheets and
schedules, selection of the sequence of train reforming, and calculations
of yard operation plans. It emines the task of organizing the function-
ing of a routine data nodel of a classification yard. It presents routine
data intonation necessary for Asu operation and the systen's normative
base. It sets forth problem of program software for reliable ASU
functioning.

The book is intended for scientific and engineering-technical personnel
involved with problems of the use of computers to auto-ate rail transport
work and railroad operations.

46 illustrations, llo tables, 27 bibliographic references.

Large classification yards constitute one of the crucial links in the orga-
nization of the shipping process in rail transport. The concentration of
large volunes of car processing in classification yards requires optiulized
operation and autonstion of the processing of various types of infornation.
In recent years. classification yards have made extensive use of nodern con-
putar technology and data transnission equipnant to handle \outine planning
tasks. Regularly. four to six tines per day, railroad couputer centers
calculate current plans of train and switching operations for nore than loo
classification yards of the network. The Leningrad-Sortirovochnyy-Hoskovskiy
and Orekhovo-Zuyevo classification yards have adopted complexes of tasks, in-
cluding a broad array of auto-ation problens.

97
m onrcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Between l97l and 1975, the Laboratory of Automation of Planning and Admin-
istration of Yard and hub OPerations of the Computer Equipment Department

of the Ministry of Railways Central Scientific-Research Institute collabor-
ated with computer canter personnel of a number of railroads to develop a
standard ASTP [automated system of current planning] of the operation of
classification yards, using the computers of the railroad computer centers. In
collaboration with specialists of the Moscow Railroad the Institute's staff
developed an ASU for the Orekhovo-Zuyevo classification yard. On the basis 0f the
experience of developing ASU's for the Orekhovo-Zuyevo and the Leningrad-
Sorcirovochnyy-ﬁoskovskiy yards, the laboratory and the Pro ect-Dasign
Technology Bureau of the ASUZhT [ASU for Railroad Transporti made basic
decisions on standard ASU's for classification yards. based on their-generation
computers.

The present work summarises the experience of research done in the Institute
0" the dcVelGPIlent 0‘ ASU'S for classification yards with re rd to methods of
organising the processing of documentary information and hen ling of techno-
logical tasks. including tasks of logical verification and primary techno-
logical processing of data from telegraphed schedule sheets. planning of
station operations. selection of the sequence of train reception and
reforming. optimalisstion of reforming programs in parallel dispersal, pre-
pararian of schedule sheets on departing consists. routine information for
station shift conmmnders, and automation of station accounting.

Remarks and suggestions concerning the book should be sent to: Moscow,
3-ya Hytishchinsksya, lo. Redaktsionno-isdatel'skiy otdel TsNII UPS.

CONTENTS Page
Porevard 3
Chapter I. Technological Functions of Classification Yard ASU “
1. Array of Tasks of Automation of Yard Operations 6
2. Experience of Handling Tasks. and Stages of Their Adoption 5
3. Tasks of Development and Introduction of ASU's for Yards 9

and Hubs in the 10th Five-Year Plan

Chapter 2. Data base and Technological Normatives 12

1. General Principles of Supplying ASU's Hith Routine 12
Initial Information

2. Array of Routine Information For Handling ASU Tasks l3

3. Normative base of classification Yard ASU l9

6. Solutions of Organisation of Interaction of Yard Operators 29
Horking with ASU's
Chapter 3. Organisation of Teleprocessing of Data in ASU's 33
I. Basic Principles of Organisation of Teleprocessing of Data 33
in Classification Yard ASU's

2. Administration of Teleprocessing Resources and Exchange 35
Processes
3. Primary Information Processing 39
4. Mathematical Apparatus for Selection of Program Char- a3
acteristics and Ensuring Service Quality to ASU Subscribers
98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter b.

1. Task
Multi

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Organisa.ion of Interaction of Technological Tasks in
the System

Formulation. Organization of Data Bank Files for

ple and Multipurpose Utilization

2. Algorithm of Organizing the Servicing of Task Handling

Reque
Chapter 5.

ate
Technological Processing of Data From Telegraphed
Train Schedule Sheet

1. Use of Network Marking Codes and Numeration of Rolling
Stock in Processing the Telegraohed Schedule Sheet

2. Computer Processing of Data From Telegraphed Schedule Sheet

Chapter 6. Routine Model of Current Status of Yard Facilities
1. Task Formulation. Make-Up and Principles of Functioning
of Model

2. Train Reception and Forwarding Plans and Organization of
Their Correction

3. Correction of Tests of Telegraphed Schedule Sheets on
Arriving Trains

I. 0 "0d. 1

of Classification Yard

5. General Algorithm of Model Functioning

Chapter 7.

Routine Current Planning of Yard Operations

1. General Layout of Plan Formulation
2. Use of Fields of the Model of Current Facility Status in
Calcu'ating Station Operation Plans

3. Orgar

ization of Admission of Trains to Station

6. Calculations of the Organisation of Train Reforming

5. Calculations of Completion of Consist Build-Up

6. Processing of Data on Through Trains

7. Calculations of Supplying Train Consists with Locomotives
and Crews

S. Calculations of Train Forwarding Plan

9. Organisation of Utilisation of Planning Results

Chapter 8.

Optimalisation of Regulation of Operations on Sorting
hump. Calculations of Schedule Sheets on Forwarded
Consists

1. Selection of Optimal Sequence of Consist Dispersal and
Train Reception Tracks
2. Algorithm of Task of Selecting Optimal Reforming Sequence

3. Task
List)

of Optimalising Consist Reforming Program (Sorting

6. Algorith of Computer Calculation of Train Schedule Sheets
and Accompanying Documents

Chapter 9.

Organisation of Reference-Information Operations
Service and Automation of Yard Accounting and Records

1. Organization of Handling of Reference-Information Tasks

2. Task

Formulation and Principles of Automation of Yard

Records
3. General Algorithm of Computer Compilation of Accounting
Forms on Traffic Operations

Chapter 10.

Program Software for Reliable System Functioning

99
FOR OFFICIAL use any

06
b6
51
57
57
63
70
73
74
78
83
87
87
9O
91
96
100
107
ill
1l6
121
122
122

125
135

138
161

161
106

168
151
FOR OFfchAL USE ONLY

1. Organization of Interaction of Two Computers 151
2. Principles of Organization and Program Software of Backup 151.
Henry System Sarvico
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Voeaoyuxnyy ordana Trudovoso Krasnogo Znanoni nauchno-isalodovatol'
akiy inatitut zhaloznodorozhnogo tranaporta (TaNII HPS). 1977

685“
080: 1870

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIGlS

FAILURE m RESTORATION PROCESSES IN DATA TRANSMISSION SYSTBIB

Moscow PWBSSY OTKAZOV I VOSSTANOVLBRIY V 8181'“!!! In (Failure and
Restoration Processes in Data Transmission Systems) in Russian 1977 signed
to press 25 Feb 77 pp 2, 113

[Annotation and table of contents iron book by V. P. Altarcv. G. I. Shakun,
and P. i. Troiinov. Izdatel'stvo 8vyas', 4,500 copies, 113 pages]

[text] This book exasines processes of failures and restorations of data
transnission system. nodels and characteristics of. the quality of operation
of date transnission systems in an interrelationship with failure and restora-
tion processes. The authors present lethods of estinating the probability

of connectivity of Isultitersinal data transmission system.

This book is intended for scientific personnel working in the area of prob-
lem of isproving reliability of technical systems and data transmission
systess. It can also be of use to persons specializing in applications of
theoretical-probability nethods.

Contents Page

Preface 3
Introduction 1.

Chapter 1. Processes of Failures and Restorations of Nonredundant
Couponents of a Data Transaission Systen 6

1.1. Failure and Restoration Process Models of Individual Devices 6
1.2. Processes of Pailuras and Restorations of Series-Connected

Devices 14
alepter 2. Basic Hodels of Data Transmission Channel Mundancy
With Ideal Control 19
2.1. Loaded Standby Redundancy 19
2.2. Loaded Redundancy Hith Parallel Transmission 31
10].

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OMLY

Chapter 3. Date Transaiseion Channel Redundancy Models With Non-

ideal Control 35

3.1. Loaded Standby Redundancy 35

3.2. Loaded Redundancy With Parallel Transnission lob

Chapter 4. Message Switching Unit Equipment Redundancy Models 69

4.1. General 1.9
6.2. Computer System Failure Process Model With Dual Operating

Mode 51

6.3. Coeputer System Failure and Restoration Process Model with
Duplex Mode. With Ideal Control of Standby Special Computer 60
4.4. Computer Syste- Failure and Restoration Proceaa Model with

Duplex Mode. with Parallel-Redundancy 65

6.5. Computer Systee Failure and Restoration Process Model With
Duplex lbde. um; Load Sharing 69

atapter 5. Data Transmission System Efficiency Indices Taking

Failure and Restoration Processes Into Account 72
5.1. General 72
5.2. Methods of Determining Probability of Systee Connectivity 72
5.3. Message Delivery Time Probability Characteristics 83

Chapter 6. Gnaracteristice of Failure and Restoration Proceeaee in
Problem of Optimization of Data Transmission Systems 98

6.1. Method of Structure Optimization of a Mltiteminal Network 98
6.2. Evaluating Methods of Increasing Connectivity Probability 101

Bibliography 108
COPYRIGiT: Irdatel'stvo "Svyaz'", 1977

3624
cso: 1370

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

ﬂIGH—MKRM‘URE NUCLEAR FUEL

Moscow wsoxormmmsors unmon: mo in Russian 1978 signed to press
21 Dec 71. pp 1-8. 1:30-1:32

[Annotatiom table of contents. prefaces and introduction free book by R. B.
Kotel'nokov. 8. I. Bashlykov. A. I. Kashtanov and '1‘. 8. Hen'shikov. Atcmizdat.
1.600 copies, 1:32 pp]

[Text] This book provides information on the properties. preparation proces-
ses and uses of a promising nuclear fuel. refractory compounds of uranium,
plutonium and thorium. Data on radiation stability of these materials and
their coapatibility with heat carriers and design materials are systemtized
and critically generalized. Methods of preparing products from then such

as sintering, hot pressing, extrusion. gas compression, vibration packing,
rotary forging, casting. application of coatings in a pseudoliquefied bed and
so on are discussed. The results from a large number of works on refractory
materials are examined. making the book useful for workers in other areas of
science and technology associated vith process development, study of proper-v
ties and use of special types of high-temperature materials such as oxides,
carbides and metal-ceramics.

The book is intended for scientific personnel and engineers involved in the
production. applications and investigation of nuclear fuel for fuel elements
of nuclear reactors, and may he used by college students in the corresponding
specialties.

Figures. 176; tables. 73; bibliography, 617 itens.

Contents Page
Preface to the Second Edition 3
Preface to the First Edition 5
Introduction 7

Chapter 1. General Smary of the Characteristics of High Temperature
Nuclear Fuel. 9
l 1 Range of uses and main properties................................ 9
1.2 Thermodynaaic stability 15
l 3 Effect of reactor irradiation on chemical composition and them-
dvnamic properties of the tuba 23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

h Diffusion characteristics......................................
5 Fusion temperatures............................................
6 Heat conductivity..............................................
7 Heat expansion.................................................
8
9

Vapor pressure and rate of evaporation.........................
Mechanical properties..........................................
.10 Electrical properties..........................................
.11 Radiation stability............................................

Increase in volume (svelling).................................

Formation of gaseous fission products..........................
1.12 Production processes...........................................
1.13 Safety procedures..............................................
1.1% Effectiveness of use...........................................

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Chapter 2. Uranium Dioxide...........................................
2.1 Phase diagram of the U-0 system................................
2.2 Preparation of uranium dioxide.................................
2.3 Fabrication of uranium dioxide products........................

Production of pellets..........................................

Production of granules and microspheres........................

Physical properties of uranium doixide.........................

Chemical properties of uranium dioxide.........................

Behavior of uranium dioxide under irradiation..................

2

anne-

Chapter 3. Plutonium Dioxide and Mixed Uranium-Plutonium Oxide Fuel..
1 Phase diagram of the Pu-O and Pu-U-O systems...................
3.2 Preparation of plutonium dioxide and mixed oxide fuel..........
Production of pellets..........................................
Vibration packing method.......................................
The sol-gel process............................................
Physical properties of Pu02 and Puoz-U02.......................
Chemical properties of Pu02 and Puoa-UOQ.......................
Behayior or Puoe and Pu02-002 under irradiation................
Use or Pan and (U, Pu)02 in nuclear reactors..................

2.
2.
3.

wwww
O\VI a-w

er h. Thorium Dioxide and Fuel Based on it......................
Phase diagram of the Th-o system...............................
Preparation of thorium dioxide.................................
Preparation of thorium dioxide products........................
Physical properties or thorium dioxide.........................
Chemical properties of thoriun dioxide.........................
Behavior of Thea-U02 and Th02 under irradiation................
Fuel based on micro fuel elements..............................
Use of thorium dioxide-based fuel in reactors..................

C

C.

P

o.- as

c-c-sr e-c-srar a'g'
.

e

@dO‘mE’WNH

Chapter 5. Uranium Carbides..........................................

5.1 The 0-0 system.................................................
Preparation of uranium carbides................................
Preparation of cores from uranium carbide......................
Physical properties of uranium carbides........................
Chemical properties of uranium carbides........................

10%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0 e

“WWW
.
\IIE'wM
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6. Plutonium Carbidea and Mixed Uranium-Plutonium Carbide Fuel .
6.1 The Pu-C and Pu-U-C systems......................................
6. 2 Preparation of plutonium carbides and mixed uranium-plutonium

carbides.......................................................
6. 3 Preparation of cores from plutonius carbides and mixed uranium-

plutoniun carbides.............................................
6. '4 Physical properties of p1utonium carbides and mixed uranium-

plutonium carbides.............................................
6. 5 Chemical properties of plutonium carbides and mixed uranium-

plutonium carbides.............................................
6.6 Meta11ography of uranium and plutonium carbides..................
6. 7 Effect of radiation on the properties of uranium and plutonium

carbides

6. 8 Use or uranius and plutonius carbides in reactors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 7. ThoriumCarbides............................................
7.1 The 'l'h-C system..
7.2 Production of thorium carbides and of products from them. . . . . . . . .
7.3 Properties of thorium carbides...................................
7.10 Use of thorium carbides in reactors......‘........................

er 8. Uranius Mononitride.........................................
The 0-]! system..
Preparation of uranium nitrides..................................
Preparation of uranium mononitride cores.........................
Physical properties of uranium monomitride.......................
Chemical properties of uranium sononitride.......................
Properties of uranium carbonitride...............................

O
3'
'6

U‘WC’WNPC‘

see-Io

a “(3000)“

0

er 9. Plutonium Nitride and Fuel Materials Based on it...........
The Pu—B systcm..
Preparation of plutonium nitride and mixed uranium-plutonium

nitrides.

Physical properties of plutonium nitride and mixed uranium-
plutonium nitrides.............................................
Chemical properties and compatibility of plutonium nitride and
mixed uranium-plutonium nitrides...............................
Effect of irradiation on the properties of (Pu. U)!‘ and Palm...
Use of nitride fuel in reactors..................................

P

8' w MPG

VI

m

Chapter 10. Thorium Nitriie
10.1 The Th-ll system.
10.2 Production of thorium nitride and of products from it............
10.3 Properties of thorium nitrides...................................

Chapter 11. Fuel Based on Borides, Phosphides, Arsenides and Sulfides
or Plutonium. Thorium and Uranium
11.1 Phase diagrams of the systems
11.2 Preparation of the compounds

105
son OFFICIAL us: ONLY

311
31 3
31 5
319

320
320
325
328
332
336
3b9

351
351

352
355

357
362

370
370
372
372

375
37 5
381
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11.3 Manufacture of products......................................... 386
11.11 Physical properties of the compounds............................ 391
11.5 Chemical properties of the compounds............................ 396

11.6 Radiation stability. Use as nuclear fuel. 1:01
Bibliography 1402
Index “29

Preface to the Second Edition

The USSR has drawn up and is implementing a maJor program in the development
of nuclear power engineering. The use of nuclear power in ships and space
apparatus is expanding. Refractory compounds of fissionable elements are
being used in most fuel elements now being developed or planned. The devel-
opment and investigation of these types of fuel is proceeding intensively.

In the period since the publication of the first edition of this book (1969),
a large amount of new data on refractory compounds of uranium. plutonium and
thorium has been published. and the compounds are being used increasingly
expensively as nuclear fuel. This has necessitated a complete reworking of
the entire book. General matters involving these compounds are discussed
subject by subJect in the first part of the book. In the subsequent sections
these questions are discussed in more detail for the individual compounds.

Questions of the suitability of nuclear fuel are inseparably connected with
the design of fuel elements and the operation conditions of reactors. Prob-
lems of the economics and effectiveness of use of specific types of fuel are
no less inseparably connected with problems of the entire fuel cycle. The
interrelated nature of these problems has been taken into account in the dis-
cussion of the various aspects directly involved with mel. although ques-
tions of the 42.1.?!) of fuel elements and the fuel cycle as a whole are outside
the scope of this book.

In accordance with emerging tendencies and newly published materials, the ex-
tent of the individual chapters has changed somewhat: the chapters on thorium
and plutonium compounds have been expanded, and those on uranium compounds
somewhat shortened. The sections on analysis of radiation stability of the
fuels in question (questions of swelling. gas formation, compatibility with
cladding. stability of micro fuel elements and the like) have been significant-
ly expanded. General susssaries of production processes. safety procedures.
effectiveness of use and economics have been introduced.

All the material has been reworked. and this edition should be considered as
a natural development of the questions included in the first edition.

The sumary part of the book and the chapters on fuel based on coated parti-
cles and Nels based on borides. phosphides. sulfides and arsenides were
written by P. B. Kotel'nihov, those on thorium oxide by P. B. Kotel‘nikov
with N. V. Shishkov. those on oxide fuels by A. I. Kashtanov. those on car-
bide and nitride fuels by s. N. Bashlykov, and those on the interaction of
oxide. carbide and nitride fuels with claddings, the effect of radiation on
the properties of carbide and nitride fuels and the use of these fuels in

nuclear reactors by T. s. Men'shikov. 01g. 3. Kotel'nikuv was the chief editor.
1

M OMCIAL KB! W
FOR OPHCIM. USE ONLY

The authors are most grateml to the comrades who have reviewed the manuscript
and made valuable consents: V. V. Kalashnikov. I. 8. Golovnin and F. 0.
Reshetnikov.

Preface to the First Edition

Intensified operating regimes and especially higher temperatures are the main
direction of progress in power production in general and in nuclear power
production in particular. As a result. the interest in refractory compounds
of the nuclear fuel elements. uranium. plutonium and thorium. is growing
steadily.

The importance of developing fuel elements based on refractory compounds of
fissionable elements has increased particclarly as a result of ,the necessity
of increasing the efficiency of operation of nuclear power stations and of
developing power production and transportation reactors for space facilities.
host important are the oxides. carbides. nitrides and to some degree the
sulfides of uranium and plutonium. which are the subject of this book.

Some of these compounds. for example uranium dioxide and plutonium dioxide.
are already used expensively in the manufactore of fuel elements for various
types of nuclear reactors in many countries. In particular, uranium dioxide
is used as fuel in the mel elements of the lovoronezhskaya Nuclear Power
Station's water-cooled water-moderated power reactor and in the reactor of
the icebreaker Lenin. However. in spite of the expensive use of oxide fuels
and the large number of works which have been published. there is in Russian
no adequately complete survey or book on the production and properties of
these materials. The authors have attapted to fill this gap with the present
book by bringing together in one place data which have been published in
various sources.

In recent years. an extensive research effort dealing with high-temperature
nuclear fuel based on uranium and thorium carbides has been begun. The
Romashka. the world’s first nuclear reactor with semiconductor electrical
generators. whose mel elements are made of uranium dicarbide. is success-
fully operating in the USSR. Dispersion elements using uranium dicarbide in
a graphite matrix have been used in some experimental and power reactors in
our country and abroad. Uranium and plutonium monocarbides and a promising
fuel for economically advantageous fast-neutron power reactors which repro-
duce nuclear fuel.

The other refractory compounds of uranim. plutonium and thorium have not as
yet come into broad use. but they are being intensively studied as extremely
promising fuels. and accordingly the authors have considered it expedient to
present in systematic form the maximm amount of data on such refractory com-
pounds as the nitrides and sulfides of uranium and plutonium.

'i'he boo): discussed questions of processes for production of the compounds.
their properties and their uses. The authors hope that the book will be use-
on for a broad range of scientific personnel. engineers and designers en-
gaged in the developent of fuel elements.

107
son omcm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Introduction

He can for convenience classify materials which are usable as nuclear fuel
into the following groups according to temperature stability:

1. low-temperature materials. with a melting point (temperature stability
range) of 700-1200° c or below (primarily alloys of metallic uranium and
plutonium. but also some easily fusible intermetallic compounds of these
elements);

2. intermediate-temperature materials. with a temperature stability range
from 1200 to 2000° c (thorium alloys, silicides, and a number of intermetsl-
lie and a few oxide compounds of uranium. plutonim and thorium);

3. high-temperature materials, with a temperature stability range above
2000° C (oxides. carbides. nitrides. sulfides and phosphides).

High-temperature mel materials have a number of valuable properties as a
result of which they are used extensively in reactor construction or are
attracting considerable attention as promising fuels. In addition to the
high fusion temperature. which in some cases is of independent interest.
these materials generally have low vapor pressure, high chemical stability,
and considerable mechanical strength at high temperatures. The production
processes for many high-temperature fuel materials and the manufacture of
products from them also have a number of common characteristics. Accord-
ingly it is advantageous to include these materials in a single group and to
discuss their production and operating characteristics and properties to-
gether.

This book discusses preparation processes and properties of oxides. carbides.
nitrides. borides, sulfides, arsenides and phosphides of uranium, plutonium
and thorium. Such materials as beryllides. aluminides, silicides and com-
plex oxide compounds are not discussed. since as a result of certain proper-
ties they cannot be included in the first group (low fusion temperature, low
volume concentration of fissionable atoms and so on); selenides and tellur-
ides are not discussed because the prospects for their use are doubtful and
there is extremely limited information about production processes and pro-
perties.

The book consists of two parts. The first gives a general survey of the main
characteristics of the high-temperature nuclear fuels which are under con-
sideration and compares their most important properties. Questions of pro-
duction processes and safety procedures which are common to the high-temperature
fuels are discussed. along with certain aspects of the effectiveness of their
use. In the second part, questions of production processes for the individual
compounds are discussed, a critical analysis of data on radiation stability
and compatibility is made. and the physical-mechanical and technical proper-
ties of the compounds are analyzed in more detail.

COPYRIGHT: Atomizdat. 1978

108

5580 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
C50: 1870
POI! 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICA'I‘I 0N6

OPTICAL PROCESSING OF IIUF’OMWI‘ION

Leningrad OPI'ICHESKAYA 0mm INPOMTSII in Russian 1978 signed to press
I: May 78 DP 3. 165-168

(Foreword, table of contents and list of abstracts from book edited by
Professor 8. B. Gurevich, Izdatel'stvo "ﬂanks", 3,1050 copies. 168 pp]

[Text] Foreword

The subJect matter of the articles in this collection reflects the current
stage of development of methods of optical information processing. Together
with an effort aimed at the incorporation of these methods into various areas
of science and technology, work aimed at improving the availability of equip-
ment and recording materials and improving coherent methods of optical in-
formation processing is under way. At the sane time. a more profound under-
standing of the difficulties which must be met in solving a number of tasks
by this method has resulted in a tendency to resort actively to noncoherent
or mixed (using electronic components) methods of processing. A number of
the works presented in this collection reflect this trend, which may possibly
continue to develop, uniting coherent and noncoherent methods with optoelec-
tronic methods and thus making possible a better coupling of optical methods
with digital electronic ones (hybrid systems).

we may tentatively group the articles in this collection in three categories.
The first includes studies on fundamental components for optical information
processing. It includes work on the development of an acoustooptic deflector.
developent of hologram recording material based on electrooptic crystals.
and studies of “Se films. In the second category are articles dealing with
the possibilities and applications of methods of coherent optical intonation
processing in astronomy and in the classification of images containing fine-
structured objects (three collective vorks). We may also include in this
category tvo articles dealing with evaluation of the enera and information
capabilities of optical information processing systems. The third group com-
prises work on noncoherent methods for optoelectronic processing of images
which make use of original matrix scanistor photodetec tors and maskons. It
is becoming possible to consider these noncoherent outoelectric methods on

the same basis as noncoherent optical and coherent methods.

109
son orrxcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contents

Foreword

8. I . Stepanov, A. A. Kamshi lin and M. P. Petrov. Holographic Recording
of Images in Birefringent Blectrooptic Crystals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

M. P. Petrov. G. A. Smolenskiy. V. V. Lemanov. A. A. Uvarov. A. II.
Anisimov. II. N. Kovalev, Yu. M. Sosov. K. K. Yushin, A. 8. Fatov
and 8. G. Yegorov. An Acoustooptic Laser Light Deflector.............

N. M. Ganzherli and V. I. Kochenov. Recording of holograms in AsSe
Films with the Light of a helium-Neon Laser.

II. A. Yesepkina, V. Yu. Petrun'kin, I. A. Vodovatov, M. G. Vysotskiy
and S. V. Pruss-Zhukovskiy. Use of Optical Processing Methods in
Radio ”tmnWlOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOIIIOIOIOOOOOIOCOI00000000000000000I

A. M. Better. II. I. Pukhtoyarova. K. A. Veyner, V. P. Gorelik. s. N.
ﬂikolayev and B. C. Turukhano. An Automatic Correlating Unit for
Size Analysis of Bacterial Colonies...................................

A. A. Kolesnokov and K. V. Lapteva. Investigation of the Statistical
Characteristics of Pine-Structured Images by the Correlation Method.. .

0. A. Bukin. Yu. A. Bykovskiy, A. I. Larkin, A. A. Markilov and
s. N. Starikov. Analysis of the Microstructure of Tracks by the
Image Autocorrelstion.................................................

B. s. Gurevich. 8. B. Ourevich and B. I. Rapoport. Energy Calcula-
tions for Television Systems with Preliminary Optical Processing
of InfomtiontttotooOOolm0‘00...0......0.00..OIOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOO

S. B. Gurevich and B. P. Relin. Information Calculations for Optical
Information Processing Units..

K. P. Berkovskaya, s. B. Gurevich, 3. G. Podlaskin and V. P. Polivho.
Correlation Processing of Images on a Hiltiline Scanistor. . . . . . . . . . . . .

K. F. Berkovskaya, Ya. P. Bernshteyn, l. V. Kirillova and L. A.
Luizova. Use of a Multiline Scanistor for Automatic Determination
of the Statistical Characteristics of Stationary Random Processes.....

K. F. Berkovskaya and B. 6. Podlaskin. A Coordinate Indicator for
a Singly luminous OhJect..............................................

K. P. Berkovskaya. G. K. Grigor'yev, S. B. Ourevich, B. G. Podlaskin
and V. P. Polivko. The ﬂadamard Transform as a Method of Signal
Analysis in Optical Information Processing Systems....................

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.

21

26

38

50

59

72

82

92

102

113

127

135
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

K. F. Berkovskeys. a. K. Grigor'yev. n. V. Kirillova, K. M. duratikov
and B. C. Podlaskin. The Possibility of Constructing a' hadamard
Spectrum Analyzer Using a Maskon-Typa Photodetector Unit. . . ... . ...... . 1'07

Abstracts

Holographic Recording of Images in Birefringent Electrooptic Crystals. s. I.
Stepanov. A. A. Kamshilin and M. P. Petrov. pp h-Zl.

The most important aspects of fulfillment of the Bragg conditions in the dif-
fraction of light by holograms recorded in birefringent electrooptic crystals
are discussed. A general expression for the diffraction efficiency of s. .
holographic grating of the dielectric tensor is given: 6(3) N. + Sc cos(K'F).
The possibility of effective electric control of the conditions for Bragg
diffraction in holop-ams recorded in electrooptic crystals is discussed. The
results of the recording of polarization characteristics of an image and of
effective electric control of image reconstruction conditions. obtained in
experiments on holographic recording in the single-axis electrooptic ferro-
electric Lima. are presented. Bibliography. 13 items; 8 illustrations.

An Acoustooptic Laser Light Deflector. H. P. Petrov, G. A. Smolenskiy. V. A.
Lemanov. A. A. Uvarov. A. N. Anisimov, I. ll. Kovalev. Yu. M. Sosov. II. K.
Yushin, A. 8. Fatov and 8. G. Yegorov. pp 21-25.

The design and performance calculations of an acoustooptic deflector using

a paratellurite crystal are described. The authors made use of diffraction
of light by a slow transverse elastic wave propagating along the [110] direc-
tion. The acoustooptic cell was controlled by a analog input voltage or by
a code from a digital computer. The experimental characteristics of the de-
flector are given for light with a vavelength of 0.6328 microns. Biblio-
graphy. 3 items; It illustrations, 1 table.

Recording of holograms in AaSe Films with the Light of a Helium-Neon laser.
at. n. Ganzherli and v. I. Kochenov. pp 26-38.

The amplitude and phase characteristics of AsSe films and the recording and
reconstruction of holograms in these films with helium-neon laser light were
investigated. The effect of interference phenomena in the films on photo-
induced changes in transmissivity and optical path difference and on the size
of the maximum attainable diffraction efficiency of the holograms and the
dependence of diffraction efficiency on the thickness of thSP films were
studied. The exposure characteristics vere investigated and a figure for the
holographic sensitivity of AsSe films obtained. Certain possibilities for
elimination of the effect of interference phenomena are indicated. Biblio-
graphyo 15 items; 9 illustrations.

1.1.1
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Use of Optical Processing Methods in Radio Astronomy. N. A. Yesepkina, V. Yu.
Pgtrun‘kin. I. A. Vodowatov. M. 0. vystoskiy and s. V. Pruss-Zhukovskiy. pp
3 ~50.

The possibilities of using methods of optical simulation of the character-
istics of radiotelescopes and optical processing for spectral analysis of
radiotelescopc ontput signals are discussed. Optical simulation of the
directional patterns and space-frequency characteristics of radiotelescope
antennas is discussed using the RATAN-GOO radiotelescope as an example.
Results of simulation of directional patterns of the RATAl-GOO with allow-
ance for phase errors resulting from mowement of the irradiator out of the
antenna focus are determined. Methods of simulating the directional patterns
of correlating radiotelescopes are discussed. Questions of spectral analysis
using the scoustooptie spectrograph are examined. Certain experimental re-
sults are presented. Bibliography. 21 items; 8 illustrations.

An Automatic Correlation Unit for Size Analysis of Bacterial Colonies. A. M.
Bekxer, R. I. Bukhtoyarova. K. A. Veyner. V. P. Gorelik, S. N. Nikolayev and
a. c. Turukhano. pp 50-58.

By using the achievements of holographic correlation analysis of images and
electronics. the authors have developed a unit for measurement of the sizes
of bacterial colonies which appear in the form of circles of different sizes.
A procedure for optimizing the recording parameters of the filter is proposed.
The signals in the correlation plane are processed with a PTO-102M television
unit modernized for the purpose. The automatic control block controls a coun-
ter. a digital printer. a series of filters and a tape drive unit which inputs
representations of the bacterial colonies. Bibliography. h items; 7 illus-
trations.

Study of the Statistical Characteristics of Fine-Structured Images by the
Correlation Method. A. A. Kolesnokov and N. V. Lapteva. pp 59-72.

The possibility of studying a set of elements which form an analyzable image
by the correlation method is discussed. The problem which is set is that of
determining two statistical characteristics of this set: the integral dis-
tribution of individual elements according to size P(r) and the probability
density of distribution of the centers of the elements “(30). The main
theoretical relationships are derived and the results of experimental test-
ing of the method are presented. confirming the correctness of the theoretical
assumptions. Bibliogrpahy. 13 items; 5 illustrations.

Analysis of the Microstructure or Tracks by the Image Autocorrelation Func-
tion. 0. A. Bukin, Yu. A. Vykovskiy, A. I. Larkin, A. A. Markilov and S. N.
Starikov. pp 72-82.

An optical method for analysis of the microstructure of tracks in photographs
from a bubble chamber is described. The theoretical basis for a method of
determining the density of the bubbles and their average size and distribution

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from the autocorrelation function and its derivative is discussed. The de-
sign of experimental units to implement the method using noncohcrent illumi-
nation are described. The results of determination of the number of elements
and their size distribution in model samples and enlarged bubble chamber
photographs are given. The effect of photograph parameters on the accuracy
of the results is considered. Bibliography. 12 items; 7 illustrations.

Energy Calculations for Television Systems Using Preliminary Optical Proces-
ging of Information. 8. B. Ourevich. B. S. Gurevich and B. I. Rapoport. pp
2'91 u

The passage of signal and noise through the input stages of a transmitting
television system with preliminary optical processing of images is analysed.
The energy relationships in the various stages vith the use of a device to
convert noncoherent to coherent radiation are considered. Changes in the
signal-to-noise ratio froa the input to the output of the system are estimated.
Bibliogrpahv. 9 items; h illustrations.

Information Calculations for Optical Information Processing Units. 5. B.
Gurevich and V. F. Relin. PP 92-102.

The information capacity of an optical infonmation processing system is dis-
cussed, the effect of various causes of infonmation loss in the system is
evaluated, and the necessity of optimal matching of the information character-
istics of the main elements of the system is indicated. A procedure for cal-
culating the information capacity of the system and its individual elements

is presented. Bibliography. 17 items; h illustrations. 1 table.

Correlation Processing of Images with a Hultiline Scanistor. K. P. Berhov-
skaya. s. B. Ourevich. B. 0. Podlaskin and V. P. Polivko. pp 102-113.

A new use for the common solid-state switched photodetector is proposed: a
multiline scanistor for calculation of the proximity of images analysed in
noncoherent light and certain functions serving as standards or prototypes.
The operating of preparing transparencies representing the standard function
is eliminated, since the representation of the standard is input electrically
into the unit as a delay in the switching signals for the various lines. The
mask transparencies vhich can be synthesized directly on the photodetector
matrix have the foam of silhouette functions. which can also be shifted or
rotated around the,center electrically. The accuracy of correlation analysis
is limited by the real parameters of the multiline scanistor. Bibliography,
11 items; 5 illustrations.

Use of a Multiline Scanistor for Automatic Determination of the Statistical
Characteristics of Stationary Random Processes. K. F. Berkovskaya, Ya. P.
Bernshteyn. n. V. Kirillova and L. A. Luizova. pp 113-127.

113
FOR orrtcuu. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The possibilities of using a switched solid-state photodctector, the multiline
ecanistor. for analysis of instances of stationary random processes is dis-
cussed. It is shown that such functionals as the area bounded by the process
and a horizontal line. the length of time the process remains above a given
level. and the number of times the process intersects a given level, can be
calculated analogicelly with the scanistor without intermediate storage of
the profilograph of the process. It is proposed to use the degree of modula-
tion of the overall video signal of a multiple recording of the random pro-
cess as an easily measurable new specific functional. A simple relationship
between this functional and the sampling estimate of the variance and the
average arithmetical deviation of the curve from the stationary level is
identified. The results of classification of irregular surfaces using the
scanistor are presented. Bibliography, h items; 7 illustrations.

A Coordinate Indicator for a Uniformly Luminescent Object. K. F. Berkovskays
and B. 6. Podlaskin. pp 127-135.

A new use for some well-known semiconductor instruments, the multiline scan-
istor and the mashon, an optical image spectrum analyzer. for rapid determina-
tion of the coordinates of a singly luminescent obJeet is proposed. The
device has promise for use in industrial process automatic control systems
using a gallium arsenide LED as a light source. Bibliography, 7 items; h
illustrations.

The hadamard Transfonm as a Method of Signal Analysis in Optical Information
Processing Systems. K. F. Berkovskaya, G. K. Grigor’yev, 8. B. Gurevich,

The properties of the ”adamard transform in its realization at the output of
an optoelectric information processing system are discussed; the noise
characteristics of the system, the possibility of implementing the principle
of energy storage using the Hadamard analysis. and the nature of operation of
photodiode natrices switched according to the two-dimensional Walsh function
are analyzed. Bibliography. 23 items; h illustrations.

The possibility of Contructing a Hadamard Spectrum Analyzer Using a Haskon-
Type Photodetector Unit. K. F. Berkovskaya. G. K. Grigor'yev, I. V. Kirillova,
K. L. Muratikov and B. 3. Podlaskin. pp lh1-163.

The advantages and shortcomings of television transmission of images in the
form of their component space-frequency spectra are discussed. The component
elements of such a system are described individually. The possibilities for
technical realization of such units are discussed. A photodetector matrix
combined with a dynamically controllable transparency is analyzed in detail.
Bibliography. 35 items; 9 illustrations.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Nam". 1918

115
I.
35:? 1870 res orncm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL IISR ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

SPECTROSCOPY 01' GAS msomcs PLASMA

Leningrad SWSKOPIYA GAZORAZRYADNOY PLAZHY (Spectroscopy of Gas Dis-
charge Please) in Russian 1976 signed to press 8 Jul 76 pp 1-2, 161

[Annotation end table of contents fron book by G. A. Grigench, editor,
Isdatel'stvo mu. 1,395 copies. 164 pages]

[Text] This book deals with study of the various elesentery processes

which take place in s low-temperature gas-discharge plasma. The articles
discuss the results of investigations of widening of spectral lines by low
pressures of the specific and contaminant gases; excitation and ionization
during aton-atoe end atoe-nolecule collisions taking place with the partici-
pation of excited particles. etc. The book also contains articles on applica-
tion of the nethod of delayed coincidences in atomic and noleculsr spectro-
scopy and on the processes of for-nation of an ultrathin structure of spectral
lines in gas-discharge light sources.

This book will be useful to persons working in plasas physics and chesistry
end its technical applications. physics of electron and atonic collisions,
gas lasers. as well as graduate students and upper-division undergraduate
students specialising in the above-enuurated areas of knowledge.

Contents Page

Transfer of Excitation Energy During Aron-Atoll and Aron-Molecule
Collisions -- I. P. Dogdanova. 0. P. Bochkove. and S. B. Prish 3

Diffusion of Excited Atoes in Specific Gas and Mnixtures -
N. P. Pen'kin and T. P. lled'ko 51

Influence of Reactions with Participation of Molecular Ions on
the Character of Discharge Afterglow in Inert Gases - V. S.

Yegorov and A. A. Pastor 65
Transfer Processes in a Disintegrating Plasas — Yu. 6. Kozlov
and V. N. Shrebov 80
115

FOR OFFICIIJ. USE ONLY
Theory of a Light Source with an Atomic Bean and Its Experimental
Verification - A. c. Zhiglinokiy, A. A. Kelnkov, and A. S.
Kochenitovokiy

COPYRIGHT: Iadetcl'etvo Leningradekogo universiteta, 1976

30210
080: 1870

116
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

AUTOMATIC CONTROL OF VIBRATIOII TESTS

mscov AVTOMATICHBKOYE UPRAVLBNIYE UBRATSIOIINYMI ISPYTANIWI in Russian
1918 signed to press 20 Jan 78 pp 110-111

[Annotation and table of contents from book by A. 6. Cetusnov, P. I. Dekh-
tyarenko, B. Yu. Handrovskiy-Sokolov et a1., Energiya, 5,500 copies, 112 pp]

[Text] This book is devoted to discussion or a series or questions related
to the analysis. synthesis and practical realization of closed automatic
control systels for vibration testing with random and determined (monc- and
polyharmonic) perturbations. Systems for control or single-component and
multicomponent (vector) random vibrations are discussed. Questions of con-
struction of such systems using analog, digital and hybrid equipment are
treated. The results of calculations for specific practical systems, their
structural arrangement and some results iron their practical use are pre-
sented.

The book is intended for a broad range of engineers and scientific personnel
engaged in the planning of automatic computer and information measuring sys-
tems.

Contents Page
Foreword

3
Chapter 1. Principles of Organization of Vibration Experiments. . . . . . . 5
1. Methods of conducting vibration experiments. . . . . . .4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2. Structure of systens for control of vibration experiments. . . . . . . 8

Chapter 2. Analog Systems for Control or Random-Load Vibration
Experiments......................................................... ll.
3. Analytical basis for structure or the control system............ 1|.

. Control system for single-component vibrations.................. 20

Control system for multicomponent vibrations.................... 26

Stability of vibration test control system with random
excitation.................................................... 32

. Accuracy of vibration test control systems with random
excit‘tionaoeevseﬂssesseessssoeoeeeaeeaeaaeeeeeeaeeseaseeeeeee “2

117
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Q 57‘“:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. Control of Vibration Tests vith Determined Excitation. . . . . 5h
8. Control of vibration tests vith nonoharnonic (sinusoidal)

excit‘tionOﬁOC...OOOOODOOOOOOIO‘OOOOIOI'.OOOOOOOIDOIIOIOOOOIOI 5h

9. Control of vibration tests with polyharnonic excitation. . . . . . . . . 59

10. Vibration test control systems with built-in feedback circuits. . 67

ll . Selection of optimal excitation signal frequency scanning nodes. 73

Chapter 10. Digital and Hybrid Control Systems 80
12. Hybrid systems for control of nonlinear processes in vibration

testo......................................................... 80

13. Structure of a digital system for control of microconponent

random vibrations............................................. 85
lb. Use or the 8?? [fast Fourier transform] algorithm to generate

and analyze random processes.................................. 89
15. Control and identification algorithms........................... 99

Bibliography 106

81080
080: 1870

118
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

WNITION 01’ am SIGIALS BY THEIR STRUCTURAL PROPERTII

Leningrad RASPOZNAVANIYE mmm SIGNAIDV P0 I10! BTRUKTURNYYAM SVOYS'I'VAM
in Russian 1917 signed to press 27 Jan 77 pp 2-1», 62

(Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book by R. V. Gudonavichyus,
P. P. Kemeshis and A. V. Chitavichyus, Isdatel'stvo "Energiya". 8,000 copies,

62 99]

[Text] This book is the first attempt at a systematic discussion of the
theoretical and practical questions of the use of structural properties of
speech signals for their recognition. The bases for design of devices to
distinguish characteristics in terms of the structural properties of the
signals are discussed, and specific circuits and results of experiments on
the recognition of oral comands are presented.

The book may be useful to engineering, technical and scientific workers
dealing with problems of information processing in automatic control systems,
those who are developing apparatus for processing and recognition of signals.
and students in advanced studies and graduate students in the above-managed
specialties.

Foreword

In recent years an extensive literature has been devoted to recognition of
sound specimens. This problem is now occupying specialists working in ex-
tremely varied disciplines: psychologists, linguists, physiologists, math-
ematicians. and engineers; the interest in the subJect is easy to explain.
since this is a problem whose successful solution will make it possible to
partially substitute automata for human intellectual activity. The neces-
sity of solving this problem is being particularly acutely felt in a number
of areas of engineering cybernetics. and particularly in the development of
means for exchange of information between humans and computers.

The ways the problem is articulated in various vorks on the recognition of
speech, the scientific research procedures andthe practical conclusions
reached by various authors frequently have rather little in comon. A

119
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unified approach to the solution of the various problems which arise in the
distinguishing of characteristics. the creation of algoritlmns and the synthe-
sis or mechanisms for recognition still does not exist. ﬂoreover. far too
little attention is being devoted to the questions of selection of an initial
description of speech signals. Many investigators (h. 5. 6] are of the opin-
ion that almost any logically constructed initial description which preserves
the data can untimately lead to positive results given the proper organisation
of higher levels of the recognition system. But this approach is not entirely
correct. if only because it may lead to excessively complex operating algo-
rithms for the system as a whole. In contrast. a properly selected initial
description would unquestionably lead to great algorithmic and hardware sim-
plification.

The authors believe that the use of a structural model for signals which com-
prises several generally acceptable contour models [13. 23] may represent a
significmt step forward in solving the general problem of recognition of
speech signals and in the particular matter of selecting an initial descrip-
tion of them. This assumption. based on the fact that in contrast to the
contour model. which encompasses both the signal and any of its functional
transformations. on structural model makes it possible to develop algorithms
the results of whose use are invariant to certain signal properties; these
advantages show up particularly clearly when there is a paucity of a priori
information on the initial signal.

The structural properties of signals are already being successfully used to
solve a series of problems in cosmunications, measuring technology and pro-
cess diagnostics [13. 23]. The first experiments in recognition of speech
signals in terms of structural characteristics gave encouraging results;
further work has removed doubts as to the promise of this approach [8, 9].

This book. which reflects the authors' experience in recent years. discusses
theoretical questions of the use of structural properties of signals for
recognition of speech signals, makes recomendations for the design of
recognizers and presents the results of experimental studies.

The first chapter deals with theoretical problems of the construction of a
structural model of signals. The second chapter discusses numerical char-
acteristics of the structural model of speech signals. i.e. characteristics
to be recognized. The third and fourth chapters deal with questions of dis-
tinguishing characteristics by the structural model and their practical
utilization for recognition.

The authors are far from believing that it is already possible to give con-
elusive formulas for the recognition of speech signals; work in this area is
only beginning. However. the authors are firmly convinced that the use of
structural properties of signals will make it possible to bring work in the
recognition of speech signals to a stage at which recognition can be carried
out with a high level of reliability using relatively simple equipment.

120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OYPICIAL USE ONLY

The authors express their deep gratitude to A. M. Zayezdnyy for valuable advice
and assistance given during preparation of the hook.

Comments and suggestions aay be sent to: 1920hl. Leningrad. Marsovo Pole. 01.
Leningrad Division. Izdatel'stvo ”Energiya".

Contents Page

Foreword 3

Chapter 1. The Structural Model of the Speech Signal...................
1. structural characteristics and structural connections.............
2. Preliminary transformations of the speech signal..................
3. so“ .‘ruct‘uu connec‘ion.l0.0.0.0000...IIDIDOISODOOOUOIIOOUUOOOa
h. Observations on the adequacy of the structural model of the

speech signal fbr models of the hearing mechanism............... 12

‘0 Qm‘ﬁ

Chapter 2. Characteristics for Recognition............................. 16
SO Genera principle“.COOO‘IOOOO0.00.00.0It.OIIIOOlOOIC‘OCIOOOCOOleO 16
6' Tomlo‘icn1nm1mt...000000000000000.060.IOOOQOOCOOOOOOOODIOOII 18
7. Quasitopological characteristics.................................. 21
8. Time spent in the sectors of the plane by the representation

point of the phase representation............................... 27
9. Coding of phase representations................................... 32
10. Integral determination of structural connections with

explic‘t t1“...OOUOOIISOOOCOOIOIOIOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOIOO0.0.00.... 32
11. Some problems of preliminary segmentation of speech signals....... 3h

Chapter 3. Perception and Measurement of Charscteristics............... 36
12. Measurement of quasitopological characteristics................... 36
13. Measurement of time of stay....................................... no
1h. Deve1opment of codes for phase representations.................... h3
150 Intea‘l ..‘m‘e.000.‘OOOOIOOOOOOOSCOOOODOOIODOOaDDDOIIOOO.00.... “8
16. Determination of certain structural connections with

explicit tine................................................... h8

Chapter h. Experimental Studies of Effectiveness of Characteristics.... L9
11. Apparatus and general experimental procedure...................... L9
18. Study of the effectiveness of quasitopological characteristics.... 52
19. Study of the effectiveness of characteristics based on

estimation of time of stay...................................... 55
20. Study of the effectiveness of integral estimates.................. 5?
21. Study of the effectiveness of mixed characteristics............... 58

Conclusion ' 59
Bibliography 60

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Energiya". 1977

330

81.80 m
cso: 1810 roe orrxcm. use can