APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R0001000200314
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8286

23 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(FOUO 7/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGKT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MTBRIALS ”PRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0P TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
3. Keely-en's Accession No-

  
   

usuooau'mc om |- Imn No.
Jras w 3296

. ". ‘
SLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

  

    
   
   
  

cm are
23 February 1979
a.

TRAN
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES (F000 7/ 79)

 
    
 
    
   
 
   

 

I. Patel-la; Ova-aiurion Reps. '
No. .

   
 

9. Mac-is. One-loathe Na- aad Address

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North clebe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

It. Somali-a (haulaaioa N“. and Address

no. Hoieet/Task/Iat Uaa No.

I). Ty ol Rape" k Period
“5:.“

      
   
    
     

As above
1:. Sunk-nun Note.

I. “warn

The report contains information on aerospace medicine. acrotechnology, bionics
and hioucoustics. biochemistry, biophysics. environmental and ecological
problems, food technology. microbiology. epideniolosy and inmunology,

marine biology. military medicine. physiology. public health. toxicology.
radiobiolosy. veterinary aedicine. behavioral science. human engineering.

psychology. psychiatry and related fields. and scientists and scientific
organizations in biomedical fields.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS LN
23 Pebru

TRMSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

(P000 7/79)
Comm
BIOCHEMISTRY

Instruments for the Study of Biopolyners
(V. A. Pavlenko; VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. No 12.

1978) ...............................................

INDUSTRIAL MICRO! IOLOGY

Appeal for Successful Completion of the State Plan and
Socialist Pledges

(V. N. Fedoryshin; GIDROLIZNAYA I LBSOKHIHICHESKAYA
PROHYSRLENNOST', No 2, 1978) ........................

Assimilation of a Flotation Method of Yeast Isolation

(LA. Suetanin; GIDROLIZNAYA I LBSOKHIMICRﬁKAYA
PROHYSHLONNOST', No 2, 1978) ........................

Conpetition for Nillionth Ton of Nutrient Yeast Initiated
(GIDROLIZNAYA I LBSOXNIHICHBSKAYA PROMYSNLENNOST' .
No 2, 1978)

Expanding Production of Nutrient Yeast in Pulp-and-Paper
Industry

(V. I. Kropotovz GIDIOLIZNAYA I LBSOKHIHICHESKAYA
PROHYSRLBNNOST'. No 6, 1978) ........................

Tapping Pines with Nutrient Yeast Infusion
(Ya. G. Droclmev. at al.; GIDROLIZNAYA I
LBSOKHIHICHESKAYA PWSNLBNNOST', No 6. 1978)

Andizhan Hydrolysis Plant's 25th Anniversary

(N. I. Pavlova, et al.; GIDROLIZNAYA I
LBSOKHIMICHBSKAYA PWSHLENNOST'. No 6, 1978) ......

— a - [III - USSR - 22 $5?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cmms (Continued)

Ilproving the Syetu for Controlling Maintenance of
Production Conditions

' (V. Ye. Ivenove; GIDROLIZNAYA I LESOKHIHICHBSKAYA
PROHYSRLBNMST', No 6. 1978) .........................

Nutrient Protein Acquisition in cm Countries

(V.S. Hinine. at 111.; OIDROLIZNAYA I LESOKHIMICHBSKAYA
Pmsﬂl‘msr" no 6’ 1978) OOOOOIOOOIO0.0000000IIIIO

Inprodtorgnesh-nuﬂxhibition Report
(3.]... Snolyekov; GIDROLIZNAYA I LESOKHIHICHESKAYA
PROHYSBLWST'. No 6. 1978) .........................

Control of Hicrobiologicel Synthesis (Soviet Patent
Literature Review)
(A.S. Pedorov, V. I. Boboehko; GIDROLIZNAYA I
LBSOKBIHICRESKAYA PROHYSIILENNOST', No 1, 1978)

SCIENTISTS AND SCIMIPIC ORGANIZATIONS
Syeposiun on Biotechnology and Bioengineering

(M. 2h. Krintepsons, Yu. 0. Yekobeon; HIKROBIOLOGIYA,
m 6. 1978) eeeoesoeseeeeoeeeeeheeoeeoeeeesoeeeeeeeeee

PUBLICATIONS
Optiniution of Han-Hechine Systen Described in New Book

(Nikoley Vledinirovich Adenovich; UPRAVLYAYmOS‘r'
“SHIN. 1977) eeoooooeeeeoeeoeteeeeeeeeeseeeeeooeeeeee

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

63

69

57

60

66

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sxocumsm

upc: 681.2
INSTRUHENTS FOR THE STUDY OF BIOPOLY'HERS
Moscow ‘1an AKADEHII “AUX 8883 in Russian No 12, 1978 pp 11-22
[Article by V. A. l’svlsnko]

[text] The presidiun of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences [AS]

considered the question of progress in fulfilling the plan
of development of instrunents for the study of biopolymsrs.

A report was delivered by V. A. Pavlenho, doctor of engineering
sciences. director of the Institute of Analytical Instrunent
Making.

Report of V. A. Pavlenko

‘l'he designing organisations of the USSR AS ere developing veriou.‘ instruments

which. according to the classification of the Council for Scientific
Instrunent Making under the Presidiul of the USSR AS. are referable to

about 25 directions of instruIent making.

Instruments in virtually all of these directions are used in all areas of
natural and engineering sciences. The vast majority of inetrusents is also

used for biological studies. including the study of composition, structure
and properties of biopolymers.

Intensive use of complex instruments began nuch later in biology than, for
example. in chenistry. Evidently. this is attributable, on the one hand,

to the status of research end. on the other hand. the lag in instrument
building and ispossibility of neeting the specific requirements of bio-

logical inveezigations without appropriate scientific research and experi-
mental design work.

Steps were taken to expedite develop-ant of instrunent production for biolo—
gical research. As a result. in 1975-1977. enterprises under the Ministry

of Instrument Melting, Automation Equipment and Control Systens set up the
production of instruments referable to 22 titles, and have produced 678 in-

strunents. Production of 8 types of instruments has been set up in the AS.
1: the experimental plant (131 instruments were nanufsctuted).

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the present time. high resolution BPR [electron paramagnetic resonance]
and Ila [nuclear magnetic resonance] radiospectrometera, optical spectro-
meters. other optical instruments and microscopes, x-ray diffraction and
roentgsnospectral analysis instruments, electron, gamma resonance and mass
spectrometers, instruments that use synchrotron radiation, electron micro-
scopes and electronographs, liquid and gas chromatographa, electrochemical
instruments, electrophoretic instruments, ultrecentrifuges, sequencers
Psekvenator"]snd synthesizers of proteins and peptides, calorimeters and
thermal analysis instruments, automatic biochemical analyzers, special
equipment for microbiology. physiology and cytology, laboratory equipment.
instruments and devices of small-scale mechanization and automation are
being used in biology.

Not all groups of instruments are used equally extensively, the degree of
development of instruments and organization of series production thereof also

are different.

In organizations under the Scientific and Technical Association of the USSR
AS, the expenses incurred for development and production of instruments

(mainly analytical) for chemistry and biology are growing constantly
(Figure l).

The interagency scientific and technical council for problems of molecular
biology and molecular genetics, under the supervision of Acadmician Yu. A.
Ovchinnikov, prepared the program "Hicromethods in Protein Chemistry."

The Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry imeni H. M. Shemyakin, Institute of
Protein, Institute of Molecular Biology, Institute of High Molecular Compounds,
Novosibirsk Institute of Organic Chemistry, Institute of Analytical Instrument
Making and the design offices of the USSR AS participated in preparing this
program.

The program provides for the‘lxecution of 13 methodological projects by
scientific research institutes and development of 17 new, modern instruments

for biochemical investigations.

Of the 17 instruments listed in the program, 12 must be developed at the
Institute of Analytical Instrument Making and one each at the SKB [special

design office] of Biological Instrument Making. Novosibirsk Institute of
Organic Chemistry and Leningrad Opticomechanical Association; 2 instruments
must be designed at the 8:3 of biophysical equipment.

Additional targets were include: in the program at the instigation of the

Institute of Analytical Instrument Making of the USSR AS: development of
a device for connecting a liquid chromatograph to a mass spectrometer,

designing an attachment with chemo-ionization for the current series-produced
mass spectrometers, development of optical and membrane instruments, as

vell as automatic pipettes with regulated contents.

The new objectives caused substantial changes in the structure of work of
the SKB of Analytical Instrument Making.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rubles . ‘ Rubles ,
millions millions

      

sou mo mo

Figure 1. Figure 2.
Growth of expenses for development Expenses for development and produc-
and production of instruments in tion of different types of instruments
organizations under the Scientific 1) mass spectrometers
and Technical Assocation of USSRAS 2) chromatographs
l) instruments for chemical studies 3) radiospectrometers
2) instruments for biological " b) data processing systems

There has been a significant increase in share and rate of development of
work dealing with liquid chromatography (Figure 2). In this regard, there
is an interesting forecast of development of some branches of scientific
instrument making in the United States. The projected annual rate of
growth in production of instruments, as listed in the Table. indicates that
development of instrument making from chromatography is alno aheed of
development of other branches of instrument making.

It is difficult to discuss all groups of instruments used to study biopolymers.

or even instruments developed for this purpose at the USSR AS. For this
reason, we shell consider the most important directions of work within the

framework of the ”Hicromsthods in Protein Chemistry" program.

First, a few words about liquid chromatography instruments. As we have
already stated, liquid chromstogrsphy is one of the important methods of
studying biopolymers.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rate of growth in instrument production in the United States, I

1976 1979 Annual nean

 

Types of instrunents 1975 1976 for 1976-79

—-——-—

Chrolstogrephs: 11 . 9 (do . 7 lb . 0
gas 11.5 31.0 10.3
liquid 12.5 66.7 22.2

Instruments for spectral analysis: 9.5 21.3 7.1
spectrophotometers 10.2 21.0 7.0
spectrofluoréneters 6.2 20.0 6.7
spectropolarinsters 5. 3 50.0 16 . 7

Mess spectroneters 8.9 27.9 9.3

m spectrometers 7.8 26.6 8.2

Electron nicroscopes 8.9 27.5 9.2

Best analyzers 7.9 36.8 12.3

X-ray equipnent 11.0 31.6 10.5

Other equipnent 6.0 17.6 5.9

 

The lag of liquid chrontogrephy. as coapared to gas chromatography, was
due primarily to the absence of needed sorbents. It is only in the last
few years, thanks to the work. done at the Institute of Silicate Chemistry.
USSR A8, did necropore glass appear, with controllable pore size, as tall as

porous silica gel, which was developed at Moscow University. however,
even these sorbsnte are not being produced on an industrial scale.

Moreover, highly sensitive gages of concentrations of substances in liquid
nedia—detector systems-«re needed for the successful developsent of liquid
chrontography. Optical seasure-ent instruments serve as such systens: photo-
neters. refrectoneters end spectrophotometers. for example, the autonomous
refractoneters produced by industry s few years ago had a sensitivity of

only 10" refraction units with about a 1 n1. size of optical nonflow-through
cells. This by no name sects the denands of liquid chromatography.

In 1972, in developing liquid chronatographs for analysis of synthetic poly-
mers. the refractooeter sensitivity was raised to 2°10" refraction units
with optical cell size or 15 ul. As converted to proteins, these instrunents
had a sensitivity of 500 ng. This group of instrunents includes the KhZhlSOlo
liquid chronotogrsph developed in 1976. It is intended for analysis of a
wide range of substances, including poly-era. The sensitivity of this
instrunent is 1010‘ ’refrsction units and that of the spectrophotometer,
6'10’~ units of optical density. The size of the sample to be analyzed is
0.25 I7. substance. This instruent per-its analysis of proteins with a
sensitivity of refrectonetric neasurenent of 2100 ng, or 3010‘” mole of
albumin.

0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.l

Such features of the optical detectors. combined with an operating mode at
a pressure of 200 atm, provide for high-speed analysis. Figure 3 illustrates

thezgolscular and mass distribution of polystyrene standards which is obtained
in min.
CJI‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Developesnt of microcolum liquid chro-
matographs was an important step in
development of liquid chromatography
in application to analysis of biopoly-
mere. In 1975. the Novosibirsk Insti-
tute of Organic Chemistry, Siberian
Branch of the USSR as, and the 8K! of
Analytical Instrument Making designed
the K112111305 chromatograph, and in
1976 a functional model of the 0b'
chromatography was built at the Novo-

 

Pigure 3. Novosibirsk Institute of Organic

Molecule and mass distribution of Chemistry. Capillary colums 0.5-1 Ila

polystyrene standards. obtained in disaster are used in these instru-

on KhZhl306 chromatography ments. and this made it possible to

(refrectometer An- 10", analysis reduce the size of samples to lo 112..

time 25 min) This is the first tine that such
parameters were reached anywhere in
the world.

It was necessary to develop special spectrophotometers for instruments in
this group, with sensitivity of 6-10" units of optical density. that

operate in the range of 200 to 600 nm with l 111 optical cells. Spectro-
photometers of this type have no equal abroad. These instruments permit

analysis of proteins with a sensitivity of about 15 ng sample, or 2'10”"
gels of albusin.

A standardised set of microcolu-I liquid chromatographs, unequaled abroad.
has been developed and is being manufactured. It is based on unification
of all units, blocks and parts, and it can replace five microcolusn liquid
cbromstograpbs for analysis of asino acids, m [phanylthiohydantoin] and
DNS [dansyl] derivatives of. amino acids, peptides and proteins.

The standardised set of chromatographs includes glass and metal calms of
different length, syringe type pumps. devices for smooth change in coaposi-

tion and concentration of solutions (gradient devices). For the first time,
a spectrophotometer, fluorometer for analysis of DES-derivatives of aeino

acids and a highly sensitive laser refractometer have been included in this
set.

The size of sup ' used with this instrument is 1 pi. Spectrophotometric
measurement with the new chromatograph is 3 times more sensitive that
existing ones (5 ng protein, or 0.8-10'" mole albumin).

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure ’0 .

Chromatograph of 22 urease solution ob-
tained on a KhZhl307 chromatograph

(analysis time, 12 min)

Bork has also been completed on development of the highly efficient KhZh1307
liquid chromatograph. 'i'he coluns of this instrument are 2.10 and 8 ms in
diameter; macropore glass is used as sorbents. The instrument operates under
pressure of 200 atm and permits rapid separation of proteins within 15-20 min.

using s-plee of 1 ul. Figure A illustrates the chromatogram of urease,
obtailmd on the X112hl$07 chromatograph in 12 min.

The KhZh2301 radiochromatograph, presently being developed, is of great
interest. This instrument combines all types of chromatography: micro-
colu-I. high pressure and preparative (using an additional photometric de-
tector). A scintillation radiometric detector with flow-through cells
serves as the base of the instrument. The original design of the detector.
with the use of scintillating quartz, makes it possible to avoid mixing the
samples with liquid acintilletors, as is the case in foreign instruments.
The sample is preserved in the preparative mode of operation. and this is
particularly important in the synthesis of biopolymers. The sensitivity of
the radiometric detector is at least 1-10" Ci at the peak, when measuring

a low-energy isotope (trititm).

The W301 chromatogrsph is an automatic instrument. In addition to data
processing. the control computer provides for an optimum mode of gradient

elution in the course of an analysis. according to the signals of the radio-
metric and photometric detectors, as well as correction of the previously
set elution curve and control of microfraction collector.

Hany design and technological problems were solved with the development of

chroutographe: all-glass precision optical cells. sspberical mirrors. various
stable puma operating under pressure of 20-200 atm, batchers for a large

number of who measuring several microliters, various miniaturized
devices (in particular. 200 atm valves. with the use of pair of leuko-

sapphires—stainless steel. processes with high precision), manufacture of
a radiometric detector of scintillating quartz, new materials have been used.

etc.

Optical gage converters are of exceptional importance to liquid chromatography.
At the initiative of the Council for Scientific Instrument Making and the
Institute of Analytical Instrument Making, new types of refractometers are

being developed at this institute: photometer-refractometer and fluoro-
photorefrattometer. The new optical instruments are build in accordance

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with an original. patenteble measuring system, based on measure-ant of the
duration of an electric pulse proportionate to the angle of deflection of

a flux of light. The angle of deflection is related to the index of light
refraction by the liquid in the measuring cells of the inetrunent. The new
syste- precludes the Iain flaws of refrectoneters build on the basis of the

classical schuehand it pernits analysis of proteins with a sensitivity of
0.5 ng, or 5°10" mole albumin. For the first time anywhere, it is possible

to use one instrument, on the basis of one optical cell, to concurrently
take neaeureeents by the refractosetric, photometric end fluorometric
methods.

The world's first laser refractoneter,
designed for liquid chronatogrsphy,
was developed at the Institute of
Analytical Instrument Making. This
instrument, with an optical cell size
of under 1 ul, permits bring the sen-
sitivity of chronatographic assay of
protein concentration to 0.1 ng, or
1-10-” mole albumin.

All

   

In conclusion of the survey of this
group of instrmaenta. it can be stated
that their sensitivity has increased
significantly in the last few years;
for example, the sensitivity of opti-
cal deteetora, in particular refracto-
neters, has increased by a factor of
10’, from 10“ to 10" refraction
units, while the sensitivity of chro-
matographic instruments increased by
1074 me Is?) a factor of 10‘, according to amount
of protein analysed in a sanple, and

   

Figure 5.
Increase in sensitivity of chronato- 3:3: 3“; t: 30:21:? 2: 3:3!”
9 I
graphs moles albumin (Figure 5).

1) according to "kosprontatsiye"

[type for concentration?) of
substances in liquid media

2) according to assay of protein
in aasple

Let us now consider another group of
instruments. In 1970, the SKB of

Analytical Instrument Making developed
the first Soviet sequencer, an instru-
nent designed to determine the sequence
of amino acids in proteins. The instrument is on a par with foreign sodela
of that time. however, neither our sequencer, nor analogous foreign instru-
nenta lived up to expectations. The American coepany, Bechan, which con-
tinued work in this field. produced a refined version of the sequencer.

the Sequenso, in 1972, which has found broad use in the entire world; in
particular, it is used in laboratories of the Institute of Bioorganic
Chenistry. Institute of Protein and Moscow State University. He were

faced with the task of developing a new Soviet sequencer for protein and

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present, a new instrument for deterninetion of amino acid sequences has
already been developed. The AP-OZ sequencer is superior to foreign models
in capabilities. and in particular it is better than the latest sequencer
of Bechman Company. All stages of the process of protein degradation by

the method of Edman can be conducted on it. including conversion of thin-

solines into PTh derivatives of amino acids. as well as determination, for
the first time in worldwide practice. of the amino acid sequence of proteins

by the densyl method. with yield of DNS derivatives of amino acids. The
programmer in the instrument makes it possible to run all operations in any
sequence and any combination. and provides for 100 cycles of degradation.

Prom the standpoint of technology. the all-glass revohung reactors for
sequencers are of interest. Their inside surface is processed with a
precision 0. up to 2 um, and breakage during rotation of the reactor does
not exceed 10 Um.

The complexity of objects such as biepolymers makes it necessary to conduct
combined studies of their properties with the use of instruments with
different operating principles. It is quite important for the experiment

not to be interrupted by intermediate manual operations. In the new sequencer.
successive separation of amino acids. proteins and peptides is automated.

The use of the sequencer and liquid chromatograph together makes it possible
to identify the separated amino acids.

It is known that mass spectrometry yields important information about the

structure of molecules. Soviet scientific instrument making resources
include some original instruaents that combine mass spectrometry and gas
chromatography techniques. Several years ago, the Institute of Cheaical

Physics and 6K3 of Analytical Instrument ﬂaking developed a chromato-
effusion-mass spectrometer. This instrument is being produced in series.

A chromato-effusiometric attachment, the commercial production of which has
.lso been set up. is used in the new general purpose mass spectrometer set.

At the present time. investigation of biepolymers by methods of mass spec-
trometry involves complicated manual operations to prepare the sample:
converting the substance to a volatile state. For this reason. it is very
important to create an instrument complex that combines a liquid chromatograph

and mass spectrometer.

The Institute of Chemical Physics. Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry and
institute of Analytical Instrument ﬂaking developed together an experimental

connecting device. We hope that this device will be refined in the very
near future and that use thereof will enrich substantially the instruments-

tion capabilities for studying biopolymers.

The use of a radio-frequency mass spectrometer is of interest to physiolo-

gical investigations; it permits demonstration of gas components-oxygen,
nitrogen and carbon dioxide—-directly in blood and tissues of a live object.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gas passes from blood into the mass spectrometer through a gas-permeable
film made of synthetic rubber, stretched over a metal capillary that is

inserted in the lumen of an injection needle. The gas samples constitute
0.1 ui/s, and accuracy of assay is 0.2 voI.Z. The instrument operating

speed makes it possible to determine the dynamics of change in concentration
of gaseous components dissolved in blood.

The program entitled "Hicromsthods in Protein Chemistry" provided for the
development of electrophoretic instruments, which are also very important
to the study of biopolymers.

Four types of electrophoretie instruments were developed at one of the enter-
prises of the Ministry of Instrument Making. Automation Equipment and Control

Systeas. An instrument for capillary isotachophoresis, the operating prin-
ciple of which is based on separation mixtures of substances according to

motility of ions, was developed by the SKB of Analytical Instrument Making
and is being produced in small batches.

however. with all the diversity of eloctrophoretic techniques and instruments.
the situation is not good in this area of instrument making. Unfortunately,
we must state that series production of electrophoretic instruments has

not been set up by the USSR Ministry of Instrument Making. Automation

Equipment and Control Systems.

The manufacture of ultracentrifuges has not been set up either. The 8K3 of
Biophysical Equipment developed several models of preparative ultracentri-
fuges operating at b0.000. 50.000, 60,000 and even 65,000 r/min. These
instrumsnts are on a par with modern instrument making. But while the plan
calls for the manufacture of 60 UTaPZ-é? ultracentrifuges operating at

$0,000 r/min in 1978. it calls for only 3 of the more sophisticated pre-
parative UTsP-bs ultraceatrifuges operating at 65.000 r/min.

The UTsA-lo (60,000 r/mia. 3 systems of optical detection, stabilization of
temperature to 0.1‘0 and rate of up to 0.21) and the UTsA-KH analytical
centrifuge (68.000 r/min. 2 systems of optical absorption detection, sta-
bilization of temperature to 0.05'c and rate to 0.12) have been developed

by the SKB of Biophysical Equipment. They are not inferior to foreign
models in their specifications. but they are not yet in series production.

The Burevestnik Scientific and Industrial Association [NPO] is collaborating
closely with the Institute of Crystallograph. USSR AS. in the field of x-
ray equipment for the study of biological substances. In particular, they
developed an original automatic 3-channel DAR-0H3 difractometer, which
operates 2-3 times faster than foreign models and yields very precise
angular measurements for several years, and it is used to examine the
structure of biological monocryatala. This instrument is in series produc-
tion. and it is in use in the institutes of the USSR AS.

Through the Joint efforts of the Burevestnik N90 and Institute of Crystallo-
graphy. the DARK-2 automatic x-ray difractometer was developed, with a

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coordinate detector, also intended for examination of biological monocryatals.
This instrument has 512 channels and permits simultaneous recording of
hundreds of reflections, so that its productivity is 60-60 times higher

than that of other difractometeis. At the present time, series production
thereof is being set up.

He cannot fail to discuss such an issue as laboratory instruments and equip-
ment, means of mechanization and automation of laboratory work. We refer
to small and, in most cases. simple laboratory equipment: all sorta of

mixers, vibration instruments, shakers, drying devices, incubators. refri-
gerators. dishwashers and laboratory glassware.

The situation is the worst with respect to laboratory glassware and devices.

The USSR Hinistry of Instrument Making, Automation Equipment and Control
Systems developed numerous instruments, but not all of them by for are being
manufactured. Even glass of the required grades is not being produced.
Instrument making is experiencing exceptional difficulties with calibrated

tubes and capillaries, for example, the SKB of Analytical Instrument Making
is compelled to produce thousands of calibrated tubes for radiospectrometers.

The required sets of tubes for fraction collectors are not being produced.
.tCa

The Ministry also developed glass columns for chromatographs; however, in-
dustrial production of these columns has not been set up. Nor are there

enterprises that could fill the columns with appropriate sorbents and
produce them in ready form.

Until recently, membrane instruments and dose-dispensing pipettes. urgently

needed in biological studies, were wanting. These small and simple
devices were imported.

At the present time, the 8K3 of Analytical Instrument Making has developed
and is manufacturing sets of PM-Ol membrane filters (about 200 per year) and

synthetic membranes of different types with specific mesh sizes. These
instruments are not inferior in quality to those manufactured by the

Amikon firm, and they are several times less expensive. At the present
time, fine-channel and fiber filters of the membrane type are being

developed, and they are intended for purification, separation, concentration
and desalination of biopolymers. Evidently, membrane chromatographs based

on thin-channel multimembrane filters will be developed in the near future.

The 8K3 of Analytical Instrument Making and SKB of Biological Instrument
Making have developed sets of pipettes to handle samples of 2 to 1000 at.
Production thereof is being set up it the present time.

It is necessary to prepare a clearcut nomenclature of laboratory instruments,
equipment and means of automation and mechanization of laboratory work,
as well as to prepare a plan for developing and learning to use them. The

10
FOR OFFICIAL. USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR Ministry of Instrument Making, Automation Equipment and Control Systems

should devote special attention to development of production of laboratory
equipment and particularly gloss goods.

In 3 years, the executors of the "Hicromethods in Protein Chemistry" program

have performed an enormous amount of work in the field of instrument making,
and much of this work is original.

Implementation of the program stimulated development of instrument making,
not only for the study of biopolymers, but for other branches of science,

and it was instrumental in universalizntion of the instruments that were
developed.

In the future, one should continue to develop goal-oriented programs for the

main directions of research. Implementation of such programs could be
particularly effective within the framework of the Scientific and Technical
Association of the USSR AS.

Discussion of Report

Academician Yu. A. Ovchinnikov pointed to the great importance of instrument
making to development of physicochemical biology. This branch of science

is presently exercising an appreciable influence on medicine, agriculture
and several branches of industry. In particular, breeding genetics and the
microbiological industry are making wide use of methods of physicochemical
biology.

biologists are faced with the task of submitting the components of living

matter to comprehensive analysis. Extremely refined and precise equipment
is needed for this. Our instrument makers have made considerable strides

in the last few years. For example, an extremely sensitive microspectro-
photometer was developed, with a detector, for analysis of products of
vital functions; a Soviet sequencer was also developed, which permits
demonstration of amino acid sequences in protein within a very short time
and using very small samples.

X-ray methods and electron microscopy are used to determine the spatial

structure of substances. These methods make it possible to observe
functioning molecules, to determine the coordinates of atoms in a molecule,

etc. Such instruments have also been developed in our country.
The use of laser technology is quite promising for biological research.

A very important step has been taken: unique instruments have been developed,
which are on a par with the best models in the world. Now we must set up
series production of new equipment.

Academician A. H. Frokhorov observed that physicists also use instruments
that have been developed at the Institute of Analytical Instrument Making

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for biology and, of course, they are developing their own equipment. However.
on the whole. instrument making is somewhat behind at physics institutes.

Physicists have an acute need for instruments to examine microproceases.
equipment for molecular epitaxy and scanning electron microscopes.

Recently, instruments needed for both physical and biolOgical research began
to be produced at the Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics and
Institute of Crystallography. The work of existing design offices should

be so organized as to have them service more than their own branch of science.

Of course, academic institutions cannot implement production of all types of

equipment. Considerable assistance on the part of the relevant ministries
is needed by the Academy in the area of instrument making.

Academician B. K. Vaynshteyn discussed problems of x-ray equipment making:
multichannel difrsctometers and two-dimensional detectors are being developed;
the photographic method has been revived, and it requires appropriate

apparatus; new instruments should not be available in a single sample, they
must be produced in series.

V. L. Tal'rose, corresponding member of the USSR AS. stated that one of the
tasks for scientists is to detect more quickly new trends in science and

to implement them in their work. Quite often a new idea is referable to
new equipment. with which one should become acquainted. It would be quite

good to create a system of mobile information about new instruments, perhaps
a small. periodically changed display at the preaidium of the USSR AS. The
second question is a management one. It is imperative for development of
scientific instrument making to be backed up not only by different ministries,
but by inclusion in the national economy plan, as an independent item in the

plan.

As for instrument making in the Academy. first of all we need modern technology.
It would be more expedient to purchase equipment with which we could build

excellent instruments, than to purchase the instruments.

Academician A. A. Bayev observed that only a limited number of Academy
institutes is equipped with the latest instruments. Most institutes that
deal with biochemistry, molecular biology and organic chemistry do not

have modern instruments. In order to change this situation, it is imperative
to set up series production of instruments that have already been developed.

to augment their reliability and expand production of small laboratory
equipment (pipettes, dose-batchers. etc.) and preparative instruments. Modern
equipment should be supplied not only to Moscow and Leningrad institutes,

but to those of republic academies and scientific institutions of all cities
in our country. Soviet instrument making should strive for total independence
from foreign firms.

Academician R. A. Harkov considers it expedient to try to organize the pro-
duction of instruments in collaboration with foreign firms (according to
Soviet projects) and to set up export of our instruments in the future.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

Academician H. s. Cilyarov called the attention of the audience to problems
of making instruments for general biology. There is no equipment in the
laboratories for setting constant temperature and humidity conditions on a
small scale, there are no instruments for transplantation work and micro-
biological cultures in chambers with aseptic flow of air; many other
instruments, some of which are very necessary, are also wanting. The
institutes that are not regular customers of the Institute of Analytical
Instrument Raking cannot get either spectrophotometers or mass spectrophoto-
meters. The amount of modern instruments in several laboratories cannot
provide for growth of science. It is imperative to set up series production
of equipment.

A. P. Yurkevich (Department of Instrument Making for Radio Electronics,
USSR State Committee for Science and Technology [CKNT]): The GKNT devotes
much attention to problems of scientific instrument making' however, there
are objective difficulties. Under the current Five-Year Plan, several
instrument making plants will be built. In 1978, proposals must be prepared
for organising long-term collaboration with CEHA member nations in the
field of instrument making. It would be desirable to set up a temporary
commission under the aegis of the Academy of Sciences, with involvement of
administrators of concerned ministries. in order to analyze the state of
affairs in the field of scientific instrument making and to prepare the
proposals.

Academician A.P.Aleksandrov, president of the USSR AS, in his summary of

the discussion, stressed the importance of the intensive work in the field

of instrument making, which is being pursued at the Academy of Sciences; he
also observed that the situation is unsatisfactory with respect to production

of scanning microscopes, spectrometers and certain other instruments. A. P.
Aleksandrov expressed the opinion that the most interesting work in

instrument making must be noted in special decisions of the presidium.
Decree

The presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences adopted a decree. for the pur-
pose of prompt fulfillment of the plan to develop instruments for the study
of biopolymers and implement series production thereof, in which it voiced
its approval of the performance of the Institute of Protein, Institute of
Bioorganic Chemistry imeni H. H. Shemyakin, Institute of Molecular Biology,
Institute of High Molecular Compounds of USSR AS, Novosibirsk Institute of
Organic Chemistry in the Siberian Department of USSR AS, Institute of
Physiology imeni A. A. Bogomolete of the Ukrainian AS, Institute of Atomic
Energy imeni I. V. Kurchatov, Institute of Molecular Genetics of USSR AS,
Institute of Crystallography imeni A. V. Shubnikov of USSR AS, SKB of
Analytical Instrument Making, SKB of Biological Instrument Making, 8K3 of
the Institute of Crystallography of USSR AS, in the area of developing new
methods and instruments for the study of biopolymers, as well as the per-
formance of the Scientific Council for the composite problem of "Biological

membranes and application of the principles of their function in practice"
under the USSR AS and Council for Scientific Instrument ﬂaking under the

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences, for the coordination of the
above-mentioned work.

The Scientific and Technical Association of the USSR AS, along with the
Council for Scientific Instrument Making under the presidium of the USSR AS,

were asked to prepare an appeal to the Hiniatry of Instrument Making,
Automation Equipment and Control Systems to take immediate steps to set up

series production of instruments for biological research. including liquid
chromatographa. electrophoretic instruments, preparative and analytical

centrifuges. x-ray analysys instruments and instruments of small laboratory
eechaniaation and technology.

It was decided to sub-it a request to the State Committee of the USSR for
Science and Technology to consider. together with the USSR AS, ministries and

agencies, the plan for accelerated development of instrument making for
scientific research in 1979-1985, and to ask the USSR Hiniatry of the

Electronic Industry to provide microprocessors in the required amounts and
assortment to instrument making organizations of the USSR AS.

The Scientific and Technological Association of the USSR AS was asked to

organize regular exhibits of newly developed instruments for members of
the presidium of the USSR AS.

In accordance with the decision of the presidium, the Scientific and
Technological Association of the USSR AS and Council for Scientific Instrument

Making under the presidium of the USSR AS must comprehensively develop the
practice of workingon instrument making fnrscientific research in collabora-

tion with foreign instrument making organizations and firms.

The Council for Scientific Instrument Making under the presidium of the
USSR AS was asked to consider the structure of the plan for development of
new instruments, bearing in mind the inclusion of target-oriented programs

in the plan, similar to the complex "Hicromethods in Protein Chemistry"
program. in other branches of science, along with the planning of

development of sets of instruments based on a single physical principle.

The section for chemicotechnological and biological sciences under the
presidium of the USSR AS, Council for Scientific Instrument Making under
the presidium of the USSR AS and Scientific and Technological Association
of the USSR AS were asked to expedite the creation of a temporary inter-
agency commission for laboratory technology.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Ranks", "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1978

10,657
CSO: 1870

lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL K160810106!

DIX: 634.0.866/.867.003.12331.876.6
APPEAL P08 SWIM. COHPLBTIGI 01’ THE STATE PLAN AND SOCIALIS‘I' P130638

Moscow cxosoumu 1 mommcmsmm pnomsnnsmos'r' in Russian No 2,
1979 pp 1-2

[Article by V. N. Pedoryshin, Deputy Chief. All-Union Soyuzleskhimproduktsiya
Industrial Association]

[text] The laborers of our motherland have responded enthusiastically to
the appeal. ads by the Conunist Party to consolidate and develop the
successes of 1977, the jubilee year. he Comrade L. I. Brezhnev noted in
his speech to the Decesber (1977) cc CPSU Plenum, 1977 was a very full year,
important in political and economic respects: no new USSR Constitution
was adopted, the 60th anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution
was triumhantly consemorated, and our economy moved substantially forward.

'nogether with all Soviet people. workers or food chemical industry have
made their contribution to the country's economic development. 'i‘hey suc-
cessfully cecpleted the plan for the second year of the five-year plan,
and their socialist pledges. Products produced in excess of the plan sold
for sore than 6 million rubles. The profit plan was completed, and the
labor productivity growth assignment was exceeded by 2.2 percent.

ﬂood chemical plants produced the prescribed assortment of products and
managed to couplets the plan for introduction of new equipment and produc-
tion processes.

A number of wood chemical enterprises took winning places in the all-union
socialist coqetition of. enterprises and organizations of. the Ministry of
Pulp and Paper Industry. Thus the Orgsintes Industrial Association was
awarded the perpetual Red Banner or the Ministry of Pulp and Paper Industry
and the trade union central couittee four times, the Syava Plant took
second place for work in the first, second, and fourth quarters of 197‘),
the mitriyevka Plant took third place. for the first and second quarters
and second place for the third quarter, as well as the perpetual Red sanner
ot the ﬂinistry of Pulp and Paper Industry and the trade union central
co-aittee tor the fourth quarter, and the Neyvo-Rudyanka Plant took second
place for the Iourth quarter. nention was made of the good work done by
the collectives or the Ashe, Barnaul , nesosibirsk, and Tikhvin plants.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The competition among worker teams in the leading occupations in honor of
the 60th anniversary of Great October assumed broad scope. The following
teams won: Ye. G. loginova's othylacetate production team and N. A.
Xondrat'yev’s charcoal production team (the Asha Plant). A. I. Pestov's
resin production team (the Barnaul Plant), Ye. B. Kolokolenkina's acetic
acid production team (the mitriyevka Plant), and G. A. Andreyeva‘s resin
production team (the 'i‘ikhvin Plant). Five hundred sixty of the best
producers in the All-Union Soyuzleskhimproduktsiya Industrial Association
were awarded the "1977 Socialist Competition winner” badge.

Last year tho now rosin extractiun plants improved their work noticeably:
The use level of output capacities and product quality increased, and the
unit material consuaption norms dropped.

however, there are also a number of shortcomings in the association's plants.
'i‘hus despite a decrease in production costs in all the enterprises as a
whole, some of them permitted considerable overconsuaption of raw materials,
chemicals, and power (the Roshotinskiy, Novo-hikhaylovskiy, Molomskiy,

Asha, and Reyvo-Rudyanka plants and the Orgsintez Industrial Association).

Incomplete assimilation of planned output capacities, ineffective use of
materials, growth in production outlays, a low level of mechanization of
manual labor, deterioration of the quality of raw materials supplied to
enterprises, and inadequate work in price forming are all in the end reduc-
ing the sector's profitability.

The production volume of brand A top and first grade rosin at enterprises
such as the neshotinskiy and Vologda plants and the Orgsintez Production
Association continues to be low.

Collectives of plants in the All-Union Soyuzleskhimproduktsiya Industrial
Association must achieve maximum assimilation of output capacity, a
reduction in the unit consumption norms for raw materials, chemicals, and
power, growth in product quality, and a decrease in losses in the third
year of the five-year plan; this pertains mainly to the zima, nesosibirsk,
Hedvesh'yegorsk, Hoiomskiy, Novo-Hikhaylovskiy, Reshotinskiy, and

Barnaul plants.

considering the decisions of the December (1977) CC CPSU Plenum and the
premises and conclusions in the speech given by Comrade L. I. Brezhnev

at this plenu, every labor collective must mobilize its efforts to complete
the following tasks: Completing and surpassing the 1978 state plan for
economic and social development of the USSR, continually increasing produc-
tion effectiveness and work quality, making sensible use of the created
economic potential, accelerating scientific-technical progress in every
possible way, intensifying production, raising labor productivity, and
intensifying economization in behalf of a further rise in the welfare of

the Soviet people.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The plan for development of wood chemical industry in 1970 foresees the
further fullest possible satisfaction of the national economy's and
population's demands for wood chemical products. Products worth more then
300 million rubles will have to be produced in 1978. The resin extraction
plants built in the Ninth Five-Year Plan will enjoy the greatest development
in 1979. Production of clarified and modified extracted rosin will exceed
10,000 tone, which will be 26 percent more than in 1977. Solving the
problem of refining extracted rosin, especially cedar rosin, is the main
prerequisite for increasing the economic effectiveness of this production
operation.

The plane call for production of about 87,000 tons of pine rosin, 100,000
tons of charcoal, 53,000 tons of butylacetate, and 42,500 tons of ethyl-
acetate.

One of the important tasks facing the wood chemical enterprises is that of
increasing the proportion of products in the top quality category. While
last year production of goods bearing the State Seal of Quality totaled
more than 61 million rubles for the association as a whole, in 1978 the
association is to produce 75.5 million rubles worth of such products, which
will be 24.9 percent of the total. veins.

The Ashe, Dmitriyevka, Maya, Barnaul , and Tikhvin plants and the Orgsintez
Industrial Association have a great deal of work to do in preparing for
certification of products for the State Seal of Quality and in increasing
their production volume. The managers of the Neyvo-Mdyanka, Syava, and
Vologda plants, which are still not producing products bearing the State
Seal of Quality, must mobilize the collectives to solve this problem.

One of the effective ways for upgrading the quality of products is to intro—
duce an integrated product quality control system. This system will go
into operation this year at the unitriyevka Plant and in the Orgsintez
industrial Association. All of the preparatory work is to be done with the
assistance of the Central Scientific Research Institute of Wood Chennai
Industry at the Neyvo-Rudyanka, Ashe, Syava, Vologda, and Tikhvin plants

in 1970 so that introduction of the integrated product quality control
system could be started in 1979.

Jointly with the sector institute, the wood chemical enterprises must
assimilate new production processes and organise production of new types
of products of better quality. Thus the Neywo-Rudyanka Plant will begin
industrial production of clarified and modified extracted rosin, and the
Orgsintes Industrial Association will begin production of glue made from
modified clarified extracted rosin and a compound consisting of clarified
extracted resin and fatty acids to be used in soap-making. Industrial
production of clarified extracted rosin will be organized at the Reshotin-
skiy Plant and a device intended for rectification of extracted turpentine
with the goal of obtaining industrial fractions of turpene hydrocarbons

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(a-pinene, Aa-carene, and dipentene) will be put into operation at the
Hedvezh'yegorsk Plant. Production of glue from cedar rosin intended for
cardboard glueing will begin at the Neva-Mikhaylovskiy Plant. The Vetluga
Plant is to work out the production processes and increase production of
better-quality inhibitor.

'ihe Syava Plant must introduce a production process for obtaining saponified
wood resin for construction materials industry, and a casting binder. A
second brand on: activated charcoal production kiln will be put into operation.

The Holmkiy Plant must assimilate production of soluble resin for activated
charcoal industry.

Experimental projects occupy a prominent place in the new equipment plan.
Thus tests will begin on the following at the Asha Plant: A charcoal cooling
and stablizing unit mounted on a vertical continuous-action retort, a new
type of settling tank used to separate resin from pyroligneous distillate,

an apparatus designed by the Moscow Institute of Chemical Machine Building
to separate wood resin from steam and 9.3, and acascade-type automatic regula-
tion system (SM!) used in processes requiring esterification of acetic

acid by ethanol».

The Orgsintez Industrial Association will test an extraction battery SAR
and a continuous acetic acid butanol esterification process. The Dmitri-
ye'lka Plant will test a cascade-type SAR used in butylacetate neutralization
and rectification processes. me Neyvo-Rudyanka Plant will obtain an
experimental industrial lot of purified synthetic camphor intended for
medical purposes. The Syava Plant is to test a method for final purifica-
tion of biologically treated waste water and produce an experimental
industrial lot of binding agents made from cold-hardened wood resin. me
Lesosibirsk Plant must produce a unit intended for clarification and
modification of extracted rosin.

The 'l'sNIIth [Central Scientific Research and Planning Institute of ﬂood
Chemical Industry] is to play an iaportant role in solving the problems
facing wood chemical industry in the third year of the five-year plan.
Enterprise workers await effective research from the scientists, the results
of which will make it possible to improve the quality of rosin, extracted
pine resin, and especially extracted cedar rosin. 'rhe institute must
accelerate the work of obtaining new products from wood resin to replace
those which no longer enjoy a sufficient demand. Jointly with the Orgsin-
tee Industrialesociation the 'rsNILKhI must finish its research on
vaccum-cooking of rosin and submit recomendations to all rosin enterprises,
which will make it possible to increase production of top quality and first
grade brand a resin.

machnical assistance from the sector institute has great significance to
improving the work of the enterprises and their assimilation of planned

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

output capacities. 'mus this year the 'rsNILKhI must provide assistance in
assimilating: Production of ethylacetate and industrial acetic acid at the
lblomskiy Plant, a continuous acetic acid butanol esterification process and
an automatic regulating system at the mitriyevka Plant. a process for
obtaining clarified extracted rosin and clarified modified extracted rosin
at the asshotinskiy and Neyvo-Rudyenka plants, a process for producing glue
out of modified clarified extracted rosin and larch balsam for chewing gum
in the Orgsintes Industrial Association, and others.

the institute met submit recomendations to new rosin extracting plants
on assimilating resinous substance extraction processes with the goal of
achieving the interim planned output capacity approved by the Ministry of
Pulp and Paper Industry.

In order that we can successfully complete the state plan. in addition to
broadening the socialist competition even more we must promote an all-out
mvenent of efficiency experts. In 1977, the economic impact enjoyed from
utilising inventions and efficiency proposals exceeded 1 million rubles.
The most valuable ones included combustion of excess uncondensable gases
from retorts in the drying kilns of the Ashe Plant (economic impact-46.000
rubles) and turpentine washing in ball mixers at the Neyvo-Rudyanka Plant
(economic impact-n73. 200 rubles) .

In 1978 the sector's enterprises will have to implement specified measures

to improve labor protection and safety foreseen by the appropriate integrated
plans. Among these measures, mechanization of heavy physical labor,
automation of production processes, introduction of hoisting and transport
equipment, and mechanization of freight handling operations will have a
prominent place.

The party teaches us that the fate of our plans rests with the people.
Success is forged in the primary party organizations and labor collectives,
and at the workplaces. It is the duty of the directors of the enterprises,
the Orgsintez Industrial Association. and the rsNIIXhI to organize the work
in such a way as to ensure unconditional coepletion and overcompletion of
the state plan and socialist pledges in the third year of the five-year plan.

commie”: Isdatel'stvo “teenaya prom-st”. ”Gidroliznaya i lesokhini-
cheskaya prom-st“, 1978

11004
(30: 1870

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“WM. MIMIOIDGY

unc 634.0.863.5:663.14.033.83
ASSIMILATIG‘ OF A MATIQI MOD OP YEAST ISOLATION

MOO! GIDIDLIZNAYA I LBSODlIHIOIESKAYA PMH’ISHIDNNOST' in Russian No 2,
1978 p 22

[Article by Engineer P. A. Smetanin, Bratsk Luther Industry Complex]

[hart] ﬁne yeast shop of the Bratsk lumber Industry Complex was put into
operation in May 1967. The plan foresaw separating yeast from sash by
a flotation method, followed by three-stage separation of the yeast sus-

pension.

The flotation method was rejected because 3 days after 5'. 800313130 Tul-G
yeast was transferred from the pure culture department into industrial
yeast-growing tanks outfitted with an airlift air distributing system,
40-50 percent of the yeast was substituted by incidental nonflotating forms.

Capitalizing on the partial capability yeast has for flotation and its
concentration within the flotation tank, we attempted separate delivery of
suspension and mesh for separation. Thus mash from the flotation tanks
underwent three-stage separation while the yeast suspension was delivered
at a concentration of 70-80 galliter to the second and then to the third
separation stage.

Due to inoperability of the yeast flotation unit all of the mash obtained
in the yeast-growing apparatus was subjected to separation, for which
purpose additional 080—35 separators had to be installed.

following the example of enterprises that had introduced the flotation
anthod for isolating yeast free mash, in 1972 our shop raised the cuvettes
in the yeast growing apparatus, which had a voltmte of 600 m3, to different
heights--l,500, 1,000, 700, and 300 mm from the bottom of the apparatus.

As a result the possibility arose for using the flotation tanks as intended.
It should be noted that an apparatus with a cuvette raised to a height of

300 In above the hottest works more stably and with greater productivity
than an innoculator in which the cuvette is located 1.500 mm above the
botton: yeast flotation, meanwhile, is identical in these apparatus.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When the flotation method was introduced. unexpectedly the stability of
foam in the yeast-growing apparatus increased significantly, and conse-
quently difficulties arose in quenching it during flotation in a two-stage
170 m3 flotation tank. The chemical (light fractions from rectification of

tallow oil) and mechanical foa- quenchers ceased to provide the necessary
degree of foam quenching.

Earlier, the yeast suspension was moved by gravity flow from the flotation
tank through a hydraulic seal into the collecter. But after stable foam
appeared the suspension began traveling periodically (in volleys) . which
resulted in overfilling of the collector and a significant loss of yeast.

The foam quenching problem was solved in the following way through the efforts
of the shop efficiency experts. We began to quench foam in the housing of
the centrifugal pup by a hydromechanical method. mogether with chemical

foam quencher. some of the yeast suspension and foes were returned by a

pm from the lower part of the flotation tank to its tapered lid through

a ring sprayer installed on the latter, and then into the working wheel of
the mechanical foam quencher, which was replaced by a disk-type device.

'Do quench small team bubbles in the housing of the centrifugal pump and
achieve hydromechanical quenching in the yeast suspension collector, fluid
was allowed to circulate in the letter.

In order to reduce losses of yeast combined with mash, the two-stage flo-
tation tank, which had three sections in its first stage, was reconstructed
as a single-stage tank with five sections. As a result the concentration
of yeast in lush following the flotation tanks decreased by 1.5-2 times.

Introduction of the flotation method for isolating yeast from mash made it
possible to substitute three-stage separation by two-stage separation.
An economic impact totaling 60,000 rubles per year was achieved.

COPYRIGl'l'z Izdatel‘stvo 'lesnaya prom-st". "Gidrolisnaya i lesokhimi-
cheskaya prom-st“, 1978

11004
C50: 1870

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INWAL HICIDBIOLOGY

MENTION FOR MILLION“! M O? NUTRIENT YBMT INITIM‘ED

MOIOOV GIDMLIZNAYA I LESOIQIIHXCHESKAYA PWSIILSNNST' in Russian “0 2,
1970 pp 29-30

[Text] In the beginning of January 1978 the collective of the Kirov
Biocheoicel Plant appealed to all enterprises producing nutrient yeast.
including those of pulp-and-paper and food industry. to initiate a social-
ist coupetition for early coupletion of the assignments planned for 3
years of the five-year plan, and for the honorary right to produce the
sillionth ton of nutrient yeast for agriculture in 1979. This patriotic
initiative was soon approved at a joint session of the giverning boards
of the Main ministration of Microbiological Industry and the Central
Co-ittee of the monies], and Petrochemical Industry workers Trade Union.

The Kirov Biochemical Plant is the flagship of the country's hydrolytic
industry. Hard work, competent use of internal reserves, and assimilation
of production capacities permitted the collective to produce 57,162 tons
of nutrient yeast in 1977. Eight hundred tons of yeast and 5,000 tons of
preained oosbinations not foreseen by the assignment were produced in
excess of the plan. Oospleting the annual plan ahead of schedule. on

21 December 1977. the Kirov workers gave the country an amount of extra
products worth 800.000 rubles. In comparison with 1976, production and
sales of conercial products increased by 30 percent, while labor produc-
tivity increased by 40 percent. Thus the entire growth in production was
achieved owing to growth in labor productivity.

The plant coupleted its plan for introduction of new equipment and organi-
zational-technical measures. which permitted the collective to make another
significant step forward on the path of technical progress. Thus assimila-
tion of the condensation-adsorption method for trapping exhaust gases

from inverters made it possible to increase furforal production and reduce,
by 90 percent, the quantity of toxic substances entering the environoent;
labor safety and effectiveness were increased as a result of the addition
of remote control of hydrolysis: six hydrolyzing units have been conmrted
to program control.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kirovworkers managed to significantly upgrade the excellence of production
and tasks their labor more healthy. Installation of five semiautomatic
packing nachines in the yeast shop, for example, has dramatically reduced
the dust concentration in the atnosphere; the specified measures of labor
protection and safety were isplenented completely in 1977.

The work indices of the Kirov Biochemical Plant were given a high assess-
asnt at a joint session of the governing boards of the Main Administration
of Microbiological Industry and the presidiun of the trade union's central
comittee in slid-January 1978. The Kirov workers were named the winners
of the all-union socialist competition for greater production effectiveness
and work quality on the basis of the results they achieved in 1977; they
also won the conpetition for an honorable welcom to the 60th anni-
versary of Great October. The collective has been nominated for the
perpetual Red banner of the cc CPSU, the 088R council of Ministers. the
AUCCTU. and the komonol Central Comittee.

This year the Kirov workers are once again exanples of high consciousness.
They have pledged to complete the 3 year assignment of the five-year plan
by the first anniversary of the new USSR Constitution's adoption, to
surpass the assignment for growth in labor productivity by 8.5 percent,
to increase the output-capital ratio by 1.5 tines over the 1975 level,
raise nutrient yeast yield by 8 percent, and econonize a significant
quantity of materials. fuel, and power.

The laborers of many enterprises in the All-Union Soyuzgidrolizpron
Industrial Association are following the exasple of the Kirov Biochenical
Plant collective: since the very first months of 1978 they have been trying
to achieve a good work rhythn and to couplets the planned assignments and
satisfy the socialist pledges.

In response to the letter frost the 0C CPSU. the USSR Council of Ministers,
the AUOCTU, and the Konsonol Central Comittee to party, soviet, business,
trade union, and mental organizations working in the Soviet Union,
published on 14 January 1978, the labor collectives of hydrolytic industry
have broadened the scope of the socialist competition for coapletion and
overcoupletion of the 1978 plan. and they have intensified their struggle
to increase production effectiveness and work quality.

The socialist pledges adopted by workers of hydrolytic industry for 1978
include upgrading product quality. leaking fuller use of fixed productive
capital. econonizing materials, fuel. and power, assinilating productive
capacities sore quickly. introducing new equipment, and inproving the
work of scientific institutions and the planning and design organizations.

“Make 1978 a year of shock laborl new successes, and new victories“: That
is the slogan of the conpetitors.

GDPYRIGIT: Izdatel‘stvo I'llesnaya pron-st", 'Gidroliznaya i lesokhini-
chesksya pron-st", 1978

11004
60: 1870 23

FOR OFFICIAL C78 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Iﬂmuﬂo MICMIOIDGY

0W 634.863.S.OO2|676.16.022.168
EXPANDING PMWCTIW 0P mmum YEAST IN PULP-AND-PM’ER mws'm

Moscow GIDROLIZMYA I LESOMIHICHBSKAYA PMSHWT' in Russian N0 6,
I978 pp 1-3

[Article by V. I. Kropotov. USSR Cosplanl

[Text] Workers of agricultural machine building. chemical.
alcrobiological, neat and dairy. food, fishing, contained
feed, and other sectors of industry oust take the met
active part ln creation or a modern teed industry.

Free: the decree of the July (1978)
CC CPSU Plenm “0n Further
Development of USSR Agriculture“

he a result of constant improvements in the production of nutrient yeast.
from year to year the enterprises of pulp-and-paper industry are increasing
the rate of yeast production. Thus in 1977 yeast production attained
“2.200 tone.

Analyzing the yeast production indices for the Ministry of Pulp and Paper
Industry as a whole and in relation to individual enterprises in recent
years (tables 1-3). we can note that the yield of yeast from 1 ton of
sultite pulp has stabilized in relation to both processes in which yeast and
alcohol. are obtained simultaneously and in those in which only yeast is
produced.

In addition to an increase in yeast production at enterprises of the Ministry
of Pulp and Paper Industry, a tendency toward a reduction in ethyl alcohol
production has taken shape. This tendency will also persist in the future.

Mono enterprises producing yeast and alcohol, the Svetogorsk, Xondopoqa,
and Arkhat.9el'sk pulp-and-paper coehines and the Priozersk Pulp Plant
achieved the highest yeast yields (33-35 kg per ton of pulp) in 1971. Low
capacity of yeast production equipment was the cause of the low yeast
yields in the Kotlas and Kansk cuisines. As a consequence not all liquor

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uugaru are conuunud i'ur ycmll productlun, Hum-ml mu'apllm pal-I inlly lulu
sulfite-yeast lush concentrates. The yeast yield has decreased signifi-

cantly at the sloksk Pulp and Paper Plant, where for 15 years the yield has
been below 31 kg per ton of pulp. though attaining 34-35 kg in sow years.

Table l

   
     
      
        

nee-alums news- 5
amen-u. v) :1 LQM ‘82.”

I m use
sepals-mun “.3...“ ‘2: | '

arm-AM. seam Is.

  

 

    

333333§§
DOC-0'39.“

 

(pp...

1") )
.VIJCIIII
CHI'IJ.

  

 

I'usos sen-9n so .
I I sea-anew. l

 

I???) 0..
I'll-l “J
mx ”.0
"IN 31.!
I274! M.)
IIM CLO
Ill.) 50.!
I” 69.3

‘Data on pulp production at enterprises producing yeast from
sultite liquor after acquisition or ethyl alcohol.

“The sane. at enterprises concurrently producing alcohol and
yeast, or alcohol alone (Hekarov Combine).

Key:
1. Year 5.
2. Pulp production (1,000 tone)
at enterprises producing 6.
3. Nutrient yeast
4. Ethyl alcohol 7.

Nutrient yeast produced,
tons

Yeast yield per ton of
:213. R9

Ethyl alcohol produced.
1,000 decaliters

Alcohol yield per ton
of pulp, liters

The ’l‘allln Combine achieved very high yeast yield per ton of pulp (95.1 kg).
At the same time at the Xzyl-Orda Pulp Plant. which also gets yeast only from
sultite liquor. the yeast yield is only 29.2 kg, which is in turn signifi-
cantly below the corresponding index for the Balakhna and Amrsk combines

(00.4 and 66.7 kg).

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2

  

      

    

 

imam“ (3) (4) ( . 06-0" span.
(1) IQJJNIJM ea “MI. I..." 52:2" «:0: s"- -..
M Mr. use ape-sue Ion-t0 " "mm-1’“
we neon. new-us u I v lesson. MM,__’M"

    
   
 

Minna "can“. untrue.
”IBI'I. I m. if

 
 

lessen” ‘. ,0. u ..
mew. gum-.3;
' e MI. Ip. 1

        

    
   
 

mo .3 mm «J an may
I!" .3 MJ 2m 79W:
1m 37?. em! 0 an an“ my:
Im an mus 0.! ‘em I' a: I.‘
um 770.1 Ann on new no...
I”: NJ 3!“ 01.3 mm m c:
I”. "9.1 8M 10.? man I a 6-:
II" ”.3 am as mu mm

Kay:
1. Year 4. Yeast yield per ton of
2. Pulp production at enterprises pulp, kg
producing yeast only. 1.000 5. Yeast production by wood
tone hydrolysis method, tone
3. Nutrient yeast produced. tone 6. Neal yeast production

at enterprises or the
Ministry of Pulp and
Paper Industry (including
that shown in ‘rable l) .
tons

In addition to increasing the yeast production volune. we are also increasing
yeast quality. While in 1975 the crude protein concentration averaged

45.4 percent for enterprises or the Ministry of Pulp and Paper Industry,

by 1977 it increased to 46.9 percent. The quality of yeast improved espe-
cially at the Sloksx Pulp and Paper Plant, the Balakhna. Ingursk, and Paula
coebines, and at the Syktyvker Lunber Industry Coupler.

‘l‘he yeast production volume of the Ministry of Pulp and Paper Industry as

a whole will continue to increase in future years. his growth is to occur
nainly through fuller utilisation of existing output capacities at the
Syktyvkar Coupler, the Ksyl-Orda Plant. and the bunk Combine. In addition
yeast production is also to be increased as a result of introduction or

new large hydrolysis-yeast plants in the Ust'-Ilinsk and Bratsk lumber
industry conplexss and a new yeast shop being created at the Svetogorskiy
Cabins. The perspectives for increasing yeast production at nest sultite
pulp plants are not very high because production of sulfite pulp is in a

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1’09. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    
  
 
 
   
 

(l)

“ensues-Mme
new.

_—

no
(a) l. ﬂea-nuns. UWI:IM|I:I::.;: we no-

anna-push nee-”(97 “.4 8.1 1 «.I
EmmwlM’”Xill ‘1“ an: at: 3:: 3:1 39
mun! . (12). u.) m: ”.0 m u
”"3... - 39!. m 3 3-: e '3
“..5.....:..,:.T16ﬁ§ not: an 2010 m7 3..
Camel mu. 1:... an: as m on
Moe-Kw. 1.7 up w an «.
macaw-1m! 181.333 1% 3.: is: :1;
"M“ Mm”not: 31.1. 3:. mi. an 4:.
”W“ wmd'm’mx- 2%: an: as as; 3::
............‘. ' mum “:32: :3 m a. 3;:

 

(2571:". uesme-tl . . um um I am sum an
(26". "possum-o. on. June-unto u moo mm soon-e

Waited-I421). on ma no.4 nu ma
1‘..."!8.':..:::.“,mx :12 3:3 .32:

{grena- “0‘13“ (327. . 13:: ”3“); u.

3
vim-mm 3.901.3{47333 at: .2
ham-I led-I" .

_____.._—-—-—
(257lute mu emu:- .
(367". lipase-nee. onetime-u mums ea sun-am

mu “.1
“.2

  
  
 

Been-In Ion-Int (317- ”33'.

flannel um

_____.———-—-
(257710". us 0 mm.
(39) IV. ling-puns. nuance-0mm nape-Issue m

33%|“

@3311“. "3.13.” m; ‘
__.____..————-
(257 "IOU. moot-nu . .
,________————-

ﬂute (42) .
#

  

38. Baykai'sk Combine

39. Bnterprises producing hydrolytic
yeast

40. Segosha Cubine

41. Syktyvkar Complex

42. Total

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 
   
 
 

Key:
1. Pulp-and-paper enterprises
2. 1977 production
3. Pulp, 1,000 tone
4. Yeast, tone
5. Yeast yield per ton of.
pulp, k9
6. Yeast yield corrected per
100s protein, tone
7. Concentration of crude
protein in yeast, t
8. Enterprises producing
yeast and ethyl alcohol
from sultite liquor
9. Svetogorsk Combine
10. Priozersk Plant
11. Syae'sk Combine
12. Vyborg Combine
13. Okulovka Combine
14. Kondopoqa Coebine
15. Kalininqradbmprom
Industrial Association
16. Sovetskiy Plant
17. Nemanskiy Plant
18. Arkhangel'ek Cosbine
19. xotlae Coebine
20. Sokolbunprom Industrial
Association
21. Kamek Combine
22. Solikamsk Combine
23. Poronaysk Combine
24. sloksk Plant
25. Total or average
26. Enterprises producing
yeast only from sultite
liquor
27. Balakhna Combine
30. Minsk Plant
31. Kayl-Orda Plant
32. Muzak Combine
33. Ingursk Combine
34. Klaypeda Plant
35. Tallin Combine
36. Enterprises producing
yeast from prehydrolysatee
37. Bratsk Complex
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stage of major technical changes involving not only improvements in the
process. reduction of raw material and chemical consumption. and a decrease
in contamination of waste water and in the quantity of exhausts and their

toxicity. but also the use of qualitatively different wood as the raw
material.

It should be noted that an increasingly greater number of enterprises are
replacing the traditional calcium substrate by amnium, sodium, and
magnesium substrates in sulfite cooking. The existing system for processing
sulfite liquor (ethyl alcohol--nuturient yeast--sulfite-yeast mash con-
centrates), the nutrient yeast--concentrates system is coming into more
frequent use. The Balakhna Carbine has convened to this system, while the
Sloksk Plant and other enterprises are presently being converted. This
conversion requires mandatory solution of the problem of growing yeast in
concentrated mediums. This would considerably reduce the load on evapora-
ting apparatus and decrease water consumption in production. Acquisition
of yeast by this system would require lower productive capacities, and the
quantity of waste water will decrease significantly. Consequently bio-
chemical treatment of undiluted liquor and prehydrolysates containing 3

percent and more sugar will produce a large economic impact (lower outlays
of materials, power. and so on).

Solving the probleem of processing undiluted liquor and prehydrolysates.
scientists and production specialists are selecting and breeding the highest-
yield yeast cultures for these medians. The Mursk Pulp and Carcboard
Coebine has achieved good results working with undiluted liquor obtained
free the digestion of pulp on an asnonium substrate (with a reducing agent
concentration of 2.8-3.2 percent). The enterprise‘s yeast plant is working
with the initial Candida sootii. using a two-stage recess. The yeast is
grown in yeast-growing tanks with a volume of 600 m employing a vibration-
controlled air distribution system. The yeast is isolated from the
suspension by the flotation method. and then it is thickened on separators.
Before drying. the suspension is plasmolyzed. The experience of the
Amursk Combine should be broadly disseminated among pulp-and-paper enter-
prises producing yeast.

The scientific research institutes have created and are now developing new
methods of chemical wood processing. in which the spent liquor from the
two-stage digestion method is to be used to produce yeast, using a magnesium-
bisulfite substrate. Later, the oxygen-soda method, the oxidative
asuonolysis method, and others are to be put to use.

with the goal of improving yeast quality and, in particular, increasing the
crude protein concentration, jointly with the enterprises the scientific
organizations are directing their efforts at selecting new high-yield, high-

protain yeast culture strains. For this purpose they are studying the
questions of using biostimulators as well as of supplying nutrients and
microelements more sensibly and fully to the yeast.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hark done‘ by the Leningrad Forestry Engineering Academy imeni s. u. Kirov
has demonstrated that sulfite-yeast plants can produce up to 50,000 more
tons of yeast by utilizing lactonas. It is known that during sulfite
digestion, up to 40 percent of the sugars are broken down, and almost half
of this quantity participates in the oxidation-reduction reactions in which
aldonic acids are formed. When sulfite liquor is prepared for biochemical
treatment, yeast does not utilize aldonic acids, which basically remain in
the form of lactones. By developing the appropriate conditions for their
utilisation and installing the additional apparatus, we can obtain good
quality yeast.

The enterprises are devoting special attention to factors influencing yeast
qualitr-production excellence, strict maintenance of prescribed production
conditions, and prevention of bacterial contamination.

The possibilities for significantly increasing production of nutrient yeast
and improving its quality are present at the pulp-and-paper enterprises.
Realization of these possibilities will produce a tangible economic impact.
Alteration of the yeast production procedures at some of the enterprises,
exploration for highly productive yeast strains, nodernizatien of the equip-
ment, and other measures must be implemented with the active participation
of the enterprise departments of scientific organization of labor in
cooperation with scientific and planning institutes. Enterprise and asso-
ciation directors bear the responsibility for practical implementation of
production modernization measures.

. In his report “Further Development of USSR Agriculture" given at the July
(1978) cc CPSU Plenum, L. I. Brezhnev attached important significance to
the protein problem, due to the lack of which tremendous overconsusption
of feed is occurring in livestock breeding. "Our chemists and workers of
microbiological, pulp-and-paper, fishing, meat and dairy, food, medical,
and a number of other sectors of industry must make their contribution to
solving the protein problem,“ said CC CPSU General Secretary, Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev. ”the appropriate assign-mats are being set for them, and
capital investments are being allocated to them."

By increasing its yeast production, pulp-and-paper industry can provide
considerable assistance to agriculture in developing livestock breeding,
increasing its production and, consequently, providing meat products to
the population.

mPYRIGm‘: Izdatel'stvo ”besnaya prom-st", "Gidroliznaya i lesokhimi-
cheakaya prom-st", 1978

1100!
C80: 1870

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL MICROBIOIDGY

UOC 634.0.284:634.0.863.S

TAPPING PINES arm NUTRIENT YEAST INFUSION.

Moscow GIDMLIZNAYA I LBSOHIINICNBSKAYA PWSHLENNOST' in Russian No 6.
I978 pp 5P6

[Article by Cand Ag Sci Ya. G. Drochnev, Senior Engineer H. V. Perelyubskiy,
and I. N. Saiukov, Senior Scientist, Kirniilp)

[Text] Stimulants prepared out of wood chemical products from pulp-and-
paper production have come into use in tree tapping in recent years. These
reagents have an intense influence on resin discharge, but when they get
into the resin the latter becomes difficult to process at rosin plants

(1).

This is why there is special significance to seeking new stimulants that
do not reduce the quality of the obtained product. The experience of the
con and Poland is interesting in this regard; these countries make bread
use of a new stinulant in pine tapping-~a nutrient yeast extract (2).
Introduction of yeast extract tapping has also begun in Bulgaria (3.4).

The Kirniilp [xirgis SSR Scientific Research Institute of Lumber Industry]
has studied the possibilities for using an aqueous infusion of dry nutrient
yeast as a resin discharge stimulant. The results of this work are presen-
ted in this article.

‘l'he experiments were conducted at the Central zonal Experimental Station
(Tszos) in Gor'kovskaya Oblast, at the Belorussian ssa Research Station
(Bela?) in Brestshaya Oblast, at the Ural'sk Research Station (GOP) in
Sverdlovskaya Oblast. and at the Siberian zonal Experimental Station
(sibzos) in Irkutskaya Oblast. The research was conducted in mature pine
stands typical of each region. Each experiment consisted of from two-told
to five-told replications: The main experinents were conducted with
50-100 trees, and exploratory experieents were conducted with 10-30 trees.
mis ensured an observation accuracy of 95-97 percent in the tint case
and 90-94 percent in the second.

The infusion was prepared from dry nutrient yeast produced by pulp-and-
paper coebines, hydrolysis plants, and protein-vitamin concentrate (WK)
plants. not water at a teeperature of 60-90' c was added to the yeast

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(0061- 20083-74.) at a ratio of 50 grans per liter. after which the product
was mixed and allowed to infuse for 2-3 days. After infusion, the solution
was filtered through two layers of gauze. Enough stimulant was prepared
to last not were than 14 days. The trees were tapped conventionally by
(khaki) intended for work with mash. The results are shown in Table l.

- Table 1

—-————_

M‘s: nus-m Ile- Iemwe c as
eruvuu area-ca In Kim. $ 11:31:15“

(i) m r. my I.
Mons ensues- eswu _ w—

‘33

 

"I

 

 

 

 

Key:
1. Place of experiment 6. BelOP
2. Resin yield from tapping 7. Tom
with an aqueous nutrient 8. WP
yeast infusion per KDP. 9. sibzos
\ of tapping with following
methods

3. Average
4 . Conventional .
5. With sash

As we can see frost Table 1, an aqueous nutrient yeast infusion significantly
intensifies resin discharge. 0n the average in 2 years of research. the
yield of resin per (karrodetsinetr) (KDP) of (podnovka) was 32-55 percent
larger with nutrient yeast tapping than with conventional tapping. These
results agree with data obtained by the Latvian 55R Academy of Sciences
Institute of Hood Chemistry in relation to yeast extract tapping (5).

Certain fluctuations can be observed in resin yield in different geographi-
cel regions. which is associated with weather and vegetation factors as
well as with the use of yeast from different plants.

In 1976-1977 the Kimiilp tested aqueous infusions prepared from nutrient
yeast produced by the Balakhna and Turinsk pulp-and-paper combines, the

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

Table 2
m | .:::::::'::::.u*.-‘-t'.m
"catamaran Lu:= In]. I new we.- r Opts-ad
swpahmsawe mm “lam-n
”um I we I’. l Ian I. l ‘rL—I
5
Win} 916) '''' 3 '8.’
u 4mm 17) a n
“DION mauve-n IOIIQI" )
pms...... .....' a u
Key:
1. Production operation producing 5. Food
yeast 6. hydrolysis
2. Plant yeast variants tested 7. Pulp-and-paper
3. ﬁssin yield per mp when 8. Protein-vitamin
tapping with yeast infusion. concentrates

\ of tapping with sash
4. Average

ravde. Kirov, Ivdel'. Lobvs. and zine hydrolysis plants. the Kstovo and
Ufa BVK plants, and the Tagil'sk and Talitsa yeast plants. The results
are shown in Table 2. grouped in relation to type of production operation.

As we can see free 'i‘able 2. the best results were obtained with tapping
using stimlents prepared fro- nutrisnt and hydrolysis yeast; yeast obtained
frost pulp-and-paper combines had a weaker influence on resin yield, while
that free BVK plants had the weakest influence. obviously the differences
in degree of inﬂuence of the yeast infusion upon resin yield depend on
any factors defining the unique features under which yeast is grown at
these enterprises. In particular. the best results are obtained when we

use nutrient yeast from plants processing conifer wood primarily. Yeast
produced from raw laterial containing a large proportion of deciduous tree
wood hes a weaker influence on resin discharge.

We also established that the influence yeast has on resin discharge also
depends on the tesperature at which the yeast is dried at the plants.
Resin yields obtained with the use of infusions of hydrolysis yeast dried
at different tesperatures were:

Yeast drying temperature. °C. .. . . 130-140 160-170 200-300
Resin yield, s of that obtained 101 97 90
with sash tapping

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The obtained results domnstrate the high stimulatory capability of yeast
from hydrolysis production obtained at a drying temperature not greater
than 140" c. and they permit us to recesseend them for preparation of
stimulant. and testing of the latter in industrial conditions.

Sisilarly as with sulfite-yeast mash, nutrient yeast infusion hardly alters
the dynamics of resin flow observed with conventional tapping (Figure l) .

 

Figure l. Dynasics of Resin Plow Prom Pines Tapped
with: l--5u1fite-yeast sash; 2--aqueous
nutrient yeast infusion; 3--conventional
technique

Key:
1. Main quantity, gm
2. Tina. hours .

Also of interest are data on changes in resin yield of trees tapped with
aqueous nutrient yeast infusion depending on month of the season. Stimulant
lads from yeast as a rule has a stabler influence on resin discharge. It

is less subjected to fluctuations from aonth to month than when mash tapping
is employed (Figure 2). This can be explained basically by the relatively
low effectiveness of yeast infusion at the beginning of the season in com-
parison with that of sash orother residues. During this time. the resin
yield achieved with yeast tapping can be 15-25 percent lower. while in
August-Septelber it can significantly exceed the yields observed with

ash tapping.

In order to increase the effectiveness of yeast stimulants. physiologically
active coopounds added to the yeast infusion were tested in exploratory
experilsnts in 1971.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

‘.
(2) (a) (a) (g, (a)

Figure 2. Resin Yield Depending on Season From Trees Tapped

With: 1--aqueous nutrient yeast infusion;
2--sulfite-yeast mash

My:

1. Resin yield per m9. \ of 4. July
yield with conventional 5. August
tapping 6. Septeeber

2. May

3. June

As we can see fros Table 3, acne additives (an-mm, xh-l. Urosulfan, bitch
esp) have a positive influence on the etisulatory capability of yeast
infusion. increasing its effectiveness by 6-12 percent.

Table 3

Compound Added Resin Yield pet

to KPD, \ of that with
Yeast Infusion yeast infusion tapping

Atrazin
ate-4n:
“-1
2 , 40
301-1
Urosulfan
Birch sap

 

3‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 4

links-u («nu : some: "more we...“

     

 

    

      

”0.1
ML!
“OJ
0.0

 

name: (10

.m
was??? 113:

          
     

Key:
1. Association 8. gm
2. Tapping pines with aqueous 9. t of that with mash tapping
. yeast infusion 10. Irkutskkhinles
3. "usher of karri, 1.000 ll. Sverdkhinles
4. Resin obtained, tons 12. Gor'kkhinles
5. Average resin yield 13. Karelkhinles
6. Per karri l4. 'lbtal or average
7. lPodnovka)

As we can see free: Table 4, enterprises working with yeast infusion achieve
relatively high technical-econoaic indices. 'l'hus resin production for

four associations was 763.3 tons. the resin yield per karri attained 915.9
gl, and the yield per podnovka was 42.2 gm, but on the average it was lower
than with sulfite-yeast mash tapping. These indices vary in relation to
individual enterprises, which is obviously associated with difficulties in
assisilating the new production processes and organizing the tests. As a
rule wherever a persistent effort was placed into introducing yeast infusion
tapping. the best results were obtained. As an exasple the resin yield

per podnovka in the Karelkhinles Association was 99 percent of that obtained
with sulfite-yesst lash tapping. cm the whole. the data of the production
tests confirmed the experimental results.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF" M1. USE ONLY

To determine resin quality. sanples were analyzed in the Central Scientific
Research and Planning Institute of Hood Cheeical Industry and processed in
a laboratory rosin unit. In this case it was determined that resin obtained
with nutrient yeast is hardly different at all in chemical composition from
resin obtained without chesical influence.

Next en experimntal 2.6-ton lot of resin was processed at the experimental
plant of the Central Scientific Research and Planning Institute oi‘ Hood
cheuical Industry (in 1977). The processing results confirmed the labora-
tory data. When settled turpentine was poured on, distinct separation of
layers was observed; emlsitication of the turpentine was not revealed.

lbsin and turpentine obtained tron this resin corresponded to cost
require-ants.

A large lot of resin will be processed in 1978 to deternine the effect
nutrient yeast infusion tapping has on rosin quality.

BIBLIOGRAPRY

l. Polyakov, P. P., Radbil', s. a., Salmova, Ye. 8., and Chashchin, A. H”
“Effect of Tapping Technique on Quality and Consmr Properties of
Rosin," 38?. INFORM. ISSOKHIHIYA 1 P0050011“, No 5, 1977. PP 11-12.

2. Stephan. 6., "Die Gswinnung des Hartes der Kiefer," Leipzig, 1973.

3. ”Effective Utilization of Bulgaria's Raw Material Base," REP. INFORM.
LBSOKHIHIYA I Poosocmu, No 9, 1977, pp 15-16.

4. Koetov, P. , '"i‘ree Tapping with the Help of Yeast Extract Biostinulant,‘
cossxo S‘lOPANS‘NO, No 8, 1977, p 30.

5. Kalnin'sh, A. Yen and Tsakars. 3. Ya., "Tapping Using Yeast Extract
as the Stimulant,” all. INFORM. LBSOKBIMIYA I PODSOCHKA, No 12, 1976,
pp 7-8.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'besnaya pron-st“, “cidroliznsya i lesokhisi-
cheskaya pron-st". 1978

1 1004
C50: 1870

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INWSTRIM. HICIDBIOIDGY

00C 634.0.863.06.091.5
”€012!th MDMLYSIS PLANTS 25TH ANNIVERSARY

Moscow GIDMLIZNAYA I LESOKﬂIHICNSSKAYA PWSIILENNOST' in Russian No 6,
1978 pp 13-15

[Article by N. l. Pavlova. P. s. Davydov. v. Ye. oleynikov, and v. 3.
Shpannagel'l

[text] The Andirhan Hydrolysis Plant issued its first products in August
1953. In the quarter of a century since then the enterprise has become
a Iajor supplier of furfural and its derivatives. nutrient yeast, and
hydrolytic lignin chemical processing products. The plant has achieVed

a high rate of production. especially of new types of products. Thus in
cosparieon with 1976. in l977 production of tetrahydrofurfuryl alcohol
increased by 6 percent, production of nitrolignin increased by almost

14 percent. and the total coauodity production voluse increased by 450,000
rubles.

Production growth is resulting mainly fros intensification of production
on the basis of technological advances.

In furfural production. for exawlem third vapor tapping line was placed
into operation in 1977. asking it possible to introduce new working condi-
tions affording a possibility for increasing the time of furfural-containing
vapor collection to 2.5 hours per cycle of the hydrolysis apparatus.

A system borrowed fro. the Georgiyevka Biochemical Plant for preparing
sulfuric acid solution with which to wet cotton pods in a jet nixture
was introduced. The need for laborious preparation of the solution in
periodic-action tanks has been elininated.

Following the example of the Pergana Chelsieai Plant, which produces furan
cospounds. cheaically treated water is now fed into the residues of the
principal furfural column, making it possible to partially neutralize the
furfural-oontaining vapor and reduce consumption of soda ash in this process.

six-section fractionating coluns and coolers having a cooling surface of
of 15 .2 each in relation to the areotropic mixture have been assembled
and placed into operation.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Stainless steel screw conveyors of new design have been manufactured to
obtain nitrolignin by a dry method. As a result of their use. production
of nitrolignin and its derivatives has increased significantly. and
discharge of nitrogen oxide into the atmosphere has been totally halted.

The economic impact enjoyed in 1977 Iron introducing these measures was
130.000 rubles.

The plant collective is celebrating its 25th anniversary in a time of
reequipment of the principal production operations. A yeast growing
apparatus with a decentralized air distribution system designed by the
UkrhlllSP has already been installed and placed into operation. This has
made it possible to increase the yeast yield from the apparatus by 50
percent and free one tank (or biological oxidation of yeast-free mash.

This year there are plans to replace the airlift air distribution systems
by the UhrhlllSP system in another yeast-growing apparatus.

The Kiev Technological Institute has provided us with the plans for an
experimental column with a diameter of 1.400 In and fishscale contact plates.

The colt-n has already been manufactured and sent to the plant. Its use

will permit us to increase the shop's productivity, improve overall quality.
and reduce steam consumption.

Production of furfural derivatives is growing. A furturyl alcohol shop
with a capacity of 2,000 tons per year went into operation in 1916. The
production procedures or this valuable product were worked out and its
production was assimilated in 1977. Jointly with the All-Union Scientific
Research Institute of Bioengineering, for several years we have been
growing Chlonella in an experimental unit: (.‘hZoneZZa is distinguished by
high adaptability to environmental conditions. valuable biochemical pro-
perties. and high yields. Chlozulla has been fed to mulberry silkworm
moths on an experimental basis. The (irst results have shown that the
yield c‘! the latter could be increased by 16-20 percent.

The plant collective is proud that it was a pioneer in qualified utilization
of hydrolytic lignin. The plant's experimental shop has now assimilated
industrial production of products such as nitrolignin (by wet and dry
methods). sunil, igetan, APR, and 1.50. horeover it is producing experi-
mental lots of 0L4 and 39-100 reagents, new drilling preparations. and
other products.

The methods used for chemical processing of hydrolytic llgnin at the plant
can be subdivided into two groups: 1) Hediﬂcation; 2) destruction
coupled with utilisation of total acquired products, without their separation.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US". ONLY

Qualified utilization of lignin was initiated in 1961, when our collective
began obtaining nitrolignin by the wet method jointly with the USSR Academy
of Sciences Institute of Organic Chemistry (Prof N. N. shoryglna's labora—
tory). In 17 years the nitroiignin production operation hae transformed
from an experimental to an industrial operation. The output of this
product has been increased by dozens of times. But the demand considerably
exceeds ‘our possibilities. since the shop's capacity does not permit
production of more than 60 tons of this valuable product per month. In our
search for a solution together with the Uzbek SSR Academy of Sciences
Institute of Chemistry we devoloped a modified, so-called dry method for
obtaining nitrolignin. It allowed us to significantly increase production
while maintaining the same qualities of the product, and to raise the
output to 600 tons per month at a very high profitability. Nitrolignin
produced by the shop is exported to Pakistan, Vietnam, and other countries.

May the plant cannot even partially satisfy the national economy's
demand for this product. Its production must be expanded by utilizing the
modern achievements of technology and chemical machine building.

working together with the geology department of Patrice Lumumba University,
the plant developed and introduced the procedure for obtaining sunil out
of nitrolignin. Sunil has a number of advantages over nitrolignin. But
because the former is a liquid product, and is not convenient to transport,
jointly with the Hoscow Institute of Petrochemical and Gas Industry imeni
Gubkin the plant organized production of igetan, a new product having the
form of a paste, but with the same properties. The plant produced 1,680
tons of igetan in 1977. But this could satisfy only a small part of the
national economy’s consumption. We must dramatically increase production
of igetan on the basis of the latest technological achievements.

Since 1976, the plant has been working jointly with the lignin chemistry
laboratory of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydrolysis
Industry to acquire APK (amnium polycarbonic acids)--yeast, microorganism,
and agricultural crop growth stimlants. The high effectiveness of APK

was confined by many years of agricultural experimentation in different
soil and climatic zones and with different crops.

APK was used as the basis for creating the procedures for obtaining bulk
lignostimulatory organic fertilizer (1.50). May the plant ships 200-300
tons of 1.30 per year to fill the orders of agricultural organizations, but
once again this is only a very small part of agriculture's total demand.
Unfortunately the existing semi-industrial unit cannot satisfy the growing
demands of agriculture. LSD production must be expanded to a scale satis-
fying the demand.

The table below provides data on the output volumes of the principal
products of our plant's experimental shop.

39
FOR OWICIAL USE Oh'LY
9:32. in 32.30021

union.» Satan .2 Man 0303.30 .5303 .0 .332
352.8 ”zoom: «.3 .2 23!. be 3333..- v2.52
:3 2n.— uOu 6080.300 7:55 .0 5.2— nooauoﬁwh

”£303 5 >uouanoon¢ 0.3126 00.50.: 09 .h 2.3 Janus aux—08m
uou 33.58 .29. .2 5.3283: ~38. .o 8288

 

    

I I. 8—

l 3
in S... ta
Sn. 3.... 82 Se. 5....
3. S: 3. 2... 8...

géggoZv
Sign—gang

ac k. 5 _mw a...
JV“.- .5 uh.-

..I at a9. 1.5.

Go... .- on"...
«arr-lul- 04— “all“!!! mm”

a .343...- a»!

w
c.
.42

.F—n #8886

.3 m... E. 3......
~ 14...}... etc... . a.“
H... ....... 1. ”ﬁx... an...
.hu .3- 9. 809g.- «"50
H ”2..” . «3.832 03.3 :8 0

3w 33-30 aces-oer:

 

 

 

 

m: 89.. 8..
e8. 8...." BS
28. 8a:

                    

 

     

 

 

AN

 

00 O. O
HNMVW

#0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«ads

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPOZ-OOOSOROOO1000ZOO31-4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Presently the experimental shop is using LOW-3,000 tons of absolutely
dry lignin per year. which is only 12-15 percent of the total quantity
available at the plant. All obtained lignin is to be processed in the
future.

Despite the stiff requirements of the plan, work aimed at obtaining new
lignin processing products is constantly going on in the experimental shop.
Plant and shop colleagues are full sewers of all creative explorations.
We recently received two inventor's certificates. Fourteen efficiency
proposals have been submitted.

The collective of the experimental shop, which joined the socialist
competition in honor of the 60th anniversary of Great October. has won
first place in the plant five times and second twice. In June 1978 the
workers of this shop completed the plan for 3 years of the fivo-year plan.

Celebrating the 25th anniversary of our plant, we must give proper credit
to its mechanical service, without which it would have been impossible
to couplets even a single task posed to the collective.

The senior mechanic’s section and shop mechanical services have completed
a hunter of major projects in the last 3 years in cooperation with the
plant's design office, as a result of which production of furfural and

its derivatives, nutrient yeast, and lignin products has increased signifi-
cantly. ’l'hese projects include: Assembly and bracing of a yeast-growing
apparatus with a decentralized air distribution system, and of a W-l75/l.6
turboblowera installation of a TsRﬂ-lZ/75-800shch centrifugal sprayer in
the yeast drier: reconstruction of flotation tanks in the yeast shop in
cooperation with the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of hydrolysis
Industry; assembly of a main furfural colum with a diameter of 2,200 ms;
assembly of two six-section fractionating column batteries and two pipe-
lines oenveying furfural-containing vapors into reheaters; replacement of
worn reheaters with a heat exchange surface area of 150 m2, and assembly

of two new reheater batteries; reconstruction of raw material wetting
screw conveyors: replacement of the firebox and rear heating surfaces of
three medias-pressure steam boilers (pressure--36 kg/cm2 , productivity--

22 tons/hr): assembly of two metallic containers for fuel oil storage,

each with a 1,000 m2 volume.

The best people of the plant, who have earned government awards, were
examles in the implementation of all organizational and technical measures.
-the collective is rightfully proud of Cavalier of the Order of the October
Revolution tinsmith s. Abdullayev; Order of the Red Labor Banner recipients
cooker V. P. Khvan, instrument controllers S. Ye. Malakhov and A.
Rakhmatulina, and engineer 0. H. Igoshin; Order of the ”Badge of Honor"
recipients director A. A. Pavlov, mechanic P. Hamirov, cooker Sh. Xhashimov,
and instrment controllers I. Dadakhanov and A. Ismanov: Order of Labor

’01
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Glory. 3d Degree recipients V. I. Doroshenko and G. I. Selina, workers in
the formal-hydrolysis shop: “For Labor Velor" nodal recipients electrician
A. I. Pletnev, engineer P. s. Devydov, and instrument controllers P.
chursyev and R. '1‘. Hullegeliyeve) 'l'or Excellence in Labor“ nodal recipients
instrument controllers V. A. Shchegoleve, s. A. Golikov. end R. Kirichenko,
lechenic N. V. Ito-snow foresen Ye. V. Podkhlobnoy and H. Imtov, and
electrician s. I. Pereyeelovets. The Presidium of the Uzbek 88R Supra-e
Soviet awarded honorary certificetes to engineer P. s. stydov end instru-
ment controllers s. Isunov and R. '1'. Hullegeliyeve.

M end e half years of the 10th Five-Year Plan are not: behind us. Our
plent collective hes successrully completed its current assignments in
reletion to the output of its prinicipel products. It is fully resolved
to park the 10th Five-Year Plen with highly productive, truly shock labor.

comment: destel'etvo "Dssnsys pron-st", 'Gidroliznsys i lesokhini-
chesksye pron-st“. 1978

11004
C802 1870

62
FOR OFFICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL MICMBIOLOGY

unc 634.0.863x658.562
IIIPKWING‘M SYSTEM FOR commmc MAINTENANCE OF PMWION CORDI'I‘IONS

Moscow cmsouzmva 1 mommamsxavn Pmsuuamoss' in mum No 6,
1973 pp l6-18

[Article by anginee. v. Ya. Ivanova, 'i'avde Hydrolysis Plant]

l'i'ext] luch attention is being devoted at the Tavda Hydrolysis Plant to
upgrading product quality and increasing labor indices in every production
section and at every workplace.

Improvements in the equipment and production processes have played an
important role in upgrading product quality. ‘mus inversion units, new
settling tanks, vacuum coolers, and vacuum eveporators have been put into
operation, and neutralysate aeration, a system for obtaining chemically

pure rectified alcohol with a five-coluln apparatus, biological oxidation

of mesh following yeast separation, and other processes have been introduced.

But no improvements can achieve the required results it the parameters of
the production processes are not strictly maintained. This is why a great
responsibility lies with researchers working on concrete process control
projects and shirt foreman who monitor compliance with production condi-
tions.

A system monitoring maintenance or production conditions has been in its
introduction stage at the plant for 5 years. It is being improved more
with every year: New forms of monitoring are being introduced, and the
methods (or transmitting monitoring results to controllers are being
improved. a daily system for monitoring all stages of hydrolysis and yeast
production operations has been introduced. This system is based on
monitoring and measuring instrument record sheets and on laboratory
analysis notes entered into the production logs. since the integrated
product quality control system has been introduced, the procedures for
determining the quality or each laborer's work and the methods of error-
free work have been formulated and are presently being introduced. In
both the hydrolysis and the yeast production operations work quality is
being evaluated on the basis of five coefficients, one of them being the

(o3
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coefficient of production process violation. In the hydrolysis production
operation the violation coefficient is conputed at all stages of the
production process.

As an example in the cooking department. to permit computation of the
production process violation coefficient we have singled out the main
parameters of the hydrolysis conditions upon the MintonanCc of which the
yield of reducing agents iron the cooking stage and the quality of hydro-
lysate depend. ‘rable l shove the norms for the production conditions.

Table l

., Normal Permissible

Sulfuric acid dosage (a1).
liters

  
     
 
  

 
  

 
 
 

Record shoot of in-
strument recording
acid level in measur-

ing gauge

 
 
 
  
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
  

 

Dosage or acid for
percolation (a2). liters
‘l‘ise of pressure increase
(03) . tin
Bleeding at excess pres-
sure' (Du). MIG-2
Excess pressure in first
20 Iin of percolation
(as) . ke/cnz
Excess pressure in hydro-
lysis apparatus during
second half of percolation
(a6) 0 liq/cu
Weighing device readings
every 20 min of cooking
(«27). tons
Hater consumption (as). n
for percolation and
washing
for loading

"i‘he process cannot be performed without bleeding.

 
   

  
 
 
 

  
  
 

Recording pressure
gauge

     

  
 
 
 
 

 

Record shoot of
recording weigher

12
1 ton
decrease

  
 
 

  
  
 
     

  
 

3:

  
 
 
  

 
  

Hater gauge record
sheet

 
 

 
 
 

lob
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the following formula is used in the computations:

a|+d2§dg+uo+d
"0
————_—__

K-
9 no

where K” is the coefficient of production process violation, a-a are the
mﬂers of production condition violations in relation to specif’fc para-

meters. n is the nuber of parameters being monitored, and c is the number
of cooking cycles per shift.

The work of tho shift is said to be unsatisfactory when gross violations
of the production conditions occur (double discharge into blow pit. entry
of acid into hydrolysis apparatus without water, splash-over of hydrolysate
entering the evaporator, increase of cooking pressure above 12 kg/cmz,
energency situations arising at the fault of the cooker). In this case

K is not ccaputsd and the overall work quality coefficient for the month
i2 decreased by 0.5. When the conditions for feeding loading water are
violated (below 10 and ever 12 s13), or when the acid feed rate is irregular
the production process violation coefficient is increased by 0.1 for

every violation. The work quality coefficient ( ) for the month is
decreased correspondingly by 0.1. Practice has s own that introduction of
this Ionitoring method has sade it possible to reduce the number of produc-
tion process violations. ‘i‘hus violations concerning the amount of water
and acid delivered in the loading stage and concerning the rate at which
acid is delivered for percolation have dropped to a minim.

for 4 months of 1977 (since the tine the new monitoring system was intro-
duced) K” was 0.15 for the cooking departnant, which is the stain production
section.

The best work quality indices were achieved by the team led by A. N.
Isyuunko, a cavalier of the Order of Lenin and the Order of Labor Glory,
3d Degree. The RV [reducing agent?) yield following the cooking stage was
2,032 kg (1,900 kg was planned), Zl,000 rubles were accumulated in the
team's 1917 personal account. and Xv - 0.135. The K” figures for other
production sections were as follows:

Neutralization station 0.161
Settling unit 0.062
Cooling station 0.251
Per-entation department 0.160

Hash distillation dcpartnsnt 0. 130

The production process violation coefficient is coaputed in the yeast shop
for workers in the principal occupations. They include the settling unit
and heat exchange. pure yeast culture growing, biomass cultivation. and
vaccm evaporation unit operators, the separator operator, the spray drier
furnace fire-an. the drier operator, and the yeast packer.

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3 «6 an

003300.. a» an 95:0-
05.» g .O.Hl ¥.ah00u~\
)5 «6 33¢ .33 o6
cg In...” man“: Isa»

Auuuhdg

a

~33}; 036
26n- vﬁ. mood :23 =3»

.93.? nuouu no «030 an mowed: No.9. son. has nu Inna—30:00 nos 393.9.
N... 3 003330 3 ”a
«23:06 05 v.3 .04: M an»... as»
.386 gono >5 use: uOu nowauus v 2.0 252...
radon—S luau mo nonvocu :buoél no.0: nova». :b ceauauucoocoo 3.. Hanna!
3 n6 an 8.19300
3 Man.58_a 2.» 9.3
6.7 M . 332E on 933 no»:
258- 0a- mu >33 :03 Bonn sewn-«>00 3»:qu mu
tau—80:00 0303 2.03 333.23 333230 mudguuuuuqoa
I30; «noun «0 «once an abuoén no.0: £000 ~03 Mb :« 8395:0080 undo»
a n6 an
3kg“. 3 M3355-
uau an: .027 M .36 33.... on» .030 :03 nan .n.v «>80
«>30 .m.n 3308 28.33 nan «330:1 no «.0 .35 :03 annual—mo
no.3 um Inoub no no. 0 an «.306: «0.0: H.003 «b ucuglunuo> 5. I560! no :9
v... .3 "83963 .4 an
3560! and van .Ebnunu
nag on o» 33 «a any...
05 u0 «.3: 05 8.7 5
Uoov :31 Shaun—530's
. 8! 4.0 Mn N ﬁg .annahnnuao«u
«.335 g u a 55!. $9.8 023.68. 33338
99!? 9303 05 co 3:... 055qu 859.30.?
33 no 533.3 g 68.? 8.? .5 .38 G 033555.» no 8332;

ion
8.2.8.. 83:98 2.33308 83338
yea u u 80 2.353 no .3453

N Can-F
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

é.£...e+58.e+..u8...+68.o+.us.o+castes...+6867.I...‘ .

"bk ouag 3 003 cu anSMuOu menacnuou 05.. .ahsolunwuouc: on

0» 3d. nu van»? on» no .303 on.» .0." on 2 no 032' ounnoand venom-.00 05 :25 "302

3 n6 an

woman—now am a Gouﬁq
Eek..- 033 26a. 3
nmnadaca 060qu on» no.5
$0.333: nacho bubs uMu
To an 332.03 an M
35:9- 05 and 53.3 05
. uou m6 k. gang..." 3.
uneqouuuooo 60330; any

33¢: as; 26a.
3 3333318 5.5

A... an gag nu 3%
5590! any can .Euoauuw
tuna on 3 Banana shot

98:: 2:. 6.7 N :33
inner, nag I 3 3.4. a...
3qu n 2.34 x5» :3»

-30.: any 026» no 3.8

.3023

35.3! o2
ago not ob

.32. 05
new «0.33.3

~38. no

 

~32}?!-
Oomrn as 09. awuuv
.3020 undo» 5 noun)
3:) no avanuagus

~33?» « 2.3. x5.» :3.»
I303 gun and.» no :8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A table demonstrating computation of K” for the yeast-growing operator
is presented as an examle (‘i‘able 2).

The figures obtained for pa, yeast concentration. and residual RV obtained
at the beginning of the shift are used in the computations for the previous
shift: the figure detenined for the residual P205 quantity is used in

the computations [or the following shift.

As a result of strict observance of the production conditions, in 1977
the yield of yeast from nv was 48.8 percent, 45 percent being planned. As
a result of economizing materials and chemicals, the yeast producers
accunulated 464.000 rubles in their personal account and 350 tons o!
nutrient yeast were produced in excess of the plan.

his work method is also being introduced into other production sections
and into the shop repair teams.

Observance or production conditions and compliance with this work method
are the main indices used in smarising the results of the socialist
cospetition between teen and shirts. These data are also the basis for
awarding the ”Best Worker in Occupation" title.

Much significance is attached at the plant to visual publicity on the
results of monitoring strict compliance with production process conditions.
”Quality Nooke' have been set up at the workplaces. Violations in
production process conditions are discussed in daily 5-minute breaks and
in work experience exchange schools.

The method for monitoring compliance with normal production conditions

in all stages of the principal production operation has been introduced
into the work or the process engineering division. The monitoring
schedule is drawn up for the year and approved by the senior engineer.
Remarks concerning violations and concrete proposals for improving the
production process are recorded in a special shop production discipline
violation log. The workers and shift foremen are made aware of these
remarks. Correction of deficiencies stated in these remarks is monitored.

On Quality Day a complete analysis is made of the production discipline
violations couitted in the last month. and concrete proposals concerning
elimination of the existing shortcomings are submitted.

Introduction and improvement of the production conditions monitoring
system is promoting not only an increase in the yield of yeast and RV from
the cooking stage and improvements in the quality of substrates and the
end product. but it is also increasing the responsibility of every laborer
for precise cospletion or his functions in the production operations. In
the end. all or this improves the enterprise's technical-economic indices
and promotes its rhythmic operation.

commons: Isdatel'stvo "nesnaya prom-st”, "Gidroliznaya i lesokhimi-
cheskaya prom-st", 1978
llooe 68

C50: 1870
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IWTMAL HICKBIOLOGY

so

000 634. 0.863. 5 (103)

MRIBN'P‘PROTBIN AQUISITION IN CBHA WONTRIBS

Moscow GIDI'OLIZNAYA I LESOKBIHICHBSKAYA PROHYSHLENNOST' in Russian, No 6,
1978 pp 25-27

[Article by Cand Tech Sci V. s. ninina, Cand Biol Sci M. Ya. Andrusenko
and L. I. lgnat'yeva, and Cand Chem Sci B. G. uirzanyanova, (ONTITEImikro-
bioprom) and (VNIIsintezbelok)!

[Text] Industrial production of nutrient protein by the method of micro-
biological synthesis has been .given the most important role in recent

years in supplying nutrient protein to animal husbandry. The reason for

this is that microbiological synthesis permits us to process various

forms of nondietary raw materials, wood and agricultural wastes in particular.

Nutrient yeast obtained by this method is a natural bioooncentrate because
in addition to protein it contains a complex of vitamins and other bio-
logically active compounds.

The first patents on continuous yeast growing processes making use of
carbohydrate mediums were awarded in Germany, Hungary. and Denmark as
long ago as in 1915-1920, but it was long before these methods enjoyed
practical implementation.

Presently many countries are producing unicellular protein with carbohydrate
substrates. The principal raw materials used are the wastes of wood processing
industry and agricultural plant wastes, the polysaccharides of which are
transformed by hydrolysis into sugars that can be assimilated by micro-
organisms: sulfite liquor and wastes from food processing, starch,
winemaking, and alcohol production operations are also important.

The can countries are devoting a great deal of attention to developing the
methods for producing nutrient yeast with carbohydrate-containing mediums,
orienting themselves on raw mterials present in sufficient quantities in
each of the countries. Because the demand for nutrient protein is not
being fully satisfied by production operations within these countries, each
year they are forced to import mill cake, grist, and milling bran (2.5-3
million tons) and fish meal (200,000-250,000 tons) from other countries.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Moreover they import large quantities or soy meal, synthetic amino acids,
vitamins. nutrient antibiotics. and so on. This is why developmnt of
nutrient protein production is quite validly said to be one or the nest
urgent priority tasks (1).

Considering the urgency of solving the protein problem we must concentrate
our attention mainly on hastening mobilisation of available reserves that
can be utilised without special expense by practically all CEMA countries.

One such reserve is growth in production of. nutrient protein of microbial
origin.

The Peoples Republic o! Bulgarians country with well developed agriculture--
possesses large quantities of agricultural wastes. M hydrolysis-yeast
plants built on the basis of Soviet plans have been operating in Bulgaria
since 1964. Cmdida and Mchoapomn yeasts are used as the producers.
Nutrient protein production will increase by about 4.8 tines during the
Seventh Five-Year Plan. The capacities for producing nutrient yeast using
wood waste and the wastes of agriculture and food and chemical industry
will increase by several orders of magnitude (2). nature nutrient protein
production in Bulgaria is characterised by the following iigures: By
l985--i$0.000-200,000 tons: by l990-2000--300,000-400.000 tons per year (3).
M facilities with an output capacity of 10,000-15,000 tons per year.
producing nutrient yeast from the waste or sugar and alcohol production.
are to be built during the Seventh Five-Year Plan (4). There are plans at
the Svilosa classical Conbine to obtain about 5,000 tons of yeast and 1,000
tons of turtural per year from aqueous prehydrolysates formed during pulp
cooking. thus concurrently solving the problem of environmental protection
(4).

The aungarian Peoples Republic uses wastes from alcohol production to obtain
nutrient yeast. Out of the total volune of nutrient yeast produced. 70
percent is obtained as biomass separated from fermented molasses, and 30
percent is grown on alcohol production wastes not containing alcohol and
yeast.

In the first case, where alcohol is produced out of molasses in termnters
with a 1.000-1,2oo m3 capacity. the yeast concentration is 1.0-1.2 percent.
The yeast is separated in separators produced by the Al'fa-uvan‘ Company,
and the biomass is washed, thickened to a 25-percent concentration. and
dried in a drum drier. The dry yeast yield per 100 liters of alcohol
produced is 12-16 kg. and the protein concentration or the end product is
45-50 percent. The cost of producing such yeast is low, since it is a
byproduct of the principal--alcohol--production operation.

when Cmdida or Tonia yeast is grown on molasses residues following alcohol
production, nutrient salt must be added to this medium. A continuous
cultivation method is being employed in fermenters of the French Soris
Company. The yeast is separated in separators and dried in driers produced

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the hire Atomayzer Company. The protein concentration in the end
product attains 50 percent. The volume or yeast produced with alcohol
production wastes is limited by the output capacities of the alcohol
plants. and it is not exhibiting any indications of a significant increase.

Nutrient yeast can also be obtained with the use or corn processing wastes.
low-grade raw food materials not utilized in other production operations.
and meat production wastes, animal fats in particular. The Central
Scientiﬁc Research Institute or Food Industry in Budapest is conducting
research on cultivation of yeast using plant and animal fats at laboratory
and industrial scales (in 39 m3 fermenters of the Pogel'bush Company).

Its amino acid composition and biological value are typical of nutrient
yeast (S)'.' In this case l-l.l kg of nutrient yeast with a protein concen-
tration of 45-50 percent are obtained from 1 kg of fat. DeVolopment of
this method is creating the basis (or fuller utilization of livestock
products, since just in Hungary alone the quantity of wastes at slaughter-
houses attains 40,000 tons per year (6).

liungarian scientists have deVeloped and patented a unique method for
obtaining protein concentrates from the green parts of feed plants. The
method. called 'Vepeks," entails separation of protein from leaf sap under
the influence of high tesperaturs. A high protein yield is a merit of
this method. For example up to 7 tons of protein can be obtained per year
from one hectare of alfalfa (7). The Vepeks Kontraktorz Cospany, which
was rounded in the country's west, in the city of Tatabanya. has the
purpose of disseminating this method (or obtaining protein feed concentrate
in liungary and abroad. One plant working in llungary produces protein
concentrates from alialra and various grasses using this method. The
protein product is sold abroad at soy prices (8).

Processing 0! cellulose-containing raw materials is presently not foreseen
in liungary. since this would require acquisition of expensive equipment
and materials.

The German Democratic Republic does not possess large resources of carbo-
hydrate-containing raw materials. Molasses, molasses residues, and sulfite
liquor are used in yeast production. 0. utilis yeast serves as the biomass
producer. Fermentation apparatus at these plants is represented by Mariam.
Val'dkhoi. Priks, and rogel'bush fermenters and spray apparatus. Vacuum
evaporators and falling-film apparatus are used to evaporate the yeast
suspension. The product is dried in roller units or in spray driers
produced by the Ram Atomayzer Company.

The Republic of Cuba, which grows sugar cane. possesses large amounts of
cellulose-containing wastes that are used for nutrient yeast production.
There is a plant on the republic's territory producing Tomla yeast using
sugar cane molasses. Nutrient yeast is also grown with alcohol plant
wastes. By 1980 another few plants producing yeast from molasses are to
be built in Cuba. Plants purchased from the French Speyshem Company will

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be supplied with befransua-Merrilen fermenters, Al'fa-LaVel' separators,
Vegando evaporators. and hire Atomayser driers, while plants purchased
from the French Schoyeller Blekman Company will be outfitted with Roger-
bush fermenters, nl'fa-uval‘ separators, and Angidro evaporators (9).
Methods for acquiring nutrient yeast from the s:iid wastes of sugar
production by hydrolysis and direct utilization of sue, to are being studied.
Oomissioning of these plants in the future will mak- .t possible to

increase production of nutrient yeast from sugar cane processing wastes
by more than 8 times.

Nutrient protein production reaches 20,000 tons per year in the Polish
Peoples Republic (10). The bulk of this production consists of yeast
obtained fru alcohol distillery grains by a nethod developed by East
German specialists. Starch and lignocellulose wastes, the reserves of
which are large in the country, can become an important source of raw
materials for Poland. The problem of obtaining biomass of some molds using
cellulose and lignin has been studied. solving the problem of decomposing
lignin has isportant significance, since a lignin concentration greater
than 5 percent makes it difficult for microflora to function in the
stomach of ruminants. wood wastes, which total 1 million tons per year
in Poland, might become an important protein source.

Industrial waste water also serves as a specific substrate for biomass
acquisition. Active sludge obtained from treatment of waste water fron
molasses residue fermentation in aerobic conditions has a protein content
of 50-60 percent (10).

The Institute of Fermentation Industry is conducting research on the growing
of yeast in sugar plant molasses. A productivity of 1.35 kg dry yeast

per cubic meter of apparatus volume per hour has been achieved in the
existing production conditions. The institute is also studying the pro-
blems of treating the waste water of this production operation together
with domestic wastes with the end goal of acquiring active sludge. When
this method is used, over 93 percent of the organic contaminants are removed
from waste water (ll). The sludge formed contains up to 50 percent
protein, which can be used as animal feed.

The Socialist Republic of Romania is producing nutrient yeast from plant
hydrolysstes. Specialists at the Romanian Scientific Research and Planning
Institute of ﬂood Processing Industry have developed a new method for
producing nutrient yeast using the wastes of wood processing industry
enterprises. The method has been tested successfully at a pilot plant.
Eight wood processing cuisines are being outfitted with nutrient yeast-
growing units uploying the new production process: the output capacity

of each of the- is the to 1,500 tons per year (12).

Production of nutrient protein in the crechoslovakian Socialist ﬂepublic
exceeds 15,000 tons per year, which includes 7,000 tons obtained through
aulfite liquor processing and 0,000 tons obtained from distillery grains

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.s
t

of alcohol plants and citric acid production wastes. Sulfite liquor is
believed to the best raw material source in Czechoslovakia; by processing
it. the-country could increase yeast production in the future to 50,000

tons per year. 6. utilis and C. lipolytiea cultures are used as the bio-
uses producers (13).

The principal equip-ant (separators. driers, eveporators) used in yeast
production is imported. Tests are presently being run on a Czechoslovakian
drier with a productivity of 2.2 tons of evaporated moisture per hour. and

on a fermentation apparatus employing sechanical mixing produced by the
Czechoslovakian Khepos Comany.

A cellulose production plant at which yeast production out of sulfite
liquor will be organised is to be built in the city of Pacov.

Straw and wood chips are a potential raw material for nutrient yeast
production in Czechoslovakia. The Like Industrial Association is planning
to produce nutrient yeast from wood processing wastes. The prices on
wood chips and bark are very low in the country since only the shipping
expenses are considered. By 1980 the annual quantity of these wastes will
attain l sillion tons. A variant of microbiological wood-cellulose waste
processing having nutrient yeast, alcohol. glutaninic acid. and others

as the end products has been developed for the Slovik Plant in (leopar-
dov).

Effective ways for hydrolyzing wastes and the Isthods for preparing then
for direct feeding of aniuals are also being developed. Experimental feed-
ing of filtered biological sludge having a protein concentration of 35-45
percent to animals for 5 years produced positive results (14). A method
has been proposed for processing fine cellulose fibers unsuited for paper
and cardboard production into nutrient yeast. The fibers are separated
fro. waste water by filtration or settling. and they are subjected to
fermentative hydrolysis with the help of the filtrate of liquid in which
Mohodem virids. a cellulase producer. had been cultured. The hydro-
lysates are used to grow 0. stilts and Cryptocoem aiﬂms yeasts.
Together with the substrate residue. the biomass is dehydrated and dried.
The end product contains up to 20 percent protein (is).

A method for growing nutrient yeast in sugar beet processing wastes has
been developed jointly with East German scientists. According to tentative
estilates this method can produce 3.5-4 tons of protein from a hectare of
sugar beets. Absence of waste water is an advantage of the method.

Hydrolysis industry in the Soviet Union is presently responsible for about
50 percent of the entire output of nurtrient yeast. which is being used
successfully to intensify livestock production.

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the very near future, on the basis of specialization and concentration
of production the livestock ferns will be transfused into industrial
enterprises producing meat, eggs, milk, and wool. Feed quality and the
physiological completeness of the feed ration are acquiring decisive signi-
ficance to maintaining high animal biological productivity. The quality

of the feed ration can be raised to the required level only on the condition
that nutrient yeast, vitamins, microelemsnts, and other substances are
introduced into the animal ration. Thus the main task of hydrolysis industry
in the 10th rive-Year Plan continues to be to significantly increase the
production voltsse, isprove quality, and reduce production costs by intro-
ducing additional high-output plants outfitted with high-output machine
waits, and by intensifying production through extensive introduction of

new equipment.

The prototypes of continuous-action apparatus for continuous one-stage and
two-stage hydrolysis of plant raw uterial are to be tested in production
conditions in the very near future: the productivity of this appartus is
12 tons of absolutely dry wood per hour. When compared with the periodic
process. continuous hydrolysis in suvh apparatus can increase the concen-
tration of the obtained sugars (by :-2.5 times) and the size of the batches
obtained, decrease consimption of steam, energy, and chemicals, and reduce
production cost by 20-30 percent.

Such hydrolysis apparatus will be supplied to new high-output plants, and
conversion of periodic-action apparatus to continuous operation will begin.
This will sake it possible to convert the entire sector to continuous
hydrolysis within a short ties and with lower capital outlays (16).

l'srmenters characterized by intense mass exchange. multiple-body evaporators,
highly productive driers, and other equipment will be installed at the
hydrolysis plants, and hydrolysis industry's first automated production
process control systen ($01?) will be introduced at the Kirov Biochemical
plug.

As a result of inroving yeast production, introducing high-yield strains,
and isplenenting other measures, the average total protein concentration
in yeast will increase to 55-60 percent, and the yeast yield from RV
[reducing agent?! will attain 54 percent (16).

The bulk of the feed yeast is to be enriched with biologically active
mounds (amino acids, vitamins, antibiotics, microeienents) and supplied
in the form of yeast additives.

Production of nutrient hydrolytic sugar (syrup). synthetic milk substitute,
fructose-glucose syrups, and other substances is to be started.

He can conclude from this that the problem of satisfying animal husbandry's
demand for nutrient protein is equally pressing to all can countries.

Sh
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cooperation along specialists tron the treternel countries will make it
possible to reveal new tone of raw neteriel (roe which to produce nutrient
protein. and to creete the procedures for processing these raw eaterials
with e consideration for the best experience or the cam countries and

the echieveeentn of world science and practice.

Future cooperation in this area nay develop in the direction of production
0! amino ecids. nutrient vitamins, antioxidants, end other feed edditivee.
end it Isanclude joint conetruction of production capacities necessary
for satisfying the ma additive «and or the cane countries.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Ohsneyde, 3., "Cooperation none can Countries in Solving the Nutrient
Protein Problem.” WWMMY SBL'SKOIOIOZYAYSTVENNYY mum. No 4,
1917. p 25.

2. cherkezov. 1., ”The Feed Problem and the Perspectives of its Solution

in Bulgeria.‘ mmmmnnomy SBL'SKOKROZYAYSWENNYY ZHURNAL ,No 4, 1977,
pp 30-3‘.

3. G'bev, A" Vasil'yev, 3.. and Stoychov. #1., "Proyzvodstvo us pray-
shlen edinoklet”chen protein (P8P) ot nekonventeialki eurovinni

iztochnitsi (bioinzheneren i tekhniko—ekonouicheeki aneliz)," Sofia,
1976.

4. miteteki, V. , “Increasing Production of Synthetic Protein 00nponents,’
ZIIIVONOVODS‘WO. 80 4, 1976, p 36.

S. Szecheniy.8., Silek. P.. end lurpeti, 6., 'Produkcja drozdzy pokernowych
ne tluercrech rvierzecych i roelinnych.‘ PRZBHYSL FEWACYINY I
norm, no 2. 1977. p 31.

6. ermn 231m, 7 January 1974.

7. Heekiewicr, A. , and Szyuenska, 3., 'Preparety biaekowe z zielonych
ezesci ”Ilia,“ PRZEHYSL mmmzur I Rom, No 2, 1977, p 19.

8. ruwsm UND WORLS REVUB, N0 51, 1976, p 632.
9. PWSL WWI"! I MW, ”0 1, 1977, p 16.

lO. ubendzineki, 5., “Zejist oveni Ilene bernych eurovin ne vyroby
lune bioneey," WASH! plums», "0 ll, 1916, p 250.

11. PEACE 1mm 1 LABORA‘IORIW WK}! PRZEHYSLY SMYHCZEG),
Vol 26. No 1, 1976, pp 25,43.

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm A08 MASSBM. NASSBRHIRTSCHAPT WD HASSBRTBCHNIK,
V01 26. No 5. 1976, p 168.

Patent No. 2288147 (Czechoslovakia). "Aerobic Microorganism Culti-
vation Method.” Published 18 April 1976.

Abbot, m, "mhlbetg Kontorenz uber Perapokcivischo nichtungen in
do: Vomrcung fencer, (luaaiger und gaatomigor Abfallstoff,"
281.1810" um PAPIBR, Vol 25, No l, 1976, p 20.

mu, 3., "Di. Venrboitung des biologischon Schism: :u Putter-
“nib.“ PAPIR A (331.0an. Vol 31, No 9. 1976, p 193.

Malov, A. 1., and Bpshceyn, Ya. V., ”Hydrolysis Industry in the
10th Five-Year Plan," GIDNLIZNOYB PIOIZVODSM, Vol 84, No 6,
1976. p l. .

COPYRIai'l‘: Imcol'atvo 'lasnaya pron-st". Gidroliznaya i lesokhini-

chukaya pron-at." . 1978

11004

080:

1870

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
...\. ton omcm. use 0mm

1mm mcsosxowcv

UDC 621.43(100)
IMMUNRGMSR-70--EXHIBITION REPORT

Moscow cxomuzmn l usomxmaarsxava PROHYSHLBNNOST' in Russian No 6,
1978 pp 30-31

[Article by B. L. Smolyakov]

[Text] During the time that the July (1978) cc CPSU Plenum was in session,
discussing the problems of. agricultural development, Soviet machine builders
displayed technical innovations for industrial food sectors, trade, and
public food services at Sokol'ri.ki Park in Moscow. The USSR had the largest
exposition in the international Inprodtorgmash-78 Exhibition, in which the
cowanies and associations or 23 countries participated. Its displays
contained equipment for enterprises or breakbaking, sugar, dairy, oil,
cheese, neat, and oil-and-tat industry.

ﬂicrobiological industry, which Comrade L. I. Brezhnev numbered in his
report to the July cc CPSU Plenum among those specialized, independent,
and large sectors which Md not existed before, also demonstrated its
potentials for producing goods for the public, and its contribution to
solving the protein problem.

Visitors to the exhibition could acquaint themselves with a process for
producing crystalline xylate, nutrient sorbitol, and mannitol, with a model
of the 3-50--a microorganism growing apparatus, with the apparatus and
processes used in the production or pectolytic enzyme preparations, with

a process for utilizing biomass when culturing pectolytic enzyme producers,
and with the characteristics of products of microbiological industry--
P-loxh (pectotoyetidin), (amilorizin), (dekaren), 6-1010: amylosubtilin,
(kormogrizin), (batsilikhin), (vitamitsin), vitamins 32 and 812, acido-
philus, monocarbonic acid, nutrient yeast, etc. These products are
enjoying a constantly increasing demand in meat, feed, canning, winemaking,
brewing, baking, and starch-syrup production operations.

The oc CPS!) and LSSR Council of Ministers decree ”On Nrther Development of
the Production of Feed Additives, Plant Protection Resources, and Other
Products or Microbiological Industry in 1978-1985," approved by the July
(1978) cc CPSU Plenum, contains an elaborate program for raising production

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of nutrient protein. amino acid, premixes, enzyme preparations, nutrient
antibiotics and vitamins. microbiological plant protection agents, and
bacterial i‘ertillrers in 1978-1985.

The Ministry of mchino Building for Light and Food Industry and household
Appliances, the enterprises of which provided the greater part of the
exhibits in the Soviet section of the Inprodtorgmash-‘IB Exhibition, is
nusbered among the sinistries ordered to manufacture the appropriate equip-
ment for microbiological industry.

During the time of this exhibition specialists had the possibility for seeing
models of highly productive machines and units characterized by high unit
output capacity. Improved separators. driors--particularly those used to
pulverise and dry baker's yeast, and evaporators used in sugar industry
were of doubtless interest to workers of hydrolysis industry. 1hus the
vac-3000 apparatus thickens sugar-containing juice, evaporating the water
frail it. It is unique in that it has an all-welded body with a built-in
secondary steam separator. ’lhe obtained syrup is then cooked in a VIN-60
vacuum apparatus, which is distinguished by forced circulation of the
product as it is cooking. Right next door the visitor can inspect the
cosh-321195 and PPN-l251-S continuous-action automtic centrifuges intended
for separation of sugar crystals from intercrystalline syrup within the
centrifugal force field.

Soviet and foreign specialists were attracted by Soviet apparatus used to
dry bulk products in a so-called vibration-induced fluidized bed. Intense
mixing results from vibration of the grid and an ascending current of hot
air. In the opinion of specialists, creation of devices (also making use
of active hydrodynamic conditions) which would make use of the principle of
spiraling a biphasal current is also a promising direction. One such drier,
the Al-VGS, consists of a drying chanber, two ventilator-radiator stations,
a pulveriser, cyclones, an. exhaust fan, and a nonitoring and control panel.
‘i'here are four boxes one on top of the other in the drying chamber. The
two pairs of boxes vibrate vertically in opposite phase, as a result of
which full balance of the vibrating mass is achieved. The vibration fre-
quency is 350 cycles per minute. ﬂow, for example, is yeast dried in them?
After being pressed through a 2.5 an diameter die, it is cut by a knife
mechanism into individual granules which are then sent to the drier. The
thickness of the layer during drying is 100 III. The temperature of delivered
air is maintained and the temperature of spent air is monitored automati-
cally in each drying box. such drying machine units, according to their
designer--the All-Union Scientific Research and Experimental Design Institute
of food Machinery-mare characterized by high effectiveness, and they are
favorably distinguished by working reliability and simplicity of manufacture
and operation.

Visitors of all sexes and ages-mot only Soviet but also foreign, including
some from faraway Australia, observed with interest the work of the Al-IIU
unit, which producas protein-rich imitation roe, a new food product that

58
FOR OFFICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was first developed in the USSR. This rival of sturgeon roe is made from
milk protein. gelatin, and vegetable oil. It contains vitamins and micro-
elements‘l ‘It is very similar to sturgeon roe in appearance, nutritional
value, and taste. All of the complex processes or the nl-nu unit are
fully mechanized and automated. This innovation was created by the USSR
Madsey of Sciences Institute or Blenento-Organic Compounds and the All-
Union Scientific Research and Experisental Design Institute or Food
Nechinsry'. ‘some or the industrial isitation roe production units are
operating at one or the Moscow enterprises.

Enterprises and organizations or ll einistries and departments participated
in the preparations for the Soviet exposition, and about 700 exhibits were
displayed. rive cam countries (Bulgaria. COR, ﬂungary, Poland, Czechoslo-
vakia) and Yugoslavia took an active part in the exhibition; The exposition
of the socialist countries was a clear demonstration of the fruitful

result of scientific-technical cooperation among own countries aimed at
creating new equipment and production processes for the food sectors of
industry, trade. and public food services. Cooperation is presently based

on contracts with about 90 scientific research and planning-and-design
organisations.

The displays sponsored by Austria, Australia, PR6, Great Britain, Denmark,
Spain, Italy, Colmia, Liechtenstein, The Netherlands, Norway, USA,
Finland, trance, Sweden. and Japan were dominated by food dressing and
packaging equipment, wrapping machines, filling machines, metering machines,
driers, machinery and machine units for vegetable canning and food concen-
trate industry, and weighing instruments and devices.

Scientific sylposiuns were held, lectures and reports were given, and press
conferences dedicated to the national days of the companies representing
particular countries were held concurrently with the exhibition. Repre-
sentatives from foreign coapanies and associations said that they viewed
participation in the international review in Moscow as a new possibility
for establishing and strenghthening scientific-technical and cosmercial
ties in the spirit of the closing docment of the all-Europe Conference

in Helsinki.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo ‘besnaya pron-st“, "Gidroliznaya i lesokhimi-
cheskaya pron-st", 1978

1100‘
C50: 1870

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL HICMBIOIDGY

UDC 634.0.863.5.002:65.011.56
mROL OP MICIDBIOIDGICAL SYNTHESIS (SOVIET PATENT LITERATURE BENIN)

Moscow GIDIDLIZNAYA I LBSOICHIMICKBSKAYA PMHYSHLENNOST' in Russian No 1,
1978, pp 30-32

[Article by Engineers A. s. Fedorov and v. I. Boboshko, Institute of
Automation. Kiev]

['next] The main objective of microbioIOgical synthesis is to acquire an
end product with minimum expenditure of nutrients. This objective can be
reached by creating production conditions which would promote maximum
utilisation of the components of the nutrient mixture and the largest
yield of an end product having prescribed properties. 'lhese conditions
can be created by means of biosynthesis control systems.

Control of biosynthesis boils down to maintaining the ratios and absolute
values of nutrient concentrations necessary for development and reproduc-
tion of the microbe population, and to creating physicochemical conditions
ensuring the best course of the process, oriented toward optimum acqui-
sition of the end product.

The biosynthesis control systems currently being used in the sector are
basically particular-“that is. they are systems which regulate and stabilize
individual parameters or the process: The rate at which the nutrient
components are delivered into the apparatus and their volume: air intake
for the purposes of aeration: the volune or culture media in the apparatus;
its tomerature; the acidity of the medium in the apparatus.

Consequently the main indices of the process--the concentrations of biomass
and nutrients in the epparatus--are not utilized in the control systems.

Such control of microbiological synthesis by indirect parameters is necessary
because 0! the absence of reliable industrial sensing elements that could
measure these principal parameters.

the effectiveness of control by indirect parameters decreases due to
ignorance of the dependencies among important factors or the process, for
examle the intensity of mass exchange. gas exchange, the growth rate of

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

microorganisms. and other controlling parameters. Reduction of the number
of parameters being measured means a loss of information on factors having
a significant influence on the process. and consequently it worsens the
possibilities for keeping the process optima.

Considering the little knowledge we have of the internal relationships of
microbiological synthesis. the complexity of the synthetic process makes
it difficult for us to choose the optima control variant from the many
possible methods of solving this problem.

This article discusses an atteapt made to generalize developments published
in the last it) years in the task as inventions dealing with control of
microbiological synthesis, developments which in the opinion of the authors
offer the greatest practical interest. These developments are at the

level of present development of science and technology.

The Institute of Physics of the Siberian Branch of the USSR Academy of
Sciences has developed a microorganism culturing device (1) in which the
culture fluid is maintained at a certain optical density with the goal of
keeping the process continuous; this density is maintained by balancing
the volume of fluid introduced into the cultivator and withdrawn from it.

The All-Onion Scientific-Production and Planning-and-Design Association
of nicrobiological Industry has patented a nutter of methods and systems
of automatic control of continuous microorganism growing processes.

Thus one of the methods (2) foresees maintaining an optimum level of air
consumption for aeration depending on the quantity of carbon dioxide

liberated, the latter being determined from the consumption of air for
aeration and the concentration of carbon dioxide in the emerging gases.

Mother method (3) involves regulation of delivery of the nutrient medim's
coepcnenu into the apparatus depending on the quantity of heat liberated.
which is estimated from the distribution of the medium's temperature field.

Now that computer technology has recently been introduced. it has become
possible to use coeplex integrated indices as control criteria. An example
of this can be found in a method proposed by the same association, in which
the rate of change of the economic coefficient of substrate utilization is
used as the control criterion. The numerical value of this coefficient is
the ratio of the quantity of biomass obtained to the mass of nutrients
utilized within a certain time interval.

In this method (4), the concentration of the nutrient substrate delivered
and constmlption of air and mineral salt solution are regulated depending
on change in the economic coefficient of substrate utilisation, which is
determined by canparing previous and subsequent (following certain intervals
of time) computed economic coefficients. In our opinion this control method

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFl-‘ICIAL USE ONLY

has the shortcoming that the inertia of the process is not considered in
the mutations of the principal index--the economic coefficient, which
is used to control the process. The economic coefficient is computed on
the basis of both input parameters (the concentration of RV [reducing
agent?) at the input of the apparatus) and output parameters (the concen-
tration of biomass and residual (W at the output). An economic coefficient
couputad on the basis of simultaneous measurements of input and output
parameters cannot reflect the course of the process at the moment at which

the parameters are being measured. since in most cases the practical lag
of the process attains 4.5-5 hours.

Control can be effective only in the event that the time interval between
control instructions is longer than the lag time. However. we believe such
control to be not very effective. since the process may deviate signifi-
cantly from optimum in the time interval between control instructions.

The All-Union Scientific-Production Association of Microbiological Industry
has also proposed a system for automatic control of continuous microorganism
cultivation (6). which makes use of the method described above to grow
nutrient yeast. Another system for automatic control of continuous micro—
organism cultivation (5) developed by the same association foresees
stabilization of water delivery and the tesperature of the culture and
nutrient mediums, regulation of the acidity and volume of medium in the
apparatus, and regulation of substrate delivery depending on the respiratory
coefficient and concentration of RV in the spent mash. The respiratory
coefficient is determined from the concentration of dissolved oxygen and
consumption of air for aeration with the help ofa special logical unit.

In a third system for automatic control of continuous microorganism culti-
vation (7) patented by this association, the temperature of the yeast
biomass and the volume and acidity of fluid in the apparatus are stabilized.
and delivery of nutrient substrate into the apparatus depends on the
respiratory coefficient, the concentration of dissolved oxygen in the fluid,
residual RV, consuption of air for aeration, and substrate acidity.

me institute of Automation (Kiev) has developed a system for automatic
control of continuous microorganism cultivation (8) which foresees stabi-
lization of consumtion of air for aeration and nutrient substrate,
temperature. and the acidity and volume of culture medium in the apparatus.
regulation of the ratio between consuption of water for dilution and
consumption of substrate, corrected in relation to the RV concentration

in the substrate, and the time the biomass remains in the apparatus, and
sampling of culture medium depending on the concentration of biomass in
the yeast suspension and residual RV.

The institute has also proposed a system for controlling periodic micro-
organism biosysthesis (9) in which control of the principal parameters of
the process--tenperature. medium acidity. and consumtion of air for

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.n_

aerationi; is achieved with an adaptive model of the process, the algorithm
of which is initially written into one of the system' s blocks. The model's
coefficients are tuned to the rate of the process.

I

M systems, for automatic control of qualitative indices in microorganism
cultivation (10,11) created by the same institute permit control of quality
parameters, for exasple the concentration of biosynthesis products in a
bank of working apparatus using one analyser-sensor and a recording instru-
ment, and automatic determination of the end of biosynthesis (for emple
in the production of feed antibiotics) in each apparatus.

The All-mien Planning-and-Design and Scientific Research Institute of
Automtion of Food Industry has proposed a method (12) for automatic control
of microorganism cultivation, in which consumtion of aerating air, the rpm
of the mixer, and pressure in the apparatus are stabilized, these indices
simultaneously being corrected in relation to the difference in concentra-
tions of carbon dioxide in delivered and spent air.

The All-mion Scientific Research Institute of Bioengineering has developed
a device regulating microorganism cultivation (13); it regulates biomass
concentration in the apparatus depending on microorganism growth rate by
changing the substrate delivery rate.

V. N. Ostroumov and his colleagues have proposed a method of continuous
microorganism cultivation (14) in which liquid hydrocarbons, for example
paraffins and other components necessary for cultivation, mineral salts
in particular, are delivered into the apparatus depending on the gas
concentration in the culture medium: the latter is maintained constant
throughout the entire cultivation time.

I. S. Ryvkina, et al. have patented a method for automatic control of
continuous microorganism cultivation (15) foreseeing, with the goal of
stabilizing the concentration of residual hydrocarbons and reducing
fluctuations in the productivity of the apparatus, regulation of the
coneuption of hydrocarbons and water depending on biomass concentration.

The Groznyy branch of the Scientific Research and Planning Institute of
Pull Automation in Petroleum and Chemical Industry has developed a method
for automatic control of aerobic microorganism cultivation (16) in which,
with goal of intensifying the process, the delivery of air into the
apparatus to aerate the medium is regulated with a consideration for the
rate of change in the redox potential or with a consideration for the
partial pressure of dissolved oxygen in the presence of a zero rate of
change in the redox potential.

‘lhe colleagues of this same institute have proposed a method for automatic
control of continuous fermentation in a battery of fermenters, in which
the raw material-gas ratio in the first apparatus and temerature in
subsequent units are regulated) in this case all regulated parameters are

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

corrected on the basis of the amount of hydrogen measured in the fermnta-
tion gases of each apparatus.

The Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Microorganisms of the USSR
Academy of Sciences has developed a method for controlling microorganism
cultivation in thermostatic conditions (l8) , in which the biomass concen-

tration is maintained at a prescribed level and the rate of delivery of
nutrient medium is regulated depending on culture fluid temperature.

The Institute of Microbiology imeni Avgust Kirkhenehteyn has proposed a
system for automatic control of microorganism cultivation (19) in which
air delivery for aeration and the rpm of the mixer are regulated depending

on the quantity of oxygen consumed for endogenous respiration of the
culture and synthesis of the end product.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Gitel'mn, I. 1., et a1., "Inventor's Certificate No 182870,
15 July 1963." BYULIM'BN' 1209mm, No 12, 1966, p 79.

2. Odinokov, G. h. , et al., “Inventor's Certificate No 334240,
13 April. 1970,“ BYULLETBN’ 120882134", No 12, 1972, p 96.

3. 'l'okarev, s. 1., and Loskutov, G. 11., "Inventor's Certificate No 424875,
30 June 1972,‘I BYW' IZOBRBTBNIY, No 15, 1974, p 86.

4. Odinokov, G. 11., and Loskutov, 6. $1., “Inventor's Certificate No 507625,
10 June 1974,“ BYW' IZOBRETENIY, No 11, 1976, p 83.

S. Balaehevich, I. 1., Litvin, E. 1., and wokarev, B. 1., “Inventor's
Certificate No 412241, 20 December 1971,” BYULLETBN' 1203mm“,
No 3. 1974, p 10.

6. Odinokov, G. 11., and noekutov, G. H., "Inventor's Certificate No 527472,
25 8013:8er 1974,” SYULLBTBN' IZOBRETSNIY, No 3, 1976, p 83.

7. Litvin, B. 1., et a1., I'Inventor'il Certificate No 522228,
30 October 1914,“ BYULLBTEN' IZOBRBTBNIY, No 27, 1976, p 82.

8. Govdya, Yu. 0., et a1., 'Inventor's Certificate No 308060.
23 January 1969,“ BYUW' Izoenzmrr, No 21. 1971, p 89.

9. Zakharchenko, N. Ye., et a1., “Inventor's Certificate No 488847,
18 Decesber 1972," BYULLS‘I'BN' IZOBRBTBNIY, No 39, 1975, p 70.

10. Zakharchenko, N. Ye., et a1., "Inventor‘s Certificate No 489784,
20 Member 1973," BYULLETEN' IZOBRETBNIY, No 40, 1975, p 64.

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zakherchenko, N. Yen et ai., "Inventor's Certificate No 489788,
“January 1974," BYULLBTEN' 1203mm, No 40, 1975, p 65.

Trinchuk, c. 8., and Geiger, L. L, "Inventor's Certificate No 355213,
24 Noveiaer 1970,“ BYUM‘A‘BN' IMWIY, No 31, 1972, p 87.

Veroniﬁ, G. 1., et ai., “Inventor's Certificate No 365373,
31_§u1y 1970," BWW' IZODRB‘PENIY, No 6, 1973, p 49.

Oetrounov, V. 1., et a1., ”Inventor's Certificate No 390136,
30 Aliquot 1971,“ am' IZOBRSTBNIY, No 30, 1973, p 86.

Ryvkina, I. A., et ai., “Inventor's Certificate No 469740,
10 July 1973,“ BYUW' IZOBRBTBNIY, No 17, 1975, p 74.

Arrmanov, Ye. N., et a1, “Inventor's Certificate No 502015,
9 April 1974,“ BYUW' Housman, No 5, 1976, p 82.

Babayante, A. V. et a1., “Inventor's Certificate No 311961,
27 March 1970,“ BYULLBTEN' 1309mm. No 25, 1971, p 109.

Shkidchenko, A. UL, “Inventor'e Certificate No 506611,
20 Deceaber 1971.“ BYW' Imam-wry, No 10, 1976, p 66.

Seiga, s. 3., et a1., “Inventor's Certificate No 483426,
25 October 1973," crumm' IZOBWH, No 33, 1975, p 84.

common: Izdatei'stvo ”usnaya prcu'et", 'Gidroliznaya i

leeokhinicheekaya pron-ct", 1978

1 1004

C80:

1870

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIOUS

SYMPOSIUM OR BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOﬂGINEERING

Moscow MIRROBIOLOGIYA in Russian No 6, 1978 pp 112971132
[Article by M. 2h. Kristepsons and Yu. 0. Yakobson]

[Text] In the last few years there has been significant development of
research in the field of biotechnology and bioengineering. The decisions
of the 25th CPSU Congress played a large part in development of such re-

search; they put a number of important tasks to microbiologists. It became
necessary to sum up the completed research end prepare programs for future
work. The symposiun that convened in Riga from 16 to 16 March 1978 dealt
with this issues. The Scientific Council for Physiology end Biochemistry
of Microorganisms. USSR AS [Academy of Sciences], Main Administration of
the Microbiological Industry under the USSR Council of Ministers. All-
Union Microbiological Society. in collaboration with the Latvian AS, were
the instigators of these symposium. The practical organization of the
symposium was assigned to the Institute of Microbiology imeni Avgust
Kirkhenshteyn, Latvian AS. and Latvian Republic Department of the All-Union
Microbiological Society.

More than 500 specialists participated in the symposium: representatives of

institutions of the USSR and Union republic AS's, Glevmikrobioprom [Main
Administration for the Microbiological Industry], USSR Ministry of the

Medical Industry, USSR Ministry of the Food Industry end other agencies
and WZ's, as well as scientists from the German Democratic Republic,
Relish People's Republic and Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.

The Latvian 88R was represented by specialists who work at 11 scientific

research institutions. VUZ's and scientific-production associations. Speci-
alists from the Uevar feed producing holkhoz (Bauskiy Rayon. Latvian SSR)

also participated in the symposiun; at this kolkhoz, an experimental shop
was built for co-ercial production of protein and vitamin enriched feed.

and a problem laboratory was opened in collaboration with the Institute of
Microbiology imeni A. Kirkhenshteyn.

A. A. Drisul. Academician of the USSR AS and vice-president of the USSR AS,
delivered the opening ranarks at the symposium. The following also

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

delivered some brief greetings: Prof I. L. Rabotnova. on behalf of the
problem council for physiology and biochemistry of microorganisms. USSR AMS.
end the presidium of VMO [All-Union Microbiological Society]; Prof E. Galas.
on behalf of the delegation of scientists from the Polish People's republic.
who stressed in particular the importance of active collaboration among
specialists of CEMA member countries to solve theoretical and practical
problems in the field of biotechnology and bioengineering.

Several keynote and survey papers were delivered: "Problems of Technological
and Bioengineering Science as Related to Development of the Microbiological
Industry" (A. M. Carpov. Glsvmikrobioprogm under the USSR Council of
Ministers). ”Problems of Economics of Microbiological Synthesis" (M. P.
Morosov. USSR Goeplan). Prof M. Ringfayl. head of the scientific delega-
tion from 603 and corresponding member of the GDR AS. in his paper entitled
"Synthesis of Microbial Protein by Unicelluler Organisms and Technical
Back-Up of This Process." discussed comprehensively the possible technologi-
cal solutions from the standpoint of combining data on physiology of

producer microorganisms. optimum cultivation conditions and equipment for
the process.

In his paper, entitled "Some Theoretical Prerequisites for Developing
Fermentation Equipment,” Prof P. I. Nikolayev described and substantiated
the principles of engineering aspects of fer-enters developed at the Moscow
Institute of Chemical Machine Building, and he used the systems approach to

analyze the chief factors affecting the efficacy of fermentation equipment.

Prof V. Sikita (CSSR), in a paper entitled "Continuous Cultivation of Micro-
organisms." demonstrated the potential of the continuous method for the
study of theoretical problems of physiology, biochemistry and genetics; he
stressed the practical importance of the method for accumulation of highly
productive mutants in the producer population. The producer of acylases

used as one of the examples.

Academician M. Ye. Beker of the Latvian AS discussed development of the main
directions of microbiological research and microbiological production in

that republic. which were the prerequisite for intensive development of
investigations in the field of biotechnology and bioengineering, in his
paper entitled "Development of Biotechnology and Bioengineering in Latvian
883"; he also reported the main results of developing diverse technological
processes, finding new forms of raw material. designing fermentation equip-

ment for different purposes and development of automated regulation,
inspection and control systems for microbiological processes developed by

specialists of this republic, including the Institute of Microbiology imeni
A. Kirkhenshteyn, Latvian AS, in collaboration with many institutions of

the nation.

A total of 60 survey papers were delivered and about 120 display reports
were discussed at two plenary sessions, as well as meetings of three sections
("Processes of Fermenetion," "Media and Products of Microbial Synthesis."

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Equipment and Management"). In addition. summaries of submitted topics.
including about 350 titles ("Biotechnology and Bioengineering." in 3 volumes,
Isdstel'atvo ”Zinetne." Riga, 1978) were brought to the attention of the
participants.

It should be noted that the visual [display] reports prompted particularly
lively discussion. and this form of symposium work use highly praised by
the participants.

Various factors of basic importance to optimization of fermentation processes
were discussed in the section entitled "Fermentation Processes." The symposium
participants observed that the the data obtained in laboratory experiments

on physiology. biochemistry and genetics of producers of biologically active
substances are obviously not precise enough to make use of the potential

capabilities of a producer in the presence of specific technology and
equipment.

Investigation of thermodynamics of the fermentation process (8. Heinrits,
P. Clo-bits, GDR) and use of the balance method of estimating the proportion

of base raw material. intermediate and end products in the biological
reaction mixture as related to a specific technological process, as well as
recording the kinetic characteristics of metabolite synthesis. are very

important.

Comprehensive knovledge of activity of various enzymatic systems. as related

to the intensity of the process (A. M. nezborodov, H. P. Ruklishs), investi-
gation of bioenergetic mechanisms of metabolism of microorganisms (Yu. 3.
Shvinka) make it possible to increase significantly the effectiveness of

the biosynthetic process. Serious attention must be given to the study of
the regulatory role of carbon dioxide in cultivation of microorganisms

(A. D. Golologob, Ye. R. Davydov).

Comprehensive analysis has been made of mass transfer and scaling in extra-
polating the results of laboratory processes to semi-industrial and industrial

conditions, and attention was given to the significance of stirring (Ye. S.
bylinkin,a L. D. Shtoffer). In this section, due attention was also devoted
to processes of continuous cultivation of microorganisms in order to obtain

biomass and secondary products. both in the case of inhibited growth (I. L.
Rabotnova) and from the standpoint of resistance and microevolution of a

population. which is also governed by the main laws of evolution under
artificial continuous cultivation conditions (N. s. Pechurkin).

Foam production plays a dual role under various fermentation conditions,

depending on physicochemical properties of fermentation media and specific
equipment used, and vise restriction of this phenomenon requires special
approaches (H. 2h. Kirstapsons, H. K. Yakobsone). It should be noted that

these problems are also being investigated intensively at the Institute of
Microbiology imeni A. Kirkhenshteyn. under the supervision of Academicians

H. Ye. Beker and U. 3. Viyestur.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
,,

- -
In“

In the section on ”Media and Products of Microbial Synthesis," attention was
focused primarily on discussion of the suitability of various forms of raw
material for microbial synthesis of secondary products (N. V. Glushchenko,
H. Ye. Baker and others). There was detailed discussion of the question of

new types of raw materiel for biosynthesis of lysine (G. K. Liyepin'sh and
others).

Among the various forms of waste and by-products of other industries.
attention was called to the use of whey for cultivation of microorganisms

(H. V. Zalashko). In the general opinion of participants at this section,

raw material of which there is an abundant supply-products of photosynthesis.
waste and by-products of various industrial and agricultural enterprises.

chemical precursors, minerals and atmospheric gases-should be used to
influence biosynthesis of biologically active substances.

At this section. much attention was given to questions of immobilization of
live cells and isolated cell components, which can now be classified in an
independent direction, engineering enzymology.

There was discussion of immobilization of lysozymee on collagen (E. Galas,
Poland). preparation of solid carriers of the cellulos type for immobiliza-

tion (I. Avguatin, CSSR), physicochesical properties and enzymatic activity
of immobilized lipase, as compared to the unadulterated product (R. Yu.

Are e: ‘10)s

The question of choice of technique and metabolite purification depends on the
nature of the substrate that is being developed and the product obtained,

so that there was discussion of the general principles that must be taken

into consideration. No doubt, some methods. including ultrsfiltration. may
have several advantages (R. Yu. Are). Physicochemical products of the

"concentrate" type depend not only on the type of raw material, but produc-
tion technology; for this reason, special attention should be given to the

study of correlation between the properties of such products and technology
of production thereof (Ya. Ya. Laukevita and others). At this section.

there was also discussion of problems of disintegration of microorganisms
in various disintegrator systems (3. A. Pikhte), special methods of dehydra-
tion for preservation of viable cells (H. Ye. Beker), as well as problems

related to purification and sterilization of air (G. L. Motins), and a few
others.

In the section on "Equipment and Management [or control]," attention was
mainly concentrated on problems and specific results pertaining to the
development of complex fermentation lines, various instruments for inspec-

tion. control and automation of the fermentation process with a hook-up to
a computer.

In most cases, the submitted data were the result of generalization of con-
siderable experimental and semi-industrial material. as well as production
knowhow, and in many cases comparable products were evaluated on the basis

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the systems analytic approach. Some original data were reported on
automatic regulation of cell mass synthesis (D. Poland ct al.. 60R); there

was discussion of bioengineering and machine-building aspects of designing
large fermentation apparatus (A. Prokop et al.. CSSR). problems of
development of fermenters for optimum management of the process of micro-
biological synthesis over a maximum range of variable parameters, and
equipping them with automatic devices for inspection and control of the
process by the producing plant (U. E. Viyestur), comparative data on techno-
logical apparatus for sterile processes (V. A. Osen'kina et a1.), data on

various devices for cultivation of bakers' yeast (6. G. Gandzyuk, A. I.
Sokolenko), development of aodern technological lines varying in capability
for the production of enzymes and enzymatic preparations (K. A. Kalunyants.

L. I. Golgar). There was a report on development of original, selective
electrodes (Yu. Yu. Kulis, E. V. Rallis), and a method was proposed for
examining bioengineering operations with the use of computers (K. G. Fedoseyev,
As As MPG-N“).

It should be noted that an entire set of engineering systems for cultivation
of microorganisms, with which the symposium participants could become
acquainted. in part,byvisiting the biotechnological complex of the Institute
of Microbiology imeni A. Kirkhenshteyn, Latvian AS, was brought to the
attention of the symposium participants by this institute, in the papers,
display reports and special publications for the symposium. The technical
specifications of these systems are reflected in a special brochure ("Technical
Systems of Cultivating Microorganisms," Zinstne, Riga, 1978, 32 pages).

Many speakers also touched upon economic problems of microbiological synthesis

in their papers dealing with fermentation processes, choice of raw material,
methods of isolating and purifying end products and developing apparatus.

however, economic problems were discussed the most vividly in the paper of
v. P. 2amakh, general director of the Biokhimreaktiv [biochemical Reagents]

Scientific and Industrial Association, which was entitled "Technological
and Economic Aspects of Production of Biochemical Reagents and Products

in the USSR,” in which he demonstrated the complexity of organizing produc-
tion. as related to the volume of production of each specific type of
product. The speak.r offered several specific suggestions on organizing and

backing up such production, as well as organizing collaboration between a
scientific team and industrial enterprises.

0n the last day of the symposium. a film, entitled "Irreplaceable Lysine"
(Riga Notion Pic tare Studio) was screened for the participants; it dealt
with creation and industrial use of s microbiological method of producing

a lysine feed concentrate at the Livany Experimental Biochemical Plant
of Glavmikrobioprom in Latvian SSR.

At the final plenary session, the accomplishments of the symposium were
summed up. the most important problems to be submitted to comprehensive
investigation were outlined, and a joint decision was elaborated. It was
stressed that biotechnology and bioengineering are of exceptional scientific

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and practical importance as the key element that links microbiological
science with practical use of microorganisms in various branches of the national

economy. and first of all with regard to cultivation of microorganisms for
biosynthesis of secondary metabolites.

Prompt evaluation of biotechnological and bioengineering aspects could be
largely instrumental in specifying the types of laboratory investigations
and thereby expedite development of processes and introduction thereof to
industry. It was stressed that in solving purely biotechnological and bio-
engineering problems. considerably more attention should be given to environ-
mental protection. In this respect. of exceptional importance are the
directives of the 25th CPSU Congress pertaining to development of waste-
free production and closed-cycle production. It can be noted that some
advances have been made in the area of developing waste-free production by
the staff of the Experimental Biochemical Plant of the Latvian AS, under the
supervision of its director, A. A. Lurinya. Hero of Socialist Labor. and
chief engineer 3. Ya. Karklinya, Honored Industrial worker of Latvian 85R
and corresponding sember of the Latvian as.

It can also be noted that some microbiological products of the "concentrate“
type can be well-used for regulating microbiological processes in soil, in
particular for accelerating degradation and elimination of chemical pollutants
and recycling the material in mining industry dumps. as well as products for
stimulating plant grown in establishing green belts in the region of indus-

trial buildings where there is a high degree of pollution of atmospheric air.

The symposium participants observed that the time is ripe to single out
biotechnology and bioengineering as independent scientific specialties.

It was shown at the symposium that many problems of biotechnology and bio-
engineering are complex; they are being worked on at different scientific
and industrial institutes, many VUZ's. as well as planning institutes and
specialized design offices; many problems are being resolved directly
under industrial conditions.

Various branches of industry are concerned with the results of this research
and these projects: microbiological. chemical pharmaceutical, medical,

food, agriculture, as wall as such branches as oil production and oil refining,
as well as the enrichment [processing?] industry. However. finalisation

and industrial application of many investigations are being delayed (some

types of fer-enters, automatic control devices, apparatus for cell disinteg-
ration and others). For this reason. it would be expedient to coordinate
this work within the framework of a specialized interagency council, under
the supervision of the State Committee for Science and Technology of the
USSR Council of Ministers.

In the course of the discussion, it became apparent that different specialists
interpret differently the content of such concepts as "biotechnology," "bio-
engineering." and "biotechnical"; there is also disagreement on terminology.

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The participants unanilously concluded that it is ties to seriously tackle
problens of terninology, and for this reason the USSR AS should be asked

to establish a special cos-ission to systenntize existing terms and develop
new ones in the field of biotechnology and bioengineering.

The opinion vas voiced that there is an urgent need for special biotechno-
logical and bioengineering periodicals, as well as the desirability of
publishing the proceedings of this synposiun. In addition, it was noted

that it would be expedient to organize such synposiuns regularly, at least
once every 203 years.

The syapoaiun participants were pleased with the ennOuncenent of Prof M.
Ringfayl that the GDR A8 and GDR Biological Society propose that the second

sylposiun of socialist countries on biotechnology and bioengineering be
held in November 1980. in Leipzig.

COPYRIGHT: Itdatel'stvo "Nsuks," "Hikrobiologiya". 1978

10,657
080: 1870

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

njn. .

UDC 629.1.075
OPTIMIZATIOH OP HAN-MACHINE sysrm DESCRIBED IN NEW BOOK

Moscow UPMVLYAYEFDST' HASBIN (The Controllability of Machines) in Russian
1977 signed to press 15 Jul 77 pp 3-8, 279~280

Liorewrd. introduction and table of contents from book by Nikolsy Vladi-
mirovich Mamovich, Iadatel'stvo “Hashimstroyeniye”. 9,500 copies,

280 pags_s_7
ﬂag Foreword

In the vast field of modern engineering psychology research the development
of methods of recording the energy expenditures of the body of the man-
operator on the processing of controlling a machine occupies a very nodest
place. Proper attention is not being devoted to questions of limiting the
energy load on the body in the practice of planning the work place of the
un-operator when determining his work posture. developing new systems of
control and information. determining the feasible limits of the automation
of the functions of control and so on.

lleanwhile experimental data attest that the correlation of the required and
proposed energy expenditures of the body during the process of controlling
a machine cannot but have a decisive influence on the quality and reliabil-
ity of the performance of the functions of control. In general from the
technical point of view the neglect of questions of the power supply of any
unit of an operating system is inadmissible, since a deficiency of supply
entails the rejection of this unit, no matter hov perfect it night by func-
tionally. The human body, of course, is not a technical unit, but in its
activity on the control of a machine ..."the contraction of muscles. the
stepping up of the work of the nervous system... the increase of attention.
of precision—everything requires additional. as cowared with the state of
rest, expenditures of enersy resources" L2§_/. These energy resources are
expended by the body from its own, very limited source of power supply.
therefore it is logical to assme that there is an energy limit of the load-
ing of the man-operator with functions of control and that exceeding it
entails the nonperformance of functions.

In this case the question arises: how to convince the designer that the
actions. which he has planned, of the nan-operator on the control of a

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

machine are within the limits not only of the functional, but also of the
energy potentials of man and. consequently. will be performed with the re-
quired reliability? In order to answer this question there is needed. ap-
parently, the development of a method of the calculation and direct record-
ing of the energy expenditures during the processing of controlling a ma-
chine. which in addition to the existing methods of organizing the function-
al activity of the man-operator would make it possible to regulate this ac-
tivity with respect to energy.

The theoretical part of this book was developed on the easmption that the
indicated energy limit of the loading of the man-operator with functions of
control exists, a limit which is quite close and often is unintentionally
overstepped by designers due to the lack of the appropriate manuals. In the
book the method of approaching the designing of the man-machine system,
which provides for the minimization of the energy expenditures of the body
of the man-operator on actions on controlling a machine, is substantiated,
and examples of the practical application of the methods to problems of de-
signing the work place of the man-operator are described.

The order of exposition. which was adopted in the book. corresponds to the
methodological approach of the author to the solution of problems of this
sort over many years. beginning with the first postwar years, when the

idea of the method was formulated as applied to problems of aircraft build-
ing [17. The experience gained at the time confirmed the effectiveness

of the method. while the use_o.§ the concept of information. which was intro-
duced by N. Wiener in 1948 L2], made it possible to extend it to general
machine building. Regardless of the methodology chosen by the author, the
experimental materials and espiricsl data cited in the book can also be of
independent interest.

It is impossible. of course, to count on the exhaustive completeness of all
the particular theoretical assumptions of the book. 'lhe questions of the
development of methods of the quantitative definition of the obtained cri-
teria on the basis of the recording of both the general energy expenditures
of the body of the man-operator and those on the functioning of its indi-
vidual organs and systems are the most complicated and are subject to fur-
ther study. According to existing notions, the majority 05 these energy
expenditures are connected with physical movements £13, 29/. while the
nerve end brain activity, which constitutes. as a rule, the basis of the
activity of the man-operator, is not energy-consuming and therefore is not
governed by energy expenditures. Such a notion does not accord with the
data to the effect that there passes through_the brain more than 20 percent
of the blood which supplies it with oxygen LZQI. and with well-known cases
of appreciable general fatigue following great nerve and brain strains: the
fatigue of e pilot after an instrument flight (as cowared with a visual
flight), an engineer after a crucial conference or, say, a student after
taking an examination.

The very fact of the lower energy consumption of nerve and brain activity
as compared with physical activity does not give grounds to assert that

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the amount and quality of this activity do not depend on the energy re-
sources of the brain and the appropriate systems of the body. The develop-
ment of methods of estimating and regulating the energy expenditures of the
body as hpplied to all types of activity of the man—operator is one of the
central problems of engineering psychology.

however, in any theoretically complicated technical problem (and in this
case it‘is a matter precisely of the technical problem of adapting the ma-
chine to1ian) an approximate solution can be found by means of simplifying
it on the condition of the preservation of the essence of the problem. In
this case the essence of the problem can be reduced to the limitation of
the energy strain on the body as a whole and on its systems from the condi-
tion of the preservation of certain functional data of the man-operator,
while the essence of simplification can be reduced to the adoption of a
conventional model of the energetics of the body which uniformly expends
energy on the operation of the appropriate organs, like fluid from communi-
cating vessels. The system of criteria, which was elaborated on the basis
of such assumptions, made it possible to substantiate the requirements of
the optimization of the work place of the man-operator, which satisfy the
qualitative appraisals by operators of the ease of control of a machine.

The methodological approach to the solution of the problems of designing
aircraft cockpits, which is based on the obtained requirements, made it
possible to make a number of result-producing studies and to build equip-
ment models which are quite ideal as to ease of use during a flight (some
of them are described in the book). This methodological approach is being
successfully used in the further development of equipment. Therefore, re-
gardless of the degree of theoretical validity of this approach at present,
its use in other sectors of machine building is feasible.

In the book the practical experience of the appraisals and designing of

the work place of the man-operator is systematized for the purpose of help-
ing the designer to create the maximum conveniences in the control of equip—
ment, and the crew of an airplane, the driver of a motor vehicle, the worker
at s works and in general the person dealing with equipment to facilitate
the control of this equipment and to increase labor safety and productivity.

In connection with the great amount and diversity of the research, the
materials of which were used in preparing the book, it is impossible to
list all the participants in this research. The performance of such opera-
tions as the development of new systems of control and indication, the
search for new forms of the interior of the cockpit, the study of the dynam-
ics and systems of automatic aircraft equipment and so on has always been
governed by the creative efforts of many specialists, from the technician

to the skilled engineer and test pilot. The author expresses his gratitude
to all the participants in this research for many years of joint fruitful
work.

The author expresses thanks to honored Figure of Science and Technology,
Doctor of Technical Sciences Professor V. S. Vedrov; honored

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure of Science and Technology. Doctor of Technical Sciences Professor
H. A. Tayts, and to the readers: honored Test Pilot of the USSR, hero of
the Soviet Unibn, Doctor of Technical Sciences H. L. Galley, and Candidate
of Medical Sciences V. A. Popov for a number of valuable remarks and ad-
vice, which they made when reviewing the manuscript.

Introduction

The designing problem of adapting a machine to control by man becomes more
cowlicated with the development of technology and at present has assumed
the form of the "man-machine problem," which urgently requires solution.
Does this mean that before this problem did not exist?

Every machine is above all a tool of labor, while the appearance of the
first tools of labor was connected with the beginning of the labor activity
of man and his formation as a thinking being. The aspiration to adapt the
tool of labor to his hands and to make it easy to use, and to develop in
hisself the appropriate labor skills accompanied man from the first steps
of civilisation. lbreover, the process of the "mtual adaptation" of man
and the tool of labor together with the aspiration of man to invent new
tools constituted the basis of the increase of labor productivity-"the
basis of the development of civilization itself. It can be asserted, con-
sequently, that the "man-machine problem" was incorporated in the basis of
the formation of man himself and arose at the same tine as his appearance
on earth.

Why did this problem not arise earlier with such urgency?

‘nle losses of production due to the poor "mutual adaptability" of man and
nchine depend on the level of development of technology and labor produc-
tivity. Pith the growth of technology and labor productivity the price of
an error of man in interaction with a machine. which is expressed in abso-
lute losses of production, increases. For example. the consequences of an
error in the piloting of a passenger plane of 30 years ago with 20 passengers
on board and of a modern liner seating 200-600 are incommensurable. Conse-
quently, the observed increase of interest in the problem of optiairing

the man-machine system and the search for its solution are not accidental,
but are the natural result of the development of technology and the in-
crease of labor productivity throughout the world.

That is the situation with the man-machine problem right now. What are
the prospects of its development in the future?

The solution of this problem, which in itself is not simple. is complicated
by the fact that a synthesis of the data of the psychophysiology of man, on
the one hand, and the design and tactics of the operation of the machine, on

the other, is required. In other words, the organization of research work
at the aeeting point of psychophysiology and the two fields of technology

is required _/_ 11/ . The experience of organizing such work. shows that it is

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
--- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an extrea‘bly complicated matter to overcome the unique "barrier of occupa-
tional incompatibility," which arises here, and to organise the result-pro-
ducing cooperation of specialists of such different specializations.

The delayfrih the solution of the man-machine problem served as a pretext
for the attempts to "bypass" this solution by means of the complete automa-
tion of the cycle of operation of the machine and the exclusion of man from
it. For the designer of a machine this means is always tempting because
he limits the designing to a group of technical problems which yield to
calculation or modeling and is completely freed from the need to guess,
what surprises the unknown "blank spaces" of psychophysiology can give and
whom of 'the most competent specialists on these matters he should believe

more. In connection with this direction in technology two questions arise
which are of decisive importance in formulating the man-machine problem:

To what extent are the attempts at the complete automation of the man-machine
system justifiable and universal?

How do you solve the man~machine problem, if it does not appear possible to
avoid this solution by complete automation?

If the technology of the future will make it possible to exclude man

from the cycle of operation of a machine, right now it is expedient to aim
the efforts not at the solution of the man-machine problem, but at the de-
velopment of automatic equipment which eliminates this question from the
agenda. If there are areas of technology, in which complete automation in
principle is imr Issible, it is necessary to find this solution by develop-
ing a scientific method of the optimization of the man-machine system.

In this book the man-machine system is examined in a conventionally simpli-
fied form, as a system of organised influence on the environment, which
formed spontaneously in the struggle for existence and led to the appearance
on earth of man, who controls the system. In such an examination, man out-
side the system is inconceivable, while the further evolution of the system
is the material basis of the development of civilisation.

This evolution is represented in the form of the inrovement of the system
in two directions:

the increase of the functional possibilities of the machine as the executor
of the control signals received from an,

the attribution to the machine of s set of properties which guarantee the
utilization by man of its functional possibilities and are united with the

concept of the [controllability/ Lin italich of the machine.

The former, technical, direction rests only on technical achievements. The
latter is governed by the synthesis of the data of technology and psycho-

physiology.

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An atte-pt is node in the book to elaborate theoretically the letter direc-
tion on the basis of the consideration of the influence of the energy ex-
penditures of the body on its functional potentials.

Contents Page

Theoretical Principles of Designing the Work Place of the Man-Operator

Chapter 1. The Origin and Develop-em of the Man-Machine System. . 9
1.1. The Machine-Autoutic Machine. "Men" and Pun-Machine Systems. 9
1.2. The Coefficient of Labor Productivity. The Manual and Mechan-

ized Tool of Labor. The Machine Controlled by Pun . . . . . . . . . lb
1.3. The Concept of the Controllsbility of a Machine . . . . . . . 20

Chapter 2. The Peculiaritisa of Man as a Unit of the System. . . . 28
2.1. The Averagingoi‘ the Detaof Psychophysiology . . . . . . . . . 28
2.2. The Permissible Energy Strain. The Reliability of the System. 30
2.3. The Influence of Environ-ental Conditions on the working
Capacity..............................35
2.6. The Ihtuel Independence of Functional Data. . . . . . . . . . 36
2.5. Comatibility Hith Other Units. The Functions of Performance

and Stability. The Stesdineea of the Operation of the Machine. The
PunctionsoftheProgrs-Ceneretor................. 37
2.6. MerveandBrainActivity...................1.7
2.7.PhysicelActivity......................50

Chapter 3. The Distribution of Control Punct’rss Between Man and

theAutoeeticMachine.......................51c
3.1. Regular Variants of the Man-Machine System. . . . . . . . . . 5!.
3.2. The Liaits of Autonstion of Control Functions . . . . . . . . 57
3.3. Forecasting of the Automation of Control Functions. . . . . . 61

Chapter b. Regulation of the Controllability of Machines . . . : . 63
4.1. Rorss of the Signals of Response and Feedback of Automtic
“chi“.eeoesesesseseesseeeaeeeeeeessl63
b.2. Means of Linking Up Man with the Machine. The Work Place of
ManattheMschine.........................66
10.3. Morse of the Signals of Response and Feedback for the
Man-thchineSysten.........................70
4.6. Criteria of the Controllsbility of a Machine. . . . . . . . . 72

78
FOR OFPICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Part No
Optimization of the work Place of the Nan-Operator

Chapter 5. Means of Conditioning Environmental Conditions. . . . . . 81
5.1. TheHorkPosture........................ 81

Chapter 6. Means of Influence on the Machine-Performer . . . . . . . 91
6.1. The Allocation of Energy Expenditures in Operations Hith a Con-

trol Lever. Design Parameters of Levers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
6.2. The Number of Control Levers. Automation. The Combination of
Levers................................97
6.3. The Location of Control Levers in the Hark Zone of the hands.

Areas of Different Power-Intensity of the Use of Levers . . . . . . . 101
6.6. External Design of Control Levers and Their Relative Posi-
tioning...............................113
6.5. The Kinematics of Control Levers. The Kinematic Diagram. Orienta-
tion With Respect to the Han-Operator and the Form of Levers. . . . . 118
6.6. Systems of Manual Control. The Definition, Classification and
KethodsofOptimization.......................125
6.7. Systems Used Discretely. Systems of Continuous Manual Tracking. 129
6.8. Functions of the Hovement of a Lever and the Forces on It. The
Source Parameter of the System. The Order of the Coherent Function. . 131
6.9. The Concept of Unaabiguity of the System of Manual Tracking . . 135
6.10. Tactile Control, the Alignability of the Lever, the Coordination
oftheﬂovamentaofthaLever....................139

Chapter 7. leans of Information of the Man-Operator. . . . . . . . . 165
7.1. Means of Visual Information (SVI). Classification. Allocation

of Energy Expenditures Hhen Using SVI. Design Parameters . . . . . . 166
7.2. The Number of SVI's. Automation of the Functions of Control and
Co-Iunicetione. The Combination of SVI's. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
7.3. The Location of SVI'a According to the Front and Depth of the

Zone of View. Areas of Different Power-Intensity of the Use of SVI's.
AnglesofOrientatiouofSVI's. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .157
7.4. External Design of SVI'a: Relative Positioning, Form. Painting
andLaheling.............................16!.
7.5. Form of the Image on the Face of SVI's. The Degree of Modeling

and the Forms of Coding of Information Signals. . . . . . . . . . . . 169
7.6. Form of the Details of the Image: Angular Dimensions, Lighting,
Contrast...............................17!.
7.7. Master and Forecasting SVI's. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
7.8. Heana of Sound and Tactile Information (521 and STI). . . . . . 177

Chapter 8. Examples of the Optimization of the Hork Place of a Pilot

inanAirplane............................183
8.1. Systems of Path Control of an Airplane. . . . . . . . . . . . . 184
8.2. Structure of Pitch Control. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186
8.3. StructureofRollControl...................203

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8.6._ Pitch and Roll Control in Case of Piloting According to an Object
Flying in Front of the Airplane. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213

8.5. Structure of the System of Control of Flight Speed . . . . . . . 217

8.6. Experimental Study of Systems of Pitch and Roll Control. . . . . 222
8.7. Henna of Visual Information of the Pilot (Crew). . . . . . . . . 249
8.8. Optinun Form of Planar Indication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250
8.9. "Barrier or Occupational Skills" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 262
8.10. Arrangement of Cockpit Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 266

Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 278

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Naehinostroyeniye". 1977

7807
650: 1870

END

80
FOR OFFIC1AL USE ONLY