APPROVED FOR RELEASE: IOOTIOIIOO: cuA-nol-aa-ooosonoocrn000400344
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040034-9

4 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8398
13 April 1.979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 14/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100040034-9
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. “were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was suuarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGRT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING 00828581? 0!"
MATERIALS REPRODUC- HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBMINATION
01’ THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED POROFPICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE QNLY

JPRS L/83
13 April

TRANSLATIDNS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(9000 14/19)

CONTENTS
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Nestinian Leaders Discuss Pros, Cons or me Meeting
(AL-warm simmer, 9-15 Feb 79)

Ill-Assad Finds Nev Political Strength ‘mrough Iraqi
Alliance
(m mum m,m79) 00.0.00.0IOOOODDOOOOOOOOOO

Palestinian leaders on Mideast Crises
(rm: MIDDLE m, un- 79)

AMER“

Redistribution of Power Analyzed
(Souhayr Belhassea; mm: mm, in Msr 79)

Rev Agricultural, Industrial Projects Inaugurated
(MARCHB ROPICAUX B'i‘ numerals, 9 Par 79) .....

Briers
Japanese Steel Contract
Belgian Transportation Cooperation
Austrian Cooperation .
Pressure-Cooker Assembly Line

writer Sees Radical Clericalism Unlikely To Prevail
(Arrigo Levi; an arm, 3 Feb 79)

LEBANON

Balance of Payments Good Despite Security Problem
(AL-"ATM! AL-'ARABI, 9-15 Feb 79)
F'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY '5

CONTEMS (Cont lnucd) .

mmmnm

Forces Opposed to Unity sun-lug Up Racial Tennion
(Said (ma mum; AFRIQUE-ASIB, 5-18 Mn 79) .

-b-

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
l-‘llll ulFl-‘ICIAI. lllll-I ONLY

INTER-ARM! AFFAIRS

I'MJ'L‘l'l'INIAN LEADERS DISCUSS PROS. CONS 0? MC MEETING
l'arlu Al.-HA'I'AN M.-'I\RAIII in Arabic 9-H Feb 79 pp 26-28

IAri iele: "Another Question to the Leaders of the Resistance: 'llhnt
Are the Pluses and Mhmses or the Latest Pllc Meeting?”

I'l‘exll The results or the lloth session of the Palestine National Council
II'N(:| eoatlnue to he the subject of dehate in may circles. particularly
among various chapters oi" the Palestinian movement which had hoped that
the session would settle the question of the new structure of the Execu-
tive (knmlttee or the ll'alustluel Liberation Organization [PLO], and
espeelally the question of the l'opulnr Front for the Liberation of Pales-
tlne ll'l-‘l.l'| regalnlm: Its seat on the Executive Comittee after an absence
of :Iluml It years.

llesplle the almost unanimous affirmation that the sessim's positive results
outwelnht most or the renaming negative aspects. the lack of agreement at
the sesslon on the nature of the new structure of the Executive Cousittee
was not the only neuatlve aspect. for there is still the question of the
apportloneenl of the Arab financial allocations among the various organiza-
tions. Slnee there was no agree-eat on the ratios of apportionoent. the
matter was left to the Executlve mittee to decide. while Fatah has
demanded that all the flnanelnl allocations be kept at the disposal of

Ihe PM) until all chapters are integrated.

In an el Iurl to net an Idea of the l'alestlnlans' appraisal of the achieve-
meals ol the session. MAMTAN Illa-MM!" put a specific question to [our
of the partleimats: maselv. llanl nl-llasan (Fatah). Nayif llawatsah (Dess-
rral le I'rmlt). 'Ahd-aI-Rahm Mnad (Arab Liberation Front). and Zuhnyr
Mnlmln (Sa' lnah) .

The upwil'le quesl Inn was: "llhat Is your objective appraisal of the real
aehlevmems or the I'Niz's Iloth session. and what are the salient pluses
:nul Illmseu?"

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE (lls'. Y
Fill: Ilh'i’liilAl. IIHI‘: "NIX

ﬂmH:H4Mmm:

Plan: Unanimlty nu Politleal Resolutions
Hlnun: Popular Front luNot Returning to Executive Comoittee

'I'he xenulon was very Important in that we oil. as I’oientininn forces and
an ltulependehtn. ll|',rt'('(l on numerous vitnl political issues. The ldth
session was the ”rut one at which there was unanimous agreement on the
polltieal renolntlotn:. Unanimous agree-eat was also reached on the prin-
eiple ol' eontinuimt the (lining with Jordan. As for the issue of leader-

:thlp, Fatah wnu numi' intent on maintaining internal baiances'within the
Pa | en! In lun arena .

For no. I-‘ntuh. the important thing was that the PLO retain an overwhelming
majority. The Iormlntionu that were proposed for modifying the makeup of
the Hxvi‘lll Ive tron-ittee t‘llttltl not mater a majority in their favor. parti-
eulorly among: the imiependents. So we decided that, according to the by-
l-‘NH. illere wan no need for the Executive Committee to resign. Further-
llurt‘. the eoni'erenee mm: It a vote of confidence. The only thing that

we hmi hoped Ior hut whleh (”d not come about was for the readmission oi

the Popular Front to the comittee; however. l no sure that within the next
'l Inmtilm the Popular Front will he able to return to the Executive Comittee.

Nayll llawatomh:

l'lux: Reel iiylur, the l'alext'[ulna-Jordanian Dialog
Minna: I'opular l-‘ront Hill Not Get into Executive Comittee

For the first tine In yearn. the council unanimously approved the phased

pol ltleal program for national unity under the banner of the Pip. Also.

all chapter“ of the resistance move-eat have joined in preparing the ground-
work tor the phased political and organizational program. ending ail poli-
lieal npptmitioh u) the PLO program that was approved in 1974.

This in a gain for our people. for national unity and for the independent
nature of Palestinian "ulntt-Inking. It is also a very good omen for
our eoontryoeu inuitle . ~.n-ll an outside the occupied homeland. for all
tln- fun-ex ol' the revolution now accept a single, integrated phased

nat ioual program.

The l'almtt iulau- lordanian Dialog

The Mill session also approved resolutions which set the control and

eotullt [mm for the success oi the I'aieutininn-Jordanian dialog--an issue
that was the stheet or a Palestinian dispute prior to the convening oi'
the Mth ueuxiou. Ilowever, the session succeeded in establishing controls
for the iaithfui or a sound interpretation of the resolutions of the Robot.
Alizlt'l'ﬂ uutl Ilaululml stint-it I'mtl'erenccs. so as to insure for the revolution
and the I'm a united stand to the search for a new and sound framework for

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
r'llli Il"I"|IIl:\l. IIIH‘: ONLY

|oinl action in Palestinian-Jordanian relations and to Insure that. when
Implemented. they would result In common action against Camp David and
the autonomy plan. They would also lead to setting right Palestinian-
Jordanlan relations on the basis or the right to sell-determination. to
the return to the homeland. and to national independence, as well as the
Idlﬂs right to represent all the Palestinian people and to he present
:nmnnt them In all areas. including Jordan. pursuant to the resolutions
or the Arab summit conferences. the last of which was held in Baghdad.
This aehievement also eonstltutes a great gain for our people and revo-
lution In that it eliminates political contradictions and unites the'
Palestinian leadership in the dialog with Jordan. ,7
The lhth session also approved a most Important resolution, one which re-
lleela a determination to infuse the spirit of democracy into relation-
shlpu within the ranks of the revolution. This denounces internicine
warfare and the resort to firearms la disputed matters. This resolution
defeats efforts in use the strategy or giving fanciful promises with the

ohleet or creallnu dlsaenslon among the forces of the revolution and weak-
enllm their unity.

The session also solved financial problems in a way that insures warmer
relations among the various chapters of the revolution. This is of great

importance for the safeguarding of the independence of Palestinian decision-
malt I up. .

"here Is the New Executive Committee?

We had hoped that the lhth session would select an Executive Committee
whleh wouldtut into action all these achievements and guarantee a dominant
role for the advocates of national unity and the guardians of the indepen-
dence of valestInlan deeision-aaking; unfortunately, however, we were faced
with a series of imposses that led to a dead end.

Sirenuthenlnn the trend toward national unity and the independence of
mleatlnlau deelslun-mﬂklnn calls for theparticipation of the chapters

of the realsianuv which enjoy a high level of political independence from
the Arah hie powers on the Executive Committee. That is why, to insure
unuty or eomunnh the "Popular Front" should have been admitted to the
"ereutive Committee. Likewise. to Insure the independence of Palestinian
deelsion-making. those groups which enjoy such independence should have
heen admitted to the Executive Committee.

lastly, we will exert all our efforts in the coming days and weeks to

mind the error that oeeorred during the final 15 minutes of the closing
neeilnn oi this session. in order to insure the work of this political

and organizational session will he translated into a concrete and creative
reality under the banner or unity and the independent character of Pales-
tinian derision-making so that the accomplishments and achievements of this

3
Fill: Ill-'FICIM. lL’sl-Z (iNi '
FOX IlFi’liIlM. "SH ONLY

\

evasion will hooone concrete gains for our people and revolution and
for all the forceu of Arab ateadfastneee in the face of the Canp David
accord» and the llquidationint autonomy plan.

'Mai-a l-Rah im All-ad:

i'lnn: llnlted National Stand

Minus: Preservation of the Status Quo ,
The Puc held ita Ihth session under nuneroua'and varied circumstances and
condition». all of which required a general politnml.course which. in

the Palestinian arena. ennentially meant the need to unite the various
chapluru of the reulatanee politically and organisationally down to the
lnwu-ai levels.

The thinking of nearly all participants was influenced by the political
deveiolnenta that preceded the convening of the NC. They were all
uppuui'il to the (laslp David agreement. and in favor of the joint national
action charter between Syria and Iraq and the decisions of the ninth Arab
summit conference in Ilaghdad-mlbeit in differing degrees or with some
reservations. .

'i'he Pluses of the Last Session

Not-withstanding the results of the llath session of the PRC. which were
characterized by a preservation of the status quo, the work of the PM:
reflected numerous pluses which must be emphasized. These were:

Overall unity of the national stand and agreement on the importance and
necessity of national unity as the framework for the interaction of all
opinions within the Palestinian arena. inorder to sci-love a strong and
uound national stand that in capable of putting up a capable and effec-
tive resistance against proposals that imply surrender and plans that are
a lnwd at the liquidation of the Palestine issue.

insistence of the forces that are sore deeply rooted in the Palestinian
arena on achieving national unity. even if at the cost of secondary

pol ltleal eoacenaimu that do not affect the fundamental issues. or of
:Igreolnr, to ni’i'..‘li'||7..‘ttlunul formulations proposed with the sin of weaken-
inn and Ina-stringing the ilxecutive Comittee.

Admission of new Palestinian forces into the PRC. with the right to par-
Lil‘ipnli‘ in I'm hodiea. such as the central council and all the others.

Approval of the lunllt‘lcnl progran for Palestinian national unity. together
with the amend-alts proposed by the Executive Co-lttee. such as endorse—
aeni or the joint national action charter between Syria and Iraq, as well
an the lianhdad mum-it conference decisions.

I.
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-I ONLY
Filli II|""|‘:I1\|. ”Ill-2 UNIX

Approval of the organiaat imal plan for national unity among the chapters
ol’ the Palestinian resistance. even though certain participants kopt_the
plan from being given a concrete. form and the legitimcy of the approval

of lhe I'Nil. Iluwever. assinninr. the lmpiementatimol‘ the plan to the Execu-
Iivo (:omillee requiring: llml ll. first take all sleps to enable all the
(:lmpiers oi the resistance to participate actively and effectively in the
Palestinian decision-making and to implement the resulting decisions deno-
erailealiy will he a point of contention for the Executive Coenittee and
for the I'm Central (himlttee.

These were the pluses: the sinuses are represented in forces within the
council which imve sought to preserve the status quo in a vain effort to
counteract the positive political developments amag the assess within the
Arah homeland and to prevont their effect upon national and Arab decision-
naklnr, regarding the future ol’ the Palestinian ceuee.

Zuhayr Muhsin:

l'lIm: Agreement on Palestinian Unity i'ian
Minus: llilenua on Makeup of Leadership

The fimii meeting of the ”nth session of the NC might give a negative
Impression of the outeose ol' the session as a whole. Unquestionsbly.
the last day of this session was tense and difficult and wrought with
lrritatlons. At that seeting. a state of divisiveness nesrly developed.
and this would have been a grave threat to the position and future of
the I'M). This was a surprising and startling develop-ent, one that
hai’l‘icd mat people, even most council members, inasmuch as the council
meetings had all along heen proceeding positively sad encouragingly end
the plan for national unity. both political and organisational. had been
unanimously approved during the first days of the session.

It was only at this particular session that political contradictions were
reduced and conflicts and differences almost totally eliminated-wome-
thlnn that had not been possible in any of the previous sessions. At this

- session also unanimous agreement was reached on the plan for national unity
based on a tlt-isnerntit'. confrontational foundation which requires respect
lor and adherence to the principle of collective leadership.

(hmsequemly. we do not think too much weight should be given to the
summary misunderstanding brought about by the agitated and artificial
nintmplu'rt' of the final day's meeting.

i'osltlve Attitude of Popular Front
Certainly the problem of the makeup of the leadership that came up

sharply on the last day did not take anyone by surprise--particuiarly
the leaders or the various chapters. For weeks prior to the convening

i 5
l mm ornclia. ma: as. '
ﬁll: -I*i-'li5|:\l. "HI-i UNI l'

of the session It was anticipated that a difficult dilemn would he
lurml when the «mention ol‘ the makeup of the leadership came up for
III'II-‘lll"'llllll in. line makeup of the new lixm'ul Ive (lounll'tee.

For one. thin". It was clear that the I’l’l.l’ would resume its seat on the
HXt-t'llilvt' (km-lttee. after sitting on the opposition side for sore than

In years. The. i'l’l.l‘ was attending this session with a totally positive
attitude toward the Phil's political program which it had helped to draw
up fl months hel‘ore the convening of the session. It was also coming to
the I'lii! after all the canity and friction that existed between it and
some or the other organiaationsnparticuiarly the Sa'igah and the Democra-
tie i-‘ront--hud been ended. Also the PRC was being held within the frame-
work of everyone proceeding to the start of a new era of cooperation and
joint struggle to advance the cause of Palestinian national action and
the Phil. and to give concrete shape to the objective of national unity.

This positive new relationship within the various chapters was the
object of unwarranted suspicion by certain colleagues within the Fatah
leadership. The world was told that it was the result of the Syrian-
Iraqi rapprochement and an attempt by Iraq and Syria to impose their
Influence and control within the PLO.

It was also portrayed as an attempt to cut Fatah down to size or rob it
of the l’aiestialnn decision-making role. arguing that' the guarantee of
independent Palestinian dcciaion~aaking lies in keeping this decision-
raakiag in the hands of Fatah alone.

i would like ,to explain here that the Iraqi-Syrian rapprocheaent has
indeed had sane positive effects on the chapters' relations with each
other. This is only natural. But it is not necessarily true or reason-
able to say that all the positive relationships that have developed along
the chapters are the result of the Syrian-Iraqi rapprochesent. because
these relationships began to develop aany months before the Iraqi-Syrian
conference. One taunt not forget that these chapters had signed the
Tripoli document at the end of November 1977. following Sadat's trea-
sonahle visit to occupied Jerusalem. as a step in the Palestinian
response to the "Sadat initiative" and his policy of surrender and
llquldat Ion.

liver since that day there has been no misunderstanding within these organ-
izations. with the exception of the single instance between theta and
Fatah. One should also not forget that all these organizations had pat—
tleip-aed In drawing up and approving the plan for Palestinian unity weeks
prior to the miracle of the Syrian—Iraqi conference, at a tine when there
was Ilul. the slightest hint that such a miracle would happen.

These chapters felt it imperative to expedite the settlement of all die-
putes anus; then. as well as between then and the national organizations,

6
You OFFICIAL Ina-2 omn'
Fill“. Ill-'FICIAI. "5H UNLY

and also to rully behind a unlinual political line foilowinn Sudnt's visit
in Jerusalem. This feeling grew even stronger after Sadat signed the
lhmp nnvid agreement.

This doubled the determination of the chapters of the revolution to re-
spond to the blatant betrayal which has brought the conspiracy to liqui-
date the Palestinian question to the point of actual implementation.

is it. therefore. reasonable to expect that these chapters, which were
able to overcome their differences and move quickly toward amtual under-
standing and solidarity. would revert to fighting and squabbling, after
the Important positive development of the Syrian-Iraqi ugreement--a devel-
nnaaent linlt ls decisive in the Arab arena?

It was on offense against everybody. including the PLO and national unity.
to portray the situation contrary to what it was and to cast doubt and
suspicion upon the ehnpters' earnest desire for agreement and cooperation.
even exploiting this positive phenomenon for the purpose of creating a
sharply divisive situation that is artificial, unjustified and of no
hmwiH nimwmw.

Fntnh's Position

It was not in the-interest of the Fatah leadership that the state of
solidarity which developed among the various chapters should be pictured
as a response to the Sadat betrayal. or as being behind a wave against
Fatah itself--eveu though everybody was hard at work assuring the rea-
lization of the largest possible measure of reform within the PLO and
its organs and the creation of the conditions necessary to translate the
concept or national unity into a firm and stable reality.

The PNC. in its recent session, has achieved great results that far out-
weigh the disagreement over the formation of the Executive Committee--or
twen the Executive Committee itself.

It approved the political and organizational plan. It was also evident
ihrnuuﬂunu all the meetings that, for the first time. everyone was
speaking the same or a very similar political language. the essence of
which wus the condemnation of Sndat's initiative of surrender and liqui-
dation. the futility of any hope for a Just political settlement of the
dispute In the area, the positive evaluation of the Iraqi-Syrian rapproche-
ment as'a fundamental step toward regaining the strategic balance against
Uu‘tuumw. and the regeneration of hope and confidence among Arabs in
general and Palestinians in particular.

He continue to be convinced that the important pluses that emerged during
the work or the run will overshadow and eliminate any temporary negative
Impressions. In short. the session honoring the late Nouari Boumediene
was a successful one that witnessed earnest. fertile discussions. The
success of the session was nut diminished by the transitory setbacks
during the final moments.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ilNL‘.’
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040034-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

HAN! AL-HASAN: ZARAYR HURS IN:
"Fatah is eager for equilibrium" "No one is again:

   

'ABD--;’\L-RAHIM AHMAD: HAWATMAH:
”The minimum limit" "Spreading the d

COPYRIGHT: 1979 AL-VATAN AL-ARABI

8340

C50: 6802
8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040034-9
FOR OFFICIAL lL‘iii l)Ni.Y

INI‘Ell-M

AL-ASSAD FINDS NEW POLITICAL STRENGTH THROUGH IRAQI ALLIANCE
London Till-2 MIDDLE EAST 1n Englilh Mar 79 pp (is-‘8

[Text]

The 8 yrinnJroui IIllia'ncc hna
imp rovod Syria' a standing in
the Arab world and la a blow
to American policy in the
Middle Boat. according to

Saudi and Gull tlnanea waa teduet
trickle. i‘nIlIleInI In lebanon and elat
one mpitaiked on by the United. ‘
imielandi‘ Mpttofoeeesnatoi’a
step with rapt. Metnhen. of the h
Steadfastneea and Confrontation t

Zind Shnwley. recently in U531. Min-Ila. South Yemen. an
Damaacua. tic loolta at “mi" ”Milan Omnhelioni

deselop ntcnta lnaide Syria
and their implicationa for the
reg ion. lle also aaaeaaca the
effect the alliance with lraq la

llitely to have on Syria' a
domestic and foreign policy.
and examiner the step a Presi-

united more by circumstance than
and the Font distlm hhed iteelf. t
b) it: itnﬂmltenmm

neee'aity condoned by both with:
more recently by political develop
Nothingahortymnimitaat then-{nu
amid have been ad equate. and Pet
Amati has been applying hie pnM-n pl

dent Aaand (right) may *ﬁngmhumhtmmlm
talte to atear the country - aihelt the mad important one -

through what promiaca to be a
troubled time for the area.
hum ate-It the middle at am until a few

eoenpmrnu nt‘ Syria'a memory .al
planning. The main aim ia top

Aud'a moat treasured political
diplomatic eatd- any in to!

mailman IitimhedoeliWA-‘idlﬂ «ten. Foe in the Middle Rant
Intuit-Illa! and Syria in nnetai We lune eiiplmnoey and policy are n;-
the hnlmam! “W N 9' “‘9 Mi" reaction to pteaIuIe. buoyancy l:
nurld in was and 1m may of ianmnt tom.
wiwcwm toms-den l'henlllaneewilhlraq mum"
diplomatic initiatw mum‘h‘ the militienl toap oi mlbe “15"".
tlIeeeumalmieaeaitnesinSWW- heeurne int-mi ly import am
The unit-mate in IAbanon. Mii'k'ud diplomatic and milled” ineptitude?
t»,- um..." l-raeii interference and debt us mt itaallia heeoma appanntu
Iain; iItlinIitlnlion. mad. 8) ‘hl am “they the Horn “All!“ Ind
pdilimﬂy and militarily imprIteoLlahannn optf'l'ha alliance 3 CNN to":
was rimmed III Syria’a Yemen. This. SW I... a, m balance um

tier-thee nith aerioua inﬂation. a reduced
Plan. mmlm religion noting. and
t‘l‘ﬂﬂ't‘lﬂ in the major 8) ﬁlm cities
iipintini the end o! Ali-ad‘s regime to tame
mnmatuo.

9

turn. dietatu the nature and extent
allgaoee. '

tmay appearaInat minuto
that they allianeehaapnmeaeduh

NR OFFICII'tL USE ONL‘.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hunt. The “methtdnnt‘ t tetetlun" ni‘ the ten
(«reign mini-trite heve ettemnllneti tn
they can net en one unit. wheat-vet

MU. Mme: e hemell mnmtun
truionnl end intentntittnel pol ttln-ntiy

neonte to "H. ‘l‘histhuheen venlm u-ttte
hy Sulat'e initiative and by t hem-t mil
nttempte tn Intuit-Me Middle Itnstwn
tllrltenncyln tel.

l‘hie Itniﬂ («elm policy In I ntmn; In.
umment he the wait of any miln'n
decided it the hinted
laden-hip. feel le that teenimn tti’
tmmvteleeneitnlnltulﬁhethemmll
eltuetitutdoeenoteiiowelltmpultlmtuhe
teltenttettiutletlymwhethettnel «null
wilhlheUSutlhOSWietU ntnnd
whethee to entee Intn tome item at

tuetﬂthttit-n with luteel.

linth unwittin- have put telntium with
the USSR. nlthnttgh that are )Imtt'iilltt'l
tlietmheti dime-meat tl't «tut
trance. like tee toe elntttpie. lit- ntimt
with the United Stetee. which In the new nt
ltnq wen hened let-t yen. wrte twee
intmtietltoeu the Smiet Uni-In.

Drapite Weeteen pen-t etmthttiun that
the lrnqie wete no the print at ntinptim en
Egyptinmtyle I dun: ewe-attic £10m
Suintieteu hylteqnutnennu lhm
an e pnlitinl innit. Syrie'e ninth-u with
Macaw ete eleo etehle. eagle-rial nﬂee the
nit; SovietUnimhnrkhthﬁn‘en-le
in -

When Syrian Chit! d Stnit‘ (Emmet
tliltmet Shehehi cut “I!!! hie "i in
MumlutNmemhenltmm e
tactical move which ind little In «to with
Shehehi hinteelf at with Swim-8min
teietiute. '.

Bet-em d the dieutmne Middle PM
diplmtuy by it! Ulla-ti Stairs in
the rum. eehingtm‘mmtimuttttlmth
Sytie and lteq in telling. much tn the die-
ttwttintment of Saudi Amltin. Sandi
tun-em hee been neutralise! Inn-tune ti
this Ametieen wenhne- ttnti nhu lI‘t‘t‘iN d

the S; rim-luau nltettte. Thi- wnn “Mal-
|'\' tenement in Varmint-e. when Riyadh
fueled that .‘ the might nign e tteety of
friendship nit the Strict lininn if Saudi
teaches nettinued to new 08.wa
ll toy.

Attempt: we Int-inn nuttle by Syria and
ltmtulntluencengimel 'tiausingtntee
infmnnl metht-tle went-tee. One

10

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040034-9

l

eletnple ie the veeent 1‘
activity Inside lmt. The ﬂ
my Inna time between
lmninn utny have been at
by Jnlnl Telbnnl. whoee
8m dnee um. nee eet \1
lmi-thieh htetiee lat ‘
and autumn.
n3‘?”""‘3'w"""£"t§
cotter
ﬂeetlon ot’ the Syrian en
mink-trite and m eta

plenniu end N.)
Apln with ﬁlm .
mete It pea. toe the M
eemettnitmhennzeeeeery.

Much of thie tnilit t
tete the (can of ﬂit
menoetmee. ineiudim tl
(but not joint) pttteheee n:
Stwiet Union. So far. no til

volley
«hutheemhelt
Unification olthe Synen
metinn ministries will we»

8:
new contemplating
miﬁeettm of the Built 3
le even ' '

Butthettniondtheputiu

lme time. «who tno tun.
Mm‘tl‘mmﬁn‘tm and Beta
me: me pmhleme. «-
slim.

This doee not neen th
3 n Heed of State. vomit
e rnnle conﬂict nut

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040034-9
:4. s 3an
mmlu

mm:
main

ﬁmﬁ

“guano:
III-MI

l' P
v
mmmm

Vud

mmMmﬁdu
momma

mm mm m «mu

m,

pm
qnmmm

M "l“ m mm 1qu

E?

”m '1 0m" ‘m mu

wwwwnwmum
mnmawm-Wmm
mu n m: tn '0:

mm

In

zé‘izggaz
a? iiiigéé

s -‘ 2. ‘3
g *rz§°-r
3?? ggégfg‘
2%; g? €§§
5 mgﬁigaf
§§§Bii‘ii§
Esgi‘ggigg
s§§§3§‘é 3
FOR OFFICIAL I188 ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

PALESTINIAN LBADBRS 0N MIDBAST CRISBS

London THE MIDDLE W! in anglioh “or 79 pp 36-39
[Excerpts]

IIABIISII: Coup David Manned Porch Illusions

or George Ilobuh. Socroury General. Popular Front for tho Liberation
of Palestine (PFLP)

ham“ Ionulnlolht iodnhuﬁohnndofdlmn-In‘m
leleocnmldehMb Momhhpnphlnﬂurh
ﬂMdaﬂCompDovIII-ndlhtom Immmmhmmh buoy
lﬁwkInIIon of our com III“ I: ulrﬁnnpmublohuhmnondm

Im ‘ ‘I‘IIIo Ibeul «all I «Hunk .Hohuuhnovortho
P miuInn argon Inn to tho 1::de twaIIbowI-ovdm
highs-uhﬂbhlevclofﬂ . unloaded. ...,
Commas-Human ImpuIIIIu We hm led VIIMII‘II-ooln
moi mu tho wholo nylon and II. mlunnoofou Iimnndforlmum
mum”. Camp DovId dissipated ﬁuh‘o II. all." of tho no will stay Ibo

mmLmIInIo-umldmchomﬂo pooplohm mu.
mum Iluwgh nrgodoIIon whim! m ouch
changinwlwboI-ncodm. nnmbudJnnIuvIcINyfoulldm
'm IanoSyrIon unlﬂculoa In I” Many Inn been unwind that In. a
mm Inouhhunlemhnltbmt MmMMboonIho Idoolonlldoul
nan-uh. mun Include all pro- moment Into W's. But boyond
Mommunndﬁmlnlhmo W. as have In mm and:
VIII-nut Hermon. Impedoliu. «1qu and uni-M
'l'II- Jordonlln value In dilfm - III: elem
lam-III» lumped-lint plan. whlch Inhyvu Our and naval. WI. now canton
on mm mm with n. Iwﬁu on mm b loud. but our polltIcoI
mukmlmumkolmmhuth umlowllholncmdnwm
IMOIummenmmmhn mlmmodmm
I‘MInIm In Juana can only be Imp-Id ruins.
bvgnﬂIIc-IIWO.

§

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Alli! IYAnt lie that Strike at 0.8. Intoruota

Mm Iyod (Saleh Khalnt) oecond-tn-touond to Arafat in Potoh

'l‘he lamell eunlntlnn in South
Lebanon la vlnu the my in: total
empnllt'et. in. «when with the
lth National hltwement. we

uhnlltlnnll wecnn to pmentthla.

In the meantlme we thall «melody
mlnta our nth-ale in the occupied
tenltorlea. at long at the meld autumn-a
to room notional tight to build a atnle.
A we are eleo ttyln; to men-nine the
pnlltlenl and mllllnry nhalnelea lo tut
mlvlttnhewidthehmden.

Cmalrletlne the US ehnllenxo to out
eiuhla and Ila lnallwlnn of Arab
wummentn mlnot no. we moat atvilte at
US intense in the region. Wllhmt humilnl
tivlllmdcoune.

Kin; llttaaaln will never «pen hla
hunleta to \- apotttnneotnly. llut new
dmttmlm nte developln‘ {not and they
will {om hltn todo an. Would you have ewe
imagined math I will end to the Shah

AM We don't want lluunln to how to
leave. But we shall mum.

in Lebanon aotne any we timid
he dleannod lllte the In Itlaa. But we ate
covered by the WM Ammo. let the
gtw gloom“ the magi: then we will

everyt new to
reduce tenalon. lltot'l of letting when he
dltenned.

Sonto ohoeevota have commented un-
levoutohly on my tallu wlth hlaeonlte
leadeea. But l law Amln Oeniayel and
othen who a melee pteltlon on lmel
and admitted that the lutttve cl Lelannun
lie! with the Malta. Antin no minted to
tackle thooe in the nghtlat (hint who deal
with heal. and he on the alllnnee ul
lehanotgy‘ia and t alga». \l‘hett
M ”We ‘ 1"

Israel uia will mow to lehanon. ‘lhe
mote people we can gain oe neutrellee
ln lebamntho hettee.

MAW: Not Much Talk of Moderation

Noyes llattatneh. Secretary General of the Duocrettc Front for the
Liberation of Palestine (new)

1}! null lntpottant mtlt of t
PNCn-oothotwedrewupacommohd

. political mum. deﬁning the
pl rightanfthe Paleatinlanpeuple ln thla

late.

Links between the l’nlentlnlnn tooletnnoo
and intematlmal oeoneeolvo foreeo. .
{manly the neinlist camp led by the
. Niel Union. new: «trend. 'l‘hia was a;
victory [at the dammtlt lives within the l
PnlNlntan multilinn and a defeat (at the l
righti-t nmllell-ugmmlet teeula.

We etlll have to have a mute [no-l
puttionate and elﬁeient Executlve {
Committee - n demtie and collective
Whip lue whit-h we have alt-aye (audit.
We hate heen very active in defendinc o
com-rt preltlun an the dlalogue with
Jordan. \l'e «heme l’nxn othent on the mn-
tenl. not on the principle. We are in fat-om
nth dinlmte has-ed m the Rabat evolutions.
lllll in all the: yum llmlnhnstefmedto

13

ltnpleenent then resolution.

The osmium Palestinian delegation to
Ammangatelnontheoopolntoandthlo
moot M'lat rectiﬁed.

'Arafat'o visit to Riyadh is part of hit oon-
tinuoua balancing act am the axiom
Anb «pit-la. Anyway. Saodl ell’otta to
will the PM) to the tight have been
anu 'defentetlm.1hetewon'tbemuth
loll: Pnlentinlnn "niodeeatlon" in nettle.
ment negotiation.

The DFLP lino ntlooted a lending tole In
the eluted “male in the occupied
teeeitorlee. and Fetteh in lntenoiMn‘ ll too.

As to Iran. the ahall have 35 million
Iranians on out eide in a paltion thot the
USoneetlt-linedeothemoathnpatant
between Japan and lstoel. 'l‘hb also
opens entin-ly new and veal pee-
wectivee he mean moi-emu in the

olivetiono.

FOR OFFICIAL USE Oil "
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JlBRILt Ceap Devid Signetoriea Buying Lebanon Land

Ahmad Jihril. Secretary General of the Popular Front for the Liberation
of Palatine-General Conaend (Pup-co)

HASSAN :

“” Wimwt &

gmpe ve

Sytlan-lraql intimation. which

mated a bettee aim-ohm for unity.
(‘mtacta between aulne Pale-tiniane and
Caito continue. but the fact that they are
mnled out in aotvet pm that than in-
ltiativcamweait.

The new altuatlon haa alon ontnpelled
Fnteh not to go lurthet with oontacte
uMﬂwwm

“W atout t recog-
nition of lanai). alngue will change
nuthl in theAmeelcenatand.

it at and all theae who talk about
peaceful confrontation between a
antes-elem «be: muLwr’mhu th:

unaccepta to n poop
even to thoae in Galilee. and that tenet
umld nevee think 0! peaceful competition.
One side unuat win completely.

If the Palutlnlan tevnlutlon gave up
«mini atntggie it would mum lta mine

the political independence of the PLO
{nun any [tub or met-Arab m.

The waa mainly between
tlnatein the PN whot‘lependmealemal
Item mi Patch. which haa aiwdya knight
ilmaotintl .

Theme-Ind tnaltwaatoadoptapaitlve
nttilude mute Judah. Fatelt will not
«line-Judah to join the Camp David line.

The eventual inclualon at all Palestinian
umnipatim m the Executive Committee
wentltl "1:1“ ll»: all lenlaawx‘htlﬁ:
turnout at lglteat . 'l
line of Patch ha been ltnpmcd alt
name argue that we have ltnt the battle on
how to miduct the dialogue withdoedao.

A: to the [reel-Syrian uniﬁcation. we
uninfuvourolltmndweueat ' ' totuen
it into an lugl-Syrian-l' eo-
unlinatiun. lot we ate alway- airaid at

éOurtnalt at the PNCwaatn achieve

14

neutron. The Syrian-lead uniﬁcation
‘ulrlll “WMWUm’M ouch

male: I change
Hueaaln'a attitude.

i an: optimistic about lamina. in use
we mpoaed out pteaenoe lnaiatad on
(teedom of action and the labaneee
authoeitlee wen much mote agalnu ue.
ht'ahehankweatenotalomlnlebanon.
in immhadtheauppoetotNaaaee.m
we haveeven moteArabeuppott. Nobody
can dlaann no.

The myaterloua land purchaaea in
South bbanon came altar Camp David
which provided a “aolutlon' totem third 0!
the Poieatlnian a. 111a otheee ale
3% “Emil.“ hm m

t mp agreementa ate
onea who ate land lot teeettlement.
3.... ii: t3”- ““1““ 3
say t t are ace not
mtlemem in the South. won:

t.

New Kind of Guerrilla Warfare Planned

liani Haaaan, top political adviaor to Arafat

alliance in which wean: not dentin-«57m
viaitbyAtatattoRiyedhmtheeveolthe
Council mdetilned that we want political
relations with all Araboountriee.

The lanelia are now ptepating to attach
dean and South labenon. but they use
digging their own grave. The time fee ex-
panaion la over. though i am mvinted that
Sadat will facilitate theit task by algnlng a
peace agreeumu befote May. Sadat is very
atupidto thlel‘umvelntotliehandaol
America. willbehielaatyeae.

Pateh is getting ebongee all the time in
‘Mmmowmmm m
at in l
““3; "' 9mg“ °‘ “m '-""
we ate. we ao .
no hauler will be doaed to no. i want
to «Include by Iaying that Fatah will

nevernoopuulltlalevenifweget
”All“.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

liAiiOtlHt Iraq-Syria Alliance um Not Affect Our Independence

Khaled Fahoun. AChaimon of the Palestinian National Council

the inoreaalne man oi the

Paleatinlan revolution. it haa

eanetioned unity and. whatever the
unatttidabie diiierencea. thie only it
count-thine to which all oi or are now cont-
ntitted ea newr before.

This will pea enhance our military
eii’oetitenen. enab in. in to liquidate aw
pmieet for adminlatrative emailed
anti-runny In the occupied territoriee end
{ms-lid“ drawn up by the US. Sadat and

Our In thoae territorlu will [at
more e ective help from no and our ooo
mihiatlon with iron. Syria and ell the
muntriea oi the Steadfaetnaae Front will

é n; We hae laid the foundntlnt'ta for

our ind nee. We are part at the great
Arab ll ion motetnent and unity
tlmen‘toonatltutearieh.

Some worn on aeainet laeaeli‘
retaliation beoeuae oi our inoreeaed
activity in Palatine. But we cannot
renounce our national right to roeiat
motivation. whatever the coat. analation in
both neeeeaary and uaelul.

The Shah visited Sadat on hie way out.
Them “Hop”elmedtheworldthat they
are in Iheeorne eamp.theantl« camp.
liutltttaethepoopleoliranwho uedout
theShahandJelithhepeopled
Paranoia triotlc. _

r Outlet. epolre at the PNO on
behalf oi European parliamentarian.

nurwbeetrencthened. unmarried the no ae the aole legitimate
l reell ' didn't aee crucial conﬂict in mmtatlve of all Paleetlnian people and
the PM elimlone. mum With uttr right toeatabllehotuatatelnallol’
which eteothine wan tackled wee a great l‘almine- TM! "Md "I M"!
lawn in democraqy. The lraolesyrlaa ”meme-a in the Weet oi our luat
alliance is certainly not going to leopardlae m0“
NURSEN: Oppoaad To Pateh Dialogue with Lebanon Right

Zuhair ltuheen. Head of PLO Military Department and Secretary-General of
al-Saiqa

My contribution to the PNC centred

on the need to resume the ﬂame

with Joedan and to face the (act t

Sadat will aim a peace agreement. Aa
Palestinian and Arab forte- we muet
prepare otuaelvea l’or Sndat'a attrrender and
titerevengethattheUSwilltaltei’oetheiaaa
finnandtheamereeneeolanewAnb
runt.

1hiereveneawlll takethetonnotwar.
with Sadat hel ierael even materially;
this ia why unity and coordination
with the nationaliat Arab eountrioe to now no

'irnpoetattt.

The national unity name
appnned by all organiaatlona :2 become
Ihel’rnmeworh forallourdedaiuuandior
our futile lnltlativea. a! the
Palestinian revolution hea a very clear
tneanirteioetl.

15

We want 3% own—Ft
reactionary and non-nationallat regime.
butwewanttoeorkwiththoaowhohave
expreaeedanationaliat policy.

The dialogue with Jordan h a gradual.
dialectical proton, but the future will bring
abalanceofforeealnourfavburdetnnotat
all in favour of Fateh‘a d with the
rightlet leadership in labanon. think it will
haveaneoatlveell‘ectonourtacticaland
atralﬂicline.

ii it cornea to war between larael and
Sadat on one aide. and the lreoiSylian
Paloatinlan Eaetern hont on the other. the
attitude of the uncommitted oottntrlae will
betottynottlzeatlnvolvdei.

We aim on It return to
the Executive (gnome or the
PM. They have a hell of a lot to
oontributetoouratrtuie.

FOR OFFICIAL USE O LY
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

MU DAOUD: I An Against Peat Operations Nov

Abu-Deoud (lethal-ad Daoud Auda). Member of the

Fatah Revolutionary
Council. leader of Fatah left '

certainly etren'gthena the migraine. '
'l‘hoeewhoeeedangerlnthleunionete
really eoneemed on! about their linlte with

in the PNC there wetoiwo innate. the
pmureeeive and eoneervatlve. Feteh
remaina the largeat force but the
tandChamoun.

uthera. in alliance with Pateh can
achieve a lot of democratic and mun-Mitre
W though they didn‘t mine auto
lit-lently «united to thin PNC meeting.
Arafat etili managea to exploit the
(tillereneea among them. So he eueeeerled in
netting away with hit dealt with the
lehaneae rightlrta. and with hie untnrte
wichkinltutnoyeanngoButhedidm
uhtnin the dimmement oi the frdnyln.
which he wee ready to accept from i910.
The eventual return of the ”1.? mid
hot to neutrai'ne there polieiee. llebarh
an: llawatrneh ehould werit together to
light lanlatlon. ilAreiet hat hie way it could
inverydanmllctovrtnanydihe
PM“!!! that trundle baelt anti forth to
arm.
it Will" be eaay {or the [reel-Syrian
alliance to prevent thle. thomh uniﬁcation

Our differeoeea with the "LP-
GC reached their peel: laet summer
with armed elaahea. We will iron:
that oruanltaliort beeaure we prefer
democratic meant to overcome ton-
trnrlietione. The rightiate in the reairtanoe
umal’raldot‘ournewideaaendour

criticism of the mo. .

We believe in a etrategie alliance with the
axialiet earnp led by the Soviet Union and.
ea an Arab liberation rnovetnent. We aleo
later gond relatione with all nationalist
Arab eountriee but not at the expenee oi’our
atrategie obieetivea.
We ahall aluaya any Geneva ton-
fereneeaerrell aa ' molutloneuzand
one What we expect from the 8 ~iraqi
alliance le that it ehould open all for
our military aetim. eapeeiallyJordan.

We believe that the present balance oi
Met will not give or any Paleatlalan

atate. And even in return for aatate we trill

16

Jordan. the Sandie.
i am known ior peat operation. but i
am agninet them now. lthinlr we nntet oat-
eentrale on the occupied territoriee, thoteeh
not with DMJype propaganda open
atione. We ehould only etrilre at tergete iiite
a ehi carrying not to imel.
eouree. iii'een get Sadat. i nun‘t mire
theepportunity. but never at the outoiin-
voi elviliana. Sadat will probably set
eornet on Oau out o! the nemtiatlune.
endthen will returntothe Arab l‘oldto
regain credibility. Thla will enable him to
«wander

iiirthee.

But the Zlonlata won't make «In.
eeeeione.'l‘heywantanierael from the Nile
tetheaihnteaattherhtda
Nd Wot War. They will start ’

with a war againat the Syrian-iml
entity.

YAQOUB: No Such Thing ea Iaraell 'Prosreaalvee'

'ralaat Yaqoub. Secretary General of the Palestine Liberation Front

not recognise iarael. we Fair-m
eatablieh national authority one any
liberatedland.

The Jordanian regime - which it an
imperioliet creation and tool, etiil wantatbe
liquidation of the Palerlinian eauae. it to
quiet now beeauee it wante Arab tine-ieial
eupport liketheBaghdad fundaSoi’arthe
ltiruhaem.butwernuetfighttnre-
eetabiieh the aituetien as it was before

s’i'mdi’i‘." againa dialogue wi h
e are y t any t
leraeil "progreeelvea" became they
don‘t exiet. We are also against oontaete
with the US Administration whoee position
will not change in the foreseeable future.
Aatothereoent PNC. iteraanotanex.
ercire in demoeraq. Moat «(the repreeen-
tatlvee were ehoeen by i-‘ateh and the PNC
ie etiil controlled by Fateh. All the
atrueturea oi the Palestinian
rewiutim must be changed. but title

m‘llbeaiongandgradualprooeae.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
KAYYMJ :

hr Alulel-liahlmt- Knyynll. inner Secretary-General of the Arab Liberation

l'illt (lPl’llllAI. llSll ONLY

Prn'nt. author and intellectual

COPYRIGHT:

cso :

'I‘hr eeiura e! the l'l-‘lal' In the u-

wutlw i‘nmmitlw nl‘Ihe I‘I.0 \“Itlltl

mt he a malnr ewnl. 'Ihr balance of

rum-.- anniIl mnnin mum nv lent the
mine. \Vllh halal mix-lain; much an
nnwanlnn “whim lsmI-l «ml the US llml It
may nut In give anythinu may.

The U1": llinnlltll will! lllt‘ I'M) alunt‘tl
by Alain-w Yum; la nutlning but a trial
Inn'lnm In nIn-Imilum the “Inuit-mum" In
lla- I’Nil. lly alum:- Ielling Sadat In give In
the US luv: Inmlyn-«l il-I-lf mul III-mule in-
numlilt' uf mill-u nu llll‘ l'nltmilninn lune.
lint this- mil: u- line. In Ihe lullllllt'l‘ ni'
pair: in nanlllnlly shining in um I‘nvmn.

11"» me all“ purple in Pnlell wlm lame
In gel unnrtlnim: fn-m Saint. lint lam-l nml
the IIS a-nlly lum- nullnluu in din. 111t-
l‘nlnlinlnn ll'ﬂlill‘ nn' wry |Inlillrnlly um-
.q-inm. 'I'lu-y um'l willr l’nt lllmiuns lilte a
Imam may"! all" rnn't |'\‘I'Il mwly water
nillmnl nn [um-Ii OK.

1979 [C Magazines Ltd.

1.820

17

Some l-‘nt-eh I'enple. Still have Sadat: llopou '

limunllnx Iln: Ilialngm- with Jordan. the
aulme in there. «lather we like it at not.
and it in an lmputtant centre of political
activity. it: all-wee Ilu made Camp David
hanlIm at. We mutt extract the maximum
tun nna l'ann It. without lllualmu. ll lo-ln
Jnalan'n intern-t In amlm naulate In.‘

The emplm’n m l‘nluitlnlnn in.
«It-[mulmm at the l’NC was Mutable but
it may hide the real lntenllml oi acme
"mule. 'l'ln- mun-lilienl reality of the Iraqi-
Syrlaa ualilcatlon muat have a crucial in-
llm-me nu nnr mntexieal and tactical think-
my.

'nniny the Palestinian lemieuhlp sin-am
Palminianism to the (lettimeat oi pan-
Arahlum. lint Ila.- l‘altalilniam will defeat
Ihla lmnl. In unite nt‘ Pateh'u almwdnm
Ilulndl lnmws ”ill, but lian-almeh
aim linlu with the nnelaliat camp
in the mute wny that l’alutinlnnlun
humanity-alumnus.

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0N1."
m art-helm. usr: max

AldleA

thlSThthllUN 0F POHER ANALYZbD

Paris JHUNH AFRIQUh in French [4 Nat 79 pp 26, 27
b

|Arl icle by Soubayr llelhassen]

|Texl| Is the office of minister compatible with belonging to the political
bureau? For two months that question has been the basis both for profound
discussion and disagreement between the members of the political bureau,

who are divided on how to organize the Party and form the government, as well
as on relations between the two authorities. At a meeting beginning on

b March the central committee of the National Liberation Front (FLN) must do-
citlc. .. .. -

As was the case lbr the agreement on naming Col Chadli Bendjedid to the presi-
dency of the Republic, the redistribution of power is the object of shifting
alliances between a small number of men. There are two principal groups, call-
ed "militant" and "pragmatic."

On 23 February the political bureau's work seemed to have ended with the vic-
tory of the "militants"; Muhammad Salah Yahiaoui, an FLN leader, had made
himself tho-defender of absolute primacy for the Party, reputed to control
governmental activity according to the socialistic model practised in certain
countries of Eastern Europe and in the Soviet Union. 50 the task of the new
government would be solely to execute.

The weekly RhVOLurION AFRICAINh was talking the next day about an "indispensable
choice between administrative function and political function--two different,
though complementary ideas that cannot, however, be confused or blendedi"

The statement by the single Party's organ left the supposition that the game
HHS "Vl‘l'.

Nchrtheless, the debate continues and in the transactions the members of
what has become a phantom government have carried all the weight. Some min-
isters who do not want to be separated from the portfolios and even claim to

be "ministers of sovereignty" (that is not exclusively technical)seem to have
contributed to reversing the decision.

18
lin:(iFr;HlAL "SH nuts
Foreign Arhilrs Minister Abdoiazlz noutcfllka, a "pragmatist", is opposed to
Yahlaonl and announiao his decision to abandon his Ilnlstry.

For Ghadli and the zinay, such a departure could have repercussions later on
relations abroad. in the iumediate Future it would ensure the ascension of
Nuhaumad Salah Yahiaoul, who thus at the time of the presidential election
would merely have put off the evil hour. Also, the president said he was in
favor of retaining boateFlika. The principle of double membership in the pe-
lltlcai bureau and the government was indirectly in effect again.

For all that, the question of the redistribution of posts was not settled.
Speculations were going full blast. Will Mr Boutcflilta be retained in For-
eign Affairs? Will he have the rank of vice president? That is not ruled
out. Another president would be Ahmed Ben Cherlf, who would demand a large
ministry, Hydraulics and Agriculture. But the creation of post of super-in-
lster of Economy, industry and Agriculture, assisted by several secretaries of
state, would be seriously envisaged. The post would be assigned to

Belald Ahdessalam, along with a vice presidency.

With such supenmlnistries, the post of prime Ilnister would becoue a kind of
general secretariat to the government; its titular head would be
Mr Ahdelghaui, Interior Minister.

No accord having been achieved between the 17 Icebers of the political bureau,
‘ the central committee was called upon to decide. Statutorily it is that com-
mittee that approves the redistribution of tasks in the political bureau, on
the proposal of the secretary general, President Chadli.

The incompatibility between belonging to the political bureau and exercising
ministerial functions would not be retained a priori, but the position of the
Ion members of the central committee, who are rather "militant," could still
be holding back some surprises. However, nothing in the brief Algerian polit-
ical tradition says decisions taken must be adhered to. in any case. the ab-
sence of precedent leaves plenty of room to maneuver.

lilii‘Yliliill‘l': .leune Afriquc (illUl‘Jl/i i979

8940
[3“): IIIINI

19
FOR I‘rHClM. USE 02 Y
FOR 0iFIc!AL nan ONLY

ALGER I A

NI-M Milii'CUL'i'UIML, INlluil'liIM. "KUI‘XZI'S INMXIURATKD
Paris MRCIIIES 'I'ROI’ICAUX IE'I‘ MEDITERRANEENS in French 9 Mar 79- p 621
rrext| laaaguratloas la the West

Tayehi Larbi, the Algerian minister of Agriculture and the Agrarian Revolu-
Iiua, from I to d March made an inspection visit to the Western part of the
countuy, to tho governorates of hl-Asnal, Sidl Bel-Abbes, Oran, Tlencen.
Mascara and Mostaganen. During his tour he was to perform several dedications.

At Miliaaa on I March: I) Dedication of a cattle feed production unit

of Uu:(NAh (Nathnau Cattle Feed Office). This unit will have a capacity
or 40,000 tons per year and employ 100 workers. The ONAB has ll other
units throughout the country, with a total capacity of 370,000 tons.

Fivu more units are in progress. 2) Laying the cornerstone of the Aribe
dairy produce complex (the Ain Defla district). This complex, with an in-
itial capacity of 30 tons of cheese per day, will employ 1,200 persons,
300 of them women, and later will employ 2,500 persons. Bovine cattle-
raisiag units are anticipated.

At Sidi Bel-Abbes on 2 March: l)0edication of a new Onalait unit, with a
daily capacity of 70,000 liters of milk and 12,000 pieces of cheese.

2) Dedication of the new Cofel headquarters, including an adninistrative
building, housing, repair shop, cold storage warehouses (327-ton capacity).
3) Laying cornerstones of: a poultry slaughterhouse, capacity 2,500
chickens per day; a poultry center (5 farms, 2,500,000 chickens per year);
and a socialist village (100 housing units) in Boukhanifis.

At Tlencea on 3 March: Laying the cornerstone of a production center for
eggs for consunption and a cattle-feed plant.

Al Mohammadia on 4 March: Laying the cornerstone of the incubator of the
poultry center. '

lnaugurations in Iil Asnam '

The secretary general of the Algerian Con-erce Hinistry on 22 February in
El Asnan (ibrmeriy Orleaasville) dedicated a distribution unit of the National

20
Fok nPiiCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Trade Establishment and a supemrket of the National Construction Materials
Colpany (SNNGA).

Constituting an important storage warehouse, the ENC unit specializes in dis-
tributing hardware articles, tools. household-appliances, copy machines. It
is responsible for answering the needs of users. dealers, national cospanies.
administrations and governorate consular cooperatives.

The sales unit of Algerian Galleries, with a surface of 7,500 square leters.
is located right in the center of the cellune's seat. It employs sale 135
persons.

New Industrial Bakery

Mound Tayebi Larbi, the minister of Agriculture and the Agrarian Revolu-
tion, on 22 February in the Algiers governorate dedicated the Cheraga indus-

trial bakery, which was developed by the Interoccupationsl Algerian Grains
Office (OAIC).

The OAIC envisages developing six lore bakeries of the some type (the Mostefa
Ben Brahin bakery is about to be started), to be implanted in Tlencen,
Mostaganen, Setif. Annaba, Skikda and Tizi-Ouzou. The latter, like the first
developuent, will have a school to ensure the training of the unit's person-
nel, which will be open to bakers and bakery workers from the private sector.
The Selpac Company. has also already sent personnel to Spain for training.

so they can take charge of the new units belonging to the celpany. But, ac-
cording to £1. lDUNAHID, realization of these plans is being delayed so that
the trainees returning frol their training can remain nonoperational for a
long enough period after their return.

COPYRIGH‘: Rene Moreux et Cio, Paris. 1979

8946
C50: 4400

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0i~..Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGBRIA

BRIEFS
JAPANESE STEEL CONTRACT-4M Algerian National Steel Conpany has just entrusted
to a Japanese group the exploitation of the Gare Djebilet iron lines (in the
southwestern part of the country), as well as construction of a steel coaplex
having an annual capacity of 10,000,000 tons. The amount of the contract is
$l9l,000.000. Nippon Steel had previously concluded contracts with the Alger-

BBLGIAN TRANSPORTATION COOPERATION~A delegation frol the Belgian Coﬁmica-
tions Hinistry arrived in Algiers on 26 February for talks with the leaders

of the Transportation ﬂinistry, about setting up the cooperation prograa out-
lined in the docuaent signed on 21 September 1978 by Ahmed Draia. Algerian
Transportation Minister, and Henri Sinonet, Foreign Affairs Minister of Bel-
giun (see MARCHES TROPICAUX ET BDITBRRANEENS, 29 September 1978, p 2575).

The new discussions dealt with Belgian proposals concerning the various areas
of cooperation examined at the tine of the last aeeting, held in Algiers free
1 to 9 Noveﬂaer 1978 (see MARCHES TROPICAUX ET WDITBRRANEENS, 24 Noveaber
1978. p 3085). in particular the modalities for financing invest-ants relative
to developing railway infrastructures, the Center forrllailway Training, a
higher Institute for Ground Transportation, the Implementation of repair shops
and technical assistance in certain areas of exploitation. [Text] [Paris mums

AUSTRIAN COOPERATlON--A delegation from the Federal Republic of Austria ar-
rived in Algiers on 1 March to discuss with leaders of the Transportation Min-
istry the conditions for and methods of setting up.cooperation in aatters
having to do with railway transportation. These talks followed those engaged
in in Vienna in May 1978, during which prospects for cooperation between the
two countries in setting up development of railway infrastructures were exam-
ined. [Text] [Paris MARCRES TROPICAUX ET lEDITERRANBENS in French 9 Mar 79

p 621} 8946

PRESSURE-COOKER ASSEBLY LINE-och 28 February a new asseably plant for manu-
facturing pressure cookers was inaugurated at the headquarters of the
"Alminiun" fin in the Algid'n'. governorate, by Hadj Yale, Conerce Minister.
This firm, under the protectinn of the gevernorate. specializes in manufactur-
ing cooking utensils. Founded in 1958, abandoned in 1972 by its owner with

22
son OFFICIAL (BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

liabilities of over 800,000,000 centinos. since 1973 the first has been con-
nected with the governernte. it currently elploys 65 workers and produces
300 tons of cooking articles per year. Several sonths fro- now its active
force will be as persons. This new nenufccturing esseubly line. built by

an ltelion contractor (Monete). which cost neerly 7.000.000 diners. will pro-
duce after 1900 over 150.000 Osiris pressure cookers. thus bringing produc-
tion to 900 tons per year. However. in its starting phase. the nnnui'ncturlng
esselbly line will yield only 6.000 units per month. in four sites. 5 to ll
liters. The price to the consuler of the ll-liter nodel would be 150 diners.
gut] [Paris mums ‘l‘llOPlCAllx ET leTERMNBBNS in French 9 liar 79 p 621]

46

050: 4400

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0M3
I09. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

"RITER 838$ RADICAL CLBHCALISM UNLIKBLY 1'0 2 NAIL \
mm M man in ltelien 3 Feb 79 i: 3

(Article by Arrigo Levi: "There to Riek of Civil Her After the Uncertein
Revolution-[rent No One Cen 8ey who will "in”!

[Text] The trimhee return of xhoeeyni doee not re-
eove the eerioue teneione which ere elreedy evident in
the heterogeneoue coelition which celled hin heck end
which eooner or leter will explode egein. An ideology
of lelee (elter Ceetroeie end heoiee) eythiiied hy en
ineecure weet? The country'e echievenente end the eheh'e
errote. The opportunien of the ruling powere towerd the
evolving peoplee.

The etery of the riee. greetneee end tell of the Pereien wire of Rose
Pehlevi ie deetined to hecoee en exeeplery hietory, inortent for under-
etending the world in which we live end the eurprieee it holde (or us.
The eheh eincerely ptoooeed to note Iren e greet modern power in e very
few yeere. The dyneety of the Pehlevie wee young. without tredition, end
week in neturel links with lrenien eociety; but thie. which in the end
proved e fundenentel weekneee, wee (or e long tine e force. teciliteting
the work of rupture which the eheh. in hie role ee e noderniter. ee Pereie'e
Keeel Ateturlt. intended to cerry out. end which he eucceeded in cerrying
out eucceeefully for e coneiderehle tine. Rio "white revolution” wee

not e eere deeegogic cover for euthoriterien end portly corrupt power: it
eleo cerried reel veluee of eociel end economic progreee.

‘rodey. eythe end counterwthe intertwine conetently end nelte it difficult
to for- en objective Judgnent on the Iren of here Pehlevi. ee ie the cue
eleo with Heo'e Chine or comiet Vietnen. in eny ceee. it ie e Eect
thet the eheh hed not eurrounded hieeel! eolely with generel. greedy
politiciene end torturer police-en. In the yeere of the eheh, e new
technocrecy wee toned in Iten which includee thoueende of young peoole
educeted in the beet wettern univereitiee; end thie in e genuinely
hrillent end very eehitioue elite. one which need the eheh ee ouch ee

it wee ueed hy hie, to bring forwerd ite own progre- of econolic develop-
ment end nodernieetion. conceived eutononouely end in eeny weye very
ettrective.

24
YO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I ONLY

Iran has for a long tine had exemplary rates of development, which for a
decade (up to 1976) were aaintsined at around 10 percent per year. A
part of the civil reforns against the traditional powers. of the land-
owners or the nullehs. had a genuine liberating content. The living
conditions of the population are greatly iaproved. But the very rapidity
and ferocity of the changes (the visitor to Tehran. a horrendous and in-
human aetropolis in the grip of the anarchy of aggressive and neurotic
traffic, felt even physically the violence exerted on persons by modern-
isatlon) unleashed psychological and social tensions which the shah and
his ruling class, in their cola-on preemption, constantly underestimated.

Hith hindsight. it can be observed how they alienated from theaseives the
syepathiea not only of the aore traditional society but also those of the
new emerging classes. to when the authoritarian regime did not grant
adequate liberties, powers and participation. The comists should
keep silent on this aspect of the shah's regime, since the shameful poli-
tical repression in iron was in any case less than in the Vietnea of
today, or in Cambodia. or in any other co-unist regime which night be
cited. The nonco-unists have not kept quiet. even if perhaps they have
not spoken enough or have not been heard: in any case. it is certain

that the rebellion against the shah has been nourished also by the just
synpnthics for the opposition from western denocratic circles and
countries. including Carter's caQeign for civil rights.

But fundamentally, it has been the very policy of the shah and his gov-
ernors that has raised against the king of kings the most extraordinary
and heterogeneous political alliance imaginable-an alliance that has
included moslem fundamentalists, marxiat revolutionaries. the mercantile
class of the baeasra. deprived by the new bureaucracy of its traditional
eeonoeic functions, nationalist forces. liberals and democrats of all
types. noderates and revolutionaries. between those who advised him-
beginning with Carter's America (not, unfortunately, that of linen)—
to have more denocrecy and those who suggested greater repression. the
shah chose a aiddle way. asking a policy which was enough to arouse vast
and indignant opposition but was not sufficient to break it: the liberali-
sation measures cane too late. and only facilitated the victory of the
revolution.

it is relatively easy today to say that the shah's fall from power was
therefore inevitable—especially from the time around 1976 when the shah
and his advisers. having become aware that the oil reserves would not

last forever, decided actually to accelerate the already mad pace of
development, accentuating the imbalances between production goals and
social goals. It is a fact that the shah and his governors were given many
warnings, which were ignored.

In a conference held in Persepolis in 1976. attended by a hundred western
experts and about as nany Iranian experts and aanagera (almost all of
them young, and really very outstanding for their education and intellectual

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE \. 1L?

0
l'Oll OFFICIAL 083 01“.?

iivelinoea). it vaa aaid inaiatently by any Heaternera that the political
and eocial tonaloaa arouaed by auch rapid and iabalanced develop-ant. and
the brutal aethoda of police repreaaion by the lranian powera. eonatituted
a very exploeive threat. oven if no one knew or could foroaoe at that

tine that the exploaion would occur ao quickly. But arrogance deafened
the uheh and hie adviaera. ouch ea then Priae iiiniater hoveyda. who at

that tiae liked to give contenptuoua leeturoa to the "turbulent" countriea.
auch aa ltaly.

Porecd-aarch developnent. in a backward country not aubjeeted to iron-
fiated conuniat totalitarianian. la in reality an atteapt by any regiae
to achieve political atabllity. Devolopaent (thia ia a thoaia worked
out by the Latin American econoaiata and dear to Guido Carli) centraliaea
the well-being and the roaourcea of relatively aaall aocial groupa. pre-
claely thoee who occupy the advanced productive aector or the poaitiona
of power. The backward aajority anda up relatively iapoveriahod of re-
nourcea, the aadernired area doea not expand. and the aocial diaperitiea
increase. but aloe. anyone who takes part in the nodernieation proceaa
(code on great unfulfilled aab‘ltiona and on fruatrationa. it ia in

fact the urbanized population. which has iaproved ita atandard of living
at the coat of traunatic diaruption of traditional valuoa and-iuenae
personal aacrificea. which generates forces of contoatation. of proteat.
of revolution. The phenonenon ia faniliar to ua ltaliana. even if it ia
leaa cateatrophic in italy.

lie for iron. the propheta of dooa have been proven right aooner than they
iaaginedt the revolutionary potential waa undereatinated by all. be-
ginning with the iranian governaent. if it had not been. than obviously
the revolution would not have broken out: a revolution ia by definition
a country's unexpected act of revelation to itaelf. through which the
country ahowa itaolf to be different froa what it thought it waa. or in-
deed. froe what it had been up to that aoaent: it effectively changea

in the courae of the revolution.

The iranian explosion is rich in leaaona for all. preciaely becauae [ran
wan. ln may ways. a aodel country, widely admired. a country which had
brilliantly overcone aoae of the neat difficult probleaa of nodernization.
beginning with the problea of training a technologically advanced aanagerial
clean in a brief period of tine. Pron Asia to the Middle bat. froa

Africa to Latin Anerica. a long aeriea of eountriea co-itted to aodern-
iution proceaaea will have to reflect on the Iranian enqle in the

days of ita failure. on in the days of ita aucceaa.

To countrica no different fro- one another aa South Korea. Saudi Arabia
(which. though, hoe a govern-eat far better rooted in ita own aocial
reality). Turkey. Nigeria. Brazil. the way of aodernitation aunt appear
today aorc fraught with unknowna and perila. It nuat be admitted that
the totalitarian regions of laniniat derivation, even if they have not
ahown theaaeivea to be at all auperior to the liber-capitaliat regiaea.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL U88 ONLY

or regimes of authoritarian-capitalist type, have nevertheless shown, in
managing economic progress and modernization (leaving values of liberty
aside). a considerably greater capacity to preserve lull political
control; in short, they have shown thenselves to be stronger and more
stable-if necessary, with a little help from Soviet power.

For the countries which are not communist, the way of modernization is
fraught with unknowns, it is a process whose outcomes are unpredictable.
Just as post-shah iron is unpredictable. The triunphal reentry of the
ayatollah Khomeyni does not make one forget the tensions which have
already manifested themselves in the heterogeneous coalition which is
calling him back and which will explode again sooner or later. Mean-
while, the country seems an the brink of civil war, and no one can say

who will win. Now it is fashionable to say that "islom will win in any
case." with lslam added-aiter Haeism, Castroism, and so on-to the list
of exotic ideologies mythified by a western world which is insecure and
has a bad conscience. In reality, isiam too, although it is an articulated
and couples culture, is barely beginning to confront the difficult problems
of modernisation. These orobless are very largely in the future and not

in the past of the regions of islsmic culture; what. in the end, will
remain of islamism, it is impossible to foresee.

The clerical traditionalism, demagogic and violent, of the ayatollah
Khomeyni (who nevertheless must choose, even within the Islamic republic
which he wants to establish, between a compromise with the other social
forces and a dictatorship, which would be the more unstable and more total-
itsrisn it is). thus has as little chance of prevailing as the model of
the future modern, industrialised and urbanized islsnic society as does
the archaic system of family-feudal government of Saudi Arabia and the
Gulf emirates for emerging intact fros the explosive growth process which
oil wealth is precipitrﬂing. The old regimes and the old ideologies are
condemned; the new regimes are, by their nature, in the process of
amalgamation.

The entire southern part or the world, with great material resources and
immense human potential, and with its burden of traditional values and
cultures, has barely begun a long and unpredictable historic journey

(the most restless advanced societies appear solid by comparison), during
which it will be constantly stimulated and subsequently destabilized by
the impact of the ideals of liberty and well-being and by the technologies
of the west, as well as by the revolutionary gospel of the communist
ideologies. The opportunism and maneuvers of the great powers will
aggravate matters.

it is within this framework, where old and new tensions and conflicts
will develop, increasingly often, in view of the atomic threshheld.
that the conflict between East and west, between the United States and
the Soviet Union. will evolve in the coming years. The system of rela-
tions among the powers. which in the "provincial" world of the 1950's

27
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and 1960's we. able to hove n cortnln (unctlonal utility. can no longer
be of we in the very broad and fluid frnwwork of the 1980’s and 1990's.
and should be radically thought. on: snow. Tho stakes are very high:
nakhlng lnu than the maintenance of nuclear pence.

COMMON: 1979, Edith LA STANPA 8.9.A.

11267
(ISO: 3104

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

LEBANON

EALANCB OP PAYMENTS GOOD DESPITE SECURITY PROBLEM
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 9-15 Feb 79 p 56

[Text] The striking phenomenon of Lebanon's economy is that last year's
balance of payments has shoun a surplus. something unprecedented even during
the best years of economic prosperity, although it was (and still is) suf-
fering from a recession due to the unstable atmosphere. Dr George 'Ashi
shed some light on this phenomenon and on severalaspects of Lebanon‘s eco-
nomic problems which await long overdue solutions. "a was interviewed by a
correspondent of AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI. Dr George 'Aahi is secretary of the
board of the Lebanese Banking Association and the director-general of the
Credit Commercial de France. These positions make him privy to the hidden
aspects of the banking situation.

[Question] There is an inclination to consider 1978 as a year of setback
in Lebanon's economy. which had recovered somewhat during 1977. Hhat do
you think?

[Answer] It was not a year of total setback. The setback began during the
second half of 1978 despite various deterioratioas in security which occurred
during the first halfofthe year following the al-Feyysdiysh incident in
February. The collapse of security caused the most severe setback in Leban-
on's economy. with the exception of the banking sector which did not cease
its operations and which had adapted to operating under emergency conditions.
Total figures indicate that in 1977 there was a surplus of $700 million in
the balance of payments. This surplus is unprecedented in Lebanon. even
during the best years of prosperity. Despite the 1978 setback. the balance
of payments showed a surplus of between $250 and $300 million.

[Question] has the expansion in investments been a factor which helped the
banking industry to move into the real estate and industrial sectors?

[Answer] There are no new investments in Lebanon‘s industrial sector at
this time. Rather. there has been a reduction in this investment because
most of the factories which were hit in 1975-76 had not completely resumed
operation in 1977-78. These factories remained practically idle along with

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON;Y
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

other rectoriee thet hed tried to reeuu operetion. beceuee in l978 new
rectoriee thet hed eurvived during the 2 yeere or we: were hit. Sane of
theee were in el-Dureh. e huge induetriel eree which ettrected eeverel

induetriel. co-erciel end benking inetitutione thet hed eoved free other
ereee.

Dr 'Aehi edded thet honking depoeite ieproved. In April 1978 they were
eetineted et 16.5 billion lire. en increeee of note then 1.5 billion lire
over the figure for 1977. we expect thet it hee now reeched 16 billion
lire. but elthough henhing depoeite ere increeeing due to e theoreticel
increeee in benhing potentiel. the feet ie. the ecope of inventing ouch
depoeite et the locel level ie nerrow under the eecurity circunetencee.

[Queetion] "here ere the benking reeourcee being invested under the cur-
rent circunetenceet

[Anewer] There ere eubetentiel reel eetete inveetnente in Lebenon new, be-
ceuee reel eetete property ie generelly eecure end beceuee the Lebeneee
ectperinent hee been eucceeerul in view or the country'e limited eire. heel
eetete pricee continue 'to increeee due to the feet thet the benhe thet ere
omitted to inveeting their reeourcee could'not find eny plece to put the
noney except in reel eetete beceuee o! the preveiling circunetnecee. I‘hie
hee etimleted the reel eetete nerhet. he e reeult. we find thet reel
eetete pricee in Siden. for exenple. heve increeeed eight tinee during the
put 2 yeere. In the north. they increeeed five tinee. By contreet. the
ecope of benking eervicee (or trileterel trede. i.e.. externel trenecetione,
hee ehrunk.

[Cueetionl Hhet ere the ottecte of euch conditione (elong with the decline
in the velue of the deller) on the velue of the Lebeneee lire?

[Anewer] The velue of the lire wee ebout 3.1 lire per doller et the begin-
ning of 1977. Deepite fluctuetione in the price of the duller, it did not
chenge in Lebenon up or don beyond 8 percent. but beceuee the doller hee
declined egeinet other foreign currenciee. the velue or the lire decreeeed
egeinet other etrong foreign currenciee. Thie ie nothing to be eehened of
ee fer ee Lebenon ie concerned. Hhet ie unueuel in ubenon ie thet the lire
neinteined thie level vie-ewie the doller end other herd currenciee. As
for the future of the Leheneee lire. one ehould note thet the foreign ex-
chenge rete or every currency ie detcrnined hy the lew of eupply end denend.
Thin lew. ee perteining to the currency. in deternined by the belence of
peynente. Indeed. the belence of peynente in Iaebenon wee fevoreble in 1977
end 1978. end ee 1 nentioned eerlier. it hee even regietered e eurplue.
Thie indicetee thet there ie no need to worry ebout the velue of the Leben-
eee lire. eepecielly eince it ie etrongly becked. Here I met eey thet

the eource of the lire'e etrength in not its hocking but the equilibriu

or the netionel econony. You ney eek no how e belence ie echieved when the
country ie in e etete of war end ecenaic receeeion. In feet. thie ie the
etrengeet eepect of the Debeneee wonder. In e country et wer, e country

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE OFLY
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

whose economy is destroyed. a country suffering froe a recession-despite
ell that—its balance of payments registers a surplus and its currency is
healthy and balanced. There are two apparent factors behind the healthy
balance of paysents and both in the-selves ere harsful to ubenon's econ-
oly. The first factor is the transactions of visible and invisieble fi-
nancing of the war. The var is harmful to Lebanon and its econony. The
second factor is the resittances of Lebanese expatriates who work and earn
Ioney abroad. Re hope that their migration is not going to be final be-
cause their continued residence ebroad is apt to slow down the pace of re-
construction of Lebanon.

COl’YRIGﬂT: 1979. MATH AL-‘AMBI

8676
(:80: 6802

31
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR MIGIAL 1188 ONLY

mmm

FORCES OPPOSID ro UNITY 31mm UP RACIAL mrou
Paris Arum-A813 in trench 5-18 Her 79 p 29

[Article by 8eid Ould Khelite: ”who Is “treetening Netionsl Unity?
The,.‘rine hes nselly Not Gone for Going beck to the 'Recisl Probln'"!

[Text] The deedline set by President Ould Beleck for the horoccsn
soldiers to lssve Heuritsnien netionsl territory hes precticslly
errived. The Moroccen power continues nonetheless to seek e diversion
cepsble of impeding the peece process which Nouskchott see-s determined
to cerry out to its conplstion.

It is egeinst this politicel beckground that, sdded to the econuic
problens bequeethed by Hokhter Ould Deddeh. e crisis is breeking out
in heuritenie which the "speciellred" co-entstors heve quickly
described es s "reciel problem."

According to these cansntstors. the peoples of the .south ere very
discontent with the lot epportioned to then by the regime which issued
from the coup d'etet of 10 July 1978. Sons go so fer es to speck of
spertheid!

Just whet is the situetion of the bleck Heuritsniens; end first of ell.
who are they?

Host of thu ere terners end fisher-hen end live elong the Senegel River.
Before they were severely hitudirectly by the drought, end indirectly
by the wsr effortnthe Heuriteniens of the south constituted the most
highly sdventeged group in reletion to the rest of the populetion,

who ere lergely naeds. Beceuse of their encestrel ties with the
'roucouleur, tuleni, Soninke end other tribes, living in mli end
Senegsl, they heve been eble to esteblish en important network of trsde
exchenges, besed essentislly on berter.

In the ere of Hokhter Ould Deddeh's reign. the problem of the blecks
in Heuritenis wes never reised. It existed nevertheless in the torn
of e survivel of slevery which never went by thet none, nede less
ilegrent. it is true, in e systen of erploitetion of men by sen of
which the Moors (whites) were elso victims.

32
Pm OFFICIAL US! MY
P03 OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

One thus has a right to question these sudden attempts. which at the
present time can have no other sin than to pit Mauritanians against
other Meuritenians-oall the aura so in that these ettenpts take their
pretest fron the Arsbizstion policy decided on by Nouakchott with the
aim (a correct one) of .rewelding national unity. An unpopular measure.
by definition, in the eyes of the forner colonial powers. who have
profited not a little. and are still profiting, iron the cultural

and political divisions and convulsions in Africa and elsewhere.

Massan II. in an interview given to a trench radio program, made
remarks which give confort to this colonial logic, isolating the blacks
of Mauritania fru the rest of the people. and in the some spirit,
distinguishing the 'l'ouaregs of Algeria from the rest of the Algerians.
In the view of the king, only the Sehrsouis. described as "bandits"

by the palace's propaganda. should be Moroccans, by free will or by
force. The trouble for the Moroccan nonerch is that he is far from
being able to transforn his desires into realities.

This being so, it is nonetheless true that although the free circulation
existing between the populations of the two banks of the Senegal River‘
facilitates exchanges of all sorts and strengthens ethnic and cultural
solidarity, without anyone complaining. so far. it can furnish a
pretext to anyone who wants to make trouble along the border.

break Up the Anny?

likewise. all those who for cultural reasons, like those of President
Senghor, or from political actives. like those of Massan II, are

not satisfied with the openness of the borders and the peaceful
coexistence which this openness presupposes can encourage breakups
which the populations concerned are far from desiring.

From this point of view. the recent declarations by President

Ould Seleck ("let those who do not feel at has go elsewhere") seen
to express a feeling of irritation towards those who are working to
splinter Mauritanian national unity.

The challenge is. indeed, very real. In the words of a Mauritanian
diplomat. Nouakchott's enenies want to "undermine the morale of the
army, in which there are a great many black soldiers, now that the
Sahara affair is on the point of being solved.... They are trying,
to stir up the waters just when they are on the point of settling."

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Afrique-Asie

11,267
680: M00 . am .

33
ran OFFICIAL USE ONLY