APPROVED FOR RELEME: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00050R000100030000-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030060-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8357

28 March 1979

TRANSUITIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 114/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030060-1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by Jess. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was smrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horda or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGIT MUS AND REGUMTIONS GWERNING WHERSRIP OF
MATERIALS RBPWDUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
I.“ N . 1R ' ' A .
”0" 0 JIIS L/8357 3» atloaeala eceaanan No

Luas-ua e'on'lc

28 March 19 79

TRANSLATIONS OII NARCGI‘ICS MD DANGEROUS DRWS
(9000 14/79) _

.. Pedal-Ea 0 a-luciee Re .
“O. I I 3‘

l0. Pcoieet/‘l'aal/Iads Unit No.
H. Contact/Gnu No.

I ' o: ' ' N «am I11 alle tPead
z 5mm“. mum“ m m
Aa above

   
 
   
     
   
 

    
    
 

. Padang-a. Ouaautatiaa Nana and Menu
Joint Publication Iaaaatch Servica
1000 North clebo Road

Arlington. Virginia 22201

 

IS. Supple-canny Nun

Mm'acca

The aerial report conaiato of translationa from the votld press and radio
relating to law. law enforcement. illicit traffic and petaonalitiaa concerned
with narcotics and dangeroua dma.

. lay Iowa and eta-cu Aaalyua.

Narcotics

Drug Addiction

Lav (Juriaptudence)
Lav Enforceunt

I78 Hemline/Openl-Eadd Tet-o

Dangerous Druga
Drug Control
Dru; Traffic

l1¢CO$ATIFi¢UIG¢uo 5K. 60. 61'

I. Availabuluy 5mm“

for Official me Only.
united "tuber of popiea Available Fro. JPRS.

 

'0.‘ ~'I.‘.. I-‘V- ."ll

1m: to»: an oz ntnoooczo “"M” ""“'"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS W835
28 March 1

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(P000 14/79)

Contents

ASIA
MW

Brier-
Heroin Hun

HURM

Briers
Heroin Seized
Opium Seized
Seize Heroin, Arrest Roma
Opium Seized in hungde

MIA

Briefs
Bali Police Detein amulet-e

mm

South Pacific Regional tin-couc- Training Program Open:
(mm mm Post, 5, 7 Feb 79)

Kinieter of Police Sneaks
'lev Zeehnd Connection' Feared

Drug Education Prone: Coiled Waste of ammo Mooey'
(mud Mimi-us mm mar, 17 m 79)

Police Mininer Notes Alumina Rice in Heroin, Cocaine Use
(mm mm: rose, 2 Feb 79)

Four-1m Jeil Sentence for Heroin Offense
(m mass, in m: 79)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comma (Continued)

Briers
Heroin ‘rrsi‘ficker Jailed
Sentenced on Drug Charge
Mergide Trafficking Charges
Heroin Supply Trial

PMCISI'AN

Seven Centers for Opiun Addicts in Mershsd
(mm'7m79) O...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOO.I...

sou-am

Brie“
mroppon Des].

THAILAND

Police llsb Heroin Courier
(3mm war, 7 Mar 19)

CAM

hartner Consents on hrihunnn Decrinineliution
(Various sauces, various dates) ...................

BC Education Minister Opposes
legislation mentioned, Editorial by Dick Beddoes

Briefs
Drugs Seized
mu MOPS
CZBCBOSIDVMCI’A
Briefs
Bunion Simmer
mm AMIGA
mam-m

Police Ihcovers Illegal Drug haufhcturins in Mastores
(u m, 25 m: 79)

.1).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CW8 (Continued)

Briers
Drug Traffickers Arrested

3mm

Colonbisn Plane washes With 20,000 Pmnd Minimum Cache
(cum amounts, 1 Mn- 79)

BOLIVIA

Briers
Cocaine traffickers on Trial
Cocaine Seizure
Drug Trstfickers Arrested

COLOMBIA

Briers
Larger notions Curb Drugs

acumen

Narcotics Control Agreemnt Sigied Hith Colo-bis
(Voz de los Andes, 3 hr 19) ......................

Efforts To Avoid Misuse of Mnceuticels
(EL cmclo, 21 Feb 79) sosesessesseseeooseeoeosso

Brie i‘s
Coceine Posts Ekported

MDCICO

Accomplice Informs on Piedras Negros Heroin Trafficker
(m. Dmuo no news rooms, 16, 20 Feb 79)

Origin of ﬂeroin Disclosed
Special Coordinator Investigstins

Cocaine Minusnn Truman's Officially Jailed
(a. mm, 1 Feb 79)

Couple Captured with Marianne, Coosine
(IA voz on. um, 21 Jan 79)

Sentence or Colombian Cocaine mfncker Reduced
(31. mm, 15 m 79)

-C-

m onlcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY '

coma (Continued)

Heroin Laboratory Destroyed in Rosales
(KL name be m man-no, 16 m 79)

Briefs
Beroin Seizure in Dursngo
Pin Trafficker Captured
Wicker“ Appeal Denied
Opiul, Weapons Seized
harticher's Sentence Reduced
'mles' Inform on ‘n'ai’ricker
Iouth Heroin Addiction Rising

um MOPS
WK

Police Narcotics Section Chief laments Death Increase
(Volner Nissen Interview; summon: mam,
21 J50 ”) OOOOOOOOQOOOOOIOOIIIOOOOOOOOIOOOOIIOOIOOOCO

SPADI

Suspect Arrested for Pharmacy Robberies
(m, In Feb n) 0.0.00000000000000000IOOO00......O...

Briefs
Drugs Seized in Mesa
Heroin Traffickers Arrested
Heroin Trafficker Arrested at Airpa't
Cocaine Seised at Airport
neshish Found in hrabena
Cocaine Trafficker Arrested

- d -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

"mom BUST-u-In the Melbourne nagtetrate'a court today a 35-year-old Ian.
(Ethan lock). appeared on two chargea of inportlns and poaaeaains heroin.
The proaacutor eald (lock) arrived on a flight tron Turkey on Saturday
and uaa arreatad at Melbourne airport after cuatm ofﬁcera found about
600 arena of heroin tn ahoulder pada under hla clothing. The heroin had
a atraet value of $000,000. (lock) wee relanded 1n cuatody until Tuesday
week. [lielbourue Overaeaa Service in Bullet; 1230 681' 19 Mar 79 W]

050: $300
BRIEFS

HERO!!! SBIZEDnRangoon. 27 Petr—Acting on intonation, U Tun Kyaw. a nonber
of the South Okkalape Township People's Council Executive Connittee. and

a teen of police-en raided the house of 22-year-old Haung Hyo Khin at the
Central Market in Hard No 8 at dam today and arrested Haung Hyo Khin.

Haung Sein Then of the Central herket and Ma Tu Tu Her of No 68. 156th Street.
Tenwe, along with 12 packages of heroin worth 12 kyate each. The police

have filed charges against then under Sections 6 (B) and 16 (D) [of the
Naicotic Drugs Law]. [Text] [Rangoon HYANHA ALIN in Burnese 28 Feb 79 p 7

UK

OPIUH SEIZED-mong Ping, l7 Petr-Acting on a tipoff that opium will be trans—
ported from Taunggyi area to Moog Ping. Intelligence Office Lt Khin Haung Sue
and a unit from the lold Infantry Regiment, township people's council executive
comittee nenber U Rle Kyi, township police comander U "in Haung and a
police squad. and Auk-zay-dan ward people's council chair-an U Ronda yester-
day searched the jeep with registration plate 3-7614 traveling from Xunhing
to Hong Ping. The search. conducted at the reginent'e checkpoint on
Taunggyi-Keng Tung Road, uncovered 25 packages of opium weighing 69.25 visa
[1 vise equals 3.6 pounds] hidden among the oceans and turmeric cache. The
opiue was sealed and confiscated by the police while eight persons on the
jeep--Aik Lu. Aik Sein. Neyankhsn. Mk Lon. Ailr. Ywet. Win Kyaw, driver

U Levin and Sai Lott-were charged under Sections 6.3, 7/6 and 10/6 of the
Narcotic Drugs Law. [Text] [Rangoon WKTIIA PYEITRU NEZIN in Burmese

6 Mar 79 p lo BR]

5812?. HEROIN. ARREST W-diogok. 23 Feb-«Acting on infatuation. Hogok
township people's council executive conittee nenber U San Tin. police
station officer U Tun Po and a party on 20 February searched the residence
of Ho Khin Ngwe Thein in Hogok’s Hyona ward. The search uncovered four
penicillin bottles containing heroin. Hogok police have charged

Mn Khin Ngwe Thein under Sections 10.3 and 6.3 of the Narcotic Drugs Law.
[Text] [Rangoon HYANHA ALI“ in Bunsee 5 Her 79 p lo BK]
OPIUH 82128!) IN PAUNGDB-Jaungde, 1 Huh-Acting on information, Sub-inspector
U Ohn Hanna and Private U an Rhin of Paunsde People's Police Force searched
U Hanna Khne of Okkan at Sein "in Tea Shop at the Prone-Rangoon bun atation
in Paungde at 2200 yesterday in the preaence of U Anne Kyi, chairman of the
No 2 Market Hard. and U Shun Il'in. They aeizad .57 viee [1 via equale

3.6 lbs] of mu opium hidden in hit handbag. U Mann; Khve vaa arrented

under Sections 6 (I!) and 7 (B) [of the Narcotic Drugs Lav]. Acting on the
testimony given by 0 "am: Khvo that he had bought the coins from Home Paul:
S. of Taingchit Hard. the police arrested and queatimd Hauns Punk Sn.
[Text] [Rangoon mm PYBITHU mm in lune-e 6 Her 79 p 6 BR]

030: 5300
BRIEFS

BALI POLICE DETAIN SHUGGLBRSn'No New Zealanders wanted by the Australian
police for trying to smuggle 10.6 pounds of ganja in August last year have
bean detained by police in Bali Island. An Indonesian police spokesman
said the two men were arrested at a hotel room where police also found about
277 kilograms of ganja. The official ANTARA News Agency said Australian
police had earlier asked for Indonesian help to locate the two men who, to-
gether with 16 other people. tried to snuggle 5.6 pounds of ganja into
Australia last August. [Text] [Kuala Luapur Domestic Service in English
1130 cm lo Her 79 BK]
SOUTH PACIFIC REGIONAL NARCOTICS TRAINING PROGRAM OPENS

Ministet of Police Speaks

Wellington THE EVENING POST in English 5 Feb 79 p 6

[Text]

_Wmm

mm m? M.” mtg»

.m m
“mam “mam

mm“ Emmi y.

ﬁwﬂ w m .wwmwm“
“me mﬂﬁwm

mg- may? Wm swam“ mm

. mewmx mw
wwwwm” mmwmnmuwm mammmwuwmh

mﬁ. mum
“WWW “Mm“.aa

%
'ch Zenlnnd Connection' Feared
New Zealand could soon become a major stage-pout for heroin traf-

ficking to the United States, a top Aneticnn anti-drug officer has told

wellington TH£ EVENING POST in English 7 Feb 79 p 38
the New Zealnnd Police.

[Text]

mum”: .._ “mm. am: am. n...“ a»...

_ _
mam... may... ﬂ

in“ :2: Emma “mug—u E:

w”: u mnmmmm “mm“...m mm»... «mm m”
g “ mm g :A m

. n. mu m . m an nu
.w any mm “mm. mmm mmm a;

33m :Emm k :5”me
m2 1%. m3

Wldmmm mm. -m. 3mm: 3
mu I.‘ MW»
may” ”Wm www.mmw. mmwwwmmwnmm.mmm

5320

C50:
DRUG EDUCATION PROGRAM CALLED 'HASTE OF PUBLIC HONEY'

wellington THE EVENING POST in English 17 Feb 79 p 6

[Article by David Mccllll

[Text]

It'll II"CIIII-II< ." .:.'I‘Il“" ‘I ‘0‘-“ III.

Km w.“ “mi in: 3.
mm“ “Nun mm ummmmm mwmumm mum “mm
W. mmmﬁmmmm

2% a “£6 may? g

..n 3;” meé .um. umMmm 5... m ”imam
mammmmm mm mm, “mam“: mwmmm. WWW
MW“? “Mum mmmmemmmm .mmmm” Mummm m: ”Mm
rm “mm? m a
- msfmmmmmmm mum“ Um ”mm

THE Gum- and
May!!!

8-5;!
.: m N. mg.“ 3.“ .M.
WNW ”mm“ a J. a”
“a“ .. a ﬂaw www.muw mmmmmm

“amazing“...

_. $.13“ 3 :ﬁ: 1.: m
,_WMM.M_W.WT1WWM:M...WF
”MW ﬂhummmm “dunk.“ mmmmmmmu Wm
E mam mem .whmmm .mﬁmm mm

M

POLICE MINISTER NOTES ALARHING RISE IN NERDIN. COCAINE USE
Wellington THE EVENING POST in English 2 Feb 79 p 1

[T_xt]

5320

CSO:
mun-rm JAIL summer. FOR anon: omsn
alriatchurch THE PRESS in Englieh 11: Feb 79 p lo

[Tort] A nan who eold heroin to get noney for druge to feed hie habit wee
jailed for four yeare by Mr Juetice Caeey in the Suprene Court yeeterday.

The nan. John Lafutu. 27. unanployed. had pleaded guilty to a charge of
poaeeeeion of heroin for aupply.

Mr H. J. Knowlae. for Lafutu. eaid that the anount of heroin involved in
the offence wae very enell-only 232 ng. he had obtained the drug on

credit and intended to eell it for $2000. of which $1000 wae for hineelf
and the renainder wee to pay back the debt he owed hie eupplier. The
anount involved wee about half the anount to aupport the legal preamp-
tion that poeeeeeion of the drug waa for aupply to other pereone. Lafutu.
the father of three children, had freely adnitted to detectivee of the
drug equad that he intended to aell the drug.

The drug had been eo diluted and put in capaulea that it would not have
endangered an addict with an overdoee. In the caee of an addict it would
have been virtually ueeleae in eingle-aachet forn.

Lafutu had been leae than honeet in hie intention to aell virtually uee-
leae quantitiea of heroin on the atreet at $25 a tine. but an an experi-
enced ueer of the drug he wee well aware of the danger levele. Lafutu
had eaid: "I don't want the life of anyone on Iy conecience."

It wae a aituation which wae in no way related to a large-acale pueher
involved in a want profit with no poeeible regard for the conaequencae.
Lafutu had been nerely eelling the drug to aupport hie habit and hie
family. Hr Knowlea eaid.

Ilia honour eaid that he accepted what couneel had eaid of Lafutu and that
he wee a ueer who had got into debt and had turned to dietribution. Ae
e nenber of a Samoan fanily he had been unable to cope in a large urban
aociety and had got involved in petty crime and eventually in druge. The
amount of heroin in each eachet wee nininel. Bowever. w—one better than
Lafutu knew of the affecte of the drug and how eaeily it could lead to
nore dieaatroue coneequencee. hie honour eaid.
BRIEFS

HEROIN TRAFFICXBR JARED—Auckland. Today (PA)--A nan who adaitted pos-
sessing heroin for supply was sentenced yesterday to 2 1/2 years' jail.
Appearing before Hrs Auguste Hallace. SH. was Creig williae Sloan. 28.
painter. "hen Sloan pleaded on the charge. the quantity of heroin
involved was stated to be about 15 green. Sergeant H. A. Brown said
yesterday the quantity wee 26 grass. and the drug was 19 percent pure.
Counsel. Mr B. V. Haclsan. said Sloan had bought $2800 worth of heroin
for his personal use and to sell to hie friends. He had wanted only
$1800 worth for hinself and his wife. and intended to sell the balance.
Counsel said Sloan was not a "Mr Big" in the drug world-he was sinply
an addict supporting hie habit. The Magistrate said Sloan had obviously
been drawn into the "filthy" business of dealing through hie own needs.
[Tent] [wellington TIE EVENIBG POST in English 31 Jan 19 p 20]

SENTENCE!) 0N DRUG CHARCE--Aucklend, 2 Feb (FA)--A Reausra sales assistant
was sentenced to four months' periodic detention on a charge of using her
prenises for supply of heroin, when she appeared in the Magistrate's
Court today. Julia Margaret Hodgeson. aged 18. had previously pleaded
guilty to the charge. She was appearing before Hr J. R. Callander. Sh.
The charge had arisen sfter a nan died on the way to hospital after
injecting herein at the defendant's preaises. [Text] [Wellington THE
EVENING POST in English 3 Feb 79 p 8]

LYSBRGIDE TRAFFICKING CHARGES-4 cospsny director and a housewife were
rsnndsd in custody without plea when they appeared before Hr J. S.
Bisphan. SM. yesterday on drug charges. Graha- John Josephs. aged 27.
is charged jointly with Hendy Dawn Josephs, aged 26. of possessing lyser-
gide and of having the drug for the purpose of supply. The alleged
offences were emitted at Leithfield Beach on Saturday. Grahas Josephs
was reundsd to February 12 and Heady Josephs to February 15. [Text]
[alristchurch THE PRESS in English 6 Feb 79 p 5]

112301" SUFFLY TRIAL—Auckland. 15 Feb (FA)-A 17-year-old girl was today
co-ittsd to the Suprene Court for trial on a charge of possessing heroin
for supply at the end of s depositions hearing in the Magistrate's Court.
She was Christine Anne Munro. jewellery nanufscturer. of Kingsland. who
pleaded not guilty to the charge. She was co-itted in custody for trial
by Dir J. Jaffs and Mr C. A. bevsridge. Justices of the Peace. pending an
application for bail to the Supreme Court. [Text] [Wellington 1112 EVENING
905': in English 16 Feb 79 p 5]

680: 5320 1.1
SEVEN CENTERS FOR OPIUH ADDICTS IN HYDERABAD
Karachi THE SUN in English 7 Mar 79 p 3

[Text] The Deputy Commissioner. Hyderabad. Hr Khalid Saeed has opened
seven emergency centres for opiun addicts.

The centres which will function as treatnent-cul-rehabilitation clinics
are located at: Hunicipal Dispensary. near Government High School, Rieals
Road; Mauls Ali Qsdas. Station Road; Mehran Printing Press. Tendo Hali
Hohs-nad; Qazi stun School. Liaqust Colony; Municipal Dispensary. Phule-
li; Office of the Anju-sn Palsh-i-Behbood. Hekrani Para and Hoha-ndi
hospital. Unit No S Latifabnd.

The action has been initiated on emergency basis owning to the reports
regarding some deaths of addicts due to the nonsvailability of opium.
following ban of sale and use of intoxicanta.

The centres established throughout Hyderabad District shall be Ianned by
trained medical staff and personnel oftheSocial Helfere Depart-eat, to
combat side effects arising due to the nonuse of the drug by the habitual
users.

C50: 5300
BRIEFS

HIROPPON DEAL-Juno Japaneee and two Koreana have been arreated by the
Seoul Metropolitan Police on auapicion of having dealt in hiroppon worth
about 100 million won. police reported yeaterday. Huruo Nagaaaki. Mo.

and Huneharu Takahaai. 68, both living in Tokyo and Iti- ‘l‘aeein 68, and in
Tot-pot. 37. of Seoul. have been placed in cuatody on charges of violating
the Habitual Drug Control Law. They are accuaed of having produced one
kilograa of the atillulant drug in Pusan and tried to take it out of the
country on Feb 28. according to police. [Text] [Seoul Til! KOREA TIMES

in Englieh 9 Her 79 p 8]

(:80: 5300

13
POLICE NAB HBROIN COURIER
Bangkok BANGKOK POST in English 7 Mar 79 p 1

[Text] A narcotics suppression police taaa yesterday arrested a aan with
2.3 kilograms of No. 3 heroin in front of the Oepartaent of Technical and
Economic Cooperation on Xrung Kasem Road yesterday afternoon.

Prasit chariyaworathaa (27), an auto spareparts dealer. was arrested follow-
ing a tip-off that he will be delivering the heroin to customers in the
area.

At about 3.30 p.m.. a motorcycle dropped Prasit in front of the department
and sped away. "siting police officers asked for a search of the paper
bags carried by Prasit and found the heroin.

Praait is alleged to have told police that he had been asked to deliver

the heroin by Mrs Chanphen Phenwatthana (alias Lo Hing-how), wife of alleged
narcotics trafficker Chang Pen Pen.

Chang. a Chinese-Haw national was arrested in South Vietnam on narcotics
offences in early 1975. and served a two-year sentence there before return-
ing to Thailand about three months ago.

Escaped

Police rushed to Mrs Chanphen's house in $01 Chiamchan on Ekaaai Road only

to find that she had escaped. Chang was found in the house with another two
Chinese-Haw.

All three men were briefly detained for interrogation on the whereabouts of
Mrs Chanphen before being released.

Praait has been detained for further interrogation at the Crime Suppression
Division police headquarters.

CSO: 5300

lb
FURTHER COMMENTS ON MARIllUANA DECRIHINALIZATION

BC Education Minister Opposes

Ottawa Till-2 WEEKEND CITIZEN in English 24 Feb 79 p 1/:

[Text]

VICTORIA (CP) —
British Columbia educa-
tion minister Pat McGeer
said Thursday he is
opposed to any mow by
the federal government to
decriminalize marijuana.

McGeer. a brain rc~
search scientist. aid mari-
juana is dangerous. and
this should be made clear
to the public.

Spoke-men for the Lib-
eral. Conservative and
New Democratic parties
indicated earlier this
month they were rilling to
grant speedy Commons

passage to legislation vir-

tually eliminating penalties
tor posacuion of marijua-
na for pereonal use.

"I am disappointed that
the federal government
isn't fad“ up to its rev
paulbiﬁhald is taking
what appears to be the po-
liticel route. and that‘s not
rerponaible—to l‘rn
against it." Mcher said
in an interview.

He :aid the changes
were being brought about
through political pressure
from youth groups and
some lawyers. "but I can
tell you there‘s none from
tcientiata.‘

Legislation Questioned

Toronto THE GLOBE AND HAIL in English 27 Feb 79 p 8

[Editorial by Dick Beddoes: "Straight Dope on Stoned Age")

[Text]

OPE. STORIES are a drug on the
market. particularly in this new
Stoned Age when tedoral

politician
are outternplattm decnmtnalluu the the ot
met-throne. Ah. there. Mart Lalonde.
Other assemblies. pethape mom "and
rtls 0! thus ahuee. urge ceutton on
tnallaatton.

Cotncillon lnYoehhomnhvllldehate.
mm. a moluuut eponaotetl Ivy

Aldemen “(Mam Nohletnanaad

ot
fwmmmm "W”
“suchacttonvouldotahetteaateﬂotyouth
toohtntn marttuam. wtuchlsadnngetom

d

orlt'a resolution was tn eﬂect accorded
by the centtal mummmm
deryﬂcedntaetcaCotnctl.

.‘l’hnetoconaldet

The mates-a. In contuwoejast week.
petitioned "theappmttetetedenlomctau
topmldeadequatetlme. . .toeneueethat

maleattecungthetewtetatedto
:tnzﬂjuana...tnayheuaeaedhym

Now we can't stopmany
hackltom Itntchstonedonpot
Second m the ettecta el maujuona
umunetton ta the concern 0! Alcohol and
Drug Concerns. Inc" 01 Dan tulle. At hand
is theyoup'ehttet "amo
tot-tum on testslauve chance
removal 0! wincant penaltlee 0! enable
Mute decﬂmtnalhatton or Whit o!
cannahtssuhatancea."

Alcohol and mmwtm'

"30.000 concealed Canadian.”- elm-that
"leglslatlve change ought not to We
to tutther eecalauon at marijuana uae."

Uee lncteaaea

Evtoence (tom the us. exeettence toot.
umaccocdhntommmc»

C50: 5320

cums. that the
"htghct tn thu
nultzcd mull
ITS": A w
todecrtmtnnlt
“an htcroaeet
18-19 In:
: Det
"demonstrate
Impteaston on
that the drug
the mane Ch
pottet t In h
"Meant In
:uren (attention
Donut K1]
pmgrums tor
emptoys the II
snu anat
ITEM: In I
III Dr.V
College 0! Phi
mot won:
because the d

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDPGZ-OOGSOROOO100030060-1
BRIEFS

DRUGS SBIZBD-d'oronto (CP)-Hetropoliten Toronto Police eey 112 gre- of
heroin, two green of coceine end three grele of heehieh oil. with e tote].
street value of $250,000. were eeized in e reid et en apartment Huntley.
Diane Thereeee Lenieux. 22. Pierre Ledouceur. 26. end Gerald willie-

Colford. 32. e11 of Toronto. were cherged with poeeeeeion. [Text]
[Otteve m CITIZEN in Ensueh 21 Peb 79 p 68)

080: 5320

17
BRIBPS

WHISH SWMuPregue-ncuninnl proceedings are underway in Czechoslovakia
again: on alien, Kimono Ali All, who tried to male to wear Berlin via
Czechoslovak territory over 12 kilogram of huhioh worth e total of 2.5
million crowns. Invoctiutiono into the cue continue. [Tut] [Prune

C11: in English 1102 cm 21 Her 79 L0]

cso: $300

18
POLICE WOMEN ILLEGAL DRUG WW6 IN DRUOSTORBS
Buenos Airea LA PMSA in Spanish 25 Feb 79 p 5

[Text] La Plata (Buenos Aires). By order of the federal judge of Court
No. l in this capital. Dr. Gustavo de la Serna, so far 50 pharaaciss
have been closed in this city and their managers—about 80 of then-have
been arrested. in an effort to detarnine the degree of responsibility

of each of then in the purchase, without bills,‘ of psychopharna-
ceuticals and Iind-altering substances in a drugstore by the nane of
Santa Rosa which was opened in the City of Dolores and whose storage
facilities were located in this capital; the pharnacy apparently is the
property of the owner of a well-known local pharnacy, located downtown.
which was closed by court order on 19 February; it was this facility
which attracted attention.

It was inpossible to obtain any official infatuation on action taken on
Friday and yesterday since the above-neutioned judge stayed away fron
his office, personally directing the investigations along with provin-
cial police officers who shortly afterward were joined by the Federal
Police.

The gradual closing of these business establishments aroused the attention
of the public to the extent that the population began to have trouble in
getting the necessary nedical products—a situation which becane worse

as of the late afternoon hours the day before yesterday when only a very
snall water of pharmacies was left to take care of the rising den-3d
resulting from this developnsnt, keeping in mind that 50 percent of the
renaining pharnaciea are closed on account of vacations.

A quick trip to the businesses involved enabled us to talk with their
owners who renained in the pharmacies although they were under detention.
Sons of then would not conent and others were quite astonished over the
closing order in spite of the fact that, as they said, there was no
evidence as to any kind of conercial link with the previously nantioned
drugstore.

l9
Announcement

The Mos Airss Province Phenscists Aesocistion releeeed en snnounceeent
on this issue.

It wee pointed out thet ”in View of the eess errest of professional pher-
seciste besed on the ruling of the Pederel Court. on chsrges of eeking
purcheses fro- e drugstore thet did not supply bills which. insteed. ere
credited through peynents esde. the luenos Aires Phsrncists Associetion
urgently requests the clerificetion of the trisl situetion in view of the
need for teking core of the public."

The ennounceunt wee releesed to the public end et the sens tine the week-
end opening schedule wee properly worked out.

Reesone For Heesure

In spite of strict police security. so we ssid before. end obviously in
spite of court security on the steps teken. we note thet the order wee
issued shortly efter e nen drove e pickup truck in the town of Sen Vicen-
te. with pleetic pouches conteining peychophsreeceuticels end elnd-chenging
drugs; he wee errested by the locsl police.

The person. whose identity could not be estsblished. sold the ebove-
nentioned products. without bills. in pherssciee in werious towns through-
out the province. st e price of nore then 30 percent below the going rete.
0n the besis of the prisoner's own ststesents. the police repidly deter-
eined his origin end rsided the werehouse end errested its weer.

0n the besie of the evidence. it wee possible to order the procedures
which pereitted the deteninetion of irrepulsrities—elthough not in ell
ceses--concerning the ownership of phsrssceuticels which were not properly
ecquired end which were obteined in unusuel quentities.

It slso trenspired thet lsboretories were discovered in three plumcies.

coqlete with nechinery for the mufecture of pills. es well so rew est-

eriel. to e degree not connected with the specific ectivity of those pher-
eecies.

lt wss slso leerned thet coded nedicel prescriptions were found in these
preeises; this led to en in-depth investigstion in en effort to detenine
the purpose of those who issued thee. es well es those who received thee
in this condition.

we sre slso sble to report thet ease persons were errested by eisteke end

thet en effort is being nsde to correct the situetion by ordering the
inediste releese of these individuels.
S ido Bf Eocts

The ilprcssion is that tho diszovsry of ispropor sales. which we nentioned
earlier, could have sou unsuspsctod inplicstions in view of tho initisl
dotsrsinations node along those. lines slthoush, for rsa as of secrecy.
vs cannot so bsyond what us have rcportsd so far.

It was also possible to establish that. parallel to the local procedures.
provincial police had conducted sinila: operations in tons along the
Atlantic zone, loading to the closing of phomcios and the arrest of
their owners or mason.

5058
C50: 5300

21
BRIEFS

DRUG MICK!” ARRESTED-4h. mttoml sender-cry has reported that eight
person. have been arrested in Melon“. Salt: and Jujuy. and that 250
kilogram of coca luv“ were Mud. [Manon Mn. u 2mm in Spanish

17mr79p6m

cso: 5300
COWS!“ PM!!! CRASH- um 20,000 POUND WWW CACHE

Georgetown GHANA CBRONICLB in Englieh 1 Her 79 p 8

[Text] Neeeeu. Beh-ee (Cene)-A win-engine eix-eeeter Aero-Co-mder
plene loeded with eerijuene fro. Colmbie crashed into e houee here

Needey night, killing two nen eboerd, the police reported yeeterdey.

Olner of the 900.000 two-(let building, Mr. iienry Cleere, hie vife ad
eiwt children vere hole et the tine but eireculouely eeceped injury.

The plene brought down electricity ceblee. end blecked out Buboo Tom. e
epereely populeted eection of Neeeeu. before hitting the Cleere‘e hone.
Ludtily it did not buret into (1.“.

me two deed een were eeid by police to be Colonhiene. but no neeee were
releeeed.

Following the creeh. end before police teeched the ecene. people in ve-
hiclee reportedly cerried any nore then 200 bege (ebout 100 pounde eech)
of the eerijuene cergo vhich vee ecettered over e wide eree.

Police eeid there vee e lerge mount etill ehoerd. but geve no preciee
figure or the eetineted velue in ceeh.

Officiele here eeid they were elerted thet the eircreft hed e loed of
eerijuene eboerd through e neeeege redioed by Hie-i eirport.

the red-end-ohite plume vee cning in to land et Neeeeu eirport vhen the

pilot epperently picked up the neeeege elerting the locel officiele. end
he chenged couree.

Police eeid it eeened he tried to lend in e cleering in Buboo ‘rovn, but
hit the power linee end creehed.

23
“mny nntd thn plan hnd flown 1900 anon fro- Coloiun with ttn 10nd of 11-
lnnnl amp.

Colonbtn hnn dnvnlopnd into thn prlndpnl South Andean neuron of illnsnl

drugs for thn 0.8. nnrltnt. with thn Bnh-nn buns incunntnuy unnd n n
trnnntt point for thn nnuulnrn.

630: 530

2'3
BRIEFS

comm MHOGRS 0N TRIAL-“the National Control Board of Dangerous
Drugs has put (Cristina lupus-sol de Mani). (PranCiscn Calderon Leila),
(Juonil Paustino Apeque Choque) and (Cleeonte Mendoza Quiaca) at the dis-
posal of ordinary justice for trial. They were arrested on 12 February
whilo selling 5 kg of cocaine, aanufactured at Pocoata in Oaasuyos Pro-
vince, La Pas Departlent. Three other ncnberr of the sane gang are at
large, being sought by the police. [La Par Radio Panauericana Network in
Spanish 1700 GMT 17 Mar 79 FY]

OOCAIIIB SEIZURE-M large quantity of cocaine suede in this country was
seized by the National Control Board of Dangerous Substances during tho
last few hours. According to unofficiel sources, it was a large value
of drug handled by a numerous band of drug traffickers, many of whole are
now in jail. Police said they could give no other intonation because
investigations are still underway and more arrests are expected. (La Pas
Bl. MARIO in Spanish l3 Her 79 p lo Pr]

DRUG mmcxm ARRESTED-Jute Cruz. 22 Feb (PmmclA)—Col Raul lacobar,
director of the narcotics department, told the press about the results of
three operations which led to the seizure of 10 kg of cocaine and the ar-
rest of 10 traffickers. who are listed as follows: Alberto Chavez Vacs,
Alberto Olnado. Ricardo Banegas Picolet and Antonio Betevez Caaacho. all
Bolivian citizens. 0n the second operation. two 0.8. citizens who were

about to board a plane at the international airport were discovered to be
carrying 1 kg of cocaine hidden inside a tape recorder. They are Jose Kurpel
and Janet Piper Hahaondi. (La Pa: PRESZKCIA in Spanish 23 tab 79 p 2 FY]

(:80: 5300

25
LARGER NATIONS cm chs—BogoCs—Attomy Gsusrsl Gulllsno Gousslss
Chsrry ha sutsd d!!! povsrful coutrlss which srs mor consumers of
Isrthusns should coopsrsts lu ordsr to curb tho lllsgsl trsttlc. During
s noting on drugs. Gouzslss ststsd that tho funds of poor couucrlss
should not bs chs only onss dsvotsd to curb drug crunching; thoss us-
tlous sﬂsctsd should slso provlds dsclslvs support. [Tm] [logots
Csdsns mu Supsr to 3pm»: 1100 arr 2 un- 79 PA]

C50: 5300

26
mourns CONTROL imam-r 51am H111! comm
PAOb0127 Quito Vos da los Andes in Spanish 1730 Off 3 Her 79 PA

[Text] On behalf of their two countries. Jose Ayala Lasso and Diego Uribe
Vargas. the foreign ministers of Ecuador and Colombia. respectively-the
latter being on an official visit to this city—signed an administrative
sgreeunt to prevent. control and repress illegal traffic in and abuse or
narcotics and psychotropic substances.

The docuent which was signed. taking into consideration the two countries'
international co-itments and based on awareness of the serious social and
other consequences resulting from the cultivation. processing, traffic in
and ebuse of those substances, contains the following agreements.

The Governments of Ecuador and Colombia will harmonize their policies for
the prevention. control and repression of the illegal traffic in and dmse
of narcotics and psychotropic substances and will coordinate bilateral pro»
gram for joint prevention and repression of this traffic.

‘ihe contracting parties will opportunely and expeditiously process documents
required for the prooecution of crimes covered by this agreement in order to
enable the competent authorities to act as quickly as possible.

“the contracting parties will strengthen their respective official organiza-
tions that are responsible for the prevention. control and repression of il-
legal traffic in and abuse of narcotics and psychotropic substances and will
harmonize criteria, policies and programs for this purpose in coordination
with public organizations charged with social welfare.

GO: 5300

27
EFFORTS r0 AVOID MISUSE OF PHARMACEUTICALS
Quito BL COHERCIO in Spanish 21 Feb 79 p 2

[fexj7 The Ministry of Public Health with the National Divi-
sion and Narcotics Inspection is conducting an energetic cam-
paign to prevent the abuse of some pharmaceutical products
which can be harmful or misused by the public and to provide
guidelines on the national and international level to the

pharmaceutical laboratories which produce medicines in Ecuador.

The Division of Narcotics Inspection which belongs to the
Division of Medical Inspection and Supervision grants the
respective permits for the laboratories to produce medicines
which contain narcotics and psychotropies.

Besides they grant permits to import these products after
exact data is available on the needs of the domestic market

and use in Ecuador.

Control of Sales

This department controls on a continuous and monthly basis

the sale of products which contain both narcotics as well as
psychotropics in Ecuador's pharmacies, in addition to effi-
cently controlling the sale of special medicines. In order

to obtain better services and inspection, the Division and
Narcotics Inspection have issued two types of prescription
books for the use of doctors with sufficient copies to prevent
the probl m of contaje [cannot identity--possibly chaniaje,

blackmai .

Rehabilitation

For improved daily operation, the above organization has under
it a department for the rehabilitation of persons with drug

26
problems for which it has a team of two sociologists, a psy-
chologist, and a medical psychiatrist.

The department handles all the persons who apply to the divi-
sien with the above mentioned problems or are sent by branches
of the national police, Interpol or courts.

Coordinated

It must be explained, says the Ministry of Public Health, that

the above department works in coordination with other national

as well as international institutions, within its field of nar-
cotics oentrel. Both within the country as well as abroad, it

maintains a system of monthly and annual reporting on the work
which it carries out, working continuously, among other organ-
iiag’ons, with JIPE [International Board of Narcotics Inspec-

‘v 0 e

The work which the Quito office is doing extends to 10 provinces
of Ecuador and the Guayaquil office, to the 10 remaining
provinces.

For greater effectiveness, they maintain an additional laboratory
belonging to the institution where they analyze all types of
products suspected of being drugs, as well as products confis-
cated by the police or Interpol which might be drugs, in case

of possible traffic or public abuse.

8490
080: 5300
BRIEFB

COCAINE PASTE EXPOBTBD--Lina 22 Feb (LATIN)-A reuote Andean
district became the main ”factory" of basic cocaine paste,
with all the inhabitants being involved in the preparation

of the drug.through the influence of an enterprising wolan.
Vhen the police were our rised by the feverish activity of
the neck inhabitants of iluchaoa in the harvesting of coca
leaves, they became suspicious of the operation when they
found out that the plant was not sold in the nearby markets.
Vhen they apprehended the wonan, Andrea Padua Saturno, she
confessed that the town in general devoted itself to preparing
the paste which was later refined in Colonbia or Ecuador.
Padua, boss of the army of workers, said that she collected
weekly sons 20 pounds of basic cocaine Just: from the inhabi-
tants and delivered it to Enrique Parfan, who ”exported“ it
to those countries. Hiluchaca is located in a remote and
inaccessible spot in the no ta n province of Huanca o, 320
kilometers fro Lina. an}? uito 81. camera in panieh
23 Feb 79 p 1 8490

30
ACCOMPLICB INFORMS 0R PIBDRAS NEGRAS HBROIN TRAFFICKBR
Origin of Heroin Disclosed
Piedras Negros El DIARIO DB PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 16 Feb 79 Sec B p 1

[Text] Yesterday. Manuel Esquivel. alias “Bl Manolo." aade e statenent to
the agent of the Federal Public Hinistry, Xavier Elizondo. providing detail-
ed information on how he obtained the 8 ounces of heroin which were confis-
cated fron him. He gave material evidence on the notorious drug trafficker.
Nicolas Hernandez. identifying hin as the individual in charge of the dis-
tribution and sale of the drugs.

Yesterday and today. tests were made on the chemical reaction of the drugs
which were seized. in order to deter-inc their percentage of purity and
their actual weight. This was being done at the health center in this town
by experts. who will turn over their findings to the federal authorities.
The latter will have to have this infornation in order to deternine whether
or not both individuals are liable in this case.

Special Coordinator Investigating
Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DE PIBDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 20 Feb 79 See A p 2

[Text] Alfredo Aaron Juarez. the general coordinator of the agencies of the
Federal Public Ministry, arrived at noon to conduct a nore thorough investi-
gation and to probe into the existing information on the case of the arrest
of hanuel Esquivel. alias "El Manolo." from when agents of the Federal Ju-
dicial Police confiscated 8 ounces of heroin the week before last.

An inquiry is also being made on why no arrest has been made of the czar of
the drug traffic on this border, Nicolas Hernandez. an individual identified
by "El Manolo" as the one who gave hin the drugs for distribution.

it was also said that Nicolas Hernandez is confined to his hone. because his
health is quite precarious. He suffered his fifth heart attack yesterday.
and the Federal Judicial Police are keeping constant surveillance over his
hone.

2909

cs0: 5330

31
COCAINE, WIHUANA TRAFFICKERS OFFICIALLY JAILED
Nuevo Laredo 31. HANANA in Spanish 7 Feb 79 Sec 8 p 3

[Text] Yesterday. four presumed drug traffickers whose crininal cases were
heard in the third district court were declared officially iaprisoned. as
persons prasused guilty of col-sitting a cries against health in various de-
greet.

In connection with proceedings 29-979. Jose Javier Montoya Perez, alias "Fl
Gordo;" Alejandro Gonzalez Cantu, alias "Bl Canayg" and Antonio Garcia Es-
pinose. alias "Fl Tony," were declared officially iaprisoned.

As may be recalled, these three individuals were captured by the Federal
Judicial Police on 26 January.

Montoya Perez and "El Canny" had noderate amounts of cocaine in their pos-
session, and declared that it had been sold to then by Antonio Garcia Espi-
nosa, froa whoa the ease kind of powder, weighing half an ounce. was con-
fiscated.

Moreover, the seas court issued an order for the official imprisonment of
Carlos Felipe Seen: Hernandez. as an individual presu-ed guilty of conit-
ting a crine against health in the degree of transporting urihuana.

This person was arrested a few days ago by Federal Judicial Police agents.
who thereby conplied with the warrant for his arrest issued by the judge.

It was noted that this individual evaded the action of the Federal Judicial
Police on 30 Deceaber of last year, when agents intercepted a bus on which
39 kilogram of narihuana were being carried. on the highway between Vic-
toria and Hatanoros, at the site of "Les Norias."

On that occasion. Victor lingo Ramos Perez was arrested, and clailed to be
the owner of the drugs in association with Carlos Felipe Seen: Hernandez
who, taking advantage of the fact that the Federal Judicial Police were
searching the baggage rack of the bus, escaped into the woods.

2909
080: 5330
count CAPTURE!) WITH MARIJUANA, COCAINB
Piedras Negras LA V02 DEL NORTE in Spanish 21 Jan 79 p 1

[Text] Saltillo, Coshuila, 20 Jamar-Cocaine and narihuena which were
being transported as sanples were seized by the Federal Judicial Police,
and the driver of the vehicle and his wife were arrested.

The incident took place when a Federal Judicial Police vehicle intercepted
a pickup truck at the Agua Nueva settlement 38 kiloneters fros this capi-
tal. because they considered its occupants to be acting suspiciously. And.
upon searching then, they found 60 kilogram of sarihuann end i grass of
cocaine. which they were carrying to the border town of Piedras Pegres as
a sample for a larger voluae of contraband which they intended to sell.

The individual in custody, Jesus Hernandez Vargas, aged 51- and a native of
Piedrss Negras. Coahuila. told the agent of the Federal Public Ministry
that an unknown person paid his 5.000 pesos for carrying the drugs, which
he picked up in Anatlsn del Rio, Zacatecas; adding that this was the fifth
time that he had made tripe carrying drugs.

ﬂernandez Vargas has a criminal record. In 1972. he was convicted by the
Piedras Negras district court for crimes against health, and ”he was a drug
addict for 17 years.

Insofar as his wife. Elisa Tiestre Osegura is concerned (she is also nearly
60 years old). she told the PubJ‘c Ministry that she did not know at first
about her husband's activities. and that when he picked up the drugs and
told her about then. she urged her husband to take then back; which he did
not do. with the consequences that have been described.

The individuals under arrest will be turned over to Federal Judge Fernando

A. Yates Vsldes next Monday, and he will decide on their fate after analyz-
ing the evidence submitted by the Public Ministry.

2909
(:80: 5330

33
SENTENCE 0F COLOHDIAN COCAINE TRAFFICKER RIUCED
huevo Laredo El. MARIANA in Spanish 15 Feb 79 Sec 3 p 3

[Text] The Supra-e Court of Justice of the Nation granted a partial pardon
to the drug trafficker. Rafael Jaller Che-at. of Colombian origin. vhose
eentsnce was reduced to 6 years in prison and a line of 6.000 pesos. lie
is currently serving his tern in the Social Rehabilitation Center.

In Deceder 1976. the second district judge issued a sentence of 12 years
end 3 unthc' inprisonnant. and a fine of 18,000 pesos. for the accused.
The letter. dissatisfied with that decision. filed an appeal with the uni-
fied fourth circuit court. located in Monterrey. Nuevo Leon.

The magistrates of that court were of the opinion that the penalty as ex:-
cessive. and decided to reduce the sentence to 8 years and 6 maths in
prison. and a fine of 8.000 pesos.

Jaller Chanat subsequently filed an appeal for direct pardon with the Su-
prene Court of Justice of the Nation. and finally had his sentence reduced

to 6 years' inprisonnent.

Jeller Chant was captured by agents of the Eednrel Judicial Police on the
night of 29 Auguet 1915. when he was in one of the rooes of the ”San Carlos"
llotel in Reynose, Tanaulipss, together with Carlos Aasdor Ricardo.

Chane: was free Colo-bio. and had brought a suitcase containing 2 kilograms
of cocaine to Reynoss.

At the time of the arrest. Jose Manuel Bravo hairez was traveling about in
McAllen. Tamas. seeking a custoner to whoe he could sell the cocaine.

2909
CSO: S330
HEROIN LAIORATORY DESTROYED IN NOGALES
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 16 Feb 79 Sec 8 p 3

[Text] Agents of the Federal Judicial Police based in Sultana del Norte
dealt another effective blow upon arresting two individuals whose vehicle

ained traces of marihuana. because they discovered a site where mari-
u-. - was being stored in which a heroin processing laboratory had also
been established.

The headquarters of the Federal Judicial Police in the northern zone, head-
ed by Mr Margarito Handez Rico. issued an announcement yesterday regarding
the arrest of Harcelo Gonzalez Ramos and Jose Armando Maldonado Zamora, and
the results obtained free the interrogation to which the two persons were
subjected.

Gonzalez Ramos and Maldonado Zamora were arrested last Uedneaday in the city
of Honterrey, while driving a 1976 Ford pickup truck with Texas license
plates HTH-67S. in which the federal agents found traces of marihuana.

They Confess Their Crise

The two individuals under arrest were closely questioned, and Marcelo Gon-
zalez Ramos said that he was the owner of the "Calichitas" farm. in the
municipality of Nogales. Nuevo Leon. The federal agents went there, and
found 66 kilograms of marihuana and a primitive laboratory for processing
heroin.

The entity headed by Comdr Margarito Hendez Rico reported that the labora-
tory consisted of the following:

Two glass bottles containing 250 grams of a white powder, which was apparent-
ly “cutting" substance for heroin; a bottle containing a transparent liquid
that was apparently alcohol: a bottle containing a dark-colored liquid which
appeared to be a coloring agent; and a precision scale. In the same loca-
tion. the agents of the Office of Attorney General of the Republic seized a
Stevens 22-caliber rifle. a Granfield 22-caliber rifle and 20 unused rounds
of ammunition for a 7.5 shotgun.

2909

C50: 5330

35
BRIEFS

HERO!" SEIZURE IN DURANGO-~Durango. 10 Pebrmryn‘roday, the Federal Judicial
Police here eeited 3.5 kilograne of pure heroin. dealing one of the not
effective blowa to the international drug traffic, becauae it in thought
that the ahipnent wee to be taken to the United Statea. ‘l'ha druga are
worth about 30 nillion peace on the black aarket. Pive peraona were arreet-
ed, three being aihlinga. end the mﬂer nay poeaibly increaae. The con-
nander of the federal entity in Durango, Pedro Pare: liidalgo. announced

that thoee under arreet are: Aguetin. Alfredo end Alicia Garcia Aguirre.

and Joae Martinez Jurado and Agapito Reyea Alvarado. He alao aid that. when
the five peraona were erreeted. it wee faund that the heroin wee being pro-
ceeeed in a prinitive laboratory which they had at the "La Herredura" fern.
located in the vicinity of Halage, along the highway between Durango and
Ciuded Lerdo. where the druga were diacovered. packed in polyethylene bage.
Perez Hidelgo added that the find wae nade on Friday Iorning, when the bro-
ther and eieter. Alfredo and Alicia Garcia, were arreated, They reaide in
the "El Keeatro" development, in thie capital. During the firat interroga-
tion. they ednitted to all the etepa which they took in the couree of their
illegal activitiee. A few ninutea after Alfredo and Alicia were captured.
at about 1200 houra. Aguatin wee arreated upon hie arrival at the eforenen-
tioned fern in a 1979 Ford be Baron black car. without licenae platea. which
he owned. The fare ie alao hia. After Aguatin wee arreeted. they went to
the eite where they had aet up a prinitive laboratory in which the gun wee
converted into top quality heroin. Free the wee nade of the inpleaenta, it
wee eatinated that they had been proceaaing the drugs in that location for
any yeare. [Text] [Culiacan EL 80!. DZ SINALOA in Spanieh ll Feb 79 p 6] 2909

PILL TRAPPICKER CAPTURE-4M preauned drug trefficker Pranciaco Gaona Garcia.
who wee captured on Monday by the federal Judicial Police in Rem“. Taneu-
lipae, had 1,000 toxic pilla in hie residence. Prencieco Gaona had been
followed eecretly for eeveral nonthe, becauae drug addicts had identified

him an the Iain aupplier of paychotropic aubatancee to the young people ad-
dicted to thia kind of drug. The reaulta of the inveatigation proved auc-
ceeaful, becauae aaveral boxee containing a total of 1.000 paychotropic

pille were aeized fron thie individual. Further-are. federal agenta detail-
ed to Honterrey, Nuevo Leon, raided a reeidence on Monday afternoon on Kili-
najero Street. in the Hitrea developnent. becauee they had received a tip
to the effect that marihuana was stored there. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo KL
MANANA in Spanish 16 Feb 79 Sec 8 p 6] 2909

TRAFFICKER'S APPEAL DENIED--Yeaterday. the district judge. Eduardo Aguilar.
notified BL DlARIO that the sentence passed on drug trafficker Moises Am-
saras Medina had been confirmed by the magistrate of the eighth circuit
unified court located in Torreon. Coahuila. It was said that Moises Almarst
Medina filed an appeal because he thought that the sentence imposed by the
district judge was too severe. but that appeal did him no good. because

the unified court decided that the sentenced passed on Almaraz Medina. alias
"La Yufa." namtely. 6 years' imprisonment and a fine of 10.000 pesos. should
be sustained. As may be recalled. "La Yufa" was arrested by the Federal Ju-
dicial Police with a package containing heroin in his possession. However.
yesterday. the amount with which he was captured was not reported. or rather
was not repeated. He was tried for the crime of possession and attempted
sale of heroin. in the respective degrees. [Text] [Piedras Negrns EL DIARIO
DE VIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 13 Jan 79 Sec A p a] 2909

OPIUM. HEAPONS SEIZED--0n Sunday. agents of the federal Judicial Police de-
tailed to El Mante. Tampaulipas. confiscated 1.700 grams of raw opium. ae-
veral automatic weapons and some vehicles; simultaneously capturing the
presumed drug traffickers Jesus Moreno Valenzuela. Ramon Oropeza Moreno.
Silverio Moreno Oropeza and Abel Moreno Quintero. The arrest of the four
individuals took place on a farm owned by Ramon Oropeza Moreno Reports
released by the agency of the Federal Public Ministry indicate that. seve-
ral days ago. the Federal Judicial Police learned that some traffickers

who were engaged in "processing" the opium to make heroin were hiding out
on a farm near Ciuded Mante. This prompted the mobilization of the agents.
who captured the aforementioned persons with l.700 grams of opium in their
possession which they intended to convert into heroin. At the same time.
they seized from them several vehicles. as well as a 12 caliber shotgun.

a sawed-off 20eM-l carbine and four pistols of various calibera. and also

a precision scale and three bottles containing acetone. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo
EL HANANA in Spaninh 20 Feb 79 Sec 3 p 3] 2909

TRAPPICKBR'S SENTENCE REDUCEO--0n the basis of direct pardon No 5947-977.
which was issued recently. the Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation hand-
ed down a favorable decision affecting the notorious drug trafficker. Pedro
Torres Leon. revoking a long prison sentence of 10 years imposed on him by
the first district court of Duraago. At present. Torres Leon is incarcerat-
ed in the Social Rehabilitation Center. at the disposal of several federal
courts in which he was given various penalties for his guilt in commutting
crimes against health in four trials. Hith regard to the sentence that was
lifted. it was reported that Torres Leon was sentenced to 11 years and 6
months' imprisonment in connection with proceedings No 68-967. for crimes
involving the escape of prisoners. illegal privation of liberty and robbery.
The convict filed an appeal and succeeded in having the Supreme Court of
Justice revoke the 10-year jail term for crimes involving the escape of
prisoners and illegal privation of liberty. In connection with this case.
Torres Leon will serve only 1 year and 6 months in prison for the crime of
robbery. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL MANANA in Spanish 2 Feb 79 Sec 3 p 3] 2909

37
'MULBS' INFORM 0N TRAFFICKBRuHeIl organized ringe of drug traffickers ere
etill operating from the interior eection of the country. and ueing "wlee"
to ehip aarihuana weighing ae little ae a few hilograae and ae much on ee-
verel tone. The foregoing waa proven again when agente of the Federal Ju-
dicial Police captured Abel Yepee llernander. Bernardo limo: Yepee and Gabino
Canino Yepee with a load of 6l kilograne of naribuana. upon being interro-
gated. they eade a full confeeeion. and inforned on the ringleader of the
drug trafficking group operating fro- Nueva ltalia, in the auto of Hichoa-
can. the three "burroe" revealed that they had been hired by liilario Ga-
nino Ayala to carry the 61 kilograne of aarihuana fron Irapuato to thie
border: adding that they arrived at a etorage place located on Rafael Ve-
larde Street. at the corner of 51th. and waited there for a "contact." who
wee to identify hinaelf ae ”Arturo.” "Arturo" did not arrive. but the Fe-
deral Judicial Police egente did. and arreeted then. David Garcia Canalee.
con-under of the Pederal Judicial Police. inediately contacted hie col-
leaguee in Nuava ltalia. Hichoacan. to have then erreat Hilario; becauee it
ie believed that he mt have in hie Hichoacan etoragc placee not juet a
few kilogram. but tone of uerihuene ready for ehipoent to the northern
border of the country. [Text] [Ciudad Juarez El. nomentzo in Spenieh 16
Feb 79 Sec A p 3] 2909

YOUTH “mom ADDICTION RISINW-Deepite the high coat of heroin. nany young
people in thie town are ueing it. Thia fact waa learned (toe the report
that l2 percent of the individuale treated leet year at the metal lleelth
Center were addicted to that drug. It eleo indicatee that heroin nay be
eaaily procured in thie town; and hence the police authoritiee have been
urged to take more effective action againet thoee poiaoning the public.
The head of the Hental health Center in thie town. Dr Prancieco Javier
Rivera Sanchez. gave thie infer-nation to the reporter fron El. nounnno.
he eaid that cocaine wee used by ll percent of the young people who were
treated for problem of drug addiction. The profeeeional eaid that eeri-
huane and paychotropic aubetancea are the druge ueed aoet by the youth.
he etreeeed the fact that such of the problem liee in the eaee with which
the young people in particular can obtain druge. (Text! [Ciudad Juarez

El. FRONTBRIZO in Spanieh 12 Feb 79 Sec A p 7] 2909

C80: 5330
POLICE NARCUHCS SECTION CHIRP “HINTS DEATH INCREASE
Copenhagen “81.1868“ TIDBNDB in Danish 21 Jan 79 p 5

[Interview with Police Attorney Vol-er hissen by Poul Pleasing: "More than
500 Narcotics Deaths in 10 Years")

[Text] The head of the narcotics diviJion at Copenhagen
Police Headquarters. Police Attorney Vol-er Nisaen.
thinks that the annual nuabsr of deaths will continue
to increase. About so are expected in 1978 as against
13 in 1969.

The nudist of deaths fro. narcotics in 1978 will. when we have the final
statistics in a few months. show a new increase in all probability to about
so. More than 500 people in the last 10 years have lost their lives fro-
narcotics abuse. And there are no prospects for a decrease in the nutter
of narcotics deaths on an annual basis. 0n the contrary.

The head of the narcotics division at Police Headquarters in Copenhagen.
Police Attorney Volser Niasen. aaintains that 1977's extre-ly tragic
figure-40 narcotics deaths--has already been equalled in 1978, and the
police attorney believes that the final figure for 1978 will be about so.

"Many of the addicts new dying are people that started abusing drugs in
the aid or late 60's." the attorney explained.

[Question] What drugs are the addicts using with such fatal results?

[Answer] At the present tins its Pakistani aorphine pills end eorphine
hydrochloride. and then heroin of course.

[Question] but last year you said that cocaine was on its way to Den-ark.

[Answer] Cocaine is here in the drug-abuse world-~in discotheques. key

clubs and nightlife in general. It's used in high society, but in prosti-
tution circles too. by those who also use central atisulsnts. But cocaine
is generally the drug of the upper classes.
[Queetion] Md ia it ee dangeroua ae heroin?

[Anawer] Yea. it ie. Actually you can’t tell if eonebody ie dead ae the
reault of heroin abuae or cocaine abuee. whether or not they abuee one
drug or another. the reault ie the eanenthey become emaciated and die
from enacietion.

[Queetion] Ie there any regular pattern for people who end up ae drug ab-
ueere‘l

[Anewer] I atill believe that the neat inortant reaeon by far in that
the druge are available. Hany try it for the fun of it and get hooked
becauae they euddenly experience a etete of well-being that they never
felt before. They want to experience it again at any coat and they think.
"I can control it." But we all know that the hardeet thing in the world
for people to do ie to control thenealvee. Thet'e true for any for. of
drug abuee. exceeeive anoking and exceeeive alcohol uee for inatance. And
for thoee that eat the-eelvee to death as for ae that goee. They're aware.
all of then. that they ehould refrain from smoking eo nuch. drinking no
such or eating eo much. But the one thing they can't do ie refrain. And
it'e the eane with the druge. only the etate of dependency takea over lore
quickly and is more dangeroue. eo that it deetroye the abuaere.

But it'a clear that when aoaeone takee any drug at all there ie a tenta-
tion to see if it will have the name fantastic effect of well-being again.
It's only huaan nature.

We have a large nuder of unfortunate examlee of people who got hooked
and have told ue about how Iliaerable they were when they couldn't control
theneelvee. And that'a true whether they were ueing haeh or another
narcotic.

Doctore Preecribe for The-elvee

lleeh can vary quite a bit. You can get haah that ie two or three tinee
ae etrong ea other heeh. Yea. you can get haeh that ie eight or ten time
ae etrong ae narihuana for inetance. and we even have the extract-«he li-
quid haah oil--that can be five to ten tinee etronger than regular heeh.
‘l'hat'e why it'a really niarepreaenting the facta to epeak about haah in
general. llaeh aleo cauaee a peychological dependence juat like all other
hallucinogene do with many people.

[Queation] But are there any placee at all where people who have aa you
aay gotten hooked can go to get help?

[Answer] That depende to aone extent really on who they are. For that to
happen of couree you have to prevent their acceee to the drug. And it'a
alwaye amazed ne that there seem to be euch eaey acceee to drugs in our
outpatient treatnant ayeten.
I an reainded of a tragic example in this connection. There was a physician

who was a specialist in internal aedicins and to none extent in narcotics.
ile because dependent on asperidine.

lie was aware that he would have to cut himself off froa using superidine
to save hinalef. And since he was able to write prescriptions for the

drug on the strength of hie license to practice he asked to be denied the
right to write them for pain-killing drugs.

It seemed to be a great idea. but after some tins had elapsed he was
caught in a drugstore with a prescription for asporidine that he had
written in the name of one of his colleagues. In a subsequent hearing he
admitted that he had signed his colleagues' names in note than fifty cases
in order to get neperidine. lie couldn't do without it.

Everyone was sorry for his and wanted to help his. New fifty cases of
forgery is not soaething that can be ignored. but there was also the fact
that he had gotten himself into the situation in order to stop abusing the
drug. And since he hadn't sold the drug to anyone else. the public pro-
secutor agreed—with a long series of conditions--to drop charges so that
he could salvage his practice. lie was supposed to subait to unannounced
supervisory visits at his office. etc.. and he was even given an office be-
cause he was an outstanding scientist. lie wrote Zb-carat scientific ar-
ticles right up to the end.

It Bnded Up in Suicide

There was a seating of the board of healc where he finally found out that

everything was going to be OK. lie expressed his exceeding gratitude for
all that had been done for hill. and the meeting ended. That was at noon.

At two o'clock he was caught trying to buy neperidine with a false pre-
scription. So they asked hie why on earth he had done it. And he answered-
and don‘t forget that drug addicts rationalize differently than we do--
'Uell. I. didn't think they'd be checking up today.’

A couple of years ago he consitted suicide. Everything had gone to pieces--

his narriage. his job. everything. Everything revolved around one thing--
drugs.

Any one of us could get into the same situation. So its a basic principle
of any drug treat-Int to keep people off drugs. and it is a basic principle
with us if we are going to do our job right to keep our country off of

drugs. or at any rate down to a level that not too any people are tented.

After just three recorded drug deaths in 1968 the nuiaer has increased on
an annual basis (on the average) in the ten years free 1969 to 1978.

kl
1969 13

1970 37
1971 37
1972 5‘
1973 55
1974 52
1975 61
1976 62
1977 70

1978 about 80.

[Question] Is it going to continue at the seen rete so that we will pro-
bebiy have more than 100 drug deaths and aayhe acre in 1980 for instance?

[Ansverl It vill of course so on for s while yet. Beceuse it‘s happening
all over the world, and we are an open society. not an isolated enclave.
As long es the problea is getting worse in other countries it will also

be getting worse here. He are all affected.

9386
030: 5300
SUSPWI‘ mm NR MC! EMS
Madrid BC in Spun-h 14 Fob 79 p 51

ﬁrm] Hodrid (m- our emu-m cram-1m. Contrd ammo.
Squad hu motod o poroon Iho oinglohondodly hold up oidat phonooloo
in tho «pit-1. ‘l'ho In in “no Alvoros Rohooo. 29, who had hoon
moltod 1n Alienate in July for mobbing 12 othor phonooioo.

Ming tho loot tow dun, o lugo mount of drug- otolon during tho vovo
of holdup-moat of duoh voro unquootionohly oo-ittod by mno.

hon boon roviovod in tho idontiﬂootion lohontory of tho Suporlor
Polioo Koodqurtoro. Horoovor, vuiouo drug: and moottco otolon during
tho holdupo voro oonnoootod tn- hh uhon ho no mootod. ﬂoat of tho
drug-o thot ho robhod MI phonooioo vote for hto individual uno. althom
ot thou ho oold oono of tho- or omhongod th- {or othoro. no doc took
now in 3 who: of holdupo.

mno Alnros trovolod in o Soot 127. llconoo ploto 51796—60, much
had boon otolon o fov duo hoforo than n m on ”-1. Stnot. no hut
throotonod tho ototion ntchon in ordor to toko pooooooion of tho vohiolo.

 

E1110 Alva-oz Rohooo

8743
080: 5300
DRIER

18068 881.1! mam—mm. Halaga Police Drug Squad has

arrootod 10 poroono botvoon tho agoo of 16 and 25 who voro found using
drugs in a PodrOcaloJoo chalet. The confiscated drags includo 60 grace
of heroin , 10 gram oi‘ cocaino. S doaoo of 1.81). 500 gran of haahioh
and other narcotics with a black mkot value of about 2 aillion

poootao. 'l'ho arreotod porocno includo youtho in variouo protoooicno on
well an otudonto m. Granada. m- tho aoaont, the Haloga Polioo are,
of oouroo. romaining oilont about tho case. althcm a can rooiding in
Madrid none to havo boon tho oupplior of tho drugo. Found Doing Drop
in “Madrid—Police agento in a patrol car tux-priood four youths
botvoon tho ogoo at 16 and 18 ac they vere oonming haohiah inaido a
car parked on Padul Stroot. Pclico reported that oovon tableto of tho
oubatanco and nine nodical proooriptiona vero taken tron than. Thoy oaid
that thoy had purchased tho- i‘rca ooao yuahoro. ‘rhroo c tho ooripticno
voro made out for a Inodicino rogudod a narcotic. ‘l'oxt

[Madrid n in 3mm 13 M 79 p 41 8743

mm mans We Civil Guard has arrootod 12 rcutho for
allegod drug wiggling, Guard oourcoo reportod. 'l'hooo arrested arc
Viconzo Malina, Sorgio Poriaboocc and Aloooio Falsona. who aro Italian.
and Spaninh citizens Carlos Javior Gutierro: Garcia. Santiago Jineno
Perez. Haria Pilar Horino Sana. Ali‘onoo Dias Pona. Pablo Aronao hobo,
Carloo Caldoron Royoa. Higuol Perez Merino. Antonio Arenas Aguilar and
Enrique Molina Martin. Polico coni‘iocatod 3 kilos-am or horoino, 8
kilos of hanhioh and a i'ov gala oi‘ cpiul. According to Civil Guard
sources, the trarriokoro had boon oporating for a who: oi‘ aontho.
bringing urchandloo th ports or Algocirao and Lao Pal-ac on
Grand Canary 1.1m. rmj [mm n in Spanioh 28 Jan 79

p as] am

-13 MCKH ARRESTED A? AIRPORT—Into kilogruo of horoino. valued
at 33 aillicn poooo. have boon ooni'iocatod at Bat-wan Airport m- a
Britiah mbjoct hailing iron Bong Kong. ‘l'ho drug woo being carried by
Ho luck-hung. 20. a vaitor by mfoooicn. Ibo arrived at the Hadrid
airport shortly artor 1600 hoaro on a rogularly ochodulod night iron

his
Zurich. lo Ruck-bung tried to get tho drug through in a sort or trisaing
fastened to we sides of a suitcase and covered entirely with a lining.
According to the Era Agency. he was arrested by agents at th: civil Guard of
the District Attorney's Office and Anti-Drug Squad. together with rsonnol
iron the travelers service of Barnes rport Gusto-s. [Text

[mm no in Spanish 25 Jan 79 p 41 e743

COCAINE SEIZBD AT AlRPORT--At the Barajas airport on Friday. the Fiscal Ser-
vices of the Civil Guard discovered l kilogram of cocaine worth 12 million
pesetas and four gold and eaerald pendants in a suitcase being carried by
Jose Miguel Serra Haciel. of Portuguese nationality. Serra Haciel was a
passenger on the Liaa-Bogota-Caracas flight. He has been turned over to
legal authorities. According to our sources. the drug. of a high degree of
punity. was contained in plastic bags cleverly concealed in the traveling
bag. It will be recalled that in December. the Civil Guard Forces working
at the same airport seized two shipments of heroine and cocaine hidden in
suitcases with fake battens. The cocaine. worth 30 aillion pesetas. was
being carried by two Dutch subjects casing from Bogota. [Text] [Madrid
Arc in Spanish 28 Feb 79 p 59] 11.664

HASHISR FOUND IN HARABELLA--Harabclla (Halaga). 26 Peb--A total of 75 kilo-
grams of hashish was seized on the Barcelona-Cadiz highway near Harbella by
the Civil Guard assigned to traffic control. when neabere of the Guard were
handling an accident on the highway. they observed that upon noting the pre-
sence of the force. one vehicle abruptly changed directions. The Guard
immediately pursued it. Once the oesbers of the Guard had caught up with the
car and searched it. they found 75 kilograss of hashish worth over 7 million
pesetas in the trunk under a fake bottom. The occupants of the vehicle were
arrested. One of then. of Italian nationality. was identified only as R. R.
The other two were Spaniards: Cayetano Coeares Garcia. a native and resident
of Alicante. and Rogelio Tejeda Noguero, a native and resident of bsrcelona.
(EFF) [Text] [Barcelona LA VARGUARDIA in Spanish 25 Feb 79 p 39] 11.66i

COCAINE TRAFFICKER AkRESTED-olwo aen of Argentine nationality and one Bolivian
have been arrested at the Sarajas airport when trying to snuggle ll kilograms
of cocaine into our country. The individuals were identified as Helio Daniel
Ass-son. 36; Hilde Alberto Assann. SS: and Fernando Marcelo Zaabrano. 29.

The three had arrived from Buenos Aires on an Argentine Airline flight. when
their luggage was on the conveyor belt in the international section of the
Barsjas airport. a dog used by the Civil Guard Narcotics Service and whose
none is "Onix" smelled out the drug. The sen belong to a ring whose task

it is to snuggle cocaine processed in South Aserica into our country. The

value of the product seized is some 100 million pesetas. [Text] [Madrid
Alt in Spanish lb Feb 79 p 55] ll.b66

C80: 5300 END

“5