APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP02-00850R000100010039-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010039-7

FOR OH'ILIAL USE ONLY

JPRS {/0232
18 January 1979

INSTRUCTIONS FOR PLANNING BUIUJINGS FOR
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS SN 495-77

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00010039-7
NUl‘E

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
(l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was aumasrised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
ciea, views or attitudes of the 11.5. Government.

PROCUW OP PUBL ICATIGIS

JPRS publications my be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service. Springfield. Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recouended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthlz Catalog of
0.8. Governent Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. 0.8. Govermaent Printing Office. Hashington, 0.0.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names.
title and series) are available through Bell a Howell, Old
Mansfield Road. wooster. duo, “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service.
1000 North clebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
RWY oocuutnmuou lama! so. . s. IsaIsIoM's Aaaswss no
not JPRS L/ 82 32

trauma-ow.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR PLANNING BUILDINGS FOR SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS SN (095-77

names»
in. N. Paatukhov. A. M. Koshkin. ot al. (editors)

WMommmw

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Glebe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

It. Wavy lam
INSTRUKTSIYA P0 PROYEKTIRCNANIYU ZOANIY MWHNO-ISSLBDCNATEL'SKIIOI UCNRBZNOENIY
SN 495-77. Moscow, I978

lawman-m

This report contains instructions drafted by GIPRONII [All-Union State Institute
for the Planning of Scientific Research Institutes and Laboratories] for design-
ing buildings for scientific research institutes. Included is information on
structural design, water supply and sewage, heating and electrical equipment.

WWW. a. We

USSR Heat Structure
Architecture Hater Fire Alarms
NII Electricity Air Conditioning

SWIM 7m

cmﬂﬂsﬂlm I)"
lth “MMMM

son orricuu. use our. united nunb;: or Unclassified

Co ie A silable frost Plls. ummmhau
P ' v J Uncla ified

 

«mum-w
Wovens-m
Moscow INSTRUKTSIYA PO PROYEKTIROVANIYU ZDANIY NAUCHNO-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8232

18 January

INSTRUCTIONS FOR PLANNING BUILDINGS FOR
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS SN 095-77

ISSLBDOVATBL'SRIRH UCHREZHDBNIY SN 495-77 in Russian 1978
signed to press 1 Jan 78, pp 1-57

[Book edited by Yu. N. Paetukhov, A.M. Koshkin, et a1..

Stroyizdat, 30,000 copies]

Comeu‘rs PM

1. General Regulations ........................................

2. Master Plans ...............................................

3. Volume-Planning and Structural Designs .....................
Laboratory Facilities ......................................
Scientific Information Facilities ..........................
Auxiliary Facilities .......................................

4. Water Supply and Sewage ................ ...... ..............
Hater Supply .......,........ ...... .........................
Sewage . ..... ...............................................

Hot Water Supply ............. ...... ........................

5. Heat Supply, Heating and Ventilation .......................

6. Gas Supply .................................................

7. Power Supply and Electrical Equipment ......................

Appendix 1. Total Area of Buildings for 811 per Staff Associate

- a - [I - USSR - M

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

Appendix 2.

Appendix 3.

Appendix a.

Deter-ining ﬂeet teen in ﬂeeting the Exterior Air
Entering the Pecilitice Through Iniiltretion ....

Liet of Pecilitiee To Be Equipped with Autouetic
Fire Aleree .....................................

Lie: of Buildinge end Pecilitiee To Be Equipped
With Automatic Fire Extinguiehere ...............

. b .

’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INSTRUCTIONS FOR PLANNING BUILDINGS
FOR SCIENTIFIC RBSEARCN INSTITUTIONS

8N 495-77

INSTRUKTSIYA P0 PROYEKTIROVANIYU ZDANIY
NAUCNO- ISSLEDOVATEL' SKIN}! UCHRBZNDEN IY

SN 695-77

Yu. N. Putukhov. A. M. Koahktn, o: :1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[TOXt] The Instructions for Planning Buildings
for Scientific Research Institutions SN 495~77
were drafted by GIPRONII [All-Union State In-
stitutc for the Planning of Scientific Research

Institutes and Laboratories] of the USSR Academy
of Sciences.

 
  

    

SN 495-77

Construction Norma
State Connittee of
USSR Council of Ministers
on Construction Affairs
(USSR Gosstroy)

   

Instructions
for planning buildings
for scientific research
institutions

 
   
     
 
 

 
    
 

1. GENERAL REGULATIONS

1.]. The requirements of these Instructions should be fulfilled when plan-
ning new and renovated buildings for scientific institutions with academic
and sectorial specialization (henceforth to be called NII).

The require-eats of these Instructions do not extend to the planning of
buildings for computation centers, observatories, elementary particle
accelerators. simulators. vivariuas, sutcclaves, laboratories for radio-
active substances (for class I and II work), particularly pure substances,
virologicsl and pathogenic microorganisms. and artificial climate stations.

1.2. Categories of production facilities (processes) with explosion. fire-
explosion and fire hazards in laboratory, production and warehouse facilities
of N11 of natural and technical sciences should be adopted in accordance with
special lists drawn up and approved by the ministries and departeents.

2. MASTER PLANS

2.1. when locating buildings for NII. the requirements of the chapter of the
SNiP [Construction Nor-s and Regulations] on planning the layout and building
development of cities. settlements and rural population centers must be
adhered to; the asster plans for NII for natural and technical sciences must
be designed in accordance with the chapter of SNiP on designing master plans
for industrial enterprises.

 
   

    

Entered by
the USSR Acadeny of Sciences

Approved by
the Decree of

    
 

Deadline for
putting into

     
      
 

the State Committee of operation
the USSR Council of Ministers 1 January
on Construction Affairs 1978

      
    

of 13 June 1977. No 71

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.2. The density of building up the site of N11 for natural and technical
sciences should be at least 25 percent. and of N11 for social sciences-~at
least 30 percent. when the building density is determined. the areas of
sections of test fields, proving grounds. sanitation-protection and other
protective zones are not taken into account.

2.3. when designing the master plans for “It, provision should be made for
areas for parking motor vehicles. motor scooters, motorcycles and bicycles,
in accordance with the chapter of SNiP on designing the layout and building
development of cities, settlements and rural population centers.

2.6. Sites should be provided for gymastic exercises. estimating 1 square
meter per staff associate of the N11.

3. VOLUME-PLANNING AND STRUCTURAL DESIGNS

3.1. When drafting volume-planning and structural designs for buildings for
NH. the requirements of the chapter of SNiP on planning public buildings
and structures must be observed, and when planning laboratory'end production
buildings and facilities for [ill of natural and technical sciences—the
chapter of SNiP on planning production buildings for industrial enterprises.

3.2. Laboratory and production buildings for N1! of natural and technical
sciences should be in fireproof grade II.

The distances from the doors of the facilities to the outside exit or to the
stairwell, as well as the area of the floor between the fireproof walls of
buildings for N11 (with the exception of separate production buildings)
should be adopted in accordance with the chapter of BM? on planning public
buildings and structures.

3.3. In buildings for ﬁll that are 5 stories and more in height. as well as
when there is a difference in the levels of the floor of the entrance hall
and the floor of the upper story (other than the engineering floor) of 13.2
meters and more. passenger elevators should be provided.

In laboratory and production buildings for N1! of natural and technical
sciences that are 2 and more stories high, freight elevators should be
provided. The lifting capacity of the elevators should be determined by
calculation. Unloading areas measuring 2.7 X 2.7 meters should be provided
at the freight elevators on each floor.

3.6. Enclosures for recesses designed to house engineering lines should be
made of noncombustible materials. The recesses should be separated by floors
with reinforced concrete diaphragms at least 8 cm thick; at the same time,
the layer of concrete from the lower edge to the center of gravity of the
extended reinforcement should be at least 30 ms. Convenient access from the
corridor should be provided for engineering lines located in recesses.

2

P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.5. Outside exits should he provided from facilities with production pro-
cesses of category C located on basement and foundation floors. It is per-
missible to use general stairwells for the exit from these facilities. with
specification that outside exits be separated from the rest of the stairwell

by dead-end noncombustible enclosing structures with at least a 1-hour fire-
proof limit.

3.6. to laboratory buildings for N11 of natural and technical sciences.
rubbish chutes must be provided. estimating l rubbish chute per 100 meters
of length of the building.

Storerooms for Janitorial supplies. 3 m2 in area. must be provided on each
floor of buildings for “II.

3.7. The total area of N11 per staff associate must not exceed that indi-
cated in Appendix 1.

Laboratory facilities

3.8. The area for the facilities of laboratories for N1! of natural and
technical sciences should be adopted in accordance with Table 1.

Table l.

    
   

 

Ares per laboratory

Facilities associate it! .2

   

Chemical. physics. biological laboratories.
facilities for work with radioactive substances.
chemical and industrial preparatory and washing
facilities

Microanalytical and analytical weighing facilities

Note: The area of facilities for other laboratories should be chosen in
accordance with the industrial requirements and specifications of the equip-
ment located in then.

The area of the work faciiities (laboratories) for theoretical work should be
adopted by estimating a a per associate. and when the work places are
equipped with two desks--6 m2 .

3.9. Lnbovsﬁory facilities are not permitted to be on basement floors.

3.10. Special facilities (compartnents) should be provided in laboratory
buildings to store the operating stock of flaamable liquids and chemicals.

3.ll. Ceiling plates in laboratory facilities with production processes of
categories A. B and F should have a flat lower surface. Ribbed plates and
suspended ceilings are not permitted in these facilities.

3.12. Entrances to stairwells and corridors from facilities with produc-
tion processes of categories A, B and F are required to have double-door lock

FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
chambers. The enclosing structures of the double-door lock charbers should
he made of noncn-huutihle Mterinls with n fireproof limit of at least

0.75 hours. The doul‘u tn the lock chm-her» from the facilities with pro-
duction processes of categories A and I! should he specified to be self-
clmaing. fitting tightly when shut. and with a fireproof limit of 0.6 hours.
and from other facilities-«lads of non-fireproof eaterials, not glass.

The doors of laboratory facilities with production (processes) of category c
are permitted to be sade of non-fireproof ssterials, not glass.

3.13. In buildings for laboratories of N1! of natural and technical sciences.

the sininun width of the corridors should be 2 esters, and of the doors--
1 meter.

Scientific Intonation Facilities

3.14. The nusber of conference halls. halls for seetinga of scientific

councils. auditorium. linguaphone booths and the nuaber of seats in then
should be adopted in accordance with Table 2.

3.15. The area of the conference halls, not counting the area of the plat-
fors. should he deter-ined by estimating 0.7 .2. and when the seats are
equipped with desks-~0.8 I2 per seat. The depth of the platform in halls

with up to 350 seats should be 5 Deters. from 350 to 500-7 esters, and over
500--9 meters.

The area of the hall for meetings of the scientific council and of the
auditoriuo should be determined by estieating 0.8 .2 per seat when the hall
and the auditorium are equipped with chairs. and 2 uz—when they are
equipped with chairs and tables.

An additional area of 2 «32 should be provided to place projection equip-ant
in the halls and auditorium.

The area of the linguaphone booths should be deter-ined in accordance with
the chapter of SNiP on planning institutions of higher education.

3.]6. The conference halls should be provided with: a set of equipeent for
novice (when there are 200 seats and sore in the hall), in accordance with
the chapter of 8M? on planning public buildings and structures, with the
estimnted para-eters and conditions for screen visibility being adopted in
accordance with the chapter of SN? on planning clubs;

Preparation facilities with an area of 10 .2,

Audi; equipment (when there are 200 seats and wore in the ha11)-sn area of
18 .

Presidlunzzroom with up to 350 seats in the hall—an area of 12 32,- and over
soc-m. ;
Stock storeroos. with under 500 seats in the hall--lZ I2, and over SOD-26 .2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H. I n F IF I la! F 22.3 H.

. _ _ n a a _ _ _ « . .3. 2.2.83.3: 8 ‘

k Flak on ha to”. WI lounl. ESSSR< as
n a u u _ a .

. Bus—«985$
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.17. The area of the lobby for the conference hell should be detersined
by estimating 0.6 oz per seat in the hall.

3.18. Conference halls in laboratory buildings for N11 for natural and
technical sciences should be arranged in accordance with Table 3.

Table 3.

    
   
 
 

Number of seats in conference hall

Up to 300
Over 300 and up to 600
Over 600

1- 3
1-2

3.19. Suspended ceilings and the facing for the walls of conference halls
should be specified to be made from almost noninfla-able materials; the

francs of the suspended ceilings should be natal or wood, thoroughly
impregnated with fireproofing coapounds.

3.20. In the scientific library provision out be made for a stackroon.
reading rooms, an anteroom with a loan desk and readers' catalogue. a desk
for issuing books and a display case of new books. room for book acquisi-
tions and processing and an office for the head librarian. For libr ric.
vi th a collection of 50-200,000 units in the stacks. facilities 18 in
area should be provided for binding and restoring work.

3.21. has stacks for the collection and nudaer of seats in the reading
rooms of the libraries should be approved in accordance with Table 6.

Table 6.

   
    
 
  

With number of staff
associates

Collection storage,
in thousand units

  

NII

Number of seats in reading rooms

 

Natural and tech-
nical sciences

Social sciences
3.22 The area of the stacks equipped with single-tier permanent racks
should be determined frost estisating:

For hooks-4.5 .2 per 1000 units for storage.
For journals-4.7 I2 per 1000 units of storage.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The area of the reading roan. entrance hall. rooms for book acquisition and

processing and office or the head librarian should he adopted in accordance
vlth Tab lo 5.

 

Table 5.
Facilities Measuring indicator Area.
in a2
Reading room For seat 3
Per 1000 units storage in
open access collection 5
Per librarian on duty 4
Entrance hall For seat in reading room 0.65
Rooms for book acquisition
and processing, office of
head librarian Per library associate 6

 

3.23. The stacks should be equipped with metal shelves, and the reading
roons--uith single-choir reading tables. and booths for individual work,

3 n2 in area. For the open access collections. located right in the read-
ing rooms. wooden shelves are permitted.

3.24. The closed stacks should be separated fron the other facilities by
fireproof walls and ceilings with the fireproof limit at least 1 hour.

3.25. The composition and area of the facilities in the scientific-
technical inforaation division and the scientific archives should be as
follows:

Rooms for reference and bibliographical description of infornation documents

and rooms for graphic layout of scientific uorks--6 oz per associate in the
division:

Facilities for readers--3 m2 per seat;

Facilities for reference card indexes--0.0b m2 per 1000 catalogue card ,
indexes:

Repositories for documents-~2.6 ml per 1000 units of doculent storage:

Repositories for uicrofilns-0.9 n2 per 100 boxes (measuring 360 X 360 X
X 65 mm and vith a capacity of 200 meters of film) of rolled microfilns;

Facilities for photo-copying and electrography-in accordance vith the
technological requirements and specifications of the equipmenr.

The total area of the facilities for the scientific-technical information
division and scientific archives per staff associate of the NI! should be
no more than 0.2 I2.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Auxiliary Facilities

3.26. The sanitation-everyday facilities and facilities for public catering
enterprises, public health centers. Nll administrative offices. design
bureaus and social organizations should be planned in accordance with the
chapter of SNiP on planning auxiliary buildings and facilities for indus-
trial enterprises. In this case:

The sanitation-everyday facilities should be provided for those working in
the laboratories and the production facilities of the NI! of natural and
technical sciences; for the rest of those working at the N1! of natural and
technical sciences and NI! of social sciences, only toilets. wash rooms and
rooms for vosen's personal hygiene should be provided;

The amount of sanitation equipment in the lsvatories should to estimated as
1 toilet bowl and l urinal per 50 men and 1 toilet bowl per 30 women;

The public health centers should be provided for N2! of natural and tech-

nical sciences; for Nll of social sciences. a medical too. 12 m2 in area
slmnld be provided:

Storage of street clothing should be provided in general coatroons for street
clothing. on hangers.

3.27. The number of places in the coatrooms for street clothing should be
adopted depending on the size of the staff of associates with a coefficient
of l.l. the area-~from estisating 0.08 oz per place.

3.28. The area of the entrance hell (not counting the costrooms) should be

detSmined by estimating 0.2 m2 per worker in the building, but be at least
18 .

To locate kiosks selling newspa era, books and medications in the entrmce
hall. an additional area of lo a for each kiosk should be provided.

3.29. 1he area of the administrative work rooms of NI! should be adopted
by estimating 6 In2 per associate.

The total area of the administrative facilities per administrative associate
(allowing for offices and reception rooes) should be. in N1! of natural and
technlgal sciences, not over 9.5 oz. and in N11 of social sciences-mot over
11.5

3.30. The nuwer of men and amber of women on the staffs of associates of
Nll should he adopted as equal. or in accordance with the planning assignment.

3.3l. Emergency showers should be provided in the laboratory buildings of
Nil of natural and technical sciences on each floor. The distance from the
laboratory facilities to the essrgency shower should be not more than 30 m.

FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.32. Facilities for service personnel (janitors. elevator operators,
guards etc.) in each hit building should be accepted with an area of

0.75 per person on a shift; the area of the facilities for the service
personnel should be at least 8 n2.

4. HATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE

6.1. For Nil buildings. systeas for interior water pipelines end sewage
should be planned in accordance with the chapter of SNiP on planning the
interior water pipelines and sewage for buildings in this division.

4.2. In Nll buildings over two stories. for groups of laboratory facilities
located on a single vertical. the water supply and sewage stendpipes should
be laid out in the engineering line recesses.

The supply pipelines should be laid open. sloping toward the standpipes.
For departments located in the center of the facilities. the pipelines
should be laid in basement conduits or in the teething of the floor. and

at these sections of the pipelines there should be no cut-off devices and
screw connections.

The aain and transfer pipelines should be laid out in base-ent ducts,
technical basesents or on the technical floors.

6.3. The consolidated flow rates of water and sewage should be deternined
in accordance with Table 6.

Table 6.

     
 
  
 
 
 

 

Hater v f sewage flow rates

Basic facilities of building per 1 of total area

    

liters/hr liters/day

 

  

Che-ical and biological laboratories
Physics laboratories

Bxperiaental workshops 35
Facilities for ﬁll of social sciences.

scientific-inforaation and auxiliary

facilities 5

Water Supply

6.4. In NI! buildings a mified interior water pipeline (facilities-drinking
water. production and fire-prevention). The water should be of potable
quality.

The require-cuts for quality of water for industrial equipment and its
temperature specifications should be established by the industrial assignsent.

9

FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘I’ICIM. USE ONLY

6.5. Centralized systeas of recycled water supply and repeated use of water
should be provided for the production water supply of a group of N11
buildings.

5.6. The water flow rate for laboratory faucets. qo. in liters/sec. should
be accepted according to Table 7. and the probability of their operation--

determined according to the foraula
0.006

p...’......

00
where qo is the flow rate of water taken for a laboratory faucet, established
at the. estimated section of the system. the flow rate per second of which
is the greatest.

Tah 1e 7.

2)'«:~,.,-.m (5) “.2.

MN“. m IM~

leans udopa “M as 1”
”“°'“" ....‘.33-.. ﬁgmen- 153“- 6)
(1) . "iv-«Ml as" “N " man ”a;

 

 

 

(9) llunncaa no amount Ma
tenements - 0.0!?
(10)Cuccutcu aaaopnopmn _
pauoumu 0. N 0.!
(1 1) Boaqnaaﬁopauh apau na-
60me pamsmlu - 0.!
( 12) Knsosaa soaocrpylnom

 

actors "' ”"5
( 1 ”Tcruoaonsctsoc ebony
aosasut [lo teammate”. n. llo amntlS)
".'f'.§"'.'.°-':u":a(1‘)

ran tear amuse-
caoll cam npo«
cu:

Key:
1. Water faucets
2. Flow rate of water. qo . in liters/sec
3. Total (cold and hot)

6. Cold or hot
5. Free pressure head before faucet. in a. water colum

b. Mini-u- diaaeters of conditional passage of pipelines. in u

7. Input

8. Output

9. ﬂipple at refrigerator colum

l . Laboratory sink mixer 16. According to technical spe-
ll. Laboratory sink faucet cifications of equipoent or
12. Jet pulp colum industrial part of plan

13. Industrial equip-eat 15. According to estinate

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.7. when determining the maximum hourly flow rate of water. the coefficient
of use of the water faucets should be taken as equal to 0.28.

4.8. The water flow rate for the interior fire-extinguishing of buildings
for Nil of natural and technical sciences should be accepted by calculating
the simultaneous operation of two jets and the flow rate of water per jet
as 2.5 liters/soc.. and for buildings for Ni! of social sciences-~as for
administrative buildings.

4.9. For emergency showers. a tank with a capacity of 200 liters. filled

with water from the water pipeline system through the ball cock should be
provided.

A group of emergency showers placed along a single vertical should be served

by a single tank. installed under the ceiling of the upper floor or on the
technical floor.

The flow rate of the water to fill the tank for the emergency shower is not
counted in the estimated flow rate of the water. The shower should turn on
automatically when the stall is entered.

Sewage

4.10. In construction regions not provided with a sewage system. the
installation of s set of local purification structures must be provided
for the buildings and structures of Nil.

é.ll. The composition and concentration of the contaminants in the produc-
tion sewage should be determined according to the technological data.

For preliminary estimates. the active reaction (pH) and biochemical oxygen

requirement (BPK) in the sewage from laboratory instruments should be taken
as:

a) in organic chemistry laboratories. pH-6.5-8.5 and BPK20-100 mg/l;
b) In inorganic chemistry laboratories, ph-6.5-8.5 and BPKzo-100 mg/l:
c) in biological laboratories. pH-6.S-8.S and BPKzo--200-SOO mg/l.

b.l2. The estimated discharge of sewage should be accepted in accordance
with the estimated flow rate of the water consumptioa. with the discharge
of the sewage from the emergency showers not being counted.

4.13. The installation of an additional siphon must be provided at each
output line from the laboratory facilities. regardless of the presence of
a hydraulic seal at the instrunents.

additional siphons should be selected in consideration of the possibility
of the effect on them of acids. alkalies and solvents.

ll

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1‘08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm. The outgo of sewage into the exterior sewage system is not permitted
from drains installed in facilities for service discharge etorehousea to
store and bottle chemicals and highly inns-table and fuel liquids. An
area must be provided to collect the product poured off and the water from
washing the floor.

The sewage discharges are removed from the areas in the chemical storehousea
after their neutralization by a hand pump into the sewage system. and from
the areas in the warehouses for highly inflamable and fuel liquids--into
metal tanks.

Hot water Supply

I..15. Centralized hot water supply systens should be designed for buildings

for N11 in accordance with the chapter of SNiP on planning hot water supply
and these Instructions.

4.16. The estimated hourly consumption of heat needed to heat the water
should be adopted according to the larger of the two rates determined for
the operating conditions of the hot water supply system in the course of
the work day and for 65 minutes after the work day has ended. In the first
case the heat consumption for the heating should be considered as 30 percent
of the hourly consumption of hot water for the washrooms, 10 percent of the
hourly consumption of water for the shower systems and 100 percent of the
hourly consmption of water for industrial needs; in the second case. the
heat ronsuwtion for the heeting--lOO percent of the hourly consumption of.
hot water for the washrooms and shower systems and 50 percent of the hourly
consumption of water for industrial needs.

6.17. The hot-water consuption by the laboratory instruaents should be
accepted according to Table 7. The laboratory sinks and washers, washrooms
and shower stalls should be equipped with individual miners.

5. IiEA‘l‘ SUPPLY. “EATING AND vmrunon
5.1. The heat supply. heating and ventilation for N11 buildings should be
designed in accordance with the chapter of $111? on planning heating.
ventilation and air conditioning and the chapter of SNiP on planning heating
systems and by this section.

5.2. The heat supply for a group of buildings and structures for NI! should
as a rule be provided from a central heating point.

5.3. The feed of heat for the heat supply of the heating, ventilation and
hot water supply systems should as a rule be provided along separate pipe-
lines fron the heating center.

1he pipelines should be specified to be laid in a cos-on duct.

12

FOR OFPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR Oﬂ’iCIM. USE ONLY

5.‘. Open laying of the pipelines of the heating systems in the buildings
should he specified.

Covered laying of the pipelines ls permlnslhle in facilities for which
special industrial requirements are imposed (microbiological isolation
rooms. facilities for particularly pure operations. etc.).

5.5. Air-heating and air curtains in the main entrances to N1! buildings
for natural and technical sciences should be provided if the estimated
temperature of the outside air of the coldest five-day period in the con-
struction region (estimated parameters 3) is -15°c and below and there are
over 200 persons working in the building.

5.6. The combined heat consumption for heating. ventilation and hot water
supply of the buildings should be determined according to Table 8.

 

 

 

 

 

    

Tahle 8.
.._.__...__. (I)_Pum nus .
m2“ no m'IDIII: _(_2 .. term
Facilities 9 I 9 3. 1:23?
. 5’ ‘) 9 3)? slash Ila
- .35 :33 m

 

(7)0Xumncam s Gue-
aonncrsse .ufao-

[u ropnn 0.38
'(3) Oummrme Mme
pumps-i 0.86
(9) Hum mum says-
tun-umpmanu-

usuum arma-

m-mll ll Rumm-

- mural-mot 0.37
I-Iau-nnumruraas-
(10) um-vanepruuc 0,34
ll-muut‘sua llllll

(ll) «(unease-new
says a}:

Key:

1. Heat consumption

2. For heating

3. For ventilation

a. Keel/m3.hr-'C

5. Kcal/mJ-hro'c per m2 of total area

6. For hot water supply, keel/hr per m2 of total area
7. Chemical and biological laboratories

8. Physics laboratories

9. Scientific information and auxiliary facilities
10. Experimental workshops
ll. Facilities for NI! of social sciences

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Estimated

air tempera

ture in Heating Ventilation
facilities. Requirements Requirements
in 'c. in

cold period
of year

A. Laboratory facilities

   
    

20 Water. with radi- In accordance with note
store or headers 2 for this table
20 Same Same

20 M II

According to industrial According to industrial
assignment assignment
Purification of inflow-
ing air in bacterio-
logical filters
Air velocity in working
area not over 0.05 m/s
Volume of air removed--
80% of volume of inflow
air
Water, with According to industrial
0- built-in heat- assignment. allowing for
ing elements or instructions of note 3
registers made for this table
of smooth pipe Inflow and exhaust sys-
tems, separate for this
group of facilities
Air ducts of exhaust
system may be laid up to
exhaust ventilator in
general engineering
recesses, with transit-
through upper floors

Water with Removal of air through
radiators or exhaust hood. Inflow to
headers upper area

Same Same
on «teen: vpvoa

tonon can: canal» on gun nosoeaaun
cc—Hnuns roan: can on wanna: own <owclo
paw onnaasna

on tun:

now»uno~a sumo

on macaw: vuvoo

p: Inonoonove

coOnr. a: anon

an mnawpununnuu

«nanunona

canon tun: anao<u~ on pxu <owcla on
newnonan- anon can mnos noton puns.

on aaoons whens ~\u anon cvvou ano-

moao. can: noonnuam no pancannnaw
nuanunOnu nouuuaaoan
H: 39.9 mocha-nan an
waunuwwoa »: gov-none
maoupnnnoo. acne-unnn
Hater with
radiators

  

Hood over autoclave and
plate, volume of air

being removed and inflow-
ing according to estimate
for removing excess heat

 

According to industrial assignment

16-18 Water with
registers made
of smooth pipes
accessible for

cleaning

B..Experimental Workshops

16 Hater with
radiators or
headers

In exhaust hood the
velocity of the air in
the gates with all the
valves open should he at
least 0.5 ale with usual
work and 1 m/s when the
mercury is heated

Calorific intensity
should not exceed 100-
125 kcsl/(m3chr).
Temperature in facilities
Water with
radiators or
headers

Hater with
radiators

 

1"

Feed of inflow air into
work area

Air velocity in work
ares-not over 0.2 m/a
Removal of air in glass-
bloving facilities-from
upper area. in quartz-
blouing--from local vents
and from upper area (10-
151).

Air removed from welding
stations by local vents
of equal suction and
single-draft sir exchange
of facilities

Air removed from upper
area, inflow-etc work
area

Air removed by local
vents from furnaces and
tanks for hardening and
additionally from upper
area for balance of heat
surplus, inflow-~to work
area

Air removed by side vents
of tanks and single-draft
air exchange

Air removed from upper
area. inflov-evenly to
upper area

Air removed by local
vents of industrial
equipment and additional
single-draft air exchange
Air removed from upper
area, inflowb-to upper
area

Emergency ventilation
(exhaust) in amount of

8 volumes of facilities
in 1 hr,. not compensated
by inflow
FOR orrrcm. 033 0qu

ture in
facilities.
in 'c, in
cold period
of year

Requirements

Hater with
radiators or
headers

Sane, with
radiators

 

Ventilation
Requirements

Air removed by local
vents of radio-assembly
sections and additionally
fron upper area for
balance of heat surplus.
inflou--to upper area
Air reaoved by local
vents of srindstones;
purification of reloved
air in cyclone with
inverse taper. inflovb-
to upper area

Air removed by local
vents of grinding-
polishing tool; purifica-
tion of removed air in
ﬂak type filter. inflow
-to upper area
18. warehouses for " Air removed;natural.

equipment. not compensated by
warehouses for inflow
cylinders

19. Facilities of According to industrial Natural ventilation in
buildings of assignment amount of single sir
separate exchange in 1 hr for
warehouses inflow and eadmsust
for
equipment

Notes: 1. The amomt of harmful substances, heat and moisture escaping in
facilities should be determined in the technological part of the plan.

2. For laboratory facilities equipped aith exhaust hoods, the calculation
of the exhaust ventilation should be made according to the greatest value of
the amount of air removed through the exhaust hoods (depending on the air
speed in the estimated opening of the hood). and the anomt of air needed
to remove excess heat and moisture fro. the facilities.

3. When planning ventilation systems for the laboratories mentioned in

item 6 of this table. in addition there should be fulfillment of the require-
ment of the Fundamental Sanitation Regulations for Hork With Radioactive
Substances and Other Sources of Ionizing Radiations. approved by the USSR
Hinlatry of health by agreement with USSR Gosstroy.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.8. Additional losses of heat to warm the outside air entering the facili-
ties of chemical laboratories through infiltration should be determined in
accordance with Appendix 2.

5.9. For laboratory facilities of N1! of natural and technical sciences,
balanced ventilation, mechanically induced. should be designed. providing
heating, purification and humidification (in the cold period of the year)
of the air when necessary.

5.10. When the ventilation is planned, the temperature, relative humidity
and air velocity in the facilities of natural and technical scientific
laboratories should be adopted just as for production facilities, the work
in which is included among the light category, as well as in accordance with
industrial requirements.

5.11. In facilities in which work is performed with harmful substances of
all classes of hazard or fuel steams and gases are emitted, air recircula-
tion is not permitted.

5.12. The beat emission, Q, in heal/hr. from the current collectors of the
industrial equipment should be determined according to the formula

0.860”,

where Q is the established power of the current collectors, in kw;

N is the coefficient, allowing for the degree of charge, use of
established power, simultaneity of operation of the current col-
lectors and passage of heat to the facilities, equal to:
for chemical laboratories—0. 05;
for physics and other laboratories—0. 015;
for machine tools installed in experimental workshops—0. 15.

The established power of permanent current collectors of industrial units
and the coefficient K for them must be adopted according to the data from
the industrial part of the plan.

Heat emission to the facilities from gas Bunsen burners, Q , in kcal/hr,
established at laboratory desks, should be determined according to the

formula
0 - IMO-0.6 n,

where 1000--the heat load for the burner. in kcal/hr;
0.6--the coefficient taking into consideration the amount of heat
entering the facilities;
n—tbe number of 'burners burning simultaneously (for every two
associates working in the laboratory facilities, one burner is
customary).

Moisture emission from the laboratory Bunsen burner should be accepted as
200 g/br.

20

FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
POM OPPICIAL USE OﬂLY

5.i]. Opening parts of windows and natural ventilation systems should be
provided in laboratory facilities to remove the air from the facilities in
nonworking time.

5.14. The amount of air remOVed through the exhaust hood should be deter-
mined in accordance with the velocity of the air in the estimated opening
of the hood. in accordance with Table 10.

Table 10

  
      
   

ﬂnxlmum permissible concentrations
of harmful substances

Air velocity
in estimated opening of hood.

 

in work area. in mglmJ in m/sec
Ower lo 0.5
from 10 to 0.1 0.7
1

less than 0.1

Notes: 1. The area of the estimated opening must be adopted as 0.2 a3 per
meter of length of exhaust hood.

 

2. in work involving emission of aerosols and dust from substances of hazard
class i, 2 and 3 into the air. the air velocity in the estimated opening at
the exhaust hood should be accepted as 1.2-1.5 m/sec.

J. The coefficient of simultaneity of the work of the exhaust hoods should
be accepted as equal to a unit.

5.15. Air flow should be fed directly into the laboratory isciiities in the
amount of 90 percent of the amount of air removed by local vent systems. and
the rest of the air (IOZ)-into the corridor and the halls; at the same time.
a 20-fold exchange of air should be ensured in the halls of buildings that
specialize in chemical laboratories. adjacent to the stairwelis or the
elevator shafts; the volume of the halls should be adopted as estimated for
the minimum, and not over 130 m3.

5.!6. In aerodynamic calculation of the balanced ventilation systems of
buildings for chemical laboratories. the head of air into the facilities
must be taken into account (depending on the floor on which the facilities
are located) in accordance with Table ll.

  
 

Table ll

Amount of head on floors. has/I3

 
 
  

Facilities

 

   

l 2 3 4 5

 

laboratories
Rooms for theoretical work
avrridors and halls

no»
Out-a
MON
bUIs-n
”#0

2|

'03 OFPICIAL US! Oil?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5.17. It is not persissible to combine the air ducts of local vents of
soldering posts with the air ducts of the exhaust ventilation of facilities
for a different purpose. with the exception of facilities where the welding
or alloys containing lead is done for short periods of tine (not sore than
an hour a day).

5.18. The pernissiblo levels of acoustic pressure and acousl'. levels at
pornanent work places nust be adopted in accordance with 608? [All-Union
State Standard] l2.l.003--76.

5.19. At inflow. exhaust and recirculation air ducts serving facilities
equipped with automatic fire-extinguishing systems. autosatic valves with
electric drive. connected with the autosatic fire-extinguishing systess.
should be provided. The valves should be installed in direct proxiaity to
the facilities served by the air duct.

5.20. For exhaust systems of facilities for laboratories with production
processes of categories A. B and f. reserve fans should be provided that
turn on antoaatically when the basic fan stops. as Hell as a light signal
indication of the operation of the fan. Reserve fans do not have to be
provided for facilities for laboratories with production processes of
categories c, D and B. A light signal indicator of the operation of the
fan for the local vent should be provided in the laboratory facilities.

5.21. Plenua ventilation systeas. air conditioning and air heating systeas
serving facilities with production processes of categories A. I and f
should he designed separate for the groups of facilities of each of these
categories.

The feed of air into auxiliary facilities. as well as facilities with pro-
duction processes of categories D and 8 say be provided by plenum ventila-
tion systeas and air conditioning systeas that serve the facilities of
laboratories with production processes of category c; in this case the
facilities with the production processes of category c should be provided
with a supply of air along a separate air duct (fro- the ventilation
equipsent facilities or the static pressure chasber); there should be a
flat check valve on this air duct.

5.22. The feed of air into the coapsrtaent for the operating stock of
highly flammable liquids with production processes of categories A. b and

P. located in the building for the laboratories. say be provided from the
plenun ventilation systess serving the facilities with production processes
of category c. on condition that the coaparteent with the operating stock
of highly flasnahle liquids is equipped with an automatic fire extinguishing
system and autosatic fire-retardant valves are installed at the inflow and
exhaust air ducts in front of their inputs to the facilities of the compart-
ments. and also that there is an autosatic cut-off device for the inflow

and exhaust air ducts in case of fire in the coapartsents.

22

FOR OPPICIAL USE OILY
5.23. Exhaust ventilation systems serving facilities with production pro-
cesses of categories a. b and F should he designed as separate for each
facility.

5.215. The exhaust ventilation systel of facilities for laboratories with
production processes of category c. equipped with exhaust hoods. including
those designed for work with dangerously explosive or flamble substances.
should be designed in the following way:

Decentralized free the exhaust hoods with an individual air duct and venti-
lator for each facility;

Centralized. in which the exhaust air ducts froneach separate laboratory
facility are combined into a vertical collector tank located outside the
building. or a horizontal one located on the technical floor. in the
facilities for the exhaust systee equipment.

In the centralized exhaust ventilation system there lust be provided:

Installation of fire-retardant valves at the branches of the air ducts for
the laboratory facilities;

Installation of a reserve fan that turns on automatically when the sain one
stops. and when the work involves the use of dangerously explosive or
dangerously explosive and flat-sable materials. there lust be provided in
addition:

installation of a fan and electric eotor in an explosion-proof version;

Autosatic control of the concentration of gases in the collector tank and

an interlock that ensure the addition of outside air when the concentration
of gases or stese in the collector is over 20 percent of the lower lieit of
ignition (if there is industrial substantiation this device is not provided).

Poreation of highly toxic eixtures of steam. gases and aerosols in the
collector is not pereissible.

5.25. with the decentralized systes of exhaust ventilation it is persissible
to locate the equipment for the systems serving the laboratory facilities
with production processes of category c together with the equip-est designed
for the ventilation systees for the auxiliary facilities. as well as with
the equipeent of the exhaust ventilation systees for facilities with pro-
duction processes of categories D and B. In this case. autoeetic fire-
retardant valves should be installed at the air ducts of the exhaust systees
of facilities in which highly flan-able and fuel liquids are used.

5.26. For laboratory facilities with production processes of category c.
it is permissible to design co-nn inflow collectors. Coebining the floor
branches of the air ducts or floor collectors is pereissible for not over

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nine floors. in this case. provision nust be made to install self-closing
flat check valves at each floor branch or floor collector that serves a
group of facilities with a total area of not over 300 .2.

5.27. In laboratory facilities the local vents and the con-on exchange
exhaust say he coebined into one exhaust system. The air ducts of the
local vents and the cosason exchange exhaust say be cosbined within the
laboratory facilities or in the facilities with the ventilation equipsent.

5.28. in exhaust ventilation systess for laboratories, when an air sixture
with chesically active guess is removed, sir ducts ssde tron corrosion-
resistaat materials should be used.

6. 6A8 SUPPLY

6.1. The gas supply should be designed in accordance with the chapter of
SNiP on designing interior devices. exterior networks and structures for
gas supply. in consideration of this section. Low-pressure gas should be
used (or industrial and everyday needs.

6.2. The combined gas flow rate should be detersined from the heat loads
in accordance with Table l2.

Table 12.

  
   

 
  
 

lleat loads per 1 .2

Basic facilities in building of “"1 area q” in kcsllhr

Cheeicsl and biological laboratories 50
Physics laboratories 12
txperisental workshops 30

6.3. when detersining the ssatisus hourly flow rate of gas, 9,, . s3 (“PM
lday. the heat loads and den-and factor of the action of the gas instrulents.
it. given in Table 13. should be used.

6.6. The estisated hourly flow rate of the gas should be determined accord-
ing to the for-uls

OIL-l ' ask-
where q ~~tlw rated heat load by one user of the use type. in ltcal/hr;
n «the number of users of the seas type in the building or the
estilsted section of the pipeline;
wnthe calorific value of the gas used. in heal/s3 (m);
k «the desmd factor of the action of the users.

The daily ascent of gas 0",. in .3 ("TH/day. should be determined according
to the formula

26

FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY
in a max—(333x. 32839333. 35339. .- 8v

«34531.2. on an... in 3b.... .auyuetsuonuap on gay 3:33.630 838536.5k
. m
.I .II_ I I l . I . o o 83 .34: .93... .B. .83 ohm:
58425 as}...

 

 

0.0 . 639 3.3. in. unzﬁgdaoawv.

.559. «2.52333. «Sauna—haw

7.355; :2: 1183..
3.18383. piggosv

 

 

 

 

 

la ”Hi—l: 3‘ so _ I! _ a. a g on o. v.36
I'lllllullllll. Jvcsﬁﬁz .3 582.5.
n idﬁgagyn any AN _

 

lllllll||||l|l||.|l||u||
'0]! OWICIAL 083 ONLY

4..»-
Q‘V’ " 1.5‘

where Tuthe work ties in hours:
l.5--the hourly peaking factor of gas consusption.

7. rowan SUPPLY AND ELECTRICAL BQUIWT

7.l. Power supply. power electrical equipment and electric lighting for all
should be designed in accordance with the Rules for Setting Up Electric
Installation (PUB), inst ‘uctions for planning power supply. power and light-
ing electrical equipaent for industrial enterprises. installation of ground
and foundation level systeee at electrical plants. installation of lightning
protection for buildings and structures. the chapter of Sllil’ on planning
artificial lighting and these Instructions.

7.2. According to the degree of reliability of the power supply. the
electric receivers of warehouse and utility facilities and electric notors
of sachine tool and crane equip-ant are included in the third category. and
the rest of the electric receivers--in the second category.

The power supply of the electric actors of fire service pueps and other
electric receivers of fire-prevention devices. of protection and fire
warning signal systees. elevators. electric eotcrs for escrgency ventila-
tion and eeergency electric lighting should be provided free different
transformers of two-transformer substations or fm trensfornsrs of two
neighboring transformer substations. with two separate lines each with en

autosatic reserve switching device.

7.3. Direct current with a voltage of 380/220 volts should be used for the
power supply of N11.

7.6. The direct current power supply for laboratory facilities should as a
rule be provided free local rectifiers. placed in the given laboratory.

The use of nonportable storage batteries (for the entire building) and
installation of centralized systesa of direct current power supply is
persitted when there are special justifications in the planning assignaent
only for a voltage of 110 and 220 volts.

7.5. A special laboratory network nust be provided in NI! buildings to
power the electric receivers hooked up to the laboratory panels.

7.6. Laboratory panels should be specified for alternating current voltage
of 330/220 volts (with substantiation. also for no and 220 volts direct
current-case paragraph 7.6). Direct current with a voltage of 2e, 12 and

6 volts should not be supplied to laboratory panels.

7.7. All the socket outlets on laboratory panels should have a grounding
contact.

26

FOR OHIO!“ 08! (Ill!
FOR OFVICTAL USE ONLY

7.8. When n luhorntory power supply system Is planned. allowance oust be
node (or the possibility of its replacement if there is a change in the
process of pcrforsing the scientific research work.

7.9. Hires and cables with aluminum cores should be used. except in cases
stipulated in the PUB.

7.10. Systems powering laboratory panels. as well as lighting systeas for
Ni! buildings should be protected against overloading.

7.11. The use of capacity. when Iain laboratory systems are estisated.
should be adopted according to the nusber of distributing centers connected.

when a laboratory power supply distributing systes is planned. as a rule not
more than three laboratory panels should be combined "into the circuit"; in
this case the cross section of the wires should be chosen iron the conditions
of a full load of one laboratory panel and the selectivity of the shield.

7.12. When the power of the transformers is selected. the use factors of
the electric receivers for the laboratory system should be adopted according
to Table 16. and the use factors of the other electric receivers-according
to Table 15.

The estinated power of the laboratory panels should be adopted according to
Table 16.

Table lh

      
   
    
    
  
     
   

Electric receiver Use factor

    

alternating current direct current

Biological laboratories

Chenical laboratories

Physics laboratories 0.15

Table l5

Use factor

   

Electric receivers

Exhaust ventilation systess
Plenun ventilation systems
Metal and wood working machine tools. sechanisos
Welding transformers

Cranes and hoists

Resistance furnaces. induction furnaces. valve
oscillators. electric motors. Puﬂps

Lighting:

°9999°
“DICK-INN“
U‘U‘

for power systess
for inputs

00

ND

27

’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 16.

  
  
   
  
 
 

Estimated power of one
laboratory panel. in kw

 

Laboratory panels alternating direct current

current. llo and 220 V
380/220 v

In cheslcal and biological laboratories:
exhaust hood panels
laboratory chesicsl desk panels
wall laboratory panels
to physics laboratories:
exhaust hood panels
wall laboratory panels
laboratory physics desk panels

sue-0° .000
M MUM

7.13. The cosbined indicators of the estimated power of the trensforsers
of a transformer substation should be adopted according to Table 17.

Table 17.

 

Betisated power of
transfer-era, in kva

per staff
associate

   
 

Facilities

  
   

per s2 of
total area

Chemical and biological laboratories
Physics laboratories

working facilities (laboratories) of
social science N11

Experiaental workshops

7.15. The laboratory facilities of N11 of natural and technical sciences
should be included asong facilities with heightened danger of injury to
people free electric shocks.

7.15. The corridors of the buildings. if no centralised systen of dust
resoval is provided for thee. should be provided with socket outlets with
a protective contact to connect cleaning nachines. The socket outlets
should he installed at a distance that ensures the possibility of hooking
up the cleaning machines with s feed line 15 asters long.

7.16. A special systes should be provided for power for the refrigerators.

7.17. Industrial grounding with a resistance of 10 ohss should be provided
for particularly precise neasuressats in sose facilities (according to the

28

I03 OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

assignment for the planning). When there are special requirements for the
industrial part of the plan. the resistance of the industrial grounding
devices may be reduced to 2-3 ohms. The grounding wires for the industrial
grounding for the purpose of ensuring minimum induction should be provided
with shields with an outer insulating covering.

The cross section of the grounding wires of the industrial grounding system
should be determined by estimate and be at least 25 mag, and the cross
sections of the branches to the facilities--nt least 10 mm2 for aluminum.

Laboratory panels must be provided with a place to install terminals for
industrial grounding. insulated from the housing of the letal panel. The
source of the industrial grounding should be at least 15-20 meters from the
source of the protective grounding.

7.l8. Shielded facilities should as a rule be provided with one input from
the power system. The protective grounding (zero adjustment) system of the
building must be used to ground the shield.

7.19. To service and repair lamps and electrical equipment. separate
facilities must be provided with an area estimated as 10 m2 for each 1000
lamps. but at least 20 m2. These facilities must be equipped with work

benches for the electrical wiring work. laboratory panels, shelves and
washers with hot and cold water.

7.20. The systems for smoke removal and the head of the air, the electrical
fire warning signal systems. fire pumps and emergency ventilation should be
supplied with electric power from a special electric panel of the fire-
fighting devices. which should be colored red. These electrical systems
must be laid separately from the other electrical systems for the building.

7.21. Units controlling and distributing inert gases through the laboratory
facilities should be equipped with gas analyzers for continuous monitoring
of the purity of the gas returned from the laboratory and light and sound
signal warnings of a disorder in the hermetic sealing of the gas line.

7.22. Facilities designed for work involving ionizing emissions must be
equipped with instruments for radiation monitoring; a lighted signal panel
uhnuld he installed at the entrance doors of these facilities: "Entry
Forbidden." "Entry Permitted." When the level of activity of the ionizing
emissions in these facilities is below the established threshold. the
radiation monitoring instruments should be in a holding state, which should
be signaled by a green light. Exceeding the permissible threshold of
activity of the ionizing emissions should be accompanied by switching from
the green to a red light and a sound signal in the facilities being moni-
tored and on the radiation monitoring panel. The irradiation chambers should
be equipped with a mechanical blocking device, preventing entry into the
facilities during work of the source of the irradiation.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7.23. isotope laboratory facilities should be provided with continuous or
periodic monitoring of the radiation level and compulsory monitoring for

possible contamination of clothing and the body when the associates leave
the facilities.

7.25. Facilities for laboratories with toxic substances should be equipped
with gas analyzers and a blocking system. The monitoring and blocking system.
when the maximum permissible concentrations are reached. should ensure:

Switching on the emergency ventilation.

Cutting off the toxic gas or liquid at the supply pipeline.

Supplying light and sound signals to the facilities being monitored and to
the panels of the person on duty,

Closing the valve at the inflow air duct with the cutting off of the exhaust
systems.

7.25. All facilities with production processes of categories A, B and F
should be equipped with gas analyzers and a blocking system. The monitoring

and blocking system. when the minum permissible concentrations are reached,
should ensure:

Switching on the emergency exhaust ventilation.
Cutting off the gas with cut-off valves at the supply pipeline and supplying
light and sound signals.

7.26. Nil buildings should be provided with a central control panel of the

sanitatary engineering and industrial units. located in the facilities for
the control service.

Local exhaust ventilation systems (local vents. chemical exhaust hoods, etc.)
should be controlled from the facilities being served, and only the signal of
the condition should extend to the control panel. In some cases the control
panel may be installed in the facilities for the plenum ventilation systems.

7.27. An interior communications telephone should be installed in the
laboratory and office facilities. Tie-lines to city telephones should be
installed in the administrative facilities and in the offices of the division
chiefs of laboratory heads.

7.28. The director's line should be designed for direct. efficient communica-
tions between the NI! director and the division chiefs and laboratory heads.

7.29. Secondary electric clocks should be installed in the corridors.
entrance halls. reading rooms and production facilities 30 I? or more in
area.

7.30. The city. local and director's co-nnication system. as well as those
for the electric clocks and radio installation should be cosbined into a
single comprehensive system.

30

FOR OFFICIAL 053 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7.31. Open laying of the low-power communications systens should be speci-
fied in the production and auxiliary facilities. and in the rest of the
facilities--elosed (in this case the use of steel pipes is not permitted).

7. 32. Radio installation for NH buildings must be designed free the city
broadcasting network. It is pereiasihle to design a local broadcast relay
exchange if this is specified by the assignment for the planning.

Radio points of the city network should be installed in administrative
facilities and in the offices of laboratory heads. The radio points of

the local radio broadcast relay exchange should be located in the laboratory
facilities and in the offices.

7.33. The facilities mentioned in Appendix 3 should be equipped with auto-
not ic fire warning signals. The autonatic fire-extinguishing systeus should
be provided in accordance with Appendix Io.

Aprsnmx 1
Total Area of Buildings for NI! per Staff Associate
Table lb

        
    

 

  

timber of Staff Associates Total Area. in .2

 

N1! of natural and technical sciences

300 30
600 29.7
1000 29.3
2000 28.3
3500 26.8
NI! of social sciences
300 20
600 19.6
1000 18.6

APPENDIX 2

Deter-lam: lleat boss in heating the Exterior Air Entering the facilities
Through Infiltration

The additional heat losses. Q... . in heal/hr, to heat the outside air enter-
ing. through infiltration. cheeical laboratories, should be deter-ined
according to the fomla

"‘ PA
Q n m—
“ V5

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR orrtcuu. USE ONLY

where lh-the amount of the relative hent lossen. accepted according to

graphs (Pigs. 1-14):

Bnthe nondieensionel coefficient. equal. for buildings up to 6
floors inclusive. to 11.9. and for buildings up to 9 stories.
to 12.90;

Futhe area of the windows of identical design in facilities. in .2;

Authe coefficient allowing for heating the air through basic heat
losses: for single and double casenents. A - l. for the rest of
the designs of the window apertures node. A -0.8;

a--the specific characteristics of the resistance to the air penetra-
tion of the design adopted for Iaking the window apertures.
in n2°hrzlkg. determined according to Table 19.

Additional heat losses for heating the exterior air entering the facilities
through infiltration should be determined for the working and nonworking
tine and the greater anomt of heat loss be adopted in the calculations.

 

 

Table l9e
Designs of fillings of window apertures s. nz-hrzlkg
and type of sealing linings

Single or double sash without sealing linings for the 0.0016
panels

Sane. with the panels sealed with foan rubber 0.022
Sane. with the panels sealed with foan polyurethane 0.029
Double sashes without sealing linings for the panels 0.0035
Sass. with panels of inner sash sealed with feet rubber 0.029
Sane. with the panels sealed with foes polyurethane 0.035
Double sashes with panels sealed for both sashes with 0.051.
foee rubber

Sass. with panels sealed with fees polyurethane 0.066

Notes: 1. The designs for the fillings of the window apertures and the
type of sealing lining should be adopted in accordance with the Ski? for
.onstruction heat engineering.

2. The values of the specific specifications of resistance to air penetra-
tion for the filling of window apertures. a . are adopted in the table for
an outside air teeperature of t” - -3o‘c and the teqersture of the air in
the facilities. is - 20'0 (t - 4°C). For other teepersture conditions
the table values should be natiplied by the coefficient K. deter-ined
according to the for-ole

32

'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
Figure 1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

’IIE

          

 

 
 

\\mi

\‘lu
‘3!-

\‘a-ggf

m

\ Illa-Ill...-
‘RWImn-u.
' I“ mica-mm.-

§E§§i:

me

 

ET"

V. 13“,.

EISS

  
    
 

\‘qm

  

VOM

    

ERIC-m

W0

‘L‘.

“L‘s

   
 
   

   
  

i
E rda/
I " 0/ wit
'u, ‘Ggggigg ' "
yé 'iﬁ’ dlll
55 33 EE::::
,%5 E III-

     

o.
Q
S
é
'é

AIomt of relative heet lo-
26 floors of e 6-etoty boil
for facilities with extent
the inflow during work time

33
FOR ORIGIN.

c’.
§
8
a"
0?

       

oee (Q) for facilities of the let-
ding in nonworking tine. to well as
ventilation fully compensated by

US! ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
      

 
   

   

 
 

       
 
 

Y'IJ'M/o
6‘ .
I I
I
III. III
‘=:::::::.2
’. .I."IM
,III
5.3“!
. In
" . {m I?“
Vﬁﬁﬂ'p'ai
A 4
5A; inﬁrm!!!“
’url‘ ‘535355’ I1
)7! a £15 uv-o
zdggﬁgu av-m
31.9.15
g==ul ll

       

Figure 2. Mount of relative heat losses (5) for facilities of 36-6th

ﬂoors of 6-otory building in nonworking time. as well u for

facilities with exhaust ventilation, fully commuted by
inflow during working tine

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR Ol’l’IClM. 083 ONLY

.muéﬁ.

 

mum

 

Figure 3. Amount of relative heat losses (0) for facilities of Stir-6th
floorn of 6-13th building in nonworking time. as well u for
facilities with exhaust ventilation fully conpenuted by
inflow during working tine

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

\‘III

 

0
I 0 ~10 ~20 '00 ~00 -00 0»?

     

Pl'gurc 4. Amount of relative heat losses (6) for facilities of lot-2d
floors of 6~otory building with exhaust ventilation not

compensated by inflow during working hours

36

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0. he _

: . \‘IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII

l
. .
: - -
: - -
. - . I

l : I '

    
 
 
     
    

a:

 
 

_ n

‘I

“km

 

: o -m -:o -:o «0 ~50 9,?

Figure 5. Amount of relative heat losses (‘0') for facilities of 3d-loth
floors of 6-story building with exhaust ventilation, not
coupenuted by inflow during working time

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE DULY
FOR ()I’I'ICML URI! ONLY

IIISSI

        
 
      

IIIIIII

 

‘I

   
 

IIIISIIIIII
QIIIIIIII
I

‘83
:.L

III-Ill,
IIIII
III-ll
=... 25"

“1:3

IIIIENII
IIIIIIQXGII IEI

d‘;;III3IIIIIIII

Inuit

III

.4

VIIW
m;I§
-\\‘§:\
Ik\
IIII I‘E
“II-I‘D
mIII\m
“II-I5“
II
II
II

Figure 6. A-ount of nelstivs heat losses (5) for fscilttiss of $th—6th
floors of 6-story building with sxhsust ventilation, not
compensated by inflow during working tins

n

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

    

    

lllllllllg’in
IIIIIIIIIIEEII'Aw-rd.‘ o
III-IIIIIIIII'I-II'AIES

A-ouot or roiativc heat losses (Q) for facilities of lot-2d
floor of 6-ntory buiidlng with excess inflov during working

tine

Figure 7.

39

FOR OFFICIAL 088 OﬂDY
FOR OPFIOML USE ONLY

2V!!!»
AVIIO
V405“

            

'WIIIIII’IM“
IIZIIIIIIE

IIUWVIIIIIIMI
III-WWIIIII'VI
IIIIIIZWIIIIIEI
IIIIIIIMVIIII 1‘
IIIIIIIIIWIII WI
IIIIIIIIIIVIIIIQI
IIIIIIIIIIZAIIEE
IIIIIIIIIIIICIIIZI
I“IIIIIIIIIIIZII=I
IIIIIIII IIIIIZIIIa

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIia
b. J .

       

  

mount of relative hut lone: (a) for Include. of M-Sth

Figure 8.

floors of 6-otory bundtus with “em inflow during working

MIC

60

m omcw. US! ONLY
W)" (WHOMI. "RN "Nb?

Figure 9.

 

bl

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

‘IIIIIIIIIIIII

IIIIIIIIIIII/

IIIIIIIIIIIu
Illlll:llm

      
     
 
   
      

 
 
   

III II .9.-
IIIIIIII'AIII'IA

’IIIIIIIMII ﬁﬂ
IIIIIIIIII/
IIIIIIMII/III
IIIIInIIwm
IIIIIIIIIIIII
IIIInIIIIIIII
IIIIIIV IIIIII
IIIIIu l-l4ml
IIuIaIIIBaI
InInIIIIIIIII
‘lnII55IIIII-
IIIIzIIIIIIII
IIZIIIIIIII'
III-I: a:iuI
l==aiilllllll

  

  
     
    
   
   
       
    

  

  

l

  

Figure 10. Annunt of telntivn heat losses (63 for facilities of 36-6th

floors of 9-otory building when ventilation oysten is switched
off

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0-
.lﬂﬂl IIIHH III! III in."
HM”, :aﬂllI-umdllﬂl a
III-"ﬁlllllﬂﬂlllﬂﬁn—lnl 4

   

  
  

   
 

IIIIEIMIIIIMIIIIIIII I.
IIIIIIIMIIIIIIIIIEHIII.
IIIIIIIIuIIIIaIIIrIII
IIIIIIIIInIIIUAnIIIII
IIIIIIIIIIIumIr. I

  
   

Illlll

      
      

  
 

I
I
I
,I
I
I
, I
I
,I
I
I
I
I
,I
I
i
0
J 0

(Q) for facilities of Sch-Gun
ventilation system is switched

y building when
‘3

Amount of relative heat losses

floors of 9-star

off.

Figure 11.

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

 
   
   

   

IEIIIIIII III
.I III III llu
Illll ll: nu
IIIIIIII

:45:

      

llllllllln
,llllllllua

  
 

V!
N..-

MHIIIIIB

II§IIIIIIII
Kllﬁlllllll

   

MK

lIIIN-INIIIIII
III-INIIIEIII

IQIIIU§II
Null-IIIKEII

ﬂﬂIII-Bﬂll

“II

   

.I
\I
M.

l
I
I
I

      

      

Figure 12. Moon: of relative but loans (6) for facilities of 7th-8th
floors of 9-uory building when mtilation onto- 1. switch“!
off

‘6

' [OI OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

III-ImeSIIIII
lull-n I-“SII-
III“...-

 

~ I‘m-Inna...“

s o w ~10 an on -:o ¢,,'c

Figure 13. Amount of relative heat losses (6) fat facilities of 9th floor
of 9-otory building when ventilation system is switched off

‘5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

 

Figure 14. Aaount of relative heat loaoaa (5) for facilitiea of lat-9th
floora with exceaa eahauat, of 9-atory building when the
ventilation eyatea ia operating

”P810018 3
List of Facilitiee To Be Squipped Hith Autonatic Fire Mar.

1. Pacilitiea of laboratoriea of Ill! of natural and technical aciencoa
with production proceaaea of categoriea A, B and c. working facilitiaa
(lahoratoriea) of Nii of aociel aciencea. photo lehoratoriea (except
:ave;0ping lahoretoriea). facilitiea for control and aeaeuring inetruenta
Kl? . '

3. Auxiliary lacilitieauin accordance vith the chapter of 8M? on planning
auxiliary huildinga and facilitiee for induatrial enterpriaea.

lo. Bxporiaentel vorkahopa: iacilitioa with production prooeaeee oi cate-
goriea A. o and c. facilitiea {or repairing electrical engineering. radio
engineering and theraal equipaent and inatri-enta.

5. warehouae facilitiea: for highly Ila-able. fuel liquida and cheaicale.
vhan the area of the varehouee ia leaa than 300 .2, for atoring cylindera
vith fuel gaaea and for etoriog codmotihle aeteriela and equipaent or
antcriala aid aquipeent in codwetihle packaging.

66

'0. omcm. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Facilities for transformers with oil transformers. compressor and
panel facilities and control boards.

Note. If these facilities are to be equipped with safety signal devices.
they must be equipped with combined safety-fire signal devices.

APPENDIX 4

List of Buildings and Facilities To Be Equipped With Automatic Fire
Extinguishers

l. Warehouses for highly flnmnnblc liquids. fuel liquids and fuel chemicals
with an area of 300 I and over: facilities (compartments) for storing the
operating stock of highly flammable liquids. fuel liquids and chemicals.

2. Facilities (booths. boxes) for testing using highly flammable liquids
and fuel liquids.

3. Facilities with special-purpose equipment. instruments and materials:

facilities for storing and issuing special-purpose items. accounts. menu-
scripts and other documentation of particular value.

67

P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0338 00.33

C— .9: =4— . Go .95 \ lawn—no.3":
«.18. .96 :33. .— 233— .uoa our—0100."!
3795:. c. u 358...!» 8.8: .338 0888
3&3??? .8230 H . 93:. Add you 016—. . Hi0 . Ilium you 0.30.70 ado: 03.80am

cowaooualoo
303 we nag—vol
«onus—vol n12.-
"530.33.".

«0 guano:

    

  

keno-.356 0.359.
n..— concur-lune”:—

uOuo-Jzuﬂ 83:
you «gamma-ungua—

am! udtwm ma." 2
23H eoH.o.o?-o\ous H
an! an? an OH?

)xum o°.—.w.o)\Nl Qua— .—

      

   

nuance
um n62" )\.H8¢muoam(u b532— uo haul—«3.:-
Zum Q.m.\(.noo J!— .I.. H EH00

 

H33.— uouua no nouns—H33
nauqluucoo onus..-

.Hg «one Ilauuoa «a

 

«a. H633 n37.
.2 ameoHé62~3§aa H

 

aha-non.—

      
   

      

    

u0uoa onus... ~30! 89:...
you .3252 «Ixoux no: oouounﬁnuuogu—
3:9— 6:8qu caucunﬁunoauu

one." coauuam
v03 Mao-HS

~52 SIN-<5“. H «:2
ix: ode-<09— H Ix: «no! you 2330:

an
93:02 on
09—
no.3!—
. nouuawuuaon Inval—
Hm

Hula—.5...) on nod—Ham

 

   
   

oouounlauu
concutaou
ghouls-uncut.

 

z... oHaznuoHéda-u H
i SizHoHéaes H
a 38.. ad .89. H

  
  

£3.33 "anon “vouch

   

down:—
:33:

 
  

    
 

   

333539

0683338

325 no gunnnuuuoo no .3333qu

   

93:5

:3 3.2.5 «0 I398 Hagan-2535. 0..» «o
3.25 can Hugh—v5.5 3 302.5 3.25qu 30:55 me mum-5 33.30 .5250: 23330.38 «0 0.33.

.395. Huang-50* .

68

ron onrcw. us: onu-
POI! OFFICIAL IISK "MIN

.- N.¢20\n¢o .— 0309 33qu no; 0030—8
3 n.nnh7..n.n q .5... uﬁuuounm
1

3 341.533:— ~ .5303— »: uoa nor—3.60:2
A
0‘89— nouoluoouOunl-uuoza

a 22: o.u)u}.&u u

a «332—003 n
H N521“. .— n,

_. 37... oil-69. H

                          
                

 

013.com 3—
0.33.0

h0u'l09u0unﬂeu3 «u

8.3 On .I.

7....» u.o)\l.nua .— ususIOQuOunlnung;

     

«3300 avenue.-
unuuuau 0:3:

no.— 3. has «02330—3.
25:8 accuwev
InuOuoauucou «have»
L2. 2390» you 0033.6

2.5.38

    

538.
'33qu
CTN-5‘3— 3." 2‘

28..~a..3:.§_ H
Q.-:a§

28..~8.3 .3 a

        

    

  

3—5: 3 o.— .u 330x «0933:9303 you
Go 3.55:de u luau»! .59. no.— aowuoa-oou 3.

.. .Iv \3 u... 3:: 25300

3.3 a can )u «08:271—33ch

lav-$0.333 n you 3.80: n!— nevus-u

. can»... u.
.. 538 .3335qu

3 2.33:: 3 302.5

maul. mo sauna—9C .
nun—5

no.6»

unop— uo 230-!

592.0 3.33
0—5500

a no ucuaoa

mucosa our—om

3:33:08
nuance: any:

>uu>uuuavcou ado:

ucaaﬂwls

uo acuuaguunon

scroylulat, 1978 EN!)

COPYING”:

(09
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0

12151
(:80:

8346/0550