APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00060R000‘000.0004-2

3 CPR". 1979 (PM 10/79)

FOR OFFICIAL USE CNLY

ans was“
3 April 1979

TRANSMTIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(Fouo 10/79)
CIVIL DEFENSE AT AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION FACILITIES

U. S. JOINT MUCATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY
um

”I: publicatione contain intonation priaarily tron foreign
newapapere. periodicale and booha. but aleo tron newe agency
tranenieeiona and broadcaete. Hateriele fro- foreign-language
eourcea are tranalated; thoee tron lnglieh-lenguege eourcee
are tranacribed or reprinted. with the original phraeing end
other characteriatica retained.

lleedlinee. editorial reporte. and material encloaed in brackete
[l are eupplied by JP”. Proceeeing indicatore euch aa [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the (irat line of each iten, or following the
laet line of a brief. indicate how the original intonation wee
proceaeed. hhere no proceeeing indicator ie given. the infor-
nation wee a_riud or extracted.

Uni-iliar nanea rendered phonetically or tranaliterated ere
encloeed in parentheeea. Horde or nauee preceded by a quea-
tion ark and encloeed in parentheeea were not clear in the
original but have been aupplied ea appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notee within the body of an
in. originate with the eource. tiara within itena are ac
given by eource.

the contente of thia publication in no way repreeent the poli-
ciea, views or attitudea of the 0.8. Govern-eat.

”RIG? “"8 MID rem-nous mum oumsmr 0?
ramms WED WU! mum m1” 01380411“le
0? BIS ”31.!me ll ezsntcm MMICIAL US! GILL
NR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

JPRB 13/8368
3 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS m USSR HILITARY AFFAIRS
(moo 10m)
Cwu. because AT Asmcuu'uut Paonucnou FAclees

Noam GMZKDANBKAYA 080m NA on'mrm BBL'SKOHiOZYAYSWBNNOGO

gigonggosm in Rusian 1910 aignod to pross 13 Oct 77 pp 159-210.
l-3

(Annotation. 'rablo ot Conunts and Chaptar 7 iron book by
NJ. Akinov and ms. n'in. Izaatal'atvo 'Kolos', 200,000
oopiea, 335 paqaa, titlo paqa intonation. table of contnnta,
introduction and axoarpts tron book previously pnbliahod in
ans L/0260. 2 tab 79, [000 4/79 of this sarios, pagas 1-37)

Intonation on Authors

[Tart] V. 0. ll'in note chapters 2. 7 (moot for tha factora influanto-
in; work stability at facilities and tho basic nasauras for intransin;
work stability at facilitiaa). 8. 9 and ll of thia tool; A. II. Antropov
and V. c. maria vrots chapter l2; II. I. Akinov trots tho rsst.

Annotation

‘l'hia textbook mainas: co tanks and organisation at agricultural facili-
ties; tho-ital. biological and radiation dotactora and dosinstars; the

(acility CD plan; organizing and conducting raacns and .srgancy restoration

work vithin tho torritory o! an agricultural facility and also a cont-i-
natad urban facility; and othar iaanu

1 (III - USSR - 0 7000]

FOR OFFICIAL m8 aux
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contente

Intruuct‘meaeeoeeaeeeeeeaeeeeeeoeoe

Chapter 1. Civil Defence Tulsa and Organizational Structure
for an Agricultural Facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

l.
2.

3a
‘a

The Capitaliet Statua' Heapone of Haaa Deatruction

and a Brief Deacription of Then. . . . . . . . . . .
The Poreign Statea' henna for Delivering Heapona of
hue Deatruction to Objectivea (Tergeta) . . . . . .
CivilDefenae'l'aaha.................
Civil Defenee Organizational Structure . . . . . . .

Chapter 2. The Effect of Heapona of llaaa Deetruction on
Agricultural Pacilitiea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

l.
2.
3.

h.

12.

Nuclear Ueapona Effecta on Agricultural Pacilitiea .
Radioactive Pollution (Cont-ination) of the Terrain
The Effect of the Producte of a Nuclear hploaion on
Peopleandhniaala.................
The Effect of the hmducta of a Nuclear hploeion on
P1.nt. O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
Contaaination of Piah Lite by Radioactive Suhatancea
Contaaination of Pood. Peed and Hater by Radioactive
“u“m.’ O O O O 0 O O O O O O O O 0 O O J I O O O
Chuicel Ueapone Effecta on People and Roi-ale . . .
Oonmimtlon of terrain. Iuildinge. Pood. Peed and

UaterhyPoiaonouaRgeuta...............

Chemical Agente Deaigned to Deatroy Rgriculutral Crope .
Biological liar-fare Rgenta Effecta on People and Roi-ale.

Contnaination of Pood. Peed and Hater by Diaeaee-

Carryiuuicroorgani-aend Toxina . . . . . . . . . . .

Biological Uariare Agente “recto on Planta . . . .

Chapter 3. Radiation and Che-ital Detectore and Devicea for
honitoring Radioactive Contaaination and Irradiation . .

1.
2.
J.

b.
S.

6.

Typee of Radioactive Radiation . . . . . . . . . . .
l‘nite of Ileaaure-ent ror Radioactive Radiation . . .
Purpoae. Operating Principle and Deaign of Doaiaetera

Purpoae and Sonic Performance Data for the DP-SD and

o

e

eeea

eeee

theDP-SRlnetn-ente .................

Purpoae and Iaeic Perfonance Data (or Individual Doai-

caterKita.......................
ChcnicalReconnaieaanceKite...............

Dcvicea for Detecting Ruat Sporea and Phytophthora
Sporea in the At-oaphere and on Crop! . . . . . . .
s‘orm “t. O O O O 0 I O O O O 0 O O O O I O O O 0

Chapter 6. Protecting the Population Againat Heapone of lace
Dcetruction ......................

1.

Protective Civil Defenae Structurea . . . . . . . .

2
roe OFFICIAL 088 “I

e

eeee

ee~e

12
18

22
22

30

38

60
61

lo?
58
52

55
SS

01
81
FOR OFPICIAL 083 ONLY

sheltler. O 0 0 O O I O I O 6 6 O Q 0 O O O 6 6 6 O O 6
Rediationsheltere..................
Rulee for Being Civil Defence Protective Structuree . . .
Dieporeel and lvecuetion of the Population . . . . . . .
Reception and Lodging of People Involved in Diepereel
endBvecuetion.....................
lndividuel lieene of Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Proceduree for Ueing the Individual Piret Aid Kit end the
Iﬂd6V66u‘1 M‘t‘.’ Mumnt O O O O O O O O I O O O O O 6

eoao

Chapter 5. Actione of the Population Under the Threat of en lne-y
Attack and in leeponee to Civil Defence Alerte . . . . . . . .

1.

2.

Actione of the Population Under the threat of an Bneuy
AtuCk O 0 O O 0 O 0 O 6 O 0 O O I O I 6 O 6 O O 6 I O I 6
Civil Defence Alerte end Action. of the Population . . . .

Chapter 6. Adepting end Ueing Agriculturel Bouip-ent for Civil
DefcneePurpoeee .

5.

Being Agricultural Hachincry end Toole to Decontelinete
the Terrain. Buildinge. Structuree. Pecilitiee end
6nuip-ent end to Protect Plent Life . . . . . . . . . . . .
hloying Agriculturel Aircraft to Protect Plent Life . . .
Equip-ant Beployed to Protect Liveetoclz . . . . . . . . . .
Adapting and Being Tractore. Bxcevatore. land Iecleeetion
ﬂechinery end load-ﬂendling [quip-eat to Necheniee hecue
end uergency Reetoretion Hark . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Safety Neeeurce when lleing Agriculturel end Specialized
equip-cut for Decontenination Purpoeee . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 7. Hort Stability of Agriculturel Pecilitiee in Hertiue . .

I.
2.
3.
A.

Pectore Influencing Hort Stehility et Pecilitiee . . . . .

leeic Meeeuree for Increeeing Bork Stability et Pecilitiee

Protecting Anieeln Agaimt Ueepone of lien Deetruction . .

CD Heeeuree to liininate the Aftercffecte of the

Bneny'e unloynent of Ueapone of haee Deetruction on

Liventocleer-e......................
Heeeuree in Zonee of ledioective Conteninuion . . . . .
liceeuree in 0 Center of Chenicel Contaninetion . . . . .
Beeic heeeurce to Ililinete a Center of Biologicel
Conteeinetion......................
Veterinary 'l'rcetncnt -2 Mini. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deconte-inetingaquipnent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deconte-inating the Territory of Liveetoclt Par-e end
LivcetockPecilitiee ..................
Rendering Nedicol Aeeietence end Preventive ﬂedicel
Meietencc to Contenineted Anieele . . . . . . . . . . .
Proceduree for Slaughtering end Conducting e Veterinery
ﬂedicel luninetion of the Heat of Anilele Subjected to
the affecte of Iieepone of hue beetruction . . . . . . .

-3-

M 07710151. USE ONLY

one-

one.

61

96
100

. 107

110
122

125
125
131
137

137
1‘9
152

155
156
159
159

160
166

172
173
175
176
176
166
165

166

169
’0

6D

7.

9.

70!! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Protecting Plantc Againct Veaponc of Mace Dectruction .
CD heacurcc "hen Plante are Conteninated by llarbicidec
CD heeeurec when Plentc are Contaeinated by biological
Aunt. O 0 O O O b D O O I O O O 0 O D O O I O O O R R
CD heacurec when Planta are Contaeineted by Radioactive
sub.uuc.. l I O D O l O D I b O O O D O 0 O O O b b 0
CD Heacurec for Reducing Crop laceee and Surface
Contenination of Agricultural Productc by Radioactive

e

192
193

195
197

SWICIIICCI................ooo..o.197

Conducting Agricultural Production on band with an lncrcaced

Strontiue-90Content....................

bacic Meaeurcc for Reducing the bntry of Strontiu-PO

1nt° Punt. ft“ th. 80‘! D O O O I O C O O O O O O I I O

Peed Production on band with an Increcced Level of Radio-

ectivity.........................

Feeding Agricultural Aninclo in Zonec with an Increeced

bevelofRedioactivity..................

Doing and Growing Titer in an Area with an lncreaeed Level

ofRadioectivity......................

Protecting and Decontcninating Pood. Peed. Hater and
8ourceeofﬂater....................
Decontceinating Pood. Peed and Hater Under Rolkhoc and
Samoa matt‘m. O O O O 0 C I O D I O O O O O O O 0
Quick Hethodc for Detecting Radioactive bubetancec.
herbicidec and biological Agente in Pood. Peed and Hater

Chapter 8. “the Civil Defence Plan for en Agricultural Pacility .

S.

PurpoceoftheCivilDefoncaPlan . . . . . . . . . . .
becic Requiremnte for the Civil Defence Plan . . . . .
bacic. Initial Data Required to Develop Civil Defence
Plcnc .........................
Proceduroc for Developing. Approving and Correcting the
CivilDefencePlan.................‘.
Civil Defence Plcn Docunentc end Their Contentc . . . .
brief Contentc of the bccic Appendicec of the CD Plan

Chapter 9. hethodc for Evaluating the Radiation Situation baced
onReconnaiccenceDete....................

l.

2.

3.

Dctenining Zonec of Contadnetion baced on the Known
ml of ml.t‘°ﬂ O 0 C O 0 I O O O O O D O O O O O O O

Dctereining the Docegc of Radiation Received by People and

Aninalc ﬂhile Located in Contaeineted Zonec and "bile
‘l'revercingSuanonee .................
Detenining the Perniceible Tine for Remining in e
Contaeinated Zone beced on the Rnown Level of Radiation
Deternining the Perniceible Tine for beginning Bork in a
Contc-inated Zone with a Given Docage of Radiation and
Deter-lining the Duration of Dork- . . . . . . . . . . . .

.g-

M 03716351. USE ONLY

0

e

201
202
206
203
210
212
215
21a
no
225
225
226
223
229
233
236

236

236
239

2‘2
FOR OFFICIAL 08! ONLY

Deter-lining the Conteninetion of Green in Peeturoe.
Grein. locel food end Ilorieontel Surfeoen by India-
octiveﬂuhetencee...................
“tinting Agriculturel Crop loneee . . . . . . . . . .
Deter-min; the “01' of Shifte for Conducting Reecue

work Ieeed on the ledietion situetion which an Developed

.tth."c111tyeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Deter-lining Bork Oonditione for Iolkhoe Horkere. Horton
end hployoee in en Aree of Redioective Conteniution .

duepter no. Orgenieins end Conducting Reecue end urgency
Ieetoretionﬂorh .....................

1.
2.

30
be

S.

Orunieine Reecue and hergency Reetoretion Bork . . .
Bork of the Steff end Servicee in Prepering Due for the
Facility C!) Chief to Nelle e Decieion on the Conduct of
Relcucuotk.........o............
Conducting Reecue Dork et en Agriculturel Pecility . .
Rendering Aeeietence to en Urben Pecility in Corryin;
OutReecueHork....................
Relievingcnlorletione................

Chepter ll. rightiu Piree end Other Nature]. Dieeetere in Rurel

Me...........................o.

1.
2e
3.
‘e
5.

6.

rightingl'iree ....................
Firefighting Sefety Bouipnent............

Reecue end hergency Reetoretion Bork when Cleening 0p
Afterenlerthquelne.‘................

leecue Bork During Ceteetrophic Inundetione ('loode). .
Ieecue end hergency leutroetion Hort Min. harrioenee

Ieecue Hort During Torrential anoure. undelidee. Snow-

elindeeendSuouDrifte..................

Supporting the Actione of CD For-tine in Cleening Up

After heturel Dieeetere end Their Aftereffecte . . . . . .

Chapter 12. Politicel Indoctrinecion Dork with CD For-tun
Pereounel in e Oonbet situetion end Uhile cleenin; lip After
Neturel Dieeetere. lbrel. foliticel end Peychologicel
“ruining to en lntearel Pert of the ‘i‘reiniu for Civil
Defeneel’orceeendthel’opuletion. . . . . . . . . .. . . . .

1.

2e

3.

The Orgeniution. Teet- end Content of hiiticel indoctrin-

etiun Bork with CD Venetian Pereonnel in e Conhet

sttutunoeeoeeoeee.eeeeeeeeeeeeee

Speciel Puturee of Politicel Indoctrinetion Bork in CD
Pot-etione During kercieee end Uhile Cleenin; Up After

Ihturel Dieeetere end Accidente.. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
lbrel, Politicel end Peychologitel ‘l‘reinir; ie en Inportent

integrel Pert of the Treinin; end lndoctrinetion for

Pereonnel of Civil Defenee ibn-Hiliterieed Ponetione . . .

J

M orncw. 08! MY

2“
2‘ S

26 5
2‘8

252
236

257
260
270
279

28l
202
289

292
293

295

296

296

303

306
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Chepter 13. Civil Defenee Treining for the Population
of en Agriculturel Pecility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 312
l. Orgenieing end Plenning Civil Defenee Treining
for the Populetion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 312
2. Treining the Populetion end Leederehip. Coeeend.
Officer end lenk end Pile Pereonnel of CD
Iornetione . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315
3. Civil Defenee Speciel A no Tecticel Treining
end Beercieee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 318
d. CD Treining Tecilitiee for en Agriculturel
"c‘lit, O I I O O O J 0 e O O 0 O I e 0 I O O 0 322
S. Prepering to Tehe end Giving the RLD [Reedy for
Lehor end Defenee] Teete on the Section
”Civil Defenee” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325

Appendices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . L . . . . . . . . . . 327

CHAPfli 7. WORK STABILITY OF AGRICULTURAL
PACILITIBS II HAITI”!

1. Pectore Influencing Bork Stehility et Pecilitiee

[Text] One of the eein eieeione of CD in increeeing the work
etehility of netionel econoeic fecilitiee during wertine, in-
cluding egriculturel fecilitiee.

The prohlee of etehle production of food end egriculturel rew
eeteriele during e wet in hecoeing one of the soot inportent
prohleee in the netter of eupplying theee neteriele to the
Areed Porcee. the populetion end induetry. Thie ceueee e
require-ent to creete. in peecetine. e11 the eeceeeery pre-
requieitee for noreel functioning of egriculturel production
under the exceptionelly difficult conditione of wertine end
to thereby eneure the country e coeplete end uninterrupted
eupply of egriculturel produce. V. l. Lenin wrote thet "The
heet erny end the people eoet devoted to the revolution will
he ieeedietely deetroyed hy the eneny if they ere not euf-
ficiently erned. eupplied with food end treined.”'

lne fecilitiee which. in peecetine. reletively reelieticelly

end precieely deternine the fectore which will heve e negetive
effect on production end the fecilitiee which develop the
eppropriete neeeuree which euet he conducted in peece end wer
will he better prepered for etehle work during wertine. The
tieely conduct of orgeeiretionel. egrocheeicel. egrotechnicel.
technicel engineering end other neeeuree cen einieire the effecte
of weepone of none deetruction on egriculturel fecilitiee end

.____________1___.
.Lenin. V. . Polo. eohr. eoch-" [Conplete Collected Dorie].

vol 3‘. p ‘08. -6-
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OI?ICIAL US! ONLY

thoy can croato favorahlo conditiona to quickly olioinato
tho aftercffacta of an onaay attack and to raatoro thoir
production activity. in thio roapoct. hy l/wotk otahility
of an agricultural facility/l during wartino. wo noon ito
ahility to quickly olininato tho affocta oi waapona of naao
daotruction and to roatoro production of tho appropriato
quality of agricultural produco at tho plannod lovol.

Tho haaic calculationa for ovaluating tha work otahility of

a facility prinarily hoil down to dotornining tho poaoihlo looooo
in pooplo. agricultural cropa. agricultural livootock--including
a roduction in thoir productivity--and aloo looaoa in othor

noano of production. to nako thooo calculationa. it ia nocoa-
oary to havo a knowlodgo of tho factoro which will offoct tho
production procooa for agricultural produco.

rho onony'o onployaant oi nucloar waapona can howo tho lorgoat
offact on a facility. Iocauao of thia. it io wary inportant:

to dotornino tho iacility'a location in rolation to tho prohahlo
oito of a nuclaar otriko ahoad of tioo; hoood on an ovaluation
of tho prohahlo oituation, to anticipata which caaualty pro-
ducing factora can havo an ottoct on tho facility (which aono

of radioactivo contanination will tho facility ho locatod in):
and aloo to ootinato tho poaoihlo production looaoa.

tho oifoct of waapona o! naoa doatruction on lacilitioo can aloo
ha dopondont upon thoir inportanco and aroa of opocialiration.
Thoroioro. loaooo ohould ha ootinatad with duo rogard for tho
aroa of opocialirotion and tho voluno of agricultural production.
Accordingly. it io nocaaaary to plan and conduct noaauroa which
incroaao an agricultural iacility'a work otahility. lt io aloo
inportant to tako into account tho ooaaonal natura of agricultural
production. Hith conparativoly ainilar offocta tron woapona oi
aaaa doatruction. tho uork atohility of agricultural facilitiaa

will dopond upon tho poriod oi production thoao waapona aro uaod
in.

For oxaaplo. prinarily wintor cropa can ho
dootroyod during tho wintor: wintar and apring
cropa can ho dootroyod during tho apring; and
tho Iajority of tho cropo undor cultivation
can ho dootroyod during tho ounaor. tho
lorgoat looooa will ho whon tho onony onployo
waapona of naao doatruction during tho opting-
aunnor poriod. Planta oro dootroyod by radio-
actiwo irradiation to tho groatoot ortont

during tho tilling phaoo and whon putting out
tuhoro.

-7-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

by conaidaring the factora which have an affect on the work
atability of agricultural facilitiea and by ueing the appropriate
aathoda. it ia poeaibla to deteraine their work atability under
the variegated conditiona of wartina and it ie alao poeaible to
develop and conduct neaauraa to increaae the work atability of
facilitiea.

2. baaic Heaeuraa for Incraaaing Work Stability at ’acilitiaa

The eeaauraa being conducted by the even and the Soviet govern-
nant--to introduce new technical equipaent and new tachnologiaa
into production on a wideepread baaia. to accelerate the develop-
nant of agricultural nachine building. to expand the power
engineering capacitiea. to increaaa the output of aineral ferti-
lirara and chenicala for protecting planta. to eolva the protein
problen. to incraaae the training of paraonnel and enployeea of
the popular vocationa. ae well ae other naaaurea--are having

a large. poaitive affect on the work etability of agricultural
facilitiaa.

To anaura etablc work of an agricultural facility during a war.
it is naceaaary--baaed on on-hand facilitiea--to develop. plan
and conduct. in peace and in war. a ayetan of aeaauree directed
at ainiaiaing the effect of weapona of aaea deatruction on the
facility and at creating favorable conditiona to quickly aliuin-
ate the effecta of an enaay attack.

In //paacatiaa/l. prinary attention ahould be devoted to creating
and preparing a eufficient nunber of radiation eheltera. etock-
piling individual protective gear and aedical auppliea. nnd alao
training the entire population for efficient protection ugainat
the effecta of weapona of naea deatruction during an aneny attack
and training than to conduct agricultural production. the nore
reliably the population ia protactod and the leaa the loaaaa it
takea, the nora favorable the conditiona will be for reatoring
atable work for the facility.

The following preparatory aeeauree wil? be of great inportance
in eneuring the fecility'a work atabili-y: atockpiling autono-
eoua aourcea of electrical power and the neceaaary quantity of
petroleul and lubricanta; adapting agricultural equip-ant and
eaintaining it in good running order and in conatant raadineaa
for operation: creating the neceaaary atockpilea of nateriale
to aaal and reinforce the protective propertiaa of reaidentiel.
liveatock. atorage and other facilitiea and aourcea of water
auppliea and aatariala to protect (ahelter) grain. feed. vege-
tablea and other agricultural produce during ita harveating.
tranaport. procaaeing and atorage.

.3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is always necessary to attespt to create the necessary stock-
piles of produce. feed. biological preparations. antibodies.
decontsninstion agents for livestock and plents. protective agents
for plants. fertilizers and other naterials. It is also necessary
to stockpile those kinds of produce and feed which can be pre-
served for a long tiss--canned. frozen and sterilized produce

and feed in granules. briquets and concentrated fora. It is
advisable to develop rabbitbreeding. poultry breeding end fish

breeding in every vay possible since these sectors provide nore
produce with the least expenditures of labor and feed: in

addition. poultry has a greater resistance to radioactive
irradiation.

Greeting good hygienic conditions for housing. feeding and using
livestock.conducting disinfection and sxtersinsting insects and
rodents at fares on a regular basis and also planned insunization
of livestock against infectious diseases era of great ilportenca.
It is necessary to supply highly valuable pedigreed livestock

and highly productive livestock with the sisplest individual
protective gear for their respiratory organs and skin. It is

reconnsnded that protective Iasks be Iade at all far-s in peace-
tile.

CD requirements should also be taken into account during future
construction of new. standard livestock fscilities and also

when on-hend cettle psns. pigstys and poultry houses are being
equipped and repaired. It is necessary. on a sore widespread
basis. to raise highly productive breeds of agricultural live-
stock which are lost insane to different diseases and also
high~yield agricultural corps which are insune to diseeses and
which resist pests. In growing plants. the developoent of
irrigated cultivation and the tieely and couplets conduct of
sgrotechnicsl. sgrochenicsl. lend reclanetion and other neasures
are of great inportancs in obtaining good. innune crops. It

is necessary to introduce work autonation and nechanisetion when
breeding livestock. growing plants and processing raw laterials;
it is necessary to prepare and adapt agricultural equipsent for
use when elininsting the aftereffects of an enesy attack.

IA cysts. of neasures directed at increasing work stability of
agricultural facilities in usrtine.’ After the enely enploys
weapons of sass destruction. it is necessary to concentrate the
prisary efforts on: quickly elininating the aftereffects of

this attack. restoring stable work at the facility and efficiently
conducting egricultursl production on contslinated territory for
the purpose of obtaining good quality agricultural produce st

the planned level. It is prinerily necessary to restore the
lost resources.

-9-
’0! OFVICIAL USE ONLY
’0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When necessary. first-aid is rendered to the victiae of the
attack and personal cleansing is conducted. Missing aanpower

is replenished with uninjured people living on the facility's
territory. it is necessary to ensure reliable protection against
daaage for the entire population during the production process.
The people aust strictly observe the established procedures for
their conduct.

when the electrical power supply network is severed. aeasures
are taken to restore it. In this case. it is necessary.to
connect the facility's autonoaoue electrical supply system and.
when necessary. take the appropriate nsasures to restore the
centralised supply of electrical power to the facility. It is
especially iaportant to conduct this measure in a clear-cut

and tiaely aanner at integrated poultry fares, poultry conbines
and livestock coaplexes where the production process can be
coapletely interrupted without electrical power.

In restoring production activity. it is necessary to use the
equipsent reaaining at the facility on a widespread basis (aotor
vehicles. tractors. agricultural aachinery. etc.). Daaaged
aachinery and equip-ent which can be reconditioned is reconditioned
and used as assigned. when necessary. contaninsted equipaent
undergoes specialized cleansing.

Special attention must bn devoted to supplying the agricultural
facility with petroleua and lubricants. The requireaente for

then are established by estinating all the work to be accoaplishcd
iron the tine of the eneay's eaployaent of weapons of aass
destruction up to the and of the year (tilling. putting down
fertilizer. weeding. watering. harvesting. etc.). At the sane
tine. the petroleum and lubricants reaaining after the enploy-
aent of weapons of ease destruction are taken into account:

the appropriate requisitions are eubnittad to higher organiz-
ations for the deficit.

When necessary to eliainate the attereffects of the eneny's
eaployaent of weapons of less destruction and to restore stable
work at the facility. measures are conducted to decontaainate

the terrain. radiation shelters and the approaches to then.
residential buildings. livestock. storage and other facilities.
water sources. produce and feed. It is very iaportant to re-
store and replenish the appropriate decontanination equipaent.
cheaical agents for protecting plants and for veterinary cleansing
of livestock and'also stockpiles of fertilizer in a tiaely aanner.
when necessary. veterinery aid is rendered to contaninated live-
stock. In horticulutre. agrotechnical. agrocheaical and other
measures are conducted to preserve and grow corps with consider-
ation for the special features of the soil on the facility's
territory. types of plants. the season and cliaatic conditions.

-10-
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
POI 0!?XCIAL USE ONLY

The onount and naturo of tho nooouroo to rootoro tho focility'a
atahlo production activity will dopond on tho typo and yiold of
tho woopono onployod by tho onoty. on tho dogroo of tho affect
of thoir coaualty producing iaotoro on individuol aoctoro and

on the facility on o wholo. i.o.. on tho oituation which dovolopa
ot the facility.

If the facility in l/in auhtcroo A-l and 4-2 of tho radioactivo
contanination/l. then all tho rootrictiono which woro intro-
duced undor tho CD alort ”Danger of ladiooctivo Contaninationl"
oro cancollod. Thoro aro no roatrictiona on tho worh tino in

all ooctora or agricultural production. Livootoch can ho locatod
on opon land and food in uood without any roatrictiono. l! the
liveotoch hove ooton contaninatod road. thon the adult population
io allowed to uao tho lrooh nilh on tho third day in tho Iirot
ouhrono and on tho filth day in the oocond auhtono: childron aro
allowed to uoo it on tho 15th and 25th doyo. roapoctivoly.
Livoatoch dootinod for olaughtor undorgo votorinary cloanoing.
The produce iron all agriculutral cropo can ho uood for nutri-
tive purpoaoa without any rootrictiono.

Illn ouhrono A-J of tho rodioactivo contanination/l. tho populaco
nuot reaain in radiation oholtoro for a 26-hour poriod. It in
poaoihle to loavo than for 2-3 houro. l2 houro after the
onplooion. Adult livootoch ohould he kept in cloood facilitioo
(or a 26-hour poriod and yolng livoatoch (or a 4-day poriod.
Except for nilhcowo. it ie poraittod to put livoatoch out to
paature two doyo attor tho fallout and nilhcowa can ho put out
throo doyo alter. Tho nilh obtained during tho iirat oi: doyo
nuot he procooood: on tho oovonth day. adulto can uoo it and
children on tho 25th day. Livootoch can he alaughtorod ior
neat only oitor veterinary cloanoing. lxcopt for tho uppor.
contaninatod layer. food can ho uood without any rootrictiono.
Bxcopt for wheat. it in pornittod to uoo all agricultural cropo
on food on the aocond day oitor tho radioactive fallout.

l/ln ouhtone A-b of the radioactivo contamination/I. tho populaco
Iuot renain in radiation oholtoro while at tho oano tino ohoorv-
ing the ootohliohod proceduroo.which can ho cancellod aitor

ten daya have poaaod. Adult livoatoch nuot he kept in livootoch
focilitioo for the iirat two doyo and young livootock aunt ho
kept in for tho firot five doyo. Tho facilitioo in auhtono A—6
aro ooolod for 1.5-2 houro. It in pornittod to put the livoatock
out to paature on the third day. The Iilh ohtainod during tho
iirot s doyo ia proceaaod; adulto can uoe it on tho6th day
and children on the 25th day. Except for tho uppor lO-lSycn
layer. it in pornittod to uoo load without any rootrictiono.
Livootoch aro alanghtorod for noat aitor votorinary cloaaoing
without any rootrictionn. All agricultural cropo can ho uood

-11-
POI OFYXCIAL 09¢ OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for nutritive purpoeca on the third day after the radioactive
fallout.

l/ln euheone 3-1 of the radioactive contaaination/l. work
atability will be greatly dependent upon the people'a obaervance
of the proceduree for their conduct and their accoapliaheent

of the recoaaendatione on conducting agricultural production.
During the firet four daya. the populace auat reaain in radiation
eheltera and they auat obaerve the eatebliahed procedurea. It
ia edviaable to keep liveatoch in cloaed aealed fecilitiea. If
week and old liveatoch were located on open land and if they have
eaten contaeinated graaa. it ia recon-ended that they be alaugh-
tered for neat after a veterinary cleenaing. Cattle can be put
out to paature on the bth day; ailh can be uaed by adulta on
the 8th day and by children on the 30th day. Except for the
upper iO-lS-ce layer. it ia peraitted to uae the feed without
any reatrictiona. It ia recoaaended that fielda vith iaoleted.
heavily contoainated agricultural cropa be reaeadod and that
the appropriate agrotechnical eeeaurea he conducted on a regular
baaio to grow a good harveat. Uhen plant growth atopa. they
ahould be cut for ailege or hey. ancept for wheat. all agri-
cultural cropa can be uaed ea food on the 3rd day after

the radioactive fallout and wheat can be uaed 10 daya after.
After a preliainery cleanaing. fruita and vegetablea are uaed
without any teatrictiona.

I/ln aubrone 3—2 of the radioactive contaainetion/l. the
facility'a worh atablity will be greatly dependent upon the
eeeaurea for reliably protecting the populace. liveatoch. pre-
pared agricultural produce. and alao upon reatoring and creating
the appropriate atockpilea of food reaourcea. The populace

auat reaain in radiation aheltera for a period of air deya while
obaerving the eatebliahed procedurea at the aane tine. During
the firat deya after contaainetlon. it ia neceaaary to accoapliah
only the Ioat urgent work on caring for the liveatoch. decontae-
ineting the aurrounding territory and aeveral other joba on
ell-ineting the radioactive contaaination. lt ia recon-ended
that adult liveatock be kept in facilitice for three daya and
young liveatock be kept in for a period of five Jaye and it ie
recon-ended that they be given clean (not conteainated by radio-
active aubetencea) feed. it ie peraitted to take liveatock

out to peature on the 7th day: adulta can uae the ailh on
the 10th day and children on the 30th day.

Aa a reault of the effect of radioactive eubatancea in aubrone
3-2. large crop loaaea are poaaible; eoreover. individual cropa
will eleoat coapletely pariah. It in recoaaended that everything
poaaihle be herveated froa the fielda. decontaainoted and aent
for technical proceaaing. The fielda where plante have died auat
be reaeeded (early ripening crope are aown).

-12-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFIICIAL 088 ONLY

I/duhcone l-3 of the redioective conteninetion.// Under the
conditions of the heevy redioective conteninetion of this
suhrone. prieery ettention is firet directed st reliehly pro-
tecting the populece. liveetock. food products. feed end weter
sources. It is prinerily neceeeery to use well-prepered redie-
tion shelters. seeled livestock end other fecilities. eppropri-
etely protected weter sources. individuel protective geer end
preventive eedicel geer; it is sleo necessery to strictly ohserve
the procedures for the people's conduct end the procedures for
keeping the livestock. During the first six deys efter e nucleer
explosion. the populece nust renein in redietion shelters end
they eust strictly ohserve the eetehliehed procedures for their
conduct. Upon the expiretion of this period end during e period
of 16 deys. it is poesihle to work 3-10 hours e dey end to

spend the reneining ties in reeidentiel fecilities. During the
first deys. it is necessery to ecconplieh only the einieun of
the eetreeely ieportent work. During the first six deys efter
the erploeion. livestock nust he kept in clooed fecilitiee end
they eust he kept in seeled fecilitiee during the first deys.
feed end wetsr which is well sheltered cen he used without eny
restrictions. it is pereitted to put the livestock out to
pesture on the ninth dey sfter the explosion. The edult popu-
letion cen use the nilk on the 10th dey end children cen one it
on the 30th dey. If livestock-re loceted on open lend during
the redioective fellout end during e period of lZ-Z‘ hours efter
the fellout. it is recon-ended thet they he evecueted huyond
this zone end innedietely sleughtered for eset. Cereel grein

crops end pees eust he reseeded. Potetoee. root crops end
fruit nuet he hervestod.

The following jobs will he conducted: deconteninetion of the
territory. produce. feed. verioue fecilities; personel cleensing
of people: veterinery cleensing of egriculturel livestock; end
specielized clesneing of equip-eat.

I/The cone of dengerous redioective conteeinetion (C).//

he s result of the dengerous redioective contnninetion l/in
suhrone c-lll. prinery ettention is directed et conducting
tinely end effective protective neeeuree. Th' oopulece nust
reeein in well prepered redietion shelters for e period of

lo deys end they nust ohserve the estehlished procedures.
During the first four deys, the nest urgent work on eleeentery
life eupport ectivities for people end livestock noet he con-
ducted. The letter nuet he kept in seeled livestock fecilities.
Produce end feed will he covered up end etored in etorehoueee.
For precticel purposes. it is extreeely difficult to conduct eny
work on growing plente. "hen neceseery. it is edvisehle to
hervest potetoes. root crope end fruit. The required work will
he conducted on deconteninetiog the territory. produce, feed.

-13-
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0l 0!PICIAL US! ONLY

fecilitiee. eenitery cleeneing of people. veterinery cleeneing

of liweetoch end epecielieed cleeneing of equipeent: the work on
reetoring egriculturel production will eleo he cerried out.

For ell precticel purpoeee. it ie not edvieehle to conduct
egriculturel production l/in euheonee c-z end 0-3 of the
redioectiwe conteninetion/L People. liveetoch. produce. feed

end weter eourceo nuwt he reliehly eheltered. If the opportunity
preeente iteelf. people end liweetoch nuet he ewecueted to un-

contenineted or leee contenineted ereee upon the expiretion of
five deye.

Theee ere the heeic principlee for eneuring etehle work et
egriculturel fecilitiee during wertine. At thet tine. reliehle
protection of liveetock end liveetoch produce. plente end

plent produce end eleo weter eourcee egeinet the effecte of
weepone of neee deetruction ie of exceptionelly greet inportence.

3. Protecting Aninele Ageinet Heepone of "non Destruction

When the threet of en eneny etteck erieee. work ie conducted

et the fern for the purpoee of preventing deetruction of egri-
culturel eninele or of nininieing the effect of weepone of

neee deetruction on then. Liveetock end other fecilitiee ere
prepered to protect egriculturel enimele. Rough end eucculent
feed end eourcee of weter ere covered. Stockpilee of the equip-
nent required‘§o elininete the eftereffecte of the enploynent of
weepone of neee deetruction ere checked end eet up: egriculturel
equipnent ie prepered to work in centere of deetruction. Oheerv-
etion of the etnoephere. young plente end plent hede ie increeeed
for the purpoee of detecting e nucleer exploeion or the eneny'e
enploynent of chenicel or hiologicel werfere egente in e tinely
nenner.

[Protecting eninele in liweetoch fecilitiee.l The liveetoch
fecilitiee which ere on-hend et the fern end which ere prepered
in the eppropriete nenner ere prinerily ueed for group protection
of eninele. The preperetion prinerily coneiete of eeeling then.
For thie purpoee. cley. cenent. line (621 elehed line. 322 weter.
62 eodiun chloride). cley-greeee (3 perte cley. l pert greeee)
end other nortere or pleetere ere put on the ceiling end cindere
or eend ere ueed ee fill fron ehove. holee in the welle end
hetween the window perte ere filled with conventionel or cley-
greeee putty. It in recon-ended thet pert of the windowe he
“3M1! “‘1“ up with brick or penele end eeverel windowe ehould
he left for neturel lighting of the fecilitiee: wooden penele
covered with terpeper or other thick neteriel ere nede for then.
It in bent to eeel the windowe with file. etteching it elong the
perinetor of the wooden edgee. 'or the heet eeel. the edgee of
the file ehould he peeted down with e cley-greeee putty (3:1).
8eeling the windowe with filn ie the cheepeet end noet reliehle

-15-
F0! OFPICIAL USE ONLY
'0! 0'?ICIAL 083 ONLY

eeel for preventing the penetretion of arc egente or
euhotencee.

The doore to liveetoch fecilitiee ere repeired end covered

with tnrpeper. ruhher-treeted eeteriel or filo. To reinforce
the door ire-en. the plecee where they join the well ere filled
with e ceeent or other norter. The plecee where the door folde
join ere covered with e wide plenh neiled hell wey up the door.
A etrip oi eleetic neteriel--grooved or epongy rubber or felt--
ie etteched elong the entire perineter oi the door (role. the
eeee kind of etrip ie neiled to the plenh covering the hole
between the (olde of e double-fold door. If the door opene

in. clenp holte ere etteched to it for e tighter (it: if it
opene out. drew-in holte ere put on it. Curteine nede iron e
thick eeteriel ere hung on the ineide of door openinge: they
ere tightly etteched to the door (re-e. lntrencee which ere
ueed on e deily heeie ero equipped with e veetihule of ouch

eiee thet it will he poeeihle to open end cloee the outer door
while loceted in it.

Ventiletion ducte (ehefte) end openinge of the trihutery venti-
letion eyetee ere peched with hurlep hege or eeche tilled with
eewduet. hey. etc. iron the fecility eide: the ducte ere covered
with e etopper (ilep). hut. in euch e nenner thet the ventiletion
eyetee cen he opened quickly when neceeeery. For heet protection
egeinet genne redietion. dirt ie heeped eround the outeide wooden
welle up to epproninetely the windowe (e height of 150-130 cl)

or e fence to built et e dietence of 50-60 on iron the well end
the epece between the fence end the well ie filled with dirt.

li there ie not enough roon in the fecility to eet up e 5-7-

dey supply of feed. e eeeled leen-to nede from hoerde end covered
with torn-Per in built for thin purpoee ectoee iron one of

the doore or windowe. A eupply of cley or line ie kept in the
fecility neer the doore to eeke eorter which cen he need to

cover holoe which ere diecovered.

It to neceeeery to plow up the territory eround the perine'er
of the liveetoch fern to prevent firee iron the 50'0‘00 4'!
greee. Penele with firefighting equipeent ere eet up et e die-
tence of 20-30 I Iron the fecilitiee.

to protect the people who ere tehing cere of the liveetoch. one

of the inner roone (e relexetion rooe) ie equipped or e redie-
tion ehelter in built neer the liveetoch feoility. the plene

for theee eheltere ere developed with en exit wey to the veetihulo
of the liweetock iecility. the ninieel nueher oi people--et

leeet three people to: one lecility end 5-5 people per 150-200
nilhcowe et e nilhcow fecility--ere left to tote cere of the
liveetock.

-15-
rue OFFICIhL USE ONLY
'08 OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Depending on the type of facility. the filtration cocfficiente
for the facilitiee which are prepered to protect liweetock
fluctuate fron 150 to 300 for radioactive eubetencee and

fron 60 to 60 for gaeeoue cheeicel agente (for the nunber
epecified. the concentration of redioectiwe eubetencee or
chenical werfare egente within the facility ie leee then the
concentration outeide by a factor of l). Conteeineted
ineecte. tiche and rodente cannot penetrate theee hinde of
fecilitiee. A brick liweetock facility decreeeee the redie-
tion by e fector of 10-15 end e wooden one decreageg 1: by .
factor of 3-5. when liweetock ere being kept in e eeeled
facility. conditione are creeted which proeote the deetruction
of cheeical warfare egente which penetrate it through holee
(increeeed hueidity and air tenpereture end the proeence of
eeeonie). Due to the unique eupport of the tenpereture and
eir within euch facilitiee. gaeeoue and cloudy eubetancee end
eeoke cannot freely penetrate then.

A 5-7-dey eupply of feed (beeed on the nininel noree) ie eet
up in a eeeled facility: when there ie no centrelieed water
eupply (froe e well). water ie etochpiled for the eene period
of tine. At e fireproof dietence froe etructuree. an edditionel
7-10-dey eupply of hay. cowered with the eeteriele et hand.
in eet up on the fere'e territory. the einieue daily norne
of feed end water are: for cettle. about 5-6 kg of hey or
ebout 6-5 kg of hay end l-2 hg of concentrated feed end ebout
20-30 1 of water: for eheep end goete. about 0.5-1 kg of hay
and about b-5 l of water; for hoge. about 6-0 1 of water and
ebout 2-) kg of concentreted feed. Selt ie elieineted fron
the retion. Peed euppliee are put in epecial eectione of

the fecilitiee. in feed peeeegee end in lofte. It ehould be
borne in eind that the feed will eerwe ae en edditionel leyer
which decreeeee the gen-e reye. Dete on the chengee for e
few elenente of the eicroclieete in e eeeled cow bern ere
cited in Table 31.

leeeerch hee ehown thet cettle. eheep. goete and eleo hoge
endure the increeeed teepereture end hueidity in e eeeled
facility with the eoet difficulty. to ieprowe the nicroclieete
in euch e fecility. litter with en increaeed eoieture cepecity
ehould be ueed end eeeeuree ehould eleo be tehen to reduce the
content of aeeonie end hydrogen eulfide in the air and to pre-
eerwe the oxygen content. for theee purpoeee. ueing heroeene
dewicee for lighting in not recon-ended and it ie not recon-
Iended thet liweetocl be dieturbed.

the length of tine for beeping liweetoch in e eeeled fecility
depende on the teeperature end hueidity of the mner eir. the
wind epeed end the wolune of eir in the fecility. when the

-16-
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OfPlClAL Ull ONLY

Table 31. Figures on the hicroclinete in e aeeled Cow

 

  
 
  

hern.
(a) E:) el”...t\w
(1) not Mm a...
nae-«newn- «en.

(a) [m uepemutn W
(9) Mn my?" ”"-

(10)
ll: ::
lie _
:: °-2
Ne

Note: l. Theee neteriele were ohteined when pedigree heifere
end town with e duily nilh yield of 7 l were kept in e iecility
for e 2t-hour period. 2. The outer eir tenpereture iluntueted
froe +l6 degreee during the dey to +2 degreee in the norning:
wind epeed iluctueted iron l.5 to 2.5 nleec. After the live-
etoch hed heen kept for 13 houre. the outer eir tenpereture
d7opped to +2 degreee end the wind epeed intreeeed to 2.5

n eet.

Key:
1. Study tine
2. Tenperetnre in fecility (degreee)
3. leletive hunidity
‘. Contente of the eir in the incility
5. Cerhon dioxide (p.f¢.ng)
6. Annonie (ng/l)
7. hydrogen euliide (ng/l)
I. Infore cloning the letility
9. After cloeing the fecility:
l0. houre

 

outer eir tenpereture ie low end the wind epeed ie high.
liweetoch cen he kept longer then when the tenpereture in high.
the wind epeed ie low end the hunidity ie high. ipeciiicelly.
in e eeeled. etenderd hrich iecility (with e norn of 16 cubic
netern per cow. l2-l) equere netere per yonng cettle up to

2 yeere of ege end 6 equere netern per hog). liveetoch cen
withetend the following conditione without eny denege to their
heelth: up to 72 houre in the winter with deily tlnctnetione
in outer eir tenpereture iron -20 to -25 degreee end e wind
npeed o! 2-‘ nine: end up to 90 houre with e etrong wind (5-6

n/eec); up to 2‘ houre during were eeeenne with en onter eir
tenpereture oi +l0 to +20 degreee end e wind epeed of 0-3 nine:

-17-
IO. OYVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

end up to 3‘ houre with en eir teeoereture of +8 to +16
degreee. 1n e eee1ed dugout. nudhut or renodeled eilege
trench. eheep weighing up to ‘6 ng with e nore of 3 equere
eetere per eninel cen withetendi up to 20 houre on hot deye
with deily fluctuetione in outer eir tenpereture iron 19 to
10 degreee end e weeh wind (0-2 e/eec): up to SS houre in
eerly epring end lete fell with en outer eir teepereture froe
-7 to +1 degreee end e week wind: end up to SS houre in the winter.
After the tine nentioned hee peeeed. the feciiitiee ehould he
eired out for e period of two houro. Then. efter helf of the
originel tiee of the eninel'e etey in theee fecilitiee hee
peered. it ie neceeeery to repeet the eiring.

Ventiletion pipee cen he opened ineedietely After the redioective
duet hee eettled on the ground. In thie ceee. the peeeege of
redioectiwe duet into the fecility through the wentiletion pipe
ee e reeult of the eecondery fornetion of duet doee not prreent
e threet to the eninele. 1n the event the fere'e territory

in conteeineted with eerin gee in the eueeer. it will eweporete
end deconpoee eeverel houre 1eter (6 houre 1eter with e eoii
teepereture of 20 degreee end 12 houre 1eter with e tenpereture
of 10 degreee). no eoon ee the dengeroue concentretion of the
cheeicel werfere egent dieeppeere. it ie neceeeery to pertielly
uneeel the fecility ieeedietely.

when equipping eodern liweetoch fecilitiee with e forced ventile-
tion eyeten. it ie neceeeery to piece e filter Iede free neteriel
et hend (Petryenov febric or ectiveted cerhon) in the opening

of the eir intehe end it ie neceeeery to enpply electricel power
for opereting the ventiletion eyetee end other oechinerp.

the reeelte of epeciel etudiee heve ehown thet.
when e hog breeding conplen for 2.600 hoge ie
eee1ed up end the forced ventiietien eyetee ie
ewitched off. the enieele cen he kept up to 6
houre in the winter if there ie on everege of

3.1 cubic eetere of eir for eech eninel. ly

the 6th hour. the eir tenpereture in the fecility
increeeee to 12-15 degreee. the reletiwe hunidity
increeeee to 100 percent end the cerhon dioxide
content increeeee to 1.‘ percent. The pulee of
the edult hoge increeeee to 130-1‘0 per eioute
end their reepiretion goee up to 110-120.

Poultry et integreted poultry feree wee in even
pore dire etreite when the wentiietion eyetee
wee ehot off.

'0' OP'lClAL USE OIL?
l0! OPPXCIAL "8! ONLY

Ilquipping other fecilitien to protect enineln./ Vegetehle
bine. nilege trenchen. winter nheltern, herbicide nhedn end
bernn cen be equipped for thin purpone. They ere neeled junt
like the liventock fecilitine ere. A log ceiling in built over
eilegn trenchen. terpaper or ntrew ie leid over it end it in
covered over with e 50-30 cn lnyer of dirt iron ebove. Ventile-
tion pipen with e crone nection of do by eo on end with ncreenn
on the fecility nide ere run through the roof to the outnide:

e ventibule with thick doorn in built for en entrence. Sewerel
windown which ere neeled with file ere nnde for neturel lighting.
Querrien. revinnn end receneen in the ground cen be equipped in
the nppropriete nenner.

I! there not enough liventoch end other incilitien, it in recon-
nended thet nudhutn end dugoutn with neeled entrencen end
neeled ventiletion eyntnnn be built to protect cettle. Por
dugoutn. e 2.3-3 n deep end 3-. n wide trench in dug: n log
ceiling in built over it end it in covered by e ‘0-60 cn leyer
of dirt. The ground weter lnvel nhould be tnhen into connider-
etion when conntructing dugoutn. When the ground in week.

the welle ere reinforced with wettle or boerde. Troughn ere
built ineide the dugoutn end nudhutnz dreinege chennele for
urine end e pit for (none ere dug out. A dugout in built for
2-i enineln end n nudhut in built for o-xo. Inpecielly velue-
ble liventoch cen be nheltered nore reliehly in dugoutn.

The protective propertien of the terrein cen be need to protect
liventoch egeinet overthOIurt during the nhoch weve end cloud
of e nucleer enplonion: revinen. cenyonn end lerge woodn. The
redietion protection coefficient of woodn in 2. Liventoch nunt
be driven into the woode to n dietnnce of et lennt 500 n iron
the edge of it. Sheltering liveetoch under cover in the woode
ennurnn nore relinble protection (or then. SPIYOO voodn end
bunhen cennot nerve no protection egeinet llc ngento end nub-
ntencen.

levinen end cenyonn rennot he ue.’ Lo protect liventoch egeinet
ec werfcre .guntn which eccunulete in the lov lnndn end rennin
there for n long tine.

llvecunting liventoch.l With the onnnt of the denger of en nttnch.
liventoch ere evecueted to nnie dintencen tron fer-n locetnd

nenr nejor citien end inportnnt induntrinl inntelletione. They
ere elno tnhen out of ereen where flooding in nntizipnted. In
thene cenen, previounly prepered ludhutl. deprennionn in the
ground. cenyonn. utility huildingn. etc. ere uned et the

cettle nnrnhelling ereen (they cre prepered to protect liventoch
en pointed out nbove). Liventoch ere evecueted by notor vehicle
trennport or they ere driven. for thene purponen. reilroed
trennportntion cen elno be uned.

-x’-
In! OIVXCI‘L USS OIL?
'0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Protecting liveetock in treneit.l Hhen cettle ere being
trnnepnrtod through rontcre of ronteeinetion hy notor vehirlr
end by reil or when they ere being certed out of ereee with

e dengeroue level of redioective duet conteeinetion. ell nec-
eeeery eeeeuree ere teken eo thet people end liveetock do not
becoee conteeineted during treneport. The hetchee end doore

of reilroed cere ere cloned. biveetock in notor vehiclee ere
covered with eeteriel et hend (file. terpeulin). During the
trip through e center of conteninetion, individuel protective
geer ie ueed for the reepiretory orgene of people end liveetock.
The treneport peeeee through e center of conteeinetion et high
epeed end without eny etope (Pigure 63) [figure not reproduced).

llndividuel protective geer for liveetock.’ Thie geer ie pri-
eerily intended for highly velueble liveetock end eleo for thoee
ceeee where cettle ere being driven (certed) out of centere of
conteeinetion. Protective neeke ere eede (toe the eeteriel

et hend to protect the reepiretory end digeetive otgene oi
cettle end horeee. The protective neek coneiete of e ceee.

e bottoe end e etrep. The cone end bottoe of it ere eede

(roe three leyere of burlep with e filtering neteriel pleced
between then: oekue. wool. eoee. The PA! [Pettyenov enelyticel
filter] or the TAB? [Petryenov ebeorptive filter) ere the beet
eeteriel (or liltere. Strepe ere eewn on the eeek to ettech

it to the enieel'e fece end no the edgee of it will (it enugly
egeinet ite iece. 8i: pockete ere eede elong the entire length
oi the perieeter of the ceee end eeell wooden eticke 15-17 ce
long ere put in eech o! then (they give the eeek e eteble fore
end keep it (roe clinging to the enieel'e tece when it inhelee).

Stiff peper covere. ee well ee terpeulin. file. burlep. etrew
eete. etc.. ere need to protect the ekin of enieele. The
liebe of enieele ere protected egeinet cheeicel werfere egente
by terpeulin etockinge treeted with oil: efter firet wetting
the liebe with weter. they cen be eeeered with e cley-liee
peete (l bucket of cley. 2 l of weter. 1.5 kg of bleecbing
powder). The liebe ere protected in thoee ceeee where it ie
neceeeery to drive enieele through e center of cheeicel conten-
inetion.

[Protecting enieele when liveetock hee been driven out.l Under
theee conditione. the protective feeturee of the terrein ere
ueuelly need; covered dugoute ere eleo built end winter eheltere
end herbicide etorehoueee (where they eniet) ere reeodeled.
Driving or certing cettle (toe the eree where redioective fell-
out in enticipeted to e eeie piece in eleo reeorted to. In
dietent peeturee. it eey be poeeible to eucceeeiully drive
liveetock to thin kind of plece end on to e eejor city efter

'0! OFPICIAL US! OGLY
POI OIPICIAL US! ONLY

tho nucloor otriko io dolivorod. Tho opood for driving cowo

io 25-30 to o doyu it io 15-20 to for ohoop. "hon conducting
thooo nooouroo, o lorgo rolo io ollocotod to connunicotiono

ond tinolv notification of tho livootock toono on boginning

tho livootock drivo ond on tho routo diroction. Tho routoo for tho
cottlo drivo. tho orooo for oooonbling thon oud tho coro roquirod
oro plonnod in poocotino.

lProvontivo trootnont ogoinot oninol contoninotion./ Hooouroo
ouch oo voccinotion ond controlling inoocto. ticho ond rodonro
ploy o lorgo rolo in protocting oninolo ogoinot contoninotion

by biologicol worforo ogonto. Iy conducting opocific voccinotion
of oninolo ogoinot oopcciolly dongorouo infoctiouo dioooooo in o
tinoly nonnor. it in poooiblo to provont tho oppooronco ond
oprood of infoctiouo dioooooo. Obviouoly, it io odwiooblo to
conduct prowontiwo innoculotiono for onilolo only in tho loot
proboblo orooo for tho onploynont of biologicol worforo ogonto

by tho onooy. Tho difficulty in conducting thooo nooouroo con-
oioto of tho foct thot it io inpoooiblo to dotornino ohood of
tioo which ogont willbo uood by tho onony. ln oddition. ot
prooont. thoro oro no opocific voccinotiono ond oorun for ooworol
infoctaouo dioooooo (glondoro. Africon owino flu. otc.).

Ao poooiblo corrioro of infoctiouo dioooooo. inoocto oro dootroyod
with opociol cholicol ouhotoncoo--inoocticidoo--ond ticho oro
dootroyod with ocoricidoo (dintoron [cc13ca(0I)r(o)(ocn3)3].
trichlorooothylphoophoto-S. polyohloropinono. cyodrino ond othoro).
lopollonto (diothyltoluonido ond othoro) oro uood to ocoro inoocto
owoy. Voriouo poioonouo boit (food ond wotor) io uood to oxtor-
Iinoto rodonto (oxtorninoto roto). zoocounorin. rot poioon.
rotindino ond oinc phoophido oro uood.

Spociol proporotiono oro uood to provont rodiotion contoninotion;
thooo proporotiono incroooo tho body'o rooiotonco ogoinot tho
offocto of ionising rodiotion (protoctoro). Thoy oro introducod
in o nuoclo. undor tho okin. in o voin or givon intornolly l-o
houro boforo irrodiotioo. Thooo proporotiono con bo nood. for
ononplo. whon it io nocoooory to tronoport oninolo ocrooo on
oroo with lorgo rodiotion lovolo (whon tronoporting thou out

of on oroo with o dongorouo lovol of rodiooctivo contoninotion).
Cyotoino. cyotoninoo (ls-l [oxponoion unknownl). noxonino.
(cyotophoophoto) ond All [oninoothylioothiuroniun] proporotiono
hovo o provontivo offoct.

6. CD looouroo to llininoto tho Aftoroffocto of tho lnony'o
luployoont of Uoopono of Nooo Dootruction on Livootock Porno

lo o cootor of nocloor dootruction. in tho poth of o rodiooctivo
cloud ond in contoro of chonicol ond biologicol contoninotion.

-21-
f0! OFFICIkL US! ONLY
FOR OfflCIAL USE ONLY

neeeuree ere conducted to eeve liveetock. Theee eeeeuree
include werning. reconneieeence of centere of conteeinetion.
evelueting the eituetion which hee developed et e perticuler
fere, eeeeuree to eeve end protect liveetock froe weepone of
eeee deetruction end rendering eedicel eeeietence to thee.
deconteeineting the territory. buildinge. equipeent, weter end
the bodiee of enieele. conducting doeieetric eonitoring end
reeolving the ieeue of econoeic utilitetion of injured cettle
end poultry.

[Operetione to eeve liveetoch end fodder in e center of nucleer
deetruction./ Reecue operetione on liveetock feree within e
center of nucleer deetruction ere dietinguiehed by their high
level of coeplexity end exceptionel difficulty eince e lerge
voluee of thee euet be conducted within the ehorteet poeeible
tiee. The coeplexity of theee operetione coneiete of the feet
thet they euet be conducted in deetroyed buildinge. under eeokey
conditione end under conditione of redioective conteeinntion.
Reecue operetione coneiet of putting out firee in cettle yerde.
reecuing liveetock froe burning end deetroyed buildinge. leeding
thee out to eefe plecee. rendering urgent eedicel eeeietence end
firet old to injured liveetock end eleo eeving fodder end reetor-
ing the weter eupply eechinery. Heeeuree ere eleo token to
reetore the power eyetee.

leecue operetione in plecee where feed grein ie etored boil
down to putting out firee et the etorehoueee. eneuring the
eefety of work in deeeged buildinge end reeowing deeeged end
uneuiteble feed.

when conducting reecue operetione or night. it ie ieportent to:
orgenire lighting. regulate treffic on the fere'e territory.
incrneee reconneieeence end externel obeervetion end eneure
eefe working conditione for pereonnel. If reecue operetione
ere conducted in the winter. it ie neceeeery to: orgenite
clearing work for the pethe to bring out liweetoch. check up
on tho preeence of were clothing for foreetion pereonnel end
eeteblieh e plece for people to were theeeelvee.

Uhen reecuing liweetock froe deetroyed end burning buildinge.
it ie neceeeery to reeowe the denger of obetructione firet by
teering down henging etructuree or propping thee up with teepor-
ery eupporte. Anieele held down by collepeed perte of buildinge
ere extrected efter uninjured or injured.hut eble to now.
cettle are driven out.

Sefety eeeeuree ere etrictly obeerved when conducting reecue
operetione. Perieeter poete end petrole ere put out et dengetoue
plecee eed werning eigneere eleo eet up. People orgeniee eutuel

-22-
’0! OFFIClﬁb USE ONLY
FOR OIPICIAL US! ONLY

eefety neeeuree for eech other end etrict oheervetion ie eet
up for people working in enoke or gee tilled huildinge.

After conducting the reecue operetione. the hodiee oi deed
eninele ere huried et the cettle greveyerd end injured eninele
ere given nedicel eeeietence or preventive eid depending on
the neture of their injury (wounde. hurne. hruieee).

Heeeuree in Zonee of Redioective Conteninetion

Reconneieeence ie conducted in eonee of redioective contenineted
lend: the eituetion ie evelueted heeed on the ectuel redietion
levele: the poeeihle rete of eickneee end deeth ie eetineted

for the liveetock end the eequence end volune for cerrying out

the required work ere plenned (veterinery cleeneing of liveetock.
treeting or eleughtering injured eninele. decontenineting fecili-
tiee. the fern'e territory, ohjecte for cering for liveetock.
feed. weter, etc.). Proceduree for protecting people end eninele.
ee well ee proceduree for working in e center of conteninetion.
ere eetehliehed.

lProceduree for protecting end keeping eninele in eonee of
redioective conteninetion./ Aninele loceted in eeeled fecilitiee
will he reliehly protected egeinet conteninetion tron redioective
euhetencee. the eninele nuet renein ineide the fecilitiee until
the denger or their heing contenineted outeide the fecilitiee ie
elinineted. Hhen there in no denger o! e fecility heing conten-
ineted. the ventiletion eyeten in it ie opened. The proceduree
for protecting end keeping eninele in eonee of redioective con-
teninetion ere ehown in Tehle 32.

In rone A. eninele cen he driven out of the fecilitiee to peeture

in l-‘ deye: hy thie tine. the redietion level in the peeture will
heve decreeeed to 0.5 roentgene/hr. however. redioective ieotopee
of iodine (higher then the perlieeihle enount) will etill he con-
teined in the nilk o! lecteting eninele end it will heve to he
proceeeed for hutter during the following 3-5 deye. Children cen
only he given thie nilk 15-25 deye efter the cove hegin grering.
Iven etricter proceduree ere eetehliehed for tonee I end c; lore-
over. Iilk cettle cennot he given locel feed in tone c--not only
during the tiret nonthe efter the fern'e territory in contenineted
hy redioective duet hut not even during the eeverel yeere which

tollow--eince the ecrontiun-90 content in the nilk will he higher
then the pernieeihle enount in thin ceee.

In the event people ere evecueted tron zone C. enilele ere eleo
renoved tron it. Service pereonnel engeged in loeding liveetock
on treneport end treneferring it through contenineted territory
nuet not he irredieted higher then the pernieeihle enount. there-
fore. it ie inportent to celculete the tine for heginning the
evecuetion. '
-23-
’0! OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Tabla 32. Procaduraa for Protactins and Reaping Aniaala in Zonaa of

'1: in datarainad according to tha foraula: 0

land
11 w.

(12)Bd
(11)64

Radioactive Contanination.

_-bao—. ma...»-

§ lvmnwmul‘! (3) id?

 

 
 
      
     
 

   
  
 
 
 
  

ii 9)
has. up” I” g; '
l a
“an !: §.%
«an Ito-r b‘n I
”:4 “any;

Inn-um g:

   

o—‘uu. o CSEBI

833 8d 8 i! 8 III!

 

I

- 5' P°° to

ﬁ‘ vor tha tiaaa ohovn. tha laval of radiation on tha ground
will be raducad by a factor of 0.5 roantgana/hr.

Subaaquantly. Iilk can ha uaad in ita natural for- by
adulta vithout any raatrictiona.

It.

Kay:

Zonaa .
Doaa of irradiation--D until coaplata dacay of
radioactiva aubatancaa (r)*

Radiation lavala (roantgana/hr) aftar tha axploaion
Bout

nov aany daya latar can aniaala ba avacuatad

In how aany daya can livaatock ba put out to

paatura**

For how aany daya ahould ailk ba ptocaaaad into buttar
aftar cova are put out to paaturaﬁﬁﬁ

tor hov aany daya aftar cova ara put out to pasture
can ailk ha givan to childran

Iacoaaandad diraction for davalopin; livcatoct branding
for continual life of tha population

-25-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70% OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. 0-2
110 0'1
lae .‘3
‘)e .‘z
1‘. 3-1

15. hot aandatory
16. lot evacuated

1?. Ditto
18. heat
19. heat and nilk
20. ”ilk

lDriving cattle./ In the event paaturee are threatened by
radioactive coetaaination or when they are already contaeinated.
cattle in diaper-ed liveetock breeding areae are driven aa
quickly ae poaoible to the eide(perpendicularly) away free the
direction at the wind'a eovenent. lt ia heat to uae roade with

a hard eurface or areaa with low graaa for the drive. "hen driving
liveatock along land contaninated by radioactive aubetancee. the
aniaale are not given green to eat. The radiation done which
people will receive while driving the liveetock ia calculated.

lt euat not exceed $0 roentgena during a d-day period. Peraonnel
tending the aninala uae individual protective gear (reepiratore.
duet tight cloth bandagee). Upon coeing out of a center of radio-
active contaeioation. anieale undergo veterinary claanaing end
people carry out peraonal cleaneing.

[Tine periode for etarting cattle grating in eonee of radlo-
active conraaination.l when detereining the tine periode ior
etarting cattle grazing in areae located along the path of a
radioactive cloud or when deteraining the poaeible tine for

sowing graae here to feed anilala. a nunber o! factora are taken
into account and priearily the poeeibility of people being able

to work aafely on radioactive coataainated land. Heat end draft
liveetock can begin grating when the radiation level decreaeea

to 0.5 roentgene/hr and lactating aniaale can begin when the radia-
tion levela are no greater than 0.1 roentgena/hr if the Iilk ie
intended for the adult population and even later if it ia intended
for children. At theae radiation levela. graea can be unwed to
lead lactating cowa. goate and ehaep.

1n the event of a nuclear aieeile war. plant foliage will alao be
contaeinated by radioactive eubetancea aa a reault of worldwide
radioactive fallout iron the tropoaphere and etratoephara. Pall-
out free the atratoephere occura during the 2-3 sooth period after
the exploaion: eoreover. it containa iaotopee with a long lite

and iaotopee with a anall halt-lite (iodine-lJl. telluriua-llz.
beriue-lbo. atrontiue-OO and othera).

-25-

POO OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'08 OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Special calculationa ahow that, when eilk town are eaintainad

by gracing. the silk will be uneuitable ae food in ita natural
for- for a period of aeveral weeka due to the increaaed radio-
activity. stratoopheric fallout continuea for at leaat aeyen
yeare: it only containa iaotopea with a long life 'ntrontiun-Oo.
canine-131 and othera). The additional contalinatlon of feed.
paature graeeea and young agricultural crops Iuet be taken into
account when reaolving the iaaue on the tile perioda for beginning
liveetock grating. feeding thee eowed graaa and uaing the cropa

in an econoeical Ianner.

Decontaeination of liveatock facilitiea. objecte for caring for
aniaala. the territory of the fare and. when neceaaary. feed and
water ia carried out in tonea of radioactive contanination.

Neaaurea in a Center of Chelical Contanination

In a center of chenical contaeination. production activity ia
only poaaible after the aitea and facilitiea which people and
aninala can cone into contact with are conpletely decontalinated.
In connection with thia. thorough reconnaieeance ie conducted

on the farn'e territory after the type of chenical warfare agent
ia deter-ined. Contaeinatad territory in clearly defined and

ita bordera are Iarked with etandard barrier aigna or with the
aeana at hand. 'ornation paraonnal carry out reacue operationa
here in their individual protective gear (gae naake. rubberized
euit. rubber boota. rubber glovea).

neaaurea for caving aninala in a center of chenical contanination
are directed at atopping the entry of chenical warfare agenta
into the body. atopping their action (veterinary cleaneing) and
conducting antidotal and ayeptonatic treataent. the entry of
chenical warfare agente into the body in atopped by ueing indiv-
idual protective gear. by cleaning viaible epota of poieon on
the akin with decontaninanta. by taking aninala out of a center
of contanination and by conducting a eubeequent veterinary
cleanaing of then. Antidotal treat-ent ia conducted either
directly in the center of contalination or innediately after

the anieala are let out of the center but before the veterinary
cleanoing.

Decontaninating livestock facilitiee and the farl'a territory in
one of the ieportant eeaaurea.

Antidotea are givan to aninale contalinated by organic phoaphorua
chc-icel warfare agenta and by eyetenic gaaee ae noon on poeaible

noreover. the eooner the antidote in given after poeioning. the
greater the nuober of injured liveatock that will be eeved.

-25-

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
VOI OVIICIAL US! ONLY

Phospholitine‘--alone or even better in solution with run-40a
[expansion unknown]--is used as an antidote egainst organic
phosphorous chenical warfare egents. The solutions are prepared
separately with sterile distilled water or thoronehlv boiled
wntcr and then sired: 1.5 parts of a 75 percent solution of phospholitine

and 1 part of s 20 percent solution of WA. A 15 ll dose of the
sirture is injected into the nuscles of adult cattle. adult

horses. canels and buffelol the young of these species are given
e d nl dose: adult deer and donkeys are given a 5 nl dose and
young anisals are given a 1 ll dose: adult hogs ere given a

2.5 sl dose end young hogs are given a 0.6 sl dose; sheep and
goats are given a 1 nl dose and young sheep and goats are given
a 0.2 sl dose. The cited antidote can also be injected after
the appearance of convulsions.

Of the other antidotes. a solution of water and atropine or
plstyphyllin (they are injected in the suscles with consideration
for the live weight and type of eninsl) and also thropacine

(S-lo nglhg). which has a central effect. can be used. TﬁI-A

increases the curative effect of atropine. thropacine and
phospholitine.

with russic acid posioning. it is necessary to use anyl nitritn
(by inhalation) as quickly as possible; it forss a conpound
(sethenoglobin) in the body which easily unites with the posion.
About l0-20 ll of anyl nitrite is poured onto the nucous senbrane
of the nose for large aninels and about 0.5 nl of it are used for
snsll aninals. Injured anisals are subsequently treeted with
other antidotes. As yet. there is no antidote for nusterd gee.

Anissls are transported fron e center of chenical contanination
by notor vehicle or they are led out after passages are decon-
tasineted. lf aninels were located in well sealed facilities.
they ere left in place: only a decontsnination of the fsrn's
territory and livestock facilities is conducted insedietely.
Antidotsl trestnent is enployed when people are contaninated
during their work in a center of chenicel contalinstion. After

working in such a center. all personnel go through personal
cleansing.

‘An aronatic light yellow. thick oily liquid. It is an epent
with a central snecarinic. cholinolytic effect but it does not

restorc the activity of the cholinesterese.

*ﬁA yellowish-white crystalline powder which dissolves well
in water. It restores the activity of the cholinesterase

and thereby increeses the curative effect of phospholitine.

-21-
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

beeic heeeuree to llininete e Center of Iiologicel Conteninetion

Heeeuree to elininete e center of biologicel conteninetion depend
on the type of egent end the nethod of ite enploynent. The
eeeeon end tine of dey. weether conditione. the level of
preperedneee of fornetione end inetitutione end the preeence

of nenpower end eouipnent heve e greet effect on the work con-
ducted. Heeeuree ere conducted in two etegee in e center of
conteninetion.

[The firet etegel-ountil the type of egent 1e deternined.
Overell enti-epieootic end enti-epidenic neeeuree ere cerried
out: e querentine ie levied. the eiee of the center of con-
teninetion ie eetebliehed. eenplee ere teken end they ere eent
to e leboretory to deter-ine the type of infectioue dieeeee
egent (when there ie e field leboretory preeent. thie cen be
done on the epot ueing quick nethode).

//A querentine/l in e eyeten of etrict enti-epieootic end
enti-epideeic neeeuree to eeel off (ieolete) the entire center
of conteninetion end to elininete the infectioue dieeeee in it.
It ie eetebliehed by e decieion of the executive connittee of
the Soviet of feople'e Deputiee (reyon. obleet. republic).
Guerd poete (police. tee-e for preeerving lew end order. lili-
tery teene) ere eet up on ell the roede eround the querentined
territory end werning eigne with inetructione for detoure ere
eet up. The querentine neeeuree provide for etopping entry

to end exit fro. the center of conteninetion by vehicle or on
foot end etopping eny kind of property being brought out of it
without deconteninetion. The peeeege of people. eninele. trene-
port ie prohibited. herkete. enterteinnent fecilitiee end
educetionel inetitutione cen be cloeed. Neeeuree ere conducted
to elininete infection in the center of conteninetion.

[The eecond etegeI--efter the try. *' ~30». in deterlined.

The querentino in either left on or it ie repleced by e

regine of obeervetion (for infectioue dieeeeee which ere not
trene-itted through contect between eick end heelthy orgcniele).

IIObeervetion/lie eetebliehed et e fern for problene with in-
fectioue dieeeeee; reetrictive neeeuree end ieoletion ere
cerried out et the eene tine. Obeervetion providee for: en
increeee in nedicel end veterinery obeervetion in e center of
conteninetion: reetricting trevel to end fro. it end eleo
reetrictione on teking verioue property. eninele end fodder
free it: ieoleting end treeting people or eninele which ere
nick or euepected of being nick; conducting veccinetion end
dieinfection.

.3g.

70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OPVXCIAL OBI ONLY

A querentine in left on for diherien ulcer', Illndifv. plegue.
oncepholonyelitie. cholere. peittecoeie opideeic typhue end for
dieeeeee not encountered within the te :itory of the ”III.

In the event the eneny enploye en egent which nehee people eich.

ell people who ere eich end euepected of being eich ere ieoleted
end treeted in the querentined eree; ell people ere exenined

by neene of e liet for rounde: huildinse. clothee end ehoee ere
dieinfected; nonitoring of weter eourceu end food producte ie
increeeed; innunieetione ere given or epeciel preventive enti-
hlotice ere given; enti-epideeic work proceduree ere eetehliehed

for work fecilitiee. Acceee to the center of conteninetion ie

only pernitted for pereonnel end for people who will perticipete

in conducting the neeeuree to elilinete the center of contelinetion.

ln theee ceeee. the people grented ecceee to the center of con-
teninetion ere veccineted firet.

The extent of the neeeuree end the nethode end neene of controlling
different infectioue illneeeee ere not the eene end the length
of the querentine ie eleo different. Therefore. depending on
the type of egent. neeeuree ere conducted in e center of hiolog-
icel conteninetion in eccordence with the current inetructione
end nenuele epproved hy thu hein Veterinery Adninietretion of
the 088! HA [Ninietry of Agriculture]; noreover. ell work ie
conducted in coordinetion with Iedicel eervice enployeee. Uhen
conducting neeeuree to elininete infectioue dieeeeee. people ere
guided by the epproprzete inetructione end nenuele epproved by
the USO! Ninietry of hoelth.

The reeponeihility for conplying with the rulee of e querentine
end for conducting neeenree to elilineto infectioue dieeeeee ee
quickly ee poeeihle ie levied on fern end enterpriee executivee.
locel euthoritetive egenciee end egenciee of the Hinietry of
Agriculture end heelth in the locelitiee.

Veterinery Treitnent of Aninele

During veterinery treetnent of enilele. redioective euhetencee
ere renoved fro. the outer eurfecee of their oodiee. chelicel
end hiologicel wetfere egente which heve fellen on their ehin
ere renoved or decontenineted end firet eid in given to injured
eninele. Veterinery treetnent hen the goel of preventing the
illneee of enilele euhjected to the effecte of I36 egente and
euhetencee. of Ieking worh eefe for pereonnel tending injured
eninele. of eneuring the poeeihility of ueing the nexinun nunher
of injured Liveetoch for neet end other fern neede end. in the
event of hiologicel conteninetion. of not pvrnitting the infec-
tioue dieeeee to epreed.

-19-
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OPIICIAL 0!! ONLY

All onioolo locatod in o cootor of chonical or biological
contaninotion ond thooo which aro contaninatod by radioactiwo
ouhotoncoo obowo tho porniooiblo onount oro oubjoctod to troat-
wont.

Spoc..l arooo oro oot up (or wotorinory trootnont of public
livootoch. Priwotoly-ownad livootoch io trootod on tho opot.

ln worn woathor. tho llwotorinory troatnont orool/ (Figaro do)
it not op on lond with o porniooihlo lowol of radiotion. boyond
tho bordoro of n cootor of chonicol contoninotion ond on tho
boundarioo or within tho torritory of o contor of biological
contonination. In tho lottor cooa. tho torritory for tho troat-
nont oroo and tho torritory for hooping trootod oninolo oro
dioinfoctod.

Tho aroo ooloctod io noor a ooorco of wotor. not clooor than
100-200 I to through-roodo and liwootoch facilitioo ond pro-
torobly on ground which in diotinguiohod by o good copobility
to oboorb wator (candy). Thoro nuot bo good opprooch routoo
to tho oroo.

ln cold woothor. tho oroo io not up inoido o tocility.which nohoo
it poooiblo to conduct tho roqoirod work. whon tho opproprioto
focilitioo oro prooont ot o torn with o outficiont oupply of
wator. o hord floor ond o drain pipo for wooto wator. onilolo

con aloo bo trootod inoido thio iocility in worn woothor. In

tho coooo citod. wooto wotor ontoro o colloctor: tron horo. it

it tahon to oofo olocoo for bariol in voooolo it tho rodiooctivo
lowol of tho wotor it high. "hon trooting oninolo contaninatod
by biologicol or chonicol worioro agonto. tho wotor in tho

wotor colloctor io oloo docontooiootod.

Tho site of tho oroo io dotorninod hy tho nulhor of liwootoch
which nunt ho trootod ot tho oono tioo: for thio purpooo.
opproxinotoly 30 oquoro notoro oro colculotod for ooch ooilol.

Tho oroo io diwidod into "cootoninotod" ond "cloon" porto. A
non (or contoninotod liwootock io oot up in tho oroo; it
chongor to o dividor and thon to o corridor 0.8-0.9 I wido.
which in partitionod into 5-6 oniool trootnont otopo; hoyood
tho otopo in o poooogo (up to lo I) ond o otop for ‘0’!I¢‘Y‘¢
Ionitoring of onioolo: tho lottor hoo o lovohlo hor on tho oido
to drivo onilnlo through to tho oido pon. All of thio Inhoo

up thc'bontalinotod'port. Droinogo ditchoo oro dog on both
oidoo of tho corridor.ond polo. hoord. otc. plonhing it out
ovor tho ditchoo for tho conwooionco of oooroting poroonnol.
Pirn flooring io oloo out inoido tho otopo oo thoro will not ho
ony nod in tho. during trootnont o! oninolo. At o diotonco of
lo I fro- tho otooo. o pit to dog to aboorh tho droinogo wotor;

'0! OFYICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

10.
lL

this pit
fro- the

'0! OPPXCIAL US! ONLY

Figure 66.

Reception and sorting point 12.
Pen for contaednated eniesls l).
Divider lo.
Passage-stop 15.
Veterinary treat-ant stops lo.

Dosieetric stop
Pen for treated anieals l7.
Veterinary aid position for ll.
treated snieals l9.
Divider 20.
Aniaal sorting stop ll.
22.

.58

- 90. amaze-.519

 
 
    

sauna» (22)

Veterinary Treat-ant Area

Aninal holding pen

louipeent for cleaning aninels

field nieughtering point

Yiltered well

Position for personal cleansing
of people

lest site for people

Contseinated pert oi the area

Clean part

To slaughter

To treat-ant

To far-

connects the ditch vith the drainage ditches coeing

stops.

A position in installed in the "conteeinated"

part to clean overalls and articles for tending anieels and for
personal cleansing of people; a device is net up to unload eninale

arriving by notor vehicle.
a pen is set up to the left or the right of the corridor.

tor eninals requiring repeat treateent.

Livestock

are driven into it to be held (or treat-ent in the event oi their
contanination by cheeical and biological varfare agents.

-31-

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OIPICIAL 0!! ONLY

Tho corridor ondo ot tho poo for trootod onilolo. Thio in tho
"olooo" port of tho oroo. A pooition io oot up to conduct pro-
vontiyo Iodiool oooouroo in tho pon. Pooitiono oro oloo oot up
in tho "cloon" port for ooroonnol root ond for porting opociol
vohicloo; o doth for loading onioolo io built horo.

Tho votorinory trootoont oroo for onioolo io oituotod oo thot

tho flov of onioolo fro- tho‘bontooinotof‘port to tho "oloon"

port proooodo ogoinot tho proyoiling viodo for tho giyon oroo
Poloo. boordo ond othor notoriolo ot hood oro uood to oot up

tho corridor and pooo. Vhoo nocoooory. o iiold oloughtoring point
io oot up noor tho oroo.

[Nothodo ond oouipooot for votoriuory trootoont of ooilolo./
IIDry trootlont./l ”hon tho ohin of onioolo io oootooinotod

by rodiooctivo duot. thio trootooot con bo oooduotod by uoiog
tho opproprioto lochinoo (tho votorinory dioinfootiog lochioo)
ond vocuul cloonoro. Tho rodioottivo duot collootod by thol io

buriod in tho ground. Shooting to tho boot Iothod of dry troot-
oont for ohooo.

Vhon tho okin of onioolo io tootooinotod by cholitol vorforo
ogonto. blooching povdor or ooloiul hypoohlorido io optiohlod

on tho ourfoco of thoir bodioo; thon. thio io vorhod io‘o tho
hoir with o brool Iodo froo ootoriol ot hood. Trootoont bogioo
with tho oootiono of ohin with tho grootoot oootoliootioo: oltor
thio. tho hood. nooh. forvord liob. body ood roor liob o! ooo
oido oro trootod in ooouoooo ood thoo tho othor oido io trootod
in tho oooo ordor. About 15-30 oioutoo ottor trootooot, tho
blooching povdor ohould ho roloyod tron tbo okio vith o bruoh.
rogo or otrov brooo.

I/Uot trootnoot./I lt coooioto of trootiog tho ohio of ooilolo
l/tootooinotod by rodioootivo oubotoocoo/l with oolutiono of
votor ond (ourfooo ooting) dotorgooto ood by uoiog voriouo lochinoo.
For thio purpooo. o 0.3 porooot oolution of 81-2 or SP-ZU povdor
or o 0.) porcoot oolutioo of 0P-7 oluloifior or OP-lo vith o

0.7 porcont oolutioo of oodiuo hololotophoophoto oddod to it oro
uood oo dotorgooto. [oxponoioo of obbroviotiooo uohoovol to
tho oboonco of tho itooo nolod. oolutiooo of rotor ood ”Iovoot'”
Povdor. oulfoool or oorlol tollov ooopo oro uood. rho otoodord
PA-l [fooling ogont] fooling ogoot providoo good rooulto. I!
nono of thooo itolo oro proooot. tho obin coo bo voobod vith
cloon votor undor 2-1 ot-oophoroo of prooouro.

chloriootiog ood oxidiliog dooootoliootiog ogonto and booio do-
conto-iootiog ogonto oro uood to troot tho okio of ooilolo [Icon-

tooinotod by ohooicol vortoro ogooto.// at tho for-or. tho
following oro uoodt blooohiog povdor (in pooto forI--2 kg of

-32-

'0! OFYICIAL USE ONLY
- '0! OFFICIAL US! 03L?

bleeching powder per i of weter--or on e eolution): celniun
bihypochlorite (INC) or 2/3 the beeic eelt of celciun hypo-
chloritc (one) (on e wetery peete--in e retio of XI‘ for one

end in e retio of 1:10 for one); e 1 percent eolution of weter

end poteeeiun pernegenete ecidified with e 1 percent eolution

of ecetic or hydrochloric ecid (ueed when the ekin ie contenineted
by nitrogen nueterd gee). 0f the beeic decontenineting egentn.
the following ere ueed: eodiun hydroxide (in the lore of e 0.5
percent eolution in weter). e lO-l! percent eolution of weter

end eeeonie (for eerin conteninetion), eodiue cerbonete end eodiue
bicerbonete (in the fore of e 2 percent eolucion to deconteeinete

the I060“! Ienbrenee of the eyee end of the neeel end nouth
peeeegee).

Solutione of weter end the following egente ere ueed to treet the
ehin of enieele l/conteeineted hy eporoue eicrohee/II en 0 percent
eolution of eonochloride of iodine; e eolution of trichlorineted
cyenuric ecid conteining et leeet 7 percent ectiwe chlorine;

e 1 percent eolution of hydrogen peroxide in e 0.5 percent eolution
of fornic or ecetic ecid; e 10 percent eolution of 2/3 the beeic
eelt of celciun hypochlorite; e purified eolution of bleeching
powder conteining et leeet b percent ective chlorine. Solutione
of the eeee preperetione ere ueed when l/the ehin/l of enieele

, l/ie conteeineted by yirueee or nicroflore which do not fore
eporee/l but in concentretione reduced by e fector of 1.5-2.

In eddition. e 1 percent euepeneion of 1/3 the beeic eelt of cel-
ciue hypochlorite end e ‘ percent eolution of weter end chlorenine

cen be ueed for theee purpoeee. The eolutione neeed ere prepered
ineedietely before uee.

To eoeh the heir (wool) of enilele with the dieinfecting eolutione
better. it ie good to edd 0.01 percent of en eeuleifying egent
(OP-7. Of-lo. sr-z. eulfenol) to then before uee.

the eolutione of bleeching powder end trichlorineted cyenuric
ecid ere prepered eccording to the epeciel inetructione.
Veterinery (rnv-z [Konerow deconteninetion vehicle]. LSD-2
[enpeneion unknown!) end other equip-not (epreyere. gee trucke.
oil truche. chenicel eprey truche. etc.). which ere equipped
with e reccptecle to dietribute the weter, ere ueed to put the
eolutione end weter on the eninele' bodiee.

The 2/3 the beeic eelt of celciue hypochlorite eolution. the
chlorenine I eolution which conteine ‘ percent ective chlorine
end the hydrogen peroxide in ecid cen be ueed with the directed
eennn1_.gghgd by ueing the weterinery decooteninetion vehicle
(VDV) for thie purpone. When ueing the eeroeol lethod, J tilee
leee of the dieinfecting eolution required for weterinery treet-

lent ie ueed then when the eolutione ere ueed to week down the
body of en eninel.

IProceduree for weterinery treeteent of enieele.l the proceduree

end eequence for treeting the ehin of eninele depende upon the

type of contendneting egnnt (chenicel. biologicel or redioectiwe). Yiret of ell.
- -33-

rue OIIICIAL 03! OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

decontenineted eninele ere norted by type end eeverity of con-
teninetion: efter thin. the type of egent required to cleen the
chin ie deternined end deeigneted. At the eene tine. the pro-

hlen of whether preventive nedicel egente ere required in eolved.

In the event the chin ie contenineted by l/redioective euhetencee/l.
eelective doeinetric reedinge ere tehen end the eninele ere
inepected. Hhen the thin in contenineted higher then the pernic-
eihle enount. the eninele ere eelected for veterinery treetnent.

The liveetoch undergoing treetnent ere driven into the pen; free
here. they ere eent through the divider in groupe of 3-6 eninele
(depending on the nunher of etope) to the veterinery treetnent
etope. veing e ehower hrueh. eech eninel ie treeted with the
eppropriete eolution on both eidee. To evoid contenineting
people. the hruehee ere etteched to e 00-100 to long etich; the
hone in pleced elong thie etich: the eolution peeeee elong it

to the hrueh. the reer of the eninel ie treeted firet. then the
heed. neck. heck eide. forwerd end reer linhe (fro. top to hotton).
After being treeted with the detergent eolution. the eninel ie
weehed down with cleen weter.

The enieele ere driven one et e tile to the leet etop where doei-
netric nonitoring ie conducted. if the level of redioectivity
hee decreeeed to the pernieeihle level. the enieel ie cent to the
pen for ”cleen” liveetoch: if the level of redioectivity ie etill
ehove the pernieeihle linit. it ie eent heck through the eide

pen for repeet treetnent.

Up to 65-70 percent of the redioective euhetencee cen he renoved
fro. the hodiee of cettle end horeee with the detergente. lepeet
treetnent ie leee effective: leee then en edditionel 10 percent
of the reeeining redioective euhetencee ere renoved.

l/Poen treetnent.ll toe. in fed under preeeure fro. the etenderd
PG-lﬁ foee generetor of e firetruck onto the enieel end it covere
the entire eurfece of ite body. After e 2-) ninute contect. the
foe. ie cleened of! with hruehee on long hendlee end up to 65-75
percent of the redioective duet ie renoved fro. the heir end ehin
elong with it. After thie treetnent. it ie not neceeeery to weeh
down the eninele with weter.

 

'the etenderd foe. generetor coneiete of e heroeene contect con-
teining 06-00 percent eulfonic ecid. e enell enount of etiff
edheeive. undietilled elcohol end eodiul hydronide: in e 0-7-
percent concentretion. it will not ireeee et -0 degreee c.

'3‘.

'0! OF'ICIAL "3! ONLY
’0! GIVICIAL Ull OIL?

l! thoro oro no datotgonta. aninala aro waahod down with watar
(againat tho wool) iron a Kira pulp; tho watot ia tad undo: a
proaauro of 3-3 atloapharoa. in thia coao. 30-30 patcant of tho
radioactiwa duat ia waahad away.

Vhon oninola aro contaninatod by l/poaionoua aganta,// tho typo

of agont aoployad by tho onany io dotarainad iirat and than tho
ttoatlont bogina. Dhan tho contacination ia by otganic phoaphotua
ogonta. ontidotoa oro injoctad into tho aninalo' nuacloa bafoto
wototinary ttoatlont.

Uhan tho contanination in by binary gaaoa and Iaatatd goa. propor-
ationa which givo oil chlorina ato wood for troatoont; whan tho
contaoinotion ia by aatin and lawaaita. a aolution oi aodiuo
hydroxido or annonia ia aaod; whan tho contanination ia by nitrogon
auatatd gaa. a aolution of potoaaiun porooganata ia wood.

Afton thotough traatnant with tho aolntiono citad, tho aninala ara
driwon into tho aido pon for o 20-30 ainuta dotontios daring which
tho chonicol watiato agont doconpoaoa. Than tho aninalo oto again

driwon to tho atopa whoro thay ato waahod down with watar to ranowo
tho docontolinating ogont and tho docolpoaod producta of tho choli-

cal warfata aganto: aitar thia. thay ata lod to tho cloan part of
tho atoa.

Uhan aninalo ara contoninotad by I/biological agonta,/I watocinary
trootoont ia conductod oa quickly on poaaibla illodiatoly oitat
tho fact of tho aoroool ooploylont of biological warloro ogonta
haa boon oatobliohod and without waiting to ootabliah tho typo oi
ogont onployod. ln thoao coaoa. aolutiona of diainiocting ogonta
oro ooployod againat tho nictoilora which iota quichly. Daring
wotorinary ttootlont. tho acrfaca of tho oninol'o body in aoahod

abundantly and conplatoly with tho particular aolntion. Ion thio
pntpoao. tho following alonnta o! dininlocting ogonta aro ox-

pondod (l): 20-23 par adnlt horao and par adult cattlo; 12-13 par
calf and ahoap; and ‘-3 par hog. Tho anilala ttoatod with tho
aolntion o! diainfoctant oto driwon Iron tho atopa to tho aida

pon ond thay ata datainod thora to: on boat (during thia tina. tho
Iicrootgoniono and wiruooo will bo hillad); aitot thio. thay ato
again dtiwon to tho otopo. waahod down with war- watoc and lod to
tho cloan part. During hot. col-or woathat. tho onilala aro troatod
with tho aolntion o! diainiactont again 23-30 oinataa latac (oitor
drying out) no that tho aninol'o body will bo anpoaod to tho dia-
inioctant aolntion for at loaat ono hour. Alto: troating tho akin
with tho diainlactant aolution. tho onilolo oto injoctod with choco-
tharaputic ogonta (owlla drnga) and ontibiotica (totcacyclino.

ate.) and. oitot aatobliahing tho typo o! ogont. with opociiic
corn and woccinoa.

-35-

POI OPTICXAL USI OIL!
FOR OPPICIAL "8! ONLY

Hhon oninolo rocoivo o l/oultiplo contalinotion.// thoy oro
firot trootod with docontooinoting oolutioho to dootroy ond
rooovo tho chooical agonto. Tho oolutiono uood for thio pur-
pooo oro aloo ofioctivo whoa tho oniwolo oro contooinatod by
biological ogonto which do not ioro oporoo: whon tho anilalo oro
thoroughly woohod down. radioactiwo ouhotancoo oro aloo rooovod
iron tho ourfaco oi thoir hodioo. Thou. whon nocoooary. tho
onioalo oro woohod down with dioinioctont oolutiono prioorily to
dootroy oicroboo which fora oporoo. During a 10-hour poriod.
160-200 lorgo agricultural onioolo con bo troatod at a oinglo
otoriliror. Tho trootod onioalo oro oithor oont to tho (oro.
for trootloot or to oloughtor.

Por wot wotorinory trootoont oi hogo. ohoop and calvoo. it io
adviooblc to build a cago with o lottico floor and with opoco

for 10 hood within tho dirty port of tho oroa and conduct

group trootoont for onilolo horo. lodioactiyo duot io rolovod

hy wator boing rod iron any oort oi lochino undor a prooouro of

J atooophoroo. In tho owont hogo. ohoop or calvoo //oro contou-
inotcd by chooical or biological ogohto.l/ thoy oro troatod with
docontolinoting oolutiooo in tho oooo oannor oo largo anioolo oro.
Shoop. goato ond hogo contooinatod by biologicol ogooto can bo
trootod by owiooing in o tub iillod with a oolutioo of oonochlorido
of iodino or hydrogon pororido in tho concontrotiooo citod obovo
and by oubooquontly dotoioiog thou for a 1-hour poriod. Thon.

tho anioolo oro woohod down with wotor. Poultry llcootaoiootod
by radioactivo oubotancoo/l oro waohod down diroctly in thoir
cogoo and. at iotogrotod poultry iaroo. in tho oahitary cloonoing
chooboro locatod at tho poultry rocoiwing ohopo. Tho oolutiono
oro proporod boood on tho calculation of l l por chickoo. 1.2 l
por duck and 1.3 l por goooo. Hhon llpoultry io coutooiaotod by
chooical worforo ogooto.l/ it io rocoooondod that they be woohod
down with a 0.5 porcout oolutioo of oodiuo hydroxido or o oolutioo
of 2/3 tho baoic oolt of calciuo hypochlorito. Agricultural
poultry io oloo docontooinotod in ohowor chooboro.

Poroonnol conduct votorinory trootoont of anilolo in thoir
individual protoctivo goar. Whoa tho anioolo oro cootaliootod

by rodiooctivo oubotoncoo. tho roopirotor can bo wood in ploco

of tho goo oaok. upon cooploting tho work. tho oquipoout. tochoi-
cal goor and oyorallo aro docontooiuotod. Poroonool go through

a cooploto poroonol cloonoing. If iuturo work io not aoticipotod
in tho aroa. tho droioogo ditchoo and tho pit for droinogo wator
oro covorod up with dirt. tho contooinotod port io (oncod in ond
woroing oigho aro placod at tho corooro of it with tho oigo: "Con-
tooiootodl.‘

-35-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! 0Y?ICIAL US! ONLY

Docontaninating Bquipnont

Agricultural oquipwont ia dacontaninatod in a apocially oquippod

aroa whoro docha aro built for tho wohiclaa ond drainago ditchoo
aro dug around tho doch.

Illadioactivo duct/I io ronowod by aolutiona oi watar and dotorganto
(SP-20 81-2. tallow aoap) with ahowor bruahoa ettachod to fira
puapo. Tho oxpandituro norna for tho oolution ara 2.5-3 l/oquaro
wotor. Tho wohicloo can ho traatod by a poworiul atraan oi wator

iron tho firo puap (20 l/aquara notor). In tho wintor. tho vohicloo
ara driod with oolvonto--horoaono. dioool fuol. gaoolino.

l/Pooionoua agonto/I aro doatroyod by a watory paato oi blanching
Povdet or calciul hypuchlorito and alao by aaaonia wator or a apocial
alkaline annonio aolution (containing 2 porcant aodiun hydroxido.
S porcont wonoothanolanino and 20 porcont onwonia: it docontoninatoo
aarin vory wall). Tho onuipnont ia wipad down with raga aoahad

in tho prapatation citod. In tho aboonco of docontalinanto.
chonical agonto oro ronowad with oolwonta (horoaono. gaaolino.
dichloroothana.otc.). Lator. tho troatod raga aro oithor burnod

or buriod in tho ground. Aitar tho vohicloo aro docontaninotod.
thoy aro oprayod of! with wator. pornittod to dry out and groaood
with lubricating groaoo or oil to prowont corroaion of natallic
parta. "hon wiping down tho oquipnont with raga. tho dacontaninant
oxpondituro norno aro 1-1.3 l/oquaro notor.

lguipnont.ia dioinfactod with oolutiono of watar and calciun
hypochlorita. blaaching powdor. foraaldohydo. hyaol, nonochlorida
of iodino and othoro. Tho nothodo oi diainfoction ara tho aano
aa for docontanination.

Docontaninating tho Torritory of Livoatoch
rarna and Livaotoch Pacilitioo

Tho warhconnoctod with docontaninating an oroa roquiroo a largo
oxpandituro of nanpowor and aquipnont. for oxanplo. to docontan-
inato torritory with an aroa of ono hoctaro. at loaat lo tono of

a dacontaninating oolution ara roquirod. Thnroioro. not all tho
territory of a far- and not all tho builditga and atructuroo ara
docontaninatod but only that part upon which pooplo will liwo and
work and whoro aniaala and food atoroo will to locatod. Tho ro-
waining ooctiona of tho aroa aro narhod with apocial warning oigna
and loft to docontaninato on thoir own.

Dopanding upon tho contoninating factor. tho docontanination oi
torritory. ioddor. food. wator and wariouo articloo ia callod

Ilradioactivo docontaainotion. chonical donontanination. dia-
inioction.//

-37-
'0‘ OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OIIICIAL USE ONLY

[Radioactive decontamination] is the removal of radioactive sub-
stances fron the surfaces of various objects and also from food
products, fodder and water. In all cases, the goal of decontamina-
tion is to bring the radioactive contamination down to the permis-
sible amounts. with the /mechanical/ nethod of decontaminstion.
radioactive dust is removed from the surface of objects by sweeping.
shaking and washing with water; in addition. effort is also applied
to remove the contaminated layer of land or snow. to filter water.
etc. The lthemical/ method of decontamination consists of dis-
solving the radioactive dust or changing the radioactive isotopes

into complex conpounds and subsequently removing then with a
particuler solution. A lphysico-chemical/ method of decontamina-

tion is also used; various decontaminating solutions are used for
this purpose.

hard surface roads and sidewalks are washed with water (under a
pressure of 3-5 atmospheres). using 3 l of water per square meter
of surface. Dirt reeds ere replowed or their upper layer is re-
moved with a scraper. Livestock facilities are decontaminated

by washing away the radioactive substances with a strong strean

of water. Hashing away the radioactive substances begins with the
roof and then the walls. doors and windows are decontaninated;

the stream of water should be directed at the surface of the faci-
lity at an angle of 30-60 degrees. Brushes and broons on long
poles can also be used when washing down the walls and roof. The
radioactive contamination renoved from objects must be buried.
When cleaning livestock facilities, trenches and holes are dug

to absorb the water contaminated by the radioactive substances;
when the decontamination is completed. they are covered up with
dirt. After sprinkling the floor with water first. the decontam-
ination of the inside of livestock facilities begins by nechanical-
1y cleaning the rubbish and manure out of then. Rubbish and
manure contaminated by radioactive substances cannot be burned;
they are taken out to specially allocated areas and buried at a
depth of at least 70 cm. The walls. partitions and floors in the
stalls or aisles are thoroughly washed and the water is collected
along the drainage ditches in specially dug holes which are filled
with dirt later. Articles used for tending animals (feed troughs.
buckets. etc.) are washed down with water; brushes are used for
this purpose. household soap. soda. lye or surface acting agents
(OP-7. OP-lO) in a 0.3 percent concentration are used for more
complete decontamination.

It is recomnended that the following solutions be used to recon-
taminate individual protective gear and items used to tend animals:
1) a sunmer decontaminating solution (SD)--a 0.3 p‘rcent solution
of water and 0P-7 or OP-lO in a 0.7 percent solution of sodium
hexanetaphosphate; 2) a sunmer decontaninating acid solution
(80A)--the sane ingredients with the addition of 2 percent hydro-
chloric acid and 0.1 percent of ABP-S (anino-butane polymer)

-3g-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

ruet inhibitor; 2) u winter deconteeineting ecid eolution
(90A) which includee the eeee coeponente en the SDA eolution
but celciue chloride or eegneeiue chloride in included ineteed
of the eodiue hexeeetephoephete to lower the ireeeing point.

The leether perte of herneeeee ere wiped with e deep cloth (oekue)
end the felt end rope perte ere eheken out. Clothee. eeoche end
epeciel underweer ere ehehen out end then. when neceeeery. weehed
in e detergent eolution eccording to epeciel proceduree.

[Cheeicel deconteeinetion/ ie the deconteeinetion or reeovel of
cheeicel werfere egente. Tho eethode oi deconteeinetion ere:
l/eechenicel.l/ where the conteeineted leyer of the ground. enow.
fodder or produce ie reeowed or the conteeineted eree ie eeeled

off: Ilcheeicel./l where the cheeicel weriere egente ere neutrelited
or deetroyed by cheeicel egente: //phyeice1./l where the cheeicel
egente ere deetroyed by high teepereturee. reeoved by eolveete

or eveporeted by eiring; l/eixed.l/ where the eethode neeed ebove
ere coebined.

Ioede end peeeegee to fecilitiee conteeineted by cheeciel werfere
egente ere deconteeineted in the following eennert 1) the
conteeineted eree ie eprinhled with bleeching powder (1 kg of
bleeching powder per equere eeter of eurfece): it ie eubeequently
plowed up to e depth of 3-6 on end egein eprintled witn bleeching
powder. when the ereeie weekly conteeineted. bleeching powder
in eprinhled on it end then weter ie poured on it 20-30 einutee
leter (when there in e wind. the weter ie poured on firet end
then the bleeching powder ie eprinhled on it): or 2) the upper
10-ce leyer oi the ground (20-25 on leyer of enow) ie reeowed;

or 3) the euriece of the ground in covered with eend or eenure

(et leeet e lO-ce leyer) end e cover in eede of boerde. eheete
of plywood. brenchee. etc.

Vecilitiee ere deconteeineted with e 10-20 percent eolution of
bleeching powder or e 5 percent eolution of eodiue eulfite.
Celciue hypochlorite or uneleked llee cen be ueed ineteed of the
bleeching powder. when the eir teepereture in lower then + 5
degreee. eulturic chloride. or e were 5-10 percent eclution of

eodiue hydroxide or e 10-12 percent eolution of eeeonle weter
‘0 ueed.

A 1-1.5 1/equere eeter eolution of dcconteeinept to required to
deconteeinete buildinge end etructuree conteeineted by eueterd

gee end e 1.5-2 l/equere eeter eolution ie required to deconteein-
ete buildinge end etructuree conteeineted by eerin end binery
geeee. when deconteeineting coil with the powder of 2/3 the

beeic eelt of celciue hypochlorite or with bleeching powder.

their expenditure noree ere 0.5-1 hg/equere eetct: et the eeee

-39-

’Ol OPTICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL 088 ONLY

tine. b l/aquere aeter of water in required to wet down the

eoil. lf wooden aurfacee have been eubjected to the effect of
cheaical warfare agente for a long tine. it ie poeaible for then
to ”eveat out" the cheeical agente after their decontanination.
Therefore. it in neceoeary to repeat the decontanination. lneide
facilitiea. decontanination begine with the walla. feeding trougha
and floore: then the rubbieh and aanure ie cleaned up and the
floora are cleaned again. The nanure and rubhieh are burned or
taken to epecially allocated place: for burial. hetellic objecte
(buckete. pitchforbe. apadee. etc.) are decontaainated by firing.
by boiling thee in a 1-2 percent aolution of lye for 2 houre or
by wiping thee with aolvente 2-3 tiaee. After boiling. the arti-
clee are waehed down with clean water. wooden objecte (trougha.
feeding troughe. tethering poete. etc.) are decontaninated

with a peate of bleaching powder or with eolutione of decontan-
ineting agente and oubeequently weahed with water (1.5-2 houre
later). Hooden articlea of little value are burned.

Paeturee and hayfieldo contaninated by cheeical agenta are narhed
with warning eigne. The poeeibility oi ueing then after they have
been decontalinated on their own in decided baaed on the reaulta
of laboratory etudiea of neterial taken fron the contaninated
placea. A reliable nethod of decontaninetion in burning the vege-
tetion while obeerving fire aafety leaeuree.

l/vieinfectionl/ ie the deetruction of agente of infectioue die-
eaaea in the external environ-eat. The poaeihle nethoda are:
l/chenicaL/l where the nicroorganiaae are killed with chenicel
preparatione; l/phyaicall/ if they are deetroyed by high tenpera-
turea. ganne raya or ultraeonic eoundz and alao. l/phyaico-
cheeical.l/ where. for exanple. the effecta of high tenperaturee
and the etean froa forealin are coabined in a Poroalindatean
chanber.

Liveetoch facilitiee and the territory adjoining than are dia-
infected in the following nanner: the territory and then the
facilitiee (cow barne. pig etiee.etablea. etc.) are firat
abundantly wetted down with the dieinfectant aolution; after
thie. a nechenicai cleaning in conducted. Nanure and rubbieh
are burned on the apot or at the liveetocb graveyard; when they
are being taken away. n 1 co layer of bleaching powder in
aprinkled on the bottoa of the vehicle and on top of then.
before loading. the interior aurfacea of the vehicle eidea are
eeeared with a bleaching powder paste. Then. every object being
treated. without exception. in coapletely vetted down with
eolutione of diainfectanta. The wooden and aetallic erticlee
used for tending aninale. ea well an itene aade froa fibere.
wool. tarpaulin and cotton. are diainfected by boiling then 30
ainutee for vegetative typea of nicrobea end 2 houre for the
apore typee. They can alao be deconteeinated in the Yornalin

-‘o-
POI OFPICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OIPXCIAL Ull OIL?

steen chesber. es well es by soeking then in e disinfectent
solution.

Articles eeds fron leether. rubber end synthetic file ere wiped
2-3 tines with e disinfectent eolution with 0.1-0.2 percent

of en esulsifier (OP-7. or-xo end others) edded to it to soeh
then better; efter disinfection. the itens ere dried out end
leether erticles ere sneered with greese (ointnent).

Pecilities end equip-out contelineted by spores of Siberien
ulcers ere treeted 3 tines et hourly intervels. During e single
treetoent. l l of solution is used for l squere ester of eree
end. for spore types of nicrobes. 2 l ere used. One of the
following egents is used: e suspension of bleeching powder
conteining not less then 5 percent ective chlorine: e 10 percent
solution of forneldehyde (celculeting 10 l of Pornelin per

90 l of weter); e 5 percent solution of eonochloride of iodine:
e 20 percent purified solution of the 2/3 besic selt of celciun

hypochlorite. The solution is ebundently poured over the soil
( lo l/squere ester).

lendering hedicel Assistence end Preventive Hedicel
Assistence to Conteninetsd Anisels

Anisels with e slight cese of Iredietion sickness] only require
good cere. sound nourish-sot end veterinery observetion. the
eppropriete nedicines ere used in the event their condition
worsens. In extrensly bed ceses of rsdietion conteninetion, it
is not edviseble to treet eninels; they ere sleughtered for lost
or to be used for'con-erciel purposes. Uith e bed cese of rsdie-
tion sickness. only highly productive eninels should be treeted.
Aninels with en everege cese of rsdietion sickness ere prinerily
subjected to treetsent. In these ceses. the treet-sot is elweys
conprehenisve end it is directed et preventing infectious coupli-
cetions end st nor-elising the functions of producing blood. the
circuletory end digestive orgens end the endocrine end centrel
nervous systels. A greet deel of ettention should be devoted to
leinteining end feeding sick enilels. They ere pleced in dry.
cleen. well-ventileted fecilities. lourishlent which is not

sound end tilely. disturbences. overheetint or overcooling
cettle end elso poor conditions for seinte ning the- drew out
the period of rsdietion sickness.

The retions ere Iede up of sound. good quelity feed. Anilels

ere given legueinous plents or Iixed hey. good silegs. ground
root crops. hren. ground grein end ninerel edditives. Uhen using
strsw. it lust he steeled end fed with the bren. feed should be
given J-b tiles e dey in slell portions. Vite-in therepy hes e
good effect on enilels. Therefore. frol the first deys of the

-‘1-

l0! OFVXCIAL USE ONLY
'0! OIPIClAL 08! ONLY

illneee. it ie reconnended thet the ratione include herbel flour.
200-300 g of coniftfoui flour. gernineted grein end. in the eunner.
green leguninoue plente end cereel greine. when 'heir eituetion

in bed. eninele ere given concentretionn of vitenine. c. I end

I conplee. eepecielly II; (the deily done of vitenine ie increeeed
by e fector of 2-3).

Iﬂhen there in internel conteninetion by producte of e nucleer
enploeinnk edeorbente. bone-eel or beriun eulfete ere given in
nor-e1 dance by lining then vith e double e'nount of voter to elininete
theee producte fro. the inteetinee end to reduce their ebeorbtion
by the blood. Adeober--beriun eulfete with e thoroughly edenio-
tive eurfece--providee the beet effect. Activeted cerbon (200-300 g)
or heolin end veter cen eleo he need. A lenetive--eodiun eulfete
decehydrete in nornel doeee--ie given 20-60 ninutee efter their
introduction. Poteeeiun iodide in need to reduce the build-up of
redioective iodine in the thyroid glend. Lerge eninele ere given
2.5 g of it end enell eninele ere given 0.25 g.

[For bcte conteninetion of the ekin./ neeeuree directed et elinine-
ting pein. erreeting the developnent of inflennetion. epeeding up
the regeneretive proceeeee end preventing the developnent of in-
fection ehould be conducted on eoon ee poeeible.

lfor conteninetion/ of eninele by llorgenic phoephoroue/l chebicel
verfere egente. the eynptone ere treeted efter the introduction of
entidotee. lecovery ueuelly note in 1-7 deye leter.

for eninele contenineted by Ilprueeic ecid/l or llcyenogen
chloride.//--efter ueing enyl nitrite--it ie neceeeery to inject
e 1 percent eolution of nethylene blue prepered in e 25 percent
eolution of voter end glucoee into the vein end. vithout teking
the needle out of the vein. e 30 percent eolution of eodiun hypo-
eulfete ouet be injected (100-200 .1 of both for lerge eninele
end 10-20 nl for enell eninele). If both preperetione ere not
eveileble. one of then in injected.

Hhen eninele ere contenineted by llnueterd geeﬂk e bendege vith

e 2 percent eolution of chlorenine in put on the contenineted ehin
end then e bendege vith e p¢n¢¢1111n ointnent or vith e revereible
enuleion of eulfe drnge. reduce the reeorptive effect. e

)0 percent eolution of eodiun hypoeulfete (150-200 .1 for lerge
eninele end 20-b0 n1 for onell end young eninele) ie introduced
intrevenouely. Subeequent treetnent in for eynptone. Synptono
ere treeted for internel conteninetion.

For conteninetion by Illevieite/l.e 10 percent eolution of
(nonotyol) in 5 percent glucoee ie injected in the vein or
under the ekin en en entidote (150 .1 for lerge eninele. 35 ll

-52-

FOR OFPlCIAL USE ONLY
’Ol OPPICIAL US! ONLY

for young cattle. 15 n1 for eheep, hoga). The antidote ie in-
jected four tinee on the firat day after the contamination by

levieite. three tieee on the eecond day and two tinee on the
third through the fifth daya.

For contanination by I/phoegene.I/neeauree are taken to prevent
enphyeena. Oxygen ie injected under the akin for the oxygen

ehortage which develope (3-3 1 for large eninala and 0.5 1 for
anall eninele).

Proceduree for Slaughtering end Conducting a
Veterinary Nedicel Iraninetion of the Heat of Aninele
Subjected to the lffecte of Ueapone of Naee Deetruction

Aninale are grouped into exclueive groupe according to the type.
nature and degree of injury (contanination) end aleo according to
the deadlinee for elaughtering. They are aleughtered with their
reapective groupe at a eanitery eleughter houae or in the general
ahop of a neat conbine after healthy eninele are eleughtered or
they are eleughtared et field eleughtaring pointe which are epeciel-
1y eat up. At thia point. it is neceeeary to have: a derrick
crane to prepare the cerceeeec--the crane ie equipped with a hoiet
which in net up over a hole covered by a lattice flooring: a

rack for the orgena and carcaee half: a table for ecraping and
ealting the hidee and a table for getting rid of the contenta

of the inteatinee and atonech; a barrel for pickling the raw
inteetinea and a container for water; a wheel barrow and light
inatrunente. A pit for the contentc of the etonach end intee-
tinel tract and for confiecatee (rejected organe or perte of
organe) ie dug 5-10 I fron thie point. With a aingle derrick
cranc. 20 head of cattle can be eleughtered and proceeeed during

a 10-hour period. In all ceeee where conteninated eninale are
eleughtered. when renoving the hide and innarde. neaeuree are
taken to prevent the poeeibility of conteninating the carcaee

with the wool and the contenta of the atonach and inteetinal
tract.

[for contanination by nuclear weapone./ Aninala with pronounced
clinical eynptona of radiation aickneee. with a high body tenpere-
ture. with ekin contaninated by radioactive aubetencee higher than
the pernieeible anounte and thoae which have not gone through a
veterinary inepection cannot be eleughtered for neat.

l/Uhen there are Iultiple injuriee/l fro. the ehock wave. heat
rediation and radiation. eninele are eleughtered and a veterinary
nedicel inepection of the carcaee and orgena ie conducted with
due regard for the injury (traune or burn) which her caueed the
greeteet pathological chengee which have an effect on the nedical
end hygenic icdicee for the neat. Hith wideepreed burne on the
chin (third degree borne over an eree of et leaat 5 percent of

-g3-
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

the body'e eurfece),eninnle ehould be oleughtered for neet
within the iiret iour deye eiter the injury eince eicrobe
eeedin; of the tieeuee cen teke plece leter; in connection with
thie. theee cerceeeee nuet be eubjected to becteriologicel end
biochenicel etudiee.

l/Hith recent injuriee end broken bonee.// eninele cen be
eleuehtered for sent if there ere no locel inileenetione end

if the body tenpereture ie nornel. In theee ceeee, only the
tieeuee perneeted by blood end ewollen tieeuee ere renoved.

If inileneetione. inflelnetion in the blood flowing to the lynph
nodee end eleo indicetione oi putreiection ere detected in the
injured ereee. beteriolopicel end biochenicel etudiee of the
cerceeeee ere conducted eiter the enieele ere eleughtered.

l/Hith gen-e irredintion/l of eninele in doeee which ceuee bed
end extreeely bed ceeee of redietion eickneee, they ere eent for
eleuphter. If they ere killed during the firet 3-12 deye efter
irredetion. i.e.. before e pronounced clinicel picture of redie-
tion eickneee hee developed. then. in the eheence of pethologicel
chenuee. the eeet ie ueed without eny reetrictione. In theee
ceeee. e veterinery nedicel inepection of the internel organe ie
conducted in eccordence with eaieting reguletione.

l/Uith internel redioective conteninetionll in doeee which ceuee
eerioue injuriee. enieele cen be eleughtered for neet until pro-
nounced clinicel eynptole of illneee develop. Theee enieele ere
ueuelly killed between the 6th end.l2th deye efter redioective
eubetencee heve etopped entering the body. During thie period.
the level of redioectivity in eoft tieeuee decreeeee by e tector
of 10 or sore end pronounced clinicel eyeptoee of illneee eey not
eppeer. with internel conteninetion by the eerly redioective eub-
etencee of e nucleer exploeion. eniIele cen be killed for neet
during the iiret deye eiter conteeinetion; et thie tilt, the
thyroid glend end the eejor peckete of lyeph nodee ere reeoved end
deetroyed.

heeeurelente ere teken of the level of redioectivity in the cerceeeee
end other eleughter producte obteined fro. contenineted eninele.

The reeulte of the veterinery ledicel eveluetion depend upon the
concentretion of redioective eubetencee in then. If the content

of the letter exceede the per-ieeible concentretion. the cerceeeee
end other eleughter producte ere put in etorese. The note junior

the producte o; the exploeion which heve entered the enieel'e

body end the eooner the eninel ie killed efter they heve entered

ite body. the quicker the concentretion of redioectlve eubetencee

in the cerceee end other producte will decreeee during etorege.

with internel conteeinetion of enilele by redioective etrontiue.
eleughter producte ere produced depending upon the concentretion

-‘t-

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFVICIAL "8| ONLY

of thin redioective ieotope in then end depending upon the
hilltnic eedicel quelity of the neet.

IUith conteeinetion by poeionoue egente./ In the ebeence of
entidotee or with e fetel conteninetion by eueterd gee end
eephyeieting chenicel egente. it ie nore efvieeble to eleughter
the eninele for eeet. Por thie purpoee. the proceduree for

e preeleughter inepection of then end e e poeteleughter exenin-

etion of the eleughter producte nuet coeply with exieting regu-
letione.

when the technicel reeourcee ere preeent. ell contenineted
enieele. regerdleee of the type of chenicel egent. ere killed
during the first two houre efter conteninetion. If theee con-
ditione do not exiet. the following priority order ie eetebliehed
for eleughtering contenineted liveetoch.

Anieele contenineted ee followe ere eleughtered in firet priority:
e bed ceee of conteninetion by orgenic phoephoroue chenicel
egente with e developed clinicel picture of poeioning end eleo
in ceeee where their deeth hee been poetponed by the introduc-
tion of entidotee; e eerioue ceee of conteninetion of the chin
by nitrogen end eulfuric nueterd gee with the eppeerence of pro-
nounced dieturbence. convuleione. eweiling of the chin in the
contenineted epot end interruption of cerdiel ectivity; everege
end light ceeee of conteeinetion by lewieite; end bed ceeee of
conteeinetion by nerve end perelyeing geeee. Anieele conten-
ineted by the following ere eleughtered in eecond priority: en
everege ceee o! conteeinetion by orgenic phoephorone chenicel
egente; e bed ceee of conteninetion by eulfuric nueterd gee
through the reepiretory orgene. digeetive orgene end ehin; e

bed cone of conteninetion by phoegene. In third priority.
eninele not ectuelly in denger of dying (elight poeioning)

ere eleughtered for eeet. They ere killed when neceeeery for
neet.

Aninele with e bed ceee of lewieite conteninetion (they ere
treeted with en entidote end. in the ebeence of the letter.

they ere deetroyed end buried in the ground) ee well on thoee
in e etete of egony ere not eleughtered for neet.

Aninele with everege end elight ceece 0‘ lewieite contelinetion
which were not killed during the firet two houre efter being
contenineted cen be eleughtered no eooner then 12-16 houre leter
eince ereenic eccunuletee in the nueclee during the 2-8 hour
intervel efter conteeinetion. In the future. ite content greduel-
ly decreeeee but it cen be preeerved in the orgene up to 25-30
deye. Therefore. Ieet obteined fron eninele contelineted by
lewieite nuet be etudied for ereenic content (the neturel content
of ereenic in neet ie not greeter then 0.5 eg/kg).

-45-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI 0!?!CIAL US! ONLY

During tho oodicol owaluotion of ooat. guidolinoo aro pro-
vidod by tho rooulta of tho votorinory oodicol oranination
of tho carcaoaoo ond orgono with duo rogard for tho dota
iron tho prooloughtor inopoction.

hoot io producod without any rootrictiona: l) oftor oaturation
whon contooinotod by organic phoophorouo chooicol agonto
(rogardlooo of tho oaana of contanination) if tho onilol woo
hillad during tho firot two houro aitar tho clinical picturo

oi pooioning dowolopod; whon olaughtaring liwootock contooinatod
by binary goooo. tho Ioat ouot bo otudiod for ito pooion con-
tont which ouat not oxcaod tho laxinuo poroiooiblo nor-o; tho
intornol orgono iron onioalo contooinotod by organic phoophorouo
chooical ogonta aro oont for coonorcial oolwago; 2) whon thoro

io lioitod contooination of tho akin by ouotard goo or lowioito
(individual droploto of tho chooicol ogont) or whan only tho
lowar porto of tho lioba aro contaoinatod; in thooo caooo, tho
contalinotod opoto on tho carcooaoa oro trinood of! and tho
contooinotod parto of tho liobo aro rooovod and coat for oalwogo:
J) whon onioalo aro contolinotod by Iuotord goo through tho
roopiratory organo and whon thay oro olaughtorod during tho firot
6-8 houra and aloo whon thoy oro contaoinotod through tho digoo-
tiwo organa it tho oninol woo olaughtorod not lator than lZ-ld
houro tron tho tioo oi ita contaoination: in thooo coooo. all

tho intornol orgono ond tho hood aro oont for oolvogot I) in

tho awont anioalo aro contooinatod by aaphixiating chonicol
ogonto and whon clinical oigno of boginning olphyoooa oro
proaont. oll tho intornal organo aro oont for col-orciol oolyogo.

ﬂoat in condo-nod ond oont for connorcial procoooing or doo-
troyod: in cooo of wory ooriouo contoninotion of onilolo by
ouotard goo through tho roapiratory or digootiwo orgonoz whon

a lorgo oroo (ooro than 1/3 of tho ourfoco) of tho okin io
contooinatad and whon tho aninal ia alroady in a bad oworoll
condition during tho firot houro of pooioning; whon it io noc-
cooaary to trio away a part of tho carcaoo which oxcoodo 501

of ita ourfaco; whon binary gaooo aro dotoctod in tho loot obovo
the porniooibla lilito: whon Iicroiloro hovo ooodod tho loot
which provonto ito utilization no food.

Tho hidoo of onioalo cootoninatod by poroiotont chonicol ogonta
ore rooovod froo tho oloughtoring aitoo and oubjoctod to do-
contolination and prooorwation.

[with contonination by biological ogonta.l "hon dotorlining

tho poooibility of oloughtoring aninolo contolinotod by bio-
logical agonto for loot. tho typo oi ogont. ito for. of on-
ployoont (ooroool. powdor. otc.). tho duration of tho oninol'o
oxpoauro in tho contor o! contaninotion. tho tioo for conducting

-£6-
POI OFFIClﬁL USE OILY
l0! 0'?!CIAL UII OIL!

veterinary treatnent and nonspecific or specific preventive
seasures. as veil as the anisals' susceptibility to an agent
of this type (or to agents of these types) are taken into
consideration. Anisals subjected to biological conteeinetion
are not persittsd to be slaughtered for neat: until the type
of agent or tonin enploysd by the eneny is established: if
they have not gone through veterinary inspection and veterin-
ary treatnsnt after being subjected to contaninstion by an
agent or the toxin of botulisn; if sick or suspected of being
sick vith Siberian ulcers. eelioidosis. rabbit fever. cattle
plague. African svine flu. canel plague. poultry plague and
ornithopsittacosis as vell as vith illnesses not encountered
in the Soviet Union. for other infectious diseeses. guide-
linee are provided by the appropriate regulations for vet-
erinary inspection of eninals and for veterinary nedical en-
eeination of seat and nest products.

All persons conducting veterinary treateent. prselsughtsr
inspection. slaughter of aninals and preparation of carcasses
lust coeply vith individual preventive Isaeures. Inoking.
drinking and eating are forbidden during vork. "hen the
slaughter of aninals contalinated by biological agents is
conpletsd. slaughter houses. slaughtering points and slaughter-
ing areas are subjected to lechsnical cleaning and disinfec-
tion. All instrunents. equlpnent. tools and overalls es vell
as drainage vater are decontaninated. Operating personnel

go through a personal cleansing.

5. Protecting Plants Against Isapons of less Destruction

A nunber of organisational. egrochelical and other measures are
conducted in peacetine to protect plants against weapons of

ease destruction. An especially large anount of attention is
devoted to preventing the spread of agricultural crop diseases
and pests. Appropriate breeding vork is also conducted to
develop plant types vhich are innune to diseases and ionising
radiation. ”ensures are conducted to inprove soil fertility and
quarantine nessures are csrried out.

CD Measures when Plants Are Contaninated by Herbicides

Facility CD chiefs and the appropriate specialists of the plant
protective services organiae all the neesures for protecting
plants against veapone of less destruction. The practical vork
is accomplished by the nanpover and equip-eat of the kolkhoaes.
sovkhoaes. nechenited detach-snts of the Argricultursl Iquip-
nent Association and plant protection stations. After establish-
ing the fact that the eneny hue enployed chelical agente. the
kolkhox (sovkhoa) agrono-isr and the phytopethologicel

-gy-
'0! OFYICIAL US; ONLY
FOR OP'ICIAL 088 ONLY

reconnaieeance teen thoroughly enaoino all the iaro'o iialdo
and, uoing vieual and Quick oethode. they deteroine the type

of herbicide (defoliant, dooiccant) and they aloo taha oanpleo
for a laboratory anolyoio and detaroine the houndarieo of

the contaoination. A record or report io conpiled baond on the
reoulto of the enaoination oi the agricultural area. One

copy of the report io oent to the otaii of the rayon'o plant
and anioal protective eervico end. along with the oaoploo

taken (planto. clippingo). the oecond copy io eent to tho agro-
chenical laboratory (the plant protection otation. ocientiiic
rooearch inotitute).

After detaroining the type and dooe oi the herbicideo which have
oottled on tho planto. the torn agronooiot forecaoto tho poooible
level of plant contanination with due regard for their develop-
nontal otaga. weather conditiono and aloo poooible crop loooeo

or plant daatho: after thio. he outlinao a plan of oeaoureo to
eave tho harveot. ﬂhen young cropo are contooinated by herbi-
cideo to a olight degree where poooible crop loooeo do not

exceed 30 percent oi 3030'. thorough and incroaoed care of

young cropo io required. hineral ouppleoento ore given.
cultivation io carried out between tho rowo. additional

watering io conducted. etc. The grain harveotod tron thooo
iieldo io only uood for food with tho peroiooiou of the aedical
oarvice and it io uood (or feed for liveotoch only with tho por-
niooion of veterinary opacielioto after they have deteroioed tho
reoaioing aoount of herbicide in it. when uoing nineral terti-
litero (or oupplenontory plant feeding. it ohould be borne in
wind that ouppleoentary feeding of young cotton planto and other
dicotyledono with nitrogen fortilieero will increooe tho tonicity

o! the herbicide during tho firot 1-2 weeho after the eoployoont of 2.6-0
I2.6-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid] or 2.6.5-1 [2.6,S-trichlorophononyacotic acid).

Vhen there io an average level of contaoination of young cropo
(50-70 percent reduction in the harveot). depending on the iaro'o
aconooy and ito eowipoent reoourceo. the planto can be plowed up
and the iieldo can then be nown again with cropo which are in-
oune tn the given herbicide or the contooinatod cropo are left
(or harveoting when oandatory oeaoureo are conducted to reduce
the haroiul oiloct oi the herbicide. The harveot obtained iron
theoe areao io wood ao food (or people or ao feed for livootock
after the anount of herbicide reoaining in it io doternined.

the oeedo of oil producing corpo (ounilowero. caotor planto)
which are obtained Iron iioldo which have an average level of
contaoination by 2.‘-D. 2.6.5-1 preparatione are proceooed

_—_——

0 ango--the eiiective dooe which. when ooployed will reduce the
harveot by 30 percent.

-‘a-
P0! OFFIClkL USE ONLY
roe omcm. uir on!

for connerciel purpoeee. The eeede of dicotyledone fron theee
fielde ehould not he etored eince they ere dietinguiehed hy e
low cepecity for gerninetion.

when n high level (90-100 percent of the herveet periehee) of
the young crope ere contenineted. the plente ere. ee e rule.
deetroyed. when the plente ere not very high. the field ie
plowed over; when the plente ere high, they ere nowed. tehen
heyond the hounderiee of the field end hurned end the field
ie plowed over. Vith e high level of conteninetion of dicotyle-
done (eunflowere. leguninoue crope. vegetehle crope) end
fodder greeeee with the 2.6-0. 2.‘.S-T preperetione. it

ie reconnended thet they he nowen quickly end put into eilege
end it ie reconnended thet the ereee he plowed over. During
the eilege proceee. the herhicidee cited deconpoee without
interfering with the nicrohiologicel proceee which tehee

plece when the none in ground. The eilege will eleo he euit-
ehle for feeding liveetoch.

Chopping--i.e.. renoving thet pert of the etelh which hee the
deforned lenvee (up to ll: of the etelh)--ie one of the nethode
for eeving cotton plente contenineted hy prepretione of the
2.‘-D type. Chopping epeede up the fornetion end developnent
of edditionel ehoote end it epeede up the fornetion of fertile
hronchee on then with holle. ft in effective when the plente
ere in the etegee of heving 5-5 ectuel leevee end hefore hudding
hegine, with the condition thet they ere contenineted hy herhi-
cide to n elight or everege degree (crop loeeee up to 40-70
percent). ft in not very effective when conducted during the
leter pheeee of cotton plent developnent (in the event e

herhicide hee heen enployed) end eleo when plente heve heen
conteninnted to e eevere degree.

It ehould he horne in nind thet. when the herveet it reduced hy
30 percent ee e renult of the enploynent of e herhicide, the
connerciel quelity of the reneining cotton fiher end eeede ie
eherply reduced. The fiher will he fourth rete end the eeede
will he third cleen. "hen 70 percent of the herveet in loot.
the fiher chengee to fourth-fifth grede end eeede ere not reted.

Regerdleee of the herhicide done (perequet. picloren, di-
nethylereinic ecid). eninnle ere not pernitted to grene on
conteninoted peeturee end greee conteninnted hy herhicidee

in not pernitted to he nowed end fed to eninnln. within
theee ereee. veter cennot he tehen fron open eourcee to

drinh. to uee for nutritive purpoeee end to weter eninele
without the pernieeion of the nedicel end veterinery eervicee.

-49-

’0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
l0! 0P1lClAL "8! ONLY

IUeing contaninated land.l During the year a herbicide ie
eaployed. plowed-np fielde can he need for eowing winter or
early-ripening epring food and fodder crope which are ieenne
to the preparation eeployed by the eneey. Thne. grain crope,
priearily corn. can be cultivated on land contaninated by
picloran and it ie recon-ended that winter crope be eown in
fielde contaeinated by paraqnat.

Dnring the firet eeveral yaare. land contaninated by dieethyl-
ereonic acid or by ite praparatione cannot he need to grow

food and fodder crope eince the harveet nay contain an incraaeed
aaonnt of areenic. Theee areae can he need for coeeercial crope
which are not need for food or feed.

00 heannrea Hhen Plante are Contaeinated by biological Agente

when the fact hae been eetabliehed that biological agente have
been eeployed. it ie neceeeary to eetablieh the type of agent
and carry out an exaeination of all the fielde. Dnring the
exaeination proceee. the bonndariee of contaeination. the
deneity of the eporee per eonara neter. the degree of initial
contanination of each field and the poeeihility of an apiphytic
condition developing are eetabllehed.

When the nredoeporee of Ilgrain rnet/l are detected in the air
or on crope. the poeeibility of the paraeite growing in the fielde
ie deternined end deadlinee and a priority order for treating
fielde with fnngicidee (cinebe. polycarbacene. eanebe and other
dithiocarbanatee ae well ae nickle ealte. gronnd or collodial
enlphnr. etc.) are planned. It ie eoet advieable to nee cinebe
(a deep gray or yellowieh gray powder containing 50 to 90
percent of the active ingredient-otinc biethylenedithiocarhanate
[(CNIIHCSS) 2n!) and polycarbecane (the coeplen of the einc ealt
froe biethy enedithiocarbaeic acid and polyethylenethinraedi-
enlfide: it ie eannfactnred in the for- of a 73-80 percent deep
powder). For encceeeful control of grain rnet. it ie very in-
portant to detereine the tile when the fielde ehonld be treated
with fnngicidee.

the tine for the noet effective eeploynant
of fnngicidee ie detereined in the following
manner. The firet treateent ie conducted
npon detecting the agent for eten rnet in
the air or on crope in an anonnt capable of
caneing an epiphytic condition if the weather
favore it. The poaeible contanination of
wheat ie analysed further and the cycle for
the firet nredogeneration of the fnngne ie
deternined. If there wae a dew or if it had
rained in the 6-0 hon: period while the

-so-
POI OFFICIAL us: ONLY
POI OPPICIAL US! ONLY

aporoo woro oottling down. and it tho air
tonporaturo did not drop lowor than + 10-12
dogrooo. thon tho oporoa which oottlod on
tho planto will grow and contaninato tho
whoat with ruot.

Tho cyclo for growing tho lirot urodogonorotion
of tho funguo dopondo on tho tonporaturotl
tho highor it io tho quichor tho growing
cyolo will ond. tor ito cooplotion. it ro-
quiroo a ouo or oiloctiwo tonporaturoo which
oqualo 125 dogrooo (or whoat oton ruot and
it roquiroo a Iinilul tolporaturo oqual to

+ 2 dogrooa for tho paraoito'o growth. Pro-
oooding iron thio. tho tyclo for dowoloping
tho firot urodogonoration io cacluatod ac-
cording to tho Iornulat c

"-717.
whoroll io tho cyolo for growing tho gono-
ration (in doyo); c io tho oul of tho ofﬂoctiwo
tooporaturo; 1 io tho aworago daily air ton-
poraturo; t ia tho lowor tonporaturo throsh-
hold for growing tho fungua (oqual to + 2
dogrooo).

mam--

val-l

 

loyx l. Dato
2. rooporaturoo (in dogrooo)
3. Aworago daily
6. [trottiwa T-t
5. Sun of offoctivo tolporaturoo

lranplo. Tho aporoo aro dotoctod on 20 loy.
Tho aworago daily tonporaturo waa oqual to
l. dogrooo; thoro wao dow on tho planto
throughout tho ontiro night and thoy woro
contalinatod. rho ouhooquont couroo of tho
tonporaturox

-51-
POI OI7ICXAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to this data, the appearance of
pustules of rust should he expected on 28
Hey. This neans that it is necessary to
spray the crops with fungicides before the
nassive developnent of uredopustules and
before the uredospores of the fungus are
scattered. i.e., not later than 28-29 Hey.

The deadlines for subsequent treatnents of
the_grain with fungicides ere deterninsd
in the sane nannsr.

Cinebe or polycarhacene suspended in water with an expenditure
norn of 4 kg per hectare (for the active ingredient) are used
for chenical treatnent of fields against rust. The suspension
is sprayed on the fields fron an airplane equipped with a

boon sprayer or fron a helicopter equipped with a boon sprayer
with a centrifugal whirling diffuser and also with ground-based
sprayers.

The suspension is prepared before use; crops are treated with
it in the norning (before 1000-1100 hours) or after 1800 hours.
The treatnent is conducted 2-3 tines: the first tine is
innediately after it has been established that the eneny en-
ployed spores of the rust fungus; the second tine is during
the 1-3 day period before the first generation of the fungus
has finished growing. When necessary, the third treatnent is
before the second generation is finished. At the sane tine,
uncontanineted territory is also taken in. Neasures are taken
at the sane tine to elininate the internediate host--the
harbcrry bush.

To control l/phytophthora infection// of potatoes. the tops of
the plants are sprayed with fungicides conhined with supple-
nentary leaf-feeding of phosphorous and potassiun. for these
purposes. a nirture of Bordeaux insectcide. calciun chloride
end superphosphate extracts is used. The Bordeaux nixture

(a solution of copper sulfate and unslaked line) is prepared
according to special nethods. Then. two parts of a 7.5 percent
solution of superphosphete extracts in water are taken, about
1.5 percent of calciun chloride is added and everything is
nixed with one part of a 3 percent Bordeexx nixture of a neutral
reaction. The working solution is used 1; the freshly prepared
forn. Due to the difficulty in preparing the Bordeaux nixture.
cinebe or copper onychloride (50 or 90 percent copper oxychloride
and the rest--filler) is usually used. The expenditure norn per
hecter for one treatnent of both preparations is 2 kg of the
active ingredient.

-52-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'OR O'PICIAL "8! ONLY

The firot fungicide treetnent of potato plante io ecconpliohed
ionodietely after the fact in eotebliohod that tho plento aro
contaninated end not later than the day of the initial appear-
once of tho diooooo. the doodlinoo for ouboequont treateonto
are deternined by tho agronoeioto booed on tho length of tine
tho fungicido'o activity ie prooerved on tho plento and booed
on tho oynop.ic weather forecaot for tho given eroe. The
nininun and nexieuo tonperoturo. tho oun of the effective
tonpereturoe. tho incubation cycle for growing tho funguo and
tho preeenco of precipitation are token into eccount.

Cinoho and tho Iordoeun Iixture are need to elininate rice
l/piriculeriooio.// Only noaouroo which incroaoe ooil fertility
end breeding work are conducted ae eeaoureo for controlling
l/cotton plent wilt.//

[Tending agriculturel cropo.l It in recon-ended that cereal
cropo be given eupplenentel leaf-feedingo of potoooiun (0-16
kg/hectere end phoophorouo and poteooiun (0 kg of potoooiun
chloride and 7 kg of ouperphoophato por hectoro). oopocielly
during the tuber period. Supple-entel crop watering io rooortod
to in irrigated land during the tilloring end tuber otegoo.
Contoninetod vegetation io deotroyod. Potato and boot

crope receive oupplenontal cultivation botwoon the rowe and
additional fertilizer.

when lharveoting cropo./ it io iaportant to prevent contonin-
ation of need neteriol.

co hoaeureo "hen Plento are Contenineted by
Badioectivo Subotenceo

For all practical purpooeo. it io inpoooible to protect plante
in the field froe the ceoualty producing fectoro of e nuclear
explooion. including rodioective oubotancoe. Only onell ereeo
can be covered with filn. Therefore. in the event the onony
olployo nuclear weepono. the beeic nooouroo in growing plante
will be directed at reducing the donege ceuoed by radioectivo
fallout end at decroeoing the entry of rediooctive iootopeo into

plant tioouoo. copecially into tho econolicelly uooful part of
then.

The redioactive producto of a nuclear exploeion cen oottlo on
fieldo l/bofore oowing.// In thio caoe. the ooi‘ io contenin-
ated and. therefore. dcop plowingo-by conplctcly turning the
furrow over-oohould be conducted in all fieldo dooigneted to

be oown with winter and opring cropo in zoneo c end 3 of the

peth of the redioective cloud. he a rooult of thio plowing.

the upper. contonineted leyor io put on the botton or the furrow.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

dubeequently. ehallowar plowing ie conducted in order not to
raiea the radioactive eoil to the eurface.

when nuclear warheada are exploded during llthe plant vegeta-
tion period.// not only the eoil but aleo the vegetative cover
ie conteninated by radioactive eubetancee. Thie kind of eitua-
tion can ariee when the path of the radioactive cloud ie being
for-ad during above and below ground nuclear exploeione (local
radioactive fallout) and aleo during the period of inteneive.
worldwide radioactive fallout (tropoepheric and etratoepberic
fallout) which can occur over a period of 2-3 yeara. In theee
caeee. a ayeten of protective neaeuree directed at eaving crope
and decreaeing the radioactive contanination of the producte

of plant groving ie enployed.

Finally. over a period of eany yeare. the eoil will contain
iaotopee with a long life (etrontiae-90. ceeiun-l37 and othere)
which eigrate fro. the eoil to the plante. In theee eituatione.
a eyeten of neaauree directed at reducing the tranefer of radio-
active eubetancee into the underground part of plante and root
crope ie conducted.

CD Meaeuree for Reducing Crop Loeeee and
Surface Contaeination of Agricultural Producea by
fadioactive Subetancee

Growing vegetable and berry crope and fruit and citrue treee in
protected ground (greenhoueea. hothoueee. bot beda) ia the ideal
eeaeure for protecting plante againet radioactive fallout. In
our country. a great deal of attention ie devoted to greenbouae
far-in; for the purpoee of eupplying the population with freeh
vegetablea and berriee the year round. Large greenboueee are
being built at the eovkhozee near citiee.

Thue. the area of greenhoueee at the capital'e
Hoecow Sovkho: Conbine ie 66 hectaraa. During
the year, the conbine producer 16.000-18.000
tone of vegetablee.

During the period of a threat of an eneny attack. anall araae

of vegetable crope. tea plantatione and citrue grovee can be
covered by file. For thla purpoee. 1.5 tone of polyvinylchloride
file ie required per hectare of area and labor expendituree

for covering it will be 20 Ian-houre.

During the period of inteneive. worldwide radioactive fallout.
it ie recon-ended that nore food crope whoee grain ie covered
by folda or acelee (legueee. oate, rice. uillet. buckwheat.
corn) be cultivated. The eeede of eunflowere. flax and help

-55-
FOR OFVICIAL USE OﬂLY
'0! 0P?ICIAL "8! ONLY

ere protected egeinet euriece conteeinetion by redioective enb-
etencee. Until e lot of redioective eubetencee build up in the

eoil. the tubere of potetoee ere eleo protected egnlnet locel
conteeinetion by the eoil.

The negnitnde o! the euriece conteeinetion oi plente by redio-
ective eubetencee depende upon the (ore of the leevee. the
preeence oi ridgee on then. etc. end eleo upon the etege of plent
grovth when the redioective duet eettled (Teble 33).

Teble 33. Btrontiue-QO Content of Orein end Chef! During
buriece Conteeinetion oi wheet Crope by en leotope
During Verioue Btegee of Orovth

(1) - .WM "tune-OD
Output-hmou-n-m ‘2) ‘s'ﬂou-Mnuw

”.30.“ W... m.

     

hey: l. Stege of grovth during which crope were

conteeineted.

2. Strontiue-90 content (percencege of vhet tell
on crope)

3. In the grein

6. In the chef!

5. Tillering

6. Putting out tubere

1. Ilooeing

8. Golden ripeneee

the leee tine thet peeeee iron the dey of redioective conten-
inetion of crope until the herveet ie gethered in. the greeter
the eeount of redioectlve eubetencee thet vill be conteined in
the herveet of egricolturel crope. During plent vegetetion.
their level of redloectivity decreeeee ee e reeult of the
netorel decey of redioective enbetencee. redioectiye duet being
veehed off by precipitetion. redioective duet being blovn of!
by the wind end ee e reeult of old leevee felling off. "hen
crope ere vetered vith epriehling eyetele. e eigniticent pert
of the redioective duet le veehed off the plente.

[tending egriculturel crope./ the proceee of tending crope ie
chenged for porpoeee of reducing crop loeeee. In order to plan
leeeuree for tending crope. e tield doeege eep ehould be drevn
up. For thie purpoee. it ie neceeeery to obtein dete on the

-55-
I0! OPPICIAL ”SE ONLY
FOR OVVICIAL 088 Oﬂbl

tiee of the nuclear exploeion. the beginning and end of local
radioectiwe fallout and the eaxinue levele of radiation in
varioue fielde. The levele of radiation in all the fielde

are cited for a eingle. epecific tine (for 1 hour or 10 houre
after the erploeion. etc. 3 after thie. the appropriate valuee
for the radiation levele are poeted on the field nap (Pigure
65). Then. the radiation doee which vegetating plente will
receive during a e-dey period or until the end of the vegetation
period ie eetieated (eee Table ‘5 on p 265). veing the data
in Table ll. probable crop loeeee are calculated baeed on the
eiee of the radiation doeee. leeed on theee calculatione. the
radiation eituation which hae developed in the fielde. neadowe
end gardene ia evaluated and neeeuree are planned for tending
crope and for eeving. gathering and ueing the herveet.

if the redioective duet fell on the fielde when the crope had
already ripened. then. given a tinely herveet. it will not have
any effect on the eiee of the herveet. However. the grein
obtained nay loee ite gereinating capacity froe the effect of
ionizing radiation. In addition. the grain lay crueble and.

in dry weather. root crope nay rot if the herveet cannot be done
in a tieely eanner due to the high level of radiation in the
fielde for theee crope. Por enaeple. practically all the cereal
crope in the etagee of growth will perieh in tone ; up to

50 percent of the crope nay aleo perieh in tone 3.

If. according to.the eetieete. 50 percent or eore of the herveet
of vegetating plente will perieh in e particular field. an end
ie put to tending the crope. The radiation levele will be high
here. laeed on rediation eecurity conditione. when the oppor-
tunity preeente iteelf. the cereal and legueinoue crope in

theee fielde are nowad for hay and the areae ere egein eown
with early ripening crope or the eoil ie prepared for winter
crope. Ihe hey obteined froe theee fielde ie need for live-
etoch after redioactive eeeeurenente are taken.

In fielde where leee than 50 percent of the crope perieh. care
for the crope ie ieprovedx plente are given eupplenentel leaf
feedinge; cultivation ie conducted between the rowe: the
wetering noree are increaeed: etc.

Uhen plente are contaeineted during early etagee of growth by

a doee which ia 50 percent of the fetal doee. their growth and
developeent ure eharply arreeted and. at the eaee tine. the
herveet decreaeee by epproxieately 60-70 percent. If plente

are radiated by the cited done after blooeing. the herveet eey
drop ineignificently (up to 20 percent): however. the grein will
not be euitebte for eeed purpoeee. It nay loee ite gereinating
capacity. The redietion of wheet crope by a £00 roentgen doee
during the tillering and blooeing etagee will cauee e so percent

-55-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ray:

POI OFFICIAL 083 CID!

    

 

   

  

' -

 
 
 
    
 

  

tour I . I. 31' “f:"
(:0, «mu'ﬂﬂh-‘m - lyﬁgnéggw“ m

l.
2.
3.

‘.
S.

Pigura 68. Piold Dooaga ”an (or Vanguard
Roltnoa and Poaoibla Crop Loaoaa
aitar Radioactiva Pallont

Piald nunbar and 1a. Proa radiation afiacta
aroa (hoctarao) 19. Iron intarruption of
Radiation lovol production procaao‘
(roontnono/hr) 20. Crop loaoao doc to a
During fallout shortaga of nochanico.
Ry I + l POL. ninoral (artill-
Plant radiation doaa aara and alao Goa to
5! hIfVOOt ‘1'. nonconplianca with
(field radio-aror harvaot daadlinao.
nan-a radiation ' 21. Radiation laval l hr
radiation) attar burnt

Crop 22. Rurot at 1506.

Uintor vhaat Yiald - l nagaton.
Potatooa 23. Pron tho kolkhoa to
Clovar groan! taro of tho
Graoaao ouriaca burst - 150 in
Rarlay 2‘. loan A

Vatch and oato 25, 10.. |

state of plant trovch 26. nun:-
at tho tila oi iallout 27, un1ga Rivar

tillarint 28. Black Rivar

Iloonin; 29. Shalan' Rivar
Putting out tobaro

Proactad crop looo
(parcont)

-57-

’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 OﬂLY

looo to tho groin horwoot; in thio cooo. tho grain which (oroo
will conplotoly looo ito fiold gortinoting capocity. Tho
rodiotion of whoat cropo by a 200 roontgon dooo during tho oooo
otogoo of growth will load to o 30 porcont looo of tho horvoot
ond to o 20-50 porcont roduction in tho groin'o fiold goroin-
oting copocity. Tho rodiotion of 10-20 on high potato ohooto
will load to o so porcont looo of tho horvoot ond to a 30-50
porcont roduction in tho fiold gorninoting capacity of tho
potatooo horvootod tron thooo orooo.

lhorvooting and uoing cropo./ It io inportont to firoly oo-
toblioh tho procodutoo and priority ordor for harwooting cropo
fron floldo doponding on thoir lowol of rodiotion. Cropo

in fioldo with tho lowoot. oofoot lovolo of rodiotion for
pooplo oro harwootod firot. whilo tho cropo oro boing hor-
vootod horo. tho lovol of radiooctiwity in tho oubooouont
fioldo with highor lowolo of rodiooctiwity will doclino oigni-
ficontly. Thuo. it io poooiblo to gradually horvoot oll tho
cropo fro- oll tho fioldo. Cropo with diifotont lowolo of
radiooctiwity oro otorod ooporotoly.

In ordor not to poroit oocondoty contonination of groin
by tho ooil. it io roconnondod thot groin cropo bo harvootod
diroctly by conbinoo with o highor cut.

It in bottor to taho tho harwootod cropo owoy fron tho fiold
ionodiotoly to gtonorioo or wogotablo otorohouooo or it io
bottor to otoro thon in on oroo proparod for thio purpooo
ond covor thon with torpoulin or fill.

"hon horvooting cropo on todiooctiwo contoninatod loud. it io
nocoooary to work in coworallo nodo of donoo fiboro ond roopir-
otoro ond it io nocoooory to nonitor pooplo’o rodiotion doooo.
To o cortain oxtont. tho produco horvootod Iron thooo fioldo
will be rodiooctiwo. Agriculturol opociolioto oro obligotod
to provido o ohillod roconoondotion on uoing tho cropo. Tho
nutritiwo quolitioo of groin. root cropo. hoy and otrow oro
not chongod by tho offocto of ganno royo ond bota particloo.
They can only bo unouitoblo for food or foddor purpoooo duo to
rodiooctiwo contoninotion. Uith porniooiblo lovolo of rodio-
activo contaninotion. ouch horticulturol produco io uood for
food ond foddor putpoooo: whon tho radioactiwo contont io
highor thon tho porniooiblo lowolo. tho produco io doconton-
inotod or oont for con-orcial procoooing (for olcohol, otarch.
ougot. oil).

6. Conducting Agriculturol Production on Land with on Incroaood
Strontiun-90 Contont

Uhon tho ooil io radiooctiwoly contoninotod. iootopoo with a long
lifo. ouch ao otrontiun-90. ccoiun-137. tuthoniun-103 ond 106.

.53.
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OVPICIAL "8! ONLY

pronethiun-lln. ceriu-l“ and othere build up in it. 8trontiun-90
ie nore active in the eoil-plant link. In conparieon with the
other radioactive ieotopee. it aleo preeente the greateet bio-
logical danger. Therefore. in fielde contaninated by radio-
active eubetancee. the appropriate neaeuree ere prinarily con-
ducted to reduce the paeeaga of etrontiun-90 froe the eoil to
the underground parte of plante or root crope.

The enternalbmuWO'1GO of the ronee of radioactive contanination
are characterised by the following levele of etrontiuI-90
content in a s-cn layer of eoil (in curiee/equare hiloneter):
cone A--0.2-0.S: eone I--3: none c--io.

Ilone A.I lt ie nore advieable for farne located on the .
periphery of the cone to be ewitched over to vegetable production.
In thie pert of the path of the radioactive cloud. the etrontiun-
90 content of the eoil fluctuatee fron 0.2 to l curie/equare
hiloneter: therefore. vegetablee will contain a pernieeible
anount of thie ieotope for uee ae food. In other areae where

the etrontiun-90 content exceede l curie/ 0000f. kiloneter. it
will not be poeeible to obtain vegetablee with the pernieeible
etrontiun-90 content during the firet yeare after a nuclear lie-
eile war. Obviouely. during the firet 3-6 yeare when there ie
inteneive worldwide radioactive fallout. it will be altogether
inpoeeible to obtain any leafy vegetablee (lettuce. eorrel.

dill. pareley and othere) fron open ground eince they will be
badly contaainated by radioactive duet and it will be rather
difficult to renove it fron their eurfacee. During the firet
yeare. theee vegetablee can only be grown in hot bede and
greenhoueee. Uith etrontiun-90 lewele up to 2 curioe/equare
kilo-eter on the periphery of cone A. it ie poeeible to raiee
cattle on locally produced feed eince the etrontiuI-OO content

in the nilk will be within the pernieeible wartine linite.

In the niddle of zone A and along ite internal border where the
etrontiue-90 content of the eoil reachee 3 curieelequare kilo-
later. it ie nore advieable to cultivate grain and leguninoue
food crope. Since the leguninoue crope aeeinilate 6-3 tilee
nore etrontiun-90 fro. the eoil than cereal crope do. it ie
reconnended that they be eown in eoile with a lower content

of the ieotope.

[Zone 3.] ft ie nore advieable to uee the land in thie none to
produce connercial crope (flax. henp. caneline. eunflowere.
caetor. eeeential oil plante. cotton. eugar heete and othere)

ae well an potatoee for etarch or alcohol and grain crope for
alcohol. Grain and leguninoue crope can aleo be grown for eeede
eince the quality of the grain eeede doee not change in thin
caee. Podder and root crope can aleo be cultivated here to feed

-59-

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
'08 OP?ICIAL USE ONLY

neet end dreft liveetoch. Por the firet tine. the eoil ie
plowed to the nexinue depth.

Throughout the entire territory of none I. neet end dreft live-
etoch. ketlkul eheep end eheep for eeet end wool. wild enieele
end poultry (when hept in pone) cen be reieed on locelly pro-
duced feed. Adult cettle. eheep end goete cen be fettened up
for neet with locel food when the level of etrontiue-90 in the
coil in up to 10 curiee/eouere hiloeeter end celvee cen be
fettened with locel feed when the level ie lower then S curiee/
equere hiloeeter. Only 2-‘ weehe before eleughter. it ie inpor-
tent to give thee feed obteined fron e tone with noderete redie-
tion or fro. ereee which were not eubjected to locel redioective
conteeinetion.

Itone c./ During the firet yeer. neeeuree ere conducted here

to reduce the etrontiue-90 content in the ereble leyer: with
levele of etrontiun-90 conteninetion froe 10 to 30 curiee/equere
hiloeeter. deep plowing by turning over the furrow ie conducted
or plowing ie conducted by trenepoeing the eoil leyere (to e
depth of'50-70 on). Then. coeeerciel crope ere grown on the
plowed lend. Dreft liveetoch cen be kept on the feed produced
in coil with e eexieun etrontiun-90 conteeinetion of 30 curieel
equere centieeter end hoge cen be fettened for lerd on grein
produced in lend with e etrontiue-90 content up to 100 curiee/
equere hiloeeter. ﬂith the eene content of the ieotope in feed.
the eeet of hoge will contein lo tinee leee of it then the neet
of cowe end cheep.

1t ie edvieeble to reiee eeet end egg breede of poultry in tonee
I end c. hevertheleee. when the egg leying period ie over.
poultry ehould be given cleen feed before eleughtering the. for
neet.

A difficult eituetion develope in ronee I end c for pond end
leke fieh breeding. The etrontiun-Oo content in the bonee of
fieh (perch. corp) will be en everege of 3.000 tinee greeter
then the content in the weter end the content in the nueclee
will be S tieee greeter then in the weter; the ceeiue-lJ? content
ie the eueclee will be 3.000 (cerp) end 9.000 (perch) tieee
greeter then in the weter. The fieh ebeorb 67-70 percent of

the redioectiwe ieotopee froe the weter end they ebeorb the
reneining enount froe the food they uee. with e nexieun con-
centretion of 2.l x 10'9 curieell of etrontiue-9O in the weter
fiehegge begin to die end. with e concentretion froe 2.1 s 10":
to 2.1 x 10-10 curieell. defornitiee develop in lerwee end

young fieh. With e concentretion of 2.1 x 10" curieell (21
nenocuriee) of the ieotope in the weter. the deeth of ell the
egge end fieh lo obeerved.

-50-

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP'IOIAL "8! ONLY

Land with a otrontiun-90 contont of up to $0 curiooloquaro
hilonotor can ho uood for agricultural production; in orcoptional
caooo. grain to fatton hogo {or lard can ho grown on land con-
taining up to too curiooloquoro kilonotor of thio iootopo in tho
ooil. In tho ranaininn torritory or thio oono. it io inpoooihlo
to grow planto during tho firot yoaro. It in boot to uoo thio
land to plant woodox pino trooo whooo control rooto ponotrato
dooply into tho ooil aro hoot.

uhon growing planto on land with an incroaood contont of radio-
iootonoo with a long liio. it io rocowoondod that opociol woo-

auroo diroctod at roducin; tho tranoror of tho iootopo iron tho
ooil into tho planto ho conductod.

Iaoic Noaouroo for Iaducin; tho lntry of strontiun-OO
into Planto iron tho coil

Tho paooano of otrontiun-9o iron tho ooil into planto dopondo
upon nunorouo factoro which aro charactoriotic of tho quolity

and fortility of tho ooil. In addition. tho phyoiological
foaturoo of tho planto play a oigniricant rolo in thin procooo.
Cropo which contain noro calciun aloo draw aoro otrontiun out

of tho ooil (tabla 36). rhuo. lonuninouo crono accunuloto

2-5 tinoo noro otrontiun-OO than coroal crono. tho loaot anount
of otrontiun-Oo io accuoulatod in tho grain. loavoo and otalho
of corn. Approxinatoly Juat ao nuch otrontiun-90 io tranoiorrod
tron tho ooil to tha tuhoro of potatooo ond corroto ao io
tranaforrod to tho .raia or coroal cropo .rown_in tho oano iiold.
lvon difforont .radoa of tho oano crop do not accuaulato tho oano
aoount or thin iootopo (tahlo 36).

rahla at. tho Paooogo of Strontiun-QO and Cooiun-137 iron
Variouo Typoo of doilo into tho lorvooto or Sovoral
Cropa owor o ,3-yoar roriod (an a porcantago of
thoir total contont in tho ooil; o lahorotory
oxporinont)

.-———-__-

   
 
 
  
 
  

m “‘3‘ "m

3 man. ryvawwua

2 I mun. no
‘ luau cyan-

toy:
1. Soil toxturo S. Oato
2. clayoy oand 6. Poao
J. Avorago loan 7. Clowor
‘. loavy loan 8. tiaothy
-51-

'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OPPICIAL 088 ONLY

lt ie reconnendod that the following agrocheeical and agro-
tachnical neaeurea be conducted to reduce the entry of etrontiun-
90 iron the aoil to lead and food cropo.

IAgrotechnical aeaaurec.’ l. Illeeoving the top layer of eoil./l
ladioactiwa oubetanceo are prilarily contained in the top.

S-co layer of the aoil. thie layer o! the eoil can be relowed
with a ecraper. taken away and buried in a trench or dulped in

I ravine or awanp. thio aoaeure can be conductod in enall

areaa (truck gardono).

2. I/Reducing tho aaount o! etrontiun-90 in the root layer

of the eoil./l Thio ie achiowed by burying the upper. con-
taninatad layer of the coil at a depth of 50-70 co by plowing
it deeply and turning the furrow over or by cutting the upper
layer of the coil to a depth of 3-10 on and placing it on the
botton of the iurrow. After thie procedure in accolpliohed.
the etrontiuI-90 content in plant. ie reducod by a factor of
3-10. Where the coil layer ie not doep. tho eoil ia plowod to
a depth of 25-30 cu: at tho oano tile. the otrontiuI-90 ie
dictributcd throughout the ontira depth of the plowed layer of
coil and ite contant in a unit wolune of coil ie reduced: it
will enter plante in leaeer quantitiea (Table 35).

Table 33. the Bifoct of tho Dapth of Soil Cultiletion on
tha intrance of StrontiuI-OO into Agricultural
Crope (in the yoar plowed)

  
  

(2) ﬂue-n
I ‘7~' an» no an OA
mm (on 9.6 ”.0 5.5
3 m. "you 520.0 0.9 750.0 MUG)
6 Kylmn. run-nae we 3.0.0 1.3 mm l.’
S oﬁﬁn «no out «mo an;
Key:
1. Crop 6. Plowing to a dopth of about
2. 2. larlcy 25 on
a. Grain 7. Yield (ccntnere/hcctare)
b. Chat! 8. Nicrocurieo in l kg
3. Potatoeo. toboro 9. Plowing to a depth of about
6. Corn. greon body 50 ca
5. Clover. hay lo. Trace.
-52-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL "I! ONLY

3. IDaatroying tha Iod./ ltrontiua-90 it proaarvad for nany
yaaro in tho aod of natural hayiioldn and pnoturao and it
actually doaa not ponatrata to a dapth graator than 5 on.

At tha laaa tiaa. tha iaotopa in tho and in prinarily in tha
torn of organir conpoundc and it in not abaorbad by tha
ninarala in tha nail and. tharaforo. it in nora accooaibla

to tha root oyctan of planta. At a raault oi thia. approxi-
nataly 4 tinao aa aucb atrontiua-90 nntara naadou and paatura
planta iron tho and noar tho roota than in tha caaa vhan hay
graaaao ara grovn on plouod land. Doatroying tho and in naadovc
and paaturcc will oigniiicantly roduca tho icotopo'a contant
in tho undarground parta of planta.

d. Illaducing radioactiva contanination vhon hatvaating corps II
by pracluding oparationa which ara acconpaniad by tho intonoiva
fornation oi duat. Hhan putting up hay. it in nocoaoary to ro-
duca tha nuabar of duaty opnrationa (raking. atc.). It in racon-
aandnd that cropa with aara bu harvaatad directly by conbinaa.

Hachanical nothoda of daotroying voada ahould bn raplacad vith
chaaical Iathoda.

lAgrochanical aoaaurca.l 1. //Putting lino on acid noilo, aoila
with poor calciun tranaiar and aloe on aoila vhich contain a
largo anount oi activa aluainun./l Uhan 1.5-2 doaaa of lina
aroput on an acidic. aoddy pocvolic aoil for tha hydrolitic
acidity, tha atrontiuI-OO contant in planta ia raducad by a
factor of 2-5 and tha caaiua-137 contont ia raducod by a factor
or 2-2.5. It ia racoanandad that b tona o! lina par hoctarn

ba put on aandy. podtolic aod cm! 10 tona par hoctarn ba put on
avaraga and haayy loan. Iban tha liaa ia introducad. not only
dour tho contont of radioiiotopoc docraaaa but the yiald of
agricultural crops alao incraaaaa by a factor of 1.3-2. lovavor.
putting lino on tho coil ia only poaaiblo uithin tba linita of
tho aoil'a capacity to abaorb calciun. Uith a naninnn archanga
o! calciua in tha aoil. putting down lilo vill not bava a notica-
ablo affact. It ahould nlao ba borna in Iind that putting line
on aoila in not alvaya doairabla vhcn growing potatoaa

and flax ainca tbaao cropa provide the boat yiald in acidic aoila.

In nagncoiua-poor aoila. doloaita naal baa tha boat affact in
raducing atrontiun-OO in tho harvaat.

2. l/Tho introduction of organic fartilirara ll (lulcb. pant.
pond nludga, Ianuro) lovora tba ntrontiun-90 contact in tho
harvaat of agricultural cropa aoat intanaivaly uban aandy aoila
ara undar cultivation and laaot vbcn avaraga and baavy loaa

aoila arc undar cultivation. it ia raconnandad that 20-30 tona
of organic fartilinara par hactara be put on ooddy podnolic aoila

-63-

’0! OFTICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OI?ICIAL USE ONLY

for grain cropo and 30-00 tono bo put down for cultivatod cropo.
ln thio caoo. tho otrontiuo-Oo contont io roducod by a factor of
2.39

Tho ooot offoctivo action for roducing otrontiuo-90. cooiuo-ll7.
ooriuo-loo and ruthoniuo-196 in tho harvoot io putting organic
fortilitoro ond lino on tho ooil togothor (tho otrontiuo-90
contont in tho harvoot io roducod by a factor of t-o). Carting
oanuro containing a largo aoount of otrontiuo-9o to tho fioldo
io not roconoondod.

3. l/Uoing linoral iortiliooro./l Putting phoophorouo iartilitoro
on ooilo of o cortain typo pronotoo tho rotontion of otrontiuo-9o
in tho ooil (oo o rooult o! ito oottling with tho phoophatoo).
Spocificolly. tho ooploynont of tortilitoro io olioctivo in tho
land of wootorn Siborio. oopocially (or wintor cropo. Iitrogon
fortiliooro ohould bo uood in doooo which onouro o high incroaoo
in tho harvoot for tho givon ooil and cliootic conditiono. Largo
doooo of nitrogon incroaoe the transfor of otrontiun-90 and
cooiuo-l)? tron tho ooil to plants. rotaooiuo fortiliooro

roduco tho accunulation oi cooiuo-117 in tho harwoot. Tho uoo

of calciuo fortiliooro io offoctivo for ooilo of oovorol typoo.
Nonocalciuo and oonopotoooiun phoophotoo provido tho boot
rooulto.

Tho joint application of lino. organic ond ninoral iortiliooro
on light oandy ond looo ooilo can prowido a ioctor o! 10
roduction of otrontiuo in tho harvoot.

6. IISolocting cropo ond typoo of plonto/l with tho noot
pronouncod ability to diocriainato otrontiuo-90 or cropo in-
tondod for coooorciol procoooing. lt hao boon ootabliohod
thot difioront kindo of tho oooo crop do not occuoulato tho
oaoo ooount of otrontiuo-9o (rablo 36).

S. [Inigh ooil fortility and agricultural cultivation.// in-
prowing tho oicrootructuro of tho ooil. uoing otinulatoro for
plont growth. uoing high yiold grodoo and an additional appli-
cation of lortilitor. controlling woodo. otc. olwayo proootoo
on incroooo in tho yiold of ogricultural cropo and. thoroby.
proootoo a roduction in tho contont of radioactivo iootopoo

in tho harvoot. Illrrigation/l io ono of tho baoic oothodo

(or incroaoing tho yiold oi ogricultural cropo in oonoo with
inoufficiont Ioioturo. Uoing irrigotion which onouroo nor-a1
conditiono for fooding plonto and tho groatoot growth of tho
bionooo pro-otoo o roduction of tho otrontiun-90 concontration
in a unit loco of tho harvoot by a factor of 1.5-2. lxcoooivo
watoring incrcooco tho onount of ottontiuo-90 accoooiblo to
planto in tho ooil ouoponoion: thio loado to an incroaoo in tho
tronofor of thio iootopo iron tho ooil to tho plant. "hon thoro

-5‘-

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
\
m omcuu. can om
I

rohlo 36. Atonnulotion of otrontiunp90 (nonocurioo/kg) "hon tho
toil Containo l Curio/Gonoro Iiloootor of it and l h;-
oquivolont of Convortod Colciuo por zoo u of Soil

    

an
an
30
ll
“8
no
Roy:
1. Crop ond typo
2. Grain
3. Chotf
6. Loovoo
S. Stolho
6. Pooo
o. Copital
h. lonthinovokiy
7. Ioano
a. luooion
h. rood

O. Sunflovoro
a. Saratov
h. Pood

 

io inonfficiont noioturo in tho ooll, tho contont of vaoto
olononto in plonto. including otrontiun-90. incrooooo.

6. l/Locoliain; tho plont root oyoton in tho uppor layor of

tho ooil.// It to honoficiol to uoo thio nooouro ottor tho

ooil io dooply plovod by tnrnin; tho furrow oyor. Locolirin;
tho root oyoton in tho nppor layor of tho ooil io ochiovod hy
opplyin; tortilioor to it vith ouhooquont diocin; or ohollov
plovin; and oloo hy ooloctin; cropo with o Iihrouo root oyoton.

7. l/Puttin; ogrlcultnral cropo in tho opproprioto ooilo./l

lt io noro odviaahlo to cnltivoto cropa vhich ooainiloto noro
otrontinn-90 (clovor. pooo. votch. hnchvhoot. otc.) in oollo

with o hard toxturo; in thin cooo. looo of tho iootopo io
tronoforrod to tho nndorgronnd part of tho plonto nonod thon

tron light. oondy ooilo. lt lo noro odyioohlo to ollocoto ooftor
onilo for cropo vhich aooinilato looo of tho otrontinn-90

(noto, vhoot. flox. coroal grooooo). thuo. 7-0 tinoo noro
attention-90 occnnnlotoo in tho choii oi ooto cultivatod in

-55-
'0' OFFICIkL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sandy soil and «-s tiaes aoro accuaulatos in the groin than
vhon this crop is grown in blackoarth containing the sale
anount of the isotope.

8. IISowing early ripening grades/l proaotos loss of on accus-
ulation of the rodloiﬂotoviﬂ in the harvest due to tho shorter
length of their growth cycle in tho contaainatod soils.

Peed Production on band with an Increased level
of Radioactivity

During tho period of intensive radioactive fallout iron the
etaosphoro, tho surface contaaination of plants by radioactive
substances will be predoainsnt (nore than 90 percent) over tho
root contaainetion. During tho first days and aonthe, isotopes
with a short life take up a significant share of tho activity
in tho products of a nuclear explosion; of these iootopos. tho
iodine isotopes represent the greatest biological dongor (tho
period of "iodine” danger). Strontiua-89 will be predoninant
in tho radioactive fallout 2-3 nonths later and until tho end
of tho year; in subsequent years, strontiua-90 and cooiua-l37
will be prodoainant (tho period of ”strontium and cesiua”
danger).

It is practically iapossiblo to change the levels of contoaina-
tion of food crops during the first years. Therefore, when pro-
ucing food. preference should be given to root crops vhich

are protected iron radioactive dust by the ground; cereal crops
to the leaves of which less radioactive dust adheres: grain
crops with protected grain (loguninous. corn); and early
ripening food crops.

When putting up hay. secondary radioactive contaaination of
it by the soil should be avoided. ﬂay obtained from natural.
poorly productive lands will be contaainatod by radioactive
substances to o greater degree than will hay froa high yield.
sown grasses. The outer leaves should be removed fro- feed
cabbage.

Peed prepared at the fern aust be stored inaediatoly and pro-
tected against additional contaaination by radioactive fallout.

It is recon-ended that feed contaainated by radioactive substances
not be used inledistely but after holding it for 2-3 nonths;
during this tile. their level of radioactivty will decrease
significantly as a result of natural decay. Peed which is

heavily contalinated by radioactive dust undergoes decontan—
ination.

—66-

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
POR O'PICIAL US! ONLY

Ae the redioective (ellout decree-lee. the eir route of plent
conteeinetion will decreeee end the eoil route will increeee

due to the eccunuletion of redioectiwe ieotopee in the eoil.
Therefore. when producing feed. eeeeuree ere tehen for 5-7
yeere efter nucleer exploeione to reduce the etrontiun-90 end
ceeiuI-l37 content in feed. Due to the fir-er innohilieetion
oi ceeiue-l37 in the eoil in coeperieon with etrontiue-90.

feed crope cen he put in erehle lend with levele o! ceeiun-137
conteninetion which exceed their lewele of conteeinetion by
etrontiun-90 by e tector of e-o. Peed production for nilh
liveetoch ie organieed on the cleeneet lend (not nore then

2 curiee of etrontiun-90 per equere hiloneter). Peed crope

for eninele intended for eeet cen he grown on lend with e

level of etrontiun-90 conteeinetion up to 10 curiee/equere
hiloeeter: grein for hoge end poultry cen be grown when the
eoil ie conteeineted up to 30 end in enceptioneICIOOO 0P ‘0 10°
curiee/equere hiloneter.

For e period of neny decedee. ieed production nuet he cerried
out on eerehle lend: in thie ceee. the etrontiue-90 content
of feed crope will he eignificently lower then (or feed fro-
neturel ereee. neturel eccueuletione end hey-ehing euet he
reduced to the einieun eince lore etrontiuI-90 entere the
hodiee of enieele with feed tron euch ereee then with feed
Iron field crop rotetione. It ie neceeeery to cultivete lore
potetoee end heete for feed.

The ooeeihle eiee of the eccunuletion of etrontiun-90 in verioue
feed groupe ie ehown in Tehle 37.

In ell ceeee. it ie neceeeery to nonitor the content of redio-
ective euhetencee in feed crope.

Feeding Agriculturel Aninele in Zonee with en
lncreeeed Level of ledioectivity

The level of conteninetioo of liveetoch produce hy redioective
euhetencee depende upon the content of thee in the feed. the
enount of the feed in the retion end the nethod of keeping
eni-ele. All other conditione heing equel. the greeteet con-
centretion of redioectiye ieotopee in silk end neet will exiet
when eninele ohtein their feed {roe neturel ereee. Therefore.
on land with en increeeed content of redioectiwe euhetencee.
it ie lore edvieehle to chenge to keeping enilele in etelle end
ohteining the feed iron field crop rotetione. In thie ceee.
it ie eeeier to control the content of redioective euhetencee
in the retione for eniuele. end. coneequently, it ie eeeier to
control the eeount of the. in liveetock produce.

-57-

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
IOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

rehle 37. leletive Strontiu;:;0 Content in the Herveet of

feed Crone (celcnleted pet unit of feed) Grown Under
dieiler soil Conditione end vith e Biniler Content
of the 1eotope in the Soil. the Strontine-90
Content in 1 kg of Oete ie Adopted ee e Unit.

..... (1.)......._...... .. -
linen” av... '

Out

ﬂ‘me

Knuwaemunmcuwwn

mac

lira

luunrm
ituunuunu

     
 

 

  

 

     
     

CSOO'.
o o. ..

|l|!|oaaao

 
   

  

~9:
on-

Cat-Mo nag-bean
IMMN
Stnmn

lllll§§$88

§§§§§IIIII

    

33-
00

Note: The root trope end tone of root-heering plente ere
converted to dry neteriel.

Key:
1. Crop 8. Corn. golden ripe
2. Otein 9. Vetch
3. Chef! 10. Peee
6. Root crope 11. Potetoee
5. Tone of root 12. leete. enger
heering plente 13. leete. feed
6. Oete 16. tnrnipe [nepne]
7. Ierley 15. annipe [cenpeetrie]

During the tiret period of e nucleet ver. liveetock grezing

ie etopped. Aninele. eepecielly eilkcove. goete end eheep.
ehould he fed ”cleen” feed fro- protected etockpilee. Other-
viee. in eddition to the etrontinn. ceeine end heriue ieotopee.
e eignificent enount of tedioective iodine leotopee cen enter
the nilk: thie preeente e greet denget for people.

when redioective iellout eettlee in the winter, hedly conten-
ineted peeturee end greee fro- netnrel ereee ehould eleo not
he need in the eerly epring. During thie period. it to

hotter to give the eninele feed (roe field crop rotetione or
fro- the etockpilee on-hend; noreover. it ie neceeeery to tehe
into ecconnt the enount of redioective enhetencee entering
their hodiee in e11 ceeee.

tn the next eeeeon. etrontine-90 will he the noet dengerone
redioective ieotope; it entere e11 feed crope froe the eoi1
(etructurel conteninetion). Under theee conditione. the feed
with the loveet etrontiue-90 content ie fed to nilkcove end
pregnent enilele. 91th e deily nilk yield of 10-20 kg. 0.13

-68-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0! OP'ICIAL "8! ONLY

percent of the etrontiue-90 which entere the eninel'e body
with the feed during e dey entere eech liter of cow'e nilk
end. with e yield of 3-10 kg. 0.17 percent of it entere the
hilt. lt ie wore edwieeble to feed oilhcowe end pregnent
enieele grein.coeree feed Iron cereel crope. potetoee end
corn. Due to the increeeed etrontiuI-90 content. it ie

not edvieeble to include bren. turnipe lnepue]. tnrnipe
[cenpeetriel end the tope of root beering plente in the
retione for nilhcowe. They cen be given to dreft enilele
end to hoge end eheep which ere being lettened (not during
the lecteting period). Due to the enclueion of legwninoue
crope tron the retione for lecteting end pregnent cowe. e
protein end celciue ehortege ney fern. Celciun ie ueuelly
repleced by introducing ninerel edditiwee to the retion
(eeet-boneeeel. bone-eel. tricelciunphoephete end othere);
noreover. thie eleo reducee the ebeorption oi etrontiue-OO.
The ehortege of feed elbuein ie repleced by uree nitrete
(not sure then 100 g of uree per dey) which ie included
elong with feed rich in cerbohydretee. Crein concentretee
cen eehe up 60 percent of the retione for fettening eninele.
It ie edvieeble to give hydroponic greene to lecteting.

pregnent eninele. young enieele end eleo to poultry in the
winter to replece the witenin deficiency.

Cettle end hoge being Kettened end eleo dreft eninele cen

be given feed with e higher etrontiun-90 content but clcen

feed ehould be given to the eninele for 2-6 weehe end sore
before eleughter (Teble 30). During thie period. the

eeeily exchenged etrontiun-90 will eecepe free the body end

the content of it in the nnecle tieeue will be eherply reduced.

letione with e reduced protein content fecilitete e reduction
in etrontiue-90 depoeite in the eheleton end iodine-lSl
depoeite in the thyroid glend. Introducing lerge enounte

of feed crope free the Cruciferee fenily (cebbege. turnipe
end othere which ere rich in thiocyenetee) to the retione
reducee the eecepe of iodine-131 with the silk.

More etrontiue-90 entere the bodiee of young. growing uni-ole
fro- the feed then entere the bodiee oi edult enieele. there-
fore. when young enieele ere being fettened. it ie neceeeery to
uee feed with e lower etrontiun-90 content. It ehould eleo

be borne in eind thet. when the retione ere eetureted with
vitnnin Dz. etrontiue-9o depoeite in the ekeleton increeee
end. when there to en increeeed celciul content in the retione.
they decreeee. Thue. when the concentretion of celciun in the
retione for cowe ie increeeed tron 30-70 to 220-2‘0 g. the
etrontiue-90 in the gill ie reduced by so percent. reking thie

into eccount. en increeeed enount o! celciue ehould be put in
the retione for Iilkcowe.

-69-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Tabla 38. vain; "ilk and Naat During tha Protracted Intry
of Strontiun-90 into tho Iodiaa oi Cova with tho
Pond.

    

)3» Moon m'.
| man loam I
3 . 1°) 3 D
'0 8:55 . .aanat- :3 : :
m 00“ 10 T a to
m 0.0 W7 ):.'.'.m. g mail." (1”
2"“ In”

* Skin nilk. vhay and buttornilk ara (ad to young aninala.
hono and wild aninalo

'. Tha nuoclao ara trinnad and mood at food and tho bonaa
ara daotroyad.

Kay: 1. Anount of atrontiun-9o in the daily ration
(nicrocurioo por cow)
2. lilk cova
3. Anount of otrontiun-90 containad in tha nilk with
a daily nilk yield of 7-10 h; (nicrocurioa par 1.)
6. ”ilk «ca
5. Uhan fattanod (or naat
6. Batora alaughtoring for naat. kaap on claan
food (dayo)
7. ”aat uoa
a. lo roatrictiona
9. Procoaoad for tour craan. curdo. buttar.
lo. Ditto
ll. Procooaad for buttar
'12. Procaooad for naltad buttar
13. Trio-in; carcaoaaon

 

when there ia a protractod antry of atrontiun-90 into the
bodioa of hano. 60 to 60 percent of tha radioactiva iootopa
tron tha daily rationa will antor aach as}: noraovat. 96.5
parcant of it vill ontor tha ohall and 3.5 parcant of it will
ontor tho at; vhita and yolk. Tharofora. tha otrontiun-90
contant ahould be linitod in tha rationo for laying hona.

-70-
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OIPICIAL 088 ONLY

7. Uaing and Growing rinbor in an Aroa with an lncroaood Lovol
of Radioactivity

During tho poriod of intonoivo fallout iron nucloar oxplooiono
(local and tropoaphoric) and doponding on tho conditiono of
tho radiation oituotion. work diroctod at roducing tho danago
cauood to a troo torn by radioactiwo oubatancoa io conductod.
tho radioactiwo duat falling on a largo toroot io prinarily
otoppod by tho topo of tho trooa (to-9o porcont) whilo falling
on tho loavon. noodloo. bronchoo and trunka of trooo. A onall
part of tho radioactiyo aubotancoo nanotratoa tho canopy of
tho wooda. oottling on tho graaoy ouriaco and tho ourfaco of
tho woodo' covaring. Attor tho radioactive fallout. it bogino
to nigroto wortically and horizontally: atnoophoric fallout io
blown by tho wind (phyoical nigrotion) or ocattorod whon tho
loavon. noodloo. branchoo and bark toll of! (biological nig-
ration). Tho radioactivo nuclidoo partially ponotrato tho
intornal tiaauoa of woody planta troo tho undorground parto.
Suboonuontly. tho radioactivo nuclidoo aloo ontor tho undor-
ground part of trooo tron tho aoil through tho root oyotou.

Hhon tho woodo io contaninatod by oarly producta of a nucloar
oxploaion. ito contonination ia prinarily cauood by tho otfoct
of bota-radiation which in actually conplotoly oboorbod by tho
troo topa. In conpariaon with tho bota-radiation. tho goo-a
rayo aro aboorbod 10 tinoa loao.

Doponding on tho aito of tho doaoo abaorbod by the trooa. which
dotcrninoa tho donoity of tho contolination of tho wooda by
radioactivo oubotancoo. tho contanination of tho wooda can appoar
aa a tonporary aupproaoion of growth. a partial atrophy ot
branchoa or the conploto dooth of trooa and plantinga. Hhon

a lethal dooo of radioactiwo aubotancoo ia oboorbod at high
lovola of contanination. tho conploto dooth of tho growth and
plantinga uoually takoo placo during tho firat yoar. At a
lowor lowol of contalination. tho doprooood otato of tho trooa
io roplacod by a poriod of alow tootoration 2-3 yoaro lator

(up to 10 yoaro and noro).

"hon thoro io radioactive fallout during tho ouo-or in lltono A.//
a drying out of the coniforoua troaa and rotardod growth for

tho dcciduouo trooo can bo oxpcctod ovor appronilatoly 1/10 of
tho aroa (which abaorbo a dooo of gonna radiation of bo-too rada
through tho trcc topo): in l/tono I.// tho coniforoua trooo will
dio in half of tho aroa and a atrong contaninotion of than will

bo obaorvod in tho ronaining part: in docid ouo wooda. a partial
drying out of tho trcoo ia pooaiblo in half tho aroa (whoro tho
troo topo aboorb o doao of ganna radiation of boo-1.200 rada): in

-71-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l/sone 6.]! the coniferous trees die conpletely throughout the
entire area and a drying out of the trees is possible in deciduous
woods.

91th the partial or conplete death of the trees. nass reproduction
of entonologicel posts is possible and the fire safety situation
sharply worsens. Therefore. neasurss directed at reducing the
danger of fire, liniting the reproduction of entonological posts.
using wood pulp acononically and assisting in restoring the woods
are taken.

ICutting woods./ with radiation contanination oi the woods. all
the coniferous trees which have dasage to over 85 percent of the
tree tops and all the deciduous trees with over 95 percent danege
to the tree tops are cut down. ﬂoods of fir trees are cut down
conpletely if over 50 percent of the nature trees. over 60
percent of the naturing trees and over 75 percent of the young
trees have died. This is due to the fact that the ronaining

part of the trees will be blown down by tho wind it only tho

dead trees are cut down.

It is sore advisable to cut tho woods in tho winter tine. In
this case. tho radiation dose for people is reduced, dust is

not fornod. tho covering of tho woods is not destroyed and

tho scale of soil erosion is reduced. The wood pulp is stripped
at the cutting site. The rsnains of trees which are of no
econonic value are dunpod in ravines and hollows.

with lower levels of radioactive contaninetion. only sanitary
cuttings are conducted in nature groves. passages are cut in
naturing groves and the trees which have over 85 percent of their
tops dead are thinned out and rosovod in young groves.

[Planting woods/ on contaninstod territory is conducted after the
soil is plowed deeply by turning over the furrow. If the groves
were not cospletoly cut down. then the covering and tho conten-
inated layer of the soil are renewed in the areas where trees are
being planted. At the ease tine, seeds or young shoots obtained
tron clean or lightly contsninatod areas of woods are used. heavy-
duty tree planting noterials are used for planting in badly
contaninnted areas.

[Using woods on land with an incressod strontiuI-9O content./

It is sore advisable to use land which is badly contaninatod by
radioactive isotopes with a long life, and which is for this rea-
son excluded Iron agricultural rotation. for planting woods.
About 50-60 years will pass until the woods are cut. During this
tine. a significant part of the radioactive isotopes will decay.
It has been experinentally established that soil contaninated by
strontiun-90 up to 50 curios/square kiloneter does not even Offect

-72-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

tho gorninotion copobility of tho ooodo oi coniforouo trooo in

tho ground (pino. opruco. loroh). But. tho dooth of growing
ooodlingo io ohoorvod undor thooo conditiono. thoroioro, hoovy-
duty notoriolo ohtoinod tron ooilo with looo of tho iootopo oro

uood to plont woodo in ooilo with o high otrontiun-90 contont.

It in oloo tokon into oonoidorotion thot trooo of dociduouo opocioo.
for oronplo. hitch trooo. oooiniloto o oignificontly grootor onount
of otrontiun-90 iron tho ooil thon coniforouo trooo (pinoo) do
oinco they oooiniloto noro colciuo iron tho ooil thon tho coniforouo
trooo do: noroowor. tho dociduouo opocioo howo noro rooto in tho
ourfoco loyor of tho ooil. In principlo. woodo con to plontod

in orooo whoro tho lowol of otrontiun-90 ond oooiun-137 ooil
contoninotion will not kill tho young trooo.

"hon woodo oro hoing grown on lond with on incrooood contont of
rodiooctiwo iootopoo with o long lifo. tho wood pulp ond bork
will contoin rodiooctiwo ouhotoncoo: noroowor. thoro will ho
;:)tinoo noro oi thon in tho hork thon in tho wood pulp (tohlo

Tohlo 39. Poooihlo Rodiooctiwo lootopo Contont in Coniiorouo
Trooo ond Huohroono at tho Outor lordoro of tho
2onoo of lodiooctivo Contoninotod Torroin Iiwo
Yooro Aftor o lucloor Surfoco lurot Conductod in
tho sunnor (ootinotod woluoo)

 

W m IO MI I”. n
(‘) I 420%.! ~um V’IIO “no.

 

Note: The otrontiun-90 contont in two tinoo grootor in tho
wood pulp of dociduouo opocioo.

Key: 1. Zono
2. B
3. c
b. lootopo contont ot tho outor hordoro of tho tonoo
in picocurioo/kg of on oir driod notoriol
5. Hood pulp
6. Bork
7. Huohroono

-73-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

with levela of atrontiun-90 contamination exceeding 1 curie/aquare
hilonater. gathering nuahroona and herriea in the wooda ia pro-
hibited. Vith atrontiun-90 contaeination greater than 10 curiea/
aquare hilonater. branchea. bark and wood pulp without hark can-
not be uaed for fuel. With a naxinun level of contaninetion of
10 curiae/aquare kiloneter. the wood pulp of the trunk. with the
bark. ia auitable for any acononic purpoae. with a naxinun
atrontiun-90 contanination of 50 curiealaquare kilonetar. the
wood pulp and bark of deciduoua apeciea can be uaed to naka
plywood. furniture and to build reaidantial facilitiea. Hith a
greater denaity of atrontiun-90 contanination. deciduoua wood
pulp ia uaad to aaka croaa tiaa. telephone polea and to build
raaidential facilitiea. It ia pernitted to uae coniferoua wood
pulp to nake plywood. furniture and to build reaidental houaea
when the lavala of atrontiun-90 contaeination are greater than

50 curiae/aquare hiloneter. but. in thia caae. the outer age
ringa which are forned after the radioactive contaninetion are
renoved.

a. Protecting and Dacontaninating Food. Peed. Hater and Sourcea
of Hater

To avoid contanination of grain and other produce with NBC agenta
and aubatancaa. it ia nacaaaary to eeal then off fro. the outer.
contaninated air. for thia purpoae. atorage facilitiea are aaaled
and inculeted packaging and wrapping eateriala are uaed.

lProtecting food and grain in warehouaea and atorehouaea./ when
aealing warehouaea. ntanGYIC! and vegetable atorehouaaa. all
the holee in the doora. windowa and encloaing atructurea (eapecial-
ly in the floora and the placaa where the walla join the roof)
are covered and part of the windowa are eealed up tightly with
brick; broken windowa are repaired and all the holea in windowa
are covered with putty. clay. etc.; ahuttera are nade to cover
the renaining window openinga: doora are repaired and covered
with an inpenetrahle naterial; rubber or felt atripa are put in
the janb: holee in the roof (ceiling) and walla are covered
(boarda. Ruberoid. etc. are nailed up). All pipea and air ducta
are equipped with gate valvea.

Silage laceted in 91109 end heylage located in niloa and

trenchea are reliably protected against nnc agenta and aubatancea:
it ia only neceaaary to aeal the loading docka. Heat. fate and
nilh producta are reliebly protected in refrigeratora.

[Protecting feed and produce under field conditiona./ It ia
organized by ainple nethoda with the nateriala on-hand at

the fern. It ahould be taken into account that flax and cotton
aecha do not protect the grain. flour and other produce located
in than fron llc contanination.

-74-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hundlce of grein are covered with eynthetic iiln. terpeulin or

o layer of etrow. hey or eod. When covering then with ter-
peulin. e leyer of etrew ie put under it eince hinery yeeee

end acroeol wirueee cen penetrete it (without en edditicnel leyer
of etrew. they cen reech the grein end conteeinete it). Pilee
of potetdee end root crope ere covered like the grein. hut it

ie heet to ley e 20-30-cn leyer of etrew iiret end then cover it
with e leyer of dirt. Ventiletion ducte ere pleced in eeyerel
epote ineide the pile elong the length of it end dreinege

ditchee ere dug elong the perineter. Potetoee end root crope
cen he reliehly protected in holee.

Stecke (ricke) oi hey end etrew ere covered with terpeulin.
file or non-ieod etrew (Figure 66) [figure not reproduced].
when cowering then with iiln or terpeulin. their edgee ere
tightly preeeed to the ground with loge. etonee or dirt. A
3-n wide etrip ie plowed elong the outeide oi the rick or

eteck. in the winter. e leyer of ice cen he iroeen on the
heyetecke.

The feed loceted on the territory of the liweetock fern or neer
it. which ie intended for uee in the neer future. ie covered
firet. The etockpile of covered feed for nilkcowe nuet he
eetineted for et leeet 3 nonthe.

[Protecting produce end forege in treneit./ 'roduce ie trene-
ported in epeciel conteinere: flour certe. cowered wegone. weter
tenke. refrigeretor trucke. refrigeretor cere end ieotherlel con-
teinere which eneure e reliehle degree of tightneee. Verioue
eeeled conteinere cen eleo he ueed to treneport grein forege.
when being treneported in e eteke-hody vehicle or cert. food

end grein forege ere covered with terpeulin or eynthetic file.
Thick hoxee with eeeled tope covered by tin plete on the outeide
end eleo reliehly eeeled cerdhoerd hoxee end kreft eecke cen he
ueed to treneport produce end grein forege.

IProtecting food end weter under houeehold conditione./ Por
thie purpoee. they ere cowered with neteriele et hend or pecked
in protective peckegee. leeelente end cellere ere eeeled hy
the conwentionel nethod; the potetoee. cerrote. heete. etc.
etorcd in then ere covered with fill or repecked in nultileyer.
kreft peper eecke end tied up. Produce cen he put in herrele
or thick hoxee; they ere covered with fill or oilcloth end
thick peper end tied up.

All dry produce (euger. pcerl herley, flour. etc.) end eleo
hreed end dry hreed cen he reliehly protected in peckegee of
thick peper or enell eecke of fill. They ere tied up tightly
end pleced in e kettle. hucket. cerdhoerd box or plywood hex:
then. the lid ie put on end they ere tied up with fill or

-7s-
you omcm use om
POR OFFICIAL “8! ONLY

oilclouI(PirurO 67) [finure not reproduced]. Butter, nergerine

end eolid fete ere ueuelly repecked in gleee jere end covered
with cellophene. file. percheent or noreel peper on the outeide
end tied up. It ie neceeeery to etore the tied up. peckeeed pro-
duc; in cupboarde. refrigeretore, etorerooee. beeeeente or

cel ere.

Stockpilee of weter end liquid fete ere ueuelly etored in
covered bottlee. decentere. thereoe bottlee. food cenietere
end eilk conteinere. terse etockpilee of weter ere etored in
berrele end other conteinere.

Berrele of pickled food ere covered with file or oil cloth on
the outeide end tightly tied up. All produce in eeeled sleee
jere end tin cene (cenned food. fruit. condeneed eilh. etc.)
are reliebly protected eaeinet NBC esente end eubetencee.

Bech feeily euet keep e 2-3-dey eupply of produce (celculeted
for ell eeebere of the feeily)--cenned eeet end fieh producte.
condeneed eilk. euger. henkeck or dried breed-oend eleo e 2-3-
dey eupply of weter (fruit juice. beveregee).

IProtecting eourcee oi weter egeinet NBC exente end eubetencee.l
Lerge. open eourcee of weter (lekee. ponde. rivere) cennot be
protected egeinet conteeinetion end euch work ie not plenned.
The weter free erteeien welle elweye flowe ireeh. It ie eut-
ticient to eieply eeel the weter tower. The top of eheft

welle ere protected. A 30-ce thick leyer of cley ie p‘eced
eround the wooden frene et e dietence of l I end it ie treeped
down (the cley hindere the flow endeecpeee of reinweter into

the well throueh the holee of the wooden ire-e). The cley ie
covered with e lS-ce leyer of eend which ie repleced with cleen
eend ee it becoeee conteeineted. The top of the well ie covered
with e thick cover end e coeeon bucket ie euepended in it. A
box eede or boerde or nettin; eeeered with cley ie built over
the well. Trenchee erc dug elons the Periphery to drein rein-
weter. The cley cetcher ie not eede eround eheft welle equipped
with ceeent collere.

Deconteeineting Food. Peed end Beter Under
Kolkhoe end Sovkhoe Conditione

The liveetock protection teen end the plent protection teen con-
duct deconteeinetion of feed end weter on fer-e. The decon-
teeinetion teeee (groupe) deconteeinete the food end poteble
wetcr et the kolkho: (eovkhoe). The coepleteneee of the decon-
teeinetion neeeurce ie eonitored by epecieliete of veterinery
and ecdicel fecilitiee.

-76-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’03 OIPICIAL "8! ONLY

Ila-owing rodioactivo ouhotoncoo (docontaoinotion)./ lt io
adwioohlo to otoro all typoo or food contaninatod by rodio-
actiwo duot highor than tho porniooihlo lowolo until thair lovol
of radioactivity dropo to tho oorniooihlo lowol. thoy aro do-
contaninatod whon tharo io no otochpilo o! claan food. For
thio purpooa. tho uppor lo-co layor of hay in tho otacho io
ronowod and a layor of tho oano thichnooo io cut away tron tho
oidoo and out into otorago; during tho tioo of ito otorogo.

tho lowal of radioactivity will dacraaoo ao a rooult o! tho
docay of radioactivo ouhotancoo. Orain io aloo handlod in tho
oaoo oannar. hodiation ooaouraoonto aro tohon of tho rooaining
hay or grain and thoy aro iod to liwaotoch whon tho lowol of
thoir activity io within tho lilito of tho porniooihlo lowolo.
Radioactiwo ouhotoncao can ho waohod of! of grain iorogo with
wotor. loot cropo aro thoroughly waohod with wator Iany tiIoo
or tho top layor of than io ocropod off.

wotor io docontoninatod by filtration diotillotion or lotting
it otond. "hon wotor io pooood through a layor of oowduot.

poot or carbon. tho radioactiwo duot and part of tho IIleiOOtOPOO
diooolvod in tho wotor aro rotoinod: oond only rotaino tho radio-
actiwo duot. Docontanination with ion oxchanging rooin (pooitiwa
and onion oxchango rooioo) io tho noot offoctiwo. Rotor io
offoctivoly docontaoinotod hy lotting it otond whon coagulanto
(clay and othoro) aro addod to it.

Pood in burlap hago io cloonod with vocuuu cloanoro or ropachod
in cloon hogo. Tho ourfoco. contoninatod layor lo cut owoy

fro- oolid foto. Sloho of hoot aro waohod down with wotor.

whon thoro io otructurol cootanination, IO‘t io put into otorogo
or roprocooood oo oauoago and cannod goodo which aro otorod; tho
rodiooctiwo ouhotoncoo will docoy during otorogo.

whon nilk io contaninatod hy rodiooctiwo ouhotancoo ahovo tho
poroiooihlo lioito. it in roprocooood into huttor. condonood

silk. dry will or curdo which can ho otorod for o longor poriod
of tino: tho radioactivo ouhotancoo will docoy during otorogo.

An avorogo of 2 porcont o! tho oorly producto of a nucloar ox-
plooion (porcontago of tho contont or rodioactivo ouhotoncoo

in_a unit woluoo of silk) ontoro huttor ondon aworogo of 20-‘0
porccnt ontoro curdo. Tahlo 60 ohowo tho nognitudo of tho trono-
for of individual radioactivo iootopoo fro. Iilh to Iilh producto.

Hhon ougor hooto aro hoing procooood. 0.02 porcont of tho otrontiul-
90 can ontor tho ougar. 52.8 porcont con ontor tho pulp and

0.8 porcoot of it can ontor tho oyrup; whon potatooo aro hoing
procoooodt 2 porcont of tho otrontiuI-90 con ontor tho otorch.

-77-

POI 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

Table ‘0. Tranefer (percent) of Radioactive laotopea froa
”ilk to Hilk Producte Hade at a Plant

 

Mom :00 «no mo
Caner a: . g: a:
Macao career-ca I.” 2.28 3.53
2-“ w... .33 w w:
hm . . e
(‘ anyone 7.40 1.“ ”J0
23 iguwauuéxgu.“ has an» t“,
13Cuuﬁmurnue on“. It” 7t“
Key: 1. Type of product 7. Skin ailk
2. 8trontiua-90 8. butter
3. Ceeiua-137 9. Iutterailk
a. Iodine-131 lo. lennic Caaein
5. ”ilk ll. lennic whey
6. ereaa ll. Caeeinic acid

13. Acidic whey

 

ICheaical agent decontaaination./ Under kolkho: and eovkhoe
conditione. food and forage are decontaninated by airing. heat
treat-ant and cheacial aethode. The upper. contaainated layer
ia reaoved froa hayetacke. vegetable pilee end bundlee of
grain: the feed it epread out in a thin layer on uncontaainated
ground and aired out while periodically turning it over. During
the were eeaeon. forage can decontaainate iteelf: in 2-4 daye
when contaainated by earin. in 5-10 daye when contaainated by
auetard gae and in 20-b5 daye when conteainated by eoaaae.

1t takee bulky forage longer to decontaainate iteelf than it
doee grain forage. lay and etraw can be deconteainatcd by
eoaking thee in a 10-12 percent eolution of aaaonia for 2 daye
or in a aolution of conetruction line (on 0 9). toot crupe

are decontaainated with preparetione containing chlorine and
eubeequently waehed thoroughly with water.

when forage and food located in buildinge are contaainated by
non-oereietent cheaicel agente or by paire of pereietent agente.
the doore. windowe and ventilation devicee are opened or the
forage and food are taken outeide and aired until the cheaical
agente dieappear froa thee.

Huetard gae. earin and binary gaeee arc deconteainated fro-
green forage very well in a grain dryer with a high-teaperature

heat tranefer agent or by the cheaical lethod and by treating it
with “CORR-1M“!!! agente end eubeequently waehing it thoroughly.

-73-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR O'PIOIAL "8! ONLY

Slabo o! noot oro dooontaoinotod by airing and aloo by boat
troatnont (boiling thoroughly. trooting with otoon).

Hhon onall onounto of chonicol agonto hawo iollon on food.
it it dotontaninatod by boiling. "hon food ond iorago oro
contoninotod by lowooito. it io nondatory to otudy thoo for
oroonic oontont aitor docontonination: doponding upon tho
concontrotion of it. tho ioouo oi uoing tho citod produco io
aloo rooolvod.

Tho 81000 joro. bottloo. ood oloo. kottloo. coniotoro. kroft
bogo. polyotholono packoging and variouo contoinoro in which
food in otorod oro dooontoninotod by woohing (wiping) thoir
ourfocoo with docontoninonto.

wotor io dooontoninatod (whon thoro io no uncontaninotod. puro
wator) by boiling ond chlorination. wotor io drown iron con-
taninatod ohait wollo ond docontoninatod: tho franoo oro onoarod
with a blooching powdor pooto ond blooching powdor io oprinklod
on tho botton. Aitor thio. tho wotor occuoulatod in tho woll io
drown again and ronowod. Tho noat portion of wotor io chockod
for ito contont of chonical agonto and chlorino; whon tho

onount of thon io not dongorouo to oninalo and pooplo, it io
porniooiblo to uoo it. ahon tho torritory of artooian wollo

or covorod opringo aro contaninotod. tho wotor toworo. cappingo.
orooo for drowing wator and tho ourrounding torritory oro
docontoninotod.

lDiointoction./ Food. iorago and wotor oro dioinfoctod by choli-
col nnd phyoicol nothodo. Thuo. tho ourfaco of a hoyotock con-
toninatod by oporoo of Siborion ulooro io troatod twico within

a Zb-hour poriod with a ‘ porcont oolution of iornoldohydo:

for ooch troatnont. o 2-litor oolution io coloulotod for oach
oquoro notor of tho otook‘o ourfoco. Tho oolution io oppliod

undor o prooouro of at looot (ivo otnoophoroo ond it io oproyod
in onoll porticloo. Aftor thio. tho hoy (otrow) in oirod.

Groin torogo (ooto, barley. corn) contoninatod by oporoo of tho
agont for Siborion ulcoro io dootroyod. It con aloo bo docon-
toninatod by oubnorging it in o 6 porcont oolution of iornoldo-
hydo for 26 houro or in a 2 porcont actiwo oolution of chloronino
(in tight borrolo with lido). After thio. tho grain in tokon

out of tho barrolo ond driod until tho odor conplotoly diooppooro.

Nonoporouo nicroorgnniono in groin can bo dootroyod by troating
it in a groin dryor oporating in tho high tonporaturo nodo.

Groin forogo contaninotod by tho ogont of botulion or ito

toxin in docontoninotod by oooking it in o ono porcont oolution
of oodiun hydroxido for o poriod of four houro and by oubooquontly
woohing it out thoroughly throo tinoo in wotor ond drying it out.

-79-
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

when there is a sufficient quantity of file at the fare. hay
and groin forage can be decontaminated with a gaseous nixture--
nethyl bronide and ethylene oxide in a ratio of 2:1 (1.5 kg

of the gas per cubic ester of air at a pressure of 300-nn of
nercury)--in the sooner at tenperatures of +15 degrees c and
greater. Hater is decontaminated by boiling or chlorination.

Food contalinated by sporous types of nicroorganisns and toxins
is destroyed; food contaninated by nonsporous for-s of pathogenic
nicroorgenisns is decontaninated by boiling; fats are decontae-
inated by renelting then.

”eat contaainated by sporous types of uicroorganisns can be
disinfected with stean in closed kettles under a pressure of
1.5 atnospberes (2.5 hours exposure) or it is processed as
canned goods sterilised at 120 degrees. neat contaminated by
nonsporous types of nicrobes. viruses and nihettsia is decon-
taninated by boiling.

I/Safety neasures during decontanination.// All work on decon-
taeinating food. forage and water is conducted with a strict
observation of safety eeasures and after the appropriate in-
struction. "hen working with objects contaeinated by radio-
active substances. it is inportant to not allow personnel

to receive excess radiation. Hart is conducted in individual
protective gear. During the work. it is forbidden to take food
or drink. snoke. sit down or lie down on contalinated objects
and it is forbidden to renove the individual protective gear.
After the work. the individual protective gear is decontanineted;
the people who conducted the work on decontaninating objects

go through personal cleansing.

9. Quick Hethods for Detecting Radioactive Substances,
herbicides and biological Agents in food, Feed and Hater

lQuick nethods for detecting radioactive substances./ These
lethods are based on the relationship between the rate of genes
radiation froa the object being studied and the radioactive sub-
stances contained in the volune of the object being studied.

They are divided into field and laboratory nethods. The field
nethods are used during the first 30 days after nuclear explosions
and the laboratory nethods are used during the period of a

year.

1. IIDetecting radioactive substances in seall anounts with
the DH-5A(B) [dosileter].// The gal-a background (level of
radiation) is neasured first in Iicroroentgene per hour with
the DH-5A(B) in the area where it is anticipated that radio-
active produce, feed or water will be detected. In this caee.

the tip of the neter's probe lust be one 3 above the ground and
the screen of the neter's probe nuat be in the "6" position.

-go-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ron OFFICIAL 082 ONLY

If the geana background exceade the pernieeible level of con-
tanination for the given object by a fector of three and lore.
leaeure-ente cannot be taken eince unreliable figuree will be
obtained for the true redioective contanination of the object.
In there caaee. neaeurenente are taken behind aone eort of
ehield. in a and hut. dugout or building which reducee the

genre rediation iron the eurrnunding environ-out. After neaeur-
ing the ganna gackground. the rate of the doaa of gal-a radia-
tion ie neaeured for an object being etudied (produce. feed.
wetar) which hae a etrictly defined capacity: a one i bucket.

e 1.5 l kettle. e loaf of bread. etc. At the acne rise, the

tip of the aeter'e probe with the ecreen in the "0" poeition

ie held at a dietance of 1-1.5 cl fro. the eurface of the object
being etudied. The ganna gackground ie aubtracted fro- the
figure for the rate of the object'e radiation doee and the

value of the level of radioactivity obtained ie conpared with
the perlieeible level confirmed for the given produce. The
neaaurelent error ie plua or Iinua a factor of two-three.

2. //The quick nethod of detecting radioactive eubetancea

with the DM-SB(A) and the aubeequent celculatione according

to o fornule.// The gal-a background ie firet leaeured with
the 08-53 at a dietance of at leaet 200 n fro- the object being
etudied. Then. the object (graee. grain. etc.) ie approached
and the rate of the doee ia neaeured at a dietance of l I fro-
it. in both caeee. the probe'e ecreen nuet be in the "c" poai-
tion. The celculation ie conducted according to the fornule

Q - P . n. where Q ie the level of radioactivity of the object
being etudied in nicrocuriee/kg (l); P ie the rate of the doee
of gonna radiation from the object of neaeurenent without the
beckground. in r/hr [roentgene/honr]; n ie an experinentally
eetabliahed coefficient for eech object (it ie 100,000 for graae.
300 for silk. etc.).

Bxanple. In a field where the level of radia-
tion equala l r/hr. a eixture of vetch and oate
ie cut and taken to the fare. The gen-a beck-
ground radiation on the iarn'a territory equale
0.6 r/hr end the rate of the doee iron the nix-
ture of vetch and oete equala 0.7 r/hr (together
with the background). Putting thie data in

the iornula. we get: Q - (0.7 - 0.5) - 100,000 -
30.000 Iicrocuriee/kg or 30 nilicuriea/kg. It
ie neceaeary to convert the value obtained for
the daily ration and colpare it with the per-ia-
eible aeount of radioactive eubetencee in the
daily rat.on for anilale.

-81-

FOR OFFICIéL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

[Laboratory nethoda for detecting radioactive aubatancee./

1. l/The quick method for determining the proportional level
of radioactivity. in a thick layer.// Thia nethod ia ueed

to meaaure preparationa with a proportional level of activity
within the limita from 0.1 to 100 microcuriee/kg and up to a
year while the producta of a nuclear exploaion are aging. Por
thia purpoae. a amall eluninun or plaatic (made from the film
of a filmetrip) beaker 26-nm in diameter and lO-mm high (or
bo-nm in dianeter and 30-35-mm high) ie taken and it ia
densely filled to the top (without weighing) with the produce
being atudied; meat. graaa. coarac feed. Iacaroni etc. in
ground up well. Then. the 03-100 converaion unit is prepared
for operation (according to the technical deecription attached
to it). The eample (preparation) in the amell beaker ie put
in the lead booth of the ODD-l7 [gaa diecharge doaimeter] ao
that ite eurface ie located at a diatance of 10 mm (or 20 mm)
from the opening of the meter and reedinga are taken twice.
The arithmetic average ia calculated baeed on the reaulta of
the two meaeurementa; the level of activity of the aoecimen
under study ia calculated according to the formula: A'M'u "
where A ie the level of beta activity in nicrocuriee/kg (l):
N» is the rate neaaured for the aemple along with the back-
ground in pulaee per minute (the average value): Ag in
the rate meaeured for the background in pulaee per minute:

K ia an experimentally eatabliehed coefficientsfor eaall beakere
with a diameter of 26 em and when the eample ia placed at

a diatance of 10 mm from the neter'a opening. it equale 0.015;
for emall beakera with a diameter of ‘0 mm and when the eample
it placed at a diatance or 20 mm from the meter'a opening. it

equela 0.027. The neaaurement error in 3 130-200 percent.

&"Ko

Example: The rate calculated for a aanple of
grain forage (a amell beaker with a diameter of
26 mm) located at a diatance of 10 me tron the
con-17 meter'a opening equals 230 pulaea/nin.
The background of the unit is 30 pulaea/min.
The level of activity ie: A - (230 - 30) - 0.015 -
3 nicrocuriea/kg. The value obtained ia com-
pared with the pernieeible l.ve1 and the pro-
blem of the euitability of the grain fo;age

for feeding animala ie reaolved; in thia caae.
it in important for the radioactive content

not to exceed the permiaaible value for the
daily rationa.

2. //The preciae determination of the proportional level of
radioactivity/I in food. feed and water in conducted in labor-
atoriee according to apecial mothode deacribed in the radio-

logical literature.

'By proportional level of radioactivity. we mean the concentration of radio-

active aubetencee per unit of wei t or volume curie k ' -
60"..Iks= etc.) ‘22 ( a/ 8. curiee/l, micro-

POR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
IDR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

lDotornining tho lovol of radioactivity on aurfocoo./ Tho
radioactivo contanination oi agricultural oquipnont and

of tho body auriacoa oi oninala and non io dotorninod in tho
following nonnor. Tirot. tho gonna background ia dotorninod
for tho aroa of tho cnticipotod nooauronont at a hoight of

1 n iron tho aurioco oi tho ground. Thon, in tho aano aroa.
tho lovol of radioactivity of tho ontiro aurfoco ia noaaurod in
r/hr (nr/hr) with tho probo of tho DP-SA(I) and tho ocroon in
tho ”6“ poaition It a diatanco of 1-1.5 cn fron tho objoct bofcg
atudiod (poroon. aninal. vohiclo). Tho following ; rnula io
uaod for tho oubaoquont colculationox P,.-P.,_ - n1.

whororu in tho lovol of radioactivity of tho our it of tho
objoct undor atudy: Rm io tho lovol of radioactivity of tho
ouriaco of tho objoct togothor with tho background on noaourod
by tho DH-5A(l) notor: F5 ia tho gonna background: K it

a cooificiont which taboo tho acrooning offoct of tho objoct
into account. Tor notor vohiclo and agricultural oquipnont.
it oquolo 1.5; for tho body ouriacoo of non and aninalo. it
oquala 1.2; and for individual protoctivo goar. packogoo of
food ond food atororoona. it oquala 1.0. Tho voluo obtainod
in thia nannor in conparod with tho porniaaiblo lovol.

onnplo: Tho gonna background for tho aroa
of noaauronont oqualo 0.3 r/hr. Aftor har-
vooting grain in radiooctivo contaninatod
torrain. tho lovol of radioactivity of tho
conbino oquallod 0.6 r/hr. Tho truo radio-
activo contonination of tho conbino in:

1).. - 0,5 _ l}:— o.4 pl't.

Two noaaurononto--ono with tho oponing of tho DH-SA(B) notor'a
probo cloaod and tho occond with it opon--oro takon to dotor-
nino tho rodioactivo contanination of aurfacoa through which
ganna raya paoa (tho bodioo of notor vohicloa. thin woodon
wolla ond tho dividing walla oi atructuroo) and oloo to dotor-
nino tho proaonco of rodiooctivo aubatancoa within tho body of
a non or aninal. If the notor roadingo oro tho aano with tho
probo'a oponing cloood ond opon. tho ouriaco undor otudy in not
contaninatod by radioactive aubotoncoo. Tho ganno radiotion ia
paoaing through tho aurfoco boing otudiod fron tho othor aido
of it (or iron tho intornal tioouoo of tho body). If tho roadingo
arc groator whon tho opening of tho notcr'a probo ia opon thon
whon it in cloaod, tho aurfaco ia contaninotod by rodioactivo
nubotancca.

onnplo: Tho doainctor oporotor oatabliahoo
tho lovol of radioactivity for tho ourfaco of

a cow'a body. Tho gonna background in tho aroa
of noaauronont in 0.2 r/hr. Tho lovol of

-33-
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OPPICIAL 088 ONLY

radioactivity of the surface of the cow's
body on the left and right equals 0.5 r/hr
with the probe's opening closed and it is
0.8 r/hr with the probe's opening open.
Consequently. the surface of the cow's
body is contaninated by radioactive sub-
stances; the value for the contesinetion

W p,-ob—(—'.’:§- -o.ml~.

This value is conpared with the persiseible
level.

lQuick sethods for detecting chsaicel warfare agents./ The
detection of cheaicel agents in the air, food. feed and
water vith chssical reconnaissance devices is described in
Chapter 3. rield nethods for detecting herbicides are set
forth hers.

IDstecting herbicides.l l. The fact thet the enesyhes esployed
herbicides and the epproxiaate level of plant conteninetion can
be detected by [Is visual inspection// at the fields and accord-
ing to the external signs of plant delege ii the herbicides were
used in casualty-producing doses (see Chapter 2).

2. //The fluorescent sethod.// This is the easiest Isthod for
detecting the 2."D spray. the enount of it end the tins of

its use. The second iron the top. ssell leaves (standard in
size) are taken Eros the cotton plants; they are put in a pre-
viously prepared 0.01 percent solution of alcohol and fluorescein
(100 lg of the dye is dissolved in 5-10 .1 of the rectified
alcohol spirits end then the voluse is brought up to l l) and
they ere kept in it for a period of £0 sinutes. Vhen this tile
has lapsed. the leeves are washed with water iron a tap for

15-20 sinutes (they can be washed in trays): after this. they

are put betvesn sheets of filter paper in a press for 2-3 hours.
The cotton lsaves dried in the press are suitable for subsequent
analysis. They are spread out in Petrie dishes one at a tine.
put under the fluoroscope at a distance of 5-7 CI iron the light
filter in a slightly inclined positon end exalined under ultra-
violet light. To deter-ins the level and ties of contssination
of the cotton. the nature and degree of brightness of the leaves
being analyzed are coapsred with color standards prepared previously
according to special instructions or a special lighting scale is
used.

3. //The reaction of sodiun dithionite' on parequat.// Contacinsted
leaves are cut off with scissors put ih a test tube. covered vith

‘ Sodiul hydrosulfite
-35-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONEY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

80 percent othylolcohol ond ohokon for e period of 5 linutoo:
otter thio. tho both io corotully pourod into I greduotod toot
tubo through o popor filter. An olcohol both free e troy oxpoood
in tho field con be token for tho onolyoio. Two-three dropo of
tho oolution boin; otudiod oro put on o otrip of filtor popor:
thoy ore kopt in tho oir for 1-2 oinutoo ond thou tho popor io
olightly oproyod with o oolution of wotor ooturotod with ooooniuo
chlorido oud iooediotoly oitorwordo with o 1 porcent oolution

of oodiuo dithionito in twico tho nor-o1 oolutiou of oodiuu
hydroxido. If poroquot io prooont. blue opoto oppoor which dio-
oppoor o ninuto lotor but oppoor oeoin otter tho popor io oproyod
ogoin with oodiuo dithionito. The oonoitivity io 0.1 3kg.

Other uothodo for detecting horhicideo. includiue //1oborotory//
oothodo. oro oot forth in opociol oohuolo. For 1 loborotory
onolyoio. 15-20 plonto fro- oech ooctioo of tho field oro oont

to tho loborotory or on olcohol both iron troyo end othor our-
focoo io oont.

[Quick Iothodo for dotoctin; biologicol o;onto.l Indicativo,
eccolorotod end concluoivo Iothodo of roooorch oro uoed to do-

tect tho ogouto of infectiouo dioooooo on objocto in tho extornol‘
environ-oat.

Illndicotive (opproxiloto) Iothodo/l note it poooiblo to obtain
oh onower 1-2 houro otter tho beginning of tho otudy. Tho
luoinoocont-oorologicol nothod end the licroocopic dried oleor
techniouo boloag to theoo nothodo.

l/Thc luoineocent-oerolosicol lethod/l io booed on tho foct

thot. when oicroboo ere trooted with luoiuoocont zero. they unite
with the lulinoocont outibody end ocquiro the obility to ohine
Iinnnece) under ultroviolot or blue light. At tho oolo tile.
oech type of oicrobe io dietinguiohod by e opocific light.

i/‘l‘he oicroocopic dried oooor tochnique.// where dried eoooro ore
tinted with opociel dyeo. io uoed for dctocting. tor oxoople,
the ogent of Siberian ulcero.

l/Acceleretod rooeorch oothodo/l ore differentiotod depending

on the type of licroorgenioo. Hicroorgoniooo ore grown in on
ecceleroted nonner in opociol. nutritive environ-onto uoing

growth otiluletoro. The culture which ie grown in thio leaner

is then uoed to conteninote expori-entel oninolo which ore ouo-
ceptible to it or dried olooro oro prepored from it for the uicro-
ocope. Voriouo reoctiono (the roection to the build up of

titer end othoro) end tooto (tooto on oonoitizod porpoiooo) ore
reoortod to.

-35-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l/Conclueive nethoda./l The final reault ie obtained after a
complete bacteriological etudy of contaminated eaperieantal
animale.

lbetermining the level of eporea in the air and on crope./
Microecope alidea taken fron vind vanea or the POZR-ltlexpenaion
unknovn] meter are uaed for thia purpoae.

l. The nicroacope alidea taken from veather vanea are firet
examined quickly under the nicroecope. In the event aporea
are detected. they are counted vithout exception along the
three longitudinal atripa (vhen there are a few aporea--3-5

per viaual field of the microacope) or they are counted in

the 20 vieual fielda for each atrip (60 vieual fielda; if

lore than 5 anorea are detected per vieual field of the micro-
acone). The number of enorea throughout the entire alide and
for a aquare centineter of it ia then calculated according to
the formulae:

N‘ugii --for a compact examination of the longitudinal
‘ atrioa or
N I .31 a!“
- 0 --for an exanination of the 60 vieual fielda.

where N ia the number of eporee on the entire alide (unite);

n in the average number of eporea in an individual atrip (unite):
n1 ia the average number of anorea in a aingle viaual field
(unite): l ia the length of the part of the alide (mm) being
examined; d ie the diameter of the microacope'a viauel field
(mm): b ia the vidth of the alide (mm).

Bxenplee: a) the average number of eporea in
one atrip (n) in 100; the diameter of the viaual
field (d) ia 1.66 mm (determined previoualy):
the vidth of the alide (b) la 25 mm. The number
of aporea on the entire alide in the given case
ie: lavas

N- I.“ -lw5.

h) the average number of eporea in one viaual field
(n1) in lo; the length of the alide (l) in 70 mm.
the vidth (b) in 25 mm; the diameter of the vieual
field in 1.6 mu. The number of eporea on the
entire alide ia: .31....95.”

"" Leo

 

 

 

rem

To determine the number of eporee in a aquare centimeter, the
total number of them ehould be divided by the overall area of
the alide (deducting for the extreme parta of it vhich vere
covered by the groovea of the-vind vane and also for the edges
covered by the apecimen mount).

-86-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF7ICIAL US! ONLY

2. with the roan-n neter, the level of spores on crops is
detereined eccotding to e speciel netbod.

The results of the enslyses of the level oi spores in the eit
end on crops ere written dovn on speciel reporting fore No 1.
The points of observetion end fore lo 1 ere sent to the plent
protection etetion. When one or note uredospores ere detected
on s squere centieeter of the slide iron the vind vene. this
inforeetion is iIIedietely sent by telephone or telegteph to
the chief of the teyon's plent end enieel protective service
end for- No l is sent 1etet.

with isvotsble veether conditions (reletive hueidity et crop
level of etleest 75 percent. the presence of dev end optiesl
sir teepereture) end during fsvoreble steges o! plent growth.
e bed epipbytic condition cen be expected to etise when 0.6

or note spores heve fellen on s squere centineter of the
slide's suriece during e Zé-hour period for e phytophthore
infection of potetoes end when one spots or note heve fellen
on e squere centileter of the slide's suriece during e 24-hour
period for cereel stelk blight.

COPYRIGHT: ltdetel'stvo "Kolos" 1978

9001
080: 81“]082‘ - 3ND -

-37-

FOR OFFICIEL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040004-2

END 0|
FICHE

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040004-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040004-2

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-00850R000100040004-2