APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP02-00880R000100030028-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82u00850R000100030028-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/OJZS

9 March 19 79

' TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR POLITICAL
AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030020-7
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT MRS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WHERSIiIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED ﬂEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
oIoLIoanPmc can l- “rm- N».

     
    
   
 
   
        
    
   
 
      
  
       
   
   
        
   

   
   
   

J. "n 'I"""“ M n ‘hln-h Nu.

ms 1.] 8325

TRANSIATIUNS 0N USSR - POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(P000 3/79)

  

‘ rpm no

9 March 1979

     

    

O. Pull-III.~ ”suntan-n Nllf and Addie-I
.Iolnt Publications Recent-ch Service
1000 North clebo Rood

Arlington, Virginia 22201

l0. Flown/Tailvai Um h...

  
  
  

  

I . (mun/(aunt No.

I2. ‘t'a'nu-unl "unnum- None and Mann

   

IS. Type oi Report I Pond
Coven!

As above

IO. \hszu- u

  

The report contains information on government and party structure, policy and
problem. in" and social regulation, education. and culture]. and social aspects
of Soviet life. trade union and Kouonol activitioe.

  

. k. y Imk .md Dc- uni-M Anny-n.
USSR

Political Science
Sociology

Government

Communism

Luv (Jurisprudence)
Education

Culture (Social Sciences)

 

I o. Deutiptou

II’L "- aul-- ns Up" I lulu! Tome

    
  
  
 

    
   

"e. ”nun—ulna.- 51). 5?. 5K

    
 
  

II. Jun! lulu. Van-rm

For official the Only. Limited
Number of Copies Available From JPRS

. ”no urn n nun . c on

. Steamy Clue (Th-l

3|. No. 0' Pop“
“9“." . 28
mm

THIS you In as nevnooucm WM“ "”’""
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/8325
9 March 19'.

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR POLITICAL

AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(2000 3/79)

Coureurs
INTERNATIWM.

Donna's Contndictiono, quu Impeding It. Preston Viewed
(V. M. Kulioh; “mam KMSS I SOVRBIBNYY MIR,

Jill-30b 79) a...OCOCOOOCIOOOOOCOOO'OOOQOOOOO0.00.00.00.00

Hodvodov Interview on Soviet-Chino“ Rotation.
(Roy Hodvcdov Interview; IA STMPA, 27 Doc 78) ..........

RATIWAL

Icy Hodvodcv chum” Distortion of Ilia Ponition'
(Roy "CW“.V} LA MPA' 26 J” 79) cocoooooocoaoooooooo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

DETENTE'S CONTRADICTIONS. ISSUES IHPBDING ITS PROGRESS VIEHED

hoscov RABOCNIY KLASS I SOVREHENNYY MIR in Russian No l, Jan—Feb 79
signed to press 28 Dec 78 pp 17-32 LD

[Article by V. N. Kulieh: "Detente and the Threat of Har--Alternative
Trends"]

[Text] In the second half of the seventies the process of international
detente is manifesting itself increasingly noticeably. albeit in a sane-
what contradictory fashion. 0n the one hand its influence on international
relations is increasing, the nuaber of states actively supporting it is
growing and the positions of political and social forces fighting for
detente are strengthening. 0n the other hand. the criticise of detente

by rightuing,‘conservative forces in Western countries, particularly in the
United States. is intensifying. These circles are receiving active support
from the present PRC leadership. This criticism from both directions is
turning into direct attacks on detente and open slander of its supporters.
In several cases it contains the demand for a return practically to the
cold war and appeals to prepare for world war. In his time former u.s.
President Gerald Ford also joined in the "antidetente" campaign, publicly
refusing to use the term "detente." Then and now, Iany people try to give
their own interpretation of the detente process and on that basis to criti-
cize and reject the phenomenon itself. Certain influential groups. and
sometimes even governments. in Heetern countries act more cautiously: They
verbally support detente but in fact exert considerable efforts to retard

the process of its development and prevent it free spreading to the mili-
tary sphere.

Thus detente is the subject of a bitter political and ideological struggle
which has dravn into its orbit all states and governments and political

and social forces in the world, without exception. This struggle has
eabraced all spheres of international relations and is exerting considerable
influence on the behavior of both governments and sociopolitical forces.

In this connection the Soviet theory of international relations is faced
with the task of devoting even sore attention to studying the factors which

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

determined the emergence and development of the detente process. revealing
its motive forces and contradictions and seeking ways and means of peace-
fully resolving these contradictions in the interests of further developing
the entire process.

The article here offered to the reader pursues the goal of giving a general
characterization of international detente and examining the problems with-
out whose resolution it cannot be deepened.

Changes in the Correlation and Distribution of Forces in the Horld--The
Host Important Preconditions of Detente

International detente is the necessary result of the development of politi-
cal. economic and social processes and the successes of science and tech—
nology. which led to a substantial change in the correlation and distribution
of forces both internationally and within many states. "As a result the
distribution of forces in the world arena has changed completely." L. I. Brezh-
nev noted in the report ”0n the Draft USSR Constitution" at the CPSU Central
Committee 24 Hay 1977 Plenum. “The real possibility has appeared of averting
a new world war, and the threat of the emergence of such a war has already
receded. although we still have much work to do in this sphere and a stubborn
struggle still lies ahead"[1].

A simplistic interpretation of the question of the change in the correla-
tion of forces and the substitution of the question of the correlation of
military forces is often encountered in the Hestern press, particularly the
American press. of course, military strength as yet remains one of the most
obvious and dangerous indicators of the might of this or that state, al-
though it does not reflect its real might in full. But even if preference
is given to military strength. a detailed impression of the real strength of
states and of the potential for its foreign political realization can be
obtained if this strength is assessed within the system of international
relations which determine the correlation and distribution of forces in the
world and its regions. This is of exceptionally great significance for an
understanding of the essence of international detente and for revealing its
methods of influencing states' foreign policy and their potential for
realizing the foreign policy resOurces at their disposal, particularly such
extremely dangerous resources as military strength and war.

The most important condition predetermining international detente was the
consolidation of the international positions of world socialism. It is
known that socialism as a teaching rejects war as a rational policy means.
except in the case of a just war for independence and national and social
liberation. The idea of peace is directly connected in this teaching with
the ideas of national. social. economic and political progress. with the
formation of first one socialist state and then a system of such states the
task of excluding war from mankind's life becomes the aim not only of
progressive social forces but also of a state policy based on economic. moral.
political and military might, and also on the international prestige of
socialist states.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The governments of socialist countries have proceeded and proceed in their
proposals from the basis of the now generally acknowledged fact that not
only fundamental contradictions but also spheres of common interest exist
between socialist and capitalist countries. The peoples of all the world's
countries have an interest in averting world war, in disarmament. reducing
military expenditure, the effective exploitation of the advantages of the
international division of labor. the exploitation of the riches of the
world's oceans and environmental conservation, resolving the problems of
energy resources and raw materials and eliminating mass hunger and dangerous
diseases. The existence of such common or coinciding interests among states
and peoples and the ever-growing demand for them to be acted on is a con-

vincing argument for the policy of peaceful coexistence and international
detente.

The international communist and workers movement is a significant force
capable of restricting and stopping the actions of the aggressive forces of
imperialism. And although these forces are seeking by every available means
to weaken the resistance of the communist and workers movement via the
forces of militarism and aggression, these efforts are not bringing the
desired result. Communist parties have become an important component in

the distribution of forces in capitalist countries. In some countries they
have taken the lead in the working people's mass political struggle and
become a nationwide political force (in France and Italy. for instance), and
in others the process of communist parties emerging into the arena of
national activity is under way. In a third group of countries the communist
parties' role in political life is becoming increasingly noticeable.[2]
Energetic actions by communist parties jointly with other leftwing and anti-
war forces in capitalist countries are promoting to a significant extent the
change in the correlation of forces in favor of international detente and
peace.

The socialist community states and communist and workers parties of most
countries of the world build their policy in the struggle to maintain peace
and international detente with consideration for the trends in international
relations determined by the development of world processes. Such an approach
made it possible as early as 1956 for the 20th CPSU Congress to formulate a
conclusion on the absence of the fatal inevitability of wars in modern con-
ditions. Some 5 years later the CPSU program adopted by the 22d Party
Congress stated that "peaceful coexistence between socialist and capitalist
states is an objective necessity of the development of human society. Var
cannot and must not serve as a means of resolving international disputes."l3l
This formulation of the question of peaceful coexistence between states with

different social systems has been supported by the world communist and
workers movement.[‘]

The peace program adopted in 1971 by the 26th CPSU Congress sets out the
Soviet dnion's concrete tasks in insuring peace and friendship among
peoples. Their practical implementation promoted a significant acceleration

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

in the development of the processes of relaxation of tension and establish-
ment of cooperation between the 085% and capitalist countries. The 25th

CPSU Congress adopted the "program of further struggle for peace and inter-
national cooperation and for the freedom and independence of the peoples,"
which included concrete Soviet proposals on questions of peace and insuring
international security. These aim at resolving urgent tasks in strengthening
the relaxation of tension and making it irreversible.

By Joint efforts, the socialist community states have elaborated a realistic
program for restructuring the system of international relations so as to
preclude the possibility of the emergence of a situation in which political,
economic and ideological contradictions and conflicts between capitalist and
socialist states, accumulating, expanding and becoming exacerbated, would go
so far as to be transformed into armed struggle, into war. In a series of
joint declarations and appeals to western states they have proposed the
resolution of the problem of emerging from the cold war and eliminating its
conseqaences, creating international stability in Europe and subsequently in
other regions by developing mutually advantageous economic, scientific.
technical and cultural cooperation, eliminating the most dangerous elements
in the present-day international structure (for instance, military confronta-
tion, military conflicts and military-political blocs) and disarmament.

Exceptionally great significance for the development of the process of
international detente is attached to the elimination of the colonial system
of imperialism. the profound social transformations taking place in coun-
tries freed from colonial dependence, the formation of new states and the
increase in their international political prestige. All these phenomena
substantially reuuce the reserves and restrict the sphere of operations

of imperialism and its main mesns--militarism. Host of the Asian, African
and Latin American countries liberated from colonial dependence have chosen
nonalinement as the basis of their foreign policy. Their proclamation of
neutrality with respect to the military-political blocs does not mean they
are indifferent to such international questions as those of peace and war,
imperialism and colonialism. Having an interest in cooperating with other
countries in the sphere of the economy, science and technology, culture and
health care, so as to accelerate their countries' development, break out of
the backwardness to which colonialism condemned them in the shortest possi-
ble time and achieve full national independence, economic independence and
social progress. the liberated countries come out as active supporters of
detente and opponents of everything associated with the policy of cold war
and military confrontation in international relations. They wage an active
struggle against militarism and the threat of nuclear missile war, with
which they associate the danger of the restoration of foreign exploitation
and political oppression.

The emergence and strengthening of international solidarity among Asian,
African and Latin American countries on the basis of the nonalinement policy
has promoted a significant change in the correlation of forces in favor of
maintaining peace and insuring international security. This is also

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reflected in the change in the distribution of forces in the United Nations,
whose members now number 150. An absolute majority in the United Nations is
made up of socialist states and states liberated from colonial dependence.

Changes have also taken place in western states' governments. In a number
of countries the parties. groups and politicians attaching most importance
in their policy to military strength have lost seas of their influence on
governments' foreign policy. while parties. groups within them and people
capable of implementing a more realistic foreign policy have strengthened
their positions in the leadership of the states. And although, as is known.
western states' ruling circles have still not renounced their former atti-
tude toward the "position of strength" policy or their habit of thinking in
terms of military strength, they have begun to implement a more realistic
policy. As a rule supporters of a tough policy with respect to socialist
states form the opposition in their countries' parliaments: The conserva-
tives in Britain, the Christian Democrats in the PRC, and rightwing, con-
servative republicans and democrats in the United States. Such a position
has arisen in most of the developed capitalist states.

The changes in the correlation and distribution of forces in the world

have influenced the "position of strength" policy and the attitude toward
its main means--military strength. On this question. American researcher
Col Amos A. Jordan Jr wrote: "A paradoxical situation has arisen: In

recent decades the gulf between the military potentials of strong and weak
states has increased. but the ability of the strong to impose their will on
the weak has seemingly lessened. It seems that the traditional role of
military strength as supreme ruler of interstate relations has changed to
some extent."[ 1 At approximately the same time another American researcher,
J. Clark, wrote this: "Of course. nations can exert moral, political, eco-
nomic and other influence on one another. However, inasmuch as the ultimate,
supreme arbiter of international disputes is war. the military factor
acquires a higher degree of significance in political calculations. Any
symptoms of weakness or unpreparedness on the part of a great power is
immediately reflected in its political status."[6] Such an argument on
questions of international politics, set out in the pages of a military
journal at the beginning of the period of detente, could be put down to

the military author's limited thinking. But later, other similar state-
ments appeared, made by politicians. In March 1976, for instance, u.s.
Secretary of State H. Kissinger stated: "Without reliable military strength
in all arms categories no diplomacy, however skillful, can help us. That is

why I have resolutely supported a strong national defense in all weapons
categories."[7]

It is traditional for capitalism to make the role of military strength
absolute. As V. I. Lenin pointed out, "Under capitalism any basis for
distributing spheres of influence, interests, colonies and so forth other
than that of considering the [strength] [word in itslics--PBIS] of those
participating in the shareout--general economic, financial and military
strength, and so forth-is inconceivable,"[3] and military strength is

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

allotted the decisive place, the role of "supreme ruler of international
relations." [t is this which determines the desire on the part of imperi-
alist state, above all the United States. to possess military superiority
over socialism, which could insure their domination in the world. Their
policy in the forties and fifties aimed at achieving this goal, when the
governments of those states considered that the solid economic, scientific
and technical potential of the North American countries. the Heat European
countries restored since the war and Japan will make it possible for them
to create and constantly maintain their military might at a level which
would be unattainable for any other state or group of states. particularly
the Soviet Union and other socialist states, which suffered enormous losses
during ﬂorid War It.

The western states, despite their desire. tremendous material expenditure and
efforts, did not succeed in achieving overall military superiority over the
USSR and all the socialist community countries. They have had to settle

for relative strategic equilibrium. For instance, in central Europe a more
or less identical level of Warsaw Pact and NATO armed forces has been estab-
lished now for many years. despite differences in their organizational
structures and training which are determined by social. political. economic
and national features, historical traditions and military doctrines. A rela-
tive equilibrium has also become establishedbetween USSR and 0.5. Strategic
Nuclear Missile Forces. The maintenance of the relative equilibrium of
forces in these key areas in the military structures of states of the two
social systems virtually means that an overall strategic equilibrium of
military forces is insured.

Maintaining such equilibrium demands the expenditure of tremendous efforts
and material resources on the part of the Soviet Union and all the socialist
community countries, but they are obliged to act in that way. The success-
ful implementation of this task has made it possible for the socialist
countries to insure reliable defense and has prevented the imperialist states
effectively realizing a situation of the constant danger of war in their own
interests. although such attempts have more than once brought Europe to the
brink of all-out war. It has made it possible to restrain the aggressive
forces and preserve peace in Europe for more than 30 years. It has made it
possible for the Soviet Union and other socialist community states to place
on a practicable footing the resolution of the questions of disarmament and
averting war.

The relative equilibrium of military forces has influenced the official
views of the U.S. Government on the rule of military strength as a foreign
policy means. In his annual report to Congress. U.s. Defense Secretary
Harold Brown writes that in its foreign policy the United States must not
rely mainly on military strength, but must also make use of wherever
possible of other means--economic industrial and agricultural potentials.
level of technology and so forthIél. Nonetheless he allots the decisive
role to military strength. “It is true," he goes on to write. "that

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1ngernational disputes are rarely resolved constructively by military
moans. But it is equally true that in this troubled world we can rarely
resolve international dissutee by peaceful means unless these are based
on military potential".[1 1

The process of "recognition" of the fact of the change in the correlation

of forces in the world and of the establishment of a relative equilibrium
of military forces between the socialist and capitalist state systems on the
port of leaders of western states is far from corresponding to the real
state of affairs. Prejudice attempts to pass off what is desired as the
reality. in short. various kinds of confusions, errors and miscalculations
have prevented them from gaining a realistic impression of the real correla-
tion of forces and correctly assessing its international political signifi-
cance. The illusion of military superiority and the associated confidence
in ailitary impunity have created and maintained among thou the opinion that
the only language in which they could "successfully" carry out a dialog with
the USSR. other socialist states and peoples which have been and are being
liberated from colonial dependence is the language of force.

The numerous failures of foreign policy plans and actions undertaken "from
. position of strength" with respect to the socialist countries and defeats
in were against National Liberation Forces. particularly such striking
defeats as in the wars in Korea. Indochina. Algeria and Angola. have each
had a more sobering effect on the ardent supporters and creators of the
"position of strength" policy and made then consider to a greater extent
the real correlation and distributi n of forces in the world. Approximately
agnce the midsixties statements have appeared with increasing frequency in
the American and Heat European press on the equilibrium or party of forces
between East and Heat, above all the strategic forces of the USSR and the
United States. and attempts have been made to clarify the effect of this
phenomenon on relations between states with different social systems. Only
in the seventies was the existence of such an equilibrium acknowledged by
U.S- official circles.

It is hard to overestimate the significance of the party of forces. and
still more of its acknowledgement by official circles in the United States
and its allies, for the development of the process of international
detente. First, this helped to seriously restrict the potential of imperi-
alLst "position of strength" policy, to develop peaceful relations among
states and to increase the international prestige of the policy of peace-
ful coexistence. Speaking at Notre Dame University 22 June 1977, U.S.
President J. Carter said: "we can no longer count on the other 150 coun-
tries submitting to the diktat of those who hold might in their hands; we
must have faith in ourselves and strive to inspire, convince and lead other
countries." Second. they were the direct preconditions for the turn in the
Polgcy of the United States and other western states away from confrontation
and nuclear blackmail to talks with socialist states. Third, this acknowl-
.ds¢aant. reflecting the real correlation of forces between the USSR and

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the United States, between the socialist community states and capitalist
countries, made it possible for governments on both sides to choose the
principles of "equal security" and "not prejudicing the security of any
countries" as the basis for holding further talks on limiting strategic
nuclear missile weapons. reducing arms forces and armaments in central
Europe. and disarmament. Finally, the western states' acknowledgement of
the overall parity of military forces between the two world systems of
states could act as a precedent for the resolution of problems of reducing
armed forces and armaments and of disarmament in respect of individual
regions of the world.

In the most general terms the establishnent of a relative equilibrium of
military forces and its recognition by the major imperialist powers. to-
gether with the strengthening trend toward a change in the overall correla-
tion of forces in the world in favor of socialism. national liberation and
progress, create favorable conditions for the further development and the
deepening of the process of international detente.

The Contradiztory Nature of the Detente Process. the Preservation of the
Danger of Her

Other forces and opposite trends leading to an exacerbation of international
tension. the continuation of the arms race and to war are still active in
the world and exert a considerable influence. First. the conditions which
gave rise to the cold war persist, and extreme conservative forces seeking
to insure that the contradictions between capitalism and socialism, between
states with different social systems are resolved by means of force and
violence have not lost their influence on the policy of western states.
Second. colonialism and neocolonialism have still not been fully eradicated.
and are constantly engendering international crises and military conflicts
in Asia, Africa and Latin America which to a greater or lesser degree objec-
tively help to preserve international tension and are often used by reac-
tionary, conservative forces to maintain such tension. Third, the system of
military confrontation created in the cold war years remains--the bloc
structure of international relations, developed military organizations

of blocs and states, a level of countries' mobilised preparations and of the
combat readiness of the sides' armed forces which is excessively high for
peacetime, and military bases and armed forces on other countries‘ terri-
tories. Fourth. the arms race is continuing even more intensively. Fifth.
the military expenditure of an absolute majority of countries is increasing
from year to year.

Thus international detente is a concrete historical state of international
relations in which alternative trends are operating simultaneously and
exerting a substantial influence on the most important events--trends toward
preserving peace and strengthening international security, toward developing
all-round cooperation between countries. and on the other hand toward
exacerbating the international situation, stepping up tension and increasing

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the danger of war. By virtue of this. as the participants in the Berlin
conference of European Communist and Workers Parties noted. universal peace
is still not guaranteed. detente "has not yet become lasting" and "serious

obstacles still remain along the path to reliable security and coopera-
tion."l11|

international detente is a process of developing the entire system of
international relations from a cold war situation to a status insuring

the reliability of peaceful relations among states, above all among states
with different social systems. and to businesslike and equal cooperation
among them. a process distinguished by exceptional dynamism and by its con-
tradictory nature. as determined by the actions of the opposing trends in
the international situation.

international detente is also that type of states' foreign policy aimed at
preserving peace and insuring all-round cooperation among states and
peoples. averting international conflicts and wars and implementing effec-
tive measures to curb the arms race. reduce armed forces and armaments and
bring about disarmament.

international detente is connected in the most direct way with the change
in the forms of confrontation between the two world systems. in the forms
of resolving the contradic:i;ns inherent in the world system of states.

The establishment of a relative equilibrium at military forces on the two
sides introduces serious changes into the system of the struggle to possess
military superiority. a struggle which has always been characteristic of
exploitative societies and their states. in our time this goal is only
pursued by one of the two main systems of states-the imperialist system.
The socialist community states are consistent supporters of preserving a
stable equilibrium of military forces and military potentials between states
with different social systems. of ending the arms race and of disarmament.

In order to resolve the problems associated with social transformations
and socialist and communist building. and to reliably defend themselves
and their interests. they need a stable equilibrium of military forces. and
not military superiority. The Soviet Government. like the governments of
other socialist community countries. has declared this repeatedly. In an
interview for the Heat German Newspaper VORHABRTS L. l. Brezhnev said that
"the Soviet Union believes for its part that approximate equality and
parity are sufficient for defense needs. He do not set ourselves the goal
of achieving military superiority. He also know that this very concept
loses its meaning in view of the existence of the present huge arsenals

of nuclear weapons and delivery means already stockpiled".[l ]

The fact that the Soviet Union has not sought and is not seeking military
superiority is attested by the entire experience of military competition
between the USSR and the United States and between states with different
social systems throughout the postwar period. As a rule. it is the United
States and the other western powers which have created new weapons or

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

military systems and thereby challenged the Soviet Union and the other
socialist community states. The socialist countries have been forced to
accept the challenge and to respond to it with specific measures to
strengthen their defense and protect their interests by equalizing the
aides' military might or neutralizing the western countries' military
advantages. This has been and remains a specific manifestation of the
struggle between the aforementioned two opposing trends in contemporary
international relations. The socialist conmmnity states and the working
class have succeeded in imposing on their class opponents both peaceful
competition in the spheres of the economy, science and technology. and
culture. and relations between states with different social systems based
on the principles of peaceful coexistence. and in achieving international
detente.

As noted above. international detente. which has to a considerable extent
developed under the influence of the change in the world disposition of
forces. the establishment of relative equilibrium between the military
forces of the two world systems of states and the realization by western
powers' ruling circles of the international political importance of this
equilibrium. contributes in its turn to maintaining this equilibrium and
determines the need for states to seek forms of foreign policy activity
which are adequate for it. At the same time the maintenance of the mili-
tary equilibrium at a high level is not only exceptionally burdensome and
guinous for the peoples but also dangerous from the military viewpoint--
something which determines the urgent need to lower this level. This is
also prompted by the fact that the military equilibrium of forces is dynamic
in nature and is constantly developing. It is connected with the arms race,
and the latter in its turn contributes to msintaining--and, in periods when
it is intensifying, also to strengthening--international tension and to
preserving universal suspicion and mistrust in the world. Moreover. any
equi)'Frium. especially an equilibrium of military forces-and a high level
at that--causes a dangerous trend towards attempts to disrupt it. For
instance. the desire of the United States and its allies for military tech-
nological and therefore to some extent strategic superiority over the Soviet
Union and the other socialist community countries has been and remains the
main source of the arms race and war danger. In particular, the American
policy of constantly stepping up military expenditure is fraught with a
disruption of the established equilibrium between 0.5. and USSR military
forces. in an August 1978 interview with BUSINESS “EEK Magazine. U.S.
President J. Carter declared: "l foresee defense expenditure rising
steadily for the remainder of my presidency--I can see no prospect of
significantly reducing military expenditure--even if the Strategic Arms
Limitation Agreement is successfully concluded. He must maintain our
defense potential. That is a necessary and good investment".i13] For its
part the U.s. Department of Defense is without any reservations planning
the constant buildup of the military budget. The latest report by U.S.
Defense Secretary Harold Brown plans an increase in spending from $116.8
billion in me to $172.1 billion in 1933.1“!

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a rule. partial and temporary discrepancies and inequalities in
individual elements making up the general equilibrium of military forces
arise in the process of the arms race and the sides' military preparations.
in themselves these discrepancies and inequalities may not represent serious
military advantages for one side over the other and may not create a threat
or military danger for other states and peoples. But insofar as there are
forces which are not interested in international detente, these dispropor-
tiens may be utilized by them in order to fuel international tension and to
kindle crisis and conflicts. Advantages in the most important elements of
armed forces while there is an overall equilibrium between the sides' forces
maintained at a high level may create in the most aggressively minded groups
in government circles the illusory certainty that they possess strategic
superiority and may tempt them to utilize these advantages for their foreign
policy aims. There are many examples of this use of partial strategic
advantages. The most indicative of them are the intervention by the

western powers and primarily the United States in Korea in 1950-1953. the
American intervention in Indochina, the attempts by the United States and
NATO to exert military pressure on the Soviet Union and other countries of
the world and. finally, the Israeli armed forces' acts of sabotage against
Uganda and Lebanon and the acts of military sabotage by the Rhodesian racist
regime's army against neighboring states. It is also appropriate to recall
the fact that Hitlerite Germany unleashed world war Ii in the expectation
that its advantages in tank forces and aviation and also the political con-
tradictions between its enemies would guarantee it military victory despite
the fact that it not only had no overall military superiority over them but
was considerably inferior to their combined strength.

with a view to fueling international tension the western countries make

wide use of the vagueness of the concept of "equilibrium" or "balance of
forces"--something which creates a certain freedom not only of interpreta-
tion but also of practical actions for the foreign policy utilization of
military force. For instance, relative equality now exists in Europe be-
tween the military forces of NATO and the Narsaw Pact. The socialist
community countries are proposing to the western states that this be accepted
as the starting point for the elaboration of an agreement and the adoption

of specific measures to reduce armed forces and armaments and to decrease

the level of military confrontation between the sides in central Europe.

The representatives of the NATO countries deny the existence of this
equality of forces in central Europe. Judging by certain of their remarks.
the western states would be suited by an "equilibrium of forces" in this
region which ruled out the possibility of the socialist community states
influencing international events outside their own borders. In their
proposals at the talks on reducing armed forces and armaments in central
Europe they proceed from the principle which they have formulated of an
say-strical or unequal reduction in the sides' forces. Acceptance of

these proposals by the socialist states would be equivalent to acknowledging
the right of the NATO western powers to have substantial military advantages
in Europe. Judging by western press commentaries. the western powers‘

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe orncuu. use omx

representatives at the talks in Vienna are utilizing as Justification for
their position data on differences between the structures of the sides'
armed forces and the numerical strength of certain branches of them. But
here they disregard the overall strategic correlation between the sides
forces which incorporates all the component parts of the armed forces--
ground forces. air forces. strategic and tactical nuclear forces and others.
Another fact which is disregarded is that the present equilibrium between
military forces in Europe took shape in the process of protracted military
competition between the sides in which one side's advantages in a particular
branch of the armed forces have been counterbalanced by the other side with
advantages in other branches of the armed forces and armaments.

The constant repetitions by the western countries' mass media of the thesis
of the Bureau Pact's supposed ”superiority" of strength over NATO are
utilized to justify the constant buildup of NATO's armed forces and military
potential and the western states' position at the Vienna talks and are also
aimed at convincing the western public of the existence of a military
"threat from the East." This propaganda contributes to maintaining in the
western country mistrust of the socialist states and to maintaining in
Europe and throughout the world an atmosphere favorable to the "position-
of—strength" policy.

International detente cannot fail to exert a substantial influence on the
potential for and forms of states' foreign policy utilization of military
force. Governments or statesmen are free to recognize it or not. to use
the term "detente" or not and to attach their own meaning to it or not.
but they are forced to reckon with the situation reflected by the term.

in the last few years the opinion that under contemporary conditions world
nuclear war would be so destructive and devastating that it loses all
political point has become predominant. Recognition of the political
irrationality of world nuclear war. however, does not mean--so long as
there exist stockpiles of nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles for them,
special military organizations for their employment and political forces
championing the buildup of strategic nuclear forces and their utilization
as an instrument of foreign policy--that the danger of it is automatically
eliminated.

The danger of world nuclear war which persists even under the conditions

of international detente exerts a serious influence on every aspect of
contemporary international relations. it has an impact on the foreign
policy of all states and pressures the public of all the world's countries.
it contributes to preserving the mutual mistrust between capitalist and
socialist countries. fuels universal suspicion and maintains constant ten-
sion in the world. It is precisely these properties of the danger of world
war which are intensively exploited by the western states and primarily the
United States in the interests of their foreign policy. The ways in which
it is utilized are extremely diverse. They cover the wide range from

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nuclear blackmail and the threat of nuclear attack to the dissemination

of information about the development of nuclear weapons and their delivery
vehlcles--ballietic and cruise missiles and aircraft-discussions of possible
ways of utilizing these weapons in a war and so forth.

international detente seriously restricts the possibility of rationally
utilizing a regional conflict as an instrument of the "pesition-of-otrength"
policy. The failure of the American military intervention in Indochina is
cogent confirmation of this. Touching on this question. 0.5. President

J. Carter said at a press conference 3 May 1977: "I believe that the and
experience which we have had in Vietnam has deeply and I hope forever proved
to the American people the dangerousness of such cases where our country
resorts to utilizing military means in some remote region of the earth under
conditions where our own security is not threatened. with the exception of
circumstances where this is connected with ratified treaties...as is the
case. for instance. with Japan and NATO." It follows from this statement
that it is still impossible to rule out the possibility of new military
adventures by imperialism in Europe. Asia and other regions of the world.
Nor are there any guarantees that local conflicts of the type of the Cyprus.
Zaire and southern African conflicts will not arise. And although none of
the conflicts of this kind has automatically developed into a large war. they
have influenced and continue to influence international relations. compli-
cating the development of the detente process.

however, it must be noted that under the conditions of the relative
equilibrium between the military forces of states with different social
systems and the anticolonialist and anti-imperialist activeness of the

young, liberated African and Asian countries. the imperialist states have
begun to display a more cautious approach to deciding the question of
directly employing military force and military intervention against the
socialist and developing countries. For instance. even such an extreme
measure by the Arab stat.s as the oil embargo did not evoke from the wee-
tern powers their usual resction in the paat--a military incursion of
"gunboat diplomacy." The imperialist powers' struggle for markets and
sources of raw materials. particularly energy-~a struggle which has
exacerbated in the last few years under the influence of the economic crisis--
is also conducted by the present chiefly by peaceful means and is only rarely
accompanied by new military conflicts such as the conflict in Zaire, for
instance. It may also be recalled that the ".8. Congress did not support

the initiative by President Ford's administration to undertake armed inter-
vention in Angola.

The conditions of international detente limit to a certain extent but do not
rule out the possibility of the foreign policy utilization of military

force to pressure the policy of other 'tates in indirect ways--that is. in
ways below the level of a threat to employ military forces. These include
all types of military show of strength such as maneuvers, "showing the
flag." the arms race, the reorganization and redeployment of armed forces.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the publication of data about these actions. official information or the
dissemination of rumors about the revision of strategic plans and about the
elaboration and adoption of programs for the creation of new armaments. data
about weapons tests and others. it is perfectly clear that the war danger
connected with these possibilities of the foreign policy utilization of
military forces also persists. international detente has also made its

mark on the western powers' policy in the sphere of the arms race. During
the cold war period their ruling circles usually openly proclaimed their
desire to insure military superiority over the socialist countries and did
not conceal their anger that they were unable to achieve the planned aim.
Nowadays similar statements are usually made by the rightwing extreme con-
servative opposition. Taking into account the peoples‘ love of peace and
the mass public protests at the arms race. military preparations and local
wars. official circles make considerable efforts to conceal their intentions
in this sphere. They continue the arms race while camouflaging it with
statements that this is being done in the interests of preserving peace and
insuring military equality with the socialist community countries. under the
influence of scientific and technological progress and so forth.

Thus the relaxation of international tension has restricted the sphere of
the use of and the freedom to use military force as the most effective
instrument of foreign policy and is thereby contributing to the development
of relations between states with different social systems on the basis of
the principles of peaceful coexistence. But the fact that it has not yet
been possible to lower the level of military confrontation between them and
to eliminate the danger of war seriously restricts the potential for
developing comprehensive cooperation between states and peoples and hampers
the further development of the process of international detente.

Military Detente is a Necessary Condition of Eliminating the Danger of War

Hilitary detente in its most general form constitutes part of the general
process of alleviating international tension which is implemented by means
of measures to lower the levels of military confrontation, primarily between
states with different social systems. to eliminate military conflicts and

to remove hotbeds of war danger in the world and individual regions. Under
contemporary conditions where the process of international detente has made
somewhat greater headway in the political sphere than it has in the military
sphere and where the profound restructuring of international relations on
the basis of the principles of peaceful coexistence has already begun. the
questions of military detente assume particular topicality.

The common task of states and the peoples in the sphere of military detente
boils down to insuring the creation of a system of relations among all
states and primarily between states with different social systems which
rules out the possibility of relying on the military resolution of the
problems and disputes which exist or may spring up between them. The
solution of the practical tasks of military detente is possibly through

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mainly political means along with the solution of the problems of general
detente. but it is complicated by the necessity of political intrusion
into a specific military sphere directly connected with the national
security of states and peoples. In the correlation of the political and
military aspects of the relaxation of international tension the political
aspect certainly takes priority. but in view of the complexity and par-
ticular delicacy of the problems of military detente, the latter acquires
a relative independence. For the same reasons it is impossible to solve the
tasks of military detente by some kind of on-off action. even an extremely
significaa: one. That requires tremendous efforts. persistence and
patience. principledness and flexibility. understanding and optimum con-
sideration of the interests of the coexisting states and their systems. no

prejudice to their security, the comprehensive assessment of prospects and
the observance of consistency.

The initiative in the struggle for general and military detente belongs
entirely to the socialist community countries and the communist and workers
parties. It is precisely they who have elaborated the fullest and most
realistic action programs in this sphere and who are persistently seeking
to implement them. The 25th CPSU Congress adopted a program of further
struggle for peace and international cooperation which is a development and
continuation of the peace program put forward by the 26th CPSU Congress.
This program has been supported by the fraternal communist and workers
parties of the socialist countries. By unanimously adopting a final docu-
ment the conference of European Communist and workers Parties (June 1976)
gave the working class and the broad working people's masses a clear orien-
tation which contributes to intensifying their struggle for the termination
of the arms race, disarmament and the strengthening of peace and interna-
tional security. The declarations adopted by the conferences of the Harsaw
Pact States' Political Consultative Committee (November 1976 and November
1978) show the successes in the struggle for international detente and the
obstacles standing in the way of its further development and outline specific
actions according with the interests of all peoples. At the U.N. General
Assembly Special Session on Disarmament (May 1978) the Soviet Union sub-
mitted proposals "on practical ways to end the arms race" which noted the
results already achieved in this sphere and outline the specific problems

whose solution may insure a resolute breakthrough in the struggle to end the
arms race.l15]

The most important problems of military detente are eliminating the threat
of world war. ending the arms race-primarily the nuclear missile arms
race--and implementing disarmament. The Warsaw Pact states' declaration
adopted 23 November 1978 points out: "A resolute shift in ending the arms

race is ossible. Every effort must be made to insure that it becomes a
reality" 16]

The inclusion of the principle of the renunciation of force or the threat
of force in the U.N. Charter and in the international documents signed by

15
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the socialist and capitalist states in the last decade, including the
Ali-European Conference final act. is of extremely great importance for

the adoption of measures for military detente in that it contributes to
strenghtenlng mutual trust among the states and opens up great potential

for cooperation between them. But recognition alone is not enough to

insure that the principle becomes an indisputable law of international

life. It is also necessary to take serious practical measures to insure
that the renunciation of the use of force or the threat of force forms the
basis of the practice of interstate relations and to reduce still more the
threat of world war. In this plane the Soviet proposal for the conclusion
of a world Treaty on the Nonuse of Force in International Relations assumed
exceptionally great importance. The conclusion of such a treaty would mean
a transition from broad recognition of a principle to the adoption by all
states of the world of a treaty connitment not to use force and to resolve
disputes among themselves by peaceful means in such a way as not to threaten
international peace and security. It would be an exceptionally major action
bringing the world nearer to a state in which it would be possible to finally
eradicate war and aggression.

The elimination of the danger of nuclear war demands the adoption of a
number of special measures which would include, along with commitments to
refrain from employing nuclear weapons and from using them as a threat.
specific actions to and production of all types of nuclear weapons and
gradually reduce stockpiles of them until they have been totally eliminated,
to totally ban tests of them, to end the development and production of all
other types of weapons of mass destruction and also to end the creation of
convontioaal armaments of great destructive power.

It is also necessary to strengthen the regime of the nonproliferation of
nuclear weapons under conditions whereby all states have access without

any discrimination to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes under
effective international control and in accordance with international atomic
energy agency standards. In addition, it is necessary to implement measures
such as withdrawing nuclear armaments from the territory of foreign states
and creating nuclear free zones.

The Soviet Union's statement that "it will never use nuclear weapons against
states which renounce the production and acquisition of nuclear weapons and
do not have nuclear weapons on their territory" and also its expression of
readiness to conclude special agreements with any of these nonnuclear states
are of exceptionally great importance for strengthening the regime of the
nonproliferation of nuclear weapons.

In the final analysis the destruction of stockpiles of all types of nuclear
weapons, the outlawing of them and the ending of production of them would
be a reliable guarantee against the unleashing of nuclear war and would
totally eliminate the danger of it. But on the road toward this supreme
result great importance attaches to the successful conclusion of the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet-American Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. The immediate aim of
these talks is to prevent the opening of a new channel of the strategic
arms rece--something which would nullify the limitations already achieved
in the sphere of this race. A second important task is to prevent the
development, start of production and deployment of a new type of nuclear
weepons--neutron weapons.

Guided by their desire to take another effective step to eliminate the
threat of nuclear war the Harsaw Pact states propose to all the states
which signed the final act that they conclude a treaty on not being the
first to use nuclear weapons against one another. Moreover. the question
of convening a conference of the nuclear powers--the USSR, United States.
PRC. France and Britain--is acquiring increasing international topicality.

The tendency toward relative stability in the strategic or military
equilibrium of the sides' forces--a tendency which has been revealed in

the process of the military competition between the states of the two

world uystems--caa be regarded as a serious precondition for the mutual
stabilisation of the established equilibrium of forces in the most important
areas of the world and primarily in Europe and for the adoption of measures
to reduce its level. Agreement between the East and West European states
to freeze the balance of military forces in Europe at the present level
would be a most important condition of consolidating the success of the
incipient turn away from military confrontation toward the policy of
resolving international disputes through negotiation and an important step
toward creating a security system in that region on a collective basis.

The problem of reducing armed forces and armaments in central Europe-that
is. the problem of reducing military tension in an area where it is par-
ticularly great and where the confrontation between the armed forces of the
two military-political alliances is particularly dangerous--occupies a
central place in military detente. Talks about this have been going on in
Vienna for almost 5 years now and the number of plenary session is inexorably
nearing 200, while the number of unofficial meetings between the participants
is incalculable; nevertheless. there are still no practical results. The
reduction of armed forces and armaments in Europe is connected with the
solution of questions such as the reduction of national armed forces, the
withdrawal of foreign troops and armaments from other countries' territory
and the disbandment of the withdrawn units. the elimination of foreign
military bases, the renunciation of any show of strength, the elaboration

of measures preventing the accidental occurrence of incidents and preventing
them from developing into military crises and the reduction of all coun-
tries' military budgets.

The proposals which the socialist ceuntries--the USSR, GDR. Poland and
the CSSR--submitted 8 June 1978 are another substantial contribution by
them to the struggle for international detente. Their acceptance by the
western powers would result in a lowering of the level of military con-
frontation in central Europe and at the same time the preservation of the

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

established proportions between the national armed forces and the overall
equilibrium of NATO and Harsaw Pact forces.

The interests of further normalizing international relations and the
interests of military detente require that the division of the world into
opposing military blocs be overcome. The Warsaw Pact states have repeatedly
put forward a proposal for the simultaneous disbandment of the North Atlan-
tic and Harsaw Pact organizations or. as a preliminary step. for the
elimination of their military organizations. At the same time they urge

all states not to take any action which might result in the expansion of
existing or the creation of new military-political groupings.

These measures would make it possible gradually to restrict and then to
reduce the material base of the confrontation which now exists and also to
eliminate the situation of war danger in the world. Their successful
implementation would bring the world nearer to general and complete diam
armament which, an is widely recognized. could radically resolve the problem
of peace and international security.

In the contemporary era which is characterized by alternative trends such
as the further development of the detente process and the intensification
of the danger of war. the implementation of measures of military detente

is a necessary condition of mankind's social. material and scientific and
technical progress and of insuring the sovereign rights of the peoples

and states. In their 23 November declaration the Harsaw Pact states

stated that there is no type of armaments which they "would not be prepared
to restrict or reduce on the basis of strict observance of the principle of.
not prejudicing the security of any country".[17]

FOOTNOTES
1. L. T. Brezhnev. "Along Lenin's Course“. Vol 6 hoscow 1978 p 376.

2. See A. l. Sobolev. "Problems of the world Revolutionary Process."
RABOCHIY KLASS I SOVREHBNNY HIR No 6. 1977 pp 12-13.

J. CPSU Program. Moscow 1961 p 59.

6. For instance. the 1969 international Conference of Communist and
workers Parties unanimously expressed the opinion that "the defense
of peace is inextricably linked with the struggle to impose on the
imperialists peaceful coexistence between states with different
social systems. which requires observance of the principles of
sovereignty. equality. the territorial inviolability of every state,
big or small. noninterference in other countries' internal affairs.
respect for the right of all peoples freely to choose their socio-
economic and political system and the settlement of unresolved inter-
national issues by political means. through talks" (the international
Conference of Communist and workers Parties. Moscow 1969. Prague 1969
p 33).

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5. Issues of Netionsl Security in the 1970s. Edited by Col Amos A.
Jordan Jr.. New York 1967 p 36.
6. ".3. Novel Institute Proceedings. March 1969 p 61.
7. 0.8. NBHS AND WORLD REPORT. 5 March 1976 p 27.
8. V. I. Lenin, "Co-plate Collected Horks." Vol 27 p 617.

9. Depsrtssnt of Defense. Annual Report. By 1979. usrold Brown,
Seerotsry of Defense, 2 February 1978 p 22.

10. Up. cit.. p 32.

11. Conference of Bumpesn Comnist and Workers Parties. Berlin
29-30 June 1976. Moscow 1977 p 16.

12. PRAVDA, 6 Hey 1978.
13. BUSINESS WEEK 21 August 1978.

16. In Oospsrsble Prices, Depertsent of Defense, Annusl Report. Fiscal
Yesr 1979. Harold Brown, Secretsry of Defense. 2 February 1978 p 12.

15. PRAVDA. 31 any 1978.
16. PRAVDA. 26 Novesbet 1978.
17. PRAVDA, 26 November 1978.

COPYRIGHT: "Rsbochiy klsss i sovrenennyy sir" 1979.

C80: 1800

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTBNATIONAL

HBDVEDEV INTERVIEW 0N SOVIET-CHINESE RELATIONS

Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 27 Dec 78 p 1

[Interview with Roy Hedvedev by Livio Zenotti: "The Russians Have Ancient
Feelings for China (from Love to Hate) but They Do not Know It"]

[Text] Moscow. Roy Hedvedev has followed Chinese affairs for years. lie
explains, "[I started] inediately at the university when our relations
with Peking were still good.“ Before he was converted into an historian,
now the nest eninent of the "dissenters" to explore the USSR planet, he
was a pedegog and party activist. he knows the Russian people, their soul,
better than others. That is why I ask his whet feelings he believes the
Russian people have today toward the neighboring, but different, protago-
nists of the other "real socialisn.“ the Chinese.

[Answer] You know the Ian in the street is a statistical inage. And I
have never carried out. nor do I know of. deooscopit studies conducted by
others on this subject.

[Question] But you are a careful observer....

[Answer] This is true. But the Russians' attitude regarding the Chinese
has changed several times over the past 100 years. This is also true of
the Japanese. At the beginning of the Century. we did not understand
their culture, their great traditions. Czarisn saw Chins merely as a land
of conquest. In 1900 it occupied part of Henchuria and Korea. in conpeti-
tion with Japanese expansionisn. The Gear went to war against them. con-
vinced they would gein an easy victory. Instead, Russia was defeated.

[Question] What was the effect of the defeat on the population?

[Answer] The monster of the "yellow peril" was born then. It had the face
of all Eastern peoples. After 1917, instead, the Bolsheviks sympathized
with Sun Yet-sen and many Russians considered China a potential ally in
the world revolution. Anong other things, this was the thesis of the
(Io-intern. Still in the 1930's. the Kuoninteng as well as the col-mists
were presented as friends of the Soviets.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] But how was this propaganda received by the nan in the street?

[Answer] I recall. when I was a child. that I learned a poea in school:

It told the story of a hungry shark. Japan. and of a peaceful whale. China.
which was najeetic but weak. Hy school-ate cried over its fate. bloody.
disasdaered. .

[Question] Didn't you know anything about the difference between the Third
Internationale and Mao Tse-tung‘!

[Answer] Absolutely nothing. 0n the level of the people. no one knew
about Stalin's concern about Mao's triunphs and still less about those of
the Chinese leader about the Soviet pressures.

[Question] Hhen did the feelings of the people begin to change?

[Answer] Between 1950 and 1959. be it as it nay. the USSR gave China con-
siderable help. The people. however. were perplexed about the necessary
sacrifices. Life was already very harsh. and further sacrifices were de-
manded in the nane of solidarity with China. The sinple people did not
understand. At that ties I was a propagandiat in a CPSU area comittee
and I often lads speeches about China. The students were enthusiastic.
but the workers and the far-era asked us questions which indicated their
dissatisfaction. They would have preferred to eat a little better. rather
than also suffer for the Chinese. A few years later. sylpathy had de-
creased even aaong the students. At the Youth Festival in 1957. the
Africans were given war-er receptions than the Chinese.

[Question] But hadn't the regine yet revealed the conflicts that opposed
it to Communist China even to meters of the party?

[Answer] No, they did it in the early 1960's. The press began to report
existing ideological differences. But the tines were different than when
the rupture with Yugoslavia took place. There could be no talk of anti-
Chinese furor. The rupture eeened evident and deep to everyone only at the
tine of the "Cultural Revolution.” Khruehev's decision to blow up all or
alsost all the fortifications along the frontier in sign of friendship went
for naught. The people. who perhaps had not even agreed with that action.
became very dietrustful. And with the first bloody incidents in 1969.

that distrust becaae hostility.

[Question] What do the Russians know about China. what do they know about
the Chinese: Only what they learned through propaganda?

[Answer] Certainly, there is the propaganda that has considerable influ-
ence and generates negative feelings. But not only that of the state,

but also the propaganda of a certain nationalism Solzhenitsyn very ef-
fectively expressed this fear of Chinese expansionien and probably in tine

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

made proselytea. Then. many youths who did military service on the Chinese
frontier returned to their families and talked about the army that is on

the other side.

[Question] Then, there is no sympathy for the Chinese in the USSR?

[Answer] It seems significant to me that the Radio Peking transmissions

directed to our country are not jet-sad. Our leaders know that no one
listens to then, contrary to the experience with Western broadcasts. The
programs carry primitive propaganda, and. aside from any other considera-
tion, they are ineffective. I know only one case of a dissident who wanted
to go to china. He was a Kharkov worker. a con-unist. lie succeeded in
getting into the Chinese Embassy here in lbscow. I. want to go to alias;
you fight the bureaucrats and build socialism, he said. They threw him
out. And the Soviet authorities did nothing to him. showing how uncon-

cerned they are. ‘

[Question] For once, then. Soviet propaganda achieves unanieity‘!

[Answer] It is not this. There is lack of credibility also regarding
the rsgine'a propaganda concerning China. In fact, the Russians know very
little about the Chinese reality; their judgments are often sore esotional
than rational. The average Soviet citizen imagines two kinds of Chinese:

the fanatic Maoist. capable of anything, and all the others, who make the
Russians ask how they can be so patient. Thus with the for-er obsessed.

the latter submissive, when the order cones to attack the USSR, no one
will draw back.

[Question] And who do the Russians think would win the war?

[Answer] A very bitter story says: Our regime is powerful but if we were
to be invaded by a billion Chinese how could they build enough concentra-

tion casps to hold them all?

COPYRIGﬂT: 1978 LA STAHPA S.p.A.

6034
C50: 3101.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

ROY HEDVBDl-IV CNARCBS DISTORTION OF HIS POSITION
Turin LA STANPA in italian 26 Jan 79 p 3 [.0

[Open letter from dissident Soviet historian Roy liedvedev: "I. The.
Dissident in the USSR Today")

[Text] Dear editor, some weeks ago the American sagazine newsman pub-
lished a distorted version of my article "Khrushchev in Retirement."
written 2 months previously for u 8100A. However, not only does NEHSHEEK
fail to make any reference to your paper, but it clains to have come into
possession of an unpublished SMIZDAT document. circulating clandestinely
in Moscow. In the editorial cosssent it adds, moreover, that the article
was written on the basis of conversations with meebers of Khrushchev's

faaily. Those were not my sources: I am not acquainted with the Ihrush-
chov family.

My relations with foreign correspondents in Moscow are in general good.
however. it often happens to many Jounalists that they "forget." This

also happens with certain Hestern editors. I have just received from

France a few copies of ay book. "The October Revolution." The flyleaf
states that the author was held in a psychiatric hospital for 2 years as

a punishment for his dissident activity and that his first work. "Staliniss,"
appeared thanks to sstorial in the Kremlin's secret archives. Unfortunately
I do not have access to the Kremlin and it was sy brother. Zhores. subse-

quently deprived of his Soviet citizenship and now living in exile in
London, who was held in an ssylus.

in 1972 an editor of the American edition of "Stslinism" went one better:
he said that I managed to write it thanks to the influence which I enjoy
through "two or three" Politburo sembers." It is a pity that he did not
name them. I would have approached then immediately. seeing as it was
precisely on account of that book that i was expelled from the party. in
which I was told by everyone that l was totally alien to the CPS!) line.

Whom do I represent in sy country? i as often asked this question by
fellow countrymen and foreignern, sometimes politely and sometimes not.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Solzhenitsyn has said a number of times that I am the spokesman for a

small group of old Bolsheviks. lie is partly correct. When i started to
work in the social sciences it was a group of party veterans who liked

to call themselves "old Bolsheviks" who acquainted me with their recollec-
Lionu and their records. 11|ere are few of them left now. Later I was
helped by literary and scientific intellectuals who do not think in the same
way as that Russian emigree, who wrote: "Our government is .cdiocre. like
the people. The majority of people do not need anything. Television.
vodka. a few diversions and they are happy. “they do not need any democrati-
zation" [NOVOYE RUSSKOYE SLOVO 15-18 May 197‘].

Evun someone like Aleksandr ‘i'vardovskiy was of a different opinion. And
aithumgh some militant dissidents both at home and in emigration accused
him of opportunism in some cases. I am convinced that both as poet and as
NOWY MIR editor he did more for the development of social awareness in the
Soviet Union than several Grigorenkos. This does not imply denying that
our intellectuals have any faults. but recognising that only the best of
them can extricate the country from its cultural and economic stagnation.

Some party leaders assigned to ideological problems have been insisting
with particular determination for some time that an and be put to sy
activity. which is allegedly destroying the image of "developed socialism”
created by propaganda. But I do not believe that there is any real "model"
in our country.

That is not enough for Solzhenitsyn, however: lie is indignant that Roy
Medvedev defends the very idea of socialism. because, according to him and
his old friend A. Shafaryevich. there are no acceptable "models" and nor
can there be a socialism "with a human face." Solzhenitsyn. who shows that
he has the same idea of the term "dissident" as he does of the titles
"Artist of the Soviet people" of "Hero of Socialist Labor." believes that
i run no personal risks. The poet ileum Korzhavin does not agree. insofar
as he writes that. through my claim to be a more socialist socialist than
the regime. i an automatically aspiring to take its place.

I do not know whom of the two to heed: Until 1975 i was persecuted with
threats of arrest and other methods. charges were laid against me. people
came to question me, i was sulmsoned to KGB and prosecuting attorney interro-
gations. Then the repression diminished. but was stepped up again last
year. As a result Solzhenitsyn does not criticize me any more. Now he
attacks the Hestern system of life. its "unlimited" freedoms, with greater
aggressiveness than Soviet propaganda. Thus he has become a double dissi-
dent. both soviet and American.

Some dissidents consider me i-oral. indeed. during the sixties i did
criticize historian Petr Yakir and former general Grigorenko; I also publicly
expressed my disagreement with certain articles by Sakharov and Solzhenitsyn.
Even the regime regards me as lateral. inasmuch as i have criticized not
only Stalin and Krhshchev but also sometimes Lenin and Brezhnev.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In general dissidents believe that they cannot be criticized because

they are under pressure from the regime. But the regime also believes that
it in turn cannot be criticized, because it is under pressure from imperi-
nlinm. In both casen. whoever fails to follow their logic is in fact
colluding with the enemy: In the dissidents' case. the regime and in the
regime's case. the dissidents.

Among the People

Obviously under such conditions it is difficult to retain one's independence
of assessment and judgment.

On my military document I am registered with the rank of senior lieutenant
[tenente maggiore] in the reserves. But for some reason some dissidents
or senidissidents say that I am at least a KGB colonel. 0n the birthday
of the author‘ N. some Leningrad writers and scientists took me to a
quiet house. Then they asked me to talk to top KGB chief Yuriy Andropov
to obtain better prison treatment for their friends H. Haramain and

h. (Jeyfits) [name as published-~FBIS]. In exchange they undertook not to
raise any protest about the case. I replied that I had never met with
Andropov in my life and that it should have been clear to anyone that I
would not have the slightest chance of submitting any petition to him.
they did not believe me. Immediately after this conversation (Jeyfits)
received a tough sentence, Harsmtin was released on probation and went to
France. where he edits a new emigree magazine, ECO [name as published--
F318]. I think Maramain is fully aware that he never needed my protection.

A not inconsiderable number of misunderstandings stem precisely from the
casual nature of certain reporting. I have a very common Russian surname:
In Italian I would be called Orsi [Bears--FBIS]. Hy Christian name. on the
other hand, is rather unusual. But if articles appear in the press signed
just with the surname Hedvedev they can be wrongly attributed. I have just
been told that Polish dissidents were filled with indignation when they
heard an article by "Hedvedev." which approved of the Harsaw Pact troops'
invasion of Czechoslovakia, broadcast by Radio Free Europe. Obviously the
article was not by me. As later became clear, it was written by a NOVOSTI
editor with the same surname as I. I could mention several similar cases.

I decided to devote my life to social sciences and politics when I was lb
and I have never changed my mind. I qualified for university teaching in
philosophy. but I worked for a long time as an elementary school teacher
and headmaster. This made it possible for me to come to know people
close to.

Now, just as when I was not a dissident. I receive visits from many people.
I am pleased when I can offer them some help or advice. albeit limited to
my small resources. Despite this, some people arrive with strange ideas
of what I can do.

25
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An engineer from Odessa asked me to help him regain title over two
important shipbuilding patents. A geologist did the same. They prompted
me to study unpublished theories on schizophrenia. I had :0 confess my
impotence and ignorance with respect to such problems.

A young lady teacher from Vologda asked me to introduce her to a foreigner
so she could marry him and thus go abroad with him. She wants to go to
the Heat without. however, resorting to marrying s Jew. as her sister did.
Unfortunately. all the foreigners i know are already married and i would
not like to jeopardize their family unity.

On her departure for the United States an elderly lady asked me to accompany
her in search of furs and jewels to take away with her. She had large
quantities of Soviet cash available and knew that rubles are worthless in
the United States. it took me some time to make her understand that i know
nothing about commerce.

A leading scientist suggested to me one day that I organize a clandestine
printing works. he said that the necessary materials were already avail-
able in his institute. All that was missing were the manuscripts for
printing. 1 rejected his proposal. I also rejected a proposal from three
officials of the NKVD. the political police of the Stalin period, then
retired. They offered to print thousands of copies of my Samisdat writings,
to be distributed throughout Moscow via paper bombs [bombe-csrte] installed
on the roofs of central buildings. They left as disappointed as the two
fellows who sought my cooperation in kidnaping the secretary of the local
party committee and to secure in exchange for his release the release of
several jailed dissidents.

The Soviet Union is big and complex. And it can create special problems
for one such as myself. apart from the expected problems.

Some years ago a fairly famous poet called Naum Korzhavin emigrated from

the USSR. in general, we liked his poems. While still in his homeland
Korzhavin underwent a complex politic—Z .. thlvu. iie himself recounted
how he would consult with the NKVD. Then. still in Stalin' a lifetime, he
wrote an anti-Stalinist poem and ended up in exile. As soon as he was
rehabilitated the poet did not restrict himself to backing the resolutions
of the 20th and 22d CPSU Congresses: he also tried to reassess our past

and his own personal past. The only book of his poetry published officially
in Moscow included one called "Commissars of the Twenties." it was a
romantic image of the Bolshevik commissars of the twenties, who "descended

into the shadow of the thirties."

"The commissars of the twenties: If remember them from the thirtiea.l
You guided me. you people of steel. you repelled every evil...."

They are modest verses. but for us they had a personal value. My father
was one of those commissars. At the end of the twenties he held the rank

of regimental commissar. In 1938 he was arrested; he died in a Kolyma
concentration camp. 2
6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Revolut ion

New Korzhavin is no longer a romantic. in the article "Roy Hedvedev's
pluralisn" he mocks the "Commissar Origins" of Roy Hedevedv. "whose father.

like his friends, gaily pushed Russia into the abyss" in 1917 IROVOYB
RUSSKOYE SLOVO 2 April 1976].

i would like to make a small observation. In l9l7 my father was not a
commissar: He was a starving orphan in the city of Astrakhan. The follow-
ing year he did not go to serve in the army for a "connisaar's fat allowance"
but out of a feeling of justice and solidarity with poor people. My nether
cones from a Jewish family with several children and has never lived in
Russia. but in Georgia. 1 have reason to believe that even Korzhnvln knows
what little reason the Jews had for sympathizing with Russian tsarism.

history knows many changes. There were also commanders and coumlassrs.
sons of poor peasants. who set themselves at the head of armed detachments
to prevent the starved peasants from reaching the railroad stations. That
was in 1932-1933. My father was not one of them. And I never had the time
to ask his what he thought and knew of those tragic events.

l an called a Marxist. Bolshevik. Leninist. Jeffersoaian and Khrushcheviaa.
Without special qualifications, 1 would only accept the first definition.

1 regard it as natural for a personification of scientific. ideological and
ethnicsl trends to take place in the first instance. That shows the
acknowledgement of the merits of a founder of a way of thinking. But it
cannot be eternal. The ideas which bear the nose of whoever expressed
than first become a religion or a dogmatic code of moral rules. Scientific
trends must not become new sciences. which must not necessarily take this
or that name. Therefore I describe myself as simply a socialist. Nor do

i intend to discuss here and now how I view socialism.

But no historian. no western politician can ignore the complex history of
the Russian revolution. it is an experience which must he understood and
not merely rejected. if we really have the Heat’s future at heart.

I think you and I send you my best regards.

[Signed] Roy Hedvedev.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Editr. LA STAHPA S.p.A.

680: 3105 END

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY