APPROVID FOR R.L.A.-: 2007/08/00: cIA-RDP02-00000R000100040040-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040046-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8410
20 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 16/79)

EL S.‘]()N41'FNJBIJ<ZAKTTCJ¥1$ REENEAJRCNI SINOVN(JE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040046-8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information priurily frost foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fro- naws agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original intonation was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sun-arised or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or trensliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion curl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. lines within items «n as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Govern-ent.

COPYRIGlT MRS AND REGULATIORS MINING mRSIIIP OF
MATERIALS 113me “RED! mum THAT DISSBMI'NATION
OP TRIS PUBLICATION 38 33mm MOFPICIAL USE ONLY.
roa‘ orr'xcm. use puma

JPRS won:
20 April 1!

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(rouo 16/79)

Conn-ms

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

PFLP leader Calls for Progressive Alliance To Oppose
Autonomy Project
(George Hubssh Interview; tin-um summer,

2-8 m 79) ssssssseossssssssssssssssssssssssoosooo

'Arnfst mpounds natal: Politics]. Positions
(hair 'Arsfnt Interview; was?" mummy,
23 hb‘l m 79) ss-ssssssossessssssesesessssssesss

mc Fail To Heal Rift in Palestinian Insdership
(AL-Wm “F'MI, 2'8 Feb ’3) esssssessesosseese

IRAQ

Reporter Investigates Iraqi Positions on Arab Issued
(Hn'il Rsth; ALPHWALJARABI, 23 ssh-1 In: 79).

“ROCCO

Journal Carries Interview With Essen Aide on Sahara
Problem

(Alma Reds Guedirs Interview; JEUIIB AFRIQUB,

h A“. 79) noossosoooossosssosenescence-enooooosouoo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

PPLP LEADER CALLS FOR PROGRESSIVE ALI-WE 10 OPPOSB AMONG“ PROJECT
Paris AL-RATAN AL-‘ARADI in Arabic 2-8 Mar 79 pp 16-17

[Interview with Dr George Rabash about Palestinian unity, situation in
Lebanon and events in Iran: ”I An Calling for Progressive Alliance To
Confront Hostile Plans and Foil Autonoey Project; Popular Front Stands in

One Trench Hith All Factions of Resistance in Spite of Differences"; tine
and place not giveg7

1?ext7 In the course of investigating the positions of the factions of the
Palestinian resistance at this turning point in time which is characterized
by changes in Iran whose final inpact has not yet been felt. AL-UATAN Ab-

AMBI conducted this interview with Dr George llabesh. the secretary general
of the PPLP.

The interview consisted of a review of recent develop-eats. Dr uabash
began the interview by presenting his evaluation of the preliainary results

of the Iranian revolution and its effects on the Palestinian question and
the Arab region.

Ila said. "The revolution has brought about the crushing defeat of a
reactionary regine that was endorsed by international inperialiso as an
agent for its business and an executive agent for its plans not only in
Iran, but also in the entire Gulf area. The collapse of the regine and its
institutions constitutes the collapse of an imrtant executive tool whose
use isperialise has had for a long ties. It was able through this regine
to plunder the resources of the Iranian people and to use the Iranian Any
against liberation sovenents. Inparislisa has lost one of its significant
geographic. econoaic. political and nilitary strategic spots.

“The victory of the uprising dealt a aorta). blow to local aonopolies that
were under the control of the Zionist nova-eat which is allied with inter
national capitalist nonopolies. me Zionist novenent thus lost an isportant
position which it had used for a long tine to plunder the funds of the
Iranian masses and to serve the Zionist entity in occupied Palestine."

Blaborating upon what has already been said, Dr George Babash thought that
as a result of the Iranian uprising the reactionary ilperislist Zionist
alliance did lose a crucial link in its series of links. and that this has

led to an upset in the other links}.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although the governsent of the shah represented a natural ens-y. threatening
even conservative regiles through its ambitions in the Gulf. Dr George habash
thinks that the collapse of the shah's govern-eat has ends the conservative

regimes lune an'allied silitary and an econosic base. and that this is asking
thee sense iapending danger.

The Loss for Israel

um. regard to how this is affecting Israel. Dr George habash said. "The
Zionist entity. which for years gone by had considered the sheh'a regiss
and institutions to be centralized points for striking at the progressive
forces and regiaes in the Arab area. tresbled at the victory which reaoved
these centers. 11.. Zionist entity lost a basic source of oil, and it also
lost a fundaasntal base that it had used for a long tine to train its
ailitary cadres. It lost an iaportant intelligence center.

The fact is that in spite of their strategic isportance. the source of
Zionist alert is not confined to these aspects; it rather transcends then
to the other political and noral aspects which are represented in the aajor
thrust towards the Palestinian revolution and the question of Palestine.
The reins of this trust were loosened by the victory of the Iranian people.

Dr George habash analyzed the directions of the inediate steps that were
taken by the united States to deal with this. This was done by scans of

air force reviews and the expeditious dispatch of weapons to acne regimes
that were in league with the United States. he expressed his opinion that
these seasures will not be the only alternatives. and that other alternatives
will be proposed. These will focus on the scans of restoring the bases

and the allied entities that have been torn down. These alternatives will
have a basic position at Can David between the representatives of the United
States, of the Egyptian regiae and of the Zionist entity.

Dr Habash deduces free: this that signing the sepsrate peace between al-Sadat's
regiae and the Zionist entity has becoae one of i-perialias's urgent demands.

He went on to say:

"This will have a Iajor imact on the area. it will quickly place historical
responsibilities before the Arab progressive forces to confront the alliance
that is being railroaded in spite of the Arab leases.

It is thus that the historical responsibility which is being borne by the
Arab progressive forces coapcls then to gather the new factors of thﬁs
memos and use then advantageously to develop their own alliance to confront
these plans."

Results of National Council Meeting

[Question-[- You case out of the 16th session of the National Council without
electing a new executive connittee. Hhat has the course of Palestinian
national unity achieved?

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Xnuwuj7 The National Palestinian Council case out of its l‘th session
with sose positive results. It approved a political program that was agreed
upon by all the factions. It also approved an organizational prograa that

detersined the organizational principles and bases for front action within
the liberation organization.

But the council failed to elect a new executive connittee. and this nade

our Palestinian and Arab nasses look with anxiety at the contradiction
between the positive results that were previously sentioned and this negative
result. Hence. the council's failure to elect a new executive connittee was
a clear indication of what we have always said about the need to continue

the struggle to solve the problems that pertain to the establishment of a
national unity on sound bases.

Building Palestinian national unity cannot be carried out unless two basic
factors are closely connected.

The first factor consists of an accurate, theoretical view of the bases and

principles of the unity-of the national and progressive forces during the
stage of national liberation.

The second factor consists of establishing and applying scientific standards
that must be used to esti-nte the balances of power and their proportionality
among the factions of the Palestinian revolution.

with regard to the first factor there are bases Z;nd principle§7 recorded
in the council's programs and resolutions which we consider sound and
scientific. But these bases jibe principle§7 become nere ink on paper
(as happened in the lbth session) in the absence of the second factor.

L6uestiog7 how are the nenbers of the National Council selected?

authority in the liberation organization. and this sakes the selection of
its nesbers a sensitive and an inportant process. But we do not yet know
of the existence of standards to select or elect its members. and this makes

the application of sound organisational bases a difficult if not an inpossible
operation.

[Knewer7 The Palestinian National Council is the highest legislative

We Are in One Trench

[aucstiqn7 How is work carried out in the institutions and departments
of the organization?

Lanwe§7 There are no standards for front-line action within these depart-ents
and institutions. and this sakes building national unity in the revolution'e
infrastructures a difficult. in fact. an alsost inpossible case. Therefore.

we believe that establishing and applying sound scientific standards to
evaluate the balances of power on the Palestinian scene and relying on

sound organizational principles will put the process of building national
unity on the right track.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
E'OR ul’l-‘ICIAL USE ONLY

The fact that there are three Palestinian organisations outside the franework
of the executive coaaittee end the fact that seat of the organisations

rennin outside the organization‘s depart-ants and institutions cannot possibly
he an indication of a sound direction for building national unity.

He will continue to fight on the popular and on the political leVel to
correct the picture and to bring about progress in building national unity.
But I would like to indicate clearly that the popular front stands in one
trench with all the factions of the revolution to confront the conspiracies
of the inperisliat. Zionist and reactionary enesies regardless of the
differences between us about the organizational question.

The Autono-y Conspiracy

[Questioé7 The autonomy project on the Heat Bank and the Case Strip is
a conspiracy whose purpose is to strike at the Palestinian Revolution and
liquidate the question of Palestine. What do you think are the neans of
fighting this project?

[Answer7 The autonony project is in fact the neat dangerous episode of the
direct_ conspiracy against the question of Palestine at this stage. The
project is tied. on the one hand, to the Casp David agree-ant. and. on the
other hand. the leaders of the Zionist entity regard it as ”their project"
for solving the question of Palestine.

He cannot talk about fighting this project in isolation from the general

and coaprehensive confrontation of the reactionary, Zionist. iaperialist
plots in the area. In spite of the project's specificity and the necessity
to have a special plan to confront it. it is tied to inperialisu' a sore
comprehensive plan. Therefore. the resistance' a own program lust necessarily
be tied to the conprehensive confrontation progrsn.

The general outlines of the confrontation program lie in the progra-s of

the Arab and Palestinian progressive and national forces which opposed the
Camp David agreeaent: the prograa of the Steadfastness and Confrontation
Front; the Syrian-Iraqi Covenant; and the political prosraa that was recently
approved by the Palestinian National Council. not the special confrontation
will undoubtedly require detailed programs to ensure that our aasses inside
the occupied land. and basically on the Heat Bank and the Gaza Strip. will
rennin steadfast.

By steadfast. we do not seen political steadfastness only. We do neon
naterial steadfastnesa which requires dealing with the livelihood probleas
of our assses inside the country; dealing with their econonic. agricultural
and industrial problens; and dealing with their educational problena. etc.
He. therefore, think that the liberation organisation is being called upon
to draw up a detailed progrsn to solve these probleas and to adopt the
budgets that are necessary for then. The budgets that were approved by the
Baghdad Sunnit Conference in this regard will help solve these probleas and
guarantee their requiraents.

I.
roe omcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Afte; ensuring the material basis for steadfastness inside [the occupied
land]. it is our opinion that the organisations of the revolution are to
unify their popular and political efforts and to sabark upon a series of
escalating struggles to foil the project politically. The organizations

are also to unify efforts to prevent any cooperation with the advocates of
the conspiratorial project.

This. of course, is in addition to the necessity of continuing to escalate
military action against the Zionist entity. He would thus guarnatee the
failure of the project.

"The Plan Continuing in Lebanon
Lﬁuestiqﬁ7 ﬂow are latters going in Lebanon?

lﬁnswe§7 In Lebanon the separatist Zionist alliance continues to iupleaent
the plan that was drawn up by the Zionist enemy. In South Lebanon the
Zionist enemy is establishing his occupation as tine goes by and is sntrench-
ing his positions under the auspices of the agent Sa'd Haddad.

In the areas that are controlled by the separatists. preparations are

continuing to force the iaperialist Zionist project on all of Lebanon over
the long range.

In this period in particular U. 8. imperialism is holding on to the Lebanese
card as a scene of exerting pressure on the Syrian regime. on the Palestinian
resistance. on the Lebanese_National Hove-ant and on all the forces that

are opposed to Caap David Lin an attenpt t§7 exhaust then.

He think that confronting the separatist Zionist plot is the function of

the lebanese masses in their battle. As far as the south is concerned, it
is the duty of Arab progressive forces to take a responsible position in
view of the establish-ent of the Zionist occupation of this part of our Arab

hoaeland. It is in this context that the Palestinian revolution can play
its historical role.

COPYRIGHT: 1971 ALPHATAN AL-ARABI

8592
C80: 6802

5
FOR ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

'ARAFAT “POUNDS PATAH POLITICAL POSITIONS
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 23 Feb-l Mar 79 pp 16-18

[Interview with Yasir ‘Arafst by Shefiq al-Hut: "'Arafat Defines Position
of Palestinian Resistance on Klsoseyni's Revolution. Dialogue with Jordan,
Casp David. the United States and France; Our Relationship Hith Revolution-
aries of Iran Goes Back Many Years: 0.8. Intelligence Conspired To Kill
Abu Hanan; the Pact ‘l'hst Iraq Joined Confrontation States Cowensetes Arabs

for Egypt's Teaporary Departure; France Retreeted Pros De Ceulle's Palestinian
Position Under u.s. Pressure27

[13:57 This is the second tine for AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI to initiate a
dialogue with Mr Yasir 'Arafat. Without defining his [official] capacity

it say be very difficult to distinguish between lir Yasir 'Arafat the chair-
san of the PLO and Mr Yasir 'Arefat the leader of Fatah. This is because
the dividing line between the responsibilities of the two cousnda disappears
and vanishes in any vital occasions in view of the influence exercised by
Fatah in guiding the PLO and in view of the logic of things. which does not
accept duality on the revolutionary scene.

Major and significant events have taken place. and very significant develop-ants
have occurred since the interview which AL-HA‘i'All Ala-'ARABI conducted 8 sonths
ago with Abu 'A-ar.

During this period al-Sadat signed the Cap David accords alone, challenging
30 years of strategic Arab solidarity around the question of Palestine.

During this period the Pan-Arab Front for Steadfastness and Confrontation
was formed; the historic agree-eat between Syria and Iraq took place; and

the National Action Covenant was issued by thes_to achieve unity. These
months also witnessed the Baghdad Arab Su-it Laseting7 and its success

in spite of the fact that bets were nade c1")ut the inpossibility of convening
it. Bets were then made while it was in session that it would fail.

During this period a proninent Arab leader who was one of the biggest allies
of the Palestinian revolution departed iron the Arab hosaland. [this Arab

leader is] President houari Boundiene. During this period the people's
revolution in Iran led by Ayatollah Kohneyni was victorious. It thrust

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

onto the scene in the Hiddle Bast variables that were turning Iran into a
reinforcement factor for the Palestinian revolution. Consequently. it
encouraged the confrontation canp against the capitulatory progress.

In view of these variables from which the Palestinian revolution was not
divorced--in fact it any have inherently assumed the opinions of Abu ‘Nlaar _
either as chairman of the PLO or as leader of Fateh—ithe revolution acquired/
special significance in a period characterized by a review of considerations
by all the parties.

The text of the interview that was carried out with hr Yasir 'Arafat follows.

Those who know Abu'A-ar closely. and especially those who live with hits

day and night, are saying that he has not yet recovered from the wound he
received when Abu llesen was killed. Abu “seen was like a son to him; indeed.
he was "his dearest son" as Abu 'Aalaar says whenever soaeone mentions

Abu "seen in his presence. It is known that Abu Essen was the only one

of his colleagues who called Abu 'Anar, Father.

Nevertheless. when I set his to record this interview. which was. as usual.
coapleted in interrupted stages. his face was radiant; his eyes were shining;
and his face was sailing. That was on the evening of 10 February. he had
just finished a telephone conversation with the headquarters of Ayatollah
Khoaeyni in Tehran. and he appeared to be confident that the revolution
there would be victorious in spite of the danger of these hours which pre-
ceded the settlenent of the battle on the aorning of the following day.

I did not want to spoil his joy. but I was not able to hide .1 concern and
lay apprehension about the gloomy acts of fate that lay hidden beyond these
hours. I found ayself. in spite of myself. saying:

Khoneyni Hill "in

[Questiog/ Soue are blaaing Fatah and are blaaing you in particular for
rushing into a public declaration of your position on the Iranian revolution.
If Khoneyni fails, this could bring about negative reactions that would

have designs on the Palestinian revolution.

lle replied inediately and confidently.

LXnm57 Don't worry. Kinneyni will win. They have inforaed me that
they were turning everything in the streets of Tehran into barricades and
that the people have taken up area.

I thought he would not say any more in response to say question. but after
finishing a nutter of telephone calls that lasted over an hour. he case
hack and he said:

Linme57 Those who accuse Patah of revolutionary ventures do not understand
Fatah and do not understand the revolution. They think that we discovered

7
Fox onrcm. use 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Iranian revolution the day they heard about it in the newspapers some
months ago. because they do not know how deep and how old is our relation-
ship with this revolution. Some of then did not understand the secret behind
my participation 2 years ago in eulogizing one of the men of this revolution.
lie was 'Ali Shari'ati in the al-‘Amiliyah School in Beirut. Some of then
attacked me under the slogan of secularism. But Fatah, which came into being
against the Zionist conquest to liberate our people and our honaland. will
remain loyal to all those in the world who have been vanquished. They can
be of any religion or of any color as long as they are fighting for their
freedom and their dignity against subjugation.

Therefore, our relationship with the Iranian revolution and its man goes
back many years. He used to offer its young man. its leaders and its
advocates everything we could. He were on their side because this is how
we understand revolutionary solidarity. It is a question of principle
before being one of profit and loss. At the same time they were with us in
the trenches of the battle and the holy war; they fought with us and they
died with us. They were with us in Europe in their legions; everywhere
they were found, they suffered with us.

Abu 'Amaar stopped talking for a while. and then he resumed his conversation:

Fighting against Zionism and colonialism is not a mere matter of words to

be spoken or slogans to be painted on walls. Fighting Zionists and colonialism
is a mtter of action and movement. One who knows the conditions of the
deposed Shah's Iran realizes what kind of stronghold of colonialism has
collapsed.

The conversation was interrupted for a moment when Abu Jihad entered _/_the
room] and Abu 'Asmar added with a chuckle:

Here is our brother Abu Jihad who would rush to the South Pole to help and
to offer whatever assistance he can if_he_hears about a revolution there.
This is just; it is right; and it is 1003/ duty. We have found and we
are still finding those who help us and support our revolution.

_I_Questiog/ Although the revolution's position on the Camp David accords

and your statments and struggles against these two agreements are clear.

we would like to have your appraisal of what the course of this capitulatory
settlement has achieved.

LAnswag/ At the beginning we met affirm the principle behind our position
as a revolution and as a people: we are rejecting this course completely
in for: and in substance. when we announced our position the parties of
Camp David thought they might be able to find substitutes for us. But then
they were confronted with the firm nationalistic position in the areas

that were occupied in 19“. Prodded by their Palestinian nationalism they
took part in rejecting any agreement or solution that did not guarantee

our national rights and was not agreed upon with the PLO in its capcity as

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the sole legitimate representative of the people of Palestine. The Americans.
Israel and al-Sadat were not able to sake a single Palestinian citizen budge
from the position that was declared by the PLO. Purthermcre. our sasaes
escalated their struggles on all levels and by different means. until there
was no longer any room [jot the§7 in the enemy's jails. All the methods

of subjugation. terror and torture-and all this was attested to by

Miss Johnson, the foaer consular charge d'affaires at the 0.8. Consulate

in Jerusalen-did not dissuade a single fighter from his nationalist position.

Our time boob which blew up in the faces of the Camp David trio is made up
of our great people in the occupied land. This was the first blow that was
dealt to the parties of Camp David on the Palestinian scene. Then the blows
that were dealt to then on the Arab scene succeeded each other. These began
with the creation of the Arab Front for Steadfastness and Confrontation;
then case the Syrian-Iraqi agreement, the Joint National Coamunique and
recently, not finally. the Baghdad Arab Suamit.

[ﬁnestion7 Hhat was the most recent blow?

He replied with a smile that covered his face:

1Knswe§7 Even though.... The revolution in Iran.

£5ueatio§7 would you tell us soae details about the Arab blows?

[Answegl He will return to this in a while. but let me now discuss the
blows that fell on the Camp David accords on the international scene. First,
in spite of treaendous American pressure there was no enthusiasm for these
two agreements at the United Nations because there is a unanimity there that
overlooking the question of Palestine and not establishing a solution to it
will not bring peace to the area. The European Common Market bloc. which

is allied to the United States. had the seas reaction. Afterwards we find
that the bloc of non-aligned countries, the Islamic bloc and the African
group were clearer in their position: they saw no alternative to the need
to guarantee Palestinians their national rights as a basic condition for

any political solution that ensures the safety of the area and the survival
of this peace. The positions of the Soviet Union and of the socialist
countries are known and so are the UN resolutions. Today the Aaericao are
working on two conflicting courses: the first calls for expedition in sign-
ing the Egyptian-Israeli pact and the other cells for waiting. because a
treaty that is not worth the ink and the paper it is written on would be

of no use.

0

[ﬁuestioﬁ7 Let us now return to the political talk on the Arab scene.

[Answegl You know and everyone knows that ever since it came into being
Patah has used one criterion for its relationship with others: it is their
position on the Palestinian question, the Palestinian revolution and the
organization that represents the Palestinian people. Support for Palestine

9
FOR OFFICIAL use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is no longer merely a theoretical position. especially when we talk about
brothers. The support that is expected free every Arab country differs in
quality end in quantity iron the support that is expected free any African
or hurpean nation. because the pan-Arab nature of the question and our
cosmn Arab destiny requires the magnitude and the kind of support to us
to he cnuensurnte with our national faith and the relationship of destiny
that holdu us together.

This is a matter of principle. we had to refer to it so that we would not
lose ourselves in details. in passing events or in the negative ataosphere
that any soaetiass cone over the Arab ncene. Therefore. after al-Sadat
dissented tron the pun-Arab course. and after his serious renunciation of
the pan-Arab question. it was natural for the Arab psyche to be shaken and
for the Arab countries-«rt least scene of the-«to begin confronting the
new situation that disturbed the balance of power.

it is self-evident that we were aaong the first to undertake this course.

The innediate reaction was the pan-Arab gathering that convened in Tripoli.
in Algiers and then in Damascus. It later becaae known as the National

Front for Steadfastness and Confrontation. in the course of the converse-
tion here I would like to aention with all loyalty and gratitude the role

of the late President. [Bug brother Ilouari bouudiene. People near and

far know how close he was to our revolution. lie had a basic role in the
context of the front. and his ideas and opinions were extreaely important
and strategically far-sighted. Of course. we aentioned Boueediene in partic-
ular because he is now in the eras of God and we owe it to bin to raaed‘er
his and also to reauber the role of the other brothers who are leaders

of the countries that participated in establishing this front. lie are hoping
to stiaulate the role of the front after our brothers in Algiers settle
their affairs.

After that. in view of the universality of the ieperialist-zionist-el-Sadst
attack. we had to sake sore effort to gather and to stabilize the Arab

ranks. The Syrian-Iraqi agree-ant fulfilled a hope that any faithful people
have been striving for for a long tile. Our confidence in the ability of
our nation increased when the two fraternal countries took their step toward
unity in the Joint National Covenant. There is no doubt that the fact that
fraternal Iraq did join the confrontation countries gave us a significant
strategic depth and coapcnsated us to a large degree for the departure of
Egypt free the scene of struggle-oa departure we hope will be teqorsry.

But the surprise that astonished Hashington in particular was the fact that
the Arab Su-it Conference had convened in Baghdad. Heshington did not
believe that the sue-it would take place without al-Sadat's regile. when
the conference did convene. Hashington thought that the unit would explode
[roe the inside and that the Arab countries would not agree on a aini-na
prograa to confront Csnp David. But what did happen and did surprise Hash-
ington was the fact that the conference was not only convened but that it
adopted imrunt resolutions. 0n the Palestinian question Arabs cannot be
classified into aoderates and extreainsts. Within certain limits all Arabs
cannot but agree.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ll. 8. policy is so stupid when it imagines that there is one Arab official
who would. for exanple. accept Jerusalem's threat. I an saying. for example.
and the fact is the the Camp David accords--in fact. everything in the

chap David accords--canot he accepted by any honest Arab. These two agree-
nents deprive ligypt even of its independence. He not bear in aind that
with these two agreements the United States went beyond the liait even with
its Arab allies. Today. the talks are faltering over the priority of
Egyptian conitnent and whether this priority belongs to Egypt's comitaents
to agreements it node with the Arabs or to its agreeaent with the Zionist
eneay. The only thing that the Caap David parties offered to the people of

Palestine was a new slavery which they are being asked to legitiaise and
to accept.

I will say one nore tine that u.s. policy is so stupid! It considered

lan Saith's black najority project in Rhodesia unacceptable and at the

ease tine it was offering the people in Palestine what is less than Bantustan.
I would like to say here that the Baghdad Suauit was a painful blow to the
capitulatory settlenent project. Its resoltuione curbed, even to none
extent, this declining course in the policy of the Egyptian regime. But

this does not mean that we are satisfied with this linit of joint political
action. we all know the capabilities and the resources of our nation: these
have not yet been used. Our nation has the weapon of oil. and it has petro-
leua funds; it has nuaeroue people: it has a strategic location; it has

other natural resources: and it has everything so as to iapose its will in
peace and in war.

Our Relations With Bearded Are laproving

[Buestiog7 Prior to the suit conference in baghdad, relations between
sone Palestinian organizations and sons Arab capitals were overcast. what
effect did the suaaait conferences have on these relationships?

LAnsweﬂ The fact is that before the Baghdad Su-it all Arab relations
were overcast and tense. But the conference dispelled sany of these clouds
and relaxed nsny of these tensions. The st-osphere today is not like it
used to be; it is beconing clearer and better. Take for exalsple the change
that has cone over relations between Syria and Iraq-whet they were and
what they've becone and the effect of this change on national action.
Likewise. the relations of our brothers in denocratic Yenen with nueeroua
Arab countries have also iaproved and continue to iaprove.

As far as 5...- relntiong] in Fatah with the brothers in tree are concerned.
the naghdnd Su-it was a suitable occasion to turn over the page that was
not in the interests of all of us and to turn Linsteag] to a new page of
nutual cooperation and agree-eat. Today we are continuing our contacts with
our brothers in Baghdad in order to further and to strengthen this coopera-
tion and this agree-eat. we would sention that Brother Abu al-Lutf. the
foreign affairs official in the liberation organization. had visited Baghdad
alaust 2 aonths ago and that his visit was fruitful and beniicial.

11
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Iwortance of Dialogue with Jordan

mucutien-I What about "slestinian-Jordanian relations? Much has been
said abou this subject. especially at the last National Council. Have you
reached an agreenen_t_7 on a united position with all the brothers?

[A'nsweﬂ Political struggle nust not be held back by enotlon no setter

how severe the wounds end how painful the senories. In the course of our
struggle to foil the Anerican-Iarseli-al-Sadat settlesent we have to sort

out and to define Arab positions. Then we have.to strengthen those positions
that oppose this settleaent. end we have to work to change those positions
that support it. This was the starting point in the subject of resuning the
dialogue with Jordan. It is known that the Jordanian scene constitutes a
vital. an inportant and a basic geopolitical and demographic reality for

the struggle of our people. In spite of the negative factors and even the
contradictions that say cone over our relations with Jordan. we sust always
resesber this geopolitical and deeographic reality. In addition to the fact
that a large percentage of our people live in Jordan. Ila-an is our gateway

to the Heat Bank. to the Case Strip and to our occupied hossland. There-
fore, we differed with acne of our brothers who were opposed to "the principle
of talking with Jordan." we also differed in opinion about what nay be
called a frantwork for this dialogue.

I do not want to pronote nyself over others, just as I refuse to let others
presets thesselves over on. we have already taken a nunber of positions

and we have set up several agree-ants. Sons of our brothers had reservations
about these positions and these agreeaente. In fact. sons of then opposed
these positions and these agreesents and accused us of extravagances when

we undertook thee. Then the days went by. and the positions changed and
what was rejected becene acceptable. This is what happened when we signed
the Cairo Agremnt with Lebanon and when we decided to go to the united
Nations. There are other ens-plea. Brother Abu al-Lutf will soon visit
Ann to sake preparations for a visit I intend to sake afterwards.

Aserica and the Palestinian Question

Lauestioﬂ There is another subject which provoked long and heated discussion
during the last National Assedrly: it pertained to counnications with the
United States. "hat is your position on that subject?

[Answer] Thin is an old and a new question. I resenber that you asked
Ie the ease question during our last interview 7 or 8 nonths ago. no you
reader ny reply to it? Because sy reply is still the seas.

He began searching anong the pspers'that were in our hands for the for-er
answer. but Abu 'A-sar did not give us ties to find the papers. and he
said:

[Tinswer/ That' s all right. I rest-bar ey anew". The gist of it was that
the u. s. sdsinintration still forbids its esployees fro- snaking any fore-l

12
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY

contact with the PLO. I remember I said that although we are aware of the
U.S. position. which is extreaely biased towards Israel, and although we are
aware of the United States‘ imperialist policy. we do recognize at the some
tine the importance this country has in international politics. Anyone who
does not recognise this or who aininises the inportance of this role is
asking a big aistake. Therefore. we think that. first. we nust-in fact.

it is our duty-~infora the American people shout the realities of the struggle

in the area and clarify to then the political and the national goals to
achieve which we here arse.

in this context I kept the door open for every U. 8. official who wanted to
inquire and tried to understand. It was never a secret that I have received
nuaerous senators. representatives and [other7 U. S. figures. To do justice
to the truth let Ie aention that none of then were touched and were respon-
sive. They returned to the United States with points of view that were
radically different fro. those which they had,previoualy held.

As far as official coasunications are concerned. none of which has taken
place so far. we have announced repeatedly that we will always be willing

to sake such contact provided that there be no pro-conditions and that this
contact be aade publicly in front of the whole world. I think that the tiae
has cone for some of our brothers who have reservations about such political
activity to realize that dialogue does not necessarily seen accepting the
point of view of the party with when we are having the dialogue. Let us
keep in aind how aany years the secret and the public dialogue went on
between the Vietnaaeae rebels and the Americans. As far as dialogue with
the United States is concerned. there is no doubt that if it were to take
place the task will be throny and difficult. But it is our duty to explain
our question ourselves to the whole world and to try to achieve the recognition
of all the countries of the world and especially the asjor countries.

The Process of Role Distribution

jﬁuestio§7 By the way. would you consent on the stat-ants that were aade
by U.S. Aabasssdor to the United Nations Andrew Young about the necessity

of talking to the Palestinians? Some observers considered his statements
to be dalllance with the liberation organisation.

he shook his head and replied:

[Answer] Brzezinski said. "Bye bye PLO!" The U. s. State Depart-eat ignored
the nest iapudent political decision of this age. I as referring to the
resolution of the Israeli Knesset which came before the attack on South
Lebanon. The resolution called for the annihilation of the liberation
organisation and its ailitary forces and the liquidation of its political
leadership. Then Young said what he did say. This appears to be an agreed

upon distribution of roles. The U.$. adainistration may have thought that
rising such a statesent with the session of our National Council would
reduce the intensity of Palestinian wrath with its aggressive policy.

13
FOR OVPICiAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 0.8. adliniatration has lost its credibility. He all tens-bet the
aerieu of irreanlute acts by the United States which paved the way for
nl-Sndat'a visit to Jerusalea and afterwards to the Caap David accords.

There was talk about "a hoselsnd for the Palestinians" and about official
recognition of the fact that "the liberation organisation represents a
basic part of the people of Palestine. This was a joint 1!. s.-80viet
coamnique which included for the first tine U. 8. recognition of the fact
that the people of Palestine exist and that they have legitimate rights.
The 11.8. adainiatrstion took all this back until it case to the "autonoay"
joke.

After all this we no longer believe the statements that are sade by Carter's
adainistration. And here in this regard I eust raise an important question
about the role of the U. S. Central Intelligence Agency in the assassination
of the brave Palestinian leader Abu Ilasan Sale-ah by Israeli intelligence
sen or by sen free Begin's special office. Is it possible that 0.8. intelli-
gence use not connected with this criae when we knew about the strong
relationship that exists between blessed and Begin‘s office which has been
set aside for U. 3. intelligence? he are certain that Israeli intelligence.
like all the intelligence agencies of [the countries] revoling in the orbit
of the United States, receives its orders from U. 8. intelligence just as

it receives the capabilities for its support and survival.

France Retreated Pros Its Position

Eueatlop] The last question I have is about the liberation organization's
relations with the French Govern-eat in particular. whose guest recently
was Heahe Dayan.

Answer] I as very sorry about the fact that French policy is still
fluctuating in its position and has not taken on; step forward beyond the
course that had been charted by the late great Lleadeﬂ de Gaulla and

by Peapidou after his. Further-ore. it hurts as to say that there has

been some retreat with regard to the French position on the question of
Palestine, on the Palestinian revolution and on the liberation organization.
It has becoee clear to us sore than any other tile in the past that the
French position on our people is very such affected by the Alerican position,
which is ceapletely biased towards the Zionist eaeay.

It in regrettable to see France retreating fro. its independent policy to
return again to the Auction orbit. I as saying with all candor that if the
official French position continues to be what it is, the Arab nation will
be called upon by the Palestinian revolution to reevaluate its position and
It considerations with the Prenrh Governaent. Arab-French friendship cannot
continue to be one-sided. on the side of the Arabs.

1':
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this regard I would like to refer to a state-ant lads by Moshe Dayan a
few days ago. Dayan said that the govern-cot of France had talked with him
about in position vis-a-vis a Palestinian entity and not a Palestinian
utntv. So far the French have not denied thin. and I cannot isngino that
untlvru hqu rvnrhvd lhr utnuv when Duynaluuuuuwttnt orrivlal upokumuui

for the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

COPYRIGﬂT: 1979 AL-HATAN AL-ARABI

8592
080: 6802

15
FOR orncm. use 0qu
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

PNC FAILS T0 REM. RIFT IN PALESTINIAN LEADERSHIP
Paris AL-UATAN Alr'ARABI in Arabic 2-8 Feb 79 pp 27-29

Article dispatched by AL-HATAN Alr'ARABI correspondent fron Damascus:
when Hinds of Political Troubles Blow and Branches in Forest Becone
Entangled; What happened Behind Scenes of National Palestinian Council:

Probleu of Proportionste_chresentation Behind Postpone-ant of Election of
New Executive emitteeﬂl

[foxy At the bar of the Meridian Hotel which faces the building of the
(:gnernl Federation of Syrian workers. where the Palestinian National Council
[”137 was neeting in its 15th session, I overheard one of the foriegn
correspondents saying to his colleague:

"One who tries to cover news of the Palestinians finds hinaelf inadvertently
covering news of all the Arab countries. The nature of the Palestinian
question. the aultiplicity of places where Palestinians reside and the
nultiplicity of political currents along the. are naking their congresses.
in spite of their Palestinian identity. appear to be national congresses or
congresses of the Deague of Arab Nations.”

The fact is that the truth in this observation is not inconsiderable. and
it applies even to the Fatah movement which was established in 1965. This
is because the other different Palestinian factions and forces are no lore
than developed extensions of national and patriotic novanents that go back
for decades. Bven Patsh itself is not free of figures who had been subers
of son of these forces. parties and novesents before joining Patah.

Although Palestinian political state-ents are generally waited on the
principles on which Palestinian politics is based. one detects lore than
one tone when one hears those statements. There is a nationalist tone. e

Ba'athist tone, a leftist tone. an Islamic tone and a tone that say be
called. especially after this council neeting in particular. a Patah tone.

There is neither vilification nor praise in Lthis observatiog7. This is

an objective fact that was prescribed by nunerous factors: ease of these
are inherited. and sent are acquired. This is not the place for providing
details about these factors, but they do in fact exist. One who deals with
the question of the Palestinian revolution lillt inevitably take these factors
into consideration if he is striving for objectivity and reality.

16
roe orucm. use our
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The National Council chose Danascus as the site of its 14th session The

Syrian capital thus bees-e the first Arab capital to host the PNc since the
PLO cane into existence.

After the occupation of Jerusalem and Gaza it had becose custosary for the
Palestinians to convene their congresses at Arab League headquarters in
Cairo. They did not want to hurt people's feelings in the other Arab capitals.

and they wanted to avoid arousing any sensitivities. which are nuserous in
our vast Arab hoscland.

Danascus in particular was chosen after al-Ssdat's Cairo dissented from Arab
consensus. The choice was lads after the pan-Arab agreement between Iraq
and Syria. In spite of the great sateen which Palestinians have for Algeria
and the great estee- which it holds for the Palestinians, Algeria was ruled

out [as a possible sit§7 because of the death of the late houeri housediene.
This session of the PRC was named after his.

Thus there were clear and obvious shadows that loo-ed ahead for the council.
Then President Hafiz al-Ased's statement confirnee [Ehe existence q§7 these
shadows. This either urged or inspired Mr Yesir 'Arafat to tell his, as he
offered his the council's gift-a replica of the radiant rock--that the
Palestinian revolution was affirming its pan-Arab character and that it was
hoisting the flag of the Arab revolution and of Arab nationslise.

The Unity of the Resistance: an Isportsnt Indicator

The fact that President al-Asad included in his address at the opening
session on indiscriminate request to Palestinian factions to support the
lrsqi-Syrian agree-eat did attract attention.

President al-Aaad said. “The Iraqi-Syrian agree-ent needs the efforts of
all of you. It needs your protection and your increased support. The
agreesent is for all of you. for all of us and for the entire Arab nation.
It is not for individuals, for leaders or for specific groups." he said.
'hhsr brothers in [rag and we view this matter free no other franeworh than
this. Therefore. this is how you lust look at it."

This advice from President al-Asad was considered tantasount to an
acknowledge-eat of the isportance of the Palestinian revolution and of the
vitality of its role in the Arab area. It also indicated an interest in the
unity of the revolution's factions and the need to have the. settle their

differences on the nature of the lake-up of the organizations' executive
co-nlttcc.

But nobody expected this subject in particular to become critical: nobody
expected the National Council to fail in reaching an agree-eat on electing

a new executive cousittee because of a disagree-set about quotas. This is
because all the organizations had been working hard for Iany sonths and had
formulated a national unity project in two parts: political and organisational.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

since agreement upon this project was completed prior to the agreement
between Syria and Iraq, the council was careful to introduce the necessary
amendments to it before endorsing it so that the project would include
reference to the Joint National Covenant. an appraisal of it. and an
expression of its importance as a national accomplishment and n bluwark for
the Palestinian revolution.

The fact is that the Iraqi-Syrian Covenant had provided the suitable climate
for ratification of the political and organizational program to which the
factions of the resistance had agreed.

Disagreement About Proportionate Representation

There vas disagreeaent. hovever. about proportionate representation. Relying
on one of the organization's bylaws, the council was satisfied with an
endorsement of the existing executive committee as the organization‘s legiti-

mete commanding body until the council should convene again in an emergency
or a regular session. This may take place in 3 months.

This unexpected outcome, especially after the unanimous ratification of the
political program, aroused the interests of numerous political agencies
inside and outside the Palestinaien scene. There is no doubt that the Arab
citizen who is concerned about these organisational Palestinian affairs did
read analyses. Justifications and defenses that are not free from some bias
against this or the other party.

The fact is that it is very difficult to evaluate the position of every
organization and to make a judgment about it without risking being accused
of siding uith one party and not the other. There are such entanglements,
cross-purposes. analogies and incompatibilities on the Palestinian political
map that--as they say--s Moroccan astrologer would sometimes be needed to
analyze its riddles and reveal its secrets. Not everything that is known

is being said. Palestinians often disagree about what they don't say and
not about what they do say.

Let us citc an example.

The subject of Palestinian relations with Jordan took more than three
consecutive days of the council's time. More than 50 members and all the
representatives of the organizations without exception had statements about
the subject.

There would be no harm in citing another example to indicate how entangled
the branches in the Palestinian forest are. This example is from the minor
sphere of private relations between the factions.

An internal disagreement in one of the factions of the revolution. the
General Command of the PFLP. took place between the previous and the current

sessions of the National Council. As a result of this diasgreement--which

18
FOR 0F?ICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

no one was able to contain or transcend--a group seceded from the front.
Ind [its aenber§7 announced they would set up a new organization called
the Palestinian Liberation front.

This organization asked the PNC to recognize it. and the council found

itself in a dileaaa because the old organisation [i.a., the PFbEY was opposed
to recognition for the Palestinian Liberation Front and threatened to with-
draw from the PRC if the council accepted the new front in the PNC. The
seabers of the new front were threatening that denying then recognition aeant
a denial of actual national unity. They said that they would not be respon-
sible in the future for any actions they sight undertake, because they were
reaoved fro. the sphere of joint action. Try and solve this probles if you
can!

An Bxaaple Fro. the International Sphere

Froa this saall sphere we cite an exaaple from the international sphere.
This is the third exaaple of political torture on the Palestinian scene.

in the past during the days of Mao Zedong it was custoaary to sention the
People's Republic of China in the course of greeting the friends of the
revolution. But this tiae there were those who refused to greet China
because China was opposing everything the Soviets had agreed to. and it was
agreeing with everything the Soviets had opposed. China this tiae supported
the Camp David accords. and no Palestinian can consider such a position to
be that of a friend. considering the aagnitude and the kind of friendship
that existed between china and the Palestinian revolution.

"hat is to be done? And the discussion goes on: do we accept this or not?
The conferees weigh acceptance against rejection. and they ultiaately sort
out the profits fro. the losses. and so on.

I cited these examples so I can return to the subject that has attracted
everybody's attention: it is the failure to establish a new executive
coanittae that would be on a par with the ambitious unifying political pro-
gram in spite of the fact that there was agreeasnt and consensus about this
progrna.

we will he brief. and we will try to be as objective as possible.

Fatah in stating so-ething to this effect: "Now that we have agreed on a
uingle political prograa. proportionate representation in the executive
con-ittee aunt reflect the real proportions of the organization. It would
not be permissible for Fatah to be just like the other organisations when
all have acknowledged that it has been the backbone of the resistance and
that it had borne 90 percent of the burdens of the war in South [labsnoﬁ7
against Israel.”

19
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fatah becones even sore candid and states. "There is not a national front

in any revolution in the world that does_ not have a managing body. Fatah

is the nanaging body [of this revolution/ in the context of a group leader-
ship where the minority is subject to the majority. This is stipulated

in the organizational bill for national unity which has already been ratified."

03 the basis of this era ement Fatah was naking proposals to every formula
(that was being proposed to form the executive committee to ensure that
the aforementioned stateaent is realized.

Blows From Every Side

In accordance with that, most of the organizations are in agreement with
the following stateeeatx

"in spite of the prestige of Fatah. the situation requires the establish-ant
of a strong coamand that includes all the forces and sakes a new qualitative
change in Palestinian action."

They add. "As long as we have agreed on one program. why is Fatah insisting
on distinguishing itself even though‘ nothing will actually be changed or
altered by the presence of more than one of its representatives in the
committee as long as he represents Fatah and its prestige?"

On this basis representatives of the other organisations insisted with
various degrees of vehesence that it was necessary not to favor Fatah with
sore than one representative. This. of course. would be in addition to
having Abu ‘A-ar in his capacity as the leader of the revolution.

They did not agree. Their discussion lasted for a long time. and for a
long time they were engaged in conversations that muddied the waters more
than they cleared them.

rn’hen they left the old Largumentg7 and they rushed back to South Lebanon.
where sparks were warning against a new war. They went to the capital.
Beirut, to bury a brave fighter whom the Zionists were able to snare after
having pursued him for 6 years. he is the late 'Ali llasan Sela-ah.

It is unfortunate that the Arab citizen. who is not familiar with the
complexity of Palestinian action and does not care to become familiar with
it because he is only concerned about the revolution as a whole. can do no
sore than express considerable grief when he sees that the brothers in the
Palestinian cot-and have not yet taken in the significance of these blows
which they are receiving from every side.

The hope remains. however. that the brothers will return soon and they they
will detach thesselves from the atmospheres of esotionalism and rhetoric

to reconsider all their positions so as to achieve the per-anent Arab
Palestinian dress of bringing about the substantive change in their relation-
ships and in their struggles against the eneey that lies in wait for all

of then.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIM. USE ONLY

any they lvam the lesson of truth from the cotton of the council's session,
which they began with a salute to the late Noun-i Bout-adieu. and concluded
with a salute to the late Palestinian [fightef/ 'Ali "nun Salamh.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Ab-HA'I‘AN Ala-ARAB!

8592
680: 6802

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAQ

REPORTER INVESTIGATBS IRAQI POSITIONS ON AN ISSUES
Paris Ab-HATAN Ah-‘ARABI in Arabic 23 Feb-l Mar 79 p 30-31.

[Article by Ha'il Rajab: "To Thone Who Are Betting on the Shi'itee of

Iraq After the Events in Iran: There Are No Conflicts Between Religious
Feelings and Feelings of Arab Nationalism National Unity Is Strong and
Batablishnent of Constitutional Organisations Hill Make It Stronger; al-

Ba'th Party Gave Iraq Stability That Helped It Perforn Its Mission in Gulf
and in Major Houeland27

[Texg7 The alar- that was sounded by different sources in the sedia
regarding the effects of Iranian developeents and events on the Gulf area
and regarding their negative and positive inact on the neighboring countries
was one of the factors that notivated the Departlent of Investigations in
AL-HATAN AL-‘ARAII to send the colleague Ra'il Rajab to Iraq to conduct an
objective. fact-finding investigation into Iraq's position vis-a-vis what
the different media sources are describing as "the cauldron which is boiling
over with possibilities."

I was not alone in ny journey from Paris to Baghdad. I was accoqasnied

fron the very first nonent and all during the 5 hours on board the Iraqi
Airvays airplane by nunerous questions about the notive that several inter-
national nedia sources had in helping each other exaggerate the imact of
Iranian events and in singling out Iraq as the location that would be in

the spotlight. They did so in a nanner which indicated the special attention
Iran is getting free the countries of the area or fro. the international

powers that have positions of influence in the area or the leans to attslpt
to influence the course of events.

Why?
What are the strategic natives and considerations that lie behind this?

These were difficult questions that Iraqis. especially concerned officials
and ordinary citizens. had to respond to. The proverb states. "The ovner
of the house knows best what is in it."

22
FOR. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And thus the question that I raised here and there was this:

what are the factors that lie behind this foreign interest in Iraq? what
are the natives behind giving expression to this interest, which emphasizes
linking develop-eats, possibilities, Iraq's vital strategic location, its
nilitary capabilities, its oil resources, its human capabilities and its
role in shaping prevailing trends in the area?

The objective and comprehensive reply to this question nay lie in what an
informed source stated; he turned the spotlight on the aspects of the subject
when he said:

"There are several and numerous factors that lie behind the interest in Iraq.
Two vital and isportant matters are anong then.

"The first is that the regine in Iraq does not consider its geographic
location to be the legally deternined land that is defined by well-known
international borders. The regine in Iraq was created by the Socialist

Arab Ba'th Party. The missions of the Iraqi revolution transcend the nation-
al boundaries and include the entire pan-Arab scene. Iraqis affirs that this
understanding of their revolution does not seen that they are "surrogate
revolutionaries" for the Arab people in their different countries, nor does
it lean overlooking taking advantage of the Arab status quo without hamering
the factors of its developaent. ,

"This was actually what they affireed at the sumit conference. This policy
is a fact that is not unknown to anyone because it is the essential nature
of the candid national ideology of the Socialist Arab Bs'th Party.

"The second [vital and iwortant matter] is that the strong, settled nature
of Iraq since the outbreak of the revolution on 17 July 1968 affirns that
the sasscs' ties with their revolution and their confidence in this revolu-
tion, which was led by the Socialist Arab Ba'th Party, are deep and are
characterized by a very effective inviolsbility. Thus, the stability of
conditions in Iraq along with the growth in the strength_of these conditions
in a nanner that is consistent with the advance of the [revolution'gl course
focus the spotlights on two considerations that explain and justify the
interest in Iraq.

"The first one of these considerations is that no bets are being nede on
strengthening relations with Iraq. and no precautions are being taken in
anticipation of dreaded surprise.

The second consideration is that the stability of a strong, national regi-e,
which is independent of international tendencies, does not appeal to these
tendencies which try in various ways to control the area; to have a certain
snount of influence to affect its directions; and to modify its courses to
sake thee consistent with their own ideological or political objectives.
Consequently, the stability of this national regime is of interest to these

23
son omcm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tendencies in a negative, contradictory sense. that is. in the sense of
restricting opportunities or blocking some of then fros being used by the
Socialist Arab Be'th Party. which is leading the state and society [in
Iran .

"It in thus that the ideological and political course [of this raging]
constitutes a nuisance ﬁe these tendencies]. In addition. there is
another reason which increases other people's displeasure with then: this
course has a superior ability to deal with and to control events. As a
result every counter-reaction that goes in another direction turns the
enesies' plans upside down and in one solent turns the success of adver-
series into a catastrophe. Irdq's initiative. for exasple. to bring about
a pan-Arab alignment in accordance with the resolutions of the laghsd
Su-it Conference and to achieve Iraqi-Syrian unity illustrates the highest
degree of cospetency in directing the practical courses of ideological
politics in a sensor that would deal crushing blows to the enesies of the
nation and express the efficiency of the strategic sind in its devotion to
the objectives and the aspirations of the Arab nation."

These analayses that were offered to se by an inforsed source lingered in sy
sind as I tried to detersine the features of the action that Iraq wants and
to cospare the: with the other possible trend of concerned countries in the
Arab region or in the Middle East region.

iraq has always remained in the sidst of the region's events. This is a
fact that indicates Iraq‘s destiny in the past. in the present. and in the
future.

To diversify Iy sources in cospleting the picture [5f the situation in Ira37
I asked sy cospanion a question about what he thought Iraq's position sight
be in any policy that say be drawn up for the area. LI posed the questioa7
as the car carried ug through Baghdad‘s crowded streets and a cold breeze
brushed against [ougl faces.

As ‘i said. the question was no sore than another attent to find the truth
fro. sore than one source and fros different positions. After sose deep
thought sy cospanion said. "I will give you a clear and a sisple answer.

The features of Iraq's position in any policy that is drawn up for the area
were deter-ined by our great cospanion Saddas llusayn in one of this talks
when he said. 'up cosprehensive policy will be drawn up for the Middle

East unless Iraq is placed on the sand table Lsilitary ssneuver planning
board]. am that In one way or another it can be included in the considerations
or in the treat-cot.”

My sind continued to pursue this deep vision and to tie the sovesent of
events in the area with Iraq's position. Pros this vision I for-elated
strong ideas about the kind or sajor hopes that Iraq is striving for. shout
the worries that others are having about its course. about the kind of
worries Iraq may have and about the kinds of victories the achieve-eats of
which appears to be inevitable.

235
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

The no days that I spent in Iraq were haracter red by a series of radiant
pictures about the continuous effort to achieve the goals of the nation;
to reinforce the socialist structure: to establish deaoeracy as a systea of
ideological values and a practical course; and to build socialisa in all the
areaa as a central law to solve the probleas of society.

During ay visit to the nest distinguished ﬂown o_f_7 al-Nejaf. the glimer
of the golden done on top of the final resting place of al-Iaaa 'Ali iba

Abi Talib loosed in the distance between liarbala' and al-Najaf. It was like
a lighthouse telling generations the story of the iuortsl heroes in the
life of the nation. Pros afar the dose appeared to be a glowing flame and

s gliuering light. I confess that the basis of ay visit to the sacred
shrines in Iiarbala' and al-Najaf was a desire to see the chaste burial
grounds. This was coabiaed with a secret that saved ae as a journalist who
tracts down and analyses events. I wanted to know the truth about the antic-
ipated events that the western aedia was picturing with regard to the iapact
the Iranian crisis will have on Iraq.

The western aedia are tryingnand they are trying very harduto picture the
events that are happening on the Iranian scene as events that will have an
iapact on Iraq. They are trying to show that it would be easy for the Shi'ite
hosieas of Iraq to be negatively affected by what is happening in Iran.

in the courtyard of the al-llaydari aosque where a group of sea were getting
ready to pcrfora the noon prayer. I tried in an indirect way to pose soae
questions with which I intended to verify some letters. A dignified older
nan wearing a white turban and with a grey beard said. "Hhat is happening in
Iran in an internal event. it is a utter of interest to the citizens of
Iran. and aaong then are the religious sen. He held the knowledge of
Ayatollah Khoaeyni in high estees. lie is free to adopt for Iran the course
he finds suitable for it. This is an accepted fact. But if the countries
that do not want Iraq and the Arab nation to achieve progress and unity are
hoping that the Iranian crisis spurred by their atteapts will have negative
effects on the Shi'ites in Iraq. this would be a different thing.

"Our Arab character is Just as sacred as our religion. The pride we have
in our Arab character and in the course that our rulers are pursuing is
fundaaentai."

in the light of what I heard I felt ay face flush with eabarrassneat
because i had esbarked upon this line of questioning. but what else could
be done when Journalia- is the profession of difficulties and of searching
for the truth? Reluctantly i put the question to an official just as I had
put it to may other people here and there and in al-hajaf.

The official replied. "Rhea western Iedia correspondents write such about
Iraq's fears of the events in Iran and the fact that these events say gener-
ate probleas with Iraq' and when they overexert the-selves in writing about

25
me omcm. use 0qu
FOR OWICIM. 088 ONLY

the Shi'itea and the feet that they are subject to oppression, they do not
(In up without political considerations. It is our considered opinion that
two factors clenrly underlie this situation:

"First. there is an etteapt to play on sectarian sensitivities to fight the
revolution. but the fact is that this sectarian chord is torn and is incapable
of producing the desired tune.

”Second. the trend to unite with Syria has turned the balance of power in
the nroo end has created I dangerous strategic crack in hostile tendencies
and considerations. If such a trend is dangerous. the lost dangerous thing
about it is its ideological basis and its solid doctrinal course. Bneaies'
ottespts to portray the Iraqi-Syrian agreesent aa a fearful reaction to the
events in Iran are attespts whose objective is to reeove the agree-ant fro.
its ideological and historical context and present it as a political agree-
sent entered into in anticipation of emergencies and hypothetical events.
This is one of the aotives underlying the recent increase in co-entetiea
about the impact of the Iranian crisis on the Shi'itea in tree.

"This tendency on the port of western aedia correspondents reveals the
degree of triviolity to which western aedia agencies has declined. This
trend also reveals their intentions against Iraq and against Arab unity."

The official added. ”he are confident that all our people have achieved a
degree of ideological inunity which sakes their national unity fir- and
unshoheeble. If there are those in the west who are dressing that events in
lren will have negative effects on our Shi'ite Arab citizens. we tell their
dreea on. They will soon find theaselvea in the side: of a terrifying
night-are." And here the official did not hide rne fact that had the events
of Iron token place during any adsinistration other than that of the Socialist
Arab Ba’th Party. they would have had a negative inset. ”This is due to

the fact that these od-inistrations which had a sectarian basis were not able
to establish just laws for life. They were prisoners of their sectarian
makeup. '

Stability Is an Existing Pact
"Are you confident that stability in iraq can only becose finly established?"

The official replied. "This is the truth. We do not sake this stateaent
perfunctorily: we rather take it as a result of the course of the revolution
and of the horizons that it will achieve in the future. A country which
fears the possibilities that may shake its stability cannot resolve to expand
the desecratic process for the lessee.”

"flow is that?"

without any prefotory res-rite the official said. ”Did you not hear Conrade
Snddsl llusayn in a speech he cede to the workers refer to this Iajor question.
which is that the-co-and has approved general elections for all the people

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm OFFICIAL IIHR 0N!”

of lraq no that the Central Council of the people's representatives. the
parliaeunt. may be created? It will he one of the constitutional represent-
ative inetitutiona wherein the masses will participate in formulating
reaolutions and in building the state and eociety."

I tried to excuse myself, but I was etopped by the otficial'a voice. lie
was saying. "This is not the only thing that the «mad intends to achieve.
It has on its agenda a coepleted etudy about the deeocratic eanagenent of
the etate's inetitutione. Thie study will eoon take the fore of law. This
eeans that the workara are to becoee extensively end collectively involved
in a legal and in a revolutionary eanner in the esnageeent of the state's
agencies. This will be done according to special principlee for practicing
deeocrecy in reporting. criticizing and eupervieing."

Thia develop-ant indicates quite eloquently that events in Iraq are
proceeding on their course. It is reeponding to any questions in e
practical way by providing centrelieed reeulta ineteed of reactione. In
this regard an observer tinda a general eenae of optieiaa in the fact that
the traiiblaeing experiments which Iraq is experiencing will eucceed and
the enjor general national hopes that are hanging on the unity of Iraq and
Syria will be achieved. Everyone one eeete in Baghdad will eseure one that
this unity l0 undoubtedly caning. It is the hour of destiny. and unity
[with Syrig/ was an still is the destiny of Iraq.

COPYRIGIT! 1979 AL-HM‘AN Ala-MI

8592
(280: 6802

27
ron omcm use om
I'Oll ORIGIN. 083 OHLY

MOROCCO

Jouml. mam xmavm H111! tussle: AIDE 0N SAHARA PROBLEM
Paris JBUNB APRIQUE in French 6 Apr 79 pp 71-73 to

[Interview with Moroccan King Iiessan's adviser Aheed Redo Guedira by
llunid darrada ”exclusive": "Morocco Hill Give Priority to the Quest for
a Negotiated Solution to the Problee of Sahara"-date and place not
specified]

[Excerpt] Jam mmuc: how would Morocco react to another attack by
the Poliserio Front niniler to the attack against Ten-tan in february?

Muted Roda Guedira: hitherto the Moroccan any was satisfied with insuring
the citisens' security end defending localities under attack. henceforth
it will go further then thstuit will pursue aggressors. trying to inflict
on then the greatest possible losses but stopping short of fully exercis-
ing its right of pursuit [droit de suite). This is one of the aspects of
the policy stated in the royal nessage of 8 “arch.

JBUNB ”8100!: why has Morocco. which repeatedly end solesnly stated prior
to 8 “arch its intention of fully exercising the right of pursuit. refrained
[roe exercising it?

Mned Rcda Guedira: Because we have deliberately lilited our erey's
action.

Jame APRIQUE: in that case. why did you untion the right of pursuit?

Iii-ed Rcdn Guedirn: In order to reeind people of a naturally end legally
acknowledged right possessed by any country whose territory is violated
by aggressors based abroad. The exercise of this right depends on the
political situation. Both the exigencies of defense and diploeatic
require-onto lust be considered.

mm. amtouz: Hill the National Security Council have any any officers
nu auburn?

Mned Redo Guedira: All council sesbers will be representatives of
“organised political sovesents." Die-bore of the goverment and certain

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
representatives of the any will participate in the council's deliberations
whenever their presence is deemed necessary.

mum; “th03: Sane people believe that the new Sahara policy anounts to
offering the opposition a foola' bargain-«war against Algeria in sxchenge
of social peace....

dined Redo Ouadirea This is en erroneous interpretation since the neaeage
referred to Sahara and nothing else.

JSUNB AFRIQUB: Nonetheless. it could he retorted that the new Sahara policy
is not devoid of ulterior notives connected with social tensions.

luv-ed Roda Guedira: I can assure you that the Ring did not intend to nahe
any deal with the opposition when he addressed hie nessage to parlianent.
It is true. however. that a certain neasure of social peace is necessary
to ennhie Norocco fully to assure the responsibilities inposed on it by the
situation prevailing in our Sahara.

JBUNE AFRIQUB: The King's recent visit to France. which seemed to preeage
a peaceful solution. was i-Iediately followed by a hardening in Horocco's
attitude. Should it he deduced fron this that the visit proved to he of
no avail after all?

Ahmed Reds Guedira: bet no repeat that the nessage constitutes a clarifica-
tion rather than an indication of the adoption of a sore hardline policy on
our part and that in this context horocco will continue to give priority

to the quest for a negotiated solution. As for the King's visit to francs.
it has in no way proved unprofitable since it enabled the two heads of

state to exchange views on a question which retains of fundanental
inportance to Morocco.

mm armour: Did the two heads of state exchange viewpoints or did their
viewpoints clash?

Ah-ed Redo Ouedira: Both.

.1th M11008: wm not Franco-Horoccan relations suffer as a result of
Rahat's new policy?

M-cd Reds Guedira: Absolutely not. As far as I know. President Giscerd
d'Bstaing has no specific or personal policy with respect to the Sahara
problen. ft scene to as that he is trying to help the parties concerned
out of this deadlock and find a satisfactory solution.

.muuz AFRIQUB: Is he nere likely to achieve this now (after 8 ﬂsrch) than
ho was in the post?

Mood nedn Guedira: Certainly. if he has not. it would not be our fault.

29
FOR ORIGIN. US! MY
JBUNH APRIQUE: Hr Olivier Stirn. E‘ranch eacretary of etate for foreign
ul‘faire. thought fit to atate that a mating between Haaaan I! and Chadli
waa "a poaaibility.” IL la believed in certain French diplomatic tin-Ina
that it wee werely a "alip of the tongue" or a "blunder" en hie part. What
exactly happened?

Ill-ed Ileda Uuedira: It in not up to we to explain Hr Stirn'a etateeente.
however. I an able to etate that what he aaid had no connection with the
euntente of the talhe between Preeident Oiecard d'lietaing and King liaeean II.

JEUNB APRIQUB: The King'e recent etataoente on American televiaion euggeet
that he hea been unable to aodify the 0.3. attitude. eapecielly toward
the question of area' euppliea to Horocco....

Muted Roda Guedira: In 1960. Horocce and the United Statea concluded an area
agree-eat. 'l‘ha Americana have iapoaed on ua a very atrict interpretation

of it which, in ny view. ie a conaequence of niareading of the agree-ant.
eepecinlly with reference to Sahara.

JBUNB APRIQUB: la the United Statue prepared to let liorocco uaa area it hae
eupplied in forner Spaniah Sahara?

Mined Reda Guedirn: He in fact uee Auricen area to protect Sahara but quite
often we have to explain the aituatien and diecuee uttere firet.

JBUNB APRIQUB: Do you think that you will be able to Iodiiy the Merican
attitude?

Aheed Redo Guedira: We have conducted. and will continue to conduct. a
large-eacle explanatory campaign anon; Alerican leaders. Deepite the
difficulties with which we have been faced. we have not loot hope that

the United States will cone to aeaeee the eituation nore correctly and gain
a better underetanding of our policy.

JBUUR APRIQUB: will the Mericen attitude not lead to a rapprochenent between
Morocco and the Soviet Union?

Aheed Roda Cuedira: He have excellent relatione with the Soviet Union and
there in no reaaon why we ahould not ealt it to eupply ua with em.

.IBUNB M‘MQUR: Would it agree to aupply area to you?
Alned Ridn Guedira: Certainly.

COPYMCIIT: Jennc Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

cso: 61:00 END

30
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY