APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010016-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010016-2

EUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8209

8 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(FOUO 2/79)
Esrscrs OF NONIONIZING
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010016-2
NOTE

JPRS publicatinc~ contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
l] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
ur [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

‘.!-ﬁlGHf LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP 0F
XATFRL"S REPRODUCED NEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
' :- is 9'.‘3l.lCa\T [08 BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
muooeumc OMA l- Moon No.
me L/szoo

. .
TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

BIONEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES (F000 2 7
Effects of Nonionizing Electroﬁaqnetic {cgzation

o.
9. hue-meg mumm- Ncu cod Mam N. Hem" alhl'ocl 0“ No.

Joint Publications Research Service

1000 North Glebo Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201
I}. 32:31. Report a Pﬂhd

J. IceIpuaI'o Attention No.
. ' pen

' l‘!

8 Jenna 1979

  
   
   
     

      
   

 
   
      
 
      
   
   
       

  
  
  

I). Spa-acting Ono-hum None cod aw..-

  

Aa above

to. Meme»

 

The report contains information on aerospace medicine. agrotechnolosy. bionic:
and bioacoustics. biochemistry. biophysics. environmental and ecological
problems. food technology. microbiology. epidemiology and immunology.

narine biology. nilitary medicine. physiology. public health. toxicology.
radiobiolosy. veterinary medicine. behavioral science. human engineering.
psychology. psychiatry and related fields. and ocienriate and scientific
organizations in biomedical fields.
TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(Eouo 2/79)

EFFECTS OF NONIONIZING '
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION

CONTENTS PAGE

Changes in the Physiological Processes of Hydrobionts "hen Exposed to
s Constant Magnetic Field
(A. l. Tsneyet's; GIDROBIOLOGICHESKIY alumni. ”No 5. 1978)........ l

The Effect of Electric Fields on Drosophile Behavior

(V. B. Chernyshev, V. H. Afonina; IZVES‘I'IYA mam NAUK .
sssR. SERIYA BIOWIcﬂgquA. “Met 78)....0...‘0.0.0.0000... 12

The Effect of Strong Magnetic Fields on the Active Transport in
the Choroid Plans

(S. Ye. Iresler, et sl.; DOM! mom: “AUX 8533, No 2, 1978). 2‘

Change in Conductivity Of Ala-eticin-Hodified Phospholipid
He-hrsnes brposed to a high Frequency Electromagnetic Field
(V. V. 'ryszhelov. et el.; BIOFIZIKA; No 4. l978)................. . 29

Tespersture Reaction and Survival of Experimental Annals Imposed
to Various Intensities of Microwaves

(V. L. “stratum. et al.; BYULLETEN' EKSPERDIEN‘I'AL'MY
BIOLOGII I HBOITSINY. No 9, 1978)................................ 32

Interaction Between the Body and Electromagnetic Fields so an
Enviror-entsl Factor

(VZAD‘ODEYS‘WIYB ORBMIIZHA S BLEK'I‘RONMNI‘I’NW POLYMI
W S PAK‘I‘OW OKRUZEAYUSRCHBY SRBDY, 1977)...................... 37

Reactions of Biological Systems to Magnetic Fields
(smrsn sxowcicmzsxzru $18111! NA mum POLYA, l978)...... 60

- e - [III - USSR - 22 561' PC )0]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 575.522

CHANGES IN THE PHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESSES OF HYDROBIONTS WHEN
EXPOSED TO A CONSTANT MAGNETIC FIELD

Kieg66ggRONIOLOGICHESKIY ZHURNAL in Russian No S, 1978
PP ‘

[Article by A.I. Tane eva, Institute for the hiology of the
Southern Seas of the krainian SSR Academy of Sciences,
Sevastopol]

[Text] As a result of current wide-spread utilization of mag-
netic fields in many sectors of industry, science and tech-
nology, the need to study their effects on biological objects
has rown. lnvesti ators, in particular, are interested in

the nfluence of or entation effects (9.20) of homo eneous

and hetero eneous artificial magnetic fields on var ous aspects

of metahol sm, growth, development, and activity of plants and
animals (9,10,20,21 and others).

We conducted experiments to elucidate the influence of hetero-
geneous and homogeneous magnetic fields of differing intensi-
ties and polarities on eggs (eggs were collected in the Sakskiy
lake (Crimea) in 1970-71) and larvae of the brine Ihrimp Anemia
Salina M. hdw. The artemia was selected as an experimental
model because of its ability to res ond to external environ-
mental factors and the ease in whic it can be obtained for
laboratory use. In addition to these factors, artemia larvae

have important significance from the stand-point of their mass
cultivation as valuable nutrient matter for fish.

For the heterogeneous MP [magnetic field], an electromagnet
was used with polar dimensions of 65 x 30 mm positioned oppo-
site each other; the distance between poles was 30 mm. For
the homogeneous MF. a horseshoe-shaped constant magnet was
used with polar dimensions of 410 x 30 mm, positioned parallel
to each other; the distance between poles was 39 mm. The in-
tensity of the magnetic field on the eggs was 200 (heterogen-

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cous MF) and 1800 (homogeneous HF) e [ergs]. After prolonged
uninterrupted output by the electromagnet, temperature changes
(accuracy e 0.5“ Centigrade) on the surface of the experimental
area were not observed, eliminating the influence of this fac-

tor on the results. The intensity of the MF was measured by a
teslamcter F-43554/4.

Changes in the number of hatched larvae (percent), their rate
of growth, and reSpiratory rate served as indices for the bio-
logical effect of the MF. Eggs of approximately similar di-
ameter (0.20 mm) with intact shells were carefully selected for
the experiment. The dry eggs were placed in weighing bottles
(20 ml volume) which were filled with water of a given salinity.
Four analyses were conducted in each experiment (100 eggs per
analysis . For one analysis. the eggs were placed on the south
pic of t e magnet, for another-~on t e north ple. Two control
analyses were conduced at the natural magnetic pole of the
Earth. The terminal pole of the magnet was oriented towards

the direction of the Earth's poles. Larval hatching occurred
spontaneously in a magnetic field of 25-26‘. The control eggs
were found in analagous conditions. Counting of nauplius larvae

was carried out at 30-40 hours when th: maximum number of lar-
vae were already hatched.

The solutions for all the experiments were prepared from fil-
tered north sea water with additives of sodium chloride at the

rate of 20 g/l. Food for the brine shrimp consisted of yeast cells
and chlorella. '

The length of the brine shrimp from the anterior edge of the head

to the end of the tail was determined each day at a designated
time using binoculars from a NBS [biological stereomicroscope]
and a metered scale-ruler. Average sizes were determined. The
dry weights were determined after dessication in an oven at
105’. The cumulative dry weight of animals weighed simultane-
ously was not less than 2-3 mg. Weighing was conducted on mi-
croanalytical scales SHD-1000.

The secondary effect of the magnetic fields on respiration of
developing brine shrimp was determined by the Hat-burg apparatus.

About 150 newborn larvae of approximately similar size were
placed in the respirometer; their dry weight equaled 0.0026-
0.003 mg. Respiration was measured at 20’, speed of respira-
tion was expressed in ul 0 /mg of dry weight after 1 hour.
Manometer readings were taien after each our. The duration
of the experiments was 3-4 hours. Data were calculated accor-
ding to the method of variational statistics.

The studies did not show essential differences in the quantity
2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of larvae hatched in an heteroaenoous magnetic field with an
intensity of 200 e and in a control field. In on homogeneous
magnetic field at the south (5) ole, the quantity of larvae
was greater than in the control y 53 percent (P<'0.05)--table
1. Some increase was also observed in the north (N) pole, how-
ever the differences between the test and control were shown to
be statistically insignificant (P> 0.05).

Kalil-Gann- I. Ran-nae unto 1200 s) I Mimi-1mm (will my
'nwn no swim arm-ea A. \a Inn

——'—"'—-;T._——'_n'—_——

; S .
'1 l "arm Ina-am -.
2 Mann-nut. '5. 0 IUIMI "nu-J)" Ayn. i L HE'FuL- [-
I n’. l

 

 

 

200 '--x 0.33:4) 107 «um
7 .N «1.01.6.5 IN >01?“
l..|\' «.MM ’00 --

law 5 GI 331.4,: If»: ‘.n.'€'
N flﬁtm'l Ila >03!-
K 4o.2*a_| m --

941’ u we I: an". [I not-mm elm-we mm; a I'M" mm '00 “m- 33"”
a wee: s— mum manor war-um. N—cemmuﬂ. K-- mum-Ins. 0 - «aw.

Table l. The influence of heterogeneous (200 e) and homo-
geneous (1800 e) PMF [poles of magnetic field) on hatching
of A. salina larvae.

Intensity-e

Variant

Number of nauplius larvae hatched

Percent, for control

South

North

Control

Note. Mean data is presented; in each test there were 100
eggs. Sited here and elsewhere S--south pole of the magnet,
N-north, K--control, 0--test.

p
O

o

QQQOU‘DWN

too...

The study of the "magnetic sensitivity" of brine shrimp to the
south and north pole of a magnet was interesting. The biologi-
cal effect of the magnetic oles was determined accordin to
changes in body length of tRe "magnet" larvae as compare to
the controls.

Experiments demonstrated that anheterogeneous magnetic field
does not influence the growth of larvae (see diagram). however,
anhomogeneous field increases growth rate (table 2). In addi-
tion, in larvae hatched near the south pole of the magnet, the
growth rate was higher than in control larvae and in those

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

developing near the north pole; in the latter, the average
growth rate did not differ from the control. Thus, the na-
ture and degree of polar influence on growth rate of larvae
exposed to conditions of varyin "magnetic sensitivity", de-
pends on the pole of the magnet c field. We ascertained that

the maggsvai’c field “2?” at long-lasting residual influence.

. n
n

 

1' Cxurucw mine-mote pom .nmunox A. aallna MDIU!
nun-n nunnu up" pom-hem": mu nnx manomnnom
uamnrump «0.1:: (200 y).

 

 

“h--.

:' .“ 6 J’l‘yllnl
1. Rate of body length growth of newborn A. salina larvae after
2 Exposure to an heterogeneous magnetic field (200e).
. ay
3. mm per day
4. N--north, K--control, S--south

We followed the effect of the poles on respiratory rate of
larvae hatched in a magnetic field. A marked difference be-
tween the test and control larvae following exposure to an
heterogeneous magnetic field with an intensity of 200 e was

not demonstrated (table 3). Analysis of the data showed that
in neWborn brine shrimp, a decrease in respiratory rate occurred

after a 24 hour exposure to an homogeneous magnetic field;
after 36 hours, the effect of the MF was noticeably weakened.
From this fact, a definite relationship between respiratory
rate of hatched larvae and magnetic field exposure was ascer-
tained. Suppressed respiratory rate was less marked in larvae,
developing near the north pole of the magnet. Thus, newborn
brine shrimp in which oxygen intake was reduced following a 20

hour exposure to a MP with an intensity of 1800 e, demonstrated
greater resistance to a HP than adult specimens (15).

Analysis of experimental data on the influence of an homogeneous
HF on growth and respiration of brine shrimp reveals that growth
increases in a magnetic field (south pale) when oxygen consump-
tion is reduced. Growth rate is dependent on the nature of gas
exchange which results from changes in the processes of oxida-
tion and phOSphorylation, and a general iecrease in anaerobic

metabolism caused by the MF effect.

We assume that the increased growth rate of larvae, observed
on the second day of exposure to a: homogeneous HF, occurs

I.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not as a result of accelerated activity of the metabolic pro-
cesses which are the bases for growth, but rather, as a result
of tissue hydration. In this regard, experiments were conducted
to determine the dry weight of two-day old larvae exposed to an
homogeneous magnetic fiel .

1.! no.- u no 2. ban-me unaware tor-mere none in may run ”gamma alum

 

 

 

 

.\. ullm
1411mm: L1H «w I‘
2.. .. . - -...... .. . . . ._ 7-..—
"uu nu ilk-unis“: S'uK !6 a“; 8313‘
b. _\ "u Lois-gum? ll! JUL“: (0.!!-
9 .\ m u|,-nn*u,u.-2 ml >035
10. In uh 01min”)! mo - — --

1. Table 2. Effect of an homegeneous magnetic field on the body
length of two-day old A. saline larvae.

2. Variant 6. North and control
3. Average body length 7. South and north
4. Percent for control 8. South

5. South and control 9. North

10. Control

'I Mann .1. lbw-tame alumna ant-name» A. saline mac Jehtnua m an
museum and!

:- ‘hnunnquu a \HI. 'I

1

 

. -_.. -. .. .... .

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I Z'I ‘

L M~ar——-rx—m—-—kr"—-jm '——-P:""'l& ‘““"
m um unaw' '-' I' . «um. "-m‘ I‘ v nuns-u -;:. p
I nun-mu- :5; i nun-m :21." l “luv-.4 ""“l
6 'l lmmmuum M”

'/,S ingnﬂmo lm plum magma m >u,m «Altman "6 p0,"?-
*--x 0.30:0,029 m >045 0.215.043: m >o,m (Wynne 97 >o_m

‘-l\' 'll,29*0.0!l3 loo .- 0.22:0,010 Inn .. 0,4.Ig0ﬁ2l :00
100mmng Mn
5 0.30:0.0-13 97 Luthu'rnJStOﬁN M <0.MIO.27*D.(M 84')“an
N 0.37.204“: lob >01!» 0.95:0.032 m (0.03 0,230,024 90 >016
K mils-0.019 loo — 05:41:01“. Ion lumtaum Iml

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Table 3. Oxygen consumption by A. saline larvae after ex-
posure to magnetic fields

2. Exposure to HP, hours 6. HeterOgeneous MP
3. Variant 7. South

4. ul per hour in one animal 8. North

5. Percent for control 9 Control

10: Homogeneous MP

Dry weight of two-day old larvae growing in a magnetic field,

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

calculated on the basis of length, was less than that of lar-
vae unex osed to MF (table 4). Thus, one can assume that,
given un form body length in brine shrimp exposed to PMP, dry
weight was decreased as result of greater water retention.

1.1a0uua 4. Ban-an: mum amt-com mn- ua coarpmane
tynere menu y mane-aux lawman A. ullna

5 . Gym no u I w nap-cu

-—_———-—

6. I 7.
\w ". I untrue-o

     
  

  

 

3' s 0.39:! 0.0014 0.0m 71
9‘" mxm mum: opus so
wk 0.29! 0.007l 0.02“ we

1 J" p w u e u a n u e. llnuaenem rpmme name.

1. Table 4. The effect of an homogeneous magnetic field on
the dry weight of two-day old A. salina larvae.
2. Variant 6. mg
3. Growth mm 7. Percent for control
4. Dry weight of one anima1,mg 3. South
5. Dry weight per 1 mm of growth 9. North
10. Control
11. Note. Hean data are pre-
sented.

Data in the literature on the effect of MP on tissue hydration
are quite contradictory. A weak magnetic field decreases
tissue hydration (5.18). A MF with an intensity of 1000 e sti-
mulates development of eggs and increases the water retehtion
capacity of their shells (10,11). It has been established (14)
that increasing the exposure of artemia eggs to a MF with an
intensity of 2000 e from 24 to 92 hours leads to changes which
stimulate hatching of larvae.

Our studies also indicated that an homogeneous "F with an in-
tensity of 1800 c has a positive influence on the metabolic

activity of the eggs, enabling them to absorb greater amounts

of water. Consequently, accelerated growth of recently hatChedlgrvae
occurs; the length of the brine shrimp on the second day of the ex-
periment surpassed the length of the control specimens.

We surmise that stimulation for hatching of larvae is based on
changes in water properties or increased permeability of mem-
branes induced by exposure to an homogeneous MF. Thus, expo-
sure activates metabolic processes in the embryo and effects
subsequent growth of the brine shrimp after hatching.

The probable basis of MP influence on larvae is activation of
6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the metabolic processes (8) which encourage accumulation of
osmotically active substances in the egg. One of these sub-
stances is free glycerin, a break-down product of carbohydrates
in the form of trehalose, the fundamental energy source for
embryonic development (5). Trehalose increases internal osmo-
tic pressure, causing the eggs to absorb water (24). A.S.
Filippov and co-authors have demonstrated changing carbohydrate
content in plants subjected to a MF (19).

A change in the configuration of protein macromolecules (4,11)
which determine the processes of water absorption by the eggs,

has not been ruled out as the basic mechanism of NF influence
on water metabolism.

One canossume that the hydration of the developing brine shrimp
body, exhibited on the second day of the experiment in the
form of increased body length, is based on changes in water-
mineral metabolism of the organism with a shift on the side

of water and sodium retention. Changes in sodium concentration
are caused by the effect of the homogeneous PMF on ion-protein
binding processes (1,2,7). Sodium ions participate in the
process of protein tissue hydration (6). It has been demon-
strated previously (3) in studies on body length of experi-
mental and control brine shrimp that prolonged exposure to a MF

(2-7 days) causes reversal of larval growth. The processes
which stimulate brine shrimp growth are replaced by those which
inhibit it. Our data on brine shrimp growth concurs with data pre-
Scntcd in the literature (12.18.22).

In our studies, we observed (in the first two days) electrolyte
changes resulting from homogeneous PHF exposure which have the
characteristics of a nonspecific compensatory reaction, detri-
mental to growth. The nonspecific character of the animals'
reaction to an MP was exhibited in responses of the central
nervous system, water metabolism disturbances, and changes in
tisuue hydration capacity (20,21). It has been reported pre-
vously (13) that a PMF with an intensity of 1-8,000 e causes
changes in the hydration capacity of mussel tissue.

It is interesting to examine the degree of tissue hydration in
a "mignetically sensitized" living organism. The sea acorn,
Balanus eburneus, was used as the model for these studies. It
is known that the quantity of water in the body of the balanus
is altered when the animal is placed in solutions of varying
salinity (17). A state of osmotic anabiosis develops, accom-
panied by decreased metabolic activity, suspension of motor
activity, loss of light reflex and other sensory responses.
h'ater content in the body of a brine shrimp placed in water with
low salinity is increased and vice versa. When the brine shrimp

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are transferred to water with a salinity content common to
their native habitat (17°/ ) they return quickly to a normal
state and motor activity rdgumes.

We put brine shrimp in tanks filled with water of varying salinity

and placed the tanks in the inter-polar space of a constant
magnetic field with an intensity of 1050 e for 30 minutes to
one hour. For these experiments, we used a constant homogen-
eous electromagnet with polar dimensions of 65 x 30 mm, situ-
ated opposite each other. The control sample was placed in
the same water-filled container but not subjected to the HF.
For optimum observation of the condition of the crayfish,
their shells were removed before the experiment. For two hours
prior to the beginning of the experiment, the balanus were
placed in water with a S and SS°/ee salinity content. During
this time, motor activity of the animal ceased completely,
reaction to spinal stimulation disappeared, and the brine shrimp
became osmoticslly anabiotic. Following exposure to PMF, the
brine shrimp remained in water with the same saline content for

another hour, at which time they were transferred to common
sea water (l7°/oo). Further observations were conducted until
the onset of death. heath was defined as cessation of motion
in reSponse to spinal stimulation. In each series of experi-
ments, we determined the degree of brine shrimp hydration and de-
hydration by weighing them before and after residence in water
of S and SS°/oo salinity for a period of 30 minutes, one, and
two hours. In all, nine sets of tests were conducted, each of
which included six parallel experiments. Two groups (test and
control) of experiments were conducted in common sea water
(17°/eo), two-~in water with lower salinity (5°/oo) and two--
in higher (SS'IM).

The experiments demonstrated (table 5) that in water with 5°/eo
salinity, body weight of the balanus was increased by 34%, but
in a concentrated solution (SS°/oe), it decreased by 25‘.
Changes in the water content of the brine shrimp body during hydra-
tion and dehydration were in the range of 50% of normal, normal,
and higher. The degree of hydration of a brine shrimp body placed

in water with weak salinity and exposed to PM? with an intensity
of 1050 e reached 146%. This was 12$ greater than in the con-
trol (P< 0.05).

Thus, increase in water content of the crayfish body in test
conditions alters the organism's "magnetic sensitivity".
These data confirm that the reactions of biological objects
to a MF are a combination of many harmful processes.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

2.
3.
4.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. """"

Tau-Ia 0. Cream mu If.“ ban-hymn m anu- amen-m»? u momma-i6
Manta Ina acacia-ma mm man u

 

— —w
2 : J."MII1II‘OI-a(‘lﬁ.a

._.._..._... ...._ _..... -. ..-.._-._....._ _.- .. -
‘MfcuoL 430mm I‘M-.0 ‘ 6 mum- l'

—.— w ..-.. m .- .-.....——- ..
H |

l-x I8." I l s | n

”- -———— .—-.-—-————-—- .—_._.__

[1 I00 Ion lm I00 I In“ Im .. .
s to? In no m m no (0,05 <o.no
65 73 1o 7‘ 7e! " a? gum <0 .m

Table 5. Degree of hydration of the balanus body when
placed in water of lower and higher salinity after PMF
(1050 e) exposure.
Salinity ‘lo. 5. 60 minutes
Weight change (i) after 6. 120 minutes
30 minutes 7. K-ocontrol

8. O--test

 

 

w—-| o

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Conclusions

1.

2.

3.

4.

S.

l.

2.

An homogeneous MP with an intensity of 1800 e intensifies
hatching of A. salina larvae and accelerates their growth
rate.

An homogeneous NF suppresses oxygen consumption of develOp-

ing crayfish; however, animals located near the north
pole of the magnet exhibit this phenomena to a lesser
extent.

Dry weight of larvae hatched in a HP, calculated on the
basis of body length, was found to be less than the weight
of unexposed larvae.

Given different MP intensities, the "magnetic sensitivity"
of brine shrimp appears to be stronger in an honogeneoua field
in conparisen to an heterogeneous one.

Increase in water content of the brine ahrinp body alters its
"magnetic sensitivity".

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aristarkhov, V.M., Piruzyan, L.A.. Tsybyshev, V.P. The
influence of PMF on the proteins of ascitic tumor sarcoma-
37. "MP in Medicine", l974, 100,pages 53-54.
Aristarkhov, V.M., Piruayan, L.A., Harkuze, 1.1. The effect

of PMF on the distribution of sodium and calcium ions in
ascitic tumor sarcoma-37. Ibid. pages 125-126.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

S.

6.

9.

10.

11.

£2.

FOR OFFICIAL IlSli ONLY

Dolgopol'skaya, M.A., Taneyeva, A.I., Vladimirov, L.V.
The effect of PMF on the growth and development of Ar-
temia salinn brine shrimp. In the hook: Questions on fish
breeding and sanitary biological mana ement of reservoirs
in the Ukraine, part I. Kiev, "Scient fic Council", 1970,
pages 17-19.

Dorfman, Ya.G. The physiologic mechanism of the effect of
static MP on living systems. Moscow, VINITI [All-Union

Institute of Scientific and Technical Information], 1960,
40 pages.

Ivleva, I.V. Branchiopolds. In the book: The biological

foundations and methods for mass cultivation of food for
invertebrates. Moscow, "Science", 1969, 171 pages.

Kizevetter, I.V. Biochemistry of raw materials found in
water. Moscow, 1973, 423 pages.

Markuze, I.I., Piruzyan, L.A., Aristarkhov, V.M. The effect
of PMF on the development of ascitic tumor sarcoma-37.
"MP in Medicine", Frunze, 1974, 100, pages 111-112.

Maykelson, S.M. Radio emission, magnetic and electrical
fields. In the book: Fundamentals of space biology and
medicine, 2, book 2. Moscow, "Science", 1975, pages 40-45.

Novitskiy, Yu. 1., Strekova, V.Yu., Tarakanova, G.A.The
effect of PMF on plant growth. The influence of MP on
biological objects. Moscow, "Science", 1971, pages 69-68.

Oboznaya, 5.1., Obozynyy, E.P., Shakhbazov, v.6. The in-
fluence of PM? on dry seeds and the water retention capa-
city of corn tissues. In the book: Materials from the
second All-Union conference to study the effects of mag-
netic fields on biological objects. September 24-26, 1 69.
Moscow, 1969, pages 167-168.

Sirotina, L.V., Sirotin, A.A., et.a1. Water intake by ger-
minating millet seeds exposed to a MP. In the book: Ma-
terials from the second All-Union symposium on the influ-
ence of natural and artificially weakened MP on biological
pgiects, September 18-20, 1973. Belgorod, 1973, pages 147-

Smirnov, A.M. Growth and metabolism of crops in sterile
culture conditions. Author's abstract of doctoral disser-
tation. Moscow, 1967, 28 pages.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

13. Tana eva, A.1. The influence of a constant magnetic field
on t e hydration of livin mussel tissue. in the book:
Materials from the All-0n on symposium on studies of the
Black and Mediterranean seas for the utilization and re-
servation of their resources part 4, Kiev, "Scientif c
Councils”, ms. pages 109-113.

14. Taneyeva. A.1., Dolgopol'skaya, M.A. Effect of PM? on
artemia eggs. Biophysics, 1973, 18, No. 5, pages 944-946.

15. Taneyeva, A.1.. Dolgopol'skaya, N.A. The biological effect
of a constant magnetic field on artemia. Hydrobiology
Journal, 1974, 10, No. 4, pages 63-69.

16. Tarakanova, G.A., Strekova, V.Yu., Prudnikova V.P..
Novitskiy, Yu.1. Some physiologic and cytolo {c chan es
in germinating seeds in a constant magnetic ield. P ant
Physiology, 1965, 12, No. 6, pages 10 5-1064.

17. Tarusov, 8.N. Protoplasma. 1930, 9, 97 pages.

18. Tarakanova, 6.A. Direct and secondary effects of a MF of
low intensity on sprout growth. In the book: Materials
from the second All-Union simposium on the influence of
natural and artifically wea ened NF on biological objects,
September 18-20, 1973. Belgorod, 1973, pages 88-89.

19. Filippov, A.S. Tyun'kov, 1.V., et. al. The influence of
a wea PM? on unplanted wheat seed of the Skal variety,
‘bido . [1.808 89.900

20. Kholodov, Yu. A. Magnetism in biology. Moscow, "Science",
1970, 96 pages.

21. Kholodov Yu.A. Man in a magnetic web (the magnetic field
and lifef. Moscow, ”Science', 1972, 142 pages.

22. Chvayev, P.P. The effect of geophysical factors on seed
and germinating plants. Summary of reports of the second
zona symposium on bionics. Hinsk, 1967, pages 107-111.

23. Barnothy, M.F. Reduction of radiation mortalit through
magnegig pre-treatment. Nature, 1963, 200, Nu er 49o ,
page ..

24. Dutrieu, J. Queslques observations biochemiques et
physiologiques sur le development d'Artemia saline Leach.
Rend. 1st. sci. Camerinon, 1960, 1, page 99.

COPYRIGHT: Iadatel'atvo "Naukova dis-ha”, ”Gidrobiologieheakiy shut-M1",
1978
11

9139 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
680: 1870
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 612.010.62:595.7
“III! ["861 0? ELECTRIC PXBLDS Oll DROSOPllIM BEHAVIOR

Hoecow IZVBSTIYA AKADZHII alum 888R. SERIYA BIOLOGICNBSKAXA in Rueeien No 5.
Sop-Oct l973 pp 723-731

[Article by V. I. Chernyehev end V. M. Afonine. Hoecow Stete Univereity ieeni
H. V. Lononoeov: "The Effect of Electric Pielde on Droeophile behevior
(Droeophile Helenogeeter Maia)". received 26 Sep 75]

[Text] when expoeed to e eonetent or elternetins electric field,
droeophilee pleced between the pletee of e condeneer
ceeee to love. The percentege of the droeophilee reepond-
ing to the field ie directly proportionel to the field
inteneity end invereely porportionel to eir hunidity end,
epperently. to the infreeonie beckground. The effect it
eexinel et the frequency of lo herte; it doee not depend
on the polerity of the condeneer pletee, their contect
with the droeophilee. ionieetion end electric conductiv-
ity of the eir, etooepheric diechergee, etnoepheric pree-
eure, end the dieturbencee of the geomagnetic field.
There ere no reeponeee in winter. It ie eeeueed thet
droeophilee ere effected by eechenicel forcee eriein;

during the interection of the body cherae with the ex-
ternel field.

The electric field ie en ordinery neturel fector. The inteneity of the elec-
tric field of the eteoephere in cleer weether neer the eurfece of the eerth

ie epproxieetely 150 via. however. in thunderetorn weether it reechee tene
of thoueende of volte per l I.

The effect of electric fielde on the orgenien hee not been eufficiently etud-
ied. however. e number of feet; ere eveileble now which indicete thet the

electric field cen exert eporecieble influence on the behevior of lend eni-
nele. perticulerly ineecte.

In feet. e coneidereble port of the droeophilee pleced between the pletee of
of e condeneer ceeee to uore when e reletively eeell potentiel ie delivered
to theee pletee (Idwerde, 1960). An enelogoue reeponee wee obeerved by no
in the beetle Der-eetee eibiricue Br: however. when the pletee ere connected

12

FOR OFPICIAL USE 03L?
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to e current eource. clothee mothe sanctiﬁed diepley ehort excitetion re-
pleced eubeequently by inhibition (Afonine et el, 1973). let ue etreee thet
the level of the reeponeee of theee beetlee end uothe. for reeeone unknown
to ue. were cherecterired by e high degree of inetebility. end it wee not
poeeible to reproduce the experiment every dey. when emell ineecte love
over a nonunifornly charged eurfece. they perceive en increeee in the cherge
ee en obetecle (New. 1961).

The ehielding from the eurrounding fielde eleo hee en obvioue effect on the
behevior of ineecte. For exe-ple. Shoven (1971) writee. referring to un-
publiehed dete of Lepoint. that the ehielding of juniper buehee with e grounded
Peredey’e cege reeulted in e noticeable increeee in the nunber of ineecte on
theee buehee. In our experiuente. the ehielding of the coil eurfece reeulted
in on increeee in the number of enell ineecte end uitee in the ehielded eec-
tion. on the everege. 1.5 tiaee in conperieon with the control (Tehernyehev

Gt .1. 1913: e

Thue. it ie poeeible to coneider proven thet ineecte reepond to the electric
fielde eround then. however. their field perception uechunien reeeine un-
known.

He found the two following hypotheeee to be the noet convincing:

l) e week electric current eppeere in the electric field end flowe through
the eir end body of the orgenien; it ie thie current thet ceueee e reeponee
(Ger-er. 1971);

2) the body of eny lend orgeniem ie, ee e rule. cherged to e certein degree;
or e reeult of the interection of theee chergee with the externel field,
there eppeer nechenicel forcee which ere perceived in one wey or enother
(Tehernyehev et el. 1973).

The ebove-eentioned fecte. ee well ee other fecte indiceting the influence

of electric fielde on live objecte cen be interpreted in fever of eny of theee
hypotheeee. It ie evident thet the velidity of one of theee hypotheeee cen

be proven by phyeicel experi-ente.

If the firet hypotheeie ie true. the reection Iuet increeee with increeee of
the current flowing in the field, i.e.. with increeee of the ionieetion end
electric conductivity of the eir, better contect of the object with the
current-conducting eurfece. end increeee in the hulidity of the eir end the
eubetretun on which the object ie loceted.

however, if the eecond hypotheeie ie true. then the reletionehip nuet be con-
pletely oppoeite. beceuee ell of the ebove-Ientioned conditione ere fevoreble
for the dreining of the body cherge. end. coneequently. reduce the forcee of

the interection between the chergee.

Thie erticle deecribee the reeponeee of droeophilee to electric fielde of
verioue pereletere. we tried to umderetend the field perception necheniee,
ee well ee the reeeone for the veriebility of the reeponeee.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Materials and Methods

we studied flies Drosophila melanogaster Neig (wild type) which are culti-
vated in the Department of Genetics of the Moscow State University.

we studied the effect of the electric field on the nobility of these flies.
Plate batteries. an autotransformer, or an infralow-frequency oscillator
62-16 served as the sources of the necessary potential.

Here. we shall dwell chiefly on the methods common for all experiments.
Special methods are described together with the results of the appropriate
experiments.

In order to observe the responses of the drosophilas to the electric field.
we used chambers made of Petri dishes. A round copper plate connected with
one of the terminals of the current source was placed within each dish. The
insulation material was a circle of thick white paper approximately of the
same diameter placed on the plate, and a ring of the same paper 3-5 mm high
end 50-60 mm in diameter was placed on top of it. On top of the paper ring,
another Petri dish was placed with a saturated hacl solution and a wire cir-
cular electrode within it. Thus, e working space of the chember was created
whose bottom was the copper plate and paper and the ceiling was the second
"plate" .. the glass plate with the solution of the electrolyte, and the
side walls were formed by the circular strip of thick paper. The trans-
parent upper "plate" made it possible to observe easily the behavior of the
objects which were within the field.

As a rule, the experiment was conducted with six such chambers simultaneously.
These chambers were placed in a special thermostatically controlled vessel
enclosed in glass and illuminated from the top by an incandescent lamp. As

a result, a constant temperature of 27° c was maintained in the chamber, the
illumination was about 600 ix, and the air humidity was about 70 1 due to

the open upper plates with the saturated salt solution.

One hour before the experiment. ten flies subjected to ether anesthesia were
placed in each chamber. by the beginning of the experiment. normal behavior
of such flies was fully restored.

At the beginning of the experiment. the number of ectiVe flies in each cham-
ber was counted ten times in the course of approximately 10 minutes. then
the necessary electric potential was fed to the plates. and the mobility
check was repeated in the same manner. In approximately 10 minutes, the
current was turned off and the mobility of the flies was determined for the
third time. As a result of this we had 60 mobility checks before. during,
and after the exposure to the field, which made it easy to make statistical
comparison by the Student criterion.

0n the basis of the obtained data. the following indices were calculated:

response level -- percentage of the droeophiles which ceased moving after

the field was turned on (the ratio of the number of the drosophilas which
la

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stopped moving under the effect of the field to the nulber of the active
drosophiles before the experiment); the percentege of the drosophiles which
were ective before the experiment. during the experisent, end efter it.

A considereble pert of the experiments were conducted et the bees of the
Hsin Geophye icel Observetory (000) in Voyeykovo neer Leningred. 'l‘he euthors
ere very areteful to the steff of the Depertsent of Atsospheric Electricity
of the 060 for their technicel help, the results of geophysical neesurenents
which were nude eveileble to then, end consultetions.

All the retaining experiments were conducted et the egrobiologicel stetion
of the Moscow Stete University "Cheshnikovo" neer Moscow.

Generei Picture of the Responses to the Electric Field. when e field of suf-
ficient intensity wes turned on. e considereble pert of the drosophiles or
even ell of thee ceesed to save. The response becoses noticesble 1-2 sec
efter the pistes ere connected with the source of current, but soeetises it
continues to increese in the course of 1-2 minutes. Hsny flies oove fro-
the bottoe of the chember to its side well. elweys essu-ing e verticel posi-
tion with their heeds up. At low field intensities of the order of severel
volt/cs. the nobility of the flies restores in the field severel linutes
efter it is turned on, end et high intensities (hundreds of volts/te).the re-
sponse is seinteined for hours without chengee.

After the field is turned off . their nobility restores repidly to the origins!
level. The finel nobility level is reeched efter severel seconds. end soee-
tines efter one minute. As e rule, the slower the response builds up in the
field, the longer it tekes for the originel nobility level to restore. The
response to the elternetins field does not differ superficielly et ell fro-
the response to the constent field. One of the eats-pies of the response
described shove is shown in Figure I.

I r
e no 10" "T15

Figure l. The response of the drosophiles to the eltero
netins electric field (220 who. 50 Ils).
Y-uis .. percentege of ective drosophiles.
x-exis -- tine. pin. The errows show the
counts when the field wes turned on end
turned off.

Key: l. Kin

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ilh‘l’lllllll. IIRK ONLY

Dependence of the Response on the Field Pereneters. s) Intensity. The re-
sponse level depends clesrly on the field intensity, both of the constent
field end slternsting field. The response level incresses psrticulsrly
shsrply with intensity in the intervsl free 0 to 50 vice, i.e., to the usuel
intensity level in s thunderstorn weether. however. even witn intensities
of ebout 250 v/cn, the response continues to increese with incressed poten-
tiel. Figure 2 shows the results of one of such experiments. A coupletely
enslogous reletionship wes ohteined in ell other experieents, but the ever-
ege response level differs for different deys.

 

(1)

Figure 2. Dependence of the response level of the
drosophiles on the intensity of the constent

(2) end slternsting (50 hr) field (1).
Key: 1. v/cn

The nlnieel intensity st which it wes still possible to notice e response of
short duretion wes 2 vice. This intensity cen occur in neturel conditions
when smell clouds pess overheed.

h) Polerity of the Pletes. The response does not depend et ell on the sign
of the chsrge of the upper end lower pletes. The reletions between the re-
sponse levels in the csse of the positive cherge oi the upper plete end posi-
tive cherge of the lower plste in two experiments with e field intensity of
80 v/c- where 1.0 end 0,8. end in two other experiments st 250 v/ce .- 1,0
end 1.1. The response veried noticeehly during the experi-ent, therefore,

the differences of the responses with different polsrities of the pletes ere
cleerly unrelisble.

Figure 3. Dependence of the response
level of the drosophilee on the field
frequency.
Key: 1. ﬂ:

 

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c) Frequency. The dependence of the response on the field frequency is
quite obvious. The highest end the most steble response wss observed when
sinusoidelly chenging potentisl with e frequency of 10-50 R: wes fed to the
pletes (Figure 3). The level of the response fells both when the field fre-
quency is increesed end when it is lowered (P :r 0.95). The response in
the constent field is lower then in the slterneting field (within the renge
of the sinusoidelly chenging potentiel from 0.1 to 100 Re which we studied).

Dependence of the Response on the Electric Conductivity end humidity of the
Air end the Substretue on the Bottom of the Chsmber. e) Ionieetion end
Electric Conductivity of the Air. The resultc of 6S deily observetions con-
ducted under strictly stsnderd conditions end st stenderd tine (ebout 17

hours end 30 minutes by locel stenderd tine) were competed with the indices

of neturel concentretion of ions end electric conductivity of the sir.
Messurements of the concentrstion of positive end negetive ions were conducted
severel tines e dey, including directly before the experiment in the room
where the response of the drosophiles to the field wes observed. Heesure-
ments were done with en ion counter of Tverskoy's system.

Positive end negetive everege hourly electric conductivity of the sir wes
meesured near our leboretory by the members of the department of etnospheric
electricity of the 060 by teesns of the Allik unit.

In spite of the epperent stebility of the experimentel conditions, the re-
sponse level of the drosophiles wes different on different dsys. verying from
13 to 93 1. However. we were uneble to detect eny correletlon between the
response level end the results of the meesurenent of the ionisetion end elec-
tric conductivity of the sir.

In the subsequent series of our experiments, we ertificielly chengsd the
ionltetion end electric conductivity of the sir. lower levels of ionieetion
end electric conductivitywu. crested by screening the chembers with smoke.
lncreese in these indices by severel orders wes echieved by plecing redio-
ective collectors directly inside three experimentel chesbers. Bxperimentel
sources of elphe-reys with e plutonium isotope (Pu23 ) were used. Th6 velue
of the ionisetlon current reeched, on the everege, e out 0.6-6.0'10' e.
The size of the ective pert of the collector wes 32 mm, end the ectivity in
the source wes 0.019 m-curie. Por the control. metel rubles which ere close
in site end shepe to the collectors were pleced in three other cheabers.

In two out of five experluents, the screening of the chewbers with smoke re-
sulted in e slight decreese in the response, end in three other emperieents

in s slight increese. Two experiments with the redioective isotope yielded

e response retio in the sxperilent to the control without the isotope of

Thus. the level of the ionisetion end electric conductivity of the sir both
within the neturel renge. end beyond its boundsry did not exert eny substen-
tiel influence on the response of the drosophiles to the field.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pl)“ (IPI’ICIM. USE ONLY

b) Contact of the Droeophilaa' with the Current-Conducting Surface. In one
aeriee of experimenta, the paper lining wae removed from the current-cerrying
lower plate. Ae a result of thie. the droaophilae were crawling directly on
the poliehed copper plate. The relatione of the responee levels with and
without content in five experimente were ae followe: 1,1. 1.0, 0.9. 1.2. and
1.3. The differencee between the experiments and the control are obviouely
u..certain.

Thus, according to our data. direct contact between the droeophila end the
current-conducting eurface hardly chengee their reaponee to the field. Let
ue note that in Bdwarda' experimenta (1960) droeophilaa reaponded to the
field only during contact with a current-carrying aurface. It is true. how-
ever. that thie contact ia very relative due to the well-known high electric
reeietence of the body integumente of ineecta.

c) The Effect of Air humidity on the Reeponao Level. Different levela of

air humidity in the chambera wee created by means of aaturated ealt aolutiona
(Nacl about 77 7., “0003): about 56 7., 8301: about 36 1) ea well ae by meant
of braided pieces of cotton eoaked in water (about 100 T) end calcined gren-
ulea of calcium eilicete (about 0 1). The aalt eolutiona end cotton breide

were placed in circular plaetilin traugha eurrounding the experimental chem-
bore. Theae trougha were lower than the aide paper walls of the chambers by
fractione of 1 Ian, due to which air of a definite degree of humidity entered

the chamber.

Each experiment wee conducted with three degreee of humidity. All experi-
mente neceeearily included a variant with S6 7. humidity. The minimum number
of experimente were done at a humidity of 0 2 (three experimenta, 30 obeer-
vatione), and the maximum number of experimente were done at 56 1 humidity
(13 experiments, 130 obaarvatione).

If we take the reeponee level at 56% humidity to be equal to unity, then we
emall obtain the following dependence of the reeponae level on the huidity:
0‘7. hunidity ~- 0.6; 361 -- 1.1: 561 -- l; 0.77% .. 0.8 and 1007. -- 0.3.

All differencee are highly certain (P> 0.999) with the exception of reeponeee
at 310 and 56 1 huidity. Thue, when humidity increaecd in the interval from
36 to 1007., the reeponee fella off clearly.

If droaophilae etay for eeveral houre in chambere with different levela of
humidity, the reeponee in the chambers with low humidity (36 and S6 1) de-
clinee noticeably and, finally. the reeponee levels at a varioue degreee of
humidity come cloaer together. Evidently, thie decline in the reeponae level
ie connected with the "drying" of the droeophilee, which becomee noticeable
in the chamber with zero humidity even at the beginning of the experiment.

Biological Variability of Reeponaee. The reeponeee of the droaophilee to
the field are practically independent of their age. Reeponeee of melee are
eomewhat higher than thoee of femalee. There ia a very weak poeitive correl-
ation between the preliminary level of mobility of droeophilae before the
enperiment and the level of the reeponee. however. it ie not certain.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a rule, responses are somewhat higher in the second half of the day, dur-
ing the time of the maximum mobility of the drosophilas.

There is a marked seasonal periodicity of the responre in spite of the fact
that the culture is kept under constant temperature and stable conditions
all year round. The optimal time for the observation of responses is hay-June,
although very high responses can be observed during other months. Unfortun-
ately, standard experiments were not conducted every month. Nevertheless,
there were definite regularities: in February, none of the ten experiments
yielded noticeable responses, one experiment conducted in March gave a weak
response -- 25%, three experiments conducted in April yielded an average of
63%, one experiment in Hay -- 827., 19 experiments in June and 26 experiments
in July -- an average of 71 and 561, respectively. One experiment in August
yeilded an unexpected high response -- 79 percent, three experiments in
September -- an average of 487., one experiment in October -- 22 (although
nonstandard experiments conducted in October show that a rather high level
of response is observed sometimes during this month). From November until
spring, we were unable to observe any responses of drosophilas to the field.

Recurrence of the Effect. We have already mentioned that the minimum level
of the response observed by us in the sunset was l3!, and the maximum level
was 931. Both of these levels were observed on the days which were close to
one another in drosophilas of almost identical age from a standard culture,et

the same time of day, and the same illumination, temperature, and air hu-
uldl‘Ye

It is natural to assume that this variability of responses can be caused only

by some external causes, i.e., some factors which are usually not controlled
and which' penetrate through the walls of the laboratory.

we have already conducted experiments which showed that ionisation and elec-
tric conductivity of the air cannot be these factors. In search of these
factors, we analysed correlations between the levels of various natural fac-
tors and response level in 65 daily standard experiments. Moreover, a number
of additional experiments were conducted, which revealed the influence of
certain artificially created factors on the response level.

a) Electromagnetic Oscillations of Atmospheric Origin (atmospherics). The
average hourly number of the discharges of atmospherics at a frequency of

7.2 ms was determined by the members of the department of atmospheric elec-
tricity of the 600 with the aid of a storm recording device. we did not de-

tect any correlation between these indices and the response level of the
drosoph ilas .

we also tried to-determine the effect of atmospherics by artificially chang-
ing their level. The lowering of the level of the atmospherics was accom-
plished by shielding the chambers with an iron net (wire diameter 0.5 I,
site of mesh 2 a). higher levels of atmospherics were created by the fol-
lowing four methods:

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (II-‘HCIM. USE ONLY

.. Potential from a 65-7A oscillator was fed to the plates of the chambers
_ for an hour before the experiment.

-- The same potential from the same oscillator was fed to the plates both
before the experiment and during it.

.. A magnetic tape recording of natural atmospherics was fed to the plates
before and during the experiment.

-- Artificial discharges were created near the chamber during the experiment.

No certain changes in the responses were detected in any of these variants
of the experiment.

b) Gradient of the Atmosphere Potential. Measurements of the gradient of
the atmosphere potential are conducted constantly by the members of the de-
partment of atmospheric electricity of the 660. This factor is not one of
the factors penetrating into closed laboratory premises. Nevertheless, in
our search for a mutually correlated complex of factors, we tried to find
correlation between the potential gradient and the response level, but did
not succeed.

c) Perturbed Variations of the Geomagnetic Field. Continuous observations
of the state of the geoma netic field were conducted near our laboratory by
the members of the IZHIR lnstituteof Terrestrial Magnetism, the lonoaphere,
and Radio Have Propagation] of the USSR Academy of Sciences. The three-hour
indices of geomagnetic perturbance K and 26-hour sums of these indices 2!!
which were made available to us by the members of the institute did not show
any correlation with the response level. however, after a very heavy mag-
netic storm of 6 July 1976, we observed a total depression of both mobility,
and the response of the drosophilas to the field.

d) Atmospheric Pressure. we did not detect any correlation between the re-
sponse levels and the atmospheric pressure (three-hour indices according to
the data of the meteorological station at the 660 "Voyaykovo" base).

e) lnfrasonic Background. lnfrasound is an ordinary factor which, however,
as a rule, is not taken into consideration by researchers. Sources of infra-
sound can be wind, various vehicles, industrial installationa,snd elevators
in buildings. Moreover, powerful infrasounds which spread very far occur

in polar auroras occurring during heavy geomagnetic storms, earthquakes,
eruptions of volcanoes. as well as during the movement of large atmospheric
fronts (Vladimirskiy, 1974). Very little is known about the effect of infra-
sound on live organisms.

In our experiments in a cylindrical chamber (height 50 mm, diameter 105 mm).
we created alternating compression and rarefaction of the air corresponding
to the passing of an infrasonic wave. The bottom of the cylinder was covered
with a rubber film in the center of which a tin plate 20 mm in diameter was

glued. A small electromagnet was secured below the cylinder. when electric

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (IFPICIM. USE ONLY

current passed through the electromagnet, it pulled the plate and the film 1.5-
2 In downward. Thus, the amplitude of the occurring infrasound was of the or-
der of lo dyn/cmz. The source of sinusoidal low-frequency current fed to the
elcctromagnet was a 62-16 oscillator. The main experiments were conducted
with a current of 8 as. Consequently, the infrasonic oscillations occurring
in response to each half-cycle of current had a frequency of 16 hr and vsrged
on the sound audible to Ian. At the top, the cylinder was hermetically sealed
with a glass lid.

An ordinary chamber used for observing the responses of drosophilas to the
field (220 v/cm, 50 he) was placed within the cylinder. Other chambers out-
side the cylinder served as the control. In order to avoid vibration as far
as possible, the chamber within the cylinder was suspended on rubber strips,
and the chambers outside the cylinder were placed on a thick porolon lining.
The intensity of the current passing through the Ingnet was regulated in such
a way that the plate would be attracted to the magnet but would not hit it.

The experiments started with observation on the responses of the drosophilas
to the electric field before the infrasound was switched on. having con-
vinced ourselves that the response levels in the experimental and the control
chambers were close to one another, we switched on the infrasound. The dro-
sophilas were under its influence for 1.5-2 hours. After this, we observed
again the responses of the drosophilas to the field of the same parameters
with the infresound switched on.

In 1.5-2 hours, the response level changed both in the experiment, and in
the control. However, the response remained at the same level only in two
out of the sixteen experiments with infrasound. In all other instances,
the response dropped considerably and reached, on the average, about 0.6 of
the former level. The decline of the response under the effect of infra-
eound was highly certain (P 70.999).

In eight control measurement: ofresponses, their level could change in any

direction. however, on the average, the response remained at the former
level (1.0).

Special experiments with an electromagnet showed that the variable magnetic
field penetrating into the chamber together with the infrasound could not
cause changes in the response level.

Thus, the preliminary experiments conducted by us indicate that the infra-
aonic background could be the probable cause of the variability of the re-
sponse level of drosophilas to the electric field. In any case, this was

the only factor under whose effect we observed changes in the responses
while all other conditions were standard. Evidently, the more intensive the
infrmsound and the longer its effect, the higher is the threshold of the
response of the drosophila to the field. Several additional experiments
conducted by us showed that an infrasound with a frequency of 0.1 hr, evi-
dendly, also lowers the response level. however, low sound frequencies, evi-
dently, on the contrary, increase the responses of drosophilas.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this connection, it is interesting to note that almost all observations
conducted in the city laboratory showed no responses of drosophilas to the
electric field. All results cited here were obtained in experiments con-
ducted in a rural area, where the vibrational background and the infrasonic
background connected with it are considerably weaker than in the city. Also,
it is not ruled out that the absence of responses which we observed after

a heavy magnetic storm was connected with the effect of powerful infrasounds
of natural origin on the drosophilas.

The results obtained by us show that natural electric fields must have a sub-
stantial effect on the behavior of drosophilas. Increase in the electric
field intensity which, as a rule, is connected with the appearance of clouds
and the approaching of foul weather, hinders the mobility of drosophilas and,
evidently, their flight, as a result of which the drosophilas move to shel-
tered spots.

Our observations also make it possible to suggest some ideas about the field
perception mechanism. The main facts obtained by us are as follows: 1) re-
sponse increases with the field intensity; 2) response is similar in the el-
ternating and constant fields; 3) the response level is lower in the constant
field than in the alternating field, and the response is maximal at the fre-
quency of 10 he; a) the response does not depend on the polarity of the
plates; 5) the response is practically independent of the level of the ion-
ization and electric conductivity of the air; 6) the response does not depend
on the contact of the drosophilas with the current-conducting platet; 7) the
response increases as air humidity decreases in the interval of loo-3&1.

The hypothesis proposed by us regarding the perception of the field as mech-
anical forces arising under the interaction of the body charge with the ex-
ternal field is in line with these facts. however, the absence of a connec-
tion between the response and the electric conductivity of the air is incon-
sistent with this conclusion, but, evidently, the drainage of the body charge
is negligible even at a high level of electric conductivity of the air.

The hypothesis that the field is perceived as a current flowing through the
air and the body of the organism is inconsistent with the facts that the re-
sponse increases as the air humidity decreases and that the response is in-
dependent of the contact with the plates and the level of the electric con-
ductivity of the air.

If our hypothesis is valid, the alternating field must cause a peculiar swing-
ing of the object. He assume, that resonance phenomena are also possible
here. If we assume that the body of a drosophila is fixed at one point,

then the resonance frequency for such a "pendulum" must be about 10 hs, which
is well in agreement with the results of the experiments. Responding to an
additional force, as well as to "swinging", the drosophila ceases to move,
which can be easily observed by placing the drosophila in an air stream in
which turbulent oscillation phenomena always occur near the wells.

however, we believe that it is premature to explain the response to the field
by the perception of mechanical effects alone.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The studies conducted by us alao make it possible to estimate the cffccta
of varioua "penetrating" factors on the reproducibility of the experiment.
Searching for such biologically actiVe factora in one of the main prchleaa
nrlning in studying the effects of the weather and aolar activity on organ-
laaa. as well as biological clocka.

Our data show that one of auch factors could he infraaounda both of natural
and artificial origin.

ll

2.

3.

Bibliography

Afonina. V. M.; Yer-hove, N. 1.; Zolotarev. Yo. Kh.; Korol'. ‘l‘. 8.; and
Chernyahev, V. B. 1976. In the collection: "True Hotha. Pyralid Hotha.
Leather Eaters." No 6. HGU [Hoacov State Univeraity]. Hoacov. p 73.

Vladimirakiy, B. M. 1m. "Atlaoaphcric Infraaound aa a Poaaible Factor
Transmitting the Effect of Solar Activity on the Bioaphere," 12V muster
ASTROFIZICIESKOY OBSERVATORII [Proceedinga of the Criaean Aatrophyaical
Observatory], 52, Moacov. Nauka.

Comer, H. c. 1971. 12V AN MTV 85R [Proceedinga of Latvian SSE Acad-
emy of Sciences], No lo, p 69.

shoven. n. 1971. "m: naaekonykh"[tngeet Kingdom], Hoacov, nu.
dearda. o. x. 1960. emu J ZOOL. 38. No 5, 399.
m. u. c. l96l. cam m, as. No 5, 391.

'l‘shernyahev. U. 3.; Erahova. N. 1.; Tikhonova, E. V.: and Shakhanova.
E. H. 1973. PEDOBIODOGIA, 13. 1.37.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Nauka". "taveatiya All SSSR, aeriya hiologichcakaya",

1978

10.233
C80: 1870

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m EFFECT OF STRONG mmm 7131.08 0" m ACTIVE TRANSPORT IN m CHOROID
".8803

bio-cow DOKMDY aumn mun sssn (Reporte of the USSR Icadeey of Sciencee)
in Ruaaian Vol 262 No 2. I978 pp “5-668

Article by 8. Ye. Drealer, V. li. Breeler, Ii. N. Vaeil’yeva, and I. N. Kae-
bekov, Leningrad lnetitute of Nuclear Phyeica ineni B. P. Konetantinov of
the USSR Acadeny of Sciencee and lnetitute of Evolutionary Phyeiology and
liochenietry ineni l. H. Sachenov of the 088R Academy of Sciencea. Leningrad,
eubnitted by Acadeeician Ye. li. [rent 25 May 78]

[Text] Until recently. it waa doubted that uagnetic fields could affect
biological objecta. In fact. eince alnoat all Ioleculee which enter into
the conpoeition of biological tieeuee and orgene are dianagnetic. the lag-
netic field ie capable of inducing in then a very enll magnetic nonent

y - xii. where Ii ia the nagnetic field inteneity, and 3c ia nagnetic eua-
ceptibility. The energy acquired by euch a want in the ugnetic field

pl! ie vaniehingly nail in coeparieon with the energy of them! notion if!
(I: -- loltenann'e conatent. 'i' .. abeolute te-pereture). 'i‘hue. for the lag-
netic £1.14 a - a . 105 A/IOO‘ Oerated) the mum ﬁll/u < 10-6. It it
clear that any noticeable effect of the nagnetic field on individual biolog-
icel noleculee ie out of the queetion. however. there are exceptione to
thia general rule: liquid cryetala (neaophaeee). ‘i‘hey fora oriented domino
containing nillione of individual loleculee. It in well known that liquid
cryatale are oriented by magnetic fielde. aince the criterion pli/lt‘i‘ for then
becouee noticeably greater than one. 'i'hia ie the reault of einultaneoua
orientation of nillione of noleculea for-ing the domino.

Typical repreeentativee of eutectic liquid cryetale are lipoide fro. which
all biological ne-branee are built. Therefore. the orientation effect of
the magnetic field on the fragmente of bionenbranee it well eatebliehed

[1, 2]. One of the functional unifeetationa of Iagnetic orientation wee
etudied by ue in worka [3, 6] in which we inveetigated the active traneport
of fluorescein by the newbranee of the tubulee of the kidneya of the frog.

This work givee the reeulte of atudiee on the influence of the Iagnetic field
on the active tranaport of fluoreacein in the choroid plexua of a rabbit
brain. ‘i’hia object has a aubetantial advantage over the kidney: ita

26

ron OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIM. In»: ONLY

epithelial cella fore folda which. on the average. are arranged in e parti-
cular manner in relation to the nacroecopic plane of the organ. Therefore,
it ie poeeihle to accoeplieh the orientation of the nembranee of the pleeue

in relation to the eagnetic field.

The technique of the renovel of the choroid lexue and the Iethod of eeaeur-
ing the concentration are deecribed in work 5]. In order to etudy the ef-
fect of the eagnetic field on the traneport of fluoreecein, the choroid
plexue wee etraightened out between two nylon nete eecured in epeciel freeee.
The latter were placed in a conetantotenperature veeeel located between polee
of an electrcugnet or in the 'hoarl" channel of a euperconducting eole-
noid. By turning the freea around ite axle. we could orient the neebranee
of the plexue in relation to the eagnetic field in varioue nannera. The
eecond plexue of the eaee enieal wee ueed ea a control and wee incubated
eimltaneouely with the firet plexue outeide of the eagnetic field. In each
eeperinent we need h-S paire of choroid plexueee. The meaeureeente of flu-
oreecein were repeated 30-60 tinee in varioue eectione of the ant eenbrane.
The incubation oediun wae Ringer-lien!“ eolution of the following coepoeition
(in em: Neel 136.8; mi 5.6.; CeCl 1.25; iigSO‘ 0.0; "301; 0.5; anllPo‘
0.36; M2904. 0.1.5; glucoee 5.5: lie 03 6.1; the pll of the eolution wee main-
tained at a level of 7.6-7.5. In the inetancee when the content of ione of
Ca“. lia", or It+ changed in the incubation oediue, the overall oeeonolarity
of the eolutione wee eaintained at a conetant level by adding choline chlo-
ride or by co-peneating with other catione. Oxygen wee blown through the
eolution in the courae of the entire incubation tine. The treneport rate

of fluoreacein wee deter-ined by Iaeaauring the concentration of the fluore-
ecein peeeing inalde the plexue in is einutee of incubation. The concentra-
tion of fluoreacein in the nediue in all experinente wee 10"“. The fact
that we were dealing with active traneport of fluoreacein and not with dif-
fueion wee proved by the fact that treneport progreeeed ageinat the concen-
tration gradient. within the plexua (in blood capillariee), fluoreecain
concentration at the end of incubation wae 0-12 tilee higher than in the
eurrounding nediue. for each pair of plexueee (taken from one rabbit), the
average ratio of "experiment" (traneport in the Iagnetic field)l"control"
(traneport outeide of the field) wee deter-ined. Then, theee relative veluee
were averaged over the entire eeriee of mink and a 95 1 confidence inter-
val wee calculated. The experieente conducted by ue ahowed, fire: of all.
that influence of the magnetic field on the active traneport of fluoreecein
depende critically on the orientation of the neebrana. Only with the nor-
eel orientation of the plane of the plexue in relation to the vector of
the magnetic field inteneity, the latter haa a atrong effect on the tram-
port. liowaver. if the plane of the plexue ie parallel to the field, the ef-
fect la insignificant. Intermediate reeulte are obtained with other englee.
Therefore, in all experiaente deecribed below. the plexue plane wee arranged
perpendicularly to the direction of the eagnetic field. Thie arena that the
plicate newbrene of the plexue wee oriented chiefly along the line of force.
In theee experiiaente. the magnetic field inteneity wee naintained conetant
and equal to 1.75 ' 106 Ala (22403 0e). The “mature of the nediue wee
J6 degreee C. and the incubation period wee ls Iinutee.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'Oli Ol’l’ICIM. USE ONLY

._ __ _ _. A ._h-‘
ax. —----. 5 r-s x

Pield lnteneity. k04-

l'igure l. The effect of the eagnetic field inteneity on the
treneport of fluoroecein in the choroid plexue.
0n the Y-axie -- the ratio of the fluoreecein trane-
port in the aagnetic field to the canaport outeide
the field. Incubation conditiouzfluoreecein con-
centretion in the oediua 10’" ll. concentration of
calcium lone 0.12 Iii. incubation period 13 ein.

The following incubation conditione were changed: 1) concentration of aodiu-
iona: 2) concentretion of potaeeiun lone; 3) concentretion of celebs ione;
lo) introduction of K-atrophanthin into the incubation eediua: preincubation
of the choroid plexue in the couree of 2.5-3 houre at 0 degree 0.

The Iain reeulte of the experioente ere ehown in ‘i'able l.

The lffect of the liegnetic Field on the Active l‘reneport of

Pluongugin in thg Choroid lea
:ncubation Conditione m M" °f

ontrol nioale

Normal linger-nenhe eolution 1.863007 6
Solution with a low concentration of Ca2+ (0.1 of

none!) 0.69.10.08 S
ﬂoral solution with addition oi’ R-etwphanthm

(5'10 Ii) 1.88:0.21 0
Solution with e low concentration of 0a“ with

addition of K-etrophanthin 1.9010.” 5
Hediua without eodiua (eodiun replaced with

choline chloride) 03330.06 4
Hediu without ooteeeiu- (poteeriuo replaced with

eodiu) 1.0510.” ’0
normal eolution. sabre-e ore-incubated at 0°C 1.003040 I.

The Iain reeult of our etudiee are: alwct a two-fold increaee in the fluor-
eacein traneport under the effect of the magnetic field in a nor-a1 incubav
tion Iediul and e coqletely oopoaite effect (inhibition of traneport) in
the oediu- with e low concentretion of calcium ione. Addition to the actual
incubation nediu- of K-etrophanthin. which ie an inhibitor of K‘, Na“

26

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dependent ATPaee [adenoeinetriphoephateee]. doee not change the relative ef-
fect of the magnetic field on the traneport. however. if R-etrophanthin ie
added to a medium with a low calcium concentration. than the oppoeite effect
ia obeerved: the magnetic field begine to etimulate the traneport of fluor-
eecein in the plexue.

Figure l ehowe the dependence of the effect of the magnetic field on the
traneport upon the field inteneity in the incubation medium with a low con-
centration of Ca2* ione. He can eee that eaturation eeta in at a field in-
teneity of a~a 2.50106 All. The etimuletion effect of the magnetic field on
the traneport in a normal incubation medium hae an analogoua form.

Ae hae been mentioned abowe, lipoid moleculee forming liquid-cryatal domaine
can be a eubetantial real object of the influence of the magnetic field in

a biological membrane. The atructure of the membrane ie determined by the
influence of a number of fectore on the lipoid domain: electrical field gen-
erated by the ionic pump depending on K‘. Na*-dependent ATPeee; thermal mo-
tion of lipoid moleculea. the greater. the leae the etrength of linkage be-
tween then and the wiecoeity of the lipoid layer. In turn, the etructure

of the lipoid layer can determine the orientation of the traneport channele
in the membrane. me well ae the ectivity of a number of eneymee built-in into
the membrane, primarily ATPaee.

In order to determine whether or not the effect of the magnetic field on the
traneport ia connected with the changee in ite potential. we atudied the ad-
eorption by the choroid plexue of a negatively charged fluoreecent dye l, d
eniline-nephthalene-eulfonate (ANS whoae ability of being adsorbed on the
membrane depende on ite potential 6]. Heeeuramente were conducted in the
following mann r: a) The plexua wae kept for one minute in a normal medium
containing lo M ANS and then wee waahed for 30 minutee in a medium without
ANS. Such eaperimente were conducted both in the magnetic field and outeide
the field. After this. the fluoreacence of both membranee wee meaeured and
the "experiment"l"control” ratio wee calculated, which wee found to be equal
to l.0§:9.02. b) The plexua wee incubated in a normal medium without ANS
(one membrane in the magnetic field. and the other outeide the field). Then
they were eubmerged in an ANS eolution for one minute, rineed in a eolution
without ANS, and fluoreecence wee meeeured. In thie caee. the "experiment/
control" ratio wee l.0130.01. Evidently, the magnetic field doee not exert
an appreciable effect on the tranamembrane potential of the choroid plexue.
A poeaible explanation of the eifecte obeerved by ue ie the influence of the
changee in the orientation of the lipoid leyere under the effect of the mag-
netic field on the channele for the traneport of organic ecide or on the
activity of K‘. Ne‘vdependent ATPaae built-in into the membrane. Under the
conditione when the work of thie enzyme ie euppreeaed coneiderably (for ex-
ample, during incubation at a low temperature or when potaeaium iona are
excluded from the incubation medium). the magnetic field doee not exert in-
fluence on the proceea of the active traneport into the plexue. Under theee
unfavorable conditione, ea ie ehown by the reeulta of our preceding work
[5], the rate of the active traneport decreaaee by approximately $0 1 and.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

evidently, no structural changes caused in the membrane by the magnetic field
are capable of exerting an appreciable effect on the transport process.
X-strophanthin, which inhibits the work of ATPasa. evidently. changes the
structure or the enayue-lipoid complex. The effect of the magnetic field in
this case consists in coopensation of these unfavorable structural changes.
Calcium has a substantial effect on the structure or the phospholipoid layer
due to the interaction with the phosphate groups. Its absonto causes con-
siderable changes in the structure of the doaainaend the effect of the nag-
netic field changes its sign. Thus. we see that the problem of the effect
of the magnetic field on the protease» occurring in the Innhrano is quite
calpllcated. In order to soivu it. it is absolutely necessary to conduct
structural studies on nenbranes in u magnetic field so as to the a clear
idea about the nature of the orientation of the lipoid doIains. He are con-
ducting detailed studies at the present time.

Received 6 April l978

3 lb l iography
l. Chalatonitis, u.. and chageaux. c. R. 58R. 0.. Vol 275. 687 (1973)

2. Neugebauer. 0.; Dlsuroch. A.; and worcster, 0. P83 LETTERS. Vol 78,
Jl (1977)

3. Bresler. c. Ye., and Brssler. V. H. DAR [Reports of the USSR Academy
of Sciences], Vol m. 936 (1974)

6. Iresler. V. N.: Bresler. s. 8.; and Nikitorov. A. A. BIOCNIH ET IIOPHYS
ACTA. Vol 506, 526 (1973).

S. Iresler, V. H.; Nikiforov. A. A.; and Siaonovskiy. L. N. ?l2IOL ZHURN
[Physiological Journal]. 62. 73 (l976)

6. Shipley. 6. "Biological Helbranes," 1973. p l
COPYRIGHT: Iadatel'stvo "ﬂanks“, “Doklady Akadeuii nauk SSSR". 1978

10,233
080: [870

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oﬂ’lCML USE ONLY

CHANGE IN MWIVI‘N OP WICIN-NDIHBD HOSPIIOLIPID mm
EXPOSED TO A "16! rmuwcv BWWC ”EDD

Noncow SIOPIZIM in Meeien No e, 1978 pp 732-733

[Article by V. v. nethelw. s. I. Alekeeyev, end P. A. Grigor'yov.
083R Acedeey of Scieneee Inetitute of biological Phyeice. Puehchino.
Moscow Obleet]

[Text] our research wee conducted on lecithin uedorene eyeteme
obtained with the method suggested by Mueller. ot el. (l). The
concentration or alaeeticin in the electrolyte eolution wae 0.8 ug/el
on both eidee or the methane. A waveguide device wee nee-bled to
irrediate the neebranee with e high frequency electrooegnetio iield
(at W). Bnergy propageted in the weveguide an e traveling wave
with a etending weve factor not greater than l.3. The frequency or
the power eupply generetor wee 0.9 Gilt. under theee experimentel
conditione the intensity of the inteer tield in the electrolyte
eolution ie not eore then S.“ I loo/i (volte/eeter). where P ie
power eupplied to the waveguide in wette. In the experi-ente. the
duration of the irradiation pulee did not exceed 4 eec. with the
intervale between puleee being not leee then lo eec. Theee irre-
diation conditione precluded heeting or the electrolyte eolution
within the teepereture eeeeurelent precieion linite (3 0.5 degrees).

When elaneticin-eoditied binoleculer phoepholipid eenbrenee (am)
ere irradieted by an Ii? field, the electric vector of which is per-
pendicular to the plene of the Iabrene. we obeerve e revereible
decline in conductivity of the mm (by one order of negnitude end
eore)--eee Figure i. In the ceee where the electric vector of the
W in parellel to the plane or the Inbrene, for precticel purpoeee
the effect doee not develop (or 2-3 eec. Bxpoeure or am to on

an m in the ebeence of eleneticin did not lead to noticeable
change in lee-brene conductivity either.

he the eelt concentretion end the inteneity or the me grow.

reletive chenge in oenbrane conductivity War/i” declines. with
the chenge in cup/o being greeter with Kcl eolution then with

29

FOR OPTICIAA. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and solution (t‘iguru 2). The reciprocals c! on o are ehown in
the figure. lmvu. our/o does not depend on e enetioin conoentntion.

Inc I l

Lawton"

Figure 1. change in conductivity of Mentioin-Iiodiliod
Phoephoiipid lie-bun“ Irredieted by en an N? m Pulee

in e 1 a Re! Solution: Arrow indicete noeente when field
is turned on (6) end or: (f).

”'11?
:0!- ‘ '

“‘9‘

    

. . '. I 0
II J! I I p'wltu

rigure 2. Dependence of Chenge in wane Conductivity
on at m Intensity et Different Selt Concenttetione:
Curves 1 end 2 oorteepond to 0.5 end 2 H mm solution:
cutvee 3 end 4 oorreepond to 0.5 end 2 in mi eolution.
Curvee 5 end 8 inuetxete the dependence 1n (6/0”) ~ Pap,

I

30
POR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

It ohould ho notod that hoating can oloo cauao o doclino in conductivity
otanolo-otioin-aoditiod aodarano. and that thio chanco in conduc-
tivity io propcttional to tho inoroooo in tomorotuzo.

oonooquontly chanco in tho conductivity of on aloaoticin-ocditiod
wrano oapoood to a Hold can bo tho product c! hootinc of
aloaoticin channolo. ln thia cooo tho doolino in tho oyotu'a
conductivity io oquivalont to hoatinc of tho channola by 12- at
anti-u liold intonoity. locouoo tho ooluticn io not hoatod during
tho tino on irradiation. local caloric hootinc o! outnno channolo
auot bo hypothooiaod.

1! yo aaouao that tho ohaorvod oiioct hoo a local caloric notuto.

vo auot rojoot tho cloaoical voluoo of tho thonal conductivity
factor for aicroroqiono ouch oo channola in phoapholipid nubnnoo.
tho typical tiao of oatabliohncnt of now conductivity valuoa “to:
tho (iold ia turnod on (0.2-0.4 ooc) and tho ccamtod Iagnitudo o!
chonnol hoating quantitativoly proouppooo that a chonnol oxporioncoa
hoot looo only through radiation.

In ccncluoion tho authoxo oxprou their coop gtototulnooo to G. N.
Borootovokiy for hio conatant attontion to tho work and hio diocuooion

of its :ooulto.

BIBMOGMPKY

1. ”action 9.. Rudin, D. 0., and Hoocott. I. c.. J. ms. 6138..
Vol 67, 1963. p 53‘.

COPYRIGﬂ'I Imtol’stvo "mama ”BioflxlkA', 1978

11004
C801 1870

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'Oll OHICIAL 088 ONLY

"DC: 616-001.2-O92.9-036.8-07:612.55/56

MIRA!!!“ REACTION AND SURVIVAL 01' MW“. mm “P0880 N
VARIOUS [WSI‘HRS OI "IMAM

Moscow emm' MMMI‘I‘AL'NOY 3101.001! 1 $01181“? in Russisn No 9.
1978 pp 282-283

[Article by V. L. hetrenine. V. H. Poesdsheye end I. A. Rudehov. Scientific
Resesrch Institute of Hedicel Rediology (director: Pro! Ye. A. Zherbin).
088R Acedeey of hedicel Sciences. Obnineh. eubeitted 5 Dec 77 (presented
by P. n. Gorieontov. Acsdeeicisn of the 088R Acede-y oi Hedicel Sciences)!

[Text] A study use eede of dynenics of body tespersture

in the course of the dsy. effects on this pereseter in CIA nice
end Dieter rets kept in contsiners for irrsdietion. es vell
es the teepereture reection end survivel siter exposure to
3m? (superhigh frequency] fields vsryin; in intensity.

It wee deeonstreted thet the extent of tenpereture eleve-

tion end survivsl rste depend on the flux density end
duretion of exposure. The extent of tenpereture elevetion .
during exposure end extent of decline of this pereeeter siter
exposure my be considered prognostic signs of lesion due to
the SH? field (em. 918933.. No 9. 1978. p 282).

Key words: sap field; body teepersturs; survivel rste.

It is necesssry to study survivel rste end tsupereture reectione of sni-sls.
not only when they ere exposed to high intensity 8!!! fields [1. 3. 5. 6).
but in developing sethods of tresteent end prevention of scute redioueve
lesions [2. ‘1. however. the contredictory evslustion of these perustere
is ettributeble to the leek of s stenderd nethodoloaicel spprosch. l'or
exesple. sons suthors believe thet in the csee of ecute rsdiovsve lesion.
the sniesle' die priurily during exposure. uhile those thet survive the
ecute iector do not die thereeiter [3]. According to the observetione of
other resesrchers. the deeths occuring st the long postrsdietion tern ere
of subetentiel sipnificencs [2]. Studies of body teq'tereture ere ususlly
united to the period of exposure. end they ere not pursued in subsequent
hours or deys. slthoueh thereontric dete ere of considereble interest to
cosplex evsluetion of the condition of the orunise following exposure to
uicroveves.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hui IWPH‘IAI. IIMH "NLY

for this reason. our objective was to Investigate the temperature reaction
and survival of experimental animals of different species following
exposure to thermal intensities of 8"? fields.

Methods

He conducted this study on puberal 03A mice and Histar rats. The temperature
indices and survival rate were studied for 30 days after single exposure to
microanes (delivered by the physiotherapeutic bath-58 unit in the range

of the shaped wave. 2375 an: frequency. power flux density (PPH) 10. do and
60 HH/cm‘. exposure time 10. 30. b5 and 60 min. ambient temperature 18-22°C.
relative humidity 60-752). The animals were irradiated in special containers
made of radiolucent material and each animal was in an individual cubicle
during exposure. Rectal temperature was measured using a TPKH-l electric
thermometer with a skin sensor. before exposure and at different intervals
after it.

The results were submitted to processing using the criterion of Student.
as well as elements of correlation and regression analysis.

Results

In the course of the day (between 0900 and 1600 hours). the body temperature
of the mice drops by an average of 1.5’. and significant individual fluctua-
tions are observed. Unlike mice. the average temperatures of rats constituted
36. 36.1 and 36.1'0 at 0900. 1300 and 1600 hours. respectively.

Table 1. Mean body temperature increment as function of exposure and
intensity of irradiation of animals of different species

PPM. Bxposur AT. oc

Species iii/cuea time. mi
so to 0.1
3 a 3'3

"1“ on so ale
to 45 L1
to no 0.:
:3 a: at

u” do so .130
so so as
oo 45 3.0

in rats exposed for 30 min (PPM I 60 HH/cm’), motor restlessness was observed
by the l0th-20th min of exposure, the animals then became listless. developing
hyperemia of the ears. tail. tips of the paws and sanious discharge from the
nose. The body temperature was elevated by a mean of 2.1’c ismediately after

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

exposure; 3 h later and for the next 3-5 days it reseined o.s-1.3°c lower

then the initiol level. SOIQ deaths were observed on the 19th and 23d post-
exposure dsys.

In another series of tests using the ease intensity of microwaves we prolonged
exposure tise to double the previous duration (60 sin). The snieels in
this series could be divided into three groups: 1) those that died "under
the bees" [during exposure]. 2) those that died within the first 24 h after
exposure and 3) those that survived or died at the long postexposure tise.
The initial teepereture leVel did not effect the survivel rete; at the ease
ties. the tesperature increeent during expoeure constituted e neon of 6°C
esong snieels thet died within the let day. and -l.5' eeong those that
survived or died at the long term. The body temperature of irrodieted rats
dropped to u-as'c 3 h after exposure and to are in those thst died within
the first 2!. h.

The Figure illustrates the results of themutry on rets over e 30-day
period. The body tespereture of these enisels reoeined low for the first
lo dnye after exposure, then reverted to norsal, but dropped sgein prior
to death on the 25th and 30th days (rets Nos 2 and 8).

 

JJ, \
\I '
BefqufMiuosnunﬁ l5 :0 1: an I

I Postexposure deys

Body temperature of rats following single exposure to nicrowsves
(PPM - loo mule-3. exposure tine 60 min). X-axis. tine after exposure;
y-sxis. body telpereture

l) rat no 2 2) No A 3) No [not given] 4) No 8

A cosperison of teepereture increnent in the course of irradiation (+61) end
decline thereof thereafter. in relstion to the base level (-61) in sons
anieels revealed that there is a rsther sarlted correlation between then
(coefficient of correlation r - 0.66. I - -.12). Thus, e lore marked

3!.
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

temperature elevation during exposure and Easter decline after exposure were
observed in animals that died within 26 h after irradiation.

In analogous studies of mice exposed for 30 min with PPM I 60 W/cmz. there
was negligible elevation of body temperature: but 3 h after exposure the
rectal temperature dropped to 35.1.3.0.8'6 in mice that subsequently survived
and to 29.2:1.1°c in those that expired.

Exposure of mice and rats to 10 lM/cm2 for different periods of time was
not associated with changes in temperature or animal deaths.

Rats were found to be more sensitive to microwaves with the SH? field level
and exposure method we used. As a result of exposure to Slil', the changes in
temperature of mice (Table l) and death rate thereof (Table 2) were less marked
than in rats.

Table 2. Distribution of animal deaths at different postradiation times
with different exposure times and intensity of radiation

        
    

   

   

of units.

Survival
rate,

 

Nmber

  

  

-' I”
- 8 IN
2 16 66.7
_. 8 IN
._ 6 75
_ l 10

|
Note: ﬂ/ounot irradiated; 0-death during exposure period.

At the present time, it is difficult to determine the causes of animal

death at the long postradiation ten; perhaps it is attributable to the de-
adsptional influence of microwaves. lowered resistance to infections and

other deleterious factors. The decline of body temperature, which we

recorded for a long tine after exposure. evidently related to involvement

of the nervous systen and impaired thermoregulation in the irradiated organism.
is an indirect confirmation of the presence of persistent disturbances. The
extent of elevation of body temperature during irradiation and of decline

thereof after exposure may be interpreted as significant prognostic signs

in the presence of acute radiowave lesion. Animal death at the long post-
radiation term requires further coeplex investigation of the condition of

the organism using methods that permit evaluation of extent of rehabilitation
after exposure.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

2.

3.

lo.

5.
6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Gordon, z. V.. and bobnnovu. Ye. A. in "Trudy In-ta gigiyeny trade 1
professionul'nykh ubolcvaniy ma 888R" [works of the Institute of
Industrial nygicne and Occupational Dianna, USSR Acacia-y of Radical
Sciences). Vyp l. 1960. p 59.

Kolduyev. V. N. BYULI... EKSPBR. BIOL. [Bulletin of Experimental
Biology]. No 9, 1973, p 27.

Lebanon. Ye. A. "Biological Effects of Superhigh Frequencicu." in "Trudy
gigiycny tmda i professional'nykh ubolovuniy m SSSR," Vyp l, 1960,

p 61.

Idem, in "0 biologichcukon deyatvii cloktrougnituykh polcy ndiochutot”
[Biological Effects of Electromagnetic nadiofrcquency Fields]. Moscow.

Vyp 6, 1973. p 141.

Kikolajczyk. Ii. PAT. POI... Vol 26, 1973. p 325.

Nicholson, 8.. et 81. INDUSTR. MED. $1336.. Vol 30. 1961, p 298.

OOPYRIGRT: "Byullotcn' ekaperiuntal'noy biolosii i uditainy". 1978

10 . 657
(ISO: 1870

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR nFPIuIAL "SH HNLV

UDCI 613.l+6l2.016.b26

INTERACTION BETWEEN TNE BODY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS AS AN ENVIRONMENTAL
FACTOR

Kiev VZAINODEYSTVIYE ORGANIZHA s ELEKTROHAGRITNYHY POLYAHI KAK S raxronoa
OKRUZHAYUSRCRSY 8830? (Interaction aetween the body and Electromagnetic
Fields as an Environmental Factor) in Russian 1977 signed to press 9 Dec 17.
pp 2. 3-4. 217

lAnnotation. foreword and table of contents from book by Andrey Hikhaylovich
Serdyuk, lsdatel'stvo Naukovs Dumka. 1200 copies. 228 pages]

[Text] This book deals with the question of interaction between the body
and electromagnetic fields as an environmental factor. It formulates the
approaches for complex evaluation of the biological effects of electro-
magnetic fields on organisms on different levels of organisation. ranging
from unicellular ones to man; it describes the methods for improving the
environment in areas where there are sources of electromagnetic fields.
and it sheds light on questions of continued development of the problem.

In addition to biomedical issues, the monograph deals with sociohygienic,
engineering, urba-construction and other questions. It will be quite
useful to scientific and practical workers in the medical and biological
fields. urban builders. as well as a wide range of specialists concerned
with environmental protection.

There are 37 illustrations and 60 tables; the bibliography is on pages 207-
226.

Foreword

Unprecedented flowering of science. transformation thereof into a direct
productive force aiding in finding the optimum solutions to social problems
constitute the decisive feature of the socialistic lifestyle. Problems of
increasing the effectiveness of science and making maximum use of its
advances in our national economy become a powerful factor in accelerating
scientific and technological progress which acquires a human direction
under conditions of well-developed socialism.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR lWFIlilN. "SI-2 ONLY

Man's power over the forces of nature is constantly increasing. The past

few years have shown Conclusively that industrialization and scientific-
technolagical progress are leading to an appreciable change in the environ-
ment. Man is creating. more and more intensively. an artificial habitat

that makes it possible to isprove living and working conditions. but. not
infrequently. development of the artificial environment is in contradiction

to the biological and neural distinctions of the body. which developed in the
course of thousands of years of evolution. The lack of appropriate control

of this process could have adverse ecological and genetic consequences. and

it could be seriously detrimental to life. Par this reason. it is important
to define the nature of deleteriouaness of environmental factors. It is
iapossible to provide an unequivocal evaluation thereof. due to the complexity
of interaction between adverse factors and huaan health. as wall as the short-
age of data about aany active factors.

At the present time. physical factors. i.e.. electrical and electroeagnetic.
are acquiring particular significance along numerous environsental factors.
including those that accoapanied the evolution of living nature.

Energycapabilities are increasing in all countries of the world with each
year. Continued expansion of the use. in the national econoay. of various
forms of energy. created or intensified by man. is unquestionable. There
are the seat diverse sources of generation of energy: high-frequency.for
communication and radio broadcasting; aicrovave for radar. television and
industry; infrared. for heating instruments; energy of visible light--
lasers; ultraviolet radiation--bactericidal leaps; ionizing radiation for
the equipment of x-rey laboratories. nuclear weapons. atosic energy
installations. artificial radioactive isotopes. etc. The problem of pro-
viding for nor-a1 function of the biosphere and biogeocenoaas with the
ever increasing supply of energy in society consists of defining and
creating conditions. under which development of industry and wide use

of energy. including its new forms. would not constitute a potential hazard
to man, animal and plant kingdom of our planet.

The-number of works published on the biological effects of electromagnetic
fields and mechanismsof their action on the organism is growing constantly.
Questions of liniting the adverse effects of electromagnetic fields are
discussed by aany scientists in the world. These debates are based on the
advances of Soviet scientists. specialists in con. Polish People's Republic.
CSSR. the United States and other countries. At the present tine. more
than 700 scientists in different specialties are working on this problem.
And while the problem has still not been exhaustively formulated and there
are not enough data to answer the fundamental questions. every new discovery
node by Soviet and foreign researchers will aid in finding the routes for
continued development thereof.

This book describes distinctly the present status of the problem. There
are debatable sections in it and. of course. some o-iseions have been made.
The author devoted considerable attention to the biological role of electro-
magnetic fielda in the radiofrequency range. as being one of the present

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WFICIAI. IISR ONLY

widespread sources of energy in the environment: he has singled out un-
reached or debatable aspects and defined the possible directions of future
scientific research. At the present time. this problea concerns scientists
in many specialties. practising physicians. engineerings. urban builders
and specialists dealing with problems of environmental protection.

The author's conception of biological significance of electromagnetic fields
will undoubtedly interest the reader very much and draw the attention of
specialists, who will find in this monograph coverage of theoretical

issues and various practical aspects.

Contents Page

Foreword [by F. N. Serkov, corresponding member of the Ukrainian

Academy of Sciences) 3
Introduction 5
Chapter 1.. Effects of Electromagnetic Fields on Public Health 11
Chapter 2. Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Fields (.7

Chapter 3. Mechanisms of Biological Action of Electromagnetic Fields 79

Chapter 6. Compensatory-Adsptational Reactions of the Organism to

Electromagnetic Fields 97
Chapter 5. Electromagnetic Fields in the Biosphere 105
Earth's natural electric field 105
Artificial electric fields 109
Magnetic fields 113
Natural electromagnetic fields 117
Artificial electromagnetic fields 131
Chapter 6. Sources of Electromagnetic Fields 161
Chapter 7. inlays and Means of Defining the Characteristics of
Electromagnetic Fields 153
Chapter 8. Hays and "cans of Protection Against Electromagnetic
Fields 167
Setting standards for intensity of electromagnetic fields 167
Protective measures when working with sources of electromagnetic
fields 179
Protecting the public from electromagnetic fields 193
Conclusion 202
Bibliography 207
COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl'stvo "Naultova dunks". 1977
10.657
C80: 1870 39

FOR OFFXCIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 577.3
REACTIONS OF BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS TO MAGNETIC FIELDS

Noecou REAKTSII BIOLOGICNBSKIKH SISTEH NA HABNITNYYB POLYA in Russian 1978
signed to press 20 Feb 78 pp 2, 213

[Annotation and Table of Contents of book edited by Yu. A. Kholodov.
Izdatel'stvo Nsuks, 2,250 copies. 213 pages]

[Text] The collection ausnsrizes the achievements in the field of magneto-

biology. uhich studies the effect of artificial and natural magnetic fields on
biological systems. The reactions SY'various levels of organization of

biological systems. from nolecular to population, are described. Notice
is taken of the relationship of biological reactions to the parameters of
the sagnetic field in effect. which to a certain extent makes it possible
to control the activity of the bio-object, by changing the parameters of
the field. The bionic. ecological. therapeutic and hygienic aspects of

magnetobiology are discussed.

The book is designed for a broad range of readers: biologists. medical
personnel in various specialties. physicists. engineers and technicians
interested in biological problems.

Table of Contents

The Achievenents of Magnetoblology
Yu. A. Kholodov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Physical-Chemical Fundamentals of the Primary Mechanisms of
the Biological Action of s Magnetic Field
V. H. Arisuarkhov. L. A. Piruzyan, V. P. Tsybyshcv . . . . . . . 6
Hegnetohydrodynamic and Electrohydrodynamic Effects in the

Mechanisms of the Action of Magnetic Fields on Biological Objects
Ye. Z. Gak, G. P. Konsrov, H. 2. Oak . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’illl ill-’l’liilhl. “81-1 ONLY

Characteristics of the affect of Pulsed Magnetic Fields on
Conductive Fluids and Biological Systems
Y". V. 30PM". Ga “s Elwin. Vs Io Ml’kev‘ch. Y’s 2s 611k a a a s 39

Biochemical Aspects of the Effect of weak Lou-Frequency Magnetic
Fields
Rs Na POVIOVC. No to mzalevskayo. Va Vs sokOIOWk‘y s a a s o a ‘9

Destahilization of Monequilibrium Processes as the Basis of the
General Mechanism of the Biological Effect of Magnetic Fields
6 I p. P lckhmov I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ,9

Bioenergetics and the Regulatory Systems of an Organise 0n Exposure
to Magnetic Fields
M. A. Shishlo. S. Kh. Kubli. V. P. Muzhnyy . . . . . . . . . . 81

The Magnetosenaitivity of Microorganisms
SI A. PCVIOViCh I I I I I I I I I I O O I I I I I I I I I I I 103

Plant Reactions to Magnetic Fields
Y0. II NOV1t9k1y I I I I I I I I I I I 0 I I I I I I I I I I I 11’

Magnetic Fields, Adaptation Reactions and the Resistance of
the Organism
L. Kh. Garksvi. Ye. B. Rvskins. M. A. Ukolova . . . . . . . . 131

The Effect of Magnetic Fields on the Blood and Circulatory System
RI PI K‘kut I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1‘9

Psychophysiological Analysis of the Reactions of the nervous System
to Magnetic Fields
Y”. AI Kholodov I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 167

The Effect of Magnetic Fields on Natural Populations
"I PI Trnvktn I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I O I I I I 178

A Study of the Biottopiss of the Parameters of a weak Magnetic
Field in the Ultrnlov Frequency Range
N. I. Muza1evskaya. G. D. Shushkov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199

Magnetophores and Magnetophoric Devices
AI 5' refer I I I I I I I I I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I 209

COPYRIGMT: Izdatel'stvo "Rooks". 1978

12151
cso: 1870 END

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY