APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R00010002001 1 -0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020011-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS I./8266

6 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR TRADE AND SERVICES
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020011—6
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGiT LAUS AND REGULATIONS CWERNING WNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROPFICIAL USE ONLY.
. TRANSUTIONS 0N USSR TRADE AND SERVICES. (POUO 2/79) 6. February 1979

7. Aubwh) 0. micron. Quaint-on Rep.
9. l'ulomm; u‘annaanon Nan and Adduu II. Paopeul‘l’ull'ul Una No.
Joint Publications Research Service

l000 North Globe Road ll. “mm/o“. Ne.
Arlington, Virginia 22201

I). Soon-«in. Ouaaumoe Nun end Address ll. Type el Moon I Pevied
Coveted

As above

6. Menu"

This serial report contains intonation on international economic relations.
cor-unicutions. consumer goods. doleetic trade. transportation. manpower. and
industrial sociology.

. Key Verde end Donna Aulyeie.

USSR

International Relations
Cornerce

Consumer Goods

Domestic Trade
Economics

Hsnpouer
Telecou-unications
Trensportat ion

"5- Mouulwoe/Onn-Endhl Tet-e

lie.COSATlfnU/Gwp 5C, 51. 173

ll. Aymlsbduy Newman

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Limited Number of
Copies Available From JPRS

     

reimburse-n snag. n-ua vegans-cc new."

1’le FORM “A? I! IIPIOWCED
l-‘UR Ul"l-‘l('ll\l: USE ONLY

JPRS 13/8266
6 February

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR TRADE AND SERVICES
(rouo 2/79)

Coureurs
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC REIAQIONS

Socialist Economic Integration Among CEMA Countries
(R. Yevstigneyev; VOROSY EKORGiIKI, No 11, 1978) ....

Soviet-Polish Comission Meets on Issues in the Economic
Sciences

(A. Arkhipov; vomosx mama, lo 11, 1978)

Structure of ministers]. Cooperation oi’ cm Countries
(In. Kormnov; vomosr momma, lo 12, 1978)

TRANSPORTATION

Increasing the Efficiency of Bulk Freight Transport on
Railroads
(1.0. Kazokhovskiy; mrmm mm
M 2mm 1mm, 1977)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC "I'll/VP IONS

SWIALIBT scouculc ”RATIO“ mom CM CWNTRXB
lbscow vornosr amount! 80 ll, 1978 pp 109-1));

Article I} R. Yevatigneyev: "Convergence of Bcononic Mechanism of cm
untries"

[mg m process of intenaification of socialist ecouoaic integration
and evening out of the levels of econ'nic developnent of countries of the
fellowship have put 5‘37 0n the agenda of the day convergence of econonic
aechanisna of can iountries as a component part and a necessary condition
of these procesaes.

Socialist econoaic integration intenaifies mutual relationships of the re-
productive structures of cm countries by way of develop-cot of interna-
tional specialization and cooperation of production, directed toward rain-
ing the effectiveneae of the national econony. The intensification of co-
operation in production, Aubatantiated by contenporary scientific and tech-
nical revolution, requime a aubatantial inproveaent of the earlier for-ed
fans and nethods of cooperation which cannot be indifferent to the national
eyetena o! econoaic mange-ant. Ilprovenent of the aechanian of integration
in directly dependent on the developaent of national system of nnageaant.

The torn. and neth of econoaic and scientific-technical cooperation of
aocialist countriee have always been and still are under the influence of
the system of national econoaic nnageaent in those countriea. Until aid
1960's, even though the systens of econoaic unagenent in CM comtries
were very sinilar, they did not aotivate sufficiently enough the rapidly in-
duetrializing econoaies to realize international specialization and coopera-
tion of production whose development ode headway ninly throtuh the

l “E: principle of evening out the economic develop-ent of countriea in-
cluded in it La inherent in the world socialiet ayeten. But the closer
the levele of econoa/ of individual countries, the nore readily the fora-
of nnifeatation of co.» principles of building aocialiaa converge. nae
ilportance of the search for the mat effective international for-a of
their realization increases. 'nais refera, in particular, to the aathoda
oi' anaging the econoaic buildup.” (u. Volhov, ”mpical hate of Econoa-
ice," xmm lo 10, 19:8, p 71)

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

coordinetion of mutual co-odity turnover. ‘nren the integrationnl process
se the process of International socielist cooperation of nstionel iehor was
only in the stsge of inception.

he edoption of the Complex Progren of Socielist Economic IntegretiOn of cm
Countries coincided in time with the first years of economic reforms in those
countries. Improvement of the methods of planning, strengthening of econonic
sti-ili, erection of lsrge associations-dill this contributed to the heighten-
ing of the countries‘ interest in the international cooperation of production
both on e ncro and on e micro scsie.2

‘l'he centrel link of economic unngement of every socialist country is plen-
ning. Accordingly, Joint plenning activities in the form of ccordinetion of
five-yeer end long-tern pisns, Joint pisnning of the development of individusl
industries end types of production, making forecsete, end exchange of plsnning
experience occupy first piece snow the instruments of cooperation of can
countries. ‘ﬂre relstionehip between one end the other is obvious. At the
some time the improvement of Joint pinnning sctivlties of CM countries is
to e considerehle degree determined by the level of pienning in those coun-
tries. Indeed, intensified progrsm- end goal-oriented interindustriai ep-
proech to the development of netional economic plans, scccnpenied hy the wid-
ening of horizons of nationei pinning, has exerted influence also on the ep-
proech to the determinetion of oasis of the coordination of lens of cm
countries: long-term goal-oriented programs of cooperation We”) in the
hey complexes of industries of physicsl production hsve become a new impor-
tant instrument of integration. At the 32nd meeting of the session of can
(1978) three out of five mm eermsrhed for development eere spproved: in
the field of energy, fuel, and rev nterisls; sgriculture end food industry;
nehine building. Preperstion of Irma. wrecing consumer goods production
and treneport, is coming to en end. 0r enother example: increesing the role
of ministries end economic essocietions leeds to inprovement of the orgnniu-
tion of work in respect to the coordinstion of plans, as well as to the in-
ception end development of such s prospective form of cooperation es Joint
plenning in separate sectors of production.

mu end other measures to adjust the planning instrummts of cooperetion
to the new intergovernmentsl end external condition cennot, es experience
shows, produc- proper effect without relishle velue criteris of internation-
si specialisation. The development of co-odity-monetary relations in so-
cielist countries in ennui-action with the growing role of progrem epprosch
to plsnning end the creation of cost accounting production sssocietions hires

2 Contrery to the fhcts, bourgeois suthore contend thst economic reforms are
sllegedly ”directed easiest integration within the linits of can" (r. Olen-
denning, "cameos: Progress and Prospects,” IAN mm, Brussels 1917,

Vol 25, lo 3, p 16). By characterizing economic reforms es the reeson for
intensified in recent years economic relations of some CM comtries with
the Heat, the cited author is distorting the truth. ‘i'he expansion of such
reletions is ceused hy coqletely different reasons, in pnrticuler, hy the
utilization of some new possibilities of cooperation vith cepitalist coun-
tries.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘Ok UFFHIIM. USE ONLY

it possible to reveal are accurately the directions of specialisation of
production, taking into account the needs of the whole socialist fellowship.
The strengthening of econoaic stiauli of international specialisation on the
more and aicro level of national econoay in the end contributes to the in-
provencnt of the vhole systca of value instn-cnts of cooperation: rates of
exchange, credit, prices. and so forth.

In our opinion, the point of view, according to which "the effective use of
the coordination of plans, and all the are of Joint planning as instruents
of the international division of labor amng CM comtries not be preceded
by the creatiOn of a couple: econoaic nechanisa of integration. And only on
the basis of this neehanisa owing to the utilization of its stimulating ef-
fect can the effectiveness of plan coordination and Joint planning nnifest
itself,"3 is invalid. Understanding the coordination of plans, the vhole
Joint planning activities as a passive reflection of the requirements of the
lav of value is actually a call to fora international specialization in a
roundabout vay, through the aarhet, vhich in no vay can be recognized as ef-
fectivc.

Plan-oriented nature of socialist economy ﬁxes it possible to realise eco-
nonlc integration lore rationally, by way of putting the planning, entity-
aonetary, and organizational instrunents in operation simultaneously. For
era-pie, it is advisable to reorganize foreign trade prices in the course of
developing wars and other plan-related docuacnts of cooperation, and not
separately.

ﬁxing the course of prograa- and goal-oriented approach to the introduction
and realization of integrational acasuresusuch are the obJective lava govern-
ing the develop-cot of the econoaic nechanisn of socialist integration. Car-
rying cut this course is not ilpeded by the fact that the participants of the
integration are sovereign states vho do not pass their prerogatives on to a
supernational organ. Speaking at the Fourth World Congress of Iconoaists in
Budapest (l91h), 0. Bogoaolov pointed out in this connection the confession
of a Hestern economist that an inter-State fog-uh binds each of the govern-
aents stronger than a supernational function.

3 WPOMBKA ruuou lo 9, 1913, p 592. Let us note, that in this context
the author understands under the econoaic nechanisn only the set of value
instruments, i.e. interprets the cconoaic aechanisa in the narrov sense
of the word.

3 See HIROVAYA “mun“ I mm mmnﬂm NO 11, 19”, p 29.
Berevith let us note, that in the Cos-on lbrket "a situation of unique
'interregmn' has for-ed itself when national aechanisas of foreign eco-
noaic control are /already/ [In italics] partially defer-ed, but a uni-
fied international nechanisa has not been created /yet/ [In italiep] (and

whether it vill be created, is unknown).” (In. Bhishkov, “bile. of the
Cosmo Market," NOV/0!: VRDIYA [to 1th, 1915, p 19)

3
mu arrmuu. use ONLY
Hm IIFFHJM. llfilr'. UNLV

Econoeic rei‘ores in can countries heve stinulsted the ecceleretion of the
processes of internntionel socinllst division end cooperation of lehor.

'l'hey hnve given inpetus to the sctive end versntile inclusion of netionel
systees of economic nensgeeent in the for-ing lechenisn oi' internetionel
socislist integrstion. Orsduel convergence of netionel systene of Innege-
eent is s necesssry condition for mrther develop-ent of this nechenisn end
deep nutunl penetretion of the reproductive structures of CM countries.
This convergence should he envisioned not es eutoeetic evernging of the
nethods of econoeic megs-eat in individuel countries end not so their re-
orpninetion after the likeness of methods effective in ny one country. In
our opinion, convergence of the netioml systees of msgeeent occurs es the
levels of econonic develop-nut end nccordingly the conditions of econoeic
operations in cm countries even thenelves out neturelly. mviously, the
process of fomtion of the systole of megs-cut, sdequete to e developed
socielist econoey, should be viewed es the generel direction of convergence
of the netionel systene of unegeesnt. 0f couree, we ere not speeking shout
e coeplete unificstion of systeu, beceuse this would seen ignoring the spe-
cific conditions of countries end, therefore, not wing the intern]. reserves
of production to the full.

Dcononic referee lnunched in oil the countries froe the very beginning pur-
sued the sens goelsnincrense in the efficiency of public production end
trenefer to the intensive type of expended reproduction. net is why they
went in the sees direction: increesing the role of centrelised plenning,
turning isrge econoeic couplexes into the eein link of the netion..l econo-
ny, increeeing the responsibility, end intensifying the econoeic stinulus
of econonic links. But the epproeches to the achieve-sot of these goels
differed noticeehly slang the countries. This use expleined not only by oh-
Jective conditions, elthouh econoeic neth' is reset lore keenly to the con-
crete econoeic situetion then sdeinietretive nethods. Inch country led its
own sesrch for Optlu solutions. In the course of this sesrch positive ex-
perience wee sccunuleted, end ferns end nethode of economic operntione which
heve not Justified the-selves were discerded.

At the present tine in the Europeen countries-ushers of CM one can observe
entry ss if into “the second round" of econeeic referee which is cherecter-
iced by e sore successive (teking into eccomt the experience of the pest de-
cede) reeliution of the originelly developed principles of iqrovenent of
pleading end ecomeic senegeeent. Concrete enemles of this new stage cen
be seen in every country. In the (38R, for eagle, e coupler experinent
wee sterted on n lerge scele in Pehrusry 1978 in the nnsgenent of efficien-
cy end quelity, on the tonic of which it is expected to develop name to
inprove senegenent of the vhole netionel econoev in the yeers 19814985. In
the Hungerien People's Republic they ere peying ettention to the strengthen-
ing of the econonic levers of optieizetion of the structure of public produc—
tion; in psrticuler, they ere raising the stimleting function of the price.
in the I‘olish People's Republic they ere cerrying out work in respect to the
inprovenent of n new finencisl-econonic systee, known es the systen of lerge
econoeic orgnnizstions (mo). In the People's Republic of Bulgnrin on the

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL "SH ONLY

basis of decisions of the National Party Conference (April 1978), dedicated
to the inproveaent of socialist organization of labor and planned aanageaent
of the econoay, Central Conittec of the Bulgarian Cos-mist Party and the
Council of Ministers adopted in June 1978 a decree, directed "to our-cunt
excessive centralisation of the operations nnageaent of production, to con-
solidate and increase econoaic independence and initiative of associations,
coahines, agrarian- industrial and industrial-agrarian coaplexen, and other
econoaic organizations."5 In the Socialist Republic of Remain in the begin-
ning of 1918 they announced "the breaking of the obsolete nechanisa and its
replaceaent with a new aechanisa, taking into account the dennda of the
rapid progress of productive forces, aodern tons of financial-econoaic na-
ageaent, deaocratic limits of independence and self-goverment of enter-
prises."6. Plenun of the Central Co-ittee of the Mien Co-uniat Party,
held in i978, and the Joint aeeting of the Politispolkoa of the cc of the
96?, Per-anent Bureau of the Suprese Soviet of Socioecononic Develop-at,

and the Council of Kinisters of the Socialist Republic of Ronnie have adopt-
ed a nusher of iuportant decisions in respect to this question.

All this gives reasons for certain conclusions about the tendencies of de-
velopnent of the ferns and aethods of planned econoaic unageaent in the
European countries of socialist fellowship. First of all chief attention

is given to the iarge econoaic organizations which are becoaing the min

link of the national econoay. In the 088R the concerns (of the type of pro-
duction associations in the 1381!) are gradually replacing the trusts (of the
type of industrial associations in the lBBR). In the aungarian People's Re-
public State Enterprises new went in effect on 1 Jan 78 which declared as the
min link of the national econoay an enterprise which upon the decision of a
constituent organ can enter a trust (as a Juridical person) or voluntarily,
an association. Although this law did not revive the official statutes of
the so-called large industrial enterprise, created hack in aid 1960's, none-
theless it took into account that such enterprises are actually auctioning,
eahracing the greatest part of industry.7 Chairaan of the Planning (lo-is-
sion under the Council of Ministers of the Polish People's Republic ‘1‘.
Vzhashchik, co-enting on the thrch (1977) decision of the gowemaent about
the aodification of the financial-economic systes effective in me, noted
that ”the systea of mo, put in effect in the aiddle of the past five-year
period, had passed the test and contribute% to the fulfillsent and over ful-
fillnent of the 1971-1975 five-year plan." in the People's Republic of
Bulgaria the June (1978) decree on the “Extension of Rights and Miles of
Econoaic Organizations" was addressed to large links of the national econo-
ny which are all econoaic organizations which, in turn, include the so-called
production-econoaic links (enterprises, plants, factories, and so forth which

5 B'Wm v nc lb 51, 1978.
6 semen 18 m 1978.
1 mystic No 51, 1977.

8 21015 GGPOMRCZE No 19, 19,7.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR (IFFHIIM. IISIH UNIX

have internal cost accountins). In this decree the econonic coahine vaa
naned as the aost successful fan of direct orsanitation and unasenent of
production.

In all the above-naned countries Icasures are being taken in respect to fur-
ther inroveaent of the financial-econoaic instruaents of econoaic orsaniza-
tions nnassaent. As an exslple ve can sive the search for the best version
of usins the indicator of net or conventional-net output as a basis of eco-

noaic stimulus. ‘lhis refers first of all to the fomtion of the vase fund.
Thus, in the 088R at industrial enterprises vhich participate in the above-

nentioned ezperiasnt the accepted standard of vase fund for-tion is calcu-

lated as a percentage of the volune of conventional-net output.

In the ﬂunssrian People's Republic since the besinnins of the previous five-
year plan at a under of enterprises the srovth liait of the suppleaentary
vase is resulated by one accepted standard of dependence of the vase on the
indicator of output (vase plus profit) per vorker. his accepted standard
is not established by a directive, but is deterained by the systea of taxa-
tion of the srovth of the aver-ase vase at an enterprise. Since 1976 at acre
than half of all enterprises the srovth of the averase vase or the vase fund
depends vithin certain liaits on the aentioned accepted standard.

In the Polish People's Republic a normtive aethod of vase fund for-tion is
in effect. In aost organizations differentiated standards of vase fund in-
creaent for every percent of additional (conventioml-net) output are accept-
ed. In soae orsaninations the accepted standard is established as a share
of the vase fund in the volune of added output.

Socialist Republic of Ronnie this year announced transfer to the indicator
of net output as the criterion of deteraination of the usnitude of vase funds
at the enterprises.

In the field of investaent asnasenent srovth of the share of ovn funds and
returnable loans in the cosmn sources of capital investnent financins con-
tinues. In Bunsary a principle is in effect since 1916, accordins to vhich
all capital investaents, including those realized upon the decision of ceu-
tral omns, not be paid by enterprises fron their ovn funds, hanh loans or
special sovernnent returnable loans. In aunsary and Poland the anortiaation
of objects put in operation on credit becones the source of repaynent of the
loans, and vhen there is not enoush aaortiration, also profit froa the use
of the sane objects. The nentioned profit also pays interest on loans, vhich
in acne countries vas raised to 8 percent.

Durins the distribution of profit, such attention is attached to the increase
of the role of payments of cost accountins orpnitations to the state b t.
Paynents connected vith the voluae of resources, used by the enterprises pay-
aents for the funds, for the use of land, vater, different kinds of set con-
tributions to the state budset to finance social insurance benefits), have be-
cole popular.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI: ”NLY

The final allocation of profit between the state budget and the mm. of
enterprises in the ODR and Socialist Republic 0" Ronnie is realized with
the help of a special payment whose planned rate is detersined in an ah»
solute sun. Along with this in some countries they are looking for n for-
sula which would perait them to realize till the end the principle of quote
allocation of profit, to bind the interests of individual enterprises more
closely with the interests of the whole national econony. The experience
of such allocation, which excludes net surplus of profit, has been acct-u-
lated in particular in ﬂungary.

Our task does not include a detailed analysis of all the recent measures in
respect to the islpmvenent of economic mechanism in CM countries. Suf-
fice it to say that they all signify further development of the principle
of democratic centralisn applicable to modern conditions, expansion of del-
ocratic foundations of national econonic unsgsment and, therefore, inten-
sification of a tendency to converge the economic aechanisss of socialist
countries.

Does understanding the convergence of the national systems of usage-sat
as an ohJective process, connected with the ripening of the respective do-
nestic conditions, mean passive waiting for the convergence of system?
Should the changes of external conditions of developnnt, in the first
place the needs of socialist econonic integration he reflected in the na-
tional econoaic nechsnisss? If yes, then won't this upset the ohJective
laws of intraecononic develop-ant of countries? In the econonic literature
already quite definite answers are forning to these questions. For ample,
Czechoslovak econonists L. hteyka and Y. Golechek state in the article ”In-
tegration and the National Systens of Planned Ihnagement" tint "the nin pur-
pose of convergence of the national systess of mange-ant is orientation to-
ward i-provensnt in these systess of prerequisites which promte the inten-
sification of integrational processes."1°

Inny participants of the international theoretical seminar, organized by the
mess 1m sass ﬁnstitute of scone-1c. of the worm Socialist sum: under
the was Acadeay of Scienceg7, also think that the important prohlen of in-
provenent of Joint planning activities is further adaptation of econoaic
nechanisss of socialist countries to the conditions of econonic integration,
creation of prerequisites for their inclusion in this process. Bulgarian
scientist '1'. Lyuhikov focuses his attention on the fact that the process of
convergence of national econonic mechanisms needs nnagenent Just like the

5 A unique reaction to this tendency was an editorial in the Jan 1978 is-
sue or the ngazine SOVIET STUDIB which contained an appeal to western
“Sovietologists' to accentuate their attention on the differences of eco-
nosic sechanisss of socialist countries, to coupare the experience of
sone countries in this field with the experience of other countries.

10 uosromﬁsxi: uovm so 36, 1976, p 3.

7
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FHK UFFHZIM. llSF ONLY

process of ilproveaent of the aechanisa of integration.11 According to the
opinion of G. Kraft (00R), in the process of ilprovenent and convergence of
national systens of planning and aansgeaent it is necessary to resolve the
following problems: delimitation and deternination of functions of all or-
gans of nnageaent in the national econony tron the point of view of their
activities within the liaits of socialist econoaic integration; deter-ina-
tion of coordinated indicators of efficient developaent of socialist econo-
aic integration, taking into account the specific needs in diverse fields
of aanageaent; creation in the national econoaic systen of nnsgeaent and
planning of conditions, ensuring the activities of international econoaic
organizations; developaent and introduction of co-on noaenclatures, espe-
cially of a single classification of unuractured goods in CM countries.
Adaptation of these eleaente which are a coaponent part of the national sys-
teas of planning, 6. Kraft notes, can occur only gradually, as the internal
conditions of production in individml countries converge and socialist in-
tegration develops.

It should be noted that in the Soviet Union a series of iaportant aeasuree
were taken in respect to the adaptation of eleaents of the econoaic aecha-
nisa to the require-onto of integration. Por enlple, in Article 15 of the
law About the Council of Ministers of the £888 it is expressly pointed out
that the Council of Ninisters "organius and directs the activities, con-
nected with participation of the IBSR in socialist econoslic integration and
international socialist division of labor: takes aeaeures to ensure coordi-
nation of the state plans of the (BSR with the State plans of countries-
aesbers of the Council of Bconoaic Mutual Assistance, realise specialization
and cooperation of production, develop and realise long-tern goal-oriented
prograas of cooperation with countries-mu of the Council of Econoaic
Nuttnl Assistance."

The question of picking out and separating in the national systeas of eco-
noaic nuagenent special blocks, with the help of which these systems link
up directly with each other, nerits attention. Here, though, we are speak-
ing not about sons siailar systens of planning, organisation, and stimla-
tion of foreign econoaic activities, but about the fact that such systems
have been in principle created and are Mctioning. be tact,that "in acne
countries in the course of econoaic reform the independence of enterprises

 

ll See Interaction of Intergovernnental Planning and Control System With
the Systea of Joing Planning." "thterialy nezhdmarodnogo teorsticheskog:
sealnara" [iterials of the International 1heoretical Beninar , m 568

[Roscow Institute of Econoaic Planning Horld Socialist Syste , mes Al
3881!, Moscow, 1978, p 120.

12 See "Interaction of Intergovernaental Planning and Control System With
the Syste- of Joint Planning," p M.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘mi III-I II’IAI u..|. "Ni?

and economic organizations in thc ophcre of foreign economic activities in-
creased more than in other countrieo," and "therefore, sometimee in the come
of economic cooperation there arise certain difficulties because of a lack of
coincidence of authority and differences in the level of concrete partners
during the ncgotiations,"15 does not serve, in the opinion of Deputy Chair-an
of Gospian i881! N. Inozeatsev, as an nrgunent in favor of unification of these
systens.

Hhiie concurring vith this point of view, at the same tine it is ilpossihle
not to ncntion that the foreign econonic block is not isolated fron the con-
aun system of econonic management and that in the future, as the integration-
sl processes develop, there will occur "n steady broadening of the field for
aaneuvering the material, financial, and labor resources on an international
scale, transforsntion of foreign economic activities into a couponent part of
the whole intraeconoaic life of socialist countries."15 That is why the regu-
larity of convergence (not unification!) of the for- and methods of economic
mnagenent cannot help touching upon the cxtrosconoaic activities proper as
well.

Already at the present tine in none of the can countries is the system of
cxtroeconomic relations nnageaent huilt vithout being reflected in special
or other sections of national plans of resources, including capital invest-
ment allocated to carry out integrational measures. In the econoaic mecha-
nisnc of countries the relationships of production and foreign trade mater-
prises are getting stronger, and the organizational tons of realizing state
monopoly on all forms or extrocconoaic relations are improving. A closer
dependence between the effect from external economic activities and the re-
sult of production-econoaic activities inside the country is established;
this dependence is reflected also in the cost accounting stimuli of produc-
tion.

Proa everything that has been said it can he seen that the convergence of
econosic mechanisas of countries of socialist fellowship is a mtifhceted
process which is in constant indissoiuhle interrelationship with the levels
of economic development of individual countries, nehanisn of integration,
and the degree of development of integrational processes, as well as with
many other, less significant factors. The convergence of economic nechanisma
has not only econonic, but also great political isportance, being one of the
aspects of the process of ail-round convergence of socialist countries.

13 EKOIIMIKA I OMAIHUTSIYA pmmmooo PROIZVOIB‘I'VA No 2, 1916, p 95.

it Yg. s.8hiryayev, "Bironoaicheskiy neiihaniza sotsialistichesiroy integratsii”
[EconomicBgechanisa of Socialist Integration], Indatel’stvo hanoaika,
1973. P 1 -

COPYRIGHT: itdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekononiki", 1978

8502
080: i&3

9
rm: HFFICIM. usr: «mm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL Economic RSLAﬂOIB

SOVIET-POLISH MSSION mm 0!! 188!” In no: 900101110 SCIENCE
lbscov VOMY HOWE“! in Russian No 11, 1978 pp 157-159

[Article by i. Arkhipov: “Fourth Session of the Soviet-Polish Cc-ission on
Cooperetion in the Field of Bocnosic Sciences'J

[Text] The fourth session of the Soviet-Polish Conission of the BSR Acedeey
of Sciences end Polish Acedeny of Sciences. which wee devoted to e discussion
of sooio-eccnceic probless of the efficiency of netionel production under sc-
cieliss. wee held in my 1978 in fellin. In opening the session, Acedelicien
1'. nucheturcv. director of the Soviet unit in the Comicsicn. noted the urgency
of the probless which had been reised for discussion. pointed out the besic di-
rections in research being done by Soviet scholers on the problems of efficien-
cy. end cent light on the isportence of developing theoreticsl questions of the
efficiency of netionol production for preoticel use in the neticnel eccnoeies
of the 1883 end Polish People's Republic.

The reports by the perticipente in the session sen be tentetiVely broken down
into three groups. The first group of reports wee devoted to the theoreticel
end sethodologicel problese of the efficiency of neticnel production under sc-
cielisa.

The besic questions of the theory of economic efficiency of socialist produc-
tion. of econceic efficiency es s cetescry in the politiceli econoqy of sociel-
ise. end of the netionel eccnceic epproech to the result (ispect) cf sooielist
production were exenined in e report by A. Nothin. corresponding seeber of the
88R icedeey of Sciences (Institute of Economics of the $83 Acedeey of Sci-
ences). The utiliution of ell varieties of the intensive type of expended re-
production durinc the period of seture socieliss has done such. in the opinion
of A. Nothin, to increase the results fr“ the input of living end esbodied
lebcr thet is directed towerd the growth of the national wen-being end escor-
plishsent of other scciel tesks. This ccrreleticn between input end its result
finds expression in the politicrl eccnoey of socielise in the ceteacry of eco-

ncsic efficiency of neticnel production end reproduction. e ceteaory which (3th
scterires the reletisns between e socielist society end the individuel sectors
of the econcq end production collectives end within thee, reletions which one

10
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY
Hm Hl-‘FNIIM. Ill-I5 UNIX

of the point or vim: which he hna boon

. One or the specific traito

dovclopod oocinlien conaioto
or the fact that n heightening or production efficiency become an ilportant

a lav. By expanding the
uphcrc or ito ocopo. the category of efficiency cxpreooee more conoiotently the

“no”. in aociniioa autumn
its development move up to the forefront.

portnncc of the social aspect in determining the efficiency or production, the

the impact of eocialiet
Mther on, u. ChelaJ dwelt upon
upon quootione oi' the quantitative

hio report to an analysis 01‘ the problem of coabiniru natio
cicncy with the efficiency or economic ornnizatione (enterp
of the vnlidi ty and mucotionahle advantages of every kind

mtionnl economic efficiency, he noted that the lethod of
vocinliut econonic ayotca has still not 1'

male or uocialiat entorprieoo. At the cane time. experience in. chem that

U
FOR I'l't'llIlM. i'SE' «“CIJ'
F0" ()FFHHM. "SF. ONLY

the very highest national economic efficiency cannot be achieved without a fire
grounding for it in the efficiency of enterprises. Further on. J. Padsstka
exuined the nest iaportant over-all erasures that are directed toward contain-

ing efficiency on the nacro- and aicroeconoaio scale.

In the second group of reports. problcas of scientific-technical progress as

the basis for raising production efficiency and questions of the socio-econoaio
efficiency of new technology. as well as of the rational utilisation of aanpower
resources as a factor in raising the efficiency of econoaio operation. were eu-

Mmde

In the report by Acedeaician a. Arakelyan of the Arlenian 83R Acadely of Scien-
ces (Institute of Econoaics of the Arlenian 888 Academy of Sciences). the quali-
tative changes that are occurring in the tools of labor. in production techno-
logy and the utilization of energy were pointed out. [is east light on the ob-
Jeotive tie between the developent of scientific-technical progress and in-
creasing the qualifications of workers and he stressed the need to i-prove the
administration of scientific-technical progress, which envisages a sore rapid
assimilation in production of the results of scientific research work which

has already been coapleted.

A lively discussion was provoked by the positions set forth in the report by
Doctor of Econoaic Sciences H. Vilensliy (Institute of Boone-ice of the ISSR
Auden of Sciences) on the question of utilization of the category of socio-
eccnoaic effectiveness in the adainistration of scientific-technical progress.
The speaker exanincd not only the objective need for evaluation of new
technology through a criterion and through indicators of socioeconoeic
effectiveness, but also the real potential for such an evaluation.

A. Helich (Polish People's Republic), corresponding neaber of the Pouch Asap
deny of Sciences. dwelt in his speech on the probleas of the rational utilisa—
tion of aanpower resources called for by the switch to intensive aethods of
economic operation. which has been acquiring ever greater iaportance in noent
times. He gave a review of the situation in regard to manpower resources in
Poland. which is characterised by a growth of short supply in the labor force.
In his opinion. one sust not exaggerate the scarcity of aanpower in the country.
since there are substantial internal resources in connection with the policy
which has been carried out for a long nuaber of years of providing for full es-
ployeent at enterprises. Intersectorial shifts and a chemo in the structure
of esploysent are iaportant instruments in tho rationalization of esployeent.
In this connection, A. helich directed attention to the next point. If stress
has been laid on aeasures to cosbat personnel tumover in the policy of Job
placeaent until recently, then new the need to resolve at the sane ties the
questions of Justified changes in one's place of work is becoaing ever sore ur-
gent. since goal-directed shifts of employees respond to the interests of soci-
ety. The speaker also raised the question of giving enterprises and collectives
an incentive for the rational utilization of nanpower resources. The systea of
providing incentives oust direct enterprises toward replacing living labor with
eabodied labor. iaproveasnt in its organization, the utilization of aaterial
and aoral incentives. and iaproveaent in the aethods of planning and forecast-

ing Job place-ant.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fllll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The third mun of speeches was deleted to current probless of the efficiency
or capi tnl investments end the effectiveness of regional economic deVelopnent.

The report by Doctor of Economic Sciences V. Krnsevskiy (Institute of Economics
of the USSR Academy of Sciences) analyzed the methodological problem in the
efficiency of cepitnl inveetnents: retooling of the national economy and the
time factor, accounting for the statistical leg in n planned economic systes.
seal-directed economic pros-rm, integral effect and giving it dynamism, scien-
tific-technical progress and building cycles. K. Secenski. member of the Polish
Academy of Sciences, along with an exnninetion oi‘ the questions of More-- and
moroecenosio efficiency of capital investments, touched in his report on the
problem of working up sethods for evaluating Joint cupitnl investsente being
carried out on the basin of the program for economic integration of the cm
countries. This reletee to neJer Joint construction projects. first and fore-
most. in the extractive industry.

V. ansisto. corresponding sesber of the Estonian SSR Acsde of Sciences (In-
stitute of Econonics of the Estonian 388 Acadeqy of Science‘s, examined the
problem of the effectiveness of regional economic developDent of the Union
republics and of major economic regions on the basis of the ample of the
Estonian SSH. In hie opinion. these problems must be resolved in sore detail,
inasmuch as one can take specific local factors into account to n such
grenter extent here.

Doctor of Economic Sciences V. Wolfe (Polish People's Republic) cove a report
on the utilization of econometric models in the process of planning for the
national economy of the Polish People's Republic.

in the concluding speeches. Aesdesicien T. Khschoturov and II. Cholej, corre-
sponding oenber of the Polish Acedew of Sciences. noted the ilpertence end

in; the next session of the consiseien in Warsaw durilu the second hsli‘ of 1979.
uhere there will be a discussion of questions or international economic inte-
gration of socialist countries end the econoeics of technical progress.

(XWYRIGHT: lzdstel'stvo ”Pravda”. ”Veprosy chem-lid", 1978

13

Ft”! IIPI'ICIM. 3'59 ”\‘iJ'
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS

STRUCTURE OF MULEILATERAL COOPERATION 0F CEMA COUNTRIES
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 12. 1978 pp 66-70

[Article by Yu. Kormnov in the section "Economics of the World
Socialist System”: “Development of the Organizational Structure
of Multilateral Cooperation of the CEMA Countries”]

[Text] In January of the coming year the countries in the
socialist community and all progressive mankind will mark the
30th anniversary of CENA--the world's first organization for
economic cooperation between socialist countries. The forma-
tion of CEMA which was effected by the wil l of the communist
and workers' parties of the socialist countries in Europe--
Bulgaria. Hungary. Poland. Romania. USSR and Czechoslovakia--
has become a major historical step along the path foretold by

V. I. Lenin. in which as a counter balance to imperialism which
alienates nations against each other. socialism is creating "new.
higher forms of human society. when the legitimate needs and
progressive aspirations of the working masses of /any/ [in bold-

face] nationality will be satisfied for the first time in inter-
national unity...."

During the past 30 years from a regional organization of coopera-
tion of European socialist countries CEMA has become an organi-
zation of the socialist countries of three continents: EurOpe.
Asia and Latin America. Twelve years after the GDR joined CEMA
(1950) the "RR [Mongolian People's Republic] became a member
(1962). and ten years after that the Republic of Cuba also be-
came a member. At the 32d session held in the summer of 1978
the Socialist Republic of Vietnam joined CENA. This great event
of international significance evoked the universal approval of
the fraternal countries and parties. A. N. Kosygin stressed at
the session that the ”entry of Vietnam into CEMA shows the con-

tinuing solidarity of the countries of world socialism under the
banner of Lenin's ideas.”

1%
FOR OFPICIM. 058 ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The might of the CEﬁA community which is getting stronger per-
sonifies the intensification of the entire organizational and
institutional system of their multilateral veeperation as a
component of the mechanism for economic cooperation of the
fraternal countries. This system has withstood the test of time
and on the whole is providing the proper conditions for effi-
cient and dynamic development of the mutual ties of the fraternal
countries. which does not by any means cancel the continuing im-
provement of it in light of the new problems of cooperation at
the present stage of its development. The decisions of the

12d CEMA session have become an important step along this path.

CEMA has laid down the foundations for forming a ramified orga-
nizational and institutional structure of multilateral coopera-
tion of the fraternal countries. This process is developing
under the effect of the progress of the productiVe forces and
international socialist collectivization of production. The
communist and workers' partieszvu the governments of the CEMA
countries are guiding it taking into account the requirements
of the economic laws of socialism as the advanced social system
and a world system.

There is a close link between the internal government organiza-
tional systems for control of the economic structure in social-
ist countries and the structure for collective control of mu-
tual economic cooperation. The commonality of the direction of
the social and economic progress of the fraternal countries and
the problems being solved by them in building developed social-
ism and communism lies at the basis of the deve10pment of both
administrative structures.

The organizational structures for control of social and economic
development have been formed and strengthened during the 30 years
in the countries of the community. This does not. however. pre-
clude their further progress. for as L. I. Brezhnev emphasized
at the thh CPSU Congress “The improvement of a control system

is not a one-time measure. but a dynamic process for resolution
of problems being posed by life.“

The development of the monopoly of a socialist state on foreign
trade into its monopoly on the entire aggregate of foreign eco-
nomic ties is being put into the forefront among the fundamental
improvements in the foreign economic sphere. Reflected in this
is the developing foreign economic function of socialist states.
which now does not consist only of relations of trade exchange.
but is spreading also into the area of production-economic. con-
struction. transportation. scientific and technical. monetary-
credit and other relations in the economic sphere. This fact
was consolidated by legislation for the first time in the new
USSR Constitution. Article 73 states: "The jurisdiction of the
USSR. represented by its higher organs of state power and

15
ran OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

administration extends to...foreign trade and other forms of
foreign economic activity on the basis of state monopoly."

The plurality sf concrete subjects of foreign economic ties of
our country with other socialist countries does not violate the
unity of will and the policy of a socialist state since overall
direction of them is exercisaiby the USSR Council of Ministers.
It has been consolidated in tho USSR law on the USSR Council of
Ministers that the government of the Soviet Union ”organizes and
directs the activity associated with the USSR participation in
socialist economic integration and international socialist divi-
sion of labor; and takes steps to insure coordination of USSR
state plans with the state plans of the CEMA countries. to ef-
fect Specialization and cooperation in production. and to de-
velop and implement long-term special programs for cooperation..."

At the session of the USSR Supreme Soviet (6 July 1978). A. A.
Gromyko said that "The significant expansion of the sphere of
international cooperation of the Soviet Union has required the
direct involvement of literally dozens of different ministries.
committees and departments in the work on making interstate
agreements.” The same situation applies to all the CEMA coun-
tries. It reflects an important feature of the current stage
of their economic cooperation.

Practically all state committees. ministries. departments and
administrative organizations of the Soviet Union now have various
ties. which have been defined by law and decrees of the govern-
ment. with their partners in the other socialist countries on
questions of scientific and technical. economic and planning-
coordinating nature which occur in various organizational and
institutional forms. Also directly participating in them are
economic organizations such as foreign trade. scientific and
technical. transportation. industrial (from a number of CEMA
countries). construction and other organizations. This stems
from the fact that under the conditions of socialist economic
integration economic ties are more and more simultaneously and
interdependently encompassing science. technology. production.
supply and sales. and exchange of services. It is quite natural
that a "comprehensive solution to problems being coordinated
which embrace the questions of science and technology. capital
investment. specialization and cooperation in production. as
well as coord nation on this basis of mutual deliveries and the
basic conditions for them“ has evolved in the comprehensive pro-
gram for socialist economic integration as a necessary condition
for the high efficiency of cooperation. Also reflected in this
arrangement is the comprehensive nature of the internal state
planning solutions on the social and economic development of
these socialist countries. and the requirements of the scientific
and technical revolution which is consolidating the mutual ties

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

of such links in the unified chain of technical progress as
scientific reuearch--engineering deve]opment--introduction into
production--consumption.

The growing scale and complexity of the economic problems of
socialist economic integration especially now. when the realiza-
tion of long-term special pur ose programs of cooperation in

the main areas of production is becoming the core of all work

in the CEMA agencies. are inevitably adding an ever greater
number of ministries and organizations subordinate to them of
the various countries to the work on preparation. coordination
and realization of solutions and agreements on cooperation.

The intensification of the role and significance of comprehensive
integrated forms of cooperation2 of the socialist countries is
lending to a qualitative improvement and deepening of inter-
national socialist production relations. This requires setting
up and operating those international economic organizations

which would effectively promote the planned development of co-
operation and production. and the direction of temporary shifts
in labor. material and financial resources in the OSHA community.
facilitating the Optimum association of them to raise labor pro-
ductivity and exploit through joint efforts the natural resources
located in the territory of one or another fraternal country.

Used for this within the CEMA countries are these economic and
administrative measures which cannot be applied in the spheneti
interstate coordination owing to state separation of socialist
property and the full sovereignty of the fraternal countries.
including also in the resolution by them of the questions on

the use of natural resources. Therefore coming to the foreground
in the area of mutual cooperation of the CEMA countries is not
the administrative-managerial. but the planning-coordinating
function. not some kind of "international" ministries. but spe-
cific international economic organizations (M80). It is pre-
cisely in this organizational form that the production relations
of the process of socialist collectivization of production in
the cooperation of the CEMA countries are now finding their ex-
pression. Linking the plans of the cooperating countries at the
sector and subsector level. their economic interests. and the
conditions and norms of economic operation. the international
economic organizations are uniting the interests of their parti-
cipants into common interests despite the national-state separa-
tion of property.

Socialism and social property in contrast to capitalism with all
the varieties of private ownership are not separating. but uniting
the owners both on a state and on an international scale. since
both the strategic (building of communism)end the everyday (growth
in labor productivity for a steady increase in the material and

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OYPICIM. 083 ONLY

cultural levol of the life of the people) goals coincide. The
coincidence of these problems in principle by no means eliminates
distinctions in details. stages and means of solving them in each
fraternal country. The most important thing is that this is a
distinction of concrete practice. and not one of fundamental
principle of economic policy of the fraternal parties which is
the firm doctrine of Marxism-Leninism and its political economy.3

or course. state separation of property of the countries that
are participating in an M80 introduces much of a specific na-
ture into the relations of socialist owners of the various
countries in comparison to the relations of property within

the socialist countries. Cooperating in an NBC. the countries-
partners mutually inform each other about various aspects of
production. An atmosphere of great mutual economic trust is
thereby created and the opportunity emerges to evaluate the ef-
ficiency of alternatives in cooperation from both national as
well as common (international) positions. This pertains es-
pecially to joint enterprises since this is where the natliral.
labor. material and financial resources of the interested coun-
tries are directly joined together.

As cooperation expands and relations on the division and coopera-
tion of labor spread into the area of scientific-technical. in-
vestment. labor. natural resources and other factors in produc-
tion and into the area of its technolo and organization and

the “post-production" (commercial-salegx sphere the necessity
arises for continuing predictive-analytic. technical-technologi-
cal. planning-coordinating. and commercial-economic work. All
this stimulates the process of creating seetorial MBO's or new
structural subdivisions in CEMA. and defines their functions as
well as the criteria for substantiating the establishment of them.

The international economic relations of the socialist countries.
the most important feature of which is their conformity to plan.
also give rise to organizations which have been called upon to
strengthen and develop relations of direct regulation of coopera-
tion in production economics and joint planning activity.

The leading role in cooperation in planning activity and espe~
cially coordination of plans. as was consolidated in the compre-
hensive program of socialist economic integration. belongs to
the central planning agencies of the CEMA countries ”with broad
cooperation of the appropriate CEMA agencies. ministries. de-
partments. associations. and major enterprises and direct ties
between sectorial state agencies and economic organizations.“

The charter of CEHA. the provisions on its agencies. and the
agreements on establishment of multilateral economic organiza-
tions define among the main planning and coordinating functions

18
so: orncm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coordination of the prospects for joint development of pro-
duction. and coordination of cooperation for better use of
production capacity and for elimination of shortages that may
occur in one or another product.

The chief and common aim for all the varieties of the MEO's of
the socialist countries is to promote faster and fuller satis-
faction of the needs of the national economy for specific pro-
ducts with the most efficient manufacture and mutually advanta-
geous exchange of them. and with extensive use for this purpose
of the advantages of international socialist division and co-
Operation of labor. The MEO's of the socialist countries in
the sphere of production are essentially organizational forms
of socialist international collectivization of production and
forms of organization of the internationalized labor of the
workers of the several friendly countries. They make it pos-
sible to put into action Lenin's instructions to "struggle
/against/ [in boldface] petty national narrow-mindedness.
reserve. and isolation. and for consideration of the whole and
the universal...."“

The social nature of the international economic organizatins of
the socialist countries is manifested in their basic functions
which reveal the specific aspects and features of international
socialist production relations. These are first of all the
relations of socialist division and cooperation of labor which
are predetermined by socialist ownership of the means of pro-
duction. the processes of concentration of production and demo-
cratic centralization of control of them. The entire 30 year
experience of multilateral cooperation of the CEMA countries
has shown that the deeper the cooperative ties in the scientific-
production sphere. the more necessary is an adequate form of
collective control in the form of the various forms of inter-
national economic organizations.

The organizational-institutional structure of the multilateral
cooperation of the socialist countries began forming 30 years
ago at the time CEMA was established. The functional agencies
of CEMA during the first years of its activity began to be sup-
plementxiby sectorial commissions in 1956. Substantial changes
in thestructure of the council occurred in 1962. and then at
the beginning of the 70's in connection with the necessity for
better organizational support tg the comprehensive program of
socialist economic integration.

The first interstat coordinating organizations(MGKO) f r the
sectors of industry . transportation and communications emerged
in the 60's. The experience of their activity. which had shown
a number of advantages. contributed to aha establishment of new
organizations of this type in the 70's.

19
son onrcm. use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problems of purposeful coordination of the means for reali—
zation of major economic projects stirred the CEMA countries

to take a new step in the development of the organizational-
institutionul structure of control of mutual economic coopera-
tion and to pass to the establishment of international economic
associations (MKhO) which was consolidated in the comprehensive
program of socialist economic integration. To date the CEMA
countries have set up six multilateral international economic
organizations.9 The founding documents of these organizations
specify that in addition to planning and coordinating functions
they must also perform the directly economic functions of a
production. service. and commercial-marketing nature. which

it must be said has proved to be no easy task.

The participants in these international economic organizations
are both state agencies and the economic organizations of the
countries. while the founders are the states. The internal
state legal status in the field of activity of the ministries.
departments and economic organizations--the participants in

the MEO's. and the range of their rights and functions largely
determine the limits of authority and functions of the varieties
of the corresponding organizations.

The international economic organizations of the CEMA countries
perform the functions of control of cooperation basically within
the framework of the sectors and subsectors in industry. trans-
portation and communications and in the sphere of credit. Ques-
tions concerning scientific research. technical developments.
production and sales are worked out within these frameworks.

The international banks of the CEMA countries--MIB [Inter-
national Investment 3 ank J and the 31838 [International Bank for
Economicc ooperation]--perform the functions specific to them.
They can locate their branches in one or several participant
countries and even outside of them.

Both single sector ("Intermetall") as well as subsector (05??)
[Organization of Cooperation of Bearing Industry] organizations
currently exist. This reflects the sector principle of control
of the economy which has been established in the CEMA countries
for years. Substantial measures to strengthen intersectorial
control of the economy and to enhance the role and significance
of the program-target method of control of the leading complexes
of production have been outlined for the current five-year plan
and the future by the 25th CPSU Go see as well as by the party
congresses in the other CEMA countr es.

It was stated in the cc CPSU report to the 25th congress that
under current conditions the "question on the improvement of the
methods of a comprehensive solution to major state intersectorial
and territorial problems is ripe. Required here are unified

20
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

centralized programs embracing all stages of work--from design
Lo practical implementation. It is essential that in each case
there be specific agencies and specific people bearing the full
weight of responsibility and coordinating all efforts within the
framework of one or another program." Similar tasks have been
set also in a number of other CEMA countries. Such a direction
in improvement of internal state control systems will inevitably
be and is now being reflected in international economic relations
of the fraternal countries. in intensification of multisectorial
comprehensive forms of cooperation within the framework of CEMA.
and in the development and realization by the CEMA countries of
international long term target programs of cooperation (DTsPS).

Such a fundamentally new form of cooperation between the CEMA
countries in planning activity as the DTsPS may require organi-
zational forms of work appro riate to it in the agencies of CEMA
and other HEO's. The possib lity also cannot be excluded that
multisectorial MEO's will emerge in future to control the pro-
cesses of realization of these pro rams. Time will show the
justification for such a forecast nasmuch as the possibilities
which the CEMA agencies and the sectorial international organi-
zations now operating have today are far from exhausted.

The CENA countries are currently using primarily the form of
interstate coordinating organizations (MGKO). This is die to

a number of circumstances. The fact is first of all that such
functions have been and are being performed by the Council for
Mutual Economic Assistance and its permanent commissions from
which the currently operating MGKO's were detached. In a number
of areas the consultative-advisory and major sectorial nature of
the work of the permanent commissions of CEMA and its sections
in time became inadequate to regulate the subsector operational
cooperation. Subsector MGKO's began to be created on the basis
of the sections and operating groups of the CEMA agencies to
eliminate bottlenecks which had formed.

The development of productive forces and improvement of
production relations in the socialist countries have moved pro—

duction (economic, industrial, aisgrian-induetrial, etc.) associations to
the foreground within the A countries since the middle of the

60's. ”Experience ShOWS." said L. I. Brezhnev at the 25th CPSU
Congress. "that ordy large scale associations are capable of
concentrating a sufficient number of skilled specialists. in-
suring rapid technical progress, and making better and fuller
use of all resources. The policy to create associations and
combines must be conducted firmly--over the long term they must
become the basic self supporting links in socialist production."

Such a pol cy is typical of the last ten years for all the CEMA
countries. 0 In the USSR it was especially intensively conducted

21
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in 1971-1975 when the decisions of the thh CPSU Congress were
implemented. Takeminto account what has already been done

the task of "com leting the work on creating production associa-
tions and improv ng their activity“ has been set in the new five-
year plan by the 25th party congress.

The enhanced roles of economic associations anithe strengthening
of the sectorial principle of management has led to their be-
coming participants in the international coordinating and econo—
mic organizations of the majority of the CEMA countries. Soviet
all-union industrial associations also obtained that right in

1973.1

The formation and development of production and scientific-pro-
duction associations in the socialist countries, raising the
direct cooperation of labor to a new higher level. are stimu-
lating its development into international cooperation. In the
process it is interesting to note that roduction (industrial)
associations of a number of CEHA countrges are appearing in the
MEO's together with foreign trade organizations. This insures
the comprehensiveness of consideration of problems from both
production-technological and commercial-economic positions.

The emergence of Joint enterprises. particularly in sectors
dealing with raw materials. is stimulating the expansion of
cooperation. They have a grad future for it is in them that
real and profound cooperation in labor and production occurs
directly and daily and the material. financial, labor and
natural resources of the cooperating countries are directly
jo ned.

In our view there are grounds to tie the establishment of an
adequate number of joint enterprises together with development
of international economic associations. Organizing MMhO's with
the task of developing economic activity. but without allocating
real material-financial resources to them evidently is hardly
efficient. Self supporting activity is inherent only to enter-
prises operating in the spheres of production, technical develop-
ment and services. An organizational superstructure "over some-
thing that is not there" is unwarranted and no formal “conver-
sions of coordinating-administrative activity into ”economic"

by putting it on a payment-accounting basis instead of a more
responsive nature of management of estimate-budget financing.

in essence. can change things. Rather the form of the HEO's

must be adjusted to the essence of the functions really per-
formed by them.

The successful activity and further improvement of the organi-
zational-institutional apparatus of economic cooperation of the
socialist countries largely depends on creating the organizational-

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

economic and legal prerequisites that are required for tile in
the countries. The determination of the CENA countries in this
in unanimous and the comprehensive program of socialist economic

lntuurntion in evidenCe of thin. however the process of creating
such prerequisites is no simple nor fleeting task. Many seien-
tiric and practical problems will have to be solved on this path.

One of them concerns the relationship of the interaction of the
sectorial economic organizations of CEMA with the Council for
Mutual Economic Assistance. CEMA is the most universal multi-
sectorlal and multifunctional international organization of the
socialist countries. It regulates the economic cooperation of

the countries belonging to t practically on the scale of the
national economy as a wholf. Country delegations in CEMA agencies
repreSent the state level. 2

Hence it follows that sectorial MEO's cannot be established with-
out a tie to CEMA. function without coordination with it. and
much less duplicate the work conducted in its agencies. Ex-
perience shows the objective necessity of such interaction. It
becomes apparent. for example. in that the CEMA executive com-
mittee regularly considers in its sessions the work of the sec-
torial economic organizations. the success of the activity of
which. as experience has shown. largely depends on the inter-
action with the appropriate permanent commissions and departments
of the CEMA secretariat.

The interaction of the CEMA sectorial agencies with the sectorial
international organizations is in no way characterized by re-
lationships of "command" and ”subordination." inasmuch as they
are all established by sOVereign states. Here we are speaking
as it follows from the decisions of the 32d CEMA session. about
the clear delimitation of the tasks within CEMA between its rep-
resentative agencies in the secretariat. as well as the MEO’s.
about the definition of the priority directions of the work of
the 1atter.end about all international economic organizations

of the CEMA countries being guided in their activity by the
norms of cooperation--both by those pertaining directly to them.
and by those being established by the normative and methodologi-
cal documents adopted within the framework of CEMA. which.by

the way. has already become the norm.

Also pertaining to all the MEO's of the CEMA countries is the
general requirement. defined by the 32d CEMA session to get
more results from their activity. and to focus attention on the
solution to the problems of production-economic and scientific-
technical cooperation. to the realization of measures stemming

from the DTsPs. and to specializationtuu cooperation of pro-
duction.

23
son OFFICIAL use outv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is sometimes controversy in scientific discussions on tho
inadequate pace of establishing new MEO's and. consequently. of
the development of the organizational structure of collective
control of the multilateral cooperation of the CEMA countries.
Experience. however. has shown that success in so?“ing specific
problems of cooperation is by no means determined by the quan-
tity of such organizations and the varieties of them. On the
contrary. both the number and specific forms of MEO's are de-
termined by the content and scale of the problems of coopera-
tion in the spheres of material production. scientific research
and technical development. and circulation. Cooperation of the
CEMA countries in large measure gains not so much from numbers
of new organizations. as from quality. efficiency and evident
usefulness of their activity. That is why the requirements to
substantiate the advantages of establishing new international
economic organizations and on the level of all preparatory work
on setting them up are being made more exacting. Establishing
an MED is advisable only when the corresponding sector of pro-
duction needs one and there are real conditions for successful
functioning of it and when the pro osals for establishing it
have thorough technical and econom c substantiation. including
an evaluation of the expected results of its activity. mea-
sures for insuring the economic. organizational. legal and
personnel conditions for its effective operation. precise
definition of the functions of the M80 being newly established

and justification as to why these functions cannot be performed
by CEMA agencies.

Expanding the scale and deepening the content of the coopera-
tion of the CEMA countries require further improvement in the
form and methods of the activity of all the international eco-
nomic organizations and first of all of the Council for Mutual
Economic Assistance. At its 32d meeting. the CEMA session.
guided by the basic directives of the central committees of

the communist and workers' parties and of the CEMA countries'
governments. approved a document. prepared by the CEMA executive
committee. which contains a complex of measures for further im-
provement of the organization of cooperation of the countries
and activity of the council. By this document the ”work of all
CEMA agencies shall be oriented to the primary solution of the
problems of cooperation in the sphere of material production.
first of all those associated with realization of long term
target programs of cooperation. to further strengthening of
planning principles in the work of CEMA. and to raising the ef-
fectiveness. efficiency. expeditiousness and coordination in the

activity of all CEMA agencies and the international organizations
of the CEMA member countries."13

This pertains to the integral program of specific actions for
the coming years which concerns all the agencies of the council

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the Mﬂu'n of the CEMA member Countries. In his address at
the unﬁnion. A. N. Kouygin. the chief of the soviet delegation.
noted In this connection the necessity of focusing the attention
of the CHMA executive committee on the main key problems. on
coordination of the work of CEMA agencies and the international
economic organizations of the CEMA countries. on the monitoring
of the fulfillment of the comprehensive program of socialist
economic integration and the long term tar et programs. and on
the systematic introduction into the pract es of CENA of ex-
peditious and efficient forms and methods of work.

The role of the CEMA committee on cooperation in planning ac~
tivity is also growing today. Not restricting itself to working
outall the problems and agreements on realization of the DTsPS.
it is called upon to skillfully direct this work within the
framework of the permanent sectorial commissions. the role and
responsibility of which for it as the chief drafters of agree-
ments is sharply increasing. A. N. Kosygin noted at the 32d
CEMA session that "the sectorial international economic organi-
zations must also be more actively included in this work."

The organizational-institutional system of cooperation of the
countries in the CEMA community is steadily developing under

the influence not only of the internal state processes in the
socialist countries and their mutual cooperation. but also under
the effect of factors external to the CEMA community--the posi-
tive changes in the entire world. The cooperation of CEHA with

countries that are not members of this organization has ex-
panded in recent years.

On the basis of a special agreement cooperation between CEMA and
the SFRYu [Socialist Federated Republic of Yugoslavia] has been

actively developing since l96h. This agreement has shown its
effectiveness as a flexible progressive form of cooperation be-

work of the council on the basis of observance of the principles

of [“11 equality. respect for sovereignty. goodwill and mutual
advantage. It has demonstrated the truly democratic nature of
CEMA and the possibility of individual countries cooperating on
a broad range of problems without becoming a CEMA member and
practically on equal terms with the CEMA member countries. The
agreement to no little degree promoted the growth in trade turn-
over of Yugoslavia with the CEMA countries. which in the last
five-year plan was about 10.2 billion rubles. double that of

the previous five-year plan. It is also expected to more than
double in the current five-year plan.1

Along with representatives of the LNDR [Lao People's Democratic
Republic]. the participation in the work of recent CEMA sessions

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

of delegations from such countries of revolutionary Africa as
the People's Republic of Angola and Socialist Ethiopia is Very
significant. The propensity of the countries being liberated
from the yoke of imperialism for actiVe cooperation with the
countries in the CEMA community botll on a bilateral and on

a coordinated multilateral basis is increasing from year to year.
This is also being reflected in the organizational forms of
cooperation with the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance.

Me mean the joint commissions of CEMA-Iraq and CEMA-Mexico.

The open. nondiscriminatory and mutually advantageous nature of
cooperation with the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance at-
tracted Finland. which has traditionally maintained a peaceful
and constructive policy in economic business ties of countries
with a different social system. to it. This year the community
of the CEMA countries and Finland noted with satisfaction the
fifth anniversary of the activity of the commission of CEMA-
Finland. During these years (from 1973 to 19??) the trade
turnover between the CEMA countries and Finland increased by
more than 2.5-fold. reaching 2.6 billion rubles. and the share
of the CEMA countries in the foreign trade of Finland grew from
15 percent in 1973 to 23 percent in 1977.

CEMA ties with nonmember countries are assuming ever greater im-
portance and more varied foams. The experience of them is await-
ing its generalization. It shows that cooperation with CENA or
with other countries within its framework requires not simply

a desire to cooperate or to "Join” CEMA. but proper preliminary
preparation of the partners for this. It requires an accumula-
tion of experience of mutually advantageous cooperation on
specific economic projects on a bilateral and a coordinated
multilateral basis with the CEMA countries. And it r uires
making and meeting mutual commitmmte including mater al ones.

The recognition and authority of cm is also swing Inthe international
organizations of the world. Ln iyzl some had regular contacts
with more than 30 international organizations including the UN.
CEMA delegations partici ated in sessions of the UN General
Assembly in 1977 and 197 . CEMA has extensive contacts with the
European Economic Commission. UNESCO and 800800.

The 30 years of CEMA has coincided with a crucial period in
cooperation of the fraternal countries. The first three long
term specific-purpose programs of cooperation in fuel and raw
materials. the food industry and machine building were adopted
at the 32d CEMA session. Pull scale preparation is underway

on the remaining two special purpose programs of cooperation on
transportation and production of manufactured consumer goods.
The next CEMA session. the 33d. which will be held in Moscow
ten years after the historic 23d (special) session. which

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

defined the path for socialist economic integration. will be
faced with working out and initiating execution of u number of
agreements through which the long- Lermcpcial-pxmae mrama of co-
operation will be realized. and with putting the first important
mennureu into effect from the complex of measures on improving
the activity of all the elements of the organizational-instit-

utional structure of the multilateral cooperation of the CEMA
community countries.

FOOTNOTES
V. I. Lenin. “Complete Collection of Works." Vol 26. p #0.

These include first of all the Joint construction of facili-
ties so that the participants may obtain products or ser-

vices: production-trade. scientific-technical cooperation
and specialization. Joint operation of facilities in the

form of joint enterprises: and scientific-production acti-
vity within the framework of international associations.

The accession to power in the PRC of politicians who have
deserted Marxism-Leninism has among the evident foreign
economic consequences of the betrayal of the cause of
socialist internationalism the virtual severance also of
economic relations with the CENA countries. direct. un-
disguised provocatione against such CEMA countries as
Vietnam. the MNR [Mongolian People's Republic]. and the
USSR. and the chauvanistic overemphasis of its great power
interest. It must be stated that at the present time the
leaders of the KPK [Chinese Communist Party] and the PRC
have betrayed both the strategic and the everyday interests
of their people and the world socialist system.

V. I. Lenin. “Complete Collection of Works." Vol 30. p 45.

In addition to the main agencies--the Session and the Ex-
ecutive Committee. the following agencies are currently
operating in CEMA: CEMA committees (on cooperation in
planning. on supply of materials and equipment. and on
scientific and technical cooperation): permanent commissions
(on statistics. foreign trade. monetary and financial prob-
lems. electric power. on the use of atomic energy for peace-
ful purposes. geology. gas and petroleum industry. coal in-
dustry. chemical. non-ferrous metallurgy. ferrous metal-
lurgy. machine tool building. radio engineering and elec-
tronics industry. construction. transportation. civil avia-
tion. telecommunications and postal services. standardiza-
tion. light industry. food. agriculture. and health):

27
FOR OHICXAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

FOR OI’PICIAI. 083 ORLY

Conferences: of department heads (on prices and inventions).
of water management and labor agencies; of country represen-
tatives on legal problems and ministers of internal trade

of the CEMA member countries.

In 196% organizations were created for cooperation in the
bearing industry (OSPP). ferrous metallurgy (“Intormetall”).
production of machines for ve stable growing. horticulture
and grape growing ("Agronash"). An intergovernmental com-
miss on on cooperation of the socialist countries on com-
puter technology was foamed in 1969.

Organization for cooperation of the Socialist Countries in
Telecommunications and Postal Services (038) and the Common
Freight Car Pool (OPV)--in 1963.

These include the international sectoriai organizations set
up in 1971 on cooperation in small-batch chemistry ("Inter-
khim"). the electrical equipment industry (“Interelektro”)
and the Joint use of containers--the Council of the SPK

(197“) -

They are the international economic associations on nuclear
instrument making “Interatominstrument” (1972). on produc-
tion of industrial equipment for the textile industry
”Intertekstﬂfmash” (1973). on organization of cooperation
in making deliveries of equipment and rendering technical
assistance in the construction of atomic power stations
”Interatomenergo" (1973) in the field of chemical fibers
"Interkhimvolokno' (197b). and the international economic
association ”Intervodoochistka” (1977). and “Internefte-
produkt" (1978).

For more details see "Sovershenstvovaniye upravleniya
ekonomikoy stran SEV" [Improving Control of the Economy
of the OSHA Countries]. Izdatel'stvo "Nauka'. 197“.

See the decree of the CC CPSU and the USSR Council of
Ministers of 2 March 1973. "On certain measures for further
improvement of control of industry.” (PRAVDA. 3 March 1973).

As a rule the chiefs of the delegations of the countries at
meetings of the session are the heads of governments. at
meetings of the OSHA executive committee--deputy chairmen

of decmncns of ministers and at meetings of permanent com-
missions--ministers.

"Communique on the 32d Meeting of the Session of the Council
for ﬂutual Economic Assistance." (PRAVDA. 30 June 1978).

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1h. (ice VOPROSY EKONOMIKI. No 9. 1977. p 111.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl'atvo “Pravda". "Voproay okonomikl". 1978

8516
cso. 1823

29
Iron omcm. use on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

INCREASING TIIE EFFICIENCY OF BULK FREIGHT TRANSPORT 0N RAILROADS

Moscow RATSIONMJZATSIYA PERBVOZOK GRUZOV NA ZNBLBZNYKH 00le
[Increasing the Efficiency of Freight Transport on Railroads“) in Russian
1977 pp 191-197

[Chapter 5 from book by I. G. Kasakhovskiy. "Transport" Publishers]
[Text] Chapter 5. Rationalization of Bulk Freight Transport

Freight flows on the railroad network are made up of several thousand de-
scriptions of various types of freight. The alphabetical list of the
Standardised Rate and Statistical Products List alone enuaerstes approxi-
nately 5.000 descriptions of types of freight. if they are ranked indi-
vidually vithin this diversity by freight turnover in railroad transport.
the folloving fuel freights would be first: coal. petroleum and petroleua
products. peat and fuel shales. Ranking second would be the natal ores:
iron and manganese ore. nonferrous ore and rev sulfur. ferrous metals. flux-
es and scrap metal. The third group would include construction freight.
heat refractories. industrial raw aaterials and molding (foundry) asterials.
granular slags and cement.

Accounting for one-fifth of the railroad freight turnover are agricultural.
lumber and cheaicsl types of freight. in order to sisplify the planning
of transport and the operational accounting of fulfilling the plan. the
entire diversity of products hauled by the railroads has been grouped
together in 63 products-list groups. The proportion of each products-
list group in the total amount of freight shipped out and in freight turn-
over varies. The importance of transporting this or that freight is
determined not only by its volume in hauls. Individual types of products
with a relatively modest volume of hauls are generally the most valuable
in terms of costs and in urgency of delivery.

Measures to streamline transport must first of all concern hulk freight.
which determines the volume and direction of the freight flous making

up the interregional exchange. Such consolidated groups lust include fuel
freight. setsl ores. construction minerals, lumber. agricultural produce,

30
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chemical and mineral fertilizers (see Table £5). ln total shipments the
first six consolidated groups occupy approximately 88 percent and in freight
turnover about 80 percent.

1. Fuel freight

The largest share in the transport operation of railroads is occupied by
fuel freight. Measures promulgated by the party and the government have
permitted an increase in the extraction of fuel. if during the Eighth
Five-Year Plan the aVerage annual increase in its extraction amounted to

Sl million tons. then in the Ninth Five-Year plan it rose to 73.7 million
tons. The extraction of petroleum and natural gas developed at the most
rapid rate. During the last is years when the total extraction of fuel
increased 2.3-fold. the extraction of petroleum grew 3.3-fold. whereas that
of natural gas increased 6.3-fold.

The headlong development of the petrochemical and natural gas industry
brought about a significant increase in the proportion of liquid fuel
and natural gas in the country's energy supply.

The proportion of petroleum and natural gas has increased l.7-fold over the
lS-year period and has reached 2/3 of the fuel balance. The porportion of
solid fuel. primarily in the form of coal, has decreased accordingly.

 

 

 

Table as

EﬂﬁﬂﬁﬂlLﬂﬂLﬂnd Proportion of Consolidated Prei ht Grou s Hauled on Railroads
Consolidated Make-up by Products-list Group Proportion. 1
Freight Groups of Plan and Account Freight
___._.__.________ TurnOVer
Fuels Coal. coke, petroleum and petro- 32.2

leun products. pest and peat pro-

ducts. shslas
Hera] ores iron and manganese ores. non- 16.5

ferrous ore and raw sulfur. fer-

rus metals. fluxes. ferrous

scrap metals
Construction Construction materials. heat lJ.‘
minerals refractories. industrial raw

materials. and molding materi-

als. granular alags. cement
Lumber Lumber 9 . 6
Agricultural :rain. flour. sugar beets. 5.6
produce potatoes. vegetables and fruits.

cot ton
Chemical and Chemical and mineral fertilizers 3.1
mineral fertilizers
0wa Misc. freight 19.8

 

31

mo net-ven- s . r- turn-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The indicated changes in the structure of the fuel balance have been re-
flected in freight transport and in transport-economic ties.

Coal. Despite the decrease of coal in the (uel balance its extraction has
been increasing iron year to year. If in 1965 577.7 million tons were ax~
tracted. and in l970--626.1 million tons. then in 1975 701.3 sillion tons
were extracted. ‘

Along with the growth in coal extraction its transport by railroad has in-
creased accordingly. Horeover. if intheﬁighth Five-Year Plan the annual
increase in coal ship-eats amounted to sonewhat sore than 12 million tons.
then in the Ninth Five-Year Plan it exceeded 20 sillion tone. Coal hauls
in the eastern part of the network grew on a particularly large scale.
with an average growth in total coal ship-ants of 16.5 percent in 1975 as
coepared with 1970 in Kazakhstan this growth alounted to 5e.7 percent. in
Siberia 23.7 percent. in the Northern Caucasus only 8 percent.

Coal hauls are characterized by a high degree of concentration with regard
to shipping out and by a degree of dispersion with regard to delivery. or
the 1390 stations which ship out hard coal 107 stations account for 75 per-
cent of the total shipping out. At the ease tine coal is unloaded at 7100
stations. or almost every one which is open for freight operations.

Despite a certain decrease in the portion of the Donets-Dnieper region in
the network shipping out of coal. its proportion still continues to reaain
high--about 35 percent. Nevertheless. the outstripping growth of coal
extraction in the regions of Hestern and Eastern Siberia and Kazakhstan

is constantly increasing their role in supplying coal to the national
econoly. If in 1965 the proportion of these regions in the network's ship-
ping out of coal amounted to 32 percent. then in 1975 it reached 60 percent.

Five economic regions--Denets-Dnieper, Northern Caucasus, Nestern Siberian,
Eastern Siberian and Kazakhstan--account for 90 percent of all the inter-
regional exchange of coal. During the Eighth and Ninth Five-Year Pleas we
obserVed an uninterrupted increase in the proportion in the interregional
exchange of coal (roe Siberia and Kazakhstan as well as their replace-eat of
Donete coal. During this period coal shipped out of the Donets-Dnieper
region and the Northern Caucasus to other regions was reduced by 18 million
tone or 22 percent while their proportion in interregional exchange de-
creased iron 46 percent in 1965 to 30.6 percent in 1975. More and sore
Donbass cool remains within the borders of this region. The proportion of
heels of Donets coal by local transportation within the Donete-Dnieper
region has already exceeded 81 percent. and it continues to increase.

A constant increase in the shipment of coal fro. Siberia and Kasakhsten is
replacing Donets coal iron year to year. and the proportion of this coal in
interregional exchange rose free #5 percent in 1965 to 60 percent in 1975.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a result there has been considerable expansion in the zone or distribu-

tion or Siberian coal in a westerly direction right into the Southwestern.
Central-Chernozen. and ﬂorthwestern regions; of Kazakhstan coal to the
”rule: and Eastern Siberian coal to the Far East.

Transport has begun of Kuznetsk. Karaganda and intinsk coal for the elec-
tric power stations of the Ukrainian SSR as well as Kuznetsk coking coal
for the coal-tar chemical enterprises of the Donbasa and Dnleper region.
Transport has begun at the brown coal of the Chelyabinsk deposit for the
peat-fired electric power stations of the Gor'kiy and Kalinin oblests.
Along with this there has been a 2.5-fold increase in the long-distance
hauls of coal Eros Eastern Siberia to the Far East and a doubling of the
amount (roe Kazakhstan to Central Asia and the Urals.

The voluue of long hauls above the average distance reached 18.2 million
tons in October 1975. and it increased by almost 30 percent in comparison
with October 1975: moreover. for distances in excess of 2,0P0 kn. 8 lil-
lion tons of coal were hauled. or about 10 percent of the total amounts
shipped out as coapared to 3.9 million tons in October 1965. The con-
siderable increase in long-distance hauls has brought about a growth in

the average distance of coal hauls from 680 km in 1965 to 698 kn in 1975.
or an increase of 18 kn.

A number of inefficient hauls are linked to shortcomings in the estab-
lishment of fuel systems at individual electric power stations. Thus. nest of
of the electric power stations of the Volga region utilize closely situated
resources of fuel oil and natural gas. in connection with which other elec-
tric power stations. in particular those of Hosenergo and Leaenergo. are
compelled to operate on coal brought in from long distances.

Taking into consideration the trend toward a constant expansion of the zone
where Kuznetsk and Kazakhstan types of coal are consuaed, the cost isportant
condition for curtailing the unproductive operation of railroad transport

as well as outlays by the national scone-y for hauling coal consists of the

rational delineation of the regions where this coal is consumed and those
which use the Donets coal.

In the first place we eust speed up the solution of the problem of converting
the electric power stations of the Volga region as well as those of the
Central and Central-Chernozea regions to the coebustion of Kuznetsk coal

and to the coabustioa of Moscow-region coal and to gas-fuel oil. This will

peruit cutting downlhe transport of Donete coal in the ease direction as
that from the Kuznetsk region.

It seen expedient to reexamine the fuel systeus of the electric power sta-
tions with a particular view to converting individual electric power sta-
tions ol the Volga region to the coebuation of Juanetsk coal instead of
fuel oil and increasing. because of this. the delivery of (uel oil to the
electric power stations of the central regions. Taking into account the

33
roe omcm. use nNLr
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fact that the heat value of fuel oil is twice as high as that of coal. this

would permit a significant curtailment of long-distance coal hauls along with
a reduction in the extremely heavy loads carried by the railroads connecting

the center regions with the Urala.

Measures must be promulgated to increase the extraction of coking coal in
the Dohets Basin in order to curtail its being shipped in to plants of the
Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy of the Ukraine from Karagands and the Kuzbass.

An important task is the maximum increase of peat extraction in Belorussis
and the Volgo-Vystka region. which will permit a reduction in long-distance
hauls of coal to these regions from the Urals. in connection with the
shortage of peat resources. measures must be taken to ensure the supply of
electric power stations in these regions with fuel oil and natural gas as
well as to provide a maximum supply of L'vov-Volynsk coal to the consumers
of belorussia and the baltic region. so that gas-type end long-flame types
or coal from the Conbass do not have to be sent to these regions.

we must increase the extraction of local types of coal in Central Asia and
speed up the conversion of municipal services (public utilities) of these
republics to gas-fuel oil in order to curtail as much as possible the ship-
ping in of Juznetsk coal.

In the Far East we must also increase the extraction of maritime and Raychi-
hhinsh types of coal up to amounts which would ensure the curtailment of

the shipping in of brown coal of the Kharanorsk deposit for electric power
stations and consumers of the Amur area of the Khabarovsk and Maritime
Krays.

In connection with the increasing flow of coal from the eastern regions in

a westerly direction an important problem is the more complete utilization
of river modes of transportation. Special measures must be promulgated to
increase the handling capacities of river ports and stations of Perm'Ksmbar-
ks. Ufa. Ul'yanovsk. Kuybyshev. Tol'yatti in order to augment significantly
the volume of coal hauls in direct-combined railroad transportation.

Pertoleum freight. hauls of petroleum freight on railroad transport have
been increasing to an extent which is considerably greater than the total
volume of hauls. If in l975. es coopared to 1965. the total freight shipped
increased by 50 percent. and freight turnover by 66 percent. then the ship-
ment and freight turnover of petroleum freight increased by 75 percent.

The proportion of petroleum freight in the total amount of shipments grew
from 9.2 percent in 1965 to 10.8 percent in 1975. while in freight turnover
In increased accordingly from 16.6 percent to 16.9 percent; i.e.. it ap-
proached the freight turnover of coal. The average distance of petroleum
ffctsht hauls in 1975renched 1261 km and exceeded by 1.6 times the average
distance of all freight hauls by railroad transport. Although the relative
outlays spent by the national economy on transporting petroleum and petrole-
um products are gradually decreasing in connection with the increase in the

3“
FOR OFFKCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

proportion of inexpensIVe pipeline transport. there are still extensive
possibilities for curtailing then by means of streamlining transport-
economle ties.

In hauls of petroleum freight the greatest proportion is occupied by petro-
leum, fuel oil, and diesel fuel. In 1975 these three consolidated groups
accounted for 70.6 percent of the total volume shipped and 71 percent of
the freight turnover of petroleum freight. At the same time the proportion
of railroad hauls of diesel fuel and other. clear petroleum products has
gradually decreased over the last few years.

The change in the structure of petroleum freight transport has occurred
basically because of petroleum and fuel oil.

Extrenely long-distance hauls of all the basic types of petroleum products
are constantly increasing. Approximately 20 millions tons per year of fuel
oil. more than 8 million tons of diesel fuel. more than 8 million tons of
gasoline and more than 5 million tons of kerosene were transported OVer
distances in excess of 2,000 km.

inefficient transportof petroleum products comes basically because of a
lack of coordination between the variety of petroleum products which are
turned out by a number of oil refineries. the needs of the economic regions
which are dependent on them. as well as those of the oil-refining installa-
tions at individual oil refineries for the quality of petroleum which can
be extracted at the nearest deposits.

At:|nneber of Siberia's oil refineries a large surplus of sulfurous fuel
oil is formed. and it is shipped westward to the Urals, the Volga region.
Kazakhstan. and Central Asia over distances ranging from 3,500 to 5,000 km.
At the same tine low-sulfur fuel oil is shipped in the reverse direction
from the Northern Caucasus. the Volga region and the Urels to Siberia and
the Far East.

Excessively long-distance hauls are also permitted for fuel oil for ships--
from the Novogor'kiy oil refinery to the Ukraine and from the Ursls for
consumers in the North-western economic region.

The oil-refining industry like no other manifests closely interrelated
causes which bring about the emergence of inefficient transport ties.

Thus. low-sulfur Shsimsk petroleum is shipped out from Voynovka to the
Northern Caucasus over a distance of almost 3,000 km. By organizing the
separate processing of high-sulfur and low-sulfur petroleum oil-refining
and the deilvery of Shaimsk petroleum to this combine we could have elimina-
ted the superfluous. long-distance hauls of crude petroleum from Voynovka

tn the Northern Caucasus and curtailed the shipment in the opposite direc-
tion of low-sulfur fuel oil to the regions of the Urals and Siberia.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The guarantee of the interchangeability or A-66 and A-72 gasoline will per-
mit the elimination of excessively long-distance and counter hauls in a
number of directions.

The streamlining of petroleum-product hauls must also be carried out by
means of redistributing the hauls by types of transport,and primarily. by
increasing the role of pipeline transportation; the latter's proportion in
petroleum-product hauls is still less than 102.

Along with stepping up the construction of main product pipelines and the
full utilization of the capacities of existing ones we need to expand the
network of local pipelines to pump fuel oil from oil refineries to the
nearest electric power plants, as well as to transport aviation kerosene to
airports. There must be a significant increase in the scope of petroleum
freight hauls by river transport. including those from the Bashkir plants
along the Belaya and Volga Rivers. from Omsk along the lrtysh River. from

the city of Cor'kiy along the Volga River and by maritime transport from
Kherson to Odessa.

The freeing of the railroads from short-range hauls of petroleum products
requires a step-up in the construction of distribution units at oil-refining
enterprises in order to transfer the finished products to motor vehicle
transport.

The basic condition for the rational distribution of the production of in-
dividual types of petroleum products is satisfying the needs of the nearby
regions for them. Depending on this. we must operationally regulate the
output volumes of petroleum products by variety of assortment and even by
the seasons. More rapid rates of growth must be attained in the production
of petroleum products in the Ukrainian SSR. the Baltic region, Kazakhstan
and in the Far East.

In the regions of Siberia where there is a great need for clear petroleum
products. production volumes of these items must be raised at the expense
of fuel oil .

COPYRIGHT: Moscow "Transport", 1977

2384
080: 8145/0516 END

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY