APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010001-8
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010001-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY

JPRS L/8194

2 January 1979

TRANSLATIMS 0N USSR INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. jOlNT pIELICATIONS RESEARCH SERVIG

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010001—8
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been suppliedasappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itemw are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGUIATIONS GWERNING WRSNIP 0F
HATIRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN R£QUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
I.Rs NO.
w JmL/8194 -W
I!

. .. - us

MSMTIQIS 0U USSR INDUSTRIAL ”PAIRS. (F000 1/79) 2 January 1979

           
    

 
   
  

7. Maude) .- Pellsvms‘ Oaaa-astlos lap

No. .
I Prokec/Tasi/Ioll Usn No.

I}! slla nPsusd
C211“ M

 
 

. Puts-ms; Omasisuiss Nuns and Address
Joint Publications Research Sawics
1000 worth Clsbs load
Arlington, Virginia 22201

   
 

  
    
     

It. Sponsoring Gnu-ind“ Nana sod Mduss

    
  

As above

“'0“.

    

This serial report contains infornation on the devalopnent and productivity
of the autoaotive and tractor industry; cbsnical industry and chenical
nachinery output; electronic end precision equip-ant; netallurgy and
Istaluorkin; equip-eat; construction cquipnent and building natarials.

    
      
       

    
 

     
 

. ' 7 . at... Asa us. e - sail-us

     
       
    

USSR

Autonotive Industry htaluorkins Bouipnant
Agricultural Machinery Economics

Chenical Industry

Construction

 
 

Construction Haterials
Construction Equipncnt
Electronics Industry
ﬂatsllurgy

m. haiku/worm Tens

 
   
    
 

    
 

m. COSA‘I’IFiru/Csssp 20. SC. 7A. 11!. 13C. 13!. na. 131. I)"

Asadsbnlny State-rs!

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY. LiIited Rider of
Copies Available Iron JPRS

      
     

'“" "'”‘ ""‘" ""' nus row a" st stnoouao ""”"“ "”"'"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J'PRS 1/81

2 Johnny

TRANSLATIWS on USSR INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS

(P000 1/79)
Couteuts

WWMIWY

USSR Reportedly Satin Intern Aid in t’roducin; New Car
(renneth (coding; I'll! YDWICIM. was, 6 Dec 78).......

CONSTRUCTION, COW!“ mam, MID mums “TRIALS

Siting and Layout of Heating—Syne- loilorhoma Duct-ital
(tarn'xm 081m. 1977)...........................

mmmnc murmur:

Inliability of Hacking Toola llith Digital Propa- Control
in Operation
(A. 8. Lapioua. at al.; arm I m. lo 10.

1978)....uu-u...o..o........c.a.......a.n......oo--

liothod of Latinatin; the Proceaa Reliability of Ilachino
Tooln Uith Digital Rogrn Control
(v. s. Starodnbov, H. S. Molar: 8W1 I mstmmn.
“ 1°. 1978,00...ooooooonooooooaooooonooooonoocoooooooo

manna-Soviet Cooperation in Machine: Tool loading
(1'. calori; sum I 1mm. 80 10. 1978)..........
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WW! AND TRACTOR INWS‘I'RY

USSR REPORTEDLY SEEKING VBSI'BRN AID IN PRODUCING NW CAR
London THE FINANCIAL TIMES in English 6 Dec 78 p 1 LD

[Dispatch by actor industry correspondent Kenneth Gooding: "Russia in
Talks on New Car"]

[Text] Moscow. 3 Dec--‘l'he Soviet Union wants to put a fenily saloon of
Cortins size on the road as quickly as possible. and has had initial
discussions with a handful of Uestern European manufacturers about the
project.

Ford. General Motors-which sakes Opel and Vauxhall cars in £urope--Renault
and Citroen have been involved in the talks. The Russians insist that

though the project is in its very early stages. sole western car-sakers
are seriously interested.

Negotiations will be complex. but the Soviet Ministry of Automobile ‘l‘rsnpport
hopes they will be conpleted in tine for the start of the next five—year
plan in 1981.

The idea would be for one of the two plants near Moscow now asking the
outdated hosltvich cars to switch production to the family saloon. which
would be identical with a node] produced in the Uest. Up to 200.000 a year
would be produced.

At present the Soviet Union wants the Hestern nanuf’acturers to pay for the
reequipnent program and then take care produced at the Moscow plant in
payment.

About 30 percent of the output would be exported and any of the companies

nased could easily absorb the 60,000 to 70.000 cars a year involved in
their European sales networks.

Production costs are much lower in Russia than in the Nest and the scheme
could be highly profitable for the Western manufacturer concerned.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But tremendous obotaclcx have to be cleared away for the project to cone to
frultlon. not the least of them the political problems faclng U.S.-ovncd
concerns like Ford and General Motors in a deal of this sort.

COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd.. 1978

C80: 1827

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WWO“. commoner! MACHINE“. AND BUILDIM) “TRIALS

5mm mo um or mrmc-srsm eonmuousss DESCRIBED
Moscow xorwm 1mm in Russian 19?? pp 3984.10

[Chapter 10 from the book. "Kotel'nyye Ustanovki" [Boilerhouse Installa-

tions]. by K. P. Roddatis. Morgan; passages between slantlines printed
in fine type]

[Btcerpt] 10-1. The Siting of Heat-amply Sources

Hhen sitirg a boilerhouse that will serve as the heat-supply source for an
enterprise and a housing district. an effort is made to place it close to
the center of the heating load. giving consideration to the direction of
the prevailing winds (or wind rose). the location of the housing tracts.
planted greenery. the local terrain. the ground-water level. waterulupply
sources. the potential for establishing cinder heaps. and a lumber of
other circumstances that are governed by the appropriate construction and
other norms and regulations. as well as the potential for further expan-
sion during the estimated period of development of the district in ques-
tion. In so doing. the possibility is created of combining existing or

planned boilerhouses and heating grids of other districts with the boiler-
house being designed.

The land on which the boilerhouse or heat-supply source is to be located
should have reliable ground that can serve as a natural foundation for the

building and structures. Eartlmoving and other leveling work should be
minimal.

The boilerhouse building. the facility for receiving and discharging solid
and liquid fuel,and the railroad tracks should. as a rule. be situated
parallel to the contour of the natural relief. The terrain should also be
considered when siting facilities for removing clinker and ash from the
bone-mouse. Where the clinker and ash cannot be used for construction or

other specific wrposes. the dunps for then should be placed on land sec-
tions that areclosest to the boilerhouse and are unsuitable or less suit-

able for other purposes. or outside the boilerhouse grounds. preferably in
gullies or it marshy places. Cinder-heap dimensions are chosen on the
basis of a boilerhouse's operation for 10-25 years.

3

FOR OFFICIAL [SB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The discharge of water from the grounds and from the boilerhnme uuileling
should be executed and coordinated with the network of industrial. storm.
and household sewer systems for the whole area or the erterprise or the
land that has been set aside for construction of the hoilcrhouso. Efflu-
ent from the chemical. water-treatment. mazut and lubricant activities.

from washing the external heating surfaces of boiler units. and from acid-
flushing and other flushing of equipment should be neutralized and purified
of solid-particle. petroleun-product and other pollutants. and cooled l-O a
temperature below 1.0 degrees Celsius. and only after this released into
the sewer system.

In designing boilerhouses for industrial enterprises. roads. structures

and buildings for like purposes should be amalgamated. ’me grounds of a
boiler house. if it is located outside the industrial enterprise and has
an open area with the equipment. warehouses. transport installations and
commications located on them. should he furnished with all the convenien-
ces. a protective zone planted to greenery. and surrounded by a Lia-meter
chain-link fence. The distances (gaps) that correspond to the construc-
tion nouns and regulations and roads that will enable transport and fire-
department operations to be performed should be stipulated between build-
ings. structures and the fuel storage and other installations. The main
access route to the grounds and the ring road around the boilerhouse will
bebuilt from the nonextensible end of the boilerhouse building. Joining
the beilerhouse grounds to the cannon-carrier railroad is planned in coor-
dination with the appropriate railroad adninistration. Premises. buildings
and structures that present fire hazards should be made of noncombustible
materials. The categories of the various parts of the bail lerhousc build-
ing and auxiliary structures and premises and the characteristics of the
materials that are required for them are fixed. In choosing the materials
and structure for structural members of boilerhouse buildings. the require-
ments of the Principles [L Bibliography. not reproduced] 1. 2 and 18]

and other appropriate SNiP's [Construction Norms and Regulations] and
Principles. including electrical-emineering specifications. should be
considered.

10-2. Boilerhouse Buildings

It is customary to classify bcilerhouses as enclosed. senior-en and open:
at enclosed boilerhouses all the equipment is placed inside the building;
in semiopen boilerhouses. auxiliary equipment-deaerators. tanks. ash
traps. flue-gas pumps and fans—is installed outside the building; and at
open boilerhouses shelter is provided for regular servicing of the basic
equipment-Aha boiler units—but only the coatrol ranels and mm; s and
filters for the chemical water purifiers are placed inside buildings.

The basic equipnent for open-type boiler houses should be specially adap‘.-~
ed to operation at below-freezing whicnt temperatures.

Boilerhouses situated at inhabited places should. as a rule. be c:‘ the on-
closed type. but on the grounds of industrial enterprises they ca— be c"
any type. if climatic conditions and the equipment permit.

1
-.

FOR OFFICIAL USE 03.1.?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BoilerMuse buildims can be built to be freestanding or contiguous to
other bums—interlocked.

Boilerhouss praises are interlocked with production departments at ease
enterprises. at municipal and domestic-amenities buildings (except for the
bathhouse) and at the services buildings of therapeutic institutions. The
boilsrhouse is separated from other premises by a special substantial
fireproof wall; no praises of any kind are placed above the boiler units.
Sometimes boilerhouses are placed inside production. social or housing

buildings. part of the premises being allocated for them; such boilerrooms
are said to be built-in.

The installation of boiler units of all types and shapes inside prodmtion
premises is accomplished by the forming of a boilerroom premise with a
height or at least 2 meters. with noncombustible partitions. floor and
ceilirg.

Haste-heat recovery boilers and power-engineering units can be isolated
from the operating premise together with the technological units. Free-
standing buildims are most widely used for ‘coilerhouses.

Modern boilsrhouse buildings are erected. as a pale. with one-story trams-
works with single-alignent spans of equal width and height. when the
equiment must be placed in several stories. pavilion-type buildings with
built-in etsgsres are used. The dimensions or the mans of buildings are
to be 12. 18. 21. and 30 meters; for mall boilsrhouse» spans of 6 and 9
meters are permitted. Aside from calms. outer walls with pilasters can
be load-bearisg building members where the spans are mail (6. 9 and 12
meters). the height is saall (up to 7.2 meters) and no load-1min mech-
anius rest on the walls. where the span is 12 meters or more. only col-
uans with spacing of 6 or 12 meters are used. For the. multistory portion
or a boilsrhouse building, it is proper. for example. to use column grids
of 6x7 or 61:9 meters at the nonextensible end. The height of boilsrhouse
buildims depends upon the size of the span and is established in size
sultiples of 0.6 to 1.8 meters.

It part of the building is to be multietory. then the grade levels or the
stories should be 3.6. l..2 and 6 meters. except for the first floor. which
can have a height or 7.2 meters. where the building's height is less than
7.2 meters. its load-bearing outer walls can be made of brick or of other
masonry units. A boilsrhouse building can have an ash story with the
floor level at the grade level of the grounds only where a special schene
for clinker and ash reaoval is used or where there is a high swam-water
level: an ash story should not be specially separated.

1! equipment that imparts dynamic loadings on footims—crushers. mills.
flue-gas pups. fans. and so on—is installed in a boilsrhouse. the foot-
ings erected for it are not Joined to the floor and walls of the buildim.
The outer walls. socle. and inner walls of buildims with load-bearing
columns are made of hum panels made of lightweight concrete or keramtit

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE USLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

concrete. or of masonry pieces; partitions are made of gypsum-concrete
panels or other panels. Apertures for doors and windows and holes for the
passage or gas and air lines and pipelines and for the installation or
wodularized equipment are made in walls and partitiOns. Structure for the
well at the extensible end of a boilerhouse building should allow for
the execution of construction and installing operations. Inter-story coil--
ing floors are made of concrete slabs. which are laid on crossbars that

mastic and gravel applied to it is placed on top or the roof. the use of
skylights is limited. Floors should be strong. resistant to heat and
moisture. noncombustible. and not susceptible to destruction by the ten-
porary effects of oil. acids and allulies. Conduits are laid in boiler-
house floors for the removal of clinker and ash. for feed lines for air to
firebox installations. for electrical and other cable. and for pipelines
for water and sewage; openings are sometimes lett in the floor for the
footings under the equipment. The floor can be one-piece or several lays-
ers or made of slabs. The windows more often than not are made in the
form of separate openings or long strips; large apertures are divided
into parts by posts and beams; the window casements are attached to the

lend-bearing parts or the building. The window sills are made at an unis
or 50 degrees. and the height or the aperture is in multiples of 0.6 to
l..8 meters. Doors are to be 1.0. 1.5 or 2.0 meters wide and 2.1. meters
high; they are manufactured from steel or metal framework or are made of
wood with felt linim impregnated with clay and with steel-sheet lining.

least two exits from the boilerhouse with fire esca on opposite sides
(it outside. in a storm porch or stairway enclosure . Gates {m the
boiler-unit premises are made of two halves that open wide outward for the
passage of transport. have a height or 2-1. seters and a width of 2.b-l..2
meters and incorporates a wicket gate for pedestrians.

The steel bunkers are covered on the outside by thermal insulation to 2 ~e-
vent condensation of steam on their walls. Fuel bunkers rest on column.

6

FOR GPFXCIAL P55 QSL?
FOR OFFICMI. USE ONLY

or crossbars or are lung from them. The span between the column axes of
the bunker allow or the colunns that are built into the premises are to
be 3.0 and .0 meters. Above the bunker, the width of the galleries for
fuel feed depends upon the lumber and sizes of the mel-transport mechan-
iuns: they adjoin the boilerhouse at the nonextensible end of the build-
ing. not resting upon the load-bearing walls or the building's framework.

An example of executing such a boilerhouse building. for 35 NH OOGcel/hr)
and made of prefabricated reinforced concrete. is shown in figure 10-1.
The load-bearing structure has been executed in the form of a framework
with columns. cone: te-slab ceiling floors, reinforced-comrete girders

and a plate roof with thermoinsulating layer and water insulation and a
covering of rolled material.

 

Figure 10-1. Dimensions
and Scheme of a Boilerhouse
mu Based on 35 av (30
Goal/hr with Boiler Units
That mm Solid Fuel in a

Bed (Design by LstgipI‘Opm §§"

      
        

$33173“)

[Latvian State Regional In-
stitute for the Des of
Industrial Equipment ).

oop—

Nauu'ue'mt -

Key:

1. Transformer station.

2. Chemical water purifier.
3. Pope.

In Machine shop.

 

Solid fuel is fed by belt conveyors that are located in an inclined gel-
lery and over the bunkers. Olinlcer and ash removal has been mechanized.
All the basic and auxiliary equipnent has been plated in one pavilion-type
premise. which is separated from the machine shep. services and amenities
praises by partitions; the transfonner mbstation has been placed outside
the building.

A still simpler boilerhouse building at which gas and mamt are burned is
shown in figure 10-2. where the built-in etagere and services and amenities
7

FOR OFFICIAL. 'L'SE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

premises that are situated at the nonextensiblo end of the building are
eeen in elevation.

 

. Jig-1-4,. [— . — E..——.1..-.w

I
.3” - .—
L_l ;
L ..’.-7€“_ .._‘;'."£.....‘£".'7 .‘090.L5.’« {4. ."m m M"

g

|

.1

5/000 4

 

L.__

 

Figure 10-2. Dimensions and Scheme for Boiler-house Building Based on 105
m (90 Creel/hr) with Steel Hot-Hater Boilers for Gas and Hazut (Design by
Latgiproprom Latvian State Regional Institute for the Design or Industri-

al Bquipnent] .

Key:

10 KhVO [management].

2. KT? [technical monitoring point].

 

The choice of dimensions for the building is determined by the factory-

stated clearances of the equipment and by the size of the passages between
the equipment and curtain-wall structure, which is governed by the Prin-

ciples and by construction norms.

In order to provide for mechanization of the installation and repair of
equipmt in the boilerhousc premises, beams and adapters for attachim
load-lifting devices shadd be stiwlated. if the weight or the parts re-
moved is more than 100 I3. For the heaviest parts, provisions should be
made {or bringixg up a truck crane or other similar mechanisms.

8

FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10-3. Equiment Layout.

Inside the building the boilerhouse equiment should be placed in accord-
ance with the layout developed by the plant that manufactures the boiler
unite or in accordance with a standard design. Other layouts are allowed
only during rebuilding. The boiler units are placed within the premise
in one row with the servicim front facim window openings. and it is de-
sirable that the heat-recovery surfaces—the water econanizer and water
preheater—end the auxiliary oquipeent (mills. forced-draft fans. arrange-
ments for scrubbing flue gasesandflue-gas pumps) be placed before and after
each separate boiler unit individually. The only exception to this are
cast-iron boilers that are modularised in two units. their side walls

Joinim.

The general boilerhouse equipaent that serves to prepare the water. and
also the heat exchangers and maps. are located in the boilerhouse at the
nonextensible end of the building. Above the watehpreparatlon equipnent.
where the layout is enclosed. the deaerator is installed in Inch fashion
that the distance therefrom to the peeps that feed the cater into the
boiler unit will be well. The place for water preparation umlly is
isolated by a wall. and in it are placed integrated transformer absta-
tions, workshops for the repair of boilerroom equipnent. monitorim and
meamrim instruments. and other services and premises for the amenities.

Figure 10-3 shows an enclosed layout for a boilerhouse with four cast-iron
his iya~6 hot-water boilers that operate on solid fuel (AS [anthracite
seeﬁ. PZh [boiler and forge coal] and brown coal). with a total thermal
productivity of 2. 3—3. 5 w (2-3 Gcai/hr).

/'fha boilerhouse is designed for heat supply under an enclosed system and
for applying hot water in accordance with a circulating system with accu-
mulator tanks.

A four-pipe system has been adopted for districts where the lowest outside
air temperature tout.air is -w degrees c. A fuel warehouse of the en-

closed type is selected and it is placed at the part of the boilerhouse
where the expansion thereof is anticipated, in a boilerhouse compartment
of 6x12 meters; fuel is fed from the warehouse to the boilerhouse by
means of electrical hoist and narrow-gage car, and into the warshcnse by
automotive transport. Clinker and ash are removed by means of a scraper
into a bunker in the boilerhouse building. The clinker and ash are
brought out from the bunker by automotive transport.

Gases move elm underground horizontal fluee to the steel flue from the
NIIWZ [State Scientific-Research Institute for Industrial and Sanitary
Gas Scrubbing] cyclones by flue-gas pups.

hater is prepared under a schema for simle-stage treatment with a sodim
cationite with net storage of salt and with vacuun dsaeration; the water

9

FOR OFFXCIN. L'SE ONLY
is applied from water mains: production and amenities sewage system: have
been made eepornto.

 

 

figure 10-3. Enclosed Loy-
out or Equipmt for a Boil-

erhouee with Chet-Iron Hot- . _ ----_.
Hater Boilers. Developed by ‘ ‘ .5
Sentekhproyekt [State De- ﬁ._ .. .
eign Institute for Induetri- 1m. . '.-|

:1 Sanitary-agineering De-
eign of USSR Goeetroy].

Key:
1. mum-6 type boiler.
2. Mp3 {or network water
(winter and mor).
3. Ramterial water mp.
1.. Rev-materiel meter ,
mhu‘el‘e ."I‘x “ z T -

5. Preheat" {or chunically I . I. '; - n

. mined voter. " I '1 J'- '

o. Mp for deeereted - .. . '
water.

70 Mentor.

80 1:11.011"th We

9. Mp for feeding water
from the dumtor to
the euctim-mp
eJeetore.

10. Acmlator tenke. . . . 3 . .. ..

ll. Sodiu- cetionite filter. til-J. Jy-_;+yfg,,.ﬂ ;, .3. .__;.. I

12. Tank for sterile alt. ' - ._ =

13° ”00”,.“ We I.

u» Hutch-level tank.

15. Ejector or map for

alt-solution feed.

16. Ejector for feeding
water into the inter-
nedinte tank.

170 POEM.“ {On-

18. Flue-gee pulp.

19. Aeh trep.

29. 3103 and uh remover.

21. Electrical hoist.

A. Puel storage.

 

 

 

 

 

Electricity is applied {we a 3ao- or 220-volt grid to a panel for in-
heuee neede. Aecumletor tanks are installed behind the boilerhouse
building. which in nude with e load-burn; reinforced-concrete .' mmork.
The me]. meter of Dam of nee or the boilerhouee is set at 1.,30J.

10
FOR C'ﬂ-‘zcm. 3's: arxzx
FOR OFFICIAL USE HNI Y

The unit-by-unit princi is was not adhered to in laying out the flue-gas
punps and other pumpmf

Aside frm heating and hot-water supply. customers often require low-pres-
sure stea. For food. light. and meat indistry enterprises. mnicipal and
household customers. and agriculture. there are designs for boilerhousea
with cast-iron or steel boilers for hot water and steam.

”plea of such boilerhouses are given in [L. 22].

Steam boiler units of low productivity are laid out in pavilion-type build-
ings with arrangements on the premise for etageres.

An example of a layout of a heatim and production boilerhouse with an en-
closed heat-supply system with "Mt-1043 boiler units. to operate on gas
and masut. is shown in figure 10-1..

/Steam is sent to production with a pressure of 0.7 "Pa (7 kg-force/cmz)
after reduction; losses of condensate to production are 50 percent. Hater
for heat-amply needs is heated by steam at 0.? 141’s (7 u—forcs/cmz) in
steam-water heat exchangers almost without loss of condensate. The water
is processed in sodium-cationite exchange filters under a two-stage
ache-s. it receives an addition of sodium nitrate. and it is deaerated in
an atmospheric-type thermal deaerator installed outside the boilerhouse
building. Also outside the buildim are tanks (or bunker) and a pup for
wet storage and pumping of saline solution (12 and 15). m the pipes to
the equipsent inside the boilerhouse buildim have been laid in a mnken
heated conduit. Next to the boilerhouse building is an open transfonsr
mbstation, not far from which a well has been built for heatim lines and
for water from scavemim.

The boilerhouse building is made of prefabricated reinforced concrete. and
the posts, crossbars and window easements are steel; the doors are of wood

and the footirgs under the equipsent are made of monolithic reinforced
concrete.

Tclephcne service. radio communications and clock service are called for.

Electric power comes from the grid through a distribution substation at a
voltage of 6 or 10 kw.

All the boilerhouse equipment has been laid out in unit-by-unit fashion.
The steam line has been made single-strand, the feed line two-strand:
feed pups with electric and stem drive are to be installed. Flue gases

from the flue-gas punps are sent along the undery'ound herisontal
fluss to the brick or comrete flue—one for the four boiler units.

Auxiliary equipnent for the whole boilerhouse is situated at the unsxten-

sible end of the building the boilerhouse compartment is 61:18 meters in
.1905

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     

 

JK- , é
ﬁi‘wz‘ﬁh .
Jan-ans swan-61$" )r,.'._.f.,§'_.|_.‘v‘ln.‘.‘v‘l " 5”; -__
. | C'..' _'.‘ . .'.'.'. i;
”A?

  
   

$14

‘- —-‘.—.——

 

.=l‘"‘..-u t. J '_"- ..'I.u::..- .
5. 2c '1' " my: ' '3?!)
, . 25 .r‘ ,.
u 'l- .I - 3 J.-- 1.2:.” (...? -'-.
" .3 $4.34 {WEE
‘ .- I r; -- _ ",
n 5,} {raj €"‘I5|1.'
' ..rh '

 

9w -- 22;. ~‘.":‘.:"' - 1_-‘.- d .5 1.2-:
5’ I-.- ... .. . ’4’”

 

Figure 10-1.. Sealapen Layout. for a Ballet-house with mun-1043 Steam Bon-
ere. Developed by Santekhproyekt [State De Institute for Industrial
meaty-humerus Design of use Goutno .

Key:
a. mention.
be Me

For legend. see figure 10-3. except for:

[ley cootnmed on next page]
12

FOR UZ'FICU‘" 05:: -3XI.‘.'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

22. Contimous scavenging separator.

23. Reduction-coon“ installation (above the chemical water purifier).

21.. Cooler for stays.

250 PM Me

26. Network water preheator.

27. Salt solution filter.

28. Tank for transferring cationites.

29. Dispenser puup.

30. Tank for strong salt solution.

31. Tank for flushim water.

32. Pmp for flushim water.

33. Panel for monitoring and assuring instrments and automated equip-
mt.

TP. Transformer substation.

———~_—_——

These are standard designs for the layout of boilerhouses that have been
developed for cases of heat supply by one heat carrier—steals or hot water..
Their deficiencies include crowded placement of water-preparation equip-
sent and pumps. which complicates repair work. and the use of Open instal-
lation of transformers./

Latgipropron [Latvian State Regional Institute for the Design of Indus-
trial Enterprises] has developed layouts also for larger steam boiler
units [L. 22]. Layouts have been developed with hot-water boilers ( steel)
for various fuels for KV-GH and [xv-1's boilers. for [”76 to 58 III (from

I. to 50 Goal/hr). An example of a layout for a boilerhouse with large
IW-Gi-SO hot-water boilers is shown in figure 10-5.

/KV-6H-50 boilers and the other equipnent are placed in pavilion-type
buildings. The heat load of the boiler-house involves the expenditure of
so percent of the heat on heating and ventilation and 20 percent on hot-
water supply with the operation of covered heating networks with a water
temperature of 150—70 degrees Celsius.

In this boilerhouse layout. network and recirculation pm, 3 have been in-
stalled in front of the boilers. and panels with nonitorim and steaming
instnnents are installed above then on an etagere. The inexteneible end
is occupied by a transformer substation. repair shops and amenities
premises.

Bquipnent for water preparation. includim deaarstion. he been placed in
the first boilerhouse compartments. The positions indicated previously
have been preserved in the constructional sphere and. in order to redace
vibration. fans and flue-gas pumps have been installed on monolithic foot-
ima not Joined to the floor. The placement of the rest of the equipsent
is apparent from figure 10-5.

Boilerhouses that operate on solid mel that is burned in headers have the

largest dimensions. Figure 10-6 shows a covered layout for KV-TK-30 steel
hot-water boilers in a boilerhouse for an enclosed heat-supply system.

13

FOR Ct'FICXAL 6:3 £57.?
FOR OF'ICIM. USE: ONLY

figure 10-5. Meloaed
Layout for 0 Bone»-
hauue with man-50
Stool Water
Donors, Developed by
hump“ [Latvian
Stat. Region» mm.-
mm for the Doug: of

mum-m Mun-bent].
Keys ‘

[or legend. m ru-
ureo 10-3 and 10-h.
wept for:

31.. maintaining
NIP.
A. Plan at. the 0.00
and. level.

3. Plan at. the 600
grade level.

”000
fawn .m'

L_.--_ ____.
. D09:

 

FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OPl’lClM. USE ONLY

ﬁgure 10-6. Covered layout for a Bonerhouee with
Mom-N Steel Hob-Hater Boilers. Developed by Leb—
;1propm [Latvian sum Regional Institute for the

hem of Muriel Equipment]. ‘ _, .

Key: .
For legend. eee figures 10-3. 10-h and 10-5. except .
for: I \
350 Calpﬂloor. ‘ ‘
36. Mr col- - ‘ {

lectOre o'“
37. liner

um.
38. mm

”P‘-

tutor.
39. Scraper

IMP.
(00 RIP

for

sprin-

Him

the uh

‘r.pe
'01. “nah"

113

Mo
(.2. Ash-

sluic-

1n;

WP.

 

15

FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

This same equipment layout can be retained also for the installation of
ash traps and flue-gas pumps outside the building. In front of the boil-
ers is the bunker gallery. atop which are the fuel conveyors; the raw-N01
feeders are under the bunkers. and the pulverisation equipment is at
grade level.

The placement of the other equipsent is tho same as in the preceding lay-
out. but ash traps of the wet type have been installed in front of the
flue-gas pups. Indraulic remval of clinker and ash. the scheme for
which is shown in figure 7-32 {not reproduced], that required the instal-
lation of additional pups and tanks and a charge in the sewerage system.
has been used in the boilerhouse.

The constructional phase has been executed in a fashion similar to the
layout that has been examined.

Somewhat different from the examined layouts are those for use of the heat
of secondary energy sources. for example. waste-heat recovery boilers. and
the heat of waste gases from open-hearth furnaces; one of these has been
shown, where the waste-heat recovery boiler is located in the enclosed
praise. in figure 10-7.

The boiler unit 1 of the type depictedinfigure 6-31 [not reproduced] has
compound forced-circulation of water from dm 2 through coils. usim
pulp 3. Flue gases from an open-hearth furnace pass through boiler l.
which involves convective heating surfaces. and are removed by flue-gas
pulp 1. into the flue 5. Since the gases from the open-hearth furnace are
polluted by carry-off from the charge. with a dust content of up to 10
grams per n3. the boiler heating mrface is to be cleaned by shot (see
figures 5-60 and 5-61 [not reprodxced] that arrive from bunker 6 and dis-
tributor 7. and is to be washed with water that comes from special pipes 8.
The shot or sludge is collected during the washing with water in bunker 9.
and then the shot is returned by won: conveyor 10 along a pipeline into
bunker 6. and the water and sludge are pimped out by mp 11. The waste-
heat recovery boiler for servicim the purification installations is laid
out with a substantial depth for the bunkers 9.

where deepening is dispensed with and the waste-heat recwzry boiler in-
stallation is enclosed. the height of the building is almost donned.

Boilers that serve for the heatim or evaporation of high-boiling organic
heat-transfer agents are placed as closely as possible to the technologi-
cal apparatus. and their layout is distixcuished from the layout of the
MR boilers previously exuined mainly by the absence of arrangements
for water preparation and deaeration. and in some cases also of an air
preheater.

The examples of boilerhouse equipment layout that were examined do not
cover boilers with pressure chargim. the developnent of the structure and
layout of which has not been completed yet. Preliminary Santekhg. _ k.

16

FOR OFFICIAL i'SE ONLY
__ ._ —‘

 

 

“
~

  

YQEQC

 

\

‘ s &A\

  

v

 

.-‘«
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[state Design Institute for Industrial Sanitary-Mimering Design or ussa
Oosstroy; date for boiler-unit lsyouts of 1.1-7 ke-{orce/secouda (“-25 tons
per hour have shown that the construction volume of the buildim changes
but little in comparison with the lsyout shown in figure 10-1..

The msin chsmes in equipnent layout are the transfer or the fan to the
front or the boiler unit and dispensing with the installation of flue—see
pusps. It is sealed that the cost of boilerhouse equipnent for units
with pressure charging and the annual operating expenses will not be
changed considerably.

111.09
cso: east/0251A

18

FOR EFFICIAL 63! 3V1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NETALWRKIN murmur

UDC 62l.9.06-529-l92

RELIABlLlTY OP MACHINE TOOLS NIT" DIGITAL TROGRAH CONTROL IN OPERATION

Noscow STANKI l INSTRUNENT in Ruseinn No ID. [978 pp 8-9
[Article by A. S. anidus. V. T. Portnen, L. G. hegsvnrynnl

[Text] At :he present tine industryis using A procedure developed by the
ENlHS Institute to study nechine tools with digital progrns control in
operstion. The basic principles of the procedure are discussed below.

The system for gathering data on the reliability of Inchine tools with
digital progran control nust insure that reliable. cospsrable snd objective
data will be obtained and also the possibility for generslirntion of then.
when gathering the inforlation. the csuses of failures. their type and

scans of eliminating then. the tine for returning the nachine tool to
operation and the run tile of the machine tool betueen failures are recorded.

In order to obtain information about reliability. it is reconnanded that
anchine tools be selected which operate under standard conditions for the
given nodel of uschine tools not subject to capital und sediun repair. When
classifying the operating conditions on stsndsrd it is necessary to consider
the nomenclature. overall disensions. the requiresents on accuracy and the
Iaterinl of the unthined products altogether. the types of operations per-
for-ed. the Iscbining conditions. external conditions (dust. vibration level.
tenperature in the (acility). the qualifications of the service personnel
(including repair personnel). and the quality of technical servicing. The
observations lust be pertorned at the plants with well organised production
facilities where the sscbine tools are loaded for two or three shifts.

The infornation is gathered by the service personnel under the direction
and with the participation of the machine tool nanufacturers. The site of
the sanple of nochine tools sad the observation tine depend on what
accuracy and reliability of the reliability indexes are required and also
the proposed distribution low of the obserVed randos events. It is
recon-ended that iron 5 to 20 naehine tools be selected for observation
(depending on the series nature oi their output. the territorial arrange-
Bent. the operatins conditions. and so on). Considering the actual

l9

'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distribution latJ of the random events. it is necessary to select the
number of machine tools and the duration of the ohuervalious no that the
observed amber of random events (failures. repairs and so on) will be no
less than 55. This insures reliability of evaluating the reliability index
of n.9 with a relative errer of 0.2.

The following components necessary to evaluating reliability enter into the
rated stock of operating time of the machine tools with digital program
control: the run time and the repair time.

The run time by which we mean the total time from beginning to end of
operation of the machine tool with respec' to each control program is
determined by means of instruments which automatically record the operation
of the machine tool by the program from the time the start button is switched
on to the "end of program." or by recording the time for machining a given
part with respect to the control program and the number of machined parts.

if a reject is detected for reasons which do not depend on the fitness of
the machine tool. then the time spent on manufacturing the rejected parts

is included in the run time. if the causes of rejects depend on the fitness
of the machine tool. then the time expended on manufacturing the rejected
products is excluded from the run time in the final rejects: for a correct-
able reject. the time for redoing the product is excluded; the reject is
considered only in the case where the run time varies by more than 2 to 11.

The repair time for a machine tool with digital program control is the time
spent on detection of the failure. determination of the cause of its appear-
ance and elimination of the consequences of the failure. including the

time for a test start. This includes the time for elimination of tool
failures if they are not a consequence of failure of the machine tool but
also the repair expectation tune.

a classification of the repair time of the machine tools with digital program
control with respect to groups of components has been adopted: the digital
program control unit. mechanical components. electrical equipment (the

main propulsion and feed electric drive). the electroautomation. measuring
devices (feedback sensors with converters). the feed network of the machine
tool with digital program control: the hydraulic equipment; the lubrication
and cooling systens. The time for elimination of failure». the reuse of
which has not been established is put in a separate group.

During the process of gathering information on the reliability of nachine
tools with digital program control in operation all types of failurv% are
recorded. including mistakes (self-eliminating failures). with respect to
the established actual causes of failures. the latter are separated into
independent failures of the elements of the machine tool and dependent ones.
Further analysis and evaluation of the reliability (including the determina-
tion of the number of failures taken into account when calculating the
reliability indexes) is carried out with respect to the indepwncec' f [lurch

20

FOR OfflClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the elements. Here the time for elimination of the dependent failures
of the elements is included in the time for repair for the corresponding
independent failures (that is. the repair time completely pertains to
independent failures).

The appearance of dependent failures and damage requiring a great deal of
time to eliminate indicates the vulnerability of the structural design,
which is taken into account when analyzing the reliability. The operating
failures are isolated in a separate group. in each case substantiating the
classification of the failure among the operating failures. For determining
the reliability indexes. the operating failures are not taken into account.
for they usually are not caused by defects of the machine tool with digital
program control. in particular, the response of the protection for causes
connected with violation of the operating rules of the machine tool is not
considered a failure.

If the given operating failure is systematically repeated on a number of
machine tools, then it must be considered as the structural or production
failure and taken into account when determining the reliability indexes;
this is recorded when analyzing the reliability.

The partial failure (limiting the technological possibilities or output
capacity of the machine tool but permitting continuation of work) eliminated
during the periods of technical servicing or planned repair belongs to the
insignificant damage. It is not recorded as a failure and correspondingly
is not taken into account when determining the reliability indexes. The
formula includes the number of failures or the repair time.

when analyzing the reliability, the systematically repeating failures are
discovered which reflect the peculiarities of the structural design. the
manufacturing defect and the operating conditions and the failure is
connected with danger to life and health of people. The information about
the dangerous failure must be transmitted directly to the main designer of
the manufacturing plant and the chief mechanic of the user plant.

During the failures leading to rejection of the products, it is necessary to
analyze the cause of the reject for the reason of their dependence on the
fitness of the machine tool. If the reject does not depend on the fitness
of the machine tool (it appears as a result of defects or noncorrespondence
of the material of the machined product, failures of the tools. errors ln
programming. and so on). then the failure is not recorded.

The rejection for causes which depend on the fitness of the machine tool is
considered to be a failure. If several of the products manufactured in a

row turn out to be rejected (for example. as a result of the existing monitor-
ing system or with respect to incomplete examination on the part of the
machine tool operator). then this is considered as one failure.

The tool failures. as a rule, are not taken into account. and when necessary
they are recorded separately.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The reliability indexes of the machine tools operating under the standard
operating conditions for the given models during the period before the
first capital repair are random variables and they are characterized by
parameters (the average value. dispersion) estimated statistically with
indication of the fiducial intervals.

By the BNTMS Institute procedure for machine tools with digital program
control. the following reliability indexes are recommended.

1. The run time per failure (the fail-safenoss index)

N
T “('Ill) Sh.
‘ecl

where t1 is the total run time of the i-th machine tool for the observation
period. hours; N is the number of machine tools under observation; m is

the total number of failures (including mistakes) of the N machine tools
(only the independent failures are taken into account, and the operating
failures and tool failures are not considered).

2. The average repair time (the repairability index) T.- Ulm) £3!“

I--I

where t3 is the nine spent on detection, finding the cause and eliminating
the consgquences of the j-th machine tool failure. hours (the waiting time
for repairs is not included).

3. The specific repair time is the time spent on detection. finding the
cautrs of failures and elimination of the consequences of the failures
per unit time of fail-safe operation (the complex reliability index)

" 4‘ 'r /T
In- \.‘I :"i '
(5 [fl III/(:1I "
The value of B is conveniently expressed in hours of the repair time (the

idle time of the machine tool and the unplanned repair) per 100 hours of
operation of the machine tool with respect to the control programs.

The specific repair time is related functionally to the availability factor
Kr -- the probability that the machine tool will turn out to be set at an
arbitrary point in time (except the planned periods, during which the use
of the machine tool for its purpose is not provided for, and the idle time
with respect to organizational causes); B-(l-Kr)/Kr.

The fail-safeness indexes T and the repairability indexes T3 are determined
only in cases where the observation conditions Luarantee consideration of
allof the failures without exception, including the mistakes. The complex
reliability index B is defined under the conditions guaranteeing considera-
tion of all the failures and in cases where some part of the failures

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(in particular. the mistakes) not causing significant idle time could not
be recorded. The recovery time spent on unrecorded failures must be (and
usually turns out to be) small by comparison with the repair time for
actually considered failures.

As the use index of the machine tool with digital program control. the use
coefficient of the stock of operating time with respect to the operating
time of the machine tool by the control programs is used. which is in the
form of the ratio of the run time of the machine tools to the rated stock
of operating time: K! \N.“ {‘1‘“ . where t“ is the

i I l I
rated stock of operating time of the i-th machine tool with digital program

control. hours.

The use index of the machine tools with digital program control complexly
characterizes the level of organization of production at the user plants.
the reliability of these machine tools and tools and also the nature of the
operations performed on the machine tools.

The operational studies performed by the discussed procedure by the ENth
institute and the manufacturing plants of the machine tools with the
participation of the manufacturers of the digital program control unit have
made it possible to obtain initial data on the actual level of the reliabil-
ity and use indexes of the machine tools with digital program control.

In particular. it has been established that the values of 3:0.65 to 0.10
are acceptable (that is. S to 10 hours of idle time of the machine tool in
unplanned repair per 100 hours of operation with respect to the control
programs).

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". "Stanki l Instrument". 1978

10865
$50: 1821

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NITALHORKING EQUIrﬂiNT

UDC 621.9.06-529-192

HETNOD 0F ESTIMATING TNE PROCESS RELIABILITY OF HACNINE TOOLS HIT"
DIGITAL PROGRAM CONTROL

Noacow STARK! l INSTRUMENT in Ruaaian No 10. 1978 pp 9-11
[Article by V. s. Starodubov. H. s. Ukolov]

[Text] By the technological proceaa reliability we mean the property of
machine toola to perform the technological procena operations arising from
its purpoae while maintaining machining precision in time and achieving
quality of the machined uurfacea within the given limit.1

The preciaion and reliability of the machine toola with digital program
control depend on the operating quality of the entire aet of electronic.
mechanical and hydraulic components. the mechaniama and nodules of the
digital program control unite (the information readout and input unit; the
modules for atoring information, reproducing and conversion of it; the
clementa oi the automated control ayatem for the feed drive). the drive
motora oi the aervoelementa of the machine tool. the mechaniama for automatic
tool changing. the feedback aeneor ana no 0-.

In the machine tools with digital program control, many processes (for
example. wear awnd thermal deformationn) are occurring more intensely than
in ordinary machine toola. Thia ie explained by the high energy capacity
(they have an increaaed number of control coordinates with independent
drive and. aa a rule. they are converted to hydraulic operations). and
also the more intense operation (two or three ahifta); the proportion of
the machine time an a result of the high degree of automation in 80 to 852.
The machining on the machine tooln with digital program control i« realized
by the previoualy written program. and therefore the operator has limited
poaaibilitiea for active intervention in the proceaa in order to decrease
or eliminate the effect of the thermal deiormationn on the machining precision.

 

1A. S. Pronikov. editor, TEKNMOLOCICNESKAYA NADEZHNOST' STANKOV
[Technological Procenn Reliability of Machine Tooln], Moscow.
Naehinoatroyeniye. I971.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For determination of the actual level of ttrhnologicnl reliability it is
necessary to determine its indexes by testing the machine tools with digital
program control. Hhen testing it is necessary to take into account the
specific nature of the interaction of the machine tools and the digital
program control system consisting in the following: the machine tools and
control systems (frequently in the form of the small computer) are considered
as a single organically interrelated complex technological system: the .
degree or effect of the machine tool errors and the control system errors

on the technological reliability is determined separately and in combination;
a variety of operating conditions are taken into account (the frequent
changing of the tool and the large nomenclature of machined parts) along
with the complexity of the machining cycles (the multicoordinate control

with multitool machining of the part); the increased intensity of occurrence
of various processes in the machine tool and the control system is taken into
account: there are devices which compensate for the effect of the individual
errors in the machine tool. attachment. tool and part system and accelerating
the search for the causes of a change in machining precision. and so on.

in addition. a larger number of tests are required than for ordinary

machine tools. including new types (for example. testing the positioning
precision. the precision of the automatic tool changing. the operating

quality of the drives and the control system) and also a large volume of tests
considering a set of factors influencing the precision.

1he statistical methods of observation immediately of a large number of
machine tools with digital program control are espediently used as a result

of increased complexity and cost. it is more expedient to test a specific
machine tool and draw general conclusions on the basis of the information
obtained during the analytical calculations and experimental studies (ordinary
and accelerated tests) and also for the statistical observations of the
reliability of individual components and elements of the machine tools with
digital program control. Accordingly. it is possible to perform the tests

in two areas: testing the machine tool combined with the control system;
testing the components and mechanisms of the machine tool separately and

also the feed drives. the digital program control unit. the feedback sensors.
and so on.

it is possible to represent the estimation of the technological process
reliability 0 fthe machine tools with digital program control in the general
case in the form of successive steps: I) analysis of the specific nature

of the machine tool and the control system selected for investigation;

2) selection of the indexes for estimating the technological process
reliability; 3) development of the structural diagram for analysis of the
technological process reliability and selection of the parameters for
investigation; 6) development of the model of the variation of the machining
and precision; 5) generation of the analytical functions which relate the
indexes of technological process reliability to the precision parameters

of the machine tool and the machined parts; 6) theoretical and experimental
investigation of the component errors and factors influencing the machining

25

'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY

precision; 7) calculation of the indexes and ontimation of thc level of
technological process reliability of the machine tool.

The fourth step is the most important for the calculations and mathimnticai
expectation of the processes of loss of precision by the machine tool. in
order to create a model of the variation in machining precision it is
necessary to investigate the formation of the errors in time by the
selected parameters considering the specific nature of the machine tools
with digital program control.

The analysis of the process of machining parts on machine tools with digital
program control will permit isolation of the following basic types of errnrn
lowering the precision and reflecting their specific nature of machine tools
with digital program control: the programming error A r (it arises in the
phase of preparing the programs to control the machine tool with digital
program control); the error in adjusting the machine tool with digital
program control a": the positioning error APO, (the error when the controlled
servoelement exits to the glvon coordinate): the error in automated tool
changing Arc (characteristic of the multitool machining on machine tools
with digital program control): the error A8 [geometric rror from non-
rectilinearity. nonparallelness and nonperpendicularity of the movement of
the servoelements of the machine tool (when machining it can appear as an
error in size and shape of the part)]; the error 5,1814 fro: elastic
deformations (as a result of the insufficient rigidity of the SPiD [machine
tool. attachment. tool. part] system); the etror Ah from the fast-Occurring
processes (it arises as a result of vibrations of redistribution of the
frictional forces. change in processes. and so on); the error ac from the
processes occurring with a mean rate (from thermal deformations of the
machine tool. tool. part. wear of the tool, and so on); the error A" from
the slowly occurring processes (from wear of the tool. warping. and so on).
It is necessary to consider that the indicated errors can be by their nature
random variables (or random processes). vary in time and have vector proper-
ties.

The most characteristic for machine tools with digital program control in
the positioning error which noticeably reduces the control program operating
precision. This error is caused by the error in the interpolation connected
with nonuniformity of the pulse repetition, the error in t.» driVe actors.
the kinematic errors in the feed drive and feedback system, the d"aamlr
drive errors. the geometric errors in the machine tool. the elastic deforma-
tions of the feed drives and other factors.

Thus. the total error Act of the machining on machine tools with digital
program control is a function of many variables; a,l-t(a, ; . ; a ,;

A ‘6'“‘6'A'A) plipns

t.c.' 3’ 'r' b. C. 3'

The analysis of the process of the error formation and the u<e of the mane:
of variation of the machining precision on the machint ton; proposed in
general form in the mentioned paper made it possible to develop a model of
the variation in machining precision on machine tools with digiv- fur um

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

        

 

       

 

(In, I: ‘ {m I-rm
s- . ..I _” ' __. Z' _,' . .- _ y
”3:“. lm'“ *' "lawman

Figure 1. Model of the variation of the machining precision

on a machine tool with digital program control:
L0 and L'c -- value of the control parameter at the beginning and
end of the interadjustment period; In and l.’n -- current value
of the controlled parameter in the operating process:

P(t) -- probability of failure with respect to the controlled
parameter

Key:
1. t. hours
2. L. microns

control considering their specific nature. Using the model obtained it is
possible to determine the analytical relations which relate the technological
reliability indexes to the precision parameters of the machine tool and

the machined parts (see Fig l).

The specific nature of machining the parts on the- machine tools with digital
program control consists in the fact that part of the tolerance field ll
is consi-ed before machining in the progra-ing phase. Accordingly, the
actual reserve out“, of the machine tool with digital program control with

respect to the machine precision is less than that given by the amount (in.
that is. 6.-(l.m-l.-m)-o'p-6-A'P. where L.“ and I.” are the minimum a

maximum values- of the controlled machining precision parameter respectively.
The progra-ing errors are caused by approximation of the curvilinear out-
line and rounding of the dimensions to the value which is a multiple of the
diacreteness of the machine tool with digital program control.

Since the progra—ing errors are unavoidable. the precision of the parts
machined on the machine tool with digital program control goes outside the
tolerance limits faster than the reserve 61. with respect to the precision

27

'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "83 ONLY

of the machine tool itself will be consumed. This must he cnnﬁldertd when
investigating the technological process reliability (in the iedexes, in
the analytical relations. when determining the reserves. and so an).

Before machining the part the machine tool is adjusted to the dinvnuion
L2 which differs from Lmin by the amount loud +A (in the general case. and
t e value of £1 which is the dispersion zone 3f the dimensions of the

machined parts as a result of the error A". A”. Ab and Ate'

Considering the prohrhility of the addition method

I, | ("ﬁr-inn, '2ng i.\.. 237.717.17.53
' u") (2
Key:
1. tc
2. p

when operating the machine tool under the effect of different processes.
the center of the dispersion zone of the dimension L0 is shifted in the
intersdjustment period TN" to the point L'o by the amount I which must

be considered as a random time function with the dispersiongote ac and the
mean value Ac. The shift of the center of the dispersionzone takes place.

as a rule. as a result of the thermal deformations of the machine tool and
the dimensional wear of the tool. As a result of the effect of these factors
and also the fast-occurring processes. the errors during the interedjustment

period vary (Auwc'nz Alceb'tc: Apoa'p: Abwa'b). The scattering zone of

the indicated errors with respect to L'o increases. and by the end of the
interadjustment period it becomes equal to 212:

l: I rm): .:. ("in”)1 'l' (’t. II2)—: ' ("62): 0. 'I)'

If it is assumed that to. 21. 3c and 12 are interdependent. with a normal

law of their distribution. the error in the machine tool with digital program
control for the interadjustment period Act-to4'l+tc+i,.

ly the end of the interadjustment period. the machine tee: reserve with
digital program control with respect to machining precision renains
unconsumed:

0' a...- "n lﬂ—An'.|_ﬂf' "I

The variation and the precision parameters of the machine tool in time is
determined by lone-term operating tests. Howevor. the «stiMAtion of the
level of technological reliability of the machine tool with digital program
control can be given. using the reserve 6 of the machine tool with respect
to the machining precision and the precis on reserve couffi"lenl
KT-(dlac‘)zl as the reserve. The value of KI can be determined hr thv
results of testing the machine tool with dig tal program control ‘: rL
interadjustable period: 28

FOR 0F?!CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

K,adw.-m)lm-a”ma;arhsuupl (a

The values of GT and can be obtained as a result of short-time tents,
since for their determ nation it is not necessary to estiaate the rate of
the slowly occurring process.

For the dispersbn field 21 '60 (here o is the mean square deviation of the

L at the end of the intersdjustment period) and considering the fact that
6-2'06 +t2. the probability P(t) of fail-safe operation of the sachine tool
with digital program control can be defined as the probability that the
mentioned L will get into the tolerance field (e-a'p) during machining of the

part:

P10--0§u-¢5 [JELJELLTQ§1;QJ_EL «h
:I .

where .0 is the normalized Laplace function (056050.5).

it is necessary to consider that in order to estimate the technological
reliability it is insufficient to consider only the probability P(t) of
fail-safe operation as its index. for with respect to the value of P(t) it
is impossible to determine the value of CT and. consequently. the actual
reliability level.

The machining error on the machine tool reaches the liait for maximum
admissible values of the cooponent errors of the machine tool. that is.

when 67-0 for the given value of P(t). The operating time of the machine
tool with digital program control to this time determines the reserve 3

with respect to machining precision. Since when machining parts on machine
tools with digital program control. part of the tolerance 6 is spent before
the beginning of machining. in the programming step (in fig 1 the horizontal
crosshatched zone). actually the machine tool error goes beyond the allowance
field faster depending on the value of A. (the vertical crosshatched zone
in Fig l) and the actual reserve T6 of ghe machine tool with digital
progrsn control with respect to machtning precision is less than 1'.

The reserve of the investigated machine tool with digital program control
with respect to machining precision and the safety factory KT determined
in the interadjustment period serve as the initial data for predicting the
reserve Tr of the machine tool and the probability P(t) of failwsafe
operation with respect to the machining precision.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OhLY

 

'
o I 2 3 “.'(2)

Figure 2. Graph of the shift of the spindle an a result of
thersal deforlstions with rps of n-lOO. 200. 600. 650.
800. 1000 and l250 (the curVes I-VII respectively)
Key:
1. microns
2. houru

 

Figure 3.

Graphs of the varietion of the indexes of technological
process reliability

(s) and P(t) (h) as a result of
ther-al deformations

or A (in sicrons) equal to 50
(curve l), ‘0 (curve 21. 30 (curve 3). 20 (curve 4)

and a (curve 5); K-r-Nac; A“); IMO-tar); 8); t and u

-- areas at occurrence of technological process failures
respectively for A -0 and lo microns
Key: 'p

l. sicrona 30

’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in order to determine the numerical values of the indexes and to estimate
the level of technological process reliability. studies were made of the
errors as; or; dp; ate: A“; d a AC and Ac. forming these indexes with respect

to the "dimension precision vgth respect to the Y-coordinato" pa' meter.

on the model 6520!} vertical milling machine with digital prograa -ontrol.
The studies demonstrated that the error in the control system is Ianifested
in the tors of scattering of the angles of rotation of the shaft of the
stepping sotor vhen the control pulses are developed by it. The magnitude
of the dispersion for the stepping motor disconnected fro- the aechanical
part of the master control unit of the machine tool is 19.15’. During
operation of the stepping motor together with the master control unit the
amount of scattering of the angle increases to 39.6'. This error influences
A9 of the investigated machine tool.

The basic proportion in the overall balance. as the studies have demonstrated.
is the errors as a result of the thermal deformations which vary in time

and fluctuate within broad limits depending on the spindle rpn (see Fig 2).

In order to study the effect of the ther-al deformations on the technological
process reliability of the machine tool according to formulas (l). (2) and

(3) the indexes 61. P(t) and KT were calculated for the following values

of the errors (in microns): A -6; ar-zo; Au-lO: 69-22; db-Z; etc-o

for the case of the single too? machining): Ac-lz and Ac-O to 80.

As is obvious from the graph (see Fig 3), the level of technological
process reliability at the beginning of the interadjustaent period (for
AC'O) is quite high: 61-51 microns. KT-2.06 and P(t)Zl. with an increase

in 6c. 5T and KT decrease sharply (see Fig 3. a). For Xé-SO microns the

reserve 61-0. and KT-l (without considering the programing error. that is.

for A. -0). with a further increase in Ac. the index P(t) decreases (see
fig 3.Pb). for example. for Ac-ST microns, P(t)-0.9. and for dc-Gk microns
Pitl-0.5. Thus. if the level of thermal deformations is higher than

57 microns. then the probability P(t) of fail-safe operations decreases
sharply. Therefore the region to the right of the point ac-so aicrons

can be considered the region of occurrence of the technological process
failures (the failures with respect to the machining precision). Consider-
ing the programming errors the failures can be exhibited still earlier.

for exaaple. ifd ~10 microns the failures are already exhibited for

3;!‘0 aicrons. up

Consequently. knowing the variation of the indexes 67, P(t) and of

the technological reliability it is possible to determine the 11- ting
values of the individual component errors in the machine tools. for which
the process failures do not occur. For example. for the given probability
P(t)-0.9 of fail-safe operations (see Fig 3) the error as a result of the
thermal deformations must not exceed 57 microns.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the initial values of the technological process reliability indexes and
the error components are known. then. experimentally (or analvtirally)
determining the variations of these errors in the operating process. it is
possible to calculate the indexes 67. P(t) and KT and thus to estinate the
level of technological process reliabilitv and i s variation in time.

By varying the errors, it is also possible to determine their effect on the
technological reliability and find effective means of improving it.

Thus. in the presented example a will increase as a result of wear of

the guides (us a result of nonrectilinearity of the displacement of the
bench the initial value as-a licrons). After determining (by calculation.
experisentaiiy or under operating conditions) the wear rate. it Is

possible to establish the variation of the errors A and also the tire of
occurrence of the technological process failures. rice Pig 3 it is ohvioua
that for wear by 56 microns (that is. for a -50 aicrons) the safety margin
is close to one (KT-l.06) already for A -0. Fifteen to 30 sinutes after
inclusion of the sachine tool (see Fig 5). 61-0, and KT-l. and the failure
occurs with respect to precision.

The investigated method of estimating the process reliability of the Iachine
tools with digital progras control will permit discovery of the most
characteristic precision parameters for the specific sachine tool. determining
its technological pcocess reliability; establishment of the errors forning
these parameters; factors which influence their variation to the highest
degree and thus to find effective means of improving the technological

process reliability of the machine tool with digital program control.

COPYRIGHT: izdstel'otvo "Hashiuostroyeniye". "Stanki l instrument", I978

108‘s
CSO: 182l

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NBTALHORKIHB BQUIYHENT

UDC 62l.9.06.002.2:00|.83l(639):(47+57)]
HUNGARIAN-SOVIET COOPERATION IN HACHINE TOOL BUILDING

Moscow STAHKI l lHSTRUHEHT in Russian No ID. 1978 pp 43-56
[Article by T. Gamoril

[Text] The Tekhnoimpeks Hungarian Foreign Trade Enterprise has close
relations with the socialist countries; the volume of its foreign trade
with dealings with respect to hsport and export of machine tools based on
long-range agreements is increasing from year to year.

The Tekhnoimpeks and the Soviet foreign trade association Stantoimport

have in the last 20 years developed an actiVe. useful cooperation for
machine tool building in both countries. In the opinion oi the Hungarian
specialists. the machine tools imported from the Soviet Union have a favor-
able influence on the production results of Hungarian plants. The import
volume of the Soviet machine tools in rubles in the past years has increased
significantly. Thus. from 1950 to 1977 it increased by approximately 32
times.

The demand of the Hungarian enterprises for Soviet machine tools is increas-
ing from year to year. Therefore. every year several delegates. representa-
tives of Tekhnoimpeks and specialists of Hungarian industry come to the
Soviet Union to study the possibilities for export and import of machine
tools. They not only visit Stankoimport. but also other machine tool
building plants in the Soviet Union.

At the large Hungarian plants (for example. at the GAHTS-HAVAG, TUHGSRAH.
aaaa plants) there are a significant number of Soviet-produced machine tools
in operation. Tekhnoimpeks imports universal machine tools in large volume
and also vertical drilling machines. surface grinding machines and other
special machines (see Figures l to J).

Stankoimport has already started deliveries of machine tools with digital
program control to Hungary. The demand for these machine tools is growing,
and heginning with the results of the talks held recently it is possible
to state that more and more Soviet machine tools with digital program
control vdll be operating at Hungarian plants.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure l. The SKI-250 lnthca with digital program runtrol

 

Figure 2. EV-63O lathe with digital program control

 

Figure 3. Drilling machine with digitai program contra]

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the present time Tekhuoimpeks is exportinn various machine (unis in the
Soviet Union. from ordinary to modern machine loels with dililal program
control. The export nomenclature of Tekhnoimpeks includes precision lathes,
standless hammers. radial drillirn machines. One of the new items of

the Hungarian export nomenclature is the crimping machine. The Hungarian
machine building combine and the Chepel'skiy Haehine Building Plant h.\e

good traditions on the Sevict market. sopplyimz machine tools to the Soviet
Union.

in addition to the direct commercial items. the specialists of the Soviet
Union and Hungary are jointly dealing with the problems of scientific and
technical development. cooperation and specialization of production. The
first example of cooperation in the field of machine tool production with
digital program control in the socialist countries was the ioiat creation
and production of the SOVIHAG 630 machine tool at the Lents Electrotechniral
Plant and the Hungarian machine tool building combine. The Hungarian
foreign trade enterprise Tekhnoimpeks has also participated in two exposi-
tions in the Soviet Union: in addition. it has organized fivo special
lectures on Hungarian machine tool building and a showi‘n of movies on
achievements in this field by Hungarian industry. Hungarian specialists
frequently visit the Soviet exposition. Stankoisport shows new equipment
annually at the expositions in Budapest and organizes lectures by specialists
there. it participates regularly in the Budapest Spring Fair where
contracts for large sons were signed this year.

Both countries want to expand cooperation in the field of machine tool
production further and increase the foreign trade turnover.

COPYRIGHT: izdatei'stvo "Hashinostroyeaiye". "Stsaki i instrument". 1978

lOOLS
650: I821 END

35

FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY