APPROVED FOR RELEAOE: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP02-00000R0001 00010051 -3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010051-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY

JPRS L/8244
25 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010051-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources

are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items~are as
given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT [ANS AND RBGUIATIONS GWERNING WRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBMINATION
01’ THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOPFICIAL USE ONLY.
. Pedant-g chaniaaclen Man and Menu
Joint Publications Rasaarch Service

1000 North Globe Road ’
Arlington. Virginia 22201
II. 59000qu Ono-Issue. New and Mduaa
Covered
As above

. A mam

This serial report contains intonation on the devalopncnt and productivity
of the automotive and tractor industry; chenicnl industry and chemical
machinery output; electronic and precision equip-eat; natallurgy and
netslvorking cquipnant; construction equipoent and building materials.

a. sermon

USSR

Automotive Industry Metalworking Equip-en:
Agricultural Machinery Bconolica

Chenical Indus try

Construction

Construction Materials

Construction Bquipnent

Electronics Industry

Metallurgy

'16- Ideuiﬂcu/Opcmtaded Tens

"C- COSA" Ficu/CIOI' 2C. 50. 7A. 11’. 13C, 13?. 133. 13!. 13"

it Avsulsholuy Scanner
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Li-itcd Number of

Copies Available Fro. JPRS

     

'°"‘ ""”’ “'“" "”' run to»: Mar ss ncnoouceo . ' ""°“"°‘ ""'""
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/82

25 Jenna:

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS

(P000 2/79)
CONTENTS

0011913110021“, WWI“ WEIRD“,
AND mm mm

Regional Differences in Construction Costs
(0. mm; vomos! mama, No 11, 1978)

Standardized Heaters for l-Story Industrial Buildings Noted
(mm comma m zmnn
msmovmmcmnm 8m, 1978) .........

mmm mmm

Absolute and Relative Price Reduction of lbchines
(m. Ynkovnts; vomos! mama, so 10, 1978)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONSTRWI‘ION, CONSTRIXITION MACHINE“,
AND BUILDING MNTERIALS

REGIONAL DIFFERENCES IN CONSTRUCTION COSTS
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 11 1978 pp 13-23

[Article by c. Khaykin: "Regional Differences in Estimated Construction
Costs"]

[Text] The solution of the tasks assigned by the 25th CPSU Congress with
regard to increasing production efficiency and work quality is inextric-
ably linked with the utilization of commodity-monetary relations and with
the improvement of the entire system of economic levers to influence pro-
duction-~profits. credit. prices, etc.--which have taken on new content
under the conditions of socialise.

One of the key questions of economic policy and practice at the present
stage of the national economy's development is further improvement of the
system of prices and price formation. Serving as the basis for wholesale
prices are the economically grounded branch outlays for production output.
reflecting the present-day level of equipment. technology. and production
organization. Noreover. in the branches of the extraction industry (coal,
lumbering. niniag. the extraction of building materials. etc.), which are
characterized by essential differences in levels of outlays by regions as
affected by natural-climatic and economic-geographical conditions, whole-
sale prices are based on costs for individual production regions (tones).

In construction the methods of setting prices for output are substantially
different from the methods which have been adopted in most of the branches
of material production. The indicated differences are conditioned by the
place of construction within the system of the branches of material produc-
tion and its role in the process of extended reproduction, as indicated by
Marx. "Part of the means of labor, also including the general conditions
of labor, is either attached to a definite place, when this part as means
of labor enters into the production process, or when it is prepared to carry
out a production function, as, for example, that of a machine. Alterna-
tively. this part of the means of labor from the very beginning is pro-
duced in such an immovable form, linked with a definite place, as, for
example. soil improvement. factory buildings. blast furnaces. canals,

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rnllronds. etc. In this case the constant attachment of the means of
labor to the production process in which they must function is, at one 1
and the some time. conditioned by the physical mode of their existence."
The output of construction consists of buildings and structures which, in
turn, become means of labor (capital assets utilized for production or
nonproduction purposes) within the process of extended reproduction. The
process of creating capital assets, begun in the branches of heavy indus-
try, is completed here, assuring the realization of the technological unity
of the positive and negative portions of the capital assets as well as
their economic merger.

Buildings and structures which have been prepared for use constitute the
product of production based on the cooperation and specialization of
numerous organizations. The leading role in this production is played by
the construction organization--the general contractor. The objective of
computations between the customer (buyer) and the general contractor is

to ascertain the cost of construction output in that portion whose expenses
are borne by the contracting organizations, i.e., construction and assemb-
ling operations.

Thus, under the existing organizational forms and economic methods of con-
struction management only a portion of construction output is implemented
in commercial form, namely the construction and assembling operations, the
outlays for which comprise the cost of the negative portion of capital
assets for production and nonproduction purposes. The outlays which com-
prise the cost of the capital assets (construction and assembling opera-
tions. outlays for obtaining equipment, etc.) are computed by the customer
and are transferred by him without charge from his own account to the
account of the user organization.

During the last few years the technological structure of capital invest-
ments in most branches has been characterized by the following progressive
shifts: a growth in that portion of investments utilized for the acquisi-
tion of equipment and machinery, while the portion of investments in con-
struction and assembling operations is being curtailed. In most branches,
however. construction and assembling operations occupy an important place
in the makeup of capital investments. Therefore, to a considerable extent,
their appraisal on a reliable, economically grounded basis effects a
correct determination of the cost of the national economy's capital assets,
a balanced quality of capital investments, material resources, and produc-
tion capacities, as well as an assurance of normal economic cost account-
ing by the contracting organisations. and, in the final analysis. an in-
creased effectiveness in capital investments.

The role of the price of construction output is carried out by the esti-
mated coat of construction and assembling operations. This situation is
shared by the majority of scholarly economists. Nevertheless, with regard
to the question of computation in prices for ORZT [expansion unknown]

2
?0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

construction output and with regard to the ratio of individual and
socially necessary labor expenditures in the formation of these prices
various different opinions. at tines contradictory ones. have been

expressed. Trere has been a widespread acceptance of the viewpoint in
accordance with which price formation in construction is based on the
general principles which are inherent to all the branches of material
production and primarily in ONZT price computations for the production
of construction output. Along with this in many operations there is an
emphasis on the individual character of determining prices for construc-
tion output. which are usually linked with the technical and economic
properties of the branch. For example. a formulation such as the follow-
ing is cited: “...Thc'coat (price) of final construction output is dis-
tinct for each overall construction. and this is essentially different
from an industry wherein standardized wholesale prices are utilized for
the entire country or for its individual economic regions."2

Consequently. the price of construction output is regarded as a category
which. on the one hand. reflects socially necessary labor requirements
and which, on the other hand. takes into consideration individual outlays
as applied to the conditions of a specific construction project. Obvi-
ously. the above-indicated characteristics of the methods of price for-
mation in construction. as cited in their most general aspect. are
mutually exclusive. But what then is the genuinely economic nature of
outlays which are reflected in the prices for construction output: are
they socially necessary (average for the branch, zone. etc.) or are they
individually distinct in their nature?

In order to elucidate this. let us consider the formula for determining
the price of construction output, which may be represented in the follow-

ing form: 1r
Lou-(g amazon/r.

where a, is the price of construction output; 01' represents the volumes
(quantity)of construction elements and the forms of operations which are
envisaged by the plan for the building (structure) for the conditons of
region A'in measurements of standardized computations. estimated prices.
and other norms; d'A'represent dsgnormative (estimated) outlays per unit

of construction element (type of operation) in accordance with a standard-
ized computation. estimated price. etc., as operative in region 1';

1?; represents the coefficient of overhead expenses. as determined by the
formula left . where if is the norm of overhead expenses. as established
in percentages of direct outlays; 1’ represents the coefficienct of planned
accumulations (normative profit). 3 determined by the formula 1 ‘iii .
where 1’is the norm of planned accumulations. as established in percentages,
u7 represents the coefficient of limited outlays (expenditures for the con-
struction of temporary buildings and structures. additional expenditures
connected with the production of operations during wintertime. and others).

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basis of the price of construction output is composed of the follow-
ing two elements: the volumes (quantity) of construction elements and
types of operations envisaged by the plan for the building (structure)
and the magnitudes of the normative (estimated) outlays per unit of the
construction element (type of operations).

The individual nature of the price of construction output is linked pri-
marily with the reflection therein of the volumes of operations which are
conditioned by the engineering. construction. and volume-planning solu-
tions for the buildings (structures).3

At the some time. to the degree in which the price of construction out-
put is determined by the magnitude of estimated norms and standardized
computations. as well as that of estimated prices for materials and other
norms which are utilized to estimate the planned volumes of operations.

it reflects the socially necessary labor outlays. Such an approach per-
sits us to discover the most characteristic traits of the methods of price
formation in construction, the general and the particular in the mechanism
of determining prices for construction output in comparison with other
branches of material production.

The specifics of price formation in this branch consists of the fact that
the bearer of the ONZT in the price of construction output is its esti-

mated normative basis, i.e.. the estimated norms and standardized compu-
tations. estimated prices for materials. and other estimated norms. They
determine the scope of the socially necessary labor outlays to cover the
means of production dispersed in the construction process and to pay for
manpower per unit of structural element (type of operations). while in

the utilization of standardised plans-—per unit of final construction
output.

The system of generally mandatory estimated norms and prices which is used
to calculate the estimated cost of construction includes a great number of
different norms. providing for unequal territorial differentiation and in-
congruent regions of operation. which reflects the characteristics of

ONZT formation for the various respective types of resources.

within the present-day scope of social production. the considerable compli-
cation of its branch structure. and the extension of the geography of
capital investments, linked primarily with the inclusion of the regions

of Siberia and the Far East in economic circulation. on important pre-
requisite for improving the quality of planning‘capital investments is

the creation of a system of general cost indicators which vould reflect
equivalent volumes of construction (construction and assembling operations)
in various different regions of the country.

In order to make the transition from interregionai comparisons of estimated
prices on individual types of materials. standardized calculations on the

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

structural elements of buildings and types of operations, etc. to a com-
parative appraisal of the regional level of the estimated coat of con-
struction, it is necessary to "weigh" the numerous estimated norms with
the volumes which characterize the construction,.architectural-planning.
and engineering solutions of the various types of buildings and struc-
tures. For these purposes use has been made of a set of material-technical
and labor resources, containing proportionate indicators of their outlays
and characterizing in an averaged-out form the model of the building
(structure) with the specified technical parameters. The calculations
which have been carried out in accord-nce with such a model have permitted
the "integration" of numerous types of estimated norms. adopted for deter-
mining the estimated cost of construction. Such a device has ensured. on
the one hand, a consideration of the specific traits of the formation of
the social level of outlays for each individually taken form of objects
and tools of labor which are utilized in the process of creating construc-
tion output and, on the other hand. an appraisal of the level of outlays
in the aggregate, i.e., in that form in which they genuinely reflect the
cost structure of construction output. The influence of price-forming
factors on the regional level of estimated cost of construction should be
considered, in our opinion. in the following two basic aspects: the first
characterizes the differences in the levels of estimated norms and prices
by regions within a constant natural-substantive structure of construc-
tion output; the second is linked with an appraisal of the variations in
the levels of estimated norms and prices by regions in conjunction with
differences in the composition of material—technical and labor resources,
reflecting the planning and engineering (branch) characteristics of con-
struction.

Study of the former aspect allows a determination to be made of the mea-
sure of differences in the level of estimated norms by regions "in a pure
form" (differences in the wholesale prices for building materials, items,
and structural components. rates for freight hauls, conditions and dis-
tances for transporting materials to construction sites, wage rates for
workers, norms for overhead expenses, etc.). Moreover, the influence of
all other factors except for those of price formation are eliminated
(branch characteristics, natural-climatic conditions of the regions, etc.).
In order to characterize the shove-mentioned differences, norms were
determined, and they came to be designated as "territorial indicators of
the estimated cost of construction and assembling operations by regions
of the country."

The second aspect allows us to establish the nature and measure of
regional changes inthelevel of estimated norms and prices when they are
utilized in various combinations, reflecting the proportionate outlay of
material-technical and labor resources with regard to branches taken
separately (subbrnnches). as well as the natural-climatic conditions of
regions and zones. It was for this purpose that magnitudes were deter-
mined uf the branch coefficients for changing the estimated cost of con—
struction and assembling operations in accordance with the regions of the

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR. They contain normative appraisals of the regional level of esti-
mated outlays for oblasts. kreys, and republics (in relationship to the
base region--Hoscow Oblsst) for approximately 70 branches and subbranches
of the national economy and industry. Each of the above-mentioned aspects.
despite their obvious interconnection, is of independent importance. re-
flecting the various forms of direct and reciprocal ties of the estimated
norms and the planning and engineering solutions which affect the regional
level of the estimated cost of construction.

Experimental computations have shown that in order to obtain enlarged
quantitative appraisals characterizing the correlations in the level of
costs by regions sets may be utilised which contain a modest number of
representative resources instead of a fully developed list of them, in-
cluding more than 160 types and varieties of resources. Computer calcu-
lations using a.specially worked-out program have allowed us to derive
sets for use in an expedited analysis of the regional level of the esti-
mated costs of construction and assembling operations. Thus, for indus-
trial construction the set contains 16 representative resources. while
for agricultural production construction it contains 11. An appraisal of
the representative resources in estimated prices of each oblsst, hray,
autonomous and Union republic testifies to the fact that the results of
calculations differ only insignificantly from the magnitudes of terri-
torial indicators computed on the basis of utilizing a complete list of
material-technical and labor resources.

An analysis of the magnitudes of territorial indicators by economic
regions has allowed us to obtain the following results. In industrial
construction the territorial indicators of six economic regions (Central,
Volgo-Vyatka. Volga, Southern. Trans-Caucasian, and Moldavian 888) are
close to the base region‘s indicators and differ from them by no lore
than l--2 percent. A second group of economic regions (boners-Dnieper.
Southwestern. Baltic, Belorussian) is characterized by a lower level

(by 3--5 percent) of estimated costs for construction and assembling
operations as compared with the level of the base region. A third group
of economic regions (northwestern. Central-Chernozem. North Caucasian,
Urals) exhibits the same scope of deviations in the level of estimated
costs (3--5 percent). but in the direction of being higher as compared
with the base region. A fourth group comprises economic regions in which
the level of estimated costs substantially exceeds the level of the base
region (by 7-9 percent). This group includes the Central Asian, Western
Siberian, and Kazakhstan regions. In two econoeic regions the level of
the estimated cost of construction and assembling operations is consider-
ably higher thsn that of the base region: in Eastern Siberia by 16 per-
cent and in the Var East by 36 percent.

In agricultural construction the regional level of the estimated costs of
construction and assembling operations is characterized by indicators
whose magnitudes differ substantially from the indicators of industrial
construction. Except for the Baltic region (with a territorial indicator

_6
FOR orrrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of 0.99) agricultural construction has not a single economic region in
which the level of estimated norms and prices is lower than the level

of the base region. Only two economic regions have indicators which are
equal to the indicators of the base region (the Southwestern and the
Moldavian 88R). In three economic regions (the Belorussian, Donets-
Dnieper, and Central? the level of the estimated costs of construction

and assembling operations is 6-5 percent higher than the level of the
base region.

The level of the estimated costs of construction in the remaining economic
regions substantially exceeds the level of the base region: in three
regions (the Southern. Northwestern, and Trans-Caucasian) by 6--9 percent,
in six regions (Volgo-Vystka. Central-Chernozem, Volga, North-Caucasian.
Drain, and Central Asian) by 11--16 percent, in the western Siberian by

21 percent, in the Eastern Siberian by 27 percent. in Kazakhstan by 32
percent, and finally, in the Far East by 60 percent. The data cited
characterize the regional level of estimated norms and prices for terri-
tories within the bounds of which unified regional standardized calcula-

tions (tars-69) are utilized to determine the estimated costs of construc-
tion and assembling operations.

As regards estimated norms and prices in the regions of the Far North and
in localities equivalent to them, they are considerably higher than in the
country's remaining territory. These norms and prices reflect the traits
of the development and distribution of the material-technical base of con-
struction in the regions indicated, the conditions of transport delivery
to construction sites, natural-climatic characteristics and a number of
other factors which, in the final analysis, are reflected in the structure
and the level of the estimated costs of construction. Thus, in hagadan-
okays Oblast they amount to from 250--300 percent in the central group of
regions to 600--470 percent in the northern group of regions; in the
Yakutskaya ASSR--from 240--280 percent in the central group of regions

to 750--770 percent in the northwestern and northeastern regions of the
republic (the level of estimated norms and prices in Moscow Oblast is
taken as 100 percent).

Depending on the nature and dimensions of the intraregional variations in
the level of estimated norms and prices by oblssts, krays and republics
which are included in the economic regions, the latter may be grouped in
the following manner. ’

Group I includes the economic regions which are characterized by insignifi-
cant variations in the level of estimated norms by oblasts. krsys end
republics (Donetsk-Dnieper, Southern, Trans-Caucasian, and certain others).
in the regions indicatel, the span of dimensional variations in the terri-
torinl indicators by oblasts, krsys and republics does not exceed 3--5 per-
cent, as a result of which each of these economic regions may be considered
as a unified whole within an enlarged appraisal of the level of estimated
norms and prices.

7
Iron orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Group 11 includes economic regions in which the extremal values of the
intraregionel variations in the level of estimated norms are character-
ized by significantly large magnitudes. Horeover, the principal portion
of the oblaets, krays and republics which are included within a region
comprises a "bloc" with an equal or approximately equal level of esti-
mated norms and prices. while deviations from the indicated level are
observed only in one or a few oblasts (Volga-Vyatks and certain other
regions).

Finally, Group III includes a majority of the economic regions with an
extremely uneven distribution of the magnitudes of territorial indica-
tors by oblaats. krsys and republics. A tendency characterizing an ever-
nge level of estimated norms for the economic region is manifested by
means of constant and et'times significant variations in the indicators
which reflect the level of estimated norms and prices by oblasts. trays
and republics. Therefore, in working out and implementing planned. pro-
jected. and economic solutions the average appraisal of the level of
estimgted norms and prices by economic region may turn out to be unreli-
able.

A comparative analysis of the magnitudes of branch coefficients (for sub-
branches included as part of a branch as well as between branches) and a
comparison of them with territorial indicators has allowed us to discover
definite principles in the formation of their levels. A general tendency
for a change in the estimated costs of construction and assembling opera-
tions in a cross-section of economic regions. which was reflected in the
territorial indicators. has been manifested in an overwhelming majority
of branches. Many branches are characterised by a close coordination or
insignificant deviations in the magnitudes of branch coefficients by
oblasts. krays and republics among themselves as well as in comparison
with the characteristics of the territorial indicators.

Significant deviations (more than 3--S percent) in the magnitudes of co-
efficients by subbrsnches which are part of a branch as well as among
branches occur in the presence of one of the following conditions or a
combination of them: in cases where the structure of material resources

in the branch is characterized by a distinctly expressed specific trait.
particularly in connection with a primary need for one (or several) types
of resources (for example. the use of pipes in the subbrsnch "Transport

of Petroleum and Petroleum Products." rails and ties in the subbrsnch
"Rnllrood Transport." cahle products in the "Communications" branch, and
so forth): when use is made, in order to determine the estimated costs of
construction. of departmental catalogs of estimated prices for local
materials, items and structural components (electric power engineering,
water maintenance, railroad transport. and a number of other branches) in-
stead of oblast catalogs for zonal estimated prices which are utilised for
comparing estimated documentation'in most branches.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in characterizing the regional level of the estimated costs of construc-
tion. the territorial indicators and branch coefficients. by supplement-
ing each other. reflect various aspects of the multi-form economic-
geographicsl and natural-climatic conditions of the regions. This deter-
mines their importance and the value of their utilization in carrying out
technical-economic calculations. based on an enlarged appraisal of the
levels of estimated costs of construction by oblasts. krays. autonomous
and Union republics. and economic regions.

Calculations show that it is efficient to utilize the branch coefficients
for the branches as a whole. without breaking them up into subbrsnches.
with the exception of those which have substantial differences in their
levels. conditioned by objective factors. In industry. for example. such
branches include ferrous metallurgy (the coefficients are established
separately for the mining and enriching of raw materials and for ferrous
metallurgy not counting the mining and enriching of coal); nonierrous
metallurgy (the coefficients are determined separately for quarries and
cuts. facilities with shaft surfaces. and others); electric power engi-
neering (the coefficients are established separately for hydroelectric
power stations. GRES's((State regional electric power stations)» thermal
electric power stations. electric networks. etc.). and a number of other
branches.

The creation of a developed system of normative regional indicators has
permitted a transition to a qualitatively new stage of resolving this
economic probiem--the regionalaation of the country's territory by the
level of the estimated costs of construction (to characterize this the
term "estimated regkmalhation" has been proposed). Regionalisstioa. as
is the case with any kind of classification. constitutes a definite ab-
straction which permits, on the basis of seaming up derived information
from a large number of indicators with diverse characteristics. the dis-
covery in them of that which is most essential. As a result. it has
become possible to utilize for the purpose of solving economic problems

a comparatively small number of indicators in groups. and this substan-
tially improves the qualitative base of the information being used. Esti-
mated regionalization is marked by a great deal of complexity. dynamism.
and inertia at the same time. as well as by an indefiniteness and inexact-
nesa of the derived information. The process of regionalisation proposes
a grouping of territorial units such that minimal deviations (in accord-
ance with a fixed criterion) in the respective characteristics of terri-
turies included within the region are answered.

The regionaliut'icn of the country's territory by the level of the esti-
mated coat of construction is a major step on the road to creating a
"price atlas of construction" which should reflect the complex and recipro-
eai economic ties. ”refracted" through the prism of regional differences

in the levels of capital investments in construction and assembling
operations.

9
can narrow. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

Distinctions oust be nade between the following: general branch regiona-
lisotlon. which reflects regional differences in the levels of estimated
nor-s and prices (without a "tether" to specific branches of the national
econony and industry) as conpared with regionalization by branches (groups
of branches) of the national econony and unduatry. which is based on an
enlarged appraisal of the regional differences hilevels of estinated costs
with consideration being given to the branch specifics of construction.
Each of the aboVe-nentioned types of regionalitation possesses a relative
originality and independence and reflects a definite aspect of the
econosic-gcographical conditions of the regions and zones.

nne price region conprlaes oblasts. krays. autononous and Union republics
(those not having oblnst division) in which the levels of estisated costs
deviate within the linits of a given interval. in forning the price re-
gions use was sade of the index of the 80t2 series of preferable nonbers
(with deviations not exceeding 3 percent). Calculations show that fur-
ther narrowing of the range of variations of the above-indicated nagnltudes
(less than 3 percent) is eeononically inefficient because of the nature and
scales of the averaging out of the derived infornstion.

The question arises: wherein lies the advantage of utilizing the syste-
of estisated regionaliestion in cosparison with the use of the territorial
indicators which have been worked out for the separate oblasts, krays and
republics? As wcs noted above. under the estinated regionaliration the
territorial indicators are generalized. As a result regions are created
with quantitative characteristics which are close to the level of sstisated
horns. These price regions reflect sore exactly the doninant tendencies
in the iornation of the spatial structure of the eatinated costs of con-
struction in conparlson with the separate oblasts. hrays and republics,
while their quantitative characteristics are quite constant and stable.
in the fornation of the price regions territorially adjacent oblasts.
trays and republics were defined. in which the above-sentioned indicators
are characterized by ”troughs" or ”peaks" in cosparison with the bloc of
surrounding oblasts. The fornation of price regions has allowed us to
diacover-oin the fern of "ftedbacks"--the causes of the indicated "break-
downs" in the individual oblasts and republics as well as to evaluate
neasures by which to pot then on an econonic footing. Consequently. the
creation of a ayaten of estinated regionalieation constitutes a process
of forning regions with a nor-sliced spatial structure of the estilnted
costs of construction. and this is of prinary inportance in providing the
ground work for an evaluation of capital assets and for a solution to the
econnnic problens of planning capital investnents and ssnaging construc-
tion. .

As a result of general branch regionalisation of the country's territory
i6 regions and subregions have been for-ed in industrial and civil con-
struction and eight in agricultural construction. thus. the first price
region (with a range of territorial indicators of 0.9io-0.97) race-passes
32 territorial units. including two Union republics (the Latvian SS! and
the Lithuanian SSR). all six oblaas of the Belorussian econonic region.
eight of the Donetsk-Dnieper econonic region. 1‘ of the Southwestern
econonic region. as well as the Kalinin (Central econnsic region) and
Volgograd (Volta econonic region) oblasts.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPlClAI. USE ORLY

A special place within the systen of the general branch estimated region-
allsation in occupied by the so-rnlled ”nacroregionalitation." which an-
visngcs the (creation of price regions with the utilization as basic
nognitudea the territorial indicators. as determined for the economic
regions on the whole. without their division into oblasts. hrays and
republics. As the criterion here for the formation of price regions

the indicator of the 40th series of preferable numbers has been adopted
(with deviations in territorial indicctors of 6 percent). There are

9 price regions of this type in industrial and civil construction and

5 in agricultural construction. The less differentiated systen of basic
indicators which marks nacroregionalisation allows us in a delinited sense
to abstract from quantitative characteristics the levels of estimated norms
as oriented toward the primary territorial unitso-the oblasts. krays.
autononous republics and the Union republics which are not divided into
oblasts. One of the advantages of macroregionalisation is the stability
of the systen in time. and this is particularly inportant in prognosis-
type technical and econonic calculations and in future planning.

As distinct iron the general branch systen. regknaﬂsation by branches of
the national eeonony and industry takes into account the regional charac-
teristics of the planning and technological structure of construction and
the conditions of the estinated setting of norna by branches. it nust be
bornsin mind that the conbination of the above-nentioned characteristics
and conditions in nany branches is specific: it reflects the level of
their technical develop-ant as well as the forms and methods which have
taken shape in order to determine prices for construction output. Never-
theless. the formation of price regions for the complete set of branches.
as envisaged in the national economic plan. though creating an illusion
of reliability. actually leads to a decrease in the stability of the
econonic paraneters which characterize the regional level of the estimated
cost of construction.

The results of studies which have been carried out testify to the feasi-
bility of merging branches for the above-sentioned purposes by the follow-
ing groups: the gas industry: the petroleua-extracting industry: the trans-
port of petroleum and petroleum products: hydroelectric power stations.
electric power networks. the lumbering industry. the remaining branches

of industry; agriculture; water management; forestry: railroad transport;
housing. cultural. and personnl construction.

The turns of the territorial organisation of the national economy are con-
stantly being improved. Characteristic in this regard is the development
of such basically new forms as the territorial-production complexes (ch's).
Pinnnlng practice during the last few years has provided for the purposeful
apportionment of resources for the country's individual territories whose
development presents a problem of All-union importance. in connection

with this an important role is being played by purposeful territorial
roglonalisation by level of estimated cost of construction. presupposing
the working out of a system of indicators. oriented at such a type of

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

individual zones. For this purpose use is made of the branch coefficients

of the changes in the estimated costs of construction and assembling opera-
tions. which are combined for individual zones and the TPC's.

The basic principles determining the methods of estimated regionalitation
and the possibilities for its functional use amount to the following:
estimated regionalization has an objective economic basis. and it charac-
terizes the spatial differences of the levels of estimated costs of con-
struction to the degree in which these differences reflect in an averaged-
out form (by means of a system of generally mandatory estimated norms) the
typologies] conditions for forming the social costs of construction output.
as determined in the final analysis by the structure of the economy. by
the rate and level of its development. by the presence of capital assets

and production capacities. by the level of labor productivity. the profit-
ability of production. etc.

The system of estimated regionalizstion takes into consideration the pos-
aihilities of substantial differences in the degree of combining basic
indicators. This is connected. in the first place, with the traits of
organizing spatial forms within the bounds of which are established and
changed the conditions of applying living and past labor in construction
as well as in the branches which provide it with material-technical re-
sources and services: in the second place. with differences in the func-
tlonal use of the economic characteristics of corresponding regions
(divioion into general-branch regionalisation and regionalication by
branches of the national economy. etc.).

In order to obtain an economic characterisation of the regions. one must
utilize the nomenclature of indicators. which encompasses various aspects
of the regional cost estimate of construction (in comparison with the base
region ~~Moscow oblast): the total indicator--the "level of the estimated
costs of construction and assembling operations"; groups of coefficients
which characterize regional differences in the level of estimated outlays
(materials. the basic wages of workers. the operation of construction
machinery. and overhead expenses). in the level of estimated prices for
free-object warehouse construction materials by consolidated groups of
materials; in the level of elements comprising the estimated price (whole-
sale prices and transport-handling expenses) by consolidated groups of
materials.

The cconooic characteristics of the regions should be comparable. i.e..

the quantitative criteria which are used to delineate regions of a given
type must be identical. In regionalization (except for macroregionelita-
lion) one must ensure the comparison of economic characteristics of a given
region with nil-Union characteristics as well as with those for other
regions. especially those located on adjacent (bordering) territories.

This is all the more important inasmuch as in reality there occur not
abrupt. spasmodic changes but rather gradual changes in the conditions

of forming estimated costs of construction among regions.

12
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Estimated regionalization is oriented toward projects which have been
accepted in territorial planning. Rorking out the indicators which con-
tain the cost characteristics of territories within a system of estimated
regionalisation fills in an essential gap in creating the nornative base
which is necessary to work out and inplenont planned. project. and eco-
noaic solutions. Its adoption should facilitate the improvement of the
fares and methods of territorial planning: it will allow the optimisation
of branch and territorial schemes for the develop-ant and distribution of
production forces and enable us to find sore effective solutions in many
instances. Estisated regionalization. which reflects the systesstiaed
price characteristics of regions. may be utilised to solve various classes
of econoeic probleos as follows: the termination of plan (forecast) in-
dicators--for providing grounds for the volumes and structure of construc-
tion output. the determination of production capacities of construction
organizations and needs for material-technical resources. providing
grounds for the economic indicators of a branch; selecting optisal pro-
duction variants--in analyzing and appraising the cooperative economic
effectiveness of capital investsents. etc.: forning a normative base
which is used in planning and at the preplanning stage of developuent;
managing and organizing construction production-~in analyzing economic
indicators and evaluating the completion of the plan by territorial con-
struction organizations. defining the categorical indicators of combines.
SNU'a. etc.; probless of iaproving the setting of estisated noras and
other functional problems in the branch.

Estimated regionalization reflects the actual level of estimated nor-s

and prices. as well as the territorial division of labor which has taken
shape on a nationwide level. Shifts in the distribution of laterial pro-
duction and the developsent of Union republics and economic regions are
leading to changes in the territorial proportions of the national econosy.
Nevertheless. estimated regionalization. particularly macroregionalieation.
will not be modified essentially in the future (until 1990) since the
shifts which have taken place in proportions have occurred very slowly.

It is true that serious changes have been undergone by the coat character-
istics of a nuaber of regions in Kazakhstan. Siberia. the Far East. on the
territories of which radical transforaations have taken place. directed

at drawing natural resources into econooic circulation and winning new
territories.

the above-mentioned changes will occur under the influence of two basic
groups of factors which are operating at cross purposes as follows: on
thr one hand. lowering the level of expenses and prices as these regions
.. .un. remons which are characterised by a great concentration of re-
sources. a development of the production base. and the creation of a
sedern infrastructure; on the other hand. raising the level of prices

and rates for the purposes of stimulating the expansion of the scales of
production and attracting additional aanpower. In estimated regionalira-
tion for the future more and more impetus will be placed on the trend
towards gradually bringing closer together the levels of the estimated

13
roe OFFICIAL use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

norm" and prices by major regions as integration processes develop in
the national economy and the levels of the economic development of
oblasts. krays and autonomous and Union republics become aore even.

1.
2.

3.

5.

FOOTNOTES
K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch." [works]. Vol 26. p 182.

"Teoriya i aetodologiya planovogo tsenoobrarovaniya ”(Theory and
Methodology of Planned Price Formation]. lzd. "Hysl'". 1976. p 260.

it should be borne in mind that in determining the planned volumes

of operations we are guided by the norms of engineering and construc-
tion planning. which take into account the level achieved in the
standardization of buildings. facilities. structures end equipment.
i.e.. they reflect the socially necessary conditions of production.
However, the volumes of operations to be carried out in erecting
buildings and structures are established in each specific instance
with consideration being given to the functional purpose of the
project. as well as the natural-climatic and economic-geographical
countions or the region of construction, i.e.. individually.

The question of establishing norms for the magnitude of net income
in the price of construction output is not regarded here as one of
independent importance.

For this same reason the utilization in norms of proportionate capital
investments by a number of branch indicators, which envisages the divi-
sion of the country's territory into 10-12 zones. leads to a substan-
tial distortion in the appraisal of the regional level of the estimated
costs of construction and assembling operations.

Series of preferred numbers are used in establishing gradations of
parameters and dimensions as well as individual numerical character-
istics in technology. They consist of decimal series of a geometric

progression with denominators (80th series is 8 10 1.03).

(alrrarnnT: lsdatel'stvo "Pravda." "Voprosy ekonomiki,” 1978

2386
090: '1821

lb
70R OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIM. USE ONLY

WM. consmucnou HACﬂINHiY. AND mom HAW

MAW MES FOR l-STORY mm BUILDIIBS NOTED

Moscow vozmmm OMMAZIW momma! zwm UNUITSROVAW
(MW 81mm in Russian 1978 pp b-lz

[Chapter 1 or the book. "Vomdeniye odnoetachnykh prowshlemvid: sdanio/
unititsirolanrmdl gabaritnykh sldnma”[The bection of One-aﬁtory Industri-
al mildings or Standardized Dinensionim Schemes], 2d Edition, revised
and supplemented. by the Scientific-Research and aperinental Design In-
stitute for the Organisation. Hechanisation and Technical Assistance to
Construction (TsNIIGITP), Stroyisdat]

[Text] 1. Characteristics of Three Dimensional Layout and Structural So-
lutions of Buildings

The three-dimensional layout and structural solutions of one-story indus-
trial buildings are the most important features that determine the princi-
ples tor the organisation and techmloy of their construction. The
three-dimensional layout solutions determine: the configuration, layout.
area. height, structural value. colunar network, and the lumber. sises
and place-ant of bays; and the structural solutions detemine the choice
at load-bearirg and curtain-wall structure, the analysis schese, the types
and sises of structural members and their Joinirg. materials, and so on.

In accordance with the three-dimensional layout solution. indxstrial
buildings can be categorised as one-bay. two-bay and nultibay. The most
cosnon cases aresultiba: buildings, whose configuration enables a whole
set of production operation processes to be accomplished inside the
buildiru.

The sizes or the bays and their mutual placusent are determined by the op-
erating processes or the given production work. ”ore often than not.
identical have of a building are located parallel to one another. In
some cases a block of bays placed in parallel is Joined to a bay placed
perpernicularly.

One-story industrial buildings are subdivided in accordance with not only
their thres-dinensioml layout characteristics but also the lifting and
transportirg equipent used. into buildings without cranes and buildirgs

15
FOR orrxcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equipped with overhead-traveling bridge cranes. In the first case. trans-
port operations inside the building are perronmed by floor transport and
beam-mounted overhead-traveling hoists attached to the building‘s load-
bearing roof structure. In the second case—by means or overhead-travel-
ing bridge cranes or by beam-mounted overhead-traveling hoists that move
over crane tracks laid on crane beams. which rest on the columns. In ml-

tibayagudildings. combinations of the types of transport equipment sued
are u .

Depending upon the type or covering. buildings have sloped (one-slope or
two-slaps) or flat roofs. Single-bay buildings. as a rule. are designed
with sloped roofs, multibay buildings with both sloped and flat roofs.

In order to insure ventilation or and natural light for the premises in
certain types of industrial buildings. the installation oi“ slqlights is
stipulated. Skylights are arranged longitudinally (along the bay or the
building) or laterally. Roots with longitudinal placement of metal elq-

lights are most widely used. Hultibay buildings can have an bays with
skylights and some bays without them.

In current industrial construction practice. about 30 percent of all
buildings are erected without slqlights. ﬁnch buildings are ventilated
by air conditioning systems and afforded constant illumination in the ab-
sence of windows by daylight-type bulbs.

Depending up0n the technological peculiarities of the main production work
of the enterprises that are being built. single-story buildings can be
heated or unheated. with a suspended ceiling or without one.

In certain cases. for operating needs. basements are built in industrial
buildings in which technological equipsent, pipelines and so on are placed.

Premises for the asenities and premises for special services for an enter-
prise's departments are placed in buildings that abut on the main building
at the main facade or on the ends, or inside the building (built-in pren-

ises). Sometimes these premises are situated in a separate building.

Three-dimensional layout solutions for one-story industrial buildings of

unified dimensioning schemes with reinforced-concrete frame are shown in
table 1.

Industrial buildings with standardized dimensioning schenes with bays of
30 and 36 meters are solved with steel roof trusses and are characterised
by the following paraseters:

anildings without cranes—height from 6 to 18 meters; and spacing of po-
rimeter columns 6 meters and or center columns 6 or 12 meters; and

mildings equipped with supporting overhead-traveling bridge cranes—
height from 10.8 to 18 meters: and spacing of perimeter colnnns 6 or 12
meters and center columns 12 meters.

16
ran ovrxcm. use om
Table 1

Isle-Bay and hulttple-aay Ono-Story Industrial Buildings ofﬂniﬂed

Dueuionlng Schemes (with Prefabricated Reinforced-Concrete Francs)

List of Building Blocks for st

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

 

 

n..." W «em-v" mum-imam mama“:
In“??? " NNNn‘a‘n‘J-r'v' unnooaoooooeuemnnuvqvmmouoouoo
- mg _—_............_... .._.._.._..—____—____—_...._
. . .. .__.--... a ...._....._.. . _.. .._-... -
5:
‘4: ‘ 5‘. 5.9: “see: ‘ " ' cu": ‘
~15. 15:55:35..” i g399§8£3§8§§§§gﬁﬁg33 :5:$§55§§§
7-3----,-_-—.- - ....:.-..—--?:EI’E*Z7Z7IZZITEI7;;'
{3' ggégﬂﬁégé g 23;:222; $039933. 35 ﬁqaq qw- ggjqnc) _c¢;¢e_-K_
Si :Zztzzxzizi = 1322230122xe «2223:22sz
H ——_.. non—.- _.._...... . . -" -———
....'.'.:.'.::: 888888833 §§§§§§§:ESBE§§E§E§E§8§§§E§£§§§
~ .
rum-M

 

(“.m- I'll GOBQQO

tatteeeqqqu

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

fngﬁaa “diéééé42s' or~~°°°°seeé
Q . .g _;uw . s ‘ .1 . ;—'-T——
-§ mamas ii; . 2 iiizéagiﬂaég
'07 : 2;:e;;,§§§;,?:;;:::: a: g s Maﬁ-ﬁéaéé
P"-- ._—.... ....__-.-...u— :
gmml gamma-manage: 33 i 888886888398
9
3
H
82—;
82
:Skgﬂwﬁ QQQQ!ZY!QQQQQQQQ 'eqqq qaqqttttq
in?“ oooausnuouooaoaaggggggg vvvvooeohhhhooo o
. 3.. _ ~--- -. _-..—.- -—d I. -~— ‘ . I
I '23 nu': - " .- " ‘ ‘ 5‘ -
aA <2 =3§§3§§g~ariaésgigzggggg “-ééﬁéﬁ ééﬁéséﬁiia
‘9, 4 23:33:: ¢:-$:2.2:$g22229é g :“':a: "”1"“:
L 35-.-. fifffTifif°ffm°MEWM = ‘.‘"°_‘°“"_.“’_”.“_“"“_"‘“""_"‘°
gm;- asaasasazasassewssse: 98388838888838888
N‘Uﬂlu‘
“wast qua! nae: eﬂet ﬁxo 9991
"ovum. ”novao anvvno ﬂavovuohuoo‘ vvvv
2g — ——— .‘.
53. :8 ‘aggﬂ‘qgn 85.32“ '-
. ”gig; "ﬁg-03 “éﬁézé =§§J$E§£¢ 335?:
3 332 .581"? E‘QQQ-‘Pe .777777'r- 77':-
gi 4s“-§ 3 amount: «cinema iccnnumamb Edmund
' ‘ =-—-*- =- =-—-—————— =
2:3; '3 5; s-«nwo "new 22222228: uaaa
v V

 

1?
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Assigned ember of the building block

2. Code of the dimensioning scheme

3. “eight to the bottoe of the truss structure

lo. A. Buildings without or with lifting and transporting equipment
with a load-lifting capacity of up to 5 tons.

5. . Buildings equipped with supporting overhead-traveling bridge
cranes with load-lifting capacity of up to 50 tons

6. Bay of 6 meters

Note. legend: 5.... building without cranes; K--a building equipped with
a supporting overhead-traveling bridge crane; a--where the spacing of the
perineter colunns is 6 teeters, center colusns 6 meters, and truss structure
6 meters; &--where the spacing of perimeter columns is 6 meters, center
columns 12 meters, and truss structure 6 netersgﬂ "spacing of perimeter
colums is 6 meters, center calms 12 meters, and truss structure 12
neters; and ruspacing of perineter column is 12 meters, center calms

12 teeters, and truss structure 12 meters.

Maple: 5 --18-72a is a building block of a building without a crane,
with a bay of 18 meters, height to the bottom of the truss structure of
7.2 neters, and spacing of perineter and center coll-ill and truss structure
of 6 teeters.

18
NR orncm. use on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The gradation or building heights in increments of 0.6 and 1.2 meters and

a large number of standard column sizes enable designers to adopt standard-
iced heights for premises that are close to those required by technologi-
cal considerations. Ii' these considerations require that the design in-
crease the parameters above those adopted in the standardized dimensioning
systems. than the bays and column spacing should be designated in multiples
of 6 meters, and the height in multiples of 1.2 meters.

When designim industrial buildings. a minimal number of different stand-
ardized dimensioning schemes should be used. Choice of a scheun or combina-
tion of schemes should be based upon the rational placement or production
facilities and the technological equippent and by special requirements for
the interlocking of departments.

For each height to the bottom or the truss structure in a building that is
equipped with overhead-travail; bridge cranes, there corresponds only one
grade level for the specified crane cantilever top, based upon the prereq-

uisites tor placement of the crane or the greatest load-lifting capability
(tables 2 and 3).

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 2
Parameters of One-Story mildings ipped with
Electrical Overhead-Traveling e Cranes
Key: Em..-“ .1...“ -__. .. ._..l M... '1'."
1. Height of building to bottom ’ﬁ'ﬂw. ray-mm... 12')“: 11 21::-
of the truss structure. 32%: '“".'”"°' 23?: - ’“"‘ In»...m .
meters. I
2. Load-lifting capability of '— T ‘2
the crane, tons. 8.4 10 .. 5.15 18. 24 .
3. Grade level of the head or ﬁg :2; 53 25:2 :3; 31 12: {3
the crane rail, meters. 1o.s 10. co 3.15 311.30 | I!
14. Bay. meters. I2 10. 20 9.35 . 1'12. 21. 30. I!
5. Spacing or center colunns, 1: .10 am 111' 10 31 ! g
. 2 :10. so are 21.. . - :
”ten :32 10.20 101.5 '11:.21. an. a 1:
Note: 8 cing of perimeter col- 1:1,: .111 . l 9.3;, 111' I. 12
umns is or 12 meters. '33 30.130 1135 2-1. :10. .11. 1 '2
14.4 111.20 11.75 . 111. 24 '3
14.4 20 11.7. no. so ‘3
14.4 .111 11.05 111 '7
14.4 311.50 11.05 21.30.36 . '3
I5.6 .111. so 12.25 2-1. so. at. I!
16.3 30.541 . ms 21.30.31. I I2
111 30.511 14.115 21.30.36 1 12

 

In designing buildings with suspended transport equipment, the truss struc-
ture (beans or girders) is desigaed to be. as a rule. 6 meters. Truss-
structure spacing of 12 meters is allowed where sturdard stmcture is used.
In buildings equipped with overhead-traveling bridge cranes, the lz-eetsr
spacim is accepted. '

19
ran orrzcm. use 01.1.11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3

Parameters of One-Story Bindings Equipped with
Naturally Operated Overhead-Traveling Bridge Cranes

l
I
l
I
l

 

 

 

 

 

 

Key: 3". y g l ‘5}. .. §
1. Height of building to bot- =5 l gag ‘ng -. $3,.
ton of the truss structure, é" .r‘. 33’! i 23:; a :g I:
0 ”1:: I {13' = a; I
2 gzgimm ca bilit 5“ i . '5‘! §l§=~ »‘ g i
' P‘ Y“ 3:: at . Sal a ...:a a! .e a
the crane. tons. » u .... . ...'_ .......-. “...—..—
3. Grade level of the head of o 3.2; 5; 5 9, I: 6.6 :33; 55 5'5 9_ n
t e runs a . .
1.. 323$ meter-2n, new" 0 5: a a Is 1 6.6 5.3 I -... Is
mlgn; 6. 0.2 an” 8.4 3.2;6; 1.5 9.12
1.: 5:3 0.2 In 13.4 5:3 u Is
“0“: Spacine 01‘ perimeter 1.2 um: 5.1 :2. In 3.4 gs; 0.9 lg. 13
and center coluns is 6 meters. 7.8 3‘32: 5; 6.8 9' I?! 9 g...” 7.5 '2. n
1.s gm 0.3 H! 3.0 12.5; 8.I 2.13
1.5 as; 6.3 l'.'. 20 l
.ao Is . l.

 

In all cases the spacing of perimeter columns is established on the basis
of economic considerations. taldng into account the structural solution of
the roof and wall enclosure. as well as the mastery of the various stand-
ard sizes of structural mabers that are produced by construction-industry
plants.

In two-bay buildings less than 7.2 meters high. where perimeter colunn
spacing is 6 meters. it is remanded that the same spacirg be used also
for the center columns. and. where the height is greater. the use of 6-

meter spacing for center coluns is penitted only where there is appropri-
ate substantiation for the choice.

With regard to structural solutions, one-story industrial buildings are
made up on the basis of frame or nonfrue solutions. In frame buildings
the basic load-bearing member is the prefabricated reinforced—concrete
trans; in nonfrane buildings ‘t is the walls that absorb the loads from
the roof, liftirg and transportim equipment, winds. and so on.

The frame of a one-story industrial building consists of colunns that have
been fixed to footings. and of crane-beam and truss structure that is
fastened to the columns. The columns and truss structure fonn lateral
frameworks. The roof slabs are laid on the truss stmcture with the weld-
ing of embedded parts. Spatial rigidity and stability are achieved in
arch buildings by fastening the coluans to the footings and Joining them
to the roof. In the lateral direction the building's spatial rigidity is
provided by the lateral frmevork and in the longitudinal direction by the
longitudinal fra-ework. roof members. crane beams and tie beans.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Each pair of calms that are situated in the middle of a buildim or a
themed-expansion unit is Joined with tie beams. The length or width of
these units can reach 72 or 11.1. meters in heated and 1.8 meters in unheated
buildings.

When calunn spacing is 12 meters or more and roof slabs 6 meters long are

used. subrai‘ter girders are laid to support the trues structure. when the

roof is laid with slabs 12 meters long, the namfacturepf which has now been

mastered in several parts of the country. the need to use mbraftsr gir-

ders is done away with. This reduces the nix of prefabricated reinforced-
cancrste items and simplifies the erection of buildings.

Prunework calms are installed at the ends of buildings and between two
load-bearing perimeter columns of the longitudinal rows with a spaoiru of
12 meters. They absorb only loads from the wall enclosure and wind forces.
In buildings equipped with overhead-traveling bridge cranes, the framework

calms of the outer longitudinal rows can be an intermediate support for
the crane beams.

melamine—roofs and walls—in buildings serve to provide for a mrmal
temperature and moisture regime.

Frame Mldhvgs have. as a rule, calmer (shorter-cone) type footings.
nonframe buildings have the contimous type.

The footings under the outer calms of the frama of heated buildings and
under all the colums of unheated buildings tint are erected on soils that
heave when they freeze are placed lower than the estimated depth of soil
freezing; the depth of soil freezing is not considered in the case of the
center columns of the frames of unheated buildings. Large footings are
erected under center rows of calms because they absorb much heavier
loads than the perimeter walls.

In addition to the above-indicated structure. a number of other prefabri-
cated reinforced-concrete and concrete members are used in one-story pro-
duction-type buildings: looting and girt beams, partition panels, wall
blacks, beams and slabs for suspended ceilings, comics panels. posts and
crossbars of gates. and so on. '

Host of the exasperated members have been included in the catalog of stand-
ard structure and are being namfactured in accordance with working draw-
inge that are worked out on the basis of the products mix of prefabricated
reinforced-concrete structure made at factories for one-story industrial
buildings (table 1.).

The main prefabricated members that are used in constructing one-story in-
dustrial buildings are as follows.

Paotings in most cases are made in columnar farm. freestanding, or the
anchor-cone type. The bottom of the footing can be square, rectangular or

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
t ' :I‘II‘!‘

lv‘ "' lasso. I900 500 500 ”no. Io.I— «mum. um. I
q‘f-gpmouu 82: n2 mm, mm. 2|.I II III. Iv. VI. '
AL— "- 19 mo I4 250 "pm IInIun IIIIcIII

leg—ﬂ _ l ‘ ' . 1225'

ram I-IpoIIIquIuc "pom-Ion 8. 9 II I'.‘ I m IIIIIIorImIIuII II Mam: not.“ an.“ up. um “and”

5‘1). ”I. IN. —

5000. LS: I'IK-OI- 125. II -
MW). 890. $0. 240. 3.6: nwnnpoen: M
"”0 m 2!) no 5 um. um. I II

 

II. “'Ilﬁyohpo-

I'IquIII npommuuc ”mantle. pewmum IIpoIII-mul I2 II In I IIpII mm Guns 6 II ,(31)

I“; 4‘3?an ”eh um Ism' zoo zoo - 5.4 {I'Inzlfp'oe-rtzﬂg'".
“I alga-YIN)!

1:3; claw“ "III: we zoo 'zoo '- !
Inv- I . . . _ l I 1:22} I
I

«II-pm npommnuc (unpuumuuc "menu-II la II 24 II mm mm ”a 6 I (3‘0)

 

|
I»
%:;%l,\i€iﬁﬁ it; i now ' soon 2405- bIo. . I 5g 21. .1. hﬁq-EEEEV'
m ”I,
:m I . . 1"." 3-36 i ' I
Baillliyﬂw'l I mm 1100 240 . 240.qu - {1.9.5 To In. (33)
I .. . l I H 2
FOR (WPICMI. USE ONLY

. A an. 5&8." an

a .
Sagsigaog 3n
HHH

.328 .nn

5.... a. n “m ”9.12235." .a
.338. o a.“ Room. '3
0.8:: g 3 .33 Na no 33a

ﬂu. 88.. 3&8 233: 13:65. .8
.3393

and “ﬁg-Uk— .nnuan-Bm .8

318a .ouonceﬁaaaa-Buog .om
4 on 33."...5 588

J» as. B .5 .H .H 3.. .8498. .8
6938. «A

agggogogﬂsﬂ .3

.8338 3.. «.5 awaaﬂu no anion .o

.33 3.3... .u

5253.930

8-8 Ego 2» 8 85.3.8 4.

.«n .5803 go 53.. .o

up .ao» no 58: .m

3 .gaoounououo no «:33. 3

A5 a 593 .n

.9 55338 .3335 .~

£385 a

a

«he

23
FOR almcm. use on?
m nPHtttM. "SK nun
Table 6 (continued)

I&om.;n;lu_fnta pic-91... -: (2) .

-.._.—_., ‘.

 
  
 

Mn (1) “m, cm. wound a

0" «mm «tour mu ""‘“""'

___._.._____.1 L45 .129 L...

Km «puma» emu nu mum: am. e «um». I. 9. II. II n u u (11)
mm mam uncut :- (18)

' I
{1‘}:er an an- m .m. .wo. 0.0- new «M. |.

 

 

m” | Ilr’“ I...“

 

o ' o o o W. ‘ ' V. V L
a {:3 b . a m. M '2" ﬁamuhomo
’m

( )
I "_ ‘
ﬁll'st—‘ﬂ—‘l 5“ 3“; ”mm. .m. . - Ram-49m

a I a n vuh '
m, - .4. . 'm.

Kama ”IW «um. um am. e Mum II a u I. «um mm: mutual
mama-coma to u to v

aummhuumu‘nnn 23

- . ll .‘ .
o 4 .
S..L"'-';_=J Us a. .m. «o no 3%— u— «30:49.». I.

, m I 15.! IV. v. w. mu-

YES“

Q ‘ .. , M. m .m. 3 ,_ MONO, no. I.
o" " .3133 . no «In moo It! W. v. \l.' 11....
: 11°. 53 '

Kan-u mum-em («an in mull : animu- II. 24 30 u 30 ”apnea-nu W upon an
manna-m :- to: (2

mun-Mum‘s". (23)
.__J#__.u M ' I I I l I I I
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010051-3

FOR (DI-TINA]. US! ONLY

ls SKO‘Ohs

2. Structursl dineneione. an.
(as cm..-m‘m "‘8th Ge
5e Width 0! “P. b1.

6. Width of bottom. b2.

7. Distenu to the colw's crane
cantilever.
8. “Om... 600's
9. Series of crowns and the designer.
17. Calms or reeteuuler cross-section
for buildings without cranes. with
here or 6. 9. 12. 18 end 21. meters.
18. where the perimeter-column speeina
is 6 asters.
19. Its-014.9. hoe 11. m. V end VII.
Pro-stroyproyekt.
20. Where the center calm spacing is
6 or 12 asters.
21. Its-014.9. Nos II-VII. Pranetroyproyekt.
22. Colme of rectnmuler erase-section
for buildings with beys or 18 or 2!.
meters that ere equipped with overheed
treveling cranes with losd-lii‘tim
cepebility or 10 or 20 tons.
23. where the perimeter colun specim is
6 or 12 asters.
210s ”-01.1090 "0. I. IV. V IN VI.
mumm.
25. Counts of two-projection cross-sec-
tion for buildings with bays of 18.
21.. 30 or 36 actors that are equipped
with overheed-trsvelim crates with
load-littim cepebility or 30 or 50
M's
26s Ml-SZ. "0. I. II. III. IV CM VI.
Design Institute No 1.

25
ms omcm. use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010061-3
m OFFICIAL "8R ONLY

Specifications for standard Profabrtcued Reinforced-Concrete atmnm

Table 6
-. h ' ' .. ~ " L'ﬁ"?"‘;"" ﬁgure. “.12).... _ I
| I I . Mun. um moo-M I
y ”when

 

 

 

3am (I) uuol' worn Inn-rm ma
. cm ("g-0' Ina“! Ina-Ir
-_. .(92- ..§’L‘.§5.2..-_(§2__ .

(a) J (9)

w

 

nmu @yunngumu us nun. e mum noun a n (10)

\II'»
.. '. 4300-. nus-um. I.
__ ud“ no 400-; m. - ‘m-a.
:3 .4 mo. M11 ooh-um
_...__.__..... ._-,._- .. _. __.__-_..___L___.'
I
l

 

. |
a ,_ -
6% no. ' mum' "10,200. ..
”all I 'v. _ l

c ‘ o
_- ._.-. _,

t5 -‘ -~ -- v E! ' Bum-”macaw“ us mm c mmuwla u (12)
. . - g '

0.0-1. "““'i.'."a'.‘.‘..1°.n

11)

 

3% foo. son. an .. 2.9-3. "ﬁL."":.“‘..,..." ,

11

Bun «um: In cm I: ans-u I «mono-nu: mm (11)

 

I
I"! q '. v .
(1 ~..'_.'_'_"£i 8-! m as an zoo — | I.» ﬁﬁﬁﬁﬂ:
o «r
(5 .. ' U.)
a"! '4 |
I. L:'.:.:.;;.. .Ighﬂ‘: mum at I.
{F—‘v . 4v 5, ~ mm as an an .. ‘ 2,5 ,lrurmnm-
,-- u ' 1h)
. l

 

WNW" MI "m m 1mm n non-humus wand. (15)

. ‘ -
"5' 9.9 . mom. on. 3.
. .... “Li '{ a.» m M. m. . .. 0's."' Illlllllﬂmm.

 

 

 

{’3- “. Tie)

'1'! .... ‘f..ﬁ.: l i . ~

t'wa-gﬁz'tbx i 33. i coo lac. .3193”. mi - 0.0-3. ﬁﬁggfﬁﬁ
.. .t. .. ° l

[m on following page] 26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010051-3

FOR OVI’ICMI. USE ONLY

1. Sketch.

2s Structural MCiM'IIp IIIs
3. Length 1(a).

1.. Gross-sscticmhsuht. s.
50 Width of top. b1.

6s Hmth of bottom. b2s

7. Mstsncs to the oolmn's crsns

csntﬂsvsr.

8. Height. M’s

9. 8sr1ss or cuttings and ths dssasnsr.

10. Foot!“ bssms for buildings u1th
64st» column among.

11. 1.1.15-1. No 1. hustrcyprcyskt
[Stats Instituts {or Osnsrsl Con-
struction and Sanitsry-mmsrtm
Dss1sn or mum-m mtsrprisss].

12. Footing bssms for buildings with
124st» cclum menu.

13. us bssns (or vans ads of brick
or lightvsuht concuts asscnry.

”cs “-01-”. "0 1. 1mm
[central Scintuic-Rsssmh and
Mata-asap Instituts for
mum-m ammo and Stmcturss].

15. untsls for nuns ads of brick or
lightwuht comrsts uscnry.

16. 0-01-58. No 2. 1mm.

2?
M OWICIM. USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010061-3
FOR OFFICIAL I183 ONLY
Table II (continued)

 

 

I-.. .‘Sﬂ'ﬂ'. 9.1632112): “'_ ....-..-.
3'“ ‘1’ ' “en'lm: 3;}?! "Ir"; 33'” 'I ”3" '5‘"
..(3)_..|. ..(II) (J I <6'I..”.I531|.£6L-_122__

Mpnn "Immune «marine ”mm: It II 2! II IIIIII III-II- («rpm 0 II (36)

I
‘ I ! I .
I

 

 

 

 

 

I'I‘d ‘
I .... "3", I mo— II.s:o- IIonIMIIss.
1-,. .. ”1%; 1‘0"; '7’”, am ”I 35° “'9‘” ; ' ° IMII. I- III
[I‘d-I _. I. | ' I I lllllIllIIp-IIIIII
. I ; I. I IIIIIII II IImI-Iua
I , .'II I),
. ! ! I3? l'I3? '5
gulp—I I". .... '5 I ! ' i
' . -.-~'\' - 'i.
.. J41. \lm- .. 1 mo- ”0' 0.2." .2. I.
If: I " 3;.14 In” . am ”0.”ij ° i MI W“ (33)
“mm "mum mumnuc' Will I. I u I IIIIII lllle «In I! II (33)
‘ I
.I "I Lo I '
! .1' 1'. ‘ﬂ. ".5 III
I' - ‘ ' . ' -
”FM”? I f‘,,,¥i"’ ""0 2733 m 9‘: I: Put-.nl'l'fi'loﬂillll-
’ IIIIIIIIIIJMIIIIII II
I IIIIIIIIIIIIIII IIIIcIII-
I M
am am son I— To In- (33)
- | I
Mun mum»: m min «I maul muse. (1.0).
I - '
J ti? “6’: ' ' !
ifs-"9‘ ' ..' : . .
1.1"“ - 9;{;?'3 {g l limo. ms 650 560 IL: IIIKIII-IIOM
I-‘r mu. I. "mum-
I -' . In?!)
I I

 

llum IIIIIIIIIIIIII mad 6 II II IIIIIIIIIIIoO :I u (1.2)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010051-3

FOR OWICMI. US! ONLY

Key:

1e Sketch.

2. Stunt dinensions, an.
3. length (n).

1.. Cross-section height. a.
50 Width 0: WP. b1.

6. Width of bottom, b2.

7. Distance to the colun's orane

cantilever.

8. Height, m.

9. Series or drawing and the desigmr.

33. Ditto.

36. Semental rafter girders with span of
18 and 2!. esters where girder
spacing is 6 meters.

37. PK-01-129/68. Noe I—m, rm
mm and Design Institute No 1.

38. Seguentai rafter trusses with have of
18 and 2!. meters. where girder
spacing is 12 meters.

390 “-01.129/68' "0. II and III. ‘1"!!!-
Pmnsdaluy and Design Institute No 1.

1.0. Subratter girders for buildings with
now Me

1.1. Pic-01-110/6a. No I. Proutroyproyekt.

1.2. mt slabs 6 teeters long and 3 esters

Ce
a3. 1.1.65-7. Ito 0-5. 1mm.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010051 ~3
Tabla lo (continued)

 

 

 

 

___ lwwmm.u 2
u a “m-
'“" (1) .m. g: .:'*;.',' :gesj'"_v&o m ' WNW
(3)... <9). .12.... <9..- ﬁx-...<i_._<92

Ham mumﬂpnmmuux mum! m 0 u n amino. 3 u (M)

“10' m m m _ l.‘ UGO-7. Dun. 0-5.

1' In
,_ 0' a ‘ 2b., wanna
5.3.}. Elm . '
raw mum manna ”no. I! u n ammo. 3 n (’05)

1.

I
‘ ms .u.
mm m 466 as - 1.4-1.|umm':o'3m-

We)
Ila-m ctr-once I’m mm c mm mu 0 I I2 I ([07)

I .

 

 

‘ _ um. Iml n
mo 13' 332 33 °"“'" autumn»...
ISM: M. 2‘0. mind us Your
I, mo no m - ml W
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010051-3

1090

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SkOtche

Structur dimensions, m.
mth (H).
CX‘OOO-m‘m height. Is
width of top. by

Width of bottom, b2.

Distance to the colann's crane
cantilever. -
Height, ton'e
Series or drawings and the designer. .
I.l.65-7. No 0-5, TsNIIPronsdaniy.
Easily expendable reef slabs. 6 meters
long and 3 meters wide.
mt slabs 12 meters long and 3 meters
0e
101065-69 “0 II. TwIMMe
Hall panels for buildings with colunn
spacing of 6 and 12 meters. ‘
1-1.32-5. Nos 1 andII, TsNIIPx-omzduuy
and Proustroyniiproyekt [All-Union
Scientific-Research and Design Insti:-'
tute for Industrial Construction] or
the Urals.
1.1.32~3 No 0-1. TsﬂIIPromzdaniy.
NIIZhB Scientific-Research Institute
for Concrete and Reinforced comrete],
mar [Scientific-Research Institute
i’or the Pivsics of Construction], and
N118!!! MP8! 8883 [Scientific-Research
Institute of mildinss Materials and
Articles of m Ministry at Construc-
tion Meterials Industry].

Note: Arrows signify places for slinging
prefabricated structure: and triamles show
places for resting the prefabricated struc-
ture durim transport and storage.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010051 ~3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stepped. depending upon the cross-section of the columns and the calculat-
ed loading.

The dimensions of the anchor cone of a footing are designated with the
clearance between its walls end the colunm at the bottom it is at least
50 In. at the top 75 Inn. The depth of the anchor cone is at least the
greatest dinension of the lateral cross-section of the column and is soo-
1,250 In. At present. coluanar foundations are made with a raised anchor-
cone piece (grade level above the footing—0. 15 meter). This increases
somewhat the total cost of the concrete for the footing and the colmn.
but it enables all work on erection of the underground portion of the

building to be completed before start of the erection of the above-ground
P0“ no

Columnar footings can be one-piece or built-up. The latter consist of
flat slabs for the lower stages and footing blocks with anchor cone.
Unification of etmdard sizes of columnar footings is made difficult by
the fact that they can have different laying depths or footing area even

for single-story buildims. At present columnar footings of the anchor-
cone type are made monolithic more often than not. ‘

Continuous footings are nede of two nubers—reinforced-concrete cushion
blocks of trapezoidal or rectaxgular cross-section and concrete wall
blocks. Height of the cushion blocks is 0.3-3 tone and weight of the wall
blocks is 0.15-3 tons. The cushion blocks are laid on a prepared base di-
rectly against each other in the four of a strip. The wall blocks are
laid on the cushion blocks on mortar with closure of the vertical Joints
with mortar or a concrete mix. Reinforcement mesh is often laid in the '

horizontal Joints between the first row of wall blocks and the cushion
bIOCkOe

In some cases piles are used as a footing under the columns of one-story
production-type mildinge. The heads of the piles are Joined by Incen-
.lithio or prefabricated reinforced grillsge.

Foundation beans are T-shaped or trapezoidal in cross-section. Death of
the beans varies from 5.95 to l..3 meters. depending upon the
sites for restirg then on the footing cute or on cripple colt-ms: weight

of a bean is 2.2-9.6 tons. Bone 12 meters long are prestreeeed. and
their weight reaches 5.7 tons.

The colmne of one-story industrial buildings are of square. rectangular
or two-projection cross-section. The colulns are without cantilevere—
for buildirgs without cranes, single-cantilever fbr perimeter rows in
buildings with overhead-traveling bridge cranes. and two-cantilever for
center rows of nultibay buildings with overhead traveling bridge cranes.
The wider-crane part of the con-n can consist of one or two projections.
At present. stmcture for an I-beam and circular cross-section cola-m is

hem developed.

<

32
m omcm. use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Crane beams for boys of 6 and 12 meters are made with split metal beams,
using welded H-beams (series 1.1.26.1, No 1),for generalppurpoee overhead—
traveling bridge cranes with load-lifting capacity of 5-50 tone. For

buildings with cranes of 10-30 tone of load-lifting capacity. reinforced-
ooncrete orane beams are used.

In beams for 6-meter bays. unlike beams for 12-meter bays. the installa-
tion of braking girders is not called for. The height of beams for 6 me-
ter bays is 800 or 1,300 um, and for 12-meter bays 1,100 or 1.600 In. and

their weights are. respectively. 0.5-1.36 and 1.37-I..OI. tone; the weight
of braking girders is within the 0.1.2-O.67 ton range.

Roof beams for bays of 6 and 9 meters are made lean-to. of Mean or I-
beam cross-section. with straight-line configuration: of the upper chord
and with plain or lattioed web. Height of the beams varies from 600 to
900 me. These beams are laid without pitch. Beams for 12-meter bays
are I-beam in cross-section. and lean-to or double slope. Beams for 18-
meter bays are two-slope. I-besm in cross-section. with holes in the web
for reducing weight. Beans intended for roofs of wall slope also are in-

stalled with a spacing of 6 and 12 meters. Beams that rest on mbrsfter
girders are made in shortened form.

Roof girders for bays 18 and 21. meters are basically segmental. of two
types: bracing and nonbracing. The girders can be installed with a spa-
cing of 6 or 12 meters directly on calms or on subrafter structure.

aibrafter girders 12 meters long are installed along a row of columns in
order that trues girders with a spacing of 6 meters may rest on than.

aabrafter girders ere made prestreesed; weight of a member is 11.3 or 11
tons.

Roof slabs differ in material. shape and reinforcuemt. The choice of
slab material—heavy, hemsit or cellular concrete—depends upon the pur-
pose of the building. its temperature regime and the load on the roof.

Hell panels can be single-layer. made of heavy. kerameit or cellular con-
crete. or three-layer. in which the middle layer insulates against heat.

The mix of members for the buildings includes as basic members wall panels
made of cellular concrete 6 or 12 meters long and 0.9. 1.2, 1.5 or 1.8
meters high. Single-layer panels are 160. 200, 21.0 or 300 In thick.

Panels 6 meters long can also be used for buildings with colum spacing of
12 meters. In this case the panels are fastened by one end to the true
calms and by the other end to the frue columns that are installed spe-
cially for structure of the enclosing wall. The mix of members for build-
im includes also completely preaseembled members of mller sites.

In addition to the above-emerated basic types of prefabricated rein-
forced-concrete members. other members and parts made at factories are be-
ing used in the construction of one-story industrial buildings.

33
FOR omcm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tie rods and cross-bracing are installed in the longitudinal direction or
building bsye between the colume and Mons. or these members are cede. as
e rule. or rectangular cross-section. Their lent}: is determined by the

colunm spacing; the weight or the tie rode end orossbracing does not ex;-
Ce“ 1 ton.

Lintels and girt beans are used basically for frenirne apertures «hiring the
erection of wall emloms made or brick, and also in places where there
is an overfell or the heights of individual boys.

Steel slqlights for light and air 6 meters wide are used for buildings
with boys or 18 meters. and 12 esters wide for buildings with ban or 21..
30 end 36 meters (series I.h6b-11 and 13). In this case the spacing of
the truss structure can be 6 or 12 meters. The slqlights ere n-shepsd
and have vertical glazing. An exterior gutter is installed along the elv-
light On the root, end the roof has a slope of 1.5 percent, 5 percent or
1:12. The skylight structure calls for the use or shaped roof decldng

on purlins) or standard reinforced-concrete root slabs 316 end 31:12 me-
tere.

The main numbers of steel skylights are the enlight panels and girders.
and the end panels that Join the girders end the purlins. The mum

panels that position the skylight gleam in sheets rest on the root
trusses. The length of the panels is 6 or 12 esters and depends upon the

spacing of the root trusses. The panel consists of a system or posts.
horizontal members end sheet sheathing for the side of the elqlight. The

upper horizontel bracing for the slqlieht panels is formed by the elo-
light girders and end panels.

COPIRIOIR: Notice Not Available

111.09
cso: cam/02513

35
Fox opt-1cm. use oxzx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mmm mmm

mom mo 33mm P316 Ewe-um or Minus
noooow V09“! antenna in main No 10, 1978 pp 3046
(Artioio by Yu. Yokovotol

l‘hxtl ‘I'ho ohiot ooutont and purpooo of ociontifiruchnicoi prognoo io
oconoly of vorktilo. Motion of outloyo of living and owodiod iobor por
product unit (with oonoidorotion of ito quolity). “Tho purpooo of bringing
in ooohinoo.‘ x. "or: oophooiud, 'io, in its root gonoroi for). Motion
of coot ond conooquontiy prion of goods. poking tho- chomor. that io. ro-
duoing tho worktho roquirod for tho unutocturo of o product unit...“1 ‘lho
roto of ignoring tho ooot o! producto ooh oorvo on o noun of tho ottoa
timoo of ociontiiio and tootmiooi progress, o iooding ooomoio principlo
of which io obooiuto one! rolotivo prioo roduction o! uohinoo.

abooluto om roiotivo prioo roduotiono of noohinoo oro intorrolotod foul

of ocono-io roolirotion o! ooiontifiatoohnicol progrou, pooooooing co-oo
buoo and oonooguonooo but dittoront Induction of ruiiution. Abooluto
prioo auction oontributoo to tho (an dovoiopoout of tho ooohuio potential.
of o opocitio typo of oquiplont, oxprooood in iovor ooot ond prioo o! nonu-
Ioctund oquipnont in proportion to tho oaponoion of tho ooolo of ito pm
tion ond roduotion o! omndituroo. biotin prioo roduction ronocto tho
ooooooic roouit of tronoition to now. noro officiont oochinoo. mooring high-
or proactivity of oouoctiviood iobor.

Tho noohonioo for oohioving tho firot form of prioo docroooo io poriodic ro-
duction of not prion of mufocturod Inchinoo (in gonorol rovioiono o!
prioo iioto. changing mutant-moron whoioooio prion for funda-ntoiiy
now oqnip-ont to pot-moat roduood priooo for «ltd-ted nohinon tho oooond
io rotting lovor (coieulotod por unit of mini ottoct) priooo for nov ognip-
mt intondod to roplooo oguipunt thot hoe boon proaood foruriy.

In o pimd ooono-y, voriouo uthodo on onloyod for tho utilization of tho
principloo of ohooiuto ond roiotivo prioo roduction of oquipuont: poriodic

iouoring of uholoooio priooo of uohinory. inotruonto om! oquipoont in pro-
portion to auction of production oooto and obooioooonooy onionont of in-
orooooo ond "diction: of vholoooio priooo of marine-building product”

35
Iron orncm. use ONLY
FOR (WHCMI. USE ONLY

onployasnt of graduated wholesale prices: periodic general reveluaticns of
fixed capital: allcwncs for obsolescence in deteninaticn of .crtiration
norm of active part of fixed production capital.

Wholesale price lists should not be revised frequently so as not to under-ins
the stability of plan indicators of aanufacturers and users of nechines and
the incentives for reduction of production costs. At the sue tine, price
revisions should not be put off where conditions exist for cost reduction of
nachinss. 0n the basis of study of actual tendencies over a relative long-
tera period of tire (10-15 years). there should be determined nonstive tine
periods for revision of wholesale price lists of ”chine-building products
and possible sites of reduction of wholesale-price level provided by planned
indexes of price changes in fiva~ysar plans. Rates of price reductions of
eachines differ significantly with respect to sectors. they are highest in
radio electronics and instrument asking and relatively low in heavy Iachine
building.2 Therefore for any price lists it is enough to lower prices once
in five years combined with a general revision of wholesale prices. while for
sores types of equip-snt with higher rates of reduction of production costs
and obsolescence. two or three tires nay be required in a five-year period.

Norlaative periods for revision of price lists (coordinated with periods for
changes in nor-ativs-technical domesntaticn) md assign-ants for lowering
prices (plan indexes of prices for sectors and groups of products, long-
tern prices for the lost inortmt types of lechinery and equip-eat) have to
be included not only in the national eccnooic plan but also in the plane of
industries, associations and enterprises. This lakes it possible to carry
out tieely preparations and to search for reserve capacities for reducing
production and raising the technical level and quality of prohcticn.

1n determination of earl-u- and wholesale prices for new equip-nt, special
attention should be paid to the creation of and adherence to noraatiwa coef-
ficients of its relative price reaction edger-ed to equipment being replaced.
It is advisdale to differentiate these coefficients not only according to
types of equip-ant but also according to degree of its names (are highest-
with develop-ant of the technical and econonic potential of new generations
of nadaines. the cooperatively lower-with noderniraticn of already known
nodels of eachines).

For relative price reduction of equip-ent, it is inortant to lake fuller
use of the aschanisn of meatim for the costs of its develop-ant. for
the initial basis of the price for-nation of a new Iachine, were should be
used the noraative cost of the series-production period of a given product
in defraying costs of development (in a valid enunt) at the expense of
centralized funds (now-equiplent develop-ant fund, unified fund of science
and technology). Prequently the reason for relative price increase of new
equip-ant is errors aada in its design, but the main thing is inadequately

worked out designs of new Iadmines. lack of “perinatal plants , their being
overloaded with the output of planned series of prediction. All this leads
to large losses in the nanufacture and use of new equip-tut. Such ”scone-y'

36
ron orncuu, use on!
FDR HPPICIM. "SR GNIN

ot tho otoco o! introduction of now oquipoont holdo hock ooiontiiio-toohniool
proqrooo ond roducoo ito otioctivonooo. Projoctod production ooot ond nox-
iuu- prico poooooo littlo booio undor ouch conditiono.

hbooluto ond rolotivo prico roduction o2 oochinoo ond thoir oboclooconoo Iuot
oloo bo tokon into occount through tho uoo of incrooooo ond roductiono of tho
wholooolo pricoo of tho produoto of tho “chino-building induotry. rofloctino
o chonqo in tho tochniool lovol ond quolity of producto. thoir roproduotion
cooto and oporotion c! tho tioo actor. in ouch coooo, Iorkupo ohould ho o
oourco of odditionol oooncdc incontivo for plonninc ond dooicn crooniootiono.
for tho uoor. it ohould cuorontoo on odditimol olioct ond conooquontly o
prico roduotion for o hichor-quolity md tochnioolly Ion porioot uchino.
for obooloto ooohinoo, prico roductiono ohould bo Iodo. roducinc inoontivoo
for tho nnutocturor in rocord to tho production of obooloto oquipnont lid ot
tho up. tioo oooponootinq (or looooo tro- thoir oporotion by uoor-o. no vo
2mm, tho oyotoo o! otiuulotinq prico incrooooo ond roductiono, which in
cioooly connoctod to tho rooulto of oortiiiootion of product quolit), hoo
boon uood unilotorolly oo for. whorooo for produoto oi tho oochino-huildinc
induotry thot hoVo nooivod tho ototo Sool of Quolity prioo incrooooo and
roductiono oro rothor vidoly uood, (or producto cooinq undor tho oocond coto-
gory pricc roductiono oro uouolly not nodo. 1hio rotordo tho roto o! prioo
roduction ond ro-ovoi iro- production or obooloto nochinoo. ‘i‘ho propoool of
coo-o oconooioto io hordly corroct thot in ouch coooo prico roductiono ohould
ho undo only for producoro whilo rotoininq tho ton-or prioo lovol for auto.

Thin loodo to looooo by uooro o! ohooloto oquipoont and to highor pricoo for
now adiinoo.

Tho uoo of groduotod pricoo for producto o! tho locum-building induotr-y hoo
not bocono vidooprood. oimouch it involvoo o prooroooivo idoo-oto opociiy
ohood of tin- in prioo lioto tho poriodo ond nounto of prico rouctiono (or
opociiic products. rhio por-ito tokinq choolooconoo into occount in o plmd
oonnu and providing (or prico roductiono of uthinoo (not only obocluto but
oloo rolotivo, inouuch on tho initiol hooio (or dotoninotion of uni-n

ond wholooolo pricoo o! lotor oochinoo will turn out to ho lovot) , which
vobilizoo coot-occountinq colloctivoo to ooorch out ond to ooho oll-cut mo

of roocrvo copocitioo for cutting down production cooto ond upcrodinc ito
tochnicol lovol.

notoronco to tho nood for providing otobility o! plon indicotoro Iroquontly
oorvoo no on orquont oqoinot armatod pricoo. But voluo indicotoro I'M
nor-o (including pricoo) ohould rofloct procooooo tokinq ploco in ocono-ic
proctico ond octivoly influonoo thou. Incluoion in tho plon of croduotod
pricoo md torqor-o (or roduction of production ooot ond of wholooolo prion
will otronqthon tho nobilixing oﬂoct of tho plon for production officionoy
ond ociontitio—tochnicol proqrou. Tho vido-ocolo uoo of groduotod prioooo
and plon prico indonoo would roquiro roiling tho lovol of long-ton md m-
nuol pionninq of coot indicotor-o of o plon oo well no tho working out o!

nor-otivo poriodo (or ronowol of production of Inchinory. oquipnont ond
inotrunonto.

37
FOR OFFICIAL use our
Hm IWPICIM. Ilﬂl'. HNL)‘

Periodicelly conducted reveluetione of fined oepitel uke it poeeibie to eet
prioee for eeohinee in ecoordmce vith the ohenqing coete of their reproduoo-
tion. time with the reveiuetion of fined oepitel of l denuery 1960. the
reetoretive velue of induetriel-produotion fixed cepitel deoreeeed covered
to initiei coet by 2 percent end thet of neohinee end equip-Int by 9.7 per-
cont. while with the reveiuetion of inmetrie'i-produotion fired oepitel of

i Jenuery 1912. their reetoretive velue increeeed by 9 percent. including
uchinee end equipeent by 6 percent (et the nu tine the velue of coeputer
equipeent dropped 9 percent end thet of eeeeurinq end reguletinq inetrueente
«i percent). 'i‘hie in due both tothe rite of vholeeele pricee in l967 end
to inedequete eocountino in the reveluetion of eeohine obeoieecence. it ie
evidently edventeqeoue to terry out eyeteeeticelly end in e plenned eenner
the reveluetion of fined oepitel (once in lo yeere) vhile Iekino pore rigid
requireeente in reperd to the veluetion of obeolete equipeent. ihie viii
per-it not only to reduce ell ueed fined production oepitel to e einole velu-
etion. equelieinq thereby coet-eccountinq conditione for enterprieee end
production inetelletione thet heve gone into operetion et different three,
but will eleo eerve ee e eethod for ebeolute price reduction of exietino equip-
eent end for reletive price reduction of new equip-ent.

ther inoreeee in eeortitetion nor-- for renovetion (on the buie of redaction
of the evereoe eervice life of eechinee beceuee of the ecientific-technicel
revolution) , firet of ell et the expenee of reuced deductione for cepitel
repeire. fhie will hinder ertifioiel exteneion of the eervice life of ob»-
lete end technicelly beckverd eedninee end eherply reduce espenee end little-
effective repeire. thus for indietry in 1976. deductione for cepitel repeire
exceeded 12 billion rublee, vhich ie 22 percent lore then the totel ee- of
cpitel inveet-ente in eechine building and eetelvorkinq. At the use tine
it ie neceeeery to expend eignifioently the prediction of new, technically
oore-edvenced md pore econo-io eyeteee of eechinee for coqreheneive re-
pleceeent of obeoiete equip-eat in eodemiution of erietino enterprieee.
thie conetitutee e eejor reeerve cepecity for reieino the efficiency of
collectivieed production.

The rete of ebeolute price reduction of nev equipeent ney be judged by charger
in inderee of vholeeele pricee which reflect direct (directive) chenqee in
price-liet pricee without coneideretion of product eeeornent aid queiity (ee
well ee the chengecver fro. temrery pricee for fmdeuntelly new prodicte
to pereenent onee) .

he oen he eeen fro. the dete in the teble. the price index of Ienufectured
nechinee. inetrucnte ad equip-ht hee dropped on the whole. the evereqe
yeerly rete of thie drop veriee eionificently for different yeere. The fig-
uree ere higheet in periods vhen the price levelh poet eectore of heevy
induetry nee either dropped (1951-1955-o7d percent of everege yeerly pricee)
or et leeet not chenged 09554960 end l961-l973-o3.) percent of yeerly
pricee). lute of ebeolute price reduction for nechinee eherply eluted down
when pricee inoreeeed for fuel, power end netel (l965-i961-c1.) percent of

38
ron omcm use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rotor c! Abooluta Prion Induction or Producto of ”china Ioilding
and hotolvorkinq

4*

 

Poriodo
1950- 9 - 960- m:- lﬂ‘l- 1973-
195: we lg; [E7 121; [211
hvorago yoorly ratoo
o! vholoaalo prioo
dull”. (in poroont):
“x mm .3o’ 00.) §°o3 §‘o9 .002 .Oo‘
ooctoro or hoovy
indictry o9.) -l.o -o.7 90.7 -l.6 -0.l
ooohino building ad
.‘Ix'ofku' .7o3 .3o3 .1o‘ -‘o’ '3o2 02.1

avarogo yoarly priooo) . Naturally, tho ratoo or product prioo roOIotion or
oaohino building haVo ourtod an incluonoo on tho dynuiou o! croondibiroo

and priooo in othor oaotoro o! indnatry (both diroctly ord indiroctlyo-oo tho
rooult o! rovoluation of tho valuo of find capital).

Molyoio of changoo in tho indonoo of wholaaalo priooo or antorprioao o! ooao
aootoro oi aaohino building ahovo that ratoo or ahoolnto prioo roduotion oro
hiqhoot in ooQaratiVoly young. rapidly dovolopinq oaotoro (Iachino building.
radio olactronioa) and lovoot in a author or ooctora with aotal-intouoivo pro-
ducts. rho attaot o! prioo riooo of producto o! ru-ntorial oootoro. oopo-
oially rollod farroua Iotolo. io loot porooptihlo in thou.

hony oaohinoo vhcoa priooo oro roduood aro ooon takan out of prediction. But
it door not iollov fro- thia thot in tho givon inotmoo prioo romotiono of
Ioohinoo do not provido roal honofita to tho ooar. Ihon rotting priooo for
now owipaont, thoir lovoi ir dotaroinod by marina with alroody rodnood
priooo of prodnoto that an hoinq roploood or an prodnoto o! a portioulor
par-trio ooriao. uoroovar, in tho torntion of tho nor-otivo production
ooot of Minor, prioo roduotiono o! ooqcnont par-to and units oro tokon
into occomt. Oonooqoontly. prioo roductimo or prohcto or tho aochino-
huilding inmotry axoroooad in tho vholooala prioo indar aro a roal oocno-ic
rooult or ooiantitio-toohnical progrooo.

ht tho our tin, vholooalo prioo indoauo cannot rotlaot tho doqroo o! rol-
ativo prioo rodnction of oquipoont launch on ohamoo in product oaoort-ont
and quality oro not takon into acoount in thoir (oration (account. hovavor.
io takon o! tho (act that priooo ohmqo horo in ouct oorroopondonoo to
ohongoo intho uoo alraot or product». ‘i'ha dogroo o! rolativa prioo roducticn
or aoohinao out ho loo-«rad by ooIporing vholaoalo prioo: via: tho uppor prioo
linit otmprodnoto. Iutinthio oonnootion it ohculdhokoptinnindthat
in oalouloting of tho altootivonooo of now aquipuont. a: tho ono had. tho
oppor prioo limit, tho sari-n prioo aid oo-oti-o tho vholooolo prioo
Iroquantly ara raioad arooooivoly. Caloulotion or tho otract in dono in

39
m omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 OIILY

confouity with the potentielitiee of the new eechine, which cen be fer fro-
fully reeliud in the proceee of ite operetion. horeover, ceeee ere to be
found of inefficient uee of new end poweer equipnent. Coneequently there
in occulonelly cbeerved growth of production coet end price of producte
eenufectured with new equip-ent. which etteete to the reletive price increeee
of the letter. on the other hend, the nethode uee in eweluetinq the effec-
tiveneee of new eguipeent frequently reeult in ite lowering, which nerrowe
the econolic uee iielte of neohinee. 1‘hie occure firet of ell when the uee
of the eechinee ie eleed et econoey of living lebor. inrowenent of ite uee.
ee well ee et coneervetion of neturel reeourcee. reduced pollution of the
onvlrcneent (eince eocielly neceeeery expendimree for the reproduction of
lebor end neturel reeourcee ere not fully reflected in production coet.

end their coet-ecccmting eveluetion ie reduced erceeeively in coeperieon
to the price of the nechinee).

ln evnlueting the effectiveneee of new equip-eat. there ehould be teken into
eccount fectore influencing not only production coet (end velue) of producte
produced with ite power (reduction of epecific clue of uortiretion, econ-
ooiee in wegee. expenditures on rew end other neteriele. fuel. power. end eo
forth) but eleo uee veluee the production of quelity producte or new uee
veluee, which could not heve been oenufectured with eerlier nechinee. con-
eequently. celculetion of the effectiveneee of new ledtinee end the degree of
their reletive price reduction not be coneidered ee eleeente forning pro-
duction expendituree end chenge of uee velue end hiqu product quelity.

leproveeent of nethoch of deter-ineticn degree of reletive price reduction of
new equipeent not proceed in the directicnof fuller eetileticn of the eociel,
ocologicel end erternel econonic effecte. The eociel effect of new mill-Int
ie expreeeed in ieproved conditione of lebor rte-inc fro. its on. shie
contributee to better utiliretion end reproduction of empower. reason in-
teneity of lebor end the hereful effecte of noiee, decreeeee Iorbidity end
nekee lebor leee tiring end lore creetive. 'l‘he ecologicel effect of new
equipoent end technology finde expreeeion in the retionel uee of neturel re-
oourcee (reduction of loeeee in extrection of neturel row uteriele, greeter
intogretion of ite proceeeing. utiliretion of production weetee) end in the
reduction of environuntel pollution (introduction of weete-free technology,
purificetion of effluent weter ad weete geeee. end eo forth). ﬁle externel
ecmooic effect liee in the poeeibility of obteininc edditionel incoee fro-
the export of new eguipeent eurpeeelng the beet world nodele, eele of licen-
eee end eleo eevinge fro. the replecenent of inorted Inchinee with doleetic
thet ere not inferior in quelity end ere cheeper.

The eociel. ecologicel md externel eccnc-ic effect of new equip-ent ie in-
dieeolubly connected to the economic effect end cen be coneidered ee e veri-
ety of it end en en indirect eccnc-ic effect (in dietincticn to direct. which
is i—edietely deter-med by e coeperieon of expendituree of proaction of e
nechlne with the eevinge obteined in the ephere of ite uee). for exemle,
improve-lent of working conditione eerwee ee one of the nethode of increeeing
lte productivity; reaction of loeeee of nimrel nteriele in the couree of
their extrection reletively reduce the need for funde for proepecting end
working of new linerel depoeite.

to
m OFFICIAL [58 am
V01! OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

The theoreticel beeee end nethode of deter-inetion of ell foree of indirect
effect heve been ineufficiently worked out in the ecientific plen. it ie
often ignored in preoticel technicel-econoeic oelculetione. effectiveneu
end degree of reletive price reduction ere thereby exoeeeively reduced inee-

Iuch ee qenerelly booeted eo‘iel. ecologicel end extemel econclio require-
nente ere node on it.

at the eeee tine it would be incorrect to juetify the low efficiency of eone
new wechinee end their coeperetive higher coet in term of ieproved work con-
ditione. The decieione of the 35th crso Congreee eet ee en objective with
reepect to the creetion of new deeione for nechinee. inetruente md eppere-
tue lower coet per unit of cepecity (productivity). The cone objective ep-
plied to ecriculturel equipeent wee ewheeiud et the July (me) Plenun of
the cc even. he the reeult of introduction of new equipeent. production
coete end product pricee ehould be reduced rether then inoreeeed. while the
eociel end ecologicel reeulte of use of the nechinee ehould be ieproved.
merefore, when increeeinq lebor outleye for the ieprovenent of eociel. eco-
logicel end other perenetere of Inchinee, it ie neceeeery to cerefully veli-
dete end requlete theee cutleye. the growth of the direct econowic effect
fro- the uee of new equipeent out be eufficiently lerge to coepeneete fully
for the growing outleye on ieprove-ent of the eociel end ecologicel reeulte

of uee of wechinee end et the use tine to provide an edditicnel econo-y for
u."0

A conducted enelyeie ehowed thet in the Ninth five-her Plen end et the
beginning of the tenth, retee of ebeolute end reletive price decree-e of
nechinee elowed down for e nuber of reeeonen dieccntinuence of frequent
price revieione while prescribed none of profitebility were being exceeded.
higher pricee for rolled ferroue neteleg reveluetion of fined cepitel end

reieing of eeortiretion none; growth of pricee for ieported nechinee end
equip-ht. But the nein reeecn in our view ie pertiel uee of the late of

cyclicel develop-eat end equip-ent end the reletive reduction of the
ecientific-technicel etockpile.

‘aechnicel progreee ie uneven. One hey obeerve in thie unevenneee e oertein
pettern of periodicity in the trmeition to e quelitetively new level of
equip-ht md to e new ecientific-technicel cycle. Reference in node not

to eteqee of the life qcle throuw which eech new Iodel of e nechine peeeee
end not to the periodic repleceeent of wechine nodele within the free-work
of e pertiwler principle but to the treneiticn to e new ecientific-technicel
direction or to e new generetion of nechinee. for exuple. the developnent
of electronic coeputere opened up eeeentielly new poeeibilitiee for increee-
inc the efficiency of control of out coqlex technologicel end econowic pro-
ceeeee end eetebliehed the belie for e new ecientificotechnicel direction.
Bech eubeequent generetion of electronic coeputere ie dietinquiehed by mch
qreeter epoed of informetion proceeeinq. crowing divereity of Iodele end
fields of their use. New e new ecientific-technicel direction in being de-
velopedo-robot-equipeent, which in ite turn in cherecterired by e eucceeeiae
of goneretione of robote.

'41
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR CWFHIIM. "EH-I "NLY

in the traneition to a new ecientific-technical cycle, ite firet phaee ie the
longeet and aoat cowlex. Thie period requiree a fundamental develop-ent of
the new technical idea, carrying out of applied ecientific-reeearch. deeign
and experimtal work, development and teeting of erperinental eodele. large
inveetaente into the reaodeling of exieting plante or the conetruotion of new
onee for eeriee production of fundaeentally new equipeent and for ite adop-
tion in different epheree of uee, training or retraining of cadree. and no on.
thin ie followed by the phaee of rapid growth of production of the fundanen-
tally new equipaent and the rapid growth of the effect ate-ting free it.
technical para-etere of nachinee are ieproved. production coet and wholeeale
pricee of then drop rapidly, ”vending thereby the ephere of effective appli-
cation of the new equip-ant. Then the third phaee hegine-oa relatively etehle
developnent of the technical idea. certain eodele are replaced by othera
that are better deeiwed and acre diveree but which no longer yield a eignif-
icant growth of effect. The new technical idea and ite aarketad eyetee of
eachinee epread widely end are eetahliehed on a fir- baeie in nany epheree

of uee. But the ratee of aheolute and relative price reduction of the equip-
aent elow down. In the fourth phaee of the cycle, the potential of the given
technical idea hecoeee practically exhaueted and ite further develop-lent ie
cmnected with large outlaye, producing no perceptible effect and eoeetieee
not juetifying iteelf in the ephere of uee. the new aodele of the eachine
are occaeionally relatively aore emneive. 'i‘he Ito-ent arrivee for the trenc-
ition to a new ecientific-tedmical cycle. The longer thie treneition ie de-
layed, the greater are the loeeee incumd by eociety.

The length of the eoientific-technical cycle on the whole and in ite individ-
ual phaeee variee in different eectore, for emle in electronice and in
lining technology. But at the one tile the aoveeent of the cycle in eadt
eector ehould not be exanined in ieolation. New proaieing ecientific-
technical directione lead to revolutiona in the technical base for a group
of technical related but at time extreaely renote eectore.

At the preeent tine. a nueber of induetriee are in the lat phaee of the
technical cycle, when expenditure on the iqaroveoent of deeigne of eachinee
and their aoderniration produce little additional effect. la ie to he
noted in power uchine building and open-hearth production. in agricultural
Iechine building‘ and in other eectore. m econouic literature mine
the urgent need for tieely tranaition to a principally new level of equip-
Ient and technology ae a Ioet inortent factor for increuing the effective-
neee of ecientlfic-technicel progreee.

The transition to new generatione of Inchinee ie often hindered by the de-
fecta of the utilired operational nechaniee. ln ecience md technology plan-
ning little coneideration in given to the cyclicity of technical develop-eat
and duly cancentration of empower and reeourae ie not provided for the
preparation and coapreheneiwe balanced trmeition to the proactiaz and uee
of new generatione of aachinee. he a reeult, euch a tranaition frequently
etrvetchee over any yeere md doee not produce the neceeeary effect. In

b2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SR ONLY

otandardirotion. prico Iornation, oconooic otiuulation and in otato cortiti-
cation of product quality, o outlioiontly dilforontiatod approach io not pro-
vidod to tho {undountolly now oquipunt and tochnology and to produoto that

oro only Ioditicationo of long producod onoo thot havo oxhouotod thoir poton-
tial in gonorotiono o! Iachinoo.

0n tho booio of tho low of tho ociontificctochniool qclo, it io noooooory to
crooto fovorablo ocononio conditiono for tho cooprohonoiwo tranoition to quo-
litotivoly now oquipoont. producing o oignificant rioo in labor productivity
and officioncy of production. and aloo accoloration of tho ratoo o! obooluto
and rolativo prioo roduotion of Iothinoo.

Induction o! tho fundonontol ociontitio and tochnicol otockpilo io on inor-
tmt roooon for o oortoin olowing down of tho rotoo of obooluto and rolotivo
prioo roductim o! oochimo and log in tho rooliootion of tho roquirooonto of
tho ociontitic-tochnicol cyclo. No know that o cortoin proportionolity nuot
bo naintainod in tho rotoo of dovolop-ont of ocionco, tochnolooy ond produc-
tion: baoic ociontific roooorch Iuot otay ohood of oppliod roooarch and toch-
nical dowolopoont. which in ito turn croatoo o otodtpilo for tho outrunning of

production of tho now oquipnont oowoxod to tho rato of dovolopoont of pro-
duction an o wholo.’

Stotioticol dota, howovor. ottoot to tho tact thot thooo proportion aro not
alwayo odholod to. ‘l'ho ratoo of growth of oxpondituroo at ocionco and tho
oiro o: ooiontitic poroonnol droppod porcoptibly in tho Ninth riwo-Yoar Plon
and oopociolly at tho hoginning o! tho Mth. ‘i'horo io occurring o rolotivo
roduction in tho nuwor o! ociontitic poroonnol in inotitutiono of tho USSR
hoodo-y of Scioncoo and tho ocadonioo o! ocioncoo at tho union ropublico
ongogod primily in booic nooarch. In 1960 tho ohoro of ociontitic worhoro
of thooo inotitutiono in tho totol nun)“ of ociontitic poroonnol ceriood
12.1 porcont; in 1965. tollowing tho tumour of o nuobor o! gonoral tochnical
inotitutoo to induotry, it woo roduood to 7.8 poroont ond in 1967 to 7.1 por-
oont. Such a turnovor. of coucoo, otrongthonod tho tio of ociontific roooorch
with practico. But brunch Iiniotrioo to which gonoral todlnicol inotitutoo
on now otbordinetod oo o rulo put in tho torotront curront prohlou. puohing
into tho bockground thoonoticol roooorch that crootoo o ociontitic-toehnicol
otochpilo for tho tronoition to booically now oquipoont ond tochnology.

ln ocionoo planning, it io noooooary to devote Ion ottontion to on odvmcing
dowolopnont o! booic roooorch, providing it with codroo, notoriol nomrooo
ond guarantood oourcoo of financing. In tho conworoion of uiniotrioo to tho
now oyotol of plonning, tinoncing ond ocmonic oti-Ilotion of work on now
oquip-ont, up to 20 porcont of tho (undo of tho unitod fund {or tho dovolop-
Iont o! ocionco ond tochnology aro ollocotod (or conmcting baoic. thoontic
and roooorch ociontific work, for dooign, plonning-and-dooign and toohnolog-
ical dowolop-ont for tho motion in tho ooctor o! o ociontific-tochnicol
otockpilo. But critorio on not olwoyo dotorlinod for tho aooign-nt of
roooorch to booic or oxplorotorys problou of intorbronch dioractor (roguontly
toll out o! oight. ‘l'horoforo it io nocoooary to rolato cloooly booic roooorch

#3
POI! orrtcm use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and develop-ant to the creation of a stockpile for the transition to new
scientific-technical directions of technical develop-ant end to new genera-
tions of aeohines. It would be advantageous in our View to expand within

the franwork of the 0883 Acadeay of Sciences basic general technical research
or an isvterbranch character eiaad at the develop-ant of new sources of energy
and basically new saterlels and technological scheass and eyeteos of eaduines.

It should be answered that the technical ideas and technological principles
eaployed in ms production have largely been aadtsusted. There is an increas-
ingly acute need for the wide-scale develop-ant of basically new and reach
nore affective equip-ant and technology. this would be iqoesible to achieve
without concentration of resources on basic research and its advancing devel-
opaent without a clearcut working aechmisa of concretisation of progressive
technical ideas in the sphere of applied science and planningoand-dssign ds-

velopnent md their aatarielisation in the trees output and use of new equip-
cent.

Reduction of the technical stockpile and the weakness of “bridges“ which lead
fro- applied scientific research to the design of new equip-ant prepared for
inclusion in mass production are borne out by the following data. Pro- l9Sl-
1955 to 1961-1965. the nuaber of developed aodsls of new types of Iachines.
equip-ant. apparatus and inetruaante grew $.3-fold (including new aodsls of
inutrunente, autonation equip-ant and counter equip-ento-l7-fold) . while in
the last ll years it decreased l8 percent (and instrunnts. auto-etion and
coawter equipnento-zo percent). It is true that the nusber of new types of
industrial products developed by production and of obsolete designs of II-
chlnes. equip-mt. apparatus, inetrunents and products taken out of produc-
tion is steadily growing. which attests to the renewal of assortlsnt aid the
technical perfecting of proﬂcticn.

Evidently, the reduction in the nuﬂer of developed nodels of new equip-ant
has been affected by the shrinkage of the fundamental scientific-technical
stockpile and the reduction of attention on cleation of scientific md
planning-and-dasign develop-ants suitable for the introdlction of nodsls of
new aechines and instrunents and the inadequacy of the erperiaantel base. It
should also be reaedaered that enterprises and production associations are
little interested in the develop-ant of principally new equip-at as this is
connected with considerable risk and with tesporery deterioration of the
acme-1c indicators of work. the lost isportant planning and accounting
indicators of the develop-ant of tadonology should be in our view the nueber
of created nodsls of new equip-ant (with accumt being taken of their econ-
caic effectiveness) .. the nueber or aodels of new equip-ant actually easin-
ilated by production and the sun total of the additional effect obtained fro-
thie. we need to look for aggregated indicators characterising the transi-
tion to new generations and systole of aachines.

The course taken by the party to raise efficiency of production and speed up
technical progress raises probless of develop-ant and isple-entation of a
oosplar of aaasures on the basis of an organic union of the advantagee of the

his
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()NI.Y

eecnouy 02 developed eocialiee md the achieve-nu o: the eoientifie and

technicel revolution. A central place ehould be occupied along tnaee nea-
euree by concentration of Ianpover md reaourcee on the creation of a
eeiantitic-technioal etockpile. halting it poeeibla to enitt to a qualita-
tively nev level of equip-mt and technology, planned uee of the lave o!
cyclical developeent o! ecience and technology. the creation of an open-
tianal eaahaniee ayetelaticelly etilulatinq develop-exit and the introduc-

tion or newnre altectiVe equip-mt and abeolute and relative price reduc-
tion or Minn.

roman-as
l. x. Nara: and r. Bnqele. ”adenineniye" (worn), Vol 31, p 351.

2. In developed cwiteliet oountriee over the mm of lo yeare «candi-
turee an the productim of eten turbinee md ehipe decreeeed on the
average 37 percent. actor «Melee-53 percent. treetorenss percent.
relayeo-7o percent. mute of electronic dengue-«'90 percent. wring
1963-1976. average pricee of digital integreted circuite in the united
Stetee demand to l/268th o! the initial level and linear to 1/de1
(eee Yea. Min, Wmﬁno-tekhnidsaekaya revolyuteiya i eirdvyye teeny“
[The Scientific-reclaim Revolution ad World Priceel. Indetel'etvo
'mrhduarcxhyye otnoehaniya". 1977. pp 43-”).

3. See'ﬂuoaxoye khoryawetvo 8883 ea 60 let" (so Yaera or the 088R Nationel

Beam-y]. Jubilee etatiatical yearbook. Iedatel°etvo “Statietika'.
l9”. pp ‘30. 651.

4. At the eue tine. caaea are not excluded where, computed per unit of nea-
m1 effect, nav eachinee turn out to he tore expeneive than earlier pro-
duced onee. But thie ie not taken into account in the taking of index“.

5. See V.G. snuynqm, “sumo-lanai” puzzle-y realisataii nauchno-
tekhnicheekikh rurabotok' [Boone-i4: Problem of meliration of Scientific-
Technical Develop-ate]. Irdeul°etvo 'Nanka", l976, pp 37-38.

6. See MP. Kolotuahkina. “reenoobraxovaniya i teknnicheekiy progreee v «1'-
ekoknoxyayetvenno- naehinoetroyenii' [Price toning ad Technical Pro-

green in Agricultural Machine Building). Imul'atvo 'naahinoetmyeniye',
1976, pp 30-42.

7. See Inn. “My, 'demo-tekhnidleekiy progreeei ekono-ike rervitogo
eoteieliua' [scientific-redunical Pmme nd the EM“ of Devel-
oped Socialieu). redatel'etvo 'l‘anka', 1974. p so.

warm: Irdatel'etvo 'Prevda', 'Voproey ekooo-iki', l9”

7697
cso. 1021 m
“5

Fox omcm. use omx