APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00880R000100010008-1

3
( mun 1/79 )
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00860R000100010008-1

FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY

39M 15/8201
4 January 1979

TRANSIATIONS ou EASTERN EUROPE
Economc AND INDUSTRIAL Armns
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT PIBLICA'ﬂONS RESEARCH SEIVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE “(LY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010008-1
NOTE

JPBS publications contain infornation pri-arily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those frnn English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and uterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as {Text}
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar naaes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. Times within itens ~are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Govern-ent.

COMIC" M98 AND ”NATIONS covenants WRSHI? OP
HERIALS ”P301300. HEREIN REQUIRE THAT 0185381115710“
0? nus PUBLICATION IE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
W Wm, _
I. .«n

munons on m EUROPE - room» AND Imus'rwu.
mnns. (P000 1/79)

     
   
   
  

I. Mlphu‘e Accoulee No.
1 . .

         

I. Peeler-lee Queen-«lee up.

  

Pie ' eel/Vat "etc No.

    
     
 
   
       

Jotnt Pabltcettoue Reeeerch Service
1000 North Glebe Iced
Arlington. Virginie 22201

 
   

It? elle tPeded
cm»: pen

‘3. “uh-ten" ﬂeece

   

Y ‘

The eertel report contetne erttclee on econ-1c. theory, emulation, plenum;
end «easement; lejor esteenente on end develop-mt of trede vtthtu cam end

ontetde the Bloc; ertlclee on e11 eepecte of the utertele, eervtcee. nechtne.
electrontce, end precieton eqoipnent tnduetrtee; end concepte end ettetueente
in egrtculture, foreetry, end the food tnduetry.

     
   
   
         

     
       
   
       
  

.y wee-u e.

_ Internetionel Affetre Recount“
__ Albente , technologtcel
__ Danette

.L. Cuchoelovekte

"L Italian/0.0.5.“! Te.

31.. comm "nu/amp so. 13!

«noun, , ‘ ‘ ‘
omcm on». mm
.- .. 7 ; '

 
 
 

united thinker of Copter Aveileble From .‘PRS.

I”. O”) . ween-roe MO"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB L/B

4 Janus:

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
Economc AND INDUSTRIAL Asmas
(P000 1/79)

CONTENTS
CZECBOSLOVAKIA

Fuel, Energy Huntsman: Outlook Discussed
(Jan Neumnn; TECIINICKA PRACE, Aug 78) . . . . . . . . . . _. .

YUGOSLAVIA

Disadvantages Noted in Boone-1c Decentralization Policy
(Viktor Meier; WWII!!! Alumna, 13 Rev 78)..

-8- [III-33’6‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECIIOSLOVAKIA

FUEL. ENERGY MANAGEMENT OUTLOOK DISCUSSED
Bratislava rrcnmcn MOB in Czech Aug 78 pp 6-10

[Article by Engr Jan Neunann, CSSR deputy minister of technical and capital
developoent]

[Text] Prospective Develop-eat of Prinary Bnergy Oonsmption

The continued dynasic developnent of the Czechoslovak econony and the steady
rise of the uterial and cultural needs of the socialist society is pre-
dicated on a continued increase of prinsry energy coneusption. In 1970.
CSSR consusption reached the level of 81.2 tap (tons of specific fuel)
nnounti'ng to a specific anmal consumption of 5.7 tsp per inhabitant.
Currently the specific annual consusption of primary energy has already
reached the level of 6.5 tsp per inhabitant and is expected to exceed 7 tap

per inhabitant a year in 1980 or an overall comption of approxinately
110 million tap a year.

The preparation of the long-tern forecasts for the future development of the
econosy is'based on the asmption that. in difference to the growth rate of
the national product and industrial production, the consuption growth rate
of prisary energy will decrease for two fundanental reasons:

a) The socialist integration of cm countries will result in a division of
work and a concentration of energy-intensive sanufactures in large capacity
units erected in close vicinity of sources of energy.

b) Scientific and technical progress will lead to the introduction of new

production technologies and products which will use energy sore efficiently
and decrease energy consumption per production unit.

ﬂeeting these objectives. which. of course, will be predicated on structural
changes prinrily in industry, transportation and the construction industry.
will take it possible to nintain the dynasic growth of the national product
while at the sale tine the anmal rate of increase in the comption of
primary energy will decrease fro. the current 3.5 percent to 2.3 percent in
the last decade of the 20th century (see diagram, curve c.) Accordingly.
the overall consunption of prinary energy in 1990 (see diagram, curve a)

1
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

would reach the level of 143 nillion tnp per year and 180 nillion nap per
year in 2000. In the year 2000 noraal consumption would be about 11 tap per
inhabitant per year which is approximately the level of current specific
consuaption in the United States. satisfying this consuption will be one
of the lost exacting tasks of the continued develop-ant of the Czechoslovak
econoly; its conprehensive i-ple-entation can be achieved only by inter-
national cooperation and on the basis of division of work aaong all can
countries. At the sane tine each country has to develop its own energy
resources to the fullest possible extent.

The developeent of the lining. processing and transportation of broun and
bituainous coal and the construction of hydroelectric power plants will have
to be achieved prinsrily by our on efforts. The production. transportation
and refining of crude oil and natural gas can be accoaplished only in
coOperation with the Soviet Union which is and will renain Czechoslovakia's
indispensable partner in securing the inport of these raw eateriala. Nuclear
power will be developed by the broad cooperation of all can countries in
which the Soviet Union will again be playing the leading role. The changing
proportions of sources of priaary energy in percentages are tabulated (in
actual figures until 1970, in projections from 1980 onward.)

 

”th no me no use also

 

 

”was" an as 0.1 «a us
as us
339.53. in m an ass as
g nun-spun u as to us no
sums
”ea-ten — - u m M
was .
”Wu-sow so u u u as
Key: 1. Energy source 6. Gaseous fuels
(percent) 5. Nuclear power
2. Solid fuels 6. hydroelectric power
3. Liquid fuels + total inports

Developent of Brown Coal Hining

Brown coal (including lignite) currently plays a key role as the 0858 primary
energy resource. In 1977, lining of brown coal reached the level of N
nillion tons which represents roughly ’00 percent of all energy resources;

in 1980. close to 100 Iillion tons will be nined and in 1990 the level of
nining should reach no Iillion tons. In view of the sire of its deposits,

no further increase in brown coal mining can be expected. After the year
2000. aining of brown coal will gradually decrease with the gradual depletion
of deposits.

2

was OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Host coal is being eined in the North hohenie brown coal basin and its pro-
portion will increase further. Pot this reason. vast investeents are being
channeled into this basin for the construction of giant surface nines and
related construction projects, especially in transportation. water econosy
and coeprehensive housing. The technological units 10-: with 2.500 cubic
netere per hour and rc-z with 5,000 cubic eaters per hour of earth digging
capacity. equipped with wheel excavators free the Unicov Engineering Works.
overburden duaping eechinee from the Vithovice Tron Uorks and belt con-
veyors fro- Treneporta Chrudin were developed and are being delivered for

the renovel of overburden end the Iaiuing of coal. The bucket-wheel excavator
ex 5000 with a capacity of 5,000 cubic setere per hour. designed for
stripping overburden of high excavation resistance and the technological

unit “IO-3 with a 10,000 cubic eater per hour capacity equipped with the

wheel excavator X 10,000 end an overburden dunping sechine are under develop—
sent. All these sschinee are being develOped by the Vithovice Iron and
Engineering works. The first technological unit 1'0-3 is expected to go into
experiaental operation in 1979 equipped with an imported belt conveyor of
2,200 an width. The production oi the excavator ex 5000 was started this
year end the first excavator of this type is expected to go into operation in
1981. The atteiuent of the planned value of wining is predicated on the
tinely delivery and reliable operation of these unite.

In view of the fact that the mining of brown coal in the north 30th coal
basin will gradually reech greater depths and will involve the stripping of
increasing quantities of overburden. the output of the technological unite
will also have to be increased and an even larger unit. the 11:4 with a
capacity of 20,000 cubic neters per hour, will have to be developed.
Scientific end technical cooperation with enterprises in the one. the Polish
People's Republic and the m see-s indicated in the production of these
units. The First Hey Rubber works at Puchov will have to introduce the

production of eteel-wire-reinforcsd rubber belting up to a width of 3,000 -.

The need to resolve exacting cosplea tasks in the develop-ant of technology.
the greet capital investnents needed for coal lining and related projects
and the increasing power requiruents in the lining of brown coal (free 12
um per ton in 1970 to 18 m per ton in 1990) will at the sane tine raise
production apenditures. Therefore, in the future brown coal will no lower
represent an easily available and cheap source of energy and will have to be
used with greatest econoay. Ivan in the year 2000, brown coal will still
constitute an important coeponent of the Czechoslovak energy base. but it
will be necessary to litigate the deleterious enviromentel effect of
simian (especially of fly “II and sulfur dioxide) free its conbustion.
This will be accosplished by concentrating the coebustion of brown coal

in large-scale power plants and choral stations equipped with high-efficiency
collectors of fly ash and at least partial scrubbing of sulfur dioxide.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 MY

*
0/,
m, l
/
/ m
r‘ ’
A "
1'41. '
C
O

”MNDU“

- W m ee en
l'ﬁuim ml": yﬁﬁ
and I: Madman»

    
   
  

5

  

_‘”’

ou-ouo~§¢8

—. (We,

 
  
  

en
-
Cﬁbh..\..8=§

  

a) CSSR conauption of primary energy reaourcee (in nillion up per year),

h) Oonmption of primary energy reaourcee per inhabitant and year (up
per inhabitant and year).

c) Average annual increase in the comption of primary energy (in percent).
Develop-cut of the Ilium of Bituinoue Coal

In 1977, the nining of hituminoue coal in the cssn reachd the level of 28
nillion tone and its proportion in the overall consumption oi primary energy
is epproxinately 25 percent. We are Dining bin-inane coel from increasingly
greater depthe end under increeeingly more difficult geological conditione.
The mining of himinoue coal will require increaeing expendituree of power
and eepecially of capital inveetaente which neana that ite out will increaee.
lituninoue coal ia primarily uaed for the production of coke for induetry

end for export. while aining output in 1980 end in the long run will rain
at the approximately eene level ee now. coneiderahle capital meene will

have to he inveeted into himinoue coal ninim eepecially in the Oetrava-
Karvine coal haein which euppliec nore than 85 percent of all the Czechoelovah
hituminoue coal nined. In the tint place. the ninee will have to get new
equip-eat eepecially for niniu narrow and eeddle aeean of coal. The primary
eupplier of coahinee and plows for narrow eeane and advancing eupporte will
he the national enterpriee Oetroj et Opava which will have to he coneiderehly

6
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enlarged. Conbines for the'nlning of thick scans will be imported from the
Polish People's Republlc and the USSR. advancing supports will again have to
be supplied by the national enterprise Ostroj. The necessary hydraulic
equip-ant including punps will have to be supplied by the national enter-
prise Signs llranice in greater voluae.

New nines for the nining of coal Eros depths between 1,000 and 1.500 netsrs
will be established south of Ostrava. 'ro naater the technology of deep
drilling. cross tunneling and coal nining proper will require such develop-
ment work. the purchase of licenses and docuaentation for the production of
machinery. The national enterprise CK!) Slany will have to naster the pro-
duction of new fully autonated heavy nachines equipped with thyristor con-
trols, nachinea for driving vertical and horizontal galleries will be
supplied by the national enterprises Sancho stavby Prievidza and Oatroj
Opava. The Federal Ministry of Fuel and Power will establish two new enter-
prises for the production of coal-nining aachinery at Prihran and at Senov
near havirov and the Oatroj enterprise in Frydlant will be enlarged. The
exacting production of pneumatic equipnent for these deep nines will have to
cone fron the national enterprise MA Hilevsko. The ease technology will
also be used in establishing the new nines for bituninoua coal in the Slany
district because here also coal scans are located at a depth exceeding 1.000
neters.

Currently, bituminous coal imports fron the Soviet Union and Poland cover
about 5 percent of the overall CSSR priaary energy consumption. But this
coal constitutes an iaportant source of supply for industry and power plants,
especially in East Slovakia and north Horevia hreja. Iaporte of coal will
continue also in the future, but they cannot be expected to increase be-
cause coal will be in short supply in prospective balances of European

cm countries including the mropean part of the USSR.

Developnsnt of Crude-Oil Production and Iaport

Crudeooil production in the 055]! is negligible and is concentrated in South
Moravia and East Slovakia. Geological exploration indicates that crude oil
say be present at great depths in the area of the Carpathians, but the pre.b
med deposits can have no najor effect on the Czechoslovak energy balance.

lnports fro. the Soviet Union. carried by the Drusba pipeline, constitute
the key source of crude oil for Czechoslovak conunption and that of other
European cm countries. Crude oil and crude-oil products inported free

the Soviet Union represent approxinately a quarter of the overall ccneuaption
of CSSR priaary energy. Considering the crude-oil-production situation of
the Soviet Union. no further substantial increase of iaporta to the CSSR

can be expected. Certain crude-oil iaports to the C881! will be transported
by the Adria pipeline currently under construction which will connect the
oil port on the Adriatic coast with refineries in Yugoslavia. the mngarian
People‘s Republic and the CSSR. This pipeline will carry oil purchased iron

5
FOR OPPICIM. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Hiddle East. Therefore. the possibility of importing this crude to the
0889. is lisited by the availability of hard currency and the expected further

rise in price which since 1972 has risen elnost tenfold and has currently
.reached the level of $100 per ton.

In view of these facts, great econony nust govern the consusption of crude
oil and it should be refined pri-arily to gasoline and lubricants for use
by the expanding sotorized transport. to asphalts end pareffins and to raw
seterials for the production of monia. nethanol. plastics, synthetic
fibers. rubber and other organic chenicals. ﬂeeting-oil supplies will be
lisited end will be sede available only for technological purposes end
co-unal housing which for econonic reasons cannot burn coal.

Develop-eat of Natural Gas Production and Imports

The current 0833 production of natural gas is about 1 billion cubic esters
per year or approziaately 1 percent of the overall conmption of primary

energy. The production of natural gas is concentrated in the sale areas as
the production of crude oil. The outlook for expanding the cssa production

of natural gas is likewise unprosisim and should by 1990 reach the voluse
of 2 billion cubic setere per year. Therefore. considering 0388 gas con-

suaption. here also iaports free the Soviet Union are crucial end ssount
currently to about 6 percent of overall 088R consumption of pri-ary energy.
Natural gas is being iaported to the CSSR by the Bratrstvi pipeline built for
European cm countries, further by the transit pipeline traversing the
territory of Czechoslovakia to sons Best European countries.

The new Orenburg pipeline is currently under construction by joint efforts
of all cm countries and the construction of a pipeline which will supply
natural gas fron iran across the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia to urope
is in preparation. Therefore. it can be seemed that the isport of natural
gas to the 0851! will continue to increase and natural gas can be expected

to supply in excess of 10 percent of the Czechoslovak consuaption of priasry
energy resources.

but economy will also have to be exercised in the consumption of natural
gas. ﬂemrel gas is also an iaportsnt chemical raw neteriel for the pro-
duction of monia. sethylelcohol. and constitutes the raw naterial for
acetylene-based chaistry. It will be used as fuel in technological pro-
cesses where it is indispensable because of its great purity and in conunal
housing, especially in large cities.

hydroelectric Power Developsent

The energy generated by hydroelectric. power plants built on the rivers
Vltavs, Labs. Grove and Vah with an overall output of about 2000 In! repre-
sents less than 2 percent of the overall Czechoslovak consunption of pri-
nary energy. The hydroelectric potential of Czechoslovak rivers is being
exploited by about 30 percent. Therefore. further hydroelectric power plants

6
M OFFICIAL 082 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can be built, primarily on the Danube. Jointly with llungary and later also
with Austria. and gradually also the Vltava and Vnh cascades will be completed.
But even so the proportion of hydroelectric power in the overall consumption
of CSSR primary energy resources will be low (1.5 to 2 percent). However.

this power is still very important because it helps meet peak power demand

in the Czechoslovak electrification system.

Crucial for the Czechoslovak power industry. however, is the construction of
.pumped storage power plants which. while not included in the balance of pri-
nary energy resources because they use nore power during night-time pump-
ing than they produce. supply during peak load periods the lion's share of
the needed increase in output by the generating system. Their role will
become increasingly more isportant in the future since no peak-power
facilities with combustion turbines are expected to be built because of a
shortage of gaseous and liquid fuels.

Czechoslovakia has on its entire territory very favorable conditions for
the establisIIent of pumped-storage power plants; several localities were
selected in the CSR and the SSR suitable for the construction of facilities
with considerable peak-power output (up to 30,000 NH). The national
enterprise CKD Blansko is producing reversible aggregates for pumped-
storage power plants with an output of up to 150 ﬂu and is developing
further units with higher output. Currently the Dalesice pumped-storage
power plant is coming into operation and the Cierny Vah power plant is
under construction. The construction of the Dlouha Stran power plant in
North Moravia is in preparation and by the year 2000 the babe and
Krivoklat power plants should be completed. each with an output of from 600
to 1,000 K".

Nuclear Power Development

in spite of the vast capital investment and the hard currencies which will
be spent on them, the classical sources of energy will fall short of the
C853 consumption of primary energy beginning as early as 1980. In 1990,
the shortfall will mount to 17 million tmp and in the year 2000 to almost
a full 50 million tmp (i.e., approximately 27 percent of overall con-
sumption.)

The only realistic way of filling the energy gap is to develop nuclear
power. The other so-called new energy sources (geothermal, wind and

solar) cannot contribute significantly to the Czechoslovak energy balance
before the year 2000 considering the current level of their technical
development. The development of nuclear power constitutes one of the
principal objectives in developing the energy balance of all can countries
by a long-term target-oriented cooperative program.

At the present time, nuclear power plants are being built on an industrial
scale based on the fission of heavy nuclei (of uranium and plutonium).

Involved in this development is a vast scientific, technical and industrial
complex including:

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

-geological exploration, the mining and processing of uranium ores;

-the production of pure. fiesionahle uranium and its enriclment by the
235 U isotope;

--the production of nuclear fuels;

--the research, development and production of nuclnr reactors on the
basis of thermal and fast electrons and of other nuclear power plant
components (including the construction of production capacities and the
metallurgical base).

"reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel from thermal and fast-electron reactors
designed to recover uranium and plutonium and the separation and safe
disposal of radioactive waste;

"the training of qualified cadres for research. developaent. design work.
construction and operation of all components of the nuclear power coaplex.

This vast nuclear power complex can be mastered only by joining forces with
all other can countries under the leadership of the Soviet Union, which has
the greatest scientific, technical and industrial potential in this field.
Czechoslovakia participates in the areas where it has the necessary raw
naterial, technical and cadre prerequisites which includes primarily the
mining and processing of uranium ores and the production of selected
installations for the construction of nuclear power plants.

By 1990, a number of nuclear power plants with an approximate capacity of
10, 000 ml will have to be built in the CSSR. These will be power plants
with cooled thermal light-water reactors with a capacity of 10100 We (WER-
440) per unit and later of l, 000 me (WEIR-l, 000). Currently intensive work
is proceeding on the possibility of eusing light-water reactors also in the
production of low-energy heat (in the form of steam or hot water) for
industrial use and use in conunal housing.

After 1990. ,the building of liquid-sodium-cooled fast-electron nuclear power
plants will have to be mastered. Their advantage lies in their more
efficient utilization of uranium by almost two orders of magnitude, of
course, on condition that the processing of irradiated fuel and the re-
cycling of plutonium can be mastered. A further developmental stage till
the year 2000 will be high-temperature reactors which, in addition to
converting heat to electric power with great efficiency. will supply high-
energy heat for the metallurgical and chalical industries.

Therefore, the known ways and means of developing the potential of the
0388 power industry are sufficient to carry us into the new century. But
the road is very exacting, calling for a great effort by the scientific.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

develomental and production bane, the expenditure of coneiderahle material
and tinanciel eeana end exteneiVe international cooperation. The procure-
ment of new power reeourcea will becone increaainsly expenaive and technicelly
delandins. Therefore. the aene efforte expended on the developnent of the
energy heae will have to be expended elao on the rational uae of energy and
on f indin; waya of coneerwina energy to the umnt in all production and
treneportation aectora and in the econony of eomnal houaing.

COPYRIGHT: Technicke Prace. 1978

8666
050: 2600

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MQMVIA

nrwvuucm mom 1:: name ammzmou may
mum/mu mmam Arm-1m: an Conn 13 m 78 p 10

ﬁrtlclo by um: ﬂours ”A Slightly D: 0rd Country -- Mom of
Romania in maum loco-Inc Mtox'

ﬁat? mob. Iovolbor -- "Your oloopu; on: ttokot 1o ohoolutoly an
onion tho «to. can m on nuobor m oomot - but I mu don't
hovo too: {or you.‘ Mo to mt I u um 11: ﬂolcrodo by tho lotto: of
tho mom. co: to moo: (mm). as w u an o oooplotoly
not-o1 mum-once. Ho om ho hoo o stoop. 'rou cox-tum don't hon.»
thot when you‘vo bought o oloopor ttokot in Yugoolom you um holly out
o not. 0.. 1 ooo. You‘ro o {mun Joann». mm you not.

ot not. you'll 10m how tuna oponto homo." (ho would not hon m
ouch o convolution 1n Yu‘oolom o fov you! no.

‘lho ourpruoo kopt calm. At tho tiokot cantor of “1'. tho ototo “rhino;
ono tau-on 'lo don't own kno- Ihothor ro’u um“ mum to 31m.-
Inmpomtontmumohohootthohod.mutolm 'mosumooo
mt too mob my for tbol: tool.“ Juot Moo tho Got-n lamina-o
ooom mum; to boycott tho dam-to an mum-mama. for
moplo. booouo o! oooo mm of “onto our oolntononoo dunno. M
thotu not .11. 'l'houoomtxou ooowtorhdoooutofodor.‘ Upon
«Hal 1:: Bola-u. poplohovotonltzmtorth-w. Io-
tom It no thlo In ﬁnally .1: I”. Inn to: mum apex-too

m “o

(ho bu tho mug of tannin in o oomtry an to mam: “unload.
no nun-oxen ooooo into o m (m «to: o mm Maul onnoo
to ovum 1n rmhm'o ooooooy on! 1mm tut Mo
mmwmormmmm ammo-ammo...“
MIMI. «mucuumuoau WmMm'nm-
Yuoohvun. no mm - Inoun by tho amount but omuu
WWW—mumymwmumloym
AM tho .2. mummy om. m. tho ototo Ill-1m. u on on
intonation-.1 lml olnoo 1t Woo Uootorn mutton output.
51min mmmwmmmumumm

10
ml ovncm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rogulcticnc. nut u far on ito cocoorcinl cponticno and routo cmni .
ticn cro concornod. it in c night-cu. ”A logilticol ontorrico {or gay]
votorono cnd ocin; oocrot polioooon' io tho wry doocription of c Ymoolcv
who III boon whiting for his plono {or J hem. ﬁll. A Sound. poridiccl.
hoo collod it 'nopctioo.‘ coding c roport on (only oocnootiono within tho
coonny. which hoo ito hoodqunrton in Bound“

No Copitcl for Loono

Finn thct oporcto within tho hordoro c! n topi'lllo oro sononlly on o
could tootim. owon though tho incroooinsly um cooplox ototo roculctiono
on non-count cm oolt-ounogooont do not noko léto ocoy for thou. It in
frcnkly comodod thct thin oyctoo in Joozlldicil“; tho unity of tho Yugo-
olu norkot ond mode dentin. It in hococina' ncro ond onto or o pohloo
{or Xucoolcw connnioo to opon hronchoo in othol‘ unablico or owoc to do
huoinooo ot All. Tho now occccoic con-tituticn collo for brunch otticoc to
ho omnicod no indoyondont 'hocic amnioctionl of intocrotod lobor.‘
which cocno thot thoy out cponto oo imopondott unito. thot thoy cro
lmoly outcido tho purwiow of tho control offict chi thot thoy hcwo only
licitod righto ‘to trnnofow' mtito. lnotoncoo cro WM imoooingly
noro {roguont in which canonic- froo othor romhlicc. or coroly othor
nogiono of tho country. no hoina notly doniod ~- with cctiwo or pouiwo
oumrt mo loccl org-no -- tho cpportmity to tpon bunchoo ct oll. hoot
otton. no ottico opuo in to ho to“. or no otﬂco otolf. this trond io
incoming in myortion to tho difficultioo tho‘ ugoolcw oconnioc
oncountor hoccmo of crioio or on ortrodtoowy hu‘don or Hood on! oociol
tuoo. Thio you, any cooknioo hcvo not ovon ﬂoon ohlo to m thoir
ocployooo tho loul nininun mo without horrowitk. owon thouh tho coun-
try'o ovoull ococooic oituotion io dooorihod no not unutiotoctcry.

Tho honko conctituto c opoiol cctogory. Maui!“ to tho non lowo. um
um on no loncor trot-tor to thoir control offico {or no. in mating
loom thooo {undo thct nro dopocitod with thoir Vrcnch offico in cthor
rowhlico. nu. wontrolicotion of hcnk holdingt noono thot owon ronowcod
ccuorciolhchkolikothoaonkotuuhljmomthommhaonkmco
loneor chlo to cocmulcto outriciont copitol to {lnonco lcrco chocto o!
iopcrtonco to tho country no o nholo. up Soc-hint otticiol lwon Stonholic
ooid rocontly in tho W of Tito thct only 'h {ow poi-cont' of tho
Mo invootod in rugoolcwio within c yoor'o tioo cro ‘om hoyond tho
oonioro of iciiwiducl ropuhlico oni cutcnooouo rohicno. Othor oourcoo
roprt thot this {into io 1.5 poccoct.

Tho Mmlopod mica - prticululy l‘ooowo - m nlncot uiwilocod.
oftor oll. thoy hcwo unimlo tor inwoot-octo tho dowolopont fund pro-
widod apociolly for thou out of contribution tron tho ontiro country.
Couplicctd 'ototo ccctrocto' hotoooc illiiﬂduol “public odniniotntiono
on moirod for lama-conic invootoonto thct on of oicniticonco hoyoni
”public bondm .. in tho onouy inn-try. for oncolo. Tho] oftoc coho

11
POI OfPICIM. US! ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

do with foreign loans in expensive foreign exchange. loans which Yugoslav“
would in my cases not need if it were not itself placing obstaclse in
the way of doeestic aocunulstion of capital.

The disorder within the overall Yugoelav econcsic ani capital douin is
the result -- certainly an urwienirod result -- of a conscious policy. As
a asrk of the restoration of eonopolistio pnrty rule following the rep-sa-
sicns of l9'll and 1972. a campaign was carried on egainet "techncoracy' and
“officinliss' and sgainst the”alienetsd centers of economic power” held by
these forces. Strong econosic atruoturee neant conpetition for power to
nll levels, of this country's perty functionaries. who in any event have
never been conspicuous for their understending of econonio relationship.
The econcny thus became "atouiesd'u in this some. the act of uniting the
”basic crasnisetions" iniepsndent -- a principle of the new law on succi-
.ated labor -- did not can thet rights of sslf-uanagesent were beiw
realised. 0n the contrary. it count that large and powerful oocpnnies
were being weakened. .

Veto Power for Each Republic

Meanwhile. going hand in hand with this develop-eat was a new effort to
strsrgthen the republic: ani their structuree. This case as a result of
the fact that the perty in Yugoslavia -- no utter how such it is reproc-
snted an an all-Yugoslav party -- still hae its centers of organisation
and power in the individual republics. Their recently increased strength
thua also had to have none effect there. It is true that Tito hsd reeoved
the strong leadere in none republics after 1971; however. in the first
place he won unable to do this everywhere. and in the second plsce the
niddle-level and lower-level officials who were by no seam i-une to
"nationaliss' -- in Croatia. for era-pie -- reanined in office for the
nest put. Backed by the new constitution that granted full statehood to
the republics. the new leadera -- or none of then -- also went unobtrue-
ively but effectively to work to look after the intereste of their repub-
lics. Iithdn the all-Yugoslav fraaework. the ccnssnaus principle applies
to lawn. This aeans that all bills presented in the appropiate acacia-
sicns nnd parliaesntary oc-ittesa sust be paaaed unaniaously. not by
anority vote. This is a long ani laborious process that mully ends

in coepronise. In practice. the consensus principle loans the right of
veto for esch republic. “Not even we hed deaanded anything like tint."
aaid a Croatian intellectual who had been mninent prior to l9?i ad

had served a low prison sentence for 'nationaliss' following the over-
throw. ‘ihere are soae doubts about thin. but this ouch is certain: lunar
the present systea. it in encraously difficult to u-rive at effective
econoaic policy decisions in tens of Yugoalavia as a whole.

COPYRIGHT! RAJ. CID“, mum II Iain. 1978

7053

GO: 2300
END

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY