D. R. IVMOV. V. P. SRVEL’ VEV RND P. V. SHEHRNSKIVOF
1 4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Jpas L/O380
6 April 1979

FUNDAMENTALS OF TROOP CONTROL IN COMBAT
BY
D.A. IVANov, V.P. SAVEL'YEV AND P.V. SHEMANSKIY

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infornetion prinsrily tron foreign
newspapers, periodicals end books. but also tron news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials iro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those iron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and natariel enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation wee sunnarited or extracted.

Uniaailiar nausea rendered phonetically or translitereted are
enclosed in parentheeee. words or nausea preceded by a ques-
tion aark end enclosed in parentheeee were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of so
its. originate with the source. tines within itens~are as
given by source.

the contente of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

oormcar MRS AND "NATIONS MINING mmu 0?
panama ”PRODUCED nun! mum THAT 0133838“me
0? nus PUNJCA‘I'IOII 33 “81316120 MOFPICIAL 08! ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

opus L/8380
6 April 1979

FUNDAMENTALS OF TROOP CONTROL IN COMBAT

Moscow OSNOW UPRAVLENIYA VOYSKAMI v BOY!) in Russian 1977 signed
to press 15 Bep 77 pp 1-391

[Book by DJ. Ivnnov, v.9. Sevel'yev and P.V. Shenenskiy,
Voyenizdet. second revised end supplemented edition, 25,000 copies]

CONTENTS PAGE

Introductioneeseeessseessseolseoseeoeseeeeeeeesseeeeesseseeteeeeeeseeeessee 1

Chapter 1. Content, Essence md Procedurel Principles of Troop Conn-01.... lo
1. cent“ emcept of mtrOIOOOOCOOOOO...0..IO...OOIOOIOOOOOOOOOCOOOOIOOO ‘
2. Specific Nsture of Troop Control in Wet and the Require-onto
Ino..d m Its.OOOOOOODO0000.000.00..DOOOOOOIOOOOOOOIIOCOOOO-COs..IOIOO 16
or‘m".t1m of Modern no” mtrol sntm...”uuoonnuunuuu 17
Goals of Cosbet Troop Control. Its Content end Essence................. 23
“our“ Requlrmta of “0°, Cmtrol......u...unnuununuuo.u 38
Oterscteristic Aspects of Troop Control in eaten..................... b3

Chepter 2. Troop Control Units. Technicel Keene end Control Points........ ‘9
1. hoop cmtrol "“1“.OIOOOOOOOCOO0.0600...00.0...IDIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO... ‘9
“qutnnnt. “000d on Control Unit...u.unuunnn..o..u....uu ‘9
Role end Missions of the Consumer in Troop Control.................... 53
2. T.chn1c.1 control ”.mOOOOOO....0...OOOOOOIOOOOOIOOOOOOOO0.000IO'IDOOO 63
Conmlcstions Huns................................................... 6‘
“cm of “Kaitlin; Infomtlon.....no.......u.............u......... 71
recticsl Celculstion end Inforsstion Processing Heens.................. 73
Docunentetion end Doculent Reproduction Fscllities..................... 78
and Pat v¢1c1“OOOOOOIOOOOOO0.0000000...O...OOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOI. 83
Prospects for the Applicetion of Auto-stion Rodin for Troop Control.... 85
3. Cumisetion of Consultations end Control Points...................... 90
R.qu1mt. on Control Foint........uu......“nun"..uuuuuu 9°
“‘59:.t1m of Control Point...”...............n...o.....ou....u.u 97

- e - [III - ussn - 4 9000]
[II - ussn - 7000)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm (Continuod)
co’mtcltton. “uni“:ionoaoooaoooaooaoaocaoooouoaoooooooooooe

“UPCQY 3o orgﬂiutim of the Work of :11. Caltrol "“1‘o o a o o o o o a o o o
1. nutc Pmcipl.‘ of Troop mtroltlOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOIOOO‘80......
2. Planning tho Work of tho Coumdor and the Control Unit. . . . . . . . .
3. Soiontifio Organization of tho ”Labor of the Control Unit

offiuuoootoovtoooooototooatoooooooooaooooooaooooooaooooooooooo

Chapter In Gothoring and Procooaing Situation Data when Preparing
for and During tho Couroe of Coéat 0porationo....................
1. Content of tho Situation Data and koouirononto lnpoaod On It. . . .
2. hmdu'. fat Gtthﬂ’tng Situation D‘t.loooooootoooooo oaoaooooooa
3. Proooooing ond kaporting Situation Dato....................... ..
lo. Proapocto for Lutonation of tho Prooooo of Gathering and
h“.3.1n8 sim.d°ﬂ n.t.oooooaaop0ooaootoooooaoaoaooaoooaaooooo

Choptor 5. Codat nocnion Making (Rofinonont) and Planning
th. B.ct1. T.C‘£“ of WP.OOOOOOOOO'0O.IOOOOIOOIDOOIOOOOIOIIOOOO
10 cutCDt 0! Ch. cht Deciolmu..no.o.o.....................u
m£¢ mm“ of ”1C ”“1"”.8IIOIODOCOOOOCICOOOGOOOIIICOOOOOI
”tab: of Ch. “811: met'tm amt.aoaaoaoooooaooaoaooooooooo
2. Procoduro for Codaat Docioion Making by tho Conandor...........
Bounce of the Proceduro and tho Roquirononto moood on lt.....
Gonoral Content of the Coint Dociaion Making Promo...........

logical Hothoda of thinking of tho Co-ondor During Docioion
mins0.0.0.00...IIIIOOOOOOOOO.I.00.0000008000000000I08008......

Tho Application of hathoaotical Hothodo and hoane of
hochanization and Autoootion Vhon linking tho Coabot Dociaion....
Organization of tho Hort of tho Co-ondoro and the Control
unit. 1“ Dec1.1m mk1n'00000000000800000QOIOUOOOCIOOODOOOOIOOOU
3o Plnntn‘ th. M.t Mr.ttm.aaooaaoooooaooooooooaoaaooaaoaoooo
P1.nntn‘ content “a hoc.du"0000000000000000000.0.000.0.000...
Plantn‘ HemmthODO.I..0.0......O..0OOOOOOOOOQIO0.0.00.0.0...

Ouptor 6. Delivering the Codaat Hiaaiono to tho hooutivo Agonto

Reaponoiblo for Carrying non Out. Organization end Support of
Tmop Int.r.ct1mt0.0.00.00..0..I....00000.IICIOIOOCOOCOOOAOOOOOOO
l. Proooduroo for Roporting tho Conbat Hiooiona to tho
R..p°n.1b1. Agent.0OOJICOIOOOOOOUOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCIOOOOOOCOOUOOO.
2. Organization and Support of Continuous Intoractiono of

Troop.oaonoooooooaoooooooooooooooaoaooooootooooooooaooaoooooaoot

Chapter 7. Organization and IQlouontntion of hoaeuroa um: Roapoct
to the Support of Cadet Operationa and tho Couandant' o Servico..
memnm.nc.0OO‘OOICOOOIOOOl.00.0.00...OOOIOIOIOOIOOOOOI'OOOOO

Protoction of Troops Againot Nucloar Hoapono....................
secur‘cyaaoaoaoooooooooaoooooooaooooooaoaaaaoaoooaooooooaoooaooo

mama“: Support"onnoun...".........uun.......u.n.
-1, -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
101

108
108
115

120

137
137
163
1‘8

156

158
158
158
16k
170
170
172

189
193
199
202

202
21‘

220
220
231

2‘2
2‘3
2“
267
2‘8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coum‘rs (Continued)

a”“‘1.‘.otootooocooooaaooooahroooocotaotoooaooauoaaooooulooaoo

M.t‘ns the h.” 30610010131130“: ”Neuoaaooaaoaaooooooatoo.
bpogeodetic Support..u..nu...u....uuouu....cu.”no...
n’drmt.°r°1°.1u1 sw”rt.'......'.........CIOCOC‘OQ......C...
Roar Sarvicoo and Technical Support.............................
Co-lndmt'o soniceo.oaoooaaaaaaooaaooaaaaouo-oaaooaaoooaaooa-o

Chaptar B. Pomtion and Maintenance of High ﬂoral Spirit of the
Troop. in “ﬁ.t..'.....‘..........'.....00........0...‘.........‘
1. Rola of tho Hora]. Factor in Coliut and Mom of Building It
in the p."mn.100000¢OOOOOOOOOOOOOCOIOUOCIIOOOOOQOOOOOOOQOOOOOO
2. Proceduraa for Haintainins nigh Horala in tho hoops During
CMCt wer.t1°n.ootO00000.0.0000...COO000000.060000000000000...

Chaptar 9. Honitoring During Training and in tho Couraa of

coﬂﬂt ”cratimaitoooooodtbtloll0......0.00.0.0...OOIOCOIOODOO...
1. Honitorins Problem and Tochniquaa..............................
2. Organization and Realization of Honitorina......................

Chapter 10. Study of Codnt bcparicnca and Convoyanca of It
to th. “mp...00.00r00000...!O000600..00.000000006000000OQ‘COOOIC

1. Organization of the Work of tho control Unita with Raopuct

to the Sturly and Diaraaination of (Joint Experienccuunuu...
20 stw of MC: m.r‘.nc.00OOCOOODOCCIOOOOOOOIOOOIO00.000.06.00
3. Conveyanca of Ooabat Mariana: to the hoopa...................

conclmimoooODoaootoooaaaooooooaoaoooooootooaOoooaoooolooooooaooooo

B1bl‘o.r.phyaooaooooaoooooaaooaIorooooaooatno...Docooooaaooooooooooo

subject Ind.*oooaoooooaoaoaooaloaaaoaaoaooooooaaaoooaooaoooooooaaooo

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0"‘LY

2’09
250
252
253
256
255

261
261
269
276
276
zoo
206
286
289
293
296

302
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08:

Buslish citls

Russian title

Author (s)

Editor (s)

Publishing Rouse

Place of Publicstion

‘ Dsts of Publication

Signed to press

Copies

1 commun-

ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040016-9

m cumin; 1m 6m

PUBLICAIION DATA

FUNDAMENTALs 0P IROOP c
IN COMBAT

OSNOVY UPIAVLENIYA vars
D. A. Ivsnov. V. P. 8“

’0 Vs Shannon?

Voysnizdst

Moscow

1977

15 Ssp 77

25.000

Voysniulst. 1977

-d-

POI OPEICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-R0982-00850R000100040016-0
E’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 355.62
FUNDAMENTAL? W “00? cannot. III CODA?

[Book by D. A. lyenov. V. P. Sevel'yev end P: V. Shenenekiy entitled

"anovy Uprevleniye Voyeknni v Boyu” eeoond edition. revieed end eupplenented.
Voyeniedet. ﬂeece». 1977, 2500 copiee. 391 pegee. eigned to preee 15
September 1977]

Introduction

1he firet edition of thie work vee prepered for printing et the end of
1969. On ptblicetion. the vork received e brood reeponee end epprovel fro-
the nilitery convexity. It vee treueleted end ptbliehed in the lenguegee of
the Ger-en Denocretic Republic. the lmgerien People‘e Republic, the
People'e kepwlic of Bulgerie end Crechoelovekie. After publicetion. neny
noteworthy evente took pleoe in our comtry end ite Arned Forcee vhich hed
e direct or indirect effect end continue to heve e lerge effect on the deve-
lopment of the theory end prectice of troop control. 'lhe eoet inportmt
enong theee evente unconditionally ie the edoption of the reeolutione for
further inroveeeut of control in ell ereee of eociel life by the Nth end
25th 0P8!) Congreeeee end the plenery eeeeiono of the CPSU Gentrel Co-ittee.

In eccordnce with theee reeolutione by the perry. ecientific re-
eeerch vorl: hee been done on e brood ecele in the comtry to develop the
ecience of control founded by V. 1. win. no e result of which in recent
yeere any nejor works. textbooks, brochuree end erticlee heve been publiehed
on the problene of troop megenent end control. the euthore of which ere
feeoue Soviet ecientiete and experienced edeinietretore.

Heuuree heve been tekcn with reepect to buic inprovenent of the
eelection. deployment end treining of nenegenent on ell levele for the
netionel econoq. Econonic reforn ha been developed. Rev neene of neche-
niution end eutonetion of edednietretive end control work heve been deve-
loped end introduced into prectice. attire eutooeted control eyete. ere
being built. 1he etructure of the control elenente ie being ieproved, end
their functione ere being more precieely defined. ‘lhe loot effective
uetheeeticel economic nethode ere being fond for production plenning beeed

on the one of coeputere end other control equip-eat end eleo the theoreticel
principlee of the scientific orgmiretion of lebor.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

In evelueting the eignificmce of theee eeeeuree, et the 25th CPSU
Congreee L. l. Brezhnev node the following eteteeentx "...the neeenree to
inrove the eenegeeent of the econoey ehould be. nut be, coneidered ee the
eoet inportent reeerve. the uee of which will help eucceeefully to fulfill
the ‘Denth Five-leer Plen end produce e leeting effect in the future.“

The reeolutione of the 25th end 25th CPSU Congreeeee end the plenery
eeeeione of the CPS!) Oentrel Conittee with reepect to the probleee of con-
trol of the netionel eoonoqy mdoubtedly eleo pertein to the megenent of
the troope of our Areed Porcee who conetitute e coqoonent pert of the eociel-
iet eociety. 'lhe neeeuree teken on the beeie of the perty reeolutione
throughout the comtry to inprove the control of the econoqy ere m mprece-
dented fore of ecientific epproech for the nilitery pereonnel to the eolution
of the problene of troop control erieing in connection with ecientific end

technicel progreee end with the revolution in nilitery effeire teking plece
on the beeie of it.

‘Ihe fulfilleent of theee perty reeolutione will proeote ieproveeent
of the cadet reedineee of our troope end. in the finel enelyeie eucceeeful
fulfill-eat of one of the prinry nieeione eteted by the Z‘th end reeffirned
by the 25th cm Congreee: ”everything thet hee been creeted by the people
lost be eucceeefully defended. ‘l'o etrengthen the Soviet etete seem to
etrengthen ite Aned Porcee end ieprove the defeneive cepecity of our hone-
lend in every wey poeeible."2

'lhe ieportent eignificence of the etete of the ert of troop control
for eeintnining high coebet reedineee hee been confirmed by the entire. hie-
tory of nilitery ecience over my centuriee. 1he experience of peet were
end. eepecielly. Horld Her 11. givee ue neny equee where ertfully con-
trolled troope heve won brillient victoriee over euperior nmere of the
new. However. there have eleo been ceeee where well-erecd troope hewe
euffered deetruction only beceuee they lecked ecientific, fire, coneietent
control on the pert of the co-endere ad eteff. In order for thie not to
heppen in the future. it ie neceeeery to eeke conetent ieproveeente in troop
nenegeeent end control and reneiper the beheet of V. I. Lenin thet "eny
bettle includee the ebetrect poeeibility of defeet. end there ie no other
eeene of dininiehing thie poeeibility then orgenized preperetion for bettle.”3

In eddition. hietory confine thet the etete of the ert of precticing

troop control depende to e decieive degree on the depth of the theoreticel
reeolution of the control probleee in the generel nilitery ecience eyetee.

l. Heteriely XXV 8"yezde ms (Heteriele of the 25th Congreee of the CPSU),
Hoeeow, 1976. pp 60-62.

2. Meteriely XXIV S"ye:de ms (lleteriele of the 26th CPSU Congreee).
Hoecow. 1971. p 81.

3e Ve I. “at“. Poke 80th “we [MICIQ m11.ct.d works], v01 6. P 137e
2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'lhie reletion ie eepecielly ecutely neniieeted er the preeent tine when new
neene end nethode of ernod coebet hove iepoeed new. higher require-onto on
control. the precticel eetieiection of which ie nnthinkehle without e ecien-
tiiic theory of troop control.

ﬁle purpoee of the eecond edition of thie hook ie to enelyre the theo-
reticel principlee of troop control in nodern coaet on the heeie of the
reeolntione of the petty ad govern-at with reepect to the control prohlene
ad eleo the experience of peer were. nilitery teechinge end chengee in the
eeene end eethode of erned coaet. end to deanetrete the poeeihle neene oi
inproving troop control planed in the erniee of the noet developed com-
triee in technicel reepecte. Ina-Inch ee it doee not eppeer poeeible to
coneider troop control in ell the eleeente end verione (one of their ecti-
vity (when cerrying out coaet end politicel treining. when doing internel
eervice. ad eo on) in e eingle work. the enthore heve linited theaelvee to
the enelyeie of the control proceee only under cotter conditione. which hee
found ite reflection in the new. eoeewhet nore preciee title of the hook
”Oenovy Uprevlcniye Voyeheni V loyn" [l'undenentele of hoop Control in Con-
bet] ineteed of the forner title "Oenovy Uprevleniye Voyekeni” [Pmdenentele
of Troop Control].

In order to reduce the folune of the vork end evoid exceee repeti-
tion. the eo-celled factionel ettrihnte ie med no the heeie for ite
etructnret eech of the beeic functione of control (gethering ad proceoeing
of dete on the eituetion. decieion eeking end planing of conbet operetione.
ad eo on) ie coneidered in e eeperete chepter or eection both for training
end during coaet. ‘l'hie etructure ie teken ee the heeie in connection with
the feet thet troop control. Juet ee eny other control. ie elweye of e
cleerly erpreeeed cyclic netureuthe eejority of the troop control fmctione
during treining end during the couree of coaet operetione ere unevoidehle
ad ere repeeted egein end egein. Only their epecific content end condi-
tione of execution chenge. which the enthore heve token into eccomt in die-
cueeing eed! chepter.

when prepering the eecond edition. the critical con-onto of the

reedere of the firet edition were eleo teken into eccomt. ”the euthore ex-
preee their eincere epprecietion for theee couente.

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ()NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 1. mm. 888“: AND PROCEDURAL menus 0? moor comm
l. Gensrel Concept of Control

In eny science. the well-fomded neture of the theoreticel conclusions
end the velus of the prscticel reco-sndetione with respect to the solution
of one specisl problen or enother ere directly dependent on the proper un-
derstendins by the ressercher of the phenonsne and the processes which ere
of s nore senersl nsture with respect to the given problen end elso the Istho-
doloxy of the investipetion. the point of view end senerel scientific prin-
ciples. Atteching inortent significance to the specific neturs of control.
V. I. Lenin slso wet-nod: ”...he who takes on speciel probless without
first solving the aenersl problem. will st sech step unconsciously 'encom-
ter' these generel problem. And to encounter then blindly in each speciel
cese means to be doomed to s policy thet is note wscilleting end nore m-
founded."1 V. l. Lenin tsught thet the aenerel is e "step towerds under-
standing the specific.“

‘Ihe given procedursl principles obligete us to consider the generel
concept of control ad the principles on which the construction end func-
tioning of en control systess without exception ere beeed before we telk
shout the speciel snd specific problem of troop control in conbst.

A proper. mited interpretstion of the tens thet we heve used hes
imrtnt sinificence for theory snd prectice. ‘lhe experience of neny
sciences shave thet otherwise no theory cen be successfully developed. end
there will be verious nieunderstendings. disputes, and even disorgenisetion
of work both in the resesrch collectives and in the control spencies. In
order for this not to occur. enother well-known trench scientist. Descertes.
in his tine sdvised: ”Define the nssnin; of the words precisely end you
will sewe unkind helf of his confusion." 'nle wslidity of this opinion for
the topic thet we heve investigeted will becons sore obvious if we consider
thet there is e difference in spprosch between our Soviet press and the

l. V. l. Lenin. Couplete Collected Rorks. Vol 15, p 368.
2. rbid. Vol 29. p 252.

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

foreign press when defining end interpreting certein terns end generel con-
cepts of control. Philosophy ueuelly cherecterires control es one of tho
proportion ‘of netexiel sys tens, ad cybernetics in the process of the nove-
nent of intonation. ordering or converting e systen iron one etete to sno-
ther. Methensticiens ere prinsrily interested in the possibilities of
“radiation. elgorithniretion. quatitstive description end sinnletion of
control processes in order to creete the nethensticel basic for their euro-s-
tion. ‘lhe sociologists end jurists nost frequently eahesiee the sociel end
legel eopects which develop in control eystea. ad econoniets. the econo-ic
espects of control.

lhere ere no theoreticel errors in my of these interpretations. now-
sver. they cherecterine control only from one or severel points of View
vithout giving en integrel repreeentetion of it.

'lhe essence of troop control in conhet end operstione is in nend of
cleer definition. Sons of the definition. encountered in the litereture
reduce the essence of troop control to direction of the troops on the pert
of the co-endsre end steff. 1his cennot he coneidered setiefectory. for
the word ”direction" eleo neeéa erplaetion.

An insdequete definition of the essence of troop control is elso pre-
sented in such euthoritetive works no the "Heleye Sovetskeye Entsiklopediye"
[Snell Soviet bicyclopedie]. It ssys: ”Troop control (onlbet end operetion
control) is the preperetion. conduct end support of coaet operetiono by the
co-sender with the help of tho steff ad other control elements." 'lhe in-
exectnese of this definition et leest includes the stetenent thet the con-
nsnder conducte conhet operetions with the help of the etsff end other
egenciee. Indeed. the coast operetione ere conducted by none other then
the troops who ere the object of control for the coo-ader. steff end the
other egencies. In eddition. in the given definition the tern "troop end
operetion control" is ueed. Ihis ter- is of e note figuretive then scien-
tific neturs. Indeed. both conhet ad operetion ere two-my processes in
which both our own troops end the eneny perticipete with explicitly oppos-
ing (eneny) goele. Under theee conditions. in order to control the cadet
(operetion) it ie necessery to control not only our own troops hut elso the
eneuy. In the literel sense of the word "control" the letter is theoretic-
elly ispoesihle et leest heceuee the «under cennot require reporte fro-
the enecv or give the eneny troops orders, asign niosions end so on. ad
without doing this there in no control. It is possible end accessory to
influence the eneny sctively by the fire end the etteck of his own troops.
reception cenouflsge end other neesuree in order to force the eneny to ect
vhere. when. ad hot: it is edventsgeous to heve hi. ect. mu reflexive
espect of control is often eahesiud by certein euthors in using the torn
"coast ad operetion control.”

tron whet ha been nteted it is obvious thet there is en urgent necee-

city for giving e cleer, scientificelly hesed definition of the concepts of
"control" in generel. ad then "troop control in onion." in perticuler.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order thet this definition be understandeble ad. the esin thing. thet
it heve precticel significence, in our opinion. it met st leest mower the
following questions: who (whet) in controlling. who (whet) is being con-
trolled. whet is the control besed on. for whet purpose end how is the con-
trol epecificelly exercised?

It is possible to solve the given prohlse only by besing our solution
solidly on the lethodology of tierxist-beninist netsrislistic science. with-
out touching on ell of the conclusions of this science. first of ell let us
consider the principle thet hy the essence of my process. including eny
control. we met understend its deepest. generel.~steble end constently re-
peeting internsl aspects. Here the essence is not obvious on the surfsce
of the investigsted process ineseuch es it does not coincide with the ex-
ternel phenoeene.

'lhe letest echievenents in such sciences taking into sccount the
verious espects of control such a sociology. nilitery science. cybernetics.
psychology end so on em be of greet usistence in solving the proble- with
which we ere faced. 'lhe coupler spproech. thet is. the spproech considering
the conclusions of ell sciences. investigeting certein espects of control.
hes greet procedurel eignificence. here the initiel bees for the investiga-
tion cen be only prectice. inesIuch es it is iepoesible to think up eny
scientific theory or formietion. It cen be extrected only from the neteriel
world surrounding us. free ectuelly. objectively existing fects. ”the
point of view of life and prectice." V. 1. brain noted. "Inst be the first
ad the besic point of view of the theory of knowledge."l

Hhet do prectice end the objective world offer us with respect to the
problem of control if we spproech their-y enelyeis froe the shove-discussed
procedurel points of view? -

Above ell. they indicste thet control is not e phenoeenon thet is
thought up or occurs in e "vecuun." but is one of the genersl end objec-
tively required properties end conditions of the existence end developeent
of the uteriel world. Control occurs in ell forts of the love-ent of let-
ter: sechenicel. physical. cheeicel. biologicel. end also in sociel life.
Without control no nechine cen operete properly. e current cennot trevel
over e wire. the~:e cen be no life. including our own orgenise. en indmtriel
enterprise cannot function. the kolkho: end the govern-set es s whole cennot
function md no troop forution (subunit. unit. end so on) cam wsge bettle.

Beginning with this feet. in nodern science control is divided (else-
sifisd) into the following three lerge types:

1) Control in ineninete neture. including nechines end cowl-ates
of lechinee;

l. V. I. Lenin. Cowlete Collected Horn. Vol 18. p 11.5.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL?

2) Control in animate organieaa (biological ayetene);

3) Control in hunen aociety. in collectivea of people in their aociel
life. including the conduct of araed coebat (aociel control).

'lhere ia u significant difference with reapect to nature end purptae
nong theea typea of control. ea we ahell one below. It would be a groe-x
error to 'plece an equal aign. for exupla, between e live cell end e tenlt
regiment. ,‘IIowever. on the haeia of dialectic unity of the neterial world.
all foree of control are characterized y identical foraal attributed. gene-
rel principlea and lawn which are atudied by the cooperatively yomg acience
of cybernetica. and the knowledge of which hea greet theoretical and prac-
tical aigniiicence. ‘l‘he firet ouch attribute of any control ia the preeenee
of a defined atructure or organieation. Indeed. the torn "control" itaelf
preauppoeee in Rusaien that there in a eubject or object which controle and
together with thin. there in the aubject or object which in controlled. ‘lhe
(one: ie celled the control agent and the letter. the object of control or
the terget.‘

Re are convinced on the aimificencc of the tern "control" when we
talk about the actiona of an object which cannot and aunt not take place
randomly without trgenixation when aoae guiding or organizing effect on the
part of the control agent ia required. However. in order thet the effect

be realizable. there uuat be acne cot-unicetion between the control agent
and object.

Such worda ee "direction." "correction." "unageeent" and ao on are
identicel with reapect to aeaninr. (synonym) with the word "control." ‘lheae
worde ere uauelly uaed where we wlah to attach eole ahade of aeaning to the
control proceee. ‘lhua. the word "direction" in need. aa a rule. when we
are telking about control on the part of the higher govern-ant. party and
Iilitery organa and duty peraonnel. and when thia control in of e nore gene-
ral coordinating and guidance nature. it coﬁinea not only economic or
nilitary-atetiatical iunctiona but elao aocial-political nd educational
functiona. the aelection and deployment of pereonnel. coordination of their
activity. and ac on. For angle. we aay the "CPSU directa (not controla)
the building of con-unio- in our comtry." ”the Hiniatry of Defenae directa
the Araed Porcea." and ao on.

he worda "guidence." ”regulation.“ ”correction" and othero era need
inateed of the word "control" an a rule. when we ere talking about control
during the courae of the proceaa. in ita dynaaic atete.

“thua. when analyzing the proceaa of control free the point of view of
fore in any aatariel environaent. we auat underatand thia proceea to be the

activity of the control organ conaiating in the required guidance activity
via the co-unicationa chumela on the object of control.

7

FOR OFFICIM. USE (ItlLl'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lhe eet of theee three olenente—the control agent or organ vith the
technical neene and nethode of operation cheracterietic of it. the object
of tho control end the couunicatione chennele bntucen then-ie called the
control oyeteeI (eee Figure l).

(2)
now: alumni .mu “’

(amt/5) meme) M (5)

Min

(6)

  

.22.,

  
 
 

  

    

“EL.'_:.‘2’!.£L"__..J/ mav‘”

33) (Md-n mm)

Figure l. Schooatic Diagran of the Structure and the Operatione of the Con-
trol ”on: (the Cloud Control hoop).

Roy: 1. mject of control;
2. Peocback chennel;
3. (Infomtion of etate):
6. Environ-eat:
S . Interference ;
6. Control organ or agent;
7. Decioion aching;
8. Interference;
9. Direct co-unicatione channel

(co-em! intonation);

10. Environ-out.

In thie general eyetee the control agent eonetinea ie called the con-
trolling oyeten (or etheyeten). end the object of control or target in eone-
tinea called the controlled eyeten (aweyeten). 'lhe euthore uho exclude
the object of control or target fro- the concept of the "control eyeten"
pot-it a groee procedural error ineenuch u ouch a eyetee theoreticelly can-
not function without the object of control (eonethins to control). For
realization of the control proceee all of ite eateriel cerriera are needed-
both the "producure" and the “coneuuen.” that ie. a cloeed loop.

Coneequently. the control eyeten for. an internal structure. the
eateriel haee for any control proceee. Without the eyeten, without Ieteriel

1. In senerel in acienu e eyeten ie coneidered to be an organised, cloeed
unit of regularly connected elencnte capﬁle of interaction (ohjecte.

eubjecte. opinions. and co on). here the propertice of the eyeten an a
whole are identicel to the propertiee of each elencnt or group of ele-
unto taken individuelly.

FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

etructure. there on be no control and vice-verse. The cyeten ncture in e
miveraal property of all utter and an objectively neceaeary condition for
any control prooeea. 1he world eurrounding ua ie literally ”put together"
tron warioue eyteee. ”Now." P. mgele wrote in hie "Dialectiea of Nature.”
"all nature ia apreed out before ua an e eyeten of relations and proceaeee."

The objective nature of the exietence of the control oyeteea doea not
seen. however. that they renein unchanged. 0n the contrary, they are con-
atantly developing end are ieproving together with the development of
neterial life.

Certain attributee of control are obeerved in the moat pridtive
(“nucleated") for- in the ayatena of inorganic naturo.1 During the prolonged
couree of ‘h‘iatoric evolution on the baaia of theee elementary ayatene nore
couple: end organised biological control eyateno aroee, beginning with the
live cell end ending with the loot couple: end highly organized enter-
the human organiae. M e reeult oi eel! control (autoregulation) in auch
ayatena. blood preaeure that in per-iceible for life. teaperature. eugar
content in the blood are nintained. and the producte of proceeeing food are
eliuineted. protection iron harnful external effecte if provided. and any
other proceaeee take place.

however. the develop-out of control ayetena in nature did not end
with thia. me ganiue of nan. hie intelligence and labor have created veri-
oue technical control ayetene (nachinea). lhe oteee engine. the eutoeobile.
the coeputer. apacecraft. tank, mtiaircraft eieaile conplex. and co on“
all of theae are control ayete-e that were created by nan. here an hin-
eelf alweya eppeara ae the basic control agent. 1he eo-celled ”nen-wechine"
ayetee ie for-ed. Han uoee warioue levere, inatrueente md autonetic con-
trol devicea which operate by e program comiled by his an aide. lhe ob-
ject of control or the target ie either a neohine (couple: of Inchinea) aa a
whole or individual elenenta of it. 'ihe col-micetion chennela between Ian.
the control inatruente and the Iaehine can eleo be different: wiauel.
auditory. mechanical. electroeagnetic, chenicel. docuent, end ao on. 1hua.
a etill sore coqlex “nen-autoneton (inetrunent)-nachine" eyeten ia for-ad
(eee Figure 2).

here. if the eyeten ie capable of operating without the direct parti-
cipation of the nan (but by hie progreea). thou it ie aaid to be eutoeatic.
and with the participation of Ian. automated.

i. For lore detaile on control in inanimate nature aee L. A. Petruahenko.
"Printaip Garetnoy Svyaei" [Feedback Principle]. hoacow. 1967. he author
indicatee the inconaiatency of the wiewa whidI refute the preeence of the
attributee of control in ineniuete nature without the participation of
Ian inea-uch ea they contradict neterialiatic dialectica.

9

FOR OFFICIAL use only
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

Sinultansously with the technical systens. so the division and co-
operation of hunn ldaor increases. various social control systole hsve been
created inasnuch ss non has lived and works-d not elono but in collectives.
"Any directly socisl or joint lehor reslissd on s cooperatively large scsle."
vrote K. Herr. "needs control to a greeter or lesser degree. which estsb-
lishes the coordination between the individual operations and perfores gono-
rsl functions occurring iron the novenent of the entire production orgsnisn
in contrast to the mvenent of its independent elensnts. 'lhe individual
violin controls itself, the orchestre needs s conductor."l

(9m ﬂu

 

Figure 2. Construction of the Control Systen Using the Neens (Devices) of
Autonstion.

Key: 1. Hutuel coupling to sdjscent systen:
2. mvironnent;
3. Peedbeclt channels;
‘. Interference;
5. maject of control;
6. Direct co-unicstions channels;
7. Auto-stic instnnent:
3. Control organ or sgent;
9. Hutusl coupling to the adjacent systen;
10. Superior control organ or agent.

with respect to purpose. the socisl systems. just so the technical
systens. are varied: the shop. the industrial enterprise. the hrigsde. the
kolkhoz. the school. the scientific research institute. the smhony orches-
tra. theater. industrial associstion. breach of the national econoey. govern-
nent as a vhole. and also the coqeny. the battslion. the reginent. and so
on. llere either a nan taken individuslly or a collective of people who

1'. T. "ua‘n'su—e 575...”. Soch. [Collected works]. Vol 23. p 362.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

heve diiierent eoeignnente ere token no the control egent or orgen: the
chief. the director (the hoerd of directore). the hrigede leeder. the their-
son (the boerd). the chencellor. the conductor. the ninieter (the hoerd). the
council of tinietere. the «under. the eteﬂ. end no on. the object (euh-
ject) of control in ouch eyetene elweye ie people ueing the correeponding
equipment. Verioue chennele beginning with vieuel end eudio chennele end
ending with couples: redio electronic dewicee nelting up the eutoeeted control
eyeteee ere need for the coupling between the egente end objecte of control.

The eociel control eyeten. coneeouently. by conperieon with the tech-
nicel eyetene. ie dietinguiehed by greet conplexity end in in tho for. of
e eultiieceted coehinetion of the “nen-eutoeeton (lnltnnont)-Ien-Iediine."

Running eoeewhet eheed. let ue note thet the proper underetending of
the eeeence end etructure of control eyeteee he not only greet cognitive-
procedurel eigniiicence. hut eleo greet precticel eignificence. In the light
oi the reeolutione of the 24th md 25th CPS" Congreeeee in perticuler. it
ohligetee ue when finding neene of ilproving troop control to uee the eo-
celled eyeteee or coupler epproech rewiring ieprovenent of the verioue ee-
pecte of control on the heeie of the echievenente of e master of eciencee
eieulteneouely. not only certein individuel eleoente. hut eleo the eyeten
ee e whole. thet ie. both the control egente or orgene end their functione.
end the control objecte end the comicetion chennele with then. Only in
thie wey cen tho deeired reeult he echiewed.

Coneidering the ext-cruel torn. let ue now proceed to the enelyeie of
the internel content of control by which we ueuelly neen the eet of inter-
connected functione reelieed by the control egente in order to operete in
the neceeeery wey on the objecte of control end echiewe the finel purpoee.
1he control faction. in turn. ie coneidered to he the epeciel for- of
edeinietretive lehor of the control egent or organ which leede to the echiewe-
nent of the epeciel (internediete) goel on the peth to the core-on. finel goel.
Ihe renk of control function therefore cennot include every eleoentery nee-
eure of the control orgen. A function ie e nore independent. generel end
coneolideted concept then eny eeperetely token neeeure. It includee the
etehle group of neeeuree thet ere uniforn with reepect to neture. the reeli-
eetion o! which pernite echinweeent oi the epeciel purpoee end en epproech
to the perfornnce of the eucceeding iunctione elthough in prectice eoIe-
ti-ee there ie e cheoge in role end eone intertwining, e euperinpoeing of
one function on mother with reepect to their tine of inlenentetion. which
we ehell eee below. In the (tactical. the interreletione end the eet. con-
eeqmocee. content. technology end dynaice of the entire control proceee
ere neniieeted. 'lheir mifeetetion erieee fro- the eeperetion end epecieli-
zetion of the control and edninietretiwe work.

In eccordence with the functiooe. the etructure of the control egente
or orgene ie con~tructed. end (or the fulfill-mt of eeth of the: ueuelly
the dietribution oi righre. ohligetione ad reeponeitility eeong the conno-
nent perce (for oxenle. the duty pereonnel) of theee egente. their epeciel

11

FOR (IFHCII‘L USE UNLY
FOR ”FFICIM. USE ONLY

knowledge and skills. the application of the corresponding technical control
nsans and also the sequence of nethods and procedures for action are re-
quired. 1h~ clearcut definition of the functions consequently has great
significace.

In order correctly to define the control functions characteristic of
any control organ or agent. it is necessary again to analyse the practice of
the actions taken by the letter. In this analysis we can cooperatiwa
easily establish above all the fact thet the control process on the part of
any control orga occurs not in itself. but is the consequence of a cause. e
«action to certain changes in the object of control or in the environnent.
‘lhus, the leaf of a tree when it is heated in the sun begins to curl in order
to decrease the heating surface and curtail the evaporation of aoisturc.

The cheseleon. sensing danger. changes his color. 0n detecting a turn in the
road to the right. the driver of s sotor vehicle turns the wheel in that
direction. On receiving inforsation about a approaching eneny aircraft

free a radar or by personal observation. the «under of an entiaircraft
battery gives the cone“ to open fire. Measuring the corresponding para-
esters of notion of the aircraft. the nutonatic pilot takes action on the con-
trols and changes the heading and flight altitude. It is possible to present
an infinite nueber of such axe-plea.

What has been stated indicates quite obviously that the prisary (ini-
tial) faction of any control agent is to obtain inforeation on the state and
the actions of the object of control or target ad its environ-cot vie me
feedback channel (see Figures 1 and 2). ‘ihis infatuation is called the in-
foreetion of state in cybernetics. without this inforeation. successful
control on the part of any agent is theoretically ispossible. for this un-
avoidably (sooner or later) enters into contradiction with objective reality
and leads to destruction of the systen. Horeover. obtaining such inferna-
tion is always a specific and couples for- of activity of the control agent
requiring special rights. knovledgs and the application of the corresponding
name and satth of operation. by these argmte. it is entirely correct
to consider it a control function. and not an auxiliary seasure. ‘ihis es-
pecially pertains to the nodern social control system where the infornation
flows are growing every year. ‘iharefors it is no accident that the resolu-
tions of the party and the govern-ant provide for the creation in our country
of an ell-union sutonatad systen for gathering ad processing infer-nation.

and special attention is always given to the gathering and study of data on
the situation in the practice of tactical troop control.

The reaction of the control agent to the received infomtion of
state varies. In highly developed systens. the control agent not only re-
ceives but also perceives. stores. studies and converts the intonation of
state. it coqsrss it with the given state. ad if necessary. converts the
systes to a theoretically new state corresponding to the altered conditions.
At the ease tine the control agent actively influences the object of con-
trol. This active reaction of the systee beconea possible as a result of
the fact that the basis for its construction is the feeback principle.
This principle necessarily presupposes not only receiving infornstion of

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm IWFIGIM. USE ONLY

etete but elso the subsequent function of the control egentuplenning of the
ections of the object of control. the noet inportsnt end objectively neces-
sery ect of which is decision-aching. Without the decision of the control
egent. no purposeful sction of the object of control is theoreticelly pos-
sible.

lhe essence of neking eny decision and plenning es s whole consists
in the control egent's deteninetion of the goels of the ectione teken by the
object of control. its specific eission. the sequence. the forces, the neens.
sethods end tinen of their execution end else the neesures in support of
these ections on the besis of the enelyeis end eveluetion of the infornetion
of etete end elso the lews in the given nediun.

In cybernetics. the decision asking proceos usuelly is defined es
conversion of infornstion of etete to mend inforeetion (or control infor-
eetion) by the control egent. thet is. conversion of the infornetion of etete
to infornetion by neens of which the goels of the object of control are
steted end et the sens tine its ectione end the functioning of the synten
es e whole ere eesigned e purposeful neture. It is perfectly obvious thet
the purposeless tendon ection on the pert of eny object cennot be considered
controlled. inesmch es they contredict the nuns of the word "control."

Any control is reelised not for the sets of itself. but so thet the control-
led object cen echieve sons purpose. The purposefulnese. consequently. is
elso e nendetory end e prinery ettribute of eny type of control. indepen-
dently of)whsre it is reelieed (in nechines. live orgenisn or in e collective
o people .

Hith respect to its neture. the goels of the control cen be highly
veried. lhey depend entirely on the purpose of the syste- end the conditions
of its functioning. lbs deter-inetion of the goel by the control egent
tehee plece differently in systees. In the systens functioning without the
perticipstion of nen. for exeeple. of the orgenis- of mieels. the goel is
forned on the besis of the unconditioned end conditioned reflexes ecouired
during seny hundreds end thousends of yesrs. edsptetion to the environ-sot
end elso the genereted instincts. 1he control gosls ere defined theore-
ticelly differently in the systens with the perticipetion of use. here the
besis for this deterninetion is e higher for: of reflection of objective

ectivity--thcught--the conscious goel setting eined et setisfection of the

needs of sen. here nen is cepeble of ecting on neture. ideelly foreseeing
the finel results of the ectione teken by the object of control. According-
ly. K. Hsrx wrote: ”...the poorest erchitect is distinguished fro: the best
bee fro. the very beginning in thet before the wear cell cm be constructed.
it is elreedy being constructed in his heed. At the end of the lebor pro-
cess. e result is obteined which st the beginning of this process elresdy
existed in the ineginetion of the non. thet is. ideslly ."' In mother plece
he noted thet "in neture... one blind. unconscious force sets on enother.

in the interection of which the gensrel lsws ere exhibited. There is no

1. R. Here end I. angels. Collected works. Vol 23. p 109.

)3
Fun omcm. Use 0:va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conscious. desired goal here..on the contrary. in the history of society
people who teke action are those who are gifted with consciou..nees. approach-
ing defined goals carefully or pessionstel . Nothing is done here without
conscious intent. without a desired goel." Hhsn controlling collectives of
people in social life the goel is not only defined. but it is achieved by
Ian. here edsinistretive labor is s version of nentel lsbor. and the rela-
tions in the control systen tehe on the forts of socisl reletions enong peo-
ple with their purely hunsn quelitiss (ideology. eorsl outlooks. ettitude
toward lebor. knowledge and skills. edaptetinns. habits. end so on). he
purpose of control here hes a deeply classicel neture.

After setting a decision. the plenning process continues when necessary
end when possible. end it is coepleted. here the control org-t specifies end
details the probleee. procedures. sequence. eeens Mud and the tines of ac-
tion by the control objects. the order of their interaction with each other
and the environeent. end so on. ‘

In strict accordance with the decision end the plen-of operetions
that heve been eade by the control egent. the following control functions
are realized-«tateeent of the goele for the object of control (giving him
an order. giving a co-snd. e signal. end so on). the orgeniretion of inter-
action and relations to it and the environ-cot and also coqrehensive support
of its actions. Out of these functions. the stateeent of the goals for the
object of control is objectively necessery end the soot isportant. for with-
out it. its purposeful actions also are theoretically unthinkable.

When reelizing the eentioned functions, the control agent is deeling
not with the infornetion of stete. but with the neteriel objects end input
to then by trenseission of canned (control) informtion to then. The in-
pleeentation of the decision and the plen of operations is achieved orgeni-
rationally. for these reesons. sons euthors ooebine the given group of
control functions into one larger function of orgsnisetion which. in our
opinion, can be considered velid. but with the stipulation thet there is no
sharp boundary between the functions: this boundary is highly provisional
end while. his stipulation is confined by the fact thet without obtaining
infer-scion of stete snd decision asking. no proper organiretion is possible
did. on the contrary. the gethering of infomtion. the decision eeking end
ell the other functions ere in need of organisation. Orgenieetion. con-

eequently. per-estes the entire process of the control end operation of the
systee itself.

All of the enmereted functions constitute e type of preperetory step
in the activity of the control agent and the systse es s whole (the static
control). After their ilpleeentation. a new. executive step occurs in which
the control functions ere reelised during the course of action taken by the
objects with respect to satisfaction of the stated goals. the: is. the
dynaeic control. he given functions of the control organ are often

1. K. Her: end I. hgels. Collected Horhs. Vol 21. pp 305-306.

1‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

generalized and called rcgulr.:..on. correction or operative control. ﬂith
reepect to contnnt end eoeance they in eany caeea are einilar to the pre-
ceding (preparatory) functione.

‘in order to confirn what hea been eeid let ue again return 'to the
practical application. During the couree of action of any object of control
when fulfilling ite nieeion. the control organ again receive- infomtion
over the feedback channel aout ite etate and environnent. it colparee it
with the previoualy nude plan. in ceae of a deviation (nonconpariaon) it in-
troducee the correeponding correctiona into the plan or ndtee a theoretically
new decieion (with eherp changee in conditione). end then undo the corrected
or new prohlee over the direct cmicatione channel to the object of con-
trol. that_.ie. treneeite the con-and infornation.

1heae operatione are reputed until the object of control cowletely
carriee out ite nieeion end the final goal of the action of the eyetee an a
whole it achieved. 1he entire control proceae consequently in of a clearly
expreeeed cyclic nature.

Finally. it ie neceaeary briefly to diacuea another control function-
nonitoring. 'Ihe giv-n function ia nentioned in the papere of a nunber of
authore. However. the ieolation of nonitoring ea an independent function can
be juetified to none degree only by the great eignificence which it hae in
the general control proceee. eepecially in tactical troop control. It ia
for theee rueaone that in the preeent work the nonitoring by the couander
and the etaff of the readineee and the actione of the troope in codpat ie
conaidered in a aeparate chapter.

If we approach the given problee fron the point of view of neinte-
nance, then the aeparetion of nonitoring into on independent control function
cannot be conaidered juatified. We are eaaily convinced of this by practice.
when Ionitoring both etatically ad dynamicelly. the control agent nrely
perforee functione already inveatigated by on nuely. it gathere data on
the availability. the actual etate and the actione of the objecte of con-
trol. it conparea theee data with the decieion node and the action plan. and
in ceee of a divergence it deteninee the neceeeary correctione (it nore pre-
cieely definea the prewioue deciaion or'naltee a new one). and it given the
correaponding inetructione to the object of control (it etetee a refined or
new problee for it). Coneequently. the baeie for nonitoring ie the prin-
ciple of feedback between the organ and object of control.

11m. the analyeie perforned by on Iron the point of view of eateriel-
ietic dialectice and cybernetice on any control proceee aekee it poeeihle to
etate that independently of where thie proceae ie realieed (in a counter.
in a live organien. a collective of people or in the eociety at a whole) ita
conon feeturea are the following:

‘lhe eendetory preeence of a control eyaten eade up of the control

agent (objecte) of control ad the direct co-rnicatione and feedback chan-
nele connecting then;

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘lhe exietence of n cauu and effect relation between the eleeenta of
the control eyeten:

Purpoeeiulneee of the actione taken by the eyetee and the preeence of
a controlling pareneter:

'lhe dynaeic nature of the eyeten. ite capacity to convert froe one
etete to another and in eo doing undergo large loada free the external input
without dieturbence of ite etructure end propertiee.

Hith reepect to fore. the control in any ayetee ie the proceee of
purpoeeful input free the control organ to the object of control. end vith
reapect to content. both in the etetic end in the dyna-ic aituation it in-
cludea different functione of the Iain, undatory end etable onee pareietent-
ly repeating in and cycle are the follouing: obtaining infornetion of etate
over the feedback channel. decieion ndring on the baeia of thia intonation
lid the delivery of co-and inforeetion to the object over the direct conu-
nicetione channel. that it. eteting ite goal. Without theee three functiona.
no control in theoretically poeeible. It is worthwhile to exclude at leeet
one of then ae the control proceee eooner or later ie dieturbed or etope.
1hey perneate ell the reaaining functione. they are cloeely intertwined with
then end thua characterize the deep featuree of the entire control proceee.
‘lherefore they fully fit the philoeophical category of eeeence and perlit no
to give the following definition to the general concept of control: any
control in e proceee of input fro- the control agent to the object of con-
trol beaed on the objective love of the given environ-eat by obtaining infor-
Iation about the etate of the object of control, naking a decieion on the
beeie of thie intonation and etateeent of the nieeion of the object. lhe
given definition correeponde to all of the eueetiona iqoeed on it; for
whet ie the control. who (what) controle. vho (whet) ie controlled. on the
baeie of vhat doea the control take place and how doee it take place.

2. Specific nature of Troop Control in Cadet and the leeuireeente Inoeed
On It

1he generel cybernetic concept of control inveatigated by no in the
preceding aection ee a proceee occurring in any neteriel environ-ant per-
taine fully to the tactical troop control.

however. euch a general concept of control elem ie entirely inade-
quate for the precticel ectivity of the officere when eanaging troope in con-
bat. In order to mderetend the eubject lore deeply. V. l. unin taught that
"it ie neceeeary to encoepaee. to etudy all eidee of the eubject. all the
relatione and 'internediete concepte."" he applied to our topic. the given
procedural require-eat eeme thet in addition to the general concept of
control it ie neceeeery for the officere to have a deep underetanding of

l. V. l. Lenin. Coeplete Collected worke. Vol ‘2. p 290.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the specific neture of troop control on verious levels . keeping in mind thet
this specific neture occupies the doninent position end is of e duel neture.
first. in the cess of troop control in conet. the officers not be guided
by the generel lswe of sociel developnent end sovernsent control insssuch es
sny wer is e socisl phenonenon. end the sr-od forces ere s cosponent pert of
society end the weepons of the stete. Secondly. thoy sust hnou end skill-
fully use the levs end principles of direct comet ert following fros the
besic purpose end structure of the troops es en ohjuct of control end slso
fros the conditions of srsed cosbet which differ eisnificently fron the con-
ditions of sny other phenonsnon of sociel life.

In order to discover the specific neture of troop control in corbst,
we stein use the methodology of the theory of hawledse end we perfors e sys-

tens enelysis of the orsenirstionel structure of the troops. end the process
of their codast ectivities.

Orgeniretion of Modern Troop Control System

with respect to their orsenisetionsl structure end the neture of the
troop operetions it is possible with couplets sromds to refer to the so-
csllsd lerge self-controlled systems inessuch es they ere chsrecterired by
ell of tho besic feeturss chsrecteristic of these systems: e coeperstively
leren nudtor of cowonent elenents, conplsxity of structure, wsriety of
relstions end intersction non; the elenents end the enternel environsent.
cosplexity of the problsns solved. high dynesdc neture of the systes end its
cspscity to solve new (previously not provided for) problens, the presence of
severel criterie for estieeting the results of the operetions of the system.

‘lhess festuree ere eepecielly clesrly ssnifssted in the control sys-
tens for cosbined-erss subunits. units end cosbined units of infentry of ell

Iodern snsies. therefore we shell teks then so the bssis for the investi-
sstion.

If we consider these troops ss e systen end the cowbined-sru bettle
end srled cadet es s whole ss its operetions. then. in spite of their con-

plexity. it is possible to estsblish the following cowonents (see figure 3).

'1he first one of these is the submits of the Met sue. the sol-
diers of which conduct bettle with the ener directly by the spplicetion of
the eveileble neene of destruction. they dzztr'ﬂ his unpower end uterisl
by fire end sttsck. In the infentry of modern snics. such troops include
the notorired rifle troops (infsntry. sotorized infsntry, nechsnired). the
tent troops. missile troops. srtillery end entisircrsft defense troops.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE u 'LY
...-.~....-s~«~..-,.-~ ~--- .W-......~ . .-_ .-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I
£03)

0
O
o
I
I
o
0

  
  

icon—o Clo-urn. (12

AH.“ ”nu-In W 13)

a 4. Tgwl‘IOmll‘ 6)

~ 9 °z,".~..-..-.:r:r....."°-. (1

vigor. 3. Soho-atic Diasran of tho Hodorn Contained-Arno Unit as a Cowlex
Salt-Controllod Syoton (according to tha data of the foreign
prooa).

by: 1. With tho auporior control organ or aonta;
2. Diviaion outayoto-z
3. lrigada «bayou. (rosin-at);
b. usinoorin; units:
5. Bar aorviooo unita;
6. Engineer subunit;
7. Roar aorvicao submit:
a. Battalion nab-yuan;
9. Capany auboyotoa;
lo. Platoon auboyaton;
11. Squad “about“;
12. Provisional notation:
13. hoop control poota;
l6. Mined-aria haadquartara;
15. Chic! of typo. of troopa and union;
16. Direct oo-unioationo ad foodback ohmola;
l7. lifloa ad Iachina ma (aatoriel control);
18. With tho neighbor;
19. Mined-aru- hoadquartora control oubayatan:
20. Mirna-ar- oo-andor control onto-g
21. umn. troop. ad artillery orb-yuan;
22. Antiaircraft dofanaa oubayatan;
23. Enginoorin; troopo aubayatan;
26. Rear urvicoa and oupplyoubayatan:
25. Other wanton.

. 13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

no second coeponent of this systen are the subunits of special troops
ad rear services, the soldiers of which enter into open cocbet with the
sum only in the entrees necessity for this. he basic purpose is coqre-
hens‘iva support of the cadet operations of the dwve-enuearated coebet arns.
for this purpose, they conduct reconnaissance with the help of the corre-
sponding equip-ent. they build roads. they organize coumications. they
haul fuel and e-unition, they treat the wounded. and so on. mass submits
include the radio technical. engineering. mications, notor pool. road,
esdical and other sdaunits.

A third coeponent of the systee of each given elenent in ell of the
eodern sreies are the col-anders end the various control agents. lhey are
designed so as to control the first two cononents of the system, that is,
the subordinate stbunits of the codaet area. the special troops and rear
snrvicee. which lake at the objects of control for then. the successful
operations of the latter are unthinkable without control. especially in the
case where they are solving the general problen in the presence of active
ener counteraction. Under such conditions. the absence of control. the
coordination of the operations with respect to the target, tins and location
mevoidebly will done then to certain destruction by the eneny.

It nust be noted that in the distant past, especially during the
period of coeparetiwely cull armies and lieited battlefields. the subunit.
unit and codined unit con-enders and even the co-enders-in-chief of the
eraies not only controlled the troops but were also direct participants in
the battle. 'lhey were located directly in the codet forearions of the
subordinate troops and personally led than into battle. executing the ad-
ainistrative functions and the functions of a warrior. that is. they perti-
cipetad in the destruction of the eenpower and equip-ant of the eneny by the
application of their own physical strength and weapons.

At the present tine. end in connection with the appearance of naas
areies end a significant increase in the specs and tile scale of the cadet
operations. the situation has gone through a fmdenental shift. line control
functions. initially for the cos-ender-in-chief. and then the co-anders of
the codined units. the unit. and even the subunit, gradually beceee not
only the nein thing but the only thing.

For execution of this function. the contenders have at their disposal
the necessary agents and technical name of control, and. as a rule. they
are at the corresponding control points located in the coebat for-scion of
the suboMinete troops. Usually the oo-anders and officers of the control
units do not participate in the direct destructionof the eneny by per: onal
application of the teens of destruction in Iodern warfare. ‘nle only excep-
tion is the co-enden of the seall tactical submit (the sqmd leader. the
crew chief. the platoon leader or conpany colander) and the senior officers
in cesea where they are forced to set a personal example in the attack or
replace a soldier at a weapon or in a tank. and so on. At all other tines,
the most important and even the only lission is the control of the

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICiM. USE ONLY

subordinste troops. giving thee directions required for successful fulfill-
eent of the codaet nission.

'lhe unit end conbined unit control systess ere set up in eccordence
with the given structure of the nodern infentty troops. First of ell the
widely developed hiererchy by which we man the previously osteblished order
of subordinetion of the subordinete units end duty personnel to the swerior
ones with respect to strictly defined levels (the hiererchicel ledder) is
cherecterietic of thee.

These levels ere es follows (Pigure 3): soldier-equed (conbet crew,
deteil)—-plstoon-coepeny (bettery)-bettelim (artillery hettelion). In
eeny erodes the superior levels include the following: brigede (ﬁgment)—
division-corps-ersy (er-y group)-infentry troops es s whole. ‘hvo edjs-
cent internediete levels (for eerls, the pletoon-squed; coqeny-pletoon.
end so on) torn e control link (closed loop) conjugete to the superior. sub-
ordinete end edjecent levels.

This stepped neture oi the structure of the troop control system
pernits the intonation flows to be brought into order. echievenent of orgs-
nieetion in the troop operetions, end the netching of the nueber of objects

of control or eech level with the cspsbilities of the co-ender end the
control. units or orgens.

"The initiel cells" of the generel rroop control systee ere the sol-
diers who directly control the corresponding uteriel (weepons) end who
destroy the enemy with its help by fire end strike. In the finel enelysis.
any troop control systen is ”closed" by then. '1he success of the operstions
of the entire control systen depends on the ideologicel tapering, their
norel spirit. cadet treining end ell other purely hunen quelities. ‘me
conbinetion of the soldier with uteriel in the generel cese eekes up e
“nen-weepon" subsystee. lts peculisrity consists in the fect thet the ob-
ject of control here is not the nen, but the equipeent. ‘lhererore the
given subsystee will note correctly belong to the cetegory not of troop con-
trol but of equipment end weepons control with ell of its cherecteristic
feetures. In the process of this control. the soldier evelustes the terget.
properes or nore precisely detines the initiel dste for firing. leys the
weepon on the terget. end fires. Here the control can be reelized nenuelly.
by eechenicel eeens. se-ieutoneticslly or eutoeeticelly. Depending on the
control procedure in the given systen different chennele end tedmicel neens
of direct conunicetions end feednck ere used: visuel, nechsnicnl. wire.
redio. end so on. In eddition to the develop-ent of the progren of opers-
tions of the control devices, the non cowrehensively prepsres the entire
cowlex of coebet neteriel for epplicetion, he hes thee eveileble at the
required plece end st the required tine. he controls the operstion of the
instrument end is in constent reediness to essune their functions in the cese
of feilure or for other reesons. These ceuees cen be chsnges in the situetio
end noncorrespondence of the previously given progr- to it, the necessity
to deceive the ens-y, eepecielly if the progren for operstion of our devices

20
FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hee hecone known to hie. lhereiore in the given echelon. the proper codeine-
tion of intellectuel poeeihilitiee of non with the poeeihilitiee of the equip-
Ient ocquiree eepecielly ieportent eisnificence.

'lhe direct troop control. thet ie, control of the people equipped with
the eereriel end reduced oreeniretionelly to the oorreeponding troop collec-
tive. hesine with ouch e prinery euhmit er the equed. the coiaet weepone
crew end leunchins tree. the tenlt crew. end on on. here e eyetee ie eenereted
in which people ere the control unit end the object of control. thet ie. the
equed leeder (crew chief) end the eoldier euhordinete to hie. Ae e rule.
vieuel. euditory end eoeetieee technicel direct end feedaeck chennele ere ueed
for oo-unicetione econ. thee. 1hue. the ettrihutee cherecterietic of the

troop control eyeten. thet ie. the control eyeten for ened people. ere leni-
tented.

m equed (coehet crew) ie orgeniretionelly e euheyetee in the eyetee
of the euperior eubmit--pletoon-0here the functione of the control orsen
ere perforeed hy the comnder. hut hie control input ueuelly ie referred
directly not to the eoldier equipped with the weepon. but to the equed lee-
dere. lhe equed leedere coneequently: perform the functione of the control
opent with reepect to the euhordinete eoldiere end ere eieulteneouely the
object (euhject) of control on the pert of the pletoon leeder. tor the for-
eetion of the direct end feednck chennele here. in eddition to euditory end
vieuel eignele. verioue technicel leene cen he widely ueed (redio. telephone,
end eo on). At the cone tine e etill eore cowliceted eyetee then thet in
the equed ie forced in the pletoonuthe eyetee node up of een (pletoon lee-
der)--equipeent (redio, telephone)-en (equed leeder) with ell the ettrihutee
cherecterietic oi troop control eyeteee. ‘lheee ettrioutee ere esoin rein-
forced end hroedened in the emeequent etepe of the "hiererchicel ledder"
where the co-endere control the euhordinete not only pereonelly but with the
help of epecielly creeted control unite end eleo the poet veried technicel
neene. Thur. the eotorired coqeny conender hee e dtputy with reopect to
the politicel eection. e firet eergeent, en engineer, e eenitetion inetructor
end en ereored pereonnel carrier driver. In eddition. in the coepeny there

of then. In the Auricen Any. for exmle, thie eection includee the exe-
cutive officere. the conunicetione eergeent. the eupply eergeent. the cor
peny clerk end three redio operetore.

In the hettelion control eyetee. in eddition to the «under. there
ie hie deputy for the politicel eection end e hody ouch no the heedeuertere.
In the Aeericen Arley. thie heedquertere eteff includee the chief of etc“.
the officere in cherse of pereonnel. reconneieennce. operetione. coehot
treining. reer echelon eerwicee. micetione. end eleo the cheeicel offi-
cer end other people. In order to creete the direct and feedheclt chonnele
end eleo to provide for the operetione of the control eyetee. the ore“ of
the hettelion hee epeciel counicetione. reconneieeence end oheerwetion

unite. lhe executive hody of the hettelion ie. ooneequently. e highly coe-
pler orgenien.

21

FOR OFF ICU-1. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0le

he objecte of control in the battalion control oyatca are the noto-
rited rifle (aotoriood infantry) conpaniee. antitank. mortar and other ed:-
mite and aleo the attunite attached to the battalion for the period of ite
execution of the otatod goal (artillery. tank. ont’neore. and ao on). Each
of there aeeigned erbmite. being the object of control. at the neon tine hoe
ite own control wait with ite technical nonno and apecific nethode of con-
trol. ‘lho control mite of theee edmnite. in addition to the fact that
they are part of the control eyetea of the battalion. can be coneidered ea

coeponant levele (eubeyateaa) oi the control of coabet area or epacial
troope.

The controlling ayetea of the battalion realioee ite functione. ae a
rule. through tho coapany ooaaandere with their deputiae and aloe tho coa-
nandere of the other erbmite directly eubordinete to the battalion counnder.
'lhe battalion co-ander atatao tho oieeione for then. he receivoe the baeic
part of tho intonation about the uituation that hoe developed in their
operation tone fro- thea. and he deaande the execution of the otatod nia-
aione of theee oo-andero. 'ihuo. he ecte on the pereonnal and controle the
efforte of the etbmite for the fulfill-ant of the aieeione through tho

coepony co-andere eubordinate to him. and the latter in turn have control
over tho platoon leedore.

In the brigade (regiaent) and higher the halo control unit in all the
areiae io coneiderod to be the coieinod-araa headquartere. In addition to
the heedquartore. here there are political mite, the chiefe of tho corro-
eponding codet or. epociel troope and eervicee (artillery. engineering
eervice. and no on).! ‘lho "hierarchical ladder” at the eeno tiae will re-
ceiwo ite develop-ant not only vertically but horizontally. aleo for-ins tho
control etbeyete- for the codaat one. the epocial troope and eervicee
(one ﬁgure 3). here the right to lake the codeat docieione ae a whole in
all of the mito ie granted only to the «under. lhe aoet iaportent prin-
ciple of the conetruction of the control eyeteae. ia. coneequently. the one-
aan coauand of the co-mder. All of the retaining duty pareonnel of the

control mite and the troope the-alwoe operate in etrict accordance with
hie decieion.

Por the realization of their adninietrative fmctione. the co-andera
and tho officere of the control mite are the oethode of operation character-
ietic of then. they have at their diepoeel the correeponding control pointe.
and they uoe epocially daeignotad control noane.

'lhua. in the general etructuro of the troopa when carrying out coobet
operationa the troop control ie with reopect to fora (external appearance)
other than the activity of the co-ander. the ate“. the political unite.

the chiofa of the codat one end eerwicoe. ‘lho coqonent ole-ante of the
troop control eyetea in each echelon are the following:

1. §ee Ea internal eerwica regulatione of the Arae'd Porcoa of the 1185!.

22

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a) ma connodere and the control unite or organe (where they ariet)
of the given level located at the correeponding control pointa and uaing
variou technical neane and nethoda of operation characterietic of thee;

b) ‘lhe eo-andere uni the control mite of the etbordinete emmite
and mite (control objecta) of the ooiaet ar- (notoriaed rifle. tank. nia-
eile. artillery. antieircraft defence troopa. and ac on) and aleo the epe-

cial troopa and rear eervicea and eupply (co-micationa. engineering.
nedicel. and eo on);

c) the control eyeten between the firet two elenenta with the direct
and feedback chennele and neane of autonotion of control.

lnaenuch an the troopa have a hierarchical etructure. the control in-
put to the eoldiere of the adaordinate eubunite on the part of the encoder
of each echelon. beginning with the platoon. ie ueually realieed not di-
rectly but through the aubordinate connandera. ‘lhe latter. coneequently.
are the control unit with reapect to their atbordinatea and the object (aub-
ject) of control for the auperior «under and control unit. with reepect
to for: and etructural echenatic, the codet troop control coneequently ia
baeically ainilar to the control in any other area. for axe-ple. enterpriee
control. hwever. with reapect to purpoee. functiona (content) and the con-
ditione of their execution it ha a nore theoretical difference. the con-
eidaration of which hee ieportnnt theoretical and practical aignificence.

Goele of Codnt Troop Control. Ice Content end mecca

1he Soviet Arned Porcea are charged with the reliable protection of
the peaceful labor of the Soviet people building «union and. in the ful-
fill-en: of the agree-eat obligttion. aleo protection of the intereete of
other aocialiet comtriee fro. the aggreeeive efforte of the inperialiet
powera. ‘lhe etrengthening of .their coabet power, an the 25th crsu Congreea
pointed out. renaine one of the priaary problem. It followa fron thia
that the prinary goal of the control of the troopa of our am on the part
of the co-andere and etaffe at all levele both in peacetine and in caae en
eggreeaor unleaahee a war to conatant naintenonce of high level codat
reedineea. including the high political-total condition of the eubunite
eubordinete to then (aee Figure 4.).

It nuet be noted that in certain official and unofficial eourcee the
Iaintenanca of high codnt readineee of the troopa wee interpreted mtil
recently not ea the goal but ea the individual neaeure of the co-andere ad
eteffa equivalent to other neeeurea (the gathering of date on the eituation.
the planning of the codet operatione, and an on). 'lhia opinion ie in need
of refine-cut ineenuch an it far fron conpletely correeponda to reality. it
conetricte and reducee the eeeence of the codaat reedineae of the troopa
without Juetification and. in addition. it contradicte the require-elite of

logic, precluding the place-eat of the equal aign between the whole and ite
parta and arrange-eat of tuen in a aeriee.

23

FOR OFFICU‘; USE 0! Y
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040016-9

ton orncm. us's own

“and

  

manning. .-

oromd cm in
colbat motion.)

Ocuntuttoo and d1:
tion of the inlan-
tation of all-around
support moo of th-
oodot operations

troop combat operations and direction of their
effort. at successful mutton of the 0

mm during the tom. of oodut.

s
3.
i
.3
§
5
i

 

roadtnuu of the troops. includ
ltticol-uonl coodttton; n11-

 

Nalung tonne-tot) of
cc 3 n

3
«8
is:
:U
a
E:

 

3
3
é
a

2‘
FOR OPPICIM. USE OSLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-R0982-00850R000100040016-0
FOR OFFICIAL U88 ONLY

In order to elieinete thie theoretical deficiency. intervention of the
perty end governeent leedere hee been required. ‘lhue. 1.. l. breehnev noted
the following on receiving the greduetee of the eilitery ecedeeiee on 5 July
1967: "Manor-cue efforte end eeteriel expendituree of the people on equip-
eent of the era). conecioueneee. cowet treining end diecipline of ell of
the eilitery eerviceeen. the ert of the con-end pereonnel in troop control
end e greet deel elee ere concentreted in the coebet reedineee of the troope
ee e focel point. lhie. in the finel enelyeie. ie the crown of the coebet
eeetery of the troope in peecetiee end the key to victory in wer.”

ln eore epecificelly defining the given poeition. Herehel of the
Soviet Am A. A. Orechho geve e definition in hie book "Ar-ed Porcee of the
Soviet Stete“ (p 109) thet by codaet reedineee of the troope we euet mder-
etnd to eeen their cepebility et en: tine end wider the eoet coepliceted
conditione of repelling end deetroying eggreeeion. wherever it teey coee
froe end whetever eeene end uethode ere ueed, including nucleer weepone. he
pointed out thet the beeic coeponente of the codet reedineee of our Areed
Porcee ere the following: high enrol-comet quelitiee of ell the pereormel.
treining. diecipline. orgeniretion end phyeicel herdeningz equipeent of the
troope with weepone end eeteriel. the eeintenence of theee weepone end
Ieteriel in proper working condition: the high level of coebet md epeciel-
ieed treining of the con-end pereonnel. their cepecity to teke on the coe-
Iend of the troope. ekillful direction of their operetione. orgenieetion
of continuoue eupply with eeteriel: reedineee of the politicel mite. the
‘perty orgeniutione. end ell co-uniete by word and pereonel exeeple to in-
epire the troope to fulfill the codiet lieeione.l

1hue. the high coebet reedineee of the troope. being one of the prin-
cipel goele of their control on the pert of the officere on ell levele ie
echieved on e reeult of the reeliution of the lerge conler of intercon-
netted eeeeuree. including the neeeuree with reepect to con“ end control.
he letter ere e coqonent pert. one of the ieportent conditione of echieve-
eent of troop coﬂet reedineee. lhe troope cannot be coneidered coebet
reedy if the «undue end eteffe do not know the eituetion. do not know
how to eeke e eubetentieted coﬂet decieion, to orgeniee the interection end
eupport of the troope with everything thet ie neceeeery to echieve eucceee
of the coebet operetione. end no on.

A eecond goel of the troop control. eleo erieing for the coumdere
end the control unite of ell etegee under coebet conditione and with the
eeeigneent of e epecific coebet nieeion, coneiete in the feet thet in eny
cowlex eituetion coIpreheneive preperetion of the coehet operetione end
during the couree of their conduct ineurence of the effective epplicetion

l. ‘lhe work of the co-endere end the control unite with reepect to eeinte-
nence of high cadet reedineee of the troope in peeoetiee end vertiee ie

in need of epeciel inveetigetion in deteil. end therefore it ie not
coneidered in thie book.

25

NR OFFICIAL USE (bNLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the euhordinete aubunit of the availehle loan! of deetruction end direc-
tion of their efforte er the eucceeeful fulfilleent of the coebat nieeion.
that ie. the rout of the oppoein; ener in the uiuim tine. with leeet
loeeee for theuelwee. leaet expenditures of uteriel and eleo the cepture
or holding of e defined eection (eree. line) of the terrain.

1he given goel followe fron the very eeeence of CO‘ilt operetione end.
of couree. ie aheent in any other area. ihe coehat troop control ie realired
not for the ealte of control iteelf. but for the eake of echievins the indi-
cated soel. the perfornence of the eeeigned coebet eieeion. By the reeulte
of the aeeiened codet eieeion. thet ie. the effectiveneee of the utilicetion
of the forcee end neme of deetruction. eepecielly with respect to the nuder
of eneny loeeee end loeeee of our own troope, it ie poeeihle and ehove ell
neceeeery to urinate the effectiveneee of troop control on the pert of any
conender or control unit. ‘lheee are the nein criterie for evaluetion not
only of the troop operetione but also the activity of the co-endere and
etaffe. It ie quite ohvioue thet it ie iepoeeihle to ooneider troop control
eucceeeful if the euhordinate euhunite and unite heve not cerried out their
coﬁet eieeion or they have cerried it out with greet. mjuetifidyle loeeee
end heve echieyed the planned codut cool at too great a price.

All of the regaining epecial criteria and effectiveneee indexee of
control euch no for exawle. the operetiveneee (epeed) of the eyetee with
reepect to taking each control neaeure. ite etehility with reepect to nucleer
etrihee. redio interference and enew fire. rhytheicity end continuity of
effect. eecrecy. cerryin; cepecity of connicetione chennele. precieion of
the dete received and the celculetione perforeed. the qualificetion of the
officere. inteneity. efficiency and conditione of their lebor. the equip-
nent with the control eeene. coepleteneee end reliability of infonetion.
the quantity. quelity and tinee of develop-ent of the docunente, the econoo
nic expendituree on the neintenence of the entire eyeten lid eo on can he
coneidered only an auxiliary to the ahove-indicetod eain criterie. eepeciel-
ly the eiee of the loeeee of our troope. ineeeuch en for ue the people are
the eoet veluahle "capital." end preeervetion of their livee ia the “13h”!
etenderd of the price of victory end. coneequently. the quelity of troop
control.

'lhie ie the epecific neture of conbet troop control by cowerieon
with control in eny other aree.

1he content of troop control, that ie. the functione which the con-
nendere end the control unite perfore both in preparation end during the
couree of cadet operetione to achieve the enunereted goele-neintenance of
high cachet reedineee of the troope end their eucceeeful execution of the
eeeiyned cadet nieeion-odiffer eignificently in coéet by cowerieon with
other conditione. here certain functione cherecterietic of other unite.
elthough they keep their neeee, have e different internel eeening. end part
of thee ere auxiliary. cherecterietic only of troop control. In addition.
it ie imrtmt to note thet the value of operetione of the «undue and

26

FOR OFFXCXM. USE 0M3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tho control unito of oll of tho ocholono whon porforlins ooch function in
nodorn coobot by emoticon with tho poot hoo incrooood oisniticontly. ond
tho tioo for thio hoo boon roducod ohorply. which woo tho conooquonco of

tho oppooronco coon; tho troopo of now coobot notoriol. on incroooo in tho
opotiol dinonoiono In! tho rotoo of tho count oporotiono ond oloo o reduc-
tion of tho tioo tor codot proporotiono. In controot to tho poot. tho coo-
oondoro and ototfo now not oolvo, ior onmlo. ouch now ond cooplox prob-
lono oo tho orgonitotion of control in tho prooonco of ooono of nucloor
ottooh by tho onow. tho ofioctiwo uoo of tho rooulto of tho nucloor otrikoo
of our own troopo. tho ortmiootion ond conduct of cmot oporotiono with
tho opplicotion of dilioront dootruction noono. tho rootorotion of tho coo-
bot roodinooo of tho troopo oftor nucloor otrihoo by tho onolv. tho orgoni-
totion of tho nogotiotion o! contouinotion ond dootruction tonoo by tho
troopo ond nony othor problono.

ln ordor to conflrn whot hoo boon ototod. lot uo conoidor how ony
col-ondor or control controlo tho troopo in codaot. ond whot iunctiono oro
porfornod (ooo tiguro o).

'Iho firot of thoir functiono olwoyo it tho gothorin; ond procoooin;
of doto on tho oituotion. ln othor orooo. tho molocouo function. u wo
hovo olroody ooon. io collod obtoinin; intorootion of ototo by tho control
unit or orton. lho procooo of troop control on tho port of ony cot-condor
or hoodquortoro otoff bogino with it. Hhotovor tho oonorol or tho opociol
tool thoy howo whon proporin; for codot oporotiono ond during tho couroo
of tho coobot oporotiono (ioprovooont of tho codot roodinooo ot tho troopo.
onouronco or thio ouccoootul porioroonco of tho ototod oiooion. tho organi-
totion of intoroction of tho troopo. roconnoiooonco. trootnont of tho
woundod. ond oo on). their ptocticol octivity olwoyo ond oworywhoro booino
with obtoinin; ond rocoivin; doto on tho objoctivo. octuolly dovolopln; coo-
bot oituotion. Hlthout thio, thoy connot toho ovon ono otop olon; tho poth
to tho plmod gool. or if this io oono. thon srooo orroro ond oubjoctivio-
oro unovoldobly ponittod.

It io inportont to noto thot in o nubor of oourcoo tho givon control
function it collod not gothorin; (rocoiving). but obtoinins tho oituotion
doto. nu- dooisnotion oloo comet oo conoidorod corroct inooluch no it
dooo not corrupond to roolity. it loodo to confuoion in thoory ond proc-
tico of troop control. 1ho co-ondoro Ild tho oto“ officoro. oopociolly
(or tho lowor ochclono. tho-oolvoo procuro tho oituotion doto only by por-
oonol oboorvotion of tho bottlofiold. porter-in; rooonnoioooneo functiono
in thio too. All of tho ronoining doto thoy gothor (rocoiwo) iron voriou
oourcoo which procuro thio doto. 'lhuo. tho doto obout tho onouy oro pro-
cured by the force: ond mono of roconnoioomco. ‘lhoy rovool hio toraoto.
thoy dotor-ino thoir coupooition. locotion. ltd oo on. 1h: doto on tho
rodiotion oituotion ond tho woothor oro dotoninod by tho corrooponding
inotrunonto. on do torgoto. by rodor. ond to on. lho function of tho coo-
Iondor ond tho otoﬂ conoioto in tiloly gothurin; (rocoiving) ond otucyin;
oi oll of that doto fro. tho corroopondin; oourcoo ond okillful uoo of
tho- for oohiovo-ont of tho coubot oiooion. If thoy oro cooplotoly invootod

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

with the function of procure-ant of the data. thon ouch concepte ae the
"troop control.” “control eyatee“ and no on are expanded to boundlooo linite

in theory and practice.

However. thie lo a matter not only of tho none and oignificanco of the
given function. lhe eain thing coneieta In ita specific contont which ia
characterioad by the largo wolueo. variety and contradictory nature of the
data which the co-andor and the control unite need when controlling tho
troopa in Iodorn toilet.

for aucceoaful troop control. any coo-under or control unit requiroa
data on tho following factoro which are called tho aituetion eloaente: tho
oneey. hie troupe. neighbore. terrain. radiation aituation. hydroeetoorolo-
gicel conditiona. tioe of year and day. econooic condition of tho coebat
operationo acne and aocial-political coopoaition of tho population. in tho
horicm Aruy. tho individual eleaent of tho aituation ie conoidored to be
tho content of the eiaeion received fro. the eenior officer.

“he co-mdero and haedquartora atnffe need to collect data on all of
the enuaorated ole-onto of ;ho oituation in coder-n coabat fro. a ouch greater
area then prawioualy. inaaouch ea the width of the cowat oparationo eonoe
and the depth of the aieaione parforaed by the troopa are ouch greater.
hany of the eituation date will quickly becoae obeolete at the eodern retea
of coin: oporationa. and acne of thee. oapacially the data on the anoay.
will bo inconplota. contradictory lad oven felae. for the onaqy will try to
on all eoaeuroa to hide hio grouping fro. ua. deceive and introduce confu-
eion. A nuober of ioportant piocao of infer-lotion are atill difficult and
even iopooaible to aeaauro preciaely quantitatively. lhie inforaation. for
one-pie. includoe the data on the political-word and peychological eteto of
the peraonnel, tho degroo of coﬁat training. the national characteriatico.
tho rcaiotence in the prooenca of fatal dugor. the eontal. organizational
and volitional qualitiee of the co-andero. and oo. lhie charactoriatic of
the inforaation. in the opinion of foreign epecialiata. ia oapocially inor-
tent to conoidar not only when eating the code: decioion and planning cadet
operationa but alao when oolvin; tho probloea of auto-eting the troop con-
trol proceeaea.‘

‘mo aourcoa md Ieeno by which the counendor and the troop control
unite obtain comet aituation data are dietinguiehed by great variety. which
haa boon taken into account in tho fourth chapter of thia book.

‘lhe next troop control function lo the coﬁat docieion-Ialtins and
coebat operatione planning by tho co-andor.

1n. oaoonco of any decieion oonoiete in dotorainin; the goal of the

operationa ad eelectins the for-coo. nteriol. proceduree md tioe for
achiovclont of it: in any control ayatea with the participation of non. the

l. 'S'oo the NW“ journal. 1960. October. pp £649.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCML USE ONLY

deoieion ie the reeult of hie knowledge. creativity. experience and will.
without refuting the role of the latter. it ie etill neceeeary to point out
that the will not be baeed on deep knowledge of the lewe operating in the
given environ-not. proper eetiletion of the objectively developed eituetion.
the available forcee and uteriel. Subjectiviee and volmtariee are unavoid-
m. otherwiee. 1he volitional innlee of no lo neeful when it ie a reflec-
tion of the objective world. ‘lhie ie eepecielly ieportant when the con-
lender lakee a coﬁat decieion dealing with the application of nuclear
weepone. inee-uch ea not only the eocceee of the perforeance of the coebet
aieeion by the troope depeode on hie ecientific judgeent end correepondence
to the cadet eituation. but aleo the life of the eubordinete pereonnel. end
on an operetive-etretegic ecale. the fate of the country aa e whole. ite
eocial end politicel etructure. lhie erieee fun the fact that octet theore-
tically diffare fro. any other eociel phenooenon. Any coabet in e coeponent
pert of a two-way proceee of arned count in which the enm aleo etriveo to
deetroy our troope. here the modern troope have not only oieeilee. tanke.
gme and other coebat weapone. but prinrily the people uaing then are orga-
nieationelly reduced to the verione etbunite and conetmtly eubjected to
Iortal danger. lhey are alweye cheracterieed by a eenee of fear and eelf
preeervation. lhe coebat decieion of the consider under theee conditione

ie to coebine then into a united whole. to eneure clear interactione with
reepect to terget. tine and location between then, to ewordinate their ope-
retione to the eingle will of the under. 'iherefore in our any the
decieion ie correctly coneidered to be the baee for the troop control. and
eating it ie coneidered the out inportnt creetive (motion end pereonal

ect of the one-Ian-co-end co-ender. All renaining leaeuree with reepect

to control end aleo the operatione of the troope theeaelvee with reepect to

the erecution of the cadet deeion are realire: in etrict accordance with
the decieion.

Coneidering what he been etated. it ie poeeule to give the follow-
ing definition of the eeeence of my co-ender'e codut decieion: a coebat
decieion ie the raeult of the creative thought and will of the «under
deter-ining the goel of the coebat operatione. forcee. nateriel. proceduree
end tinee for echieve-ent of it ad aleo the nieeion of the eubordinetee
baeed on the lewe end principlee of nilitary ecience. proper explmation of
the cadet eieeion and eveluetion of the eituetion.

the ooet ieportent require-cote of the coebat decieion ere ite ecien-
tific eubetantietion. that ie. the correepondenoe to the developed and ex-
pected eituation. the aeeigned lieeion. the intention of the eenior officer.
the lewe and principle of the conduct of cadet operatione reinforced in
the rulee md regulatione. any in thie caee can the decieion be e reliable
baeie for control. It ie eepecially inportent thet the decieion be me:-
pected (e eurpriee) for the eneqy. that it be eubetentiated by the corre-
eponding celculatione of the codat capabilitiee of the troope on both eidee
and more the beet (optiIal) epplication of the neene of deetruction by our
own troope. give the greeteet effect. iwoee min- loeeee on the eneq ad
reduce the loeeee of our troope to a lint-u. lhe decieion node by "intui-
tion" not correeponding to ﬂu eituation leade either to etateeent of

29

NR OWICIAL USE it"LY

b
FOR OFFICIAL USN ONLY

unroaliotic (unfulfillablo) niaaiona for tho troopa or inconplota utilization
of thoir coobat capabilitioa. In tho paat. thaoo armro lat tho-aalvoa bo
known gradually. and thoy could ba aliainatod during tho couraa of tha
ooabat oporationo. In oodarn wariaro. oapacially whon conducting coobat
oporationo with tho application of nuclaar waopona. thay can be (alt inoton-
tanaouoly and bo fraught with ouch oorc ocrioua. at tiooo irroconcilablo can-
aoquancoo than boloro. including tho knocking out of ontiro olooonta of tho
toobat otructuro oi tho troopo and unjuatiiiod loaaao oi poroonnol. It io
alao nocoaaary to noto that tho orronoouo coabat docioion has o nagotivo
influonco on tho ooral-paychological otata of tho oubordinata troopa. it
doatroyo thoir iaith in tho capacity of thair oo-mdar and tho poaaibility
of achiaving auccooo.

In addition to oubotantiation. owan tho docioion for coobat nuot be a
opontanoouo ono. it out poi-nit tho troopo to proparo carafully for ita axo-
cution. to provont tho anon tron opaning lira and alao ba aa cloar ao poo-
oiblo for tho oubordinatoa. oxcluding dilloront undarotandingo of it.

111: oatiafaction of tho onuloratod roquirooonto on tho docioion. oapo-
cially ita optioalnoao and tho tioalinooa of oaking tho dociaion ia coupli-
catod oignificntly undar nodorn conditiono by tho fact that in contraot to
tho paat. tho tioa {or proparation of coohat oporationa hao boon roducod
oharply. and tho woluoo of control oaaouroo haa incraaood.

In addition to tho incroaaod oigniiicanca oi optinalnoao (owatantia-
tion) and tioaliooao. tho cedar docioion diiioro iron tho docioiono in othar
aroao by tho fact that ita quality ia inpoaoiblo to chock in practice for
known roaaono (iopoaaiblo to rohoaroo). boioro tho beginning of cowat opora-
tiona undor conditiona that aro aboolutoly oioilar to then. lhio paculiarity
of tho coo-andor'o dooioion hao boon figuratively doocribod by x. Silonow in
hia book "Soldiaro Ara hot born." Ono of tho horoaa of thia book aoya:
"1horo aro no rohoaroolo in war in which it to pooaiblo to oaho a dry run-
it io not that way. but lator it io oo it out ba. ‘Ihora aro no acript
writara who can odit and rcwrito tho ocript in war. lloro ovorything io writ-
ton in blood. oworythiog fro- boginning to ond. Iron a to 3..."

ho givon doticioncy can bo cononoatod for to a known dogroo by tho
oathaoatical aioulation of tho dociaion for tho forthcooing coobat oporationo
and chatting (playing) it by counter. thia aothod. ao ia known. has boon
widoly uood at tho prooont tino in dooiaion oohing and production planing.
lta introduction io a charactoriotic foaturo of tho oodorn ocionco of con-
trol. Bowowor. thou oahing a dociaion for ooobinod-oru combat. it io accou-
paniod by oigniiicant ditiicultioo which conoiat in the following.

Pirot, tho aorioo of oituation data which aro initial to tho oatho-a-
ticol oinulation. aopocially tho data on tho condition of tho paroonnol on
both oidoa. aro not “Moot to oxoct quantitatiwo ooaouro-ont. but nmrtho-
loao hawo inortant. at tiaaa owon daciaivo oignificnco for dcciaion oaILing
ad achiowing ouctoao in taint. Wan waging tho aggroooiwo war in Viotnao.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Anarican generals and officers. as it appeared to then. had calculated
everything and hoped for an easy. fast victory. however. they lost the war.

for they did not take and could not take into account the high aoral spirit
and strength of the Vietnenese.

Secondly. each new battle is never an exact copy of the preceding one

inasmuch as the ease situation does not arise under which the decision is
wade.

1hirdly. a large nulber of submits o! the cowst em and special
troops. differing sharply tron each other in purpose. organization. arise.

capability and eethods of operation. participate in the nodern conbinad-enss
conbat.

Iourthly. the substantiation of the coabst decision node oust be
evaluated not by any criterion but inediataly by several indexes differing
as iollowat the expected loss of the encey. prevented or possible losses of
our own troops. the coneusption of natariel and tine for carrying out the
cosbat lission. the capture (holding) of territory and also the social-
political consequences ol‘ the iorthconing conbst operations.

Fifthly. in the conbat situation the greatest success can often be
achieved by the coauander who ashes a less substantiated but unexpected deci-
sion for the aneny iron the purely nethenatical point of view. A. V. Suvorov
also wrote! "Surprise is victory." and this aphorisn has profound meaning
also under nodern conditions. Coebst is above all a battle of minds. the
struggle of intellects. behind the bare figures and any fornula. every con-
Iander lust see live people, his own troops and the may opposing then.
intelligent and strong. knowing the tactics and the "algoritb 4" for decision
eating and waging war.

Thus. when asking the coin decision it is necessary for the cou-
under to deal with any contradictions. the basic of which are the contra-
dictions between the necessity for having a scientifically swstantiated
decision and the difficulty of obtaining all of the data necessary for the
situation and to create a natheaatical nodel of the forthconing coder: be-
tween the necessity for reducing the decision eating tins and the growing
volune of initial intonation required for this. for gathering. processing
and the study of which it is necessary to spend a simificant anoint of ties;
between the require-ant of sisplicity. clarity and brevity of the solution
and the large vole-s of co-end intonation which sust be provided on the
basis of the decision to the subordinates: between the nusbsr of possible
losses of the many and our own troops and the consuqtion of ntariel and
tine for this: between the capture (holding)ol territory and the social-
political consequences of the coﬁat operations which are tr be conducted
men carrying out the decision; between the objective and subjective factors
influencing the content of this decision.

Practice and theoretical studies indicate that for successful resolu-
tim oi all of these and other contradictions during coder decision tasking.

31

FOR OFFICIAL US}: ("1.7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

priserily (t is necesssry to hswe e close coebinetion of logicsl end nethe-
neticel nethods end elso profound lmowledge end experience of the contender.
his skills end creetiwe thinking. courege. decisiveness. strong will, deve-
loped intuition. prediction of the course of the forthconing coebet opere~
tions. ingenuity. the cepecity to teke e substentieted risk end to tote on
the responsibility for its consequences. 'lhe ideologicel-politicel. philo-
sophicel. sstheneticsl end purely nilitsry knowledge end elso the experience.
srt end adjective norsl-volitionel quelities of the co-ender which often
pley en inportent role in eehiewenent oi codnt success ere ooncentrsted in
the co-mder's decision es et e iocel point. Hethenetics end ooeputer engi-
neering ere only e powerful tool which inproves the creetivs possibilities.
the ert of the officers with respect to neking e swetentieted decision.

The nelting of s conbet decision by the 'coeuender is continuously con-
nected with e concept such so the plenning of the coebet operetions of the
troops. ‘lhis. both Iron the logicel end iron the technicel points of View.
is e united. continuous process. 'lhsoreticelly the opinion enoomtered in
print thet initislly the coenender nekes e codest decision end only then
does the heedquertsrs steif begin to plen the coin operetions is erroneous.
‘lhis opinion does correspond to reelity end in prectice it unevoidebly leede

to procreetinetion. ties loss. red tepe. end the ebundence of unnecessery
docusents. end so on.

the essence of the plenning of the conbet operetions consists in deter-
nining the sequence. the nethods end tines for the fulfill-set of the eesigned
lission end slso the nuber end grouping of the troops required for this.
the procedure for their interection. their oonrehensive support end con-
trol. It follows fro- this thet when the connender ashes s cadet decision.
thet is, he plens the operetions. the conbet sissions for the subordinete
troops with deter-instion of whet eneny. where end when they met he rented,
where to spply the nein strike. how to construct the codet forestion. how
to support the interection with respect to nissions. lines (objects) end
tine. then et the use tins he does none other then plen the codnt opere-
tions. tie csrries out the besic plennins nissions. 1herefore the solution
is the besis for the plenning.

After decision uniting. the plsnning process does not begin. but it
continues end is coepleted. Ilere the stsii ad the chiefs of the coolest
er- end services under the leedership of the under neke the individusl
elessnts oi the decision nore specific end give it nore deteil. especielly
those which pertein to the procedures end the tines of operetions of the
troops. the procedure for their intersction end support. ‘ihey ere substen-
tinted by the necessery celculetims end sdditionel situetion dete. If
there is no possibility for this (for exemle. in the ebsence of ties). they
ere linited only by decision asking. For these ergueents. the "cot-bet
plenning ad operetions" tern frequently is med only when we ere tslking
shout the work of the co-enders ad the control units of the higher eche-
lons. beginning with the division. However. this does not nesn thet the con-
peny. bettelion end reginentel co-endere do not heve their own codtet plens.
“heir codeet decisions fixed in nenory or depicted on the up (discrete) end

32
FOR OFFICIAL use 0qu
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

playing out in detail with ouhordinotee on the terrain—these ere the plus.
the oodole of the forthcooing coder operatione.

'lhe planning of the “at operatione of tho troope, just as their
interaction and the control of then. ie an objective necessity. the low for
the preparation and conduct of my bottle. It follows free tho effect of the
law of dialectic interrelation ad interdependence oxiating in nature and
society. especially where tho collective of people is in operation. even tho
very eoolleet (the squad. the coobat crew and so on). No condor can ig-
nore the given lot just as any other law. Their role can consist only in
profound underetnding and skillful use of each law. he proper understand-
ing of the objective and subjective aspects of troop control is the ooet
inortent procedural initial point in tho solution of ell of tho control

problem. and above all the codaat docieion making and planning of cadet
operatione.

lho sharp line between coobat decision asking and planning of conbet
operotione cannot never be drawn. no difference lies only in the degree of
detailing of certain prohlons: in the decision they osuelly are reflected
in more general forn than during further planning.

'lhe coder docieion node by the co-ander will hecooo the low for the
swordinates after it has hocooe known to then. therefore the functions
under the co-ander and the control unite following the decision eating and
colbat planing are the conveying of the cadet nieeions to the troops and
the organization of their interaction. Both of these functione are essen-
tially eleo constantly connected with eech other. Giving the codast order
to die eaordinato troops and indicating to then what oneny, whore end when
they oust attack. at the one ties the «under to a known degree coordi-
netoe their efforts nd operations with respect to tnrgot, tins and location.
which ie the essence of the organization of the interaction. Bowover. ee
the experience of world Her I! has deoone'troted. the etateeent of tho nie-
eione for the troops alone is ineufficient to schieve their cloeo. continuous
interaction. In oddition. it is ueoful to give then further instructions on
how they oust act when carrying out their nieeione in order to give each
other mutual aid and by coordinated efforts successfully carry out the
coo-on coobot aission.

During world Her 11 these instructions were usually given after the
subordinate co-andore received the oieeione. node their decieiom and re-
ported then to the senior officer. In Iodem cadet. an a result of the
sharp reduction in tine for preparation. this working sequence will not
always be possible. Hoot frequently the coononder. for era-ple the hettolion
oo-nandor, is forced to give the euhordinetee instruction on the interaction
i-edistely after delivery of the coéat oieeione to then. Both of theoe

functione therefore are closely connected not only with respect to their
sense. but also with respect to the execution.

‘lhe next control function when preparing for cmbst is the organiza-
tion of the townheneive support of the coebet operatione. ‘lhe purpose of

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY
' io'i orricm. v‘si butt I.

this function is that the submits of the coebst arns create the necessary
conditions for successful execution by then of their coabat Iiesions with
respect to routing the ennny. 'lhe object of control on iepleeentation of it
is basically the special troops md rear services swunits. 'Ihe given func-
tion also differs fro: the ‘analogous function in other spheres of the con-
trol of the variety and coqaloxlty. with respect to the opinions regarding
the «India of nodern arnies. the basic types of support of codat opera-
tions in any control elensnt. including the battalion. are the following:
reconnaissance. protection agath nuclear weapons. security. canouflage.
engineering. rear services and supply (including sedicine) and technical
support. In the Aserican Am. in addition, a great deal of attention is
given to the type of swport. such as radio and radar support. In the higher
echelons of a umber of srnias. hydro-steorologicel and topogeodetic support
of codat operations is specially organised. In our opinion. it is expedient
to include the co-ndant service in these types of support inn-och as it
will pursue the goal of supporting organisational displace-ant and operation
of the troops and also the procedures for their deployment.

It is especially iaportant to consider that for the organization of
each of the enuereted types of support it is objectively necessary to have
additional (special) data on the situation. on the basis of the general
intention of the colander for the battle to detomine the nissions with
respect to the given typo of support and convey the aissions to those respon-
sible for accoqlishing :hen.

An exceptionally isportant function of cadet troop control which
per-sates all the retaining functions is the organization and performance of
the political work with the personnel. Its specific nission in center (by
colparison with other conditions) is to ensure the formation of a strong
soral spirit in each officer. sergeant and soldier. their deep understanding
and iaplenentstion of the policy of the CPS!) and the Soviet governsent. nain-
tenmce of hid: cod>st readiness of the troops. knowledge by the personnel
of the target and the nature of the war being waged and their specific nie-
sion. the strengthening of the psychological state. certainty of success.
courage and offensive iqetus. It is charged with inculcating in the troops
loyalty to their oath. hate for the eneuy. vigilnce. a sense of collecti-
visl md nutusl aid. strengthening of one-nan co-and and discipline. popu-
larization of heroiss. skillful use of equipsent. an effort to carry out the
aission. in spite of any difficulties. to the point of self-sacrifice. 'Ihe
purpose of the political work is concern for the support of the personnel
with everything required for cosbat and life. A cowonent part of the
political work is the struggle against baurgeois ideology. education of the
personnel in the spirit of nationalisa. and codut cooperation with the
arnies of other socialist countries.

It is'especially necessary to discuss the specific function of conbat
control such as the preparation of the troops for the codwet operations.
lhe experience of world Har II has denonstrsted that in addition to the
state-ant of the goals for the troops it is very isportant to conduct exer-
cises with the co-anders. the staff and the sdmnits of the troops and

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

epeciel troope and treining with reepect to their execution under conditione
that epproech the conditione of the forthconing count operetione to the
union. of couree. for Iodern tieae. the poeeibilitiee for euch exercieee
end treining will be highly lieited ee e rneult of ineufficient tile. but
they cannot be forgotten or coepletely excluded.

lhe co-andere end the control unite uuet eeke uee of the eoet ie-
portent poeeibility to achieve eolid knowledge of the coebat eieeion end the
lethod of carrying it out by each officer. eergeant and eoldier. A. V. ,
Suvorov coneidered that every eoldier euet know hie own eeneuver. In accord-
ance with thie beheet, the coeeandere and heedquartere et ell levele during
World Her It never begrudged tiee to train the pareonnel in the execution of
the forthcoeing cowbat eieeion under conditione epproaching reality to the
eexinue. ‘l‘hue. when training for the offeneive with e river croeeing. the
col-endere end the heedquertere etaffa of the unite of the 72nd Rifle Divi-
eion of the ma Arey of the uningrad Front worked out euch problene with
the pereonnel in Jenuery 1953 ae the procedure for ueing the croeeing equip-
eent. the cepture and reinforceeent of a bridgehead on the oppoeite benk of
e river. the organization and eupport of the interaction of the rifle eub-
unite with the artillery and the engineering troope.1

In eetieating the eignificence of euch exercieee md treining. the
contender of the Second Guerde Any. enelyting the Siluian operation. noted
the following: “Fifteen to 20 deye before the beginning of operatione. we
began to perform joint treining... sweequently. during joint reconneie-
once. the officere of the colbet er- were very eatiefied and they were ple-
eently eurprieed that thoee who treined together in the exercieee would go
into bottle together. 1hey knew each other. end reel confidence and mutual
underetending were developed. ‘Ihie wee highly valueble for codat."

0f courec, the treining of the troope for coebet ie not liuited to
exercieee and training eeeeione. It ie cloeely connected with neeeuree to
eupport the troope with ell thet ie needed for count and life. and aleo their
regrouping, occupation end equipeent of the initial poeitione, end eo on.
he function of prepering the troope for codet, coneequcntly. cm heve no
bounde.

A function ouch ee the orgeniretion of troop control iteelf ha no
loee epecific neture. when performing the given function under codet con-
ditione. on the beeie of the coebet decieion of the «sender. ueually the
following beeic oeeouree ere teken:

e) 1he correeponding eyetee of control pointe ie deter-ined end
creeted. their conpoeition. technicel equipmt. locetione end deploy-out

l. Arkhiv Ho SSSR IArchivee of the USSR Hinietry of Defenee]. f. 397.
op. 92". do 12. 1e 1.55e

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE (IND!
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

tine ere eetebliehed. the engineering equipment ie inetelled. their eecurity
end defeneeure orgenieed. the dieplecenent procedure in the couree of the
«int operetione end their recovery in use of feilure of one point or
enother ere plenned:

b) The work of the duty pereonnel at the control pointe ie orgenieed
with erect deterninetion of who. whet. where. when end how it nuet be done;

c) lhe reletion to the eubordinete troope. the higher heedquertere.
the neighbore end the interecting euhunite end unite end eleo cleeeified nee-
eege proceduree for the troope (3W) ere orgenieed.

Pinelly. en ieportent control function ie the monitoring of the rendi-
neee of the troope for conbet operetione with rendering of the neceeeery eid
to then. lte prieery goel coneiete in eech eoldier. eergeent end officer
exectly knowing hie nieeion in the forthconing bettle end in ell reepecte
being reedy for eucceeeful fulfillment of thie nieeion by the uee of the
equipeent entrueted to hin. with reepeet to content. the eonitoring includee
prinerily the etudy of the ectuel etete of effeire in the troope. the nehing
of e decieion on the beeie of thie etudy. to elininete the diecowered defi-
eienciee end to convey the correeponding ordere (nieeione) to the eubordi-
netee.

‘lhie ie the beeic content end epecific neture of the troop control
functione when prepering the coﬁet operetione. °

‘i‘roop control during conbet operetione ie reelly e direct continue-
tion of the ebowe-inveetignted control functione cerried out when prepering
for coﬁet. lhe beeie for it ie the iuplcnentetion of the edopted decieion
with the introduction of the required directions with reepect to the neeeure
of the verietione of the eituetione epecificelly developed during the couree
of co-bet.

1hue. when controlling the troope during the couree of cadet opere-
tione. in order to neintein oodaet cepecity et e high level or reetore the
loot coﬁet cepecity of the troope end echieve eucceeeful execution of the
eeeigned coebet nieeion by then, the «under ad the control unite do none
other then continue the gethering end the etudy of the dete on the ectuelly
developing eituetion: eccordingly. they lore precieely define the previouely
lode decieion. end with eherp chengee in the eituetion, e new decieion ie
lede: the nore precieely defined. or new nieeione. ere conveyed to the wt:-
ordinatee. end oontinuoue interection of the troope ie neinteined; the
reelieetion of the neeeuree with reepect to eupport of the cod>et operetione
md politicel work ie directed by then; they provide for continuity of the
troop control end reetore it in ceee of dieruption: they nonitor the couree
of the coﬁet operetione with indicetion of the required eid to the troope
in the fulfill-eat of their nieeione. In eddition, they etudy the experi-
ence of the coebet operetione in order to uee thie experience in the future
to ieprove the coebet reedineee of their troope.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISR ONLY

Ae ie obvioue with reepect to their content (the none of the func~
tione). during the couree of coebet operetione troop control doee not differ
theoreticelly iron the control when treining the troope. Out of ell the
enueereted functione. the eein. elweye eendetory. eteble end in prectice
cenetently repeeting fenctione ere the gethering md proceeeing of the dete
on the eituetion, eeking e decieion by thie dete and conveying the nieeione
to the egente reeponeible for cerrying it out. Hhetewer generel or epeciel
purpoee ie pureued. both during preperetion end during the couree of oonbet
operetione. to eehieve it. the «under end the control unit ere objec-
tively forced to hewe end etudy the correeponding dete on the eituetion.

eelte e decieion end convey the eieeione to egente reeponeible for eccoeplieh-
ing then.

If e11 of the reeeining functione end neeeuree cen be of e rendoe ne-
ture end ere eoeehow eupporting. then exclueion froe the control cycle of even
one of the three eentioned eein functione unevoidebly leede to dieruption of
control end. coneequently. to dieroption of the execution of the eieeion.

1heee functione euet be repeeted eepecielly frequently for the con-
eendere of the lower tecticel echelone. Let er teke. for exenple. the bet-
telion echelon. 1he bettelion cen perfore ite eieeion on the offeneiwe in e
coeperetively ehoft tine. efter which it receiwee e new nieeion. Conee-
quently. during the due of codeet operetione. the bettelion conender euet
eveluete the eituetion dete eewerel tiuee, eeke e new decieion end give the
eieeion to the eubordinetee without eleboreting e more preciee definition of
the decieion during the conree of the perfornence of eech eubeequent nieeion.

'ihue. on the beeie of the enelyeie of the etructure of the eyetee. the
goele end the content of the troop control during preperetione end during
the couree of coebet operetione it ie poeeible to give the following defini-
tion of ite eeeence: coebet troop control ie e purpoeeful ectivity of the
to-ender. eteffe. politicel egente. chiefe of the coebet eru end eervicoe
with reepect to neintenence of high co-bet reedineee of the eubordinete
eubmite. preperetion for their cadet operetione end direction of efforte
et the externel execution of the coebet eieeion during the couree of cdet
by effective epplicetion of the eweileble forcee end eeene beeed on the lewe
of creed coebet end the principlee of eilitery ecience. here. elong the
eeny control functione both during treining end during the couree of the
conbet operetione. the eoet inportent ere the following: the gethering end
the etudy of the eituetion dete. the melting of the codet decieion end lore
preciee definition of it by the «mode: end the delivery of the eieeiooe
to thoee reeponeible for eccoepliehing then.

are given definition of the eeeence of troop control doee not centre-
dict the inmletione diecueeed in the officiel eourcee. It only epecifiee
then end indicetee. who, for when, on the beeie of whet. for whet purpoee
end in whet wy the coebet troope ere controlled coneidering ite epecific
neture. In eddition. thie deter-inetion coepletely correeponde to the
philoeophicel end cybernetic tenderetending of the eeeence of eny control ee

37

NR OFFICIAL IISE (mu
FOR OFNCMI. llSl-Z ONLY

en inforeetion proceee. including obteining. etoring. converting end dieeeni-
neting the inforeetion. lte not only theoreticel but eleo precticel eigni-
licence coneiete in the feet thet it indicetee to the otficere ell pheeee
end to the ecientiiic end engineering workere. the eein. decieiye eleeent

in the entire greet chein of control eeeeuree. If by ueing the leteet tech-
nicel eeene (including eutoentod noene) the officere reech e point where they
elweye know the ectuel eituetion. quickly eeke e eubetentieted decieion end
etete the eieeione for thoee reeponeible for thee in e tieely feehion. then
ell of the eein eodern problene of troop control cen he coneidered eolved.

Modern Itequireeente of Troop ControlI

‘lhe detereinetion of the eeeence of cadet troop control end ite epo-
cific neture preeented by ue will becoeo etill better beeed if we. in eddition
to the tergete end the content. coneider the conditione of control end the
beeic requireeente following iron thee. thet ie. ite beeic nuelitetive end
quentitetiye cherecterietice indiceting to whet degree the co-ender end the
control unite ere cepeble oi orienting theneelvee confidently in the eitue-
tion. to neke e purpoeeful conbet decieion. to etete the coehet eieeione in
e tieely eenner end underetendebly. to convey then to the eubmite. orgeniee
the interection. coepreheneiwely eupport the troop ectione. eomdly end per-
eietently iepleeent the decieion.

0f ell the conditione detereining the requireeente on troop control.
the eeene of deetruction end the neture of coebet operetione ueed by the
werring eidee elweye hewe the greeteet eiiect. 1t ie quite obvioue thet
the eoet coeplex conditione for control will occur during preperetion end
during the couree of coebet operetione with the eqiloyeent of the entire
ereenel oi weapone of deetruction. including both nucleer end conventionel
weepoue. He cu teke then for the belie of the inventigetion eince if the
control correeponde to the reeuireeente iepoeed on it under ouch cmliceted
conditione, then et the eeee tiee it will be eucceeeful during cod’et without
the eeployeent of nucleer weepone.

Hhen prepering end conducting coebet operetione with the eqloyeent
of nucleer weepone end eodern conventionel weepone the controlled troope cen
be pleced in e very difficult poeition. An e reeult of the nucleer etrihee
of the eneey. they cen in e ehort tine (eleoet inetenteneouly) iepoee
loeeee unheerd of in peet were. It to not excluded thet their orgmieetionel
integrity end cachet forention will he dierupted. After the nucleer etrikee.

l. in the firet edition of the book. the given eueetion wee inveetigeted in
Grepter It. “Develop-eat of the lheory end Prettiee of Troop Control."
which hee been excluded in thin edition in connection with the publice-
tion of the book: II. I. Popel'. V. P. Sewel'yev. P. l. Show-meltiy.
”llprevleniye Voyekeei v Cody Velikoy Otecheetvennoy Voyny" (hoop Control
During the Greet Petriotic Her). Hoecow. Voyeniedet. 1971..

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8|! ONLY

they. aa a rule. will be attacked by a large non of tanka. by aotoriaed
infantry on arnorad coabat vehiclea. by coabet helicoptere and other may
equip-ant. locally broad canon of radioactive contamination. deatruction.
flooding and firce can be fornad. 'lhe poroonnel can receive large doaee of
radiation and be ubjactad to proviouoly unheard of aorel and paychological
ahoclt. eepacially at the beginning of tho war when they otill will not have
experience in the conduct of coebat operationa with the actual onloynont
of nuclear weapono.

Under ouch conditiona the aoet iaportant reouireaont on troop control
ie high coabat readinaee of all echolone in tho entire control ayatea. 'ihc
eeaenco of a given requiraaent coneieto in conetent rcedinoee of the coa-
aandara and the control unite of ell etegae to aaouae control of the aubor~
dinate troopa literally froa the firat ainuteo after receiving the coabat
alarn eignal or a ourpriae attack of the aggreaaor. and to oneure eucceaeful
fulfillaent of the conbat aieeion in any coaplex eituetion.

Proa the given definition it ie obvioua that the high codaat readi-
none of the control eyetea ie one of tho iaportant factore of troop coabat
readinoee ea a whole. here it nuat be noted thet tho readineaa of the con-
trol and co-micationa ayatea nuat be achieved eonevhat prior to the gene-
ral readinoea of the eubunit. orocada it. be at a higher level and aore
labile than it in. he eatiafaction of thie require-ant can be achieved by
tiaely and cowlete aanning of the control unite with efficient. highly que-
lified pereonnel: proper aciantific organieetion of the work in the etaff
headquartere. eklllful place-ant. diatribution and careful canouflaging of
the control pointa: coapreheneive technical equip-ant of etaff: effective
utilization of the aeane of autonation of troop control: enourance of the
flexibility and high vitality of the coumicationa eyotea and ite noiee pro-
tection; clear organitetion of tho conbet dutioe: training of the control
unite in perforning functional peculiaritioe under conlex conditiona. in
feet recovery of the dieruptod interaction and troop control.

‘Ihe above-preecnted conditione of the preparation and conduct of con-
bat operationa. and aapacially their acute. atreeeod and forced nature.
again iapoee a require-ant on troop control ouch ae eomdneee by which we
noon the capacity of all of the officore without exception. and above all.
the co-andere, to nake a courageoue decieion. pereiatently inplenent it.
retain control of the elbordinatee in their henda, proaerve the orgeniea-
tion and achieve fulfillaent of the coabat niaeion in any conplox aituation.
For thie purpoee the officere aunt have. in addition to knowledge and akille.
exceptional bravery. decieiveneaa. courage. great atrength of will and per-
eiatonce. the capacity to take a albatantieted rick, properly nod quickly
to think under norel and paychological atreea. and have a aobiliring. orga-
niring effect on the people. Coabat experience coneidere that thc anallcet
fluctuationa and indeciaiveneee. the frequent and unfomdod change of the
aieaione of the troopa in difficult areaa unavoidably get to the oubordi-
natee and have a negative effect on than. ‘lhe etrength of control. conne-
quently. ia characterized baeicelly by the pareonal (eubjective) oualitiee

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPI'ICIAL USE ONLY

of the officer. which can hardly be leaeured quantitatively. that ie. it it
hardly poeeibla to introduce any atability coefficient of Ian, although ouch
efforte have been aede. lnetond of theee offorte. of course. it ie better
to concentrate the Iain offorte on education of high qualitiee in the offi-
cera in their training eyetee.

However. the atrength of control cannot be underetood in a way that
the calendar Iuet pereletently, in apite of logic end to.» eenee. adhere
to a prewiouely nade decieion. Modern coebat ie characterized by eore fre-
quent and eharp changee in eituation than in the peat were. Under ouch con-
ditiona it ia hardly poaaible to hope that the codat will eutonetically
develop exactly in accordnce with a previoue plan. Unawoidably. it ia necee-
eery to introduce correctione and refine-ante. lherefore. the control nuet
not only be atrong but alao flexible in thie caee. By flexibility of control
we eean the capacity of the conander to core preciealy define the previoue
decieion in tine. and if the eituetion hae changed eharply. then to find the
etrength of will to drop it. cake a new decieion. rearrange the control eye-
tee and the Iethcde of ita operation in accordance with conditione in the
new eituetion. 1he renuireaent of flexibility of control. coneequently.
refere not only to the co-ender pereonelly but alao to the entire control
eyetee. For thie purpoee the co-endere and the control unite nuet have re-
lieble cmicatione with the troopa. they nuet alwaya feel the "pulea of
the battle." conetantly know the eituation. react in a tieely feehion to
changee in the eituation. lead the- and prevent poeeible coeplicetione.

However. flexibility of control cannot be identified with indecieiwe-
neee of the co-ander leading to frequent and unfunded changee in the deci-
aion trade and the ordera given the troope. the latter, ae wartine experi-
ence indicatee. alweye hee a hareful effect on troop control and the troope'
perforeance of the count nieeion.

In modern coebet. the require-ante on control coneiet of continuity
or etability. aeeuring proper functioning of the control eyetan and Iain-
taining ite capacity to eneure continuoue commicatione with the troope.
conetmt knowledge of the eituation by the «under and the etaff and the
poeeibility on their aide of exerting the required influence on the couree
of the co-bat operationa by the availeble forcee and uteriel.

1he eignificmce of thia require-ant bee increeeed in connection with
the fact that in co-parieon with the past. the capabilitiea of the may
with reepect to the deatruction of our control pointe by nuclear and conven-
tional weapone have increaeed a great deal. In addition. the neintenance
of continuoue control le coepliceted by the incruaeing rapidity of nodern
coabat operationa. the prolonged nowenent of the control pointa and in-
creaeed dietancee between then. Under ouch conditione, the continuity of
control ie eneured primarily by active reconneiaeance, etability of co-mi-
catione. high viebility ad nobility of the control pointe.

50

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘lho booic quantitatiwo critorion of tho continuity of control can bo
tho til-o during which thoro io no commication with tho troopo. ond thoro-
foro tho coo-andcr ond tho otaff cannot obtoin dota on tho oituation and
convoy tho‘oiooiono to tho oubordinotoo. Considering tho opood of Iodorn
coiyot oporotiono. at tho battolion ocholon an oporation cannot oxcood a tow
ninutoo. for othorwioo tho attaching oubunito can ponotroto to o diotoncc ouch
on to cooolicato tho oahing of o docioion by tho conmdor. oopociolly to
firo on 'tho onony without tho dugor of dootroying hio own oubunito.

In'oddition. tho continuity of control can bo choroctoriood by tho
probability of foiluro of the control pointo oo o rooult of tho onooy'o op-
plicotion of woriouo loono of dootruction to thou. tho tino for thoir rooto-

ration and tho probability of dioruption of tho cmicationo by radio intor-
fcronco.

1ho roquirooont of oocrocy on control hao no looo oignificonco in
oodorn ooobat. 'iho oooonco of tho giwon roquirooont conoioto in tho hooping
iron tho onony all of tho oooouroo porforood with roopoct to control. Ito
wiolotion with tho oodorn ooono of onooy roconnoiooanco and attock aloo can
load to ooriouo conooquoncoo. l‘ho booic critorio of oocrocy of control oro
tho probobility of dotoction by tho onoqy of our control pointo. tho intor-

coption ond docoding of conworootiono and tranooiooiono owor tho conmico-
tiono nodio.

in ordor to onouro oocrocy of control. high vigilanco of all poroonnol
io roquirod along with otrict rogiooo and cloor cut procoduroo for tho mo
of co-unicationo nodia. oopociolly whon holding rodio convorootiono. oocu-
rity oooouroo for tho pooplo porticipoting in tho dowolopoont of tho coobot
plonning door-onto. tho coroful otorago of docmonto. oocrot location md
oovo-ont of tho control pointo and oboorwation of coooufloging Iooouroo.

m officioncy and high quolity of troop control dopond to o oigni-
ficant dogroo on ouch roouirooonto on officioncy in tho work of tho co-and-
oro and control mito. which io mdorotood in thoir copacity to porl'oro oll
of thoir functiono quickly. in onticipotion of tho onoqy. coqlotoly ond
quolitotiwoly. Abovo oll. thio portoino to tho colloction of intonation
about tho oituation. tho noting of o docioion concorning it and tho convoy-
ing of inotructiono to oubordinotoo in ordor to grant thoo a ouch tioo u
poooiblo for proporotion of codnt oporotiono.

‘Iho giwon roquirooont oriooo fro- tho noturo of oodorn coubot opora-
tiono. which on diotinguiohod fro- thooo of tho out by thoir inzroucd
dynooic noturo. ooro frequent. footor and oharpor changoo in tho oituation.
and opcod. In tho loot war. the troopo attockod on tho oworogo at o rato of
ono to 2 Ito/hour and thoy Iovod on foot ot o opood of 4 to S h/hr. Undor
ouch conditiono. tho doloy. for oxonlo, of tho oituation data by l or 2
houro woo to o known dogroo od-iooiblo owon in tocticol control ccholono.
inoo-uoh u uouolly during thio tino no ohorp chongco tool: ploco in tho
oituotion. In oddition, tho co-andoro at all otogoo to tho frontlino troop

61

FOR OFFICIM. USE UNIX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coeeander could pereonelly obeerve the couree of the conhet operatione if not
in the entire cone. then in the prieary direction.

1he eituation ie entirely different in thie reepect now when the

voice of operetione with reepect to control hee increeeed eignificently. end
the tine for their execution hoe been ehnrply dccreeeed. An effort to eeve
and gain tine. not only houre but einutee end even eeconde during control has
becoee en urgent requireeent of codat activity. the prinery problee of con-
trol. 1he tine epent on inlenenting each control neaeure ie one of the cri-
terie for the capacity of the control unite to deal with the coupler eieeion
of troop control in eodern coebat.

Pepecielly high efficiency ie required in the organieation of the
battle with newly detected nuclear eieeile eyeteee md nuclear artillery of
the eneey. inaeeuch ee the tine for then to be in the leunching (firing) poei-
tione will be reckoned in only o few linutee. Upon their detection by our
reconneiaeance group during daployeent, in einutee the cow-tender uuet receive
data. evaluate. note a decieion. end traneeit inetructione to hie neane of
etteck, end they in turn out be prepered to cerry out the nieeione and
etrike egeinet the eneey. In caee of heeitetion. the eneny could etrike
firet and leave the occupied erea.

Coneequently. the beeic quantitative criterion (index) of efficiency
of control can be the tine epent by the «under and echelon etaff for one
control cycle. that ia, to obtain and etudy the eituation date. to lake a
aubatentiated decieion with reepect to it end deliver the eieaiona to than
reeponeible. Ihie tine. of couree. euet be an ehort ae poeeible in order to
provide minu- tiee for preparation of the troope to carry out the eieeion.
to eneure uniting the etrike before the eneay. end effective application by
our troupe of the .weepone of deatruction. Ite epecific duration in each
individual caee and in each echelon not have ita own lieit. the exceeding
of which (other conditione being equel) will lead to diaruption or incowlete
execution of the eeeigned eieeion. lhie minu- adeieeible duretion of one
cycle ie celled the critical control tile.

lt ie natural thet for the varioue codet arm the critical tine will
be different. It in one letter. for exawle, when controlling mtieircreft
aubunita during repuleion of an new air ettack where the critical control
tine ie eeeeured in a few eeconde. and mother letter when controlling rear
eubunite. where aeveral houre will often be adeieeible.

In eny ceee. thie tine euet not be reduced ae a reeult of the control
quality. eepecially ee e reeult of the aubetentietion of the decieion nade
end violetion of eecrecy. ﬂurrying and e euperficiel eolutiou of the prob-
lele are not coepatible with underatmding the operetionel efficiency of
control.

In order to achieve high operational efficiency of control without
loee of quality. of prilary eignificance are the high profeeeionel level of
training of the «undue and officere of the control unite. their orgeni-
rational cepecity. their ehillful uae of the leteet lane of lecheniretion

‘2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON GFPIGIAL UHH ONLY

and autonation of the control proceoooo and oloo the applicotion of exact
calculotione end the ooot effective oothodo of work.

he booic require-onto on troop control doteroinod by oodorn condi-
tiono of preporation and conduct of toilet oporatione ore theoo. They ore
all in clooe interrelation and dependence. end failure to oatiofy even one
of than can leod to interference with tho fulfill-ont of the codiat oiooion.

moractoriotic Aopocto of 'rroop Control in Coobot

1he goalo. tho content end tho conditiono of troop control in coebot
invootigotod by no indicoto thot it io of a oultioidod noturo.

0f ell aapocto of troop control in coobet. it io neceooory to note
firot tho ideological-political oide. tho oooonco of which conoioto in clooe
coobinotion of tho purely oilitory leodorohip vith politicol. vith tho ioplo-
oontation of tho ideology md policy which provoilo in our comtry. tho of-
foct on tho oubordinoto people not only by tho adoiniotrotive. but oloo
politicol oothodo (propogondo. agitotion. education. porouooion. and co on).

he given oopoct of control hoo. of couroo. ito place aloo in other
areoo of oociel life. "...Hithout tho proper political approach to buoineoo."
V. l. lonin taught. ”the given claoo will not relain in power and, come-
quently, it connot oolvo ito production prohlol."l Iiwover. during troop
control in wartime thio eopect acquireo o opociol noturo in connection with
the fact that my war. by definition of tho fomdoro of ociontific co-mioo.
io e continuation of tho policy of tho povero and voriouo claoooo intorooted
in it by other. nonely powerful ooono. end tho buic content end ooin lethod
of achieving tho political goolo of any war or oned codnt. 'ihio oeono
thot when controlling tho troopo in coobot. tho officer of any oroy will
inlenent the policy of hio claoo and tho ruling porty by tho opplicotion of
tho forcoo md none of deotruction and the developed oethodo of routing the
troopo of tho oppooito oido afforded hio. 'iho booio for thio control io ol-
voyo tho principle of party noturo, clooo end governoont opprooch to tho
oolution of tho proctical problem. Any ototelont in tho bourgeoio prooo on
their officoro' being outoido policy hoo nothing in co-on vith roolity.
Any any io o voopon of tho otote. loch officer of the bourgeoio any elvayo
defendo tho intereoto of the bourgeoioio. ioplooento ito ideology and policy
aiood at oupproooing tho rovolutionory love-ent inoide their country and
onolovooent of the poopleo of other comtrioo. Any bourgeoio control theory
therefore io an inooparoble cowonont port of the bourgeoio ideology end
policy.

In tho Soviet Amy and in tho ornieo of other oocioliot countrieo. tho
ideologicol-politicol upect of troop control hoo o theoretically different
nature. here every officer io o conductor in the life of the ideology end
policy of the Col-inlet Party. All of thio octivity io oiled ot protecting
the peaceful lobor of the Soviet people and the peopleo of the other

1. V. l. lonin, Complete Collected Horne. Vol ‘2. p 279.
‘3

FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oocioliot countrioo iroo ioporioliot oggroooion and oloo tho roinforconont
of tho irotornity ond international friondohip with tho pooploo of oil coun-
trioo. For thio purpooo ho is ohligotod to otudy dooply Horxiot-Lcniniot
thoory. know porty policy and govornoont policy. oxploin it to ito ouhordi-
notoo. hovo tho choroctoriotico of tho uniniot otylo of oonogooont ouch oo
high idoologicol noturo ond conviction in tho oreotivonooo of tho buoinooo
of «mania. politicol ooturity ond fooling. 'lho porty noturo of tho Soviot
otticor, conooquontly. ooono thot ony lottor. my otop tokon by hio. ond tho
oporotiono of tho ouhordinoto officoro. ouot ho ovoluotod fro: tho point of
viow of tho intorooto of tho CPsu. tho Soviot govornoont. tho Soviot pcoplo.
"...lt io nocoooory," V. l. unin tought. "for oil iorcoo to ochiovo in tho

otrictoot dogroo tho oituotion whoro porty outlook will ho not only wordo.
hut o roolity.M

i'ho procticol olhodilont of tho givon oopoct of troop control in our
comtry io onourod by tho guiding rolo of tho CPS” in tho building oi tho
mood forcoo ond woll-orrongod porty-politicol work.

A oocond oopoct of troop control in coIbot io tho Iorol-poychologicol
upoct. It io cloooly connoctod with tho idoologicol-politicol upoct. ond
io o continuotion ond oupplooont of it. Iho oooonco of tho givon oopoct io
that in troop control ooch Sowiot officor. in addition to hoving tho ohovo-
notod idoologicol noturo ond politicol ooturity. Iuot hiuolf inotill in hio
oubordinotoo high norol-poychologicol quolitioo, oopociolly thooo ouch oo
unlioitod dowotion to tho hooolmd md hotrod for ito ononioo. intornotion-
olioo. tho copocity otrictly to boor oll tho difficultioo ond doprivotiono
oi conhot liio. high oorol. poychologicol ond phyoicol otrongth. octivity.
outuol oid. forooooing dooth. roodinooo to oocrifico hio lifo in tho nut of
ooving othoro. bolioi in tho powor of tho woopon ontruotod to hi- and tho
copohilitioo of tho coo-moor. It io oloo inortont to ochiovo poycholo-
gicol coopotibility of tho troopo in tho Iilitory colloctivoo with ooch
othor ad with tho notoriol. oonoidoring tho foct thot tho opplicotion of
tho nojority of nodorn equip-out in codrot (woopono. tonlto. lounchoro. and
to on) io connoctod with tho efforto of tho colloctiwo ond dopondo on tho
poychologicol otohility of ooch troop.

0n tho wholo, tho givon oopoct of troop control ohligotoo ovory of-
ficor olwoyo to roooobor tho bohoot of V. I. unin rogording tho docioivo
rolo of tho oorol opirit of tho troopo in tho ochiovonont of victory. In
ordor to ootioiy thio bohoot tho offioor noodo doop knowlodgo not only of
Honiot-boniniot thoory out oloo podogogioo. poychology ond okill in tho
troining ond oducotion of oubordinotoo. conoidorotion of tho norol-poycholo-
gicol ototo whon oolwing tho procticol prohlooo of troop control.

A third oopoct of troop control in the oociol-logol oopoct. It
oriooo fro- tho foot thot ony troop colloctivo (tho oquod. coobot crow.

l. V. i. Lenin. ﬁloto Colloctod "orb. Vol 19. p 110.

$6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
plotoon.‘ oonpony. bettery. end on on) end the orned forceo on the wholo ore
on inoepu‘eble pert. e cell of our eocieliet eociety. md every troop io n
citieen of the Soviet union. "lhe Soviet Arey.” eeid 1.. l. Brerhnev ot the
Nth cm. Congreoo. “ie e port of our people. living one life with thee.
Hilitery oorvice in our country io not juot e ochool of conbot eatery.
1hie fear the use tine o good ochool of idoologicol end phyeicel towering.

diocipline end orgeniumion."l 'nu troop control eyeten ie therefore o
eociel oyetee by noture.

Accordingly. in order to inrove troop control. the knowledge end
creotive epplicetion by the officero (coneidoring the opecific neturo of
nilitery effeiro) of the love of eociel dovelopnent end the neoeureo which in
the light of the roeolutione of the perry congreoo ore token in the country
to inrove control in other oreoo. hove inportont oignificonce. herriet-
boniniet theory end the ecience of the control of eociety ere the procedurel
bone for troop control theory. During the firot yeere of Soviet Power V. l.
bonin wrote: ”1he experience which Soviet power hoe hod in building the
nilitery cennot be coneidered m ieoleted experience... 'lhe building of our
erny could only leed to eucceeoful reeulte beceuoe it woo creeted in the
opirit of the generel building of the Soviet society..."2

‘lhe given concluoion of V. l. Lenin under eodorn conditione where the
work with reepect to inproving the control of oociel life her developed on o
brood front throughout the country hoe ocquired increeoed oignificenco. In
the porty reoolurione eech officer con find ouch thet ie velueble for hie
precticel work with reepect to troop control. lhe one in troop control of
the leteet ochieveeente of the control ecience end engineering hoe eopo-
cielly ieportmt eignificence.

ln eddition. the given oopect of control bindo eech officer not only
in peecetiee but eleo in wertiee to be e eodel md to cducete hie erbordi-
netee in the epirit of the etrict obeervence of Soviet low, the rulee of
oocieliet living. the require-onto of eilitory reguletione end the ooth, the
etrengthening of diocipline. orgeniretion, collectivioe. roeodaering thet
it io in the collective thet the pereonolity of the troop ie prinorily oho ed
ee e defender of the governeent end the citizenry, end hie ebove-noted
io’eologicel-politicel end eorel-poyehologicol quelitiee ere for-ed. Even
the eoelleot violetion in coder of the require-onto of the low. the regular-
tiono end ordero of the oenior office by e «under or hie eubordinotee io
inedeioeible. lhe co-ender of the hoeelend ie entrueted with the noet
veluoble oooetnthe people, the life or deeth of who. deternineo the fete

of their relotiveo end neighbore. Men, the ooldier. ie the eoeence of
oociory; therefore the control of the eoldier olweye in of e eociol neture

l. Neteriely XXIV shfeedo ms [Heteriele of the 26th CPSU Congreooz.
Hoocow, 1971, p 81.

2. V. I. lenin. Conplete Collected Horke, Vol ‘0. pp 76-77.

‘5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

and presupposes the application of the corresponding social and legal norms
and sethods of influencing hie.

lt is also inportant to consider that the state of the art with re-
spect to eanageaent and control to a great extent detereines the aood of the
people. their attitude toward their duty and the ordere of the co-ander.
1.. l. Brezhnev noted at the 26th CPSU Congress that clearly for-ed adminis-
tration perniu the creation of a good. businesslike situation in the col-
lectives and causes growth of initiative on the part of the people. On the
other hand. ”nothing cools people off nore than the facts of poorly thought
out decisions. s id bungling or bureaucratic red tape on the part of indi-
vidual workers..."

Any require-ant to carry out the luv and the rules md regulations
euet he conhined with the fatherly concern of the officer for his subordi-
nates. polite intercourse with thee. respect for their hunan worth. 'nue
edsinistrative relations in society. including along the armed forces. are
prieerily relations asong people with their purely huan characteristics.
and it is necessary always to he guided by these relations to have a useful
effect on the people. Coarsanass and an insulting attitude. ”iron in the
voice" on the pert of the officer. have never pronoted successful control.
they have not strengthened. but on the contrary. have mdernined hie autho-
rity anong hie subordinates. which has unavoidably been felt in the outcoae
of the codat operation.

Finally. it is ieportant to note that the social-legal aspect of
troop control binds each officer when asking a coshst decision to consider
the eocial-political consequences of carrying out this decision. what ef-
fect these consequences will have not only on his collective but also on
social opinion, the attitude of the Soviet people and the peoples of other
countries toward our arly.

A fourth iaportant aspect of troop control is the organizational-
procedural aspect. It is also closely connected with the preceding lad re-
quires high organizational capacity in each officer. exactingness. eastery
of advanced asthode in work. skill in all neesures with respect to control.
quickly realized and at the sees tine realized with high quality and on the
basis of the scientific organization of labor. 'lhe skill of the officer in
working with people. in forging than into a fraternal coahat collective.
the creation of a healthy businesslike situation. eohilieetion of the. to
the successful fulfilllent of the coﬁat lission in spite of any difficul-
ties or danger is especially inportsnt. "...Por successful control," V. I.
Lenin noted. "it is necessary. in addition to knowing how to convince...
to know how to provide practical organization. 'lhis is the aost difficult
promos..."2 At another place he eqhasizad that "any edeinistrative work

I. ﬁaterials of the 24th CPS!) Congress. Moscow. 1971. p 66.
2. V. I. Lenin. (bqlete Collected ﬂorks. Vol 36. p 173.

66

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
l-‘OR DFVICIM. USE ONLY

requires special characteristics. It is possible to be the nest poverful
revolutionary and agitator. yet an entirely unsuitable administrator."l It
is also isposeible to forget the physiological md esthetic aspects of con-
trol sined at creating nornel conditions for labor and rest. the preserva-
tion of the health of the people. and inrovesent of the culture of edednis-
tretive labor.

Finally. the silitary engineering aspect of center troop control has
exceptionally isportant significance. Its essence consists in the firn
nestery his mum use by the officers of purely military knowledge which
is nade up of the lens of ailitary science. the laws and principles of aili-
tsry art set down in the rules and regulations. the characteristics of the
netsriel'qd control equipmt. the organisation. conbet capabilities and
tactics of their troops end the eneny troops and also practical skills of
the officers directly fro. the control area. It is necessary especially to
discuss the inortant significance of the knowledge md skills of the officers
in utilising the latest technical control neens \hich appear as a result of
scientific and technical progress. without then. successful control in
nodern conbst is imssible. lhey. especially the radioelectronic devices.
constitute the “nervous system" of sodern troops.

All of the basic aspects of coobst troop control that we have inves-
tigated are closely interrelated end constitute a dialectic unity. 'naie
requires of the officers profomd. couple: knouledge of various sciences
investigating the corresponding aspects of control: scientific comnise.
philosophy. political scononics. sociology. law, eilitary science. nethesa-
tics. cybernetics. psychology. pedagogy. scientific organization of labor
and also skillful codination of various nethods of control: ideological-
politicsl. socisl. legal. adainistrative. logical end netheneticel.

0n the whole. nodern troop control appears before us as the dielectic
unity of science and art. ‘lhe lots of arsed combat and the principles of
nilitery art are exhibited not in themselves but through the creative acti-
vity of the officers. 'lhe opinion that existed in the past that silitary
affairs are not so ouch mental as volitional is deeply erroneous. without
negating the inportut role of the volitional qualities of the conander.
it is still necessary to relesber that any vill that he has must be based
on a sober nind and deep knowledge. he statement of the well-known
Aperican. General H. l'idgevay. that "as a result of the variety of human
characteristics. the different level of coebst experience. troop control is
sore an art than a science"2 is erroneous. 'ihe necessity of close codine-
tion of science and art during control with any depth has been proved by
history and experience. which V. I. lanin discussed ecientifically. "...In
order to control." V. I. Lenin taught. "it is necessary to be cowetent, it
is necessary fully and exactly to know all the proouction conditions. it is

l. V. I. Lenin. Couplete Collected Works, Vol 60. p 215.
2. United States Naval Institute Proceedings. Noveoter 1967. p 30.

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SF. ONLY

necesssry to know the production equip-eat on its nodern level. it is neces-
sary to hsve known scientific education."1 The given behest of the lender

perteins fully to officers. Their activity in modern conbst control is
highly sinilsr to the sctivity of s scientist.

The enusrated aspects and conditions of troop control isposed high
requirensnts on it, the sstiefsction of which in all nodern sniee is con-
sidered a prinary prohlen. For a successful solution of it various paths
have been found. the basic ones of which are the following: the further deve-
lopeent of troop control theory and the raising of the trsining level of the
officers with respect to control problem on the hseis of this; ilprovenent
of the structure of the control organs and the troop control eyetes as s
whole; equip-one of the control units and control points with new. including
sutonated technical control ssteriel; inrovenent of the style and nethods
of operation of the co-andere ad the control units when carrying out their
functions on the basis of new technical facilities.
VON OFFICIAL US”: ONLY

cum 2. 11009 comm. mam. MIC“ nuns AND C(M'ROI. Form
1. Troop Control Unite

lhe organizational atructura of eodern control unite cane about dur-
ing the hiatorical developeent of the arsed forcea under the effect of
chance in the aeana and aathoda of coahat. the umber and organisation of
troopa and alao technical control equip-ant. During the couraa of thia
develop-cot. the require-ante on troop control changed. the clue of proh-
leea of the control unite expanded. the value of their work increeaad, and
thia in turn forced iwroveaent of their organisational atructura. bringing
it into accordance with the new require-ante and problem.

The procaea of iaprovina the organizational atructure of the control
agents. juet u the troopa the-calm. takea place continuouly and ia
realized under the direct said-Ice of the CPS". In 1918. in the raaolution
of the Party Central Couittea it wee detenined that the "policy of the
Iilitary depart-ant. juat ea all other depart-enta and inatitutione. ie
conducted on the praciae haeia of the general directive iaeuad by the party
in the neaa of ita Central Co-ittee and under ite direct control."1

Require-onto lupoaed on Control Unite

Control unite deal aucceaafully with their growing probleaa only in
caaee when their regular organizational etructure. the level of aolidarity
and preparation. the aethode of operation and technical equip-ant correspond
cowletely to the nature of nodern ooehat. lhe control mite turn out to be
capable of enaurin; reliﬁle troop control in any eituation if they corre-
apond to the following requireaante: they are conetently ready to direct
ewordinete troops: they are capable of carrying out the nioaiona given then
in a ehort tine: they have a mder of euhordinatee (duty peraonnel), con-
trol unite. auhunita) correapoodina to the control nor-z they are few,
uohile md aiaple with reapect to atructure; they provide for deploy-ant of
the control point ayataI; they have along then apecialiate with reapact to

l. "V. l. Lenin i Sovetekiye Vooruthennye Sily" (V. I. Lenin and the
Soviet Arled Forcea). Hoacow. Voyanicdat. 1967. p 128.

‘9

NR OFFICIAL USE ('NLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISK ONLY

combst arms and services; they maintain e Justifisble ratio of the number of
officers end sergsmts (enlisted men).

Among these requirements. the maintenance of control units in constant
rsedinese to direct subordinate troops has the greatest significsnce inasnuch
as they mshe up the basic element of the control system. 'lhe given require-
ment was also imposed on the control units earlier. In all armies sn effort
has always been made in peecetime to have the orgsnization of the control
units differ as little as possible from the reguler organizationsl structure
in vanilla. In this cese. if a war occurs there is no need to sdjust the
control units: they could i-mediatsly go about reforming their missions.
Under modern conditions when the significance of surprise attack has in-
creased i-sssurably. this requirement has acquired new significance. It
reduces to the fact that the readiness of the control units and. consequently.
the entire control system nust be higher than the cosbat readiness of the
troops. Only when observing a given condition ere the commander and steff
in a position to orgsnizs the forthcoming operetions of their subordinate
troops in a timely. high-quality manner.

Ihe high cosbat readiness of troops, including control units. as the
chief of the General Staff of the USSR Armed Forces has pointed out. means
"their condition is such as to ensure the fulfillment of missions with re-
spect to repulsion of an aggressor's sttscks st eny time end mder the most
complicated conditions. the fulfillment of rapid crushing counterattscks on
the enesy end the successful conduct of subsequent operations."1

This readiness of these units as well as the control system as e
whole is achieved by realization of a set of measures. among which the follow-
ing have the most inortsnt significance: the maintenance of s high morsl-
politicsl state of personnel; the outfitting of control units with trained
officers end equipment with modern technicsl leans of control and movement;
high level of training of control units in the performance of their func-

tional duties, the support of s high level of field training and solidarity;
scientific organization of work at hesdquarters.

In connection with the development of armed cosbet equipment end an
increase in scale end power of oodat operations, the volume end content of
troop control missions have increased and. together with this. the times of
their execution have been cut short. ‘lherefore the control units must be
capable of solving all problems in the short periods of time alloted for the
orgenizstion of toilet operations.

In the solution of this problem, along with s high level of training
of officers, the scientifically subetentieted determination of the composi-
tion md structure of the control mite hes acquired important significsnce.
Mien calculating them. the controllsbility norms hsve also been taken into
account: that is. the sdmissible msximum nmber of subordinates (duty per—
sonnel, control mite. subunits and units) which the commender and steff are

l. Kommmist Voomzhennyhh Sil (Ar-ed forces (Jo-mist). No 6. 1973. p 16.
50

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in o pooition to control ofioctivoly. 'rha givon norn io not o unitod nor-
tor on inotancoo. It oopondo on tho contont no comrlnxlty of tho oiooiono
to ho corriod out by ouhordinotoo. tho docroo of indopondonco grantod thou.

tho locotiono of thooo pooplo in coobat. tho prooonco of con-nicotiono. ond
oo on.

Ao a rooult of otudioo Iado in our country and ohroad it hao hoon
ootohliohod thot in any control ophoro. ono chiof (diroctor) con offoctivoly
diroct tho activity of an ovorogo of fivo to 10 pooplo diroctly oubordinoto
to hin.‘ An oxcoooivo incroooo in tho nudor of pooplo ouboroinoto to ono
poraon crootoo a oituotion of "moontrollobility." ‘lho oubordinoto dooo not
rocoivo hio tooho ond inotructiono rogordina tho oontont of tho work in tino,
and ho roooino outoido tho fiold of viov of tho coundor (chiof). lloro it
io nocoooary to conoidor thot tho coonondor. oo o rulo. hao. in oddition to
conotant cmicotiono. o oignificant nuhor of tonporory comnicotiono
(control of rho aooisnoo and oupportins onhunito. naintononco of contact
with tho intoroctins oubmito. control of roconnoiooonco unito, and oo on).
All of thio nokoo tho co-oondor huoior ond incrooooo hio lood.

'lho voll-oubotmtiotod dotorninotion of tho controllobility nor-
follovo fro. colculotins tho poooihilitioo of control unito. 'lho violotion
of thio roquirolont loado to a roduction in control officioncy. For con-
firnotion it io poooihlo to prooont on oxooplo two world war II proctioo.
At tho ond of 1961. tho oorpo diroctorotoo wore roducod: of on tho routin-
ing diroctorotoo only oi: voro loft. Ao o rooult of thio rcoruniootion.
tho totol nuﬂor of coéinod and individuol \nito ontoring tho orly roochod
16 to 18. 1ho ox‘porionco of otfonoivo oporotiono in tho vintor of 1951-1952
dononotratod ooriouo difficultioo in tho control of troopo in an om with
this convention. mo nocoooity orooo for tho rootorotion of tho corpo
lovol of tho odoiniotrotion. uhich vao rooliood lator.

Anothor roquirooont oloo ocquiroo opocial oignificonco—tho roquiro-
nont of having fov. nobilo control unito. During tho couroo of offonoivo
oporotiono in world "or II. divioion hoodquortoro voro forcod to uovo oovo-
rol tinoo a doy in oroor to bo clooor to tho troopo ond inouro continuouo
control of oubordinoto unito. In Iodorn codoat whon the offonoivo to cor-
riod out more rapidly. it io nocoooory for tho con-ondor to chonso locotiono

oignificontly Ioro froquontly ond bo roody to control troopo in novonont and
from ohort houlo.

It io unquootionablo that unoor thooo conditiono tow and highly nobilo
unito turn out to ho tho noot oultble. Exporionco ohovo that tho :roator
tho coqooition of tho control unito. tho lore coupler tho organixotion of
thoir novonont and doploylont. tho groator the donor of dotoction and.
conooquontly, dootruction by tho one-y. Bore it io nocoooory to conoidor

l. Soo A. N. lozholin. "ﬂouchnoyo Orsoniutoiyo Uprovlonohookogo kudo-
ornroyoktlrovonoyo" (Sciontific Orsonizotion of M-iniotrotivo labor-
Orsanigationol Planing)” oocov. KIWI“. 1973, p 261.

51

FOR OPTION-1. USE ()N' V
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

aleo the inortant fact of the interrelation between the comonent alenenta
of the control unit structure in the operation process. Usually. the lore
people there are participating in an operation coatined for e single goal.
the note coqlex the organization of their activity hecoeee. and the core

tine the various types of coordination. discussion and nutual infornation
teke.

In theory and practice. certein duty pereonnel consider that the basic
none of isprovins the efficiency of control is to increase the nueber of
control units. Indeed the cause of a delay in execution of neasuree with re-
epect to control and overload of individual executive units lost frequently
coneista in insufficiently clear organization of the work of the units. low-
efficiency use of technical control equip-ent and the application of obso-
lete nethode of operation corresponding to nodern requirenents.

In addition to the enuereted require-cots. the cnsurance of stringent
econoey has inortant eipnificance. V. I. Lenin coneidered it necessary to
lake the control apparatus as econonical as possible. to rseove my vestiges
of excees iron it. 'ihe basic area for inprovinp economy are sinplifica-
tion of structure and a decrease in the nude: of control unite. and noxiou-
reduction of service and support personnel. ‘ihese neaeuree can lead to a
reduction in expenditures on direct Iaintenence of the adninistrative appa-
ratue. its treininn end eervicin; and to a decreese in expenditures and
traneport md co-mication equip-eat.

Mover. reducing control mite without ecientificelly substantiated
calculetione can do nothing but here. ‘nneir cowosition depends on the
ecale of the troop orpenisn and the volune of the operation. 'lhese princi-
ples. coneiderin; the other require-eats. are need as the huis for deter-
mining the cmositim of the control units. For this purpose, die value
of work to he done under various situetionel conditions is establiehed. the
tested norm for the expenditures of tine on each operation using advanced
netth and availd>le technical leans ere eelected. and as a result of
multiple celculatione by different versions the coqosition of the control
unite is deteuined. be solution of a given prohlee ie found min; nethe-
Iaticel nethode of analysis. be objective approach to deter-ininp the
qumtity of equip-eat and structure of control units is one of the condi-
tions eneurin; control efficiency.

‘lhe coepoeition ad structure of control unite nuet eneure clear. con-
tinuous. highly qualified troop control in any eituetion. 'lhe justifiable
principle of the separation of labor with respect to types of operetione
(specieltiee) with etrict distribution of functions and goele anon: the duty
personnel is taken as the basis for deter-inins the structure. Thie ep-
proach to the structure of the control units penits exclusion of perellelis-
end duplication in the work. it cleerly outlines the sphere of activity. end
in addition fecilitetee the orgenitetion of troop control. It prosotee in-
proved efficiency in operation. 'ihe preeence of varioue control unite
reeponeihle for a defined type of operation has e poeitive effect on the
infomtion trans-iesion rate. the large flow of infornation that pours

$2

FOR OFPICII‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

into tht control oyottn it oplit into bronchoo tnd tt tho toot tint quick
proctooino o! it it tnourod. or courot. in tho obotnct of tho rtquirtd oroo-
niottion thit oolution con ltod to ptrolltlitn. toptcitlly in gtthtrins
oituotion dott. olownooo ond doloyo in tho ptriormct of ctrttin oporttiono
which oro ptrticipttod in by tho rtoponoiblo ootnto froo tho diiftrtnt con-
trol unitt. llowowor. if otch control unit hto ito own tptciiic oiooiono ond
ooch duty ptroonntl dotinod functionol dutito. thoro it no ioptoooblt woll

in tho inttrrolotiono within tho control unito. tnd tho oituttion it inprovtd
by rtodinooo of officoro to corry out tho dutiot of othtr rooponoiblt toonto
on on int‘o'rchonstoblo booio.

Control mitt ort ont of tho btoic torooto of oction on tho port of
tho tnoq. 'iho noutrtliootion of ony control ocholon crtttoo odditionol
difficultioo in oointoinino ottblo troop mostotnt. Ono of tho ooono o!
tnourino control roliobility it o oomooition of control unito which will on-

turt oioulttntouo dtployotnt of tho control point oyotto tnd will ptnit
thoir rootorotion in coot of noutrolizotion.

In conntction with tho foot thot codaot oporotiono ort conducttd by
tho joint offorto of coobot trot ond thoy ort oupporttd by tpociol troopo
ond oorwicot. tho control mitt mot onouro thoir quolifiod' diroctioo.
within tho ooﬁinod-oroo control mitt. tho nocoooity tritoo for tptcioliott
with rtopoct to coobtt trot. optciol troopo tnd oorwicoo.

According to tho viow of fortign troioo. tho oo-colltd otmdtrdiootion
of tho orotniood otructuro of troopo tnd control unito ond tho lioitins of
thoir typoo io Juotifitd. ‘lhm. in tho booic onioo of tho NATO comtrioo.
oil of tho divioionoc—infmtry. otchmiotd. troortd tmk ond oirbornt-u
hovo idonticolly oruniotd control mito.

It it iopoooiblt not to noto tho roquirtnont iopoood on control mitt
ouch to tho onouronct of t corrtct rotio of officoro ond non-coo'o (tnliottd
non). 'lho clork ond tho drtftootn oro irrtplocooblt oidoo of tho otof!
offictro. 'lht quolity of thoir work dottrointt tho lovol oi tfficioncy in
tho fomlttion of cowot docuoonto ond roduction of pltnning tiot for con-
btt oporttiono. In tho control mitt whoro tho proportion botwotn offictro
md non-con'o (tnliotcd too) hot boon upott. tho offictro trt forctd to
opond o oisnifictnt port of thoir tint on tochnicol work—proporttion of
toltgrtm for trtnooiooion. potting tooothtr topogrtphic nopo. tronoftro of
tho oituotion iron on top to tnothtr, rooding printtd tort. prtptrin; dio-
xrooo. tnd to on. whilo thooo oporttiono could bo oucctoofully oxocutod by
non-can't ond ooldioro hovins opociol okillo. txporionct tnd ctrttin trtin-
ins. ‘lhorofort it it imooiblo to conoidor any reduction in oorvict por-
oonnol to o now otop olong tho poth to tho crtotion of oooll ottffo ond not
too tho ntattivo conooqutncto to which it will load.

Rolt tnd Hiooiono of tho Co-ondor in Troop Control

"hon cutting tho orgmiutionol otructurt of control mitt. tho
principlo of ant-Ion co-md it toktn ll tho boot. ‘lho control control

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY

figure ie the «under. 'lhie principle which hee cone ebout through the
experience of long-tern developeent of control mite ecquiree epecielly greet
eipificence mder nodern conditiono whcn the combo: opcretione dowelop et
exceptionelly high retee: they ere dietinguiehed by greet etreee end eherp
chengee in the eituetion. Under theee conditione only the eingle co-ender
inveeted with greet power ie cepeble of eneuring centrelired control end
directing the eiiorte of hie erbordinetce et eucceeeful coepletion of the
eteted eieeion. 1he beniniet inetruction-uthet in eilitery effeire wore then
anywhere elee ie it neceeeery to heve the etricteet mity of operetione of
lerge eeeeee of people end eubordinetion of their will to the will of one
eeno-doee not loee eny of ite eimificence here.

The contender reelitee troop control end beere coeplete reeponeibility
for their execution of eteted eieeione. In hie precticel work he ie eup-
ported by the eteff end other control unite. ‘Ihey help him to orgeniee coe-
bet operetione end conetently control the troope during the couree of ooebet.

The co-ender eehee the codet decieion. he eetdrliehee the coﬁet
eieeione for the eubordinetee. he orgenieee the interection end givee in-
etructione with reepect to the perty-politicel work. the orgenieetion of con-
trol end the conpreheneiwe eupport of coebet operetione. lhe degree to
which the decieion Iede by his correeponde to the developed eituetion ie in-
diceted by the reeulte oi the troope' execution of the eieeione. 'Ihe ekill
end cepecity to note eubetentieted decieione in e ehort tiee ere the beeic
index of the operetiwe-tecticel neturity of the «under. here. eccording
to H. V. Prunee. ekill euet be exhibited enong the "eet of verioue eethode
end eeene of eelecting thet ie eoet eppropriete in eech given ceee. hili-
tery theory cennot provide hie with eny etenderd decieion: it cen eerve
only ee e guiding principle.M

Nepoleon conpered the gift of the uilitery leeder with e equere in
which the hue ie will. the height ie eind. ‘nle equere will be e equere
only mder the condition thet the beee ie eouel to the height or. in other
worde. mind end will ere equel. If will ie euperior to eind. the Iilitery
leeder will ect decieively end couregeouely. but with little reeeon; other-
wiee. he will heve good ideee end plene. but there will not be euificient
courege end decieiveneee to execute then.

It ie poeeible to etete cetegoricelly thet eucceee in coﬁet ie
brought ebout by will codined with profeeeionel neetery. the co-ender'e
eenee of high pereonel reeponeibility for the fulfill-mt of the nieeion.

e eenifeetetion of creetivity. e reeeoneble rielt. with pereietent eeerch for
lethode leeding to victory. it ie ilpoeeible to expect volmtery. per-
eietent ection on the pert of the «under in eur-omting difficultiee on
the wey to the mint goel if he knowe hie tectice end the codet cepebili-
tiee of the weepone ad equip-eat, but doee not know the enew well lad
doee not heve experience in leederehip. "The nodern leeder," noted 1.. I.

l. a. V. Prunee. Selected "orb. Hoeoow. Voyeniedet. 1965. pp 83-“.
so

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lreehnev er the 25th Perry Gangrene. “nuet orgenicelly conhine e petty ne-
ture with deep confidence. diecipline with initietive end I creetive epproech
to eiieire. ln eddition. in my eection the leader ie ohligeted to coneidcr
the eociel-politicel end educetionel eepecte. to he eeneitive to people.

their neede end their requeete. end to eerve en en exuple in work end in
nu deily 1m."l

0n die heeie of the decieion of the courier. the work of the con-
trol mit euhordinete to hin ie to orgeniee high-quelity treining of the
troope to cerry out the iorthconing nieeion.

Under nodern conditione. in connection with equipping the troope with
nucleer weepone end other neene of deetruction. the co-endere of ell degreee
have received e eigniticently greeter cepehility for influencing the couree
of contact, to inpoee hie will on the eneny cud creete e eituetion which in
edventegeoue for hie troope. ln eddition. it nuet he coneidered thet enelo-
goue poeeihilitiee hevc eleo eppeered on the pert oi the enm. Under thcec
conditione. eucceee will be on the eide of the one who not only known the
developing eituetion. but eleo knowe how to predict ite develop-ent. ie
cepeble of quickly reecting to the evente thet heve trenepired end. et the
eeee tine. precede the eneny in operetione. Any unjuetifible deley, pee-
eiveneee oi the «under. or ieer of reeponeihility for decieion neking
will unevoidebly lend to dcetruction. Unqueetionebly. the wander in
ohligeted to be prodent. but in eddition. reedy to teke e reeeonehle rick.
Herehel of the Soviet Union I. K. lokoeeovekiy preeente e convincing eerle
in hie hook ”Soldetehiy Dolg" [A Soldier‘e Duty) fro: the prectice of troop
control during the couree of the Rural: bettlea ”At the beginning of the
third dey of the hettle el-oet ell of the irontline reeervee were involved
in codaet; end the enew continued to bring up sore end nore foroee elong
hie nein etrike direction... Hut wee to etop hill I decided on e big
rich: 1 cent ny leet reserveo-thc 9th ‘l'enk Corpe of an s. I. Iogdenov.
which wee loceted in the vicinity of Rural. covering the town iron the
eouth, on the nein direction."2

he introduction of reeervee into hettle pleyed en ilportent role
in ite outcoee. ‘lhie rink in. the index of the conender'e neturity. hie
ekill in eoberly evelueting the eituetion er the criticel nount. end

selecting fro- ell poeeihle vereione the one thet will eeeure the greeteet
gein.

felting e rink done not teen ecting inpuleively or acting prcnture
decieione without e deep enelyeie of the eituetion end celculetione without
eolid feith in eucceee. Any error of the couender in aodern ooﬁet cen
lced to ecrioue. et tinee unjuetitieble coneequencee.

l. Heteriele of the 25th Congreee of the CPS", Hoecw. 1976. p 70.

2. K. I. loeeovekiy. "Soldetekiy Dolg" (Soldier'eUuty). Hoecow. Voyenie-
det. 1968. p 23.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During tho couroo of tho porforlonco of tho coobot niooion tho troopo
con bo in o ooriouo oituotion. Under thooo conditions the co-ondcr not be
tomd togothor with tho oubunito oubordinoto to hio: ho onot poroonolly
infloonco tho couroo of codpot oporotiono. ond by hio tenocity, tho force
of hio will. hio coln ond roooonoblo poroiotonco oorwo no on oxonlo for oll
poroonnol. l! tho troopo do not ochi v; -cccc:r. rcticnco. courngo and pru-
donco oro roouirod of tho co-ondor. It in inodoiooiblo for tho co-ondor.
without onolyoing tho oituotion. ond without ootobliohing tho tron conooo of
o doloy in tho oxocotion of tho niooion. to ruoh to blooo hio onbordinotoo
for oil of tho foiluroo, ooko roplocolonto of cortoin pooplo for othoro.
rhongo hio docioion. roocind tho for-or niooiono ond ototo not niooiono for
tho odunito. 1hio hooto noot iroquontly in o! no on ond gonorotoo iorthor
confuoion in tho work of tho oubordinotoo. A co-ondor nuot oxhibit por-
oiotonco in ochiowiog tho ototod gool. ooborly owoluoto tho dowoloping oituo-

tion ond uko docioiono without hooto. but quickly ond in o ohort opon of
tilt.

Plonning boood on oobor conoidorotion of tilt ond tho octuol poooibi-
litioo of tho oubordinoto control unito ond troopo hoo oxcoptionol oigni-
ficonco in tho work of o counndor. ho not olwoyo cloorly know whot. when.
ad with whot noono oonothing hoo to bo dono. Without thio typo ol plon.
the comndor it in no pooition to work with tho futuro. oontolly looding
tho ovonto. ho will conotontly foil to do whot io nocoooory in tioo. mo
looo tino tho connondor hoo. tho grootor coro ho not toko in opprooching tho
ooloction of problono thot oro to bo oolwod by hi- poroonolly. Skill in
diotinguiohing tho prinory iron tho oocondory in on inportont choroctoriotic
of tho cmndor. ”You not. thorotoro,” V. I. Ionin odviood. "roliovo
youroolf of turnoil ond co-otion, which in tho undoing of oll of no. you
mt onourc yooroolf tho poooibility of col-1y thinking obout tho oporotion
oo o wholo...“ To not tho Ioin thing dooo not soon to nogloct whot io
oocondory; othorwioo. tho "dotoilo" will bocooo o oignificmt broko on tho
oporotion. Accordingly. ohoroctoriotico of the work otylo of tho co-ondor
ouch no purpooofulnooo, okill in finding tho docioiwo lovol in tho oporotion
on which it io nocoooory to conoontroto oll of hio booic offorto, ocquiro
inportont oipificonco. lloro tho nocoooity for tho oootory of tho Hot-riot-
uniniot dioloctic nothod of thinking io cloorly mifootcd. Inking it
poooihlo to otody tho phonooonon not in ioolotion. but in intorlotion. and
to find o-ong tho oony phononono tho docioiwo ono.

Life convincoo uo thot howovor proporod and tocticolly colpotont o
co-ondor soy ho, ho olono to in no petition to lood hio oubordinoto troopo.
1ho oo-ondor who trioo to oolwo oll of tho problono. lorgo ond null.
oinglo-hondodly. ocottoro hio forcoo. loooo tioo. ond u o rooult dooo not
do tho noin thing in tino. thin in oopociolly true for nodorn condit'lono
whon tho voluno of oporotiono with roopoct to troop control hoo incrooood
grootly. ond tho tino for oxocution hoo boon ohorply roducod. Undor thooo

i. V. l. unin, Oowloto Colloctod works. Vol 6‘. p 366.
56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIM. USE ONLY

conditiono. tho noooooity for okilliul on by tho co-ondor oi tho ouhordi-
noto control unito in tho oporotion lo oxhihitod with opociol forco. Only
by joint offorto io it poooihlo in cooprooood tioo to ovoluoto tho oituotion
cowrohonoivoly. find tho hoot noono oi uoino tho ovoilohlo forcoo ond oouip—
oont ad ot tho oooo tioo onouro oinclo-hondod docioion ookins. 'lho ohill
of tho co-mdor in rolyino on hio oooiotonto. otoff. ond porty ond Kooooool
orooniootiono. ond o copocity for oohilitin: ond crooniring tho pooplo in

tho oolution oi ototod prohlooo io ono of tho ooot inportont quolitioo of

tho oinolo co-ondor. ‘lho principlo of coo-om co-ond itoolf proouppoooo
tho hioh doolo ond porty notnro of tho conondor, hio octivo poroonol porti-

cipotion in oducotionol work. ond otrict dooondo plocod on hiooolf no hio
orbordinotoo.

nonco. tho okill of tho co-ndor in ootobliohin; tho proper. huoinooo-
liko intorrolotiono with ouhordinotoo ocquiroo opociol oigniiiconco. Unquoo-
tionbly. in ordor to control pooplo in coobot. tho co-ondor noodo o otrons
will ond oolid choroctor. howowor. thooo uooful quolitioo will hocooo tho
oppooito if thoy oro oudzihitod in tho (on of cooroonooo. inoultin; octiono
ond oxproooiono. doorndino tho huoon worth of hio ouhordinotoo. 9woorino
ond ohoutin; oro not tho indox of oxoctinonooo ond oorol principloo of tho
co-ondor. but non ovidonco of hio lock of oducotion md culturo.

Poroonnol roopoct tho connondor who. olong with otrict oxoctingnooo.
orhihito concorn for hio ouhordinotoo. wolooo thoir worth ond thoir honor.
ﬂora of tho Soviot Union 3. A. homtroyov. tho hottolion co-ondor who
otonod tho loichotoa. writoo convincingly obout thio. "Rohility ond roopoct
for otbordinotoo woro folt in tho hohovior. tho octiono ond hohito of tho
oivioion co-ondor. Ho know of no cooo whoro ho woo inoulting or dogrodod
tho worth of o ooldior or co-ondor who ioilod in hottlo. no did not looo
hio «ll-control or tonocity in tho loot ooriouo oitnotlum."l

Pot okilliul troop control it lo inoufficiont to know tho codot ox-
porionco of put woro: tho co-ondor'o intuition dooo not olwoyo coco to tho
roocuc in opprooching tho oolution oi prohlono thot on orioo. A unuinoly
ociontific opprooch boood on tho opplicotion of tho ohjoctiyo luo of
utorioliot dioloctico conoidorin; tho opocific for-o of their ooniioototion
undo: tho conditiono of orood codiot io roouirod of ovory co-ondor. 1ho
ociontitic opprooch of tho co-ondor to tho troop mogooont propoooo doop
no colprohonoivo oohotontiotion of tho docioion nodo. skillful utilicotion
of tho ochiovcocnto of ocionco, tho copobilitioo of the equip-mt.- ad od~
voncod oxporionco. ‘iho coo-under will ho on tho lml of tho coder-n ro-
quirooonto if ho hoo o dovolopod ocnoo of tho now. ho knowo how to diocotd
tho ohoolcto in tino ond okillfully oupport tho odvoncod ond tho progroooivo.
olthoush only jut gonorotod.

l. 8. A. houotroyow. “Put' It Roykhotosu” (Poth to tho Reidnotog). Hoocow.
Voyoniodot, 1961.

$7

FOR OFFICIM. USE (N'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or on tho quolitioo of tho co-ondor. tho booic one in hie proporod-
nooo for okilliul execution of tho cleoto ocopo of hio dutieo. for ”no
conocientiouonooo. no potty outhotity will roploco the booic oooonce of o
givon cooo: knowledge of whot io going on...M

V. I. Lenin oopociolly voluoo tho "orgoniooto. people with o eober
nine end can» eonoo. people codining devotion to oociolion with chill in
quietly (in opito of co-otion ond noioo) forging the etrong. frotornol joint
work of o lot-go colloctivo people.“

Conooquontly. the «under con ouccooofully dool with lorgo. conic:
obligotiono if he oorvoo oo on oxnple of high idoolo end orgoniution. he
hoo proiomd knowledge with reopoct to nilitory theory ond coobot neode. ond
he hoo nootorod tho oodotn oo‘thodo o! troop control.

Stoﬂ-booic Control Unit

Ihe co-ondor controlo ubordinote troopo proportionolly no through
tho otou. lho otoit io chergod with coupler dooiono in oodorn coiot.
Along the. one of tho ooot oignificont roloo io ployod hy oointoining con-
otont coﬁot roodinooo of the troopo end tho control unite to corry out tho
forthcouing niooion. for ito oolution. tho otoﬂ hoo cloorod. checked out
tho doto on tho condition end tho pooition of troope, dtoir lovol of otrongth

and oupport. lhoy know their noodo. whet they oro locking end whet not be
done to ioprovo their coobot roodinooo. '1he otoﬂ roceivoo thio doto not
only fro- tho roporto of otbordinoto otoﬂo but oloo by poroonol oboervotion
of tho oporotiono of tho troopo, by diocuooiono with otoff officoro. with
ewunit co-ondoro. ad diocueoiono with offiooro, non-con'o Ind ooldioro.

Anolyoing thio infomtion in e tinoly humor. tho etc“ to in o
pooition. withOut woiting to obtoin o opecific codaot lioeion. to plat of-
!octive ooooureo to olioinoto deficiencioo whidl to one degree or enothor
will reduco tho codut reodinooo of tho troopo. he on“ givoo e groot
deol of ottention to tho Iointonuco of control pointo in conotont codot
roodineoo. tho prooonco of co-unicotiono, one hwlodgt of ootobliohod eig-
nole by the duty peroonnel.

Active porticipotion in tho porty-politicol work. tho oducotion of
tho poroonnol one tho for-notion of high oorol end odot quolitioo in thou
io tho duty of tho etoft officere.

0n receiving tho codiot niooion. tho oteff pot-for- o oignificont port
of tho work with reopoct to codiot plonning. ond oloo providoo for delivering

I. V. I. honin. Cowloto Colloctod Herb. Vol 65. p 467.
2. V. l. lonin. Cowloto Collected Horn. Vol 36. p 193.

56

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the niaeiona to the reeponaible agente. In perforling the operatione with
raepect to coint planning md organization. the eta“ officera prepare the
data and the calculationa required by the «under for decieion aching: they
participate in the organization of the interaction: they plan and iaplenent
the baeic eaaauree with raepact to cowrehenaive aupport of the codaat ope-
ratione: they organize toenmicatione with the ewordinata, interacting aub-
mita. with neighboring and euperior ataiia: they aore praciaely daiina 111
the probleee connected with the equip-ant. place-ant and nova-ant of control
pointe during the couree or coﬁat operatione. Biaultanaouely. ataif offi-
care organize control of the work of aubordinate etarfe and the training of
the troopa to carry out the forthcoming niaeion.

For akillful troop control it it neceaaary above all to know clearly
the true aituation in which the troopa find thaeeelvee when carrying out a
etated Iiaeion. Coneidering that the eituation chengee rapidly. the atafi
ia conetantly concerned with the procure-ant. gathering. etudy and generali-
ution of data on the enemy. their troopa. neighbora. the nature of the ter-
rain. the radiation eituation. hydro-eteorological conditione. economic con-

dition of the conbat tone and the aocial-political coapoaition of the
population.

0n the baaia of a deep generalization and analyeia of a given eitua-
tion the ataf! preparaa aolutione md propoaala with reepact to the uee of
available forcae and equip-ant. and in accord-ma with the co-ander'e
decieion realiue the planning of the coder operation and ieplenente the
planed Ieaauraa with respect to the organization of colbat. In addition.
the eta“ offioara. without waiting for raqmete. in accordance with the
table of repreeentation of urgent reporte, and aloe in the pretence of eherp.
unexpected dlangee in aituetion. report the data to euperior etaffe. they
infora other control unite and their neighbore. In thia caaa there ie no
neceaaity for euperior ataffa to requaet reporte on the eituetion from arb-
ordinatea.

'lhe tinely receipt of data and the quick reporting of aeeignucnte to
the troopa ere inpoaaihle without etable co-unicationa. lhia ia all the
note to the cane in that the eneqy will take a nudnr of neaeuree to dieor-
genire the control of our troopa. Iherefore. the ekillful organization of
conunicatione. the taking of reliable neaeuree to protect radioelectronit
devicaa iron enemy interference. and the improve-eat of the life expectancy
of the cot-unicationa ayaten a a whole retain the conetent concern of head-
quartere under any conditione.

During the period of preparation and conduct of coﬁet operatione one
of the nieeiona of headquartera ie eccomting for pareonnal. arm-ant.
nateriel and tranaportation. Data on the cowletanaaa with which the troopa
are outfitted ueually cone to headquartaro in the next reporte and eunariee.
In caeee where eherp changea have taken place unexpectedly in the conpoei—
tion of adaunite. thie ie reported inediately. A new facet in the work of
headquartere haa beco-e ooneideration of radioactive radiation doeee.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USB (NLY
FOR OFFICE)“ IISH ONLY

Being the besic control unit of the troops. the steff ensures coordi-

neted operation of all control unite. directing their niiorte et carrying
out the coeeendsr‘s decision.

‘lhe successful execution by the steii officers of their nissione de-
pends on their proiessionsl training, oxpnrience. businesslike reeponne to
the co-ader end other duty personnel of the control units. in for their
trsining ad personsl queliiicetione, high ideological conviction. perty
lorelity. the cepecity to be guided in their ections by the interests of the
perty ad govern-eat. honor. nodesty. exectingneee, proper understading oi
criticisn ad self-criticise ere edvenced to the prinery level. 1b the sane
degree the steif ofiicer nust be cherectsrised by discipline. snecutive ebi-
lity. cepscity to exhibit independence end creativity. no role of the chief
of steff. who is the first eesistent coasnder. is exceptionally high in this
eree. At the bettelion level he brings the coaender's decision end hie in-
structions to ell oi the sdsinistrstiwe duty personnel. he involves then in
the joint resolution of the nest inportat problene end the neesuree with
respect to orgenisetion ad support of the conbet operetions. In turn. they
report ell of the beeic dete on the situetion end the conditions of their
subordinete submits to the chief of stefi end coordinete with hin ell of
the pleas with respect to their utilisstion in coast. Only under the
closest coordineted work and heelthy interreletion enong ell the duty per-

sonnel ere nornsl conditions created for the imctioning of the troop con-
trol systen on e whole.

therefore heedquertere pleys the role of the orgenieer of the work of
the entire edunistretion. ‘l'he snooth. coordineted work of e11 of the con-
trol mite end especielly the eteif depends on the treining. experience end
skill in directing the work of swordinetes. 'lhe personel orgenisstion.
the cepecity to find at eech point in tine thet link in the chain that will
decide the euccese of the letter, to nobilise ell forces to echiewe e beeic
goel cherecterite the chief of stsff es the leader of the collective.

During Horld Her II. the chief of etc“ wee invested with the respon-
sibility for neinteining the high coast readiness of the troops end control
units. the orgenisetion end support of continuous micstions with subor-
dinete ad interscting troops. superior end neighboring etefie, reconnais-
sance, organization of the co-adent's service. security end the reelisetion
of neeeures with respect to ell of their types of support. Only the chief
of staff wee grated the right to give orders in the nose of the co-endere
to ell pereonnel eubordinete to the co-ender. end in cases not allowing
postpone-eat to introduce chages independently in the decisions nede by
subordinate co-snders. ‘lhis rigat obligates the chief of eteff to e great
deel, end above ell to aeningful knowledge not only of the co-snder‘s
decision, but elso his proposels. his plea of sction in response to possible
chages in the situation. he proper interreletions oi the «under end
the chief of steif. their responsiveness, understanding of eech other—these
constitute the east inortent conditions for creeting e businesslike situa-
tion ad organised operstion of ell control units.

60

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In his seeoirs about the war. Marshal of the Soviet Union 8. 8.
biryuzov writes the following about the chief of staff, “'lhe counder auet
have faith in his chief of staff just as in himself. It is iepoesible to
work without this. 'lhe chief of staff is not eisply an executive agent.
lie is one of the closest assistants of the contender md. necessarily, with
a creative aind and nature. The chief of staff, on the basis of the general
intentions of the contender. goes through ell of the details of the situation
with his staff and prepares activated proposals. 'lhe eonitoring of the exe-
cution of orders and troop control are ensured by ssane of this."l

‘Ihs high position held by the chief of staff in troop control obli-
gates hie always to know the goals stated for the subunits by the senior of-
ficer and the COIIIndOl‘. the situation. the condition and capabilities of
hie subunits IN! the ener, the quantitative and qualitative ratio of forces
and equipsent. the developing radiation situation and its effect on the ful-
fillment of the aisaion; to be ready at any point in ties to draw conclusions
from the evaluation of the situation. to lake proposals with respect to the
decision. they determine the measures with respect to the support of the
coﬂat operations and the organisation of control.

In addition. the lost important duty of the chief of staff is the
direction of subordinate officers. He directs their work, he helps than. he
teaches the:- how their siseions oust be carried out, he sees to their tinely
presentation of reports on cadet activity.

In spite of the large snout of organizational work that he has. he
hiaealf carries out the nest coqlex aissions. During the planning process,
the chief of staff works directly with the colander on the decision asking,
he calculates the tile for the organization of codat operations. he deve-
lops the scat isportent coﬁst docmenta, which usually requires coordina-
tion along the various control units.

however well trained the chief of staff may be. he is in no position
to carry out alone all the headquarters aiseions. he reliee in his work on
his aids-the staff officers. 'lhe degree of its preparation to carry out
its duties determines the success of the work of the staff as a whole.
hence. the soot iaportsnt goal of the chief of staff is training and educa-
tion of officers, the perfection of the lethods of their operation. inrove-
eent of the saoothness of organization of the staff as the basic troop
control unit. There is no doubt that only highly qualified. ideologically
tewered. creatively thinking officers will deal successfully with the duties
of the chief of staff. the activity of whoa serves as an exonle of the con-
sunist attitude toward the perforI-Ice of duty.

1. . . Biryurov. 'Kogdn Greneli Puahki" ("hen the Guns Roared), Hoscow.
Voyenizdat, 1962. p 1‘7.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE (mix
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Senior Officers of Conbat Arm and Services

In the units, in contrast to the battalion sdninistration. in addi-
tion to the «under and the staff. there are senior officers of cosbat
arm and services and also the party-political apparatue.’ nu deputy con-
nanders of political and technical units. rear services, the artillery chiefs,
the chiefs of antiaircraft defense. the engineering and technical service.
the chief of the nissile artillery arlanant service, the chiefs of the nadi-
cal. financial. armored. sorter, food and clothing services, fuel and lubri-
cating naterials--sach of then perforns a defined type of work and bears
responsibility for the coﬁat readiness of the sdmnit subrodinate to him
and for their performance of the nission. ‘lhey carry out their duties based
on the decision of the conmander and coordinating their actions with the
contained-arms headquarters. Within their authority and duties the senior
officers of the codnt arms and services prepare the calculations of the con-
bat capabilities of the forces lid materiel subordinate to then, the plan on
the basis of the con-ander's decision. the actions of the subunit of the
conbat arns ad special troops. they give the nissiona to the executive units
and they direct the subordinate swmits and services.

The role of the party-political apparatus in troop control, in the
education of high noral qualities in the pereonnel, discipline, organization
and high responsibility for the performance of their duties in codat is
exceptionally high. In the process of noral-political training, the Marxist-
Leniniat point of view. political naturity. dedication to the party ad the
homeland are shaped in the personnel. ‘nle high con-mist ideals and convic-
tion are the basis for the moral stability of the troops, the spiritual
source of our victories. ‘lhe development of these qualities is at the cen-
ter of attention of the party-political apparatus.

During the course of the preparation and conduct of battle the party-
political apparatm works in closely with the co-ander and the staff. It
has becone a necessary rule when the deputy comnders of the political
unit, the secretaries of the party organizations are present when the com-
mander gives the codat orders and during organization of the interaction of
the troops. when necessary they give instructions to the swunit co-anders
with respect to the organization of the party-political work, they explain
the lost iuportant papers of the Control Codttee of the CPSU and the
Soviet government, the orders of the Suprene (Io-and. the col-Imitation of
the military council to the personnel, and they achieve a clear mderstanding
of their codat missions on the part cf all of the troops. If the situation
in the subunit permits. they organize party and lo-omol neetings, they
popularize the unselfish actions of the troops. ‘lhe basic efforts of the

political agency are concentrated in decisive sections on which the success
of the battle depends.

1. See the Internal Service Regulations of the USSR Armed forces.
62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’l'lClM. “SI-2 ONLY

‘lhe successful performance of the duties and missions by all of the
control units depends to a great extent on the organization and clarity of
their work. skill in any situation. and on remaining calm. maintaining their
tenacity and exhibiting high moral principles and exactingness on the sub-
unit personnel and the personnel of the subordinate staff. Under modern
conditions all of their work must take place at high speed, with the expen-
diture of minimum time on each mission. 'lhe time has passed when the con-
trol unite can spend days planning combat operations and developing a large
quantity of -evkuard documents. how new methods are needed in this work, and
a different approach to the fulfillment of the stated missions.

'lhe effective use of advanced methods in troop control is possible
through a creative approach to the determination of the content and volume
of the work. the scientific organization of labor. the skillful assimilation
of combat experience, and systematic improvement of the officers' ideolo-
gical-theoretical level.

'Ihe successful execution of the control missions is possible only on
ensuring the closest interrelation in the activity of all the duty personnel
and the control units. As never before, the quality of the control depends
not only on the work of the contender and the staff . but on the entire col-
lective of control officers.

me most important index of skillful activity of the control units is
the performance of all of the operations with a high level of staff capabi-
lity. Usually this concept includes the system of requirements on the level
of training of the officers of the control units. the quality of the opera-
tions performed by then with respect to troop control which corresponds to
the nature of modern combat. ‘lhe staff capability includes not only the
competent and accurate development of coebat docunents, but also deep know-
ledge by the officers of the problems of military art. a high level of pro-
fessional training. skill in finding new methods of operation ensuring ef-
fective use of the available forces and material in conﬁne.

Under any conditions. including the introduction of automated control
systems. the role of the staff contender in leading the troops is in no way
diminished. lhe latest technical means give them invaluable assistance.
but they do not replace man, his creative thinking. his will. his logical
analysis of the situation; as before the cos-sander remains the central
figure in the administration and control system, and the staff remains the
basic troop control body.

2. Technical Control Means

1he effectiveness of troop control depends to a great extent on the
condition ll'ld the mﬂaer of technical control means. 1hese means must pro-
vide the following: fest gathering. processing and representation (output)
of the situation data; the performance of various calculations required for
decision making and plarming of the cedar operations in short periods of

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE on. Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tile; timely foreulation of the decision eeds by the coeuander. end delivery
of the missions to the troops: high nobility of the control proposed; pro-
tection of the personnel of the control bodies frost enemy fire and penetrat-
ing radietion. end else the creetion of the necessary conditions for the
uorl: end rest of the officers. It is indisputable thet setisfying these
require-onto is possible only by nodern neens.

1hs technical control means available at the present tine in the
ereies of the different countries can be provisionelly divided into five
basic groups. beginning with their purpose end the nature of their operation:
the co-unicetions media. the naens of procuring infornetion, infornation
processing Insane md neana of perforeing tecticel calculations. docueentetion
leans end docueent reproduction teens. end the heedquerters coumd nachines
(see Figure 5).

Inasmch as it does not appear possible to give a detailed charecter-
istic of all of these noses in this book. the basic data ere proosntod below
for only those thet were used in the tscticel echelon of both the. Soviet
Am end the areiee of the nest developed ieperislist govern-out» in tech-
nicel respects. This will pernit the readers to obtain a generel represen-
tation of the possibilities of nodern control oquipeent. For more d-steiled
and deeper investigation. of course it is necessary to one other sources.1

Con-smicetions Keene

Comications neene play the leading role among other technical
neens. 1he stability of troop control depends first of ell on their condi-
tion.

In the nodern. eoet developed erniee in technicel respects. the con-
nmicetions leans include the following: redio, redio relay. vine, porteble
end signel scene.

1. One such oource is the book by A. V. Prokof'yev, "Sredstve Nekhenieatsii
i Avto-etieatsii v Shtebekh" [Hschenizetion and Automation "cans in
Headquerters], Moscow, Voyenizdst, 1976.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFlCMl. USE ONLY

[Key to Figure 5 continued iron preceding pege]

21. Dete proceeeing end celculetion equipnent

22. Simpleet conputetion equipnent

23. Computer eouipnent

2b. Computere

25. Documentetion md document reproduction
equipment

26. Sound recorder

27. Copiere

28. brewing inetrunente md toole

29. Stenderd document (one (foreelired docmente).

In ell ereiee redio ie the heeic co-unicetione medium. During world
wer ll. eepecielly in the epring of l9b3 during the development of the often-
eive. redio beceee the beeic meene of miention in the tecticel echelone.
By the middle of 19“. the rifle divieion hed 123 redioe authorized. Of
then the eignel hettelion hed 10 (R88, A-M. A-n). the eignel pletoone of
the hettelione hed one eech (R28). the ertillery unite hed 55. end the re-
neining eubunite of the divieion hed 25. he renge of the redioe in the
telephone node vee no follow: 10-30 km for the m. 10-20 km for the A-7A
end A-‘IB. end up to 6 I:- for the ”S.

The modern redioe ere cepehle of comperetively relieble group control
under any conditione. 1heir indieputdale edventegee include the feet thet
they permit cmicetione to he eetehliehed quickly, in prectice et eny
dietence end in eny terrein, they provide for infornetion trenenieeion eieul-
teneouely to e lerge nueber of correepondente. Nevertheleee. redio con-mi-
cetione heve their week pointe: eecrecy of trenenieeion ie not eneured dur-
ing operetion; co-unicetione on he dierupted by interference: the enemy
cm by ueing redio direction findere determine the locetion of the trenenit-
ting redioe. end by then. the poeition of the control pointe. ‘lheee defi-
cienciee eignificently linit the poeeibilitiee of ueing redioe.

In the tecticel echelon of the heeic foreign ermiee. prieerily ultre-
ehort-veve redioe ere need. which ie eeen in Tehle l.

lhe nodern ehort-oeve end ultreehort-ueve redietion medic heve elnoet
no electron twee. lntegreted circuite, eeniconductor devicee end einieture
perte find hroed epplicetion in then. In the new redioe. eccording to the
eetieetee of foreim epecieliete. provieion ie node for reducing the weight
end eice. decreeeing the inteke power. the preeenee of e co-on frequency

rage for ell typee of troope, e reduction in ucenning time end tine required
to eetehlieh co-unicetione.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ram 1. leeic faction-Technical Characterietice of the Redioe of the
Tactical Melon.

)hnmun .
“”55.“ MW (5) «3" <6) '“""""'"

N RC-Ad ClllA 0 47-61 “mm a I. Cone! naeaenee. eeeoa

 

ANIPRC 26 (CIIIA) 30- Ma: enamel - luau. you. datuaoa

ANNRC- 33 '8'. were —

AN one an 0(7) _

N -I 4 " (A . H mean-45 Banana. opera“. nee

“"'“““cm””.Ji.‘.1%':2‘.'m‘:'ww.§.2::‘:':::

(7) uea 0 mo» an we: in coop"
anonm
stems (09V) (17) en ”Kaunas" I eoaoee-
umncom (mm) (19) I 35-41 no 2 6 l

° ”email eepeen AN RC as punctual" AN/VRC 83 monument! Ie tee-re. deoenpeeteomepe
a ANIGRC I25 -tonuto ee l -e eerouodeee.

anaemia AN/VC 43-49 ommmca o' AN/VRC-l 2 Rum-It. non-00.9.1.0”. "“"
EI'RH
Key: 1. Me of radio 18. Tank unite and euhmite
2. Frequency band (megahertz) 19. England
3. Jude: of fixed frequenciee 20. he portable vereion ARI
A. Power (vatte) mc-zs of the AN/VRc-SS
5. Range (he) redio ie inatelled on a
6. Where need tank or erected trauport.
7. (USA) end the ANION-125. only
8. And on e quarter-ton eotot
9. Soldier. eqmd. platoon vehicle.
10. It: meant. 5-8. At 21. ‘me Mme-£349 tadioa
the halt. 35 differ fro- the “NRC-12
11. Platoon. coapeny. batta1ion by the eet of trmaceiving
12. Haxieua A0: uni-u A equip-ant.

13. At the halt 35, in notion 25
16. Battalion. brigade. divieion

15. Hith an airctaft at an a1ti- “'Voyenniyy Veetnih military
tude of 300 eaten, A8; at llerald], No 6, 1973. p 121.
an altitude of 3.000 latex-e.

160

16. For co-nicetione with tec-
tical aircraft and for recep-
tion of teconneieeence fro-
onboard aircraft

17. federal Ramblic of (Benny

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR (WFICIM. "SB ONLY

Tile 2. Tactical-Technical Characterietica of Radio Relay Conmicetion
stationa

 
   

40—60 coo—um ~20: {:1 2i
ANIMRE-QC (CIIIM ”50"“ lg-I) I:

mmmm‘ﬂum w-m loo-coo Wm c; {an
. o- coo-woo. 3-2». «I m

Wham. «mm c so '23; woo 2;
(6)

ANITRC-N (CHM) (W «co-«om IM 2". 43
ANITRCJJ! (CUM) to 4m «no—moo IMO. 34: G3; 00

Iowa
6-50 (Auraneﬂ) no I) 223-4” lo; 250 I!
. . no: :0 a: I as
PM no (em (9) 33:4” to 2;

Key: 1. Station index (comtry)
2. Comicationa range. It.
3. Frequency bud, nagaherta
lo. Radiation power, vatta
5. “er of telephone channale
6. (United Staten)
7. To
8. (humid)
9. (Federal Republic of Genny)

In a umber of foreign arniee. the adaptive abort-wave radio conu-
nicatione eyetene have hacona videepraed. in which adaptation of the radio
channel eutonatically takes place coneidering maintenance of high traneition
quality mder any oonditiona. In the near future the neat advntaseone

operating frequency and truanittar power will be antonatically aelacted on
than channela.

In troop control of any arniaa broad are i: nade of radio relay con-
unicationa. It in organized vein; a nutter of traneceiving radio relay
etatione located at a diatance eneurins eteblo co-micatione between adja-
cent etatione. ‘lhe diatance betveen than depende on the relief of the
terrain, the wavelength. the para-etere of the receiver and trenenitter, and
the neteorolosical conditiona.

n1“. etetione par-it duplex multichannel operation. they per-it
traneniaeion of all for. of information and, in addition, they conplicate
the interception of the content of the tranendaeiona, direction finding and
location of the etatione and radio interference by the com. The quality
of co-micatione depende little on the tine of year, the tine of day. and

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oh'i'lClM. USE ONLY

etnoepherio‘. or locel interference. he e reeult of the fact thet the redio
reley etetione operete in the ultreehort-weve blld. cooperatively eiwly
designed directionel entennee ere need.

A eignificent edventege of the redio reley linen ie eleo the feet
thet it ie poeeible to creete codeined liner: in one eection the mice-
tione ere neinteined over redio reley linen. end in enother eection. over
wire linen. ‘Delephone. telegreph, phototelegreph. video telephone end other
co-unicetione cen be reelixed over the redio reley linee (Tehle 2).

In eddition. the redio reley neene linit the poeeibility of eeteblieh-
ing etdale comicetione in notion: the interception of trmenieeione end
creetion of redio interference by the eruy ere not excluded: the conunice-
tione renge depende to e hid: degree on the relief of the terrain: cuoufleg-
ing of the entennee ie difficult. In eddition. e large nutter of eervice
pereonnel ere required et the tereinel and internediete etetione.

One of the neene of improving redio reley nedie. eccording to the
opinion of foreign epecieliete. ie to increue the power of the trenenittere,
to uee higher frequency end eleo optical weve bende to create redio reley
trunke with lerge cerrying cepecity. to modify the meet entennee, introduce
relote control of the inter-ediete etetione end eutoeete the operetion of
the redio reley etetion equipnent.

, Under Iodern conditione wire co-micetione heve not conpletely loet
their eignificence for troop control. Hire collunicetione eneure high que-
lity co-unicetione chennele, convenience of holding convereetione. good
defenee egeinet etloepheric end electricel interference, epeed ad eccurecy
of treneuieeion end. in eddition. they liIit the poeeibility for intercep-
tion of the trene-ieeione by the eneqy.

however, wire col-michtione ere cherecterieed by eerioun deficiencies
which conplicete their epplicetion in coint. They include high vulnerebi-
lity of the linee fro- nucleer end fire etrikee of the eneuy, coweretively
elow epeed of leying the linee. large expendituree of forcee end neene end
eetebliehing ooemnicetione, ewluerdneee 4f the equipnent. iepoeeibility of
uintoining commicetione end lotion.

1he ceble cm be leid on the eerth'e eurfece with the epeed of en
euto-obile over the route elong which the line is laid. "hen picking up the

line, the epeed of winding up the cable off the eurfeoe of the ground will
be leee.

Considering the peculieritiee of wire co-unicetione, they ere beeic-
elly need only when the ewunite etc in pleoe, in the weiting (buildup)
nree. on the defeneive. during the offensive by the etbunit in directione

where nucleer weepone ere not ueed. end also to provide internal commice-
tione et the control points.

69

FOR Oh‘PlCIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLY

Table 3. Beeic Tactical-Technical Specifications of Redari

      
 
 
 

)‘ﬂummru Arm-en
Marta

 
 
 
     
 
  
   

era/99540.15 1cm» a
mountain.) cum (8)

   

Asn»ns.5mUI/um I r. m I +2» I Dunn!» (9) _
Axn‘l'S-M CIIIA. ON 3 w ~23 Ha BTP nu aerouaal I20
mg culmovr n It. I a . u u. .o . l s
.RASURA" D t’TJANpeeu-n. OPI‘. co
ﬂﬂmu 13
..l . ' - .
“Sign?“ M41163 (Optimu- Ha ae oueuunae It!)
..0l.IMIANT“-2 wuquue. Buuu- l 2 if!) pr-ul lo I!
(”unnum- ( , . _ ;
.JMI’ACIZ" 0 outlet) - m 25 He «tantalum 0 30-40
n|¢.\!~ZIT“~72 .A". .8" ( ' e) a 15-30 :20 pru no mjm aerouamnuc 10 .A'
35’“ I (2i) so .0-
*"lnternetion Defence Review". No 5, 1972.
Key: 1. Nomenclature of the radar 11. (United States. Federal Republic
2. Range (km for detection of Germ-1y)
of: 12. On armored carriere or motor
3. People vehiclea
b. Motor vehicles. take 13. (Frmce, Federal Republic of
5. Reading preciaion (eetere) Germany, Deneerk)
6. Treneportation 16. Manual or on a motor vehicle
7. Race (kg) 15. France, Federal Rep‘blic of Germany
8. (United Statee) 16. On a motor vehicle
9. Manual 17. France. Great nritain
10. On armored carriere or l8. Hanuel
motor vehiclea 19. (France)

20. m a motor vehicle
21. Mutual or on a motor vehicle

However perfected the radio technical and wire cmicetione meme
are. they do not exclude and they do not diminish the role of mobile col-u-
nicatione meane in troop control. or the mobile mam. the moat memorable
are the helicoptare (aircraft) and also ell-terrein vehicles equipped with
communications media.

In the tactical echelona the various signal commmicetiona media have
retained their significance ea before for trenamitting conande. reports.
mutual recognition. target indication and uerninga. for this purpoec, viauel.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVFICIM. "SB ONLY

....
I

oound. “ﬂared and radiotochnicol neana are uoed. the eignal rockete. lan-
terne. tracer bullets and aholle. flago. narkero and eo on have fomd tho
broadeot application.

'lhe uae of nobile and eignal noano for troop control. eopocially under
conditione o! etrong radio interference and linitod application of radio
cmicetione. eigniticantly ioprovee tho etebility of control.

Home of (btaining Intonation

Varioue technical fecilitiea are ueually used to obtain intonation
daout our own troope. the eneny. the terrain. the radiation eituation. the
weather conditiono and other data without which euccoeeful troop control in
iopoeeible. At the ease tile. thooo Ioano per-it cobinetion ("joining") of
the diroctly adoinietrative functiono of tho control mite with the opera-
tione of the reoonneieomce forceo and neane. Thio codiination io oopociolly
iaportant when dooigning the auto-etod control eyoteno inoonuch on they theo-
reticolly cannot function without the oeano of obtaining initial infornation
for control. “the eutooated antieircraft coqlex which cannot operate with-
out air target detection noono oervee an an exo-ple of thio.

According to the foreign preae. the stone of obtaining intonation
include radar for different purpooee. tolevieion. radiation reconnaieoanco
inetrunento, neteorological nedia. obeervation inetrulsente. infrared equip-
Ient. navigational equip-ant. ooano of inetruoent and aomd reconnaiuemco.
and no on.

kedar io dooigned for detection not only of air targeta but aloo
ground targete. It molten it pooaible to obeorve in any weather. at night.
nd under conditiono of liaitod vieibility. 'me principle of enouring o
continuouo radar obeervation field of the entire tactical zone of the onony
it provided for in tho location of the radar etationo.

‘l‘ho troop radar with on operating rage of lore than 10 It- hao largo
dinonoione and heavy weight. The nodiu- (5-10 h) and ohort (leoe then 5 1:.)
range radar with independent power euppliee can be carried nenuolly. At the
battalion level in the 0.8. Ar-y there are air radero, the amnent of the
infantry troope includea nine typoe of radar. 'ihoy are all equipped with
remote control panele and are capable of auto-atically intercepting loving
and etationary targeta and neaeuring the diotance to then.

“the French Army heo in ice one-ant eeven typoe of radar, which io
aloo outo-ated. 'lhe infantry troopo of Great Britain, Italy. and Sweden

have one type of radar each. “to troopo of the Pederal Republic of Gemny
are baaically equipped with Anericen and French radar (Table 3).

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

Figure 6. 'lhe wide-carriage SIM-133 9-key adding machine.

Television as a means of obtaining situation data still has convers—
tivsly limited application. By using television equipment, as is noted in
foreign literature. it is possible to observe the battlefield. carry out
reconnaissance of the enemy. roads and terrain. maintain communications.
guide missiles to the target, monitor the operations of the troops. the re-
sults of firing, and so on.1 The installation of television on helicopters
which can continuously maneuver depending on the stated observation mission
is considered more prospective; on detection of an interesting target. the
helicopter slows its flight and hovers. The range of such equipment reaches
50 ks or more.

The optical reconnaissance devices are designed for intercepting tar-
gets and determining their location in polar or rectangular coordinates.
These instruments include the reconnaissance theodolites, range finders. sim-
ing circles and other devices. Under nighttime conditions, along with the
optical devices which are adapted for operation at night, night vision in-
struments and instruments for illuminating the terrain are used. Under
favorable observation conditions, the instruments permit reconnaissance to
a significant depth, ensuring fast and accurate interception of the targets.

Recently low-power lasers have begun to be used widely. On their
basis, range finders designed for equipping tanks and controlling artillery

1. See V. I. Bykov, Ye. P. Guaev, 1. H. Kokorin. V. A. Polyakov, "Televi-
deniye v Voyennom Dele" [Television in Military Affairs], Moscow.
Voyenizdat. 1969, pp 39-61.

72

FOR OFFICIM. U515 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fire. instrunents for conducting eir roconneissence. guiding guided sir
bode end eiseilee to the tsrget, maintenance of co-unicetione, end so on
heve bedd'built in e nudter of foreign ereies.1

Ver'ious sound reconneissence instrumts. noens of observing the
bettleiield end elso redietion reconneiseence devices pley en inportent role
in obtsindng situetion dete.

Tecticel- Gelculetion end lnfornetion Processing “seas

The ecceleretion of the processing of inconing dete end the perfora-
ence of celculetions cen be echieved es s result of using coeputer engineer-
ing. verious tebles. nonogrens, logerithnic end specialised celculetion
rules. The selection of the type of coeputetionel nedie depends on the
volune. coqlexity ad required eccurscy oi the celculetione.

Verious types of keyboerd celculetors cen be used in the opereting
prectice of the institutions of higher leerning. echelon heedquerters. be-
ginning with the bettelion. They cen be used both for the solution of the
etenderd probless by previously prepered proceduree end for the solution of
nonstanderd proble-s by unprepsred procedures.

The tinely develop-eat of procedures in heedqusrters per-its signifi-
cent inprovenent of the operetiveness in performce of the celculetions end
ensurence of effective use of the celculetore. The procedurel properetione
usuelly include the following: the selection aid the steteeent of the
problen. its description, the developeent of the netheneticel nethod. elgo-
rithn. progren end instructions for using the procedure end elso the deve-
lopnent of the nechinc progree for eolution of the problen.

The celculetion progrens cen be presented in mivereel fore—e celcu—
letion fore end celculetion progren for e specific type of celculetor. The
second progrse per-its nost cowlete utilizetion oi the possibilities of the
celculetor. It provides for reducing the celculetion tiles, but et the
eene tine the preperetion of the progren in e coweretively tedious proceee.

Nith respect to the neture of operetion end structurel design. the

celculetore ere usuelly divided into two groups—edding nechinee end celcu-
letore. '

The adding nechines besicelly perforn the eddition md subtrection
operations. They include the SIM-107, the nerrov-cerriege son-1070 end the
uide-cerriege SUM-133 (see Figure 6).

The celculetore provide for the performance of ell four erithnetic
operetione. With respect to opereting principle they ere divided into

1. "Avietion Heel: end Spece Technology". Miter 1971.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ("IM'
FOR OFFlHlAL “SH ONLY

mechanical (VK-l); electromechanical which. in turn. are semiautomatic (VK-Z.
vx-z. VK-ZH. VKP-Z) and automatic (VK-3. VHM-Z. Bystritsa-Z); electrorelay
calculators (Vil'nyus and Vyatka); computers (Vega, EDEN); the small digital
computers (Promin'-M, Nairi. Mir, Mir-l) and the all-purpose computers
(Minsk-32. and so on).

On the semiautomatic VK-2 and VK-ZH the multiplication operation is
executed semisutoaatically, and the division operation, automatically. In
contrast to them, the VK-J also performs the multiplication operation auto-
matically.

The VHF-2 does not differ with respect to its operations from the
VK-ZH. but it is capable of performing some additional operations. The VHH—
2 was built on the basis of this machine. It performs the multiplication
and division operations automatically.

The Vil'nyua (Figure 7) and Vyatks electrorelay machines automatically
perform all four arithmetic operations. raising to a power, obtaining the sum
and difference of products, multiplication with addition and subtraction.
finding the difference of the squares of two numbers. They can be connected
to different printers and punch devices.

The Vega (Figure 8) and EDEN keyboard computers are fully automatic.
Electronic circuits and semiconductor elements are used in their design.
In addition to the operations performed by the electrorelay machines. they
are capable of performing algebraic addition of products, extraction of the
square root, conversion of integers and fractions from the decimal system to
any other system. and so on. The Vega has dimensions of 510 x 450 x 250
and weighs 28.8 kg. It operates from the AC network.

 

Figure 7. Vil'nyus Electrorelay Figure 8. Vega Computer.
Calculator.

76

FUR OFFICIAL USE UNLY
won omcm. use ONLY

Tabla Io. lute Specification. 0! Inboard Calculators.

       
     
  
 

am? cym-

ch-IM "0-! [.5
W401 A “0-1 I.6
chom m-u [.6
‘ 3. Mums-u.
nuns (9)
o) mums-m-
an
0K4 280 2.0
BK-zM 280 1,0
6) anon-"mam
DMD-2 «an 2.0
3M4 400-4 2.0
Juan-d" .0921— 2.0
w- .
"W"?
nunpownl
”unﬂinc- “I. 2.5
.Bnm' 2,5

*8“ V. s. Alunt'ycv, I. s. Vinnlk, A. Ye. Vodnev. I. I. land-um. B. P.
Rosenko. "Hekhntuutyn Inzhcnemo-Tckhntchukoao 1 Upnvlcncheokogo

Trad." (Muchcntutton of the Engineering-Tatiana]. ad Administrative hbor).
mud“. 1973. pp 17. 39, ‘2. $0 and 57.

Key: 1. m“ of “china

2. Index“
3. Mechanical wood. awoke/limit. (WI. cycles/donate)
‘. Overall Ghanaian. (length. which. height). I-
5. Han. It;
6. Power, nuts
7. Ronni" for increasing the producttvity of labor. tun
8. Adding ”china: sun-107. 831-1070, SIM-133
9. cucuhtoro

a. Manta-nth: - VK-Z. vx-zu

b. Auto-nu: - VHF-2, VIM-2, ”strung—2

c. noctronlay - Vil'nyua. Vyatka
10. Soc-operation til.
11. Pm
12. To.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nica calculators or computers are

'ihe highest—output. small
he lakra—llo, Iekra-llH. lskra—l2l and Elektroniks—h—7lh.
are simple with re-

'-H. Nairi and Mir digital computers
its personnel have spe—

    

Tha Pronin
lpect to structure. They do not require that the serv
:ial prograsedng training. The Pronin'Ad (Figure 9) and Proain'-2 machines
provide for the performance of a large number of calculations. They solve the
systenJ of differential equations. they find roots, the values of defined
integrals, and so on. They are analogous with respect to structure and basic
parameters.

 

The Haiti and Na
uue of calculation pr

broad vol

in a language which is close to the ma

antic progranning of the solution. The hairi—S machine is construe
brid circuits. 76

integrated by

FOR OFFICIAL USE UNL!‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5. Basic Specifications of the Blectronic Keyboard Calculators or

 

 

Coeputere
Name of Machine Operation performmxce Height. kg
time. sec
lsltra-llo 0.03.0.2!» 3.5
lskra-lllh 0.03-0.13 8
tetra-121 0.02-0.25 12
Rlektronika-A-nn 0 .3 l . 5

The Mir-l mechine (see Figure 10) in also designed for automation of
calculations. 'lhe computation algoritha has input to the machine in the form
of a word-formula description with simultaneous printout of it on an electric
typewriter. l‘he Mir-2 machine hae a screen. "an electronic board," on which
the operator sees the results of the calculations and on introduce the
necessary corrections and explanations by ueing a "light pencil." -

In order to perform the calculations md process the incoming infor-
mation. tables, graphs. rules and other attachments can alao be used. 1hey
find broad application for determination of the following: the radii of
safe distance for personnel in case of a nuclear blaet: the eire of the con-
tamination. destruction and fire cones on application of nuclear strikes:
the depths of colums; the timee of passage of colt-us across the initial
line end the control lines and so on.

For the performance of calculatione connected with input of the ini-
tial data obtained from numeroue sources. punch meclunee are also used.
with conperetively high output capacity these machines require the partici-
pation of a man for analysis of the intermediate reeults. transfer of the
punch cards, adjustment end reoo-utation of the controlling unite. In addi-
tion. the memory of the punch machine is awkward and requires space-taking
etorage for the punch cards.

Iqroving the efficiency of the application of conuter engineering
depends not only on the quantity and quality of the aachinee. but also the
methods of using them. he best conditions occur when there is a couputer
etation et heedquertere. In this case the calculations are performed faster
and with better Quality using highly qualified computing experte. more
favorable possibilitiee for technical servicing of the nachinee are ensured.
In the presence of a small nuﬁer of calculations. the decentralized proce-
dure juetifies itself where the calculating devices are located directly in
the work areas of the heedquartere officere. The conbination of the two
procedures is also poeeiblu.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ()8: Y
FOR OFFICIAL USK ONLY

'l‘eble 6. Besic Specifications of the Snell Digitsl Cosputers

  
  

   
 

ﬁnesse":-

Csrvus «menus

I.
(loattss‘gagﬁu .nﬂ)

«am» ”'33:;

 
  

£32.... .153...

("mimmum 4096 4090
sue-m “' '.
(13,0: 7 1'
Wm, "m
(10nuvped1seass new no IJ
were (new)
(15) mm 2350
redspmum‘x) x7513: max
XIM XIOOS
(15) Mecca (It) In -
Key: 1. Indexes ll. To
2. Pro-in“! 12. Kseory sise (words); ready-access,
3. Nairi external
4. Hir 13. Input speed (characters. sec)
5. Mir-1 14. Intake power (kilovetts)
6. Nusber systee 15. Overell dilensions (u)
7. Binary-deciles). 16. Weight (kg)
8. Diner, ,
9. Decimal

10. Aver-see speed (ope-
rations. sec)

Docueentation and Docuent Reproduction Facilities

The develop-snt of various cadet doc‘ments is a necessary pert of
the troop control process. In order to reduce the expenditures of Isnunl
labor on the prepsretion, the copying and dwlicetion of text end srephicel
cosbet docu-ents at heedquertsrs. the following are used: somd recording
equipncnt (dictation nechines, tape recorders). typewriters. copying sechines,
verioue drain; nachines and devices, office sschines. various rules. tel-

plets. petterns. sets of standard inscriptions. provisional systole, nota-
tion, letters and meters on e transparent file end also standard for-s.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
o...

H)“ HF'r‘HllM. "SI". ONLY

¢-'

Among the second recording equipment, the P-lm dictation nachine has
becoae widespread. Its basic characteristics are as follows' tape speed
6.76 a/sec, recording and reproduction time 120 ainutes, weight 9 kg. It
pert-i ts recording of the orders given or the reports received under any con-
ditions. when using the dictation machine in a nudaer of cases there is no
necessity for developing a written cosbst document. The recording on tape
and supplemented by the necessary service data can serve as the document.
When necessary, by reproducing the recording in a special mode it can be
trmscribed on a typewriter. In addition, the dictation machines (tape re-
corders) can also be used as storage for various reference dsta required by
the staff officers during center operations planning. For this purpose the
officer reproduces the recording of the necessary data in advance when he has

free tine so that during the operating process he will not have to look
through various references.

Typewriters are still irreplaceable in headquarters for copying docu-
asnts. “the typing output on an ordinary typewriter. depending on the quali-
fications of the typist. is one standard page every 8 or 10 minutes. Do an
electric typewriter one page can be typed in 5 minutes. On an electric type-
writer the expenditures of labor are 16 times less than on an ordinary mecha-
nical typewriter. and the printed text is smooth and accurate. The Ukraine
PBX-A6 electric typewriter (see Figure ll) prints at a speed of up to 100
characters per minute and produces 15 to 20 copies simultaneously. The
automatic typewriters print out a paper punch tape from a role 2.5 times
faster than the most qualified typist.

  

qa~ _.' ‘ ' ~ _ ~ ""'.
he)- _ I , ..‘. '. ~. ’

Figure 11. Ukraine PER-66 Electric lypewriter.

Great possibilities are being opened up for the use of typewriters with
punch attachments. They make it possible to punch out a text on a tape or a

ounch card simultaneously with printing it. They are also used for reproduc-
tion of the encoded text on the punch tape in printed form.

In order to reproduce coabat door-rents, especially at tactical head-
quarters. thermocopying machines can find application (see Figure 12) which
permit m to obtain up to 20 copies. “hey are simple in structure and no
special training is required to operate then. hyped texts or texts written
in India ink or pencil but not aniline inks can be used as originals for

79

FOR nFI-‘ICIAL 0.5:; (new
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

copying. 'Ihe copy is obtained on a special thamlly reactive paper. he
copying process is siwle. A deficiency of this type of copy is its ambu-
quent darkening.

Table 7. Basic Specifications of moreocopying Machines“

 

 

Indexes Tar-okopir Holniys 'l'eka
Largest copy for-at (n) 210x297 210x297 210x297
Machine dimensions (In) 690x375x225 500x396x190 630x330x135
Copy tine (sec) 6-10 1.3-7 6

Height (kg) 26 16 9

*See A. V. Prokof'yev. ”Sredstva Mekhaniutaii i Avtoaariaataii v Shtebakh"
(Hechanization and Autoution Henna in Headquarters), Voyenizdat, 1976.
p 160.

The Bra and Blektrofot type electrogrsphic machines (see Figure 13)
are also used for copying docuents. Ibeir structure and operation are dis-
tinguishad by ainplicity.

A typewritten text. manuscript. printed text. drawings. diagram made
in Indie ink or soft pencil can be used as the original.

Table 8. Basic Specifications of the Era nnd Elektrofot Hechinea'

 

 

 

Indexes Era-2 Bra-H Elektrofot
Largest for-at of the

original (II) 59618“ 596x842 2101297
Copies from one exposure 3 3 3
Average operating speed

(copies per minute) 1.3 2 1-1.5
Height (kg) 260 130 65

‘See V. S. Akente'yav, I. S. Vinnik. A. Ye. Vodnev. 1. 1. Kandaurov, B. F.
Kosenko. "tiekhanizatsiys Inchenernotekhnicheakogo i Upravlencheskogo ‘l‘ruda"
(Hechsniration of maineering-‘rechnical and Adainistrative Labor), benizdat.
1973, pp 280, 290.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIX

Table 9. Basic Specifications of the Table Model Light Copiers

 

 

Indexes SKN-ZN SKN-ZZ
Hidth of copying zone. I- 960 360

Copy speed, In/hr 30-90 30-320
Overall dimensions. mm 1516x7la0xlo10 600x835x360
Height, kg‘ 120 70

A procedure such as photocopying of documents has obvious value. High
quality of the image is achieved. and the possibility of recording the in-
formation with significant diminishing is provided. It finds application in
the presence of time and the corresponding equip-ent. To make copies of maps
and diagrams. the KP-ﬂi copy frame can be used. Its dinensions are as fol-
lows: 840x630xl$0 mm, weight 40 kg.

For reproduction of the text documents and also diagrams, graphs and
tables at headquarters. hectographs can find application. 'lhe industrially
produced Yantar' hectograph peruits more than 100 copies to be obtained from
one printed form on ordinary typing paper 397x620 In in size. By comparison
with the typewriter method. the hectographic aethod is six to eight times
more efficient. The machine weighs 36 kg.

me templet of conventional signs, logarithms and special slide rules.
sets of various patterns and tenplets, drming instruments, curvimeters.
gauges, goniometers, folding magnifying glasses, a set of special colored
pens and pencils are irreplaceable in the work of the staff officers when
developing written and graphical cosbat documents.

 

Figure 14. Table Elodel SIN-2H Light Copying Machine.

The following have found application at a author of headquarters:

a) Field sets of drawing accessories. ‘Ihey include templets, rules.
India ink. pens, pencils and a pencil sharpener, watercolors and brushes,

82

Fun nFFIClid. I:.'.:-; UL‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

~V‘

drawing'ﬁnstruments. buttons. glue, edieeive tape, and a tool kit. The set
is aomted in e natal box weighing 3 kg;

b) A set of eta-pa. provisional symbols and nudaars. 'Ihe set includes
50 stews, three eta-p pads and ink. It is placed in a box with special re-
cesses 40330:” cu in size:

c) Sets of standard inscriptions, provisional sydwols, notation. let-
ters and nusbere on a transparent filer—overlay. It is also possible to
include the headings of naps, inscriptions for titles and calculations, the
signatures of duty personnel and also various provisional syﬂols, notation
and nudere noet frequently encomtered when plnning codet operations. In
addition, the set can include self-adhesive transfer viola-«decals;

d) Sets of stamps of provisional syiaols and inscriptions in special

boxes. lhe size of the steps is determined as applied to the scale of the
snap.

In order to preserve a lap, especially when working in wet weather,
protective coatings can be used. For this purpose industry produces the RS-
229 carbinol laquer and clear special plastic fills.

Various types of standard fares are also anong the eeane for accelerat-
ing document production. Practice shows that the presence at headquarters
of variotm previously prepared standard fore. and hlanke greatly facilitates
the work of the officers, especially when planning combat operations. This
is all the more true in that it is possible to represent not only the pro-
cess of performing the operative-tactical calculations on a blank fore, but
also the content of all of the basic coast documents. In this case only
the variélee need be entered. which greatly reduces the tine and accelerates
the process of filling out the document.

In addition to the general-use autonation and mechanization neans
with which the control mite and points are equipped, every staff col-ander
and officer must have the required accessories mag his supplies for working
under field conditions. lhese include a drying board folder (field kit),
compesa, dividers, a gauge, a tewlet of conventional signs and slide rule,
colored and ordinary pencils, ball (colored) pens, a penknife, en eraser,
notebook, copy paper, magnifying glass, watch, electric flashlight, topo-
graphic up, documents for conversations over the technical eon-unicetiona
neans, reference smterials, and an individual doaineter. Depending on the
missions perforeed by the officer, this set of accessories can very.

Co-snd Post Vehicles

Exceptionally high require-ants are ieposed on the co-aend post ve-
hicles. They eust have high off-road capacity, they must have high fuel
distance, protect the personnel from eneey fire and penetrating radiation,
they must be reliable in operation ad ensure convenience of operation for

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE (l-‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the officers at the control post. he set of technical means nomted on the
vehicle Int provide for aaintaining conunications both in place and in
notion and also the performance of work by the commander and the staff offi-

cers in accordance with their functional duties both at the count! post and
when visiting the troops.

In addition to conunications nedia, such vehicles usually have nevi-
gational equip-est and observation devices. Nuclear protection equipaent and
other devices are installed. ‘ihe equipaent is placed in the vehicle con-
sidering convenience of use of the cmieations nedia fro. each work space
and the possibility of working with nape. when the officer is outside the

vehicle. provision lust be node for organisation of route control of the
radios by a wire or radio.

Usually eraored vehicles are used as commd poet vehicles. m1. 1--
provea the viability end stability of control to a significant degree. it
ensures reliable protection of the personnel end the co-unications saans not
only tron bullets and shrapnel. but also free a mder of daaaging factors of
a nuclear blast. 1heir advantage also consists in the fact that with respect
to external appearance they differ little fro. the ordinary coi>at vehicles.
which facilitates camouflage and at the one tine excludes the possibility
of rapid detection. especially on the arch or when comleting a naneuver.

however. the upplication of araored vehicles to e known degree coupli-
cates the working conditions of the couander and the staff officers. 1he
linited space in the vehicles coqlicates working with a nap. 'lherefore.

in a nuber of co-and post vehicles a tent is provided which is mfolded at

the halts. thus increasing the usdele area md working convenience of the
officers.

Sons aodele of arnored co-snd post vehicles are shown in Figures 15
and 16. “me M577 co-and post vehicle was created on the basis of the H114
anphibioue ernored carrier. It is equipped with work spaces for five people.

The Sultan W105 conand post vehicle is in the production stage.
lts basic indexes are as follows: conbat weight 7.91 tone. 5 to 6 work

spaces. length 5.99 netere. height 2.02 asters. width 2.18 netera. engine
power 197.7 horsepower.

Helicopters are IOIt widely used for troop control in foreign armies.
which is indicated by the experience of the Vietna-ese ad the war in the
Near East. ‘nley are used not only as the nuns of fast love-ant of the con-
trol points. but also for the perfor-ance of troop control nissions. For
this purpose the helicopters are equipped with co-nications aeans and ob-
servation equip-eat. and are fitted with work areas for the officers. In

addition to the coI-and post vehicles. the control point equipaent includes
various special connications vehicles. sobile co-unications neans and also

transport vehicles required for support and servicing of the operation of
the control point.

8b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the usual system for gathering data. the information from the
subunit directly engaged in cosbat still goes to headquarters slowly. ‘lhis
limits the possibilities of influencing the course of combat on the part of
the co-andei’s, especially those who have powerful means of destruction at
their disposal. ‘lherafore the necessity arises for sharp acceleration of
the transmission of intonation and improvement of the operational efficiency
of its processing. ‘lheoretically, the data gathering and processing system
met be such that the data on the most importmt changes in the situation
will reach headquarters when they occur on the battlefield.

In order to achieve a sharp reduction in the time for execution of all
the basic operations with respect to troop control, it is insufficient sinly
to iqarove the methods of operation and make corrections in the organisation-
al structure of the control unit; it is necessary. in addition, to introduce
improved technical means. however, if out of all the technical eon-unications
leans even the most improved are introduced, than in this case it is diffi-
cult to count on sharp improvement of troop control and the more so, on
bringing it into accordance with the growing codaat and maneuvering capabi-
lities of the troops. his is explained by the fact that the com-micationa
media touch on only one process in troop control-«he information transmis-
sion process which, although it is the most inst-tent, still carries com-
paratively little weight in the overall volune of all of the troop control
operations. Therefore changes in the connunications media alone do not lead
to a sharp increase in operational efficiency in the work of the control mite.

1he basic path for the solution of this problem consists in the intro-
duction among the troops of the entire set of theoretically new technical
control means based on the latest achievements of radioelectronics. ‘lhe
necessity arises not only for facilitating the labor of the officers, but
also for transfer of a under of their functions to the special automated
devices and machines. Hhereas in the first phase automation of individual
troop control processes was provided. at the present time in a nudaer of
foreign armies work is being done on the creation and introduction of auto-
mated troop control system (ASUV) which encompass the basic control proces-
ses in all echelons. The development of such system is the most prospective
area in the solution of the basic troop control problems. 'lhe transition to

the automated system represents a qualitative jump in the development of the
material base for control.

The automated system cowlex includes various technical menus with
respect to purpose and structure. be basic ones include the following:
coquters, automated data pickups of different types. automated transceiving
devices. high speed automated commications media mad other devices. lhe
prinary role among these devices is played by counters. In the modern com-
puters available to foreign armies. a high degree of miniaturization has
been achieved, the capacity of the storage elements has been increased, and
the volume of information which on be processed by these machines has been
increased by many times. he machines perform such highly important missions
as the gathering md processing of information required for troop control,

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLI
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tho ooloction ond output of tho infer-notion to tho oubordinoto ond ouporior
hoodquortoro. tho co-ondor and officoro of tho control mitt in convoniont
ion for rocoption; tho poriornnco oi coqlor colculotiono. oopociolly thooo
roquirod for tho ooloction of tho loot oﬂoctivo oom of dootruction of
voriouo onoq torgoto. 'lho opocifico of tho oolvod prohlono do not orcludo.
oo toroign opociolioto noto. tho crootion of. on oll-purpooo conputor copoblo
of oolving o brood rongo of problou. ‘lho problon of crating o oinglo-typc
cowutor with difioront output copocity (conoidoring tho prohloo of procooood
interaction) in oolvod by connocting o diiforont odor of lilto noduloo.
‘lhuo. tho booic voroion of ono of tho 0.5. Am coqutoro conoioto of ooduloo:
o control procoooor. input-output nodulo. and two roody-occooo torrito noncry
noduloo, tho nulbor of which on bo incrooood. doponding on tho clooo of con-
trol body, to oight.

‘lho infomtion oonooro oro uood for gothoring. fornoting ond trono-
nitting doto iron tho prinory oourcoo to tho co-ond lovol and for rocoption
o! co-ondo iron thou in tho for. of oignolo. Soho of the oonooro oporoto
outcooticolly without oporotor oooiotmco, no othoro hovo o muol doto in-
put dovico. ‘lho trmocoivoro provido tor rocoption no outonotic roloying
of tho doto trono-itted tron tho primory oourco to tho coqutor.

Tho loot i-portnt rolo in tho cowloox oyotoo io oooignod to tho con-
Imicotiono nodio. 'rhoy ouot provido for outonotic infomtion orchongo and
onouro functioning of tho oyoton undor any conditiono.

Tho otructuro and tho functionol diogron of tho outoootod oyoton do—
pond on ito purpooo and tho oiooiono which it in to corry out. tho dogroo
of ttclmicol oquipnont, tho ocolo and orgonirotion of tho control link ond
tho volulo of incoming infomtion.

Both troop inotoncc io choroctorizod by ito own problooo, oporoting
choroctoriotico. tho iniornotion content and dogroo of outonotion inhoront
in it. moroioro ony outonotod control oyotoo providoo for tho oolution of
o dotinod clooo of control pruhlooo orioing tron tho purpooo of the oyoton.
‘lho .quolity of tho oolution of thooo problooo io ootinotod by tho corroopond-
ing indoxoo which ore tho choroctoriotico of tho outonotod control oyoton.

It in poooiblo to includo in tho: cud: thingo oo odoptohility of the
system to tho oolution of tho problon ot any point in tine. officioncy
(opood). occurtcy of oolving tho ototod problou, high corrying copocity.
noiooproof copobility. outficiont copocity, viobility, nobility. ocono-y.
ond no on.

‘l‘ho opplicotion of tho outolotod oyoton unconditionally introducoo
ohorp chongoo in tho nothodo of oporotion and tho orgnnirotionol otructuro
of tho control unita. Tho outonotion of tho doto gothoring procuooo ro-
loo-co port of tho officoro porforling thin lobor conouing work. Iloro the
doto obtoinod con bo noro oxoct ond rolioblo, for tho grootor port of thooo
doto will bo gothorod outouticolly. ‘Ihoro in no nocoooity for dovoloping
and oonding writton roporto ond ourvoyo to tho 'ouporior lovol:

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE (FLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Significat changes occur in the methods of generalization and proces-
sing of the data obtained. the processing of the scat important information
will be done by computer. This intonation is capable of automatic recogni-
tion, analysis. generalisation ad selection of the necessary data for trans-
mission to the corresponding control level. 'lhe staff will be in a position
by the previously developed program to solve a number of calculation prob-
lem connected with the application of fire weapons. the advencenent of the
troops, regrouping. calculation of the relation of the forces and means. and
so on. ‘lhs necessity for internal information disappears, for all of the
data reaching the computer after processing can be output to all of the in-
terestsd people and echelons to remote devices.

As a result. parslleliss ad duplication in the collection of the
situation data are eliminated, the necessary conditions are created for equal
fulfillment by the officers of their obligations. All of this indisputably
will isprove the efficiency of control.

when making a decision. the co-ader can, by interrogation. obtain
all of the necessary calculation and reference data by using the remote de-
vice of the conputsr.

with the appearance of automated systeas. as before. the moat import-
ant document remains the working map of the cmder. lhe map which is
projected on a screen or electromechanical plotting board permits clear
viewing of the entire situation. By the signals from the computer. the lat-
est changes in the situation can be depicted on it inedistely. If the
necessity arises, then the situation in ay section of the nap is schematic-
ally isolated on a large scale on the screen of a cathode ray tube. Differ-
ent colors can be used to designate our own troops and the enemy troops.
Here the great advantages are that along with the cot-lander, the staff of-
ficers can also observe the situation on the screen at the same tine.

‘lhe automation of the data gathering and processing and the solution
of the numerous problea of a calculational-reference nature facilitate the
labor of the staff officers and reduce the tine required to plan the coast
operations. ‘lhe decisions made will to a high degree correspond to the
developed conditions of the situation, for the basis for then will be the
latest data reflecting the true situation and the condition of our own troops
and the enemy troops and also the exact calculations and the data on all
other factors influencing the content of the decision.

Here the output devices of the ASUV provide for input and retrieval
of information. printout, clear representation of the data, doct-entstion,
and reproduction of the documents. 'lhe construction of the image in the
form of a screen. a display. ad various plotting boards permits us to ob-
tain the latest situation data at any timv .

For all large changes which occur in the methods of operation of the
control units, the role of the map does not diminish. It will be irre-

placeable in decision-taking by the «under, the planning of coast

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operstions. the stntensnt of niseions for subordinetes. the reslisstion of
control of the execution of the steted niseione by the troops. iherefore
the introduction of the A8!" in no wsy lowers the requirennmts on the staff
quslificstions of the officer or in turn. his skill in working with the up.

'Dne introduction of s new systes undonbtedly brings about not only
redistribution of the functions snong the duty personnel. but also lesds to
s chenge"in the orgsnisetionel structure of the control units. Considering
thst s nyﬁer of functions of steff officers will be transferred to eutoneted
devices.“it is possible to expect eons reduction in the sdninietrstive per-
sonnel. In sddition, new epecielists will sppeer st hesdqusrters for the
neintenence and servicing of the eutonstion nesns.

however. it is impossible not to see the new problem with which the
officers will be feced on the introduction of the eutonsted troop control
system. For the solution of the operstive-tscticel problens. the cmlete
nethenssticel description of the codnst operetions will be required of then.
which is of greet conplexity end is connected with the expenditure of signi-
ficsnt effort by the specislists. 'lhe full vslue progrls entered in the con-
puter notary cennot be crested without solving this problem.

here the operetive-tscticsl description of the problem can be sede by
well-trsined officers who conprehensively know its content end the proce-
dure for carrying out this nission, cleerly representing the voluse end
neture of the ectivity of ell of the control units, end elso fenilisr with
the peculierities of the conversion of the description to the lsngusge of
nethenstics. In the description process the proper esteblishnent of the
spproxinete quantitative relations between the coinet indexes (the retes end
width of the offensive zone. the depth of the mission and the tine for ful-
fillment of it. end so on) end the coebst possibilities of the sides, the
procedures for the troop operstions considering the situation conditions end
also the given skills snd cod)“ experience has greet significance.

With this epprosch to the operstive-tscticsl description of the nie-
sion. the process of slgorithnizetion and programing of the nission for the
cosputer is significently fsciliteted. 1his process is e no less respon-
sible phase of the operetions which oust be csrried out when using the auto-
nsted troop control systen.

lﬁnetever the difficulties in the wsy of building the ASW. there is
unquestionably s future for it. "heroes in the first phase the cowputers
were used to fecilitete the individuel tedious operstions. st the present
tine in foreign ernies operations ere being successfully csrried out with
respect to the crestion of systens which provide for sutonstion of nsny of
the control processes sinultsneously st eeverel steff col-end levels. Ihe

crestion of such system will permit s shsrp inrovenent in the control
efficiency.

89

V08 ()FFlCln'ni. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Organization of Conunications and Control Points
Require-eats on control Points

ﬁre control point is a collective of duty personnel trained and or-
ganised for work ad a couples: of technical teens and the personnel to ser-
vice then. deployed at a defined location or in novel-eat. end directly plan-
ned for troop control during training and during the course of cosbat opera-
tions. In order to provide for nornal operations of the control point.
usually. in addition, the required forces and asane for security and service
are isolated: they are located separately free the control point.

'lhe basic purpose of the control points is to ensure solid. flexible,
continuom and secret troop control under situation conditions. In order to
correspond to this purpose, they lust be highly nobile. be of small composi-
tion, equipped with modern technical control neans. protected against the
means of destruction of the snow, and create nor-s1 conditions for the work
and rest of the personnel.

The degree of nobility of the control points is directly dependent on
the quality of the aachines with which they are equipped. Practice shows
that the control points must have the best nechinee with high speed and high
off-road capability over any terrain and in any weather, which with respect
to external appearance and protection do not differ significantly fro- the
machines used to are troops. when observing the given requirenente. nobi-
lity is increased and viability iaproved. In addition, the nobility of the
control points depends to a great extent also on their position. Awkward
control points require a great deal of tine to set up and nova, which lowers
their nobility. 0n the contrary, the smaller the control points with respect
to coqosition. the easier it is to ensure proper order md organization at
then. and the more mobile and naneuverable they are.

the equip-ant of the control points with nodern technical means and.
hove all. nominations nedia, ha decisive significmce in ensuring stable
troop aenagenent. ‘lhey nust be reliable in operation. sinle to service,
and ensure uninterrupted control in a fast-changing situation. powerful
radio interference. frequent changes in location of the control points and
also in menent and when at great mutual distance.

the equip-ent of the control points can correspond to modern require-
ments only when they are stable ad protected against the neans of destruc-
tion of the eneny. prinarily against nuclear weapons. In sodern cotat it
is inpoeaible to ensure continuity of troop control if the necessary con-
cern is not shown for the defense of the personnel of the control units
against the nuns of destruction. In addition to the general neasures taken
in the interest of the protection of the troops, in the opinion of foreign
specialists. it is considered necessary to equip the control point aadtines
with collective means of protection against radioactive contudnation. Deans
of inroving the defensive properties of the machines with respect to light
eaiesion ad the effect o.’ a shockwave. and to equip the personnel with

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
D. B. IVRNOV: V. P. SIWEL’VEV NO P. V. SW93?
4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIX

reliable individuel protection nesns. Here fevorable conditions for the
noresl ectivitiee of the officers obviouslv can be crested only in the pre-
sence of sealed Iechines equipped with filtered ventilation units. In per-

ticuler. these require-cots are imposed on the Sultan W105 con-and post
vehicle in'the British Arey (Figure 16).

Here it is necessary to consider the possibility of the creetion at
the control points of nornal conditions for the fruitful work and rest of
duty personnel. In particular. convenient work areas lust be set up with

counicstions noses close by. places to rest. to set. for giving eedicel
aid, and so on.

Control Point Cot-position and System:

lhe purpose. the scale of the troop unite and the situation heve deci-
sive significance in determining the number end coeposition of the control
points.

In the battalion one control point is set up--the observation con-end
post (061’). ‘lhis arises from the fact that the battalion operates in a
completely lieited pert of the terrain (on the offensive up to 2 Ice and on
the defensive up to 5 heel ), it has a smell nuober of subordinete submits
and correspondingly hes at its disposal control equipment vhich is designed
for only one control point. In case of failure of the observation con-end
poet its functions can be teeporerily taken over by one of the conpeny coe-
senders previously trained to carry out these duties.

In the units of foreign erodes, in viev of the coeplexity of troop
control and for purposes of distributing the control units. ususlly the cor
mend post lid the rear services control point ere crested. lhe co-end post
realizes direct control of subordinets troops conducting coebet operations.
It includes the greater part of the control units headed by the co-ender.
‘lhe rear services control point is designed for eansgeeent of the rest. It
hse officers who see to the equip-ent. repair. swport and reinforcement of
the troops. The creation of two control points not only brings the manage-
eent closer to the objects of control. but it ensures the solution of the

problem of the viability of the control points and the ieprovenent of the
stability of troop control as a whole.

'lhe expediency of creating, in addition to the co-end posts. a sec-
ond point designed besically for control of rear services and supply was
confined during the last var. Accordingly, the control personnel usually
are divided into two echelons. Ihus. for exenple, the first echelon of

1. See G. I. Garbuz. D. 1". Lose. I. F. Seeonov. "Hotostrelkovyy Betel'on v
Voyu" [Motorized Rifle battalion in Combat), Moscow. Voyenisdat. 1972.
pp 93, 215.

91

FOR (lFFICIM. "SI; (may
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

division control during the wer years included the following: the couender.
the deputy coneendsrs of political end ooebet units. the chief of steff.

the opsretive end reconneissence squeds. the signel squed. one or two poli-
ticel section instructors. the chiefs of cosbet eres end services. end else
the required signel end service subunits. ‘Ihe second echelon hes the fol-
lowing: reer services. the line squed. the edniniutrntive-smegeeent unit.
the politicel section. the Judge sdvocete's office. the nilitsry court end
steff trensportetion. Ihe first echelon use the co-end post iron. which
the observetion post ves isoleted. lhis division of the control egents nede
it possible to bring control closer to the troops end to heve seen posts
within the firing renge of the enemy cepsbls of ensuring relieble control.

secret locetion in the terrein end cosperetivsly fest novenent to new loce-
tions.

In the view of the Foreign office. the necessity for echeloning the
control units under modern conditions hes increesed significently. ‘Ihis is
dicteted by the requirsnent of ensuring stdaility end continuity of control
on epplicetion of nucleer strikes by the eneny on the control point loce-
tions. “renters. in eddition to the comd posts end rser control points.
in the units end coﬁined units of .ne besic foreign ernies et the present
tine provision is eede for the creetion of e reserve (euxiliery. edvence.
reserve) cos-end post. It is orgenired sinulteneously with the couend post
end is designed for essuning control in cese of neutrelirstion of the con-
nend post. In cues where this post is locetsd eheed of the cos-end post in

direct proximity to the subordinete troops. the cosnender cen execute control
free it during codet operetions.

In the presence of sull control points echeloned elong the front end
in depth. the probebility o! simltmeons neutrelieetion of thee decreeses.
Hhere one or severel points ere neutrelired by nucleer strikes. control is
transferred to the releining interchengeeble points.

Considering thet the creetion of e second (reserve) control point is
en objective necessity. sons foreign reseerchers proposed having e sIell
speciel unit designed for operetion et the second point on the steff.

In the presence of e control point system higher require-ems ere in-
posed on the coeeunicetions nedie. They eust sets the conversetions of of-
ficers over the technicel co-unicetions eedis es close es possible to per-
sonel intercourse. In perticuler. the use of television. phototelegreph end
other leteet co-unicetions nesns for this type of couunicetions deserves
close ettention. the epplicetion of high speed control eeens will per-it
the officers of the second control point to be kept up with the situstion end
ell beeic operetions perioresd et the control point.

he coeposition end equipment of eech control point ere determined
eheed of ties. For thic purpose the chief of steff prepsres e speciel ec-
court of personnel. control end nubile neens which ere included in their

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conposition. Ila specifies the duties of each duty officer. definee the
measures. tines and procedures for executing of these duties under various
codaat conditions. 'lhis account oust be corrected after defined tine inter-
vals taking into consideration not only the nova-ant of the officers in the
service. but also the advanced experience accmlated during exercises in
solving troop control problees.

In the presence of several points. the question can erise as to which
of the: “it be considered basic? to our opinion. the besic one roneins the
one where the «under is located. with the necessary control neans, end
where the nest inortant control neesures are taken. this confiraetion fol-
lows fron the fact that only tho conander is granted the right to lake deci-
sions. and he bears personal responsibility for tho execution of tho stated
nission by tho troops.

‘lhe locstion of tho colander in battle is determined in each case by
tho specifically developed situation. Ooebet prsctico hae convincingly con-
fined one of tho basic control principled: where the fate of tho battle is
decided-«hat is where tho co-ender is. Personally obeerving the develop-
eent of events on tho battlefield. he is in a position in a short tine to
act by his forces and neens to change the situation. to have a noral-
psychological influence on his subordinates. achieving direction in their
efforts for successful execution of the stated mission.

Plecenent of Control Points During Codaat

'lhe location of the control point is deter-ined depending on the pur-
pose ad conditions. According to experience in the last war. a rear point.
for ere-ole. will be located near tho subordinate roar subunit. ‘Ihe selec-
tion of the location for the con-and post is nore cowlicated. A general
trend has been to locate the control point closer to the troope. Usually
on the offensive the co-md posts are located on the average the following
distances fro. the forward edge: for the rogiasnt 1.5 to 2 kn. 2 to 4 kn
for a division, 3 to 6 I:- for a corps; the observation poste are 0.5 to 1.5
kn sway. ‘ntis corresponds coepletely to the nature of coobat and the con-
dition of the codoat and technical control eons. ‘lhe wertine experience
has shown that neutralization of an entire control point fron air and artil-
lery strikes has been rare. Usually after fire strikes the control point
has renained in operation. it has only required replaceeent of individual
officers. or of co-unications nedia that have failed. It oust be considered
that the control points. so a rule. are located in reliable shelters.

Under nodern coobat conditions, close location of the couand posts
to the troop contact line presents definite difficulties in the placement
and operation of duty pereonnel. In order to decrease or exclude losses of
officers fro. artillery fire and nortars. to create the necessary conditions
for then to work. in a nuaber of cases it is necessary to provide engineer-
ing equipuent at the control point locations. It not be coneidered that a

93

NR OFFICU‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\

poor choice of location for the control point can lead to undesirable conse-
quences. the seellsst fluctuations of the front line in the direction of
the control point location force its renoval in a stressed situation when

the cosnandu end staff nuet be constantly in contsct with the cosbat opera-
tions.

me possibility of naintaining continuous co-micetions with subor-
dinate headquarters. neighbors and superior hesdquertsrs end in the subunits
and units end. in addition. observation of the bettlsfield decisively influ-
ences the distance of the cohmd post frost the front line.

On the average the basic co-and posts are at the following distances
fron the forward edge:1

 

Table 10
—_—-—_—————'——
Control link 0n the offensive 0n the defensive
1n the 0.3. In the West In the 0.8. In the Rest
Am Garnen Any Any German Any
Battalion 1.5-2 1.5-2 2-3 2-3
brigade 4-6 3-4 8-10 7-12
Division 8-12 10-15 10-20 to 25

The renaining posts are placed beginning with the nissions which they
carry out. and in the interest of supporting co-unicatione with the oonend
posts. 1he spacing of the posts nust be so as to exclude the possibility of
daneging two posts by one nediun-power nuclear weapon.

In the interest of inroving the viability of the control points. in
the opinions of foreign ar-ies, it is considered expedient to locate the.
to the side of the targets which are the nest probable for eneny nuclear
attacks. to use the protective properties of the terrain and also to use pre-
fabricated engineering structures. In order to protect the control point
when in place. it is reco-ended that naxisnn use be nede of natural cover--
forests. ravines. canyons, nines. and so on. which reduce the danege fro-
nuclear weapons and create the best conditions for caeouflsge. llowever. if
there is tile, especially on the defensive, for concealnsnt of personnel.
control nuns and transportation. engineering structures can be set up.

'lhe finished prefabricated and collapsible structures find broad application
for equipping the shelters.

1. See: 8. V. Grishin, P. A. mum. 3h. 1. utoﬂwili. "Taktlka (Po

Inostrennyn Vaglyadan)" [Tactics (According to Foreign Views)]. Hoseow,
Voyenitdat. 1972. pp 00-83.

9‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

‘lho dinonoiono of tho oroo ovor which tho control point io not up
dopond on ito conpooition. tho condition of tho torroin. tho onoav activity.
tho diotonco from tho forword odgo. tho tino in ono locotion and other con-
ditiono (Figuro l7).

"hon oolocting tho oroa for location of tho control point it ia aloo
nocoooary to conoidor tho working conyonionco of tho officoro. tho poaaibi-
litioo of poroonal intorcouroo along thou whon carrying out thoir niooiono.
l‘ho ooloction of tho torrain whoro tho point can ho hiddon. and groot oxpon-
diguroo of forcoo and noano on onginooring oquipnont of tho aroa. dooo not
acquiro opociol oignificonco. lhio io oopociolly tho can in that tho poo-
oihilitioo for onginooring oquipnont of tho control pointo, oopocially during
tho dovolopnont of tho offonoivo. will ho oxtronoly linitod. hooouroa ouch
ao noxiou- roduction of tho tino tho control point ia in ono placo, foot
changing of oroao by tho control pointo, caroful canoufloging againot ground
and air onony attacho, ond roliohlo covor hy antioircraft ooono aro conplotoly
juatifiod. In ordor to onouro noro orgmiud ploconont ond doploynont of
tho control point. it to ilportant thot tho poroonnol cloarly rocogniro tho
oignalo. tho locationo of tho nachinoo in tho colum. tho packing up and
doploynont for oporationo. It io oxpodiont. olong with tho oignalo of o
throat of nucloor attack and'oir ottock, dongor of oirhorno attack. tonko
and notoriood infantry. to provido oignalo which dofino tho difforont dogrooo
of proparodnooo of tho control point for novonont. If tho oignol io given
in tino to proporo for amount (by which tho voluo of nooouroo tokon io
cloorly dotor-inod). thon on orrivol of onothor oignol oftor oono tint, thoro

in a poooihility for orgoniood dooipation of tho north by tho control point
column.

In oodorn coohot tho control pointo aro tho noot inortont targoto
for tho out-y: thoroforo thoy connot main in one ploco for o long tint.
and thoy nuot loavo woll hoforo a plonnod cum otrilto. moy nuot chango
location ovon whoro tho cobot for-tiono of tho troopo oro otill in pooition.

A oharp lncroaoo in rotoo of codot oporationo hoo oignifitmtly con-
plicotod tho nointonanco of otdalo troop control. Under thooo conditiono.
tho control pointo nuot ho capohlo of oporoting on tho novo. With roopoct
to tho poooihilitioo of tho onuipnoat,~ tho oolution of thin prohlon now given
rioo to no groat difficultioo. inaonuch u in all of tho IOIt dovolopod or-
nioo tho control pointo aro oquippod with vohicloo with high off—road copa-
city and now coo-mitotiono noono capahlo of oporating underway. however.
the givon prohlol dopondo to o groot extent oloo on tho poooihilitioa of tho
ﬁll-“Ch. tender and otnff officor. lndood, troop control dooo not conoiot
oololy in Iaintononco of consultation with tho troopo. Bron in tho pro-
oonco of unintorruptod micationo, tho otaff officoro who aro in notion
and in variouo vohicloo find it quito difficult to gathor and gonoroliro data
on tho aituation. roport to thoir co-ndoro. nako the final docioion ond
dolivor tho niooiono to tho troopo.

95

FOR OFFICIM. USE O'VLY
Alien-gap (6)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yeneenue 000e-

YOOI Clue

@ Much- ull-“(3) (12 “owl-eunu- A“

G 03:? a)“ ' ”um" ”Manatee (eeoenene)

 

 
 

e v n e a
,(108 00“.” eeaea ' ’1‘ ’ "Jig 'w33'3:.mr&3mf -

Amman-ta. 57-)...” "(11) ‘ Aeaaneeen‘u 0 name-need a Yeanee-ul aaneoau (15)

    

 
 

    
     
 

.? vac-u. (ea-nan) (16)
o-e-Aeue new») (17)

  
 
 

Figure 17. Schenatic Diegran of the Location of the Control Point of e

Key: 1.

Mined-Area Unit (0.8. Any)

Pro- 300 to 600 letere or note 10.
Motor traneportation ll.
Signal admnit 12.
200-600 netera and acre 13.
Proviaional notation

Conander 16.

Deputy co-ander
Ode! of ataff

Staff officere end officera 15.
of the varioua eervicea l6.
1?.

Signal officere

Antieircrett gunner with radio
Signal center

Landing aree for helicoptere
(aircraft)

Radioa for co-micetiona with
the troope. the eenior offi-
cer. neighbora. and no on
Telephone

Shelter (dugout)

Patrol

In order to overcoee thie difficulty. eonetinee an effort ie nade to
have frequent halte of the control pointe without deconcentration and colou-
flage. Ae var-tine experience has duonetreted. theee neaeurna have low ef-
fectiveneea: noreover. they increaee the vulnerability of the control pointe
to ener air attache and fire.

Her hae denonetrated that it ie lore expedient to love the control
pointe equipped with radioe. at maxi- poeaible apeed. and to increaee the
length of the helte an a reeult of the apeed of lament. providing cover for

pointe. for deconcentretion and ca-ouflage.

'lhie organization of control

when moving the pointe increaeee their viability and createa note fevoreble

96

FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conditions for the work of the officers. Of course. in extrene necessity
when slowing down even for e few einutes cen heve serious effecte on the
course or events. the counder is justified in helting the cauend post
colt-1 for e short ties in order nore precisely to detereine unclesr proh-
lees. eeking decieions end psss the decisions on to the executive units.

‘lhe shortest tins for caving the points end eeinteining etdne conu-
nicstions during their period. in the opinion of foreign ereies. can be
schisved with helicopters equipped with redioe. meir edventegee ere eepe-
cielly perceptible where control points ere covering brood redioective
sreu. cross of deetructicn. end wide weter obetscles. end on develop-mt of
the offensive in terrein with s lieited nuher of reeds. end on long esrches.

Along the eeny conditions for ieproving the viebility of the control
points is the skillful deception of the new es to their true locetion. In
the lest wer. the following procedures were widely used: the creetian of
felse control points end einulstion of their operstian. the locetion of nediue
end high powered rediae st none distence fro- the co-ssnd poets. the replece-
nent of the apereting redioe of the couenders by other stetions. the tune-
eiesion of felss information sbout the locetions of the control points.
radio silence. end so on. All of this undoubtedly divided the ettention of
the eneey end et tines led to strike on felse tsrgets. Under nodern condi-
tions. the possibilities for deception of the eneny heve increeeed greetly.
Hith their skillful use the viebility of the control pointe can he signifi-
cently increesed. ‘

1hs eost ilportmt liseion of the steff is argeniretion of the eecu-
rity md defense of the control points. In eddition to their being cancesled
in the terrein end cerefully cmufleged sgeinet ground end sir observetion.
provieion is eede for entieircreft cover. the orgenirstion of security end
defense end elso the ca-endent‘s service. The well-thought-out werning
syeten egeinst the threst of eneey etteck. conetent nonitoring of the service
of the eubunit designeted for eccurity end defence of the control points hsve
ieportnt significnnce.

Restaretion of 'Contral Points

In spite of ell the neesuree provided by heedquertere with respect to
neintsining viehility of control points. it is neceeeery to be reedy to re-
store then efter eneq fire or nucleer strikes. 'nle footer they ere restored.
the greater the gusrsntee thet the efforts of the troops will he directed in
tine towerd the setisfsction of the oteted codaet eission.

lhe volule. content end procedure for restaretion of control depend
on the sceles of deeege done to personnel. feilureo of the co-unicstions.
ad the situetion whid: hes developed in the given seapent of the front line.
'lherefore quickly ohteining dsts on the condition of the control point neer
which s nuclesr strike hee teken plsce ie of the greetest imrtmce. For

97

FOR OFFICIAL US}: 03.“)!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this purpose. the higher headquarters can send out officers on helicopters
(aircraft) or vehicles with off-road capacity so that they are in a position
to discover the consequences of the strikes ad also to use the coaamications
lines of other control points which are near the detonation sons. In a nun-
ber of cases. a cooperatively large snout of tine is required for gathering
conplete data as a result of which a delay can occur in taking neasures to
restore control. ‘lherefore, in our opinion. it is sore Justified to obtain
data by forecasting losses and the radiation situation which has developed
as a result of a nuclear strike. 0n the basis of forecasting, the contender
is in a position to nske decisions to restore troop control. However. this
does not exclude the orgaisation of special reconnaissance to obtain are
exact date.

‘lhe restoration of control or. in other words. renewal of the inter-
rupted activity of the control points in a short tins. depends to a high de-
gree on the advance. clear deternination of the basic paths of the solution
of this problea. According to the opinions of foreign authors, the basic
nove here is to switch control to a second (reserve) point. (he of the con-
trol points of the chiefs of coast ar- can also be med as a reserve point.

lhus. in the infantry division of the ".3. Army. the battalion artil-
lery cos-and post is considered to be such a point. This point carries out
aissions that are sinilar with respect to content and is in a position
quickly to set about perforaing the new duties which will differ iron the
previous ones only with respect to scale ad not with respect to specifics.
0n switching control. provision is nade for its reinforce-ant by the com-
nications arena and personnel. In this case. continuity and the nest con-
plete priority in troop control are ensued. It is possible for even swor—
dinate co-aders and headquarters not to perceive the chage in leadership,
for it continues to perfora its duties in its custonery style.

In addition, a procedure such as transfer of control to the co-and
post of swordinate sdnnits with its sosequent reinforce-ant by others and
with co-micatione neas is considered the nest expedient.

In predicting the possibility of switching control to the subordinate
poet. during the course of battle it is required to systenstically report
the situation to this subordinate ad to report are content of all basic or-
ders ad instructions given by the connder. so that the swordinste will
be ready at ay tine to assune the factions of the higher co-and unit.
Consideration aust also be given to the possibility of a superior co-ander
seeming the functions of e neutraliaed control point of a stbordimte con-
asnder. lhis teaporsry codeinetion of duties will per-it continua: input
of the control units to the troops.

lhe possibility of realising this type of control is ensured by the
fact that the superior unit amt have cmications with the control wit
a step lower than his direct s‘bordinate, ad therefore resrrangenent of ﬁne
coenmications systen is not required. It is necessary to consider that in

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this case the information flow will increase sharply in connection with an
increase in the nuber of ubunits directly atbordinate to a given control
unit. which is felt in its operational efficiency.

One of the effective nethods, as has been noted in the foreign press.
is the isolation of a small operative group from higher headquarters with
communications means and service submits, which reinforces the unit (sun-tit)
that has lost its co-and poet and sets about carrying out the nission of
troop control. The application of this procedure has justified itself in
mass where not only the control point has failed, but the organizational in-
tegrity of the subunit has been disrupted. Undesirable consequences of s
moral-psy'chological nature have been detected. and intervention of the senior
officer is_ required.

Under any conditions. the presence of reserve col-micstions media has
the greatest significance in restoring control. In the presence of a reserve
of comicstions media ready to advance directly into the vicinity of the
created cor-and post, restoring troop control is facilitated significantly.

Finally. there is the possibility for troop control to be realized tem-
porarily from the rear subunit control point. For its successful perform-
nce of the new missions, it must be reinforced by officers and cos-unicstions
media.

‘me selection of the appropriate course will depend on the scale of
destruction of troop control, the nMer of control points, officers and com-
munications media preserved. and also the situation which has developed on
the front as a result of enemy nuclear attack.

In a nutter of cases, the restoration of the control point will not
take place in the ease order planned. Nevertheless. the timely preparation
of measures cm to a great extent promote successful perforsance of this
work.

Cases are not excluded where the control units will suffer only par-
tial losses from nuclear strikes. Depending on the size of the losses, it
can turn out to be expedient to perform certain organizational roar mea-
sures. namely, to reduce the nuwer of officers occupied with secondary
duties and to me them to reinforce the basic positions on which the stabi-
lity of troop control depends.

The measures with respect to possible aovenent of the officers in
case of neutralization of certain control points must be provided for in ad-
vance in the corresponding plans. and during the course of exercises worked
out in practice with the duty personnel on the level of interchangeability
of their new positions. 'lhe importmce of these measures is confirmed by
the fact that the level of training of the officers is the decisive condi-
tion for quick recovery of destroyed troop control.

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In case of nuclear strikes by the enemy. the control points can find
the-selves in areas with high radiation levels. It is important in this case
case that the staff officers retain their tenacity and stability and serve as
an era-ple to die troops in their behavior, ensuring continuity of troop con-
trol and organised withdrusl of the troops free the contaainstion zones.
Accordingly. the role of the soul-psychological tempering of the officers of
the control bodies, their readiness under coqlicated conditions and under
sharp physical and psychological stress to retain their capacity to sake ob-

Jective evaluations of events and psrfora their duties ltnowledgeably in-
creases. . .

lhe volume. the content. and the methods of operation of the restored
control points and units will have characteristic features. In particular.
the personal intercourse of the coauander ad the staff officers with smor-
dinates by trips into the field will be used so that the decisions will be
delivered to then in place, and under difficult conditions they will have
personal influence on the perform-Ice of the stated nission. the trans-is-
sion of oral co-mds over technical commications sesns will be practiced
significantly sore frequently.

Considering that the cmosition of the restored point, a a rule.
will be snall at first. broader interchangeability of officers acquires in-
portant significance. It is iapossible to coat on having the control point
officers feel at hone in the first few minutes after taking control. A cer-
tain anomt of tine will be needed to get into the on role. During this
initial period it is especially imrunt that subordinates, without waiting
for requests free the new leadership, thenelves report the condition of the
stbunits. their support, the course of the psrforasnce of the stated niesion,
grouping and nature of enesy operations as soon as they hear a signal. cos-
nsnd or order. his approach permits the new co-ander to grow into the
situation sore rapidly. Consideration and foresight are required on every-
one's part in order to help the officers in seaming their new and difficult
fractions to deal successfully with troop control.

If the sdmrdinste control unit, for era-ple. cos-under and battalion
headquarters is forced to assume the functions of the superior echelon. the
question can arise as to what is going to happen to the control of their own
assigned sdmnit? To co¢ine the functions or proceed along a different
path-usepsrate then. creating two control grows? It appears to us that the
latter choice is better. but it is possible only in the presence of con-mi-
cations scans and forces. In this case the cor-ander and the battalion chief
of staff can switch to the sore couples and responsible work of performing
the fmctions of the higher headquarters. and a sasll group of officers
headed by the deputy cot-sander will assule control of the regular sdnnit.

If the control point nausea the duties of the neutralized subordinate
control point. then it is expedient to isolate a sssll group of officers.
With this separate control. the efficiency and specific nature of the direc-
tion of the troops inrove: the officers are in a position lore deeply to

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
" ' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘II

study the situation and to take the necessary nseauree in tine for changing
it. heir functione are clearly outlined. their attention is not divided.
and the work proceeda lore purposefully. In addition. the interests of con-
trol dictate location of the control points in accordance with their purpose.
which is inpoeeible without their territorial separation.

Consequently, well-thought-out organization of the control points. the
taking of affective neeaurea to protect then and also for recovery when the
eneau applies nuclear strikes. are decisive conditions for ensuring continu-
ous and stable troop control in any situation.

Co-micetione Organization

1he commications neans are distributed reckoning that stable condi-
tions will be naintained with the subordinates and the interacting subunits.
with the senior officer and neighbors. Responsibility for cot-unicatione
along the front is left to the right-hand neighbor: responsibility for conu-
nicationa of the cosbined-er- eubmite with the snbunita of the coﬁat are
in left to the submits of the ooabat erna: responsibility for co-micetione
with the subunits of the special troops is invested in combined-ar- sub-
mit.s

Radio and signal co-unicationa in the battalion are usuelly organized
by the battalion and the subordinate subunits: wire cor-amications ere orga-
nized by battalion neans.

Got-mications between the interacting aubunits are established by
order of the coriander organizing the interaction.

Under my conditions the con-micationa nedia nut be capable of giv-
ing the conander and the staff the possibility of constantly knowing the
situation and reacting in e tilely leaner to changes in it. 'lhe presence of
various. new. iaproved coemnicetiona neana. in particular radio. facili-
tates the satiafection of these requirenents to a significant degree.

A cos-unicetions system is created in the battalion which is in the
fern of a set of atations md oomicationa lines deployed to ensure con-
trol of subordinates and the attached and interacting subunits, and to pro-
vide comications with the superior cot-ander and neighbors.

1he notorized rifle conpany creates its own radio network which in-
cludes the radioe of the conpeny co-enden and platoon leaders and also all
of the armored carriers of the conpeny. lhe coordination of the operating
procedures of the motorized rifle conpaniee can be realized by the coweny
col-antlers over the radio network of the battalion co-ander or by mutual
entry into the coIpeny radio network.

Colmications with the tanks attached to the battalion are realized
over the radio network of the attached tanks. It includes the cos-ender’s

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radio or the radio of the chief of staff. In order to aaintain co-unicstions
with the attached or smporting artillery battalion. its radios are joined tt
the radio network of the battalion co-ander. During cottat the artillery
battalion couender usually is located with the battalion co-ander. so that
reliable co-unications bewesn then are achieved.

In order to inrovs stability. in each instance the co-unications
systen nust have several channels with basic correspondence. Figure 18 shows
the organisation of the co-unicstions of a notorieed rifle battalion rein-
forced with a tank coapany. artillery battalion and conbat engineer platoon.
for conunications with the senior officer, the battalion co-ander has two
basic ultrashort-wave channels (ll-103i and 11-123) and two alternate channels
(one on short-wave and ultrashort-wave each). For conuicetion with the .
company co-anders there are three direct channels (3-105. 3-123, 11-126) and
one alternate artillery cos-unitations channel. In the presence of this nua-
ber of channels high reliability and carrying capacity of co-unica-dons are
ensured.

‘nte maintenance of stable mications depends not so nuch on an in-
crease in the comicstions name md junctions as on its organization and
the skillful use of the forces nd leans under different conditions, especial-
ly during the course of the answering count operations.

The skill of the co-anders and staff officers in using conunicstions
leans. especially radio. has imrtmt significance. lhe personal conversa-
tions of the officers by radio decrease the nuter of errors and repeated
requests. and in a short tine they pernit not only situation data to be ob-
tained. but also the necessary orders and instructions to be reported inle-
diatsly. In addition. the orders given personally by the co-andar have de-
fined psychological effect on subordinates, and they inspire certainty of
success in the subordinates. It is necessary to strive for naxinun reduction
of inforaation transnission tine here. Under the conditions of active inter-
ference. infomtion nun literally be "fired" at the radios. ‘l‘he ilportant
role is played not by conversations but by giving cos-ands. signals and send-
ing telegraph nesseges. ‘lhe shorter the tine of the transnission and recep-
tion of the infornation. the greater the guarantee that it will be received
and used in tine.

A reduction in the conversation tine depends on the personal organi-
zation of the officer hiaself. before establishing co-unicationa. it is
expedient to think throng! the basic content. select neaningful words and
convincing expressions, prepare the working nap and the necessary documents.
A clear, candid. logically consistent discussion of the situation or content
of the decision accelerates trmnission and at the sane tine decreases the
load on the consunications network.

'lhe conlexity of the organization of communications increases also as
a result of the fact that several dozen different radios are concentrated in
a cowarstively linitsd battalion cadet operation zone. In addition. eneuy

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

redioe will be in operation in direct proxility. Under theee conditions. the
problen erieee of aneuring electromagnetic cmetibility. It the eutual
interference of the radioe cen be excluded, then the interference on the pert
of the eneey will renain. ﬁance. when orgenizing col-micetione. provieion
ie made for neaeuree to protect both egeinet planned interference and ageinet
noise which in the reeult of a coeperieon of the frequencies of our own end
the new redioe. Space frequenciee ere planned for thie purpose. end ver-
eione of new call nigne ere developed.

are proper eelection of the ce-micetione means and type depending on
the nature and content of the problem eolved by the troops hee greet signi-
ficance. Hhereee on the offeneive. cot-Imitation ere carried out baeicelly
by redio. on the defeneive. they are noet frequently carried out over wire
co-unicatione India. Rowever, in defeneive combat. ell neceeeery radio net-
worke ere deployed in reedinaee for operetion.

Under any conditione. the loot inportmt index of the ekillful organi-
zation of co-eunicatione ia proper eelection of the neam end eethode of
infomtion trmeniuien. Experience ehowe thet under nodern conditione,
neintenmca of eteble cmicetiene ie poeeible only by exceptionel flexibi-
lity and the nu of all cmicetione scene. he co-micetione eeane need
in e oowlex have taken on new quelitiee. Thus. the nultichannel radio reley
stations have high carrying co-unicatione cepecity. which ere leee nobile.
The ehort-weve radioe heve high nobility, but they have a linited nunber of
channele. Ihe coebining of verioue neene into n conunicetione eyeten con-
peneatee for the deficienciee of certein onee end the met coeplete uee of
the poeitiwe qualitiee of othere. ‘Ihe broed eaneuvering by theee neane will
to e eignificant degree increeee the control etebility. Hhere the co-ender
end the etaff have Iodern technical equipnent et e control point. there ie
no poeeibility of their losing conunicetion with eubordinetee or higher head-
quartere. Redio comicetione or wire connicatione one be deetroyed by
the eneny. but there are nobile end eignal conmicetione eeme with which
it ie poeeible to receive deta and truenit ordere.

Wen in can where eteble radio ooumnicatione era neinteined, cone-
tinee it ie nore edventegeom to eend a report or ordere by eobile neane.
Thie type of eituetion ie poeeible when the cont.'ol pointe ere located at
short dietencee may. or when eecrecy ie to be neinteined. ‘Ihie ie eepeciel-
ly the me when the control point hee vehiclee with high off-road capacity.
which ellewietee the problen to e high degree.

with eignificant eeperetion of the control points from the troope.
which ie not cherecterietic of pureuit, the cowletion of e nerch, opore-
tione of the troopa on a broad front, when the epacing between the control
points exceede the renge of. the radioe. power anplificetion unite are used,
the etetione are pleced on pronontoriee, end directionel entennee ere ueed;
comicatione are eetabliehed through en internediete point. and coebined
uee of redio and redio relay stations is provided for.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

(a) (5) '
93” g; ,52 .51: .5... 7"“)

. l’" ---1ﬁmﬁl'

I , I.U
{2‘1 {5‘ [51 r41 .13 g ,. WW”
' I [6' 'p' Iﬂ. lap/Mule” ”3. IE] I
rum" 1; WWW' 5'
I (21' .' , | ,2 '9 cum-III-
. . g g :(2? w mmmlllrﬂ
.} g | l . :51 amnion
. , : I m 3))MEIIII
' ' L. Wm” :
'9! n I .))uuo Irm- Ell-II.
'rw ' V 9 ” 5 Whats“
:. -2 1M -

Figure 18. Schenatic of the Organization of Radio Nations in the
Motorized Rifle Battalion on Attacking Pron the "arch

Key:

1.
3.

1°.

11.

12.

Radio network of the antiaircraft
guided niaeile eubunit

Radio network of the tank con-
peny cal-and

Radio network of the notorized
rifle county No 3. co-ander
Radio network of the motorized
rifle conpany No 2. counnde':
Radio network of the notarized
rifle company No 1, co-ander
Interaction radio network
Conandere of the defensive

Motorized rifle platoon leader
Coabat reconnaiaaance patrol
Radiation and chenical recon-
neieeance aquad

Topographic reconnaieaance

lat notarized rifle company 13.

2nd motorized rifle coepany

3rd motorized rifle cmmy 1b.
Antitank guided niaaile

eubunit 15.

Mortar platoon

lat motorized rifle battalion 16.

let artillery battalion

Radio network No 1 of the 17.

eenior co-ander

Radio network No 2 of the 18.

senior cal-under 19.

Radio network No l of the submit
eotorized rifle battalion 20.
«under 21.

Radio network No 2 of the 22.
motorized rifle battalion

co-nder 23.

Radio link of the nortar battery
platoon 26.

106

Radio network of the eenior ar-
tillery chief

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on

[Key continued fro. preceding page]

25. Chief of etaff of the eotorired rifle battalion
26. Colander of notorired rifle battalion

27. Technical eupport radio network

20. Artillery battalion contender

29. Deuged tanke and areored pereonnel cerriere
30. Maintenance and ' ‘eovery group

31. Gnief of etaff of the artillery battelion

32. Firing poeition

33. Adeinietretive platoon leader

36. Forward obeervation poet

35. Radio network of the artillery battalion «under
36. Radio network of the battery 1 «new!»

37. Radio network of the battery 2 oo-ander

38. Radio network of the battery 3 co-ander.

For eutonatic radio relaying of the trenelitted radiation at the contact

point of the radio relay channele end the radioe. verioue epeciel attacheente
are ueed.

An increaee in range of the radioe can be achieved ae a reeult of care-
fully planned location of the control pointa with reepect to the coebet (larch-
ing) (creation of the erbunite. clear organization: of their dieplece-ent and
aleo ekillful eelection of the placee for deployeent of the radioe. here at
the battalion level it ie ilportent to uee all of the co-unicetione neane
coeplerly coneidering their propertiee and the poeeibilitiee with reepect to
the eupport of feet and hidden inforeation tranenieeion under the developed
conditione. Only under thie condition will it be poeeible to eneure continu-
oue oo-unicatione throughout all of the codaat period. At each and
level a united cmicetione eyeteII ie created which ie coordinated with
the eyeteea of higher headquartere ad eubordinetee, neighbore. interacting

eubunite, and providing for the require-ante of the «under and the control
unite.

‘lhe beeic initial data with reepect to the organiution of co-unice-
tione are provided by higher headquartere end the chief of etaff who definee
the comicatime eieeione. the locatione of the control pointe and aleo the

procedure for loving thee under codat conditione, with who. and at what tile
couunicatione not be provided.

Explaining the lieeione received and evaluating the eituation with
reepect to co-unicatione. the co-micatione chief deterninee the volume of

 

1. See: Voyennyy Veetnik (Military Veetnih). No 7. 1972. p 92; no 5. 1972.
p 82; G. I. Garbue. D. P. bore. 1. I. Saxonov. 'ﬁotoetrelhovyy letal'on

v Boyu" [Notorired Rifle Battalion in Coder]. hoecow. Voyeniedat. 1972.
p 176.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operatione. the «gnome of their execution nd the opecific nieoiono to the
oianal odmnit. lien it in poaaiblo to begin the evaluation of tho commi-
catione aituation with an eetination of the operatione of our own troopol
what eubunita nd what nieoion. at what opood it in poeeible to advance. fro-
whet line the eecond echelon (raeerve) will engage in codyat. what the die-
tance ie of the control pointo from tho elononte of tho coebat foreation. and
what tho poaoibilitiee of tho odmnit commicotione ere. Beginning with tho
eetinateo of our own troope. the baaic directione ere deter-ined in which
co-unicatione nuet be realized and tho expedient nethodo of trying varioue
couunicatione roam. and tho nueber of channole required to oneure oo-uni-
cotione in each direction are defined.

Hhon evaluating the one». prinery attention nuet be given by tho ais-
nal chief to deter-ination of tho capability of the anew for deetructiun.
daeaaa to tho co-micatione and creation of radio interference. and he not
plan what aaaauree to take eo that under thou conditione co-unicationa will
continue uninterrupted. '1he terrain ad tho neteorological conditione are
evaluated froe the point of view of their influence on tho operating etabi-
lity of all typeo of micatione.

'lho careful explmation of tho aieeione and a coeproheneivo eetieation
of tho eituation with reepect to co-unicatione will per-it tho eignal chief
to define tho organization of con-micatione uein; all of tho available eoane.
to diatribute then for tho eolution of the etated problem. to ioolato tho
reeorve of the neone. to plan noeeuree with respect to tho protection of con-
nunicationa auinet the waapono of urea deetruction. eneurance of eecrecy.
and aetabliaheent of the notorial and technical eupport procedurea.

It ia mquoetionablo that during the courae of coebat operatione. in
connection with the appearance of additional problem and aleo loaeea in con-
aunicatione forcee and neano. the eisnal duief will eake change. in the ope-
ration of the oignal oubunit. The maneuvering by col-micationa neme and
forcoa. akillful naneuverin; of the co-unicatione channele coneidering their
load will find broad application. It ie aleo inportant to have rolieble
internal coenmicatione at the control pointa the-elven. For orgnisation
of thio type of co-mication. different eouipeent ie ueed which providaa for
two-way. loudspeaker «window. It ie not cowlex. and no great expen-
dituree of effort or tine are required to eetablieh it.

Great proepocte are being opened up for internal co-unicatione ueing
coapact televieion and video telephone dewicee. phototelagraph unite and
radiophonee. In the preeance of otable. cloeed internal connicationo. the
neceeaity in reduced for peraonal calling of eubordinetee. Conditione are

created for ieprowing oporativoneaa md achieve-ant of coordination in the
operation.

‘lhe index of clear organizational micationa ie eneurance of the
eatéliehed procedure in the one of co-unicetione. eepeciolly in obeerving
radio diacipline. Not only the radio operatore but aloo all of the duty

106 ‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

panormel uaing radio commutation mat atrictly adhere to the rulee for
radio convareatione. Only mder thia condition in it poaaihle to achieve in-
proved etability in the cot-unitationa operationa and to aaintain aecracy
with regard to the content of the convaraationa. mararore. when organising
cmicationa. provieion ia nade for monitoring the nee of the cmmicntiona
aeana and ohaervin; radio diaciplina.

107

FOR OFFICML USE (ll '.Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GIMP!!! 3. autoimmune (1’ m3 "at: W m: comm. mm-
1. Iaeic Principlee of Troop Control

'lha organisation and nothode of operation of couandera and control
unit! in each apccitic caoe depend on the naturo of the «int niooion re-
coive-i. the tile. tho level of training of the oificora. tho degree of equip-
.nt of hoadquartare with technical control naane and other conditione. now-
ever. thia work ia characterised oloo by certain general principleo. tho
correct mderatanding and oboarvation of which ia requirad under any condi-
“m.e

Aa applied to the troop control area. by ptinciplea we nan tho baaic
rulea and principlea by which tho control mite and comdere nuet be
guided in their practical activitiee when controlling aubordinato enbmite.
litre, tho principloe are by nature tho reault oi ecienti£ic genoralitation of

practice and follow (roe the objectively operating lua of the conduct of con-
b.to

"..._Principloa are not tho etarting point of our roeoarch,” wrota
I. bgelo. ”but the concluding roaulta: theae principloa are not applied to
nature and to huan hiatory. but are d’atracted from then; it ie not nature
and non that ogreo with tho priociploa. but on the contrary. the principlee
are valid only inaeluch aa they corraepond to nature and hiatory."I

Hherue lava cannot be repealed or replacad by different onoa, prin-
ciplea. in contraat. are lore labile. Hith a change in neano and nethodo of
codat. dto principlca change. Sole loae their tuning and othera are filled
out with new leaning; nan ia relatively free in the choice of certain prin-
ciplea. amver. their creative application under other equal conditiono
alwaya proootea lore auccooeful fulfill-eat of tho etated lieeione.

At the east tint. principlea cannot be idontified with the require-

lento on troop control investigated by \- ﬁovc. 'lheeo requirocente charac-
torico the qualitativc etato of control. 1|ney oorreapond to the question of

I. K. liar: and 7. mole. Collected Doria. Vol 20. p 36.

108
m omcm. use (my '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vhot control loot ho. in ordor to corroopond to tho noturo of tho coobinod-
orno codot ond inonro ito ouccooo. 'lho control principloo. boood on tho
luo of ornod cowot ond tho roquirononto of control. 31w accumulations
ohout tho noot oxpodiont oporotiono of tho coonnndor and no“. 'lhoy dotor-
nino vhot nut ho dono no how it out ho dono in ordor to ootioty tho critt-
ins roquirononto on control. It in ontircly obvlooo that in tho diiforcnt
phoooo of dovolopoont of coin: ort, tho control principloo opcrotod ditto:-
ontly inoonuch oo tho noono ond nothodo of orood conbot ond tho roquirononto
on control hovo choncod. lhio to tho difioronco ond tho intorrolotion
hotvoon tho roquirononto on troop control ond tho principloo.

lhoro io on intorrolotion hotvoon tho control principloo cm! the otylo
of oporotion of tho coudoro ond tho control mito. If tho principloo con-
toin tho buic ruloo vhidu guido tho co-ondoro ad tho control unito in
thoir proctiool octivity. thon tho choroctoriotic footuroo of the operating
otylo. vhot poroonol quolitioo thoy out hove and shot proceduroo. ncthodo
ond noono oro noro odvontogoouo to uoo for ouccoooiul opplicotion of thcoo
principloo cm! in tho finol onolyoio tho ootiofoction of thc roquironcnto on
control. oro indicotod to thon. 'lho otylo oi oporotion. conooquontly. to to
o srootor dosroo thon tho principloo. o ouhjoctivo choroctoriotic of tho
loodoro. ln othor wordo. tho control principloo oro odiodiod ond opocifiod
through tho oporotinu otylo. lho noturo ond otylo of octivity of tho coo-
nonoor ond tho oro“ to o oimificont dosroo dotornino tho procticol roolito-
tion of tho huic principloo. ‘nno Loniniot otylo of oporotion. tho dtoroc-
toriotic iooturoo of which oro oo follow, out conotituto o oodol for thou:
high commiot idoolou ltd principlo. mity of thoory ond proctico. vordo
mo doodo. innovation. proopoctivonooo. o booinoooliko ottitudo. oodooty.
:ndopondonco. docioivonooo. doundingnooo. orgonirotion. clority ond juoti-
iobility.

In o ndor of worn tho outhoro indicoto tho oxtroaoly lorgo nudior
of principloo. oo o rooult of which thoir procticol volno to loot oo tho
booic principloo in tho octivity of tho control orsono. no thoy oooontiolly

olroody hogin to oxprooo tho («tom of tho work otylo or roooiroocnto io-
poood on troop control.

In ordor to ovoid thio doiicioncy. ot tho prooont tino only thooo
hooic principloo oro given vhich on tho vholo conotitoto o mitod coqlox of
principloo dotorninin‘ tho thooroticol hooo and tho diroction and octivity
of tho control nit. Tho oony yooro of oxporionco of tho loot vor ond oloo
poowor toochin; will per-it tho ototonont thot tho noot i-portont troop
control principloo oro hoorty noturo. ociontiiic opprooch, prodiction. onc-
Ion co-ond ond controlitotion.

mo porty nnturo to tho (main; principlo oi troop control following
fro. tho cluo noturo of orlod coohot ond tho docioivo oignificonco for onc-
ooooi'ul fulfilloont of tho codot oiooion of tho oorol-politicol ototo of
troop poroonnol. lho um principlo roquiroo of duo co-ondoro ond otoff on
oll lovolo oi procticol mark in troop control thot tho policy of tho CPSD
on tho Soviot .ovornoont ho initiotod ond iwlooontod poroiotontly. thot

109
FOR Ol’PlCIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eubordinatee be educated in the epirit of infinite devotion to their hone-
land and hate for ita eneniee. faith in the oath. friendahip and fraternity
of people and proletariat internationaliee. 'lhe practical implementation of
the party principle ia inaured prinarily by the guiding role of the cm in
the building of the erned forcea. The 6980 Progran indicatee the following:
"The beeic principle of the building of the nilitary ie the leaderahip of the
Connmiat Party exerciaed with regard to the arned forcea. atrengthening of
the role and influence of the party organicationa in the arny and in the navy.
1he party givee conetant attention to inproving ite organizing and guiding
effect on all life and activity of the any. air force and navy...”

‘Ihe Deniniet party principle requiree the nenifeetation of cooetant
concern for the ideological hardening of the troope. the waging of an mfleg-
ging battle with any aanifeetatione of bourgeoia ideology. the facte of a
political outlook. ogainat the penetration of reviaioniet viewa. Life con-
vincingly confine that the eucceaeful fulfillnent of the niaeione ie achieved
where the pereonnel are educated in the epirit of cmiet ideology and
party concerna. where a pereietent etruggle ie mder way to convert the
ideae of beninien to deep pereonal convictione on the part of each troop.
lhe given principle penatratee all the activity of the «under, the etaff
officere and the party-political apparatue. men eolving any problen.
evaluating facte. evente and phenoIena. they are alwaye and everywhere obli-
gated to begin with the require-onto of party outlook: they correepond in
thie way to the intereete of the Soviet people and the goale etated by the
party in the given phaaa for our Arned torcee.

‘Ihe growing eignificance of the principle of ecientific approach in
troop control followe all of the baaic changee which have occurred in the
neane and nethode of arned oodut which have eignificently conclicated the
control and iqoeed new. hidner require-ante on it. In order to eatiefy
thaee require-enta. firet of all a acientific approach to troop Ianagentnt
is needed.

In the broadeet eenee thie approach neane the uee by the col-andere
and etaff in their practical activity of the objective love of varioue aci-
encea: Harniat-uniniot theory. Iilitary ecience and engineering. phyeice.
cheniatry. cybernetice. radioelectronica. netheeatice. pedagogice. peychology
and the advanced experience of the troope. It ie obvioue that in order to
inplenent the given principle. deep. coqreheneive knowledge of the baeic
principlna of Herniat-leniniet theory. the mderetanding of the love of eotial
develop-eat and the love of arsed codeat. the capacity on the baaie of eater-
ialiatic dialectica deeply and conprehaneively ad objectively to analyte
and evaluete the eituation. to no what ie new and advanced. define the Iain
thing. the deciaive link in a long chain of etated goale. chill in clearly
and creatively eatiafying the require-cote of the rulee and regulatione

l. ﬁcgraeaa Ronnieticheekoy Partii Soyetekogo Soyuca [Progra- of the
Gauntlet Party of the Soviet Union]. Hoecow. Politicdat. 1976. p 112.

110

FOR OFVICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which conetitute e ecientific generalization of the any yeare of combat ox-
poriencn. are required of tho coo-endere and otaii on all lovolo. ‘lheroforo
it ie no accident that the haeic index of the ecientific approach to troop
control io the satin; of e coopreheneive. oubetentiatod dociaion by the con-
under. effective utilization of the available iorcee and eateriul. the
achieve-ant oi the codat nioeion with ninimn loeaoe and in tho eetehliehcd
ti-oo.

In diecuaein; tho ecientific approach to troop control. tho role of
tho poroonel (euhjective) qualitioe of tho oiiicer. oapecially hie bueinoee-
like approach. otrong will. decieiveneee. bravery and aleo otrongly developed
intuition and even Iantaey ie in no woy reduced. Above all. in oilitory
affairs tho role of thoee qualitioe of tho leedor incroeeee eignificantly by
cowarieon with tho control in other areae of eociel life. Coneequontly.
troop control etende before ue not only aa a acience hut aleo ae an art. the
capacity of tho officer to uee eciontific date in practice. ‘Ihe adniniotra-
tive work of co-andero and their etaii iteelf ie aleo in need of ecientiiic
organization. lhe plmnlnto Pmofulneee and organiution in work. propor
pleceoont of tho duty peroonnol coneidering their hueinoeelike qualitiee
and chill in tho efficient utilization of tine ocquire eepecielly inortent
eisniiicenco.

‘lhe prediction principle ie in continuoua relation to tho principle
of eciontific nanagenent; it eooohow cooplounto and enrichoa it.

In eoeonce. prediction coneiete in tho capacity of tho co-endor and
tho eta“ to provide in advance for poeoihlo chengee in the duration end tho
probable couroo of the forthcoming cadet operatione. 'Ihie principlo pleyo
on inportant rolo in the theory and practico of troop control inae-uch ao
without prediction it ie ilpoeeihle to echicvo victory over tho com. ‘Ihc
rolo end eignificance of prediction followe fro- the nature of an“ cadet
itoelf in which each of tho eidoe etrivoo with ell oeeouroo to hide their
intention free the onoqy. to achieve eurprieo end rout the troopo of the
other aide. l'or thia reeoon. in war thore ie alwayo ineufficiont intona-
tion daout the one-y. and eooe of thin intonation io accidental. inoufii-
ciently reliable ad oven foleo. However. the ehortago oi intonation doea
not roliove the co-ander of the duty of noting a tioely. eubetentiated con-
hat docieion.

In connection with tho introduction of nuclear weapono and tho change
in the nature of «dot. the role of prodiction incroeooe. and ite area ie
oignificantly broadened. In particular. the co-endero and staff of all
lowole ere faced with now aoalo in tho fiold of prediction ouch ea the die-
covery of the grouping of tho ooeno of an only nuclear attack and deter-ina-
tion of tho pooeihle order o! their application; conoidoretion of the effect
which tho application of thoeo eeene will have on the eoral etate md co-hat
readinoee of the troopo and aleo the nature of the terrain; forocaating the
radiation and cholical oituetion: diecovory of tho poeoiblo intontion of the
operatione of varioue enony roeervee and other prohloeo.

111

FOR OFFICIAL US: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I.

lhb ociantitically aubotantietod aolution of thaoe problone in the
procooo of prediction requiroo chill on the port of the co-ander and ate“
oiiicare in uaing the dialaotic nothod of thought. the capacity properly to
malyao the aituation. to diacovor ito nain oopecta. and aloo deep knowledge
of the principloo of codinad-arne cadet. skill in prediction it. there-
ioro. an indication of the overall tactical neatory and naturity o! the offi-
cer. In addition. proper prediction iodunthinltablo without exact calculation.
well laid out roconnaiooanca. without deep knowledge of the natariel. the
organization of the troupe. and the toctico of the enony. for without thio.
it io inpoooibla to predict the developaant of the forthcoming operationo. to

provide for the ditticultiaa which can be encountered when carrying out the
coebat oiaeion and plan ooana of overcoming than.

'lharetoro under oodern conditione. the degree of notary by the offi-
caro of the nethodology of acientitic prediction to a great extent dateradnea
tho deptho of analyoia of the developed conditione and the siting of the baeic
dacioion. Bore. the co-andaro and etaff are greatly aooiatod in otudying
the oituotion and predicting tho couroo of cadet oparotiono by the okillful
application of Iodorn technical control neano. oathonatical nothodo of invoo-
tigating oporationo. and PR! planning nothodo.

'l‘ho one-Ian co-and conotitutoo not only the soot inportmt principle
of the building of the arned forcoe. but aleo of troop control. he the con-
trol principle. it exprooaoa the one-nan leodarahip by the co-andar of
oubordinato troopo on the halo of the authority granted hio by the love of
the Soviet govern-ant and tho ordare given by tho ouporior officara. 1ha
one-nan co-and contender poraonally io rooponoibla before the party and the
govern-ant for all aopocto of the lite and coint activity of the aubmit and
tho unit. The operative-tactical. political. odnlniotratlvo ad aconowic
{motiona which offer tho co-andor tho poaoibility of flexible and lira
control. tho affective uoe of forcea and naana in conbat. inaurmca of mity
of will and actiono by peraonnal are concentrated in hio hando.

V. I. Lenin aqhaaitad the apacial noceooity for one-nan cor-and in
building' the armed (arena and in troop control under cadet conditiona. he
taught: “‘Ihe irreoponoibility covered by reterancoo to group co-and io tho
aoot dugoroue evil which thraatano everyone who doaa not have great ex-
perience in tho broad typo of operation and which in codaat leado mavoidably
to cataotropho. chaoo. pmic. anarchy and dootruction."l

In troop control the principle of one-Iand co-amd wu elwayo nocoo-
oary mdor oodarn conditiono. in connection with changoo in the ornament and
the nature of coﬁat oparotiono of troopo. lta aiuificanco haa grown
greatly. It ia recognized aa inouring affective application of tho new con-
trol none. operative and reliable troop control and otrong military dioci-
plina of the paraonnal under the couple: conditiona of highly oaneuverablo
codnt operatione with the application of nuclear waopono by both aidao.

i. V. I. Lenin. Poln. Sobr. Soch. [Conlato Collected Horka], Vol 39. p 66.
112

FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In our Arned Yorcee. one-nen contend ie constructed on the perty beeie.
which indicetee the high politicel conecioueneee of eech conender end hie
pereietent inpleeentetion of the policy of the c930. 'lhe noet coeplete end
cleareet reflection of the principle of one-non cor-end liee in the fect
thet only the conender beere conplete end pereonel responsibility for the
control of eubordinete troope and mu eucceeetul performance of the coiaet

eieeion. end thet he elene hee the right to neke the codet decieion. which
ie the bneie for control.

however. thie in no wey neene thet in the ceee of troop control the
colander cen ignore the collective, not coneider it in hie opinion. V. l.
unin. requiring etrict oheerweticn of the principle of one-non con-NI, et
the use tine werned neny tine eseinet the oneeided underetendin; end eppli-
cetion of it. the uee of here edninietretion. he teusht thet it ie poeeible
to leed by one proceee or mother without being the leederehip on the creed-
vity end initietive o! the collective. without Ieinteinins cloee reletione to
the neeeee. md without leer-nine froe then. Hence, the neceeeity erieee for
ekillful coehinetion of thie principle with initietive end creetivity of the
collective which ie ude up of the perry and toneonol orgeniretione end eleo
etetf pereonnel end other duty pereonnel of the control unit.

"In other worde. in the recent peet nilitery ert uee unifeeted pri-
Ierily in tone of the pereonelity of the couender. the nrllitery leedere.
end often the beeie for the uniteetetion wee the pereonel quelitiee of the
«under. hie intuition end volitionel riek. how nilitery ert. including
the eentioned elenente. ie lore end lore mileeted in term of the creeti-
vity of the collective beeed on exect celculetione end mteheneiwe conei-
deretion oi’ the neture of codnt. operetione end wer ee e whole. however.
the einele mder beere coqlete reeponeihility for decieion melting end
for the tuliillnent of the eteted canoe: union.“

lhe concentretion of the uoet ieportent control functione in the hende
of the eingle couender iwoeee higher require-cute on hie lorel ad buei-
neeelike quelitiee. hie proieeeionel treinins. ehill in forging the collec-
tive end nobilirin; it for eucceeeiul operetione under eny eagle: conditione.

The principle of centreliretion of control ie continuously connected
with the principle of one-Inn co-end. however. theee two principlee cennot
be coneidered identicel.

by centrelieetion of control we uemlly neen the codainetion by the
higher echelon of eubordinete troope in ite hende end the direction of their
efforte to echieve the canon whet noel in eccordence with e united plen.
here. the eenior officer not only etetee the nieeione for ethordinetee, hut
in e nuﬁer of ceeee indicetee to then the pruceduree for cerryin; out theee

deeione. end he eleo influencee the couree of conbet operetione by the
torcee md neene et hie diepoeel.

l. V. Kulihov. ISoviet Areed Porcee end Hilitery Science." KWIS‘I' [Con-
uut]. M 3. 1973. P .30

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the different hietoricel level. the problem of the degree of con-
trelieeticn of control wee eolved differently depending on the ereenent. the
orenieetion end the neture of the coehet operetione of the troope. the level
of treinine md experience of the canned pereonnel end other conditione.
here. the leee nobile the for-e of coehet. the greater the degree to which
troop control wee centrelieed.

In eodern octet. the fulfillnent of the Iieeion ie echieved by veri-
oue cadet eree end epeciel troope with their verioue eeteriel, which re-
quiree. juet ee before. the centrelieed codinetion of their conditions end
conetent coordinetion by the eenior officer of their operetione. The eepe-
cielly rigid centrelieetion of control et the preeent tine ie needed when
eolvins the prohle. of the epplicetion of powerful fire weepone end ebove
ell. nucleer weepone. lhe obeervetion of the principle of centrelieetion in
thie eree per-ite the eenior officer to eehe effective, end et the eene tine
econoeicel. one of theee neene. to decieively influence the couree of coebet.
quickly cerry over the forcee fron one direction to the other end eleo to
coordinete the operetione of ell of the forcee end neene perticipetine in
codeet with the fire end the nucleer etrikee. In eddition. the centrelire-
tion of con-end per-ite the echievenent of conplete unity of viewe in ell
echelone of the eolution of the heeic problue of troop control. the nu of
forcee end eeene in codut end eleo ineurence of purpoeeful treinins of the
troope, the «undue md eteffe for the forthcoeine bettle.

however. in eddition. the nore highly Ieneuvereble neture of Iodern
coi’et. the reduction of the preperetion tinee for it. nonunifornity of ite
developeent. the growing fire power of the eubunite. the increeee in volune
of operetione with reepect to control end other circueetencee require cloeer
codeinetion of centrelieed conned with erentine of greeter independence to
eubordinete co-endere end the poeeihility of exhibiting initietive end
creetivity in cerryins out their lieeione.

hence, the degree of centreliretion end the dependence of eubordinetee
in the ceee of centrelieed control will depend every tine on the conditione
of the eituetion. Buever. the eenior officer met indicete to the euhordi-
nete the Iethod of perforning hie eteted codnt eieeion only when thie ie

poeeible with reepect to the ad ectuelly required in the intereete of the
higher echelon.

In the nejority of ceece. the eubordinete nuet be treated independence
in the eelection of the nethode of cert-yin; out the coﬁet eieeion. the eore
eo eince he elweye ha ereeter poeeibilitiee then the eenior officer to con-
eider ell the deteile of e epecific eituetion end to quickly reect to chengee
in it. Coneiderine the powerful fire weepone with which the troope ere
equipped. end the highly eeneuvereble neture of the codet operetione, the
inortence of initietive end independence on the pert of eubordinetee hee
increeeed ereetly. eepecielly during the couree of cadet. Ignoring thie
fect. en exceeeive increeee in centrelieetion of control tnevoidebly leed to
bureeucretic red tepe end confueion. for the eenior officer begine to be
involved in the deteile end decidee ell of the queetione for the eubordinetee.

11‘

FOR OFFICIAL U35 (NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is deleyed in tho roeotion to chenges in the situetion end et the sons tine
unneceoeerily holds up the operetions of the troops. In oddition. this
brooks down the confidence of the subordinotes theeeelvee end eccuetoes thee
to possively weiting for orders or odvice froe dove. It is accessory to
note the following inortont peychologicol espect of troop control: the
officer inspired by his best idees. but without tho euthority to exhibit ini-
tiotivo. greduelly loses his energy reserve. lie becosee epethotic and begins
to feel opprehsneion. end not confidence. lhie co-end prectice is in gene-

rel strnge to the spirit of the Soviet people. who sro distinguished by
high ectivity. initietive end croetivity.

My initietive end independence of subordinetee lust be, however.
reesonoblo end he oined or finding the boot nethods end ssens of ochieving
the generol conbet goel plonned by the senior officer. Only confident. deci-
sive end strong-willed officers ere cepoble of such initiative and independ-
ence. In oddition. it is neceessry to show concern thet the eubordineteo
hove cloerly conceived the situetion. understend the intentions of the senior
officer end hove received tinely reinforce-out with the nocesoery forces end
soteriel: without this. their mifeotstion of initietive end independence
is cosplicotod. end solestisee is inposoihle. Accordingly. the stinuletion
of initietive end heroiee on the port of the subordinotee. ospcciolly sword-
ing orders ad nedels in e tisely nenner. populorisetion in the press, the
conferring of uilitory ranks. end so on hove ieportent significance.

lhe investigeted beeic principles of troop control ere closely inter-
releted. they ere interconditioned. end ore in dislectic unity end ploy en
imrtmt role in control theory.

2. Plonning the Work of the Co-ender ad the Control Unit

Under sodern conditions. oxtresely limited tine is ollotted for the
orgenisotion of cadet operetions, es s rule. llsnce. the most inportent prob-
lee hos becoee finding neens to insure the soot effective use of the sllottod
tine. lhe solution to this problee depends to e significent degree on the
cleor orgenisetion of the work of the officers. skill of the responsible
agents in echieving noxious returns in working with einiml expenditures of
forces end ties.

It is no eccident thet seny yoers of prectice hove gcncreted e serious
werning to the cos-enders end stoff thet they. in orgenicing their coder
operetions. “not use up" the ties of the subordinetoe, thet they not toke ee
their right the beeic port of the tine ollotted to cadet preporetions. No
one refutes thet the higher the cox-end echelon. the more cowlex end respon-
sible the eissions which not be cerried out. Nevertheless, in soy instence.
the interests of the swordinetes. their possibilities with respect to pro-
peretion for the forthconing coﬁet not he of per-cunt interest.

‘lhe struggle to eove tine when propering for coibet begins before
receiving the ooﬁet mission. In order to prepere the up of the forthcosing
operetions in sdvenco, the necessery for. ere prepored. end reference

115

POI. OFFICIAL 083 Oil!
M ORIGIN. US! ONLY

aotorialo aro ooloctod. mo prooonco at hoadquortoro of tho latoat oitua-

tion data roiloctins tho actual oituotion. tho otato ad tho noturo oi opo-
rotiono oi our own troopo ad duo ohm havo oopocially ioportant oisnitic-
anco. “hon ouch data oro ayailablo. tho rooponoiblo ogonto do not nood to

quootionl'tho aourcoo during organisation of conbot or to gathor additional

data whiEh‘ dotracto tron thoir porforlonco of tho niooion.

onciolly high roalization in tho work io pronotod by tho prooonco of
coﬁot calculationo which aro dovolopod in tino and oro potion-nod during tho
couroo of training, and oxotciooa taking into accomt tho poroonnol diotribu-
tion. tho con-nicotiona noana ad tranaportotion noano with roopoct to tho
control point. dotornination of tho opociiic obligation for oach orocutivo
organ. loco, it to ontiroly Juotifiablo that it tho otticor dovolopo hio
own plaza on tho booio of than in which tho data. tho calculationo, docuonto
ad cochnical noono which aro roouirod of hio aro rofloctod in dotail. than
tho tino calculation for porfomco o! oach noaouro io portal-nod. tho prob-
loaa oro cloarly dotinod which act bo ooordinatod with othor duty poroonnol.

‘lho booic rolo in tho organization of tho work of tho control unito
sooo to tho chiof of otaii. ho aotabliohoa duo volu-o. tho tiooo and tho
oxocutivo organ for tho work with roopoct to tho organization of conbat opo-
rationo. no dotorlinoa in what {on tho planning multo will bo rofloctod,
what coiaat docuaonto will bo dovolopod and by what tinoo: ho coordinatoo and
dirocto tho work of all tho control unita. lo givoo opocial ottontion to tho
tiaoly dolivory of tho data roquiood by tho otbordinato co-andoro and otaffo
for porallol oporotion with roopoct to tho organization of codut oporationa
to tho rooponoiblo asonto.

Tho booia for tho organization of tho work ia tho calculation of tho
tiao for proparation of codat oporationo. Tho procedure for calculating tho
tioo uoually roducoa to tho following. Initially, tho total aunt of tino
availdalo for organization of “at ia noro prociooly dototninod with
broahdown of it into daytiao and nichttiao. 'lhon a liot of buic oporotiona
io nodo up which can bo porforlod with approxiaato notation of tho oxpondi-
turoo of tino. Simultanoomly. tho operations which can bo porforuod in
parallol aro ootiofiod at ouo tino or onothor; tho tinoa dotor-inod by tho
ordor of the oonior officor an atatod: tho oporationo poriornod at night are
aroupod. mon tho tinoo for tho porfornanco of all tho booic nooouroo aro
lore procioaly dofinod. lho rooulta of thia work uouolly aro rofloctod in
the colondor plan of coﬁat proporation. Ono voroion of thia plan in pro-
oontcd on pogoo 196-197. In tho praoonco oi liuitod tiao which io aoot cha—
ractoriotic of nodorn codat, it io upocially iaportant to includo tho booic
mition of tho ouicoro. tho control units in tho oporation of craniu-
tion of cowat without my dolay. mo ouccoooful oolution of thin problon
dopondo to o sroat oxtont on tho cloor knowlodgo by ooch officor of what ho
is obligated to do.

116

'0’. OFFICIAL 08! "LY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Approval :
Colander

iﬁu. In: and
(Data)

 

PLAN rm mama-1m (I ma chasm
(submit) fro. to
11-0 of «mm the Italian Pnparotton the for offmtve

 

 

( Ona- uum-I. uh-
, 0

g Wyn "um-nu g?
z (b) N In I I”; (.) 6';
l V In any: c po- Komwp. um

was“! ”1:30. ‘ mu - (3) .
2 Jaime": mummy: puma:- mm, sou. non-um )

m
3 "ONO." um: I pm nono- mm. on man» )

um: um apt-um. man a nun-apo- ‘

um
4 Mum-e mm m ow Kola-up. H11] (8)

1mm awn. cm W
(«out ”coop-um!

 

5 3 ~ .
u 3.1.3:“... 1am mam. mam Kenn-up (1) x

6 110001 mu «may nun-“y Konmp (f)

7 "mm W In new.» .
mcnmnmmmuw mix.” MW
33qu mandala:

3. 09mm m u an. — ‘.

a.“ um m szu man

0 "carom I I 1 not

w at; 1'9”"- MY I" "Kama“ wane

[I
”mm-rut I wrﬁm no menu 3:53.1‘3' mm:-

II B on: W m
rutwan I: pm am: ("Into-ax) Jun ..

I: Home. .

m l. u margins-u: ”my: 3“. new“)
I! Ramon. :3 mm max Kon- , an. unnu-
~ ”M m (g)
[sea kc! on folladne use] mm. mqn,__
' . (om-n. Oat-um) I
117

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
Key: a. Iten nuﬁer h. Staff. deputy connander

b. Measures i. (to-pander
c. Execution tine. houru/ J. Contenders. staff officers
ninute k. Subunit conandsre
d. And so on 1. Deputy counnder
e. Reasonable agents m. Oomnder. deputy comnander. staff

f. Note on execution
g. Gender. chief of
staff

1. Explanation of the received mission considering the actual situation

2. Delivery of the preliminary orders

3. Preparation of date and calculations required for decision asking
end planning

lo. Continuation of the evaluation of the situation. determination of
the intent. giving the preliminary coahat orders

5. Coupletion of decision asking, statenent of the goals for the
troops

6. Report of the decision to the senior officer

7. Performce of reconnaissance in the terrain in order more pre-
cisely to determine the decision and organize the interaction

8. Organization of the offensive at the canny-platoon level

9. Preparation of the routes and equipnent of the attack position

10. Advancement and deploynent in the fire positions of artillery
and nortar

ll. Advancement of the motorised rifle (tank) subunit to the assault
position

12. Supple-eating the natariel reserves, repair and evacuation of
failed equipment

13. Monitoring of the work of subordinates

16. Giief of staff

15. (Rank. last neat)

Note. In the battalion. the given plan cannot be developed as an
independent document, and all neasures with respect to pre-
paretion for the offensive are reflected by the chief of
staff in the working nap.

here can be no standard for the distribution of duties among the of-
ficers. In each individual case. beginning with the present tine. the con-
tent and voluna of the probleas subject to solution ad also the personal
training of the officer and his specialization, the specific peculiarities
will he determined. Unquestionwly. the observation of the specialization
principle has decisive significance in the work distribution. It is diffi-
cult to count on. especially under conbat conditions, the training of the
universal officer capable of carrying out a broad class of aissions with
high quality and in a short time. As the officer accumulates experience
and knowledge. the necessary prerequisites are created for the expmsion of
his duties. lhen it will be possible to tell hin to carry out the duties of
another person on the level of mutual interchangedaility. Otherwise. it is

118

roe OFFICIAL US! (All?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inpoeeible to be certein of the etebility of troop control end the echievn-
went of high operetionel efficiency of the work of the control unit. lb opu-
cielite tho officere end develop eolid ekille in then with reepect to the
perfornenco of only e nerrow cleee of Jobe without concern for nutuel re-
pleceebility neene to work without proepecte for the future. without eeeing
tonorrow. without prepering the eteff for work under the noet difficult con-
ditione which cen develop on epplicetion of the nucleer etrike hy the eneny
on the control point.

It ie inportent not only to epproech the deterninetion of the content
of the work eeneibly. ﬂow to etete the nieeion for the reeponeible egent
eleo hee greet eignificence. 0f couree. the pereonel quelitiee of the reepon-
eible egent will hove decieive eignificence here. however. under eny condi-
tione the eneqy nuet receive inetructione fro. hie couender; whet to do. by
whet tine. end in whet forn to preeent the reeulte of hie work. It in necee~
eery to eee thet the officere of control unite not expect developed inetruc-
tione. but underetnd their chief. ee they eey. with helf e word. capture for
theneelvee the content of the neeeuree following fron the eituetion. the
decieion of the comnder end the received coltet lieeion.

Accordingly. education in the officere of e eenee of high reeponeibi-
lity for preciee execution of work in eetebliehed tinee with high quelity hee
epeciel eignificence. It ie ieportent "thet every worker." ee 1.. I. Brezhnev
pointed out et hie neeting with the workere of the 21!. Autonobile Plent.
"cleerly eee hie role in the lebor proceee. know whet he ie doing. why he it

doing it. whet depende on hie, feel thet hie lebor ie e neceoeery pert of the
overell work."1

The orgenieetion of work will becone high quelity only if it reflecte
the edvenced proceduree end nethode end eleo in full degree tekee into ec-
count the poeeibility of the uee of the eveileble technicel control neene.

In hie tine. F. mgele noted thet the individuel ie evelueted not only by
whet he doee. but how he doee it. me eelection of the edvenced nethode noet
coepletely correeponding to the developed eitueticn ie one of the cowonent
conditione of high-quelity orgeniution of work.

Another index of high oruniutim in work ie the neintenence of the
cleer regine. which providee for the coordinetion in the work of ell of the
duty pereonnol. etrict eucceeeiveneee in the execution of the nieeione.
rigid reguletion of tine ellotted for eech operetion. A coqonent pert of
the orgenizetion of work ie eleo ellowing for reet for the officere. It in
inportent not only to perforn the work with quelity ad on tine but eleo to
conserve etrength for eubeequent operetione. Accordingly. ekillful elterne-
tion of work end reet ie required. Prectice hee denonetreted for e long tine
thet it ie iqoeeible to echieve high output cepecity ad not leern how to
root, not be concerned for the recovery of etrength. No one deniu thet it
in difficult to provide in edvence for the rut tine of every officer ”fro.“

l. RAVI», 1 May 1976.
119

'0! OFFICIAL I18! ONLY
FOR orncm. 083 ONLY

md "to“ acne epecified tine. but if not ie not planned. then there ie a
danger that there will he no poaaibility for root ea e reeult of the couroe
of ovonta in general.

3. Scientific Organization of the Labor f ‘ the Control Unit Officere

for clear organiration of the work of control unite. in my ceeoa it
ie inouffioiant to depend only on the vital onperience and practical knowledge
of the chief of otaff. In the control ophare. ecientific organisation of labor
ie eapecielly nacoeaery.

It ie necooaary to coneidor eciantific only that organization of ad-
ainietrative labor which ie haaed on the achiewenenta of acience and advanced
experience eyoteaatically introduced into the activity of the «under and
the control unite. which inowrea the greateet affective nee in coebat of
euhordinate troope and their fulfill-ant of the atated eieeion in the «tab-
liehed tinee with minim expendituree of forceo and tutorial.

In other worda. thia ie the labor of the control unit officere. or-
dered. arranged. reduced to e ayatoa in accordance with the recoaaondatione
of ocienco and the achieve-ante of advanced experience.

he difference between the ordinary organiaation of labor nd ite

ecientific organization conaiate in the nethoda of taking certain aoaaurea.
the aelection of the nethoda and procedureo. In one caae the «under and
the control unite intuitively and oochanically repeat the cutoury procedureo
which have been well naetored by then. and in the other. they poreietently
naeter ad akillfully introduce into practice the lateat recouendatione of
acience and the achieve-onto of advanced experience. Iha reeulte will uncon-
ditionally be different in the two caaea.

Ihorefore the prinary goal of acientific organization of labor is
aexinuo iaproveaent of the efficiency of the labor of the control mic offi-
cera. the achieveeent of noro efficient nee of tiaa with ainiouo oxpenditurea
of forcea.

Ihe baaic areae of the ecientific organization of labor in the opera-
tion of the troop control mite can he the following: the education anong
the officere of a co-uniet attitude toward their military duty. the introduc-
tion of efficient nethoda and proceduree into operation. the inrovenent of
the lethodo of organizing work. inroveaont of the equip-ent of the work
areae of the officera in the and poet wehiclea. the develop-ant of nor-
for perforning the haeic neaaureo with reapect to troop control, the ration-
alization of the working conditiono. i-proyenent of the training and neatery
of the officera. inourance of independence and creative activity of the
reaponeible ogenta. inrovenent of the practice of noral incentive for the
officere. eucceoafwlly carrying out their dwtioa ad ao on. In addition. the
require-lento of the acientific organization of lahor are taken into accotnt
by the doaignora when creating new aachinea. inatruenta. and technical con-
trol unite. In particular. ming apecial atudiea. the adniaaible levels of

120
”R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAI. 088 ONLY

noioo. tooporaturo fluctuotiono. dogroo of illuainotion in conond poot
whicloo and otructuroo of tho control point aro dofinod. 1ho dogroo of tho
offott of thooo factoro on tho fitnooo. tho fatigno and officioncy of carry-
log out tho niooiono with roopoct to troop control io dotorninod by tho
oothodo of onginooring poyohology. poychophyoiology. poychoonginooring. and
.0 mo

in tho practical work of tho control unito ooot froquontly tho oioplor
for-o of ociontifio organisation of labor find application: ohoorvotion of
tho work of tho rooponoihlo ogont. tioo otudioo of tho oporation and ouhoo-
quont analyoio of tho organisation: and tho procoduro for porforoing tho work.

tho porforoanoo of oxporioonto with tho opplioation of tho latoot oothodo.
tochnical nomo. and oo on.

'lho prooooo of introducing ociontific orgniution of lohor uouolly
hogino with a dotoilod otody of tho contont of tho work and oothodo of por-
toning it by tho rooponoihlo agonto. 1hio procooo cm ho ochooaticolly
roprooontod in tho following form Initiolly. tho final goal or finol ro-
oult of tho work io dofinod. and thon all of tho forthcooing work io hrokon
down into cooponont olooonto.

for clarity in tho givon caao. ono of tho poooihlo altornotivoo io
tokon. 1ho otoff officor hoo rotoiwod an oooignoont for tho dovolopoont of
count ordoro to ongogo tho 2d ocholon in hattlo. lho roaoarchor hoa not
dotoroinod. hut find tho couponont olooonto of tho oporotion of tho roopon-
oihlo agont. In tho loot tonoolidatod for-o thoy look liko tho following
(in oinutoo): tho plotting of tho oiooion for tho 2d ocholon froo tho coo-
omdor'o oop onto thoir own working up - 2; tho otudy of tho prohloo plot-
tod on tho nap — 1.5: tho ooro pnoioo dotoroinotion of tho work oroa -- is
coordinating tho data on tho may with tho chiof of roconnoiooanco - 2;
writing tho hoading ond tho firot iton - 2; ooro procioo dotonination by
tho onginooring oorvico chiof of tho cloooification of tho coohot onginoor’o
otbunit oooignod to roinforco tho 2d ocholon .. 1.5; chocking tho tioo col-
culation for advanconont of tho id ocholon to tho ottaok poaition - 2; ooro
procioo dofinition of tho firo niooiono aolvod by tho artillory for oupport
of tho ongogooont of tho 2d ocholon .. 1.5: writing tho oocond itoo -- 6;
writing tho third itoo ad cowloting tho filling out of tho count ordoro --
3: tho prooontation of tho ordoro by tho chiof of otoff for chocking ad
tooting - 2; printout of tho coobat ordoro - 83 oigning of tho ordoro by
tho chiof of otaff and con-Nor - 2: occoptonto of tho doth for dio-
patch - 1.5. ‘lho total io 3‘ linutoo. ‘lho offioor ha workod at high
."C‘o

wt of tho totol tioo. a inoignificant aoomt of tino woo opont
dirottly on tho dovolopoont of tho docuont. ond tho groator port wont for
ooro procioo dotoninotiu of tho prohlooo. ooordinotion. tooting and
printing.

0n tho haoio of tho coqrohonoivo anolyoio of oil of tho olononta
(tho porforood oporotiono) it in ootahliohod which of thoo oro unocoooory.

121
m OFFICIAL OS! OILY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

which can‘be aieplified. which can be replaced by othere or codained. how
efficient the procaduraa ueed by the officer are. Ac e reault of chic analy-

aia. the poeeibility of reducing the tine required to perfore the operatione
ia diecovered.

In the given eraepla. it wee entirely poaaible to exclude the plotting
of the eiaeion for the 2d echelon on their working eap. checking of the or-
dere by the chief of ateff (I. einutea): acquieition of aiaaing data by cal-
ling the required people ie coebined (3 einutee). 'lha graeteet cine ia taken
in printing and writing by the drafteean. when dictating the ordara directly
free the lap to the typewriter. eewinge of up to 6 to 1 einutea can be
achieved. If the officer ueed a foraaliead order fore. then filling out the
docueent took 3 Iinutae, and there wee no naceaaity for printing.

‘lhue. only aa a reault of iwreving the orgusiaetion and the introduc-
tion of inroved procadurea in operetiona could the coebet ordara be written
in 16 einutaa. If we etudy the perforeence of analogoue work by verioue
people. then it ia poeaible to diacover that one worke faeter and the other
non elowly. 'lharefore. one of the eieaione of the ecientific organieation
of labor ia the etudy of the beat procedurea md nethode of operation for
their introduction into the practice of other duty pereonnel. It ie necee-
eary eleo to conaidar that it ia very difficult to convince the experienced
reeponeible agent that the eethode of hie operation are ieperfect. He often
reeeina convinced that hie procadurea and eethode developed by proper ex-
perience are the only correct onee. 'ihia ceueee a definite reeietmce on
hie part to breaking the eatabliehed pattern and introducing new eethode.
Knowledge ad practical uee of the edvuced cathode in work will par-it ac-

hieveeant of nestin- effect with leaet erpanditurea of forcae. eateriel and
tine.

'iha principle of co-eeaeureeant of the expenditurea of forcea ad tine
which providee the baeie for the ecientific orgnication of labor reeuiree
conaideretion of at what price and by what eathoda aucceea ia achieved. To

eava tine eaane to deal with the loeeae end ant...“ “gee...” .Wduuug
of forcae.

1he coeprehanaive analyeia of the work of the control unite will par-
nit effective evaluation of what in good and uaeful. proper introduction
into practice of the work of othera and, in addition. it ehowe up the bottle-
necke where forcea and tiea ere waeted. which hinder-a efficiency in the exe-
cution of their dutiee. It ie iwortant to eetablieh what ie to be done.
who ie to do it. when. in what tieea and by what procedure: how effective
the organization of the work of the raapeneible agente ie. and whether the
low diatribution ie being coped with nor-ally.

1n. chief of ataff will deal beat of all with thie problee. During
the fulfill-ant of the aeaigneant by the officer. he can find tiee to look
over the lethode of operation of the eubordinatee with experienced eyee.

122

roe OFFICIAL US! our
POI OVPIOIM. "8! ONLY

‘lhe chief of eteff ueuelly known the cepd’ilitiu. the neture. the level of
treining of the officere well. end he will mderetend rendily the ceueee for
niecelculetione. lie cen ehow how but to epproech the perfornence of tho
nieeion. the pereonel exeeple ie one of the not effective eeene of introduc-
tion of ecientifio orgaitetion of lehor into prectice end ieprovenent of tho
opereting efficiency of the duty pereonnel.

hperience ehowe thet eoientific organisation of lehor ie unthinkehle
without the preeence of noreetive. edeieeihle indexee for the expenditure of
tine on perfornence of the operetione. ihe nor-elieetion of lehor in the
heeie for ite ecientific orgeninetion. ‘lhe lehor of my reeponeihle egent.
eepecielly technicel lehor. in node up of dofined etenderd elenente. eech of
which con he quite cleerly nor-elired. 1he purely creetiwe. antel opere-
tione ere etbjected to noruliution with the greeteet difficulty.

The reelity of the orgenieetion of the operetione eignificently in-
creeeeo if it ie heeed on ecientificelly developed tine nornetivee for the
perforeace of the heeic control operetione checked out in prectice. ‘Ihe
deterlinetion prieerily of the tinee for decieion noting. the etete-ent of
the goele ad orgaieetion of the interection heve decieive eignificence.

lheee tinee ere tehen en the heeie for eetehliehnent of the duretion of any
other operetione.

however. it in neceeeery to coneider thet the deterninetion of the
tinee for performce of the ebinietretive operetione in e highly conpliceted
letter. 'lheee tinee depend on say fectore. including the degree to which the
eteff ere w to full etrength ad the level of treining of the officere. the

preeence of technicel control neae. the nudity of orgainetion of their
work. end no on.

‘lhe expendituree of tile on the perforlenoe of operetione uder de-
fined epecific conditione ca eignificatly deviete in one direction or ao-
ther fron the weighted sea velue. however. knowing the everege nor. for
tine expendituree. it ie elweye poeeihle to eelect the nethode of operetion
correepondingly which. under given conditione. will provide for the per-
for-ace of the work in the eetebliehed tinee. ad note eeeily to deter-inc
the officer'e eteff for the operetione. 1he nor-etivee mt he ewetatieted
ad correeoond in full neeeure to the nodern level of dewelopnent of the
technicel control arm end edvaced nethode of operetion. here the nor-e-
tiwee canot he coneidered ee inveriat. eetaliehed forever. At leetery of
the officere grown end new technicel control lean ere introduced. they Iuet
he ehortened. lhe nor-etivee ere the lieit. the eterting point I‘m which
the increeee in neetery of the officere end degree of efficiency in the work
of the eteff ectuelly begin.

Often the euthore inveetigeting the probleoe of iwroving the effi-
ciency of troop control reduce everything to the one of the eutoeeted control

eyeten ad leeve out the poeeihility of ordinery technicel nae which ere
cepale of greetly increaing the efficiency of the work of the officer-e.

123

roe orncm. 03! MY
M OHICMI. I!“ ONLY

therefore. perhepe in prectice the neae of eo-celled eecheniution end low
eutoeetion ere not elweye sufficiently effectively put to uee. nevertheleee.
enperience convincingly indicetee thet without their help it ie iepoeeible to
eccelerete end fecilitete the work of the officere.

lhe ieprovenent of lebor on e ecientific beeie in e conetent proceee.
ad not I eporedic ection oelculeted only to elininete bottleneck. in opere-
tion. It in moueetionebly the cane thet the ecientific orgeniretion of lebor
givee the greeteet effect under the conditione of the perforeace of e eingle
eet of neeeuree with reepect to ieproying the ectivity of ell of the control
mite. of couroe. it ie inpoeeible to mdereotieete the "epeciel procedure."
eeeeuree eined et elinineting bottlenecke.

‘fhe courier. eyetenetic ieproweeent of the ectivity of the control mite
during the couree of the orgairetion end conduct of coehet operetione will
pereit e eherp increeee on the whole in operetiveneee of the troop control.
The principle of coaleteneee in operetion with reepect to the ecientific or-
gaintion of lebor followe free the cloee interreletion ad interdependence
of the operetione ad neeeuree perfoned by the control mite. 0n failure to
obeerwe thie principle. the often good ad ueeful reconcndetione ca turn out
to be ineffective. for ere-pie. the tine eevinge echieved when perforeing the
tecticel celculetione ueing coeputer engineering ere not felt in en ieprove-
eent in the operetionel efficiency of control if the co-ender united the
decieion by prolonged lietening to the propoeele of hie emordinetee.

'lhue. the coqlex epproech clone to the orgeniretion end perforeence of
ell of the operetione ineuree en increeee in operetionel efficiency of the
control. it prevente the occurrence of new bottleneche on e reeult of cone of
the reeponeible egente being eheed ad othere behind.

here the proceee of introducing edvenced proceduree end eethode end
eleo the beet echievenente of ecience in prectice provider en effect. if it
ie continuoun. in which the officere of ell of the control mite perticipete.

One of the proceduree proeoting inproveeent of the operetionel effi-
ciency in the operetion of the control unit ie the epplicetion of PET chute.
'lhey per-it ouch nore coeplete ad deeper reproduction of the logicel flow
cherte of the eequence of the perfornace of the beeic control functione
(neeeuree) by cowerieon with the treditionel etrip diegre-e. they per-it
cleer repreeentetion of the entire proceee of preperetion of cooet opereo
tione ad ewetentieted eetebliehnent of the prioritiee end the tie-u for
perfornence of the operetione (eee figure 19).

Pull“ cherte ere eepecielly irrepleceeble when deter-lining the optinel
veteione of the uork of the officere with reopect to orgeniretion of can.»
operetione. do e rule. thin work ie done in lieited tine. It in pertici-
peted in by e lerge nuder of reeponeible egente in cloeeet dependence on
eech other. end therefore exceptionelly cleer orgenitetion in required. In
eddition. the beeic Ieuuree with reopect to the orgeniution of codet ere

12‘

FOR OFFICIAL 03! 03M
M OPHCMI. 083 ONLY

baoed on defined nornativao which are aubJected to quantitative ooneideration
peroitting coupletoiy objective detornination of the effectiwonoaa of one
nethod of organisation of work or another. lhe nathonatical bait for the
nethod of rm planning ie the run- chart (mr nodal. network) which peraita
deteraination of tho volune of operatione. aetahliahnent of the out expe-
dient eaquonce of perforoance of the noaauroe. the beat diatribution of
dotiea anong the duty paraonnal. diacovary of the ruarvo tiaoe and neano of
reducing the tinoa for organisation of coahot oparetiono.

lhe procedure for devalopeant of the chart io diatinguiahod by great
variety. [or emlo. let on conaider one of than.

The chief of etaff propoooe. with the help of the chart. early deterni-
nation of the noet expedient weroion of the diatribution of operatione anong
the raaponaiuo agente in the procoao of organising coohat operatione. llera
the tine for orgmiaation of the cadet in taken at Ia houre. After develop-

nent of the chart. the calculation on: be node by the acne procedure for 5. 6
or 7 houra.

when a ehort tine io allotted to the organization of conbat. the
parallel operatione of all of the duty peroonnel ia unqueotionably juorified
by their eurcioing great independence in eolwing the proble- dealing with
their fmctional obligationo. nonin- coordination of the operatione with re-

opect to tine ad alao reduction of the tine for the perfornance of all the
.““".e

Under thaee conditione. the haoic rooulte of the planing are expa-
diantly reflected on the working nape. and without developing other written
docunto. the aiaoione are delivered to the eubordinatoo orally with record-
ing of their content in the working notebook or on neurotic tape. roconnaia-
aanca ie carried out to nora precisely dotarnine the aolution and the problem
of interaction only in the direction of the nain otrike. lha chief of otaff
arriwea at theee concluiona not by opacial inweotigation. but booed on ex-
perience in perforning analogoue operatione. In the pretence of other tioee
for codpat preparation. unconditionally it io noceaoary to take other initial
poaitione for the calculation. leginning with the content. value and
oaquence of perfornmce of the operatione. a liot of operatione is prepared.
hparionca ahowo that the tineo for cowiling the chart are aignificantly re-
duced if the otaff haa aevaral veniona of ouch liate developed in advance or
applied to the noat difficult operating conditiono of the control unit. If

the lieu are coqilad. than one of then can turn out to be appropriate for
the opecific conditiono which exiat in the given caee or it ia neceaaary to
introduce individual. lore pracioe definitiona with roapect to content. ae-
quenca of perforlance of the operatione and the ruponoiblo agenta. It in
alao neceaoary to define the duration of the operatione in the liot. lhe
code for each operation on he inoarted when developing the chart. '

Uoually the liat of operatione in given in the for: of the following
title.

125

M ORIGIN. USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL "8! ONLY
'l‘ehld 11"!

W

:. Duretion
None of operetion (in Reeponeibie Opere- of open--
meoiideteg fog) gente tione code tion gm;
1 . 3 6
Explenetion of the nieeion received Go-endere end 1.2 20
by the conender Jointly with the chief of eteff
chief of eteff
Plotting the eieeion on the eecond Chief of eteff 1.3 18
working up
Study end eveluetion of the eneey Chief of eteff 1.3' 20
Celculetion of tine for orgmice- Chief of eteff 2'.‘ 7

tion of coebet operetione (in the
proceee of expleining the ei'eeion)

Giving inetructione with reepect to Co-ender 2.5 10
preperetion of dete end ce1cu1e-

tione required for nehing the deci-

eion ad performoe of ueeeuree with

reepect to treining troope for the

forthcoling codet operetione

Ieeuing preiieinery ordere to re- 8teff officer 5.6 5

conneieeeoce ubmite

Ieeuing prelieinery coﬁet an“ officer 5.? 12

ordere to the cdined-eree

eubmite

tuning prelieinery ordere to the Service chief 5.8 5

epeciel forcee mm:-

IVeluetion of the eneqy Oo-ender end 5.10 20
chief of eteff

Report of dete ad celculetione Steff officer 6.9 10

on the eneny to the co-ender

mimetion of the received lieeion Service chief 8.16 10

Develop-eat of the telculetion of Steff officer 7.13 20

the retio of forcee end Interiel

Perticipetion in dewelonent of the Steff officer 9.11 10

celculetion of the retio of forcee

end Deteriel

Steteeent of goele for the recon- Steff officer 11.17 18

neieeence eubmite

126

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

[Table ll continued]

M

”W 13

Preparation of the data and
calculations with respect to

application (use) of the special
forces submits

Evaluation of our own troops

Develop-cut of the calculation
of the time for advanceaent of
the troops to attack position

Estimation of the situation and
formlation of the decision

Planning of reconnaissance

Planning acasuros with respect
to camouflage and the con-
Inndant'a service

Develop-ent of control plan
and plan for rendering aid

Developeent of planning docu-
ment with respect to use of
subunits of special troops

Estiastion of radiation situa-
tion md terrain

Develop-ant of CMlt orders

Co-andar listens to proposals
of the chief of staff with
respect to the decision

Statement of tho missions for
submit connendcrs. the giving
of orders with respect to in-
teraction. conpnahensive support
of codpat operations. party-
politicsl work

Checking and signing planning
documnts

More precise deterainstion and
develop-ant of cadet orders
ad the reconnaissance plan

Service chief

Co-ander. chief

of staff

Giief of staff
Chief of staff
Staff officer
Staff officer
Staff officer

Service chief

Conander and
chief of staff

Staff officer
Chief of staff

Co-snder

Conander.
chief of staff

Staff officer

127

M OFFICIAL US! ONLY

10.12

10.16

16 .20

17.19
13.18

19.26

15.23

12.20

18.22
20.21

20.25

26.25

22.25

'12

25

12

28

25

18

3O

15

2O

55

15

50
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

[Table 11 continued)

w-g—T—T—ﬁ—
—~——————-——___._________________

Performance of reconnaieaance in Co-ander. chief 25.26 75
order note precieely to define of ataii, aervica

the decieion and the interaction chief

problena

Report to eenior officer on Oo-ander 26.27 5

readinaae for attack

lhie liat hardly containe anything not: the atafi had previouly deve-
loped the ordinary etrip cherta for the oranieation oi the control unite.
lhey aleo railected the beeic aieeiona (operationa) which had to he periornad
by the officera. 'lhe tinea and the direct reeponeibla agenta were indicated.
however, in theee cherte the internal relatione of the proceaaaa were not
obvioua. the aequente for the periornance of the enuareted oparationa wae not
clearly provided for. ad it wee difficult to detenine what the coneequancea
would be fro. the delay in coepletion of the individual operetiona. duet
mim- tim for performce of the operationa are adniaaible. where the
sreeteet bottlenecka are and which operetione mat be given greateet attention.
‘nuerefore the reflection of the organieation of the work of the control mite
in the tern of a PIR‘I' chart will per-it wore careful aelaction oi theaa prob-
len and denonatrate in clear fora the logical interrelatione and eequence of
all the oparatione periorned by eech reeponeible agent. Even if of ell oi the
advantaaea of the Pl“ chart we on only the principle of repreaentation of
orsnieation of toilet in the torn of a network, then it ie naceeaary to re-
cogniae that it ie unqueationdaly ueeiul. ma eisniiicante oi the m1
nodal increaaea i-eaeurably when toque: work ie to he done with the parti-
cipation of a large nunber of reaponeible agente. In thie cue the internal
proceaeea and operatione of individual control mite (headquarter-e divieion)

uaually are indicated in the for- of local Parr charte which eubeequently are
”town" into a coma network.

when coepilins the line. the eetabliehnent of the duration of the aepe-

ration preeente defined difficultiee. ‘lhia ia all the lore coqlicated in

that in the majority of caeea the eetabliehed nomtivee are in need of lore
pretiee deter-ination ea applied to the level of training of the ateff offi-
cera. the degree of mechanization and autonation of the work proceeeee and

alao the queation of tine. In taeee where there are no nor-ativee, probabi-
lity theory in need. tor thie purpoae three eetinatea are nede of the dura-
tion of the operation: I.“ ia the linin- (optinietic) when there are the

loot favorable conditione for perfornina the work; Tm ia the taxi-\- (peeei-

nietic) when the work ie perforned with diaadvmtageom couree of evente;

128

P0! OFFICIAL 083 will
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MGb-—0- man- man-

 

Pigure 19. run-r chert for the operetion of the control unite with reepect to
orgmitetion of the offensive (eieplified version).

Key: 1. let hour; 2. 2:! hour: 3. 36 hour; 4. 10th hour.

Tim is the soot probeble duration of the work.1 1he neen or expected duration
1‘.” ie celculeted by the for-ule

I. . . .
nun-I > 'Il;: " ‘-..‘

Texo‘ ‘ “ -‘--- m
01'
:IT

Inn or;
Wm" ~‘“.‘“‘-"‘ (2)
Pot-ale (2) ie eilpler: the difference in the reeult of the celcule-

tione perforned by one for-ale or another is enell.

1. For lore Etaie on the nethod of calculating this the eee P. c. Shechko.

V. H. Kulikov. G. 1'. Vollmv. ”Uprevleniye Voyeke-i e Ponoehch'yu Setevykh
Hetodov“ [Troop Control veins PERT Hethode], Hoeoov. Voyenizdet. 197‘.
pp 36-63.

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY \_

however. the initial data eelected for detenination of I“, are in

turn. rendoa variables; therefore errore in the calculation are poeaible. In
order to determine which date are cloeer to the expected value or, in other
worde. what the negnitude of the diepereion o in with reepect to ite expected
value. the following for-ole ie need:

2 -1 2
o -‘ Snag “n ’
6 . (1)

o2 - 0.04 (rm- I“): . (2)

or the eiqler formula

‘lhe eneller the magnitude of the diepereion it an a reeult of .the cal-
culation. the lore precieely the eetinete wee aade for the duration of the
operatione and. conaequently. r end 1' are cloeer to each other.

. lax lin
If dlere are developed noraetivee check“ out in practice, then there

ie no neceeeity to reeort to the indicated foraulaa for deternining the dura-
tion of the operation.

Ilere it ie neceeeary to begin with the fact that the preparation of the
initial data and the develop-ant of the graph occupiee a cooperatively large
mt of tile which. for the loot pert. doee not exiet during the coint or-
ganieatione period. Therefore. all of the baeic work with reepect to con-
piling the chart nuet be done before receiving the cadet nieeion.

In the preeence of initial data. the conetruction of the graph ie
realired by codining the operatione (arrowe) through evente (circlea) in a
defined eeouence fron left to right. llere the direction of the errawe ie
taken arbitrarily. and their length ie expediently eelected in ecale. Bach
operation begine and ende with an event. In order to develop thie Pm!
aodel. a detailed list of operatione ad a clear dietribution of then along
the reeponeible egente are required. In the inveetigeted exemle. theee
developed indenee are not preeented. and therefore the PERI eodel ie not
melyeed in complete form. Beginning with the poeeibilitiee. eevernl charac-
terietic vereione of the graph are used. In it an effort is aade along with
the indication of the interdependence and baaic relatione between the opera-
tione to preeerve the independence of the reeponeible agente in perforaing
theee operatione to the naxima. A eecond characterietic- of the preeented
chart coneiete in the fact that the voluu and duration of perfornance of
the operatione by the reeponeible agente are directly dependent on the tines
for coapletion of operatione by the co-ander. mun. they are placed in
defined frenee. within the liuite of which their obligatione not be per-
foned ueing the nethode of operation correeponding beet to the conditione
and aore precieely defining the volunc of their work within reaaoneble liaite.

Even in the preeence of theee cherecterietice on the chart (Figure 19)
provieion ie Iade for euch relations between the operatione of the different
reeponeible egente.

130

FOR OFFICIAL 088 C LY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Anon; thon mdoubtodly tho opotationo potion-ad by tho co-ondor (1.2.
2.5. 5.10, 10.12. 12.20. 20.25. 24.25. 25.26. 26.27) hovo docioivo oisniii-
canto on tho ontiro procooo o! ortonitotion of tho oiianoivo. '1ho tinoo and
nothodo of opotation of all of tho othor duty poroonnol aro dotorninod depend-

ing on tho proparotion and otylo of. opotation of tho counndor and his
knovlodp of tho oituation.

In addition to thio conotntly oporatins tmction. thoro aro othoro
which oloo havo a‘dofinod offoct on tho tinoo and quolity of tho oporotiono
with roopoct to tho orwitotion of. codat. hoot froquontly. tho rolotion io
oncountorod in practico whoro tho oubooquont opotation cannot ho otortod un-
til tho work of anothor ofiitor hoo boon conplotod. m. typo of rolation.
in opito of tho granting of tho nocoooary indopondonco in parlor-int tho opo-
tationo to tho rooponoihlo agonto. playo a oignificant rolo in tho organiza-
tion of coinat oporationo. In patticulor. until tho dooion hoo boon ox-
plainod (1.2) prolininary ordoro cannot to aim (5.6, 5.7. 3.8); without
porforning tho calculationo of tho tioo for arsonitotion of coin: (2', h).
it io iapoooiblo to tivo inotructiono to tho duty poroonnol (2.5); without
ovaluotins tho onow (5.10). it io inpoooiblo to doiino tho niooiono for tho
roconnaiooanco oubmito (11.11) and oo on. Proctico indicatoo thot tho noro
inquontly tho :ivon typo oi rolotion io oncomtorod hotvoon the oporotiono.
tho nro coqlax it in to ochiovo o roduction in tho tinoo oi pcrioraanco of

tho oporation ao o vholo. In tho grooh tho sivon rolotion for tho oporationo
io dopictod by linoo nado of pointo.

Cloooly rolatod to it io tho function which indicatoo that tho cooplo-
tion of ono oporation dopondo on tho conplotion of tho other oporotiono por-
fornod by mothor tooponoiblo asont. tor ox-plo. tho qualitativo ootinoto
of tho onony by tho conandor (5.10) can ho cowlotod only ottor obtaining
tho data and calculationo on tho onoq iron tho roconnoiooanco oitioor (1.3';
6.9); tho ovoluotion by tho cmdot 0! hit on troopo (lo. 12) can to con-
plotod undot tho condition of coqlotion of tho calculation of tho tino of
advanconant of tho ttoopo to tho lino for going ovor to tho attack (10. 16)
and calculation at tho ratio of tho iorcoa ad notoriol (13) ltd on on. lloro
it ia poooiblo oloo to includo tho typo of tolation whcro cowlotion of tho
oporntion dopondo on rocoiving tho nocoooary inotructiono from tho cox-odor
(tho chiof of otaff). 0n tho chart thio function io indicatod by a dottod
lino with two crooo otrohoo.

During tho organization of codat, otton tho nocoooity io oncountorod
for joint (oioultmoouo) participotion of tho rooponoiblo agento in tho por-
ioroanco oi m oporation. It in choractoriotic for the porter-moo of tho
wot cowlox opotationo (tho calculation of tho ratio of tho forcco and
notoriol, ootination of tho oituotion. ond oo on). 1ho conbination of tho
force- of tho dittotont rooponoihlo "onto in tho oolution of ouch problo.
inoureo tho hoot conditiono (or tho rodnction of. tho tint ad inrovonont of
tho quolity of tho vork porfornod. lho ouo typo of intorrolation which io
conoidorod togothor with it it tho nocoooity for coordination (noro procioo
dotornination) homon tho rohponoihlo agonto of tho initial dato on por-
tot-moo of tvo difforont oporationo. 0n tho chart the given typo of tola-
tion in indicatod by a dottod lino with throo tranovoroo narko.

131
'0'. orncm. US! ONLY
FOR omcm. US! ONLY

Toblo 12

 

l |. 3'5. 0. 9. ll. '(U‘lﬂ’ﬂ. \3.8). (0.9). (9.") RIO

l1. «laws. as u .m. (they. (1924', was

«as

2 I. m a. lo. M. l . (m. (a ). mo}

nouns. as 10.: . am). m n.- mm
{96334328,

233

8 ('13. (2.5). {3105. now 2G0
no

222

1. lo. I
20. ”3.2:: 20. 212' (I233. (N30. (N35). 12515)

N
4 kg. $1.1m; ‘ “13.55).“1) WIS). "3.10)

. as J H826) _
:53: ka. 14. Is, wig: {ﬁﬂkﬁﬁ um,

Kay: 1. No. of path 3. Oporationa tor-ins tho poth
2. Coqonont ovonto 4. Duration of tho path in ninutoo

During tho couroo of tho orgmirotion of tho oonhat oporationo. tho
typo of rolatim io onoountorod whoro ono oparation ia inoaod on tho othor
and io porfornod in parallol. "dovotailod." lhio typo of rolation oxiato
batman tho ootination oi tho oituation (5. 1o; 10. 12: 12. 20) md tho

formation of tho docioion. In tho graph it io indicatod (partially) by tho
dart“ 113.0

'lha cloar roproaontation on tho rm nodal of tho rolation hotvoon opo-
rationa pot-ito cloaror rogulation of tho activity of oach rooponoihlo agont.
oxcluaion of tho nonayotonatic intruoion of no oporation in mothor. and tho

crrtion of conditiono for plannod porforaanco of hio oporotiono by oath
of ioor.

0n tho prooontod chart (Figaro l9) fiva patho (flan) oro ioolotod
which aro baaod on tho hoginnins and ondins avonto (ooo ‘l'ablo 12).

Anon: thooo patho tho lonsoot to tho third path. which ia tho critical
ono. In our «aqua it ia not vory oharply difforont with roopoct to ito
nannitudo fro- tho othor patho. ‘lho critical path, which io outlinod on tho
graph coins a dotblo or boldfaced lino. io tho total duration of tho oporo-
tiono which liait tho ontira procooo of tho oporation, dotorninc tho gonoral
tino of ito cowlotion. lhoroforo, in incroaoing tho oporational officioncy
in tho work of tho control unita. ohm all roducing (docroaoing) tho dura-
tion of tho critical path. has docioivo oisnificanco. In ordor to oolvo
thio problon. o coaprohonoivo analyoio io Iado of tho contont and tho proca-
duro for tho porfornanco of oach oporation locatod on tho critical path. and

tho optinal voroion of tho organization of work io dotorninod on tho booio
of thio.

132

. FOR OFFICIAL 083 «.30.!
'0! OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

mo optioioation of tho Pll'i' chort it tho soot cowlor otago ond io
aiood at rodocin. tho totoi duration of tho work. tho hoaio proooduroa (or
ootioitation cm ho tho ionovinu variation of tho ooqoonca of portorlonoo
of tho individuoi operation. or in othor vorda. rooxonination of tho otruc-
turo (topoioy) oi tho notvork: rodiotrihotion of tho officers: roplooooant
of cortoin oiiorta by othora: oxcluaion of tho oocondary (mnocoooory) opo-

rationo from tho notvorh: noxiou- ooordinotion in tioo of tho porforunto of
ditioront Iooooroo. and oo on.

nocroooing tho duration of tho critiool path (1") ia not a one-tin

action. It ouot ho carriod out conotontiy. for tho cowonont oiooonto or tho
initial dota dotoroinins ito unitudo vory. In porticulor, tho tothniooi
oquipoont of tho control pointo md mita varioo. tho 1ml of oaatory of tho
co-ondor ond tho otafi oiiicoro io ioorovod. ond tho oothodo of thoir opora-
tion on inprovod. All of thio codoiood with ohiiifui organization of work
hoo o dooioivo oiiott on docroooins tho oagnitudo of tho criticoi path.

mo co-ondor and tho chioi oi otafi. hue-tin; tho criticai path. aro
in a pooition to coocontroto imic ofiorto on tho oporotiono on thio path.
ochiovios maxim roduotion of thoir portoroonco tho. In othor vordo. o
ohorp boundary in drawn homoo tho oaoic nod ooooodary itooo. I! it tut-no
out that tho durotion of tho critical path oxcoodo tho ootabliohod “no for
cowlotion of olonnio; of tho codut oporationo. thoo muuroo oro tohoo to

rodoco tho upondod tiuo by clinging tho ioyoot of tho iorcoo or «in; in-
provod nothodo oi oporation.

0thor potha aro noocritical (mtruood). lot all of tho oporationa
of thooo potho thoro aro tioo rooorvoo. “I.“ nocoooory thio poroito run-i-

nation oi tho york load of tho moonoihio agooto. onoblio; tho. during tho
tioo rooorvoo to potion othor oooratiooa.

'lho diiioronco hotvoon tho durotion of tho criticol path 1‘" ond tho
duration oi tho othor potho 1'1“) ia tho totol tioo rooorvo of tho path
Pz(‘):

’m) " 7c: ' ’zu) '
Pl(i) indicatoo tho gout of tin. within tho linito of which n in-

crouo in tho dorotion of tho oporotiono io abiooiolo without oinincont
oii’oot on tho totol cowlotioo tioo of tho pioo. For oxooolo. tho tine ro-
oom vith roopoct to tho path I.‘ io P(‘)-L3(cr)-L‘-260-230-10 aim-too.

it it poooibio to doiioo tho ti. rooarvo u appliod to ooch ovont
(Pt). Por thio ourpooo. tho oarlioot (oi tho poooibio) tioo oi hooionin; :ho

cowlotion of tho ovoot (N1) ood tho lotoot poooihlo ti-o o! ooqlotioo oi‘
tho ovooto t'“) on rockonod:

’u) ' ‘um ' ‘pm'
133

M ORIGIN. US! OIL!
POI ONICIAL "8| ONLY

Table 13
0.“, o .I .. . ”III I I I no
I”, o In II 4.174. 01 II-IIIIoIIIII ‘2Io
I..,,I,.., oIII-I III IIsonanooo

for the ewenta on the critical path. there ie no tine recem. an a
r’eault of which t.(n-t’“). 0n the pneented graph. t’“) for the ewcnta (1)

will be equal to nero - the beginning of planing ("the codaat order of the
aenior officer ha been received”): for the event (3) thin tint will be de-
fined ae the at- 20+lO-30 Iinutea fro. the tine of receiving the coﬁet order
of the oenior officer. here the tinne of the evente are calculated beginning
with the minu- duretion of ell the preceding operationa.

‘lhe tinta of leteet coqletion of the ewenta are defined ae the differ-
ence between the duration of the 'criticel path (2‘0 Iainutee) ltd the duration
of the aegnnnta located between the inwoatigated end final events.

The melyeia data ueually are exprcued in the for-- of ‘l'eble 13.

In addition to calculating dIo tint mam of the eventa, tho nccee-
city for deter-ining the tinc reeervc with rupect to each operation in en-
countered. for thia purpone it ia naceoeary to define the naxim adniaoible
tine of cowletion of each operation beginning with the duration of the
cornaeponding "criticel" operation. for which. an ie known. the tine reeorve
in equal to zero.

for emle. in order to deter-nine the operation. (7.13). it in necea-
nary that the enccnaoive interrclated operation. be traced. ‘lhc baaic
reopcnoiblc agent here ie the etaff officer. he cen proceed with the per-
for-men of operation (7.”) after the cmletion of oporatione (1.3). (2.5).
(5.7). that ia. do ninuten after receiving the codat nioaion. Initially he
filla out the data for hic own troopa. and than when another ctaff officer
beconco involved in this work. they continue the calculntion jointly. ‘lhio
officcr can ba included in the operation only ‘5 ninuten after the beginning
of planing.

when eotinating the troopc. the giwcn calculation ia required for tho
c-mder approxinately in the niddle of the operation (10. 12). ‘lhua. tho
roaponaible agent hae 63-(lMlO+lZ)-ZJ ninutee for conciling the calculation.
lbwever. in thia cane the tin reeem for it in a total of 3 ninutae. and
if the «under triee lore :rqcioely to dcfinc the proudure for evaluating

13‘

m OHICIAI. US! Ole»!
NR O'PRCMI. US! ONLY

hia own troopa and ho noodo to calculato tho ratio of tho forcoa and natoriol
nt tho hoginning of tho oporntion (lo. 12). than tho rooponaiblo agont cannot
roprooont thia calculation in coqlotod torn. rho praaantod oxanla claarly
indicatoo tho advantago of tho mr planing. It oliora tho poaaihility of
objoctivoly dotornining tho ainiom roquirod tint for tho poriornanco of ono
oporation or anothor and at tho oana tino avoiding oubjoctivity in aotinoting
tho oporating tinoa. Only by cowrohonaivo calculation and onalyoia of tho
intorrolationo or all of tho oparationa it tho pooaibility croatod for clini-
nating bottlonocko whon organiaing codat oparationa md oharply roducing tho
that for tho parloraonca of tho baaic noaourao.

Lot no aocuno in tho tirat voraion of thia oporation that thoro in a
aoquonco of tho porionanca of tho oporotiono by tho atai‘f officor aa iollowa:
(1.2). (2.5). (5.6).(l.3'). (6.9). that ia. aftor tho prolininary ordoro aro
dolivorad to tho raconnaiaaanco aubmit. ho procooda with tho atudy md oati-
nation of tho anon. no a raault, tho oporation (5. lo) - tho aatiooto at
tho anon by tho conandor - waa alnoot coqlotod boioro tho ataﬂ officor
rocoivod tho data. lhia oituation croatod a throat to tho tinoly porfornanto
of tha oporation (S. 10). In ordor to provont thia. tho following oolution
io claarly providod for on tho chart: a chugo in aaquanco and tino of bo-
ginning of tho oporationa of tho otafi officor. 'lho oporotiona (1.3') wont
into iirot placa. that ia. on rocoiving tho niaoion tho atatf officor woo
i-odiatoly own“ to tho co-andor. and during tho courao of oxplmation

of tho oioaion to tho lattor. ha parlor-ad o otudy and ovaluation of tho
onaqy.

Approxinatoly tho ono aituation waa croatad with tho partonancc of
tho oporationa (7. ll; 13. 10 and 16.20) by tho othor ataff officor. By tho
tinoa dotinod by tho duration of tho othor oporationa connoctod with than.
thoy could not bo poriornad by ono non. ha a roault, tho nocoaaity aroao for
tho rodiatribution lid giving of oporationa (16.20) to tho chiof of ata“.

Anothor approach to rodncing tho tinaa ia notod whon porforning tho
oporation (2. 5). horo oporotion (1.3) io alao includod in tho graph .. tho
plotting of tho aituation and tho nioaion rocoivad on tho aocond chart. It
ia poriorood ai-nltanoouoly with uplanation of tho niaaion by tho co-andor.
which porlita hi. aignilicantly to roduoa tho tiaa (or giving inatructiono
to tho otai‘f officor and aorvica chioia. In thia caao. thoy have tho poo-
oibility of taking a oigniiicant part of tho data tron tho otaff officor.

A caroiul calculation of tho ti-o morvoa ponita otudy of the ot-
ficora and a a‘botntiatod approach to dotonining tho aoqucnco oi porforn-
mco of tho oporationo. achiovount oi oxpodiont diatribution of tho opora-
tiona .ong tho otticora. and oatabliahncnt of tho actual tin» for thoir
boginning no onding. tho prooonco of tho ti- calcnlation not only facili-
tatoa tho diatribution o! aoaigmanto .cng tho rooponoiblo ogonta. but it
olao ponita corrooponding dotar-ination of tho nothodo of porioning tho
oporationo which inauro thoir cowlotion in tho availablo tino.

135

M ORIGIN. US! 01“.?
POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY

M u vault of tho recalculation. it 1! 900.151. to obtain the optiul
union. of tht notation. with rennet to outniution at tho coétt open-
tionv. with mpoot to nah operation. the uriiut tin. of the “ginning of
tho opontion it uttbiithod um with the latent ndniuihit tin“ of honin-
nin and main. of operation. and thc rtum tin. ptnitting the ”Home.
of on. optntion or mother to he put of! vithout braking tho find dud-
liho. ‘lhio optiniud chart in dolinud to all of ﬂu ntpmiblc cunt. and
um. u tht opteific pm of operations for :11 of the control ofiieon.

Ihu. tho willful. an of diffcront nthodt of ormintion of 00th in

out of tht condition. of tin” punt-mu by tht cmtrol unit. of their
“.U‘mo

136

'0! OFFICIAL US! 05.!
FOR omcm ”8! ONLY

cum h «111mm AND “$398M ”WARN DATA "Ill“ HISPANIC PC AND
mm 1!!! CW! U 000A! ”M10”

1. Contant of tho Situation Data and loquitoaonto lapoood on It

During tho docioion-aahin; and tho ilplonontation of tho mining noo-
onroa with raapoct to ttoop control in coahot on tho baaio of tho docioion.
tho co-andor and ataif nnot havo. avalnato nd conoidot variono oitnation
data. Hith all tho varioty. thooo data ato proopod according to tho oloaonto
noting up tho coahat aitnotionx tho anon. our on troopo; noiphboto: radia-
tion oitnationo: tamin: hydroaotooroloaical conditions: tino of ya: ad
tino of day: data on tho ocononic condition oi tho coIhat mo and tho oo-
cial-political coapooition oi a population.

lho onoqy in tho aoat iaportant oloaont of tho codat oituation. In-
aoaoch at my hattlo io a tvo-uay coabat ptocooo. oonatant doap otody of tho
onoq by tho co-andoro ad otaﬂ on our lovolo in roquirod; othotvioo it io
inpoaoihlo to count on oiiactivo application of our noano oi doottnction and.
conooquantly. auccooo of tho codat opatationo.

It io nocaaaary for any oo-andot or ataﬂ to know tho optiaal anomt
oi roliahla intonation daout tho codat cowooition and tho ottncturo of tho
pooping oi onoay iotcoa ond natotiol. tho locationo and donoo of roadinoao
oi tho on-y nucloar voapona. tho dogroa of couplotonooo and oupport of hia
«bonito (unito). tho natal opitit of hit pouonnol. tho troop control aya-
too. tho anginootin; oqnipnont of tho pooitiona occupiod by tho anon and
alao tho poaaihlo natnro ond nothodo of onoqy oporationo hoiota tho hopin-
ning and during tho contoo of codaat. It io oopocially iaportut to know
tho attitndo of tho onoly poroonnol toward tho .ivon at. tho intomlationo
hotvoon tho onliatod non and tho oiticora. tho aocial-political cowooition.
tho dostoo of codpat training. ctoativo. volitional and organization capabi-
litioo of tho co-andoro ad tho otahility of tho potoonnol in a coqlox
oituation. ‘lho coﬁot capabilitiaa. tho intontiona and prohahlo notoro of
tho onany opotationo in tho futon, tho ottong and «oak pointo. tho noot
inortant tatgoto tho doottuction of vhich will ahatply roduca tho onony
coﬁat capability .. all of thooo arc malod on tho halo of thoao data.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

ﬂowovor. in oll coooo oil of tho conondoro ond otoffo mot conoidor
that tho onow will olwoyo bo otriwing to hido hio grouping ond hio inton-
tiono froo thou ond oloo to confuoo thon. 1horoforo. oo o rolo thoro in no
oxoou infornotion aout tho onony: on tho controry. thoro io olwoyo o ohort-
ogo of inforootion. ond tho coaadoro ond otoffo out bo okillful in drowing
tho corroct oonoluoiono on th- grouping ond intontiono of tho onoov oporo-
tiono by tho owoiloblo opotty doto. Undor oodorn oonditiono, oll co-ondoro
ad otoffo not givo prinory ottontion to tho loot dotoilod poooiblo dio-
cowory of tho nuoloor roooorooo of tho onoqy (to individnol woopono ond
lounchoro). olthough tho othor forooo ond notoriol of tho onow in their tone
ond on tho flonlto copoblo of influoncing tho ooobot oiooion hovo boon otudiod
with tho roquirod dotoil. 1hoir dotoilo will bo difforont in difforont typos
of coohot ond difforont control lowolo. In tho oolpony ond bottolion lovol.
for oxooplo. doto oro noodod on tho onoqy toking up tho dofonoiwo to tho
individuol firo point ond plotoon otrong point. ad tho ouporior ocholon nood
inforootion om: tho onow with looo dotoil.

1ho oo-ondor ond otoff otudy thoir own troopo with opproxiutoly tho
oooo indoxoo on tho onony. 'ihooo indoxoo oro oo followo: pooition. cowot
cowooition. grouping ond oiooiono to bo oxocutod; tho coobot copocity of
tho troopo. including whothor thoy oro ot full otrongth, tho prooonco ond
condition of thoir oquipnont. tho politicol-oorol condition ad tho dogroo
of irrodiotion of tho poroonnol: tho pooition ad ototo of tho body. tho poo-
oibilitioo with roopoct to bringing up ntoriol. rondoring Iodicol oid. ond
no on. Sioultaoouoly with otudying thooo doto. o oolculotion io oodo of tho
ouatitotivo ad quolitotiwo rolotiono of tho forcoo ond utoriol of our own
troopo on tho onoly: tho infloonco of tho pooition on tho portornnco of tho
ototod niooion io ootaliohod. whot rogrouping Iuot bo carried out io dotor-
Iinod. o coloulotion of tho tioo roqoirod for thio io nodo, the cot-bot copo-
bilitioo of tho troopo oro colcolotod. oopociolly with roopoct to tho oppli-
cotion of tho aono of dootroction. ad oloo nounroo oro plonnod with
roopoct to inroving thou pouibilitioo.

‘l‘ho noighboro oro otodiod oo thot in tho finol onolyoio it con be do-
toroinod to whot dogroo thoir pooition. cmzoition ond noturo of oporotiono
will proooto fulfill-at of our own conbot niooion. Initiolly tho noighboro
on tho right ad loft oro otudiod ond thon tho troopo oporoting ohood. Dur-
ing this otody it in diocoworod whoro ad in whot grouping thoy oro locotod.
thoir coaot probloo ond tho dooioiono undo ond oloo tho rooulto of thoir
oxocution ad intonation conditiono.

1ho rodiotion oituotion which hon dovolopod u o rooult of tho poo-
oiblo onlicotion by tho onony of nucloor woopono io otudiod by tho recon-
noiooonoo. forocooting ond dooiootric control doto. 'iho typo. tino ond
nothod of rodiooctiwo contoninotion of tho codaot zone. the distribution of

tho rodiotion lowolo in it ad how thoy will wory with tioo oro ootobliohod
horo. -

138

M OFFICIAL USE OIILY
POI OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

‘t

he ‘e reeult of etudying the enueereted dete. the conclueione with re-
epect to the eethode of operetiun of the troope when cerrying out the coebet
nieeion ere note precieely defined. end neeeuree ere planned with reepect to

protection of the troope froe nucleer weepone. including elieinetion of the
eoneequencee of their epplieetion.

‘lhe terrein ee en eleeent of the eituetion UGO! eodern conditione hee
ecquired etill greeter eipificence then eerlier with the coeplete notoriee-
tion md nethenieetion of the troope. It ie etudied with reepect to our
entire coebet cone. lhe co-ender end eteff ere required eoet frequently to
know ite neture end type of relief. the pretence of neturel end ertificiel
obeteclee end hydroengineering etructuree. the conditione for protection
egeinet nucleer weepone. ceeouflege. oheervetion. conduct of fire end orien-
tetion of the preeence end condition of roede. the neture of the nail. the
peeeibility of the terrein end conditione of eeneuvering the troope off roed.
the preeence of building uteriele. eourcee of weter eupply end topogeodetic
pointe. Speciel ettention hee been given to predicting chengee which cen oc-
cur ee e remit of the epplicetion of the neene of cowet by the oppoeing
eidee. he e reeult of etudying the terrein. ite effect on the operetionn of
our own troope end the enemy ie eetebliehed. and it ie deter-ined how beet
to uee it when cerrying out the codiet eieeion.

the hydro-eteorologicel conditione ere etudied to detereine to whet
degree weether conditione end the weether forecut. the force end direction
of the preveiling winde. the precipitetion. river conditione (cenele. lekee
end eweqe) end eo on influence the perfornence of the coebet nieeion. Spe-
ciel ettention hee been given to the preeence end condition of hydroengineer-
ing etructuree end the poeeibility of flooding the terrein ee e reeult of
their deetruction fro- nucleer end fire etrihee, end during winter operetione.
the propertiee of the ice end enow cover.

'lhe the of yeer end the of dey ere eleo etudied fro- the point of
view of their effect on the coﬁet operetione of our own troope end the eneqy
end dcteninetion of the eeeeuree which met be token to decreeee the nege-
tive effect. 1hue, for ere-pie. during operetione in the epring eeeeon
when roede ere bed, eeeeuree ere eleo plenned with reepect to ieproving the
peeeebility of our troope, end during winter operetione. neeeuree to prevent
froetbite of the pereonnel. when etudying the tine of day. the length of
the dey end night ere firet of ell deternined, end epecific ueeeuree ere
plenned with reepect to the trmition fro- dey operetione to night opere-
tione end beck. During operetione et night. in eddition, neeeurwe ere plen-
ned with reepect to illtneinetion of the terrein end ceeouflege end eleo the

order of obeervetion of the enm. orientetion end terget indicetion ere
determined.

when etudying the econoeic oonditione in the eree end the eociel-
politicei cowoeition of the populetion. epeciel ettention ie given to the
poeeibility of using the repeir enterprieee by our own troope to repeir the
enteriel thet hee foiled. the nedicel inetitutione for treeteent of the

139

POI OFFICIAL USE CNLY
FOR OﬂlCIAl. 088 03“

wounded ad tick. the tranaport aadia. fuel and food reaarvea. for troop eup-
port. It ia aleo inportant to deteraine the aeane of aatabliahing the proper
interrelatione with the local population coneidering ite claea and national
oonpoeition. traditiona and cuatona. political nooda and attitude toward our
troope and toward the war aa a whole. Heaeuree are planned accordingly. with
reapect to increaaing the vigilace. naintaining order in the rear. atrength-
ening the eecurity of the control bodiee. eapacielly in the praaenca of a
population that ia ill-diepoead toward no in the operatione cone.

'lha enuerated eituation data and the aeaaurae following froa then are
needed by the «undue ad ataff not only at ate operative but aleo the
tactical levele. lhey are aadatory. for crawle. for the battalion coaaandor
ad ataff operating in the forward detail. in the airborne lending in the rear
of the many. during encircleaant. and an on. ‘lhie intonation will bu of
vital intereet to the coqay co-adare and platoon leadare when doing recon-
naieeance in the rear of the anew. Ignoring than. judging by the experience
of peat were. a a rule. hae led to eeriou conaequancae.

‘lhaee are the ale-ante and eituation data atudiad and taken into ac-
count by the coaander and ataffa during coaat troop control. It ia nacea-
eary. however. to note that co the reeourcae of arned coaat have been
developed. they have changed. which ie ahown in the etrengthening of the role
of ouch eituation ale-ante a radiation ad othera. however. with all the
variety. the eituation ale-ante ad the data nahing then up are clearly inter-
connected ad mtually dependent. and it in inpoeaible. for exaqla. to etudy
the anany. hie troope and the radiation aituation apart iron the conditione
of the terrain or the tine. however. the affect of the different ale-onto
of the aituation on one ale-ant of decieion or another ca be different and
even oppoeita. In practice it often happena. for exaapla. that by the con-
ditione of the terrain the nain atrika in an offenaive ia advantageoualy node
in one direction. and with reepect to the nature of the anew grouping on the
defenaive. in the other. In order to per-it ouch contradictiona. the art of
the connandcr ad the ataffa. their analytical ainda. the capacity to find
the Iain. deciaiwe factor in the aituation and to lake the noet expedient
decinion acquire primary aignificance. It ia ilportant aleo to conaider
anther thing. that the obtained infatuation nut correapond to e nuaer of
require-ante. the act inportant of edaich are the following: tinelineae of
obtaining intonation. conplateneaa. reliability and praciaion.

Theee typee of require-ante were aleo iapoaed on the aituation data
previoualy. low. they are acquiring a high degree of new aiuificance.
Pirat of all. thie pertaina to the tinelinaaa of the arrival of the aituation
data. It auat aupport the co-ader'e coaat decieion aaking or nore pre-
ciaa determination of the deciaion during the couree of coﬁat in a tine
which offera the poeaibility of delivering the niaaiona to the reaponaiblc
atenta, preparation of peraonnal and ntericl for battle. preceding the ener
in opening fire and launching the attack. The coaat experience of peat ware
teachea that late aituation data. an a rule. in ueeleaa. lta me hae oiten

led to errora in the conndar’a decieion with all of the rceultat aerioue
conaequencee.

1‘0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

In aodern cachet. ea a reeult at the increaaed neneuvarability at the
troope. the apeed at the coebat operatione and the ability at targete quick-
ly to change their location. the eignitieance at the tine factor when
gathering the eituation data hae increaaed greatly. ‘lhie tactor acquiree
apeciel inportanoe when trying to prevent delivery to the enemy at nuclear
weapane euch ea tactical aieeilee. nuclear artillery and eircratt. Aa haa
already been noted. the waapane and rocket launchere can be put into poeition
to tire within a few ainutee. Under theee conditione. in order to prevent an
eneay nuclear etrika on our troope. reconnaieeence data nuet be obtained by
the etatt during theae tew Iinutea. it nuet be evaluated and reported to the
co-ander. who nuet aka a decieion either to pereonally deatroy the anew
tutorial and weapone at deetruction. or to deliver the aieeion to the other
etatt. which auet than carry out the aieaion. Proa thie it ia abvioua whet
high attieiency ia required at the Iodarn atett when governing and analysing
eituation data. he tor doing battle with anew aviation. here eucceee or
tailure will atten be decided in a letter at eecande.

Along with thie. the co-ander needa canplete data on the eituation
which will penit hil to know. the etete of attaire coeprahenaively. to sale
a well-toundad cadet decieion and correctly react to changea in the eitua-
tion during the courea of battle. nm coupletaneee and degree at detailing
of intonation tout each eituation ale-ant will at any tine depend on the
troop eituation. the nature at the cadaat aieaion received. the degree of
knowledge at the eituation by the co-ander and the etatt at the given tine
and other canditione. lheretare it ie iapaeeible to have ready tornulaa tar
cannandere and atatta tar every variety of cadet activity with reapect to
a given problaa. It ia only paaaibla to etreee that all at the atatt atrive
to obtain ae mch detailed data an paaaible about the eneqy ad have what ia
ueuelly eutficient intonation about our own troope with dateile two levele
lower. that ie. in the battalion to the platoon. in the regiment to the con-
peny. and ac an. More detailed date are required only in individual cuee.

Any co-ander raquiree aoet oaaplate data on each element at a eitua-
tion during the period at preparation at taint operatione. when setting the
cadet decieion during the oourae at taint operationa he will in turn be
intereeted in information about the eleaanta at the eituation which at the
preaent tiae have the greeteet effect on troop operation and require lore
preciaa definition or the alteration at a prawioualy nede decieion. In
aodern combat thie will be intonation about the nuclear weapons at the
enaay. for they conecituta the baeia tor the coin: capability of hie troope.
and the aucceaa at the partaraance at the cadet liaeion depende in turn on
their deatruction by our own troope. Otten the date on the terrain. the
radiation eituation. the weather. the eupply at our troope with fuel. a-uni-
tion. md no on will have it not deciaive eigniticance, then very iwartent
einiticanca. The ebaanca of certain date on the eituation daea not relieve
the camnder at the obligation to lake (nore preciaely define) a decieion
in tine or to take aeaauree with reapect to troop control arieing fro. the
eituation on the baaia of it.

161

FOR OFFICIAL 05! JULY
POI ORIGIN. "8! ONLY

In modern coinat. reliability and accuracy of the situation data. that
is. conplete correspondence of then to the actual activity. have acquired in-
portant significmce.

With respect to the degree of reliability. the situation date are
divided into coapletsly reliable. probable. doubtful and falae. lhese data
are considered entirely reliable which are received fron several sources or
napsated fron one reliable source. and which cmlately correepond to the
developed situation and cause no doubt. lhe probable data include the data
which correspond to the situation nd the already available infornation. but
were obtained fron only one or several sources needing checking and additional
confirnation. The domtful data are the data which contradict the inforna-
tion previously received fron other sources and therefore requiring checking
and Iandatory confirnation. false data are the data explicitly not corre-
sponding to the situation and contradicting the intonation received fron
other sources.

Of course. out of the enuented types of data. the entirely reliable
data have the greatest value. Only with consideration of these data ia it
possible to naka efficient use of the available forces and naterial and to
achieve the goal of the conbat. Any overaights in evaluating the situation.
on the basis of the growing destructive power of nodern coabat neans. can lead
to undesirable consequences - unjustifiable loasee and failure to carry out
the coiat nission. msrafore. no co-ander or staff officer has the right
to violate the requirement of correctness and accuracy of reporting the
eituation. to color reality no latter how unpleasant it nay be. Accordingly.
it is appropriate to reasdur the following bahests of V. I. Lenin:

"...lhe Haudst aust consider real life. the precise facts of reality...M
"me noet dangerous thing in war ... is underestination of the eneny and feel-
ing contth that we are atronger.“ "... Only when we learn to overcone.
will we be unafraid to recomire our weineea and deficiencies. will we truly.
however and the aituation. look oureelves directly in the face."3 ‘Iha clear
execution of theae behesta is a utter of honor for each officer. his ser-
vice ad party duty. and one of the mat inportnt indexes of high ataff
integrity.

In realizing the indicated requires-ante. it is necessary constantly to
consider that under the effect of the lateet nateriel and nethods of coﬂat
the value of situation data required at each control level will greatly
increase. In a mder of cases this volune, especially during codoat. can be
not only equal to the renaining value of operations with respect to submit
control. but also exceed it. In addition. the data received during the

l. V. I. Lenin. Cowlete Collected Works. Vol 31. page 136.
2. V. I. Lenin. Cowlete Collected Works. Vol bl. page 166.
3. V. I. Lenin. Cowlete Collected Works. Vol Ma. page 309.

162

ml ORIGIN. USE ONLY
POl OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

courae of cowat change quickly and eharply; they not be gathered fron nua-
roue eourcee. free a larger epace than before with reapect to front and depth
and in ehort tinee.

he never before. the co-ander and etaff are now required to have

akill not only in quickly and correctly evaluating the available eituation
data but aleo predicting and coneidering the changee in it in time: above all,
they nuet have akin when creating a eituation that is advantageous for then-
aelvea. Tor thia purpoae, of couree. it ie neceeaary to inrove the operat-
ing proceaa of the «under and the eteff with the eituation data in all
phuee. the bait onea of which are the following: gathering the eituation
data free different aourcee; proceeaing theee data. that in, putting the: in
a for! that ie convenient for evaluation. etudy. and output, that ia, a report
on thie data to the co-ander, the superior officer (headquartera), and in-

forning the aubordinatea and interacting troopa and neighbora of then.

All of theee phaeee of working with the eituation data are intercon-
nected and are carried out. an e rule. einultaneoualy. let ue conaider then
in aneuhat more detail.

2. Procedure for Gathering Situation Data

1he co-ander gathere eituation date pereonally through the ateffe md
chiefe of the coﬁat arne (eervicae). Above all date are gathered which are
required for neking a deciaion or note preciee definition of a deciaion.
Before eating the decieion. the «under can define in hie inetructiona to
the chief of ataff what data are nieeing. and by what tile the data nuet be
prepared and delivered to hire.

me chief of eteff organiaee the work with reepect to gathering eitua-
tion data directly. he eatebliahea the total value and the content of the
intonation about the eituation required to ineure control of the ewmita in
coebat. he definee the apecific goala for the ataff officere with reepect to
the data gathering. In addition. the chief of ataff can eetablieh the aourcee
end the nethode of obtaining the required infomtion.

‘Ihe intonation about the eituation ie obtained free different eourcee
(nee Figure 20). which, in turn. includea the following: obeervation of the
cadet field. the co-mdere and ataff of the emordinatee. the attached.
eupporting end neighboring eubunite; the reconnaiaeance eubunite carrying out
gromd reconneiaeance and the reconneiaaence aircraft; the euperior chiefa
and headquartere; prieonere. deeertere and local reaidente; varioue typee of
nateriale and docueente (referencee. nape. geographic deacriptione. and no
on) of both our own production and thoee captured fro. the enemy.

Byery eource hea different eignificance with reepect to both quantity
and value of infornation. Bouever, with reapect to purpose. they can be pro-
visionally divided into prinary nd eecondary. The prinery aourcee include
thoee which conduct direct obeervatione of acne target about which it ie

1‘3

P03 OFFICIAL USE C‘lLY
m OHIOIM. US! ONLY

neceeeery to obtein intoreetion end eleo heve direct contect with it. Iheee
eourcee on be people (the eon-ender. eteff officer. obeerver. the pilot of

e reconneieeence eircreft, e ecout from non; the reconneieeence group or
petrol. e prieoner. e deeerter, locel ree‘ident, end eo on) or technicel eeene
(reder. redio reconneieeence reeourcee. redietion. engineering. neteorolo-
sicel. eound entering reconneieenee. end eo on). 'Ihe eecondery eourcee ere
thoee which do not obeem the objecte or evente directly but report the
generelieed dete on then received before thie iron the prieery eourcee. Iheee
include eubordinetee, euperior. edjecent end interectin; coneendere end eteffe,
the chiete of codaet'erle end eervicee, the co-endent'e eervice egenciee.
civil defenee egenciee end eleo their reterenoee, deecriptione. topoarephie
nope. captured coebet docueente. end eo on.

 

Figure 20. Sourcee of obteinin; eituetion dete in cadet by the couendere
end etef! heedquertere.

Key: 1. Air reconneieeence 13. Subordinete co-mdere end eteff
2. Reconneieeence ednnite 14. Co-ender, eteff end other control
(sroupe. petrole, end eo on) bodice
3. Prieonere end deeertere 15. meemtion poet
‘. locel reeidente 16. Superior cot-endere end eteff
5. Ceptured coin: deem-ente heedqmrtere
6. Captured nteriel 17. Civil defence egeneiee end locel
7. Redio recomeieeence neene forcee
8. leder reconneieeence 18. Steff of edjecent end interectins
9. Televieion reconneieeence troope
10. Engineering end cheuicel 19. Topogrephic lepe
reconneieeence 20. Referencee, deecriptione. bulletine
11. Redietion end beeteriolo- end no on
sicel reconnei’eeence 21. Oo-endent'e eervice egenciee
12. Sound uterins reconneie-
eence
1“

FOR ORIGIN. 083 081.!
m OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

'lho coiaat experience of World War I! and the practical training exor-
ciooo indicate the highly inportant aignificanco of the couple: utilimion
(coininotion) by the wonder and tho otaff of all evailblo oourcoa con-
eidorins both their pooitivo proportioo and their doficioncioa. ‘lhua. for
oxanlo. valuable intonation about the location of nuclear weapona or anony
rooorvoa can be obtained by tho ataff by radio fron onboard an air recon-
naiooanco aircraft. however. it io ilpooeiblo not to conoidor that the
pilot cannot alwayo vioually exactly determine tho ndor of detected tar-
uoto. diatinsuioh a falao target fro. a real one. Therefore. in order to be
convinc ad of tho roliéility and accuracy of tho intonation received. no e
rule. it met bo oonfiraod. eupploaented and aore prociaoly defined uoins
oovoral oonrcoo.

hora. all of tho otaff auot give priaery attention to the akillful
uao of nodorn technical reconnaiooonce equip-ant. oinoo only with ita help in
it pooaiblo in a abort tine to obtain ouch of tho neooooary data. 'Ihio was
confirmed by tho experience of World War 11. although there woo than coupo-
rativoly little ouch technical equip-ant. 'l'huo. during tho oourao of the
battloo in oeotorn Pruooia, on the booio of tho radio reconnaiaaanoe date it
waa poaaiblo to diocovor the grouping of tho 8th Tank and m Field Arlioe,
the 26th Any and ‘let rank Corpo of tho Ger-on fancier Porcoo. 'nno oteff
of out not Rifle Corpo, 6lat Am, alone woo eblo to capture and aaho uee of
store than 20 enoqy rodiogrno in 3 dayo.

"hon preparing for the offenoive operation in tho Crinaa (19M), nul-
tiplo photographing of tho anew defenooe in tho vicinity of Perokop and
Sivaah aado it pooaibla to diacovor tho onow growing. tho nature of tho
terrain and tho ayatoa of obotacloo to a depth of 25-55 In. the photogrephic
ourvoy data were reported by the headquartoto ataff to each coqany battery
and oo-ander. ‘lho otaff and tho 86th, 125th and 63rd Guardo Rifle Divinione
of tho benimad front organized a proopoctivo photographic-vieual ourvey
fro- tho advanced oboervation poota to tho depth of two eneny dofenaive poai-
tiau; thia woo of great aeaiotanco in preparing tho offonoivo, oapecially
when organitin; the artillery fire.

'nlo procedurao for receiving data on tho oituation fro. tho above
aourcaa are characterised by great variety. lha baoic onoo include the fol-
lowing: tho poroonal obaorvation of the co-andor and tho otaff officere of
the troop oporationo; the reception of roporta fron tho oourcea on the oitua-
tion over the co-nicationa facilitioa and with the help of viaual and oound
oisnela: prooontation of written roporta (toxta, srapho) or tepe recorded
reporta: liatenin. to othordinatoo' oral reporto on the oituetion (on per-
oonal interoouroo with then); the interrogation of prioonera; the otudy of
photosrapho, oolbat docunento and aodolo of eneny equipment. and eo on.

The arootoat effect ia achieved, however. by the cowlex application
of thaoe procaduroa. During the couroe of coabat. for ample, any otaff

will find it advantageous to have the not urgent and important intonation
daout tho oituation and nature of the operationa of their own troopa end the

1‘5

1'0! ORIGIN. ”SB JULY
’0! OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

ensay troops froa the subordinates in the fora of short radio signals, and
than to require of then to present a written or graphical coast report cha-
racterizing the situation in note detail. line will be the basic criterion
when selecting one procedure or another for obtaining data in the najority of
cases.

Many foreign specialists consider that the cardinal nessure with re-
spect to cutting tins for gathering the situation data is autonation of this
process. Of course. it is iapossible not to agree with this. however. it
met be rsnsaered that ssny situation data on the nodern level of develop-
ssnt of science are not abject to exact quatitative unsure-ant, for-ali-
zstion and mathematical sinulstion. For exanple. these include the aoral and
psychological state of the personnel along our own troops and the eneqy, the
degree of their coast training. the personal qualities of the co-aders.
national traditions ad euro-s. and so on. therefore. at the present tine.
along with autonation of the- data gathering process it is necessary to sch-
isve high operational efficiency in the work of the co-anders and staff and
the scans for its clear organization. It is also isportant that the officers
be able to predict what changes can occur in this situation, what new aiesion
they can receive fro. the senior officer and what situation data will be re-
quired accordingly for conbat decisi'on asking ad troop control during the
course of the coast operations. ‘Ihey are obligated actively and persistently
to obtain these data in advance, not waiting for special instructions to this
effect free the chiefs.

‘lhus. for exasple, during peacetiae all of the staffs Iuet coarehen-
sively know their troops, study the location. arsaaent and tactics of the
ens-y. the conditions of the terrain and especially the routes of the pro-
bable direction of operations. Being on the defensive, the staff prepares
data in advance which the counselor will require on going over to the offen-
sive; controlling the troops on the arch, he takes every neaaure to provide
the co-ander with all of the data required for ﬂush and nesting engage-
sent. and so on. with this organization of the work, the cannula and the
staff will have a significant part of the inforsation about each eleaent of
the situation before receiving the new coast aission. which has enornous
practical significance.

It is natural that with obtaining a new coast aiesion. the work of
the co-ander and staff with respect to gathering ad studying the situation
data will acquire a sore purposeful ad specific nature. However. for this
purpose clear direction of the staff by the Met and the chief of staff
is needed. In particular. it is very important that the co-sader and the
chief of staff properly explain the nission. calculate the tine, deternine
what situation data are already known to then, ad what data are aissing.
0n the basis of the explanation of the mission and tinst study of the avail-
able intonation on the situation. the co-ander lust at least in general

features plan and personally explain or explain through the chief of staff
his intention in coast to all of the control officers. Be amt point out

for whoa by what ties the insufficient data on the situation and the

166

P08 OHICIAI. USE ONLY
POI OHICIAL US! ONLY

calculatione out be prepared. and what requiree epeciel attention in eo
doing. Practice ehowe that without euch inetructione on the part of the cou-
nender and the chief of eteff it ie iepoeeible to achieve purpoeefulneae end
orgmieetion in the work of the control unite. and the efforte of the offi-
cere will to a eignificant degree be in vain. for the celculatione prepared
by then. the data and the propoaele can turn out to be eieply unneceeeery to
the coeemder. In accordance with the inetructione of the couender and the
chief of eteff. the work of the reeaining officere of the control unite ie
organized. Each of the. it connected directly to certain eourcee of obtain-
ing intonation. and preparee the date for the coriander in accordance with
hie job profile.

the data obtained on the eituation ae e uhole are concentrated and
generalized for the cot-lander. the chief of eteff and hie aeeietmt. he re-
eaining people gather only the inforeation needed by then. Accordingly. a
clearly organieed eutual inforeation about the eituetion between all of the
officere of the given control point and eleo betueen different pointe, hae
great ioportance. 'i‘hie eutuel inforeetion penite deeper and lore cowleto
etudy of the eituetion. and. the Iain thing. elieinetee the requeeting of
inforeation fron eubordinetee by varioue duty pereonnel of the euperior con-
trol unite whida. in turn. unloede the co-unicatione chennele.

'Ihe orgeoiution of Iutuel inforeetion .003 the control officere on
the baeie of the inetructiona of the chief of craft ie the reeponeibility of
hie aeeietent. It ie ieportent that their baeie for thie organisation. in
addition to the direct eervice eubordination. be the concern of each officer
about the general eituetion. healthy interrelatione eeong thee. underetanding
by then of the leading role in control of the officer operatore inaewch as
they eolve the probleee connected with the organisation of the coebined er-
coint and the execution of the com colbet Iieeion. Any officer. receiv-
ing data on the eituetion. in addition to reporting to the «under and the
chief of etaff. ie obligated to report a feat ae poeeible to all other in-
tereeted pertiee. The requeet fro. eubordinete headquertere for certain data
by warioue duty pereonnel of higher heedquertere Mt be categorically for-
bidden. Por nutuel infor-etion pereonel diecueeion and internal co-unice-
tione at the control point (by telephone. radio or eelector) ere uud. The
gathering of all of the duty pereonnel for exchange of inforeetion can be
accoepliehed only in extrene neceeeity.

'lhe Ioet coupler ie the exchange of date during coebet when the control
pointe are in notion. A eigtificent part of the data it obtained even under
theee conditione by the «under. ea a rule. froe eubordinatee pereonally.
end he reecte to the chengee in the eituation. that ie. he eekee e decieion
(more precieely definee one) and etetee the codnt nieeion for the reeponeible
agente. Rendering aeeietance to the conender. the eteff gethere, proceeeee
end reporte date to hie by werioue nethode (eee Figure 21). lhey report
orally over the internal radio co-unicetione of the control point or during
pereonal diecueeion with the colander on ehort helte during the couree of

147

'OR OHICIAL USE UNIX
POI OHIO!“ I!“ ONLY

cod’et. lech duty pereon reporte on hie functione directly to the «under.
or ell oi the dete on the chengee oi the eituetion ere initielly reported to
the chief of ore“ who euee then up end reporte to the contender.

 

Figure 21. Procedure for reporting eituetion dete end inforution et the
control pointe.

Key: 1. “under 3. Control officere
2. Grief of eteii 6. Sourcee of obteining the dete

Ueing the technicel comnicetione neene to obtein the eituetion dete
iron the eubordinetee. juet ee vhen trenenitting theee dete to higher heed-
quertere. every ofticer met etrive for nearin- poeeible reduction of the rite
of the report in order to eeve tine end not overloed the couuicetione chen-
nele with exceee inioreetion. Per thie purpoee it ie neceeeery to requeet end
trenelit only the dete uhieh ectuelly ie needed by the contender end the eteff
for erunit control. The previouly lentioned require-eat thet the infom-
tion on our own troope not he gethered with deteil tvo otepe dovn Iuet he
eetiefied creatively. 'lhe reduction of value of the dete trene-itted over
the conuicetione eedie end eleo the tine of the officer-e cen be eohieved by

the epplicetion of ehort, cleer toreuletione of their thoughte, the me of
etenderd report for-e no eetebliehed eignele.

1M cleer reguletion of the tile for preeentetion by eubordinetee of
reporte on the eituetion for which the eituetion dete not be divided with
reepect to degree of urgency. hee inportent eignificence. ‘lhe noet urgent
dete ere thoee which require direct reection by the oo-ender. lheee dete
include preperetion of the new to why nucleer veepone end ell of the
eherp chngee in the eituetion. lheee dete ere trenenitted outeide eny prio-
rity to ell of the interested co-endere end eteffe. 'lhe leee urgent dete
ere the dete not requiring direct ection on the pert of the «under.

3. Proceeeing end Reporting Situetion Dete

‘lhe eituetion dete received tron different eourcee ere euhject to pri-
Iery proceeeing. the eeeence of vhich ooneiete in reducing theee dete to e

convenient fore for etudy. lhey ere plotted initielly on the uorking nepe,
then entered in the noteboolu or the field boob of the duty control

168

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
Ml ORIGIN. 088 ONLY

poroonnol. 1ho nowly obtainod dato aro claooiticd and coworod with tho ol-
toady ovoilahlo doto. tho dogroo o! thoir urgoncy and roliability io dotor-
ninod conoidoring tho roliobility o! tho oourcoo of obtoininc thon. Roro
tino io oloo tohon into occount to which tho infomtion bolongo. ond it io
ootobliohod whot chongoo in tho oituotion could occur fro- tho tioo of trono-
oiooion of tho doto by tho print-y oourco.

aimltnoouoly. tho dota oro conoolidotod, it io ootobliohod what olo-
oonto of tho codot iorootion oi thoir own troopo and tho onoq thoy bolons
to. ‘lhuo. by tho Jocotion of tho individual (on holoo. tho firo woopono ond
tho obotocloo or tho may. it io poooiblo to dotoroino tho outlino of tho
torword odco of hio dodonoo. tho prooonco of plotoon ond coupony otrong
pointo ond hottolion doionoo pooitiono. ond by tho locotion of tho individual
bottorioo. it io poooiblo to dotornino tho crooning of tho onooy ortillory.
lodundom. toloo ond doubtful doto oro octoonod out in thio woy. ond tho in-
tornotion which io niooin; io dotorlinod. ‘lho lottor oro noro prociooly
dotinod ond ptocutod by odditionol intorrogotion of tho corroopondins oourco.

Tho noot inortant duo on tho up oro roiloctod in noro dotoil ond
noro cloorly than tho oocondary data. lho dosroo of dotoiling of tho doto
dopondo on tho cotogory ond purpooo of tho nap. for oxanplo. o roconnaio-
oonco officor ploto on hio up oll doto obout tho may without oxcoption.
0thor otticoro hoop thoir working napo in tho volt-o ond dotoil which thoy
nood for thoir own oorvico dutioo.

lho working oapo thoroforo oto tho baoic doctnont whoro tho oituation
io rotloctod. 'lho gonorolizod doto on tho oituotion oo o wholo oro plottod
on the working nopo of tho co-ondor, tho chic! o: otoff ond hio doputy and
oloo tho officoto hoodins up tho control pointw. hpociolly high roquiro-
unto oro iqoood on tho Iopo of oll of thooo officoro. moy nuot ho o
sonuino oirror of tho oituotion. ‘Ihoroioro. it is nccoooory to givo prinory
ottontion to tho ocquioition of oltillo in koopin; thou. ﬂith tho introduc-
tion of tho noono of conplox outoootion of tho control procooooo onons tho

troopo. tho oituotion con bo dopictod on octoono, dioployo ond othor oloo-
tronic dovicoo.

‘nao cloor orgonioation of tho work of tho ototf officoro with rupoct
to prooontation of tho oituotion doto obtainod from difioront oourcoo to tho
co-mdor or tho chiof of out! hoo i-portont oignificanco. Undor nodorn
conditiono of troining ond, tho noro no. during the couroc of conbot, pro-
longod lootinso of the comondor with hio oidoo and oxtonoivo roporto on tho
oituotion oro inodniooihlo. ‘lho doto of intoroot to tho coo-under on
reported in tho tor:- of briof. cloor onoworo to opocific quootiono. Tho noot
iuportont intonation io roportod by purpooo ot ooch control lovol and bo-
twcon thon in tho (on in which thoy oro obtainod. 1hooo roporto oro oddod

to ond undo noto opocific oo now intonation conoo in obout tho oituotion.
copccially tho onony.

169

FOR OHICXAL 083 0"“
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

lhia is how. {or oxaoplo. it woo dono during World m I! won dio-
covorin; tho plano of tho canon raociot co-ond which triad to pull out tho
loth 88 Tank Corpo which wao doiondins pooitiona hotwoon tho Dugo- and Violoy
Ilivoro in January 19‘: and roaaoign it to llunsary for participation in tho
countorattock. 'lho procoao of gatharins ond otudyinu tho data about thio
oituation by our co-and wont ao iollowo.

On 30 Dacaobor 19‘“ our radio roconnaiaoanco notad that tho oporation
of tho radioa of tho onow o 3rd ad 5th Tank Diwioiono had otoppod. 0n 1
January 1m. aacrot uonta roportod that tho proaonco of ooldioro with tho
5th Tank Diwioion onaimia had boon notod in Chanotokhov. 0n 3 January 19‘s.
radio roconnaioaanco notod nova-ant of tho radioa of tho 3rd and 5th Tank
Divioiono in tho Kryuhov-Dor diroction. 0n d January 19‘s. by capturing a
prioonor of tho 3rd Tank Diwioion in tho vicinity of Koaorno. tho nova-ant of
tho bth 88 rank Corpo to lhauary woo finally oonfirnod.

Hhon otudyinn tho rocoiwod data it io nocoaoary to toko into account
tho poaaibility of doinfornotion on tho part oi tho onoav. lat ua prooont
ono of tho charactoriotic oxanloo of tho loot war. In Juno 19“. our radioo
took boarinso on tho oporation of. tho rodio notwork of tho Viking 88 “rank
Diwioion radio notworh in tho aroa 25 h oouthwoot of loloqyya. In addition.
a "doaortar" can owor to our oido. who indicatod that a tank diviaion had
boon aovod to tho indicatad aroa to tako tho city of Chornovitaa. tho nio-
oion of noro prociaoly dotinin; all of thooo data woo givon to ono of our
roconnaiooanco :roupa oporotins in tho onoav'o roar. lt tut-nod out that tho
onoay woo pariodicolly aovins oodol tonko tron tho doptha of ito dofonooo in
tho diroction of Kilo-no and back on tractora. 'lho local population indi-
catod that tharo woro no otholono with tanko or othor oquiplant in tho indi-
catod aroa. lho provioualy obtainad data turnod out to bo toloo. ‘lho plot
of tho onon to nioinforn our co-and wao unoovorod.

In roportin; aituation data to tho co-ondor. tho chiof of ataff playa
on oapociolly roaponaihlo rolo. 0n tho halo of oxplanationa of tho aiaaion
rocoivod and catination of tho aituation. ho not bo roady to report to tho
«co-odor: tho pooaibilitiaa of tho ono-y with mpoct to tho owloylont
o! nucloar woapono and other noon: of dootruction. ito grouping, tho nature
of tho oporationo. poooiblo plano. wool: and otrons aopocto; tho poaoihilitioa
of thoir aubunita with roapoct to tho porfornanco of tho givon aiaoion, tho
roquirod "grouping of tho troopo and calculation of tho tiao for its roali-
ootion: quatitatiwo and qualitotivo rolationo of tho forcoo and aotoriol;
ootiootion of tho dowolopod radiation aituation and ito offoct on tho troop
oporationo: propooalo with roapact to tho docioion. that io. tho noot oxpo-
diont plan of oporationa in tho nivon oituotion, what coabat niaaiona ohould
ho :ivon to tho aubordinatoo, tho ordor of intoraction of tho troopo. tho
noaouroo with roapoct to oupporting codat oporotiona, tho org-citation of
control.

Simltmoouly. the chief of otaff not be roady to oubotantiato tho
roportod concluoiono and propoaalo. for thin purpooo. ho, juot at any other

150

M ORIGIN. USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL 083 ON"

offioor. not olvoyo hovo o working up. tho nocooooty ontrioo. colculotiono.
ooholotioo. photogropho, tobloo ond othor rotoronoo notoriol. llovovot. in tho
roport thio notoriol not not bo tonvortod to "crib ohooto”; it io nocoooory
to know how to ooho o oloor orol roport by tho IIP ond rotor to tho roforoncoo
only in not-rm noooooity. for oxooolo. vhon diocuooina disitol doto vhich it
to difficult to rooowor. Uooolly tho booic oolculotiono connoctod with
otudying tho oituotion ond plonning tho oodnt oporotiono includo tho tol-
lovlng: oolculotion of tho troining tino for tho conbot oporotiono. tho
rotio of forcoo ond loono of tho oppooins oidoo. colculotiono connoctod with
tho opplioo‘tion of nucloor voopono. ootiootion of tho rodiotion oituotion.
troop oovonont. tho naming of tho oirborno, forood croooina of rivoro. and

oo on.

"hon roportin; tho oituotion doto to tho ouporior oo-ondor ond hood-
quortoro. tho oo-o procoduroo oro uood u vhon obtoining thou from tho oubor-
dinotoo. noooly tho oituotion roport ond tho trononiooion of tho roport ovor
tho toohnicol con-unicotiono oodio me through tho otoff offiooro (poroonol
intorcouroo). prooontotion of writton or grophicol coobot voporto ond ourvoyo.

Hith roopoct to purpooo ond contont thoro oro codot roporto. rooon-
noiooonco roporto. oo-unicotiono. roor ond othor roporto. ond thoro oro opo-
rotivo ourvoyo. roconnoiooonco ourvoyo. counnicotiono. root. and oo on.

In oddition. tho roporto oro brokon down into unont, thot 1o. prooontod ot
tho ootdaliohod ti-o to highor hoodquortoro. ond nonurgont, vhich oro pro-
oontod by tho initiotivo of hoodquortoro itoolf or by tho booio roquirooont
of highor hoodquortoro in connoction with ohorp chongoo in tho oituotion.

Tho voluno in oontoct con bo quito voriod: fro- o oisnol. for oxo-plo. of
roodinooo for ooobot, to o dovolopod taint docmont Iodo up of oovorol itolo.
'lho contont of thio codot roport con bo oxprooood srophicolly on tho lop,
trocins popor or ordinory popor. Ono voroion of thio arophicol ooobot roport
of tho bottolion co-ondor io prooontod in Figaro 22. Ito bait odvontoso
by conorioon vith tho toxt roport io clority and. conooquontly. opood of
uootory of ito oontont. Hovovor. oisnificont tioo io roquirod for filling it
out. ‘lhoroforo hoodquortoro otton rooorto to tho toxt colbot roport which

in uouolly diocuoood in tho folloving ordor.

1ho firot iton of tho roport roflocto tho sonorol rooulto of tho por-
fononco of tho coobot niooion by our oubunito by the tin of dovolopoont of
tho roport. ito oitootion. tho noturo of tho oporotiono. tho condition ond
ouppott ono otop lovor.

In tho oocond itol. tho oituotion ond noturo of the oporotiono of tho
noishboro in tho indicotod. oopociolly in tho cooo vhoro they hovo on offoct
on tho oporotiono of tho owordinoto troopo. and tho doto on tho. for oo-o
roooon oro not known to highor hoodquortoro.

‘lho iton of tho roport contoino o cooprooood gonorol ootiooto of tho
oituotion. tho ototo and tho noturo of onon oporotiono. It to propoood
thot noro dotoilo obout tho may on ovoiloblo in tho roconnoiooonco roporto.

151

'03 OMCIAI. US! 0M3
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1n the fourth itea there ia a diecuaaion of the intention of their
operationa according to the conander'a deciaion.

1f becauae of the aituation it ia neceeaery for the-forcea and uteriel
of the eenior officer to be uaed to aeaiat the aubordinate, then thia in die-

cuaaad in the fifth itea of the report. The appropriate content of thia re-
port nuat be ea follove:

Claaaification and aeriee
To the «under of the 5th Motorized Rifle legioant

Codat report of the 3rd Motorized Rifle Battalion lo 05. Co-andere obeerve-

tion poet - hill 120.7 (1725). 5 January ms 1100 houra. Map 25000, Iiret
edition 19‘3.

1. 3rd Motorised Rifle Battalion performed the next aiaaion by 1030 houra.
1he 7th Motorised Rifle Coqany enveloped the enemy atrong point on hill 160.5
free the north. Inaaeex 15 killed and 10 wounded.

8th Motorized Rifle Conny took the weetern edge of the grove (0722). (0622).
loaaeaa 10 killed. 18 mded.

9th Motorised Rifle Conany approached the bridge (0823) at the head of the
ooh-n.

he let Artillery Battalion wee at the firing poeition. garden (0726).

2. Neighbor on the right - 2nd Motorised Rifle Battalion took Petrovha. on

the left lat Motorised Rifle Battalion halted at the line of the hill 100.5,
Ivanovka.

3. lhe eneq with atrength of up to two infantry coapaniea and 10 tanks tried
for reinforcementa on the vaat bank of the halyy atreaa. Simultaneouly the
ener advanced ita brigade reaerve for the counterattack, which vaa poaaible
after 1 to 1.5 houra in the direction of Don. hill 153.2.

6. The decieion no nude: at 1130 houra to engage the 9th Motorized Rifle
Colony battle fro. the line of the northueat alope of hill 160.5 in the
direction of the bridge (0821), hill 167.1 (0720) . and by 1300 houra on 5
January to take hill 107.1.

5. l requeat to prohibit the advance of the brigade reaervea of the eneny in
the direction of the grove (0310). Don (0621).

Co-ander 3rd Motorized Rifle Battalion (rah. laat none)
Battalion Chief of Staff (rank. laat one)

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR (WPNHM. USE ONLY

 

Figure 22. Cadet report of the battalion eouand.

Rey: a. To the «under of the 5th Motorized Rifle Resilient

b. Godot report of the 3rd Notarized Rifle Battalion no 05 5 January
1965 1100 houre

c. Mon 25.000 let edition 1963

d. neighbor

e. Grate

i. let tank Platoon

a. 7th Hotoriud Rifle many

h. 9th Kotoriud Rifle Comany

i. let Infantry Oman!

,1. lat Motorized Infantry Battalion

k. 3rd Rifle Colpany 1. Don

e. To infantry battalion

n. 1230 hour. 5 Jon 0. Executed 1 copy

9. Only to the colander of the 5th Hotorited Rifle Reginent

q. up. ... (loot name) 5 Jan. 1965

t. No by report lo;

e. 2nd lnfentry Coepany

t. Yutovo u. 2nd Tank Platoon

v. 8th Notarized Rifle many

to. let Artillery battalion

x. Vyeokoye

y. 8th Notarized Rifle Conny vith destruction of the one-u in the
vicinity of hill 151.6 it saved into the totem

z. 2. 9th Notorited Rifle Cowany with platoon ie aubordinated in cadet
to the let Tank canny (without 3rd tank pletoon)

153

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Kay to Figuro 22 continuod]

no. 3. Our roquoat to prohibit advanto of tho brigade rooorvoo of tho onoqy
tron tho vicinity of tho grova (0310)

Ma. Condor 3rd Notorirod Riilo Battalion (rank. loot none)

to. Battalion chioi of out: (rank. loot none)

Malta 2 topioo.

Copy No 1 - llaadquartoro 5th Motoriaod m1. Boginont
Copy No 2 - filo

Ex... (loot naoo. initiala)

Bio... (loot naao. initialo)

... (data) No ...

lho givon procodoro for tho diocuoaion of a toxtoal coobat roport nut
of oouroo ho conaidarod only ono of tho pooaiblo protoduroo. In a nuabor of
caooa. tho codat roport dooo not hagin with tho ovaluation of tho aituation.
tho condition and naturo of tho oporationo of our own troopo and the may.
Nonurgont coohat roporta aro diotuoood in arbitrary ion. but thoy alvayo be-
gin with the principal, dofining thing in tho aituation. that, it io nocoo-
oary to ooloct tho noat otticiont form in tho codat roport oath tioo. For
oxo-plo. tho application of otandard for-o oo follow io poooiblo:

it: tho consular Motoritodhiflo Bogi-ont
Coohat roport Motorized m1. Battalion Bo

 

Conandoro obaorvation poot Dato Tina Hap

 

 

 
 

Conotant data

 
    

Rooulto of carrying out tho niooion and tho
oituation of tho oubunito

1. No. n-o ot battalion took lino and ac on.
11. Evaluation of tho one-y

1. no. comooition of onooy

2. Dofonding of tho lino.... and oo on.

:11. Solution and rcquoot of tho battalion
co-andor

l. Dotidod to engago tho notorizod riflo
coopny in battlo from tho lino....
and to on.

156

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Connendor... Iotorieed rifle bettelion
(rent. loot neeo)

Grief of eteff (rut. loot none)
'konenitted ... (tine)
Received .u (tine)

Hoke one copy only for file

ht... (loot noel)

‘.t. No oeo

loch report euot be extreeely ehort. cloer end eccureto, end it euet
be proeented to the eddroeeeo in tho oetdtliehod tine. Ito content ie diecuo-
ood eo thet the eonior officer con quickly plot it on hie work nep, etudy end
roect in tine to the inforeetion end requoete reported to hie. ‘lho roporte
trenoeitted over the redio euet be oepecielly ohort but without looo of cle-

rity. lhey contein only whet ie eoot inortent, Qproxi-etoly in the follow-
in; fore.

"Keno-0" (code none of the ocnior officer).

"3rd Motorized Rifle Iettelion hee cerriod out ite next Iieeion. mo
eneqy io properin; e counterettock in the direction... ‘lhe decioion hee been
node et 1100 houre to engeoo the 9th hotoriud Rifle Conny in bottle iron
the lino.... end by 1300 houre, to tote the town of Del'nyeye.

"Don-5" (codo one of the counder of the 3rd Notorieod Rifle let-
tolion)

‘ihe cadet report conteinin; e diecueeion of the coo-endor'e decieion
md oddreeeod to the oenior officer ie eiped by the co-endor end chief of
etoff of the eubunit. mo roeeining roporte oddreeood to the chief of tho
higher hoedquertore ere eined by the chief of oteff.

‘lhe co-endere md eteffe of the eubordineteo. the interectin; troope
end neighbore ere inforeod of the chengoe in the oituetion. ee o rule. by per-
eonel intorcouroe with thee and direct convereetiono with thee over the cloeod
co-unicetione chonnole. 'lho cheating eituetion dete ieportent to the eonior
officer ere expleinod oe o ootter of couru to then. The ocnior officer euet
not. however, dietrect the edaordinetoe froe direct work with reepect to
troop control without opeciel need. loch cell of the oubrodinetoe not be jue-
tifiod by the nocoeoity for delivery or receiving-inortent infomtion. For
inforeetion ﬂout the one-y, in e nubor of ceeee. copioo of the inforletion
data-ate ere eent out to then.

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

s. Prospects for Autoution of the Process of Gathering end Processing
Situation Data

when analyzing the content of the co-andor's and staff 's work process
with respect to gathering and generalizing the situation data in cosbat it is
iopoesible not to note that such in it is swject of forulitation cad sinu-
lation. “therefore the cardinal aeans of accelerating and increasing the
efficiency of the given process is. of course, its autonetion in the future.

At the present tins it is difficult to inogine tho entire depth of the
changes which can occur in tho process of gathering and processing situation
data in each control echelon under tho effect of autosation. however. it is
obvious that tho degree of this effect will depend on tho possibilities of
the neans of auto-etion with which tho echelons and control units will be
equipped. Here it is possible to state only certain propossls. su-ing up
tho oxperisental data and tho theoretical views discussed in tho ailitary
press of foreim arnios in recent yesrs‘.

lhue. tho control echelons md mice which will have tho bottoa set of
autonation aedia - tho infer-scion sensors -~ and tho required nutter of
connications nedia, can autonotically gather and output as directed not
everything. but only certain infomtion: on the location of tho co-ender's
control point. on whose vehicle tho sensor is located. tho radiation levels
and other intonation which will be transnitted autonotically to the superior
control unit or body. At tho sane tine, various types of signals. short
orders, coaunds and basic intonation about the eneqy can sutontically pro-
ceed froo this control wit. to the sensor of tho lowest echelon. ‘lhe reusin-
ing value of infornation nust be obtained and processed by ordinary some

and aethods for which tho agents and duty personnel of tho lowest control
echelon not be ready.

It is proposed that tho capdsilities of tho control echelon which in
coebination with other nodern control scans have transceiving equip-sot
available directly in the vehicles of the basic duty personnel will be con-
poratively large. The gathering and transnission of the nest inortant in-
foraation daout the coisat situotion in transient to the higher echelon can
be realised over tho telecode channels by ming this equipment. The higher
control echelon con transdt signals; co-snds. short orders and the required
intonation itself to the stbordinotes over this equip-cot.

be greatest changes in the process and aethods of gathering and study-
ing the situation data take place in the control echelons and units which
have available conputors. rosote devices from the cosputers and a set of
other autonotion nodio installed at the work areas of the bssic duty person-
nel. 'Ihe inforaetion coaing fron the various sources will be processed

1. American journals: mm ad MILITARY KEVIW. matures. ARMY TIMES,
Host Conan journal HINDI.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comepondinsly. etored ad output iron the conuter hy requeet in elphmune-
ric torn on printere end electronic diepleye in the nechinee.

1he epplicetion of tho eutonetion nodie codined with other control
nene eleo offere e nwer of other edventegeez it ineuree greeter precieion
end relibility of the infomtion. optinelneee of the volu. ad epeed of
execution in the intereete of cert-yin; out the coolant nieeion. 'lhie in poe-
eihle only on efficient coebinetion of the eutoneted end noneutoneted devicee
with the creetive ectivity of the duty pereonnel vhile neinteining tho loedin.
role of the hu reeeon. A etill higher level of treinin. end ornniution
of the work of the control esenciee ie required. naey Iuet not only Inn. but
know hot: to prectice to me the cepebilitiee of the entoletion nedie. introv-
ing the current develop-cote end eleo finding new. better proceduree nd
nethode of tethering end etudyin; the eituetion dete.

157

FOR OFFICIM. USE 0? LY
I'Ok OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0mm 5. GMAT DENIM MARIE (autumn-r) MD W 1113 Mm
TACTICS (I $0098

1. Content of the Codnt Decision
Basic ale-ants of the Decision

1he codaat experience of past years and the practice of postwar train-
ing indicate convincingly that the successful fulfill-eat of the requireeents
imsed on e cosbet decision. especially its s‘bstantiation and tisslinees .oi
asking the decision. depends priasrily on the depth of knowledge. experience
and will of the co-andar. For this purpose the co-snder nut have a clear
idea of the content of the decision. that is. the kind of probless to which
it out give full. accurate and clear answers. ‘lhe letter is also confined
by science, such as psychology. It says that sen cannot create a thought
nodel of any object. lld then characterise it by words. in writing or gra-
phically when its structure. boundaries and operating principles are moleer.

With respect to the problem of the content of the co-snder's cosbat
decision there can be veriom points of view. and in reality there are veriom
points of view. If the given problee is approached only iron the point of
view of the necessity of observing the principles of one-em cmd end can-
trelizetion of control. than this solution under any conditions of the situa-
tion sust reflect all the phenoeena and aspects of the torthcoedng codat.
For this purpose it lust with respect to its content include such ale-cuts
as the idea of the cadet operation. the problees of all erbordinate subunits
of the troops end special troops. the order of their interaction did also
leasures with respect to political work. the organization of control and all
types of support of conbat operations. reconnaissance. protection against
nuclear weapons. security. camouflage. engineering. rear services and supply.
technical. topogaodetic and other types of support and also the co-andant's
service.

However. this approach alone to the content of decision, in our opinion
is inadequate. In addition to the indicated necessity. we aust without vio-
lating the principles of one-nan col-and and centralization, "consider the
psychological possibilities of the coursed. the level of his knowledge and
experience. the degree of familiarity with the actually developed situation.

158

FOR OFFICII‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

the preeence of tine for prepering for coebet operetione end including deci-
eion netting. the coepoeition of the ewordinete troope end neture of the
cadet deeion eeeigned by the eenior officer. It in eleo coneidered iepor-
tent to tehe into eccmnnt the level of treining end experimce of the officere
of the control unite end the ettordinete eubunit co-endere.

Free the enunereted fectore. the tine thet the coenender hee eveileblc
for decieion eeking eoet frequently hee the greeteet effect on the epproech
to the content of the decieion.

For the connder the noet fevoreble teeporery conditione for decieion
eeking for corbet will be between the perforeed end the forthcoeing coebet
operetione in the preeence of e prolonged intervel. During World her 11 of-
ten theee interwele enounted to eeverel deye. fron which the con-ender of eech
control echelon ueuelly received no leee then 1 or 2 deye for decieion eeking
end for the orgenieetion of coebet operetione ee e whole. Under theee condi-
tione. he could. without hurrying. coherently explein the nieeion end eeti-
nete eech elenent of the eituetion. perfore reconneieeence of the terrein.
think through ell poeeible vereione of the couree of the forthco-ing codut
operetione. coneult with hie eeeietente. weigh everything cerefully. celcu-
lete end. in the finel enelyeie eeke e decieion in which e definition ie given
to the ideee end nieeione of ell of the eubunite of the troupe end epeciel
troope. the procedure for their interection end eleo neeeuree with reepect to
critical work. control. condicetione nd eech type of eupport of eodnt
operetione. In e word. it ie not required thet eny reetrictione be introduced
into the content of the decieion under theee conditione. ‘nae neceeeity for
reflecting ell upecte of the fordtcoeing cadet in the decieion wee netdled
with the cepebilitiee of the couender.

However. when etudying the given experience et the preeent tine the
queetion unewoidebly erieee: will the conditione exiet for decieion nehing
by the co-ender in e future wer if it ie unleeehed by the eggreeeive circlee
of the inperieliet govern-tote? The etudiee of recent yeere give e negetive
enewer to the queetion.

Hhen conducting coﬁet operetione in the future, eech co-ender will
unewoiddrly encomter e eherp controdiction between the volune of operetione
which nuet be perforeed in the decieion neking end the tine which he cen
ectuelly uee for title. ‘lhie contrediction unevoidebly erieee with reepect
to the following beeic cameo. Ae hee elreedy been noted. the tine for the
preperetion of coder operetione hee been eherply reduced. ‘lhe prolonged
epecee between the ective cotet operetione. an e rule. will be decent. ‘nle
etruggle with the eneey to gein tine end leed tine in uniting e etrike will
becone nore ecute. ‘lhe epeed of coebet opcretione will be greeter. which
eeene the tinee for the fulfill-tut of one eieeion will be reduced, end the
obteining of e new eeeiutnent by the co-mder fron the eenior officer will
be eccelereted. ‘lhe repleceeent of one type of operetion with another will
be nore frequent then before.

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Accordingly. harshal of the Soviet Union A. A. Grachko wrete the fol-
lowing in his book "Voorushennyye Sily Sovetskogo Gosudarstva” [Armed Forces
of the Soviet Governaent] (p 263): "Whereas during world war I! each opera-
tion. as a rule, was preceded by a preparation period, the duration of which
was reckoned in several days and even weeks, and at the division-regiment
level usually 5 to 7 days were set aside for the organisation of offensive
cosbat. now it is iapossible to count on such significant amounts of ties.

It is entirely probable that the new operation or battle often must he orga-
nized during the course of continuing coﬁat operations, under the conditions
of unclear and frequently contradictory situations."

lhe indicated contradiction will be manifested especially sharply when
the commander receives a new coﬂut eission during the course of the coﬁet
operations being conducted in order to fulfill a previous mission. Under
these conditions the so-celled period of conbat preperation as it is usually
understood will not be available in general, end the co-ander will have to
make hie decision to carry out the new mission simultaneously with the control
of the subunit conducting active coﬁat operations. 1he snout of time which
will be used for decision making end the organization of new coinat operations
will often depend on the nature of the operations of the enenv and be reckoned
in minutes.

For confirmation of what has been stated, let us present an example.
A aotoriud rifle battalion had carried out its mission, it had taken the
enemy's strong point and received a new mission - to develop an assault and
break through the defenses at a line 3 km from the battalion for the occupa-
tion of which an eneq reserve was advancing. 0n aovement of the battalion
et a speed of lo km/hr it could attack the snow at the given line in 55
minutes. Practice shows that in this time not even an experienced co-ander
can make a decision with reflection in it of all of the problems of the orga-
nization of the forthcoming battle and its comprehensive support. he physic-
ally cannot perforn all of the required organizational measures to carry out
the decision.

lhe given conclusion because more obvious if we consider that the sub-
ordinate cousnders down to the squad leaders also require time to make
decisions and organiu codoat inside their subunits.

Thus.- under the conditions of limited time the comnander has the respon-
sibility of personally making a decision with detailed determination in it of
all of the measures of the organization of the forthconing battle and the
support of it - this news that he is faced with unrealistic problems, he
is forced either to asks a superficial (unfounded) decision or use the tile
which his subordinates need to prepare for the performance of their missions
or halt the troops and force them to wait until the decision is made. At the
some time the co-ander will doors the troops to passiveness and unsuccessful
action. break down his authority among the subordinates, discredit the prin-
ciples of one-man cos-and and centralisetion of control.

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

   
 

Figure 23. Content of the cmder's coﬂast decision.
Key: 1. Col-bet decision 9. Direction of the Ian strike
2. ectsloa elusots (concentrsuon of bulc efforts)
3. Intent of the cadet 10. strut ion 1' he cotet fomtton
operations a new of lemme: by troops
6. st use cos of the 11. otodzed riﬂe (tank) subunit of the
subordinate dauntt of let echelo
the count 12. notorxzed rme (tenk) subuntt of
. Order of tntersctton f e Zd echelon (use
the roops 13. tinny (sorter) subunit (groups)
. euu with respect 1‘. tun-croft defense sub 1t
to political orlt. con- 15. Other units (e1 to of conbet
prehemtw support of urination)
col-bet operations and 16. 91th respect pu e sons)
e orgsniuttou of 17. H1 respec to the of ope stione
cont 1 18. With respect to plsce (lines
7. In ten of united 1s. rsyons. tenets) f opetstt
the cot-meet- personally
defines the soot sportsat
souls, sud oil test to
plsnned by the eadqusrten
sud other agents ch
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition. with thin ototolont of tho oituation tho around in mowidahly
proparod for tho Honoring of nabjoctivion md voluntarion (taught in taint
with oapacially oorioua conaoquoncoo.

ln ordor for thin not to occur. tho dasroo of contralizotion of control
and dotailinc of tho dociaion loot ho co-ononroto with tho copahilitioo of
tho co-andor with roopoct to intonation procoooing. lho hooio for his work
not ho tho diﬂorontiatod approach to tho contont of tho dociaion. Practice

oupport of tho conhat oporotiono and tho orsoniration ct comm-:1 (indicated
in Figaro 23 by tho dottod lino).

md troop control. in tho prooonoo oi' outficiont tint. tho comdor hi-olf
can. hotoro giving inotructiona to tho rooponoihlo nsent. none tho docioion
with dotonination of tho niuiono, tot-coo, notoriol. tines and nothoda of
oxocntion. In tho ohoonco of tilt. ho cm ho couplotoly homd by the data:-
Inination not only of tho loot iopottant prohlo- with respect to thio typo of
oupport which moor tho givon conditiono hao tho groatoot significance, and
loan the root of tho 91mins on tho hoaio of hia intont to hio doputioo.
otaff. chiofo of tho coohat or- and oorvicoo (vhoro thoy oxiat) and thou con-
11:. or. if nocoaoory. corroct thoir plono. lhio hoconoo onto ohviouo it vo
conoidor that tho circlo of prohlooo connoctod vith inplonontins tho onuo-
ratod nooauroo io quito broad and oo-plox. It roqniroo additional analyaio
of the oituation. tho onawor to my douno of prohlou, employ: calculationo
ltd ovon opocial Innovlodgo. For oxawlo. lot no tako tho craniution of
troop control. It cannot ho roducod only to dotornination of tho placoo of

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON." Y
FOR OPTIC!“ USE ONLY

his situetion exists in orgeniting the political work in eech of the
seny types of support of codnt operetions. here. too, before giving senten-
tieted indicetions to subordinetes. it is necessery to determine the niesions.
forces. uteriel. tines. nsthods end procedures for cerrying then out. It
is eesy to see thet if under linited tine conditions the «sender personelly
tries to resolve the enusereted noeeures in ell details end give enswers to
ell of these questions. then he will unevoidebly bog down end lose the nein
thing - deteninetion of the intent of the bettle. the cod>et niesions of
the subordinete troops and the procedure for their interection. 0n the con-
trery. the differsntieted epproech to the content of the decision discussed
by us will units it possible for the conender not to heve his sttention divided.
to concentrete on the min thing end. using the collective intelligence end
creetivity of his neerest sides, to insure e tinely, high-nudity solution to
ell of the problees connected with the orgsniretion of the forthconing bettle
end its support. with this epproech. in eddition, the kind of problem the
co-ender lust enelyte when expleining the sission end estineting the situe-
tion is reduced, end this neens the totel tins on decision neking is reduced.
‘lhe experience of the exercises indicetes thet for the given epproech to the
content of the decision. the tinsly Ieking of the decision is within the bet-
telion co-ender's possibilities even for e linited tine.

This epproech to the solution in no wsy indicetes nultiple power. It
does not contredict the principles of one-Inn co-end end centreliretion
inesnuch us the right to neintein the plsns of the eesistente is left to the
«under, end the personel responsibility is reteined not only for their
personel sets but elso for the ections of their subordinetos. It nekes it
possible intelligently to conbine the principles of one-Ien co-snd of the
couender end centrelieetion of control with initietive end creetivity of the
subordinetes, to reinforce the euthority of the consult: unoug the subordi-
netes end isprove their ectivity end norel eetisfection with their routine
work. During the lest wer it wu steted convincingly thet the effort of the
«under under the linited tine conditions to "conprehend the inconrehen-
sible." his leek of feith in the officers of the control orgens kills eny ini-
tietive in then. it does e greet deel of here to the troop control end. con-
sequently. to the success of the cosbet operetions.

In the control collectives these interreletions ere the lore inednis-
sible under nodern conditions when the dynenisn of the conbet operetions hes
increesed sipificently end the level of treining of the officers hes been
reised. Consequently. not only the necessity but else the possibility of
sherply inproving the responsibility of eech officer for the setter with which
he is entrusted is st hend. "rho beeic control principle...." tsught V. I.

Lenin. "is thet s definite person is wholly responsible for the perfornence
of e definite job."

Of course, responsibility csn be different. ‘lhe col-sender and only
the «under hes the euthority to seize s coder decision es such. lie is

l. V. l. Lenin. Coolers Collected Works. Vol 52. p 23.
163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

poooonolly rooponoihlo for tho outcono of tho conbinod-oroo codaot ond ouc-
coooiul porfornonco of tho coohot niooion by tho oubordinoto troopo. no hot
no right to gut thin rooponoihility upon onyono. novovor. ovory chiof nuot
ho rooponoihlo for hio ooction of tho oporotion: othorvioo, ho connot ho
collod tho chiof. Hhorovor thoro io oono rooponoihility, thoro nuot to tho
nuthority to dotino tho corrupondin; nooouroo with roopoct to tho opociol
prohlono boood unconditionally on -tho intont of tho co-ondor in codot ond
ouhjoct to hio nondotory oppr’ovol.

1hio opprooch to tho nottor will comopond not only to tho odvoncod
oxporionco, but oloo tho principloo of control thoory thot tho docioiono on-
comtorod in lifo oro gonorol ond opociol. “mo conhot docioion of tho con-
nondor invootigotod by no in o nonorol docioion inn-sch no it includoo hio
intont portoinin: to oll of tho odaordinotoo without oxcoption. ond oinod ot
tho fulfill-oat of o co-on gool. “rho nooouroo with roopoct to individuol
prohlono (politicol workoro. ononiootion ond control. typoo or oupport) con

ho oonoidorod portiol docioiono providing for tho noting of tho sonorol codot
docioion.

Finolly. tho danvo-prooontod opprooch to tho codot docioion will toko
into occount tho trond tovord o ohorp incroooo in tho rolo of tho crootivo
Ind orsoniutionol vork of tho colloctivoo of tho control or.“ cloorly plon-
nod in our country in rocont yooro ond otronsthonod in tho rooolutiono of tho
25th Conuooo of tho cpsu ad in tho now Conotitution of tho 0888. TM pro-
oonco of tho gonorol ond opociolixod codaot docioiono, conooquontly, both
tron tho thooroticol ond tho procticol point of viov, io ontiroly juotifioblo
ond dooo not hon, oopociolly in thot thoy bosin in tho finol onolyoio with
tho intont of can poroon - tho co-ondor — ond only with hio conoont so to
tho rooponoiblo osonto. Hultiplo pm: in thin cooo in cowlotoly oxcludod.

‘Iho gonorol otructuro of tho contont of tho co-ndor'o codut doci-
oion ond ito hooic conpononto mot ho of thio typo undor nodorn conditiono.

Contont of tho Booic Docioion llononto

loch olonont of tho docioion io in nood of o cloor dofinition. opoci-
ficotion of contont ond reduction of voluno. Inoonuch no it dooo not oppoor
poooihlo in this hook to givo o dotoilod onolyoio of ooch ouch olouont in oll
of tho control ocholono ond in oll for. of codaot oporotiono. vo oholl toko
tho co-ondor'o docioion to ottoclt tron tho notch on tho hooiolor tho inm-
tiaotion lid occordingly, no oholl try to ootoblioh tho sonorol principloo
of tho opprooch to the given quootion. tho ohoorvotion of which. in our
opinion. will holp in ptoctico in ony othor oituotion.

“Iho intont of tho codot oporotiono oxprooooo tho noin guiding idoo
of tho co-ondor dotorninin; tho purpooo of thooo octiono ond oloo in gonorol
torn tho forcoo. notoriol ond nothodo of ochiovins it. morororo it in tho

noot i-portont olonont (nuclouo) of ony codaot docioion and tho okoloton of
tho nodol of tho forthcooing codaot oporotiono. All tho ronoinins olononto

161.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

of the decision and also all the special plans and actions of the troops then-
selvss are based on it.

In order to correspond to its basic purpose. the plan lust clearly
md specifically answer the following basic questions for the subordinates.

1. "her eneny. where. with what forces and material and in what se-
quence does the «under plan the attack? he answers to the given ques-
tions are needed prisarily because the final purpose of any conbat cannot be
achieved by only one. even powerful but short strike or the use of only one
neane. In any for. of coabat it is always necessary to break down the gene-
ral problaa with respect to the purpose. place (lines) and tine for a nueber
of successively fulfilled interssdiate goals. calling on the corresponding
forces and leans of destruction for their fulfill-ant and the application of
various sethode of operations. In the offensive these lissions usually ere
the next and subsequent missions. the direction of the future advance. Each
of then can be broken down into a umber of stellar specialised problens
with respect to site connected with the destruction of ens-1y targets (strong
points. fire weapons. control points). penetration of his intermediate lines
of defense. repulsion of the counterattache. forced crossings of rivers. and
so on. On the defensive. this clear division of the general mission usually
is not ends. but the coﬁat plan always provides for successive danage to
the ens-y with respect to directions on the approaches to the defense. when
deploying for attack. during the attack and when wedging into our defense.

Both on the offensive end on the defensive. it is especially inortent
that the plan define the targets and how the basic weapons of destruction are
to be used in theory.

2. In what direction is the resin strike node in the offensive or by
the basic forces concentrated in the defensive? lhe given question follows
fro. the most isportant principle of the conduct of any codet requiring that
the forces and netsrial not be split up unifornly over the entire front. but
that they be concentrated in the decisive direction in order to achieve
superiority over the eneqy in this direction.

3. [low is the coder function of the troops and what fore of samu-
ver is planned for use by then during the forthconing cadet operations?
'lhe newer to the question is closely connected with the preceding ones. It
sonehow gives naterial eﬁodinent to the nsin idea of the «under in the
corresponding grouping of forces and the methods of its operations.

The nest expedient content of the coﬂat operations plan is of this
type. As is obvious. it should not he overloaded with secondary seasuree:
otherwise. it will be difficult for the subordinate cousanders to understand.
In addition. in the effort at brevity it is necessary not to strip the plan
down too such. to liait it too such. for ere-pie. only to detarnination of
the directicn of the Iain strike of the offensive. for this is clearly

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

insufficient for explmetion of the besic ides of the superior cot-endu- to
the eubordinete.

‘lhe coebet wissions of the subordinete submits of the troops are
deterlined in the decision in strict correspondence to the plan. ‘Ihe essence
of the tern "co-bet mission" ooneiets prieerily in determination of whet
eneny grouping (terget) lust be destroyed or neutrelired by fire end etteck
by eech subunit of the first echelon. second echelon or reserve. the srtil-
lery end nortnr subunits, end so on. It follows free the very essence of
the coebet operetions. however. ineseuch es these operetions sre elweys con-
ducted within the frseework of ties end spece. the second coeponent of the
concept of .the ”cedar eission" is elwus detereinetion of the resdiness
tines. beginning end end of execution end the locetion (eree. line) of open-
t one.

‘lhie u‘orcnch to the content of the cowet mission hes greet not only
theoreticel but elso prscticel eignificsnce. It per-its formletion end
freedoe of this content of my eecondery (supporting) neesuree. st the seas
tine eccelereting the process of asking the besic decision end then the re-
porting end expleining of it to the responsible egente.

In order to confitl the given conclusion. let us present the expedient
content of the coebet missions of the subunit in the offensive tron the
eerch. In hie ettscl: decision. the col-lender csn linit hinself to definition
of the codaet eissions of the subunit in the following volume:

e) m eotorited rifle (tenk) subunit of the let echelon -- the rein-
force-ant neens. the line of trensition to the stteck, which new end where
the etteck is to tske plecs end whet line is to be token on e result of the
fulfillment of the next end following mission. the direction of the future
edvsnce. the resdiness tine; when necessery the delineeting linee between
the swunit end the neighbore cen else be plenned:

b) Ihe 2d echelon subunit .. the eeene of reinforcement. where the
sdvence is to be Iede et the beginning of the offensive. the possible lines
of engegesuent in coebet. wbich enemy, where the rout will teke plsce after
engegewent. whet line is to be teken (the next eiseion), the direction of
the future edvence;

c) nae srtillery (sorter) sdmnit -- the eree of the besic firing
positione. whet objects (tergete) ere to be neutrslized or destroyed during
ertillery properstion, support end ecconpsninent during codnt in the depths
of the eneuy's defenses. end the resdiness tine;

d) The sntisircrsft subunit — the eres of the buic fire poeitione.
who. where end when to cover. end for the coversge of which tergets to con-
centrete the besic efforts.

lhe enelogous spproech is necsesery for deteninetion of the coﬁet
Iissione end other eleeente of the conbet for-stion if they ere crested.

166

FOR OFFICIM. USE 0.2M
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This approach becones not only necessary but also coapletely possible if we
also take into account the iaportant fact that the cosbat missions are con-
tinuously connected also with the corresponding element of the decision -
the principles of interaction of the troops. 'ihe separation of these two
decision eleaents is of e highly provisional nature. Indeed. when determin—
ing the coabat ariseione for the troops. that is, establishing what onew.
where and when the subordinate subunits of the troops met be routed. the
co-ander at the sane tins lays down the basis for their interaction, the es-
sence of which consists in matching the forces and operations of the troops
with respect to the target (goals). tins and location (lines. areas and direc-
tions). however. a the experience of world war II has demonstrated. one
definition in the solution of the conbat missions of the troops for achieve—
nent of their close interrelations is inadequate. In addition to these, it
is necessary to deter-ins and then indicate the sethods of perfor-ance of the
special niasions by the subordinate subunit when solving the general problem
in order that mutual aid and clear-cut coordination of operations be insured.

'lhe degree of detailing of these sethoda of operations in the differ-
ent echelons and types of codnt operations can be. of course, different
depending on any factors: the nature of the problsn. the presence of tine.
the conditions of the terrain. the level of training and experience of the
subordinates. and so on. It is ispossibla and inexpedient to give a single
outline which is suitable for all cases encountered in real life. It is only
possible to state that this stage sust always have a reasonable liait which
can be seen its. the work experience of battalion co-andery a3 P. Ivanov in
one of his exercises in attacking free the arch.

After studying the plan and the instructions of the regisental con-
tender, explaining the sission and evaluating the situation, Maj P. Ivanov
suede his own coﬁat plan. he planned cosbat nissions of the subordinate sub-
units and then set d>out defining the order of their interaction. Pron the
decision of the senior officers. he took the following into accent: the
ties and procedure for advancement of the subunit fro: the waiting area to
the line of transition to the attack; the lines and the tines of successive
deploy-ent in cosbat for-ation; the beginning. the duration and construction
of cedar fornation, the order of operations during this period of the fire
weapons and all other submits of the battalion: the location. tines and
methods asking passages, designation ad use of the passages in the obstacles.
Taking this into account, the battalion cos-ander defined the forsation and
the line of rushing and attack of the notorired rifle and tank subunit, the
procedure for their use of the results of a nuclear attack by leans of
superior officers, artillery fire, direct laying weapons. tanks. armored
personnel carriers and other neans: nethods of naneuvering the subunit (en-
valopnent. circumvention, naneuvering of fire) with joint seizure of the roost
inortmt strong points of the ens-w, during combat in depths of ener de-
fenses and repulsion of ens-y counterattacks. rendering Iutual aid anong the
notorized rifle. tank, artillery, nortar. engineer and other subunit; the
nature of operations of the subunit in case of an enemy attack during the
advance and during counterpreparations; procedures for operations in the

167
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
a

caoo of anlattack without the application of nuclear usapono: target indica-
tion. mutual recognition and warning signals.

‘lhio circle of probloas solved by the battalion coo-ander when deter-
nining the interaction procedure has cleotoly justified itself. lhe bat-
tolion has successfully porfornod ita nioaion.

let us present mother. opposite oxanlo also existing in tho tacticsl
training and described by former troop co-andor of the Order of Lenin Moscow
Military District, General of tho Am Yo. Ivanovoltiy in mu ZVBZDA [Red
Star] for 20 June 1972. lbs co-andor of one of the tank battalions decided
to deploy tho sﬁunit ot the attack lino oomhat before the established tine.
“this "initiative" turned out to be lioplacsd. As a result. it did not result
in coordinated oinultaneous operations with the neighbors. At tho sane tine
the force of the strike was weakened. During the careful analysis of the
causes of this error it was discovered that the battalion co-andor on the
general tactical oituation. hio place and role in tho execution of the plan
of the senior officer incorrectly. lhorofore the effort to be active on the
battlefield turned into a hanful fiasco.

Fro. those oxaqlea it is obviouo hov carefully and creatively the
contender lust proceed when determining the order of interaction of the troops
in his decision. a: the one hand. he nuat see that hio otbmito act a a
clearly organised and united organiaa and forestall the one-y in launching
the attack. However, on the other hand it is inpoooible to consider the prac-
tice nor-a1 when one co-andor or another mneceooarily and without conside-
ration of the actual possibilities strives personally to define in detail
all of the procedures to be followed by the troops which are the "internal
affairs" of the oubrodinato co-andcro. ‘lhooe procedures can be defined by
the subordinates tho-elves inoonuch so they note the situation which must
be taken into account in detail.

The one thing pertains to the problems of political work. types of
support and organization of control. Bore it is also necessary harnoniomly
to codaine the principles of one-non count! and centralization of control
with independence. initiative and creativity of the officers of the control
organs and the subordinate co-andero and not to accuston then to look to the
senior officer and wait for inotructiono regarding the procedures for their
on operations.

V. I. Innin. attaching enoroom significance to one-nan cone“ and
centralization or direction. nevertheless emphasized that "mity basically
and essentially is not disturbed, but it is insured by variety in details.
in locsl peculiarities. in the nethodo of approaching a matter, the nothodo
of realizing control...“
l’Oll OHICIM. USE ONLY

Accordingly. it ie ueeful egein to nention the experience of World
Her ll. In ite initiel period. when the co-endere of the tecticel eleeente
etill hed not received outficient comet experience. there wee e very high
degree of centrelieetion of control on the pert of the eenior officer-e. eepe-
cielly when prepering codet operetione. however. eubeequently when the
con-end personnel ecquired experience. the conbet operetione one to be note
of e neneuvered neture. ad the tiuee for their preperetion were reduced.
lhie centrelitetion bece-e unneceeeery end even hateful. Coneidering the
given (note. on 18 Key 1943. the Generel lleedquertere of the Supreee Con-end
wee forced to publieh e epeciel directive to the troope eccording to which
the eenior officere were forbidden to intervene unneceeeerily in the function
of the eubordinete conundere. to control the troope "through their heed."

lheee inetructione by Generel Beedquertere pleyed e highly poeitive role in
ieproving troop control.

It in ieportent egein to note thet the hereonioue conbinetion of one-
een co-end end centreliution of control on the pert of the eenior officers
with independence. initietive end creetivity of the ewordinetee ie one of the
buic trende in the develop-cut of eodern control in ell ereee of country'e
eociel life. lhe given trend hee been given e greet deel of ettention in the
reeolutione of the 25th Congreee of the CPSU. L. l. Brezhnev eede the fol-
lcuing eteteeent in hie eu-ery report to the Centrel Co-ittee of the CPS“:
"When e decieien in node, it euet be entirely cleer who beere reeponeibility
for it. And it euet be precieely Juet ee cleer who beere reeponeibility if
the timely decieion ie not nede or it ie deleyed. 0n ell levele 0! control
it ie inportent to determine the volume end the reletion of the rights end
reeponeibilitiee... loch level of the edninietretive notes not deel with
ite own effeire no the: the higher levels will not be cluttered up with e
neee of current effeire dietrecting then from the lerge problem. end the
loweet levele cm operetively eolve the problem entering into their coupe-
tence."l Coneidering the exceptionel inportence of the given problem, he
egein touched on it et the 25th CPS!) Congreee, eteting in the eueeeery report:
"lhe eeeence of the orgenieetionel problem. einply epeeking. ie that eech
one, heving the neceeeery euthority for thie end within their lilite heering
complete euthority. deele with ite own etieire. 'lhie eleeentery everydey

rule in er the one time e beeic principle of the ecience end practice of
control."2

he fulfill-cut of the given petty require-cute in the cone of troop
control in coebet will pernit pore cowlete one of the greet creetive poeei-
bilitiee of the co-endere end etefi'e of ell degreee, the creetion elong then
of e heelthier "peychologicel clinete." end the nein thing. inrovenent of

l. Heteriely XXIV 8"yeede KPSS [Heteriele of the 26th Congreee of the CPSU],
Hoecow. 1971. pp 68-69.

2. Heteriely XXV 8"yezde ms [Heteriele of the 25th Congreee of the CPSU],
Hoecow. 1976. p 61.

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the substentietion of the coshet decisions. reduction of the time for melting
the decisions end delivery to the euhordinetes. the grenting of note time to
the euhordinetes for preperetion for cadet operetions end in the finel ene-
lyeie echievenent of the successful fulfill-eat of their coehet eissions.

2. Procedure for Cot-bet Decision Melting by the Oo-ender
Essence of the Procedure end the Requireeente Iqosed on It

The vell-foundednese end timeliness of the decision melting depend to e
greet extent on the procedure which is used in this ceee.

By the procedure in generel in science ve eeen the set of procedures
ad methods of performing eome operetion heeed on objective I“ of reelity
end insuring echievement of the planned goel.

In order to epply the given definition to the cadet decision netting
process by the contender, it ie first neceesery to teke into eccount the fol-
lowing peculierities. first. this process hesicelly is of e cleerly expressed
creetive neture. for it is elveys connected vith the eeerch for the nev end
best meene of routing the eneey end successful fulfillment of the nission.

‘lhe given peculierity erisee free the feet thet eny forthcoeing codaet will
he orgenised in e new. veriehle eituetion. end therefore it soeetinee is not
an erect copy of the preceding bettles. Secondly, the conhet decision melting
process, es s rule. tekes plece under conditions of lieited tine, end there-
fore its success depends to e greet extent on the cleer orgenieetion of the
work of the co-ender end his stbordinste officers of the control units in the
decision nelting.

Considering these psculierities it is possible epproximetely to give
the following definition of the essence of the coin: decision melting proce-
dure: the coebet decision melting procedure is the heeic set of procedures
end eethode of creetive thought of the co-ender hesed on the objective lure
end principles end elso the orgmiution of his joint work with the officers
of the control units in the decision eelting process. Its purpose is, under
any cowlex conditions of the situetion. to eseiet the cat-sender in the time-
ly. well-founded definition of the contact operetione plen, the codet eiesione
of the swordinete troops end their interection. For this purpose the proce-
dure nust correspond to e nusber of require-eats following free the conditions
of the specific neture of the decision melting process itself.

Inesmuch es the given process hesicelly is of e creetive, cognitive
neture. the eoet iwortent requireesnt on the coﬁet decision making proce-
dure is its correspondence to Kerxiet-leniniet dielectics. the theory of
knowledge. logic. the lens of ened codret end the principles of nilitery
science. "The led conesnder." wrote H. V. Prunes, "lust leern how to fully
eeeter the nethod of thought the ert of enelyeis of phenoeene which is set
forth in Kerxist teechinge.“ me echievements end conclusions of such

1. H. V. Prunes, "Tehrennyye Proisvedeniye" [Collected Horks], Koecov.
Voyeniedet. 1965. p 70. 170

FOR OFFICIAL USE OZTLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ocioncaa oo poychology. nathonatioo and cybornotico can ho of grant aaoiot-
anco to tho couandor in coobat docioion-nakins undor nodorn conditiono. Hio
aiaoion. conooquontly. conoiota in porfoct naotory of tho ontiro oot of
logical and aathonatical nothodo of thought and knowlodso gonoratod by nodorn
ocionco.

no oboorvation of tho 3iwon noot iaportant roquirononto will par-it
tho £ultillaont oi ouch roquirononto of tho docioion aakins procooo ao uni-
voroality and tloxibility. lha oooonco of tho lottor conoioto in suitability
of tho procaduro for docioion noting not for my ono, but for any typo of
hattlo: tho oiionoivo. doianoivo, and oo on and aloo undor variouo condi-
tiono of tho oituation. including with linitod tiao. ‘lhoir oatiofaction io
rocogniaod aa frooiu tho oo-andor iron a long. diificult ooarch in each
opacial caoo for tho nothodo and tho thought ooquonco and aloo tho nothodo of
organization of thoir work during tho conhot dociaion Iokins.

What haa boon otatod, of courao, dooo not noon that tho docioion nak-
ing procoduro io rocogniaod to givo tho co-andor oolo proviouoly coupilod
ochoaatic or quootionnairo fro- which. on filling it out. ho obtains a doci-
oion for any h-ttlo in finiohod fora. "1b lake up a fornulo or o general
rula... which will ho good in .11 caooo a. abourdity." notod v. 1. mm.‘
‘lho purpooe of tho procoduro io diitorant - to on tho oo-ondor with ocion-
tific nothodo of thought and tho noot officiont nothodo of organization of
hio work offoring tho pooaibility of oxhibitins croativity, art and poroonal
talont. Tho prcoanco of ouch a coma procodura for all typoo of ooabat does
not oxcludo, but, on tho contrary. proouppoooo uoo of opociol lava md prin-
ciploo of tho conduct of oach typo of conbot and aloe tho poculiaritioo of
tho coda; oparation by variouo troop ocholono (co-pony, battalion. roginont,
and to on .

It io nocoooary to indicato ouch roquirononto on tho oonhot docioion
naking procooo ao oiwlicity and clarity parlittins ito coworativoly oooy
and foot aooiailation by all oo-ndoro. including tho you; onco not having
outficiont practical axporionco.

In addition, it io nocoooary to conoidor that tho proctical oatiofoc-
tion of the onuoratod baoic roquirononta on tho codut docioion noting pro-
our in mthinhablo without doap and colprohonoivo knowlodgo of tho con-
nandor. without hio oolid nutory of tho ontiro aroonal of logical-nothono-
tical nothodo of thought. In addition. during codat docioion noting II
inortant rolo bolonoa to tho oubjoctivo qualitioo of tho conndor, oopo-
cially thooo ouch ao okill in prodicting tho oouroo of tho forthcoaina coitot.
tho dovolopnont of intuition. otrong will. courago and docioivonooo, clovor-
nooo. altill in docoivins tho onoqy. indopondonco. tho capacity for creative
thought mdor a high psychological load, roadinoao to ontor into a rcaoonoblo
riok and tako rooponoihility for tho outcona of tho combat oporationo. ‘lho

l. V. l. Lonin. Cooplato Colloctod worko, Vol 61. p 52.
171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

coebet end treining prectice indicete thet if the connender does not heve
such quelitiee end et the first difficulty vecilletee, then no well-developed
procedure will help hi- to neke the decision.

Generel Content of the Codet Decision Melting Process

Both the content of the decision itself and the procedure for asking
it by the co-ender ere definitely influenced by the following initisl deter
the neture of the codet lission received from the senior officer and hi.
instructions with reepect to the preperetion for bettlel; the developed con-
ditions of the eituetion. eepecielly the presence of the decision neking
tine: the pereonel quelities of the colander end his swordinetee.

In spite of the veriety of theee dete, the thought of the cor-lender
end orgenizetion of hie work during the conbet decision neking, the generel
principlee which we ehell diecuss below ere cherecteristic.

1he thinking process of the «under in cadet decision netting oc-
cupies the predoninent position in hie entire nultifeceted ectivity with re-
spect to troop control, ineemdi es it. in turn, deter-ines the edastentie-
tion end tinelineee of the decision. vhich scene. the success of the contact
operetione of the troops. ‘lherefore, the study of this procedure hes been
given e greet deel of ettention in ell enies, especielly in recent yeere
in connection with the charges thet heve teken place in the uteriel end
methode of erred codaet.

It in neceesery. hovev'er. to note thet the thought process of eny con-
nend during decision neking. especielly the thought of the co-ender during
codeet decision neking in e couple: situetion. is very difficult to subject
to melyeie end description. Sone euthore even cell the given proceee the
"ego-old secret." Neverthelees. ve ehell try to do this based on Her-sist-
Leniniet theory of knowledge end the results of studies of the edvence ex-
perience of ver end treining exercieee.

In my of the officiel end unofficiel sources} the co-ender's con-
bet decision is entirely justifiebly considered the result of hie explenetion
of the codaet mission received fro. the senior officer end eveluetion of the
situation (see Figure 24).

1. acre end hereefter the decisions ere not teken into eccount which were
ude by the coriander with respect to hie initietive in the absence of
col-unicetione with the senior officer end sherp chengee in the situation.

2. See “‘rektilre" [Tecticn]. Voyeniedet. 1966. pp 115-116: "Reeheniye loun-
dire lie Boy" [Codast Decision of the Go-ender]. Voyenirdet. 1966, pp 20-
38; “Vvedeniye v Teoriyu Vyrebotki Reeheniy" [Introduction to the Theory
of Decision Melting], Voyenizdet, 1972. pp 15-17.

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 26.

Key:

1.
2.
3.
lo.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Plan of tho senior officer
Coumdor's mission
Interoodioto nissions
Special nissions

S . Mission tree

6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

16.
15.

16.
17.

(Targets for destruction)
Explanation of tho oiosion
Evaluation of the oituation
may

Our own troopa

Neighbors

Terrain

liydroooteorolosical condi-
tions. tins of year and day
Radiation situation
Econonic condition of the
area, coﬁat operationo and
special social-political
conpooition of the population
mounts ot tho situation
Versions of the decision
olo-onto

173

Coobot docioion akin; process of

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

tho co-ender .

Plan of coshot operations
Godot niosions of the subunits
of tho coIbot ans

Proceduro for interaction of
tho troops

Measures with respect to poli-
tical work, support of cosbat
oporations. and organization

of control

Selection and formulation of
tho lost expedient version of
tho solution

Note: Degree of detailing by
the colander of the oeasures
with respect to the political
work. type of support of coubat
operations and organization of
control depends on the presence
of the tins and other condi-
tions of the situation.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICXAL USE ONLY

however. the co-ender'e thought process itself when eeking e decision
often ie divided into three independent end eucceeeively reelized steps:
initielly the problee is expleined. end then the eituetion ie mlueted. end
only then is the decision eede. It is iqoeeihle to fully egree with the
lest thinking. for it does not entirely correepond to reelity, edvenced ex-
perience end the theory of knowledge. ‘lhe independence end consistency of
reelieing the esntioned thought operetione of e co-ender ere of e highly pro-
Visionel neture. 1hey ere more e feeling then s reelity. The nsture of due
process of expleining the eission itself is such thet during its reslieetion
the «under is forced to one degree or enother to becone involved in eveluet-
ing the eituetion. his thinking free the very beginning of the decision asking
proceee is none other then the creetion of the thought eodel of the forth-
coeing bettle hy constent conperieon of the liseion with the conditions of its
execution ad. daove ell, with the comtsrection of the ens-y. Without heating

the situetion perfectly. it is inpossible properly to explain the given nie-
eion.

"... ‘lhe goele of een." V. I. Lenin pointed out, “ere the result of
the objective world end presuppoee it..."1 tron the knowledge of this "objec-
tive world." the reel coehet situetion, the thought process of the cu-snder
euet begin in order to deeply mderstend the goel of the cocbet operetions
planned by the senior officer end his niseion. In order to confirn whet hes
been eteted. let ue first consider the eesence end the content of eech of the
indiceted operetions connected with decision neking.

By the explenetion of the coﬁst nission. we nose the thought process
of the coenender eined on the one hend et deep perception of the intention
of the senior officer end on the other hend. the study of the content of hie
code: niseion end eetsbliehnent of the role ad the locetion which his erb-
unit will heve in fulfilling the nieeion of the higher troop echelons.

The proper understending of the mission end the intention of the senior
officer end eleo hie cotter eieeion will per-it the co-ender cleerly to
represent the purpose of the forthconing bettle end the neene plenned by the
senior officer, the tines end nethods of echieving the goel. explenetion of
the requirements on his own decision end the ectione of the swordinete
troope. In eddition. this explenetion of the problee offere the co-mder
the possibility in the short tern to replace the eenior officer in cese of
failure during the force of comet operetione, which is eepccielly inportent
in the ceee of use of nucleer weepons by the ens-y.

The eveluetion of the situetion consists in recognition of the objec-
tive conditions of the perforeence of the eseigned eieeion. he s reeult of
this recognition. fectore ere discovered which proeote or coeplicete the
echievenent of success in the forthcoeing bottle. ‘lhese fectore ere, ee is
known. the ebove-inveetigeted eleeente of the situetion.

1. V. I. Lenin, Conlete Collected "orb. Vol 29, p 171.
1710

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lhe sequence for estinating than can be different. basically beginning
with two events: the nutual relation between the elsnsnts and the importance
of each of the: under specific given conditions. It is inpossible, for
exuple. to estimate the radiation situation before evaluating the weather.
and the eneav and his troops separately from the terrain on which they are to
operate. lhe inortance of each of the elenenta of the situation can also be
different. ‘lhus, on cowletion of the larch, the prssence and condition of
the roads and the nerch possibilities of the troops can have a basic effect
on the content of the co-ander'e solution: on breaking through a prepared
defense. the eneny: on forcing a river crossing. the properties of the river
itself. and so on. 'lherefore it is impossible to establish any single se-
quence for all cues in real life of estimating the elenents of the situation.
and those who per-it this possibility are in error. lhey enter into contra-
diction with the dialectics and guide the conander's thinking along a false
path. The conclusions from evaluating each element of the situation are
usually of a duel nature. 0n the one hand, in generalised for- they reflect
the aain thing. in one elenent or another, and its effect on the performance
by the troops of the combat aission. and the other. they deternine the speci-
fic content of the corresponding element of the decision (where it is neces-
sary to apply the principal strike. how to set up the comet foraetion of the
troops, and so on). 'lhese special conclusions with respect to each elenent
of the situation and with respect to the decision in the thinking process are
towered with each other and with the conclusions free the explanation of the
nission. when necessary the latter are lore precisely defined and are node
more specific with respect -to target. time and place. with this conpariaon,
the commander again unavoiddtly encomters an entirely regular dialectic
contradiction expressed in the fact that each ale-ant of the situation or
groups of elemta has n different effect not only on the solution as a whole
but also on one element or another of it. For examle. it is not excluded
that beginning with the plan of operations of the neighbors. it is expedient
to apply the Iain strike on the right flank of our own troops; from an evalua-
tion of the ensny, in the center of the cadet formation. and from an evalua-
tion of the terrain. on the left flank. As a result of this contradiction in
the comnander's thinking during the decision neking. a ”struggle of motives"
mavoidably arises. and several alternative decisions appear.

The final selection of the best (optilal) or east expedient (close to

optimal) anong these possible versions of the decision and then formulation
of it constitutes the essence of the concluding operation and the entire
thinking process of the cos-lander during combat decision asking.

In general features this is the procedure followed by the connender's
thought during combat decision making.

For more specific explanation of its content. let us present a sample
list of questions in the form of a emery table to which the «under nurt
provide answers and also the conclusions to which he aust arrive during the
process of asking a decision to attack free the narch (see Table 16).

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

'lhe eequence oi deterninetion o! the indiceted decieion eleeente in
Tenn 14 and figure 2‘ an be different. lhue. in treining prectice the pro-
cedure ie well recon-ended in which initielly the nieeion ie expleined end
eech eleeent o! the eituecion ie eetieeted eeperetely. The combined effect
of the correeponding eleeentd of the decieion ie enelyeed. end only then ere
the generelired conclueione drewn. 'Ihie procedure it eoeetinee provieion-
elly celled decieion neking by eleeente of the eituetion.

lte‘beeic edventege coneiete in the feet thet it givee the co-onder
e conplete. epecific cleee of probleee for which he met coneietently find
well-londed enewere during cod>et decieion netting. Ae prectice hee denou-
etreted. it ie eepecielly velueble during the initiel treining of young of-
ficere in the decieion Ieking proceee et the eilitery treining inetitutione
end the co-ender‘e treining eyetee long the troope when they ere given the
eeeigneent with e new. cowlex ad entirely unknown eituetion. In thie ceee.
the treined officer. being guided by the given procedure when prepering for
the exerciee. cerefully enelyree eech elenent of the eituetion. end during
the couree of. the exerciee. hie leeder bringe the treinee to en expedient
decieion greduelly. etep by etep with the perticipetion of the entire collec-
tive of the treining group in thie proceee. Indeed. the hietory of the given
procedure indicetee ite deeignetion prieerily for treining purpoeee. It wee
coqreheneiwely developed during the yeere inedietely following world her
It in order to trein the otticere in ekille of deep enelyeie in the exercieee
of eech eleeent of the eituetion end thue neking well-founded conbet deci-
.eione.

however. the given procedure hee eignificmt deficienciee. lhe
beeic one ie thet e greet deel of tine ie required for eeking the decieion
by thie procedure which. ee hee elreedy been noted. the We: ee e rule
will not heve eveileble in coebet. In eddition. it ertificielly eeperetee
the explenetion of the lieeion fro- eveluetion of the eituetion ee e whole
end eech of ite ole-cute, it ineufficiently coepletely enelyeee the dielec-
tice of the co-endtr'e thinking proceee. it doee not entirely cleerly indi-
cete to hin how in the finel enelyeie to epproeoh the decision end find the
correct enewere to the nueeroue queetione which ere preeented in 'reble 16.

he eeene of elinineting theee deficienciee. ee edvenced prectice end
theoreticel etudiee heve denonetreted, cen eleo be different. One of the-
hee el reedy been inveetigeted in the preceding section. It coneiete in e
cleer definition of the content. e reduction in the amber end volume of eech
element of the decieion on e reeult of erclueion of exceee perte end eup-
porting neeeuree fro. then.

176
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
lpproxi-ate Content of the Conander'a Decieion ﬂaking Proceae for an AI

he March

List of baaic pr—obleu subject Conclusion to whicl

the

to study by the contender (in

arrives as a result

I: consolidated fern! in; Eroceae
3

 

ion of the
ieaion

1. ‘ihe eenior officer's plan: which

enely, in what sequence and by what
means he plane to-attack; the direc-
tion of the min etrilte and the
breakthrouﬂ: eectione; the basic
targets for destruction by nuclear
veapone and conventional weapons

in their zone of attack; the con-
bat fox-nation and nature of the
Ianeuver: the nednode of operation
in case of an attack without the
application of nuclear ueapona

2. Mieaion of our own eubunit:
purpoee of operatione and content
of the next and aubeequent nieeiona
(what enemy, where to attack, what
line to take). the depth of theae
niaeiona and execution ti-ee;
direction of further advance; width
of the offensive etrip and the
breakthrough aectiona; new of re-
inforce-eat and support; routea of
advance end lines of deployment;
readineee tine

——-—————______

Conclusions fron ea
Iiaaion:

location and role 0:
unit in the niaeiou
the hidxer echelon:
in the eoiut form
variation during th
battle; in what (pr
direction the attac
the role of the ed:
in the rout of the
grouping; the requi
the offemive attac

Conclusion by dede
l. Expedient aequen
the en-y.

2. Direction of net
breakthrough eectio
3. Construction of
and the nature of tl
in; the couree of o
6. Approximate cont
aim of the "hard
5. Especially urgen‘
reapect to prepare:
of the conbat operal
NR OHIOIAL US! ONLY

.233 05 «0 30:3! uni-8 .N ha aauuquouBSo no 3030.»

3.32%!!! «0 S32. nu. va- in: .SauSﬂ-S no 8-0.
05 we Saginaw :13 on» :50 v3 oaoaqo: uaouuaa mo 33
no ounuuauo on» .‘uouuu in luau—u. on» you nus—.0039 639.93

Juneau's
05 mo 3.3.3.3. adequacy-no Joe
.5005.» 05 no 33. «33305»:
:15 ”and! canned. v:- coupon

a
3'
t
E
B
*a
3
a
E
8
s
a
a
178

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE .‘NLY
3 ‘
——-——————_—__—__

:ion of

grouping; possible scales ad
nature of operations of the
anew by air.

1. (hast position ad state (with
respect to coaat ar- ad special
troops); providing for reinforce-
nsnts, colhat training, experi-
ence. aural-psychological state of
the personnel, degree of training,
orgaisational capacity of the
co-aders ad staffs; state of
the art with respect to arnnent.
materiel ad trasportation.
support with reserves of materiel.

2. Coshat capailities (with re-
spect to coast ar- ad special
troops); artillery ad artars -
for destruction of eneq targets
tron closed firing positions;
direct-laying weapons ad atitak
guided aiosiles -- with respect to
destruction of the fire points and
tanks; antiaircraft defense re-
sources - with respect to the
control of air targets; motorised
rifle ad tank summits -- with
respect to the creation of
superiority over the snow on
breakthrough of the defense ad

3. Order of intern
troops.

6. Basic assures ‘
the niasions with 1
reconnaissace.

Concluions Iron a
troops:

1. General conditil
capability of saw:
2. Correspondence 1
to the nature of ti
what resroupins is
the tine required 1

Conclusions with re
sion:

1. Direction of mi
ginning with the pa
own troops). struct
bat forntion. dist
forces and Iateriel
the coast fornatio
reliably covered by
craft defense resou
2. “at missions
3. Order of advance
ad interaction of
4. basic nsasures w
political work, org
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A: 0.

an: .39.: 05 no uni—.5. .33 3
3' H3»:- .aouauio~ 32.5.3.—
2.» ﬂu. gnu-H35 coo—.0 no
use... 3 32:3 5.“: 35.3: .N
Agog!— 05

no 28332—0 05 5!— nouns-306
32.3. 73082. no 8333.. .u
”swan—v cu Mada-cu Add: Icons—068

.b—ooonu

anal 3:33 2. unl— 3: El 3....
.8833!— 3» no noun: .3: .N
.6333! 05

no anal—4343 05 no 30332.
can no anouoao can we uuouuu 2."
«33.3....—

05 no 8.33525 Iona glad-.8

.nﬂowuluoao union. on» «0 PS.—
In... El 2—095 2—» «0 Hanna .5

llllllll'llllllllul

lllllhlllll'llmllu N .n

.093 0530qu an 5

ucouuuo .8..qu 2.» he .33 032—3.
05 no 3303! 05 van 257400
2-8: 05 no ado-83:0 «o 28.3
'93:. 2.! an: 05 6...... 29.8.5.
3.- nu: 2.» loan .23» 2:

louu 3.259- 96 .50 no 3323

no no»: va- Sn 3339—08 .8:
In“! on» «o 2.330 ”063.3: .n

.«ldu 89.3 05 an 08v on .3
a an...- ugucuono no 25»... .N

.2305

ES go can '5 32503 new 23
we on... 05 5539590 on. has» .3
0.595 uni. an .32.: «8.3.33 .n

88.30: 599—5

1:093 In» 6.." El .niuogv Donna-8°
v3.0.6 2—- douuou-l 3' 009—3 mo
0.“qu 392:5. Hand-II BI 739.03
Jovian! ou noon-cu 5.“: I 5.2.9.
2' 80.3.»: horn «noun-.00 3353
'80 «o 9393. I. Ooogouou down—Bo

«in. on» no oasis-3009— uncut-bu

Inn-luau qua-3.830» «9—03»-
tungoo is. .5383 82—3 28.3
luau-no no Haul-093 In» .327.“
we 95:80 you: .Su ”5352—
.32.2— uao was 3333.530 2.»
an 00’".— uaU—ql o» uooaoou 5.!-
Iu 2—095 9.300598 “8—0.an
1—383 in. on» no Sauna—0..

anon—unwed
mo nodal-nag Av

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.53....»

05 a 0053:0000.» 0n unﬂ- 035 .c
.0853

90.302501. ca undula- can...

van 2508qu 05 «0 who;- 3
luooaa on uoxau Aug 00.3010: .5
.350» non-:00: val 5.2—9.0
.33»: 000E: ~03. 05 can 330.—
.nouuuoo 05 you 323 uni-000.8 .0
.25..» 05

uo 3500.5 alone now .8308 .n
.050. .350 vac

35:030.. 0732.0 0300! .38-
38.300 05 no ugunov .0075.
3 05 no union-000 no 000.3 .0
.obuauuo 3.53 «0

00.3095... .3590 05 no 00030“
08900990 on! yuan 05 no 005..— .n
.005.— ugauv

Jon->00 no 9399a .8338 00.100
«0 null-00.:— vnI Susanna-8.6M
.0030: gnaw—Iona

El 3013' huuluha «0 8.30083 2—
2.3303 0» use: 5.!— neon-sauna

.5325

0030 you Ham-080:0 uRI 06333.3
«00:3! uni-00 609000 05 «0 val-
tnnwugu 05 3' 335003 “30.796

no 0!. on... :0 .3933 «0 uoouuﬂ
.5950»

05 «0 00.31.30».- loam 00.33008

0 n N
lilllll'l'll'lll“!

$90 00 0:- .033 .95
«$00.3 5030:3003 0033 50.. an
0009003 .332:— uo 6038qu- can
hound Sin...» 3" 00mg «Haw-00.—

moluu Ewn 05 3 0.3.33 .73 .

I00 05 0» an! 05 «0 00502.00..—
Iuoo “awaken 05 we aouuuuhqb .c

0830?:-

wnﬁ-ooauuoouvha no 009000.:

05 .3393». no»... .3333:
0.3300903.“ 000 33000000 .0003
#0000 «0.30230:- voounuuo .300
on» no 9:50: .nvnou «0 90.3.2.
«000 El 000000.: “sudden-000a .n

.E 05 ha «and! van 8030.
luau—500 «:00qu .3030: 01:000.—
uo Ida“.— uhugo on- souvu: use
.850.— .nouucoo .couualuou union.
«5 no 300': 05 «0 23.00:.—
uou 000.3 0.6330023 $300
.533 H.330: .35.“!— via
“0.03-8.80 vac unluuoonoo .9:
than 50.325030 no 3.0.3.3000 .«

.0130».-

gngn no 00800.3 «2.00.5

.50 no 2500030 05 no no.
1—30va "30000000 you 03030 30
30.3.3000 £0.33 u0 an}: on» an“)
30.“.— EI 0000300 3000 05 how
000.: 05033823 33.75833
.3320 .903 £0.33 no 2:»
"50:3 05 mo «.5»..— .nauoaoo :—

.0500:

50:» van hloao 05
no union—Inn. 0..»
a.“ 90:30." 05

no 00.30.38 2»

181
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.000000 000 00 03000000 00% 000
300000 70.000000 00 00000003 2...

_ “00000000 00 0000000 0003 000030008

’0

.000000

000 «0 000000000 00 00000 000000 .N
.0303! 00.100

000 00 0000500000 000 00 000000000
000.3 0.00 00 000000 «0 000000 :—

. «000000000 000000000

000 0000000000 0000 03.08.3000

.A00 00 000 .080000 0000 00.—
..00003000 600000.": 0000000000
70.000000000000003 0« 0000000
00000 00 00000 000 000000000 .N

8000003000 10003000000!

.800: 0.0 50: 000.5006 80...
300000 00% 000 00 000000000 000
000000 #0000000 00 0000000.:— :—
3300000 00 0000000 00.0.. 0000000008

.000u0 03 000 0.— 00000000000

«0 0000! 000000» .00 0000003000

000 000 000001 0.0000 000 00.00.0000
00....) 0000000000 00000 00 00000
[—00.00 n00.330080'000ha 00 000000
II 80.300000 H3000~000000050000
000 00000030 I000 Bowl—.0000

0 n N
llllnlllllllllllllll

.000000 000 0.“ 000 0050 0000000 000
00v 00000 0000000000.“ “000000 050
00 00:00 000 00 000000 00 000002 .N

.0000 00>.“ 000

00 000000.. 0000000 00 00000 000 00
0000003000 0030000 000 00 0.3000
0 00 000000000 0000 000 000000 00.5
00 000 0000.500 00:: “0000 003
000 .00 0000000500 .0N0000 00 .300."
000 000000000 $000000.- .0000 .003
I000." “000000 000 000 0000000 000
00 000000 «0 000000 000 ”ion :—

30302. 2.02
000 1000 2-0 «0 00000000 .00090

000 03.0.0.0 «000 000 0000 00 00”. .n

.00 00 000 000000

030 50.300330: «0 00000000000
000 30000000000 00500: 0.60:0“ "00
{303000 000 000 .0000? “0.0000000
00000000000 “0000." 00:00» 000 0.“
000 000000000 00 0000000 00.03 00.!-
000 00 000.0000» 000 000000000 “0000
I0000I00 0000: 000 000 "000000: .~

.0000:

10.005000 000 003—0000 000 0000:

000 «0 00.32.00.000 200000: 000 03
00.000 .0000 0' 00.“ 00 00008005 «000
I083 0.300000 .‘00 .00 00000000000
00 000 00000 000000 00 0.." 0000000
000 0000..“ 0000: 2000000 000 08.0."
.3055 0000000000 03000.— 00003 2n

0000
300000 000000000
«a 8332.0 C

000

000 0000 00 0000
.0000000000 00000
I0000000IO00»...
no 0000000000 a0

182
FOR OFFICIAL USE (‘NLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040010-9

FOR OHIOIAL USE ONLY

00.330000 05
500 000000.?» 500316 0030:
£00000 «0 0000! 000 000000 000

no 00000 00... you 000000000 H003
«0 000 00 0000000 00.“) 0000000:
"0300.000 8 0000000 000D 030.5008

«AR—0000 B000

000 000 030 0.0V 000000 000 «0
000300000 003 000 00 00030 00"
“003000.."- 00» no 000030 000.3

000 was: 00.6 003030000

.5000 05

5.. 0000000 000000 «0 000000.300-

. 000 no 000000000000 000 «0 030
I003? 00 0000000 00.!— 0000000: .N
.0000“

000-0 000 «50900000 90 0000000
“0030030 000.“ 05 5.“: 000000000

|llll||lll|llllllalllllllll

lllhlllllllllllllln a m

0:00 0001— 8—0» 00 0.“ 0000 000
00000000 0003 5 0000000000 $0.30»
-00 .000uou 00.0. and) 0008: .0000
00...) «0000000000 00.100 «0 0.8 2n

.00 00 0.00 .0330

.000030000 .0085 .50 0.. 00:

05 00:3 003.300 .080 03 .00..»
Isa-000 000 00 000300.00 00.8 ,.N

$003500.— 00.3003 05 00

000.— 000035 000000.000 «0 00000
05 now £0050 08.300.30.00
H000n 37.30000 «0 000.0000 0000.3
£5300.“ n00.30- .000«00.u0u00 .300
100 no 0!. 05 u0 0031330000 .n

.0000: 05

«0 53.20000 00% 050 00 30::
000 00 000 00000 10332—0500
["0000 05 00 000000 05 no 00030
«00000.— 00000 0000093 "003000000
05 no 000000000000 350000 .n

.0000) «0 0000000 000
303090 2—0000»: 3 000000 «0
000000 “30000.03 000 and) 0500.300

030.300 00300000
0000 05 «0 00.30?
10000 000 0030.70

00303000 000

no 030000300
0003.30.71.30.
0:0 000 00.30.0000
00.100 no 0000
05 00 0030.3.
I000 0.300000 00»

mo 03000.30» 3

183
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPBZ-O0860R000100040018-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040016-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

493:3 no 83:35qu El 28.3:
luau uni—3 no 323:. iuoa «10.3.32. 0»
uooaoCu Aug as usher.“ 98: .c

.3» can Aug .Idawav 60.330." £08:

:35 :33 05 8 avenue» 5.!- 2—995
05 no 3530. vna nacho... 05 32.3.38
3 :3. «Bough—35 uo anal-8.5m .n

.33 .8530“ .8338 union.

33 a.“ 60.3003 .02}...qu chasm no :33
round. .3839“! gal-v.23. El as... 05 no
oculluouuon on» no ans-Du 0 cl 3—: 3 on:
uti- .A3=duuson gown-03 :00qu on as:
can :05) {Iowa was: .coouaoaou and!
302330.» «In. 3.18 2—» no 3.354...
aguoio 05 no «noun-i uni—8 .w

n a

186

FOR OFFICIAL 083 C 'LY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPBZ-00860R000100040018-9
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY

A second inportmt noses of acceleration of the process of preparing
the decision and inproving its substatiation is the skillful codination (but
not replace-ant) by the co-snder of the shove-indicated decision staking se-
quence with respect to develop-ants of the situation with sonewhat different
order. which on be provisionally called decision naking by the decision ele-
ssnta. lhere is no theoretical difference between these two procedures and
there can be none insasuch as both are based on the seas procedural base: the
explanation of the nission and estination of the situation. 1h. difference in
then consists only in the thought sequence of the oo-ander.

During the codast decision ”king by elements of the decision the con-
ssnder explains the assigned nission and evaluates each ale-ant of the situa-
tion in close interrelation ad by the angle of their coepler effect on the
corresponding elsnent of the decision. 0n proceeding with the generation of
the decision. the co-ander i-adistely states a specific probles (where to
sake the principal strike. how to construct the codaat forestion. and so on)
and finds the newer considering the requireQnts of the senior officer's plan.
the structure of the ensny defense, the nature of the terrain md all other
conditions of the situation on which the answer depends. At the sans tins.
froe the very beginning his thinking acquires a sore purposeful nature, it pro-
ceeds along a shorter path, which nesns lore quickly halting the final goal -
deternination of the plan. the combat nissions of the troops. and the princi-
ples of their interaction (figure 2‘).

For the application of this procedure the «under not only has the
necessity but also the possibility. It is caused by the presence of the above-
indicated dialectic relation between the process of explanation of the nia-
sion, estimation of the situation and between the elenents of the situation
and also the circunstance that the contender in conbst receives such data on
the situation and studies it in tins. that is. before assign-eat of a new
sission. In this he differs significantly, for axesple. fro- the student of
an acadsqy who receives an assign-ant to hold a nseting. On receiving the
Iission. the «under in oodaat has no need to begin "fro- :ero" and succes-
sively sort out each element of the situation Isntslly inasnuch n he has al-
ready done this work. he therefore has the cowlete possibility of inediately
proceeding with the latter - the deter-ination of the elements of the decision.
‘lhis is also required by the laws of logic and the theory of knowledge. In
order to be convincud of this fact let us refer to Table 1‘.

0n careful melysis of this tile it is easy to see that the thinking
process of the co-ander when uniting the decision cannot be artificially
broken down in any way into the independent and successively realizable steps
such as explanation of the nission and evaluation of the situation. These
operations are so closely connected that the snellest disturbance of this
relation leads directly to a contradiction with the requiresents of theory
of knowledge. the essence of which consists in the following.

'lhe consciousness of nan is fornsd by reflection of the obiective will.
Pros this fact it follows that the process of codat decision seeing by the

185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY ..

col-andar, juat ea any other cognition. nuat nacaeoarily begin with the tan-
aitive perception of the real coin: aituation, objective reality and follow-
ing along the path "iron vital contanplation to abatract thought and iron it

to practice - ouch ia the dialectic path of recognition of the truth. recog-
nition of objective reality.“ mm. to man the given requirement of

the theory of knowledge can lead to groae arrora, aepecially in the caaa where
theaa errore have been per-itted by the aanior officer and the arrore of the . _
co-andar nahing the given deciaion are auperinpoead on then. In order for "
thia not to occur. before the co-andar reaorte to apecific. deep explanation
of the aaaigned niaeion. the aituation nuet firet be analysed at laaat in gene-
ral outlinea. ad for ar-pla. it in nacaaeery to deter-inc ouch factore at
where our own troopa and the anew troopa are located and what they are doing
(taking the offeneive, defanaiva. on due larch. end an on). that approxiaetaly
their cowoaition ie and aloe the general nature of the terrain. Without

thia. he cmot correctly anever any of the prohlene of the explanation of the
niaeion preeanted in “la 1‘. lion ie it poeaihle, for ar-pla. correctly to
undaratand and deeply realiaa the goal of the operation. that in. what enaey
the aanior officer plane to daatroy. vhat anew ia to he deatroyed by our on
(auhordinate) troopa. what linaa are to be taken. not having even the noat
general concept of the anew in the terrain. Without thie, when explaining

the niaaion it ie i-poeaihla to take even a etep along the path to the deci-
aion. to plan, for exaqle, even the approrinate direction of the principal
attack.

eatinatad the aituation in cloae dialectic interrelation ad caauality. in
addition. a hoe already been noted. there ha been no neceeaity. but a poa-
aihility for thin. Indeed, in codnt reality the co-ander alvaya knove the
eituation of one degree or mother. Ila conetently livee it. 'lhua, before
obtaining a new niaaion fron the eanior officer. on the haaia of hie prelini-
nary ordare. and prediction of the future oparationa he conatntly atudiaa the
eituetion, the atata and the capabilitiee of hie troopa and alao the anew
oppoaita, the terrain in the direction of probable oparationa, weather and ao
on. m aeaignnent of the liaaion, he only gathere the niaaing infarction and
nekea a nora purpoaeful atudy of all of the obtained data on the aituation
conaidering the nature of the nieaion. ‘lharefora, the co-ander doee not
need to find anawera to the dorana of queationa reflected in Table 16. Many
of theee unaware he hee in hie head or require only refine-ant. Ila can uea
the eituation not an the "raw laterial" for atudy but ea the finiehed ”pane"
for conatructing the ”building" of the dacieion. here the capacity of the
co-ender to ancoqaaea all of the nunaroua fectore of the aituetion with hie
thinking. quickly to find enong than the Iain onea deter-ining one element or
mother of the daciaion. ‘iheae Iain factors will look different under dif-
ferent conditiona. For axanple, the eequance of the routing of the eneny.
the direction of the prinery attack and the coi>at fornetion of the troopa

 

1. V. 1. Rain, Couplete Collected Horke, Vol 29, pp 152-153.
186

FOR OFFICIAL USE : ‘ILY
10R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

depend priaarily on the atructure of the anew dafenee. the fore of the
Ianeuver - on the preeence of open flanke and gape, the content of the con--
hat nieeion ad the order of interaction of auhordinate troope - their con-
hat capahilitiea. however. it ie not excluded that other fectore can turn
out to he the min factore. for mule, the condition of the terrain. the
radiation eituation. tho eupport of our own troope. and ao on. The art of
the cmdar will. in particular. coneiet in quickly analyeing the coqlex
labyrinth of the eituetion nd finding the proper way out of it. nuie art
ie within the power only of a literate. experienced officer.

lhua, the coauender'e explanation of the nieeion and hie evaluation
of the eituation are not independent etepe in hie thinking iaolated'froa
each other, but a united creative proceee of deciaion noting. After explana-
tion of the niaeion. the evaluation of the aituation doee not begin. hut con-
tinuee end goea into greater depth in order more coapletely end in nore de-
tail to find out ell of ite poeitive and negative propertieainfluencing the
perforaance of the atated aiaeion hy the euhordinate troope.

1he given theoretical eituationpernite a different approach to the
content of the proceee of explaining the aieeion iteelf. It offere the poo—-
eihility for the «under not to he liaited only to the analyeie of the
thinking of the eenior officer and hie nieeion, but to take a nore certain
etep along the path to hie own decieion. to drop hie explicitly inexpedient
vereion, to aka the plan epproxieetely. to give the troope epecific preli-
minary ordere, to give hie further thinking a lore purpoaeful nature end
thue eignificently accelerate the entire deciaion making prooeea. In addi-
tion, in explaining the ueigned nieaion in coebination with the general
conditiona of the eituation already known to him. the contender can break
down the nieeion into a nuder of internediate and apeciel prohlale (aub-
prohlene) and einulteneouely-diatrihute the letter nong the reaponeihle
ewordinate euhunite. m. procedure ia widely diecmeed in the literature
on the theory of production control under the ease of conetruction of the
“problem tree" or the "target tree," and it ie ueed conpletely in the Idli-
tary affeire ooneidering. of couree, their epecific nature.

In confirIation of what hae been etated. let ue preeent m exawle of
the application of the given 'procedure when the oo-ander erplaine the nie-
eion to attack a reinforced eneny notorired infantry conany. lnowing the
organization. weaponry. reinforcenent etandarde and tactice of the cowany
in advmce. the battalion co-ander nentelly dividee the nieeion into a
nuwer of apeciel eiaeione during hie explanation, euch ee daetruction of
the one-y in three platoon etrong pointa, neutralization of 15 nechinegme.
one large—caliber aechinegun. three nortare. lO entrenched take. eix anti-
tank guided nieailea. eix recoilleee gune, two radar, and one oheervation
poet. lie can ainultaneouely plan the dietrihution of all theee eneny tar-
gete along hie aveilahle forcee coneidering the application of the neane of
deatruction of the eenior officere with reepect to eone of then. In epite
of the fact that thie dietrihution ie of a prelininery nature (without ape-
cific indication of tine and place). it pernite the creation of the fore.

187

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

the "skeleton" of the future decision which then can be filled out with re-
spect to content much faster and auch aore easily. ‘lhe close codinetion of
the process of explaining the aission with evaluation of the situation con-
sequently has great practical significance.

It is iapossible to consider the last. concluding operation in the
thinking of the conander -- deteraination of the expedient version and form-
lotion of the solution - as an independent step. Koreover. it cannot be
called decision asking. as some euthou say. We have seen above that the
cosbst decision does not fora in the consciousness of the co-ander i-e-
diately or suddenly. but as a result of cmlex. at tines agonizing thinking,
weighing the easy pros and cons when explaining the aission and estimating
the situation. that is, over the extent of the entire decision-naking process.

the nature of the given process itself is characterized by a search
nature. inasauch as during its course. on the basis of the contradictory ef-
fect of the various eleasnts of the situation several alternative versions of
the decision unavoidably occur to the coassnder in the fora of hypotheses.
At the end of this process. no decision asking takes place. but the selection
of one out of several versions which the col-ender for one reason or another
(by one index or another) considers the best. the optiasl or the nest expe-
dient. that is. close to optiasl.

The search for 611s version begins at the very beginning of the deci-
sion asking process. During the course of this process, a literate. ex-
perienced co-snder cowaratively easily sifta out the explicitly erroneous
free the set of possible versions. The reaaining few (two or three) expedi-
ent or rational versions are coapared by the colander at the end of the
decision making process by the expected coder results (the possible losses
to the eneny and his own troops. the consuwtion of asteriel and ties for
fulfillnsnt of due aission. the capture of the terrain. and so on) and he
finally selects the best of them. Let us note that at this tile not only the
nind but also the will of the cousnder has great significance. The forced
decision is not to decide anything. that is. in action. After selecting the
best version. the co-ander formulates and explains his decision to his
swordinates. The decision asking process ends.

however. this ending of the given process can be considered only rela-
tive. Subsequently. the thinking that the co-snder does daout the solution
continues. especially for special changes in the situation which is most
characteristic for the tins of conduct of the cottat operations. During the
given period. the cousnder unavoidably aust refine. supple-ent and specify
one eleaent or another of the previously asdc decision again and agsin. and
in case of a sudden. sharp change in the situation, sake a theoretically new
decision as a whole. Most frequently. the necessity for aore precise deter-
nination or alteration of the previously made decision will occur during the
course of enlist on sharp changes in the situstion which will be difficult
for the cot-sander and staff to foresee in advance before the beginning of the
cobat operations. lhus. on the approach of the sdvsncing troops to the

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE “le
D. R. IVRNOV. V. P. SRVEL’VEV mil) P. V. SHEHBNSKIV
3 OF 4
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

forwerd defeneive line of the enew. which cennot be reconnoitered in all the
deteile before the beginning of the bettle. the couender cm abtein entirely
new dete on the grouping of the enew end the locetian of hie fire power which
requiree nare preciee definition not only of the nieeiane of hie ertillery
but elea the etructure of the cadet famtian of the edmnite end eonetinee
the direction of the nein etrihe. Still gteeter refinenente end ahengee in
the decieien ten be required efter e eudden nucleer etteck by the eneev. hie
deetruction of hydroengineering etructuree. flooding of the terrein end other
enelogoue eituetiane.

Thue. the ca-ender'e thought praceee want hie decision occure in ell
pheeee of troop control. beginning with the tine of obtaining the codnt nie-
eion end ending with ite fulfill-eat. No co-ender cen hope thet efter nelting
even e eubetentieted decieion ad ieeuing the coﬁet order everything will
proceed eutaneticelly on ite awn. ineenuch no the ener will elweye etrive to
teke the correeponding camterneeeuree. There ie no diecantinuetion in think-
ing or creetivity of the co-ender in bettle.

Logicel Hethade of thinking of the (Io-lender During Decieion ﬂexing

Now let ue coneider which epecificelly logicel eethode of thinking the
co-ender cen uee when netting e coebet decieion.

Out of theee eethade. the cowreheneive dielectic neterielietic nethad
of recognition of the truth hee prinery eignificence. Fro- the very begin-
ning of the thought proceee when uniting the colbet decieion, it requiree thet
the cc-ender beee hie thinking prinerily on the objective feet. the ectuel
conditiane end eituetion. correctly eveluete then fran the quentitetive end
quelitetive pointe of view. coneider then in clone interreletion. continuaue
developnent end chenge. diecovery of contredictione of this develop-eat.
finding the beeic elenent. diecavery of the poeeible fectore heving e deci-
eive influence on the eucceee of the fulfillnent of the cadet eieeion by
the troope. thet ie. eee the eeeence of the bottle no the externel phenonenan.

When ueing the given nethod it ie eepecielly neceeeery to diecuee the
inportence fro- the coe-ender'e point of view of the coneideretion of the
conbet eituetion not eo Inch eteticelly ee dynenicelly. the chmgee end
develop-ant during the couree of coebet. Only with thie eppraech cen the
co-ender not einply peeeively coneider the eituetion but be ite creetor.
ectively influence the operetiane of hie troope during the courne af bettle
end through then, effect the eneny. Por this purpoee. the cepecity of the
con-ender to predict the paeeible chengee in the eituetian end the cauree of
the farthcaning aoebet operetione hee prinery eignificence. It ie eeeier.
Generel of the Any 5. H. Shtenmho notee in hie neeoire. “for the count
chiefe heving the gift of fareeight to generete end quickly eeke decieione.
Frequently it occure thet one co-ender or enother experience greet diffi-
cultiee when neking e decieion. he caneidere the verioue vereione end doee
not know which one to tehe. 'Anather colander. in the eene eituetion. inne-
dietely eelecte e vereion ad throwe out the athere. um occure beceuee the
letterI ee they e92, cen eee eheed."l
l. S. H. Shtenenho, "Generel'nyy Shteb v Cody Voyny" [Generel Steff During

the Ver here). Book 2. Macaw. Voyeniedet. 1973. p ‘96.

189
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
NR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

Skill in predicting the couree of the forthconing codaet operetione
during ﬂorid Her I! wee cherecterietic of ell of the «undue of the Soviet
Amy who -hed neetered the dielectic nethod of thinking perfectly. for ere-
ple. thie 'ie whet A. Chekowekiy writee in hie novel "llokede" [llockede]
ﬂout the thinking prectice of Herehel of the Soviet Union 6. R. mukowz
“looking et the up. mukow did not eiqu reproduce the picture of the peet
bettle. he knu how to predict the neture of the future hettie. in celculeted
Iinutee. eoeehnw 'pley out' the yerioue wereione firet for hieeelf end then
for the en'ew. lie knew how to daetrect out of hi-elf end hecone «bodied
in the"eneny. then. egein beconing hieeelf. to eveluete the intentione of the
eneny.

During octet decieion Ieking. the coﬁinetion of euch generel theore-
ticel evethode of logicel thinking ee enelyeie end eyntheeie. ehetrecting end
generelieetion. induction end deduction. enelogy nd coeperieon eleo heve
ieportent eignificence.

By hreeking down the generel nieeion into e nuder of internediete nie-

eione end the generel eituetion into individuel elenente. enelyeie pernite e
deep etudy of eech of then end e diecovery of the nein onee eung then end
eeperetion of the eecondery once. in ext-ole fro. the experience of World
Her I! confine how ieportent euch enelyeie ie. when uniting the decieion to
go on the offeneiwe in October 19“ et the reinforced Shtellupcnekiy reyon.
the decieive fector in routing the eneny wee proper eelection of the vulner-
ehle enot in hie defenee. lhe co-ender of the 96th Guerde Rifle Divieion
diecowered on the heeie of the dete ohteined fron the unite md emmite con-
nendere when etudying the eneny thet eoutheeet of Shtellupen the eneny heo' e
field type defenee: thie eleo determined the coieet decieion neking. ‘lhe
decieion w. nede to neke the Iein etrike egeinet thie weekeet point. bypee-
eing the reinforced region fron the eouth which ineured euccoee of the of-
feneive.

lhe lethod of enelyeing the eituetion ie continuomly connected with
eyntheeie. which per-ite joining the reeulte of eetieeting the pertiel ele-
nente of the eituetion obteined during the enelyeie proceee into e united
whole. which ie eepecielly inortent when nehing e decieion by ite elenente.
F. hgele ewheeized thet without nelyeie there cen be no eyntheeie. but
gotether with it "...thinking ooneiete ee such in expending the objecte of
oonecioueneee to their elenente en in codeining the elenente connected to-
gether into e unity."I

Anelyeie end eyntheeie ere need in neking decieione in cloee codaine-
tion not only with eech other but eleo with euch nethoie . induction end
deduction. Induction helpe the co-ender. on the been of eingle. et tinee
ineignificent fecte of the coebet eituetion. to errive et generel conclu-
eione. Deduction. on the contrery, pernite. on the heeie of the knowledge
of the generel principlee of the conduct of coebet operetione. judg-ent of

l. R. Here and F. bgele. "orb. Vol 20. p ‘l.

190
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OH’ICIAL USE ONLY

the epeciel phenonenon of coﬂat reality. ‘ihe conclusions node by the induc-
tive aethod of thought alwaye ere checked out by the nethod of deduction and
vice versa. Induction and deduction consequently ”...are related to each

other in the sane necessary way as synthesis and snalysie."1 Let us denon-
strate this in a sinple ere-ole.

In one of the staff co-and exercieee the battalion co-nnder received
reconnaieaence data that in the vicinity of ii there were to be 10 to 15 spe-
cial vehiclee and crane vehicles under reinforced guard. 0:: receiving thie
special type data. knowing the enem's sateriel in advance. he i-edietely
essuned by induction that the eneny's nissile battery had arrived in the indi-
cated area. but which one? line deductive nethod helped his to answer this
question. for this purpose he plotted the area of concentration of the
vehiclee on a asp. covered it with the general structure of the eneny'a de-
fense, and estﬁlished that it was within 10 b of the forward line between
the defensive poeitions of the eneq. Knowing the general principles and
no'matives of the one by the ener of the nissile troops. he drew the solid
conclusion that a battery of tactical niaeiles was being deployed in the
given area which could launch a nuclear attack in 15 to 20 ninutee.

In this way the connender was ﬁle to detcnino the structure of the
men's strong point by individual entrenchnr ts and higher points, by the
operation of individual radios. the syeten of eneq control pointe. and so on.

Even in these siwlest exanea we can see that in addition to the
above-mtioned thought processes the «under also uses such processee as
ebetrscting ad generalization. ‘Iheir role ia especially inortant in the
nore conlex situations where it ie necessery to withdrew fron this bit of
infornetion daout the eituetion and concentrate attention on the nain. deci-
. aive information for the given tine. However. the discovery of the nein ele-
sent of the aituetion is not a sinpie problen, the sore so in that nany of the
situation data can be nissing, and part of then will be false. Accordingly.
eulogy and onepariaon cen be of great eesietance to the co-ander. the es-
sence of which consists in conpariaon of the available date on the aituation
with the previouly known cases ad thue finding the neceseary conclusions
for the present and the future. however. such conclusions. as a rule. are
of a propositional (probability) nature. they appeer in the form of hypothe-
ees inaenuch an the situation is nonrecurrent. and one battle is in no way
sieilar to another. Ignoring this fact. the atandard copying of the previous
operations sooner or later leads to failure to fulfill the nission. 0n the
contrary, creative consideration of the changes in the situation. finding
vhat in new always pronotes success. for confirnation of what hae been said
let us preeent two emplee fron the experience of World Her 1!.

In carrying out the offensive operation. in February 1963 our troops
were engaged in battle at languish. In the city iteelf and on the approaches
to it the eneny created e strong defenae. Repeated efforts to take the city
ended in failure. and not only became of the lack of superiority over the
eneny. Our troops nede an error in that the repeated attacks were usually

1. I. liar: and f. bgels, works. Vol 20. p 562.
191
FOR OFFICIAL ESE ONLY
[0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nade at the sane tine: they began in the norning and ended at dark. The
anew quickly aada use of this: he used night to regroup his forces and
nsteriel and reinforce his defenses. ‘ihu. by the beginning of the daytine
attack by our troops the eneny was prepared again. when this situation was
properly evaluated and the necessity for attacking at night was understood.
the correaponding decision was nade. ‘ihen the offensive was crowned with
success. In the given case the decieive role was played by doparture free
the standard. proper and creative selection of the tine of beginning the at-
tach when uniting the decision.

Let us conaider a second ar-ple. One of the battalions was to cross
a large water barrier and capture a powerful strong point of the eneu. ‘ihis
aiasion was quite conplicated in itself. and the battalion co-uder. Captain
Tret'yakov. cowlicatad it still note. it would seen. by the decision that
he nade after detailed fanilieriration with the situation. Ile considered it
necessary to naka the river crossing where it split into three. ar- flowing
through a difficult swam area. however, in reality this nest difficult
alternative turned out to be the shortest path to victory. ‘lha anew defenses
here were the weakest. and in addition. the anew did not expect attack fron
this direction. was taken by surprise and rooted.

‘iha characteristic of the thought process of the coriander when naking
the codaat decision would he inconplete if he did not mloy the so-called
inductive-heuristic nethods. In recent years a great deal of attention has
been given to than in all arniea. ‘lheir essence consiats in the capacity of
the «under to unite a decision without a developed opinion and intermediate
phaaes of their thinking process with sdasequent nental selection of all of
the eituation ale-ante. In other worde. theae nethode are based on the ahi-
lity of the co-ander to "see" the decision. to dry a .‘aet. developed nental
conclmion. to select the min iten free a set of initial situation data and
i-adiately arrive at the final reeult - the deciaion.

“mesa nathods are neat clearly exhibited during decision leaking in

the course of coﬁat operations when fast reaction of the co-ander to the
changes occurring in the aituation is required. They are based not only on

the subjective qualities of the co-nder. but prinarily on hie deep know-
ledge of the objective laws of arned codrat. the principles of nilitary science.
solid naetery of the dialectic nethods of thought nd great practical experi-
ence. Consequently. they do not so nuch contradict the logical nethod hut
swplenent and extend the- in the united deciaion naking process. In addi-
tion. they are closely connected with the psycholcgical etate of the co-ander.

his inepiration. nood. collectiveness of will. and spiritual and phyaical
forces.

'ihie peculiarity of the cowat decision leaking hy the conander hee
been figuratively characterized by General of the Army P. I. latov in his
nenoirs "0n the "arch and in corset." Ila writes: "lhe front line co-andera
know how any thoughts crowd together when you look at the location of a
forthconing battle for the last tine. Like any creation of the hands and
will of Ian. the battle is realized twice - first in thought and then in

192

FOR OFFICIAL USE - YLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reality. If the chief of staff is an operationa natheaatician. this in insuf-
ficient for the co-ander. lie nuat have the power of fantasy. straining his
eensee. to survive the first nental battle, the parte of which are still
iarinted in hie nenory like trace of photographic filn."

The Application of liathenatical Methods ad Home of Hechaiaation and Auto-
nation When Making the Coast Decision

In order to lake a tiealy. substantiated coaat decision. the applica-
tion not only of logical but also Iathenatical nethods by the coriander hoe
great imortance. ‘lhis is indicated by all of the any centuries of history
of nilitary science. A. liekedonskiy had Aristotle on his "adviser on nethe-
notice." who helped hin develop the disposition of the battles ad the forea-
tion of the troops on the battlefield. For A. V. Surov. one of the basic
operating principleo. along with speed ad iaoct. waa viaual eatination.

It is aqueationed that the role of the nethenatical nethods in nodern
coast has increased greatly inasnuch a now inatead of nave-en: of the
troops by foot ad arrangeant of continuous aiforn col-rams on the battle-
field it is neceasary to calculate theoretically different ad lore coals:
phenomena to the radiation situation. ad to eupplenent the ordinary calcula-
tione and ”estination by sight" there are linear ad dynanic progra-ing,
probability theory. differential equations. systeas aalysis, operations
research. gone theory. rear planing, progra-ing and conputer engineering.
Without natheeatical nethods, without quantitative and qualitative substa-
tiation. it ie iaoasible to adopt a proper. especially on optinal decision
in nodern coaot. One healthy idea. experience or intuition ia now insuffi-
cient. the trial ad error lethod is in general insdniasible. for in nuclear
warfare nay errors turn out to be uncorrecteble.

In addition to neceasity. the application of nothenatical nethods
arises iron poosibility. “are creative nature of the decision aaking process
doea not nea that it is not characterized by operations which ca be
for-alieed. elgoritheieed and expressed by lathenatical language. l‘heee
operations prinarily include the perfornace of various cuculations required
for naking a sastantiated decision to use the available forces ad ateriel
in coahat. the loot iwortat ad not recently encountered calculatione in
control practice are usually the following:

a) Calculation of the coaat capabilities of the coast or. ad
special troops on both sidea (Table 16), ouch as, for exaaple, artillery and
nortars - with respect to danage of the eneq targets iron closed fire
poaitions: the direct-laying athoda ad atitak guided niasilea with re-
spect to deatruction of the fire points ad take; the antiaircraft defence
neons with respect to destruction oi dr targets; the engineering troops
with respect to eating passages and obstructione, laying out routea. the
support of river crossinga. and so on;

b) Calculation of the quantitative ad qualitative relations of the
toroea ad notoriel and the created densities per h of front;

193
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c) Calculation of the poeaihle loaeea to the troopa on both eidee;

d) Calculationa connected with the novenent and traneportation of
troope hy varioua (one of tranaportation. our-outing water harriera. air-
horne ladinge. ad coeprehenaive aupport of coaet operatione:

a) Calculatione with reapect to forecaeting the radiation eituation
ad irradiation doeee oi the pereonnel. -

Depending on the type and acala of coaat. other calculation, of
couree. ca he nade. Along then. the calculatione penitting coaariaon of
the coaat capailitiaa of our own troope ad the eneny have iaortat eigni-
ticace. not only thoee which occur at the beginning oi the coaat operatione
(in etatica). hut aleo thoea which coneidering the expected loeeee of the
aidee ca occur during the couree of coaat (dynaically) when eolving the
interlediare ad epecial problem: breakthrough iron the arch of the deien~
eiva poeitiona in depth. repuleion of the any comterattache, accolpliehiug
river croeeinga. ad eo on. On the haeie oi thaee calculatione, the con-
nnder ad the ataff deternine the nuaer ad ratio of the forcee ad natetiel
required for eucceaeful eatiei‘action of the goal. grouping of the forcaa ad
the nethode of their operation. lhe quantitative ad qualitative aepecte of
the forcea and lateriel are usually calculated in eeveral veraione. ‘ihue.
in the offeneive it ie initially deter-ined in the entire zone of forthconing
coaat operations ad the entire depth of the niaaion, ad then when perfora-
ing each partial nieeion aleo eeparately on the direction of the principal
attack. During operationa involving uee of nuclear veapone. in addition. it
ia neceaeary to define the ratio of the iorcea ad uteriel after the pre-
euppoeed (expected) nuclear atriltee of both aides.

The haaic indexee by which the calculation in ude of the ratio of the
forcee in the battalion echelon are the following: notoriud rifle (notorited
infatry) autumn. take. artillery and nortare (by calibera). the antitank
neana. The initial data for the calculation are the following: the actual
coepoeition of the eubunita participating in the given oonhat. the grouping
of torcee ad nateriel which can participate in the fulfill-en: of each
niaeion. the grouping of the eneny which will withatad our troope each tine.
0n the haaia of theee data. the water of forcee are calculated. ad the
previouely defined quality of the torcee ad materiel on both eidee ie taken
into account. ‘lhen by divieion of the greater indexee by the enaller once.
their ratio ia deter-lined. ‘nne reeulta of the calculation are ueually
recorded in the table forna that are prepared in advace.

in practice ehove. the greateat accuracy of auch calculationa can he
achieved when uaing the eo-called coefficienta of co-eneurableneee of the
coaat poaaihilitiee (the fire pover. the etrike force. maneuverability.
and ao on) of varicua typea of uteriel ad coaat potentiale oi the ad:-
unite an a whole of their own troope ad of the eneqy. For exaple. taking
the coaat capabilitiea of our 122- hovitaer and notoriaed rifle battalion
to the initial unit (1.0). it in poeeihle to conpare the conhat capabilitiee
of the other neaa of deetruction. aubunite ad unite of our own troope ad

196
FOR OFFICIAL USE ‘NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the eneey with then and at the sale tine obtain their consensurd’leness co-
efficients (the coi’at potentials) paraitting the calculation and conparison
of the codaat capdilities of any grouping of the troops on the sides.

‘ihe consideration of the changes in these capabilities. depending on
the type of troop operations (offense, defense, seating engagement). the
nature of the terrain. the snout of engineering equip-ant, weather condi-
tions and also the suffered or expected losses of the troops on both sides
can be realised using additional (correction) factors.

Using the presented coefficients. the co-ender aid the staff can
also if necessary deter-ins the soot expedient procedure for replacesent of
certain asteriel or stbunits by others in order to inroye the conbat capa-
bilities of their troops and insure their greatest superiority over the
anew. especially in the priaary direction. lhus. the insufficient nuber
of tanks on the offensive can he «wanted for by n equivalent increne
in nusber of artillery. and the capabilities of the mtitanlr scans on the
defense can be increased by installing antitank barriers, and so on.

In order to perforn the calculations in all of the aodern araiss. the
soot different means find application. beginning with the calculation rules.
tables and graphs (Figure 25). the noaograu. and ending vith the keyboard
calculators and counters. All of these sens per-nit significant accelera-
tion of the perforaance of the calculations and inrove-ent of their precision.

1he previously prepared standard calculations such as. for examlo.
the calculation of the required .ount of artillery for doing dassge to the
ens-y at the platoon and coepsny strong point. the depth of the aerching
colum of subunits on the arch. the required nuiaer of transport loans for
loving the subunits. and asny others are of great assistance to the colander
in his decision asking. having these calculations at hand, the cot-sander
can quickly use then in finiahed fora or if necessary soaevhet refine then
beginning with the specific conditions of the situation.

For perforaence of the calculations using cowuter engineering, at
each staff headquarters it is expedient to have specially trained officers
and sergeants and also advance coapiled procedures, fon- and forauln. of
course. this does not relieve all the rest of the officers of the obligation
of knowing how to perforl the calculatione. but the specialisation of sons
of then is of great use. It per-its tins to be saved and the precision of
the calculations to be ilproved.

In addition to the perforlance of the calculations. in any Iodern
sraies a great deal of attention is given to the so-called lathe-sticsl
eiaulation of the dynamice of the forthch colbat operations of the
troops. It can be used during the course of the entire process of decision
asking. however. it is especially iqortant during the concluding operatione
of this process when the co-snder selects the best (optiasl) or aost expe-
dient. cloae to optisal out of several possible versions of the decision.

195

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

_. human

'4'

g“§\‘ .
:h‘\\‘

I.
uL\\

”i

\— 5 c 7 o u an: as «clean-warmer». .
“WWWhMWan-mu

 

Figure 25. Graph for detereining the required tine, magnitude of the tree“-
tion or apeed of the troopa on the larch.

Key: 1. Hove-eat tine. ninutea 2. hoverent tine. houra
3. Speed of the column. 6. Length of the route. diatance to the
Ire/hr poet (line) or depth of colum. kn

1hia operation ia celled optimization of the deciaion. the buia of which it
not only logical and qualitative but alao quantitative aubetentiation incur-
ing the not effective use of the available foreea Ild eateriel. “hen
realizing the given operation, the knowledge. art and vill of the co-ander.
hie capacity to overcooe contradictione and have the lat vord. to give the
decision the atrength of Iendetory law for ell of the auhordinatea are ethi-
hited to the highest degree.

he eaaence of any aieulation coneiete in the conatruction of the
nodal of the object (eubject) reflecting with acne accuracy and coepleteneae
of the atructure, the couree and the final quantitative reaulta of the ope-
ration. After atudying the reaulta. it ia poeaible to introduce changes
into the model and at the lane tine discover the conditiona by mane of pro-
cedurea and tieaa for achieve-eat of higher reaulta.

The aieulatien proceduree cm he the loot varied: logical, heuristic.
cybernetic. graphical. expert-ental and I0 on. ‘lhe codrat deciaion of the

196

FOR OFFICIAL USE ' \‘LY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

couender which we investigated is none other then the logical nodel of the
dynaeics of the forthcoeing battle. 1he relief plan or up with the decision
reflected on it is a graphical nodal of the battle. ‘me tecticel training
in a situation which is close to the conditions of the forthcoeing codat is
its experieentel eodsl (repetition). “me basic bottleneck of ell such eodels
is the absence of sufficient quantitative bases. The eetheeeticel sinuletion
of the coﬁet operations is recognized to eliminate the given deficiency.

By netheeetical einuletion of the dynamic; of the forthconing codmt
operations. the for-sliced algoritheic and logical description of then is
understood (in the fore. for era-ple. of the eyeten of equations and logical
rules) then pereitting use of a conputer to play out their course in several
possible versions, to predict and deter-ins by the selective criteria the
final quantitative results of the cadet end on their basis to aelect the
best version of the decision.

no coebet operations which pursue the goal of destruction of aoee
eneey targets having no reeistence or which are of a duel nature end are con-
ducted by sons individual co-bet er- uith the application of identical asses
of destruction are moretively eeeily subjected to this type of netheeetical
sieuletion. ‘lheir results are usually estiuted by sons besic criterion
(index). for examle. by them-bar of anew losses. these operationa can.
in particuler. include the coint operetione of the antieircreft defense troops
against the eneqy eircreft. If for any version of their grouping we take the
expected nutter of eneuy aircraft knocked down as the basic deficiency cri-
terion. then the nethe-eticel endel of their operations can look as follows:

“0 ' ”O‘Tfiringqenewmcontrol.gsrticipetion’

where "0 is the netheneticel expectation of the nuder of knocked down eir-
craft; no is the nutter of eveileble entieircreft firing unite end the given
version of their grouping; Tfiring is the nunber of firings which can be pro-
duced by eech firing unit in,one eneey attack: 1’ is the probﬁility of

encw
destruction of a eneny aircraft by one fire unit in one round: “control is
the reliability equation of the fire control systee; K is the

participation
coefficient of participation of the availeble fire units in the repulsion of
the eneny aircraft.

Using the given nodal and a computer, when making a decision the con-
nender (chief) can quickly obtain an enevcr to the questions. for care-pie.
of how eeny eneqy aircraft can knock down the available entiaircreft defense
means in one attack for each version of the planned growing or how eeny
fire weapons are required to insure denege to a certain nder of eircraft
and what regrouping of thee nust be carried out in connection vith this.

'lhe analogous eetheeetical eodela can be cowiled for the count
operations of the mtitenl: subunits against the aneey take; for the artil-
lery. on deeage of various objects. and so on.

197
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

he for the codained-erne coder ee e whole. in which e lerge nu-her o!
troop etbunite end epeciel troope perticipete on both eidee dietinguiehed
fro: eech other by purpoee, .orseniretion. erleeent. cepehilitiee end eethode
oi operetion. then coeperieon of the eetheeeticel eodel reflecting ell eepecte
of the operetiene of their troope end the enew in e coupler eetter. the
beeic difficulty, ee we here noted in the iirot chepter. coneiete in the feet
that the expected reeulte of the two-wey coiained-er- hettle Iuet he eeti-
nted not by eoee one criterion. but by emrel contredictory (not oo-eneu-
rete) indemt neeely. the expected enew loeeee: the poeeihle or preventehle
loeeee of our own troope; the coneuption oi neteriel end tine for execution
of the Iieeion; tekin; (holding) the terrein. ad eo on. It is deeireble to
hsve eole oi theee indexee lexieel or Iinieel. In eddition. e nuﬁer of the
initiel dete required for neitheeeticel eieuletion ere difﬁcult or iepoeeihle
t.» ioreelize md to eeeeure quentitetively (the coder treining, diecipline
end norel-peychologicel etete of the pereonnel on both eidee. the eentel end
orseniretionel cepecitiee of their co-endere. the netionel cherecterietice
of the people. the eociel-politicel eoneequencee o! the work, coder opere-
tione. end eo on). A nudaer of the initiel dete ere oi en incoeplete, tendon.
contredietory end even losicel neture. lhe conpiletion under euch oonditione
of e "victory equetion" reflecting the entire veriery of codaet operetione ie
not en eeey netter. end therefore no eirecle ehould he exp-cred of the
netheeeticien. One euet not only not mdereetieete Ietheeetice. but eleo not
overeetieete it. The feet ehould not be ignored thet the eneey eooner or
leter will know our ”equetion" end teke comteteeeeuree.

It ie poeeihle to eurnmmt the noted difficultiee by e eingle peth -
ekillful coﬂinetion of the ehove-inveetigeted losicel eethode of thought by
the eo-ender when eeking the codet decieion with eetheneticel nethode.
eepeeielly with the perforeence of the entered celculetione end eleo with
Ieniteetetion oi' creetivity. ert. courege end cleverneee. the cepecity to
deceive the eneqy. echieve eurpriee in ettecking the enemy with ekillful
epplicetion of the principlee of the conduct of hettle diecueeed in the
rulee ad reguletione.

Any erhitrery eethenticel eiqliiicetion of the coiaet operetione.
fitting the node for-ule cen leed to e ueeleee expenditure of tile end groee
errore in the conender'e decieion. which eeene. to unjuetified loeeee end
even e dieruption of the fulfill-ent of the eeeisned nieeion by hie troope.
‘Ihe decieion o! A. V. Suvorov to etteck the 100,000-Inn Mkieh Arm in
Rynik with only 10,000 eoldiere wee heeed not eo such on nethenetice ee on
the uee of the codet cherecterietice of the kueeien "edreclenen" end the
incepecity of the Mkieh cone“ to control ite 1er3e erly flexibly. There
wee e riek. but the riek wee reeeonable. beeed not on the nutter but on the
quelity of the troope. It coepletely juetified iteelf. Many enelosoue
ere-plee cone to ue fro- the experience oi Horld Her 11. ‘lhe decieion of
Generel lleedquertere of the Suprene Con-ad of the Soviet Areed Porcee to
so on the offeneive in the eprin; of 1944 wee heeed primerin on the incepe-
city of the Gerun-Peeciet troope to terry out their cachet operetione
during the eeeeon when roede were bed. ‘lhe leunchins of the principel

198

FOR OFFICIAL USE “le
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attack of our forces in the Belorussian operation through the difficult
swawy terrain was justified priesrily by the achievement of surprise attack.

The analogous approach to the decision is possible also on a tactical
scale. At one of the troop exercises in the far Eastern Military District
the tank battalion co-ander Haj .N. Revnichenko. in order to achieve a sur-
priss attack. decided to advance across country. across sections of aountainous
forested terrain and passes with crossings over the solid ice on the river.
Inaseuch as the "ens-y” did not expect the tank attack froa this direction,
the attack of the battalion was a surprise. it was fast and could not be
repelled.l

0n the whole. the close codaination of logical and aetheaatical
aethods in codat decision asking is one of the nest iaportant indexes of the
asturity of the col-snder. his knowledge ad his skill in troop control.
lhe presence of coQuters and aatheaatical asthods does not decrease. but on
the contrary. increases the role of the thinking process and the creativity
of the coanander, for in this case he is conitted. in addition to perforaance
of the ordinary functions. to define the problen for the coaputer. direct
the development of the program for it, and asks creative use of the results
of the counter operations. Only close interaction of the hunan colander
with the nachine with the decisive role of the forner can insure the satis-
faction of aodern requireaenta on coabat decisions.

Organization of the Work of the (Io-sanders and the Control Units in Decision
ﬂaking

be final results of the creativity of the co-ender when asking coa-
bat decisions. the substantiation and the timeliness of the decision depend
to a great extent not only on knowledge, experience, the thinking process,
the will of the ca-snder and his use of aathenaticel aethods and coaputer
squipaent. but also the orgnisation of his work in the given period which
is comatible with the control eleaents. lhis organization. in turn. will
be deterained .every tiae by aany factors. aaong which the decisive effect
again will cone free the presence of tiae for decision asking. Innsauch as
this tiae will be different uder various conditions, with respect to the
given problaa it is iqoasihle and inexpedient to give any single foraula
which is suitable for all cases. In the organization of the work of the

co-ander I‘ld the control units in decision asking. a creative approach.
skill and inventiveness are also necessary to order to nake econoaic use of

every ainute and to give the subordinates as auch tiaa as possible to prepare
for decision asking.

Considering what has been stated and also the general principles with
respect to the organization of the work of the control units, let us cm-
sider the specific nature of this organization during decision asking under
the nest difficult conditions fro: the point of view of tine.

1. see "ﬁasnaya Zvesda" [led Star], 23 January 197‘.
199

[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

More or less significent ties for decision naking will be available to
the consider when preparing for the offensive fro. the earth with an advance
free the buildup zone. In addition. in this case the entire situation will
be comparatively favorable inasmch as the subordinate troops are located
outside direct contact with the eneny and the codaat operations are not con-
ducted with the enemy. excluding. of course. the protection fros nuclear
strikes, control of aviation. airborne and reconnaissance-diversion groups.
Free the point of view of ties. the conditions will be distinguished in the
better direction also when asking the transition to an attack free the defense
position. although in this case as e rule there will be no prolonged breaks.

Under all such conditions the work of the cos-under and the officers
of the control units during the cedar decision taking can be organised
approximately as follows. After evaluating the generel situation usually to-
gether with the chief of staff and explaining the cosbat mission assigned
free the senior officer, the contender lakes an epproxinate opert'ions plan.
he detereines the specially tieed neesures with respect to preparation for
coﬂat and he celculates the ties available for this. The chief of staff
familiarizae the rest of the leading officers of the control organs with the
sission and the comander's plan in the ties established by him. and he eisul-
tsneously gives then instructions about reporting the preliminary codaet
orders to the subordinate submit co—snders and also preparation of the
missing data for the co-ander on the situation and the calculation.

The positive aspect of this beginning of operations consists in the
fact that it gives the future operations of the subordinates a purposeful
nature. for the officers of the control unite know in what nests (in the nsae
of what co-ander’s concept) they eust prepare the data on the situation and
the calculations, and the subordinate cmandsrs and chiefs have the possi-
bility of proceeding with specific preparation for coﬁat and the performance
of it in parallel with the hialer control echelon.

Continuing to evaluate the situation. the conander in the operating
procedure listens to the conclusions and proposals of the chief of steff and
other people with respect to the questions of interest to his and in the
final enslysie formulates and explains hie decision. All of this work
usually is done first by the chert. and then its results are sore precisely
defined and specified on the terrain during reconnaissance.

'lhe co-ander will be forced to organize hie work differently on melt-
ing s decision or lore precisely defining the decision under the conditions
of limited ties. for exanle. in obtaining a new eission during the course
of combat operations elreedy mder way. Judging by the experience of the
exercises, the most efficient organization of the work will be that where the
co-ender is located in the field when melting the decision or at the control
point end is working in a specially equipped location (in s dugout shelter
or e staff coI-and vehicle) together with the chief of staff, his deputies
ad other leading officers, he explains the new mission with their help and
estisates the latest charges in the situation, he exdtangee ideas with then

200
FOR OFFICIAL USE \1Y
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

briefly with respect to the nost ieportent problems end et the sense tins
nekes (nore precisely defines) end explsins his decision. At the control
point the coin: control center is orgenized sinultsneously. If the decision
is ends by the chert. then if there is ties the co-ender note precisely de-
fines it during the short reconnsissence tine using srnored stsff contend
vehicles only in the principel direction end with the psrticipstion of s
strictly lisdted circle of people.

ﬁle version of the orgsnieetion of the work is not excluded where the
colander will he forced to units one decision directly or note precisely
define it end give orders i-edistely (give instructions. e eignel) to the
swordinetee for the execution of the decision. Most frequently this version
will be unevoiddale when neking end refining the decisions during the course
of oonbet operetione in the incdiste reection to sherp chsngee to the situe-
tion when every ninute will be velueblex the decision to repel e sudden
counteretteck by the eneny, elieinete the snow grouping or sirborne pene-
treting into the rest of our troops. end so on. Under such conditions. the

control will be reelised by the conenders by the principle of "I see (I
host) the cousnd.”

In ell of the reneining csscs. the calender lust use the snellest
possibility to exchsnge opinions with his closest sssistence. eepecislly with
the chief of stsff end the specielist for the use of the cosbet er- end spe-
ciel troops. 'nre tinely codiined-erns codaet is conducted with the epplice-
tion of very different and couple: uteriel. It is difficult for one con-
eender. even if he hes s higher nilitery educetion. correctly to solve ell
the tecticel end purely technicel problses connected with its use. there-
fore. in the orgenieetion of such codet it is very i-portsnt to reneiaer the
behest of V. l. Lenin thet "eny specielist nust be velued es s unique echieve-
nent of engineering end culture without which nothing. no oo-unisn could
exist."1 At snother point. discoureging the leeders froe teking e purely
buresucrstic spproech he wrote: ”Isn't it disgrecefnl to correct the work of
hundreds of the best specisliets in en offhsnd nsnner and express disspprovsl
es 1: 1: were siwa s Joker"!

In addition. V. 1. Lenin often wsrned of the inednissibility of long
neetings end conferences when working out decisions. "nae renge of the dis-
cussion." he wrote. "mt be reduced to the necessery ninimn. with due
regerd to the speed snd solidness of the decision..."3 lhis sdvicc by the
lesder is eepecielly velueble for the Iodsrn co-ender when controlling
troops in codet. his foreign reports, discussions and contredictory

l. V. I. Lenin. Caplets Collected Works. Vol ‘0, p 217.

2. Ibid.. Vol 102. p 3“.
3. l'bid., Vol 39. p 308.

201

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

propoeele of the eubordinetee when nekin; decieione. of couree. ere inednie-
eihle. for they unewoidebly leed to loee of velueble tine end cen confuee the
«under. eepecielly if he etill doee not hewe sufficient experience. A
ehort eftchense of ideee with hie cloeeet euhordinetee, their cleer reeponee
to queetione of epecific intereet to hie — ell of theee ere whet the con-
nender neede for codaet decieion nekins. 'Ihe role of the chief of eteff ie
eepecielly greet here. Above ell. he nuet elweye he reedy to deeend thet the
«under give e ehort. erect enewer to any queetion connected with eveluet-
in; the eituetion ad eleo propoeele with reepect to the decieion with
required eubetentietion by :elculetion ad conclueione.

It ie ell: ueceeeery to note the peychologicel eepect of the perticipe-
tion of the collective in generating the decieion. Prectice confine thet
during collective work there in edjnetnent in the cor-ender’e peychologicel
etete: hie receptiveneee, eelf-criticien end reection to the conditione of
the eituetion ere inroved, the dager of eubjectivity end volunterien ie
decreeeed. 1he ubordinete officere of the control unite, in turn. hewe the
poeeibility of nore deeply end identically underetending the plene of the
cot-ender end hiv. nieeion. The etnoephere of bueineeelike cooperetion,
nutuel underetendins end tmt ie strengthened. the certeinty end the cor-
rectneee o’.’ the decieion eede by the contender end the echievenent of eucceee
in the forthconins bettle end eetiefection in their nilitery lehor ere
strengthened.

0n the whole. the euperior pereonel quelitiee of the con-lender, hie
ekill. independence ad etrons will coained with the collective reeeon end
creetivity of the officere of the control mite ere the noet inportent condi-
tion of melting e tinely. well-founded coebet decieion end purpoeeful further
work of the control unite with reepect to cadet operetiooe.

3. Planing the Code: Operetione
Planing Content ad Procedure

In the preceding eectione we eetehliehed thet the conbet decieion
eede by the con-ender cennot fully encoepeee ell eepecte of the arsenizetion
end conduct of the forthconin; cadet operetione. 1herefore. it ie unavoid-
ebly in need of further deteiled developnent end docunenting. ‘lhie deteiling

end docunenting of the decieion eleo conpletee the plenning of the coaet
operations.

me firet pert of thie proceee -- the deteiling of the decieion -
coneiete of e detailed detereinetion of the forcee. eeteriel. the proceduree
ad tinee for the fulfillnent of eech nieeion planed by the connender in
the decieion. end eleo the procedure for the deploy-eat of eubmite, coaet
erne end epeciel forcee. the arsenitetion of the interection. neeeuree with
reepect to political work, the conpreheneive eupport of the coaet opere-
tione. the co-endat'e eervice, the oruniretion of nonitoring end control.

202

FOR OFFICIAL USE "SLY
NR 0"“:th 088 out?

'Ihe eecond pert of the planning proceee -- the docunenting of the con-
het operetion decieion - it needed eo thet the decieion will he oweilnble to
other people end tehe on e cowletod. reguler torn.

 

Figure 26. Plenning locetion in the eyeten of heeic neeeuree with reepect
to the orgenieetioo of oodaet operetione.

Key: 1. necieion nehing and plenning of coehet operetione
2. Reporting the coiaet nieeion to the troupe
3. Orgnieetion of troop control
6. Orgnieetion of the interection of troope
S. Orgenieetion of codaet operetione
6. Orgmiution of treining of the troope for periorunce of the
forthconing nieeion
7. Orgeniution of cooreheneive eupport of cadet operetione
8. Orgeniution of politicel work
9. Honitoring end eeeietenco

mun. the plenning ie heeed on the decieion. it nekee up the contin-
uom mity with it end et the en- tine in cloeely connected with other
neeeuree perforned hy the «under end the control mite with reepect to
the orgenieetion of the cadet operetione (Figure 26).

During the phoning proceee heeic ettention ie concentreted in deter-
nining the noet effective deploy-en: in coﬂet of embordinete troope. deter-
ninetion at the bent proceduree {or their operetion. insuring axil- rout
of the oppoeite grouping of the eneny in ehort tinee with the leeet expendi-
ture end neteriel. 'lhe echievenent of thin god. in coneidered teking into
eccomt the role of nuclear weepone in cone of their one by the eenior
officere when coming out the coﬁet nieeion. It in the decisive fector in
detereining the content and procedure for i-ple-enting the phoned neuuree.
Depending on the odor. the hon: end the type of nocleer exploeione need by
the eenior officer'e plnn end the expected reeulte of their nee. the utili-
eetion of our on form end neteriel in the forthco-ing hettle ie elno
plenned.

203

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
N

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1he plenning uenelly begine with receiving the prelininery ordere or
the coder nieeion iron the eenior officer. end it ende during the orgeniee-
tion of the cadet by the developnent end eigning of the codet docunente by
the couender ad the chief of eteff. During the conree of coehet opere-
tione. the plenning continue. In eccordence vith chengee in the eituetion
ad the decieion o! the «under. correctione md are preciee definitione
ere introduced into the previouly developed plen. and on eherp vorietione
of it or obteining the new. next nieeion. the planing ie egein tepeeted.

when tine ie ehort for preperetion of coebet operetione. the ewport
of perellel work with reepect to plenning in ell echelone per-itting reduc-
tion of the tetel tine epent on plenning by an or three tinee hee epeciel
eignificence. Ihie perellelneee in the work ie echieved prieerily by re-
porting the prelininery codet ordere to the enbordinetee efter the canned»
definee the intention of the operetione. in vhich they ere ecqueinted vith
the neture of the preceding codaet eieeion.

The epecific content. volt-e. eeqnence end nethode of plenning cotet
operetione depend on the plenning level. the fore of the coin: operetione.
the neture of the eeeigned nieeion. the eetdaliehed etyle of operetione of
the co-ender. the «entity end the level of preperetion of the eteff offi-

cere. the preeence of technicel control neene end eleo tine for preperetion
of conbet operetione.

At the bettelion end even the reginentel level. the decieion neking
by the colander, the plenning of the ccdet operetione. the developnent end
filling out of the beeic colbet docunente in elveye e united. interconnected
proceee. M the couender nekee e decieion, he plote it on the nep, end the
required text infornetion end celeuletione ere entered in the work notebook.
After netting the decieion. the individul problem ere deteiled, end the
filling ont of the docunente in coepleted. bet ue briefly coneider thie
proceee ee epplied to the offeneive.

heny yeere of experience heve developed e defined. noet expedient
eequence in decieion netting. ite forenletion on the nep end the plenning of
the coder operetione. the obeervetion of which correeponde to the eeteb-
liehed order of operetione of the cotnmder with reepect to explenetion of
the eieeion. eetinetion of the eituetion. determination of the operetione
plen. coebet operetione. the principlee of interection, ineurence end con-
trol (figure 27).

The forenletion of theee decieione begine vith the plotting of the
dete fro. the coehet order received iron the eenior officer on the previou-
ly prepered nep. ‘lhe etrip of forthcoming operetione ie firet plotted in
the offeneive. lhie inedietely determinee the bounduiee vithin the lilite
of which the dete will be ehovn with the greeteet deteil on the enuy de-
feneee end eleo the utilieetion of the forcee end neteriel of the eenior
officer in hie etrip. Pert of the dete cen eleo be token fron other docu-
Iente. in perticuler. fro. the reconneieeence eyeten end the «main.

20‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE C. '.Y
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

photographic diagram. photographic plano, and an on. lho dograo of tho Q-
factor of tho population ia detorninod by tho lovol of col-and organo.

Iho following aro uauolly plottod on tho onony up of tho battalion
co-andar: tho outlino of tho forward adgo and pooitiono. tho platoon otrong
pointo and thair onginooring oquipnont. tho firo oyoton with dataila to a
ooparato firo point - oachinogun. tank. antitank niooilo. woopon: tho
vicinitioo of tho iiro pooitiona of tho artillery and nortar oubtnito. tho
oyotoa oi obotacloa in front of tho forward odso and in doptha of tho dofonoo:
tho oroaa whoro the cloooot onony rooarvoo aro locatod and tho pooaiblo naturo
of thair oparationa (tho doploynant linoa and tho diroctiono of tho contor-
attach. tho occupation of tho proparad pooitiono or are»). tho locotiono of
tho «now control pointo. 'lho Ioot oonoolidotad data aro plottod on tho lap
in tho highor-lying ocholono.

Mtar tho data on tho anon ha boon rofloctod. it to nocaaaary. with
conoidoration of tho olononta of tho dafonao and tho otructuro of tho codpat
for-nation. to plot tho oowat niaoion on tho nap. Sioultonoouoly with thin
it io nocoooary to aloo indicato tho problo- which aro oolvod in tho offon-
oiva aono of tho arbmito by tho rooourcoo of tho oonior officora. oopociolly
tho data on tho uoo of aircraft. airborno. artillary and aloo the plannod
linoo of ongagonant in coﬁat of tho 2d ocholon. tho firing lineo of tho
antitank roaorva and the uining linoo for tho nbilu obotaclea dotail. the
oroaa of doploynont of tho forooo and notoriol which aro intonded to rain-
forco tho owmita aro aloo plotted.

A cowonont oloaont of tho oituation to tho noighbora. In tho ordor
of tho aonior officoro. tho claim of tho noighboro oquiwalont to thoir
unita (orbunita) will bo indicatod. ‘lhoroforo tho otaff will roouiro a
docioion aolring procooo by tho co-andar to obtain iron the. noighboro lid

plot on tho nap tho data on tho odmnita which will directly affoct tho
flmho

"hora tho routo of advanco. tho initial lino. tho control lino, tho
doploynont lino into tho battalion. conpony and platoon column, tho lino of
convoroion to tho attack ad tho tina of paooago or onorgonco at thooo lino
ora indicated in tho ordor by tho oonior officer. than thoy aro aloo plottod
on tho nap. If dnooo data nuot bo dofinod by tho conndor ad tho otaff,
than thoy ore rofloctod lator on tho nap. during the dociaion nailing procoaa.

‘lhe abm-onuoratod intonation io uood by the co-ndor an initial
data that ho noedo for noting a ubitantiotod docioion.

During the come of tho cowrohonoivo ovaluation of tho oituation.
tho growing of the onouy and tho poaaihlo naturo of the only oporationo

whan fulfilling the atatod niooion by tho orbordinato anbmito ia rofloctod
in noro dotoil on tho lap thm would occur in tho ordor by tho oonior officor.

205

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0"“:th USE ONLY

.
ﬁ.
1"-\1
N
~J 9‘

‘. r

I
. 2,
2-141

  

Figure 27. working ehert of the reinforced battalion eo-ender with a deci-
eion to etteclv. free the eereh (vereion).

Rey: 1. working up of the co-ender of the le'. Motorized Rifle Bettalion:
2. 2/16 Motorized Rifle Regieent: 3. Sterted on 5 June l975: 6. mded...;

5. "Ch" - 5 einutee: 6. zelenyy foreet: 7. 3d Motorized Rifle Battalion:

8. Piret line of the 1131' 1’50 ldeeontoinetion etetion]; 9. 2d line of the
Lev P80: 10. Ch - 15 einutee: 11. Ch -- 30 einutee: l2. Paee Ch -— 2.00:
13. 3d line of the Pentere 980; 16. Shipke: 15. 3d Motorized Rifle lettelion;
l6. Yedlolto; 17. let Motorized Rifle Go: 18. “ch-k Mo 2: l9. Vz-ZO him:
20. “ch-k Me 1: 21. V925 helhr; 22. h-l he 30 einotee; 23. Vyeokoye;

26. let Motorized Rifle Ca: 25. let Motorized Rifle In: 26. Run 27. 3d
Motorized Rifle Co; 28. 2d Motorised Rifle Co: 29. belovo; 30. 6th lbttlr
iettelion; 31. 3d Infantry 0o: 32. Lyhevo; 33. Viehnye: 3‘. let Motorized
Rifle Co; 35. 2d infantry 0o: 36. let “rank Co: 37. My: 38. let Motorieed
Rifle On; 39. let Motorized Rifle Co: 60. let Tent Co: 101. 3d Motorized
Rifle Co; 62. 5th Motorized Rifle Reeieent: 63. let Motorized Rifle let—
telion; Mo. Route Mo 1; £5. Martino; 46. 3d Motorized Rifle Co: 67. Areret;
68. 2d Motorized Rifle no: 69. Silve: 50. Vilthrevo: 51. 1/“ Motorized Rifle
Rat; 52. Pee-it: 53. Lipetey; 56. Reeerve route ‘74 lie/hr: 55. Deoieion
under ~ 15 sin: 56. I: 57. Pit sound; 53. Goreltoye: 59. 6th Motorized
Rifle 00.: 60. 67-“: 61. 5.6 15.00; 62. Provieionel notation; 63. Mieeione
of the eenior officer‘e ertillery: 66. Artillery (eortar) eieeion by deeieion
of the eo-ender of the 3d Motorized Rifle an: 65. Avietien etrihee; 66. 2d
Motorized Rifle In: 67. Dynye: 68. 3d In! Go of the 2d Motorized Rifle In:
69. Yurovo foreet: 70. Motorized Rifle in: 71. Artillery In: 72. Structure
of the cola-u during the edvenee: 73. let Tank 0o; 7‘. Mortar better-y;

75. let Motorized Rifle Co; 76. 2d Motorized Rifle Co: 77. 34 Motorized
Rifle Co; 78. Reer; 79. Depth of colt-I ... he.

The bomderiee of the etrong pointe. the poeeihle linee of deployeeat of
reeervee end the directione of their etteche. the location of the control

206

FOR GPFICIAL IZSE “SLY
I

e

\

‘0.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pointe not only in the euhmit offeneive zone but eleo in the eonee of their
direct neighbore are defined end plotted eepecielly cerefully.

During the couree of deteninetion by the co-ender of the eleeente of
the decieion. they are plotted on the eep. Initially the direction of the
parieery attack end ell the eleeente of the total: foreation at the ettack
tiee are indicated. If the traneition to the offenaive free the buildup tone
ie noted. then for eech whordinete eubunit of the let echelon the folloving
are plotted: the line of convereion to the attack end the tiee of eeergence
edded. the direction of the etteclt and the line of the neereet end when-
quent eieaione. the direction of the future etteck. the linea end the tieee
for peaein; thee. the initiel. regulating end deployeent linea into coepeny
(platoon)1colune. the eafe renal linee. the lieitins linee betveen the
emmite.

For the 2d echelon elbmite. the following are defined end plotted:
the route of eoveeent. the line of enmeeent in comet. the line for the
next eieeion. the direction of the future offeneive. the tine of peeeege of
the linee -- initiel end regulation.

the the eep. the eieeione are reflected uhich ere perforeed by the
authorised and eeeigned artillery end eorter edmnita uith reepect to periode
of coebet operatione of the artillery -- during the artillery preparation of
the atteck. the artillery eupport of the ettech end due ertillery ecooepeni-
eent of the offeneive during codaet in depth of the new edvence: the re-
gione of the fire poeitione planed during treinin. and during the tonne of
developeent of the offeneive.

'fhe mtieircreft ednnite ere given the fire poeitione. the direction
of dieplaceeent end the regione in which they euet cover the troope froe
eneey eir etrikee.

The entitenk reeerve. if it ie celled on in the operetin; zone of the
battalion to deetroy the fire veepone of the eneey by direct laying during
artillery preperetione, the poeitione nd the tieea for tekin; thee up ere
indicated. For the period of codet operetione. the linee are reflected
free which the eenior officer plene to me thie tiee to repel the counter-
attech of the eneey tenke: for the eobile obetruction detail - the lining
linen.

0n the eep the plecee ad tine of deployeent of the control pointe
and the direction of eoveeent of the co-nd poeta during the couree of the
offeneiv'e are noted.

It hae been poeeible to eoneider the decieione coqletely foreulated
if the beeic problem of interection have not found reflection on the eep.

1. See Poﬁrik. l. 9.. Shevchenho. If. 5.. Mocheye Kerta Koeendire
[working Map of the Conander), Hoeoov. Voyeniedat. 1972, p ‘l.

207

FOR OFFICXM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

here there ia no doubt that the principlea of the interaction are deternined
by the coumder in hie deciaion. however, for coordinated application of
all the forcea and aateriel in coebat. the neceaaity ariaea for additional
aolution of a nuber of problem. In particular. it ia neceaaary to coordi-
nate the action of the etbvmita in can of nuclear atrikea in accordance
with the plan of the aenior officer and aleo with the fire and atrike by con-
ventional weapona of deatruction. For thie purpoee. firat of all the targeta
are diatributed between the fire weapone conaidering the poeeibla reaulte of
nuclear atrikea. ‘ihe procedure to be followed by the auhunita on advance to
the attack line. during the attack of the forward edge. during the battle for
iaportant objecte and the linea in depth of the eneny’e defenaea are defined.

when plotting all of theee data on the nap it ia neceaaary. however.
to conaider that exceaaive detail can naka the nap confuaed and coqlicated.

‘iherefora. in our opinion, in addition to the previoualy indicated probleu.
the following can be reflected on the nap:

a) when perforning artillery preparation: the die-cutting line. the
line for putting on the aineeweeping bladee for the attached tank auhunit.

the pointe of paaaege through the ohataclea in front of the forward edge of
the eneny and the tine for naking theee paaaagea;

b) "hen carrying out the next Iiaaion: the direction of attack of
the eubmit during joint operationa when capturing the attack of atrong
pointe and deatroying the eneny grouping jointly with the neighbor. the
nethoda of repelling poaaible eneny counterattaclt:

c) when perforning the next niaaion and developing the future offen-
eive in the depth of the defence: the linea for repelling poeeible counter-
attack. the forcea and nateriel called on for the eolution of thia problen.
the direction of the etrikea to coaplete the rent of the comtorattacking
eneay group. the antitank reaerve line and the aobile obatruction detail.
the eiaaiona of the artillery aubmit with reepect to deetroying the eneny

reaervea with concentrated and barrage fire during the advance and deploy-
aent.

A aignificant part of the interaction prohlena will be reflected by
the coeaaander in hie working notebook. “me detaile of theee entriea will
depend to a great extent on the degree of training of the co-ander hinaelf.
the preaence of tine for organization of the offenaive and the nethoda of
bringing the interaction of problem to the aubordinatee.

0n the ease nap with the aolution. the bait reaulta of planning nea-

eurea with coeprehenaive aupport of the codnt operationa can be reflected
auch M. for eraqle.

Hith reapect to reconnaiaaance: conpoaition. direction of operationa
and the nieeione of the reconnaiaeance groupe and acout patrola:

208

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON'Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with reepect to protection fron nucleer weepone: the eroe of deploy-
ment of the cowoeite deteil for the elieinetion of the coneequencee of
nucleer etrikee. the planned ereee for coeplete epecielired proceeeins;

Hith reepect to engineering eupport: the coepoeition end direction
of the operetione of the deteil for eupporting noveeente. the reeerwe or
bypeee routee. prepered by the engine! re eubunit in one of deetruction of
eectione on the beeic groupe, peeeegee thrOugh the obeteclee;

With reepect to reer eupport: the point of deployeent of the reer
eubunite during the couree of the offeneive.

In the working notebook of the contender end pertielly on the fielde
of the nep the following ero reflected in the form of teblee: the distribu-
tion of forcee end uteriel. the retio of forcee end neteriel (the cube:
poeeibilitiee), the conetruction of the ertillery preperetion. the intent-
tion eignel. werning eignele end terget indication eignele. the preeence end
dietribution of neteriel reeoureee.

In eddition to the up with the decieion, ite deteiled develop-eat
will find ite reflection in the plenning of the problem of uee in coebet of
the eubunite of the coebet eree end eleo the neeeuree with reepect to poli-
ticel work end cmnhemive eupport of the codet operetione. An hee elreedy
been noted. with mpect to tneee problem, the couender ueueny definee on-
ly the beeic goele end the ereee of their execution in hie decieion end et
the use tine offere the reeponeible egent the poeeibility of independent
eeerch for the beet nethode of wing the forcee end uteriel eubordinete to
then. he role of the officere of ell of the control unite ee creetiwe or-
genitere of the coin operetione ie eleerly nenifeeted in thie.

'ihe nudaer of ell other (except the co-ender'e decieion) codtet docu-
unto end eleo their content end coepleteneee of the diecueeion ere deter-
nined by the chief of eteff ooneidering priurily the precticel neceeeity of
the preeence of tine end neture of the eieeion fulfilled by the troope. ‘lhe
docu-ente out be cleer end elultiple. they not be written in coqreeeed
fore. without eubetentietion end generel pheeee. with the uee of eieple tern
of epeech end with obeervetion of the edopted for. and eleo the provieionel
eigne end notetion. ln eddition. the content of the docueente nuet be exact.
cleer end relieble. not pereitting other interpretetion even if eoeeone
would like to underuend the content differently.

Often it ie poeeible to heer thet in eodern cadet in the cue of
repid dewelopnent of the eituetion there ie no neening to expending tine on
cereful proceeeing of the working nepe end codaet docuente. Prectice con-
vancee m otherwiee. wherever the opereting upe ere being cereleeely kept.
end the eore eo. if the written coebet docuente ere cereleeely developed,
rejects in operetion ere lore freQuently peredtted. there ere lore errore
in celculeting the tine end deter-lining the eieeione for the eubordinete
eubunite. In addition, the cereleeely developed working up doee not

209

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

educete e sense of high responsibility in the officer et work for the preci-
sion of plotting the situation. it does not orient his in the procedure.
otgenieetion end culture control. he becomes eccuetosed to contending the

subunits without exect celculetion. without subjecting the cospliceted eitue-
tion to deep enelysis.

In this respect the positive experience of the work of steff heed-
querters during world "or II is indicetive. Studying the uteriele of the
lest wer in the erchive. you elweye investigete with deep respect the cadet
docusents of the steff of the 311th Guerds Rifle Regiment of the 108th Guerde
Rifle Division.‘ Kore then 30 yeere heve peseed. and these docmnts so
before retein their high ouelity. hey serve es en erssple of how it is
necesesry to relete to their develop-sot. ‘lhe nein thing is thet they ere
distinguished by brevity. clerity, end eccurecy in being filled out. lhey
ere ell executed with e high sense of responsibility for the quelity of the
work. Now it is even difficult to inegine thet the majority were developed
in the trenches. under eneqy fire, with poor lighting. end eonstises in bed
weether. Not one etrikeover. not one correction or cerelessly forsuleted
sentence. 'lhe people who wrote the. understood the high purpose of cosbet
docuente end used ell their effort end mtery in their developesnt.

Credit goes first of ell to the chief of steff. Lt Col 1. P. Terkhenov,
who went through the enoreou school of work in the operetive detersinetion

of division heedouerters. his is only one of the coeponents of the work of
the chief of steff.

1he reelisetion of the planning in short periods of tine is acquiring
exceptionelly inortent significance in sodern coitet. hence the necessity
erisee for reducing the volule end nuber of docueents. reiussl to develop
ewkwerd plus end. in eddition. breeder epplicstion of orel orders with sub-
sequent writing of the. in the prectice of control. Under these conditions.
the role of the working esp increeeee. with this help the «under esti-
eetes the situetion. eekes the decision, stetee the eissions for the submits.
orgsnires the interection. ad eonitors the eiseions received for mention
by the troops. 1he reflection of the besic probleoe with respect to the
orgmizetion of the cowet operetione on the working we end the colonic-

tions end reference esteriele, in the working notebooks. pernit eherp educe-
tion in the plenning tine.

In eddition to the working ups. during the plenning process. es the
treining prectice shows. in s nusber of cesee it is sore edventegeous to
develop other documents grephicelly. 'lhey insure not only better clerir;
end convenience of use, but they else per-it e eherp reduction of the tile
(or processing thee end study by the eddreseee. ‘lhis wee especislly true in
thst the topogrephic bese. the explenetory inscriptions end table force in

l. Arkhiv H0 58“! [Archive of the USSR Ministry of Defense]. f. i796, op.
141.509. ““10. p 2-6.

210

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
NR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

than have the poeaibility of being executed ahead of tine. beiore receiving
the codnt aiaaion. on the baeia of a pralininary order of the eenior officer.

In particular, on the nap they can be reflected in advance: errors
of deployment of our own subunits, data on the anew. radiation aituation.
the routea of advance hate been raiaed. the bottlenecks in then have been
defined and the bypeae routea have been narked. In addition. it ia poeaible
to write in the name of the doculent: "lha decieion of the contender of the
lat Notorized Rifle battalion to advance to 17.9" or "The uotLing nap of the
cot-lander of the let ‘(otorited Rifle Battalion. Started... mded...” For
convenience of vorkin; on the map it it important to raiae the populated
arena. their eltitudea. if neceaaary aleo to apply the coding.

A aignificant reduction of tine can be achieved if the required table
forna are prepared in tile. In particular. when preparing for the offenaive

battle it ia poeaible to ready the following table for” (aee Tables 266-
268).

Table 15

Dietribution of Forcea and Materiel in (type of conbat)

.—~-~————————————-——_
Porcea and eateriel of reinforcement 6 a rt

Artillery Antitmk maineerin; and

Stbmlt a nortar weaEna ‘ranlu other eubunita

let notorited rifle
battalion. and to on

 

Table 16

The Conatruction of the Artillery Preparation of the Attack

W
Fire Duration

atta ainutee line of conduct of fire
lot. and ao on 10 01-032" GI. -- 0.22
Table 17

Couperiaon of Foreea and Material in the Offenaive Zone ...
and the Coﬁat Poeaibilitiee of the Sidea with Reapact to
the Situation at (the tine)

Number ﬁtio

 

None of forcea and eateriel and Our own Mon; the Gnaider-
the baaic indexea of the codaet troope... enauy in; qua-
capabilitiee oi the troopa (coepoai- troopa... Quanti- lity (of
tion) (co-poei- tative the codut
Etentiala
211

FOR onmm. US! ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040016-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[reble 17 continued]

M

Totel pereonnel. including in _ 4
the cadet euhunit of the

notarized rifle coqeny (noto-

rind infantry co)
Deneity per he
‘l'enke - genotel nuher

bong thee: nediun

light

Deneity pet I:-

A-phihioue code: intentry vehicle
end Irlornd personnel cerrier -
totel meter

Deneity per la

Artillery end nature

“rotel weepone end nine.
of then more then 100 I
geuge

Dcneity per h-

Totel eree of deetmction
of the open Ienpover lb/I:
(hectere)

Mtitenk veepone

Totel unit-1k mite.
of thee: entitenlt guided eieeile

on the erected cert-in:
poneble entitenk
guided lieeile

Anti tenk veepone

Orenede lemchete

Deneity per kn

Totel nude: of deugcd tenlce

Antieircreft defence

Totel of the defense Itene

Along then: the entieircreft

nieeile eyete- of

the entitenk weepone

(inetelletion) type
rotel nunber of eit tergcte
knocked dam per etteck

Autonobilee end treilcrn

212

MR OFFICIAL US! 0 “LY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPBZ-00860R000100040018-9
."- ... -1::" .‘HIH‘N- "V!
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Tab 10 18

1-: Jul-I -

Reaervea on the 0ftenaive.... , .‘3-1‘i .

Available ‘ ' ' ' ,_ WQQW‘I for fulfill-

' ‘lhe Preeen'ce 'ana DI'e't'ribution' of the Materiel

and preaent . uent ,
None of men“ u Heuled to... _,,N.Ar_t11..1,ery

(tine) (tine) .. . preparation“ . ,tlext

.of attack aieeion...

MW
Artillery alumi-
tiOI'l (h/k) «l-Ihi-vr -,
and ac on , t .. , - .
Table 19

Signal for Mutual Recognition, Target D'eaigh'etien
and warning for the period iron r..3"-to“..'. '

Name of ei al 3 radio (viaual

Going over to the 'H't ‘ I

attack

Calling for artillery
Ceeeation of artillery ”n.5,. ML,”
fire "lulu” haw...“ ,J a
Danger from the air ‘ 4.” .r” ..;
Here are our troops, . --.)-l-_“.“n :94.
and so on ' " ' '

           

.91 r--.- '3-
C

."v-lez‘t'“ ’ -

ihe broad poaaibilitiee for reducing the planning tine'7"are‘reflected
when ueing fomliaed combat doculente. ‘ihe ﬁnalization p‘rbc'ee'l‘ia baeed
on the fact that the docuunta contain conatant and variabld‘Waluee or put-
ting it differently. permanent and variable intonation-r ' “j' '

tn... . ﬁl-"J- ..

Ihc analyaia above that out of the total content breach docuaent. up
to 50 percent goea to permanent inforuticm :.‘nuua',.ha‘l£‘of'the doth can
be written in advance on a blank torn, whichmill'p'er-it e'eiguaificent reduc-
tion of the tine for ita develop-ant. In the pruenc'e'of’the previouely
prepared tone with a lie: of conatanta, the cognition-of the docuoent
reducea to the entering of the variable data in the‘fori' of nine of popu-
lated areaa, local objecta, datee. nutbera, and no on. In thia we there in

no neceeeity for formulating the final propoeala which unconditionally will
reduce the tine for develop-eat of the docuent.

Decreaaing the planning tine can aleo be achieved as a reeult of bet-
ter thought-out organization of the work with raapect to writing the docu-
nenta. In a nuber of caaee, it in juatified to call on eeveral officera

' £13
522': .l-\';|1‘-'" ”--

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the development of individual documents , for examle, the taint orders.
In addition. it is important sore coapletely to introduce the advmced pro-
cess of writing the documents: to do away with the preparation of rough
drafts. to write plainly or dictate the text to a mist free the naps. his
method of preparing the coabet documems requires definite skill. before
dictating. it is necessary to prepare all of the necessary data, plot the
lission on the working up (if the cosbat orders are written), place die
populated areas which will be nentioned, make an entry in the working map
fields of the means of anplificetion. time, measures to support the codeat
operations. and so on. The officer must clearly imagine the sequence of the
discussion of the codiat document. Then he does not need to be distracted
to obtain the sissing information or more precisely determine the procedure
for writing the document. and he concentrates all his attention on the exact.
aultiple reflection of its content.

Planning Methods

During the process of planning codaet operations nost frequently two
nethods have found application -- series and parallel. A different combina-
tion of then is also possible.

he series method reduces to the fact that the planning of the center
operations is nade especially in each cousand level: on completion of plan-
ning in one element the problen is brought to the next subordinate level.
suesequently the planning moves from top to botton, involving smordinates
in the work. his was the basic method of organizing planning duing World
War 11. md under those conditions it was completely justified.

A positive aspect of this sethod is the fact that under the condition
of isoletion of sufficient tine for working in ead: level, it insures a more
qualitative perfonence of the operations with respect to planning. The
officers of the control units can, as soon as the cadet operations are
planned, render actual assistance to the subordinate staff in solving the
missions set before them. This assistance is especially useful to the staff
outfitted with officers who do not have sufficient theoretical training and
have little work experience. he series method promotes maintenance of
secrecy of the preparations for coubat.

However. there are significant deficiencies characteristic of this
nethod. The basic one is that with this organization of work. the planning
process takea too much tine. In addition. the series method frequently is
characterized by excessively rigid centralization in the troop control.
which significantly reduces the possibilities of subordinates in the inde-
pendent. creative solution of the problem.

Whereas during the past war this method was basic. under nodern condi-
tions it can find application when planning conbat operations when and only
when a great deal of time is put into the preparation of codat.

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0? UV
roe orncut use am:

For Iedern tileazit will be'nore justified torus. another 'nethod which
ueually in practice-1e culdd‘ the parallel n‘ethod." ‘ I ‘7. ' ;
.‘ .:7.’. 2.7 _ . p... .

'lhe parellel nethod neane the organization of 'vork with'reepect to
planning for vhichthe eubordinatee. not -veiting- for coqletion of all the
firing problem in' full-whale at euperior le'vel‘_pro'ee'ed’perelle1 with it to
the planning of the forthconing coebat operatidne‘in‘ their own echelon.

his method will perait- the planning of the codaat 'op'eratione in con-
peratively ehort tineey ee a reeult o'f uhich ’the troope receive n‘ore tine for
direct preparation for the perfornance‘of 'the'etit'ed hieeion. " Thie predomi-
nance of the given nethod'nakea -it Beale. eepecielly'lnhd'erhondigtiona of.

inited tine. -' ' -' '~ ' ' ' "

In order to realize the perellel plenning. defined conditions are
needed. Fire: of ell it ie neceeaary to bring the initiel data to the sober-
dinatee which ia required by then for'plenning. Piret of ell'it ie neceeeary
to conaider the infatuation about the may, hie grouping; c'owoaition, fire
eyeten. the engineering equipnent of the line and also the dlerecterietice
end peculiaritiee in the operationa of the enemy. 7 A . _'

In eddition-to thie.- the following an be brought t'o'th'e euhordinetee
in tine: the sradiation eituetion‘.- the conditione' or the terrein in the zone
of the torthcoaing-operationm-end eleo the naturerof operations of the neigh-
bore. (btaining theee .detaperni‘ta :the' eubunit co-an'd'er to grow into the
aituation end heve -e-,better founded epproech‘ ~t'¢$'-'th'e orga'hie’htion of the
forthcoming conbet operatione.

.. ;..;- _l‘ .-- ',.r..'-, :1 - ~ .- ' _

After the probleniia-erpleinedg it ie-n’e’ceeﬂry iﬂedietely to ieeue
the preliminary. order come.- eo. orient‘ the attordinetee"in"the'j'neture of the
forthwning.»e.ratimﬂ-«end to determine the neeeu'ree"thei"erd"pbligeted to
take- before obtaining the-apeciti'c udeeion: the preparation 'o'f'the forces
end_,recenn_ei!me acme-wetting out the'reeeréee of 'net'efr'iel; repai'ringlthe
equipmentnﬂmeticnmf the'eiclt-‘and voundedfuae of'engineerin'g eouipeent
on the terireiexin.‘ theueone oﬁ-forthco'ein'g ‘oo'dnt oper'etionafnore'precie'e
coebat calculation of the control pointa. end'eo"on‘.'“‘ ' " " '

. ; "hat haa:been etated‘nekea it poaeihle to confirn that the epplice-
tion of__-the-perellelnnethod ia not limited to'the freeework'of the mint
operation .planning: --‘:lt unavoidably extende 'to ell'the' neeeuree with reepect
to coabet trainingrbeginning with the explandtion‘hy 'the_copandere of all
etagea of -the codatzeiaeion and ending with 'the "control of the readineee of
the troope for ita execution. - ' ‘ ' "

_ , One of -,the poeeible veraiona of the 'epplicetion of theparellel nethod
ia theyorbof the lamina-lander: with reepec't to preparation of coriaet

operatione on the ecale of the battalion can he the following (eea Figure on
pagee 360-361).

215

FOR OFFICIAL7 USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Operation Sequence of the Conandere for the Subunits With Reapect to Prepare-
tion of the Battalion Colbat in the Parallel Method (Veraion)

Calculation of Time for or anization

 

the tine let hour

   

  

Hort in the field
under the direction
of the regilent
coumder, obtaining
of codaat operationa.
explanation of in-
terpretation pro-
cedure. nore pre-
ciae deterninetion
of the deciaion

and report on it

to regimental
colander.

Battalion comander Explanation of nia

and hia ataft aion (on baeia of
prelininary orders
of resilient).
me reeponae indi-
catea the preliei-
nary arrange-lento
and deciaion
“tinge

llaconnaia-
aance trip,

    
       
 
       
 

the deploy-
nent linee

         
  
  
 
 
 
    

   
  

    

 
     
     
     
     
    
   

     
   

   

     

  

   

8 a 8 Trip for Study of the ter-
‘6 n g g D: reconnaia- rain, the enaqy.
g a 5". 33'. once. the line of attack
3 g n o 3 v etudy of and the enersence
3.9 . a a: - larch route at it, direction
e and H u 3 and the of attack
3' e 3 "‘3 “-33 deployment
t 5 z 3 at; s m...
uplanation of the aiaeion. Trip for
preparation of the peraonnel reconnaia-
and alao the equipnent and aance, atudy
veapona for the forthcoeing of the route
h-ttte and linite

of recon-
, naiaamce
216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OHIOIAL USE ONLY

treble continued]

 

of conbet
2d hour our ‘th hour ‘

120 n ’I 195 21

Organization of codaat with honitoring and rendering of aid to the con-
cow-n) co-andera: giving pany co-andera end platoon leadere in the

:1

of cot-hat ordere. organitetion of conbat, the participation
organization of the in the pertornance of the party-political
interaction. coqreheneiwe neaauree

eupport and col-unicationa

———-———————.————_—___—__

Work on the terrain mder Organization of coabat Rendering of eid
direction of battalion with platoon leadere: to the platoon
colander. obtaining codut ieeuing of codet ordere. leedere in the
nieeion. explanation of the organisation of inter- codant orgeniea-
order of interaction. nore action. conprehenaiwe tion

precise definition of the inaurance and Dedica-

eolution and report of it tione

to bettelion comnder
M

Study of the terrain, the work in the field under Organieetion of
enemy. the line of attack the direction of the coﬁat with the
and the energence at it. omen; col-ander. equad leedere
the directione of attack. obtaining the codet ad the
aaeignnant. erplane- driware of the
tion of the interaction conhat vehiclea.
procedure. nore pre- reeponae of
ciee deteninetion the oomter
of the eolution end ettribute

the route for it to
ooqany co-ander

‘lhua. during the parallel nethod of operation. even without receiving
another aneignnent. the ewordinatea are ready not only to prepare the re-
quired reference data. tdrlea. charte. docunent (one and nape. but to study
the eneny. rediation eituation and terrain end also to think throudu the ver-
eiona of the nee of their ewunite. and no on.

217

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OHICIM. USE ONLY

Af tor deternination by the couender of the operations plan there ia
a poaeibility of bringing the prelininary codmt ordera to the atbordinetee
which will per-it the leeeer coeaendere to proceed with the decieion neking
on their own level. in particular. when orgenixing the offeneive in the pre-
iininery coebet order the following can be indicated: the direction end the
zone of operetione. the epproxinete contour u the coebat eieeion. the neene
of eaplificetion. end the date on the neighbors end readiness tile. Of
couree. the returne fro- theee ordere tender the decieion eeking proceee re-
quires high operative-tactical training of the couander. knowledge in
quickly analyzing the deciaion of the eenior co-ander and the developed
eituation. end on the beeie of thie, deter-inetion of their plan and the Iain
content of the codaat operatione for the attordinetee.

1he application of the parallel method of operation ie poeeibie end
expedient not only at the different co-and ieveie but aleo ineide the con-
trol of one level. For clear organization of work. the duty personnel ainui-
teneoueiy, without delay. familiarize thenulvea with the content of the con-
bet eieeion received in the unit. they apparently end directly proceed with
the preperetion of the data and the celculetiona required to generate a deci-
eion by the «under. he each elenent of the decieion ie defined by the
co-ender (ideaa. coebat nieaiona. beeie for interaction) they inediately
becone the edventege of the intereated officer. aa a reeuit of which the ac-
tuei poeaibility of the pareilei operetion of ell duty peraonnel ie creeted.

with thie order of operatione of the control unite. the etbordinetee
can eleoet eieulteneouaiy obtain ell the eieeione end inetructiona with re-
epect to the orgenixetion of codaet. which will per-it thee quickly to proceed
with the work on the decieion necking end planning of the cadet operatione.

The eaaence of the directional eethod of planning ia exhibited not only
in the organization of the work of the ueere but eleo in e nuﬁer of caeee in
the pienning content iteeif. Perticuleriy under nodern cooditione. in plan-
ning the wee of the 2d echelon. it ie neceeaary to conaider thet in addition
to ita own baaic problem it ie obligated to be reedy to carry out the tie--
eione of the eubmita of the let echelon in me of failure of the letter.
‘Ihua. during the planning proceae both vereione of the uee of the 2d echelon
are being developed in pereiiel. 1he given requireeent will introduce eigni-
ficent difficulties into the planning proceee. it will increeee the vole-e
of operationa of the organs of control, but it ie Juatified and foilowe iron
the neturc of Iodern coﬁat.

Only with clear organization in the work of the control mite ie it
poaaiblc to provide the lower eteff with the required initiel date for plen-
ning in e tinely unner. Accordingly. the eyatenetic feeilierieation of the
etbordinetee with the new incoming dete on the eituation. eepecially on the
grouping. the poeition. the intent of the operatione of the may and the
radiation eituetion acquiree apeciei eignificance. without waiting to re-
ceive the coebet ordere. they met ayatenaticaily obtain theae date. cape-
cieiiy when the troopa are not in direct contact with the eruy md comet
receive inforeation from eny other eource except higher heedquartere.

218

”R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI ONICIAI. "8! ONLY

nun. tha affective on of the parallel aothod of planning codnt opa-

rotiona ia poaaihla undo: the condition of clear organisation and high opera-
tivonaaa in tha votk of all of tho control unita.

219

m omcm. US! ONLY
m OFFICIAL “8! ONLY

cm 6. DRIVEN mo CODA? "1881“” 10 I‘ll! mm “smut: Pm
CARR!!!” mm M. WHAT!“ MID SUPMT N “ROOF mm

1. Procoduroo for Roporttn. tho Codot Moolono to tho Roopooolhlo “onto

1ho noun; of o propor coﬁot doctolon by tho cot-moor 1n ltoolf dooo
not loom-o oucooooful fulﬁll-out of tho oodaot Ilootoo. Tho docloloa ho-
coooo tho hooto (or troop control oud tho 1.! for tho odaordtnotoo only oftor
lto cootouto hocono known to thoo. thot to. whoa ooch of tho: rocolvoo hio
opoclﬁc codaot otooton. 'Ihorororo. o! oouroo. loforolng tho roopooothlo
ooonto of tho codnt dooloo to ooo o! tho loot twortont {mctlono of tho
coo-moor oud tho otoﬂ nth roopoct to coﬁot troop control.

Rollo; on of it. tho co-ondor ond oro“ houn vith tho foot thot.
tlrot of oll. tho codot doolono voro doltvorod to tho roopooolhlo uonto 1n
o tlooly oonnor. rhot to. to tho for tho ouhordlootoo to proporo for tho
oxocuttoo of tho otoolon oud oocondly thot thoy ho roportoo proclooly ond
oloorly vlthout dtotortton of rho coutont. thirdly. rho intont ond noturo of
our oporottono oro hopt oocrot fro- tho ohm. ond fourth”. oo thot tho ouh-
ordlnotoo all). hovo oll tho lulttol doto ovolldtlo for tholr doclolon noting.

moo otodylng tho codot aloolon. woolly tho following 1tou oro
oootgnod to tho odordtnotoo.

1. ho ooncluotono (ro- ovoluotluo tho onoq drum by tho ouporlor
coo-moor lo ordor thot tho ouhordlnotoo ho dalo to oxplolo tho onoly group-
lnuo. tho routo of which dour-loo tho ootoooo of tho fulfill-out of tho
gonorol codut doolono ond that thoy moorotond vhot forooo oro roqulrod of
tho- for fulﬁll-out of tho oloolon.

2. ho coﬁot union ond tho tatont of tho oo-oudor'o oporotlono
ot the ouporlor lovolo oo thot tho ombordluotoo oro oblo to mdontond tholr
ploco ond tholr rolo in tho porforvnoo of tho gonorol coohot olootoo ond ho
roody to roploco tho co-ondor 1n cooo ho to put out of octlon.

3. ‘lho oodot dooloo of tho otbordtnotoo. tho hoot: doto on tho
doolooo of hlo oouhhoro. tho mum of tho forcoo ond ootorlol of tho

220

m onxcm. US: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

oonior officor docidod in hio intoroot ond oloo hio inotructiono with roopoct
to tho intoroction.

lo. 'iho proporotion tioo for thc fulfill-cot of tho codut oiooion.
who io dooignotod dopaty co-ondor for tohing control in cooo of ioiluro of
tho control pointo of tho oonior officor. ond oloo tho locotion. doployoont
tioo ond diroction of tho dioploconont of thooo control pointo.

ofton it io nocoooory for tho ouhordinotco to know. in oddition. tho
inotrnctiono of tho oonior officor with rooooct to voriouo tyooo oi owport --
roconnoiooonco. protoction ogoinot nucloor woopono. roor ouoport. ond othoro.
All of thio io nocoooory in ordor thot tho othordinoto co-ondoro be oblo not
only corroctly to uploin tho prooodnroo for tho porforoonco of tho coohot
niooiono nd dotoroino tho oopodiont oothodo of coipot oporotiono of tho lub-
ordinoto troopo. but oloo to pin tho ouilliory nooooroo with roopoct to
cooorohonoivo oupport of tho codiot oporotiooo by thoir forcoo ond notoriol.

‘lhuo. tho voluoo of iniomtion roportod to tho oubordinotoo togothor
with tho codiot niooion io oigniiicont. howovor. tho oboonco of cortoin in-
' i‘ornotion dooo not roliowo tho onbotdinotoo of tho porioromco of tho cod’ot
oiooion; thio oboonco roquiroo initiotivo. crootivity ond indopondonco of tho
otbordinotoo. loprooch io oornod not by tho ono who dooo not fully ochiovo
tho plonnod codaot oiooion. but tho ono who. in woiting for inotructiono iron
tho oonior officor hoo noniiootod inoctivity ond indocivonooo. who in ofroid
to toko on tho rooponoihility (or indooondont oction. ‘Ihio io oopociolly
ioportont whon controlling troopo during bottlo. for with ohorp chongoo in
tho oituotion in connoction with tho lioitod tioo. tho oonior officor connot
olwoyo givo tho onbordinoto oll tho nocoooory iniomtion iron hio point of
viow ond ovon io (orcod to linit hi-oolf to oonding o rodio oignol or co-ond
on tho noturo ond tho direction of tho forthcouing oporotiooo.

1ho procoduroo for dolivory of tho coﬂot oinoiono to tho rooponoiblo
ogonto oro highly voriod. but tho following oro and out froquontly (coo
Iiguro 28):

o) lho orol ototo-ont of tho liooion for oil or oovorol oubordinoto
co-ondoro with poroonol diocuooion with tho. by tho co-ondor hi-olf or by
hio dooiuotion. tho onicor of tho control unit:

b) honooiooion of coﬁot ordoro ovor tho tochnicol co-unicotion
ooono by tho co-tndor hint" or othor duty poroonnol of tho oddniotrotion;

c) Sonding out writton. grophicol or topo rocordod codnt docuoonto
(ordoro) to tho othordinotoo;

d) Codinod nothod in which tho obovo-indicotod procodurco oro con-
biood in voriou voroiono. u: no conoidor thou in oooowhot ooro dotoil.

221

'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI ORIGIN. 083 ONLY

0“”
«If. n! m Men-MIN W
. 3.11%?
MM» (new WM!”
m Agev u “A

  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

en... *—~.e u...

' Mme mam-1w run
WW mu Nun!
0*!!th

I 'muwmrww~ “3.3, . ,""w"'"’:m
W332...» M. O m- ”mm
1.: a . ,
a ametwmtmez' K”

   

Figure 28. Proceduree for delivery of the cadet eieeion.

‘2" 1e
2e

ll.
‘1.
l3.
1‘.

Orel eteteeent of the problee by the co-ender in hie pereonel die-
cueeion with the eubordinetee

with reepect to technicel cmicetioo leehe. e report on the coin
ordere of the couender hieeelf. the etef! officere end the troop
(eervlce) chiefe

Codut ordere delivered by the eteff officere end the creep (eervice)
chiere

Oodined procedure (codinetion of eethode l. 2 end 3)

To ell of the reeponeible eseete by ore]. count order

lndividuel reepoeeible eeehte by are! cedpet order

Individuel reepoeeible esente. the eoet ieportent Iieeioee by the
«under hleeelf

‘me etefl’ officere report the nieeione to the reeeining reeponeible
egeate

by written cod’et ordere

Grephicel codaet ordere

Ordere recorded on unetic tepe

Orel eteteeent of the eieelone with pereouel diecueeioo

ﬁlth rupect to technicel co-unicetione

Delivery or the coﬁet ordere by the eteﬂ officere.

Orel eteteeent by the wonder of the cadet nieeione for the eubor-
dinetee with pereonel diecueeion with the: hed prleery eigeificence in the
peet and now reteihe thet eignificeece. 1he ewordinete co-endere. ee e
rule. ere celled up for thie purpoee by the eeelor officer to his «new
poet or to e convenient locetion in the ﬁeld. It thie doee not eppeer
poeeible. then the tender celle up certeiu eubordlnetee to hie co-end
poet or .oee to thelr toned poet where he pereoeelly delivere the cadet
deeloee. In eech of theee ceeee the connder on root intelligently

222

POI OHICIAI. US! ONLY
M OWICIM. "8% ONLY

deliver to the eubordinatee everything that ia neceeaary for thee to know
free the decieion and the inforeation of the eenior officer for preparation
for the forthcoeing coehat. he can he aura of proper explanation of the coe-
bet eieeione and the conditione of their execution to the reeponaihle egenta.
preaent explanation with raepeet to any queetione which eriae and give prac-
tical aeaietance. here it ia aaaured that the plan will be kept eocret and
there will be eecrecy regarding all preparation of coin operationa.

were the «under can aeeeehle all the auhordinatee. he givee then
the eieeione in the fore of an oral coehat order. the content and the order
of diacueeion of which depend on the type of codaet. the eieaion received and
the conditione for ice fulfilleent. lt containe the neat ieportent parta of
hie decieion - the intention and the coebat eieeione for the euhordinatea.
‘Ihe orally given order ie filled out in writing by iteee. In the friet itee
of the order. the contender reporte baaic conclueione froe evaluating the
eneey to hie eubordinetea. here. the eneey ie evaluated not only ae to hie
adeunite. hut eleo with raepect to the neighbore. froe which the eneey can
take direct action on the progreee of the execution of the combat nieaion.
'lhe concluaiona are drawn either by the conander who gave the coebat order.
froa the point of view of the coahat eieeion and on the haeia of the lateat
(at the tiee of the decieion eeking) reconneieeance inforeation generated by
the etaff. lt followe fro. thie that the content of the given itee cannot be
literally taken fro. the order of the eenior officer. for the latter giwee an
evaluation of the eneey within the framework of hie cadet order. M excep-
tion to thie rule can occur where the eubunit given the order ie not in con-
tact with the eneny (on the earth. in the 2d echelon on the defeneive. and ac
on) and doae not uae hie forcee for reconnaieeance Ileana. In thie cue the
«under diecuaaee etrictly the required quantity of data on the eneey. taken
free the order of the eenior officer. iron the inforeetion of the neighbore
and the ewmite operating in front.

‘lhe nuder of probleee evaluated by the co-ender and. conaequently.
the volune. content and eequence of diecueion of the data on the enely de-
pend on the reconneieemce preparation. the etete of the edmnite and the
type of coehet operationa.

lime. in the order to attack the following are indicated: on what
front. whet eubunita (mite) of the eneey are on the defensive. where the
forward line of their defenee ie. where and in what coepoeition the strong
pointe have been created and poeitiona prepared for the nuclear attack ecana:
hie reeervee. capable of influencing the execution of the coebet eiaeion

where the poeitiona are prepared for the reeervee. including the cutoff re-
eervee.

In the order to defend. the following are reflected: the coepoaition.
poeition and nature of operatione of the eneey grouping preparing for the
offeneive: the poeeihle direction of ite Iain etrilte and hie expected uae of
nuclear weapona. the probable tieee of going over to the offeneive.

223

m OFHCIM. “SB ONLY
POI CHICK“. US! ONLY

In the given icon of the order. depending on the eituetion. other
inportent conclueione on the eneq cen he indiceted in one forn of toilet or
enother. However. the order ehould not he overloeded: the ineufficiently
euhuentieted or doubtful conclueione ehould not he diecueeed in it end the
infornetion ehout the eneny which in ohteined by the euhordinetee by other
neene ehould not he diecueeed.

In the eecond iten of the order ueuelly there in e diecueeion of the
nieeion of the ubunit iteelf eteted by the eenior officer.

In the third iten. the procedure for the epplicetion by the eenior offi-
cer of the neene of deetruction in the rone of hie ewunite. the nieeione of
the eirhorne md other nnpping pertiee md eleo the nieeione of the neighbore
ad the deliniting linee with then ere indiceted. 'ihe given tine of the order
codined with othere ie plenned eo thet the euhordinetee cen explein their
nieeione end tehe into eccomt whet inﬂuence there will he on their execution
iron the epplicetion hy the eenior officer of the deetructive neene end the
ectione of the neighbore. here the neighbore ere indiceted ee thoee with
whon the euhordinetee will interect directly in the fulfill-mt of their nie-
eione. 1hue. in the order to the hettnlion. the nieeione of the edjeoent con.
peniee ere indiceted. however. if et the tine of giving the order the bet-
telion co-ender doee not know the decieione of the «undue of the edjeoent
hettelione. he indicetee the nieeione of the edjecent bettelione in the order.
In thie ceee the cowew co-endere will he ohligeted to find the nieeione
of edjecent coweniee hy nutuel enchenge of infomtion with then.

0n ettecking fron the north. on the notch md under other conditione.
in eddition to the nieeione of the neighbore on the right end left. at the
beginning of the given iten the poeition end neture of operetione of the eneny
directly in front end in contect with the eneqy cen he diecueeed.

1he fourth iten of the order ueueny conteine the plea of operetione of
the connender giving the order. here it ie pointed out which eneny end in
whet eeqoence the rout ie to teke plece: the direction (eree) of concentretion
of the heeic efforte: the ohjecte et the diepoeel of the eneqy deetroyed by
the deetructive neene; the cobet procedure end neture of neneuvering of the
forcee end nnteriel. lhie ie reported to the euhordinete co-nndere in order
to ineure purpoeefulneee of their operetione. the poeeihility of proper explo-
netion of the heeie for the decieion of the eenior officer. to mderetend hie
role lid plece in the eolution of the generel prohlen and to he reedy for
replete-lent of the eenior officer in one of hie loee.

In the fifth iten of the order efter the phreee ”I order” the indivi-
duel peregrephe denoted by lettere in elphebeticel order diecuu the coioet

nieeione of the eubordinete euhtnite. here the eequence of the diecueeion.
for ere-ple. when etteclting fron the notch an be en followe:

1hc euhunite of the let echelon (fro- right to left. depending on
their locetion end the cunt fornetion) - the nder of euhtnlite end the

22‘

POI ORIGIN. 058 0} Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«aunt of reinforce-out: the line end direction of ntteck: whet new is to
be routed end whst line is to be telten when cerrying out the next end other
eieeione: the direction of the future offensive; who supports; the line on
the left. the route (routes) of edvence: the tins of pesesge of the lines

(poets) - initiel. reguletion end errivel st the line of going over to the
ettech:

1he ubunite of the 2d echelon - route (direction) of notion; froe
this line they will be reedy to go into coebet: the next eiseion - which
ens-y. in which eree to rout the eneny end whet line to tote; the direction
of the future etteck; when to peso the line (poet) -- initiel edjueteent: the
forces end neene of reinforceesnt treneferred on going into coﬁst. If the
«dined-eree reserves ere isoleted. then only the direction of the edvence
end the dieplecenent during the course of the offensive ere indiceted. end
the specific mission is ststed before going into bottle:

Artillery -- duretion of the ertillery preperetion; niseions for the
tine of ertillery preperstion md support of the etteclt end ertillery secon-
penieent of the edwence in depth: the reedineee tine for opening fire: the
coeposition end contender of the ertillery group: the vicinity of the firing
positions end the edvencenent route. When discussing the ertillery niesions.
only their tecticel content is indiceted (whet may end where to destroy.
neutrelite end so on). considering thet the eethod of their fire execution

(fire type nd rete. shell consulption end so on) is eteredned by the ertil-
lery chief;

‘lhe entieircreft subunit. which wens. who to cover during prepsretion
end the course of the esseult.

‘nten in the fifth iten the comosition end the mission of werious re-
serves ere discussed in epecisl subitene.

In the fifth item of the oodnt order for the defensive in the corre-
sponding subitee the following ere defined: the submits of the let echelon--
the reinforcement eeens. the ereee (strong points) of the defensive end the
eissione. where end whet coeposition the codes: security is to hewe. how the
points et which edjecent flenlte join ere to be supported. who is to support.
the deli-iting line on the left; the 2d echelon -- the reinforcement lens,
the beeic end reserve ereee (strong points) of the defense end the mission;
the direction end lines of deploy-mt for the comterettecks end for the
tenlt sshunits end. in eddition. the firing lines for repulsion of the eneqy
tenh etteclts; for the ertillery. the eiesione with respect to the defensive
gosls. the reedineee to open fire. the firing positions. cowpoeition end
co-ender of the ertillery group: for the entieircreft subunit. the objects
to tower and the firing position; for the entitenlt reserve. the composition.
the eree of deploy-eat end the firing linee. ‘lhe reneining edmnits (ele-ents
of the codes: foraetion) hewe their nission steted for thee considering the
neture of the defensive codeet.

225

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the ninth iten the preparation tine of the eubunite for coabat ie
indicated.

In the eeventh itea of the order. the locatiena and the tiee of deploy-
nent of the control iteee in the direction of plecenent of the «send out-
poet are defined.

In the eighth itee it ie indicated who of the eubordinate officere ie

deeignated deputy co—ander for taking control in eeee of loea of the coe-
eander.

‘ihe pereonal etatenent by the coneander of the eieeiona einultaneouely
for all erbordinatee ie poeeibla only during preparation of the coabat and.
of couree. ie excluded during coebat. however. any poeeibility for the neu-
nent of the eoet inportent eieeione during pereonal con-micatione with than
by ehort oral twat ordere in need. the baeic difference fron the coebat
order being that they are, ae a rule. deeigned only for one reeponeible agent.

'lhe eequenee of hie oral or written diecueeion can be reco-ended, for
exlqle. ae folloue.

In the firet itee of the order. juat an in the codaet order. the con-
clueione free eetinating the anew are indicated.

In the eecond order. a diecueeion ie preeented of the cadet eieeion
of the eubunit to which the given order ie preeented. 'ihie itee ie the not

important. and epeeial attention out be given to the quality of ite foraule-
tion.

In the third item ueually the aieeione are indicated which are per-

formed in the intereete of the given euhunit by the foreee and lateriel of
the eenior officere.

In the fourth iten, the preparation tine of the eubunit for carrying
out the aieeion ie indicated.

1'hie ie the noet typical content of the coﬂat order and the neat fre-
quently encotmtered in practice. however. when there ie neceaeity for it,
other prohleee of intereet to the eubordinatee can he diecueeed. for exaqle,
the nethode of operatione when performing the codwat eieeion (in the eecond
itee). the problem of the neighbore (in the third itee). and an on. In eddi~
tion, if for any reeeon the arbordinatee do not hnov the eieeion of the
higher echelon and the plan of operatione of the eenior officer. then theee

prohlene can eleo be indicated in the eecond or in a eeparate itee of the
order.

The content of any cowet order not not be overloaded with exceeeive
date. general rulea and regulation require-cote. For exaaple. it ie iepoev
eible to coneider eucceeeful the folloving frequently encountered for-elation
of the codaat nieeion: "One eotorieed rifle battalion. making urina- one of
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

the results of nucleer strikes. interecting with the neighbors decisively end
et high retee is to develop the offensive in the direction of lvenovks.
Petrovlts end by sunrise on 10 Psbrusry teks the Dynovo. Devidino line." he
given fomlstion cen be ebbrevieted eleost to helf its length without loss
of eeening. neeslyt “First eotorised rifle bettslion etteelt in direction of

lvenoxlu. Petrovks ad by 0600 hours on 10 Februery tske the Dyeovo. Devidino
11“..

In sddition. when discussing my itee of the todet order it is neces-
sery to consider the level of treining. the experience end other quslities of
the subordinetes of the consumers. It is quite obvious thet the literste.
experienced end volitionsl oo-endsr requires less deteiled instructions end

explenetione on the pert of the senior officer then the one who does not hsvs
these quslitiss.

The orel reporting of the coebet eission to the subordinete officers
of the control mite by direction of the conender is reelieed using their
opersting eeps on vhich these eiseions ere reflected. leforo the officers go
to the troops. the couerlder or the chief of steff personelly checks the
correctness of their explerution of the instructions. end finds their esps.

'lhe clesr reporting of en orel order to the subordinstes depends to e
greet extent on the eestery of the coeeender end the other officers of the
cos-end lsnguege. their skill in briefly, end et the some ties. coeplstsly

end clesrly discussing the coﬁst plen end delivery of the coebet eission to
the snbordinstes.

0

he old seying: "fell so how you give your order end I will tell you
how it will be executed" reeeins spplicsble even todey. To everyone, by ex-
ternel eppeerence. behsvior. diction when giving the order. the co-snder
eust deeonstrste end inspire confidence in his subordinates in the success of
the outcoes of the forthcoeing bettle. It eust not be forgotten thst the
sesllest seomt of vecillstion on the pert of the co-mder, his nervouness
or rough tone in this use i-edietely hes e negetive psychologicel effect
on the subordinstes. 'lhe order eust be given st s rete such thst the subor-

dinetes cm plot the dsts on the esp end briefly enter in the working note-
book.

If there is eny possibility. the orel codaet order is given directly
in the field. For this purpose the eost sdventegeous point is selected froe
which e view of the tsrrein is provided in the zone (direction) of the forth-
coeing operetions not only in the disposition of our own troops but slso the
eerieue possible depth of the disposition of the enm.

‘lhe reporting of the eission to the subordinetes by technicsl cot-uni-
cetions eeens is e procedure which. es s rule, it is possible to use only
during the course of bettle. Skillful use of the conunicetions chennels
ashes it possible to convey the eissions sieultensously to seversl responsible
sgents end coepsretively quickly. which st this point is especielly ilportsnt.

227
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OHICIM. USE ONLY

however. it aleo has negative aepecte. Iranenieeiane over technical neane
can he intercepted by the eneay: therefore, when reearting to thia method. it
ie neceeeary atrictly ta abeerve control eecrecy. In addition, the given
eethod daea not pernit checking eubordinatea' underetending of the nieaian.

When tranelitting the nieeione over technical ca-unicatiana neana. the
nexinun paaeihle reduction of value of the ordere to their neplecenent by
giving co-ande and eignele hae priaery eigniticance. 'lhue. for exuple. the
ordere "beetray the attacking eneay and develop the offeneive in the direc-
tion of Sealina. Andreyevka“ can he tranenitted hy the previouely eatebliehed
eignal: "Bereaa 1256 1858" (the caardinatee). lhie reduction in volume of
infarnation ia eepecielly neceeaary when ueing varinue autonated and eignal
devicee. Canaidering the poeeibility of loan of cat-micatiana with the
troope far variaue reeeane. it ia firat neceeeery ta tranenit the coabet nie-
eian to the ewardinatee and then all other neceeeary data. In addition. it
ie inportmt ta abeerve the defined treneaieaion rate. In particular. every-
thing that the aubordinatee nuet know ehould not be trmenitted to then at
once (in a valley), for in thia caae on dietartion of what hae been traneait-
ted it in difficult to find and correct the error. Under the high-line orga-
-niratian. the orgene of. the etafi officer will be able to tranenit ordere to
the reeponaible agente during the praceea of generating the deciaian by the
cannander ae he finally deterainee the gaele and the aeaeuree with reepect to
organizing the iarthcouing canbat.

The noet iqartent and urgent ordere are ueuelly tranenitted by direct
confrontatiana with the aubordinatae. however. for holding theee converee-
:ione the officera Iuet have epeciel training end have ealid ehilla. when
tranenitting the ordere by telegrana it ie neceeeary to uee the blanka of
eetebliehed color which will obligate the radio operator (the telephone ope-
rator) to tranenit theee telegram with (int priority.

The reporting of the codnt nieeiane to the edeardinatee by the writ-
ten or graphical cadet docmnta ia a procedure which in ueed only in the
higher echelana. In the battalion and lower echelone it ie not need. here
only oral canhat ordere are given to the erbordinatee which are written down
by the colander (the chief of ataif) in hie notebook cmletely, and by the
aubardinatee. in the part pertaining to then.

he beeic {or-e a! the dacuente by scans of which the coﬂat niaeiane
are delivered to the euhardinatee are the written coabet order, the written
order recorded on Iagnetic tape or the graphical ca-bat order. Hith reepect
to content md order of diecueaian. they theoretically do not differ from
the oral ordere and include all of the beeic intonation from the ca-mder'e
decieion which the eubordinatee nuet know, which wu outlined above. Thin
infarnetian ie {emulated in the written order an briefly ae poeaihle in

order to reduce the value to the niniaun. which leane elea the develop-ant
tine.

Par thie purpaae. it ie neceeeary to make wide use of the etandard
order (area. for exanle, in the form:

228
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To the Coaaander

Mat Order No
(place. date. tiaai

Hap
(scale. year of publicationi

 

Constant data - Variable data

 

1. Brief estimation of the grouping and operations
of the ens-1y

2. Content of the coabnt aission of the subunit to
whoa the order is addressed:

a) Prom what line and at what tiae to engage in coabat;
b) Direction of operation;

c) Rust eneay to rout;

d) “hat area (line) to take;

e) Readiness tine:

f) Other indications

3. Information about the operations of the forces and
asteriel of the senior officer in the interests of
the given attunit.

Sounder

Zuni, summi

Glief of staff
bani, surnaaei

Transait ted ( tiae)
Received (tin)

Only the righthand side of the fora is filled out where brief answars
are given (on the basis of the commder's decision) to the questions stated
in the lefthand side. In so doing, the tiae both for coapiling the fora
and for studying it by the subordinates is reduced.

'lhe graphical codaat orders are also efficient: they have aaxima
brevity. and the clarity and succinctness of the contents distinguish the-
advantageously froa other foras of orders. It is necessary, however. to find
at any time the possibilities for accelerating the process of preparing then
as a result of the application of the aechaniestion aeana I“! better working
techniques of the staff officers.

229

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the subordinate co-enders (staffs) discuss in advance the sending of
the conbat orders to then or the transnission of their content over commi-
cetione means so that they can better prepare for the reception and execution
of then. At the sane tine, the subordinates inediately report the reception
of the ooshet orders (codaet missions) to the superior commander (staff).

‘lhs combined procedure for reporting the cocbst sissions consists in
the fact that the decision ssde (snore precisely defined) by the co-sender is
delivered to the responsible agents by various sethods: by a subordinate -
orally with personal discussions; another subordinate over closed consunica-
tions channels. and so on. for example, this is how it can be used during the
course of the offensive when stating the eiseions for the stbunits during the
tins of execution of the next mission:

 

Tine
Preparation ' Reporting How end by when the missions
for perforn- of the are to be delivered to the
Responsible ence of a con- mission responsible agents
agents bet nission
"1. Subunits of 9.0m 8.55 Orally, personally by the
the 1st cos-antler or the chief of
echelon staff by radio
2. Artillery 9.35 9.05 Cos-under orally through the
artillery chief
3. Antisircraft Chief of staff orally by
defense means 9.35 9.05 radio
Io. 2d echelon 9.50 9.10 Orally. personally. the con-
nander at his cow-and post
5. Rear services 9.50 9.10 Chief of staff over the
redio

*‘lhe time is taken arbitrarily, only for indicating the possible sequence of
times of delivering the mission.

For the most part the given procedure is necessary during the course
of coebat operations in the higher echelons when personal discussion with
the subordinates is lieited or excluded altogether. In this case the con-
sander states the eiseion for the basic responsible agents, to others they
are reported by the staff, the troop and service chief.

'lhus. a breed class of duty personnel are attracted to the delivery
of the missions. 1hese personnel also work in compressed time and shoot
sisulteneously. It is entirely obvious that their work nust be tinely and
clearly organised by the cosnsnder hinelf or the chief of staff.“ During
the decision ulting (refinement) process, depending on the place ad the
role of the subordinates in the solution of the general problem. they plan

230
FOR OFFICIAL USE (VLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

by what scene and when to deliver the sission to then. who of the duty per-
sonnel will be called on for this purpose, when and how they will be pre-
pered. and whet is to be done by one of the two versions. The co-mder can
explain his decision in the fore of brief orders slready prepared for the
report to the responsible agents considering the priority of the cos-and
readiness ties. As these orders are written down or plotted on the soon and
the correctness of their assisilation by the duty personnel is ducked. the
letter iseediately report thee to the responsible sgente orally with personal
discussion with thee or by other scene. It is possible also that this type
of order be given by the co-endere during the decision setting process. that
is. es the sissions are defined for the subordinates. At the sees tine. tine
is saved for training the subordinates to execute the siseion end especially
those who began to operate eerlier than the others. In both cases. the coe-
nsnder personally and through the chief of steff sees to the reporting of the
cosbat eiesion to the responsible agents by the established procedure.

In isportant role in reporting the nissions to the responsible agents
by eny sethod is played by the staff. In the ceee where the manner states
the siesion personally to ell the responsible sgente. the staff preperes the
eaterisls end the working esps thet he needs. it gethers up the subordinate
col-sanders at the designeted point in the field. it organises counnicstions
tree this point with co-end posts and the senior officer end takes security
eoaaures. During the process of stating the niesions. the staff records the
oral coebat orders and instructions of the co-endsr. they check the accuracy
of the recording and the explanation of the cosbat nission by the subordi-
nstes. for other versions of operation of the co-ander, the stsff delivers
the eissions to the responsible sgente to whoe the co-ender hes been unable
to deliver the sissions personally. In order to confire the orslly stated
eissions by the subordinates, the stuff of the higher echelons. es a rule.
duplicate the written coebet orders end send then out. In all cases the staff
delivers the orders for support to the subordinetes in which the following
ere defined with respect to each type of support: the eissions. forces.
ssteriel. sessurss for execution and resdiness tile.

2. Organizetion end Support of Continuous Interactions of Troops

'lhe sibmits end units of various codet erns. specialised troops and
evietion perticipate in nodern cowat. ‘lheir limited interaction is one of
the decisive prerequisites of the successful achieve-ent.of the cosbet goal.

that is. routing of the snow and cepture (holding) of the noted area (line)
of the terrein.

The essence of organised interaction consists in coordinated opere-
tions of ell of the forces end esteriel participeting in the cosbet by the
eission, the directions. the lines and the tiee in the interests of success-
ful perforeance of the couon codiet edssion. The interaction with respect
to the missions indicates the direction of the forces to route this grouping,
with the destruction of which the next given coebat lission is decided: the
next, subsequent and so on. within the lieits of esch of these eissions the

231
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interaction is detailed with respect to direction of operation of the troops
and also with respect to the specially isportant lines. targets and sethods
of operation. 1he coordination of the forces of the submits with respect
to tine is detersination of what they lust do at the use or a different
tiae when taking the sane line or target.

he interaction is considered organised only when the co-snders and
the staff of the interacting troops first know the general cosbat sission
and the intention of the operations of the superior chief; secondly. they
know the content of each other's codut siosions. the seth and the tins
of joint operations with respect to their fulfill-ant; thirdly, they have
reliable interaction co-unicstions with each other and with the senior of-
ficer and can realise autuel intonation exchange in a tisely aanner:

fourthly. they have md can quickly nsha use of the required nudier of inter-
action signals.

In each cosbat level and with respect to each next cosbat aission. its
own interaction systes is created so that in it the possibilities of the
various forces and ssteriel will be realized as fully as possible, so that
their efforts will he coordinated in the interests of the execution of the
codst sissions of the codined-erss submits. and within the latter. in the
interests of those who play the prissry role in the soluiton of the general
problem and. finally. so that their interaction will be specific, that is.
with respect to the target. the location and the tine it will reflect the
peculiarities of each troop level (subunit. unit. and so on).

It is obvious that the organisation of the interaction is not a one-
tise act. but a defined process of the work of the co-snder lid the staff.
he prissry role goes to the «under. whose work with respect to organiza-
tion of interaction consists of two stages: the first stage is the prepara-
tory stage. and the second is the practical reporting of the planned nethod
of interaction to the troops (see Figure 29).

1he training of the conander for the organisation of the interaction
begins inediately with obtaining the conbat aission, and ends with asking
the codaat decision. when explaining the coebat nission the co-snder. along
with the other probleu, reveals the role and the place of his subunits in
the systes of interaction of the higher echelons, and he plans how best to
interact with the neighbors and also with the forces and ssteriel of the
senior officers. When evaluating the situation. a study is sade of its ef-

fect on the application and coordination of the operations of the various
consist-arse.

As a result of estinating the situation and making the decision, the
cos-ander defines the principles of interaction of the troops when execut-
ing the forthcoling codst nission. he draws a picture (nodal) of the
course of the forthcosing combat operations. he plays out the coabst mental-
ly, in several versions. as a result of which the following are detenined:
the sequence of the routing of the enewy. the direction of concentration of

232

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

baaic forcea. the grouping of forced and aeteriel. the aiaaiona of the aub-

unita. the nature of the aeneuvering and an on.

It in alao noted when and

how to convey the planned interaction procedure to the auhordinetea.

Figure 29.

niration

Proceea of the orga-
of the interaction of

troopa in codut .

Key: 1.

2.

3.

‘e

5e

7.

Initial data for the
organization of
interaction

Coahat aiaaion and
apecific conditione of
ice execution
lnatructione of eenior
officer with reepect to
interaction

1 Training of the con-
sander for organization
of interaction

Study of the initial
data. btplanation of

the codnt aiaaion. eati-
nation of the aituation
and deteraination of the
procedure for interaction
in the codoat deciaion
Formulation of the inter-
action procedurea on the
operating up or in a
eeparate docuacnt
Deteraination of the
aethod md tiae for the
delivery to the actor-
dinatea of the planned
interaction procedure

lmmmu mm (4)
{NW WM

1min! ammm
mwmmw um“)
um.

 

8. ll Delivery of the pinned

interaction procedure to the
auhordinateo

9. By ;'ndividual ordere together vith codat aiaeiona
10. General oral inotructiona with respect to interaction inediately

after atateaent of the aioaion

11. After confination of the decisiona of the Mordinetca by playing

out the baaic problem of interaction in the field (on a aodel) with
then.

In helping the wander, the ataff preparea the required data and

calculationa for it. filla out the planned interaction procedure on ice

233

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR O'PICMI. USE ONLY

worhing nap or in an individual docunent. and realires other neasures with
respect to preparation for the orgmiration of the interaction by the aethod
established by the cousnder.

Various lethods of orgmiration of the interaction are used. 'iheir
selection depends priearily on the possibility of personal conunication with
the subordinates. the level of their training. and the time available. If
the tiae is entreaely limited and it is iapoaaible to gather all the subordi-
nates into one point in the field (at the co-and post). then the instructions
with respect to interaction are delivered to then siaultaneoualy with the
coabat nissions in the brief codret orders sent to the subordinates by the
«under hiaself end the staff officers over the closed co-micationa chan-
nels end also by personal coauunicetions with sons of then. If the situation
pernits. after oral statenent of the coebet emissions the «under can give
ell of the subordinates general instructions with respect to the interaction
directly in the field. on a nodal (a relief asp) or by the sap.

‘lhe instructions of the coaaender with respect to interaction in this
case are discussed in a strictly defined plan. Hith respect to each inter-
aediate conbat aission he defines nd indicates: a) the goal of the coordi-
nsted operation (interaction); b) the possible grouping and expected counter-
action of the eneey (if necessary. by versions): c) which forces end aateriel
or subunit of the different conbet erIa participate in achieve-ant of the
goal. that is. in routing the anew: d) the procedure for coordinated opera-
tions of these forces and uteriel (submits) with respect to the lines.

directions. targets and tines within the liltis of the given intermediate
coabat nission.

Initially. the probleu of interaction can be resolved within the
linits of visibility on terrain. and outside visibility, by the up or on a
nochup (relief plan) not only by giving the instructions. but also with the
application of the aethod of playing out the forthcoaing coabat operations.

The instructions of the co-ander with respect to interaction are not
identical with respect to content theaselvea. for they are aade up of the
content of the coabet nission and the specific problene and conditions of
its execution. In the instructions of the co-ander it is not especially

necessary to repeat the already stated codiet Iiesiooa. The procedure for
coordinated operations of the subunita of the various coast area with re-
spect to nisaion. lines ad tine md also the neighbors in the interests of
successful execution of the codrat niaaion is defined. 0n organization of
the attack fron the arch. for angle. in these instructions the following
is defined with respect to each lisaion.

a: perforeence of the next nission:

a) During the artillery preparation ad edvenceaent of the subunit
to the line of going over to the attack: the tine and the procedure for

occupation of the fire positions by the artillery and the antiaircreft .0an

.0

23‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON}?
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

and the neana of firing by direct laying - the firing linee in the initial
area for the offeneive: the etructure of the euhunit (unit) for advancement to
the line of going over to the attack: the procedure for OGVCIlcQIInC. deploy-
cent and operationa of the euhunit on going to the attack line coneidering

the poaeihle counteraction of the ground and air eneey: the tine of beginning.
duration and etructure of the artillery preparation of the attack. the prob-
lens and coordineted operationa of the warioue forcee and nateriel during
artillery preperation: the tine and nethod of clearing paeeage through oh-
etaclee (euro and the eneny'a) and deeignetion of then: the tine and the pro-
cedure for conduct of fire by the weapone of direct laying. tanlta and notorieed
rifle auhunita before the attack: each will aid with the auhunite which are in
front in direct contact with the eneqy: coordination of the operation of the
antiaircreft defence aeane with reapect to covering the troope fro. eneey air
attache and other prohleae.

h) men the attunita of the lat echelon attack and take the linee of
their next liaoiona. the following are indicated: the tine end procedure
for going over free the artillery preparation to artillery aupport of the
attack; the targeta of deatruction during artillery aupport, the eupport pro-
cedure. the eignal and the fire tranefer procedurea; the tine. the aignal and
the nethod of going over to the attack on the part of the euhmite; the pro-
cedure for paeaage of the edaunita through obataclea: the procedure for coor-
dinated operatione of the euhunita of all conhat arm of each other and the
neighhora when tehing the atrong pointa and repelling the eneny comterat-
tacha. the nature of their Ianeuvering and their autual aid; the procedure
for covering the conhat fornation fro. eneny air atrihae: the tine and the
procedure for diaplacenent of the artillery and the antiaircreft eeena to the
new poaitiona and other prohleea.

0n fulfillnent of the given niaeion. the inetructiona of the connder
are leaa detailed with reapect to interection. In the. only thoae problem
are per-itted which particularly correepond to the goala of coordinated ope-
rationa —- coqletion of the rout of the target after the fire dauge and
during the course of the eneny attack in which they will try to atrengthen

their poeition by holding advantageoue linee (targete) and launching counter-
attache.

For the attacking troopa it will he characteriatic to try to build up
atrength by engaging the 2d echelon (mem) in codaet. in connection with
which the co-ander defines the following: the targeta dauged hy artillery
fire and aviation atrihea in the direction of the 2d echelon operatione: the
line of deploy-cot of the 2d echelon (reaerve), the tile and the routee for
advance-cot to thia line, who will free the. or prepare then and when; nahing
up forces and nateriel in connection with engegeeent of the 2d echelon (the
reeerwe) in coebat I“! the interaction with the «built. of the let echelon
and the neighbore; the procedure for covering the euhtnita againat eneey air
atrilue; an e reeult of who, when and how the 2d echelon (reaerwe) will he
reetored. and other problem.

235

FOR OFFICIAL USE OllLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when developing a further attack, the instructions of the co-nandar
with respect to interaction are still less detailed than the preceding ones.
for it is difficult to estisate the possible changes in the situation in ed-
vance. which aeans to plan in detail the procedure for the coordinated opera-
tion of their troops. 'lherefore. here on the basis of the evaluation and
considering the probable changes in the situation. it is planned in general
features how the fire dasege to the eneny is realised and how the rout of
the ener will be coapleted by the operations of the codeined srns subunits.

In the instructions of the coumdsr with respect to interaction for
the tine of fulfill-cot of any of the next eissions. problem are also re-
solved which are connected with the coordination of the operations of the
subunits when overconing water barriers, the develop-ant of the attack at
night. when surnounting different types of obstacles and obstructive aress
and also the repulsion of the comterattacks end other operations of the
eneny. especially with their application of nuclear weapons. If by the deci-
sion of the senior officer the airborne is used. then the probleu of inter-
action with then ere also resolved. he places and the procedures for sove-

sent during the course of the attack of the control points in the interaction
signals are reported to the subordinates.

in all cases prinery attention is given. of course. to the fire delege
by the may and fast utilization of the results in order to fulfill each
inter-ediate aission with the least losses and expenditures of materiel and.
in the final analysis. fulfill the eonbat emission.

0n organisation of interaction, the growing significance of the coabst
with the air eneey is especially taken into account. This combat not be
continuous. active and carefully organized. designed so that the coebat for-a-
tion of the attacking troops is reliably covered. 1he coal-anders of the
sntieircrsft defense submits oust receive specific instructions on the degree
of preparedness of the forces md natariel of the sntieircrsft defenses for
repelling eneny air strikes: their locations in the easiest (latching) fores-
tions; the routes of love-ant. the sequence of the displace-ant and the
.nature of the answering during the course of the coebat operations; the
procedure for interaction with the covered subunit (target) and also with
the antiaircrnft defense scans of the junior officer and neighbors.

For all of the stdmnits, the procedure and the warning signals are
given with regard to the air enesy and the nature of their operations by the
signal: the conduct of stall aras fire. aeasures with respect to distribu-
tion. cover and cemuflage. Special attention is given in this case to the
control of the low-flying targets. including snow coder helicopters. with
the use for the destruction of not only sntieircrsft equip-cot. but sub-
nachineguns and nachineguns.

In the instructions of the co-ander with respect to interaction on
the defensive, coordinated operations of their srbmits are defined with re-
spect to the probable directions of the may attack. with respect to the

~

236

FOR OFFICIAL USE Oh..Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nissions and the direction of the countersttsch of their troops. 'Ihe special
probleas by which interaction is organieed on the defensive are the follow-
ing: the daaage to the ens-y on the approaches to the forward line of
defense; the repulsion of the enesv attack in front of the forward line: the
destruction of the eneay wadging into the defense. for destruction of the
enen)‘ on the approaches to the defense. the areas of sees and sections of
concentrated artillery fire and nortars are planned in cosbinstien with the
fire aesns of the senior officer. the air operations and the operations of

the neighbors and also the security forces in front of the forwerd line of
defense.

For repulsion of the ensny attack in front of the forward line of
defense, the coanmder indicates the areas of nassed fire. the sections of
concentrated fire and the lines of berrege fire in the nest inortent direc-
tions. the lines and the procedure for opening fire by antitank asans. the
depth of the tone of continuous fire of all types, the places for creation of
fire pockets and the construction of engineering obstacles. In addition. the
protedure for the naneuvering of the fire of all types and reserve for rein-
forcing the threatened areas and also the procedure for the utilization of
forces and eateriel froa secondary directions for the repulsion of the enewy
attack in the aain direction are planned.

In order to destroy the eneny wedged into the defense. as a rule. the
following are indicated: the local areas which nuet be tightly held in each
direction of attack of the ens-y: -the procedure for concentrated fire of all
types for danege to the wedged easy. the occupation of the fire lines with
entitmk arena and the construction of the engineering obstacles during the
course of battle. In each direction of the counterettaclt the co-snder de—
fines the following: the deploy-en: lines. the routes of edvnce ad the
2d echelon ni-sion, the artillery nission. nortsrs and the submits of the
let echelon with respect to the densge to the enesy before the beginning and
during the course of the comterettaclt. In addition. the procedure is end:-
lishcd for interaction on restoration of the defense in case of failure free
the comterattsck and on launching the counterattsck by the reserves of the
senior officers.

'ihe interaction when sufficient tine is available can be organized
not in-edistely after daily cowbet nissions. but after sole tine. The given
nethod was widely used during the last war. It consists in the fact that
after giving the oral coabet order in the field, tins is allowed to the
subordinates for uniting the coebat decisions. Then the co-ander hears and
approves the decisions and successively resolves the basic probleas of in-
teraction with then.

In support of the work of the «sender with respect to organiution
of the interaction. the role of the staff is significant. 1he staff helps
the conunder in the practical resolutions of the probles of interaction in
the field (on a aodel) and records his instructions with respect to interac-
tion. In accordance with these instructions the staff were precisely

237

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

defines or develops documents with respect to interaction and if necessary
sends notes to the subordinates. ‘ihe staff resolves the preblees of interac-
tion with the subordinates to when the consander has not been able to issue
orders personally. In addition. the staff organises and supports reliable
couunicatiens between the interacting subunit. it delivers the established
signals to thee and realises eonitering of the correctness of the organise-

tion of the interaction by the subordinates. reporting the results to the
contender.

1he interaction can be reflected in the ceebat deem-tents that differ
with respect to fore. In the subunit it is fersuleted only on the working
sap oi the cemander. by seens of which he gives the oral cosbst orders in
the field and isnediately organises interaction. In the higher echelon. it
can be for-elated by an individual decusent - schesstic (on the sap). graph
or planning interaction table.

For any version of the formulation of the interaction - on the working
nap er in regular deer-ants (schematic, graph. planning table) -- it is in-
pertant to achieve extreee brevity end clarity of representation of the basic
problem of the interaction end at the same tile presote their fast and spe-
cific practical resolution by the contender and the staff both on organisation
and especially when ssintaining interaction during the course of cosbat.

me saintenence of continuous interaction is one of the isportant
prebless of the co-ander end staff during the course of cenbat. Realising
it. the consider and the staff not do the following: first realise with
sufficient cowleteness and decision the procedure of coordinated operations
of the forces before cosbet on fulfillsent of each next ceabat mission:
secondly. sore precisely determine. supple-en: and develop the procedure in
tile considering changes in the situation: thirdly, in the case of disturb-
ance of the interaction. restore or organise it again.

“has specific content of this work by the ce-snder and the staff de-
pends a greet deal on the type of ceebat. the characteristic feature of each
next cosbst sission and the setth of carrying then out, the degree of cor-
respondence of the interaction procedure planned before coabat to the situa-
tion developing during the course of cedest. and so on. For the success of
the support of the interaction in all cases the following have definite signi-
i’icmce: constant knowledge of the situation and prediction of changes in it;
sonitoring of the cxsct fulfillsent of the cenbat siesien by the subunits and
the planned interaction procedure; the application of the refinement proce-
dure corresponding to the situation, the develop-ent and restoration of the
disruptive interaction; the usintenence of reliable co-unicetlons insuring

interaction of the subunits and tisely sending of the established interaction
signals.

Exact knowledge of the situation and prediction of changes in it -

initial prerequisite for the success of the work of the cos-ender and staff
with respect to maintaining interaction. This is achieved, in turn. by the

238
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0' '.Y
FOR ONICIM. USE ONLY

continuously conducted reconnaissance. sexism use of all sources for obtain-
ing data on the change within the situation, systenatic mutual infornation
about it between the co-anders of the interacting subunits. 0f the total
data obtained during the course of conbat. those have special significance
which parnit rapid evaluation of to what degree the previomly planned inter-
action procedure is being held to with respect to tine. lines (targets). and
if there are deviations. then what they consist of. what. when and how it is
necessary to do sonething so as to elininata and naintain clear interaction.
All of the refine-ants regarding the coordinated operation procedure are con-
veyed to the raspomible agents by short oral orders (co-sands).

Refining the interaction procedure within the limits of the already
fulfilled (next) aiseion. the «under and the staff developed and detailed
the basic probleas of interaction for the next (subsequent) niaeion. for be-
fore the battle they have been resolved only in general outlines. lhe tineli-
nose of the problesn which suat be resolved here is pradaterninad by the
content of the cosbat Isisaion itself, the nathods and the conditions for its

ulfillnent.

If this. for exanpla. is the next nission in the offensive, then it
usually is connected with the coaplation of the previomly started rout of
the enany and the effort to develop success in the depth of his defenses.
For this purpose. as a rule, the 2d echelon is engaged in the battle. Alnost
all of the forces and material participate in the fulfillnent of the nission.
the operations of which nust be coordinated without a break in the offensive
rate. here it is inpoasible to call all of the subordinates of the contenders
to the control point of the senior officer. Each of then is given the oonbat
orders orally by radio in a strictly defined procedure in which along with
deter-ination of the cosbst niasion. brief instructions are presented with
respect to the basic interaction problans.

lhe list of these problsns within the frueworh of the next nission can
be approxinately as follows: the 2d echelon (reserve) -- the line and tins
of engage-cut in combat, the conbet aission. the procedure and the aethods of
interaction with the neighbors or conpletion of the rout of the eneny: the
artillery - the fire problaws considering the attacks of their aviation. the
netth and tines of their execution. the procedure for displacenent. deploy-
Ient and conduct of fire: the special reserves - what, when and how it is
to be done to support the operations of the sdmnits perforning the nest in-
portant coder nissions. In addition. new places md deployment tines are
reported during the course of cosbat of the control points of the senior of-
ficer and the additional interaction signals.

‘lhe interaction, for exanple. during the course of defensive eonbat
when launching a counterattack for rout of the aneny wedged into the defense
is organized by the sane nethod and theoretically with respect to the sac
set of problens. but with different direction and content. Here. first of
all. due operations of the alenents of the codiat forsation are coordinated

239

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which create advantageous conditions for the counterattack. and then all of
the forces and tutorial participating in the counterattsck.

'lhe interaction can be disturbed during the course of cosbat for vari-
ous reasons. The degree of this disturbance will also be different: in one
case there can only be loss of co-unications with one or several subunits;
in another case, loss by the subunits (the eleaents of the combat foreation)
of fitness for battle. which means the possibility of solving the problems:
thirdly, both can take place sinultaneously. distinguished by a variety of
versions. Consequently. the volune. content and nethods of operation of the

commander and the staff with respect to the restoration of the disturbed in-
teraction are different.

In such a case of destruction of the interaction. the cousender and the
staff first of all establish the relation to the subunits, they explain the
situation did the condition of the subujits and the causes of the disruption
of the interaction aeong them as quickly as possible. 'lhe eaasures, and when
and how to inlet-ant then so that it will be restored without hindering the
fulfillsent of the coebet eission. are planned at. the sane ties.

' first of all interaction is set up between the subunits which play the
prinery role in the solution of the general problems or can continue execu-
tion of the mission at the sees tine as the other subunits are forced before
this to restore their coﬂat capdaility. First of all the ooabat eissions
and the interaction between the forces and uteriel designed for fire strikes
on the eneey and also using the results of these strikes and coepleting the
rout of the may are more precisely defined.

All of the instructions of the co-snder are conveyed by short orders
over the existing commications channels and with personal com-mication
with the subordinate couanders. Personal conunications with the co-snders
whose swunits have turned out to be under the most serious conditions. is
especially important. The senior officer's visit to then is one of the best
means of accelerating and iaproving the efficiency of the measures with
respect to restoration of the combat capability and dueir disruptive inter-
action. Another thing is no less inportant — the naintenance of constant
readiness of the consanders of the subordinates and interacting subunits for
taking the initiative in restoring the disrupted interaction. In this way
there are broad possibilities for their manifestation of creative initiative.
0n the basis of the general plan and the proper understanding of their role
in its inlenantation. without waiting for instructions fron above, they nust
lore precisely detenine the procedures for the operations of their subor-
dinates in accordance with the change in the situation. for this purpose
it is necessary that reliable cos-unications and nutual information be usin-
tained between them so that they will know not only each other's niasions.
but also the results of the fulfill-ant of the missions. It is necessary
that they be constantly ready to render mutual aid. that they know how

quickly to apply and execute the established interaction signals in a clear-
cut fashion.

260

70'! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'nwa. tho skillful organiution. continuous maintenance of close inter-
action of tho troops during the course of battle and its fast restoration in
cass of disruption are sons of the nost ilportant indexes of the ability of
tonandsrs and stsff in troop control and also tho conditions for chair suc-
cessful tulfillunt of the «signed coabat lission.

261

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm 7. MARIM'HON All) IMPLBiENTA‘l'ION (f “FASURBS um RBPEI‘ TO THE
SOPPGIT OP GMAT OPWTIMS AND Till C(IHMOANT'S SERVICB

Under any conditions of cosbat activity of the troops. one of the nest
isportant problems of the control mita is the organisation of measures with

respect to the support of cedar operations and the direction of their isple-
mtation during preparation and in the course of cedar.

In connection with the adoption of nuclear weapons for arusent. the
equip-ent of the troops with new materiel, the effect of these measures on
the external execution of the goals by the troops is increning inco-ensur-
sbly. lhey are faced with the goal, on the one hand. to create the necessary
conditions strong the troops in any situation for their timely execution of
the stated sissions, saintenance of their codat capd>ility and when neces-
sary. to restore it in short order, and on the other hand. to cowlicste the
application of forces and sateriel by the enemy, especially nuclear weapons.
as ouch as possible.

‘Ihe achievement of this goal is possible mder the given condition of
the couples utilization of various types of support. In addition to such
types of support widely used in world Her II as reconnaissance. security.
camouflage. engineering, radar and topogeodetic support, new provisions must
..be nsde to protect the troops against nuclear weapons. and hydrousteorologic-
sl support. In the American Arsy a great deal of attention is given to con-
bsting the radioelectronic means of the may.

1here is no domt that the comandant service can also include types
of support. with respect to purpose and content of the sissions perforoed.
it is organised in the interests of supporting the troop operations although

in n nutter of cases it is done not only by the couandant service but also
the coobat units. '

Measures with respect to types of support are organised by the staff,
the chiefs of the codat arm and services on the basis of the decision of
the co-ander nd his instructions and also the orders of higher headquarters.
Usually the content of the work with respect to organization of any type of
support in nest general for- includes the following: the preparation of

2‘2

FOR OFI’ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

date and calculations required by the «under for stbstentieted deternina-
tion of the goals, the conposition of the forces, the tutorial and the proce-
dure for utilising then with respect to a defined type of support; the ex-
planation of the nissions end the conditions of their fulfillnent; planning
of the support problen, conveying the nission to the responsible agent;
realization of the direction end control of the troop operations with respect
to fulfill-ant of the nissions. Here it is necessary to consider that the
nessures with respect to each type of support are highly varied, and their
performce has its own specific peculiarities. 'lhie requires greet prepara-
tion on the pert of the responsible agents with respect to analysis of the
available data, the coordination of the problsns that arise with other in-
terested duty personnel. the perfornance of a large quantity of calculations
which. in turn. are based on the deep knowledge by the responsible agent of
the possibilities of technical facilities celled on for inplenentation of the
noted nessures. All of this increases the responsibility of the staff
officers and other control mite for the organization end inplenentetion of
the neasures with respect to comrehensive support of the cosbat operations.

Reconnaissance

Reconnaissance out under any conditions supply the counder and
staff with the required data on the snow. the terrain. the radiation and
hydroneteorological situation. Here the data nust be obtained in e tinsly
nanner, it lust be relitle and accurate, especially the coordinates of the
nest inportanr targets on which the senior officer plans nuclear strikes.

‘lhe tinely obtaining of initially couplets data on the enemy presents
greet difficulties. with the dynanics and speed of the conbat operations and
the nobility of the nsjority of the targets, the infornation about than is
quickly obsolete. Many foreign specialists have concluded that the break
between the seens of destruction and the reconnaissance capbilities has
taken place. One author writes with outright elsrn: "'llle systen for gather-
ing, processing and distributing infornation about the many does not cor-
respond to nodern require-ants... the infantry does not have sufficient
capabilities to find the eneny and obtain data on the eneny during the tins
and with the precision which will insure the lost effective utilization of
their growing firepower and nobility."1

The solution of this problea is connected not only with the applica-
tion of nodern reconnaissance neens but also the clesrcut organization of
reconnaissance. Usually the direct work of the staff with respect to the
organization of reconnaissance, in contrast to the other types of support,
begins with obtaining the prelisinary order or explanation of the nissione
obtained. 1he co-ender or chief of staff inediately deter-nines what prin-
ary data on the eneny and the terrain and at what tine it is necessary to get
it. what forces and materiel to use for this. On the basis of these

1. Signal ISinell journal. 1972. July.

263

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

instructions, the staff officer proceeds with the planning and organization
of the aeasures on reconnaissance which he plans to implement inedistely
without waiting for the coalsnder to aka a decision. When the decision is

needs the coumdsr can more precisely define these sissions or state addi-
tional ones.

Beginning with the decision of the contender and the basic reconnais-
sance eissions set up by him, the chief of staff, who is responsible for the
organization and the state of reconnaissance. gives instructions to the staff
officers on the organisation of reconnaissance. In then he usually specifies
the reconnaissance goals. Ila establishes the sequence of their solution ad
the forces and natariel needed for this; he deteraines the methods and times
of satisfaction of the goals, in what direction. area or object to concen-
trate the basic reconnaissance forces and what forces and material to call on
for this; he estdalishes the composition of the reserve of reconnaissance
forces and materiel, the procedure for application and restoration during the
course of codsat. Re indicates the procedure for preparation of the sdmnits
isolated from the conduct of reconnaissance, the organization of cos-mica-

tions with the reconnaissance agencies, the times for saving the missions
for the responsible agents.l

0n receiving the missions and the instruction, the staff officer ex-
plains the content of the missions with respect to reconnaissance. he studies
the condition and the capabilities of the available forces and nsterisl, he
estimates the situation in which it is necessary to perfors reconnaissance
when carrying out the stated aissions, he determines what treasures must be
carried out in order to insure successful solution of the problem. During
the process of this analysis it is determined which data can be obtained with
respect to each problem frost the reconnaissance, motorised rifle and tank
subunits and also higher headquarters and, in particular, the radar, artil-
lery, engineering and radiation reconnaissance. with the complex utilisa-
tion of forces and nateriel alone it is possible to insure successful fulfill-
nent of the reconnaissance aissions.2 '

Here the proper determination of the methods of obtaining the data
has exceptionally great significance depending on the content of the mission
and the nature of possible enemy operations. 1herefore, during the process
of estimating the conditions of the situation, the reconnaissance officer
especially carefully studies what data can be obtained by observations,
search. aimsh, attack. what reconnaissance information can be obtained as
a result of troop codat operations, the interrogation of prisoners and
deserters, the interrogation of local residents, what reconnaissance data

can come fron higher headquarters, the neighbors, air reconnaissance, and so
00s

1. R. G. Simonyan, P. I. Yerenenio. N. 8. Nikolayev, V. A. Truss, "Takti-

chesltaya Rasveda" [Tactical Reconnaissance], r ssoow, Voyenizdat, 1968.
pp 22-24.

2. Ibid., p 27.

2“

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0NI...’
FOR OWICMI. USE ONLY

As a result of the coaprehensive study of the situation and all the
initial data. the staff officer distributes the available reconnaissance
forces and asteriel considering the aost effective utilization of their
cepdailitiea and with respect to the mission. more precisely defines the spe-
cific tiaes and aethoda of carrying out the missions. the measure. with re-
spect to supporting the operations of the reconnaissance sun-rite, the proce-
dure for sainteining con-mications with it. the tines and method. of p-:eaen-
tation of the data obtained. here special attention is given to the timely
detection of nuclear weapons. reserves and other inportant target. of the

mercy.

All of the basic probleaa of planning and reconnaissance usually are
reflected on the operating laps of the chief of staff. the reconnaissance
officer and other interested officers. 1he data difficult to Ihow on the tap
are entered in the working notebooks of the responsible agents. in order to
convey the eissions to the subunits when necessary. codnt orders for recon-
naissance are developed in which usually the following are indicated: brief
infomtion on the eneuy: the reconnaissance eisaiona and the forces and
satericl allocated for the- (who. where. when and what information is to be
obtained or sore precisely defined). the tines and the procedures for presen-
tation of reports. the delivery of prisoners. weapons and docu-ents captured
frost the enesny; password and response; control simaia.

One of the lisaiona of the staff in all types of mint activity, es-
pecially when the arbunita are preparing to break through the "WW defenses.
remains as before and in modern coﬁat -- the organization of ohuvation.

It is inortent here to insure continuous observation of the they did the
terrain in the entire codeet operations area and on the flanks. to the great-
est depth possible. ‘iherefore. when organizing observations. the staff
especially carefully plans the locations for the observation couand Po"

and observation posts. selects the cosposition of the observers, and provides
the. with the necessary observation devices.

Not all of the data on the enesy. the terrain and the radiation situa-
tion can be gathered by our own forces and facilities. In order to obtain
the missing data. a request is sent to higher headquarters. and "nurse are
taken to obtain this infatuation fro- the neighbors. the troops operating
in front. and aviation.

Uuring the course of the fulfill-ant of the stated lisaion. by the
utbunits. depending on the developed situation. the co-ander or the chief
of staff sore precisely defines or states the additional reconnaissance ais-

sions for the reconnaissance stbunits. end if necessary reassigna forces and
smteriel to other areas or targets. All of these leasurea usuany are
reflected on the working nap of the chief of staff and the officers directly
responsible for the actions of the reconnaissance lubmita. The uissions. as
:- rule. are conveyed to the responsible agents orally or by techntcal coanu-
nicntionu neana.

245

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic index of skillful organization of reconnaissance is the
tiseliness of obtaining exhaustive. reliable data on the one”. the terrain
and the radiation safety by the com-and“.

Protection of ‘l'roops Against Nuclear Weapons

‘lha protection against nuclear weapons is an entire systes of seasons
perforsed to prevent dasage to our own troops or attenuate the results of the
effect of the nuclear weapons as sush as possible. and at the ease tine re-
tain or restore in a short time the cadet capability of the sibmits and
insure their reliable fulfillment of the stated missions. Beginning with
this designation of the given type of support in accordance with the views
adopted in the majority of arsies. the content includes the following: pre-
diction of the radiation situation. the destruction and flooding zones; the
organisation and conduct of aviation reconnaissance; warning the troops about
the direct threat of application of nuclear weapons by the ens-y and also the
areas of destruction. fires and obstructions; provision of the personnel with
individual protection means; deconcentration of the troops and their location
during the protective properties of the terrain: engineering equipnent of the
areas occupied by the subunits. deter-ination of the lost expedient nethods
of sursounting danage and destruction zones; preparation of paths for troop
maneuvering: doainetric monitoring and consideration of the doses of radio-
active radiation of personnel; the perforsance of the countsrepidenic.
sanitary-hygienic and specialized preventive measures; elimination of the
consequences of the use of nuclear weapons by the eneny.

0n the basis of the cos-ander's decision and his instructions, the
staff develops specific measures with determination of the tines, the forces
and materiel called on for their perforssnce. 'lhe basic planing data are
reflected on the working snaps of the cot-ander. the chief of staff and the
corresponding chiefs. lhe missions and the content of the measures with
respect to protection against nuclear weapons are conveyed to the responsi-
ble agents in the codast orders and also in the instructions and the orders
with respect to engineering. rear services and other types of support.

On launching nuclear strikes by the eneuy. the con-ander and staff
first of all analyze the situation in the damaged areas, they establish the
condition and the position of the stbunits who have suffered daaage frols
nuclear weapons, they deter-inc the nature of the operations of the eneay.
lhen measures are taken to restore the codat capdaility of the troops, con-
tinue the codast operations and elisinate the consequences of the eneny's
use of nuclear weapons. In carrying out these missions, the following ac-
quire the greatest significance: the restoration of the disrupted control.
snaking the decision and conveying the refined cosbat missions to the sub-
units which have relained codaat fit; renewal of the troops fro- the contami-

nation and danaged zones, the areas with fires and flooding; reinforce-eat
of the submits with uteriel. and so on.

266

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0.'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Along with these neasures. the extinguishing and localization of
fires. the restoration of engineering structures and shelters for the person-
nel. the cleaning of paths and routes. special processing of the subunits.
degassing and deactivation of the asteriel. the terrain. roads. structures.
and so on are organized.

'lhe stbunita which have suffered insignificant losses are put into
fornstion. and are given the necessary aid: in the troops having greater
losses. authorized organisation naasures are taken.

‘lhe organizational neasures are deterained by the degree of dosage.
in one case the subunits receive reinforce-cots at the expense of the reserves
or subunits which have lost their count capacity. and in another case it is
necessary to create a reduced foreation.

Security

in all types of conhat troop operations and also during their novenent
and deploy-sent. security is always organized. 0n the arch, predicting an
engage-ant with the eneny. the troops are guarded by the arch security.

"hen the subunits are in place, security at the halt is organized.
and when conducting cotat operations. codaat security.

when organizing security, the co-ander defines its goals and estab-
lishes what llbmltl to involve in executing then. he chief of staff bears
direct responsibility for the organization and inplenentstion of security.
Planning security, he deter-ines in accordance with the decision of the con-
sander the forces and nateriel necessary to organize security, he plans the
areas (lines) for location of the security elensnts or the routes (directions)
of their nova-ant; he details the probless for the security mite consider-
ing possible enely operations, he establishes the times in which they are to
accosvlish these goals; he establishes the procedure and aethod of advmce-
sent of the security subunits to fulfill their sissions, and when necessary
he establishes the ties and the procedure for changing free one type of
security to another. In addition. the chief of staff defines the organiza-
tion of cmications with the security mite, he establishes the signals
and the procedure for interaction of security submits with the secured
troops and also their support with everything needed for successful fulfill-
aent of their nissions.

Under any conditions. provision is Isade for the organization of direct
security of the troops to protect then against attacks frol- diversionary
groups and to give the- timely warning of the threat of an one-y attack.
1he security of the lost iaportant targets is organized not reliably. Forces
and aateriel capable of successfully dealing with the stated lissions under
any conditions are allocated for their security.

2‘7

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

he developed eecurity neeeuree ere reflected on the working nepe of
the co-ender end the chief of eteff. ‘Ihe nieeione ere delivered to the
security unite. ee e rule, orelly.

Engineering Support

mgineering eupport in the engineering neeeuree end probleee pronoting
eucceeeful conduct of codaet operetione by our own iorcee end coepliceting
the operetione of the energy troope.

with the uee of nucleer ueepone. in the preeence of net deetruction.
obeteclee. firee. flooding end redioective conteninetion of the terrein. the
voluee of engineering operetione increeeee ineeeeurebly.

The eoet ieportent ptobleee of engineering eupport ere the following:
engineering reconneieeence; feciliteting the noveeent md eeneuvering of the
troope. heuling end evecuetion; the cleering oi peeeegee through obeteclee
and deetruction: the equip-ent end nethode of croeeinge: the conetruction of
ehcltere end etructuree et the control point; the inetelletion of berriere
end reeovel of the eftereethe of the deetruction: the execution of neeeuree
with reepect to cenufleging the troope end the tergete: the perforaence of
the neat conpliceted operetione requiring the epplicetion of engineering
cquipeent for the ereee'of deienee end the linee occupied by the eubunite:
the perfornence of engineering neuuree to elininete the coneequencee of use
by the eneny of nucleer veepone: the eecuring of ueter, end conetruction of
ueter eupply etetione.

Depending on the type of ooebet operetione. the developed eituetion.
the preeence of forcee, uteriel end tile end eleo the condition of the ter-
rein, the tine of yeer. tine of dey. weether conditione. the noet ieportmt
of the enu-ereted nieeione ere defined. end the procedure end tieee for their
perforeencc ere eetebliehed.

During the orgenieetion of coebet. the «under deter-inee the fol-
lowing: whet engineering neuuree lust be telten. how to uee the eeeigned
engineering eulmnite. the operetione perfornence tine. 0n the heeie of the
decieion end inetructione of the «under. the engineering reconneieeence
eieeion. the volume of engineering neuuree to protect the troope egeinet
nucleer veepone, celouflege. equip-eat of the control point, the tinee end
eequence when perforning engineering operetione. end eo on ere defined, or
Dare precisely defined.

lhe orgenizer of engineering eupport end control of the engineering
etbmite ie the engineering eervice chief.I m the up he develope en

1. V. Ye. Plyeehin. I. F. lantdthin. V. D. luvinekiy, "lnthenernoye (bee-
pecheniye (behchevoyekovogo Roye” [Engineering Support of the Coﬁined-
Arne Met], Koecov. Voyenitdet, 1972, p 12.

268

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL!
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

engineering eupport plan in which the goale of engineering eupport. the
forcee end uteriel for the performce of theee eieeione. the tieee of per-
foreence. the eaterial end technical eupport ere reflected. 'lhe plen ie
neceeeerily coordinated with the codined-eree heedeuertere. Ueuelly the

eieeione with reepect to engineering eupport are given to the reeponeihle
egente orally.

During coebet. the planned eeuuree with reepect to engineering eupport
are eore precieely defined in accordance with the changing eituetion and the

decision of the coeeander. and if neceeeery. additional eeeeuree ere deter-
eined for the etbunite.

Ceeouflege

Canouflage ie organieed to cover the true poeition end the operatione
of the eubunite froe the eneqy end eleo to cover up plene and chow felee group-
inge in troop operatione. preeent our plane. intentione end eieeione to the
eneey In felee fore. To achieve thie goal. e eet of eeaeuree hee heen deve-
loped which providee for covering the deceeouflaging eigne on location end
during operatione of the etbunite end reproduction of felee deceeoufleging
eigne by which the cum ueually detecte end recogniue the troope end ter-
gete. In order for the plenned felee dec-oufleging eigne to he convincing.
they euet he pleueihle. tactically euhetentieted end veried.

Ceeouflage cen he effective only if it ie continuous. "Modern war-
fore." wrote H. V. Prunee, ”requiree the conetent epplicetion of ceeouflege
during ell periode of toilet operatione. lhe epplicetion of cenouflege
pcriodicelly. froe cue to cue. Deane eleoet not to use it et ell..."I
Skillful reelitetion of caeouflege ie poeeihle with cereful eetieetion of the

terreln, the eeteorologicel dete. the behavior of the eneqy and the poeeibi-
litiee of his reconnaieeence mane.

Neong the ceeouflege neeeuree an important role goee to the deconcen-
tretion end eecret deployeent of the euhmite coneidering eexieue uee of the
ceeoufleging propertiee of the terrein; redio cucufiege: the oheervetion of
the condition previouely eetebliehed in the euhmite, cleer eetiefaction of
the require-onto of light and eound c-ouflage, equip-ent of felee ereee for

locetion of the emunite, the poeitione nd croeeinge; the perforeence of
dceonetretion operetione end troop noveeente.

Hceeuree are teken to preeerwe the cote: eecrecy end Ieintein high
rceponeihility along all pereonnel for the obeervetion of the order and one-
niution in the performance of ell operetione comected with preperetion for
the forthcoeing coehat operetione. It ie unqueetionehly true that eny nee-
eure with reepect to confueing the eneey ie connected with defined riek for

l. n. V. Pruner. Iehrennyye Proimdeniya [Selected Uorke]. Mecca. Voyenie-
dot. 1965. P 1300

269

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR orncm. USS ONLY

carrying out the bneic nieeion. Foreign euthore note thet before nelting e
decieion for denonetretive operetione. it ie neceeeery to etudy the poeeibi-
litiee of the energy with reepect to diecovery of the felee operetione. ieole-
tion of e sufficient newer of forcee end neteriel. eelection of e euiteble
tine. inenrenee of pleneibility end conviction of the reelieed deeonetretive
operetione. Ilere. e nudaer of probleee. eepecielly with reepect to confueion
of the eneny. ere cerried out in eccordence with the plen of higher heed-
quertere.

All of the beeic cenonflege neeeuree ere reflected on the working nepe
of the contender end the officere of the control unite. l‘he nieeione ere
delivered to the reeponeible egente orelly. In certein ceeee. written ordere
for ceeouflege cen be developed in which the following ere defined: the
ceeonflege nieeione of the enbunite: the forcee end eeteriel elloceted for
perforeence of theee eieeione: the tinee; the reeponeible egente. If necee-
eery. the indiceted nethode of perforeing the ceeouflege operetione, the
proceduree for tuning the teblee end the behavior of the troope cen be indi-
ceted in the ordere.

1hn effectiveneee of cenonilege neeeuree during preperetion end during
the course of codet operetione depende to e greet extent on the eetebliehed
strict control of the perforeence of plenned eeeenree by the troope. for
theee purpoeee prowieion ie nede for ueiug the ground end eir obeervetion
fecilitiee. reder. night vieion inetrnnente, control photogrephy fron eir-
creft (helicoptere) of the ereee where the troope end the tergete ere loceted.
Here epeciel ettention hee been given to the cenonileging of the noet ieport-
ent tergete. the ereee where eecond echelone ere loceted. the reeervee end
control pointe on which the nucleer etrihee end enew eir etteclte ere noet
probeb e.

Goebeting the ﬁnely Redioelectronic Devioee‘

Codeting eneq redioelectronic devicee hee been org-tired end in
being cerried out in order to dierupt or dieorgenize the control of the eneey
troope end oodet neteriel. lt includee the pnrpoeefnl creetion of inter-
ference. plenned redio nieinfornetion. the orgeniution of reder ceeonflege
end the protection of our fecilitiee fro. eneey redio interference end eleo
neuuree with rupect to the deetruction end euporeeeion of the eoet ieport-
ent redioelectronic tergete. ‘lhie etruggle cen be eucceeei‘ul with the one
of nodcrn nethode of etteining deteiled dete on the rediotechnicel fecili-
tiee of the enely. The beeic pert of the inforution uenelly in provided by
the rediotcchnicel reconneieeenoe which her the longeet range. higheet epeed
or obteining dete end higheet reliebility. In cmeretively ehort tine it
detects redio enieeion. enelyeee it end determines the clueificetion of the
redioelcctronic devicee.

1. This eection wee written from neteriele printed in the foreign preu.

250

FOR OFFICIAL 05! 0.3L!
'0! ONICIM. USE ONLY

tinder nodern conditione. one of the beaic nethode of dierupting the
operation of the eneny‘e radioelectronic equip-ant ie coneidered to be radio
interference. In a defined tine it ie poeeible to prevent the eneny fro-
receiwing and tranenitting intonation over the rediotechnicel neana. or to
eignificantly reduce the audibility and vieibility of the eignale, confuee
the operatore and cauae errore in the operation of the auto-eted col-unice-
tione unite.

In order to create active interference anally epecial traneaittere
and different interference etatione are uaed. Ihere are aleo one-tine inter-
ference traneeittera which ueually are dropped fro- an aircraft or nieeilee
into eneev territory. In addition. peeeiwe interference created by ueing
antiredar reflectore (dipolee) ie not eignificent. In order to create falee
targete and to camouflage the real once. angle reflectore are finding broad
application in antiredar camouflage. Along theee eeaeuree an ieportant role
ie played by radio eieinfornation - the treneeieaion of falee inforeetion,
faking radio trenaeieeiona. ewitching on the enemy eyeteae. and ac on. A
nuebar of NATO arniee deeignated epecial any eecurity eervice and radio
electronic warfare amt-rite for theee eiaeione. however, the application of
the indicated meuree prowidee only temrary eucoeee. hey can coqlicate
the operation of the radioelectronic neane only for a linited tine. Ihe noet
effective nethod of controlling the radioelectronic scene of the enew ie
coneidered to be deatruction or daeage by nuclear weapona. eiaeile and air
atriloea. artillery fire, nortar fire and airborne landinge. Finding broad
application are warioue rockete. nieeilee and aviation bode with radar and
radio heade which provide for honing on the target by the eeieeione of the
eneay radioelectronic devicee.

Defined principlee have been developed in radioelectronic warfare.
Ihe eoet imrtant are the following: nee application of forcee and eateriel
in the direction of the Iain etrike in the intereete of the performce of
the noet ieportmt goale in troop codaet: continuity of effect on the radio-
clectronic devicee end eneny eyetene; eurpriee application of coebet Deane.
lhe practical utilization of theee principlee can ieprowe the effectiveneee
of interfering with the operation of eneny radioelectronic dewicee.

Along with the organization of the coebating of the eneny radioelec-
tronic devicee. the ateff providee eeaeuree for the protection of their own
fecilitiee. Por theee purpoeee, the deetruction of the interference etatione
available to the one-y. the inteneification of radio ceeouflage end the per-
foreance of certain epecial neaeuree are planned. In particular. at apecial
radio protection eeuurea it ie race-ended that the radioe be located behind
pronontoriee. (create. and coqlexea of buildinge having a ehielding effect.
It ie nore frequently ueeful to utilize "directional antennae” which provide
uni-u- radiation in the direction of the eneey. In addition. the neat
ilportont protection eeeeure ie coneidered to be elieinetion of the charac-
terietic errore which are couitted by the radio operatore mad at the ease
tine facilitate the control of the radio tune by the eneay. 'Iheae errore
Include the following: the operation of the radioe at high power. tuning

251

M ONION]. USE ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

the caitting antenna for tranemiaeion. long-term tuning of the transmitter.
excessive service talk. unnecesaary multiple calla. failure to evitch off
the high voltage of the radio transnitter after completion of the calls.
failure to change call signs simultaneously on all radioe in the netvork, the

preeence of individual “aignaturee” and ”recogni tion signs" of individual
radio operatore.

In addition. it is moot-ended that the operation of individual types
of radioelectronic devices he completely or partially forbidden. the operat-
ing frequency band and transmitting characteristics he kept secret. the
pouerful transmittere he kept outeide the linits of the control pointe and
the secret troop control rulee he atrictly oheerved. The mat effective turn
out to he the measures for protection of our radioalectronic devicee if they
are carried out conetantly. in coebination and in ell control unite.

Topogeodetic Support

‘lhe terrain use always one of the aoet important situation elemente.
Making the coabat docieion. the contender conetantly evaluatee the terrain
in the forthconing operation tone. and it often haa decisive effect on the
succoee of codaat. Therefore it ia neceeesry that during the decieion leaking
proceee the cos-lender have all the neceeeary date on the terrain permitting
clear preeontation of the directione (areae) noet ecceeeihle for troop opera-
tions, the pretence and the atate of the road network mad the conditions of
off-road movement. the poseihle effect of the terrain on completion of the
maneuvera. Hence. the eignificance of the topogeodetic aupport for timely
reporting of all the terrain data to the contender and the ataff required
for organization of coﬁat operations incrcseee.

In addition, according to foreign preea data1 the topogeodetic eupport
missions include the following: equipment of the troops with the topographic
maps, diagram. deecriptions of the terrain. the delivery of data to the
artillery eubunite required for topographic gridding of the elemente of the
combat formation of the artillery and also preparation of the data required
by the troope for orientation in the terrain ad target indication.

Missions such so the forecaeting and reflection on the maps of the
nature of the alteration of the terrain after nuclear atrikee has under
modern conditione acquired the neat importmt eignificance. ‘lhese data, so
foreign epecialiate indicate. can he obtained in the shortest poaeihle tine
not only by forecasting the reaulte of the changee in the terrain but aleo
by surveying (photographing) theee areae which will then permit the plotting
(entry) of the changea that have occurred on the topographic map.

1. 0.8. Army Regulatione: I'M-5488 "Topographic and Geodetic Service”:
m-s-zn "ﬂapping Punctione of the Corpe of Engineere."

252

POI OFFICIAL US! OIL!
FOR OPPICIAI. US! ONLY

Hydroneteorologicol Support

successful troop control. especially under modern conditions. is un-
thinkable without exact knowledge of the air teaperature and moisture, the
wind speed and direction at different altitudes. clouds. anount of precipi-
tation. atnoepheric pressure. river conditions. canals. lakes. reservoirs.
owns and ice md snow cover. In addition. detailed data are required on
the presence and the condition of the hydroengineering structures (dens. head-
getes. end so on) and the possibility of flooding of the terrain in case of
duago to then by the enemy. It is isportant to have forecasts about the
beginning and the duration of the bad road season. the nelting tine for the
sweeps. the beginning of the thawing of the snow and ice in the rivers and
in the aountaina'. the beginning of the flooding of the rivers. and so on.

All of these data. being objective factors of the situation. have
serious effect on the content of the co-ander's decision and the nature of
troop operations. The neteorological conditions can have especially signifi-
cant effect on the accuracy of the strikes by the artillery subunits. the
optical. sound and radar reconnaissance. engineering operations, the use of
all types of cor-unicatione. the operations and neintenmce of equip-ant and
the naneuvering possibilities of the troops. "hen conducting cowat opera-
tions when nuclear weapons are used. the knowledge of the area and the aver-
age wind speed and other neteorological data are especially required. Only
with then is it possible correctly to deternine the safe reaoval of our own
troops and carry out forecasting of the radiation situation and deter-ine
the nethoda of troop operation.

hence. the aoet iwortant goals of the staff with respect to hydro-
neteorological support are the following: the gathering of data on the
neteorological conditions. the organisation and observation of weather con-
ditions. intonation of the aubordin-tea daout the meteorological data.
tinaly warning of the subunits daout the dangerous weather phenoaena (glazed
ice, rains, audslidee, fog. high winds. md so on).

'Ihe staff receives the basic part of the data on me hydro-eteorolo-
gical conditione of reconnaissance, higher headquarters. the indications of
the local residents and also their references. descriptions. short-range and
long-range forecasts. and inforuation about the current weather. ‘nne data
obtained are reflected on the operational naps of the staff officers. the
chiefs of conbat area and services. and they are taken into account in deve-
loping neeeurea with respect to the organisation lid support of coebnt ope-
rations.

Considering the iuportance of the tiaely obtaining of meteorological
data, in o nuber of araies autosated aeteorological syste- are created.
In these systole the neteorological bulletins can be generated alnoat i-ae-
dietely after the end of sounding nd then in a for- that is suitable for
direct input to the auto-ated artillery fire control syatee.1

'1'. Imam" mans: amen. August. 1912.
253

 

POI OFFICIAL USE MY
M OFFICIAL 083 01"“

Rear Services and Technical Support

These forms of support include neasures with respect to organisation
of the rear. eaterial, technical. nedical and other nsasures of support and
servicing the troops. lhe index of clear organisation of the operation of
the rear atbmits is minterrupted troop support. fast aaneuvering with the
rear forces and aatarial in accordance with changes in the situation. timely
restoration and evacuation of danaged material and arr-amt, rendering
medical aid to the wounded and their evacuation from the battlefield. tieely
novenant of the rear of the troops and reliable covering of it.

he problen of evaluating the rear situation is included as a coupe-
nent part in the general evaluation of the situation when the colander makes
a decision and when planning the coﬁat operations. It is impossible to take
a swstantiated decision without knowing how much a-Iunition, fuel and food

must be iaported and what consul-ption of material should be provided for con-
bat.

Just as when determining the neonates with respect to other types of
support. the base for eanegeaent in the rear services and supplies is the
cos-sender's decision. he commander cm define the following: the area of
deployment of the rear and the direction of movement of rear services and
supplies: the paths of approach and evacuation; the sizes of the required
reserves and tines for their creation; the norms for the consumption of the
nateriel; the basic measures with respect to technical and medical support;
the forces and nateriel used for security in the rear; the point of deploy-
ment of the rear control point in the direction of displacenent.

Beginning with the cosnander's decisions and the instructions obtained
fro. the superior officer, the officer of the rear mit defines the proce-
dure for the placement and novenent of the rear srbmits, he organises their
operation. he controls their activity with respect to the execution of the
stated missions, md he realizes the defense and security of the rear.

he agrees with the chief of staff on the basic problems with respect
to organization of the rear, he inform the chief daout the condition of the
equipment. presence of neteriel reserves, the capabilities of the eedical
facilities. a: his side, the chief of staff is obligated to deliver the con-
tent of the coabat niseion and co-ander's decision to the officer of the
roar wit and also the most iqortmt neasures which are to be inlemented
in preparing for the forthcoeing operations. During the course of carrying
out the eission, he constantly orients hi: on the changes in the situation.

especially when these changes require definite operations on the part of
the rear units.

All of the buic measures developed by the officers of the rear units
are reflected in the rear support plan. ‘lhe following are indicated in it:
the locations of the rear subunits and their missions; the sizes and tines

255

M OFFICIAL 088 Ohm!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of creating the reserve: the procedure for hauling up material. the standards
for their use; the sissions with respect to medical support; seasurea vith
respect to protection against nuclear weapons, security in the rear and the

forces and material allocated for this: the location of the rear control
point, and so on.

lhe aissions with respect to the rear are delivered to the responsible
agents orally and by written orders. During the developsent of the cosbat
operations. the conﬁned-arse headquarters and rear officers constantly sain-

tain cmicationa. insuring a coordinated decision on all the basic prob-
lam.

Technical support acquires aost isportant significance in Iodarn coa-
hnt. Its basic goal is saintenance of the uchines and other equipment asking
up the srsasent of the stbunits in proper working order and in constant readi-
ness for use. This goal is achieved by the organisation and inlesentation
of technically correct saintenance. servicing. repair end evacuation of the
orsored equipment and motor vehicles and also the supply of spare parts.

'ihe direct organiser of technical support is the deputy comnder of
the technical units.

The rear support also includes sadical support. It is aised at main-
tenance of eecurity and protecting the health of the personnel. sodern medic-
el aid to the wounded md sick. their evacuation, fastest treat-alt and
return to duty, and also prevention of the occurrence and spread of diseases
along the troops. Medical support includes the organization and the perfora-
mce of the treatsent and evacuation. sanitary hygiene and counterepideaic
measures and also the uedical service asasuras with respect to the protection
of the troops froa nuclear veepons.

Consndsnt ‘s Service

me sovesent end the cospletion of the maneuvers on the battlefield
under Isodcrn conditions are playing a significant role in the activity of the
units and subunits. In order to support the tisely and secret sovenents. for
concentration and deploysent of the troops. the couandant's service has
been organised.

lts bosic goals are as follows: the regulation of the novenent of
the troops on the routes. the crossings and passages over obstacles; the con-
trol of the observation by the troops of the established procedures and

l. V. 3'. Zelcnsltiy. A. A. Glistov, G. s. Chulkov, "Tekhnicheskoye (bespe-
cheniye Tankovylth i Kotostrelkovykh Podrazdeleniy v Sovranenxon." [Tech-

nical Support of the Tank and Motorized Rifle Subunits in Modern Corset],
Moscow. Voyenisdat. 1972, p 6.

255

FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ceeouflese neeeuree when deployed in piece and when being eoved: the eecurity
for the routee end the co-betins of divereionery roconneieeence sroupe of
the eneey on the routee end in the deployeent ereee.

In addition. the eaente of the cos-endent'e eervice gether the reeerve
personnel, eeteriel end notor vehicles end diepetoh thee to their unite. 0::
detection of redioective conteeinetion on the routee or in the deployment
ereee of the troope. the eppeerence of divereionery-reconneieeence groupe
end eleo deetruction of eectione of the routee. they report directly to heed-
quertere end wern the troope. In eddition. the coneeendent'e oer-vice ie
cherged with the duty of eeinteinin; the order of noveeent of the locel popu-
lation in the troop operetione or deployeent ereee.

Depending on the neture end content of the ectivity of the troope. the
couendmt'e eervicc ie oreenieed on eoveeent routee. in deployeent ereee.
in cadet operetion eonee. on epproech end evecuetion pethe end eleo in reer
eervicee end eupply ereee. 0n the troop noveeent routee. the oo-endent'e
eectione ere orunieed; in the conhet operetione :onee end troop end reer
eervicee deploy-eet ereee. cor-endent zonee; on the routee peeeins through
citiee. eountein peeeee end other inortent pointe, individuel couendent
eectione. The co-endent of the eectioe (zone) ie deeigneted to direct the
couendent'e eervice, end the co-endent poete (three to five people). tref-
fic control poete (two or three people) ere eet up which ere equipped with
eeene of noveeent. con-unicetione end redietion reconneieeence. reed eigne.
treffic direction indicetore, eyebole of obeteclee end other ecceeeoriee.

“the chiefe of the co-endmt poete hevins epeciel inortence ere ueuelly
officere.

0n the beeie of the co-mder'e decieion end the inetructione of the
chief of staff. the co-endent'e eet-vice ie planned by one of the eteff of-
ficere. Ite plennine besine with e etudy of the content of the co-ender'e
decieion end the inetructione of the chief of eteff end eleo the ordere of
higher heedquertere with reepect to orsenitetion of the couendent‘e eervice.
liret of ell. the eectione (eonee) ere ieoleted on the up where the con-
eendent‘e eervice ie orgenized by the forcee end eeteriel of the eenior offi-
cer. 1he reeeinine eectione (eonee) ere cerefully etudied by the eep in
order to detereine the bounderiee of the comdent'e eectione (eonee). the
plecee of eettine up the co-endent'e poete end the treffic control pointe
(controllere) end eleo the roed eigne end indicetore. Prectice ehowe thet
on eoveeent of the colt-1 over couperetively denee terrein e eignificent pert
of the control pointe cen be repleced eucceeefully by the uee of the corre-
spending indicetore (provieionel time) end orsmieetion of the eobile coe-
eendent'e poete. After etudy of the routee end eonee by the eep if there ie
e neceeeity for thie end there ie tine. the eteff orgenieee reconneieeence
of the routee (eonee). akin; wide uee of helicoptere for thie purpoee.
During the couree of reconneieeence, the locetione of the co-endnt'e poete.
the treffic control pointe end their coepoeition ere eore precieely defined;
the noet difficult eectione of the route end the eeene required for towing

256

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vehicles in these sections are defined; the directions of the bypasses. the
alternate routes. the locations of reserve forces and material of the con-
aendant's service are planned; the points of installation of the road signs
and indicators are swore precisely defined. It is expedient that the recon-
naissance group has couandent's sections (zones). representatives free the
cadet engineers erbunita and cosmmicetions and also people who are charged
with installing road signs and indicators.

After careful study of the terrain and other situation conditions. the
total number of personnel and also material and technical supplies required
for organization of the co-endent's service are detenined. the best ver-
sion of the planning will be that in which for organization of the co-andant's
service the linited forces and material. priaarily the submits of the coa-
aandant's service having correspondingly prepared personnel and the required
scans of nova-ant. conunications. reconnaissance. evacuation and road equip-
ment will be used. Under any conditions provision is node for the isolation
of reserve forces and neene designed to solve the suddenly occurring problem
with respect to the cousndmt'a service. such as. for exasple. sending out
the details on the bypasses of the sections with destruction. flooding and
conteaination. replaceasnt of the casualties. and so on. On the basis of
this calculation plans are node as to which subunit the personnel should be
called froa and what neans should be used. officers are especially carefully
selected for the duty of the section cos-endants (sons conandants).

the proper deteraination of the deploynent tines of the cousandmt's
service has great significance: wually they are deter-lined with soae lead
with respect to the troop operations so that the duty personnel of the
detail will be ﬁle to study the terrain and the route in tine. and they will
be free of their duties. The deploy-sot tines are established beginning with
the perforaance of the aiesions by the troops. 0n novenent of only one unit
along the route or with insufficient forces and material. the co-andant‘s
service is deployed successively. as the troops move. For acceleration of
the trasfer of the people and the consndant's detail froa one section to
another helicopters can be used.

Host careful provision is node for the organization of the col-endant's
service at the initial line. the sdjustaent lines. at the unprotected rail-
road crossings. in large populated areas. when bypassing zones of radioac-
tive contuinetion and also on crossings over water barriers.

The results of planning the consndant's service are reflected on the
working lap of the officer who is designated responsible for the organization
of the con-endant's service. Usually the following are plotted on the nap
(Figure 30): the aissions of the co-andant's service. the colamdant's
section (zones). the locations and cowosition of the co-Iandant's post and
the traffic control point. the procedure for deployment and the ties for
preparation of the cos-endant’s service. the locations of the co-sndant's
sections (zones). the organization of co-micstions. the comasition and

257

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

location of the reserve forces and Insane of the cos-endant's service. In
addition. the sections (tonnes) are indicated on the map on which the con-
aandant's service is organized by higher headquarters. and the forces and
materiel are calculated with indications of where they are to be called fros.

1he tiaely reporting of the missions to the responsible agents has es-
pecially important significance. A clear understanding of them by the duty
personnel of the couandant's detail depends to a great extent on the skill
in clearly and completely stating the mission. During asny years of prac-
tice. a defined sequence has been worked out and justified itself for the
statement of the aission by the chief of staff to the section (sane) con-nan-
dant. Here. he indicates the following: the infatuation about the enemy,
the order and ties of passage of the lines (points) by the troops; the bound-
aries of the section (zone). the missions and the location of the consandant.
the boundaries of adjacent sections (zones) and the location of their com-
mandant; the allocated forces and lateriel; the conposi tion and the location
of the post: the areas to which the reserve snbunits or machines must be sent;
the deploynent and move-out time of the comandant's service; the procedure
for maintaining cosnaunications with headquarters and presentation of reports;
the location of the con-under and the chief of staff.

In addition, the chief of staff delivers the content of the instruc-
tions given to the troops for camouflage, location of medical stations. spe-
cial processing stations. assesbly stations for duneged machines and other
information to the co-andant of the section (zone).

In individual cases. written orders with respect to the co—sndant's
service can be developed for the troops in which the following are indicated:
where. when and with what missions the con-sandant's service must be organized
and what special attention must be given to it; the commandanta of the sec-
tions (zones), forces and materiel placed at their disposal; on what routes
or in what areas (sections) the cosmnandant's service will be organized by
the forces and materiel of higher headquarters; the procedure for maintaining
conunlcations with the cousandants of the sections (areas); the ready time
of the conandant's service.

On coqletion of the march and also during the course of cadet ope-
rations the staff controls the performance of the missions by the conun-
dant's service units, it constantly maintains coaunanications with them and
as the situation changes assigns additional missions or redirects them on
other routes (to other zones). here the radio co-nunicationa of the coun-
mandant's service, especially during the snatch, can be used by the cousnder
in the headquarters for orders and signals to the troops and also to obtain

data from then on the condition of the subunits and the time of passage of
the planned lines by them.

During the course of the offensive, especially when it is conducted at
high speed. quite frequently the troops must accoqnlish various river cros-
sings.

258

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0i€LY
pea-m !

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lens).

 

Figure 30. Horking Mp of the staff officer with reflection on it of the

6.

10.
12.
13.
16.
15.
l6.
I7.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
2h.
25.
26.
27.
28.

organization of the consandsnt‘s service on coapletion of the
march.

Individual commandant section
Cos-endant's section no 1

. Co-andmt's zone No 1

Reserve forces and lateriel of the cmandant's service
Co-andant's section No 2

Coﬁat engineer's platoon

Build-up point for the reserve personnel and equipment
Tine of passage of the line

Submits

Head 11. ‘l'ail

Calculation of the forces and asteriel of the comndmt's service
No of the cot-sandant's sections (zones), eo-andants
No of posts

Conandants

Regulation

Regulators

Personnel

Officers

Sergeants

Soldiers

Total 23. No of indicators

Constitutions nedis

Transport leans

Evacuation means

Hho aaaigm

No 1 (rank, last nane). 259

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’l’lCIM. USE ONLY

When crossing water barriers the comndant's service is organized on
the routes of advance of the troops to the water barrier. in the tank sealing
areas. in the position areas and in the fire positions of the artillery and
at the crossings. For this purpose. the emendant of the forcing section
and the crossing co-andant are designated, and the control pess points,
cousndant's pests and traffic control points are deployed (see Figure 31).

Cassettes-Trays:

 

Figure 31. Organization of the couandant's service A: lending and ferry

crossings.
Key: 1. 1st notarized Rifle Company 2. 3d Motorized Rifle Cowany
3. 1st Motorized Rifle Battalion 5. 2d Motorized Rifle 00 ‘
S. Ferrying operation on m 6. ferry crossing on caterpillar
asphibious transport self-propelled GSP ferries
7. Provisional notation 8. Crossing coumdant
9. Control pass point 10. Rescue group on srsored per-

soenel carrier

1he instructions and the requiresents of the crossing cos-and.“ with
regard to observation of the established procedure are usndstory for all per-
sonnel of the crossing subunits.

On each route which leads to the crossing, the control pass points are
set up which pass the submits to the crossing in strict accordance with the

es tsbl ished order .

At the points where the troops are put on the ferries. if they are
assigned, co-andant posts are set up. and between the boarding location, the
control pass points and the crossing points, traffic control points (control-
lers). At night light signals are widely used to indicate the direction of

love-ant to the crossing.

260

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON.“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CllAP‘l‘ﬂl 8. FMTIN AND “Alma or HIGH “GAL SPIRIT OF THE ROOFS IN
GMAT

The successful perforaence of the sission by the officers is possible
through their profomd knowledge of Harxist-leniniat teachings on the norsl
factor. understanding of the dialectic unity and interrelations in cosbat of
nan and aachine. skill in achieving the maintenance of a high aorsl state
astong the troops under any conditions of the situation.

1. Role of the Moral factor in Cedar and Means of building It in the
Personnel

Victory in var depends on my factors. Along then an exceptionally
iaportnnt role belongs to the Iorals of the troops. "In any war." V. l.
Lenin points out. “in the iinal analysis victory cones frost the state of the
spirit of the assses who spill their blood on the battlefield."l

l'he bourgeois nilitsry specialists also agree that the hi 3h soral
state of the troops "is the nost powerful vespon known to am," that "low
moral condition of the troops is non dangerous for the any than a short-
age of a-sunition."2

however. recognition by bourgeois reeesrchers of the inortsnce of
the aoral spirit is not reinforced by scientific analysis of the essence.
the scans of (creation and the maintenance of high soral spirit of the
troops in coobat. ‘lhey lore frequently reduce the concept of Ioral spirit
to the superclsss. biological category independent of the social-political
structure of the warring governaent and the goale of the var. ‘Ihe objective
analysis of the nature of the aorsl spirit unavoidably would lead then to
discovery of the true causes and goals of predatory wars, to an indication
of the aggressive policy of the aaterial and recognition of the incapacity
of the bourgeois structure to serve as a source of aoral strength in the

l. V. I. lanin. Cowlete Collected works, Vol bl. p 121.
2. N. Oooplend, PSIIIIOUJGIYA l SOLDA‘I'. Moscow, Voyenizdst. 1958. pp 21. 26.

261

FOR OFFICIAL 038 Oh}
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

people and the any. therefore any bourgeois ideologies see sources of
moral spirit of the army only in the Iilitary organisation itself, in the
living conditions and activities of the soldiers. in training them to do
battle. It is no accident that in the 0.8. Artsy reference “Naval Officers
Guide” it is race-ended that concern be shown for rest. entertain-cut and
food in order to naintain the noral strength of the personnel.

In the 0.8. Any regulations ”Psychological Operations" it is pointed
out that the psychological effect is the principal leans of ssinteining the
moral-psychological factor on the level of the nieeions with the nest drans-
tlc situations. It is recs-ended in these regulations that the "norsl feel-
ings of love for Anerica" which can becono "decisive in the spiritual engine
of the troops" be encouraged.l

‘Ihe uglieh nilitery idsologist lateng states that the noral spirit
of the troops is detereined prinarily by the realities of war: the fatigue
of the troops. fear. hmger. sleeplessness. weather conditions. and the con-
plex situation at the front. If the cousnd takes tenures end elieinates
the comes of these negative phenoeena. then the noral spirit of the stbotdio
nste troops is strengthened.’

There is no question that these neasures have a defined effect on the
noral state of the troops, but they cannot serve as the basic sources for the
forsation of the noral spirit of the troops.

lhe tested Icons of iaperialise in naintaining the norsl state of the
troops is the ideological processing of the soldiers. ‘lhe basis for it is
the honily of antics-mien and utisovietisn, the nintenence of the nyth
of "the col-mist threat" and “Red danger," the perversion of Marxist-
beninist teaching. the slander of the foreign and internal policy of the
countries of socialise. the spreading of the nyth of their aggressiveness
and together with this the glorification of war, the propaganda of self-
seeking bourgeois nationalism. racial end nissnthropy. All of this is de-
signed so as to leach out of the people such spiritual qualities as ideology
and conscientiousness. to lower the soldier, to extinguish his consciousness,
and incite in his: the nest base instincts and passions.

It is characteristic also that the views and ideas with which they
indoctrinate the any personnel do not shine with originality or novelty.
In preparing for the Italian caspaign in 1796. Napoleon inspired his sol-
diers: "I want to lead you into the lost fruitful plains of the world. The
rich countries, great cities will be in your power. You will find honor.
glory and wealth there."3 And later after more than 150 years. during the
predatory war in Korea. in the battle for Seoul the American General

""_""'—_“1. m-aa-s Psychological Operations". 1968. '
2. Royal United Services Institute for Defense Studies journal. March 1972.
3. Napoleon. Selected works. Vol 1, Moscow. Voyenisdat. 191.1. p 65.

262
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! ORIGIN. USE ONLY

MacArthur exhorted his soldiers: "Before you is a rich city. in it there is
ouch wine and candy. take Seoul and all of the girls will be yours. the pro-
perty of the residents will belong to the victors.” As is obvious. the
aggressora in the past and today strive to incite bus passions in the sol-
diers. to excite a spirit of baiting. violence and plunder. For this educa-
tional work. a colossal propaganda apparatus is called on. including the
church and special services with respect to questions of nieinforaation. and
the press. radio. novice and television are widely used.

'lhe direction and content of the ideological processing of the sol-
dicrs begins with the prerequisites that the role of the arsies of the in-
pcrialiat govern-ents reduces to protection of the ”free world.” hence. any
actions they take are justified. 'ihe propaganda contains discussions of the
slanderous fabrications of the "crises" of the Russians against the Gereane
in world war 1!. there are reports on the "corporal punishusnt system in the
socialist eroy." there are stories about the ”Siberian labor c-ps" planned
for future military prisoners. A nusber of Imuals defining the content and

nethods of ideological-psychological influencing have been written for the
realization of this processing.

0n the training fields. a situation is created which suppresses the
psychology of the soldier to the liait and dulle hie sectional susceptibility.
Everything is done to "...accustoa the soldier to the diabolical atnephere
of fire and death. to achieve a situation such that he will feel good in the

fire. snohe and confusion. as in an ordinary situation, and they will act-
rm. wove and fight.“

'lhe ideological and coder training of any personnel performed by
the imperialists offers. of course. its ”fruits". As a result of this train-
ing, the modern arnies of the inerialist governments are converted into a

dutiful aachine and codaat for inleeentetion of the aggressive plans of the
ruling classes.

In the bourgeois society there are no real. reliable sources for the
foreation of a high aoral spirit of the troops. ho artificial effect on
the personnel can create a constantly. long-lasting effective force-the
enrol factor which coebined with other factors ensures victory.

Only Harniae-laninisa offers a genuinely scientific solution to the
problem of the foreation of the high. persistent noral spirit of the troops.
It takes into account that the moral forces of the people and the arey pre-
sent o continuous unity and ere deter-ined by the nature of the social and
govern-sent structure, the social-econonic relations of the people and the
ideology prevailing in the comtry.

1he eoral spirit expresses an attitude of the people toward the in-
terests of their hoeeland. the govern-cut policy. the goals of the war. and

. . Rtgg. "mast Training of Troops." Moscow. II. 1965. p 13.

263
FOR OFFICIAL US£ OhuY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it represents their readiness to go through any tests for the sake of the
echieveaent of victory over the eneey. 'lhis can be used to explain the fact
that the moral strength is always higher in the people who are conducting a
just war, who are fighting against aggressors. for freedoe and independence
of the comtty.

in evaluating the coabat capacity and the noral state of the anew
troops before the Stalingrad operation. liershal of the Soviet Union 6. K.
Zhukov wrote: "‘lhe satellite troops were arned worse by cowarison with the
Ger-an troops. 'lhey had less experience, and they had insufficient codat
capacity even on the defensive. 'lhe Iain thing is that their soldiers, in-
deed many of the soldiers, did not want to die for foreign interests...“
'lherefore it was no accident that our cousnd dealt the principal blow in
the sections where the troops having comparatively low noral strength were
located.

'lhe state of the norsl spirit of the troops depends to a decisive degree
on the nature md goals of the war. the degree of their understmding by the
personnel. "The conviction in the Justice of the war. the creation of a
necessity for sacrificing one's life for the good of one's brothers." V. I.
lenin taught. "raises the spirit of the soldiers and forces than to beer un-
heard of difficulties... 'lhis consciousness by the sauce of the goals2 and
the reasons for the war has enormous significance and ensures victory."2

‘lhus. the "noral factor indicates the spiritual capacity of the peo-
ple and the any persistently to bear any difficulties and deprivations, the
most severe tests of war and not lose the will to fight and become victorious
over the enely."3

'lhe role of the noral factor in nodern warfare ha been increased
sharply. 'lhis is caused prinsrily by the political nature of a future war.
A war. if the inperialists wage it. is with respect to political essence a
decisive collision of two opposite social systeas which deternines the ex-
tre-e decisiveness of the operations of the two sides. ‘lhis type of war un-
conditionally reguires complete straining of all of the efforts of the people
and the army. it imasursbly increases the responsibility of each soldier
md officer for the fate of his country.

The significance of the noral strength of the troops has increased as
n result of adopting nuclear weapons. the nest destructive and powerful ar-
eanent and a change in the procedures for armed codnt and the nature of
nodern warfare. Combat operations will assure an exceptionally intense,
highly asncuwerble nature and they will be distinguished by fast, sherp

 

l. 67!. Zhukov. I'VospotsinaI-Iiya i Rauyshlevniya" (lie-airs and 'i‘hought).
Hoscow, Acadesty of Applied Sciences. 1971. p 383.

2. V. I. lanin, Complete Collected Works, Vol 61. p 121.

3. A. A. Bpishev, "ﬂogucheye Orurhiye Partii" (Powerful weapon of the Party),
Moscow. Voyenizdst. 1973. p 266.

266
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

changes in the situation. mutual struggles to gain tins and capture the ini-
tiative. All of this has an unprecedentedly strong effect on the psychology
of the soldier. Only those personnel convinced of the just nature of the
wor. having strong nerves and high cosbat mastery can withstand the tests of
the coupler conditions of the codaat situation. It is not the materiel. how-
ever powerful or threatening. but the soldier who has entered it to perfec-
tion who achieves victory in codiat. lhe more coqlicated the equipsent and
the more powerful the seans of destruction. the higher the require-ants on
the nan, his ideological conviction, coﬂst nastery and psychological temper-
that

when deternining the role of the moral spirit it is impossible not to
consider also the expansion of the scales and sharpening of the ideological
struggle between the warring countries. In modern warfare it is necessary to
expect significantly greater effect free enemy propaganda on the conscious-
ness and psychology of the people than was practiced in past wars. People
with solid ideological convictions devoted completely to the party and the
people can withstand the pernicious effect of this propaganda.

All of these facts immeasurably increase the role of the moral factor
in modern warfare. At the sane time, the high moral spirit is not a congeni-
tnl quality of man. end it does not arise in him automatically. It is deve-
loped as a result of hard. purposeful educational work with the young before
service in the army. being the son of his people. the draftee, just as all
matters of society. is educated in the spirit of Marxism md laniniss, in
accordance with the norms of the moral code of a builder of co-uniss. 1he
principles of this code motivate all of the affairs and the ideas of our
people. During the period of arm service, active and purposeful formation
and reinforcement of the moral strength of the soldier takes place. ‘Ihis
process has two aspects-«he moral-political and socialdpsychological aspect
entering in continuous unity. During the course of the aural-political and
psychological training, all of the intellectual. moral and physical capabi-
lities of man are cemented into a united whole. converting them to one of the
decisive components of the combat power of the army—a high moral spirit.

‘lhe moral-political training for. a Marxist-Mini" point of view.
columnist conviction in the troops, it arm them with a deep understanding
of the policies of the CPS!) and the Soviet government. the essence and the
goals of the war. and it reinforces the moral principles in them determining
the behavior of people in toilet.

The soral-politicsl qualities of Soviet troops are formed primarily
by purposeful party-political work. As 1.. I. Brezhnev noted at the 25th
Party Congress, the "complex approach to the statement of the entire busi-
ness of education, that is, ensurance of close unity of the ideological-
political, labor and moral education considering the peculiarities of the
various groups of workers" must be manifested.1

.—

1. H‘n-ter'is'ly xxv Swyeeda use (Materials of the 25th cpsu Congress). p 7a.
265
FOR omcm. use ow
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is undoubtedly the fact that in the combat situation the efforts
at educational work are aimed at maintenance of constant, high cowst readi-
ness of the troops and successful fulfillment of the stated cowat mission.

'lhe basis for party-political work is the propaganda of uninisn, the
decisions of the party congresses and the resolutions of the CPSU Central
Co-ittee and the Soviet govern-ant. In these sources and documents there

is enormous spiritual wealth ensuring the formation of a scientific point of
view in the troops.

The explanation of the problems of the internal and foreign policy of
our party and government acquires special significance. The deep understand-
ing of it develops in the troops a sense of patriotisn and pride in their
country. it develops in them a sense of personal responsibility for the pro-
tection of our homeland.

It is inpossible morally to prepare the people for cowst if we do not
explain the goals of the war to them, if we keep them in ignorance with re-
spect to the tests which they can encounter during the course of fulfillment
of the codaat nission. Every troop must be convinced of the just nature of
the war which our people must wage. clearly see the goals of this war, know
that the nuclear missiles will be the decisive means of armed cosbst, but
under defined conditions the units and submits can conduct combat operations
only with conventional weapons.

Education is aimed at improving the codes: activity of the troops
when they perform specific coldest missions and skillful action by them pri-
marily when nuclear weapons are esployed. During the process of the educa-
tion work. the troops are indoctrinated with a sense not only of moral but
also material superiority over the enemy. The advantage of our weapons is
indicated. and at the same time faith in their strength is developed. A
convincing demonstration of the weak and strong characteristics of the
weapons of the enemy and the characteristics of the procedures for their
application in cosbat helps to develop efficient procedures and methods of
doing coebnt with the means of destruction of the eneey and protection
against them in the personnel.

It is no less important to accustom the troops to working with high
efficiency on the battlefield, comletely giving all of their efforts and
tolerating great physical loads. Only under this condition are they in a
position to withstand the extreme stress of the forces in codest, especially
during the course of cosbat operations continuously for several days when
nuclear weapons are eqloyed.

Greatest attention is given to the education in the personnel of high
offensive iqetus, which is the primary index of their codaat activity. The
development of these qualities in the troops follows from the specific nature
of the offensive--the type of combat characterized by decisiveneas of the
lethods of operation of the troops. the speec‘ and intensity of their deve-
lopment, the acute struggle for the initiative and gain of time.

266
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The psychological training is organically connected with the coral-
political training which affects the consciomness, the reason of the troops
and the other aspects of their psychology-«will, feeling, tolerance and
emotion. *

During the psychological training. the personnel develop an inner
readiness and capacity to carry out the codet missions courageously in
stressed situations that are dangerous to their lives, successfully to sur-
vive the most severe tests of wartime and in serious, critical times retain
their self-confidence, strength. skill in operating selflessly, actively. end
persistently. in complete accordance with commist convictions and moral
principles of behavior. The formation in the personnel of such qualities as
courage. cunning. discipline, decisiveness, persistence, imagination, and
readiness for mutual aid and assistance acquires the greatest significance.

The most important goal of the psychological training consists in
teaching the personnel to overcome .‘Eears occurring mder dangerous conditions
to withstand the sudden effect of pmerful stimuli. llere it must be con-
sidercd that the manifestation of fear, in contrast to fright, is caused not
by direct stimuli. but the expectation of danger. Therefore before the ap-
plication of a nuclear weapon by the enemy some soldiers can manifest confu-
also or apathy. 0n occurrence of a dangerous situation fear can paralyze
the will of man, taking way his capacity to control his actions. The pre-
vention of these harmful phenomena is possible through developing solid
faith of the troops in their forces. knowledge of the destructive effect of
the weapon and expedient means and methods of defense.

In psychological training, along with the personal characteristics of
the troop, the specific nature of his duties performed during the course of
battle is taken into account. mus. the personnel of the reconnaissance
sdmnita, the special crews whose job is to minimize the consequences of
nuclear attack must act under conditions of constant danger of irradiation
and burns. Their psychological hardening can be achieved by systematic
exercises on the training fields permitting convincing simulation of the con-
ditions mder which it is necessary to perform in coebat.

The critical and dangerous situations during the course of battle
cause equal psychological stress in the commanders. Initially the stress
that occurs can increase the fitness for work. but then lead to disruption
and disorganization of its activity. "The coriander experiences on the
battlefield..." Harshnl of the Soviet Union H. V- hhharov wrote, ”the same
thing as a soldier. but as the leader he must also make scientifically ada-
stnntiatcd decisions. answer for the fate of the battle. the fight. the ope-
ration. the life and activity of the people smbordimate to hill."1 The com-
plexity of his work increases as a result of the fact that in the majority

1. MTV. whiten "o Nauchnom Podkhode x Rukovodstvu Voyskami (Scientific
Approach to Troop Management), Hoscow. Voyenizdat, 1967. p 59.

267

FOR OFFICIAL USE OiZY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of case he is forced to nake a decision without having eadlaustive, conplete

data on the situation, having extrenely linited tine for generating the deci-
sion.

In addition, skill in doing psychological battle with the enemy is
required. 'lhe battle is not only a collision of forces. weapons and people,
but also a battle of ainds, wills, tenacity, the effect on the psychology of
the eneny in order to generate doubt in hits, indecisiveness, and confusion,
and to force hin to abandon his intentions.

During the process of psychological training it is inportant to teach
a teen skill in the control of his behavior in colbat and to be always ready
so that any test will not turn out to be unexpected for hin. Of course, no
one can conpletsly elininate stress when in a dangerous situation. With the
corresponding psychological hardening, the nan, in spite of the effect of
powerful stinuli and the strain caused by then, does not lose the presence
of a spirit, does not lose nastery and skills, but, on the contrary, nobilizes
all of his capacity, his strength of will for successful actions correspond-
ing to the nost cowlicated situation.

he generation of such qualities is achieved to a significant degree
when perforning exercises before the battle under conditions approaching
battle conditions to the nsxiaum In order to for- enotionel-volitional sta-
bility it is fully justified to apply such procedures as the firing of artil-
lery, nortars and tanks over the heads of our own troops, firing machine guns
and snbnachins guns fron behind the flanks and in the gaps between the arb-
units; attacking the notorised rifle stbmits after a rolling barrage: drop-
ping bosbs directly on the attack targets, overtaking the personnel with
tanks, the throwing of hand grenades, negotiating nine fields, log obstacles,
flooding, sections of contaninstion md destruction; forced crossing of
rivers using the neans at hand; silulation of the external picture of the
battle, and so on.

The specific content and direction of the neasures with respect to
iaproving noral strength of the troops are varied. they are differently
nanifested when fulfilling each mission by the troops.

the application of various aeasures creating a situation of risk and
danger causes high nervom strain in the troops, it accustons then to the
couples conditions of the cod>st situation, it for. solid will, bravery,
decisiveness, codaat activity. readiness to withstand serious cosbat tests.

During the course of the training exercises perforned under conditions
approaching the comet situation to the taxi-us, a proper representation of
cottat is formed in the officers, the capacity objectively to estinats the
cosbnt capabilities of our troops and the enely is developed, a fast reaction
to the changes in the situation develops. skills are acquired in proper
evaluation of the reel scales of the danger in codast.

268

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIM. USE ONLY

The development in the officer of the capacity to act on the field of
battle decisively and skillfully even with incomplete data on the situation.
the presence of subunits that are not to full strength and high activity on
the part of the enemy have important significance. In the case of insuffi-
cient professional and psychological training the officer. falling into com-
plicated conditions. more frequently lowers the cosbat capabilities of hie
troops and mcriticelly evaluates the possibilities of the eneev. and hence
lakes mfomded decisions.

‘Ihe performance by the officer of his duties under conditions which
are close to the cadet situation will promote the development in him of the
necessary moral-psychological stability. It is important that the situation
created in such training exercises excite the contender to manifest skill,
decisivenese, independence, intelligent initiative, and readiness to take a
justified risk for the sake of fulfillment of the mission.

here the moral-psychological qualities of the officer become a reel
force in the control when they are supplemented by fire knowledge of the
rules and regulations. the codut materiel and also the cowrehenaive know-
ledge of the enemy troops. their weapons and tactics.

2. Procedures for Maintaining high Hotels in the Troops During (hint
Operations

Codiat experience confirm that it is most difficult to ensure the
moral strength of the troops iseledietely at the beginning of coebat opera-
tions. 'lhis has many causes. ‘ihere is a sharp transition from peacetime
conditions to wartime. The personnel are not experienced under fire; they
have no count experience. Approaching suddenly. the enemy will apply new
combat means or no: methods of utilizing previously existing means from the
beginning of the codyat operations on a broad scale. It is known, for exam-
ple, that at the beginning of World Hat II the ease application by the enemy
of tanks and aircraft, striking deep. cutting blows. the creation of condi-
tions for encirclenent in individual cases had a negative effect on the com-
bat capacity of a defined troop unit. A sense of fear and uncertainty of
their own strength arose among some of the troops. However, on finding
methods of counteracting the enemy And also on improving combat mastery. im-
proving the moral-psychological state of the troops. this fear was more suc-
cessfully overcome.

with the use of nuclear weapons on the battlefield there are still

more such phenomena and unexpected events. This is especially true in that
the destructive properties of nuclear weapons have only been determined ex-
perimentally. under testing conditions. It is not excluded that on the use
of nuclear weapons by the opponents on a battlefield, the concept which was
developed during peacetime about their destructive characteristics and the
methods of using them will change sharply, which requires corrections to be
made in the cotter procedures and, consequently. in the training of the
personnel.

269

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the causes of breakdown of the eoral spirit of the troops is
unquestionably the constant threat of nuclear strikes by the sneey end the
absence of confidence in the reliability of the eeens and nethods of protec-
tion against the destructive factors, in particular radioactive conteninstion.

0n use of nuclear strikes by the eneey and during operations in the
tones of contamination. destruction and fires. soae part of the personnel
will exhibit excessive caution, leading to a slowdown and a preeature rush
to get medical treatment.

'lhe eeintenence of high moral spirit among the troops when conducting
combat operations in radioactive contamination tones will acquire exceptional
significance and the finding of effective means of solving this problee. the
basic means is the performce of carefully thoughtout and purposeful educa-
tional work, aobilizing the personnel to active operations. the taking of the
necessary protective measures end elimination of the consequences of the me
of nuclear weapons by the enemy.

Under these conditions. the level of cowat training of the troops
and their internal readiness to conduct active operations with conlete stress
on their forces will have decisive significance in the performance of the
stated mission. ‘lhis readiness is made up of ideological conviction. cer-
tainty in the strength and power of their weapons and materiel used accord-
ing to the plan of higher headquarters, unconditional faith in their coe-
menders. This is also promoted by the firm knowledge by the troops of the
means of codaeting the eneay. "...If each one sees and knows," H. V. Prunae
wrote, 'Mhat can be sent against hie and in practice foresees the applica-
tion of these technical means. then we have achieved a great deal in the
meaning of coabat education and codest hardening of the personnel of our Red

Aray ."

"Ken is so created," said Adairel Hakarov, "that he will go to cer-
tain death when the danger to hie is known. but he is afraid of even‘ due
sound of bilge water if he is not accustomed to it."

In turn. it is required that a special approach be exhibited to those
for whoa a serious inhibition has developed earning a bent-bed attitude and
indifference to the situation and inability. In order to restore the pay--
chological equilibriu it is necessary to talk with them. calm and direct
thee to the performance of the required protective measures and then by giv-
ing commends. cause activity and direct attention to the fulfillment of the
stated codeat mission under the most cowlicated conditions.

In order to overcome the benudaed attitude and neutralization. the
personal example of e coerads. a certain co-end from an officer, an inspir-
ing word from a political worker can be effective. ‘lhen the men more

1. H. V. Frmse, Selected works. Moscow. Voyeniadet, 1965, p 466.

270

FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
P‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quickly overtones his confusion. suppresses his instinct for self-preservation
and begins active participation.

with a decrease in the seriousness of the damage and preservation of
the psychological strength of the personnel during troop operations under
radioactive contasination conditions, observation of a strict regime, disci-

pline and skillful use of the protective properties of the terrain acquire
special significance.

however great the losses suffered by the subunits fro- nuclear attacks.
it is iaportant that the personnel remaining not lose their codut capacity
or faith in their own strength. he persistence and activity in the perform-
ance of the stated mission under any condition is an index of the high moral
spirit of the troops. hare, evaluating the developed situation. it is neces-
sary to begin with the real relation of forces and lateriel and also the
Intel state of the enemy troops on whom a powerful answering nuclear strike
has been made. Daring and courageous action under these conditions can
ensure victory. The moral strength of the enely can be broken by the deci-
sive operations of our troops, a deep rush into the depth of his defenses.
the application of strikes to the flanks and rear. the conduct of active
coahat operations day and night. he successful advance proaotea lifting of
the moral spirit, instills courage and confidence in their strength and at
the same time generates a sense of defense against the effects of nuclear
weapons. for being in direct contact with the may cowlicates the use of
nuclear weapons.

It follows to see the principal factor of recovery among the troops
of psychological stability in the successful solution of the cadet mission.
In whatever state the subunit turns out to be after the enaq makes the
nuclear strike. if the conander has been skillful in conprehensively eval-
uating the developed situation in a short period of ties and eating a well-
founded solution and eobilizing the subordinates for its execution. then in
this case all of the alsra and dngar of the troops can be overcome by
their active movements.

During the course of fulfillment of the codaat mission, the measures
corresponding to the removal of excessive stress will have inportant sini-
ficance. Here the decisive role is played by the personal conunication
between the co-ander and the party and political apparatm with the swor-
dinstea, a well-thoughtout placement of col-unists and Kouomol meders. the
appearance of the subunits in the second echelon or reserve or free the
damage zone, alternation of the codat operations with rear, organization

of regular nutrition. timely rendering of aid to the wounded and sick, the
suppression of rumors and the panic mood, and so on.

'ihe encoapeasing of all of the personnel during the course of cowat
operations with political influence depends to a great extent on the proper
placement of the contains and the Konsomol menbers in the sdmnit so that
in each of them a strong group of active party meters will constantly
exist—the codaat nucleus capable of retaining its strength reader the most

271
FOR OFFICIAL USE OBLY
1'68 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comlicated conditions. high discipline. the mifestation of courage, in-
spiration from the feats and the intelligent action of the other troops.
Specific missions are stated for the conunists and the tonsonol msﬁers to
perform individual work with each soldier and sergeant.

1he maintenance of high moral spirit of the troops leading the cowat
operations in the cont-ination zones depends to a high degree on the effec-
tiveness and timeliness of the measures with respect to radiation reconnais-
sance, elimination of the consequences of the enew's nuclear strike, and
maintemnce of strict order on the paths of covenant and in the rear of our
troops. Ihersfore, the subunits performing these measures must find itself
under strong party-political influence.

Ihe sullest manifestations of confusion or panic on the part of the
individual military servicemen must be suppressed inediately. In order to
prevent such dangerous phenomena it is necessary. in addition to constant
explanatory work. to plan a nuber of organizational seasures.

An inportant role in the maintenance of strict order on the paths of
advance and in the rear of our troops and, perhaps. in preventing undesirable
conseonences for the outcone of the battle goes to the conandants subunits.
Therefore. the educational and organisational work in these stbunits must be
given special attention. 'lhe co-sndant's detail includes the most experi-
enced and trained officers, sergeants and soldiers from among the co-sunists
and Konsomol nedyers capable of suppressing possible disorganization and
spontaneous action of individual troops with a heavy hand.

In overcoming the elements of .fear and disorganization, the spoken
word can at times turn out to be irreplaceable, and especially the personal
exaaple of the coauander and the political worker. ‘lhey are obligated by
personal influence to restore the codat spirit of the demoralired srbunit.
overcone the noods of depression, elininate uncertainty in their strength.
mobilize the personnel to the conduct of decisive coder operations.

me role of the force of the example of the comander is great. V. I.
Lenin, studying Napoleon's book "Thoughts," wrote the following sentence:
"...In each battle there is a time when the bravest soldiers have a desire
to run after the greatest effort; this psnic is generated by the d>sence of
faith in his own courage; an insignificant event. a pretext is sufficient to
return this faith to hin; there is a great art in doing this."1 Personal
respect. self-confidence, and the firm decisiveness of the commander can re-
turn this "faith in his courage," exclude the manifestation of panic. turn
the course of events in the required direction, for the "personal influ-
ence..." emphasised V. I. Lenin, "means terribly much."2
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In tho oyoton of potty-politicol oction on tho poroonnol, on inpott-
mt rolo ouot bo oivon to tho populotitotion of tho hotoic doodo ond odvoncod
oxporionco oi tho codaot oporotiono of tho troopo mdot tho conditiono of tho
uoo of nucloor woopono. ‘lho iqottonco of thio work cot-to priootily tron
tho foot thot during wortino tho Iothodo ond noono of ptotoction of tho troopo
iron nucloor woopono will bo continuouoly inrovod oo cod’ot oxpotionco io
occu-ulotod. ‘lho co-ond. tho hoodquottoto ond politicol orsono nuot Ioko
cownhonoivo uoo of thio oxpotioneo ond inttoduco tho noot voludplo nothodo
ond procoduroo of both individuol ooldioto. oouoonto ond officoro ond ontito
oubunito into proctico. lho'odvoncod oxpotionoo io diooooinotod by voriouo
noono, ptinorily by poroonol diocuooiouo of. tho co-ondoro, tho otou officoto
ond politicol wotkoro with tho troopo ond oloo oondin; thou ruindoro ond
othor printod notoriolo.

tho rolo of tho oo-ondot ond hio doputy with roopoct to tho politicol
unit in oxcoptionolly groot in nointoinin; tho norol opirit oi troopo. "hon
noting o dooioion rot codaot oporotiono. thoy oto obligotod not only to ooti-
onto tho ovoiloblo norol poooihilitioo of oubotdinoto troopo but oloo to noto
npoclfic nooouroo with roopoc-t to thoir nointonmco or ottonathoning. lot
thio purpooo. tho co-ondor dirooto tho porty-politicol work. orionto tho
oubordinotoo to tho ditticultioo which con bo oncomtotod by tho troopo dur-
ing tho porter-moo of tho oiooiono ond dototninoo whot oooouroo with toopoct
to oorol-politicol ttoining. whon. whoto ond by whot noono to oporoto.

Ditocting tho potty-politic“ work, tho cﬂ-IIOO! porticipotoo di-
toctly in tho noot inortont noooutoo. uoing ovoty poooibility for potoonol
norol influonco on tho oubordinoto. oopociouy fro- tho odnnito which howo
ouffcrod groot looooo ond. conooquontly. hovo oufforod ooriouo oorol brook-
dovn. Not only io tho contont of tho opociol noooutoo with roopoct to loin-
toining tho high notol opirit of tho troopo. but oloo tho bohovior. tho toct
of tho co-ondor. tho otoff offioor ond politicol workor ouot bocooo on
odditionol foctor which otronsthono tho politicol iniluoncc on oubordinotoo.
By thoir tonocity, coolnooo. colo. otrmth ond coniidonce in victory. thoy
nuot oducoto ond ouppott oinilot foolingo ond quolitioo in tho oubotdinotoo.

It in inortont thot tho oubordinotos not only rocoiwo tho niooiono in
o tinoly oonnor, but oloo thot thoy proporly mdorotond ond noto tho nothodo
of cor-yin; out tho niooiono thot cortoopond to tho situation. Tho oituo-
tion will choose quickly ond ohotply. ‘lhooo chonsoo oro brought to tho
omotdinotoo in tho roquitod voluo. in otdot to provont ourprioo by tho
onowy. including hio poychologicol divoroiono.

mio typo of divoroion will ho oilod ot undonoining tho oorol opirit
of our troopo. In tho opociol hmdbooko on tho conduct of poychologicol wor-
foro pwliohod in tho bourgeoio comtrioo, tho ptocoduroo oro tofloctod ond
rocouondotiono oto nodo on how to conpol tho onony ooldioto to dooott. to
ourtondor ond cool-it other IIOl’Il ctinoo, undonoino thoit motonco ad
thoir otronsth. wookon thoir will ond oood ponic. All of thooo ptocodotoo
will bo uood on o brood ocolo tron tho vory boginning of the wor. ‘nlotoforo,

273

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

such operations by the eneny must not be underestisated. 'ihey aust be con-
bated by nore powerful ideological weapons persitting neutralization of the
slanderous effect of the bourgeois ideology on our troops. In addition. it
is necessary to do active political work asong the troops and the population
of the anew to break down the moral-cod)“ spirit of their forces at the

front and the population in the rear. paralyze their will to resist and in-
cline them to get out of the war by antiwar desonstrationa and operations.

'lhe basic content of this work nust be explanation of the just goals
of the war waged by the countries of the socialist fraternity and, on the
contrary. the unjust nature of it on the part of the imperialist govern-
eents. a truthful discussion of the economic and military power of the
socialist countries. unsasking the lies and runors of imperialist propaganda;
objective demonstration of the unavoidability of victory of the socialist
fraternity in the war. explanation of the weakness of the inperialist coali-
tion and indication of the paths of withdrawal from the unjust war.

‘lhia work nust be purposeful and specific. It is planned in accord-
ance with the codat aission perforated by the subunits which Ileana that it is
directed against the enemy group which is to be routed. For this purpose,
the moral state of the personnel. their strength and psychological hardening
are carefully studied. for which various sources are used: the radio inter-
ception data. interrogation of prisoners and the local population. inter-
cepted letters. diaries and other naterisls and documents. As a result of
studying these ssterials. the co-snder discovers and more precisely defines
the strong and weak points of the noral preparation of the enemy during his
decision asking and plans active seasures to intensify the moral effect on
the enemy in order to achieve that destruction.

Measures against propaganda and ideological diversions of the enemy
are taken by all. but in accordance with a united plan. In this respect,
the experience of the counterpropagands in World war II by the political or-

gene, the party and Koesoaol organizations, co-snders and staff has not
lost significance.

“Dre basic efforts of the Fascist propaganda were aimed at spreading
the myth of the undefeatsbility of the German May. the superiority of their
weapons and eateriel, calls to surrender and cease resistance. inciting
disputes anong the different nationalities, and so on. It is sufficient to
state that during the period from June to October 1941 the Fascists dropped

#00 million leaflets over our troops. During the battles outside Leningrad,
lS Iillion leaflets were dropped.

In the struggle with enemy propaganda, various ferns and nethods were
used. ‘lhe basic forms of the ideological battle with the enemy were the
following: printed and oral propaganda, radio propaganda, visual agitation.

1. Yu. Chernyek, "mi-cry Starogo Hiry" (Chiserss of the Old Horld). Moscow.

Holodays Gvsrdiya, 1970, p 206.
276

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIM. USE ONLY

Among the- the primary role was played by printed propaganda. Its basic
for” were leaflets. bulletins. circulars. newspapers, letters. brochures.
Journals and books.

Along with the printed propaganda. oral propaganda has also becoae
widespread. It was carried out by the political organs using special loud-
speakers. The radio propaganda was handled through the ailitary and cap-
tured radio stations and also the civilian radio stations in the cities at
the front. Posters. transparencies. slogans, and boards with agitation
calls found application in the visual agitation. Our eounterpropaganda in
specific axe-plea demonstrated the weakness of the coﬂat and aural state of
the Fascist am and the fall off in Iilitary production. It revealed the
bestiality perpetrated by the Nazis on the silitery prisoners and peaceful
population and it taught hatred for the invaders. Our comterpropagande was
distinguished by an offensive nature and was one of the most isportant areas
of ideological-political work providing for inroveaent of the noral spirit
of the troops, strengthening of discipline. organisation. education, poli-
tical aaturity. conviction and personal responsibility of the troops of
aodel conduct of the comet missions.

The experience in center against the undersining propaganda of the
Fascists during world War II has not lost its significance. for the inerial-

ist countries have coapletely arsed thesaelvea with the basic goals, scans
and methods used by the Nazis.

275

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cum 9. Hoax-roam Dumas MINING MD IN llla 6011188 01' comet muons
1. Monitoring Problems and Techniques

Cosbat troop control is based on the certainty of the «modem that
his subordinates will carry out the cosbat aissions assigned by hi.- exactly
end in tine. his belief begins with the prerequisite that the “ordinates
teke couplets responsibility for psrforning the niesion. Therefore, they
aust not overlook details. and they sust have the capdvility for manifest-
ing initiative and at the ass tine acquiring faith in their own troops and
in the success of the battle.

It is iaportant in this case that the subordinate conanders know and
constantly feel that they are not alone in cosbat. Believing in then. the
senior officer constantly sees to the course of coshst and can at any tine
render assistance to then with all the forces and asteriel that he has avail-
able. Ilowever. this assistance is possible only under the condition of
knowledge by the senior officer of the course and the results of the per-
for-once of the codaat sissions by the subordinates. Hence, the unquestioned
requirements: "Believe and check." At the seas ties the checking is not an
extraordinary asasure calculated to ”trap." "expose,“ its primary and "more
conlex goal is to check the correctness of the work... check the system of
organization of operations; insurance of the highest productivity of the
operation. . 3'“

The general purpose of the aonitorin; reduces to checking the readi-
ness of the subordinate troops for oodmt and the results of the perfornance
of the count siasions by then with sisultansous rendering of practical aid

to then. The specific goals and Iethods of monitoring are derived fro- the
content of the cosbat aission and the conditions of the fulfill-ent of it,
especially the level of training of the stbordinate coenanders and staff and
the presence of tine. Iheoreticslly Ionitorins is carried out in two direc-
tions: on the one hand, the co-ander controls the operation of the staff,

 

W. I. Lenin, (haplete Collected Horka. Vol ‘6. p 127.
n'v. I. Lenin. Couplete Collected Horka. V01 37, p 339.

276

FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the chiefs of codat ares md services directly subordinate to his, and on
the other hand. the cos-ander and the staff, chiefs of corhet area and ser-
vices subordinate to his jointly check the activity of the sﬁordinata troops
by a united plan. Each of these areas is characterized by a special noni-
toring problem.

he coriander sees to the correctness of the execution of the opera-
tions with respect to neintenmce of constant cobat readiness of the troops.
planning and cosprshensive swport of codat operations. the conveying of the
cowat niasions to the responsible agents and also the organization of the
interaction. the control points and co-unicatione points in tine by the
staff. the chiefs of combat area and services. As for the monitoring prob—
lesa with respect to the line of subordinate troops they are greater with
respect to volt-e and are more varied with respect to content. They encom-
pass the nest iaportant aspects of training end activity of the subordinate
troops and their control elements. Host frequently and above all the fol-
lowing are checked: the stats of ﬁne art with respect to cotter readiness
of the subunits. the timeliness of obtaining and correctness of explaining
the codut aissions by the ethordinate cos-andere, the correspondence of
their decisions to the attention of the senior officer. the correctness and
coepleteness of realization by the subordinates of the measures for interac-
tion. the comprehensive study of the codaat operations. the organization of
control and cosmmications points.

the checking of the state of the coabat readiness of the subunits is
a primary niasion. During its accomplish-eat. the degree to which the sub-
units are supplied with personnel and various materiel. their provision with
everything necessary for codaat and life and also the level of cadet and
political training of the personnel and other problems of constant readiness
of the srbunits are established.

It is obvious that all of the remaining monitoring missions, especial-
ly with respect to the support Ieasures. are connected to one degree of ano-
ther with checking and naintsining the cadet readiness of the subunits.
mus. checking the readiness of the arbordinstes to defend against many
nuclear weapons reduces to the discovery along the personnel of the subunits
of individual protection means, the skill in making correct use of then.
knowledge and skills of the personnel in observing the safe distribution
none and other protection measures. It is very iwortant to monitor the
correctness of the organization of reconnaissance for which knowledge by the
responsible agents of the reconnaissance missions. times lid nethods of
executing them. careful preparation of the reconnaissance units for opera-
tions and then. the results of these operations with respect to carrying out
the stated missions is also tested. It is no less important to check out the
correctness of implenenting the measures with respect to other types of
support. especially camouflage, security and radio counteraction.

'Ihe checking of the quality of their work done by the subordinates
with respect to planning the coﬂat operations and the reportinf of the ais-
sions is done usually with respect to a broad class of problems which cmnot

277

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be lisited to any one list. One thing is certain: it is necessary to find
and state to the stbordinates the best ssans of accelerating and inroving
the effectiveness of their given work under actual conditions. As for

sonitoring the organization of the control points and cossunications points
by the subordinates, in a nueber of other questions their readiness to re-

store control under the seat serious instances of its disruption by the
ener is checked out.

The organization. quickness and secrecy of movement and operations of
the troops and the control unite in coebst depend to a great extent on the
cossandent's service. o'l'hercfore‘ the timeliness and correctness of its

deploy-ant nd its support in the indicated areas or on the routes are
checked. It is considered that the co-mdant's service itself has a very
broad and responsible sonitoring function: It is invested with monitoring
the procedure for sovessnt or daploynent of the troops. canouflaging then,
and so on. mus. the co-andant's service hes been converted to one of the
nost imrtant monitoring ssane and is directly connected with the sonitor-

ing techniques which are selected by the superior chief (headquarters) for
checking out the subordinate troops.

In codaet practice the scat effective use the ssthod of sending the
duty personnel of the superior control unit to check the isportant problems
directly in the swordinate mite. 1111s is mderstandable, for it is here
that the known principle is realised: better to see once then to hear a
hundred tines. 1he efficiency of this method is unquestioned. It per-its
local conviction of the properness of the performance of the neasures by the
subordin-tes with respect to troop control; in addition, it offers the pos-
sibility of local detailed inforsation of the subordinates about the situa-
tion, answering the probless that arise enong than and also the rendering
of specific aid. “therefore. a possibility is found for personal cos-mica-

tione with the subordinates and checking out the results of their activity
locally.

however. in sodern codaat conditions for application of this method
will not always be favorable. The extremely lisited tine. cowlex radiation
situation and the speed of develop-ant of events-«ll of these linit and
sonetisse exclude the possibility for the co-Isnder personally or the staff
officers to go to the subordi‘nstes to monitor then. Most frequently this
sethod is applicable under sore or less stable conditions. that is, during
the organization of cosbat or the snrch and also during the course of codast
under conditions where the personal intervention of the chief or staff of-
ficers is the only possible or expedient measure to equalize a serious
situation that has developed. “waver, in these cases it is necessary to
weigh to what degree a trip to the subordinate locatioﬁ will insure fulfill-

sent of the mnitoring goals and whether it is more efficient to use another
method.

'lhe monitoring is also realized by studying the verbal or written
reports of the subordinate co-Ianders (chiefs) or various written cots:

278

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0N..Y
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

documents developed and sent by them to higher headquarters (orders. and so
on). 'lhe given monitoring technique can be used both for organisation and
during the course of combat. Its advantage is that the monitoring problems
are solved by studying the data axperssed by the subordinates in brief,

clear fornuletions which accelerates the monitoring process. In addition.
the recording of the infatuation in the documents improves the responsibility
of the subordinates for their accuracy which increases the decree of reliabi-
lity of the data reported in them.

In the documents, however, the events that have taken place. opera-
tions already completed by the subordinates, can be reflected, therefore they
quickly become obsolete, which lowers their value. The application of this
method is limited also by the fact that it is not always possible and expedi-
ent to require that written combat documents be sent out by the subordinates.
In addition, not all of the problems (information) needed by the senior of-
ficer for monitoring can be discussed in them. All of this emphasizes that
the oversighta detected by the documents in the operations of the subordi-
nates often will ge difficult to prevent or eliminate. especially during the
course of cadet when the time for analysis and issuing of the corresponding
instructions to the subordinates will be extremely small or not exist at ell.

In these cases, direct conversations are held with the subordinates
with respect to the co-mications channels during the course of which the
results of the work of the subordinate co-anders and staff with respect to
troop management and the course of the codat missions are explained. 'lhis
method permits comparatively feat obtaining of the required information from
the emordinates and it makes it possible to give them instructions with
respect to elimination of the discovered deficiencies in their decisions or
operations. However, even in the given method there are also bottlenecks.
For example. the oral reports of the srbordinstes cannot always correspond
to the objective state of affairs as a result of unskillful or inaccurate
evaluation of it. Not all of the monitoring goals can be solved with the
desired coepleteneas, in particular, the possibility of checking out the work
of the subordinates with respect to planning and support of the combat opera-
tions as a result of their large volume and comlexity is limited. In eddi-
tion, certain problems for purposes of achieving secrecy of preparations of
codaat operations cannot be discussed in general over the technical consu-
nications means. Therefore monitoring by conversations with the subordi-
nates over technical co-unicetion means is used only for the solution of
ainple problems: checking the time of reception of cosbst orders by the
subordinates. the time of passage or engagement of lines (targets) in com-
bat, and so on.

Inasmuch as each of the investigated monitoring techniques has advan-
tages and disadvantages. they are used in codaination and in a way as to

more completely use the stronger aspects of each of them when organising
sonitoring under actual conditions.

279

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’Oﬂ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Organization and Realization of Monitoring

1he organization of the monitoring includes determination of the pur-
pose and the goals of the monitoring, the development of the monitoring plan.
the conveying of the contents of the monitoring plan to the duty personnel
participating in its inlementation. training (instruction) of these person-
nel in doing the monitoring. determination of the procedure and time for
reporting the monitoring results.

These problems are resolved depending on the actual conditions and the
scale of the troop echelon. In the control unite where there are no staff
headquarters. the monitoring is organized and conducted by the commander him-
self. Where there are staff headquarters and other control units. the moni-
toring is realized somewhat differently (Figure 32). Unconditionally. even
here the role of the «under is significant. is defines the problesm of
monitoring the work of the subordinate co-anders and staff , he gives instruc-
tions to his staff. when and how best to implement them. 'n‘lo co-ander par-
ticipates personally in the monitoring, checking the accuracy of the per~
formance of the most importmt missions end measures by the swordinates.

In addition, the special duty of the conander is to monitor the quality of
the work of the subordinate control apparatus. especially the headquarters
unit which usually perform a significant volt-3e of work.

he staff plans the monitoring, it conveys the monitoring missions to
the duty personnel participating in it. it trains these personnel for imple-
mentation of the monitoring. it directly participates in the monitoring.
generalizes the results of monitoring and assistance to the ewrodinates and
reports them to the commander.

The planning of monitoring includee specification and definition of
the procedure for carrying out the monitoring missions. that is. what, where.
in what sequence and when to check. which methods to use while calling on
which duty personnel to implement the mnitoring, when and in what form to
request the monitoring results to the co-ander.

280

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

mama, mac» 4! mamb-
2' m, «1W» Hammer, "any

 
 
 

  
 

m
ml" :35" 5 .

       

Figure 32. Organizational monitoring

Provisional notation: 4—- Personsl report (observation)
e—- -— Study of documents and oral
reports
a— — — — With respect to technical cannu-
nicatione leans.

Key: 1. ﬁonitoring realised inside the wit control apparatus
2. Monitoring realized by the connendar, the staff by a single plan
3. Deputy consander and other duty personnel
lo. Codained-srns staff, staff unit (officers)
5. Subordinate swunits

me content of the monitoring plan is discussed in the torn of short
itens (notes) in the work notebook of the col-lander (the chief of staff). and

if there is tine. then in a special docunent with approximately the follow-
ing fora:

"1 UPI) “we"

Unit co-ander

(rank. surnanei

281

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bote Plan for Monitoring the Preparation of
the Unit for the offensive

 

Rho does who, how and

 

Goals of who Monitoring the noni- when to report
Order No. monitoring monitors Tine toring the monitor-
ing results
1 Occupation of 3rd 1800 Deputy Unit, com-
the initial motorised hours com- mander
position for rifle bst- to 2100 sander orally at
the offensive, talion hours of the 2130 hours
and so on on Io unit on 6 August
August

Unit headquarters chief

(rank, surname)

"me requirements imposed on nonitoring are as follows: purposeful-
ncss, that is. checking out the basic problems where required by the situa-
tion; tine limits of monitoring, that is, performance of it calculating the
prevention of deficiencies in the work of the attordinates; ooabination of
the testing of the quality of the work of the swordinates with practical
assistance to then.

The execution of the planned nonitoring goals is achieved by a codi-
nntion of various methods. They are cod>ined with respect to time so that
the problems of primary importance of interest to the cosmander can be
checked by various methods simultaneously or at different times and so that
a prolonged separation of the swordinate contenders from the subunit control
does not occur. Let us assume that the consumer has ads the decision to
apply a fire strike against the essay during the course of combat. but he
doubts the accuracy of the report of the «under to the smordinste submit
with respect to the line reached by him. In addition, knowledge of the true

position of the srbunit is very important, for it operates in the direction
where the target of the fire strike is located. For checking and more pre-
cise determination of the position of the given subunit it is possible to
carbine several methods: sending out the staff officer on the mobile nesns
for visual observation; request of additional data from the subordinate
contender or staff with respect to technical conunications leans, obtaining
of these data from the commanders or the staff of the adjacent albunit.

In determining the times and the participants in the monitoring. it
is necessary to consider that there will not always be a possibility of es-
tablishing time and isolation of the special group only for nonitoring.
Most frequently, when training and especially during the course of combat
the monitoring nust be done sinultaneomly with the performance of other
neasures with respect to troop control. lhus. along with the conveying of

282

FOR OFFICIAL USB 01“.?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the combat missions to the responsible agents. the correctness of their
explanation by the swordinate contenders is checked. ‘lhen their work is
monitored by the decision making end realization of the measures with respect
to the support of the codast operations.

The proper estimation of the quality of the work of the subordinates,
the discovery and elimination of deficiencies in it, is s problea which can
be solved only by cowetent and trained officers. 'lherefore monitoring, for
exawle, of the training mid the operations of the artillery subunits or the
swunits of the special troops is carried out by the officers having the
corresponding service work profile.

‘nte problems resolved on the monitoring level are tied to the mea-
sures with respect to monitoring the higher levels, in order to avoid dupli-
cation. that is. simultaneous testing of certain subunits with respect to
certain problems. On the basis of the plan for the monitoring developed by
the codined-arms headquarters. the chiefs of the coebat ar- md services
can if necessary develop their special monitoring plans, detailing in then
the problem of the methods of monitoring the subunits of their cottat arms
or services.

However well the officer is trained with respect to the profile of
his service activity. being desiueted for monitoring. he is obligated care-
fully to prepare for this work. his is especially important for the officers
who are monitoring by the method of personal intercourse with the swordi-
nates. The officer present among the troops is an authoritative representa-
tive of the superior chief. he must carry out the will of the colmander.
exhibiting persistence and decisiveness in the requirement of accurate exe-
cution of all of the planned measures by the subordinate commanders or staff
headquarters. However. the authority of the officer present for monitoring
depends entirely on the quality of the work done by him and the assistance
which he has rendered the ubordinates. correcting deficiencies and inaccu-
racies in their work. In order to correct, it is necessary to know how to
correct. It is necessary. as V. I. Lenin emphasised, "first of all, to
study and study the conduct of a matter in an institution, enterprise or
section. and so on; secondly, it is necessary to make the required practical
chmges in time and implement them in the affairs.“ 'lhis is the point of
view from which the officers are trained to monitor.

In staying with the troops for checking, each officer explains his
special goals. he studies the conditions and plans the procedure for carry-
ing out these goals. We initial data required is picked up free: the
monitoring plan and is conveyed to the officers sent to perform the moni-
toring in advance so that they can prepare and coordinate their participa-
tion in the monitoring with the other form of operations with respect to
troop control. lhese data are brought to the officers most frequently by

*V. I. Lenin. Conlete Collected works. Vol lob, p 127.

283

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the comander or the chief of staff personally in the operating procedure
and, first of all. to those who are sent to the troops for the performance
of the most important and urgent monitoring problems.

When selecting the procedure for realizing the monitoring. the follow-
ing are established: the root that is convenient from the point of view of
speed and safety; the time of arrival of the subordinate consider at the
control point; where the control is to begin and in what order: when and
where considering the movement of the control point he will return after
carrying out the monitoring missions and how to put the results. The under-
estimation of these problems leads to disturbance of the monitoring plan
with all of its consequences. ‘lhus, failure to take into account the im-
portance of selecting hidden. safe paths (directions) of movement to the
nonitoring targets leads to unjustified losses from enemy fire or the ef-
fects of its dispersion-reconnaissance groups. Lack of knowledge of the
location of the subordinate control points where it is necessary to go for
monitoring or the location of the control point at the time of return to it
from the subordinate locations leads to the fact that the officers lose a
great deal of time uselessly and therefore do not participate in the routine
work of troop control.

“the participants in the monitoring prepare for its realisation depend-
ing on the nature of the monitoring problem. If. for example, it is neces-
sary to estimate the correctness of the decision of the subordinate com-
mander. then the person doing the testing must first study the decision of
his co-Isnder and analyze in detail the conditions of implementing it to the
subordinates. A study is especially carefully made of 'the situation at the
front line of this subunit to which the officer is sent for monitoring; here
the situation is studied not only at the given time but also considering the
prospects for its change and development during the course of codiat. With»
out this preparation it does not deal with the problem of checking the
expediency of the decision of the subordinate cosssander and. of cOurse. can-
not be of specific assistance to him. ‘lhe corresponding training is required
also when checking the more narrow problems, for example, the development
by the subordinates of measures for reconnaissance or other types of support.
Striving to see that the testing is objective and complete, the officer con-
ducting it studies all of the orders and the data serving as the basis for
the development of these measures by the subordinates.

Often for checking the performance by the subordinates of a set of
measures related by a single goal. for example, with respect to restoration
of combat capability. it is necessary to send out a group of officers. ‘lhis
group is instructed usually by a commander or staff chief. ihe officers
primarily are oriented on the content of the orders given to the stbunit to
which they are sent for monitoring. ‘lhe possible procedures for the cellist
use of this subunit after restoration of the cosbat fitness is reported to
them. As a result they are given instructions as to how and about what to
inform the commmder of this subunit. what, when and how to check and render
sid locally, when and how to report the results of the work done. 'lhe ef-
forts of the group officers are aimed at checking the performance of the
basic measures by the subordinates in time.

286
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0-.LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lhe aonitoring is done so that there will be no necessity for the
subordinate couanders to take leave froa their work. when visiting the
subunit to check then out, in a nuaber of cases it nay be justifiable to ob-
serve the course of the work of the couander or explain interesting data to
the chief of staff and other responsible agents. When monitoring over the
conunications channels it is also desirable to vary the procedures for ob-
taining and checking the interesting data. It is not always efficient for
checking and lore precise determination of one problen or another to hold
direct conversations with the subordinate commander and staff officers. To
save the tins of the subordinate colander it is possible to limit ourselves
to listening to his conversations with the cosmonders of the subordinate
levels by connecting to their radio network.

During the course of monitoring. the monitoring results are su-ed up
which are recorded in the work notebooks of the duty personnel called on for
this purpose. ‘lhe actual state of the checked problem, when md how they
were checked out and the brief contents of the instructions given to the
subordinates with respect to eliminating the discovered deficiencies are
recorded. All of this is reported in oral or written fora to the cornander
or the chief of staff. who, to an equal degree lust constantly know the
following: the degree of readiness of the troops for the operations. what
they have done and what renains to be done, what difficulties are encountered
aaong the sabordinate troops and what it is necessary to undertake to elimi-
nate than in the shortest possible tine.

The evaluation of the wonitoring results is also carried out from the
point of view of isproving the methods and achievement of educational goals
with respect to the subordinates. During the aonitoring process. the genuine
executive qualities of the sdaordinates, their advantages and deficiencies
are discovered. At the use tine the subordinates are trained to critically
evaluate the results of their work. The sense of personal responsibility for
the matter at hand and the creation of the necessity for inproving the level
of their knowledge are ilproved. ‘lherefore the meaning of monitoring is
greatly enhanced if the results are instructively discussed in tine. ‘lhe
subordinates receive only what will proaote inprovenent of cedar troop
control.

285

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPm 10. STUDY W CWT EXPRIDICB AND CMBYAKE (3 IT 10 ms TROOPS

1. Organization of the work of the Control Units With Respect to the Study
and Dissenination of Cosbat Experience

The significance of the codaet experience is determined by the fact
that war is a severe higher school in attacking the codat readiness of our
troops and the correctness of nilitery theory developed under peacetime con-
ditions. Only during the course of the war is it possible to discover end
evaluate the genuine views and possibilities of the eneny for conducting coe-
bst operations with sufficient completeness.

“thus, the study of the coeparison of the true views and results of
conbat practice of the opponents pernits us to find the best means of is-
proving the cowosition, the organizational structure and cosbat use of our
troops. ibis explains. for example, the fact that during World War II the
cosposition and structure of the conbined-arn mit of the Soviet Array were
changed three tines, by which their cosbat capdailitiea were isproved. 'ihe
norastives and the nethods of their coi>at use were nore precisely defined,
respectively, which was reflected in the regulations which were also revised
three tines during the war years.

Now, as is known, the seans of arsed cosbat have changed greatly, and
under their effect, the nature and the netth of codaat operations, and the
practical cowat experience in their application does not exist. Therefore
with the beginning and during the course of a war to a greater degree than
before it will be necessary to refine, alter and develop views of the con-
bat application of the troops more than once.

The control mite for the study and dissemination of conbat experi-
ence are being trained in advance. in pescetine. ‘lhe value and the content
of their given work are variable and they depend .-n the type of cadet
operations, the assigned nission and the actual conditions of perfornence.
However. under any conditions their efforts are distributed so that the
basic problems will be solved as completely md objectively as possible
which consists in the fact of discovering the following: the state of the
coebat readiness of the ener troops and by what means he will support it;

286

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040016-9

0.“. . o '. '. . . '
6 “IL 1979
FOR OFFICIAL USE (‘NLY

the poseession by the enemy of nuclear weapons. conbat characteristics and
principles for the me of these weapons: cospoeition. technical equipnent
and organizational structure of the troops: new methods of conducting and
insuring eneny coﬁet operations. their strong and weak sides; the systes.
methods and teens of controlling the enemy: the possibilities and setth of
operation of the eneay with respect to the disruption of the control of our
troops; the effect of new senns of codastting aid the operations of the enemy
for the setth of operation of their troops. their cosposition. organisa-
tional structure. the control of then. support of their coobat operations.
1hese and other goals are resolved so that as a result of the study and con-
sideration of the date Eros codict experience surprise on the part of the
enesy will be excluded.

All of the duty personnel and control mite will participate to one
degree or another in the study and dissesination of combat experience in each
link. All of the instructions sent in this case will begin with the cos-
sander. During the troop control process. he takes into sccomt everything
that In instructed free the previously investigated comet experience. He
notes and considers. in particular. everything that is new about the enesy.
he plans measures and tines for broadening the study of especially islportsnt
irforsation about the enesy. Mrythins positive and all the deficiencies
in the operations of our troops are also recorded by the couander. lie dis-
covers the causes for the deficiencies. he notes the procedures and the tines
for elisinating then. and also the delivery to the subordinates of every-
thing instructive and vsludile for inroving their (MI! sestery. 'Ihe cou-
sander gives the chief of staff instructions. defining in these instructions
the eissions with respect to the study snd dissesinetion of the cosbat ex-
perience. lhe co-ander approves the plsn for their execution did then
traces the planning precision and the realization by the staff of the see-
sures with respect to the study and dissesinstion of cotet experience and,
he personally executes the especially important ones.

The basic part of the work of studying and dissesinsting the coshst
experience is done by the staff. 1he duties of the staff include the follow-
ing: the develop-eat of a plan for studying the cadet experience and the
conveying of the planned sessures to the troops: the gathering and discus-
sion of the date on codist experience and reporting of then in the estab-
lished tises to the co-snder and higher hesdquarteas. information dwut new
devolnpuents of the staff of the subordinate, interacting troops and neigh-
bors; the keeping of notes fro- orsl discussions and instructions of the
coasmder with respect to the realisation of the generalized coebat experi-
ence; the develop-lent in accordance with the instructions of the «under
and by the svsilble Iaterials of the drafts of the orders to the troops;
the keeping of a log of catat operations and the development of other re-
porting inforsstion taint docu-ents; monitoring of the work of the stbordi-
nates with respect to study and assisilation of coﬁst experience. These
eissions are distributed by the chief of staff sing the staff officers.

287

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘lhe work st steff heedeuertere with respect to the perforeence of the
missions is distributed epproximtely es follows (eee Figure 33). ‘lhe greet-
eet volum tells to the etefi’ officers in cherge of operative problems. 1hr
participation in the work of other officers ie lieited only to speciel
problem. Orgenieing their work. the chief of etefi pev :onelly cerries out
the nest ieportmt end urgent nieeiooe. he confirm end describes the infor-
eetion report documnts. he drove conclueione. mkes reports end proposele
to the coeeender with respect to the investigeted problem. he conducts
orei discussions connected with the conveyence of comet experience to the
troope. end he nonitore the execution of the plenned operetions by the stsff
officers in tine.

me work of the stetf is orgenited so thst the bmic efforts of their
officers will be concentreted in the solution of the primry problem end so
the: without speciel neceeeity the swordinetes will not be pulled any fro-
the control of the troops engeged in coiaet. Provision is elso esde to note
the study and conveyence of the comet experience into e mited procees in
which the meet velueble i‘ectuel dete ere reelieed directly by the troops es

they ere received.
Wm
',' _ 01 wk
J 7 7‘

Wag

 
    

Figure 33. Distribution
of work in the eteff with
respect to the study did
dieeeeinetion of octet
experience.

 
 
          

we
1333}

Key:

o) Itc- numer

b) Mes of operetione

c) officere (mite) of staff
heedquortere deeling with
the following problem

d) Operetive

e) Reconneissence

f) Cos-micetiono

3) Reporting end reinforce—
nente

In) Other problem

i) Chiefe of comet arm
and services

1) by the line of our own
troops.

   
     
      
     
     

[cw
§\\\F

\‘T

\\

.\\\\\\\§
Who

  

.\\.
\_\\

   

Provisionel notetion

Deere comlete reeponeibility for the
' perfornence of the operetione:

Perticipetes in the work. solving
specielieed problem.

208
F0! OWXCIM. USE ONIX
NR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

[Key to Figure 33 continde

l) Developmnt of the plan for etudying the cod>et experience and conveying
it to the reeponeible agente

2) Gathering. etudy of the date on the comet experience. reporte and infor-
eation about the-

3) Support of the holding by the comander (the chief of etefi‘) of oral die-
cueaione of the comet operatione

6) Keeping the comet operatione log

5) Developmnt and delivery to the troope of the neteriala iron the gene-
relieed coebet experience end ordere with reepect to ita introduction

6) Monitoring of the execution of the meeuree with reepect to etudy and
introducing the cowat experience.

2. Study of Codaet experience

‘lhe etudy of comet experience includea the following: the develop-
mnt of the officer'e work plane. gathering, gezeralixation of the comet
experience date and ita formletion in the correeponding documnte.

‘lhe plan for etudying comet experience hm been developed in epecific
form of can: or for e nore prolonged period of current (forthcoeing) ope-
retione. during which it ie poaeible to etudy the problem of intereet. 1he
beaie for the plan ie mde up of the inetructione of the comender and higher
heedquertere end eleo the comet nieeion and actual conditione for carrying
it out. It ie imortmt here to predict the developeent of the aituetion.
to know how to etate the met inportant problem and plan effective mthoda
of etudying then. The plan ie formulated as a table. It reflecte the met
ieportent problem of coﬂet experience. edaject to inveetigationa; who
participatee in thin; the time and nethode of aolving the plmned problen;
when, what reporting docuente nuet be developed and to whoa preeented:
which. by when, when, where and with who. are the oral diecueeione of the
comet operatione or individual tactical examlee end other problem to be
held.

‘lhe content of the plan ie reported to the reeponeible agente in the
torn of notee or inetructiono in which the epeciel problem are defined, when
md what nethode of their execution, in uhet (one the reeulte are to be

reported.

1he eucceae of etudying the codnt experience depends primarily on
the preaence of the required anomt of reliable intonation dwut it and.
secondly. on the approach to ite interpretation and evaluation. It in
deeirable. of oouree. that thie intonation be as comreheneive ea poeeible,
but the ayateeization end interpretation are no leee ieportent.

intonation ie obtained fro- mny eourcee and by varioue mthode:
a) the tripe by the officere and etudiee eede by then of the comet experi-
ence on location or observation of the couree of the coebet operatione fro-

289

FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the control pointer b) in the forn of oral or documnt informtion of higher
headquarters. interacting troops and neighbors: c) by studying documnts
captured froa the anew. aodela of equipmnt. the interrogation of prisoners
and local residents: d) holding conferences and matings for the study and
evaluation of the problem of comet experience; a) the study of the oral
reports. the reporting-informtion and other comet documnts toning froa the
subordinate troops. Generaliaed natarials stored in the headquarters on
previous battles are also used.

‘lhe work of the officers in studying the comet experience directly
among the troops is one of the basic mthods. It is used both before the
beginning and during the course of coin: operations and after their comle-
tion. ‘mis procedure gives the required effect, but only with appropriate
preparation of the officers who are carefully instructed. Clear instructions
are given to than: what problem to study locally, what sources (mterials)
and how to use then. by what tine to generalize and foraulate the inform-
tion that is obtained. to whoa and when to report. 'Ihe study of the comet
experience often can be comined with the solution of another probleau
support of the control of the troops engaged in comet operations. In this
case it is inportmt to point out to the officers and to visit the troops in
what sequence and by what methods these assignmnts are to be carried out
without losses in quality of each of then.

It is always necessary to consider that the application by the anew
of new aateriel and new sethods and neans of comet operations are first
experienced by the troops directly participating in the battle. lhe ad-
vanced experience in operations is acct-dated by then. 1he efforts of the
officers sent out for this purpose are concentrated on the gathering and
studying of this experience. During the process of studying the comet ex-
perience. they hold discuuions with the participants in the battle. study-
ing the aost instructive episodes and valuable informtion about the opera-
tions of the troops and the control units as such as possible in the field.

In order to study these especially isportant and comlex problem such
as the construction of the aneny defense and others. after which taint
special groups can be sent directly into the field. They include the repre-
sentatives of the various codat arm ad special troops and also partici-
pants in the investigated coma operations fros anong the officers, ser—
geants and soldiers. ‘lhe work of the groups is done by plan which is deve-
loped on a asp and is approved by the com-1d or the chief of staff. In the
plan the following are indicated: the coqosition of the group did its
equip-ant; the posts (routes. sections) and operating in tine in the fields:
the problem noted for study at each post (route. section); the procedures
for solving especially inportant problem. the masures for supporting the
operations of the group (security. co-unications, and so on).

‘me data gathered from various sources are processed. they are plot-
ted first of all on the working aaps of the officers and they are entered
in the notebooks (the working notebooks) in the fore in which they were

290

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gathered. lhe problem arising in this case for the officers are also re-
corded. ‘lhus. the facts. the statistical and other infornation on the inves-
tigated problens are systeneticalfly accunulated. Wen studying then not
everything. of course. is taken on faith. For example. the sunny docunents
of the subordinates and various types of oral infornation (the stories of
eyewitness-es. and so on) out be carefully checked out. for inaccuracy and
s‘bjective evaluations are probably in then. arerything that is duplicated
is sifted out. the doubtful is sore carefully defined. and the nissing infor-
nation is filled in. his is the continuous procees of generalizing the

data which serves the purpose of establishing reliability of the generalized
data. their inportance, the tines for fornulation inlthe su-ary docunent and
delivery of then in accordance with the assign-ant.

1he results of studying the octet experience are reflected in the in-
formation reporting documents: the log of octet operations, the sunny
nap. various types of su-saries or emery reports or eiwly in the note-
books of the officers in the for: of notes and rot-eats.

The codaat operations log is the basic information reporting docunent.
It contains the generalised eaterial for the study and use of codat experi-
ence. n cowlete and objective evaluation of the course and the results of
the coﬁat operations is presented. It is kept by one of the officers in
arbitrary fore. As a rule. the entries in the Journal are preceded by the
selection of the docunents and the eaterials for the described period: the
decisions of the colander. the codaat orders. codaat reports of the subor-
dinates. the entries free oral orders and conversations over the technical
co-unicetions seane. Carefully studying then. the staff officer keeping the
log explains how the count operatims took place, what new infomtion (posi-
tive and negative) that influences the result of the coder wu discovered.

The entries are made clearly on one side of the sheet and in the fol-
lowing sequence: date (day. eonth and year); general situation at the front
of the unit; eneq-his strength. coeposition. the presence of nuclear wea-
pone. grouping and tactical density. the characteristic of the defensive
lines. the nu code: means used by hi- and new tactical procedures; our
own troops-males of all of the sdnnits entering into the unit. their ar-
rangesent. coﬁat and nunerical cowosition; list of unit control officers:
position of neighbors and the mint nissions carried out by then. ratio of
forces; naterisl swport of the troops with respect to basic types of equip-
sent; political-note! state of our own troops and the ens-y; data on the
nature of the terrain and the weather conditions; count nission of the unit
delivered by the senior officer. codrat decision of the unit coumder.
description of the course of the cadet operations of our troops and the
may with respect to the problem solved by the unit and also the work of
the control units. ‘lhe instructive codeet episodes and heroic deeds of the
personnel. new procedures and netth of conducting conduct operations and
other data pertaining to the evaluation of the condition and operations of
our own troops ad the anew are entered in the log. ‘1he entry in the log
after a day of battle ends with short conch-ions pertaining to the results

291

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the performance of the coabet nission and a reference to the sources used.
The reporting nape. the diagrale of the individual reinforceaente (objects)
of the eneny, photographs of outstanding heroes, copies of the necessary
docunente (cadet orders. diagraas of the combat orders. and so on) are
attached to the log.

‘lhe entries in the journal are systenaticelly checked by the chief of
staff; it is isportant that they be aade without interruption. fully and
objectively. Hith respect to the course of the control check. the chief of
staff gives instructions to the officer keeping the log. with respect to whet
problem and what conclusions to draw. what to supple-ant and refine or deve-
lop. what appendices to asks to the log. and so on. At the end of a fixed

tine, a copy is nade from the cadet operations journal which is presented
to higher headquarters.

lhe reporting nap is a cadet doth which is med when filling out
the coebat operations leg. when preparing the anelysee. reports and the
dacu-ents (orders) with respect to the propagation of cosbat experience. he
following are depicted on it: the position and the grouping of the forces
and nateriel of the unit two steps down. its neighbors and the eneny before
the beginning of the cowbat; the conbat mission of the unit end its neighbors;
the cadet decision of the unit con-anders; the course of the codrat opera-
tione of the unit with indication of the basic changes in the situation and
the decisions of the comander with respect to then. During the course of
combat various provisional signs (different colors) are mad to indicate the
basic principles and operations of the wit and its subunit, the reflection
of the eneny comterattecks, the engagement of coiaet of the second echelon.

the counterattack. and so on with the detail required for description of the
conbet operations in the’ log.

line results of the cod>at report on the results of generalizing the
cosbat experience are presented to higher headquarters, which usually estab-
lishes the values of the problens and the tines for distributing then in it.
In this report an estimate is eade of the cadet operations of the troops
for the defined tines nasely. the brief characteristics of the results of
the combat activity of the wait for the reporting period; the enesvy gives a
general characteristic of the coabet operations. the peculiarities of the
organization and conduct of battle. the nethode of application of nuclear
weapons. the cosbat area and the eateriel, the new nodels of area-ant and
their basic tactical-technical specifications, the peculiarities of con-
structing the defense. the best reinforced sections. individual defense units
and the strong points of the enemy occupied by our troops; their own troops-
the peculiarities of the codnt operations with respect to each coabat aria.
new fares of constructing the coﬁat procedures and eethods of preparation
and conduct of coabat operations, new aethods of controlling the troops and

supporting the coebet operations of the troops used during the reporting
period.

292

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0|.2.Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Various types of diagrsee. photographs. descriptions of the instruc-
tive codnt episodes. and so on are appended to the report.

In addition to the indicated reporting and intonation documents, the
data on the coﬂat experience are depicted in various types of energency and
noneeergency coﬂat reports and aunties presented to the higher echelon
during the course of the cosbet operations and also in the cotat docuents
for troop control (the working nape, conbat orders. and so on).

All of then have been studied in combination with the other eateriale
and intonation so as to discover everything valuable froe the codiat experi-
ence and report it to the ubordinates reliably and clearly and in tine.

3. Conveyance of Cedar Experience to the Troops

The cadet experience is conveyed to the troops by various nethods.
nost frequently oral instructions, oral reports on the basic results of the
coebat. the emery written orders. oral analyses of the cache: results. the
holding of exercises with the srbordinates considering the conbat experience.
As a rule. these procedures are codained and are supplemented by the printed
editions published by the superior agencies for all of the personnel—news-
papers. nanoira. cowat sheets and so on.

The oral instructions of the con-ander to the subordinates are the
east effective and therefore the frequently practiced neens of conveyance of
codat experience. lhey contain the dispatch data and the require-ants with
respect to the introduction of the positive codat experience by the subor-
dinetes. ‘lhe colander gives these instructions during the course of codat.
conbining then with a performance of neasuree to control the troops or before
the beginning md after the end of ooﬁat at the service conferences, recon-
naissance neetings and exercises. 1he instructions are given to all arbor-
dinates with personal discussion with than or over the technical couunica-
tions means. ‘Ihe briefness and clarity. the value of the content helping
the srbordinates successfully to solve the probleanthese are the basic
things to which this type of instruction must correspond. lherefore, con-
sidering their necessity under actual conditions. the couander gives in-
structions to the subordinates only after careful training.

Other netth of the conveyance of the code: experience are applied
before the beginning and after the and of the count operations when favor-
able conditions exist for the gathering of the subordinates and reading of
the report to then, oral analysis or holding practical exercises with than.

the scary report is designed for familiarization of all of the of-
ficers of the unit with the data free the conbat experience obtained in
battle. In it there are clear. conpressed discussions of the facts and the
conclusions fro. the cadet experience with respect to any iaportant phase
of battle or the battle as a whole. ‘lhereiore the report can be general and
special and is nede either for the personnel of all categories or only for
those on who- the discussed problee has direct bearing.

293

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1he content of the report is discussed in srbitrery fore. but its

theestic end purpose ere teken into sccoulxt. If its purpoee is suing up
the bettle es s whole. then frequently the following problem ere briefly
discussed in it: the content of the comet eiesion end the conditions of its
fulfill-tut: the nest chsrecteristic peculisrities of the bettle to which
ettention must be given. At the end of the report conclusions are drawn md
instructions ere presented on how to use the conbst experience. he discus-
sion of s more nerrow cless of probleee in the report, of course. is pos-
eible. It is ueuslly done by the mder or the chief of eteff.

The orel enslysie of the coebet is nede only with the directly subordi-
nete contenders end eteff or with ell of the officers of the unit (subunit).

‘lhe orel enelyeis cen be constructed on this level.

1. ‘lhe genersl eituetion developed et the front st the tins of obtein-
in; the conbet nieeion end the conclusions drewn froe it.

2. The content of the code: Iiseion end the role of the mite (sub-
units) in the cadet.

3. he coebet decision of the conender end the content of the work
of the control seenciee perfornsd on its besie during orssniution of codaet.

1.. 1he conduct of the codaet operstione: to whet degree they corre-
spond to the decision nsde; the operstione of the eubordinete troops. whet,
when end how the eneqy will teke counterection seeinet then: the work of the
control unite during coder; how the eubordinete submits and control mite
heve teken into eccount everything positive md elininste the deficiencies
discovered in the previous bettles.

S. ‘lhe senerel conclusions end instructions following free the sne-
lyeis ere es follows: the results of psrfornsnce by the units (subunits)
of the coebet niesion; whet cen be considered positive end negetive in the
operstione of their troops; how the nu eethode of doing bettle used by the
ens-y were counterected; whet must no token into sccomt in training the
troops end the control mite, with respect to whet beeic problems to orgsnize
exercises with thee end by whet nethode: whet out of the conbet experience.

in whet fore. by whet method end et whet tine to convey it to the subordi-
netes in higher heedqusrters.

‘lhis enelyeie procedure is only one of the possible ones. ‘lhs nder
of snelysed problene cen be greeter or eeeller. end they on be considered
with e different degree of deteil. end if necessery in e different sequence.
It is inportent thet it be discussed in u cmrused end clser e form a
possible. It includes only the most besic end instructive. During the
enelysis, for sxesple, of the control probleu. en effort is eede to show
in whet eseeure operational efficiency hes been echieved in the develop-eat
of the eepecielly difficult neesures end the discovery of the besic

296

POI! OPPICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deficiencies in order to evoid their repetition in the future. The course of
cosbet is discussed not in the fore of e sieple description of troop opere-
tions, but in the forts of en snelyeis of the operetion of the subunits of
verious camber eres. co-enders end steff with deeonstretion of whet wee in-
structive in their operetions. the epplicetion of the neteriel end whet les-
sons cen be leerned froe it. The eveluetion end the conclusions with respect
to the coebet operetions of the troops end the work of the control units euet
follow fro: the ectuel conditions which ere enalyeed in deteil in the enelysis
process. For the enelyeis for clerity of the interpretetion of the situetion.
photogrephs end eoviee. reports by the perticipents in the bettle. end gre-
phicel coﬁst docuents (our own end those ceptured fro- the eneny) ere used.

Properetione ere node for en enelysis such thet it cen be held soon
efter coepletion of the bettle. ‘lhe officers prepsring the enelysis explein
the topic end the goel in edvence. they explein the cowosition of the perti-
cipents. the locetion end the ties of the enelyeis. end they prepere the
required topicel esteriele with respect to the besic problems, illustretions.
references, end so on.

The exercises with the co-enders end the steff of the subordinete
troops to study the corbet experience ere held by various methods—in the
fore of tecticsl neetings or group exercises. the stsff contend treining when
the troops ere in reserve. during reet end relexetion end if possible, in
propering for codast operetions.

The holding of this type of exercise when prepering for cowet opere-
tions, es the experience of the lest wer deeonstrsted, is elweys justified.
however, it is neceesery thet the topics end the treining goels correspond
to the nsture of the forthconing codet operetions end thet the ecquired
coder experience be fully used in the exercises. lhis 1‘s echieved by veri-
oue nethods. In one cue. the beeis for the exercise cen be considered to
be the instructive nitustion of the cod>et or one of its finel steps end
considering this situetion. develop defined treining problees. In enother
csee, en erbitrerily selected tecticsl beckground is used for the exercise,
end when working out the treining problems end during the enelysis. construc-
tive exeeples ere presented from coebst prectice. In eddition. the exercise
teo‘c cen be en enelysis of one instructive bettle or enother or its indi-
viduel episodes. Depending on the type of exercise end its treining pur-
poses, it is else possible to use e coﬁinstion of indicsted methode.

‘l'he cherecterietic feeture of nodern codnt operstions is the fest
end sheep chengee in situetion. the consequencee of which cen now be very
serious for say of the opereting sides. end their elieinetion. ouch lore con-
pliceted then in the lest wer. 'lhis gives rise to the necessity for finding
eore effective neens end eethode of oodaet end protection, the performce of
e growing volt-e of leesures to insure eefety of our troops. lherefore the
costs: experience euet be conveyed to the troops eore efficiently.

295

FOR OPF’ICI’AL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONCLUS IO!

‘lho chmgeo that hove token ploce in recent yeara an o rooult of ocien-
titic and technical progrooo in the neeno and Iothodo of conducting coin:
oporationo have had a oigniiicant effect on troop control on the part of the
con-endero and headquartoro of all degrooo. 'lhoy have inoaod new, incroaoed
require-onto on the control. Bore the following have acquired oxpodolly
ioportont significance: high coder readinooe of the co-endoro end the
otaff for control of the troopo literally iron the iirot ninutoo of the war
unloaahod by the oggreooor, firmooo, flexibility. continuity (otﬁility).
oecrecy and high efficiency of control in my cowlox oituation, including
when tho one-y lounchao nuclear attache on tho control point and when he uooo
noon radio interference on our connicetiono oyotee.

In oddition. the proctice and tho otudieo porforood in tho given work
have denonotrotod thot the oatioioction of tho onunoratod require-onto on
troop control io a highly eonlox, Iultifaceted prohlon.

I'or ito oolution in all of tho nodorn areioo it io conoidored noceo-
oary to take o cowlox approach. to reolize on entire oyoton of no-ureo of
o technical. organizational and rooearch noture.

‘lhe firot group of ouch ooaouroo. both in tho Soviet Union and
abrood. often include the equip-oat of hoodquartero with tho lotut technic-
ol control noano, eopociolly tho noano of nechonieotion and outonation of
tho control procoooeo which conotitute tho ocientific-technical haoo of
modern control. 1hio opinion io ontiroly well founded. Practice confine
thot without the perfection of the troop control tochniqueo it to iwoooible
to oatiofy the require-onto now iqoood on it. In addition, the leteet
ochievcocnto of ocionce and engineering pernit the given opinion to be con-
oidered not only oubotantiotod but oloo actually realieoblo. however. the
given path connot he conoidorod the only one. he ataff coI-ondere cannot
woit pueively mtil they have a theoretically new control technique ad
equip-lent. 'lhoy have greet poooihilitioo for inproving control on tho haoio
of the already existing technical none.

"any rooearchero conoidor the oecond group of eeuuree clooely con-
nected with the fire: to include the inrovonent of the otructure of the

296
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

control units and points of the troops. in order that on the basis of the nev
equipnent they are aade sssll with respect to cosposition. mobile. stable and
vible with the ensey's use not only of conventional seans of destruction.
but also of nuclear weapons. This opinion also is unquestioned. however.
here. in our opinion. it is necessary to note that the practical realization
of the given group of seasurss lust necessarily be preceded by careful test-
ing of the. on an entire series of training exercises. Above all this per-
tains to the structure of the control unite. here special care and a scien-
tific approach are required. for speed and inadequate substmtiation of any
reorganization of the control units unavoidably will do her- to the codat
readiness of the troops.

When discussing the necessity for isproving the structure of national
economic control in the statuary report of the Central Oo-sittee to the 25th
CPS!) Congress. 1.. I. Brezhnev warned: "me Central Genittee is against
hurried. poorly thought out rearrangement of the sdeinistrative structure and
the developed sethods of asnagetsent. It is necessary to measure not seven.
as is co-only said. but eight or even 10 tines. before cutting. However.
if we have aeasured. if we have understood what hm becoae restrictive in the
continuously developing national econosy within the framework of the existing
economic sechanisa. then it amt be decisively ilproved.“ These instruc-
tions of the party mquestionably pertain also to improvements of the struc-
ture of the troop control units.

1he third group of aessures includes further isproveaent of the orga-
nization and aethods of operation of the cousnders and staff with respect
to the inpleaentstion of each control function with the use of the available
control equip-ant and with the existing structure of the control units. 1he
experience of past were. the postwar exercises and the results of the studies
deeonstrate that along this path each «under and staff has great. and
still not coepletely used reserves.

‘lhus. when gathering and studying the situation data during the pre-
parations and during the force of codat the greatest effect cones free the
centralized aethod of this gathering. the esteblishsent and exact execution
of the scientifically substantiated periodicity of the reports and the degree
of detailing of the situation data. the coupler utilisation and codinetion
of the available technical mans. sources and asthods of obtaining these
data. advance (before receiving the eission) study of then. the application
of short (to the signals) reports and foraalited for-s. reduction of suiti-

phuing end parallelisn (excess duplication) in the information transfer
offer the best effect.

For tiaely. srbstantieted codpst decision tasking (refine-ant) by the
consumer and planning of the coder operations of the troops. a clear defi-

nition of the voluae and content of this decision. ridding it of secondary
problem. hen-onions coﬁination of one-ea: wand and centralization of

materials of the 23th CPSU Congress. Hoscow. 1976. p 61.
297

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

control on the conssnder's port with initiative. creativity and independence
of the duty personnel stbordinate to his: when seeking the decision have in-
portant significance. when asking the decision and planning the sessures
with respect to cosprehensive support of the cowst operations, political
work and organisation of control. it is necessary sharply to increase the
role of the chief of staff and the chiefs of the cosbat area (services).

more widely to practice the joint work with thee of the cos-ander during the
decision asking by creating a cottat control center at the cos-and post. to
reduce the nudaer and voice of planning coubat docuents. skillfully to con-
bine the logical methods with sathemtical nethoda end use comuter engineer-
ing for the calculations end quantitative sdastantistion of the decisions
made. It is necessary to isprove the procedure for asking decisions itself.
to teach the officers to sake decisions considering the cowlex effect on
then of all of the conditions of the situation.

when convey, ng the cadet missions to the troops. orreniaing and sup-
porting their interaction. preliminary cosbat orders with or.entation of the
subordinate co-snders and staff on the nature of the forthconing operations
have recommended thensslves well. ‘ihey offer the possibility of quickly
engaging in preparations for coast and the perforssnce of sany aaasures with
respect to this preparation in parallel (alsoet eisultanaously) with the
superior cousander and headquarters. 'lhe specific cod>et sisaions and the
instructions with respect to interaction of the troops must be conveyed to
the subordinates as they are detersdned by the couander by short cosbat or-
ders. For speed of recording of the latter and their transniuion over the
comnications scene, it is advantageous to use fornalired blanks. It is
also isportant skillfully to codine the various ssthods of conveying the
missions and the instructions with respect to interaction: the issuing of
an oral count order personally by the cosIIander or its conveyance to the
subordinates by the staff officers going to the field; the trmssdssion of
short (to signals) orders over the radio by personal conversations with the
stbordinetes; the delivery to the subordinates of the text. graphical or
order written on magnetic tape. First of all it is necessary to deliver the
siseions and instructions to the troops who play the sain role, begin opera-
tions first and who require a great deal of tine for preparation.

These are only the basic measures with respect to further isprovenent
of troop control. Their successful ispleseatation, however. wholly depends
on the cosprehensive developsent of a specialized branch in the general
silitary science systeD-the theory of cosbet troop control—end the ssstery
of this theory by our officers. In the light of the well-known instructions
of V. l. Lenin on the necessity for developing the science of control and the
resolutions of the 25th CPS!) Congress with respect to control problem in
all areas of social life of the comtry, the given problem is one of the nest
urgent inasmuch as without the scientific control theory there can be no
effective practice. It is ispossible successfully to isprove the technical
Ileana. the structure and sethods of operation of the control units. After
it has been firaly sestercd by the officers. the given theory will becolse a

threatening saterisl force for the enemy; it essentially will improve the
cosbat readiness of the troops.

298

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me study node in this book. the consideration of the requirements of
practice and the results of s broad discussion of the given problem in our
eilitary press permits the etete'eent that the object of the study for the
theory of troop control euet be in practice the activity of the coneanders
on the control units of all degrees with respect to cottet troop control. and
its subject. the discovery of the lava and the principles of this control,
the eechanisee of their effect and also the scene and methods of a practical

utilization by the co-endare and staff of the different echelons in the con-
bet situation.

um respect to content, the coﬂst troop control theory lust include
o Mid”? of interconnected divisions of a general-theoretical. theoretical,
organisational and applied (practical) nature.

“the first section can be made up of the general end procedural princi-
ples of the troop control theory. 'lhe following basic problem eust be deve-
loped and discussed in it: the general concept of control in engineering.
nature md society; the purpose. content and essence of cowat troop control;
the developnent of the theory and practice of control by the experience of
pest were end exercises; eodern require-eats on control end the criterion for
estieating its effectiveness; the general lave for all eleeents and the troop
control principles; the peculiarities of this control at strategic. opera-
tive and tactical levels end also in the various foree of armed forces, cot--
bet ares end speciel troops: the state of the art with respect to troop con--
trol in the erriee of the union republics and in the ereies of probable
eneeies; the object of investigation, the subject of the content end the
eethods of investigation of the troop control theory, its place in eilitary
science end interrelation to the Marxist-uninist science end other sciences
studying various aspects of control.

The second division of the cadet troop control theory can also be
eade up of organizational problem such u the construction (structure) of
modern control system. the functions and rights of commd. the control
mite and duty personnel; the principles of selection and deploy-ant of per-
sonnel, the organization of the control points end the work at then of the
agents of the various echelons and codaet ens end in various form of coe-
bat operations; the structure of the troop control systems in the union
cruise and in the ereies of probable enemies.

The content of the third section of the control theory can be the
technical means of control: their purpose, classification, operative-tactical
characteristics and the procedure for their use in the units and at the con-
trol points. llere the prospects for the auto-etion of the processes of
troop control and also the characteristics of the control techniques of

foreign armies must find their reflection.

‘lhe enuaorsted three divisions constitute the procedural. general
theoretical. organizational and technical base for the next, the fourth divi-
sion of control theory--the stethode and the art of conbat troop control. In

299

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OYPICIAL USE ONLY

it. the classification and characteristic of these methods must be analysed
by parts. and the main thing. it is necessary to give specific race-enda-
tions to the co-mders and the control units of the various echelons with
respect to the artificial practical iqlsmsntation of the functions (techno-
logy) of control using modern and prospective technical leans; gathering and
study of situation data; ulting well-founded decisions and planning combat
operations; convey-ace of the missions to the troops, organisation of their
interaction. coaprehsnsive support, political work and monitoring; prepara-
tion of the troops for coabat and also control of then during the course of
the combat operations. The most inortant problen of this section is the
procedure for making an optinal or substantiateddecision by tho co-snder.
for this decision is the basis for the entire process of troop control.

Inasmuch u the practice of troop control is a dynsnic, continuously
developing process. to that degree it is asndatory to have a fifth division
of this theory which analyses the problem occurring in the given historic
phase and the possible nsans of solving the: by further inproveasnt cf the
troop control systea as a single interval organism. its structure. technical
equipment; and the functioning procedure.

As is obvious. the type of problems which the troop control theory
must discuss is very broad, iaportant and coqlex. It cannot be replaced by
any other science or theory, including cybernetics, which, as A. l. Berg.
D. H. Gvisnieni and A. N. Kolmogrov and other well-known Soviet scientists
have ewhasized aany tines. studies the very broad control laws. indepen-
dently of where the control occurs: in a live organism, in nachines or in
human society. For the practical application of these general laws the
officers aust solidly know the specifics of troop control in cadet, the
reflection of which is recognised in the troop control theory on the basis
of the couple: analysis of all aspects of the given process: ideological-
political, moral-psychological. social-legal, organisational-procedural and
pure sulitsry technical.

lhe study of the specific nature together with the other problem of
military science. as experience shows, cannot fully satisfy the practical
requirements under aodern conditions. For this purpose, a special, more
fundamental theoretical develop-eat of then is required which coebines
science md art into an integral whole and lights the path of practice in
the work of the conanders and staffs. 'ihe initial procedural lid general
scientific base for this develop-ant is the Harrist-beninist theory, the
laws of social development and armed codat, the principles of nilitary art.
the resolutions of the CPSU and the aeasures taken in the country with re-
spect to improving the control of the national economy, the advanced ex-
perience in troop control in previous vars and in postwar exercises, the
nchievenents in the field of the control of the arIiee of other socialist
countries and capitalist countries. and also the conclusions of such sciences
as cybernetios. asthmtics, psychology, sociology, la: and other sciences
investigating the various aspects of control. For the development of con-
trol theory consequently there is not only necessity but also possibility.

300

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0|.LY
POI OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Along with the imdenentel develop-eat of troop control theory it ie
neceeeery to ieprove the procedure for ite etudy end to indoctrinete the
otlicere in the precticel ekille of control in e11 of the eilitery treinins
inetitutione end in the eyeten of cone“ treining in the troope. V. l.
benin indiceted that we ”.umet withetmd the tent of the knowledge of the
tundeeentele of the tl pry with reepect to the ooeetion of our govern-eat
epperetue. the knowledge 0! the ind-entele of the ecience of control..."
iheee inetrnctione of the leeder hove not loet their eieniticence in our
tine. "Control." 1.. I. lreehnev noted. "hoe been converted to e ecience.
but thie ecienee not he neetered ee feet ad ee deeply ee poeeihle. it not
he pereietently etudied.”” ‘lhe given require-Int of the petty undoubtedly
perteine eleo to our officere. Ior eucceeeiol coieet control it ie necee-
eery for the- prinerily to neke e creetive etody of herxiee-beniniee theory.
heve e deep knowledge of the neteriel ad the principlee of conducting cadet
operetione. however. in eddition. they need eolid knowledge ad precticel
ehille directly (roe the eree of troop control. ‘lhe further develop-eat of
theory. ilprovenent of the troop control eyeten end inmonent of the trein-

in; of the ofticere in the one of control will pronote en increeee in the
cadet reedineu of our used form.

W. I. lanin. Oowlete Collected Harte, Vol ‘5. p 39‘.
“L. l. Brezhnev. “beninehin Korean“ [Pollowing Lenin'e Cour-eel. Vol 2. p 522.

301

_ M OFFICIAL USE OILY
1.
2.

3.
‘0

5e

6.

70

9.

10.

11.

13.

I10.

'5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIU‘W
K. "on end P. angele. Soch. [collected Work-l. Vol 6. 20. 21. 23. 25.

V. I. Lenin. Poln. Sobr. Soch. [Cowlete Collected works]. Vol 6. 13.
18. 2S. 29. 31. 35. 36. 37. 38. 60. 61. b2. u, as.

Prostate XPSS [hostel of the CPSU]. Hoecou. Politiulet. 1971.

Heteriely XXIV s'eede 088 [Hetetiele of the 26th 0980 Congnee]. Hoecov.
Politiulet. 1971.

Hoteriely XXV s’eede ms [Heteriele of me 25th mu Congme]. Hoecov,
Politiedet. 1976.

L. l. Brezhnev, "beninekin Korean” [Following Lenin'e Donne]. Vol 1 to
5. Noecov. Politizdet. 1970-1976.

H. l. Xelinin. "G Voepitenii i muchenii“ [Mucetion cud heining].
Moscow. Politizdet. 1970-1976.

H. V. Emu. lebrennyye Proimdeniye [Selected Hot-Ia]. Hoecov. Voyenie-
dot. 1965.

A. A. Crechko. “Ne Streehe Hire 1 Stroitel'etve Ronnie-e” [In the let-
tle for Peece end the Building of (ﬁe-union]. Hoecov, Voyeniedet. 1971.

A. A. Orechko, "Vooruehennyye $in Soveteltoeo Gonna-rem" [Ar-ed Ponce
of the Soviet Govern-em]. Second Edition. ﬂoecov. Voyenizdet. 1975.

A. A. Yepiehev. "Nogucheye Orozhiye Pertii" [Powerful Haeoon of the
Petty]. Hoecov. Voyenizdet, 1973.

R. Ye. Helinovekiy. “lditel'no Stayet' ne Strezhe Hire [St-Id Up convin-
cingly in the settle for Peece]. Hoecov. Voyenizdet. 1962.

v. A. Abchuk. 1.. A. Yenel'3mov. et e1.. ”Vvedeniye v ‘l'eoriyu Vyrebotki
Reoheniy" [Introduction to the ‘lheory of Decieion ﬂaking]. Hoecov.
Voyenizdet. 1972.

"Avtontizirovmnye Sieteuy Uprevleniye" [Auto-end Control Syeteu].
General editing by V. G. Shorin. Moscow. Zneniye. 1973.

V. s. Akent'yev, 1. S. Vinnik. A. Ye. Vodnev. l. 2. Indoor“. l. P.
Koeenko. "Heltheniznteiye lnxhenerno-‘rekhnicheekoso i Uprevlencheekoso

Trude" [Hechenie- of haunting-Technical ad Adeinietntive Hot-k].
lenizdet. 1973.

302

POI! OFFICIAL USE Ou'LY
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

2b.

25.

26.

27.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. G. Aimeeyev. "Neuchnoye Uprevleniye mehcheetvoe" [Scientific Con-
trol of Society], Hoecov. Politirdet. 1968.

N. Ieyhekov. P. Rueinov. “urgenireteiye i affektivnoet‘ Uprevleniye
Proirvodetvoe" [Orgenitetion end Effectiveness of Production Control].
Hoecov. Hoekovekiy rehochiy. 1973.

A. V. lerebenehchikov. A. V. leehenteev. et el.. 'Metodologicheekiye
Problem Voyennoy Teorii i Prektiki" [Procedurel Prohleee of Militery
Theory end Prectice]. Hoecov. Voyeniedet. 1966.

A. I. Berg. "Kihernetike-ueuke a. Optieel'noe Uprevleniye” [whemetice
«Science of Optinel Control]. Hoecw-beninzred. mergiye. 1961..

s. Dir. "leuke Uprevleniye" [‘lhe Science of Control). Abridged trenele-
tion (roe the uglieh. Hoecov. mergiye. 1971.

V. A. Bokerev, "Kihernetike i Voyennoye Delo" [cybernetice end Hilitery
Affeire). Hoecov. Voyenixdet. 1969.

1. 1. kaov. "arseniuteiye Uprevleniye v 883A" [Orseniution of Con-
trol in the United Stetee]. Hoecov. none-in. 1966.

N. Viner, ”libernetike 111 Oprevleniye i Svyez' v Zhivotnon i Hechine"
[Cybernetice or Control end Connicetione in Mind end Hechine].
Hoecov. Sovetekoye ledio. 1958.

"Voyenneye Stretegiye“ [Kilitery Streteu]. Edited by V. D. Sokolovekiy.
Hoecw, Voyenitdet. 196‘.

”Voproey Keudloogo Rukovodetve i Sovetekikh Vooruzhennykh Silelth"
[Problem of Scientific Adliniltretion in the Soviet Arned Forcee].
adited hy Ye. P. sulinov end V. V. Shelyeg. Noecov. Voyenirdet. 1973.

”Voproey Ilprevleniye atone-Roy" [Proble- of the Control of the neo-
nouy], Hoecov. Politirdet, 197‘.

”Voyennye “emery Herehelov Sovetekogo Soyuze A. A. Grechko. I. Rh.
lure-yum. 8. S. Diryuzove. A. N. Veeilevekoso, G. K. Zhukove. 1. S.
Koneve, R. Ye. Helinonkogo, K. K. Rokoaeovekoso. V. l. Chuykove,
Generelov Arnii 8. N. Shte-euko. P. 1. letove. General-mteuente

A. It. Bleehey i Dmikh Vidnykh Voyenechel'nikof' Military Heooire of
Herehel of the Soviet Union A. A. Grechko, I. m. legruyu. 8. S.
Iiryurov. A. It. Veeileveltiy. G. K. mum. I. 8. Konev. ll. Ye.
Helinovekiy. K. I. Weemkiy. V. I. Chuylwv, Generele of the Arty
S. H. Shtenenko. P. 1. letov. Lieutenant General A. K. lluhey and
Other Pe-om Minter, Chiefe].

303

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
28.

29.

31.

32.

33.

3‘.

35.

£1.

‘2.

NR OWICIAI. USE ONLY

6. l. Garbus. D. I. Don. I. P. Smnov. ”Hotostralkovyy Datal'on v
Doyu" [Motorized Rifle Batta1ion in Conant]. Moscov. Voyonixdat. 1972.

A. K. Castsv. ”Ital: Nado Rabotst'" [ﬂow It Is Necessary ‘Do Operate].
Moscow. ltd-v0 V153”. 1927.

D. H. Cvishiani. "Organiutsiya i Upravleniya" [Organization and Con-
trol]. Moscow. Hanks. 1970.

V. H. Clushhov. "Vvedsniya v Kibernetiku" [Introduction to cybernetics].
Kiev. ltd-w AH 0381!. 1966.

A. A.- odunov. ”Vvodaniya v ‘raoriyu Upravleniya" [Introduction to Con-
trol Theory]. Moscow. none-1h. 1967.

S. V. Criahin. P. A. Zhuluw. Sh. I. Kitoshvili. "‘raktika (Po lnoatrannyn

stlyadn)" [Tactics (With Respect to Voraisn View”. Moscow. Voyenic-
dat. 1972.

0. A. Dayneho. mctodologichsskiya Problem Naukhi Upravleniya Prola-
vodstvos” [Procedural Problels of the Science of Production Control].
Moscow. Hanks. 1970.

0. A. Deyneko. "Nauka Upravleniya v $88!!" [ﬁne Science of Control in the
USSR]. Noacov. lkonosilta. 1967.

V. V. Druchlnin, D. 8. Rontorov. "ldaya. Alaoritn. Resheniye (Prin-
yatiye lashaniy i Avtosatisatsiya)" (Idea. Algorithn. Solution (Deci-
sion ﬂaking and Auto-ationn. noscov. Voyenixdat. 1972.

H. V. Zakharov. "0 Nauchnos Podihode It Pukovodstvu Voyskani" [Scienti-
fic Approach to hoop Control]. noscov. Voyenisdat. 1967.

1. G. Zav'yalov. ”Shorost'. Vreqa i Proatranstvo v Sam-annoy Voyne"
[Speed. “rise and Space in Modern Warfare]. Hoacov. Voyenizdat. 196$.

Ya. Zalensvskiy. ”Orsmizauiya nudovylnh Kollaktivov" [Organization of
Labor Collectives]. kanslated fro- the Polish, Moscow. Prone“. 1971.

V. D. Zelenakiy. A. A. Chistov. G. S. Gnulkov. ”Dakhnicheskoye awes-
pecheniye Tankovykh i Hotostrelkovylxh Podraxdeleniy v Sovrenenno- Doyu”
[Technical Support of Tank and Motorized Rifle Subunits in Modern
Codiat]. Moscow. Voyenizdat. 1972.

N. A. zunkov. D. A. Ivsnov. "Reeheniye Ionandira na Boy” [‘me Coda:
Decision of the Co-ander]. Moscow. Voycnlxdat. 196‘.

D. A. lvanov. P. V. Shenanskiy. V. G. Yanov. "Upravleniya Voysk-i v
Doyu" [Troop Control in Codtst]. Koscw. Voycnizdot. 1966.

”6

FOR OFFICIAL 05! Mi
‘3.

lab.

45.

66.

67.

68.

‘90

50.

51.

52.

53.

5‘.

SS.

56.

57.

FOR OFFICIAL [[88 ONLY

3. P. lvanov. "0 Nauchnykh Oanovakh Upravleniya Voyokani" [Scientific
Principlea of Troop Control], Hoacov, Voyenlzdat. 1975.

S. K. Il'in. "Koral'nyy Faktor v Sovrenennoy Voyne" [ﬂoral Factor in
Modern uarfare]. Hoecov. Voyanirdat. 1969.

"letoriya Voyennogo ukuaetva" [Iliotory of Military Art], General 8di-
tor A. A. Strokov. Hoecov. Voyonizdet. 1966.

8. Ya. Kauaitecr. "Oonovy Upravlaniya Pro-yehlennyn Proizvodetvol"
[Fonda-ontale of Control of Industrial Production]. Moscow. Hyel', 1971.

A. N. Kechalina. "Neuchnaya Organizatoiya Upravlencheekogo Trude—
Orgproyoktirovaniye" [Scientific Organization of Adniniatrative labor-
Organization of Planning and Daeign]. Moocov. nononika. 1971.

P. H. Kerzhentuv, "Bor'ba za Vrenya" [‘lhe Battle for Tine]. Hoecov,
Intononilta. 1965.

Ya. Ya. Kriehin. “0 Nauchnoy Organizataii Voinokogo l‘ruda" [Scientific
Organization of Military Labor]. Hoacov, Voyenizdat. 1970.

Yu. H. Kozlov. "Upravleniya Narodnyn monayatvo- 888R" [Adulnietration
of the National keno-y of the 0881]. Hoecov. Izdwo MG", 1971.

0. V. Kozlova. N. N. tumoteov, "Muchnyye Oenovy Upravlaniya Proiz-
vodetvol” [Scientific Pundaeentala of Production Control], Hoecov.
Energetika, 1970.

V. K. Konoplev. "Nanchnoye Predvideniye v Voyennon Dela" [Scientific
Prediction in Military Affaire]. Hoacov, Voyenizdat. 1976.

N. Kouplend, "Paikhologiya i Soldat" [Peychology and the Soldier].
Hoacov, Voyenizdat. 1958.

"Kare Dlya Vyaehego Upravlenchcakogo Pcroonala" [Couree for Higher
Mninietrative Peraonnel]. Abridged tranelation fro- thc bglieh,
Moscow. Ronni“. 1971.

”beninekiye Printaipy Khozyaye tvovnniya i lkh Mrcheekoye Razvitiye"
[uniniet Principles of ngeunt and Their Creative Development].
General Editor A. H. Charm. Noacov. Hyel'. 1971.

a. P. Loom. ”Clulovek v Siotenakh Upravlaniya" [Men in Control Sys-
tem], :loeoov. Zneniya. 1967.

“ﬂateutika v Doyu" [Hathelatice in Octet]. Collection of articlee.
Moscow. Voyenizdat. 1965.

305

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
38.

$9.

61.

62.
63.

66.
6s.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70 .

71.

"Hetodoloaicheokiye Probleny Voyennoy 'reorii i Praktiki" [Procedural
Problem of Military meory and Practice], Hoecov. Voyenisdet. 1969.

V. Hikheyev. "Soteial'no-Paikhologicheekiye Aepekty Upravlenniya"

[Social-hydrological Mpente of Control]. Hoecov. Holodaye Gvardiya.
197$.

”Nauthnaye Organiutaiya Uprevlencheekoso Trude" [Scientific Organisation
of M-inietrative Labor]. Praneleted fro- du Czech. Hoacov. Prosteee.
1960.

"Naudmo-‘rekhnichoekiy Progreae i Revolouiya v Voyennon Dole" [Scien-
tific and 'Dechnical Progreee and Revolution in Kilitary Affaire], General
Editor H. N. Galkin. lioeoov. Voyulixdat. 1973.

s. A. Neurtroyev. “Put' k Reykheta;u"[Path to the Reidaetas], Hoecov.
Voyenitdat, 1961.

”Organizateiya i Upravleone (Voproey l'eorii i Praktiki)" [Druniution
end Control (The Problem of meory and Practice”. Hoecov. ﬂuke. 1968.

"(know Nauchnoy Organizatoii Trude” [Pmdnentala of the Scientific

Organization of Labor]. Moral Editor Yu. N. Drbrovekiy, Hoecov,
mono-in. 1971.

P. H. Petruo', P. V. She-nekiy. N. K. Chul'ekiy. ”Yadernoye Opurhiye
i Razvitiye Taktiki" [Nuclear Veapone and the Develop-ant of notice).
Hoecov. Voyenitdat. 1967.

L. A. Petruehenko. "Printeip (bratnoy Swazi" [Feedback Principle].
Hoecou, Hyel'. 1967.

V. Ya. Plyaekin. l. P. Lyedthin. V. A. Ruvinekiy. "Inzhenernoye (beepe-
cheniye (behehevoyakovogo Boye" [Busineeriu Support of Mined-Ar-
Codat], Hoecou. Voyenixdat. 1972.

N. u. Popol‘. V. P. Sevel'yev. P. V. She-enekiy, ”Upravleniye Voyeka-i
v Cody Velikoy Otecheatvennoy Voyoy" [troop Control During Vorld Her
ll]. Hoaca. Voyeniadat. 197‘.

6. Nu. Popov. "Probleq ‘l‘eorii Upravleniye" [Probleo of Control theory].
ercou. mono-in. 197‘.

A. V. Prokov'yev. ”Sredetva Hekheniaateii i Mtonetiaeteii v attabekh"

[Hecheniution and Automation Keane in lleadquerterol. ”new. Voyenit-
det. 1976.

”50 let Voorurnennykh i sssn"[sou. Annivereary of the Arned Porcea of
the USSR]. Hoecov. Voyenixdet. 1968.

306

FOR OFFICIAL US! OMJ
72.

73.

76.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

81.

82.

83.

V. D. Ryabchuk. V. l. Kovolev, "Peikhologiyn Roohoniye Konandirn"
[Peycholosy of the Conandero' Decieion], Hoacov. Voyonizdnt. 1976.

V. Ye. savkip. "Oonovnyyo Printeipy Operativnogo lekunotva i Taktiki"
[Pmdanental Principle of Operational Art and Tactice]. Moscow.
Voyenixdat. 1972.

P. 6. stochko. V. H. Kulikov. 0. ‘1‘. Volkov. "Upravleniye Voyekani I
Ponoehch'yu Sotevykh Hatodov" [hoop Count! and Control veins Plll'i‘
Nethode], Noecou. Voyeniedat. 1976.

H. P. skirdo. "Narod. Arliyn. Polkovodete" (People, Any. Military Con-
under]. Hoecov. Voyenirdat. 1970.

V. D. Singer“. K. 0. Ddaravin, "Neuka Uprevleniyo i Plot" [Science of
Co-and and Control and the Pleet]. Hoecov. Voyanizdet. 1972.

"Soldat i Voyna. Prohle-y Noral'no-Politicheekoy i Peikhologicheakoy
Podgotovki Sovetekikh Vonnov" [Soldier and Her. Problem of ﬂoral-
Political no Psychological Training of Soviet ‘rroopel. ulna by A. s.
Zheltov. Hoecov, Voyeniadat. 1971.

A. G. Sorokovoy. "Soteial'no-Peildtologiaeekiye Oenovy Rukhovodatva”
[Social-Peycholosical Principles of (Do-m6]. Hoecov. nonodka. 1971.

Yo. Staroa'toyak. ”me-enty hauki Uprevleniya" [lleeenta of the Science
of Control). 'rranalated iron the Polieh. Hoetov. Progreee, 1965.

N. Stein”. N. Yakhiel, 8. wachemov. "Upravleniye. Hodelirovaniye.
Prognorirovniye" [Mninietration. Simation. Porecaeting], ‘l'ranelated
fro- the Bulgarian. Hoocov. Monika. 1972.

”Taktika v Boyevylth Preeerehh” [notice in Coabat bra-91“]. General
uitor A. 1. Radriyenkiy. Voyenizdat. 1976 (reginent), 1976 (divieion).

"Taktika" [Tactice]. General Editor! 1 G. Rornichenko, Hoecov, Voyeniz-
dat. 1966.

V. I. ‘l‘ercehchenko. ”Orcenireteiye i Upravleniye (OPY‘l' $81M)" [Organi-
zation and Control (hporience of the United Stated]. Hoecov. Phono-
l‘kU. 1965e

"‘l‘ekhnike Ilpravleniya" [Control technique and Equip-tut], uited by
0. III. Popov. Hoocov. led-we mu. 1968.

Yu. A. Tithe-iron ”Upravlendleokoye leeheniye” [Adninietrative Deci-
nionl. noeoov. llauka. 1972.

”Uprevleniye Soteialieticheeki- Proizvodetvon" [Control of Socioliet
Production]. ﬂoecov, Monika. 1975.

307

FOR OWICIM. US! ONLY
67.

FOR ONIOML "SE 081.?

v. N. Podotov. "Motod Opttntutou Potokov Informant: v Uprovlonu

Ptouvodotvon“ [ﬂoured of conﬁning Infomtton How. and Production
Control]. ﬂoocov, atone-1n. 1970.

Yo. A. Rho-onto. ”1031“" [logic]. Hoocov. Voyonudot. 1971.

A. P. Shruohonko. "Voprooy Pukholosu v Upravloau Voyokon” [Prob-
lem of PoychoIog 1n Troop Control]. Macaw. Voyonizdot. 1973.

308

M ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”$3 ONLY

sumac: ml!

Autoution of the proceee oi sethering end proceeoins eituetion dete 115,
116. 199-201

Autonetion of the perioreence of tecticel celculetione 2M-252
Auto-eted troop control eyetee 112-117

Ooebet reedineee of the troope 32-33

Coebet reedineee of the troop control eyote. 52-53
Codet nieeion 212, 213

(Joint report 191.499

Coin: ordere 233. 28‘. 287

Codut ordere 279-283

Codetin; redio electronic devicee 31-1-316

lnterection of the troopex

«Bounce 45, 213-215

«Methode of organiution 290-298

«Support 298-300

--Reotoretion 300-302

Reetoretion of the dierupted troop control 120-132
moroccteorologicel eupport of the octet operetione 317-310
Situetion dete 37. 38, 179-199

Conveying the codtet lieeione to the troope ‘5. 276-209
ale-Ill co-eod “5-10

Journel of coﬁet operetiono 36e-365

Intention of the codot operetione 210-212

Detene eutnet nucleer veepone 308. $9

309

m OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Study of the coder experience of the troope!
«Significance 358. 359

--0rgenieetion 359. 366

Reporting 367-370

mgineering euppott of the coﬂet operetione 310-312
Intuitive-heurietic eethode of decieion melting 263
Inter-etion of etete 16

Sue-ery reporting 366

Gone“ intoreetion 19

Count! poet 120. 121

Comdmt'e eervice 320-326

Monitoring of the reedineee end operetione of troope:
-Hieeione 60. 366-350

--0rgeniution 351-356

“Hethode of reelicetion 356-357

Criteria end the induxee for eetieeting troop control effectiveneee 35. 36.
62. 250. 251

bogicel nethode need for codaet decieion eeking 236-263
Ceeouflege 312, 313

Hetheeeticel nethode need during coﬁet decieion Iehiog 266-252
hethc-eticel eiauletion of the codnt operetione of troope 267-252
Codet decieion eeking procedure:

“Bounce 217. 216

«Require-onto 218-222

—Content of the procedure 220-252

Morel fector in codet:

allole 327-332

-Pethe of (oration 332-365

Support of cadet operetione of the troope:

«Gee! 65, 66. 303

—1ypee 66. 303

-0rgmiution ad iepleeentetion 306-326

Orgmitetion of the work of control mite 160-175. 250-256

310

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
Organization of couunicetione 132-139
Ora-iiution oi troop control 60. 122-175. 252-256
Troop control unitn:

«Require-ante 67-72

«Structure 72-35

«Coronation end deeione 72-65

Salary nap 365. 366

Security 309-312

Evaluation of the eituation 323. 226-237

Perellel nethod of plennin; codnt operatione 256. 270-275
Planning of coebet operatione:

“Beeence 63. 66

«Content 66. 256-269

-Hethode 269-275

Preparation of troope for cadet 67. 60

Support of troop interaction 296-302

Political work vith nilitary pereonnel 66. 67. 332-365
Succeeeive nethod of planning coﬁat operatione 269. 270
Prelininery cadet deployment 271. 276

Troop control principlee:

“Party neture 162. 163

-8cicnti£ic nature 163. 166.

«Prediction 166. 165

“ale-In co-and 165-167

-ccntre1iretion 167-150

‘l‘roop control pointe:

Acquireunte on the pointe 110. 119

--8yeten and conpoeition 119-122

«Placennt 122-125

name-eat 125-120

«leetoration 126-132

ﬂeane of inrovins troop control 66. 65. 371-376
Co-ander'e ooﬂet decieion:

-leecnce 39
111
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

naequirenente 1:0. 61

«Content 202-217

--Decieion "kins procedure 217-276

Gethering end proceeeins eituetion dete:
-81tueticn ole-onto 30. 176

--Dete content 176-100

«Require-elite on the dete 180-1“

--8ourcee for obteinins the dete 185-185
«Redietion eourcce 1843-107

unethcde of ohteinin; dete 187-191

«Proceeeina end reporting 191-199

Putt cherte for the operetion of control unite 161-175
Col-unicetione eyetee 133

Troop control eyeten 12-16. 26-32

Troop control theory:

“abject end eubject or inveetigetion 374. 375
"Content 375-378

Technicel neene of troop control:

“Nrpoee 86

“Require-onto 86. 87

«Clueificetion 86

--Co-micetione nedie 67-52

«Hem of ohteinin; intonation 92-95

“-lhene of proceeein; infomtion ad pertor-ing celculetione 95-103
«Mom of docuuntetion 103-109

--ﬁeedquertere co-end eechinee 109-112

“Home of eutoeeting the control proceee 112-117
1bpogeodetic eupport of coder operetione 316, 317
Require-onto on troop control:

“time” 53. 56

~P1exibility 5‘

«Continuity 50. 55

-8ecrccy 55

-Operetione1 efficiency 55-57

312
m onrcm. us; out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Roar support of mint operations 318-320
Instructions of the common with roapect to troop interaction 65. 293-297
Troop control:

«Goal. 32-36

--¢ontent and oaaonca 36-51
«acquire-onto 51-58

Explmotion of codat niuion 220, 225
Troop control functions 16. 17. 36-51
Characteriatic upecta of troop control:
utdeological-political 58. S9
”Moral-psychological 59. 60
"Social-lasal 60-62
“Organizational-procedural 62, 63
«Military-technical 63-66

Goals of coabat troop control 32-36
Combat control center 256

Centralization of control 147-150
lleadquartara—troop control unit 78-82
lleadqunrtera culture 85

Bquipnant of the officer 109

Situation elucnto 38, 176-180

Decision elenente 202-217

mounts of troop control oyster 12. 16, 26-32
Control effectiveness 35, 36, 62, 250, 251

COPYRIGHT: Voyeniadnt . 1977

10865
(30: 1801 an)

313

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040016-9

END OF
FICHE
DATE FILN

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040016-9