APPROVID FOR R-L-A-I: ZOOVIOZIOO: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOCOROOO“000.001I-O
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050015-9

FOR OFFILIAL USE UILY

spas L/e444
7 May 1979

TRANSLAIIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(F000 19/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00050015-9
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poll-
eies. views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLIMTION BE RESTRICTED POROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
roa orrzcm use cum:

spas wow
7 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(2000 19/79)

Comeurs
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Arab Energy Strategy Launched -
(m "Inm EAST, ‘w 79) 000000000000000000000000000000

Edward Sa'id, Palestine National Council Heather, Interviewed
(Edward Sa'id Interview; nu: ram am, Apr 79)

3011’?

Suppression of Political Parties Becalates
(AL-HAT»! AL-MRABI, 9-15 Feb 79) ......................

Reasons for Deportation of Economic Unity Council

Secretary Analysed
(‘1'me ‘IP'MI’ 16.22 Feb 79) 00.000000000000000...

Nev Elite merging in Business World
(warm AIP'AMI, 16.22 Feb 79) 00000000000000.000000

Briefs
0.8. Aid to Media

KNIT

Crown Prince Bmphaaixaa Regional Security in Interview
(Sud al-Abdullan a1-8abah Interview; THE MIDDLE

WT, Apr 79) .0000.0000.00.00.00000000000000000000.000.

LIBYA

Qadhdhafi'e Support of Kurds Causes S sa
(AIPHATAN AL-‘MI, 9.15 "a, 79 0000000000000000000000
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

commas (Continued) Page
SUDAN

Suspected Reuben of Be'eth Party Arrested
(‘1'me AIP'MI, 16-22 F“ 79) 000.000.000.000... 2?

UNITED ARAB MATES

UAB Unity Efforts Growing
(”in mm m, Apr 79) .00.00..0...00.0.00..00..00 29

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

ARAB ENERGY STRATEGY LAUNCHED
London 1102 MIDDLE FAST in English Apr 79 pp 100,102

[Text]

The First Arab Energy Conference. held in Abu Dhahi in March. ended with

a call for a pan-Arab energy

committee to co-ordinate energy development

(or the beneﬁt 0! both olhexporting and oil-importing states. But many
topics were discussed at the conlerence without getting a mention in the
resolutions. Naomi Sakr sent this report from Abu Dhahi.

 

tipuiresmen tor the developing
enuntries tly point out

that they a coordinating
irratitutlun eqrn'valent to the
Omani-Mich ice Economic Co~
opt-rather and Development
which represents 2‘ countries oi
the industrialised world. Not
only is there no developing-
cnumry equivalent to the 0900
itrcli. but there 5 none either tor
the vnrims agencies which have
apnattcd from it - notably the
lntemetimal Energy Agency
ill-2M. which sprang up on a US
initinJve in the wake oi the
three oil price incm and the
Arch nil embargoo! 19733".
l'ive year! ago. perhaps. the
«ml (or rm IRA (or the develop
ing countries tree not
immediately obvious. The con-
n-rts c-l energy coneervation and
«warren-y nil-chaﬁng seemed to
haw little relevance for non-
itttIu-ln'rtlirtttl countries till!
err-tr either nil exrneters or nae
nruuu-nr-ienergyon a very small

arulr‘

'l'le-v outside the [EA
rem-reel it. being called “lube
rlrtueml" “In it clearly

representedcnlytheintereeteci
thehlggsst and richestenergy
ccrvsurnere. but they appeared
tobe taking Iittleor nojoint
sctiontosetupaneiternative
“international” agencycftheir

own.

The ﬁrst Arab Energy
Coniem. held in Mrs Dhabi
from i to 8 March. may thus
have come as something at a
surprise to observers inside and
outside the Arab world. The
mien-nee svas admittedly not
intematicnal in the full sense.
but in bringing together a group
of oil-importing. self-eminent
and oil-exporting countries it
did mascot a sipiticantstep
energy cooperation outside the
industrialised world. And. in
recommending the establish-
ment of a n-Arah energy
owncil. link to both the Arab
Fund lot Mimic and Social
Deveiwment (AFESD) and the
Organistion of Arab Petroleum
EIpnrting Countries (Oepecl. it
at» event some way towards in~
etitutioneiiaing that co-
operation.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Althmehthe ideecfthaoon.
ierrncevasﬁretoonceivedaten
Oapec meeting in 1973. itsevew
tual timing could hardly have'
been more appropriate. indeed.
the turmoil raging in the world
oil market with the resumption
of Iranian oil exports on new
terms alter a 10-week

hardship on the pa
pooreatnon-oil Arab states: But
least the extreme
circumstances todrsv
a large attendance and highlight
the importance of the subject
beingdiscuseed.

Algeria might raise its price by
new from 1 April. Thiswas in
addition to increased premiums
surcharges already_ an.
with tha oil . nita Inn
[toning attalnad. with
taunting that“: that thay

Egyptian-Inuit we may
that would activata tha
naolutiooa Int-tin: to the
boycott of Bout taken at the
Nmmbew anmmit
mattincin .

The mic and political
Waﬂactingtha Ant: mid
gaming tha “at two min f

are wan Wont y
mi and thia tact no doubt
contn'buted to attracting to
many mini-tan and my oil
omcinlamAbuhguhahi.ﬂno:::
«mph-noun a m- ova:
t‘mrandahaldayamtheoil
:Iinhtan «1.33:1. Arabia.

mm m.

Bot. dupita t» annual
chum-lane“. day-today
attain wan nut allowed to
dominate the talks. Oapac and
mm) had balm-en them
managed to man this by
ptapadn‘ m {um Imaufenn-
fetrnca dummtntim dealing

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with tha fundmm-nlnl mm a!
a long-tam AM: «my
atutqy and it was that Itin-
damcntala which male tha oun-
(mnea what it w.

Hat and (outta—t. then. the
confmm m not A (mum ‘ut’
dimming (uncut oil 96m.
M“ “i. “Mom "

to an
myativa and Mannie- in
Abu Dhahi m wail am that
One: mid-ten mild he

matadaiminﬂotanoilpdca
°'- '73.; ”M.”
m m: . m
M m not my wall
waived.

On tha whoia. Mm.
pticinx did not pnm to ha a
autumnal in» tho
Nah atata mm

‘ a mad to ha
aum up in a paw
omntad by the Unind
Natiuna Economic Communion
{a Wm Asia (ECWA)

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which mud that. ainca tho tn-
?‘ently {mast oil 0!
t

predictablynadytaapmaa
dalagataa tapraaanting
Mauritania. Somalia. Judas-I.
tin‘lemnaandm.
Sudan» Enemy Miniatav
Shut! al-‘l‘ohatni continued to
The Middle East
had ham to aavaniy hit by
rising oil pdcaa that it Iraa
having to dim mim- hind:
away from davalopnwnt to
paying oil hilb. Tho Islamic
ant Banknmhalpin.
Sudantopayfotthamnluaad
trolaum pmducta fmn
waihhanid.
E

2%?
'35
$2..

%

5
3
3

3:5?
8 2'3

52

3;
g
?
3
g:

-3

5g?
. gig.
i

5%:
‘3
5%

need in whim“!
One Synon delegate
hinted ptivatoly that this die.
mpancy could vellhavo boeno
deliberate move on the put of
theUScomponleo.

No one quatimed on this
topic telt tho ohotoclo to be

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pottku lonnldoble. oinco
Saudi he io in need of con.
oidotohlo odditionol upocity.
lg. rural an». and
deﬁned to co-
otdlnote with other ototea. But
it ooemo to hove been decided
that tho todmical oopocto of
each a pmjoet undead it un-
ouitohlo lot immediate cone
oldototion. and the own"! did
not feature in tho n-nt‘huiono
ouhmittodatthoond.

5. it I. . the» tun-
lotonoe ' embodied
in o 10- go document
dmlotod the anal
ooooion on 8 Match. could all
have boon written month
We tho mnl’oemeo was even
convened.

AM a ptoamblo in which
attention is drawn tothe need to
monitot [EA policieo and. ot the
some time. to document and
rotionolioe enemy mummbﬂ
in tho Arab world. the
“which; note-lent" one-on
to recommend tho ootahlioh-
ment of an ”hutitutionol
{remnant ot the national and
pan-Anblovelo".

At the notional level this
would moan oottin‘ up. or

central enemy
committooo In oo'e‘h Anb
may. ehaqed wit arm
in: mm and develop-
toentdenevgyhomollm

At the pamArob love? tho
noommendotion h be I 503'“
Mb Enemy Committee. oom-
paed of o mow!
upteoentativo p of 0W
goeialioto finonced by

opee end the AMD. which
M oootdinoto ond ptumote
noearch and peepore for futon
Arab Enemy Conferences.
Theoe ooni’otonoeo on in M0
piece every them with the
next one to he held in I cite.
QoanManh 1902.

' “no drahing' of ouch blond
recommendation cleorly did
not mute the mil-W

3

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

participation of oomo 300
deleeoteo Ind (noon or the tub-
miosion o! 24 ocholuiy popete.
in addition to countryw-
oountry mitts.
indeed. thooe who did not
attend the conlennco and who
have only the concluding otnte-
ment to judge (I. by may even
alt thelttnelm why the event
not held at ell. Fortunately tot
these people the ocodemic «in.
ttibutiom. covering evetythinu
{tom international energy
policies and thelt impact on
Arab ototeo to tho lifeapon of
Nab oil rooetvoe and tho
“oocinl ooot" of oil revenues.
will bewhlinlted by Oopoc.
in the meantime. it eon only
ho pointed out that when
in-

Itmmarioe tho multin 10mm

«mow-Pl-

' method 1.! condom
thonoetimmithalmatolldir
ctniontoldncploeolnhilloon-
(m nthot than it
opoclaliood whim
oomedoomoﬁuoteation among
thooe who tolt that
pattieulor problomomboing
into-ed

“lt‘o an Nob conference in

polite; policy mutton and
the intellectuals imply wanted

mt: ”“ "w” °"“°"
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP02-00850R000100050015-9

‘ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2:”

EE
8
E
a
3

ﬁg
Eﬁaﬁﬁ
gggiéis'
Eéﬁéaéé

a; >
5 r g
Q?

£33:
@532.—

i
i
‘5
5‘
i
3
=0-
5

E
E7
5?

COPYRIGiT: 1979 IC MAGAZINES LTD.

050: 10002

h

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000100080015-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

WARD SA'ID, PALESTINE NATIONAL COUNCIL MEMBER. INTERVIEHED
London Til! RIDDLE EAST in English Apr 79 pp 65-68

[Interview with Edward Ss'id. Palestine National Council nenbcr and Colum-
bia University professor, by Mark Bruzonsity, date and place not given]

[Text] "Are we a national independence novenent or are we a national
liberation movement?" Colt-bis University Professor and Palestine
National Council nenber Edward ll. Said asked in this candid discussion
with Fort-t Editor tiarit Bruzonsky. "We're at the juncture where we have

to unite a decision." Said was born in Jerusalem. raised in Egypt, and
educated in the United States. lie is one of four American academics of
Palestinian origin whose nanes cropped up last year as possible repre-
sentatives of the Palestinians who would be acceptable to the United
States. ilis new book "Orientalistn" is being widely discussed in intellec-
tual circles. (THE MIDDLE EAST Books Section features a review of

"Orientalisn" next month.)

Brmonsky: Were there any signiﬁcant needed 5 a very clear enmdation d s
decisions at the recent Damascus PNC Palestinian political process amid nhldt
meeting? Whydidn't you go? people can ovganiss and melt and
Soidriwasillbmlioliowedthenpoeu- significantndvmcanbemada.
bealmMWhatcamsmoinotewaathe Ohimh'meneedseleampwamnn
ptogramnie at national mity that was tor poem toward pesos - forthright
adopted. l‘tn not sure that PNCs on when statements at s inn-stale solution and some
matdewiopmentsandecidsd. built-sum a! hon- this might come about.
0 There were many expectations and W ohm lit. "anned m
tallt of s government-trestle before the 'eovttlnuim the struggle“ and aofortb ‘
meetlnt. www.mmnmam
o It was mot! an internal meeting and admthepnliticalmiomadvaw
didn‘t strike me as one o! the more ln- ugedsvntlwnwldinwhiehninsput-
“mating ones. I think the I?" and 1m Campba‘id meld.

{Maillot m m OWN- 0" h. 0* D An you suggesting the Palestinian
input-ion that then hasn't been much movement ought to discuss how two
advent m Palestine» politic- am Can? states can toot-slat in Palestine with tho
Dated. ideoloeirai struggle and the struggle
D ldeolsgiealiyyouotean? over historical interpretation continu-
O In all ways. A lot 0! people say that the ing. but the violent. the military.
Buhdad nunntlt no medal It was unpm struggle ending?
tantasaiouuuni’aintet-Arsbdiaeussions. oPmiyttatJ'unnottalldngsbouta

But l'wieltsinceSeptsntbssthatwhatls

5
FOR orrtcua. use ONLY
mul-
not the whdpol momma» at tho
mum Nowmhlthtinpolluulpxo.
woman? I daﬂhovo a: mu.
l'molmplyulklnubouuhonndtoopm
umhdoboulnunl’lluunloncom-
munity. Thou“. a lot of Wm db-
moutwonudtoulhwtheUSJon-
fummdummbdomhlm
to uuSyﬁmoﬂombodx.
mothhdobduouhplminfmm
girtwnlmohht‘mbkladmthhum
-M HIM
llh “00.me
and that tho whole thing balm
mtdmooomobodycommilmtlt
to be embodied h Palatiniun pollual
activity.
0 An m Indlmtly cmlclolu
mar. ludonhlp at tho PLO?
o No. no. I think that In tho m
dream 110'. on only palm who

i”

mldloodanIDJlobuuﬁ'unm
mmP.h-cwm'mm.m
lthlnkthothonovooobthoou o!

umllhmyullwho
autumn”

E
i
g

8
Polo-(lulu mu could be In tho I.-
hodymﬂgmhdumd
O .
ththodeoW
mmtmbhmhwd
whim-mum.“
Dmmmhvobdohtolﬂthe

Conn Halal-Inac- know you’ll
urn-pt 242 with renew-ﬂout.
0 But that's not My the way w.

pmdve It. Tlm'u windy who! I'm win

5

6

to 0y. I! we
what alum
am no all
oped“: Map
blown.
0 So. buck
Jordan and
than mom?
0 Ceminfy
Arab «mm
ndoﬂnillon
Sandi MN:
tho om“.
My 1:
am all a! o
2.116“.me
0 But It"
quantum of
ohoukl be?
0 Well. I m:
jut will! 0‘.
on. Ida"! ll
we 3 muco-
nolioml lib:
my m‘n eh
m
1:
win and t
end. And I v
lhll‘l tn norm
0 Mo” 9!
howe- unl
pmldmﬂo
0 We“. I'm
Cam's "I
kind of (In!
deﬁned by I}
0 Do you
m be I
mom"
0 Well. no.
uu)‘. iwinl
mtunhu
D And you‘
than Sula
Manhunt
0 YO. o! «I
eventually I
and that oar
«10an
D What ‘1
(he Polnll
Indouhlp
novemnl'
nowmm'
and to l‘
foo on Mel

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
33:. IRIS... 323.28. 3 .3. 3:5.
55.3083. sansfioBEoP—BJ
82 2.58.5 F 0935..

O 5:. 82 on Zoo—«Fa «3: 37:3-
1? :3 730—... :5. 3.... «2. 38—3
2.2! 1:. >583»
O?3r§}ug§§3£§
g 3-K:- g 8 :8 35. 8:.
8.885.. .5;- r..&: E33... no... F...
B:— p g .86.

o I 6—- N1. Carin-=2 - not 339.
.3 z... .232... .832. 3.1 3i.
:5. 2.33:7:2. 1:. .32..- 8::
.56 co noun—v? £55.: :8 ion-3r?
o :32. 5.: 3.35:... .8. 9: 53.:
r 22. a :3 via—5 82:8. 3:! 3
£=.=_7~2&Y.n_§=§389¢
38.3.6. 2.! 3.78.1.3 San-Ex.
9: - $5.3 :3 8 .3 HR.» «833??»
wouldfocoatho
whohsvo for
summons-s-
mlvoslmoitti-
actinlmssu
slthsoDaysn
atslalbslhou.
D mob noon

7?;me
polltloallyloto

nmolacloallya
\dssndvhoso

for tho tlno-
tluo polltloal
to ouunlu a
an mll

m.
lsosLWshaﬂvo
soon
mm
mindsﬁnltoly.
mum-ans
s lam cone
to tho ﬁlial.
liooal rights in
adoptomaolvsl

tho autoonoty
rcottnclllt oct
II at for UN

once.
cltlun. and l
r so clooel: as
lost. him?
natamsnts m
nssl. But what

immmntimspesbylathototol
blankwlnntlnl’tlootlnlsmanomosnnd.
ammwmungdmatinanshotrsctm
muposco justice. utanyun-
WuhtlnAdminiomtioothotth
Pslaatinism an s [\mctlonln‘. polltloal
socnty with this hlototy. cultun. and
D Dou'tywthlnkthlslsnoroS-dat‘o
lanltthanCamr‘o‘l
oldm'thnow.Sodot acortsln
Molthhm.whichbtosommodoto
what soouutobethsAmu-lcsnpemptlon
olththrdho'swilllngtoplayllosmln
hltmhtuastsmlththhvisw.
Sgyluit'sSodat'o foultlstoosllnplth's
Woo-operatic: bctmthomln
vhatsoenlamutualluatlsloctuy
thhp. But it ls totatlyout «touch with
reality as la obvious to won I dstached
ohm-var.
D Bat you aorllos lnpllod thot yoo‘to

stlll hopshl obotlt Carlos.
0 Well. I'm optimistic in the acne thstl
bellow in the cod common sen-I pmsila
Certainly it nuns to ma that. given what's
happened in Iran and what's howl-min;
throughout the Arab world and Mo.
arrangements when w rely upon mlm who
seem to give sstlafaction will chemo.
O Smotlmoo you speak so so
Amorlcao sud sometimes so 0
Pslaotlnlss.
0 I‘m both.
0 There's o school of thought «Mei
soos Palootlnlsn laterals lloltetl up to
80“.! llllmﬂl.
0 look. [can't speak fotothul’aleatinlam.
lust lot people llks myaol. I new up
mlillly In the Wat. And theu's no
question that Woolly and cultmslly ow
tie. to mote intlmste. most strongly linked
with tho Want.
0 And polltlully ond eoonolnlcally?
oWdLlotmo-andlmjustlotm-
those an abductions. I can Wald
Hoeloldndofsympothy withtholaﬂ.lmn-
sidetmyscllo monol'thelelljuthatdoea
not moo-arily mesns Bolslmisn for ma.
lhavoyottosecoootisfocta'yuuulstion
ol‘ Buopoan Manism into Arab ot ‘l‘ltild
World term. That bait can. about yet.
That! lo no successful Maniotnmniutm.
11m! hovo been Attempts - , valiont.
hunk stunt the Egptlan Communist
may and so - but . . .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'11:: E.- ‘u :I FEE-i

935. 3 c 3.83:2: Bx. >3...
22.5.
r8368 Saffron-$481.80

3!.— 5358 Fun-2.. as 2:... 39.3 8 9.
.23 39.3.5; :5 a! 23:0 05...: r o
.3! 1 grits—389.1».- 53:3 5 -
3.8.2:. 3: Er... p.85 9. £8. 3t.
:2... I. . 3. 805833 8 c. .323.
£8! :59 93.8...

...- u§§=S=< 83.x :5: we...

33::- ai§-?8§§u35
ans—39:58:... =§xl~383~
93.1.7.3. 35.8...
D we. to can. to: - Fan :3 0:...
82.... 33... = so. .853 8 E...
o. 3. on? tags. :5 3.55 r... n.
t... 3.55% .- E. v.25.

xi:
COPYRIGIIT:

CSO:

uipwaautnouneodlioitoumiooondaooet
otooothinotimoiodmirotionanddioguatat
thothoatrlcalqualityotthogoottuo.
lahoioitthathodldn'tloallyhtownhat
howudohwiiodhootudiodwioundout

ohltntotoahout nandahoutthe
political arena which woo ontoting ho
wouldn‘t havodoneit.

D Ceauoeocu told him Begin orao a
toaoonahlo man. .

o in that the way a head olatato hehavea‘.’
I-lo ohouid have tried to undontand in mote
detail that ho woo dealing with.

0 Do you thinlt that in two oc three
montho we could Ind Sadat changing
ooutoe again?

0 Totally. Iutything.

0 You haven't oald anything about
Bodat'o telatlonahin with Cotter.

oi don't undemnd that. i don't un-
denitand Cattet'o pemal niationohi with
anyhudy. That to ma ia a cyphet. not.
whatevetoioohoia.ianotaiool.i~iela
dealing with conatituenciea and not h a
pniiticol vacuum. The idea that the US to
politically and economically in a petition to
teatanaManhollPlonodthooealothat
SodotwanuaaitdidinEumnoattotWoold

We II. b haanityl But “at ohtiouly
wanted tohoat that.

DWhatdoyou ataltootthoSy-rian-
”:5"th in t? k dramatic
O to t. 'o a
ovont.Butwonaofg‘o:onwhotolt'ogning,
D Wouldn't tho Baudio ho aaaiouo
ahout a laotlng Syrian-Incl unity
which night aiao htlng Judah.
baboon and uayho a now Paleathlan
otato into ootno kind “federation?

0 PM ono point 0! view you and M
mute: no.1'ho m tho-e outntriea intoot
'ut otahility and tho apparatna o! got-arm
mentthohottotithfoethoSoudla.

0 lo tho Saudi ochlont with the US
ooeiouo?

0 Well. tho Soudio an inaioting that it la.
Cottohly that'o tho mango they've been
toy'htgtoptm.0ttthoothothandtho

1979 IC MAGAZINE LTD.

5802

10

Sandie need the U
hahly militarily.
minimum) in‘
not lying doo
ohovdng that tho
Jemletn and in l'
0 Why aten’t t
munity and ti
noopaoing lot it!
0 They don't kn
'i‘hoto ia no
academic 'utotituti
otitution in tho An
3%": itaelf moon
Title to what I n1
oodoua Palestinian
to teject 242. it tait
Conttal Council ti
But when they on
between the teiec
talteo nine houto. '
hoto.
You'lo dealing
political toality in
port of tho pohtica
lutowootnothingai
The Arab mid
market and they
conaumefiam. if )
doinit Coke and 1
you undentand Ar
0 But the Mob
haa variouo org:
tualo. Why am:
tho Jove an pro
0 We've ttying to
very divided poli-
tuunity with very
Moot Anho in this

in the liiooitheA
And above all.

functionally iliiu

an maul;
vet-y diatant itotn
US and they have
how the ootiet '
oociotiooﬁunt ‘

FOR OFFlle-L USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100060016-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUPPRESSION 0P POLITICAL PARTIES ESCALATBS
Parie AL-HATAN Ala-'AMBI in Arabic 9-15 Feb 79 pp 210-25

[Article: "Eecalating Suppreeeion on the Pretent of Strengthening
Democracy")

[Text] la it now the Hoelee Brotherhood'e turn? Thie in being eeked by
political obeervere in Cairo in view of the indicatione that Preeident
al-Sadat ie beginning to feel uneeay over the hoelea Brotherhood leadere'
reticence to endoree hie policiee publicly and in view of the anti-Camp
David eeraona being given in the noequee not under the control of the
Ministry of Religioue Truate. It in reported that Preeident el-Sadat haa
warned the Hoelee Brotherhood leadere that he will not etend for political
"duality" and haa reainded than that their political activity ia not
protected by an [irrevocable] licenae.

Thia developeent conee in the wake of a raid by Egyptian officiale on the
National Progreeeive Unity Party'e heedquartere on 18 January. in which the
party'e typewritere--end even the ditto eechine uaed for internal
coanunicatione-were confiecated. Political obeervero were eppreheneive
that thie etrong neaeure nigh: eoon lead to a freezing of the party'e
activitiee or to bringing ite caee before the Coenittee on Partiee in
preparation of dieeolving it.

Thie eecalation. aiaed at crippling the leftiet Egyptian party. raieee
queetione about the future fate of political developeente in Egypt. Obeervere
are convinced that no one. in or out of Egypt. can predict with certainty

that etebility will laet beyond 3 to 6 loathe. This aeeeeeeent ie baeed on
an analyeie of the eoet recent peet.

In the firat half of 1979. Egyptian political parties included:
the Egyptian Party. which held an abeolute eejority in the People'e Aeeenbly.
and which. in the words of ite chair-en. Heeduh Salim. looked up to Al-Sadat

ae ite epirituel {ether and leader. Thie party haa eepoueed the principle
of deeocratic eocialien and led the aoveeent toward internetionaliee;

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Socialist Liberal Party whose chairaan. hustafs Hured. was appointed
opposition leader by President al-Sadat;

The Coalition Party which. despite recent attacks against it. was preparing
to hold its first national convention in February of this year;

Al-Hafd Party. which was born with great difficulty and which represents
an alliance of Egypt's traditional political elesents--eleaents who favor
the new open econosic systen. aiddle-of-the-roaders. unions. and a variety

of eleaents loyal to the al-Hafd party since its inception following the
l9l9 revolution:

The National Front which. under the leadership of D. Mahmud Qadi and Hunter

Nasser. attelptsd to elect 20 representatives to the People's Assenbly in
order to gain legal recognition;

The Kuslea Brotherhood who ware "alaost" free to carry out their political

and social activities and to issue their own publications but were not
licensed legally.

In the second half of 1978. following the passage of the so-called National
unity Law. the political blueprint began to change perceptibly.

The Egyptian Party case under extreaaly heavy attack by the so-cslled
national newspapers. It was accused of inability to meet the challenge of
the opposition in the political arena. It was soon. and nelodraaatically.
put to rest. after having reigned as the "leading" or "pioneering" party.

It was replaced. as is well known. by the National Deaocrstic Party. when
this letter party case into being. it claiaed that it was a descendant of
Hustafe {asil's party before it beceae connected with the 23 June revolution.

The Socialist Liberal Party began to come apart when soae of its representa-
tives were "abducted"-wa use the tern deliberately--by the Egyptian party.
furthermore. froa the president's perspective, this party exaggerated the
effects of the scandals and aisconduct which it helped to uncover in

Hsaduh Salia'e government.

The New Hafd Party. which preferred to dissolve following the passage of
the so-celled National Unity Law.

following this. the party's leader. Yuad Sire: al-Din. becaae the target

of a severe. personal and political attack. But the nucleus of the party's
leadership renained aireculously intact. as such so that in Deceaber
Al-Hafd was able to put up its candidate. Hr 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Shurabji.

for election in the Lawyer's Guild canpaign.

The Coalition Party, shortly after suspending its political activity in

protest against the national Unity Law. resuaad publication of its
newspapers ALP'ABALI. But all issues but one published after the law

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

waa paaead. were confiscated. The party was thua reduced to ieauing only
ita internal publication. PROGRESS. produced on e ditto machine.

The National Front Party. under the leaderahip of D. Hahaud al-Qadi.
failed to get 20 repreaentativaa elected to the People's Aaaenbly to gain

legal atanding. The party. however, continued to prepare ita political
prograa.

The group of the Egyptian party'a repreaentativea which refuaed to join
Al-Sadat'a party. headed by the for-er ninieter Bngineer 'Abd al-Azin Abu
al-‘Ata. ia currently inteneifying ita political activity in the People'a
Aaaenbly an an oppoaition group.

The Hoalel Brotherhood continuaa to exerciae ite political activity and to
argue "peacefully” againat the Canp David accorda. It has good relationa
with the government. aa deacribed by one of the group's leadere. 'Olar al-
Tallaeoni, who aaid recently: "He have no conplainta againet the government,
except for the fact that it haa not reatored our legal atending."

Thua. the auaaer of 1978 hae acarcely ended when all news of the four partiea
(the Egyptian Party. the Liberal Party, the Coalition, and the new "aft
Party) diaappeared iron Al-JUHEURIYYAH. daapite the fact that three of

then are atill legally recognized. ﬂhould nention of any of the partiea
becone nacaaaary. the iten ia relegated to the ”crine acction." National
newapapere. ainilarly. nention only two political partiea:

Al-Sadat'a Party. which ia the ruling party;

The oppoaition party (Socialiat Action). which hae been legally eo deaignated
on the condition that it conducts itself an an “honorable opposition.“ In
the face of thia "nercury-lihe" blueprint for future political life in

Zgypt. obeervere ere attenpting to learn what notivatea thu changee or

explaina the incredible lack of :onaietency. They are inclined to cite
three obvioue factora:

l. The governaent'a inaiatence on aigning a peace treaty with larael;

2. The gradual evolution of an Egyptian policy that in increaaingly nore
conplenentary to the Alerican atratagy;

3. The continuing econonic deterioration and the auffering of the vaat
Iejority of the lgyptian aaeaea.

The firat of theae conaiderationa requires the neutralization or the atilling
of any oppoaition to Al-Sadet'a policy of arriving at a aettlenent with
Iarael. And aince Al-Sadat ia convinced thet peace with larael ia inevitable.
there in a need to prepare a new “crew" to take over the reigna--a crew

that in socially and paychologically ready to cooperate with the new

laraeliallyand ia free of connectiona. immediate or reaote. with the July
23 revolution.
13

FOR OFFICIRL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second consideration makes it imperative that Al-Sadat nova quickly from
his claim of desiring to establish a socialist democratic government (based
on a multiplicity of parties in the European tradition) to s two-party system
patterned after the American system.

The third consideration. which is responsible for the rapidly deteriorating
economic situation. requires that suppression neasures against the opposition
be escalated. This is precisely what gave rise to the "control" laws which
were instituted in 1979. The aim is to administer a preventive blow. one
that will abort any movement opposed to the new policv. which has sent
prices spiraling at an average annual rate of 25 pa. -nt. by official
government estimates. The rate is closer to 65 percent according to the
opposition. In light of these considerations. the final touches are being
put on a truly comprehensive policy. Keeping in mind that Egypt is a land
of comedies-comedies that are more likely to call for tears. as described
by the poet Abu al-Tayyib al-Hutanabbi--escalstion of suppression and the

imposition of total government are being perpetuated under the banner of
entrenching democracy.

Observers are certain that these three elements and their interaction will
lead to instability as a fundamental feature of the social and political
situation. These variables are likely to produce two other results:

Further division within the government. as indicated by the resignation

of three foreign ministers. the exile of numerous officials such as Hari'
and Al-cs-asi. and increased opposition among the middle class to the Camp
David policy:

Increased loss of government credibility before the masses. This dangerous
development makes people wary of governmental promises of peace. prosperity.
food security. a house for every citizen. hot voter in every home. and a
green revolution in every place.

The lack of credibility is another story. however, and will be considered
separately.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Al-HATAN ALP'ARABI

9063
080: 6802

11;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EGYPT

RIASONS FOR DEPORTATION OF ECONOMIC UNITY COUNCIL SECRETARY ANALYZBD
Paris AL-HATAN AL-'ARAET in Arabic 16-22 Feb 79 pp 26-27
[Articlez "Al-Sadat Resigns from Arab Econonic Unity Council")

[Text] Reaction to the forced police deportation of Dr Fakhri al-Qadduri.
on the orders of Egyptian authorities, has not died down. Dr al-Qadduri

is the secretary general of the Arab League's Arab Economic Unity Council
and has made his per-anent residence in Cairo. The deportation action.
carried out in a tactless fashion. presages an ominous change of directon--
as is apparent fro. the press campaign to justify it--aimed at obstructing
the inplenentation of one of the most significant accomplish-ente in

Arab cooperation.

The Arab Economic Unity Council is the most inportant Arab institution working
toward achieving a real couple-entaty Arab econoly. which is the cornerstone
of Arab financial and economic unity. Since its creation in 196‘, the
council has successfully overcome a series of regional and colonial plans
aimed at diluting its national character and bent on reducing it to an
ineffectual tool. not what is the real story behind the viscioue attack
against the council by Egyptian authorities. and what is the reason for

deporting the council's president. on an unwritten order supposedly related
to security?

To answer this question we must return to the council's last session, No 22.
in Dubbai at which the secretary general gave a report dealing with a

series of probable agreements between the Al-Sedet government and the Zionist
entity in the event that nornal diplonatic relations are established between
them. Following the report. the council adopted a resolution attesting to
its appreciation of the report's assessment of the dangers and conplications
that were bound toensueshould normal relations. including economic and
coamercial cooperation. be established between Egypt and the Zionist

entity. The report was further applauded for outlining the deager posed

to Arab econoeic unity agreements and the threat to the joint hfﬂb market
resolution and the Arab economic boycott of Israel. The council is said

to have reaffirmed its determination to remain united in the face of this
new attack.

15

IOR OIPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

On a second point. the council underscored the necessity of supporting the
resolutions of the Arab econonic boycott offices against Israel and approved

measures to safeguard the Arab economic unity agreement and the resolution
of the joint Arab market.

The council called on the secretary's office and all other Arab organiza-
tions to maintain a watchful eye and to report any development that could
weaken the unity agreeaents so that the council can renain ready to take

whatever economic measures that have been agreed upon at the Daghdad Summit
conference.

As might be expected. the report was not pleasing to Cairo and it used it

as a justification to attempt to paralyze the council‘s work. convinced

that the council is a stumbling stone on the path of its misdirected economic
plans. Cairo paved the way for its attack by sending a secret letter from
'Ali Jamal al-Nazir. Egypt's minister of state for economic cooperation

and its parlanent representative to the Arab Economic Unity Council. to the

council‘s secretary general on 13 December 1978. The text of the letter
follows:

Dr Pakhri al-Qadduri.
Secretary General of the Arab Economic Unity Council:

I was informed yesterday by Mr Hadhat 'Abd al-Aziz, deputy minister for Arab
and African cooperation affairs. and deputy to the permanent representative
to the Arab Economic Unity Council. of the content of your report at the
council's regular session. no 32. which was held in the United Arab Emirates.
Hr 'Abd al-Asis related to me the discussions that took place at the meeting
and described the efforts to distort the council's recomnendations and to
leak to Arab and foreign press agencies and broadcast stations a variety of
conflicting reports aimed at inciting Arab countries against Egypt.

I am sorry to have to remind you of the secretariat's obligation to maintain
strict neutrality, as stipulated in the Arab Economic Unity agreement. in
order to preserve a balanced impartiality in dealing with the member countries
in the council. and of the secretariat's duty not to become a political
instrument.

As careful as Egypt is in supporting the council's work, it regrets. should
this situation continue, that it will have to consult with other council
lelbars on wnys to place necessary restrictions to maintain the strict
neutrality and impartiality of the secretary's office.

The letter is signed. ‘Ali Jamal al-Nasir.
The letter was accompanied by a hysterical press campaign against the
council and its secretary. Dr Pakhri al-Qadduri. and by a wave of episodes

calculated to make his life uncomfortable. aided by the professional
Egyptian intelligence department.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dr Pakhri al-Qadduri hastened to respond officially by letter on 16 January
1978. The latter. which was addressed to Mr 'Ali Jamal al-Nazir. reads:

I received your letter. dated 13 December 1978. which appears to convey the
impression that your excallency has become the Egyptian permanent representa-
tiVe to the Arab Economic Unity Council. As I congratulate you and wish

you good luck. I promise to help you and all the permanent representatives

at the council. I wish to express my appreciation for Egypt's former
persanent representative to the council. his excellency Dr Hamid al-Sayih.
and to thank him for his excellrnt relations with the council's secretary
cinse I assumed the office on 1 Hay 1978.

Your Excellency:

You refer in your letter to distortions in the council's recommendations
and indicate that various reports were leaked to Arab and foreign press
agencies and broadcast stations aimed at provoking Arab countries against
Egypt. I wish to inform your excellency that the council nsde resolutions.
not recommendations. and that these resolutions were not distorted. As for
the charge about provoking Arab nations against Egypt. my response is that
as a loyal Arab citizen and regardless of where I happen to reside or the
nature of my responsibility. I have never entertained such a thought.
Furthermore. the reports that were released to the news media never had

the intention described in your letter.

The major portion of the news that had been released was documented and
can still be found in the official r.cords at the secretary's office. The
information released to the media objectively reflected what transpired

at the council's session. The secretary's office is prepared to provide
your excellency with photostatic copies of the press release made by

this office should you wish to review it.

If. however. some reporters added to or modified some expressions of the
release. the phenomenon is a usual occurence in and outside the Arab world.
I wish to stress to your excellency that the information I released in the
form of news items and resolutions was approved according to established
procedures and is documented. The verification of the press release. as
was the custom at previous sessions. was carried out by his highneas Al-
Shaykh Sultan sl-Huilla. the sinister of economy and trade of the United
Arab Emirates. and the council's chairman. as well as by the general
secretary. following the conclusion of the council's last session on

7 December 1978. Also. according to custom. official copies of the adopted
resolutions were distributed to all council members. including. of course.

Egypt.

You mention in your letter that ”as careful as Egypt has been in supporting
the council's work. it regrets. should this situation continue. to have to
consult with other council nsmbers on ways to place necessary restrictions

to maintain the strict neutrality and impartiality of the secretary's office."

17

P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hhile I agree with your excellency that Egypt. aa well as any other member
country, hae the right to bring to the council'e attention any procedural
queation relating to the eecretary general or hie office, I had hoped that
the Egyptian delegation would raiae thia queetion during the council'e laet
eeeaion. aapecially in view of the queetion'a urgency. however. ea 1. too.
view the queation with urgency and feel that it touchee on the confidence
placed in ne by all Iaaber natione. including Egypt. when l wee elected
council preeident. I invite you to bring the natter before the council for
appropriate action. The council in. after all, the final arbiter.

In his letter, Dr Al-Qadduri goee on to invite the Egyptian ainieter to
review the record of the 32nd aeaeion to acquaint hinaelf with the council'e
poeition toward the accueation of partiality placed against the eecretary
general by the chairman of the Egyptian delegation. The charge of a lack

of neutrality wee aired when the eecretary general included in hie report

to the council a aection entitled "lereel and the Conplementarity of the
Arab Economy." The Egyptian delegation'e requeet that this item be deleted
free the report wee turned down after a full diecueaion by the council. The
entire controvereial eection waa thua left in the eecretary'e report.

Dr Al-Qadduri inforled the Egyptian minieter that the council'e action claare
him of the Egyptian delegation‘a charge.

In a related development. and in an attempt at further clarification. Sultan
ibn Ahmad al-Hu‘lla. the UAR'a ainiater of economy and trade, and its per-
aanent delegate to the council. aent a letter to hie highneee Ali Jamal
al-Narir in which he denied the charge of partiality by the council and ite
eecretary general. Theee chargea are the tool by which Egypt had hoped to
obatruct the work of the council.

The UAR'a Iinieter of economy and trade began hie letter by connecting on
the Egyptian preee campaign againet the council and its eecretary general.
here are aoae excerpte:

"Ae chair-an of the aforementioned aeaeion. and anxious to put the facte
before your excellency and to eafeguard the poeitive relationa, characterized
by truet, that exiet along all neaber natione on one hand and between the
nenber natione aa a group and the eecretary general on the other hand. I
wiah to clarify to your excellency certain eattere related to the council
eeaaion in order to deecribe the eituation lore precieely.

"l. The council liatened to all delegation chairnen on all aattere placed
on the agenda in a cordial and conetructive epirit. All reeolutione were
aade according to the proceduree. They were verified officially and
diatributed to all aenber natione without any dietortione.

"2. The eecretary general conducted hinaelf with neutrality and objectivity
in expreaaing hie viewpointe on the lattere on the agenda. He wee extreaely

careful to ineure that diecuaeione took place in a poeitive and conetructive
epirit.

18

P08 0??!CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

"3. I wish to assure your excellency that the delegation chair-en and the
secretary general did their best to aeintsin s brotherly atmosphere in
listening to end in debating the various viewpoints, and that the council
is responsible. first and last, for its resolutions.

"1 hope that try letter will help to set the record straight and to prevent
any future obstacle to the work of the council. whose goal is to further
and support Arab econolic unity. an objective we are all careful to safeguard."

The letter was signed by sum ihn Mud ai-ndsua.

Despite all these assurances. Egyptian authorities were intent on going
ahead with their previously drawn plan. They thus informed Dr Al-Qedduri
orally of the decision to deport his as s first step in carrying out their
design. which is calculated to paralyze the council's work and to defy all
Arab nations.

The problel posed by this situation requires a quick solution based on
Article Seven of the council's rules of procedure. This article permits the
convening of an extraordinary session upon tne request of two nazion aenhen.
or on the prior request of the secretary general. The purpose of such a
session is to resolve the issue for which an extraordinary session is called.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

9063
cso: 10802

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m ELITE m1!” IN "Isms m
Peris AL-HATN. AL-'AMII in Atlbic 16-22 Feb 79 Pp 28-29
[Articles "A Portrait of Bgyptien nuresucrscy"]

[Text] In Ceiro e fenous street goes through the center of the city. It
is celled Sherif Street. On this street stends one of Egypt's best
known buildingsnthe Inobilie building. 0n the 10th floor of this
building there is en office belonging to Al-Shees Coopsny, one of Egypt's
public housing end construction coepenies. 0n the sixth floor of the
sens building there is enother office belonging to the use conpsny.

The difference between the two offices is striking end serves to underscore
the contreet between the ordinery Bgyptisn society end s new society
developing elongeide it. without eny hope thet the two will ever converge.

The elevetor is full of office workers. Soee ere neetly dressed. indiceting
thet they heve cone to work by bus; the others still csrry their cer keys
in one hend end ere busily edjusting their ties with the other. "hen the
elevetor stops et the sixth floor, the operetor goes out first to neke e
peth for the employees who work on this floor. then it stops on the 10th
floor. the operetor simply ennounces the feet in s loud voice.

The sntrence to the 10th floor office is in e stete of seei-disrepeir. The
office boy who runs the inforletion desk is there only to record which
enployeee heve reported to work. lie soon diseppesrs to return to his texi-
driving job or sons other side occupstion to supplement his incone. Whenever
he is on the job. he is often distrected end preoccupied with his deily
concerns. lie is obviously displeased when one esks hin s question. when

on office worker eeks him to bring s cup of coffee or tee. he does so
hesitstingly end only efter the request is repeated severel tiees.

Soee office workers work .end sone sit eround. They ere such like their
telephones end other equipnent which function only none of the tine. The
only pleseing espect eround is the exterior end interior eppesrence of the
director's office. The doeinent spirit of the plsce is: "who doesn't work
todey works tonorrow."

20

FOR OFFICIAL USP. (ma):
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From the instant one enters the sixth floor office. however, one joins a

new society. Everything is clean. The decor is unfamiliar. The wallpaper
is new. The semi-circular entrance to the office, with indirect lighting,

is staffed by e neatly dressed. polite clerk, who is eager to help. Everyone
is busy here; even the telephones which belong to the same coepany and are
hooked to the ease telephone network ring incessantly.

The World of Bureaucracy

In order to get a job on the 10th floor, one must have s high school diplone
and undergo a cheat and eye examination. both of which are at the conpany'e
clinic. In the clinic no one cares about your time. The issuance of a
Iedical report requires a weak to 10 days. A successful applicant (with a
college degree) is paid 30 pounds per Ionth. He may or may not find a
vacancy. To obtain a job on the sixth floor. however, one must pass a foreign
language exam. danonstrate typing skills and be reasonably attractive in
appearance. The conpany then sends the prospective employee to a special
clinic (possibly the company's own). But here one receives excellent care
and undergoes a series of tests. including a blood test and aheart examination.
The Iedical report is issued within 2 days. A successful applicant is paid
150 pounds per Ionth or possibly nore. what is important is that there will
be a vacancy and a well-defined position. 0n the 10th floor. workers report
at 8:00 am and leave at 2:00 ps--unless they sneak out early. 0n the sixth
floor. by contrast. one reports for work at 9:00 on and remains till 6:00 pm.
Furthermore, no one leaves work early.

0n the 10th floor you light be t-pted to go with your colleaguen to the
director to convince his to have the company purchase a bus for the workers.
Be will likely respond that he has no such authority or that the budget does
not permit it. On the sixth floor. and in similar circmtances. the
director is willing to lend you money to buy a private car and to have the
long-ter- loan deducted from your salary.

0n the 10th floor you work for a state. public company. 0n the sixth

floor you work for a new cospsny jointly owned by a foreign company. If
you work on the 10th floor you nay not join a club unless you have outside
income. If you are a sixth floor elployee, the company denands that you
join a club and pays your fees. This is only one example. On other streets
in Egypt one finds other examples.

As one passes through Qasr al-hil Street (a short distance between Tala’at
Kerb Square and Liberation Square). one'e attention is drawn to the
American branch of the Bank of Egypt. The bank's design is so unfamiliar
that it does not seem to fit with the dominant architecture on the street.
inside or out. The node of operation within is also different.

Anyone who watches what is happening in Egypt today will observe the
emergence of a parallel society. The characteristics of this society
reflect the econonic system it emulates, specifically capitalism This

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

new society has its own psychological and cultural values. It seems to
reject our cultural heritage and to venerate everything foreign.

'fhe mainstay of this parallel society is the private wealth that has been
accumlatimg in the hands of the country's former capitalists. in cooperation
with capitalist leaders, politicians and some military officers. Before

the country's "open economy policy" came on the scene, this group managed

to accumulate great wealth under the former economic system. It then worked
openly to transform the economic system into one centered on private capital
under the guise of ushering the so-cslled "open economy" system. The new
systa is a compromise throwback to its former practices after they failed

to undermine the previous system completely. The public outcry against

this group's attempts served to dilute its effort. It was thus cospelled

to create its new economic lifestyle alongside and parallel to the existing
system in the hope that the latter will ultimately collapse under the onslaught
of its claims and slogans. Egyptian society. once again. finds itself in
circtsnstances not very different from those that prevailed early in the

19th century when economic development was stifled under Huhe-eed Ali. who
imposed a similar "open economy" system on the country.

Foreign and jointly-owned banks have played and continue to play, a signifi-
cant role in creating this parallel society. These banks have always found
in Egypt a solution for the problem of what to do with their excess deposits,
most recently exacerbated by a flood of petrodollars. Fearful of political
instability. these banks do not participate in direct economic development
projects; instead. they prefer to deal in loan and insurance operations.

ever careful to take their profits out of the country as they pile up. A
careful analysis of their activities shows that they are merely interested

in supporting the economic activities of private enterprise.

The outward signs of this parallel society are everywhere. All new economic
establishments which cater to the new society are extensions of their

parent branches overseas, even to their decor and furnishings. One who
frequents them is led to believe he is not in Egypt. Their operating
methods are strikingly different from their native counterparts. Hhile they
use the same public utilitieantelephonea. electricity. etc-~they receive
better service by paying a "little extra" on the side. Sone of them have
even installed private microwave telephone systems. or have their own
electric generators and hospitals. Their employees have nearly taken over
the clubs and changed them into closed societies. The new society has its
own lawyers. doctors. as well as a local airline company. The average
monthly salary of its elite employees-graduates of foreign language schools
and children of influential people-is 250 pounds. the equivalent of a
deputy minister's or ministur's salary. The new society is now attempting
to dominate the cultural an! educational life of its members by freeing

them from government controls and entrusting their education to the private
sector.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

9063
C80: 5802 22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

EGYPT

BRIEFS

u.s. AID To HBDIAuReliable sources close to the Ministry of Intonation
confirmed that there is an Aaerican proposal to extend extensive financial
aid to Egyptian newspapers and other infatuation sedia to help Egypt to
counter the Arab nations' propaganda caspaign against the Caap David
agreements. The sources indicated that this special assistance. described
as urgent. nay reach 850 million. a Iajor portion of which will go to
AL-AHRAH. AL-AKIlDAR. AL-JIMIURIYYAH. DAR AL-ulLAl. and R083 AL-YUSUP. to
iaprove production. printing and editing. and to make their formats aore
attractive. A portion of the aid. according to the sources. must be spent
on the purchase of better Anarican editing and photographic equipment.

In addition. the us. proposal involves financial assistance to Egyptian
radio and television to iaprove broadcasting and increase their trans-
aisaion range. The aid package also includes the financing of a series of
inforaational campaigns to be directed at the Arab world. The distribution
of the aid was discussed at a recent meeting attended by the 0.5. ambassador
to Cairo. Hr her-man Zilts. and chaired by Mr Pikri Hulurram ‘Ubayd.

deputy prime minister and secretary general of the National Democratic
Party. A pro-inent participant at the ﬂeeting was Mr Hansur Hasan. who is
in charge of the infornstion section of the Rational Democratic Party

and a candidate for the position of state minister of information. The
meeting also considered using sons of the aid funds to publish AL-LIHA'
and nahe it the official spokasaan of the National Democratic Party.

hr Huharrala hubs-ad Ahmad. an editorial secretary of AL-AHRAN. has been
chosen as the chief editor. [Paris AL-VA‘I‘AN AL-'ARABI in Arabic 9-15 Feb
79 p 15]

COPYRIGHT: 1979 AL-UA‘I‘AN AL-'ARAB!
9063

080: 6802

23

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

KUWAIT

CRWN PRINCE WSIZES REGIONAL SECURITY IN INTERVIEH
London was met: use in English tpr 79 pp 1.6, h?

[Interview with Cretm Prince and Prime Minister Seed al-Abdulluh al-Sabah
by Ned Hatter, date and place not given]

[Text] Kuwait's Crown Prince and Prime Minister, Shaikh Seed al-Abdullah
al-Sabah, has given a strong warning that the security and protection of the
Gulf region nust be left to the people of the area. “It will be totally
unacceptable for any country tron outside the region to interfere in the
affairs of this very vital region of the world,“ he declared.

Speaking in one of his rare interviews, Shaikh Seed told Ned Hatter,
editor of our sister Arabic publication AL-ImSSAD AL-ARABI, 'If the Arab
countries cooperate more strongly, their unified forces will bring about

a lot of changes on the international scene." He also said that the Arebs
would have no choice but to wage another war against Israel unless it
bech less obdurate and unless Palestinian rights were recognised. The
Crown Prince denied recent reports that Kuwait has frozen some of its
invest-int projects in the Arab world. Excerpts from this exclusive inter-
view to low:

temmehement helm the Gulf states. In
fett. my dream it to beeble to witness eithev
unity out a ltind nf federation between all the

0 New do yeu visualise
Kuwalt In the year 3,000 and

whet rele de sew see ell

pleylng In the future?

0 Kmit is a smell and

welt-fut «nanny. Out veletiens

withuhev etetesete builtonoe-

operative: and utdustsnding.

Wednmtinmfminothet

ﬁle's affainl and ee do not

«when tn interfere Enema.

And this is that us want to

Maintain during the sentsinit' past
at the century. Naturally. in the mean-
time. the want Kweit and the other
Gulf states to enjoy stability and tenacity.
Wevetyetueh wanttesseMther

Antls countdo- Otu main mm ll at“
the I'ethnian ample should be IN. to
nuem thett limelsnd betanMIndthe
mtam Aewwoilmemidetltemajot
national moweendue enobliged town-
sene tt lot fut-us genrletions. We have
alseedy dvewn up the plans for the annual
reteoloil reduction. But thetlenotou:
sole mm. Our scientists an ending on
neeseumdmvoinentidnetionofthe
deyvhenoilntnseut.

As far as development is attuned, we
anptsttieulotefemphuismtheneedto
establish new Nuance which will enable
thskebmteheoemselfeufﬁdem
hthelonennJmuetstm-lwuthetltls

2!:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
:01 to V2. .3 6. .059- S: a. :83:
O :23 :5 «:32: :33 3 5
:55: 3&2 :33 gags-5&3
3.85; 03.12. :3 >3: 85582.58
F! 23.9: 33.232 .5: 5 g
s? o :3 5 =5 1...... 2318:. 2.5333
35.58:. saws-3.38%.;
9.373 Econ-8.1.2 Ex. cams-32:3.

_ .53 82.: (3 >3: .853 no an.
3: =83 navy-or 8 83.89:. TRE-
3... ‘28 a". .zaoraazicsi
1 9. 1x... .53 8 3.8: (s... 58
3°33. Eclipftiagao-i
l.ZP-.31$53ﬂ§ziirauf8£
3% $33.33.. 50..

O «8... 83.2.2. 3...: E .8393
2:. 3: 1:. 3.2.3 38.... >3 no:
22...... n 2173 at F pro. 03:. on

so v.2. Ear 3. Son... ‘35:: r:
23...!— E 3.3. sq no 333»
’0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIBYA

0mm!" SUPPORT OF KURDS CAUSES SURPRISE
Paris ALPHATAN ALP'ARABI in Arabic 9-15 Mar 79 p lb

[Text] Palestinian circles close to the regiac of Col Hu'annar al-Qadhdhafi
have been hinting at extrosely iaportant infornation about the very close
relationship which our brother Hu'annsr has established with none of the
”brethren" Kurd separatists.

These sources have expressed gres' surprise at this new "Qadhdaflsn"
wisdon which is opposed to all the slogans of "faith" in freedon. socialisn
and unity raised by the "liberator" of July. who was forced to swallow then
throughout the long life of the "revolution."

These sources explain the new Libyan initiative in extending friendship and
cooperation to the Kurd separatists as conpatible with the intellectual
ascendancs of the Qsdhdhafisn theory. so that the call for carving out a
portion of the large fatherlaod is an exasple of the "revolutionary" purity
and unification efforts.

Observers here believe that the ”effusive" support of the Libyan government
for the new unification approach between Iraq and Syria is nerely a
diversion to cover up the cuneplratory activities of those separatists
which Qsdhdhafi now is trying to revive after Iraq had succeeded in halting
conpletely. so that this group of separatists has no refuge left but the
advocates of nationaliss and unity.

AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI learned from Palestinian sources that theoe circles
possess iaportant iniornation which. when ssde known, will create a great
cessation in the Arab world because it involves certain practices of the
Libyan rsgils which are in no way conpatible with the slogans touted.

Besides. in a theatrical nova. Qsdhdhafi declared last week that he is
relinquishing "power" so as to devote hinself to "revolutionary" work.

No one. hovsvar. took Qadhdhafi's statement seriously. especially since
brother Hu’ennsr has sanaged in the last few nonths to perforn a cosplete
dislocation of powor bases. which was reflected in the total chaos that
resulted in all areas at all levels.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARAII

2760 26

080: ‘802
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

SUSPECT“) mans 0P IA’A'nI PARTY ARRESTED
Psrie AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arebic 16-22 Feb 79 p a

[Text] Sinilerly to the "dewn reidere" in Egypt. the "down rsidere" in
Sudsn ere expending their ectivities in order to frighten end erreet the
elenents who oppose President Rueeyri in his support of Sadet'e policies.
One of the lost prosinent persons errested for being eccueed by the Sudenene
euthorities of belonging to the Socielist Areb Be'eth Party wee Hr Hohe-sd
'Ali Jsdin. sssistent to the under eecretery of finence. The reason for
his srrest wee thet he hed in his possession penphlets egeinet Sedet'e

visit to Suden.

The Sudsnese police sleo errested ior the sense reeson Hr Yusuf lie-sit, for-er
eeneger of the People's Cooperetive Beak. end Mr Anin 'Ahd sl-Beeets Ahmed.
en ettorney.

The Sudsnsse ler Associetion hes objected to these srhitrery erreste end
hes begun to denend thet the euthorities relesse those erreeted or
srrenge for their triel inedietely rsther then keeping then in teeporery
jeils. egeinst conetitutionsl lews.

Ala-“ATARI Al-‘ARAIl's correspondent in Suden reports thet the Sudeneee
euthoritiee heve srrested s nusber of citieene in el-Ubeyyid end el-Ruhud
in western Sudsn for belonging to the Socielist Areb Be'eth Perty. end
heve ssvegely renseclted e nueber of holes under the pretext of eeerching
tm.

The police elso errested Hr Se'id Al-Hehdi, neeber of the Student Hilitent
Front et the University of Khsrtoue. es well es two Pelestinien studente
during their preperetion of e nesting held on 20 Jenuery 1979 end ettended
by ebout 3.000 students to protest Sedet's visit.

The Sudenese euthorities heve been continuing their oppressive neesures
sgsinst students. including suspending the:- from school (or merely
suspecting thet they belong to the be'eth Perty. Their ections seen to
indicete thet they ere e result of speciel instructions frol Ceiro.

27
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
Obssrvsrs hslisvs thst tbs incresssd popular displeasure crested by these

Isssurss indicsts :hst the slsssnts of s politicsl crisis are loosing in
ths horizon.

COPYRIGRTI 1979 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARAII

2760
680: ‘802

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED ARAB £818!

”A! UNITY EFFORTS GRWING

London Till MIDDLE EAST in English Apr 79 pp 12.13

[Text] y

how m bun m h tho
UAB andmltyﬂhyqumum.
In musmum 01mm
Wand tho la:

mmmwumwmmm
hthndmbwwmmmm.

dumm-

29

3

5'

E

g

2

I
22
ii?

%
2:

3

i

' 3

£33 3
5E2 535.

human as a whole '
unable. Pmly haunt of thin. immkmu
Monmmlltwm ”pummel
III total population.

1h! humid: pol hy the «Mum
to the PM Cwmll included mm to
cum! thb {certainly doom.
mm.

A “Mum and to: ”othh
0! (ho font» my dominant: by M:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COPYRIGII‘I':

080:

5820

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m”. mud of oil pmdmion
mlnihoiieid”.aunl army.
and anend io"iniamal boning“
That on Aim Dinbi
Wm wbiiahediiiodemandainwllia
an iion of tho mam to viilch Shaikh
Zayadiaabihaihlamonﬂmmmd
“roman! cailaioc"democncy"mdiot
the National humbly (parliament) to lake
amaaive paniaaeonbyohaemaaa
daaltaioteﬂidontocw haiionowuunion
nin Shaikh 2a ia on am

may Speaker
TammOmtan'I‘arya mlaaeenaaaauonx
r of the fadetation.

“1:2me hlheaamemm
(Wand ”hunhdetaliunmuelh.
thAEwill inapuaiiinnio piayamuch
malamiainaegimai ilica. luwealth
“dammit-Rim“! makeitonimpot

whibmmuiaiitanlano
Wane-at. o

1979 1c MAGAZINES LTD.

8ND