APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010009-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010009-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE MLY

JPRS 1/8202
5 January 1979

TRMSLATIONS 0N TELECOMJNICATIMS POLICY.
ESEARCH AND IEVELWFENT
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT MLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE (HLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010009-0
NOTE

JPRS publication:- contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing end
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was smrised or extracted.

Unfamiliar nausea rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or nausea preceded by a ques-
tion earl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itae originate with the source. Tiles within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Governoent.

COPYRIGIT HHS AND REGUUTIONS GOVERNING WNERSIIIP OF
MTERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIMTION
0E TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED POROFFICIM. USE ONLY.
WWOAYA
.mts uszoz _m

MSLATIONS 0N TELECOWICATIONS POLICY. RBSZARCR
MID DEVEWMNT. (P000 1/79)

   
    
       
     
       
 

  

Joint Publication Ileaearch Service
1000 North Glabe Road
Arlinatoo, Virginia 22201

thia aerial tepott cooteine tranelationa {to- tha world pteee and radio
relating to worldwide political, econooic and technical developmenta in
telecommicaticna, coupotnro. and aatellite cot-micatione. Coverage will

be worldwide with (acne on France. federal Republic of Car-any, United Kingdom
Italy, Japan. the USSR. People’e Republic of China. Sveden. and the Netherlanda.

  
       
   
 
 

satellite Co-uicationa
llecttonice and Electrical Engineering
Teleco-micatione

Talent”

"a. court ﬂan/Ge. 093. C, I. 17!. 223

  
    
 

For Official Uae Only.
United I'm-bet of Copiee Available Pto- JPRS.

VKWOC 000..., l
FOR Ol’FICIhL USE ONLY

JPRS L/BZOZ

S Januaq 1979

TRANSLATIMS M TELECMMUNICATIONS POLICY;
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPl‘EﬂT

(P000 1/79)

Coureurs PAGE

mammal: AHA!”

Briafa
Japan Loan to Madagascar

ASIA

INTER-ASIAN AFFAIRS

JAPAN

'VNA' Ralaaaaa Calbodian Nova Agency's Appeal
(m. 30" 7a) O0..IOOI.00.0.0.0....‘OOOIOOOOOOOOOOCUOO.

Japan'a Blactronica Fina iron on vac offal in 1"! Plant Deal.
(“tmﬂ "In! sum. law’s) OOOOIOCOIOOOOOCOOOOOOOO

Hitachi ‘ro Enter 0.8. Ganatai Purpoao Coupon! narut
(M MD 881m. 11 80V 78) oooooooooaaaooooooaoooa

Hitachi Announcaa Pacaiailo Strata”
(“mm'o Slum. ‘ Oct 78) ooooooooaoaooaooooooaooo

Hitachi “-200“ Shipnenta To Start in Lattar Half of 1979
(I‘M m0 satum. 6 8.9 78) aoaoaooaaaooooooooloaooo

'royota Acquiua I!!! 3033 for CoIputariud Body benign
("1” m0 Slum, 1 $29 78) aoaooaaaooooaaaooaoaooao

Savaa Pit-a ‘l'o Porn Oparating Syatan a & D Annotation
(RIM mo 5mm. 29 Sap 78)

Japanaaa Ministry To Authorize lav Radio, I!!! TV Stations
(”“1 sum. 22 “v 18) 00.0.0.0...DOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIO

11

13

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm-s (Cont inuod) Pogo

HIT! "one. to Exclude 30 Parent of Software Incooo tron Tax
(“1“ “mo salm. 16 Oct 78) OOOOOIOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOO 16

LATIN AMERICA
INTER-MEAN APIAIRS

Co-unicotiono lxporto quo Final Docuont
(Our Seoulvedo: rm. 8 Doc 78) ....................... 18

sun-3mm AFRICA

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

UNESCO Intonation Resolution Choice. Diocuued
(Sophie Bani-3.1m APRIQUB, 22 Nov 78) ............... 20

-5-
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HORLWIDE AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

JAPAN m 1‘0 mum-Japan haa extended a you loan of up to 10.5 you
billion to Hadacaacar for conatructton of ucrowave co-untcatton tactltttea,
the Foreign Mutatry announced Saturday. 11:. "intact-y aatd note. to the
effect were exchanged Saturday between Teruhtko Ilka-are. Japaoeae ubaa-

eador to Madagaecar, and C. R. Mcherd, minister of Foreign Maire of
Hadasaacar. [Tokyo ‘l'lll.’ DAILY mum: to much 19 Nov 73 p 5 0“]

(ISO: 5500

1
FOR OFFICIAL 08! am:
FOR OPI’ICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ASIAN AFFAIRS

W'RELBASBS CAMBODIA" NW8 AGENCY'S APPEAL
llanoi WA in Vietnaaeae to VII“ Ho chi Minh City 0860 GMT 3 Dec 78 09

[Text] Today, 3 Deco-her 1978. the Vietnaa Neva Agency is very happy and
hae the honor to inforn ita compatriots of the birth of the Kaupuchean
United Front for National Salvation [RUINS] and of the front'a news agency.
Saporaaean Kanpucheanthe Kaapuchean News Agency or SPK aa an acronym.

Harmly welcoaing thia great hiatoric event. we have the honor to introduce
to you the SPK appeal [lowif ra aaata] and the first iaportent docunenta of
the front.

The following is the SPK appeal:
Reepectful aalutationa to colleagea and frienda worldwide:

Beginning at 0400 GMT today. (3 Decenher 1978). Sapqraaean Kanpuchea, (SP!
a an acronyu). atarta broadcasting fro. the liberated area of our (lheloved)
Kaepuchean fatherland daily newa hulletina on 8,864 Ice in the 1100 houra
(0600 cur) cut and on 9,255 Inca in the 2130 houra (1‘30 our) caet.

SPK. the official newa agency of the arms Central (‘ICor-ittee), wiahea to
convey to ita colleaguea and frienda worldwide ita firat newa bulletin on
the norms eaergence. ‘l‘hia hiatoric event of our country reflecta the
aapiration. will and increasingly developing forces of all atrvggling
Kanpuchean people who are deter-ined to riae up to topple the reactionary.
nepotiat Pol Pot-lng Sary cliquenlackeye‘ for foreign reactionary forces;
to do away uith ita cruel, bloody regiae; to net up a people's democratic
ayaten: to develop the Angkor tradition; to turn Kawuchea into a truly
peaceful. independent. de-ocratic. neutral and nonalined country advancing
to aocialiaa; and to lake poaitive contributions to the canon atruggle for
peace and etahility in Southeaat Ania.

As the official epoheaaan of the KUPPNS Central Oo-ittee, SPK will carry
out ita activitiea in accordance with the front'a etatenent which ie
included in this SPK newe bulletin [haanr tin].

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPK eernestly cells on its colleegues end on ell friends of the Keepucheen
people end Ksnpuchse worldwide to support it in every sspect. Operetins
under difficult conditions in the beginning in the liberated eree of our
fetherlend. SPK very euch hopes thst freternel end friendly news egencies
end internetionsl end regionel news egencies will eernestly cooperete with
it end trenoelt broedly its news end photos. We convey our sincere thenks
to our friends. -

cso: 5500

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
ran orncuu. us; can

“GER-ASIAN AFFAIRS

JAPAN'S 81.36110!!!“ PINS noun 01' PRO OFFER IN 1"! PM DIAL

«200609! Tokyo mm mm! anneal in Jspehsce 18 Nov 78 lornim wzzon p 6 an.
ron anxcm. can out!

[Excerpts] Accordim to a dieoloaure by Japen-china trade sources. chine recently
inrorlelly proposed the use of a production-chain nethod in its purcheee of sssenbly
plents for color television rcccivere tron Japan. Il'he nethcde. it adopted. would call
for pay-ent in products. ,

Japanese tir- mich have been preperim to bid in the television plant deal. includim
Mitochi seisskuio. Tokyo dhibaure Dem. hstsushita baud 8cm”. 8snyo David. and
Sharp Mei Kaden. ero unani-oualy reluctant to so slow with the chineee offer for
reasons relatim to quality control. done or the. any even abandon their plen to take
part in the biddiu.

Intachi Seieelcuo em Tokyo 8hibura Delia have already Jointly ecquirsd the m orders
for eesonbly plents for picture tubes er". intecretsd circuits.

no plane for color television roceisers ere part ofthe tour nodernization program.
Unicr these plsu. s new plant for 13-inch .no 20-inch picture tubes is to be built in
lleinyam in the outskirts of Sian city. mm another new plant for intacreted circuits
will bs built in Huhsi in new Province. ‘l'he production cepacity for picture tubes
will be 960.000 units per year. out production itself is expected to begin in Deco-bar
1980. Noeniﬂle. the contraction or ﬁle inte‘retsd circuits plsnt is scheduled to

bscin so soon as the epprovel of the Cocoa (Cowdinetion Codttee on kports to
Contact Countries! is obtained.

It cppcsre thet the Chinese proposal has been proqted by a comidereticn involving
chino'o torsisn “chemo holditcs. ‘l'he eessnbly plant deel anounts to spprosi-etely
10 billion yon. Il'hs orders alrcsdy roceived for plents for picture tubss. intepretsd
circuits and 31sec (or picture tubes respectively are north l5 billion. 15 billion end
1} billion yen. his men- thst Chine's totel paint to Japen in the television
industry area elons uoulc bo es Inch as 53 billion yen.

comma: llhon Kciui Shinkunshe 1978

(:80: 5500

6
so: OFFICIAL 088 OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HITACNI TO M!!! U. 8. GENERAL PURPOSE CWT!!! MARKET
Tokyo mm mo 8mm in Japanese ll Nov 78 p 7

[Article: "Project Team To Be For-ed To Study Strategy and mu of
Machines and Drew Conclusions within This Year")

[Text] Hitachi Linited (president. airoyoehi Yoshiyana) has decided on a
policy to enter eales of general purpose computers in the Aaerican market
as one phese of its computer industry development. A project tea- has
been formed at the computer industry headquarters (chief of headquarters.
Kaaani Nagafuji), which is preeently studying sales strategy and the types
of machines to be offered. and it is expected to suhait its conclusions
within this year. This cospany is planning to invade the Anerican market.
which ie the stronghold of the world's foreaost computer manufacturer tan.
with its own brand of computere as the top goal in its development plan
for the next year, end this line of action on the part of hitechi. which
is one of the foremost cosputer manufacturers in Japan. may cause acne
major reverberations in the computer industry, both domestic and abroad.

Thie conpsny has deeignated its computer industry ae a strategic industry
with plans to firm its position in the domestic market. It it also devel-
oping its foreign market.

This company entered into a sales contract with the computer leasing con-
pany of the United States. the Aitel Company (based in San Francisco.
California), to let said coapany handle its large coaputers, which will be
marketed under their trade nene (out). It introduced its 110 1 computer
(equivalent of "-180, to be marketed aa A8 6) to A Coqany's technical sup-
port center. and this has been the etarting point for the export of an
average of five to six units per aonth. This A Conpany is selling this
computer in both the United Statea and Canada. .

In this nannsr liitachi has already made some inroads in its study of the
American market through the introduction of the on! lime. To this end.
this coqeny has been taking continuous surveys on narketing strategy.
methods and arm. Hhat has led to this present course of decidiu to in-
vade the American market has been the solidification of the M series

5
.FOI OFFICIAL I18! OIL!
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

general purpose computer's domestic market position. together with the de-
cision that en incursion into the world's lsrgest msrket. the American, is
psrssount to bolstering their own image in its strategy for developing
overseas computer markets.

Added to some preliminary surveys that had been made in the past. it was
to this end that the project team was formed to become the center of the
final step that will select the type of computers to be msrketed and lay
the sales strategy for the specific implementation of this sales program.
end it will come up with a concrete strategy by next spring.

Since there sre‘ no "limiting conditions" to the OEH contract with A Com-
pany. there are some questions of trust that may arise with promoting sales
of products of its own brands, but other than that, no major problems are
expected in such a promotion. As a result. it now has been definitely de-
cided that Hitachi will enter the American market next Japanese fiscal year.

Mitsubishi Electric and Nippon Electric have already set up on-site sales
companies for their office computer products in the United States. and will
start soles next year. Fujitsu is studying the introduction of its general
purpose computer in a manner not unlike hitschi.

In this manner. hitachi's incursion into the stronghold of IBM, which is
presently waging a massive assault on the Japanese market. will probebly

create a massive impact on the electronic computer industries both at home
and abroad.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1978

2267
680: 5500

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

\

armour announces rﬂcsmrm'sr‘viracv
Tokyo NIKKAN KWYO SHINBUN in Japanese ls Oct 78 p 16

[Text] Hitachi, Ltd. (Riroyoshi Yoshiyana, president)
clearly stated on 3 October its strategy for the coming
facsimile battle and its develowsntal policy. Spa.
cifically, (l) exports will be centered on contracts for
overseas customer trade-ark products (03H), (2) products
that are standardized, popularly used, and of high qual-
ity will be diversified and customers will be offered a
free, wide range selection, and (3) market prices have
dropped and consequently the number of customers has in-
creased so efforts will be directed at developing

machines alnost at the level of household electrical ap-
pliances and at volume sales. Contracts have been signed

or are being negotiated with two Anericsn companies and
one European country for exports as 03H. The first such
export will be to the U.S. 'l'elauto Company, and it is
expected that an annual export of LOGO-3,000 sets will
counenCe at the end of this year. This present policy
seems to be landing emphasis to the development of an
intelligent facsimile, a fascinile computer termznsl us-
ing ordinary paper and the inkjet technique. and the de-

velopment of 5 to 10 second super high speed units in the
future plans.

Since March of this year. Hitachi has been marketing eight types of high
speed units (l Minute units) as well as a mdiun speed "RIPAX 31d" that
conforms to the GI! specifications of the International Telephone and ‘l'ele-
graph Consultative Conuittee (com), and it is proceeding to secure its
position in the facsimile industry. According to the company, sales are in-

creasing regularly and it is currently increasing the production capacity of
its Totsuka plant.

The company arrived at the position that (l) the interconnection of differ-
ent facsimile systems is now possible, (2) the industry is seeing advances

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

in group network uoago by time. to include affilietue and (J) uoage by
lediwn and onell buoineaeee ae well ed by individually owned buoineeeee haa

increeeed. There heo been remarkable development in thin vein. Further-
nore. it it expected that Juot one nore etep ie needed to introduce thie

technology to the gemral public through e public (ecoinile network uoing
the hour iaceinile ”unifax" that in being planned by Nippon Telegreph and

Telephone Nblic Corporation [m]. end Nitachi hae reaueeeed ito induc-
triel atrategy.

According to liitechi'a current buic policy. exporta ained at the United
Stated end Iuropd'neinly on the line of 03H will be taken up in earneat
should trede tellu eee‘n encoureging. A contract her already been drawn up
(eale oi teceinilee. naintenence, and eooe production) et the rate of 2.000-
3.099_unito per yeer, and ahipuente will begin by the end of the yeer.
Negotietiono ere clone to the oigning otage with another 0.8. conpany end one
'in Europe. Test exporte will be initiated next epring, and lure egain. the
contrecte are expected to be in the LOW-3.000 per year acaln.

Also, the production and eale of the elreedy-introduced bueineee uee fac-
oinilea ie planned, while high claeo unite thet will cater to the ueer'e
wiehee will be proliferated. Developnente in inkjet fecoinilee uoing ordin-

ery peper, color ieceinile‘ intelligent fecoinile, and euper high opeed unite
will be proaoted to this end. Selee of intelligent facoilile units are
elated to otart in 1980.

On the other hand, ehould nice of life Iinifex rtert in eerneet. the on
of feceinilee by the generel public will becoor practical. he I reeult.
mu production and ealee would reault in facoi-ileo ol-oot on the level oi
noueehold electrical appliencee. hence, putting effort into producto “and
at neceeeleo ie intended.

ln thie nenncr Ilitachi, which her gradually energod no a power in the fac-

eiuile eree. has dieplayed ito etrategy. and thio been to hove been a grent
etimlue to the other conpeniee.

conncur: mum Xogyo Shinbunoha 197a

2267
cso: 5500

8
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

amen: H.200" snmum 1‘0 mn- ll' umn HM! OF 1979
Tokyo NIKKAN K0610 sumun in Japanese 6 80p 78 p 12

[Int] Mitschi Ltd. (prosidcnt liitoyoohl Yoshiyaus) hos couplstod dsvslor
usnt of its supsr-larga olccttonic couputor ”u-lOOli" and will initisto ship-
nnts in tha sccond half of 1979. according to an snnouncausnt tslsaud on
S Ssptoubct. This “0200!! raprcasnts tho top uit of this coupnny'o rsgulnr

Hsotiu couputsrs that can coupoto with Ian's nupar latga 3033. thstoby
classing it with the world’s largast and iutast uachinu.

Tho H-ZOOII’o intsrnal procouing spud in so high that it opotatos two and
a halt to thrsa tiuss as (sot as ths 11-190. In sodition. its coubination
vith a lnrgc capacity high spssd disk drivo (usuory capacity 3l7.2 In x 2
wits) and high spud printsr (2. 000 linss/uin) high potforusnco pctiphoral

aquipusnt oublad satup oi a systcu with a good balsnco tsuosn hatdvarc and
software.

‘l'ba cantral procauor ban a uain usuoty of s uni-n of 16 ill and is pto-
vidad with 16 channslo. A uultiptocassot continuation of n uni-n of 6
procassors io posoibls.

At the saus tiut. an intarnal arrny procassor (M?) can to addsd to iuprovc
its scicnco and tschnology couputing ptocauing capability. sod thin aubus
s uni-nu tout-fold spsso inctsass in ptocsuing tius couparsd to tha usual
uodos. In snothsr direction. [8! vith logic slsusnt of $50 gatcc psr chip
and unuory olausnt of 16 KB par chip L?! arc and to iuptovc syntou opud
nod roliubility. thoraby bringing this systcu to tha world's top level in
spuad.

Operation is greatly fucilitntcd by ths «as of s console ssrvico procssoor
which includcs a 20-inch color display. 'l'hsrs on two typu of opststing
systaus ((3): V33 and V63. The vos 3 in pstticular cuploys s usss
virtual utuoty undo that in doaipud to exploit the capubility of bio:
traffic and high dagrcs of uultipiaxing job procassing.

9
FOR CFFXCIAA. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'i‘he eyeten ia deeigned to enable efficient nee of varioue eoftvare tooie
each an online eupport program. (Th8) and data Ienagenent eyetene (ADM).
which are eaid to greatly reduce neintenence coate. ‘i'he unite are leaned
on a nonthiy baaia beginning at 36 niilion yen per nonth. "Joint reaearch"
on the H eeriea general-purpoee conpntere hee been pronoted aince an [912
by I‘ujiteu and Hitachi under a government eubeidy ae a conpetitor to the

IBM 370, but the preeent developnenta are independent efforte by theae tvo
conpaniee.

0n the other hand. I!!! announced ite 303x eeriea iaat epring and iaet fall.
At the cane tin. it greatly reduced the price of ite 310. Thu. um dealt

the donatic induetriee a nejor blow. In retaliation. Fujiteu announced ite
top ievei 11-200 in aid-January. The Iii-200 reproeente a one and a halt to
one and ionr-fifth‘e increaee in capabilitiee over the H-l90 and ie eaid to
even exceed that of "We top nachine, the 3033.

To counter theae develop-ente, Hitachi juat amounced ita "-200”. Both of
theae announce-onto repreeentad in part the role of government eubeidiee
and grante. The govern-ent ie a participant in a three party develop-ant of
euper high performance conputere with Fujiteu and Hitachi.

In any event. the war for ordere ia expected to be epurred on againet the
IBM 303x eeriea a the remit of the announcenente on the develop-ent of
eoper large conputere by two of thie country'e largaet nakera.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei: Kayo Shinbmhl 1978

2267
030: 5500

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAM

TOYOI'A [mums I!“ 3033 '08 common» MY DISIGN
Tokyo um K0610 summon in Japanooo 1 Sop 78 p ll

[toxtl Toyota Motor Co., Ltd.. hao boon conducting ro-
ooarch on CAD (body doaign aupport oyaton) that will onabla
diroct tranoition (row original dooin to tho notal for.
without firot naking a clay nodol and thoroby alininato
oovoral otopo in tho procou of now auto-ohilo dowolop-
nont. Tho conpany announcod on 3l Auguot that it hod ac-
quirod a oupor-largo oloctronic tonputor. lﬂi 3033. which
will bo introducod into ito nanuiacturing oyoton ao ono
phaoo of thia roooarch progran. ‘l'ho CAD that thio conpany
io pro-oting io aid to roduco tho nu-bar of production
otopo by about half. ‘l'ho oyoton should aloo roduco pro-
duction coota whon conputod. tho autonobilo induotry
loolu upon tho ayaton with graat intoroat at tho noxt
gonorotion oyoton. Tho 3033 has a nosin- caoatity of
oiwt oillion bytoo and procoooing capobility of 58
nanoaocondo that puto it in tho top claoa. Ito intro-
auction to oxpoctod to bring thio roooarch ono otop
clooor to practical roalioation.

Undo: tho ayoton prooontly uployod by thio co-pany, in dovoloping a now
auto-obilo tho nokoup of tho original dooign io dono firat. m. doaip io
tho baaio for a full aico woodon nodol. callod a clay nodal. oado baioro tho
Iotal vohiclo io conotruttod. M a raault. conoidorablo ti. and oftort aro
raquirad boioro tho notal stool io conatructod, and at loaot 3 to 6 yaaro
aro roquirod iron tho ti.- roooarch on a giwon auto-obilo ia initiatod un-
til tho now Iodol Iakoo ito appoaranca.

low tho do that thio co-pany ia cutrontly pronoting ia oaid to onablo a
diroct tranoition iro- tho original dooiui to tho notal oodol without going
through the clay nodol otago. and roportodly hoth tino and labor aro cut in
half.

11
FOR OFFXCIN. cs: Oh'LY
FOR OI’FICIAL USE ONLY

Tho [Ni 3033 introduced in thin praunt round not only advancoc CAD roooorch
ono atop inrthor but vac acquirod in port bocauco tho BIS (parto lict con-
putariution oyatoa) procouin; oyotoa introducod in m 1973 could no lonsor
ho adoquatoly handlod with tho I!“ 370460. Tho 3033 hon o mi.- capacity
at a aillion bytoo ond procouin. copacity of SO nanooocondo. roughly tvico
tho porforunco of tho 160, bolonu to tho world'a top clooa of conwtoro.
‘i'o dato. doiivoriao of (tho 3033] hovo boon not up for Shikoku Bloctric

Povor and Oto Lifo lncuronco Coupony. out Toyota liotor Coupany «ill ho tho
(int unutacturor to «co it.

Toyoto boliovoc that tho introduction of tho 3033 vill coon ottoct practical
colutiona to any probiou oncomtorod by tho autonobilo induotry.

comxcur: mm loco summon. 1m

2267
080: 5500

12
FOR OFFXCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

SM" "RIB T0 roan OWTING SYSTEM R G D ASSOCIATION
Tokyo MUM! mo SHINBUN in Jepenese 29 Sep 78 p 15

[Text] The propossl to bring together seven donestic
nekers es the uni: body to engeae in develop-ent of con-
puter softwere (operetin; systen - es), en entity the
Ministry of lnternstionel Trede end Industry (HIT!) is
plenning to set up in m 1979. hes token the leed.
The present plen is to set up e "lesic Technology Deo
velopnent end Reseerch Aseocietion" (provisionel nene)
next spring to serve es the orun to develop this as,
end the group will consist of the five donestic nekers:
Tujitsu, liitechi ltd.. Nippon Electric, Mitsubishi
llectric, end Toshibe elon; with the develop-entel or-
un of V1.81, Conbined Conputer leboretory (Fujitsu.
liitechi. Mitsubishi), end NBC-Toshibe lnfornetion Syeo
tens (Nippon Electric, Toehibe) for e totel of seven
conpenies. To this end, 70 billion yen will be el-
lotted over the next five yeers for resesrch on nore
then l0 the-es such es e Jepenese leneuspe intone-
tion eyeten, super virtuel nenory, end softwere one-
level stones.

The esteblishnent of the "subsidy syeten for resesrch end develop-eat on the
next uneretion coeputer“ is e nejor piller in the new conputer policy thet
lil‘l'l plens for J?! 79. This eey be celled the new follow-on policy follow-
ing resesrch end develop-snt of the VLSI thet will end in m 1979. This

is e systen thet proposes to pent subsidies to the ushers who will develop
the OS for the next generetion coeputer thet will use the V131. It is
plenncd to heve the soveruent put up 35 billion you over s five yeer
period. which will be ntched by en equel 35 billion yen tron privete
sources (or e totel of 70 billion yen.

0‘ this enount, 55 billion yen is to go for Q development end 15 billin
yen for peripherele end terninels. For the first yeer, 2.3 billion yen
will be budasud. l.7 billion yen for the OS end 60 nillion yen for
peripherals end terlinels.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l'ho njor prohlooe ln as dovolomnt have been (1) how to poeltlon the two
lnduetrlnl groupe that have been lnvolvnd 1n V181 development end (2) vhother
to uee e ﬁve conpeny eyete- (or lnduetrlel pertlclpetlon or treet Nlppon
llectrlc end ‘l‘othlhe u elnsle conpeny end let the jolnt conpeny. um.
pertlclpete to e tour conpeny eetup.

0n the other head, tn the telke hetveen um end lnduetry strong feellnge
were expreeeed thet the "as project to only en extenelon of V1.81 develop-
oent." end. furthermore, the 08 project lnvolvee nore then l0 tllee of de-
velop-eat: on e reeult. the ereee to he covered by the dlfferent conpenlee
would not he the one. end consequently lopetuoue plene to centrellte the
lnduetry olght not he prudenn 'l’hle retlonele reeulted 1n eettlln; on e

eeven conpeny eye ten.

There to etlll coneldereble the before the flnel declelone ere node. end
e umber of prohle-e etlll need to be teeolved. It one. prohehle thet the
eventuel declelon ulll he touerd e eeven conpeny eyem.

comma-r: lelun Kogyo Shinbun-ha. 1918

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

JAPANESE MINISTRY To AUTHORIZE NEH RADIO. UHF TV STATIONS
Tokyo ASA"! SHIHDUN in Japanese 22 Nov 78 Iorning edition p 3 OH

[Text] The Hinistry of Posts and Teleco-unications on 21 November briefed
the mm Regulatory Council on its tentative plan to authorise the estab-
lish-eat of four private FM radio stations end thre'e privste unr television
stations. According to the plan. liokksido end Hiyagi. Shisuoke and Hiroshila
prefectures will get one FM radio station each (prefecturel service) and
Shisuolu. Kunanoto and ngoshiss prefectures one our TV ststion each. The
einistry will hold public hearings on the plaa through approximately

10 Decoder. then fornslly refer it to the Radio Regulatory Council for
deliberation before adopting a final decision on the channel allocation plan
by the end of the yesr.

The new FM radio frequencies will be: 80.6 at: for Hokkaido. 77.1 m: for
Hiyagi Prefecture, 79.2 mu for Shixuolra Prefecture end 78.2 m: for
Hiroshiss Prefecture.

Shicuoka. classified as a "seni-hssic area" for hrosdcssting purposes, will
get the fourth private VIII TV station in the prefecture. while Kuunoto end
hgoahiu will be sdded to the list of "uni-basic sreas“ to get their third
private our stations in their respective prefectures. The channels for the
new TV ststions will be 31 for Shisuoka. 22 for Kunsnoto and 32 for ngoshisa.

COPYRIGIT: ASNII SHIHBUN. Tokyo. Honshs. 1975

C50: 5500

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

"11'! "ANTS 1'0 3161.00: 30 PBRGNT 0? 80mm INCGIB PR!!! TAX
Tokyo RIM KOGYO SHINE!!! in Japanese 16 Oct 78 p 1

[Text] with the intention of establishing a "special tax euwtion systen
for incone relating to nulti-usa software transaction (software prono-
tion tax systen)" next year. the Minietry of International trade and
Industry (Ml‘l'l) has begm negotiating with the Ministry of Finance. Ac-
cording to the disclosure nade by the um. the said easwtion systan seeks
to tax cunt 30 percent of incoae resulting fron transactions involving
the sulciuse softwarss that are registered with the Data Processing Pro-
notion Businesses Association and incidental technical services (confined
to those services perforaed by tedmicians that have passed the data pro-
cesoor qualification test). lts ai- is to coist the sales offensive by
the foreign cepital computer nanufscturers led by IBM. as well as to rspidly
establish an environ-nt receptive to co-ercialiration of coQutsr
software. Opposition fron the Finance Ministry. intent on increasing the
tax revenue. is anticipated. however. the MIT! is planning to apply strong
pressure to reelire the tax eertion systen in order to inlenent the
Software Pronotion Decision. a supple-eatery provision to the Law on
‘l‘errary Measures for Upgrading Specified Machinery and Infornstion
Industries appended at the tins of the lsttar's prcsulgstion. The probable
outcone is thst the final settlennt will be a political one.

Relative to the total data processing coat. the software cost ratio is in-
creasing rspidly. It is said that by the and of 1986 when the effective
statute of linitation for the but on Temrary lhasures for Upgrading
Specified Machinery and lnfornation Industries expires. the ratio is ex-
pected to reach 80 to 90 percent of the total cost. Therefore. the astsbo
lishnent of a software nrket based on co-ercislly profitable software
services has been. an urgent necessity.

however. in order to emete with IBM, the doustic nanufacturere have
traditionally onloyed a sales tactic based on ”no cost software services."
This action necessarily led then to uderplay the qualitative hardware
differences and "brand iugs" differences. Thus. unless there is sons for.
of strong incentive. it would be difficult to suddenly change the sales
policy. to affix price on softwares and to co-rcislixe then. Further-lore.

16
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

due to the tectnologtcel tea. the doneettc coquter mufecturere' eoft-
veree ere urkedly tntertor to thoee of tlm tn thetr functtonel cepebtlt-
ttee. And vhtle nu te erpected to tntroduce epoch-Iektn; eottveree tn

conjmctton vtth the eyeten for the next pertod. the truth of the letter

to thet the donut: counter nennfecturere do not have cowereble eoft-
veree.

Ior theee reeeone. the am to ettewttng to eeteblteh en taco. tea:
exewtton eyeten ee e etrons tnoenttve for eecnrtn; e nerket pleoe envtron-
nent for co-nrctettud eoftveree.

The enwtton retton vttt he 30 percent of tncone dertved tron treneec-
ttone tnvolvtng eultt-nee eoftveree end tnctdentel techntcel eervtoee.
Ines-och ee the Ptnenoe thtetry te etrtvtn; to tncreeee tex revenue. ne-
gottettone over the eeteblteh-ent of the eetd exemtton eyeten to expected
to encounter dttftculttee. It to certetn thet the ftnel decteton vtn he
led: tn the poltttcel erene. '

COPYRIGBT: Ntkkln Kayo Shinbunlhe 1978

11660
C80: 5500

1'!
PO! OHICIAI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

INTER-AMERICAN AHA!”

GONNA?!” am 1880! PM]. 0000'."
"WOW Mavens mu in Spaniah 2250 ON? 8 Dec 76 Flo-M 0"!an 038 OIL!
(u mar Sepulveda]

[Mt] Panaas City. 8 Dec (Pu-ouperta on cc-lnicstions in Latin Anerics reiterated
today their domes-n over the proJact for technical aid in co-lnioations proposed by
the United states to the developing countries. This polect is to be analysed in
Iashingtcn in Apil. This concern is stated in the final docuaent sproved by at area
experts at the ccnoluaion in this capital today of a conference convolted by unscoo.

lhe experts noted that the seating summed by the 0.3. Govern-cut 'could entail new
an ace dameroua nechaniau of dependence fu- 1'hi.rd Vcrld ccuntriec."

in this regard they rccoaaended to woo Director General Aaadou llhtar how that he
take to that neeting ideas which vill guarantee the participation of oomnication re-
searchers in the institutional neohanisa of systeaatic oomultations on the needs.
activities and plan related to the develop-ant of co-onications to be established there.
he experts also believe that it is absolutely necessary for the states of the region to
consider and "spare a strategy on the forthcosing redefinition [redefinioion] and redis-
tribution of radio frequencies to take place in Geneva in depteaher l979.

In this regard. they redo-ended the ”notion of him-level consultation aestinp along
the Latin Aaerican and caribbean countries to establish co-on strategies and to area on
the distribution of frequences in the region in order to present a united front before
the big technological and geopolitical options. be experts also proposed the holding
of mtina with experts m- the nonalined countries for the purpose of developing a
couch front of struggle against efforts to legiti-ise the resent situation and agaimt
the possibility of acre plundering and new for- of international doainatlon. 1hey also
asked moon to recomisc the Latin harican association of communion researchers as
a nongovernaental organisation and to assiu funds for the deeelopent of the national
centers that coupoae it.

vith regard to professional training the experts redo-ended the establish-ant or reorien-
tation of actools were training it given in co-Inioationa theory and research and the

avoidance of a pmltfgﬂt1on of Journalisa training schools by nodiuing the existiu ones
in accordance aith the availability of teachers and the true needs of the society that

they lost serve. ‘nle experts also "cc-ended research on freedoa of expression. of

18
FOR omcw. 083 MY
90R OI'I’ICIM. "8!! ONLY

cull-noun; ono'o thongs» [onluon drl mulonto] ml or tho pron. Ind tho prep-rotten
of o pro-poem. on o rodoﬂntuon of tho freedo- or oxproooton baud on a now new to
con-unto and incomuonol low on tho oubJooc no u to «work the oroouon or 0

MI moomuonol ordor rot-rain; oo-uuoouono. 'lho nouns. Hilton opoooa on NM”.

woo cloud today by moo: Baum mu. oo—mtoouom no“. dzrootor of tho (Mountain
cont-mono om mom ”that", w by Mtonto mun. ”out-no dinner of tho onlooro

IM MIOICIOM OHM). 0f MW.

19
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

UNESCO INFORMATION RESOLUTION CUOICBS DISCUSSED
Porie JBUNB APRIQUE in French 22 Nov 78 pp 37-38

[Article by Sophie Bessis: "The Price of an Agreement"!

[Text] The blocs confronting one another in UNESCO on
the problem of information are moving toward a compro-
mise. But the final text risks being considerably
sweetened.

Perie. -- Are the I“ mesber states of UNESCO finally on the path of a
general consensus concerning the famous draft declaration on means of in-
formation?

No moves had yet been made at the opening of the 20th session of the General
Conference which is carrying on its work in Paris until 28 Novewer. In

the three camps present, the Third Norld. the Nestern countries, and the
comtries of the Beat, the atmosphere leaned to pessimism end they doubted
that they could reach agreement on a subject which has been in the forefront
for six years.

The problem relating to information and media continue to cause much ink

to flow and to monopolize the attention of all the participants and observers
at the conference. But necessity is the mother of invention and the dele-
gates were actually agreed on one single point: to arrive at a consensus

at any cost to preserve "the spirit of Nairobi" and not to tarnish the

image of UNESCO by the spectacle of a public confrontation among the dif-
ferent blocs.

The marathon then unfolded at two times. In a first phase the most varied
ruors made the rounds on the fate reserved for this draft which had been
discussed and recast every two years and ... sent back every time: it was
going to be definitively buried; it would be postponed to the 21st session.
which will take place in 1980 in Belgrade; it would be rejected by the
Westerners and would then have no value since it was not adopted unanimously.
But the nonalined let it be known that they would consider as a snub the

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0!!“

Western refusal to take into account their aspirations for a "new inter-
national order in infornation.” As for the director of UNESCO, Mahtar
M'Bow, he used all his weight to reconcile opposing points of view.

But is this possible without ending up with a declaration which has becols
insignificant? For the ﬂesternere, the reference to state control of the
scans of censorship and the possibility of transforeing the India into scans
of propaganda. The defenders of the draft have rather diluted their wine
in the past two years. to the great injury of the Soviets noreover. Uhile
that presented at Nairobi in 1976 granted a clear preeeinence to the state
in the broadcasting end control of inforaatiou. the present text affine
respect for freedoe of infornetion end reduces the role initially devolving
upon the authorities without suppressing it entirely. There have therefore
been concessions. but deemed to be insufficient by the Europeans and the
Anericens pushed by their own press onto the path of fiancee.

After the first few days. when each had the opportunity to test the inten-
tions of his opposite embers. there were intense conversations in the
corridors asong the delegations, a proliferation of aaendments, the creation
of a "group to study the draft." Several meetings took place to try to
arrive at a cosproeise based on a second draft sure in conformity with the
Western desires. In this atnosphere every "hard" official statement was
shaded by such more conciliatory private or official renarks. and for sev-
eral days the main obstacles to a consensus have been lifted. The Tunisian
Hr Hustspha Hesmoudi. spokesman of the nonelined and one of the "founding
fathers" of the draft. even lets it be understood that the countries of the
Third world are not insisting on equhasizing absolutely the role of the
state in the final version.

The developnent in the attitude of the United States has been the deter-
Iining factor in working out an agreement. Piercely hostile to the draft
from the beginning, it acquired the favors of the "Third World through a
double operation. The American delegate J. Reinhardt took care in his
speech of 3 Noveﬁer to leave the door open to the negotiations by not
hurling any anathema. and announced that his country was going to con-
tribute considerably to the develop-tut of information infrastructures

in the developing countries. That could only please the interested parties.
This stateaent provoked a relief close to euphoria and Hr M'Bow, in his
reply in the general political debate ”took note with satisfaction of the
constructive spirit" of the American co-itments. At the last ninute,
however, the Europeans sub-itted a new text which lust be discussed before
the final debate on 16 Nova-bet; theatrical displays therefore cannot be
excluded. But it rensins that the cliaate seem propitious to the con-
clusion of an agreement.

One may well wonder if everyone is confident of the foreseeable outcone

of this business. which in the beginning threatened to becone the abscess
of fixation of divergences snong the different groups, as the problea of
the exclusion from UNESCO of Israel was a short time ago. Not quite. It

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

seen- first of all that the Soviets and the Eastern countries as a whole.
who originated the draft and beceae itu aost ardent defenders. have been pro-
greasiVely excluded fro. the discussions. Looking at it closely. this is
not by chance. The direct link established between the new international
econoaic order and intonation, asking the latter a chapter in the north-
South dialog. and the insistence with which the accent has been placed on
financial and technical eid in the developsent of the aedia in the Third
world have strongly contributed to pushing then onto the sidelines. The
more flexible attitude of the United States soreover say well be explained
by the desire to break the con-on front of the nonalined countries with the
socialist countries which had been established. A successful operation. it
seem. end during the course of the discussions. the tripartite bargaining
was transformed into a dialog. which see-ed to soothe everyone. except for
those who were spurned. The quasi-exclusion of the socialist countries
eased the search for a coaproaise to the extent that. sore than their part-
ners in the Third ﬂorld. they insisted on sffining the role of the state

in the dissesination of inforlation; as for the Third ﬂorid. the latest turn
of events enables it to hope for swstantial financial aid in a field dear
to its heart.

The second group of nalcontents. which sakes no bones about adlitting it.

is the Aaerican press as a whole: it is the hue and cry since the govern-ent
in Hashington decided to place no further obstacle to the adoption of the
declaration. It attracted the thunderbolts of the editorial writers of the
big papers which for sole days were in a state of war against UNESCO and
against the official position of their country. "No to usesco." headlined
the New York Tines recently. stressing that the seat precious riﬂits of the
Western desocracies would not be the subject of cosproeise and rebuking the
West for having "yielded” to Third ﬂorid and Soviet deasnds. The defense

of freedoa of the press. threatened in their eyes by the probable concluion
of the agree-sot, continues to occupy "the one.” despite the repeated as-
surances of the executive branch.

The stakes are nevertheless less iqiortant than they were. for this tale of
episodes risks being settled with a declaration devoid of all real content.

Thnt finally appears to be the price which both sides are ready to pay in
e laborious negotiation on a subject which. in the general opinion. cannot
long renain in suspense without becoaing edaarrassing.

It reuins to be seen whether it will not. because of its Miguity. dis-
please everyone instead of satisfying all the interested parties.

mPYRIGﬂT: Jeane Afrlque GIUPJIA 1978

6l08
(:50: 5500 can

22
'Ol O'NCIAI. US! ONLY