APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010027-0

1: JRNUBRV 1979 (9005' 4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000100270

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.7988 0/8220
15 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N HESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 14/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00010027-0
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from Bnglish-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or folloving the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trensliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? P031. ICA‘I'IONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. ﬁggernment Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.5. Government rrinting officer-Hashington, D.C.
20002.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell a Nowell, old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio, 05691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Globe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
- 3. Recipient's Autumn No.

'epoﬂ ‘aic

lS .‘renue 197

O.

. Protocols. Ougaaltedon New and Adrian l Picket/Tasman! Unit No.
Joint Publication. Research Service
1000 North Globe Road

Arlington. Virginia 22201

LII-I Nu
"”" ”Jns Llazzo
I . a N.

Il\.e

         

     
   
      

  

TRANSLATIONS ON WESTERN EUROPE. (pogo 4/79)

 
 

    
 
  
    

 
 
  

 
 

Contract/Giant Ne.

    

n, Sponeetlng Organization Name a“ Addms ‘3. Type sl Repon k Puled
Covered

       
       
  

As above

‘5. Supplementary Notes

Ah-uecu

The serial report containa political/economic intonation on West European
energy, finance and trade policy nattera as well as developments ane‘ trends
in the doctrine. programs and problem of the najor columnist parti ea,
including their relations with commie: parties outside the Heat Europesn
area. ' ‘

  

     

        
     
   
      
       
        
         
       
    
   
     

. cy I'm!- and ere-u: Aaelysls. e. Descriptor:

 

Political Science __lnternational Miairs _l.uxenbourg
Sociology _Auetrie _Netherlanda
Propaganda _lelgiu _Norvay
Economics __Canada -Pmﬂl
Energy _cyprus _ _8pain

Industry _Dennark _8veden

Trade _Pinland _Svitzerland
Finance _X_Prance _‘i'ur|tey

__Greece _United Kingdom
We. Heuiﬂru/Opce-Ended Tens Iceland X

Rest Gemny

xl

Italy

I72.CWTIFir|d/Gvoup SC. SD. 10

 
 

ll. Availability $1me

For Official Use Only.
Linitcd Number of Copies Available Fro. JPRS.

   

voaee nub-u (luv. a-na THE FORM HAY Us IEPIWUCED «acme: nan-On
FOR _ OFFICIAL _USE ONLY

JPRS L/l

15 Jenn:

TRANSLATIONS on WESTERN EUROPE
(P000 4/79)

CouTsms
FRANCE

Ciscerd'a Recent Monetary Policy Reviewed
(Herc Ullnenn; PARIS NATCE, 15 Dec 78) ..............

Air Traneport Problems, Outlook Reviewed
(Claude Abraham; AIR 6 COSMOS. 25 Nov 78) ...........

BriaEe

Treininﬁ for Corsican Extranieta
Missile Regiment Operational

ITALY

ENI‘s 5-Year Investment Plan Announced
(Eebrizio Dresosei; CORRIERE DELLA SERA, 18 Nov 78)..

NEST GERMANY

Repatriation of Ethnic Ger-ens Prom USSR Declines
(PRANKPURTER ALLCEHEINE, 16 Dec 78) .................

Expert View: Economic Crouth, Problems for 1979
(CAPITAL, Dec 78) eeseeeeeesoeeeseosssssesosseeeeesse

Subsidized Research To Create New Jobs
(Herner Heilenenn; STERE. 23 Nov 78) ................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

crscann's mm mum mm mrmn
mu mm mm in French 15 m 78 pp 118-119

[Article by Harc Ullnann: "th Giscerd Ventures To llitch the Franc to the
Hark")

[Text] "Giscard has lost his nind. France's rate of inflation is 10 per-
cent while Geroany's is only 3 percent. And yethe is convinced the franc
will nsintain its value against the nark." "as this consent nade by Fran-
cois Hitterrand? Not at ell. By Georges Harchais than? No. neither by

hin. It was nade by a forner Cabinet ninis'ter belonging to the parliasentary

najority. And further-ore. he was speaking on behalf of” several of hie
colleagues.

Sons high-level officials express the ease view but in nore polite terns.

One of then told us on the very day of the European su-Iit neeting in Brussels:
"The only big question is whether the French econony is strong enough to
support the recently approved European lionetary Systen (96)." And since he
knows ne very well, he did not hesitate to add: "I an worried."

This Ian's line of reasoning is quite sinple. It can be su-arired in two
sentences. First of all, the French econony is still too weak for the franc
to ssintain constant parity with the nark. Secondly, if the ENS authorizes
frequent parity adjustments. it will not be of nuch use. Conclusion: France
should not have joined this club if its rules are inflexible; and it will be of
no use if its rules are flexible. If it were not for the fact that I highly
respect this nan. I would characterize hin as a Marxist. a Marxist of the
Groucho school. I refer to the oldest of the Hat: brothers, the one with the
big cigar and black matache. who used to say: ”I‘- not interested in joining
any club that would accept as as a Isobar."

Such joking aside. this is indeed a serious subject. He shall begin by asking
ourselves why Giscard d'tataing has been so patently determined the past 6
Ionths, and why he displayed so such will power Tuesday.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

His reasons. as I see it. can be grouped into three principal categories:
intellectual reasons. foreign policy reasons. and lastly and above all. domes-
tic economic policy reasons.

intellectually. the president of the republic in unhappy at the fact that

for the past few years currency exchange rates have been fixed from day to

day on foreign-exchange markets. In other words. the rate of exchange is no
more stable than the price of meat or fish. This rate is also vulnerable to
any kind of rumor and its fluctuations can be abrupt and unrelated to the long-
term evolution in the economic situation. This state of affairs is detrimental
to international trade because importers generally settle their accounts on a 90-
day basis and do not have the slightest idea as to what the final amount of
their bill will be. Manufacturers suffer from the repercussions of this unccr~
tainty. They are reluctant to count on their contracts abroad and hence to
expand their exportable production which. under other circumstances. would
create jobs.

To break this vicious chain. Giscard d'Bstaing. in agreement with West German
Chancellor helmut Sch:udt, was convinced that European currencies had to be
tightly linked to each other within a "zone of monetary stability." To prevent
speculation from causing the structure to collapse. the EH5 calls for establish-
meat of a common fund which will be the largest ever created anywhere in the
world. To set up this fund. each member country will contribute part of its
reserves. in other words. part of the ”pile" of gold and dollars it retains

to finance its foreign trade. An additional equivalent amount will also be
contributed by each country, but this time in national currencies. The fund
will be denominated in a new European Currency Unit. or ECU. The total amount
of the fund will be much greater than the amount any apeculator or group of
speculators can ever hope to amass. Consequently. the value of the different
European currencies will revert to being the business of governments.

This does not mean that a common currency will be created right away. or even

that the relative value of our different currencies will be unalterable. If.

for example. prices continue to rise more in France than in Germany. the franc
will, after all. definitely have to drop and the mark rise.

But this drop and this rise will be negotiated within European institutions
and governments will thus be obliged to determine a common policy together.
This is where the foreign policy aspect of Ciscard's reasons comes into play.
For a long time. too long a time. the French and German governments wrangled
over a matter of principle. Officials in Bonn contended that application of
coordinated economic policies had to precede the pooling of monetary resources.
Officials in Paris rebutted that such pooling was an indispensable prerequi-
site to implementation of concerted policies. This quarrel has now been
settled: both actions will take place concurrently and, therefore, the task of
organizing Europe will be_able to move forward. at long last.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From the monetary standpoint. such organization is especially necessary

in view of the dollar's instability. Every tine the dollar drops. greater
pressure is generally exerted on the mark than on the franc. As a result.
the disparity between German money and French money broadens. Now that the
mark. the franc. and several other European currencies are linked. they will
fluctuate more or less in concert and the amplitude of this fluctuation
should be less. The bigger the basin. the smaller the waves.

This aspect of the system is of particular interest to Schmidt. He is sick

and tired of having Americans target solely the German mark. along with the
Japanese yen. Constant reevaluation of the German currency has certainly

not prevented German manufacturers from selling their products abroad. but

they do so at a lower profit each day. Should the mark be drawn slightly
downward by weaker currencies. profits would increase once again and new factories
could be built in Germany.

For converse reasons. Callaghan is hesitant to tie the pound's fate to the
mark's fate. He believes. and rightly so. that this would ultimately restrict
his government's freedom of action. He has decided. therefore, to keep Great
Britain partly aloof from the EMS. As for Italy. after a day of sharp Buro-
pean bargaining. it was still not known Tuesday night whether that country
would be satisfied with the compensations it has been offered.

Giscard d'Estaing has no such hesitancy. In his view. it is better for France
to be in the company of good rather than poor students. Nor is it by mere coin-
cidence that he has asked [Prime Minister] Barre to follow a policy which
subordinates everything to improving the French economy's competitive posture.

A policy designed precisely to bring France closer to Germany. in other words.
closer to the best student in the class.

This thus brings us to the economic aspect of Giscard's line of reasoning.
If France today is in a less favorable posture than Germany. it is because
it was unable. before the oil crisis. to make the necessary change in its
industries. why was it unable to do this? Because the franc was constantly
undervalued and firms could export without too much trouble. For the past

2 years. the president of the republic and his prime minister have sought to
accelerate such change instead of curbing it. The current imperative require-
ment is to make France competitive in world markets. Giscard d'Bstaing is
convinced this is the one and only way France can gain "a key position among
the leading industrial countries.” Should it fail to do so, France would
inevitably slide downhill into a situation of financial indebtedness and
industrial subcontracting. in short. into a status of dependency and under-
development. In other words. France still cannot see the light "at the end
of the tunnel" and there will be no "eleventh hours." The recovery plan
launched by Barre is but an initial step. Success demands a lengthy period
of self-discipline and association with Germany is tangible proof of such
discipline.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

That leaves the essential question: In Vrance In a position to keep pace

with its German partner? To answer this question. one must make a diagnosis
of our economy. I hereby submit my diagnosis to PARIS MATCH readers. It is

a conscientious analysis based on a detailed survey T have been conducting
since September. This diagnosis in as follows: the French economy is improv-
ing somewhat but this improvement is slow and we have long difficult years
ahead of us.

I shall start my diagnosis with the price situation. Admittedly the decon-
trol of industrial prices did not trigger excessive increases and price

indexes for August. September. and even October were favorable. Admittedly by
sharply increasing public rates and fares in the second quarter of the year,

the government did not hesitate to “bite the bullet" early and that shock is
now behind us. Admittedly companies took advantage of the decline in raw
materials to build up their stockpiles at reasonable prices over a period of
several motnhs. and these stockpiles will be mostwelcoms next year. Admittedly.
the cost-of-living increase in 1979 should be below 8 percent. barring some
serious incident on 'dd oil front. The fact remains, however. that 8 percent
or even 7 percent, it still high. and at any rate. it is double what the Germans
will have. We must. therefore, continue our efforts. For how long? For
several years inasmuch as experience shows that it is very difficult to check
rising prices by more than 1 percent per year on the average.

I shall now consider our foreign trade. Admittedly we once again have a favorable
balance of trade and France now sells as much merchandise abroad as it purchases
there. Yet upon scrutinizing our overall trade picture. we notice that the
distribution of our trade by country and by product is not favorable. For
instance. geographically speaking, we have a trade deficit with the most
advanced industrial countries and a trade surplus with the less developed
countries. For instance. sectorially speaking. we import more processed goods
than we export. These two weaknesses show that our industry has far from
completed its necessary changes. or as we say today, its "redeployment." It
will take many more years to complete these changes. Years during which even

a revival of private investment will not reduce unemployment substantially.

To enhance their competitive posture in world markets. large companies

are now obligad--and will be obliged for a long time to come-to simultaneously
make decisions to create jobs in one place and close plants in another. In
some instances,reductions in personnel may possibly equal or exceed the number
of new personnel hired. This is actually what is happening at Rhone-Pouleuc.
Hhile that firm is making both useful and considerable capital investments in
new production units. it is, however, also making personnel cuts in its old
plants. This example shows us why establishment of new companies has become a
currently popular theme. "hen s new business starts operating. it has. by de-
finition. no excess personnel and any possible growth has repercussions. in
toto. on the labor market. Unfortunately. old habits also change slowly in this
field. and several tens of thousands of heroes ready and willing to start their
own business cannot be found overnight. This shows why action to combat

l.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unemployment must be a national priority. It also means that. for the presi-
dent of the republic. the asintsnance of economic discipline is not suffi-
cient per as.

Since we face the prospect of a long and drawn-out effort. justice and
prudence both dictate that all sacrifices be shared as equitably as possi-
ble. Three examples asply demonstrate this requirement. First. should this
or that region be plunged into a severe economic depression. it is feared

that this would cause an explosion that could politically trigger strikes

in the public sector. Secondly. if an excessively lengthy period of uneaploy-
sent and idleness were to drive many young men and wonen to desperation, sons
of than eight well yield to the teaptetion of Italian-style tsrrorisa.

Thirdly,. if wags ssmrs should ever get the feeling that they alone were
carrying the burden of all necessary transforaations. no lasting consensus
could emerge in our country.

All things considered. France's ability to Join forces with Germany depends
on maintaining a rigorous econoeic policy for several years. Yet such an
effort can be sustained only if the chief of state is able to forego the
interests of ease of this electorate in order to satisfy the aspirations of
those who will probably vote for his opponent again in 1981. I believe
Giscsrd d'zsteing is the first one to admit this. Bis loyal supporters insist
such would be his anbition for a second 7-year tern.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 par Cogedipresse 8A

8061
080: 3100

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR orncm. usr aim

FRANCE

AIR TRANSPORT PROBLEMS. OUTLOOK REVIEHBD
Paris AIR a COSMOS in French 25 Nov 78 pp 38-39, 56
[Article by Claude Abraham]

[Text] Mr Claude Abraham. the director general of Civil Aviation, was
the guest of honor of the UCCECA (Union of Chambers of Commerce and of
Airport Management) during the last general meeting of this organisation,
which was held in Paris on 15 November. He agreed to address the current
problems of French air transport but. rather than making a full report.
he chose to make some com-ants. Ha reproduce their substance belov and
thank the UCCECA for having sent them to us.

A Positive Balance sheet

The year 1950 saw the renaissance of French air transport. In 1960,

Air Inter was born. In 1970. regional aviation was developed, for 1980,
there is a question mark. Every 10 years, the director general of Civil
Aviation observed. French air transport reaches new thresholds.

The first positive element to bring to the balance sheet is the important
share of world traffic that French air transport has been able to sain-
tsin. In 1950, France was the fifth "aviation power" in the world. be-
hind the United States. the Soviet Union, Canada and Great Britain. It
had only 3 percent of world traffic. and that was sovereign traffic vith
its colonies. Today. France is still in fifth place, behind the same
countries (although their order has changed), but it has 6 percent of
world traffic. having in the meantime "achieved its reconversion." since
it no longer depends on sovereign traffic.

0n the level of infrastructure, today Paris has the second largest sir-
port in Europe and the sixth largest in the world. Sixty-five French
cities have air service. Abroad, 170 airports in a hundred or so coun-
tries can be reached by French airplanes. This result, Hr Abraham em-
phasizes, is not at all bad, if we take into consideration the fact that
during the same period other countries saw their share of international

traffic grow.

6
son orucm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The growth of freight constitutes a second positive element in the bal-
ance sheet which can be drawn up. This kind of activity is recent in
France. It represents at the moment from 30 to 40 percent of tonnage
of French long-lines carriers.

Another positive element, but a completely new one, is the penetration of
air transport throughout France. Last year, 6.5 percent of the French
travelled by air at least once; that represents 3.5 million passengers.
Only a few years ago, the penetration rate was only a percent. The
growth is substantial, but it cauld be greater. Indeed, we note that 16
percent of the Paris population travel by plane once a year, that is,

one Parisian out of six. Fifty-six percent of the trips are made for
personal reasons; young adults account for almost half of the passengers.
This penetration of air transport is very strong at present in the north-
ern and eastern sections of the country.

Hhat are the less positive elements in the balance sheet? Essentially,
tourist travel and, in particular, contract flights by chartered air-
craft. There, we see that the French flag occupies a very small place,
although that observation lust be qualified: in the case of Paris, out-
going charters are strong, but incoming charters are week. In the prov-
inces, both directions are week. In this area, Mr Claude Abraham remarks,
it must be noted that the French companies, whether public or private,
suffer from a considerable handicap: compared to their existing or potsn~
tial competitors, their costs are much higher.

A New Form of Competition

The environment for air transport in France has developed considerably,
observes the director general of Civil Aviation, who foresees the coming
of "a completely different world, of which we are seeing only the dawn."

The first characteristic of this development is the new form that compe-
tition has assumed. It works on three levels. First, it is represented
by the transporters in the developing countries. Not only are they ask-
ing, and rightly so, for their just share of the traffic-~that is. for
the traffic in their own country-but they also are entering the world
market with such technical quality, prices and ambitions, that they be-
come very strong competitors. This is particularly true of the countries
of Southeast Asia: Singapore Airlines, Korean Airlines. etc.

Secondly, these are countries with socialist economies. They have a very
comprehensive and well conceived idea of their own interests and of their
balance of payments. They are ready to use the means necessary in order
to play an essential role.

A third form of competition is represented by the position of the United
States. In 1955, American national and international transport accounted
for 78 percent of world air traffic. In 1978, their share was reduced by

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

about half (that is, to 38 percent) and they now account for only 18 per-
cent of international traffic. In 20 years, the Americans have therefore
lost half of their dominion‘and, consequently, of their superiority. But
they have retained the habits they had when they were alone. They still
want to regulate world transport and have undertaken a strategy to recon-
quer the market. To do this, they intend:

-to rely upon dynamic, young and very productive companies in order to
launch an assault on the world market. It should be understood that be-
tween the best managed of the American companies and the whole of the
European ones. the difference in costs can reach 35 percent.

--to support unconditionally the fares of supplementary air transport
companies. The support accorded by the American government to these
companies is explained all the more by the fact that the fleet of these
companies is considered one of the elements of its national defense.

--to conduct a policy of low fares, which is all the more popular since
consumerism is now fashionable.

All the elements for success have thus been brought together to permit
the Americans to win the battle for air transport. In 18 months. Dr Kahn.
the director of the CAB, Civil Aeronautics Board, has overthrown all the
traditions and defenses of the world of international air transport. In
addition, he has found allies in Europe, objective or resigned ones, who
accept willy-nilly the new rules of the game.

Originally. each country proceeded to an exchange of air routes. The
system was in balance. Each country controlled the capacities estab-
lished by the companies. The fares which were established were discussec
in the IATA and the final rates were set by the countries of origin and
of destination.

Today, the whole system has blown apart with the new bilateral agreements:
agreements with Great Britain (Bermuda II), then with the Netherlands.
Belgium, Israel and the PRC. The rule, today, is that of the freedom, for
an American company, to go anywhere at the price it chooses. 0n the other
hand, the European companies do not have absolute freedom: they have only
received a greater number of cities which they are permitted to serve in
the United States. There is therefore an imbalance. Lufthansa, for ex-
ample, has obteired the right to serve 11 cities in the United States,
while the Americans can go anywhere they want in west Germany.

To be even more certain that there will not be any more regulation for the
American companies. the Congress of the United States has voted to abolish
the can in 5 years. It was a real tour de force!

The last element in this wild competition: the IATA. This organization
has adopted new statutes in order to survive in the face of the United

8 .
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
Fi‘ii «warm. use "my

States. It is not sure that they will nucceud. Nevertheless. there is
now an "a la carte" fare system.

Liberalization and Hatching Fares

For us. the director general of Civil Aviation asks. what are the conse-
quences of such a situation? He should become aware of a certain number
of requirements.

He transport 3 million passengers. That represents a clientele large
enough to make itself heard. They must be satisfied.

besides. it will be difficult for us to make passengers accept compli-
cated fare structures. incomprehensible ones.

In the third place. we must take into consideration the very great perme-
ability of frontiers. What happens among our neighbors is very contagious.
We are more obliged in take into account the development going on around
us. "Splendid isolation" is no longer possible.

These new requirements have immediate consequences. He cannot hope to
maintain the protectionism of the past. Hr Abraham declares. French pol-
icy must change completely in order to respond to fisrcer and fiercer com-
petition. "a have therefore changed our regulatory system to a signifi-
cant extent. This is a reality which is not yet too well known.

Nonscheduled intro-European flights have now been greatly liberalized.
with a few minor reservations for reciprocity. "He are perhaps a little
too liberal." France is the one country in Europe which has the greatest
number of airports open to international traffic (180 permanently and 160
on request). This is probably excessive. In the area of scheduled long-
lines flights. liberalisation is also increasing. This is an irresist-
ible development. It also exists in the case of overseas flights: for
the Carribean. the destination is completely open.

Liberalization then exists and it will grow. That means we must take care
to balance the rights between different countries.

Another characteristic: watching fares will remain necessary. I do not
think. Mr Abraham continues. that we can let just any marginal transporter
offer anything at all on the sarket because he enters it from time to
time. but we cannot allow archaic fare structures to continue to exist.
He must therefore "police” our affairs with discernment.

Finally. the third and last characteristic of the future of air transport:
the situation of the French companies.

Each time we ask for the freedom to do something. we must ask for the free-
dom not to do it. In other words, we must not impose restrictions on the

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONaY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

public without compensating it. Competition and constraints which are
too great are irreconcilable. He must also understand that there is a
problem of choice butueen competition vith its possible consequences
and a controlled regine affecting a certain number of domestic destina-
tions or of coastal traffic.

Another point to be dintioned in the situation of the French companies:
the problem of neu charters. It is not shocking to turn towards a sys-
ten in which initiatives would be were greatly encouraged than they are
today. But we must accept the consequences. The disappearance of a
company or a line should not be a national tragedy. It will also be
necessary for the "tour operators" to become conscious of their role

in this respect. It must be understood that on aircraft becomes profit-
able after 2,500 or 3,000 hours and not after 1,200. The airline cen-
panics and the ”tour operators" must work together to fill the planes.

As for the companies Air France and UTA. they will have to become con-
scious of the necessity of adapting to a more and more competitive con-
text.

"Thinking Small"

The director general of Civil Aviation concluded his renarks by launching
an appeal. The productivity at an airline company; he said. is a collec-
tive responsibility. It is too easy and toe unjust to say that the per-
sonnel is too well paid. There are no snsll economies in air transport.
Any increased expense. as justified as it may be in appearance. is an ex-
tra veight that the companies viii have to drag along. More than ever,
Hr Abraham believes, the moment has come to "think small." This is an
essential objective that must not be lost sight of. It concerns all the
partners of air transport, including airports. This is an appeal for a
strong effort that must be nade new because the air transport battle will
be a hard one.

COPYRIchT: Air 6 Cosmos, Paris, 1978

3956
CSO: 3100

10
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

BRIEFS

mmm FOR CORSICAN DCTRMSTSnA report by the DST [trench Inteml
Security service] indicated prior to [Prime Minister] Berre'n departure
for Cornice that the extrmiats on the island had recently undergone

training in Palestinian camps in Iraq, Syria and Lebanon. [Text] [Paria
PARIS MTG! in Frchh 22 Dec 78 p 117]

MISSILE lem OPERATIONAL-41hr: first of six regimenta of the array'a
ground forces to be equipped with Roland surface-to-nir missiles in now
practically operational in the Verdun region. The resistant is provided
with the Roland I (clear-weather version) mounted on an Ami-30 cheseis.
Each vehicle carrier 10 missiles, two of with are always ready for firing.
[Text] [Paris mm DE: L'AEROMUl‘IQUE in French Dec 78 p 6]

(:80: 3100

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

ENI'S S-YIAR 1mm“ PLAN ANNOUNCED
Milan CORNERS DELLA 838A in Italian 18 Nov 78 p 11

[Article by Fabriaio Dragosei: "The all! will Invest 8,800 Billion Lira in
Energy in 5 Years")

[Text] .Rone-ol’or the 5 years from 1978 (included) through 1982, the EN!
[National Hydrocarbons Agency] group will have total financial needs of
11,500 billion lira. Of this sun, 10,000 billion is earnarked for invest-
nent. “these figures are contained in the progran report of Minister of
State l’articipetione Biesglie. Among the appendices, which have not yet
been made public, are Bill's prograns for the 5-year period 1978-1982. At
the end of 1982, the debt will be equal to 73 percent of couitments, a
level which is defined in the report as "notably higher then the level for
companies which operate in analogous sectors and with which BN1 finds it-
self competing in the national and international nerketl."

In the lest 12 nontha, the group's short-term debt hes decreased by about
1,000 billion, going from 2,300 to 1,300 billion. There is, howsver,a risk
that the agency's financial situation will become difficult in the years
to come, especially because of the inadequacy of the endowsnr funda and
the delay in paying them out. And the demanding investment program, which
in the report is judged essential for the country'a energy policy, could
run jerkily also because of failure to pay out the funds: in other words,
"unless there is an unforeseen inproveaent in self-financing, a proper-
tionate reshaping of the investeent programs, for that part of them whose
implementation has not yet been started," would be made necessary.

To be precise, investments of 10,039 billion lira, including 6,155 billion
in Italy, are forecast for the 5-year period. In toto, a little nore than
8,800 billion will be earmarked for investments in the sector of energy

sources and related activities. One thousand billion will be invested in

chemicals, 77 billion in textiles, and (01 billion in the mechanical industry.

The total of net coauitments, which at the end of 1977 cans to 8,952 billion,
will rise at the end of 1982 to 16,679 billion, 73 percent of which (the per-
centage today is 71 percent) will be covered, as was said above, by borrowing.

12
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

General examination of the nitustion of the ENI group (“which also has
constantly shown net-profit rate» higher than those of the 767 enterprises
in the Mediobanca sample") reVeals "chronic loss situations in the chemical
sector, textiles, and in the refining and distribution activities of the
petroleum sector." In the 2-year period 1978-[979, the chemical and res-
tile sectors lead one to foresee negative results oi more than 650 billion
lira. One also reads in the document that in these sectors, it is a pri-
ority objective to reestablish conditions of efficiency and cost-effective-
ness in management.“

In the coming years, the group will move along seVernl precise strategic
lines indicated in the report:

Internstionaiisation--To buy raw materials in a more effective manner; to
obtain a part of the necessary financial resources in the international
market; to sell more the products and services of the group's firms (be-
tween 1975 and 1977, foreign billings increased 90 percent, topping 3,000
billion; in the first 6 months of 1978 they reached 2,650 billion).

A New Investment Poiicy--Seeking greater flexibility of the installations.

New Research Policys-To enrich the technological content of the product
lines.

Accentuated ActiOn in the South.

Diversification of Product Linws--The document worked out by the BN1 and
the Ministry of State Participations also takes under examination the pro-
grams for the individual sectors in which the state petroleum agency

operates.

Energy Sources--Por the mineral sector,.the BN1 will invest,3,849 billion
in the 5-year period. both in Italy and abroad. For refining of petroleum
products, investments of 306 billion in Italy are forecast; they will be
used, among other things, for increasing the yields of intermediate distil-
latea (gas oils, etc.), for which there is greater demand. As regards
nuclear energy, the BN1 will be involved only in the area of the fuel cycle,
"taking a position as a national broker in this sector." The petroleum
agency is going heavily into coal (investments of 162 billion), gsothermy
(investments of 77 billion), and solar energy (3 billion to the end of

1979).

chemistry--Ninety percent of the anticipated investments in this sector are
earmaakod for restructuring of the eristing establishments. The program is
to go more heavily into refined chemical products, and in general, invest-
ments with low capital intensity.

Toxtilos--In this sector also, the priority objective is improvement of
the existing enterprises, for which 77 billion is set aside. 0n tho

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«ployncnt sidouthe report ststca--“conaidcrnblo sacrifices are nacouary."
By the and of 1982. jobs should decrease by 6.785.

Mechanical Induatryu'l‘hc m is working with the Nuovo Pignons [New Pinion]
company, which is aiming, in the next years to come, at an even stronger
poaition in the international sarkata. Pnrthomore, than will he s greater
comics-ant in the nuclear sector.

comma: 1978 Editorials dal "Camera dollo Sou" s.o.s.

11%? \
680: 3105

1b
10!! OFFICIAL USE OIlLY
FUR lll-‘l-‘HHM. "SH ONLY

WEST GERMANY

REPATRIATION 0F ETﬂNIC GERMANS FROM USSR DECLINBS
Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGBNHINE in German 14 Dec 78 p 3
[Article signed Lgn.)

[Thur] Nuremberg, l” Doc-~lr seems as though the federal government has had
to take some setbacks in its efforts toward the resettlement of Soviet citi-
zens of German descent to the Federal Republic. hopes generally linked to
the Bonn visit by Soviet head of state and party chairman Brezhnev in early
May this year obviously have not come true. while the resettler figures
during the first 4 months of this year still allowed to assume a tendency

of increase-in March, for example, 929 Russians of German origin were
registered in the Frisdland border-transit camp-they decreased to 657 in May
and to 600 in June. The result improved once more in July when 825 resettlers
came. But when 503 Russians of German origin arrived in the Federal Republic
in August, the number of resettlements reached the tentatively lowest level
of the year. In September, the border transit camp at Friedland had accommo-
dated 530 resettlers from Russia and in October 573. with 533 resettlements
in November finally. the quota dropped by nearly half in comparison with
November 1977 (1,103).

The situation is termed particularly difficult in the Tedzhik and Kirgir
Soviet republics. This paper has learned from reliable sources that in
these republics exit per-its for which people of German descent often had
been waiting for eany years, in many cases have been annulled again since
about early July. Utterences by the intelligence service as well as by the
authorities competent for the resettlement indicate the reasons for the
repressive actions. It is obviously difficult to fill with new personnel
the gaps caused to many production enterprises by resettlements to the
Federal Republic. Thus, reportedly. plant managers have been told that a
labor shortage, for instance in the harvest assignment. may not be justified
or excused with the absence of personnel of German descent having left the
Soviet Union.

Hhet caused concern among the people of German origin was the announcement
that the family reunion in the present form might be concluded by the Soviet
Union in early 1981. These rumors spread by the intelligence service

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR UPPICIAL USE ONLY

reportedly are beeed on considerations to conclude with the Federal Republic
an agreement on the future fanily reunion. The repatriation agreeaent of
1958 is eonaidered obeolete. Circles of the Soviet intelligence service
further are said to have reported that the Soviet Union is also interested in
an expanded family reunion in the event of a contractual agreement with the
Federal Republic. So for only the closeat relatives. as a rule earried
couples, parents. children, and brothers and sisters have been allowed to
leave the country.

In this connection there is talk of financial payments expected from Bonn.
in this even the Federal Republic uould be facing demands in the amount of
billions, uhich the federal government-if aeked--certainly uould deny. if
only because it does not want to be disturbed in preliminary talks on ouch
a tickliah issue.

An extended family reunion would even increase the nueber of applicants.
According to the findinge of the atuttgart "land group of the Germans from
Russia". more than 10,000 separated families had applied for family reunion
in 197$. Reportedly the German Red Cross has new receifed about 65.000
applicationa.

COPYRIGRT: P.A.2. GmbH. Frankfurt am Main 1978

680: 3103

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WEST GERMANY

EXPERT VIBHS ECONOMIC GROWTH, PROBImS FOR 1979
uasburg CAPITAL in corsan Dec 78 pp 133, 135-6. 141-2

[Text] The Economy, 1979--In the German economy there will be a more
rapid upward movement than in this year, at least until the middle of
1979. Above all, consusption. construction outlays, and exports are
imparting their upward impulses. whether these torces will subsequently
also prove to be lasting and will push growth further upwards depends
on temperate wage settlements and on a delicately measured-out monetary
policy. Prices, which are likely to once again rise more sharply

next year, harbor an additional danger, says Professor Norbert Halter,
ecomnic research expert at the Kiel Institute for World Boone-y.

Upward Pressure

The initial conditions for 1979 are more favorable than in the previous
year. Consumers and euployers are viewing the economic situation with
confidence. Along wage and salary earners, anxiety about losing their
jobs is disappearing. The fins are handling better than expected
their persistant monetary troubles. And finally, in other countries
of Western Europe as well demand is reviving. which promises to German
businesses additional orders and a greater level of. activity. Thus
the employers and the consuers are also ready to increase their
budgets for investments and consumption respectively. The result:
Econonic growth is gaining in force and intensity. An increment of

4 percent is probably in the cards.

But the apparently stable situation which is now giving a lift to the
scone-y can quickly change. .more have been enough exasples of this
from recent years, when strikes, lockouts, and deficiencies in
connection with foreign demand have shifted the balance in an instant.
One quarter, the economy would go up, but in the'tollowing quarter

it would already be going down again. The enduring, self-sustaining
upswing failed to appear. me economists coined for this the concept
or the "washboard econony."

Thus in the suIner of 1977 a profound lull prevailed, and the scenic
output stagnated. In' the tall and early winter, the businessmen were

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

able to get many orders, and production rose again, only to then
abruptly and utterly give way at the turn of the year. 'Ihe labor
conflicts in the printing and metal industries for higher wages and
secure jobs dieconcerted the economy. he enterprises became restrained
with their orders.

After the collective wage agreenents were concluded, uncertainty also
receded. since the suner of 1978, once again the expansive forces
have clearly dominated. But they are not quite sufficient to offset
the losses of the first half of the year. Instead of the aimed-at
mark of 3.5 percent more growth. in the econouic annual balance sheet.
of 1978 a half point less than this is likely to emerge. This is
nevertheless still a sizable increase, if it is additionally taken into
consideration that the population is decreasing and thus fewer persons
have to be provided for.

Yet this growth rate is not enough to push the number of unemployed
persons below the million-person limit on a yearly average, because
structural problems are paramount in the labor market. This is shown
by a breakdown of the overall uneuploylent figure. Half of it is made
up of wouen seeking a job, although their proportion of all persons
employed cones to only around a third. Unskilled workers are likewise
out of work to a degree greater than the average.

In 1979 as well, nothing of this fundamental weakness of the labor
aarket will change. But to judge economic development simply in view
of the underenploylsent situation reflects a distorted picture of the
actual state of affairs. claims Professor Norbert "alter, 34 years old,
of the Kiel Institute for world Bconow, in an analysis made for
CAPITAL. Thus, for this econotaic research expert, even I'the growth
rate of next year is acceptable." However, if in the 1919 round of
collective wage agreements there are once again strikes. or if the
trade unions can force through high wage settle-exits, then despite
the generally favorable initial situation, a renewed trend reversal
toward the negative is to be expected.

A new danger is loaning: Prices are again clisting more sharply.
But if the Bundesbank were to react too strongly to this, perhaps
through drastic contraction of the noney supply, the interest rates
would shoot upwards and would necessarily weaken elployaent and
production. The analysis in detail:

Scone-1c growth: a plus 4 percent; labor market and wages: functional
weakness: exports: a plus 7.5 percent; finance: and taxes: stimlante.

These stimulate growth :

Inves unents--6 . St
consumption-4 . 0t
8xports--'l . 5‘

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reports"? . 5t
Prefitsnll .0\
wages and saleries--6 .6\

These not as a drag:

Huge costs-«2 . 5t
Prices-~41 . 0t
Unemployed-420 .000 people

This growth is in the cards: 4.0‘
Prof Halter on Bconeuic Growth: 4- 4 rercent

The sums: of 1979 marked the turning point. If the economy has been
generally characterised in recent years by a lull, this tine the middle
of the year brought the beginning of an upward tendency. his powerful
upswing is likely to continue until far into the year 1979; certainly
monetary and financial policy has so far not shown any departure from
its economic stimulation course. The improved conditions. even if only
hesitant. in the most important of the countries who trade with the

P86 is contributing to this upward develop-ant. The strongest stimulants
to the upswing in demand continue to cone from the building trade,
which by new already has on hand well-filled order books. The outlays
on construction for next year in terns of real value are likely to be '
6 to 7 percent higher than in 1978.

Even if--sonething which is scarcely conceivablsutho monetary and
financial policy nakers were to once again adopt in the near future

a restrictive course. nevertheless in view of the time legs with which
production reacts to such interventions. a significant setback for
construction investments can be ruled out, at all events for 1979.

The upward trend in housing construction will be especially strong,

while the State will seek to avoid through an extension of the
eiddlc-toru investment prograas the worst of the bottlenecks in the

civil engineering field. The expansion of building output is not so

such deterained by how «and develops. but by how quickly the enterprises
can expand their capacity. since it is very hard to obtain skilled
workers, indeed to hire even unskilled construction workers. it is

only through a aodernisation of the stock on hand of equipuent and
nachinery than an enlarge-em of capacity can be achieved.

Stronger investment activity is to be expected in other sectors of

the econoay as well. such as for exanple in the electrical industry

and in trade, since in these branches sales expectations have fir-ed up.

Kn machine building. the technical advance lads possible by aicroprocessors
sakes the purchase of new facilities and nachines necessary.

19
res omcuu. use em
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second stable demand component in 1.979 is likely to be private
consumption once again. which is being held high both by the consumption
climate and also by the incomes being received. Because:

it turns out that the tax relief will be oven greater than at the
beginning of 1978;

the development of wages is likely to correspond to that of the year 1977
on the whole:

in contrast to 1978. pension incomes are rising again:
an expansion of employment can be anticipated.

Already in 1973. the savings ratio reached a relatively low level.
Therefore a slight rise in this is at least not to be excluded. Upon
the weighing of all these factors. a rise in private consumption of
4 percent is in the cards.

Autouobile sales will also have a good level of activity in 1979. The
donand is as strong as ever, and tho nanufaoturers are still finding
it hard to keep up with the domestic and foreign orders.

Travel likewise has once again a quite prominent position on the
expense account lists. And in the favored items of the coneuser,
hone requisites are probably to be forging far forward once again.

however. the basic conditions for a sustained improvement in the
propensity to invest are still not fulfilled: tesperate wage settle-tints.
Again conflicts are loosing between the negotiating parties. In the

end. they are hardly likely to turn out otherwise than in the previous
year-«the effect being that the wage cost burden will continue to

retain too high. With other factors things look better.

For example, the prospect has disappeared that the interest rates

night drop even further. and therefore the borrowers have abandoned
their wait-and-see attitude. Anyway, the view with respect to a
deficiency of investsent activity does not seem to be justified.

Because it has been evolving upwards. in spite of all the glossy
predictions. with renarkable constancy and vigor: since the nadir

in the recession of 1975. at a rate of a good 5 percent per year.

In 1979, it is likely that on the average a rate of as such as 6.5 percent
will eeerge. The cosputations which show. on the basis of the boo-
year of 1970. an invesuent gap for the whole of the 1910's are based
on an inadmissible calculation. Because that very year of 1970 fell

in a phase of overinvesuents, caused by the under-valuation of the
sari: and the excessive stimulating of the scone-y by political leasures
at that tine. All the ease, the present lanentations about the weakness
of invest-ants by all leans have their justification. Because since

the middle of the 1970's.. the maths: of gainfully euployable persons

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has been climbing due to the entry into gainful activity of age groups
with a high birth rate. and the requisite jobs can be provided only
through an expansion of production capacity. Yet in important corporative
groups there are doubts about whether the labor market problem should

be solved by a policy of growth or by n distributing of the work.

As long as it remains politically in the air what growth rate the PEG
ought to have in the future, an awards development of private investments
is scarcely likely to appear.

In other words: As long as we do not want more growth. it would be
surprising if we got more growth on the whole.

On Labor Market and wages: Functional Weakness

I1"he Federal Government is not making proper headway in the labor market--
despite its numerous economic policy programs. ll‘hie is no wonder,
because the present underemployment is less the consequence of a
weakness in demand than the consequence instead of a non-functioning
labor market.

Thus, the enterprises in the boom branches of construction and vehicles
are not finding adequately qualified workers-and this with just under
a million unemployed and in addition around 700,000 citizens not
registered with the employment offices who are out of work but who

at the present time figure that they do not have any chances for a

job placement.

Sven more clearly than the high nusber of unemployed is able to do,

the structural nature of this set 0! economic problems is shown by

the trend of employment. 'nodey there are no more gainfully active
people than in the middle of 1975, although ecommic growth has amounted
to between 3 and 3.5 percent on the average in the last 3 years.

the PRC thus owes its increase in prosperity to a higher output per
employee. In contrast to this is the United States: There. an annual
growth of 4 to 4.5 percent has led to an expansion of employment of
about 3 percent. Consequently its rise in productivity was considerably
weaker than in the rec, but the improvement in the employment situation
was notably more favorable. The decisive cause of this difference:
Whereas in the United States real wages increased only slightly after
the oil crisis, they rose strongly in the PRC. This has been reflected
in the investment activity. The American businesses are expanding

their production capacities, which entails the hiring of additional
workers. on the other hand. the German tirms are above all taking
rationalization measures, and the number of persons ewloyed can thus
at best be kept at the same level.

Consequently, the wage agreement negotiating parties have it in their
power to achieve full employment once again. It would be an important
step in the right direction for the 1979 round of collective agreements

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

to adopt a cautious course which brings the enterprises a perceptible
profit increase. To be sure, for the upcoming wage settlements,
constrictive factors can be discerned which increase both the demands

of the trade unions and also the willingness of the employers to give in
to such demands. Thus at the beginning of the year when wages will be
negotiated, prices could rise more sharply. Moreover: The business
upswing of the second half of 1978 is thoroughly visible from the
statistics, just at the time of the round of wage agreements, so that
the trade unions are thus already pressing for extra pay even though

the course of the economy as a whole in 1979 is not measurable. what is
more. they will be seeking to carry through first of all negotiations

in the economically most favored branches. since--as is customary--

the first wage settlement is likely to provide the mark to be aimed at
for the entire round of wage agreements, there is a danger that this time
the agreements will prove to be too high.

Aside from the quarrel over raise percentages, a protecting of the social
welfare in connection with the wage raises will probably be once again
up for debate. Many trade unions maintain that the tax relief favors
especially those who draw higher incomes. They are therefore demanding
wage settl-ents which provide for a larger raise for the lower wage
groups. This could worsen even more the situation of the less skilled
workers: Such special wags raises trigger investments by means of which
jobs of unskilled workers above all are removed by rationalization
measures.

A third important issue of the round of wage agreements is certainly

the shortening of working time. Whereas the resistance of the businesses
against reducing the work week seems to be extensive enough to stave off
the trade union demands at least in l979, a slight lengthening of

leave time is probably not avoidable.

uployees' capital formation is likely to be only a peripheral issue,
as it has been for decades now. Genuine advances will be made by this
concept only at the individual company level-d: the employers want it.
Because company-specific capital formation dissipates. in the trade-
union view, the forces of the employees, who might thus develop an
increasing interest in their own company. Thereby, that which justifies
the existence of the trade unions is lost: The state of being in
solidarity with their own class. however, employers have not on the
whole as yet drawn the conclusion from this that in capital formation
there lies a chance to improve their position by making into partners
those workers and employees who have already becase "rich."

In general--an easing of the tension between labor and management,
especially on the question of wages, is a prerequisite for overcoming
the problems which grow out of the increasing labor supply. Age groups
which had a high birth rate are now beginning their working life.

In fact, for the first time next year an increase in employment is

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aqain anticipated. which is likely to amount to about 1 percentnthat
is, to around 200,000 persons. But additional employment need not load
without fail to a decrease in the humor of uneaployed. as developments
in other Industrial countries provo. In these placen it has been
observed that new persons from the ore-called latent reserve of the
labor market are reporting back for work and are being hired as the
onpiownent situation improvnn somewhat. it is probable. heweVer. that
the number of unemployed people is likely to be reduced by around
100.000 persons.

Exports: To increase by 7.5 Percent

All monetary oscillations in recent months notwithstanding, German
exports are increasing, for example in their amount of the world trade.

It has proved possible to raise exports to almst the same degree as
imports. To be sure. these export quotas can often be maintained only
by the expedient o' Osman firms consciously accepting in their pricing
a narrowing of their profit margins.

Yet this compression is frequently overestimated. Because sale proceeds
have not in turn fallen so very such. The reason: To be sure. the
dollar has tumbled and with that the value of the sari: has automatically
risen. But the U. s. trade makes up only a small portion of the total
German exchange of goods. Likewise favorably operating for the German
exporters was the fact that the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen have
gained much more strongly even than the sark in exchange-rate value.

The fall of the dollar brings oven in the short run a cost advantage
to the m. Because many isportant raw tutorial prices are fixed in
dollars. such as for example crude oil. ‘ihs devaluation of the 0. s.
currency thus enables German enterprises to buy crude oi‘. at lower
prices. 'Jpshot: although the rapid changes in the exchange rates
have increased uncertainty. the competitiveness of the doustic
exporters has not been lastingly unpaired. Consequently the German
export trade is likely to profit also by the stimulation of demand
in the Nest European countries which is loosing for the coining year.
The American business outlook alone is likely to weaken next year--
but this is sonsthing which does not cancel out the powerful European
sti-ulants to world trade, because of our snail share of trade with
the United States. since the European countries will in the future
demand more goods. the Americans will be able to sell more goods and
to sake up the deficit in their balance of trade. with that, one of
the fundamental causes of the dollar‘s weakness might be eliminated.

In connection with the developing countries and the nations of the
Eastern bloc. trade developments depend decisively on whether they
obtain international credits in order to cover their import needs.
The conditions for this have been considerably improved. following the

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 08H ONLY

resolutions of the International Monetary rund to provide new credit
facilities. a new wave of protectionist measures. which retards

world trade. is not to be expected because the employment situation

in most of the industrial countries is not growing any worse and thus

the pressure for more import restrictions not only on the part of the
trade unions but also on the part of the enterprises is scarcely

becoming any greater. Just as certainly will the desirable liberalisation
of world trade probably make very little headway. in view of the continuing
grave labor market problems.

Now the monetary relations of the mark and the competitiveness of

Oar-an enterprises further develop is also dependent on what happens
with the plan on establishing in Western Europe an extended none of
stable exchange rates. In this association. the interests of the
partners with weak currencies-“such as for mic francs-wile
predominantly in introducing stability. whereas the stronger participants
such as the me are hoping to gain a competitive advantage in the markets
of the mesber countries. But the prospects are slight of success in
carrying through with these plans in opposition to the forces on the
foreign exchange market. as the experiences with the “snake" have

taught us.

The predicted export increase of 7.5 percent seems achievable even if
the monetary alliance were to not materialise at all or were to fall to
pieces after just a few months. Because even the regime of flexible
exchange rates which would then continue to prevail obviously does not
prevent the international integration of the markets from continuing.

this is sufficiently shown by the experiences to date with the fluctuating
exchange rate parities. whereas total economic production in the
industrial countries increased by around 25 percent in the 1970's.

German foreign trade rose by so percent. Despite a strong upward
revaluation. exports in this decade have so far risen just as strongly

as imports.

however. this stable upward development was connected with a redirecting
of the flows of goods. To be sure. the main portion of German exports
is still going to the European trading-partner nations. and the main
portion of our imports comes from the same countries. But both the
oil-exporting countries and the Eastern Bloc nations have more and more
become a stabilising element in German foreign trade.

In the future. trade with the nations of the Third world offers above
all great prospects for growth. they have high import needs. Yet they
lack the capital for financing these imports. One task of the industrial
countries and thus of the see also should be to make available credits

to these nations. for example within the framework of developmental aid.
The German economy would not be the least to profit from the augmenting
of their assets. since it could then export more to the developing
countries.

26
POI! OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sane effect would be achieved if the lionn goVernnunt were to set up
a stockpile of important raw materials. it would New to buy such ores
in the developing countries. which could pay for more imports with the
proceeds free the raw material trade.

on l-‘lmncon. Taxesu Stimulants!

'i‘he l’ederal Government in again placing its hopes in a policy of growth.
Therefore it is camarking more funds for research investments. to help
the enterprises in the development of new goods and techniques which
can guarantee production and esploytnent for tomorrow. hereoVer, it in
lowering the incoee tax and wages tax in order that for the employees
their work may once again be rewarding. Donn is putting through this
plan. which is oriented towards the nedi-s- tern, against the opposition
of the trade unions. which have endorsed a rapid. dramatic raising of
the entire public expenditures. Yet entirely without the trade unions
nothing can be done. Therefore, the Federal Goverment also had to
enclose within its grmth package improvements in connection with
children'n allowances and saternal protection: Measures which sorely
redistribute the incomes of today. but do not provide for the incense
of tooorrow.

'i'he upward adjustment of the value-added tax is also growth-inpairing.
since it--like every additional burdening of the citizens by the State--
blocks incentives to work. And after all: It does not relieve the
capital market, even though it is by this that the Federal Goverrsssnt
justifies the additional charge. mus it is hoping for more tax
revenues and through this a ssaller budget deficit. which must be

made up through loans in the capital market. Up to this point, the
official calculation night prove right. Except. the higher bill has

to be paid either by the consumers or by the businessmen. If the firms
cannot pass on the additional percentage point in their prices, than

it will depress profits. Result: ‘nie enterprises have less noney

to finance their investments fro- thair own pockets. Instead of the
State. it is now they who mist raise loans in the capital sarket.

But if the consuners are asked to pay by way of higher prices, their
expenditures will rise. Thereby the savings fraction of their incomes
necessarily drops. Less money flows into the capital whet, which

in turn cancels out the effects of the less extensive borrowing by the
govement. Upshot: At bottesu everything stands. one way or another.
as it was.

Nevertheless, the enlivening stiwulants of the new package are dotinant.
The relief connected with the wages tax and incoae tax could ease the
situation in the round of wage negotiations. Because the investment
propensity of the enterprises is isproving. But even if the trade

unions remain adasant and ignore this relief in the things they insist
on, the progras still has a dented-increasing effect, since the disposable
inconcs are thereby raised.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

With on improving buninoun outlook. the aprinqe of tax revenue will alao
more etrongly bubble (orth. since at the cane tine the erpenditurea

for the unemployed are dropping beeauea of the eoeewhat more favorable
employment eituation and a continuation of the curbing ct coate in the
public health aeaor ia to be anticipated. the national delicit in 1979
(or the federal Govern-ant, Leander. aunioipalitiee. and ecoial ineurance
ie not likely to exceed 65 billion earke. in view or thia deticit,

many a citiren will criticiee the public budget policy aa unecund.

But juat ae little ae it can be figured out free the rinancial deficit
of a company whether a aound or an unaound buaineaa policy in being
tollowed, can the quality o! the financial policy be neaeured by the
level or the national deficit. whenever indebtedneee reeulta iron the
fact that private and overall econoeic torcee of growth are being
etinulated. eoundneaa ie a given tact. In order to proeote the lorcee
or growth, interventione in the dietribution c! income-which inhibit
the will to work--ought to be curtailed. 'rhie involvee for example
abandoning the lunationleae proacting of eavinge. 1n. abolition or

the entire. trade tax would eeee to be juet ea urgent. The income and
wagee tax on the one hand and the value-added tax on the other ehould
in the future alone torn the pillare o! the tax eyeten. To be euro.
theee renovatione in the national revenuea would in the ahcrt run

bring eherttalle in tax revenuee and thue a higher deficit. With thie.
thoae linite would be exceeded which at preeent are eeen by the
bundeebank ae juet atill tolerable. An additional conflict between

the goverment and the Bundeebank ie looting in connection with the
policy on atability. Beoauee in the oourae or next year the riee in
pricee ie likely to accelerate to aleoet 4 percent. ‘I‘hie ia a ccneequenoe
of eine tree the pact: The exceaeive expaneion of the monetary supply,
which co-Ienced ae long ago ae late in the amner of 1977. It invariably
turne out that euch an expaneion ie followed. arter an interval of

a year and a held. by a rice in the rate or price increases.

Pointing in the cane price-raining direction are the bottlenecks in

the commotion market. Any relic! by way or toodatutte, ouch ae has
been the care in the lat 2 1/2 yeara. ia no longer to be expected.

Alec the phaae of price di-inutioae in connection with iaport pricee

ie likely to be coming to an end. becaueo the mark in unlikely to
continue to be upvaluod in term of real value, and the phase or etable
world market pricee ace-a to be drawing to a close. “heroes in
connection with the accelerating price upawing the Mechank has to

be intereeted in the introduction or etabilieation, the Vederal covert-ent
ie anwicue to by all eeane prevent a receaeive development in conjunction
with the election year or 1980. Ivan i! the Bundeebank only throttlee ,
gently the increaee in the nonetary eupply, a alight rice in the -
intereat rates could not be avoided, eince at the cane time the «sand
of. the conauere and bucineeeee for loans ia cliﬂaing. It bonn continues
to remain expanaive and it Prankturt tries to put on the brakee sore
sharply. a rapid increaee in interact retee could be expected in 1979.
for even next year the danger would exiat that the upewing juat under
way night cone to an end.

coerucar: 197B Gum” + Jahr M & Co.

1211:. 2‘
cs0: :10: ran omcm. use om:
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"881' GERMANY

8088101280 RESEARGI TO CREATE NEH JOBS
Ila-burg STERN in German 23 Nov 78 pp 252-255

[Article by Herner lleilcmnnn: "Financial injections: Money To Revive
Tired Managers"!

[Text] Vulker Ilauff, minister for research and
technology, vents to create new jobs by pouring
additional billions into new technologies.

in the saudi Arabian desert, Volker Ilsuff, minister for research, had on
original experience. The rich sheykhe were desperately looking for a
producer of equipnent for the desalination of sea water, and they were
naking inquiries of Japanese and west German firsts. Now the Japanese
have cone up with an item which will be worth millions, because Krupp and
Densg had to give up after prelininary negotiations: They lacked the
technicsl know-how-Jepen's industry has a nonopely in this area. After
the lost battle for sales, llauff was struck by this realization: "Our
heroes are simply too tired.” '

The ninister for research knows how to revive tired business nsnagers:
money. For that reason the Federal Govern-en: wants to increase the 1979
budget for this ministry to on 5.6 billion (a lé-percent increase conpusd
to 1978). And rightfully so, as is evident in a still unpublished study
by the Prognos so, a Swiss economic advisory service. The d9-pege paper
cans to the conclusion that in recent years the promotion of projects

and innovations crested elmst150,000 Jobs and approximately 300,000 jobs
resulted. According to Neuff, this proves that the promotion of research
is definitely a useful loans for labor narket policies. He believes:

If the PRC shows no lore interest in new technology thsn it has to date,
no new jobs could be created to take the place of those uhich are eliminated
because of expediency.

According to Prognos, there was a danger of a "technological vacuun,"
because at the beginning of the 1970's the German industry had no desire
to put noney into "uncertain new and continuing technical develop-outs.”
The vacuum was only prevented by doubling the mount of public funds for
research: "Research and development are indispensable conponents of a
liberal foreign trade policy."

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OIFICIAL USE ONLY

whoever continues to offer stale ideas. however, will not receive a single
tired Conan mark from lleuff: "I want innovation, not subsidy." To date,
free 1975 until 1978, the largest suns were collected by

unonnuclear energy research (107,000 jobs), DH 1 billion;
--data processing (51,000 jobs), on 1.2 billion;
«electronics (60,000 jobs), on 280 million;

o-chenical technology (30,000 jobs). on 52 nillion.

Occasionally promotional policies directed in this nenner even lead to
the establishment of new fires. For instence, after they were pro-iced
on 160 million by the Ministry for Research. A36 and Hecker-Cheaietronic
in Upper heverie decided to found a subsidiary for the specific purpose
of manufacturing solar-cell generators. Experts believe that the solar-
cell narket will be good in 15 years end well worth DH 20 billion.

In the Ruhr area, m 12 million is being spent on testing a "directional
guidance system" for automobile drivers, which is supposed to prevent
traffic Jens. In the case of a nation-wide introduction, tens of thousands
of jobs would be assured because of extensive orders. Automobile suppliers
will also profit from the development of a new nonlocking brake system,
which is being financed with a grant of alnost DH 8 million.

Even the resignation in the suffering shipbuilding industry is being

helped through money from Benn. For instance, the Luehring shipyard in
Brake on the Lower Heeer. supported by the Ministry for Research, hes
begun the development of a “twin-hull multipurpose vehicle” to cadet oil
pollution. In the opinion of experts: "This is an opportunity to
penetrate an existing vecutm in the market. Prospects for export are
good." And Prognos figures that in addition to the jobs which are directly
created or assured with the money from the Hinietry for Research, 660,000
more workers will owe their jobs to orders which will result from future
research.

Even if Otto Craf Ladesdorff, minister for economics, views these develop-
nents with suspicion: ﬂauff wants to continue the present course,
reassured by the expert opinion of Prognoa A6 at a cost of DH 150,000,

and he wants to create a mood of speculative enterprise in the German
economy: "He again need pioneer spirit among business managers and the
willingness to assume risks.”

OOPYRIGEIT: 1978 81'3"

8991
080: 3103 3ND

28
rot orncm. use our