APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00060R000100020026-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020025-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/8280

16 February 19 79

VIBRATION DAMPING SYSTEMS IN
MACHINES AND MECHANISMS

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020025-1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. 'rimes within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Govermnt.

COPYRIGT MKS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUC- ERRED! REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0? 11113 PUBLICATION 38 RESTRICTED MOFFICIAI. USE ONLY.
0!". -

8008f DOCUMENYMION Run" N0.
m m -

Chou-cum» amen.

mrw-mm SYS'I'BB IN MACHINES AND MECHANISAB 1- --rue 1979

than“!
u. n. Genkin (editor) W

  
     
   
 
  

 
 

m Modulus Nene one Meme
Joint Pub]. icetione Research Service

1000 North Globe Road
Arlington. Virginie 22201

      
   
 
 
     
    
      
      
 
     
        
   
 
     

umwmmmmm “Mdunﬂthuluvmd

As above

 
 

It We" Nous
VDRO-IZOLEUWSHCRIYE SISTM V MASHINAKR I W16, Moscov, 1977

“Manx mice-en»

  

This collection is dedicated to methods of overcoming vibrations of machines
and neckmnioms. Met «ode are examined of distributing vibration energy along
structures as well as methods of acwatic diagnosis of ball bearings and

localizing acoustic sources.

  

I). m Maude e. W

USSR Elastic System Acoustic Diagnosis
Engineering Rods Air-Cushions
Vibrations , Shock Absorbers

a When term

  
 

“Me-ow ummmm semen-en
For Official Use Only. Limited UNCLASSIFIED 113
Nunoer of Co iee Avei able From J‘PRS. some. a v am
9 1 uncuss'irfénw '
”MI. “Week-mu MW loll mu—m

('m'] any”:
W 6' m
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8280
16 February 1979

VIBRATION DAMPING SYSTEMS IN
MACHINES AND MECHANISMS

Moscow VIBRO-IZOLIRUYUSHCHIYB SISTBMY V HASHINAXH I MEWIZMAKH
in Russian 1977 signed to press 18 May 78, pp 1-113

[Book edited by M.D. Genkin, Izdatal'stvo 'Nauka', 2,400 copies,
116 pages]

Commits PAGE

Active Vibroprotection Systems
()4. D. oemn, v. v. Yahlonakiy) 1

An Active Vibroprotection System With Control Hith Respect to Low-
Frequency and Vibrational hrturbations
(“I D. Genkin, et do) C0.00.000000.000.000.00...IIIOOOOOOOOIO. 11

Some Problem of Vibroconpenaatiou of Elastic System
(v. A. Tikhonov, v. v. Yablonakiy) 17

Have Propagation Over Thin-walled Rods
(In. I. Dobrovnitakiy, u. n. Genkin) 31

Q1 Approximate Theories of Plexural Vibrations of Rods
(In. I. Bobrovnitakiy) h?

Inventi tion of Space-Tine Coherence of Son: Types of Acoustic Fields
A. M. Medvedkov, A. '1'. arm-mu) 57

A mthod of Vibration Damping in Sane Rod Structures
(v. )1. may, v. v. anlonakiy) 65

a: the Operation of Rubber-Metal Shock Absorbers
(R. 1. Vans”, et 81.) oaocooooc-ooceooecoecoaooeeooouooooooo 72

-a- [I-USSR-GPOUO]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COM'MS (Continued)

maluating the Loading Capacity 01‘ on Air-Cushion Support
(R. I. veytam) OIIOIOOOIIOOIIOOIOCDOI.OIOOOIOOOIUOOOOOOO

koblem of Acoustic Diagnosis
(1“. I. Bobrmitauy’ et 51.) I.I...OOOOOOOIOOIOIOOOOOOOO

m1 Bearing Diagnosis by a Vibration bathed
(B. T. mnel'. at all) II.I.IOIOIOOOOOOOOIIOIIDIOIOOIOOC

Localization of Acoustic Sources
(10 P. SUMO“, at no) OOOIOOOOOOOOOOUOOI000.0000.00000

m the Problem of Vibration Diagnosis of Technological Flaws in
Electric Dhchines

(V. A. AW) 000000.000eeeUOOOossseooeossosesoeeeoeeeos

Sortvare System for Checking and Diagnosing Electric Inchines
(v. A. “in“, at 810) OOOOOOOOOIOOOOOIIOIOOIOIOOOOCIIIOO

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100020025-1

' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

English title

Russian title

Author (9)

Editor (I)

Publishing House

Place of Publication

Date of Publication

- Signed to press

Copies

COPYRIGHT

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.-

PUBLICAIION DATA

VIBRATIOﬂ-DAMPING
AID MECHANISMS

VIBRO-IZOLIRUYUSH

MASEINAKH I MEKBA

M. D. Genkin

Nauka

Moscow

197?

18 May 77

2,hoo

Izdatel' atvo "Non!

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02108: CIA-RDP82-00860R000100020026-1
FOR Oﬂ'ICIAL USE ONLY

['5er An examination is made or the propagation of vibration energy
through structural elements, ninly through red structures, and the
acoustic diagnosis of ball bearings is considered as veil as localiza-
tion of acoustic sources.

The collection in written for scien' iric and engineering-technical workers.
AC‘i‘I W: V l IIROPM'V'HM'iON SYSTEMS
M. D. Gcnkin. V. V. anlonskiy

This article examines active vibroprotection systems (AVS) as controllable
systems for vibration protection and presents a classification of such
systems from different viewpoints. '

A controllable system for vibration protection is a system for automatically
controlling the vibration or a mechanical obJect to reduce vibration to a
predetermined level at certain points or in a region or space, in a pre-
determined frequency band or time region for a certain class of external
actions. 'lhe obJect of control is a mechanism or attached structural unit.
the source of information is the data on the vibration state of the object.
the criterion of effectiveness of control is the magnitude of the vibration or
some functional that characterizes the vibroactivity or the obJeet in the
final analysis.

It: a. rule, controllable vibroprotection systems (VS) require energy input
from an additional external source. These systems can be divided into
three groups (see the diagram).

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Classification of controllable and active vibroprotection systems

(1) Yaw-snows BC

. (A2JC I Fungal-Hum
upsunpaau

 

 
 

   

(5) .

C mammal

  
   
 
  

     

C ynpnmnm c ynpoamuu
no woman] no umwwmmu

I mymlo Iowans-nu

e

 

KEY: l--Controllable VS 7--Adaptive
2--AVS 8--Hith control with respect to
3--VS with variable parameters external perturbation
h--VS with variable structure 9--Hith dynamic coordinate control
5--Hith compensation lO--Se1f-adJusting
6--Hith deflection control ll—Searching
(by stabilization) 12--Non-searching

In the first group are the AVS. In these the actuating elements act
directly on the object along with the disturbing factors. Passive parameters
uuually rennin unaltered.

in the uccond group are V5 in which the actuating devices act on passive
elements (a mass, 4: spring. a damper), changing their value in some way
(continuouzly or in steps). For instance a change takes place in the distri-
buLlon of unbalanced masses (autobalancing), the mass or stiffness of a
dynamic nntivibrator. lumen there is a fairly slow change in parameters.

the system as a whole behaves like a passive system. Rapid changes that are
comm-able in velocity to a vibrational process lead to fundamentally new
properties such as increased stability.

In the third group are VC- with variable structure. where there is a change not
only in parameters, but in the order of activation of various links.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In systems with variable parameters and variable structure. energy losses
from the outside source are determined by the mechanism of action on the
parameters and structure, and do not directly involve the vibrational
process itself.

Practically always the active vibroprotection is provided by the combined
action of actuating (active) and passive elements of the system. In some
cases the‘ vibroprotective role of the passive elements is especially clear.
For instance in the electrohydraulic vibroprotection system of Ref. 1 there
is a spring that is connected in series with a hydraulic cylinder. and the
AVS with force control in the shock-absorbing mechanism of Ref. 2 also
acts only in combination with fairly pliable elastic elements. Some authors
[Ref. 3] call such systems hybrid in contrast to ”purely active." We feel
that such a division is unsound since there are no "purely active" systems
(i. c. systems that are independent of passive parameters).

D. Karnopp [Raf. h] uses the term "semi-active" for a system with an electro-
hydraulic mechanism that changes the stifmess of an elastic suspension.
According to the classification that we propose, this is a system with
variable parameters.

In extensive use are mathematical models of AVS as systems with additional
stifmess, damping or mass introduced by feedback with respect to the corre-
sponding kinematic parameters (displacement, velocity, acceleration) [Ref.
2, 5]. 0n the other hand the block diagrams of passive systems are depicted
as control systems [Ref. 6]. Obviously this gives no basis for considering
AVS a type of systems with variable parameters.

Actually the AVS, in contrast to passive systems, provides a wider choice of
reciprocal and negative inserted parameters. Moreover, the region of
constancy of a given inserted parameter is limited by the passband of the
feedback loop. The introduction of equivalent parameters is useful for a
more graphic representation of the effectiveness of the system in the
working frequency band, but is completely useless in stability analysis.

AVS with control with respect to perturbation. In the theory of vibro-
protection many versions of AVS with control with respect to perturbation

can be considered. The source of control is a signal proportional to the
perturbing factors (force or kinematic). Usually in automation. perturbations
are taken as independent of the response of the system that changes in the
process of regulation. Such for instance are the kinematic perturbations of
equipment on the base side, and also the vibrations of the shaft and bearings
of a spring-mounted rotor machine if the components of the AVS are on a
foundation or other supporting structural elements, 1. e. they are "decoupled"
from the source. The main goal is taken as realisation of a transfer function
that ensures "invariance" (independence of perturbations) of the selected
dynamic coordinates. This is open-cycle control. This requires extensive
information on the system.

FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the basis of a given form of the continuous spectrum of random pertur-
bations and various criteria or vibroproteetion, the theory of optimmn
filters in used to find the optimum structure of the VS. which in a number
of instances must necessarily contain active elements [Ref. 7].

Essentially different from this kind of control is vibrocompensation with
control with respect to the dynamic coordinates of the object [Ref. 2,

8-15]. These coordinates in a certain frequency range can be treated as
external perturbations of some part of the system. An example is provided

by the dynamic forces f transmitted through elastic elements (shock absorbers)
to the foundation of machines, or from the outside to the equipment to be
siolated. its best protection for equipment to be isolated is provided

by applying compensating (active) forces f‘3 to the points of action of the
given perturbations; to do this, it is natural to use these perturbations
themselves as the control signal. Invariance in this case should be under-
stood as “decoupling" of the object from the source of vibrations. The

ideal transfer function of the control circuit is equal to falfI-l. i. e.

it is frequency-independent, which is favorable for wide-band vibroprotection.

In contrast to control with respect to external perturbations, stability

may be disrupted in a system due to feedbacka through the object. Some
versions of control can be partly or completely represented as control with
respect to deviation of a dynamic force [Ref. 11:). Stability can be improved
by using correcting circuits, filters, or combined control (with respect to
perturbation and deflection).

An AVS is proposed in Ref. 16 with control with respect to deformation of
an elastic element. This coincides with control with respect to force,
where the shock absorber is an elastic link without losses.

AVS with deflection control. This control principle is used in the over-
whelming majority of V8 with electromechanical feedback that are described in
the literature. They have certain advantages: there is no requirement for
complete information on the perturbations or (to a certain extent) on the
characteristics of the equipment to be isolated since a slight change in

the latter has little effect on damping efficiency.

lief. 17-20 deal with general studies of feedback with respect to acceleration.
velocity and displacement in simple unidirectional mechanical circuits.
Research has been done [Ref. 18, 21] on the stability and other properties

of AVS in arbitrary elastic systems and in shock-mounted objects with six
degrees of freedom.

"of. '22-25 examine multichannel systems of electromechanical feedback with
respect to deflections as applied to rods, plates, shells and an acoustic
medium.

Many papers have been devoted to the development and theory of individual
devices as well as to their applications. In Ref. 26, 27 a study is done on

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE DULY

electromagnetic vibrocompenaators unified into a single element together
with a vacuum tube and a feedback coil (velocity sensor). Ref. 28-36 deal
with electrodynamic devices. Despite the great possibilities proved for
these devices by many authors. only laboratory models have been described.
Apparently the problem lies in the difficulties of making reliable and
econoaic vibrators.

Matters are different when it comes to controllable hydraulic and pneumatic
suspensions designed for damping low-frequency actions and compensating
slwly changing loads. Playing a decisive role here on the one hand have
been the high operational reliability and the large developed forces with
speed sufficient for quasistatic conditions (although according to the latest
data the frequency range has been increased to a few hundred hertz); on the
other hand there have been the extensive possibilities of control provided
by electromechanical sensors (there are V8 with purely hydraulic control as
well [Ref. 31)). Controllable hydraulic and pneumatic devices have been
developed on the basis of equipment that has already been perfected, checked
out and put into wide use. The first research on electrohydraulic devices
was done in Ref. 1. in the USSR this research has been developed in Ref. 7,
20. 31-33 and elsewhere. A model of a V8 for a human operator has been
made [Ref. 7], and controllable suspensions are being developed for motor
vehicles (Ref. 3h]. A special group is constituted by self-leveling elastic
supports for foundationleas installation of machine tools. mainly pneumatic
(Barry Control 00., and in the Soviet Union an original design has been
worked out in Ref. 35).

In modern machines that operate on moving objects it is advisable to use
pliable vibration-damping rotor suspensions in the bearings together with

a self-leveling system (stabilization of rotor position relative to the
stator and housing). Ref. 35. 31 describe stabilizing electromagnets placed
between the stator and bearings. and controlled by a signal proportional to
deflection of the rotor or change in the load on the bearings. In view of
the low time constant, the low electromagnetic stiffness of the system and
its insensitivity to transverse displacements. it has an advantage in speed,
particularly as compared with pneumatic devices, and combines better with
elastic elements (parallel connection). Calculations show that an especially
appreciable vibration-damping effect is realized with simultaneous use of
electromagnets as controllable vibrocompensators on the vibration frequency.
M‘tcr solution of a number of engineering problems an electromagnetic system
may be used in rotor machines.

AVS with compensation and stabilisation (particulars of analysis). Mainly,
we use a system of ordinary differential equations or partial differential
equations with constant coefficients and with additional terms in the second
member. In connection with the introduction of elements of automatic control
circuits (amplifiers, filters) there is a tendency to change to structural
methods that are common to the object and the control circuit. The Routh-
iiurwits criterion in used to evaluate stability only i". characteristic

 

1See the article by H. D. Genkin. V. G. Yelezov, H. A. Pronina and
V. V. Yablonskiy, "Active Vibroprotection System with Control with Respect
to Low-frequency and Vibrational Perturbations" in this collection.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equations of up to order h. The Bode-Nyquist criterion [Ref. 22, 30] is most
widely uued in more complicated cases. In Ref. 13. 1'! an immitance criterion
is uued that includes impedancen detsmined experimentally by the same
vibrocompensators .

Most AVS are made to ensure linear operation, and nonlinearity is treated as
a spurious eradicablc effect. In systems for stabilizing quasistatie dis-
placements (including in the self-leveling supports mentioned above) the
nonlinearity of the responses of elastic and active elements is considerable
in operation on large displacements. In the system with electromagnet of
Ref. 37 the elastic elements must necessarily have a rigid response to ensure
static stability of the obJect in the magnetic field. He should expect

more and more extensive use of nonlinear methods for comprehensive evaluation
of operability under working conditions. A number of authors have pointed
out an improvement in stability with nonlinear operation.

Self-adjusting AVS. So far these systems have remained almost unconsidered
in the literature, even though they are obviously needed, particularly in
control with respect to perturbation in separate frequency bands, under
conditions of variable frequency and drift of the characteristics of the
controlled obJect.

Non-searching self-adjusting AVS. An example is a system of a fairly large
number n of controllable vibrators that compensate oscillations in a girder
structural element,1 or in some region of an extended plate. For instance
vibrations on a given frequency are minimized at a mean-square or maximum
level that is determined from the readings of m acceleration converters.
Under certain conditions we can limit ourselves to compensation of the
initial vibration at n points. For this purpose we measure beforehand

the natural and reciprocal compliance (matrix ‘1). From the vector of
initial vibration X0 we use a digital computer incorporated into the AVS

to calculate the vector of the necessary compensating (active) force

Pa 3 -Y'1X°.

Since the matrix Y can be found and inverted beforehand on required fre-
quencies, a comparatively small computer unit is needed for operational
control of vibration. Non-searching systems provide the highest speed, which
is necessary when there is a considerable change of the initial vibration

in time.

Ref. 25 considers selection of the points of installation of vibrocompensators
when there is a. limitatiou on power consumption.

Seam-hing self-adjusting AVS. The main peculiarity of the quality function
of the vibroprotection system for a complex obJect is the presence of "local

 

1See the article by V. A. 'i‘ikhonov and V. V. Yablonskiy, "Some Problems
of Vibrocompensation of Elastic Systems" in this collection.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

extrema." 'iherefore methods of sequential variation of dynamic test forces
are not well nui ted to neat-china. In Ref. 25 a computer was used to study
a method or ulmnlmnmnm vimnuc in all fornrn in prowl-Lion to residual
vibratlou. mui uluu n simplex method for the name model (a girder). The
former method was effective for dumping "pure" normal modes with a surplus
of vibrators. 'lhe speed of the latter method depends considerably on the
initial point of the search and on the dimensions of the simplex. 'ihis
simplex must be reduced during search to achieve the re.uired accuracy of
control. and of course there is a concomitant reduction of speed. The
speed is determined by the speed of vibration measurement on each step, and
by the setting of appropriate rated forces on the vibrators.

Considering the feasibility of making miniature self-contained cemputing
devices. we should consider self-adJusting MS with perturbation control
the most promising for sources of vibration that are polyhnrmonic in nature.

No less important is self-adJustment of control circuits with feedback to
improve efficiency.

Optimum control of damping of oscillations of elastic systems. Research on
control of oscillating elastic systems is based on L. S. Pantry in's maximum
principle and also on dynamic programming (Bellman's principle )afRef. 38-h0].
in particular. an examination was made of control of the oscillations of a
Jet. a rod and a thin plate. Typical formulation of the problem: find a
control, 1. e. a cyst-m of forces or kinematic actions applied at certain
(outside or intermediate) points of the object to reduce its free oscillations
to a predetermined level in the shortest time. A similar problem is formu-
lated for vibration dampers [Ref. lb]. Such a control is one of the methods
of aetiVe vibroprotection as applied to nonstationary actions. and speci fi-
cally impact actions. Practical realization of this control leads to AVS
with optimum control that appreciably surpass self-adjusting AVS in their
capabilities. Such systems have already been created for fairly slow
processes (e. r}. damping of gyroscope oscillations).

Considering what has been said. let us note the maJor factors that are most
conducive to more extended use of AVS in technology:

1.. Availability of powerful compact actuating mechanisms (hydraulic and
pneumatic) that provide the necessary dynamic and static forces in the
low-frequency range (from a few hertz to tens of hertz).

2. Law mmznitude of vibrational forces transmitted to supports. particularly
in :zhock -moun1.e«i mechanisms of rotor type. 'lhis enables the use of AVS with
control with respect to force for additional reduction of vibrations. Actu-
ating elements (as a rule electromagnetic vibrators) may have small overall
dimensions and low power consumptioa under these conditions.

5. The capability for using passive vibroprotection devices (particularly
elastic links) to improve the conditions of operation of active elements
and enhance the total effect.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY

30. A wide choice of methods and means of control Home and vibration trium-

duceru. amplifiers. filters. correcting circuits). and the possibility ot‘
making. compact computers.

REFERENCES

l. D. Shubert. D. Rushichka. "Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of
Electrohydraulic Vibroprotection Systems." Konstruirovaniye i tekhnologiya

mashinostroyeniya [Design and Technolow of Machine Bui lding]. No 1:.
Moscow. Mir. 1969.

2. M. D. Oenkin. V. G. Yelezov, V. V. Yablonskiy. "Methods of Active
Damping or Vibration of Mechanisms" in: "Dinamika i skustika mashin"
[Dynamics and Acoustics of Machines]. Moscow. Nauks. 1971.

3. D. A. his. "InvestigatiOn of a Hybrid Vibroprotection System." ﬁkuprcss-
ini‘ormstsiya. "Iapytatel'nyye pribory i stendy" [Test Devices and Stands].
1969. No 13.

h. D. Karnopp. M. J. Crosby. R. A. Harvood. "Vibration Control Using Semi-
Active Force Generators." TRANS. ASHE. 1971:. v. 96. No 2.

5. K. V. Frolov. "Reduction of the Amplitude of oscillations of Resonant
Systems by Controlled Change of Parameters." MASMINOVEDBNIYE. 1965. No 3.

6. S. V. Yeliseyev. "Theory of Active Vibroprotection Systems and its
Applications." author's abstract of doctoral dissertation. Kiev Poly-
technical Institute. 1973.

7. A. V. Sinsv. B. A. Potemkin. Yu. G. Sufronov. "On the Possibilities
of Realizing Optimum 'h'ansfer Nnctions by Using Electrohydrsulie
Vihrorrotection Devices" in "Vliyaniye vibratsiy razlichnykh spektrov
na organism cheloveka-operatora i problemy vibrozashchity" [Influence
that Vibrations of Various Spectra llave on the Organism of a human
Operator. and Problems or Vibroprotection]. Moscow. Nauka. 1972.

8. M. D. Genkin. A. V. Rimokiy-Korsakov, A. M. Tselebrovskiy. V. V. anlon-
ukiy. "A Shock Absorber with Automatic Control" Soviet Patent Mo 259568.
liYULLL‘I‘EN' IZOBRETENIY, 1970. lb 2.

9. M. D. Genxin. V. G. Yelezov. V. V. Yablonakiy. "Vibration Damping of
Multidimensional Objects with the Use or Electromechanical Feedback."
Konrerentsiya no kolebnniynm mekhanicheskikh sistem (tezisy dokladov)
lConrcrencc on Oscillations of Mechanical Systems (Abstracts of Reports”.
Kiev. 1971.

1!). M. D. Genkin. V. G. Yelewv. V. V. Yoblonskiy. "Some Problem of Active
Vibroprotection in a Wide Frequency Band." Doklady na Vos'moy Vscsoyuznoy

Akusticheskoy koni‘erentuii [Reports to the Eighth All-Union Acoustics
Conference]. Moscow. Acoustics Institute. 1973.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ll. M. D. Genkin. V. O. Yelezov, V. V. Yablonskiy, "Peculiarities of Some
Arrangements for Active Vibration Damping with Combined Control."
in: "Akusticheskaya dinamika mashin i konstruktsiy" [Acoustic Dynamics
of Machines and Structural Elements], Moscow, Mauka, 1973.

12. M. D. Genkin. V. G. Yelezov, V. V. Yablonskiy. "Criteria (‘0! 'electing
Systems for Active Vibration Damping of Mechanisms" in: "Akustichesksya
dinamika nashin i konatruktsiy," Moscow, Mauka, 1973.

13. M. D. Cenkin, V. 0. Yelezov. V. V. Yablonskiy, "Use 01‘ Frequency Sta-
bility Criteria in Problems of Active Vibration Damping or Multireaonanca

Systems" in: "Akustichsskaya dinamika mashin i konstruktsiy," Moscow,
Nauka. 1973.

110. M. D. Genkin. V. 0. Yelesov. R. B. Statnikov, V. V. Yablonskiy, "Choosing
the Optimum Parameters of an Active Vibration Damper vith Electro-
mechanical Feedback vith Respect to Relative Displacement and 'ibtal
Force" in: "Vibroakusticheskiye protsessy v mashinakh i prisoyedinennykh
konntruktsiyakh" [Vibroacoustic Processes in Machines and Attached Struc-
tural Members]. Moscow. ﬂanks, 1971:.

15. M. A. Gcnkin. V. c. Yelezov, V. V. Yablonakiy. B. L. Fridman, "Development
of Methods of Active Vibration Damping" in: "Mctody aktivnoy i passivnoy
vibroizolyatsii mashin i prisoyedinennykh konstruktsiy" [Methods of

Active and Passive Vibration Damping or Machines and Attached Structural
Members], Mascow. Hanks, 1915.

16. V. s. Martyshkin, I. A. Pikulev, "A method of Automatic Compensation
of Random Displacements of Vibration-Damped Foundations That May be
Placed Under Precision Instruments," Soviet Patent No 13loh12, BYULLE'I'BM'
IYDBRETENIY. 1960, No 2‘0.

17. Sbornik "Voprosy nadezhnosti i vibratsionnoy zashchitv priborov" [Problems

of Reliability and Vibration Protection of Instrumental. Irkutsk, IPI
publishers, 1972.

18. Sbornik ”Vibratsionnaya zashchita i nadezhnost' priborov, mashin i
mckhanizmov" [Vibration Protection and Reliability of Instruments.
Machines and Mechanisms], Irkutsk. IPI publishers. 1973..

19. Sbornik "Avtomobil'nyy i bezdorozhnyy transport" [Motor Vehicle and
Ol'r-thc-Road Transportation], Irkutsk, IPI publishers. 1973.

20. Sbornik "‘l‘eoriya aktivnykh vibrozashchitnykh sistem” [Theory of Active
Vibroprotection Systems]. Irkutsk. IPI publishers, 19110.

21. M. z. Kolovakiy, "Controlling Oscillations of Mechanical Systems,"
ummuos'rnovauns, 1911., Mo 6.

FOR OFI’ICIIJ. USE ONLY
22.

27.

28.

33.

A. S. Knyazev. B. D. Tartakovskiy, "Using Electromechanical Feedback
for Damping Flexursl Oscillations of Rods." AKUSTICHESKIY ZHURNAL,
1965, Vol 11, No 2.

B. D. Tartovukiy. "A Multichannel Electromechanical Feedback System of
General Type (for Vibration Dmapin )" in: "Kolebaniya, izlucheniye i
demprirevaniye uprugikh struktur“ Oscillations, Radiation and Damping
of Elastic Structures], Moscow, Nuuka, 1973.

u. D. Tartakovskiy, "Impedance and Energy Characteristics of a Multi-
channel System for Electromechanical Compensation of Vibrations and
Sound Field" in: "Kolebaniya, izlucheniye i dempfirovaniye uprugikh
struktur," Moscow. Mauke, 1973.

A. I. Vyalyshcv. o. s. Gayrilov, O. S. Lyubaahevskiy, B. D. Tartakovskiy,
Yu. Ch. Choni, "Synthesis of a System for Compensation of a Vibration
Field in a Limited Region of a Semi-Infinite Plate," VIBROTEKNNIKA.

197M. No l (22).

S. S. Korablev, "Machine and Instrument Vibration Exciters and Dampers
that Contain a Self-Excited Oscillator." Author's abstract of doctoral
dissertation. Institute of the Science of Machines, Moscow, 1970.

S. S. Korablev, V. I. Shapin. "An Electromechanical Damper or Rod -
Oscillations." in: "Mekhanika mashin" [Mechanics of Machines], No 35-36.
Moscow, Nauka, 1972.

Abu-Akil, "An Electrodynamic Vibration Absorber as a Iassive or Active
Degice," Konstruirovaniye i tekhnologiya mashinoatroyeniya. No h, Mir,
l9 7.

Kh'yudimak. "Electromechanical Vibration Suppression." U. 8. Patent
C1888 313-128. "0 3088062, 1963.

T. H. Rockwell. "Investigation of Structure-Borne Vibration Dampers."
mm. 1965, v. 38. Mo Ia.

F. A. Furman, "Active Hydraulic Vibration Systems," VESTNIK MASMIMO-
STROYBMIYA, 1972, No S.

A. S. Oel'man. K. V. Frolov, F. A. Furman, R. G. Voronchikhin. "A
Tracking Mydraulie Damper of Oscillations of Mechanical Systems” in:
"Kolebaniya i ustoychivost' priborov i elementov sistem upravleniya"
[Oscillations and Stability of Instruments and Elements of Control
Systems]. Moscow, Nauka, 1968.

A. V. Sinev, "Construction of a Mathematical Model of a Hydraulic Power
Control System by Methods of Circuit Theory” in: "Kolebaniya i ustoyehi-
voat' priborov, mashin i elementov sistem upravleniya" [Oscillations and

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It

Stability of Instruments. Machines and Elements of Control Systems].
Moscow. lauks. 1968.

311. R. A. Musarskiy. "Investigation of the Possibilities of 'Aetive' Suspen-
sion of Transport Vehicles.” Uchenyye zapiski universiteta. seriya
mekhanika [Scientific Annals of the University. Mechanics Series].

No 135. aor'kiy. 1971.

35. V. '1'. maakov. "Pneumatic Active Means of Vibration Damping for Pre-
cision Machine Tools.“ Trudy Ul'yanovskogo politekhnicheskogo institute
[Proceedings of Ul'yanov Polytechnicsl Institute]. V. 9, No l. 1973.

36. V. G. Yelezov. "An Electromechanical Control System for Loerequency
Correction of the Characteristics of an Elastic Vibration Damper."

Doklady na Vos'moy Vsesoyuznoy Akusticheskoy konferentsii. Moscow.
Acoustics Institute. 1973.

31. V. c. Yelezov. "A Vibration Damping Support with an Electromechanical
Control System" in: "Vibroakusticheskiye protsessy v mashinakh i pri-
soyedinennykh konstruktsiyakh. Moscow. Ranks. 19?“.

38. A. G. Butkovskiy. ”Hetody upravleniya sistemami s raspredelennvmi

parametrami" [Methods of Controlling Systems with Distributed Parameters].
Moscow. Nauka, 1975.

39. A. I. Yegorov, G. B. Shenfel'd. "Concerning a Problem of Optimua Control
of Plexural Oscillations of a Oirder." Trudy Franzenskogo politekhni-

eheakogo institute [Proceedings of Frunze Polytechnical Institute],
No '55, 1971.

ho. I. A. Karnovskiy. "0n the Problea of Eliminating Oscillations in
Plates." PRIKLADNAYA NEW“, 1.97.0. V. 10. No 2.

'51. H. Kvibel. "A Study of the Feasibility of Active Shock Isolation,"
1ms.-ascn.. 1968. v. 36. no 6.

AN ACTIVE VI BROPROTECTION 8Y8?” WITH CONTROL wrm RESPECT TO DOV-FREQUENCY
AND VIBRATIOIIAL WEATIONS

M. D. Genkin. V. G. Yelezov, N. A. Pronina, V. V. Yablonskiy

An examination is made in Ref. 1-3 of active vibroprotection systems (AVS)
with control with respect to force or strain on an elastic element that
connects the source of oscillation to the object that is to be isolated.
These systems contain individual control channels that include a force or
deformation transducer, an amplifier and an electromagnet that operates on
the object to be isolated close to the point of application of the force.

The transfer ratio of the vibrocompensation system has a constant value in
the vibration band and is close to zero in the low-frequency region. Control

11

”I OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is equivalent to reducing the stiffness of the elastic
elementn in the vibration band. On the other hand. the
utnhillzation uyntem of Ref. 3 has a constant transfer
ratio on low frequencies and does not operate in the
vibration band. Control is equivalent to increasing the
stifhuess of elastic elements on low frequencies. In the
first case the differential of oscillations in artificially
increased on relatively stiff shock absorbers. In the
second case it becomes mssible to use a pliable insulating
suspension for mechanisms on moving obJectu under conditions
of varying misalignmento, as well as inertial loads (ex-
ternal low-frequency perturbations).

 

0n the basis of simple computational examples. this paper
investigates vibroprotection by simultaneous control in
Fig. l the vibration and low-frequency perturbation bands.

Diagram of the AM? and basic equations. The mechanical system (Fig. 1)
contains mass m" excited by external force 1“ (source of oscillations), an
elastic element with complex stiffness PM +3"). 0" is the loss factor).
and also mass m" and an elastic element with complex stiffness k"(l +Jx“) --
the model of the object to be isolated -- the “load." The action of the
controlled electromagnet with frame fastened to the source (mass m") and
armature fastened to the obJect to be isolated (the rigid base) is depicted
in accordance with the conventional scheme [Ref. 1. 2] by two equal and
opposite active forces 19 applied to mass m" and the base.

me transfer function has the following form:

If K .130"
‘9‘ ' ’W’ ' 11% - 15m '

nanny“ winery“

for RC and LCR filters respectively.

In the frequency region (p-Ju) this function can be transformed to the
following form (for LCR filters):

i-OW: (“mm-above:
MW: 1.010.‘
”[3" m + K"("——_1-mm:r+ new}
(3)

where 0 -0/0.; a».- Flm'; f is the force in the elastic element (control
signal); Kfc and Kr“ are the nominal coefficients of amplification of the

control circuit in the bands of stabilization (when n < l) and vibrocompen-
nation (when 9 91) respectively; ac. 9n are the normalized natural

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

frequencies of the low-frequency and high-frequency LCR filters; he. A“ are
the inductance loos factors of the filters. the reciprocals of their Q.

The forced oscillations in the AVS that operates in the object (see Fig. l)
are described by the following system of equations:

or? + k“ (1 +179)“ + KM? -— x') - I'.

.. - a '
m'x“+k'(i +IA')(I + K,)(.r“-x')+k'(i +jl')x" - o. ()

where P's/:6“: x—xgﬂ'ﬂ'". and the transfer ratio of the control circuit Kt
is defined by expression (1).

We evaluate the effectiveness of vibration damping as usual on the basis of
the coefficient Mn) - f/f“ of transfer of force to the rigid base via an
elastic element in a system with one degree of freedom. It is natural to take
the measure of effectiveness of active vibration d ing as the absolute
value of the ratio of frequency responses INN/”ml of the passive and
active systems in the vibration frequency band. For a system of wide-band
vibrocoupensation [Ref. 1] when 9»l(considerably above resonance) the
effectiveness is equal to

IA/A“ - Bu " "O’IIII| "" H“ "' K's): “’

where To is the complex stiffness of the system without control ("regular"
stiffness) that ensures resistance to low-frequency oscillations, and
I... -I. (I —.K,.) is the equivalent stifmess in the vibration band.

We evaluate the effectiveness of stabilization from the reduction in dis-
placements of the mass or deformations of the spring caused by the low-
frequency actions (when n «1). The effectiveness can be expressed as

a. u like,“ - I 4- Km (3)
where i is the complex stiffness of the system without control, which is
taken as clearly lower than the "regular" stiffness, and therefore. generally
speaking. does not ensure stability to low-frequency perturbations;

F‘.-F (I + K,,) is the equivalent stiffness in the low-frequency band.

The effectiveness of vibration damping with an AVS having control of both
types can be expressed by the quantity

5.. In + 10.): {(1 — Kid-ii + K's/(i — Kn). (0)

i. e. an the product of expressions ('0) and (5). Stabilization should
ensure the required stiffness on low frequencies. 1. e. the equality

IFlu + KR) ~ ml. (7)

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VIl-rm-nmlv'mmlJml mmll. mnnm- the mlnlmum I-qulvnlvnl. utll'l‘nmm R] - Km) In
Mn,- l'l'cquunt‘y band of vlln-ulJun that In mmluniblc with the existing con-
straints in the low-frequency band. Assuming condition (7), equation (6)
characterizes the effectiveness of this A18 as compared with the "regular"
passive vibration damper (with stiffness k0).

Duality of the two control system. Let 2,. s; be the impedances of the
arms of the simplest L-shaped low-frequency or high-frequency filter (LPF and
HPF). If z1/(n +zg) is the transfer function of the "PP, then zz/(z1+zz)
is the transfer function of the LP? with the ease elements but connected in
reverse order. In accordance with expression (1). the equivalent stiffness

k(l +Kr) that appears in equations (3) can be expressed and transformed as
follows:

for vibrocompensation:

F...u7i(1—Kh'|;{u)'ui(i—K,.)(l+ KI: L). (8)

— " ”+3. .

 

for stabilization

KR 1

5,... 1(1 + K“ "LA-In + Kn)(i—m;m)- (9)
Comparing expressions (8) and (9) we find that the AVS with compensation is
equivalent to a stabilizing AVB in which the stiffness of the elastic element
is equal to k(l-Km), while the transfer ratio in the lad-frequency region
is Km/(l-Km); the AVIS with stabilization is equivalent to a_conpensatin5
AVS in which the stiffness of the elastic element is equal to Hinge).
while the transfer ratio in the vibration band is life/(14.196). This enables
us to investigate stabilizing systems by methods presented in Ref. 1, 2. but
with consideration of the dependence of the stiffness of the equivalent
elastic element on the transfer ratio Kfc-

 

Both kinds of control can also be represented in a form such as vitrocom-
psnsation

 

_ I. ’
teas "‘ k (‘ + KR m -- K" I“ 'T’a) a .
KI: K" I"

_ I
nk(‘ 4‘ Kk)(1—m;TK-%;- ”I [c '|l+tll). (‘0)

where ‘11:, :1“ are the elements of two different filters (LP? and HP? in the
initial expression, RF? in the final expression). 'ihe equivalent transfer
ratio (last two terms) has a "two-step" frequency response.

Expression (10) implies directly that if the limiting frequencies are suf-
ficiently separated. the controls can be treated separately, each in its

own band. Frequency separation is useful for reducing the mutual influence
of frequency distortions, and also for getting away from resonant frequencies.
if on the other hand the limiting frequencies are equal and in this connection
the elements of filters 11c and a“ are identical. the equivalent control

has the simplest form

1':

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

,_ , _ Kirl'xn :

Essa ‘(iﬂ Kle)(' Wm).

that is analogous to AVS that have already been studied with a single RF? in
the control channel.

Object with one degree of freedem and aperiodic links. As mH-H- (massive
obJect to be isolated) the motion of the system is described by a single
equation'(we consider viscous friction):

m"? + 260 4- KM" + k'(l -|- K,).\" n I". 26 ~1de - coast.

In the case of control of form (1) with aperiodic links in both channels,

a characteristic polynomial of fourth order is obtained. Let the initial
system relative to which the effectiveness is calculated have stiffness RB
and natural frequency no. Assigning fixed values of 26, Tc. 'Ih (in dimension-
less form). we will vary the stiffness k" and frequency «:0 of the obJect.

each time selecting the value of Km in accordance with the equality

k"(l Him) IkB, thus ensuring the same resistance to low-frequency pertur-
bations as in the initial system. Using the Routh-Hurwitz criterion, we find
the value of Km on the boundary of stability. 'Ihe results of calculation of
effectiveness B according to (6) are eunmarized in Table 1.

TABLE 1

 

NOTE: .lﬁIdB

These data show that combined control gives a greater effect than each form
of control separately.

Object with We degrees of freedom and oscillatory links (LCR filters).

'ihe conditions of greatest effectiveness of an AVS in an object with two
degrees of freedom were investigated in accordance with system of equations
(3) and control characteristic (2). with consideration of stability require-
ments and vibration damping requirements. the values of 9C. {In were chosen
in a range of 0.5-5. The problem of obtaining the maximum value of B was
formulated. An investigation of this kind was done for shock-mounted mecha-
nisms in which the suspensions must not be noticeably deformed over a rela-
tively wide range of low-frequency perturbations a-o-c.5 (i. e. up to half
of the resonant frequency), while vibration damping must be effective in the
range of a» S. The ratio aMN Im"/a"-0.Ol and partial frequency 0,. I

.Q VWnT/ou- loo correspond to a massive and rigid foundation.

15

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Nyqulnt stability condi tionn as applied to the function of the reciprocal
relation [Ref. '1 ] had the following form:
Rc'l‘qn) .- u Re K, (Ch) (6: — i'i) — lm K,(9.)(1" + M»)! (b. —
- 1')- - 9’0!) + [Re K! (900.- + ”1) +
+ lm Kr (and. — 1'1)! (1' + M: — 9:1"))Il(1'+ .
+ 1b; — OWN (b: — 1'1 — 92am>— 1. (H)

where a,— 1—0219!“ b,- l -(| + «00%?» Re Knnl). lm‘K,(Q,) are the
values of the real and imaginary parts of the transfer ratio of the control

circuit on frequency 91; 01 is the i-th root of the equation

tumour + n.) + Im Imam - m): (b - n— ma)...
- memam - m — 1m mono" + u): a“ + n -
- 9’1.) - on (‘2)
a- i—Q’Kl}: b-i—(i+a..)ow:.
ln solving the optimization problem, the input parameters were taken as

Sic. Ac, an, A“. Km, Km. 1. e. those parameters of the control circuit that
are at the disposal of the designer.

A: a result of investigation of the six-

dimsnsional space (Km. K“, lc, A“, ac. Q“) (g I

by the method of 'global linear programming

search with subsequent gradient descent from v“.-‘.
the 5-10 sets with greatest values of B. the ' k

setn of parameters are found for which 3 has .u‘.
the greatest value. satisfying conditions um '5

(11). (12). The sets that are best in the

given sense for h I0.1 and 0.25 are given in
Table 2, where the sets with the highest value
of B in each column are found after gradient
descent. and correspond to the extrenun value

of B. Plotted in Pig. 2 are the regions of
stability (on the side with shading) in the
Km-Km plane for the optima sets that cor-
respond to the maximum value of B at different A.

lI'he curves in Pig. 2 show the monotonic nature
of the reduction in B with deviation of Kfc
and Km from the optimum values shown on the
curve by asterisks. For each of the points indicated on the boundary. the
numbers show the corresponding values of the degree of damping B and the
critical frequency of self-excitation of the system “up' The change in sup
along. both boundaries is also monotonic.

 

A comparison of the effectiveness of the versions of AVS considered in Ref.
1-3 with that provided by the given AVS (assming optimum parameters of its
control circuit) shown that the vibration damping effect with combined

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 2
B. an “I: “I: “up N k 0c “a
I - 0.l
- 0.00 0.31 - 0,83 0.“ 3.70 3.52 0.53
7 0.5 0.33 Li 0.5 3.02 3.31 I 0.5
A -0,” ‘
— 0.31 0.53 0,“ 0.8‘ 3.70 2,52 0.53
10 0.05 0.7‘ 1.01 0.5 0.39 3.03 0.5
NOTE: Jﬁ I dB

control in 5 dB higher on the average than with control in the band of low-
frcqucncy perturbations or in the vibration band.

REFEENCB

l. H. D. Genkin, V. 6. Yelezov, V. V. Yablonskiy. "Methods for Active
Damping of Vibrations of Mechanisms" in: "Dinamika i akustika mashin"
[Dynamics and Acoustics of Machines], Moscow. Nauka, 1971.

2. M. D. Genkin. V. G. Yelezov. V. V. Yablonskiy, "Criteria for Selecting
Systems for Active Vibration Damping of Mechanism" in: "Akusticheskaya
dinamika mashin i konstruktsiy" [Acoustic Dynamics of Machines and
Structural Elements]. Moscow. Nauka, 1973.

3. V. G. Yelezov, "A Vibration Damping Support with an Electromechanical
Control System" in "Vibroakusticheskiye protsessy v mashiaakh i pri-
noyedinennykh honstruktaiyakh" [Vibroacoustic Processes in Machines and
Attached Structural Members]. Moscow, Nauka, 1971:.

II. V. P. Sigorskiy. A. i. Petrenko. "Osnovy teorii elektronnykh skhem"
[Principles of the Theory of Electronic Circuits]. Kiev. 'l‘ekhnika. 1967.

SOME PROBLEMS OF VIBROCOHPENSATION OP ELASTIC SYSTmS
V. A. 'i‘ikhonov. V. V. Yablonskiy

The use of additional sources of vibration energy (vibrators) in different
fields of technology as elements of an active vibroprotection system leads
to expansion of the possibilities of facilities for passive vibration damping
of elastic structures. The problem of selecting a law of additional exci-
tation to reduce the resultant vibration and noise of machines and mechanisms
is basic in this regard. and is solved in different ways. Ref. 1, 2 describe
vibration control that is accomplished by a system of automatic force control

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

control are used in an open arrangement. Self-contained control of vibrators
by optimizer-computing devices sssunes assignment of an algorithm of adaptive
search for the extremum state 01‘ the obJect. The theory of possible optimum
control in this case has not been adequately developed. The solution with

vibration sources remains open.

This article gives the results of computer modeling of some algorithms of
vibrocompensation in linear elastic systems. Estimates are made on the

Here u‘(t.x,y.z) is the vector function or spatial displacement or a point;
P‘(t.x.y.z) = (ff. r5,.... :3) is the vector function that assigns the dis-
tribution of forces from the controlling vibrators; L“, Ln, LA are linear
smetric differential operators with given boundary conditions; I... In

are gradients of the quadratic functional of kinetic energy and potential
energy or elastic detonation respectively; LA is a dissipative operator that
is taken as equal to banana/3t for internal friction in the material.

We will take the forces 1’‘ as controlling forces. the function F‘(t.x,y.z)
on time segment [hum] being a piecewise-continuous function of time and
coordinates defined in the region of permissible controls: We by.

He write the criterion of quality of vibration control as
Q(F'>-Iu:(F')—u‘l. (2)

where the norm is taken in a functional Hilbert space in which the energy

scalar product is given; no is the given distribution of vibration at time to.

In contrast to Ref. 1:, the quality function here depends implicitly on the
controlling forces.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The problem of optimum control of vibration is formulated as follows. Among
all the admissible controls Fuenf that transform the elastic system from

the given initial state an to the required final state un-ua, it is necessary
to find the one such that

Q (P) _ min.

I‘CD'

After selecting as the initial state of the system one such that the sources
of forces P3 are disconnected, the control with vibrocompensation is reduced
to minimization of the norm of the resultant vibration, i. e. from the
mathematical standpoint to determination of the minimum mean-square deviation
in the case of linear oscillations [Ref. 7] for the vibration field excited

by the controlling forces away from the initial field excited by some unknown
load F.

An important class of vibration controls is harmonic control, which is often
realized in practice. It is easy to show that in the general case this
control is not optimum (with respect to the condition in Ref. 3) For

instance for a girder of fixed cross section the optimum control found in
Ref. h would be

M. 10-97,“, x).

where v(t,x) is the solution of the homogeneous equation of flexural oscil-
lations of a girder with the corresponding boundary conditions, and condition

6 (In x) - (2am) In! (I... x) —

iiere y and a are the parameters of the quality functional; m is the linear
mass of the girder.

Expansion of the solution in a Fourier time series leads to an expression for
the control in the form

13...“. x) - {72(Cmos «u + 0.35» m x. (x).
l

where mi are eigenvalues; X1(x) is the eigenform of the initial boundary value
problem, and the coefficients 01 and D1 in the general case are not equal
and do not vanish independently.

Restricting the class of admissible controls, let us formulate the problem

of minimizing the quality function with harmonic control depending on the
distribution and magnitude of forces 1‘“. Let us consider motion of a system
in the class of harmonic oscillations with frequency to, and controlling

forces as quasistationary harmonics of the same frequency, but with different
amplitude and phase on finite time intervals (transient processes are excluded
from consideration): where x°,

x“, F“ are complex functions of coordinates. Then, eliminating the time term .
in (l)

[(1 + NL- - m’L.]x‘ - I'. (3)
19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

where l is the loss factor (taken as frequency-independent), we can get
the expression xaiKU“) (K is the influence function). It is required to

minimize quality function (2). which we write for instance for one-dimensional
syutemn (Pig. 1) as

1 .
Qw¢hrm-rewar. _ n)
O
or with respect to the criterion of the maximum of the modulus
Q, .- m:xlx° (E) — x‘(€)l« (5)

Here 5 is the dimensionless coordinate

 

Fig. 1

Estimation of the required number of vibrators. Let us determine the number n
I

of vibrators as sources of concentrated controlling forces f‘- 2‘, [gag—3,).
‘-|

arbitrarily distributed with respect to length (area) such that with proper
selection of the magnitudes of forces ff, the norm of the function of the
resultant vibration distribution [Qll' - (x' -—x‘. x° -x°) :— II x' —x‘ II‘ differs
from the norm of the initial distribution hmctioletP- (Zap-“fly by no
more than a set number of times (or by B decibels):

wm®®<m
Ol'

[QIPIIQ§P<10’M'* B... (6)

Expanding all functions appearing in (3) in a series with respect to eigen-
functions X; (1 s1, 2,...) of a homogeneous operator with corresponding
boundary conditions. and using the condition of orthonormalization with
respect to kinetic energ

(leloxal)-6luu I'm-1.2...” (1)
where 6;“. in the Kronecker delta, we get the relations
re) - Sax. (a). p. - ML“ [(1 + mu:- 0'1- - (8)
I
20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

llere ii; and p; are the coefficients of expannion of the functions x“ and f"
renpectlvely; at

are the natural frequencien'. i... in the operation of multi-
pllvntlnn by tlu- rum-Linn.

Hith eunuldcrutlon of ('f) and (8) we have

low - (2,6174%) xu )'_‘,(o.~ n.) x.) -

-‘ 2N3: "F‘Nol- PINXI- XI)! - 2|“: - ﬂil' -

- Iu+md-mm-EP
. IMAM-W '
where 1‘); I min“.

Without loan of generality. let no net lQﬂ'u-llx'll‘n I. Then for systems
with l." =conat we get

3. - <7‘- XI) - ,é 7m (t)
-l
and Inequality (6) taken the form

~ ”(Hind-ﬂier; 5 mm

(It! 8 ' 9
,3 (oi—eruv < " H

llaviny. ?n arbitrary varianto in the choice of amplitude and phase of the
controlling forces. we determine the latter from the nyetem of equations

 

2:. mac» - m + It) wi- o'lw. um

iicre the subscript 1 may represent an arbitrary net of n compensated modes.
Then the residual cum in estimated by the inequality

2:;"XHU I. '
H +I”.I’-“‘l < B" (H)

 

 

I~l+l

and characterizes the necessity of minimizing the work of the controllinr.
forces on dlnplacements of the component modes of order higher than n.

in n one-dimmional clantic nynten let n vibrational mode be excited on

frequency on that has no more than r nodes (points of inflection) with approxi-
mation by the polynomial

0, (I) - l§ CIXAE)

in virtue of the fact that the system or eigenmnctionn is a Chehyehev system.
The mean-square approximation theory implies that with reference to (11) it is
necessary to select the pointn of application and magnitude of If“) so that

the function of best approximation x“(€) in the sense of mean square deviation

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OPFICMI. USE ONLY

from 1:0“) is orthogonal to moden with number greater than n. If uniform
approximation of the functions x“ to x° is required. the formulated problem
can be reduced to a problem of interpolation. The values of the amplitude

and phone of the forcea ff (2n values) are uelccted no that the rcuultant
vibrations at the n points vanioh:

(9—!)I‘.“"on * " Lav-”0"!

or. substituting the expansiOns with respect to eigenmnctiOns
' " 2’31“)
X - ' X -0.
24“ at.) gl—T-‘(mm ﬂ, 1(a)

we arrive at the equivalent problem of resolution of system of equations (10).
Then we can use existing estimates of the error of interpolation by Chebyahev

polynomialo (Ref. 7]. Then with uniform approximation by power-law poly-
nomials we get the estimate

'3. (t) '- Ln (3" < A"ml’z'm‘ (I! + ”'0

where the Ln“) are Lagrange polynomials of order n; the interpolation points
are selected an roots of the Chebyshev polynomial

- (ml) .
M... “annulmx, (til

Requiring that the square of the maximum error not exceed a predetermined
degree of compensation. we get an estimate of the form

1M...I2""(n + W < Bulx‘l’.

In the case of uniform approximation in the class of trigonometric eigen-

functions. the least deviation from trigonometric polynomials iin('l') conform
to the estimate [Ref. 7]:

Ix‘c) — T.(E)|<CM12.1n.

liere M in the Lipoohitz factor:

“NW-”(ml‘. MRI-'4“;

c in an nbuolute constant defined as

 

m 3.1’ In 2 4- CI in) - Cl (11)] .
C " m ‘- Tm‘ L'Lt + a'T—- [2 u-m— 5mm

iiy analogy with the preceding we get an eutimete of the form
ICMIZMI’I; Bulx'r.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oﬁ'ICIM. USE ONLY

In tin.- cum: of urbltrnry eigenfunction“ we make reference to relation (11).
which we .nimplll‘y with camideration of the conatrnints on the controla:
”“5; thi- I, 2,. . ..n). Uoiny, the notation

R
0- - “pg. 7mm.

and considering that for beam functions |X,(§,)| < 'l. and On: WWW/2. we have
the inequality

h

01 ﬁllet-W +Wr'<0... (12)

'-

Nuncrioal analysis was done with respect to expression (12) transformed for

vi broaccelerationsx
.

2 (NW— 11' + m" <0;'i0""". (12-)

l~n+l

Here we une the notation (81)“ nag/u: and aasume that Brawn/M5 when

A -().05 and Nola-0.028. the frequency of forced oscillations being between
the fi rat and second natural frequenciea. The residual sun of the series
reduced to 200 terms as a function of the parameter 8 is shown in Fig. 2
(20 terms of the neriee are sufficient for B I0.526). with an increase in
the frequency of excitation u. a reduction in stiffness or an increase in
the inertneno of the system. i. e. with a reduction in the paramter B. a

moment arrives when condition (12a) cannot be satisfied and thus achieve
some compensation of vibrations.

 

An invaatiomtion was made of the feasibility of replacing the residual sun

by an improper integral which. with accuracy to terms of no more than the
:zccoml order of omallncnz: of the loan factor A is equal to

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'W".§.wﬁr~*'m[“‘“***”)*

+r-**¢'¢n’%‘"w§=":+(3+%”)m'nﬁ‘%ﬁ’:+
+(-3-+z’r*')"'.‘-n§:r1r2“ ”“323"1.‘ +
“Fla"‘HH—rrh-Zi' 331+”;—
_{n(3+++-é-l’)when(ﬂ+i)'>¢]
' a o * when(n+i)'<e °
anal-(I-F'n-k‘). Oil-5'. c-a‘+b'-]'7(i+}"-.

Calculations show that for B > I]. a uniform increase is observed in the
value of the integral over the residual sum (Pig. 3).

Let us note that depending on the number of the node to be compensated
I ' .
a. - ":v 2‘. mamas + Mar-"‘1'"

III-I
'lhe graph for the dependence or (II/a}. -“ﬂny— n! on n is plotted (see Fig. 3)
so that the product of the value of the given expression multiplied by snﬁ or
1(n) for identical coordinates is equal to unity. Then to determine the
amber of vibrators necessary for compensation of r harsonics with a given
degree of damping B, a sealant 8 must be laid off downward from the point
on the curve of oﬁloﬁ with abscissa r. and the nearest point (on the in-
creasing side) with abscissa equal to the integer n must be round from the
corresponding ordinate on the curve 01‘ 5M1 or 1(n). 0a Pig. 3 the moves are
shown by the points a-b-c-d.

Ii'he resultant estimates are easily generalized to two-dimensional systems.
For instance in the case of small flexural oscillations of a thin elastic
plate. we have in (3)

L. .. Dan. L. - 91., ['(g, n) .. '3: § gm _s.mn,_ '1.)-

lull-t
where D in cylindrical stiffness: M is the Laplace operator in dimensionless
coordinates c and n; sh is mass density.

Then. repeating the preceding considerations for the system of eigenmnctions
X1, orthonormalized with respect to a pair of indices, we arrive at an
estimate or the form

ll“ +m~:,—vlu,,- i i "Juan '5)?

I‘ll-l B .
“'2': (-3,—vy+av < "
2"

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIM. USE ONLY

Let a vibrational mode he set up in the plate with r nodes relatiVe to
coordinate a and n nodes relative to coordinate n. Then after determining
the amplitude and phane of the forces from the system of equations

(g.g‘l'7t.IXW(‘l° “0"“ +I‘)d1-U'|°lv “.1a2n-Hm "Lzo-o-Jﬂ)

under conditions that n t r and Its it is necessary to check satisfaction of
the inenuslities

~ ~ 2". 23mm" a)
.L':L'.-'__... < a... (:3)
'IIIO-1M'H (l +ﬂ)."- 8‘

Relation (13). as in the case of a one-dimensional system, is the condition
of minimizing the work of all forces NR located at the points of intersection
of a rectangular n: a grid on generalized displacements of modes of higher
order than these characterized by the pair of numbers n and In.

Control modeling with respect to the inﬂuence matrix. Vibrocompensation in
a linear elastic system asemes selection of a control P! such that it sets
up a mode close to the given Xo. but Opposite in sign, i. e. the limiting
condition

or. x')-_'~IX°I-.

must be satisfied. where F. - m; h- i. 2. . . .. n}: X' - (x7: {-1. 2. - - .. 0|):
lx’) - {X'l

To determine the required vector of controlling forces. we will start from
the limiting case where X‘-X° 80. i. e. the ease of total compensation of
vibrations. Then we determine I?“ from the equation

AF“ .- X'. (it)

Here A - (an: (In I. 2. . . .. In: in I. 2. . . ., n) is a matrix (in the general case
an operator- mnction) that in the case of harmonic oscillations is obtained
an a renuit of formal multiplication of the elements of the influence matrix K
by m"; the data over the acceleration vector *0 are a symbolic designation
for ennlitude (hereafter they will be omitted).

when the dimensionality of vectors x“ and F0 coincides, i. e. the number of
points of observation in equal to the nusber of points of unidirectional
discrete control (ml n). matrix equation (1'5) may have a unique solution
for do: “'0 and matrix rank equal to n. Usually the number of vibro-
acceleration pickups installed to monitor the uniformity of compensation
exceeds the number of vibrators (m > n). In the general case the system of
equations may be mutually exclusive.

25

FOR 057101“. USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

Let us formulate the problem an follows. It is required to nelect a vector P“
uuch that some «r the equationn of nysten (in) are satisfied identically. and
the error of natlufartinn of the remaining equations is determined by the
condition of minimization of quality function (h). One can find an approxi-
Iats solution of the entire system of equationn by the method of mean squares.

Assuming that the rank of the matrix A and of the expanded matrix after the

appropriate selection of points is equal to n. we write system of equations
ill.) in the form

go...” n ‘1" Uh: * ,. 1.2. - - - .ME (1.2. . . . .m). (11,“)
xi-xi-d-gauﬂ. u) - u.2.......)\u.). (1).»)

Selection of points (ik) -- the points where the function of the resultant
distribution of vibration vanishes -- in arbitrary and is determined by the
requirements of existence of a solution of equation (lbs) and construction
of the best approximation of x“ to x“.

Modeling was done with application to a foundation for the shock-mowited
obJeet that consisted of two identical girders oscillating in phase. The
initial vibration field was assigned either as an individual or mixed normal
mode of flexural oscillations of a girder fixed and supported at the ends,
or else as the result of action of a systen of concentrated forces on the
shock-absorber side. The elements of the matrix were calculated for these
cases by approximate computation of infinite sums of the form

5—” a
MUM“) a . 0. 1.1.2.....m;
0“ -.-. i-iiiH-m' ﬁ' 7'
*I‘.2.asepne
and also in closed form in terms of Krylov fmctions of a complex arguemnt

ﬂu - x' (t) IMF. - Cusoct) + caret) + cool/(“:0 +
+ duvet) - xv mt - an. r -: IW + mu".
’0 - “glut.
ilere the constants Chi-Cu“ were found for each segment by solving the corre-
sponding boundary value problem.

A model was constructed for compensation of individual normal modes of the
girders supported and fixed at the ends (see Fig. l):

“0’ I ”'5 t n
X,m-m:——ﬁi'—. ﬂ,zT(4r+i).
I
and for mixed modes: I: - grunt). A preliminary investigation was made

of the unrfnce of the quality function with respect to the two previously
indicated criteria. preference being given among step-hy-step search methods
to parallel change of coordinates with a variable step

26
FOR orricm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

M“ - H Rd: .. mm. Mm]: - HAM. a - 1. 2.....n}.

Bome results of compensation of individual modea are shown in Fig. 10-6. .011
Fig. la the axis of abucissan reflectu the ntep-by-ntep change in forceu f“.
and the Roman numeraln indicate: Iuthe method of influence coefficientn:
Huntep-by-ntep search. A "gully" structure of the surface of the quality
function in observed, i. e. there is a aharp minimum of a function of many
variables. the degree or sharpness of the minimum on the surface incl-caning
with a reduction or the number r of the mode and an increase in the number n
of vibratorn. The latter leads to a case of a poorly conditioned matrix A

and an unstable solutiOn I close to the global minimum of the quality
mnction._

’Io’l
Fig. '1 ll

 

I x I J iZ‘I/Il}!

d8
IlllIiILI
IHYAYI'L‘

W

b
l'IkILILIi!
‘n‘ml

    
       
      
     
 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cox" -s-l

 

   
    

Ill-III.
mull-l
Issui-
=eses-
' 3M

I
I
q-Wm" a) - ﬁlm"

II

 
   
 

Note: card-r1

    
     

   
 
 

Fig. 7

 

.7]
The necessary number of uniformly arranged vibrators for the given degree of
compensation of different modes is found from Fig. 5, 6. which corresponds
to the previously given estimates. The following versions are considered in
Fig. 5 for the case n-S: a--r=3. bur-l4, cur-5, d--r=6. The white
circles denote points of installation of vibrators, the black circles denote
points of observation.

'11": degree of coupensstion is shown as a function of the frequency of exci-
tation in Fig. 1, where the first natural frequencies are shown on the axis
of nbscissas. 0n resonant frequencies and close to then an intense rise is

28

FOR 0?FICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY “

observed in the degree of compensation of the corresponding resonant mode,

and a drop for remaining modes. With an increase in frequency it is mainly
higher harmonics that are excited. which leads to a reduction in the level

of compensation since the latter reflects the fraction of higher uncompensated
modes in the resultant vibration field. This explains the existence of a
limiting frequency aboVe which 81 changes sign. which corresponds to excess
excitation.

Force control by a reduced number of vibrators. The conventional method or
vibrocompensation (Ref. 1] is based on connecting a single vibrator (or more
to correspond in number to the components of the excitation force that are
to be compensated) in the feedback circuit under each shock absorber. the
force being developed by the vibrator Pk being close in magnitude to that
trammitted by the shock absorber. and opposite in phase: I‘Qufk. Thus the
system of compensating forces in the given case exactly reproduces the system
of disturbing forces. which is ensured by setting the corresponding transfer
ratio of the feedback circuit. However. in the case of a large number of
shock absorbers the control system becomes too cumbersome. In particular.
the number of vibrators may be much greater than the number n necessary for
damping vibration of a given degree of "complexity." An investigation was
made of compensation with a considerable (2-3 times) reduction in the number
of vibrocompensators and retention of the same principles of control.

A computer was used to model the second method of assigning the initial
field of vibrations: an examination was made of the result of excitation of
a girder structural element by a system of concentrated forces transmitted
to the foundation from the shock-absorber side. The forces of excitation
were recalculated from the curve of vibrations (having two inflection points)
taken from experimental data. An exact solution was used to calculate
matrix A. It was found that the resultant initial mode is close to the
first normal mode for s girder with mole-0.117.

In the case of force control by a smaller number of vibrators than the number
of shock absorbers. the latter are connected in groups of adJacent shock
absorbers with close values of the amplitudes and phases of the forces trans-
mitted to the fOundation. Corresponding to each group of adjacent shock
absorbers is a single vibrator located in the middle of the group arrangement.
and the control law is determined from the rule

73“‘(7.T.'+7a+l¥-').

if the groups intersect, i. e. the same shock absorber belongs to neighboring
groups and is "served" by two vibrators. and

7:- —2L.-
‘n
if the groups are independent.

The solution with respect to a predetermined sum vector of the controlling
force was compared with the solution by the method of influence coefficients.

29
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI’ICIAL USE ONLY

It was assumed that 13 shock absorbers uniformly spaced lengthwise of the
girder are broken down into groups of 2-h. depending on the number of
vibrators. The results are numerised in the table.

 

KEY: lununber of vibrato": n
2--nethod of influence coefficients

3~-force control
115 I dB

Vibration control using an influence matrix provides a high degree of compon-
aation. but this involves a larger number of vibrators than required in the
case of an initial node close to the first. The difference between the
calculated vectors of controlling forces and those that are preassigned has
a considerable effect with increasing :1. The weak dependence of compensation
on the number of vibrators in force control can be attributed to the need

for more exact assignment of the forces of control with increasing n in view
of the development of "gullying" of the surface of the quality function.

Thus for linear elastic systems whose natural frequencies are considerably
higher than the excitation frequency. high effectiveness of vibrocompensation
can be achieved by grouping adjacent shock absorbers with little difference
in amplitude and phase within the limits of the group. and by controlling
vibration on the foundation with respect to the sun vector of the force.

The number of vibroconpensators can be reduced to a minimum by calculating
the controlling forces from an influence matrix.

REFERENCES

l. M. D. Oenkin. V. 0. Yelezov, V. V. Yablonskiy. "Methods of Active
heaping of Vibrations of Mechanisms" in: "Dinanika i akustika nashin"
[Dynamics and Acoustics of Machines]. Moacow, Nauka. 1971.

2. A. s. Knyazev. B. D. Tsrtakovshiy. "Oslablcniye vibratsiy i izlucheniye
shuns vibriruvushchini plastinami s pomshch'yu elektrouekhanicheskoy
obratnoy svyazi" [Attenuation of Vibrations and Emission of Noise by
Vibrating Plates by Means of Electromechanical Feedback]. Kiev. "haukova
dunks." 1966.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ii" son orncm. use om

3. V. Komkov. "Teoriya optimal'nogo upravleniya dempfriovaniyem kolebaniy
prostykh uprugikh sistem" [Theory of Optimum Control of Dumping of the
Oscillations of Simple Elastic Systems]. Moscow. Mir. 197'.

h. A. I. Yegorov. G. B. Shenfcl'd, "Concerning a Problem of Optimum Control
of Flexural Oscillations of a Oirder.“ Trudy Prunzenskogo politekhni-

eheskogo instituta [Proceedings of Frunze Polytechnieal Institute].
No AS. 1971.

5. i. A. Karnovskiy, "0n the Problem of Eliminating Oscillations in
Plates," PRIKLADNAYA HEKHANIKA, 197“, v. 10. No 2.

6. A. M. Gavrilov. "0n Calculating Discrete Systems for Compensation of
Flexural Oscillations of Plates" in: "Bor'ba s shumom i zvukovoy
vibratsiyey" [Controlling noise and Acoustic Vibration], Moscow House
of Scientific and Technical Propaganda imeni F. E. Dzerzhinskiy. l97h.

7. i. S. Berezin. N. P. Zhidkov. "Metody vychisleniy" [Methods of Compu-
tations]. v. 1. Moscow. Nauka. 1966.

HAVE PROPAGATION OVER THIN-HALLED RODS
Yu. I. Bobrovnitskiy. M. D. Genkin

One of the difficult problems of mechanics is the study of oscillations of
uniform rods of arbitrary cross section. Within the framework of the linear
theory of elasticity exact solutions have been found only for an elastic
cylinder and a layer (Ref. 1]. The Pochhammer-Chree and Rayleigh-Lamb
dispersion equations of normal waves in these structures had been derived in
the last century. and have been extensively studied. These solutions have
played a special part in the construction of simplified theories of calcu-
lation. The exact solution is the standard by which the approximation given
by any engineering theory is evaluated.

Oscillations of strip-rods have also been fairly completely studied [Ref. 2].
The accuracy of the results found for a strip is lower than for a cylinder
or a layer. and is given by the inequality

x§»(2h)2. (1)

where A: is the wavelength of a shear wave in the material; 2h is the thick-
ness of the strip. The frequency band in which this inequality is satisfied
defines the limits of applicability of the Germain-Lagrange equation of
flexurnl oscillations of a thin plate and the dynamic equations of the plane
stressed state that describe longitudinal-transverse oscillations of a strip
[Ref. 3]. Nevertheless. this frequency band considerably exceeds the range
of applicability of engineering theories that are valid when

itwaﬂ. (2)

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

where 2|! is the width of the strip (transverse dimensions of the rod). 'i‘hiu
circumstance permits us to use the solutions for a strip in the same way an a
standard in comparative analysis of different approximate theories [Rcf. h].

The theory of thin elastic shells [Ref. 5] also has approximately the same
accuracy. Since thin-walled rods are cylindrical thin shells. fairly exact
solutions can be found for them (e. g. Ref. 5. 6) that considerably simplify
the construction of simpler models (Ref. 1].

However, for rods made up of strips the results of the theory of thin shells
are not applicable because of the presence of corner Joints. At present
such rods are calculated exclusively by apprOximate methods [Ref. *0. 8. 9]
with accuracy bounded by inequality (2).

This article presents a theory of wave propagation over thin-walled rods
formed by Joining several thin strips. i. e. OVer rods with profiles that
are made of straight-line segments. 'ihe theory accounts for all forms of
motion of the strips. and it is assisted that the Germain-Lagrange equation is
valid for their flexural oscillations, while the longitudinal-transverse
oscillations of the strips are described by dynamic equations of the plane
stressed state. Thus the limits of applicability of the results are de-
termined by inequality (1). Moreover. lengitudinsl bending is disregarded.
Dispersion equations of various types of normal waves are derived for rods
of the most widely used cross sections (l-bcam. angle iron and so on). and
an investigation is made of the general properties of the resultant equations.

The method to be used for calculation is a generalization of the conventional
method or dynamic stiffnesses, and is fairly clearly outlined in her. 10. 11.
In brief, its essence reduces to the following. when a normal wave of the
form u(€.n) exp(ikx- iut) propagates over a rod, where k is the constant

of propagation of the wave with respect to the longitudinal coordinate x.
u(£.n) is the displacement vector that depends on the transverse coordinates
C and n. forces and moments of forces of reaction arise on the lines of
Joining of the strips that are also exponentially dependent an 3:. 3y breaking
the rod down into separate strips and substituting these forces and moments
for the interaction of these strips, the initial problem can be reduced to
several problems on forced oscillations of the strips under the action of
forces and torques that are exponentially distributed along the edges.

As shown in Ref. 10. the solutions of these problems can be written in a
compact form that is convenient for further computations. This can be
achieved by means of the concept of linear dynamic stiffness which is the
ratio of the linear density of force (torque) to displacement (angle of turn)
when they are exponentially dependent on the coordinate along the line of
application of the force (wisest). The Junction of such solutions along

the lines of their Joining leads to dispersion equations of nonnal wares in
the given thin-walled rod.

1. An elastic strip as an alarm: of a thin-walled rod. The linear dynamic
stl ffnesses of the strip that are needed for further calculations can be

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

obtained by solving the homogeneous equations of the plane stressed state
and Germain-Lagrange equations when exponentially distributed forces and
torqueu'a'ct on the edges or the strip. Son of these quantities were calcu-
lated in Ref. 10. Derivation of the others is analogous. and therefore we
give here only the final results.

The following right-handed orthogonal system is chosen for the strip: the
x-axis is directed along the strip and coincides with its middle line. the
y-axis also lies in the plane of the strip. and the z-axis is normal to the
strip. 'ihe thickness of the strip is equal to 2h. and the width is an. The
characteristics of the material of the strip: E. v are the Young modulus

and Poisson ratio, 81-3/(l-v2). 32 -E/2/(l+v) are the longitudinal and
shear moduli of a thin plate.

The following expressions can be obtained for the linear dynamic bending
stiffnesses of the strip:

symmetric excitation

8:! - alt/”'6" ”:5 B -’ 8;] " DBJH‘O“ 8:3 - D?J”6¢.

IB‘ l -- Due/Hm. (3)
antisymnetric excitation

3:. .- DoJH-s.. ‘ 9:; - — 8:, .. sauna. at. - sum”

'5‘] " Due/”ms- . (4)
asymtric excitation

Bu I! 001W. 8'. D — Bu - “IMO. B“ I D'IHO.
In] - on. ma. (5)

The indieec "c" and ”a” denote sy-etric and antisymtric.

Acting in the ease of symetric excitation on the edges of the strip y- 2}!
are distributed forces Pcieh) exp (ikx- iut) =P§(-H) exp (ikx) - int) and torques
HEN") exp (ikx-iut) . z(-ll) exp(ikx- iut). Solution of the problem of
forced oscillations gives displacement and angles of turn on the edges

whh) -w(-ii) and on!) I-o(-ii). 1hese quantities are reciprocally related by
a matrix of linear dynamic stiffnesses

mm 07, 0:. em) (6)
MW!) ‘1 5;, 3;, «(In '
From here on we oait the repeated exponential factor exp(ikx -iut) . leaving
only the amplitude values of the quantities.

Forces rgm) I-Fﬂ-H) and torques M10!) =M§(-H) act in the ease of anti-
symmetric excitation on the edges of a strip. In the ease of asymmetric

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

excitation. experimentally distributed force F10!) and torque Mxhi) act on
the edge y-+li. while edge yI-Ii is stress-free. Formulas (h). (5) give
expressions for the elements of the matrices of linear dynamic stiffnesses
that are defined by matrix model (6). In these D-251h3/3 denotes the
cylindrical utiffneun of the plate. and the Greek lcttcrn an in (3) denote

the Pi mt members of thc diopcrulon equations of nomal flexural waves in a

strip with different boundary conditions on the edges, for which the ex-
pressions take the following form:

for symmetric waves

ﬁ—ashachh—lishﬂcha. y¢=2p:chachﬂ.
q-rushachB—spshﬂcha. '0.—-—2p:ahshashli.(7)
h-r'ashdchh—s'ﬂshpcha.

for antisymmetric waves

d.-schashB—ﬂchﬂsha. 7.-2p35hashﬂ.
s.-rachashﬁ—s§chﬂsha. 0.-—2;l3adchachﬂ. (8)
L-r‘achashB—s’ﬂchpsha.

for asymetric clsnpi ng

a - 6‘1. +6-il‘ +Y¢os +vao¢ +2“: - 25’“ +
+(a'r' ”shaman 2ﬂ—ap(r‘ +s‘)ch2ach2li.

7-2(Y¢)n +v.A.-)-2p:(arnc‘n2ash2p—
—ﬂs‘sh2sch2p).

e-NM. +c.1.)-aﬂrs(r +s)(l—ch2¢ch2ﬂ) +
+(a’r' +954)»: 2ash 2p.

(la-MA. +OJt)=2p:ap (ﬂs'ch2ash2ﬂ—

—ar‘ sh 2a ch 2!}.
M-4M-2ﬂﬂr's'ﬂ —ch2ach2ﬂ)—
4-(3'6‘ + ”'39 3h 26 8h 23- . (9)

In fomules (T) and (8) the boundary conditions are the same on both edges,
while formula (9) corresponds to a strip that is stress-free on edge y- -H.
The letters in (7)-(9) denote the following boundary conditions on edge y=H:
6--clamped edge (w-aw/ay =0); y--hinged (w-ano); s--unrealized clamps
(w- P; I0, 3w/3y iMx-O); Onsliding clamp (aw/3y - HI 0); X—free edge

(Hx- 5-0). Moreover, the following notation has been introduced: uo =koii;
k3=pu ID. A-kﬂgazlxz-ua; 82-A2+u6; r=Bz-v12;s-az-vhz.

bet us note that relations of the form
?¢.Iot'.l + all - 16,066..

hold among the dispersion equations for waves of different types.

3’:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
We have analogous expressions for longitudinal-transverse linear dynamic
atii‘i‘nessss:

for nymtric excitation

C?! n Wit/Ac. Cfn - -C'ut .. 2714*»- ”in " 2mm"
|c*| .- mum. (‘0’
for antisymmetric excitation

ca .. 2mm. cf. - - cg. - 2mm. 0:. - 27m»
'0'] - 27".\.IA.. (u)

for asymmetric excitation

c" " ”II/A. CI. - -Cu - 271/5. Cu -' ZT‘VAo
IC I - ZT‘AIA. (12)

'ihe first members 01‘ expressions (10) are the elements of a matrix defined

by the equality
[rm-In] [Ch cf. [um-m
new 6:: 6:. um") '

where "x9 ay are displacements along the x and y axes. while the forces on
the edges are related by the expressions F§(-H) 'F§(H) and ﬁghﬂ) --F§(H).

Expressions (11) are obtained for external forces that satisfy the equalitie:
53‘4“) “43(4), (ii) efﬂ—ﬂ), while expressions (12) correspond to the

case Fx(-H) IF:,(- )-0. In these expressions T-2h32/ﬂ and the Greek letter:
denote the first members or the dispersion equations of longitudinal-
transverse normal waves in a strip with different methods of fastening the

edges:

for symmetric waves

A.-bcina.she,—csha.clnw. un—pfmchwchan

x. - (Mb chalsh «(—ashmchq). 'k - —p,'a.sh c.9155
)

A. —a'sha.che,—bccha,sh a"
for antisymmetric waves

A.=-bsh¢.cha,-ccha.sha,, r. - —p.'a.sha.sh¢,~.

p—awshqchm—achmshq). mun—pimchmcha.”
A.—a'ch¢.shs,—bcsh¢,cha-,

for asymme tric clamping

A - A:-\o 4' At“: 4' 2 (tens + ‘1‘“) + 4L2s -
—b (a' +c’)ch2¢,ch 2a.-c(a’ +b’)sh 2a,sh2¢,—-2abc.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPl'ICIAL USE ONLY

1 u- 2 (na. 4- t..\.) - ~p,'a, (0' ch 2a. sh leg—b: sh 2a. ch 2%).

1 - 2 (M. +- 1.50 I- II M (u + c) (ch 2a. ch 2a. -— I) —
- (0' + 3") sh 2a; sh 26.1.

n u- 2 (mA. 4- n..\.) a dds, (n' sh' 2a. ch 2a. - bc ch2a.sh 24 ).

A -- Man an (a‘ -|- M8) sh :26. sh 2a,- ~2u’bc(ch 2's. cll 24,735

Introduced into the fomulas is the notation main”: w all”. lu'u-IW'IEs:

k: - [NM/E. II h‘ (I — ”/2; a? Is 1‘ - u}: a} I- ” --pha - 2” — 5|}: 5 *- WJ €52” -

In formulas (13)-(15). the boundary conditions on edge y-ll are as follows:
A--stationary edge (u M}. I0); tnedge with transverse guides (uxnuw I'0);
x--unrsalised clamps (u, oxy-O and u no II0); n-osliding clamp (uy-oxye
II0): A—stress-free edge (ow-o ye x. Re dispersion equations for
longitudinal-transverse waves sat sly the relations

2 ('m'lm + 11.) '3 A¢.s-\¢.s-

It should be noted that the boundary conditions u. .- u,, - 0. u, nan-0.

um F,-0. mavens-o cannot be realized in practice. They themselves
are satisfied on individual frequencies in strips with other boundary con-
ditions (Ref. 2]. It can be shown that boundary value problems with such
conditions contradict the Lagrange variational principle. Implied here are

the formal solutions of these problems that are used for the convenience of
further calculations.

The investigation of wave propagation over a rod of H cross section also
requires the values of linear dynamic stiffnesses of a strip free from

forces on the edges under the action of forces 15(0), Fy(0). 15(0) and torque
Mx(0) exponentially distributed along its middle line. ‘1!) derive their
expressions it is convenient to represent such a strip in the form of two
identical strips connected by the edges, and to use the results already found.

After simple transformations. we can get the following relations for this
case: '

for bending vibrations :

F,(U) - 38" 0 ”(0)

35(0) " o 20,, ¢(o)]° » ('3)
for longitudinal-transverse vibrations

[f,(0) 36,, o‘ u,(0) .

Law) " o 26... mm} a"

where the "half-strip" linear dynamic stiffnesses B t' B“ , Cu and can that
correspond to asymtric excitation are given in (55'. (123. 'ihat matrices
(l6) and (17) are diagonal is a consequence of the symtry of the structure:
symetric forces F40) and 15(0) cause only symetric responses um) and

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ux(0), whilc antisymetric actions iix(0) and mo) cause antisymmetric
reaponnou sic) and Uy(°)o

Thus. all linear dynamic stiffnesses of the strip are expressed by simple
relations (3)-(15) in terms of dispersion equations of normal waves in a
strip with different. boundary conditions on the edge. This circumstance

simplifies analysis of dispersion equations of waves in composite rods made
up of several strips.

The results given here can be used for calculating other homogeneous struc-
tures in which an elastic strip is a composite element [Ref. 10. ll].

2. Dispersion sqmtion of annual. moss in a thin-walled angle-iron rod. Let
us first consider an angle-iron rod (Fig. 1). It consists of two strips
secured together at the edges at a right angle. Let us assign the index "1"
to quantities relating to the lover strip (wall). and the index ”2" to the
upper strip (flange). Let us select two systems of coordinates (in, yl. 21)
and (x2. ya, :2) so that the axes x1 and x2 coincide with the middle lines of
the strips and are directed toward the same side. while the axes y1 and y; lie
in the plane of the strips and are directed toward the line of Joining.

ﬁzéﬁﬁl

F180 1‘5

when a normal wave of the font u(y1,y2) exp(ikx- iut) propagates along the
rod. forces of reaction arise on the line of Joining of the strips that have
non-zero components along all three coordinate axes. and a reactive bending
moment that has sne non-zero component along the xi-axis. By taking the
strips apart and substituting these reactive forces and torque for the
interaction between the strips, we arrive at a problem of forced oscillations
of a strip under the action of external forces and bending moments exponentially
distributed along one of the edges. Their solutions are written in the form

r2001.» ' 0:? Iii‘.‘ ammo
[M'l’wn]'[ai? 8‘3] «mm-’1'
F‘."(".)]_[Cii’ Cii’Hui’NIMJ. . m)
r3001.) 62} c2}. «Wm;
where i Ill, 2.

Linear relations exist between the forces and torques and also between the
displacements and angles of turn of the strips on the line of Joining. Since
there are no external actions, the sum of the reactive forces and sosuents

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! ORIGIN. USE ONLY

aunt obviously be equal to zero. In the selected systems of coordinates
this relation is written as follows:

F‘."(H.) "‘ FWI.) " 0- F:"(":) 4- ﬁrm.» '- 0.

Alr’u’d + MP0“) *5 Os F'," (”|) + FPU'I‘) as 0. ([9)
'ihe relations between the displacements and angles of turn are a consequence
of the rigid Joining or the strips: they should be the same for both strips.
In the selected coordinates. this condition takes the following form:

umw.) - - “Wild. «1"(Ilu) - u‘." (Ila).

swun- «mum. ui‘NH.) - Wm.) ' (20)
liow substituting the forces and torques from (18) in equalities (l9) and
substituting the displacements and angle of turn relating to the first strip

in accordance with (20) for the corresponding values for the second strip.
we get the homogeneous system of linear equations

(61? + Cil’w'." + Cii’ui" -' Cii’w'" - 0.
at»? +( .2 + saw." + - 0.
-Ci')u‘." + (Bii’+c‘.’.')ur" + 8W" = 0-
aw." + Bile" + (89: + 83w" - 0. ' (2"
In order for this system of equations to have a nontrivial solution. 1. e.

in order for a normal wave to propagate over the rod. its determinant must
be equal to zero,

cw +cn’ a?) — cm 81'”
c9) cm + 33’ o I.
-63 .. u B::’+c:.'.: 0:? '0' «22)
0 n9: 09: 49+ 89)

And this is indeed the dispersion equation of normal waves in an angle-iron
rod that establishes the relation between the constant of propagation It.
the angular frequency a: and the parameters of the rod.

In solving system of equations (21) in the usual way. one can find the dis-
placements and angle of turn on the edge yl Bil; of the first strip. and by
using relations (20) -- the displacements and angle of turn on edge y; I";
of the second strip. 0n the basis of these data. one can easily find the
displacements. angles of turn. stresses and all other quantities that charac-
terize the propagation of normal waves along the rod. however. in the
following discussion we will be interested mostly in the dispersion properties
of normal waves. limiting ourselves to the investigation of dispersion
equations of form (22). since it is the dispersion properties that determine
the peculiarities of propagation of waves along infinite rods. as well as
the spectral properties of natural oscillations of finite rods.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son orrtcuu. use ONLY
Dispersion equation (22) is the determinant of the sum of the matrices of
linear dynamic stiffnesses of the individual strips relative to the forces
and torques acting along the line of Joining. This matrix sum is equal to
the matrix of linear dynamic stifmesses of the Joining of the strips. i. e.
of the entire angle-iron rod. He can convince ourselves of this if instead
of (19) we assume that the sum of the reactive forces and torques in equal to
the external forces and torque. and then use relations (18) and (20). Thus
the dispersion equation can be interpreted as the zero value of the determi-
nant of the matrix of linear dynamic stifmesses of the given rod as deter-
mined on the line of Joining of its component strips. 'ihis assumption is
comes to all composite rods considered here. It is analogous to the con-
dition of resonance of oscillations of mechanical systems (the determinant of
the matrix of dynamic stiffnesses is equal to zero). the only difference being
that linear dynamic stiffnesses stand in place of the conventional dynamic
atiffnesses. and instead of resonant oscillations of the system. normal anes
are considered that have the capacity to propagate freely (without external
forces) over an infinite composite rod.

3. Channel-{non with identical flanges and T-rod. 'ihe cross sections of
these two types are shown in Pi . 2, 3. They are typified by a plane of
mirror symetry. It is known Ref. 12) that in a mechanical system with
such symmetry oscillations of two types exist - syuetric and antisymmetric
relative to this plane. They are independent of one another and can be
studied separately.

First let us consider symetric oscillations of channel iron with identical
flanges. He select two systems of coordinates: (x1.y|,z)) associated with
the wall. and (x2,y2,sz) associated with the upper flange: the coordinate
axes are oriented in the one way as for the angle-iron rod in the preceding
section. Since we are considering only syuetric movements. the oscillations
of the lower flange will by the symmetric mirror image of the oscillations

of the upper flange. Thus it is sufficient to consider the interaction of the
wall with the upper flange alone. but keeping in mind only symetrie motions
or the wall.

As in the case of the angle-iron rod. reactive forces (three components) and
a reactive torque (one component) arise on the line of Joining of the strips.
The relation between them and the corresponding displacements for the flange
in the given case is the same as in the angle-iron rod. For the wall in
symmetric vibration. this relation is expressed by formulas (6). Then re-
peating all considerations and calculations of the preceding section we can
arrive at homogeneous system (21) and dispersion equation (22) in which the
linear dynamic stiffnesses of the wall calculated for excitation on the edge
y- +ll are replaced by the corresponding linear dynamic stiffnesses of the
wall with symmetric excitation.

’me same results are reached by consideration of normal waves that are
antisymmetric relative to the mirror plane, the only difference being that

linear dynamic stiffnesses with antisy—etric excitation are taken for the
wall.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OH’ICML USE ONLY

Thus the dispersion equations of two modes of normal waves (symtric and
antioymetric) in a channel iron with identical flanges take the form of a
zero determith of fourth order (22) in which the index "1" indicates the
linear dynamic stiffnesaes of the wall with symmetric or antisymmetric
excitation. li'he symsetric case corresponds to longitudinal waves. while
the antisymmetric case corresponds to associated flexural-torsional waves.

The T-rod consisting of two strips (see Fig. 3) also has a plane of mirror
symmetry that passes through the middle plane of the wall. Therefore in this
case as well we can consider smetric and antisymctric movements indepen-
dently of one another. As before. the index ”1" will he assigned to the
wall. and the index ”2" -- to the flange. The height of the wall is 2!“.
and the width of the flange is Mi; (double flange).

Let on select two systems of coordinates (rung!) and (X2,¥2.22). We
associate the first with the wall, the xg-axis being combined with the middle
line of the wall, while the yl-axlu is directed toward the flange in the

plane of the strip. He associate the second coordinate system with the

flange in such a way that the xz-axis coincides with the line of Joining of
the wall with the flange and is directed toward the same side as the xl-axis.
while the zg-axis coincides with the y1-axis. The n and y; axes are directed
so that both systems are right-handed.

When a ometric normal wave propagates along the T-rod on the line of Joining
of the strips. forces of reaction F‘."(Il,) and F‘J'w.) arise that act on the
first strip; F'.”(0) and F1” (0) that act on the flange along its middle line.
The third component of force and the bending moment of reaction do not arise
since they cause antisy-aetric motions. 'Ihe sum of the forces of reaction is
equal- to zero:

em.) +F."(01- 0. F901.) + FM) - o. ‘23)

while the displacements of the strips 0n the line of their rigid Joining
should be identical:
d’wa- «1"(0). «two-Wm). (24)

The relation between the forces of reaction and corresponding displacements
for the wall is written in the usual way:

”Rum Ci? Ci'.’ «Wm 25
FM!» " 69) c9: «9mm ' ‘ ’
and for the flange this relation is found from formulas (16) and (l?)
'1" ‘0’ 3652' 0 "2"(01
. rg'No: ' o 233' WMJ' (28)
so

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Let us recall that the flange here is treated as a doubled strip of width

long. while the linear stiffnesses CW and 8;? apply to a flange of width
2H2.

Substituting relations (25) and (26) in equality (23) and using (at), we get
the following dinperaion equation for symetric normal waves in a T-rod:

6?) + “I? C(P

c2) aim-235:! "' 0' (27’

When a normal wave antisymetric relative to the plane of mirror nymetry

propagates along the given rod. a reaction force F1" ((1.) and reaction torque
M‘," (1],) arise on the line of Joining that act on the wall. as well as a force
of reaction F‘"(0) and a reactive aonent M‘.”(0) that act on the central line of

the flange. I'n the selected coordinate systems the condition of absence of
resultants is written an

F:"(II.)—r‘."(0)-0. Millie-r Mm-o. (28)

and the conditions of rigid Joining of the strips take the form

comm.) - - new). ammo - we). (29)

'lhe relation between forces and displacements is expressed in terms of linear
bending stiffnesses

”Film USP 53') ammo] (30)
M'.”(”d ." an" "ill: “mum '
For the flange. this relation is round from foraulas (16) and (l?)
. Fri”) .. 2612 o "2"“, . (3i)
Mynn) u :82: emu»

Proceeding in the usual way. i. e. substituting relations (30) and (31) in
equalities (28) and taking consideration of conditions (29). we can get the
sought diopersion equation of antisymtric normal waves in a T-rod in the
forts of a zero determinant of second order

09+ 20:: an

5‘2) Bi'.’+38‘.’.' ' °' (32’

 

 

Equation (27) is the dispersion equation of longitudinal nor-a1 waves in the
Ii‘-rod, and equation (32) is the equation for flexural-torsional normal waves.

1:. Boa-beam rod and I-beam with identical flanges. Rods of this type are
shown in Fig. IA, 5. These are typified by the presence of two mutually

Isl

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

perpendicular planes of airror symetry. As a consequence of this fact. in
these rods there are noraal anes of four nodes that exist independently of
one another: longitudinal. i. c. symetric relative to both planes of syn-
netry; two nodes of flexural waves that are sytunetric relative to one of the
planes and antisymtric relative to the other; and torsional waves that are
characterised by antisymetric notion relative to both planes of synnctry.

Let us consider first the box-beam rod (see Fig. 5). This consists of four
pairwise identical strips connected in four corners. In view of the symmetry
it is sufficient to consider the interaction of two strips in one of the
corner Joints. since the motion and interaction in the other Joinings will
be repeated symetrieally or antisymmetrically depending on the node of the
nernal waves. Let us take two strips. e. g. the upper one and the one on the
left. that form the upper left corner Joint. Let us construct a coordinate
system for each of these strips so that the x1 and x2 axes coincide with the
aiddle lines. while the y. and y; axes lie in the plane of the strips and
are directed toVard the line of their intersection.

When a noraol wave of any of the four nodes enumerated above propagates in
the angle Joining. forces of reaction with three components arise as well

as a reaction bending isoment with one component (along the x-axis). In the
selected coordinate systea the relations between then. and also the relations
for the displaceaents and angles of turn of the strips will coincide in
accuracy with the analogous relations for an angle-iron rod (19) and (20).
however. the relation between the forces and displacements for each of the
strips is different from (18). and will he eatpressed in terms of symtric
and antisymmetric linear dynamic stiffnesses. The derivation of the necessary
females and the final results repeat the computations for an angleoiron rod.
The dispersion equations of the four wave nodes in the hex-bean red are four
zero determinants (22) in which linear stiffnesses with symmetric or anti-
symmetric excitation stand in place of the linear dynamic stiffnesses of the
strips with asymtric excitation. Thus in examining the longitudinal waves
for both strips it is necessary to take synetric linear stiffneeses. In the
case of torsional waves all linear stiffnesses in equation (22) oust be taken
for antisymmetric excitation. No cases when symetric linear stiffnesses
are taken for one of the strips in equation (22) while antisymmetric stiff-
neuseu are taken for the other correspond to independent fiexural waves

in the horizontal and vertical planes.

Now let us go on to the I-hean rod (see Pig. in). It consists of a single
vertical strip (wall) and two horizontal double strips (flanges) that are
taken as identical. Thanks to the presence of mirror symetry. here as in
the preceding case we can consider only one Joining of the strips. e. g. the
Joining of the wall with the upper flange. In the lower Joining everything
will take place symtrically or antisymetrieally relative to the horizontal
plane of symetry. If we take two coordinate systems -— one in the wall and
the other in the flange. Just as for a T-rod. the further derivation of dis-
persion equations here will exactly repeat the derivation done for the T-rod.
The only difference is that for the wall it is necessary to take synetric

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ORLY

or antinyuunetric linear dynamic stiffnesses. As a result we get the following
dispersion equations of the tour normal wave nodes of the I-heun rod (for the

sake of convenience the index "1" is oultted and the index "2" is replaced by
a stroke):

for longitudinal waves:

c7: + “'5: 57- _'o
C", cful + 28;! .
or in expanded i‘orn

lc*l+ c:.(2c;.)+c:.(2n:.)+(20bx28h) - o. (33)

where the first term in the determinant of the matrix of linear stiffnesees

of the wall in the case of sy-netric excitation by longitudinal-transvorse
forceu;

for flexural waves in the plane or the well

 

“1+3“: '97.. -0
0:: C:.+ 30}: '
or in expanded fora
"M + chunk) + C}. (2C;1)+(2921X23n)” 0- (3",

where |c8| is the determinant of the matrix of linear stiffneeses of the wall
in the case of antisymetric longitudinal-transverse excitation for flexurel
waves in the plane of the flanges

834-10}. 81.

. , .- 0,
6:! ”a 4' 28“

or in expanded tom
w, + 13:425..) + 8:. m.) + (zstxzcm - 0. (35)

where |B°| in the determinant of the matrix of nexural linear stifmesseu of
the will in the case of ametric excitation;

for torsional waves
85 + ac}... 0:.

5:: 0:.+=02. '0'

or in expanded tom
“3- l + 8mm.) + 15:426..) 4- (ashxzck) - 0. (3°)
'43

NR OWICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where IB“| is the determinant of the matrix of flexural linear dynamic
ntlffneuues of the wall in the case of antisymmetric excitation on the edges.

5. Gunsrat properties of dispersion equations. Each root of the dispersion
equation gives a value of the constant of propagation of a normal wave. and
therefore determines its dependence on the longitudinal coordinate of the rod.
The real roots correspond to normal waves that propagate over the rod without
damping. while the imaginary roots correspond to waves that are exponentially
damped with respect to the x coordinate, all points of the rod fluctuating in
phase. The complex roots correspond to traveling waves with amplitudes that
increase or decrease exponentially with respect to x. Waves of these types
have already been encountered in the study of flexural and longitudinal-
transverse oscillations of a thin elastic strip (Ref. 2]. They all arise in
composite thin-walled rods as well.

MGPBI‘MOR equations (22). (27). (32)-(36). after substitution of the corre-
sponding expressions for linear dynamic stifmesses are transcendental
equations in which the variable A Ikﬂ is squared everywhere. 'ihis means that
if A is a root of the equation. then -A is also a root.

The first members_pf the equations are real quantities. and for each of them
the equalities f(l) I fh) I f“) are satisfied (the line denotes the complex
conjugate). In other gords. if A is a root of the equation (ix) II0, then
the complex conJugate x will also be a root of the equation f0.) 80.

'ihus the real and imaginary roots of the derived dispersion equations are

always met in pairs n. while the complex roots occur in groups of four ~-
M, u.

we can easily go on and convince ourselves that since only rational and
exponential functions of A and (A2 ”2)” appear in the first members of
these equations. they are entire functions of first order. On the basis of
general theorems of the theory of analytical functions [Ref. 13]. such
functions have an infinite (even) number of zeros that cannot have points of
crowding in any finite part of the complex plane. This implies that in each
of the rods considered above there is an infinite amber of normal waves.
and that the modulus of the constant of propagation increases monotonically
with an increase in the number of the normal wave.

let us now prove the following statement: on any frequency there exists a
finite number of real and imaginary roots and an infinite number of complex
roots of the dispersion equations investigated here.

For the proof we consider the behavior of the dimensionless constant of
propagation l of waves with high nmbers whose modulus is much greater than
unity. and the parameters ué. uﬁ and II’.

To do this. we extend the first members of the dispersion equations in series
with respect to the small quantities (3132).). (NHL). (nhﬂ) and taking only the

MA

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY

first terms. we investigate their asymptotic behavior. The expansion is a
cumbersome operation, and therefore all intermediate results are left out.

As an example. we give the expansions of the linear dynamic stiffnesoes of
a strip with asymmetric excitation:

for flexural waves

Bu 2 ‘01,“ 5h 41 — 2MIA'IP.
8,. El - 8“ z D" - V) ’0. [240 Ch ‘l - “nu/Ail”.
Bu 5': - 40). (93h 41 + ‘XVIMH.
I B I z - D’” - V)’ 1‘ [2? ch 5). - (‘M‘l/Alﬂ‘.
A, - 24d) Ill 4‘ «w; (37)

for longitudinal-transverse waves

Cu 2.. imiE". Sh 6M” -I- V) ’IA'.

6,. In - C," Q' zillEgl ”nth 4’. + “nu/”Ag.
C... 2 IOhEg’. 3h ‘AI‘I 4' V) I’A'.

IC | z iﬂh'E:).’ [2 ch 41 - (“W/”'43.

heru>d-(1+v)/(l-v). c-(3+w)/(1-v), r-(3-v)/(l+v), sen-vVich).
The expansions of linear dynamic stiffnesses of the strip for symmetric and
antisymmetric excitations have the same form and order with respect to A.

It is immediately clear from these formulas that at large [Al the flexural
linear stiffheeses exceed the longitudinal-transverse stiffnesses. In other
words for short waves the bending of the strips is the decisive form of
motion. and the longitudinal-transverse stiffnesses in the dispersion

equations can be disregarded in comparison with the flexural linear stiff-
nesses.

For instance let us consider dispersion equations (33) and (3h) for longi-
tudinal and flexural waves in an I-heam rod. Substituting in these equations
the asymptotic formulas for linear stiffnesses and disregarding quantities
Cﬁﬁ“ and Cfa‘ as having order of smallness 1'2 in comparison with art. we
can reduce them to the form (C2;°+20h)8{t I0, or in expanded form

(e' sh 21' — 22:) (a. ch 2:. ch 2): + a. sh 2w: 213+
+ a, (2l')’ch 2m - o. (39)

where the a are constants. J I1. 2, 3. This expressioa obviously decomposes
into two independent equations. The first is an asymptotic dispersion
equation of symmetric flexural waves in the flange that are not influenced
by longitudinal-transverse movements of the wall. The second equation

describes purely longitudinal waves in the wall-flange system under condition
that no bending of the flanges occurs.

After carrying out the same computations on equations (35) and (36) for
fiexural waves of the second type and torsional waves of an I-benm rod. we can

'05

FOR OFPICII‘L USE ONLY
NR OFI’ICIM. USE ONLY

got the following asymptotic equation:

6. sh 2i ch 2 l' |- s. all 3)} ch 2). I. 1;. (WP sh 2i u o. (40)

“min expression describes coabined flexural oscillations (symtric and anti-
symetric) of a wall and flanges without the participation of longitudinal-

transverse anes in this process. Equations of types (39) and (’40) are also
obtained for an I-bean rod.

For the angle-iron rod an anan ous procedure leads to two independent
equations: c; ecu no and 3.. 8'] + 'clBl -0 which. after substituting then
in (3'!) and (35). are reduced to equat ans like (39) and (ho). One of these
equations describes purely longitudinal mes in the angle-i ron rod where
bending does not occur. The second relates to purely flexural «Was that
are not influenced by longitudinal-transverse displaceaents of the strips.
Equations of the same kind are obtained for a channel-iron and box-bean rod.

Front this we can see that in the case of large Ill dispersion equations (22),
(2!). (32)-(36) reduce to staple equations with general form that can be
represented as a linear combination of quantities sh(ZA 22M). ch(2i : 21').
izch 21 and i2 sh 2A. But such equations have only complex roots. the can
convince ourselves of this by repeating the derivation of the formulas for
the roots that was done in Ref. 2 for simpler equations of this type (setting
as I a; tin. substituting exp n/2 for sh n and chn. disregarding all terms

that vanish as n-w). It turns out that after such transformations the
equatioa has a solution only when (:2 and expn are quantities of the sale
order. This implies that all its roots are eoaplex. The imaginary parts a
are proportional to the number of the root ( taking them in the order of
increasing absolute value). while the real parts are proportional to the
logarithm of the imaginary parts.

Thus the constants of propagation of normal waves of high numbers. beginning
with acne "m are complex quantities. But since there are no points of
crowding of roots in a finite section of plane A. only a finite nuabcr of M
can be situated within a circle A < [in] and some of these M say be real

or imaginary. This proves the statetsent presented above.

REFERENCES

l. 'l'. Hiker. A. Heyttsler, ”waveguide Propagation in Extended Cylinders and
l'lates" in "i-‘izicheskaya akustika" [Physical Acoustics]. w. 1. part A.
Moscow. Mir. 1966.

2. Yu. 1. Bobrovnitskiy. M. D. Genkin. "Oscillations of an Elastic Strip"
in: ”Metody [aktivnoy i paaaiwnoy] wibroizolyatsii aashin (i) prisoyedin-
nennykh konstruktsiy" (Methods of Active and Passive Vibration Damping
of Machines and Attached Structural Meabersl. Moscow, Nauka. 1975.

3. 1.. D. Landau. Ye. M. Lifshita. ”Teoriya uprugosti" [Theory of Elasticity].
Moscow. Nauka. 1965.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
la.

5.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Yu. I. Bobrovnitskiy. "0n Approximate Theories of Flexural Vibrations
of Rods" in this collection.

A. 1.. Ool'dcnveysor. “'1‘coriya uprugikh tonkikh obolochek" [Theory of
Thin Elastic Shells]. Moscow. State Technical and Theoretical Press.
1953.

R. N. Mikhaylov, "0n the Problem or Propagation and Dumping of Normal
waves in a Closed Cylindrical Shell" in "Vibratsiya i sham" [Vibration
and Noises]. Moscow. Nauka. 1969.

A. in Ool'denveyzer. “On the Theory of Thin-walled Rods." PRIIGADNAYA
MATEMATIKA I marlin. 191.9. v. 13, No 6.

V. 2. Vlasov. "'Ibnkostennyye uprugiye sterzhni" [Thin-Hailed Elastic
Rods]. Moscow. Fizsatgiz. 1959.

8. P. Timoahenko. "Teoriya izsiba. krucheniya i ustoychivosti tonko-
stennykh sterzhney otkrytogo poperechnogo secheniya. Ustoyvichost'
sterzhney. plastin i obolochek" [Theory of Bending, Twisting and Stability

of Thin-walled Rods of Open Cross Section. Stability of Rods, Plates and
Shells]. Moscow. limits. 1971.

Sbornik ”Rasprostraneniye voln v konstruktsiyakh i’z tonkikb sterzhney i
plastin [Propagation of Haves in Structural Elements Made up of Thin
Rods and Plates]. Moscow. Hanks. 1971..

I. I. Artobolevskiy. Yu. I. Bobrovnitskiy. M. D. Genkia. "Oscillations
or Homogeneous Structures Node up of Thin Strips," DOKLADY AKADEMII
NAUK $853. 19710. v. 219. No 5.

Y; Vigner. "Teoriya grupp" [Group Theory]. Moscow. Foreign Language Press.
1 1.

A. I. Markushevich, “Teoriys snaliticheskikh funktsiy" [Theory of
Analytic Functions]. v. 2. Moscow. Hanks. 1968.

ON APPROXIMATE TREORIES OP PLEXURAL VIBRATIONS OF MOS

in.

l. Bobrovnitskiy

This article presents a comparative analysis of the moat widely known two-wave
theories of flexursl vibrations of rods (Ref. 1]. Principal emphasis is
given to wave dispersion that determines the spectral properties of rods.
Approximate theories are evaluated with respect to the degree of approximation
of the wave dispersion in models to exact dispersion curves.

For the sake of simplicity we restrict ourselves to a thin elastic strip and
its antisymmetric oscillations in its own plane that are described by dynamic

’5’!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
170R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equations of the plane stressed state [Ref. a]. he solutions here (Ref. 3]
are the well known Lamb waves (normal waves in an elastic layer) that like
the cautions thenselvss are valid in the frequency range where the inequality
(kth) «1 holds, 2h being the thickness of the strip. while kt is the wave
number of shear waves in the material. The dispersion relations of the first

two antisymmetric Lamb waves are used in comparative analysis as the exact
dispersion curves.

To make the transition from the exact theory to the approximate theory we use
the method of averaging with respect to the height of the strip-rod, and

um].
average angle of slope of the cross section 1! -(i/I) glyu‘dy. intercepting

introduce the following quantities: average displacement w-(i/ZH)

é”? :

force Q- S snag and torque M- gwndy. where x, y are the longitudinal
—u

and transverse coordinates. “x . uy are the corresponding displacements,
on, c are the longitudinal" and shear stresses, 2!! is the height of a strip,
I I2h3 is the moment of inertia of the cross section. Integration of

equilibrium equations [Ref. 2] gives the following two equations relative
to the averaged quantities:

29H d‘wldl' - aQ/ax. . (l)
plan/an - aM/dx — Q. ‘ (2)

In an analogous way, by integrating the Hooke relations for the plane stressed
state [Ref. 2] we can get

Q - ZHE. [aw/0x + u. (Ii)/Hi.' (3)
M - a (Ian/ax + in» tau") — ml} - - '
- Blot/0x + v §lwudy. (4) '

where E, w are the Young modulus and the Poisson ratio of the material,
81-3/(l-v2), Bald/201w) are the longitudinal and shear moduli of
elasticity.

Equations (1)-(1|) make up a complete system of equations relative to the
four average quantities. They also include the two "excess" unknown
quantities uin) and uy (ii). The assunptions made in the approximate theories
give additional relations among the unknowns, after which the system of
equations becomes solvable. Let us now consider some specific theories.

1. The Bernoulli-Euler equation. In deriving this classical equation. the
following assumptions are made [Ref. 1;]; rod cross sections that are flat
and perpendicular to the axis of the rod in the equilibrium state remain
plane and perpendicular during bending as well; b) the longitudinal fibers
into which the rod can be split up resist bending independently without
influencing one another; c) the rotational inertia of a rod element is not

108

FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
1’01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

taken into consideration. 0n the basis of the third assumption the first
member of (2) in equal to zero. and therefore QIBM/ax. The second assump-
tion implies that ow-o, and therefore from (h) we have ﬁestas/3x, and in
virtue of the first ansunption tI-aw/ax. Therefore, substituting
q-on/axn-ma3w/ax3 in equation (1). we get the Bernoulli-inner equation

ewe-o. (s)

where D" I 81/29" is a quantity proportional to the bending stiffness. Seeking
the solution of the equation in the form of a free wave w -exp(ikx- iwt). we
get the dispersion equation

M - u‘ID' - ti. (0)

that relaten the constant of wave propagation k to frequency u. It has four
rootn corresponding to two direct and two reverse waves in the rod. Below we
will consider only direct waves On Fig. 1, curves 3 and 10 represent dis-
peraion equation (6). It can be easily seen that the Bernoulli-Euler equation

gives a good approximation of dispersion to the exact curves 1 and 2 only
on frequencies close to zero.

 

2. The Rayleigh equation [Ref. 5]. In deriving this equation. we make all
the assumptions of the previous section except the last. The relations
«hat/ax. Hasn‘t/3x are satisfied here as well, but from equation (2) we
get another expression Q-tM/ax -DI326/3%2. Substitution of this expression
in (1) leads to the Rayleigh equation

0%.! 10%- -0

0'0
771 1777-7, 0. n ‘7)

'59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where c2 IE/n is the square of the velocity of longitudinal anen in a thin
rod. The dispersion equation takes the form

at. - ’1’.-i:(ki-I‘4kb"'. (8)

where he is the wave number of a flexural wave in n Bernoulli-Euler rod; kl
in the longitudinal wave number. Curvcu Sandéon Fig. 1 correspond to this

dispersion. As can be seen frou Fig. l, accounting for rotational inertia
does not significantly improve the dispersion of waves in the rod.

3. The Bernoulli-Euler equation with consideration of shear deformations.

To account for shear deformations in the Bernoulli-Euler model (without
consideration of the moment of rotational inertia) we must drop the require-
nent for a perpendicular cross section of the line of bending while leaving
the other assumptions of section 1 unchanged. In this case we can easily
get an equation that differs from (1) in the coefficient of the mixed
derivative. this coefficient being equal to l/cé. where c.’ 2-52/9 in the
square of the velocity of propagation of shear waves in a plate. "he corre-
sponding dispersion relation is derived from (8) by substituting k2 Inez/cg
for R2. Curves 7. 8 correspond to this relation on Fig. 1.

la. 'ihe Bresse equation (Ref. 6]. In deriving this equation it is necessary
to make two assumptions: a) cross sections remair. plane; b) ow-O, which
in equivalent to the assumption of independence of deformations of individual
longitudinal fibers. Hith consideration of these assumptions, we get the
Bresse equation from (1)-(la):

I 0’ I
174'155'15“ (,,+ fﬂw“ 7:17") ‘9’

Bresse was apparently the first to consider the way that bending is influenced
by simultaneous shearing and rotational inertia. The third term in equation
(9) reflects the influence of rotational inertia, the fourth takes account
of the effect of shear deformations, and the last term, proportional to the
fourth derivative with respect to time. accounts for the simultaneous action
of both of these factors. The Bresse equation is a special case of the well
known Timoshenko equation (with shear coefficient equal to unity), and there-
fore dispersion will be analyzed below. Let us note only that simultaneous
accounting for shear and inertia leads to a qualitative change -- the
appearance of a cutoff frequency on which the dispersion curve of the second
wave moses from the imaginary region into the real region.

5. Volterra theory of plane cross sections (Ref. 7]. The only assumption in
this theory is linearity of the dependence of all displacements on transverse
coordinates. For bending of a strip. this assumption is equivalent to the
following expressions:

u.(x. y.!) .-. Nix. f). u,(x. y. f) - w(x.!). (10)

From which we get the expressions for the torque M = Elias/3x and the inter-
cepting force Qa2h32(3w/3x+0). Together with equilibrium equations (1). (2)

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

they form a system of four equations in four unknowns. or one Volterra
equation _

an” I.» u I like I 0'
w-Iv1%*(s+s)w+sw*'°' -‘“’

where cé-Exln is the square of the velocity of propagation of a longitudinal
wave in a thin plate. We can readily see that equation (11) can be derived
from the Bresse equation (9) by replacing the Young modulus E with

E1 IE/(l- v2). This means that both these equations have similar dispersion
relations on middle and high frequencies. but differ on low frequencies. As
two the Bresse. Bernoulli-Euler and Rayleigh equations give dispersion

in Iko and h 3 iko that coincides with the dispersion of the actual rod. and
equation (11; implies that it; ~ (1 - v2) 0. k2 six}. Thus the Volterra model
is (l - we)"l times stiffer than a real rod. This is a consequence of the
second equality of (10). in virtue of which this model does not permit
transverse compressions and expansions.

6. Approximations of Vlasov (Ref. 8] and Mbartsuwan liter. 9]. 'lhe second
of these theories seems: a) 3n lay-0 -- transverse displacements of all
points of the cross section are t e same; b) ow(x.y.t) I829(x,t)f(y) --
tangential stresses are distributed over the cross section as a function of
ﬂy). Using llooke law. we get directly from this equation

a. (x. y. l) n ...,££-Jy 4- “1- 0(0)-

12
u,(x.y. I) - ”(x0 ()0 I (y) . i, ('1) d'l- ( )
. .

Thus in contrast to the foregoing theories. curvature of the cross sections
of the rods is permitted here. From displacements (12) it is easy to calcu-
late the stresses. and finding the averaged quantities, to get the following
equation with the aid of (l), (2):

 

0‘ l-V’ 0% I I O'l. 1 0‘0
ﬁ+TT-(3+ﬁ)m£+ “m '53-'0-

(13)
where a-IIL/Ziilo. I is the merit of inertia of the cross section,

u u
I. u S Mindy: ’0 .. S ”(50:01. 'ihis equation differs from the Volterra equation
-u -n

in the factor a preceding cg. that depends on the mnction ﬂy). when

f(y) Il/2. equations (ll) and (13) coincide. For distribution of tangential
stresses with respect to the parabola f(y) I ("2n-y2n)/2 the coefficient a
is equal to as (2n +3)/(2n+h), which gives a-5/6 for quadratic distri-
bution (n - l).

The Vlasov is analogous. This theory is based on two assumptions relative
to displacements:

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
uni-MM) - ~W-35roh-éy. u,(x.y.!) .- w(x.l). (ii)

Iiere e - -(au.I5y),.-o and moreover (am/amp," — 0. i. c. the cross sections are
curved in such a way that after defamation they remain normal to the faces
y-iH. 'Ihe quantity °3U is the tangential stress on the middle line. Dis-
placements (1h) give the quadratic distribution of tangential stresses

oweoﬂu-yz/ii . After the necessary transformations we can get equation
(13) in which «1-5/6.

'me coefficient a (corresponding to the 'rilaoshenko shear coefficient), as will
be shown below, considerably improves the dispersion properties of flexural
waves en high frequencies. however. equation (13), like the Volterra equa-
tion, has an understated dispersion on low frequencies.

7. Approximations of Reissner [Ref. 10]. Gol'denveyner [Ref. 11) and Amber-
tswan [Ref. 12]. These theories asamne: a) o =0. b) ow(x.y.t) '32!
-O(x.t)f(y). where ﬂy) is the distribution funcﬂon of tangential stresses
(in the Reisoner approximation ﬂy) I (H2 -y7-)/2). In contrast to the approxi-
nations of the preceding section. transverse deformations arc assuaed here.
resulting in an equation that differs from the Brease equation (9) in the
coefficient a preceding e%. As applied to a strip-rod. these approximations
thus reduce to the 'finoshenko equation that will be analyzed below.

8. The Timshenko model (Ref. 13, 110]. In the Timeshenko theory the initial
equations are equilibrium equations (1), (2) and the following expressions
for the bending ment and the intercepting force:

M - Eldoldx. Q - q2llE. (aw/0x + \P)- ('5)

A comparison of these relations with expressions (3) and (b) shows that the
following assmptiono are made here: a) sync, so that (It) implies the
first relation (15), b) the cross sections remain flat, since the quantity
in (mm in (3) is replaced by the angle of inclination of the cross section 0.
c the shear coefficient q is introduced. This implies that in addition to
the other interpretations (see Ref. 1 and the foregoing section) the Timo-
ohenho can be represented on a structure of the rod type with nondcfomable
plane cross sections that satisfies relations (15). For practical purposes
it can be realized as a set of rigid plates Joined by weightless elastic
connections. e. g. in the form of spacers of a lighter and sore pliable
material that conform to conditions (15). 'ihe step of periodicity of the
chain must be much less than the wavelengths of the waves being considered.

Eliminating all quantities except displacements from equations (1), (2) and
(15), we get the 'l‘inoshenko equation

0%: (I l)d':.~

db I I 0"
F+v7r-,—;+fgw+m1§“°' “5’

from which we derive the dispersion equations

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9 h‘ I "s
.s I O I d
2*... - d +—,-+. [(k. — 7-) + 4A.] . (m

Expressions (1‘!) imply directly that on low frequencies In tho. it; I iko.
which coincides with the dispersion of the first two normal Lamb waves,
while on high frequencies curves (17) approach the real asymptotes k1 Ikt/q’:
and k; “t. 'ihe cutoff frequency of the second wave is determined from the
relation nth): . 3q and assumes the exact value for the strip at an/m.

Fig. 2 shows the dispersion curves (1'!) for different values of the shear
coefficient .

 

Fig. 2. Dispersion curves: 1. 2--of the first two antisymmetric Lush
waves; the other curves correspond to the Timoshenko model with different
values of the shear coefficient; 3. lauq-l (Bresse model); 5. 6-41-112/12;
7. 6—-q-2/3;9. 10--q-1/2.

The choice of the coefficient q depends on the kind of problem in which the
model is to be used. For instance in Ref. 15 it is proposed that the rate of
propagation of the first wave in the model approach the velocity of the
Rayleigh surface wave on high frequencies. In this case the dispersion of
this wave coincides almost ideally with the dispersion of the first Lamb
wave («180.88 when val/3). Another paper [Ref. 16] proposes that the values
of q be calculated from the condition of coincidence of the cutoff frequencies
of the model and the real rod (curves 5 and 6 on Fig. 2). Calculations

show that this value of q gives the minimum of the absolute integral
deviation of the dispersion curves of both model waves from the dispersion
Lamb waves in the frequency range of xtn-o-aa/a. Let us note that this
frequency range is the maximum possible for any two-wave model of a strip or
plate since the constant of propagation of the third Lamb wave becomes

real on higher frequencies. It is clear from Fig. 2 that we can get coinci-
dence of dispersions in individual narrow sections within this range for
other values of q.

53

FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The good agreement between the dispersions of both models and the exact
dispersion curves enables calculation of evon high natural frequencies of
real rode on which the wavelength of the shear wave becomes comparable to
the height of the rod (kg! .1).

9. improved Timouhenko model. An implied by the preceding discussion. an
essential element of the Timonhenho theory is the longitudinal coefficient q.
The choice of an optimum value for this coefficient gives the best approxi-
mation with respect to dispersion among all two-wave theories with fixed
coefficients in the equations. however, such a method of introducing an
arbitrary coefficient is not the only one. It seems natural to introduce

a greater number of arbitrary coefficients into the initial equations and

to study the possibility of improving the Timoshenko equation by choosing
the suitable values for these coefficients.

Let us write the expressions for the bending moment and intercepting force
in more general form

M - PEMWX. Q - 2H5. (OW/03 + Si). (‘5)

where p, q and s are arbitrary coefficients. Replacement of expressions
(l5) by expressions (18) is equivalent to some change of the parameters of
the elastic connections in the interpretation of the Timoshenko model given
above. After substituting them in equations (1) and (2). we get the
following equation:

6'- 1 I Oh I I 6"
12r+(w)v1r*(;7+;;‘)m§n+
l ﬂu
"'-'ﬁr" 0 19
and the corresponding dispersion relations
hi hi *i '3‘ .s" (20)
m-*"T+T=*=KT—T)+“°W '

0n low frequencies the two roots of (20) approach the values

*| z k. (”N '3. k. - ‘kh (2')

and on high frequencies they approach the asymptotes kl/ph and kt/qk. The
cutoff frequency is defined by the expression

kfﬂ' - 330 (22)
The special case s-zqis e ined in Ref. 17. As we can readily see from
(21). in this case k1 ~ko/p , k1 Iikl. and the dispersion of the model waves

on low frequencies does not coincide with the dispersion of real rods. and
when pal.-- it reduces to the dispersion of the Timoshenko model.

5:.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it neenm to un that correspondence between the low-frequency dispersion '
rulutlonu for a real rod and itn model in essential. and therefore in order
to choose the bent values of the coefficients p. q and s we require first
of all that dispersion relations (20) coincide with the corresponding
relations for a real rod on low frequencies. Pros equations (21) we then
imdiately get the equality

I-m- (23)

This expression is general for all homogeneous rods. and does not depend on
the shape of the cross section.

Calculations show that the divergences of wave dispersion in the real rod
and the sodel are very sensitive to a change in cutoff frequency. In this
connection. as a second condition imposed on the arbitrary coefficients we
take the condition of coincidence of their cutoff frequencies, which for an
arbitrary rod takes the fora

*: I. u N, (24)

where r is the radius of inertia of the cross section, and the quantity ht
is calculated on the cutoff frequency, which for a strip—rod and a plate
gives pq-Izlla.

 

Pig. 3. Dispersion curves of the first two Lamb waves (1, 2) and waves in
the refined Timeshenho model at different values of the coefficient p
(pq-nzllz): 3, lo--p=0.62; 5. 6--p-0.722; 7. 8--p-n2/12; 9. lOnp80.9h;
ll. 12--p-1 ("pure" Timoshenho model).

Fig. 3 shows the dispersion curves (20) for different values of p (the
coefficients (1 and s were found from equalities (23) and (210)). It is clear
from this figure that the Timoshenko model (p81) does not give the beat
approximation here. and the introduction of an additional correcting factor
noticeably improves the dispersion of the second wave. For instance in the
frequency range ktH-O-I dispersion curve 8 on Fig. 3 (pita/12) practically
coincides with exact curve 2. In the interval ktli-O-3s/2 the value p=0.9

55
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY
is best. The absolute integral deviation of the dispersion curves of both
waves at this value is half that given by the "pure" Timoshenko model.

it is ahovn in Ref. 18 that this improvement of dispersion properties of
the model leads to a reduction or errors in calculations of high natural
frequencies oi" real rods.

in conclusion let us note that the model that is described by equation (19)
together with relations (23) and (21:) is the beat among the possible two-vaVe
aodels with respect to dispersion properties. The incorporation or a
greater number of correcting coefficients or their introduction by another
method leads to distortion oi‘ low-frequency dispersion and therefore cannot
be considered Justified. It is also worth mentioning that a change from

the Tineshenko nodal to an improved model can be realized by substituting
the angle of turn pd for the angle of turn a in expressions (15).

REFERENCE

1. E. l. Origolyuk. I. T. Selezov. "Nonelassical Theories of Oscillations oi‘
Roda. Plates and Shells.” Series "Mekhanika tverdykh deromirm/clsykh tel"
[Mechanics of Deformable Solids]. V03 5. Moscow. All-Union Institute of
Scientific and Technical Information. 1973.

2. L. D. Landau. Ye. M. Lifshits. ”Teoriya uprugonti" [Theory of Elasticity].
Moscw. Nauka. 1967.

3. Yu. I. Dobrovnitskiy. M. D. Genkin. "Oscillations of an Elastic Strip"
in: ”Metody vibroisolyatsii mashin i priaoyedinennykh konstruktsiy"
[Methods of Vibration Damping or Haehines and Attached Structural
Members]. Moscow. liauka, 1915.

h. B. St. Venant. "Memory 0 kruchenii 1 ob izgibe prism" [Notes on 'lVisting
and Bending or Prisms]. Moscow, State Technical and Theoretical Press,

1961.

5. Rayleigh (J. H. 8trutt). ”Teoriya zvuka" [Theory of Sound], v. 1. Moscow,
State Technical and Theoretical Press. 1955.

6. M. Dresae. "Coura de mechanique appliquee." part 1. Paris. Mallet-
Docbelier. 1859.

'l. E. A. Volterra. "A One-Dimensional Theory of Have Propagation in Elastic
Rods Dased6on the 'Method of Internal Constraints'." IHG.-ARCH.. 1955.
v. 23. he .

8. D. F. Vlasov, "On Equations of the Theory of Bending or Plates." IZVBTIYA
AKADD‘II NAUK 888R. OTDELENIYA MWICIIEKIKﬂ “AUX. 1957. No 12.

9. 8. A. Nabartswan. "On a Theory of Bending of Anisotropic Plates and
Flat Shells." PRIKLADRAYA MAMTIKA I mmrm. 1960. v. 231. No 2.

$6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10. H. heisoner. "On the 'iheory of Bending of mantis Plates." J. MATH. AND
PHYS” 19"”. Va 23. No he

11. A. L. Ool'dsnveyzer. ”0n the Reissner Theory of Bending of Plates."
IZVETIYA AKADDJII NAUK 888R. WELSH!“ TEIOiNICHESKIKH "AUX. 1958. No '0.

12. s. A. Mbartsunvan. "0n the Theory of Bending of Anisotropic Plates."
IZVESTIYA WU NAUK 888R. OTDELENIYE TEKRNICHBSKIKH NAUK. 1958. No 5.

13. s. P. Tionoschenko. "0n the Correction of Shear of the Differential
Equation for Transverse Vibrations of Prismatic Bars." Collected Papers.
New York. McOraw-Ilill. 1953.

Ho. 3. P. Tinoshenko. ”Kurs teorii uprugosti" (Course in Elasticity Theory].
Kiev. "Ksukova dunks.“ 1972.

15. R. D. Nindlin. "Influence of Rotary inertia and Shear on Flexural Motion
in Isotropic Elastic Plates.“ J. APPL. “36".. 1951. v. 18. No 1.

16. N. D. Mindlin. ii. Deresiewicz. "Timoshenko's Shear Coefficient for
Plexural Vibrations of Beans." Proc. and U. 8. Nat. Congr. Applied
Mechanics. ﬂew York. 1955.

17. B. Aalani. B. Atsori. "Plexural Vibrations and Tinoshenho's Theory of
Reno.” ”MAYA TEIGINIKA I KOSDNAVTIKA. 19710. v. 12. No S.

18. Yu. I. Bobrovnitskiy. "On an Acoustic Model of Plexurally Vibrating
Rods." AMTICMKIY MIMI“ 1975. v. 21. No la.

INVESTIGATION OF SPACE-TIRE costumes or some TYPES OF ACOUSTIC PIBLIB
A. M. Medvedkov, A. T. Shargayev

In determining the influence that mechanism installed on a cannon base and
working as a group have on the overall sound field of a room. consideration

is taken of the exchange of energy between mechanisms that is due to the
propagation of vibrations through the base connections. This exchange shows
up in the fact that signals taken off synchronously from sensors installed

on the feet of the nechanisns are correlated with each other. and moreover are
correlated with the sigraal taken off from a microphone set at the investigated
point in the room.

'me excitation. propagation and emission of vibrations are wave processes and
therefore it is natural to expect that the properties or these processes will

allhow uplpriaarily in such a specific characteristic as the coherence function
Ref. 1 .

He will analyze space-tine coherence on the basis of a model in the form of a

string that interacts with the acoustic medium. ihe string is excited by
concentrated transverse forces that say be statistical in the general case.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us consider steady-state vibrations of an infinite string in a medium
with consideration of the internal friction of the material of the string
under the action of a force that varies hamnically with time. 'ib do this,
we introduce the complex tension

7.. r (l + m). (i)
where 'l‘ is the true tension of the string. and n is the loss factor. n2<<1.

Let us take the rectangular coordinate system XYZ so that the X-axis is along
the axis of the string. and the X02 plane coincides with the plane of
vibrations of the string. In this coordinate system the equation of motion
of the string is written as

nfa%-T%+P,+F. (3)

where ro is th radius of the string. so is the density of the string

i(x.t) -E(x)e' “W is the displacement of the string, F(x.t) =6(x)e‘1“£

in a concentrated force with a single amplitude that acts on the string at
point x, Fp(x,t) is the reaction of the medium to the motion of the string.
s(x) is the couple: amplitude of displacement of the string. 6(x) is the
Dirac delta function. and u is the angular frequency of harmonic oscillations

of the external force.

'ihe pressure change in the medium that is due to vibrations of the string
satisfies the wave equation that is associated with the string in the
cylindrical coordinate system (axis of symetry directed along the X-axis,
angle 0 read out positively from the plane of vibrations) and is written as

a’ no; not; 1)" not; .
15'+7sr+7'ao-r+15‘-7rw '-'°' ‘3’
where i(r,0.x.t) -p(r.0.x)e'1"t is the pressure in the medium that is caused

by string vibrations. c is the speed of sound in the medium. B(r.0,x) is the
complex amplitude of the pressure.

From the equality of normal velocities of the string and the ambient medium.
we get the following boundary condition:

at? I a ,
Wesso- ~7+l'u.. (I)
where a is the density of the medium.

'ihe reaction of the medium is the sum of the projections of elements of
force p(ro.0.x)rod6 on the s-axis. i. e.

3-
T. - — S rJ(r..0.x)cosod0¢-“. (5)

0
it is assumed in the given expressions for the unknown parameters that they

vary in time according to a harmonic law with the frequency of the perturbing
force. Therefore expressions (2)-(5) can be written in the form

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 058 Ohm

MIM- a“)? - “£3.- + 7‘» + 00:). _ (o)
0" I Jﬁi I na’ .n' ,ka' . n (7
15"F7'ari'7rmﬁ'l'1rxzﬂ P' - '
3:030 I- 75%|qu _ (8)

we write the sought solution of equations (6)-(8) as follows:

30!) - 1'; S 8. (8) Male. (0)
Ems-3.1% S snum'umema (to;

where H'."(U) is a Hankel function of the first kind.

'ihe plus sign in the exponential functiOn of (9) corresponds to propagation:
of plane waves in the positive direction (3: >0). and the minus sign -- in
the negative direction. Considering waves that damp out at infinity. we
take laczo. The solution in formula (lo) obviously satisfies the Helmholtz
equation and the Somerfeld radiation condition. After substituting (9) and
(lo) in equations (6) and (8). we get a system of two algebraic equations
relative to the two unknowns 8,“) and Sp“). and the solutions give

”(U o) ‘l
sap - (ﬁn-w cm +1.99 +£"ni-Wv—‘f'ﬂ .

(N)
S .(t) - m’ lmtlﬂ" Won“ [- m‘ + r: (i + in)? +
. an». ”:"(Ve’ "

"" .. WWW.) '

 

(13)

where m-Irﬁpo is the linear density of the string material. e6 IT]: is the
velocity of transverse waves ‘in the string in a vacuum.

For small values of ro and low frequencies, i. e. when (ro<<1, we can limit

ourselves to the first term of the asymptotic expansion for the Hankel
function and its derivative. and as a result we get

Ili"(cr.)lcll'."'(cr.) - — 1..

(13)
bet m: use the notation

Ruduwm. e-e:(n-:m--=e:u-m. (M)
£0 nus/co in the wave number of flexural vibrations in the string.

'Ib investigate pressure in the far zone (cr>>1) we use a conventional
asymptotic representation of the Hankel function (Ref. 2]

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Mm - VWexpma- mm}- (16)

Ouhstituting (ll). (12) in the expressions for displacement (9) and pressure
(10). taking (EH-(15) into~considerntlon. we get the following relations:

- I on in)

 

.. com ‘ dw’v’su'f’fuvulw III-"law"
NAIL-r) r 3-1;}? S .w— '(I +M~il d!-

I-h

(17)

He calculate integrals (16) and (17) with the use of the theory of residues
and the aethod of steepest descents [Ref. 1]. With condition Iago we get

inc-1t. ’l r ”with" i—IJLVI-i-p :.|
2mr.‘..i’ MIMI + "1'1!

.. FM: cm . tssﬂu "R!
“"0"" " ‘53— Munth—L‘nl HIM +' - “0)

where R :- ”to: V0: ‘8 1'0 - ‘/'- (2°)

     

:(x) - — . (13)

For the wave was (kl-”1) a considerable part is played by the small part of
the path of integration that includes the point of steepest descent to. we
find its location on complex plane 0 from (as) and conditions x>0. r>r..

obviously
0 C *0 < “’2' (2|)

Let us consider the vibratioas of a string excited at points :1 and x; by
concentrated transwrrse forces f1( t) and f2(t) that are taken as independent
steady-state random processes of second order. For the sake of definiteness
we set 3:. I0. x2 20. Let us use the notation Pm») and P2“) for the
Fourier transform of forces f|(t) and f2(t). and inﬂux) and "2(u,x-x2) for
the Fourier transformers of the accelerations of the string at point x that
are caused by these forces. According to Ref. 3, the Fourier transform for
the response of a linear system in the frequency region is equal to the
product of the Fourier transform of the input action multiplied by the
frequency response of the system. and therefore we have

V. (o. x) = If. (0. IN“. (a). . (22)
V. (o. x - x.) - ”a (o. x -- IMF. in). (23)

The expressions for the frequency responses ﬂ|(u.x) and H2(u.x-x2) are
obtained by using (18) and the relation

H (a. x) - (for 3 (x). (24)
”NU-1) "
“my-(1"— —.+&...(_—':1-:.51/m{;

WWI-rah

     

(23)

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

For n point x located to the left or point x2, x-xz <0. 'Ihe total acceler-

utionn "(3:1) and “(3:2) at points x1 and x; with consideration of (22)-(26)
are written in the form

In exp (— 32-) F, (e)

um.) - w.(x.)+ Wm) - W "' '

+ luexp(--l.;!---'f'=2L —lot!ﬁ(o)
Inc. V + PIP. . (27)

lucxp —L;L—%WL—lw) F; (u)

W (x!) " W10“) + W! (X!) ' +

3M. I + 9/9.

+ 201:. l+ p. ' (28)
where
t - (mm/Fm.
According to Ref. 2, the relations
M IFIMF; (uh - onwbw- u'). (29)
0;(m).-.M||F,(um. 1—1.2. ‘ (30)
M [AMFSMI -- 0. (31)

hold for uteady-utate independent random processes, where 6.10.7) is spectral

dcnzxity. M 1:: the operator of mathematical expectation, 6(o is the delta
function.

For the spectral dcnoitleo of total accelerations at points or the string
with coordinatcn x1 and x; we have

u .90. (0) ﬂag (—‘U'lﬂ 0: (0) 32
Sued?) ——_‘M'(:U+PIPJ + had“ 4.9/9.) ' ( )

_' mm- «mm M JJL. 33
3a (‘9) ' “I’d“ 4. MP.) + «ﬂea! + PIP.) ( )

lhzim'. furl-ulna (2'!)-(31) for the mutual spectral density of accelerations
v(x.) mm sz) we get

5 _ nh-xM— com/2 + (0001(0)
"M we: (I + m.) +

. ﬂexzi— omﬂ- IM)0£(O) . I
4 Wu + pip.) (3‘)

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By analogous arguments we find expressions for the spectral density of

total pressure sp(u,r,8,x) at the investigated point N(r,e,x)
pk‘r‘cosw..m'm.(o)

' Wt'lﬂ‘w-(t‘ldKH-NMI‘R}
MFOWMMWOJU)

Nannies—(Mm + mar R:

S, +

+ (35)

and for the mutual spectral density of the total acceleration at point x
and the total pressure at a point of field ll

elp(—Iut)0.(o) + co: up —lo(r+r) a u)
[\anu-E' I+-:7]R. PM”? I+%]Ra

(30)

where

r: - Rule: r. - Rdc. r -(x/C.)V1+ 0/9.: la 1m - arm
in“ - (x. - x)/r: R, - r/cos m, (1 - 1. 2).

1n formulas (35). (36) we set n .o to simpliiy calculations. 'ihe coherence
function of total acceleratious at points of the string x1 and x; with
consideration of formulas (32)-(3lo) is written as

_ [up UM) a! (n) + le(—‘M)GIID) F
““0, “”0"" l(¢’)+ :(“H “Mi-“NW!" “0". (37)

After simple transformations this formula can be written in the following way:
ago.) + ago.) + 20.(o)0,(n)cosov

71"") " [exp («Hanoi + ant-Illa: I0) -:- unemasml ' (38)

This formula implies that the coherence function of total accelerations of
the ntrinp. at points of application of forces f1(t) and f2(t) will decrease
with nn increase in the damping factor n in the string. the numerator of
the coherence function includes an interference term c0320“ that is a conse-
quence of the wave nature of the investigated oscillatory processes and leads
to a periodic change in the coherence function. In particular, as n *0 and
61-62 we have YI2(U) =cos2m, i. e. the coherence function varies as the
square of the cosine of an.

'lhe expression for the coherence function that relates the total acceleration
at an investigated point of the string to the total pressure at the investi-

gated point of the field ll(1.0,x) can be obtained from formulas (32), (35).
('5 ).

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Diuregarding attenuation and considering that in the wave sone xz/r<<l.

to; ens-901, we have
' «(awoken m|i5)03(ﬂ)¢0\;ﬂﬂ-I.-—1’)]
Y?” M” l .M-r 2(0) '

If Ra denotes the radius vector that Joins the middle of the string segment
between the points of application of forces f1(t) and f2(t) to point N of
the field, and 0 denotes the angle that this radius vector makes with the
positive direction of the axis of the string, then when X2/r<<1, we have

Dunn—V01. ~
R] -R.+-’-+m500 RI- Rﬂ—ﬁlmo‘

r. --§-‘-+-‘§-oos0. r.-—’:4--§-coso.
Hith consideration of those formulas. the coherence function can be written as

Y?» (W) "

'0.(w)esp {—Iul(-a-)coso—2:-}l/l_+—%l}+
+6,(U)exp lo %co«0—%]/I «bf-”r

 

" I .M+ no» '
When Gm») scam) the coherence function is written as
Viv 0°) 3 A cos' V-

A = lem— helm/c) R. + (At/c.) V“: + p/p,” p .. 1,
‘1 I. to(%¢030—%l/Ii +£—) -
‘ ... ‘" (cosO—%]/i+%),

obviously the coherence function takes on its maximum value when w II0.
i. e. when

 

 

 

«- ' 9
C050.“ 71/1 + T - sin “1'

'lhuu the coherence function reaches the maximum value when the coordinate of
u mint on the path of steepest descent l‘ on the real axis is equal to the
unnie that the radius vector drawn to point N from the point of application
ol‘ l‘orce f|(t) makes with the x-nxis.

The result can be attributed to the fact that the field at observation
point N In formed mainly from plane waves that propagate at the sum angle
1‘0!» and therefore is distinguished by high homogeneity.

The normalized value of the coherence function has a radiation pattern in
the plane that passes through the axis of the string and observation point R

?:.V/(\':N);sx - cos' 0.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

      

     
  
   

      
  

.'

    
 

r ". '
a 1",», '3
. N‘“ mar
:gﬁéieh' I??? ,.
Fig. 1 , II:;% 4‘! '. ,.
'1’ "”WW

   
 
 
 

  
 

 

The three-dimensional radiation pattern is obtained by rotating the curve for

cost about the 0X axis.

The radiation pattern or the coherence mnction that relates the total
acceleration at one of the points of application of the force to the total
pressure in the field that is caused by vibrations of the string under the
action of two random forces with different spectral densities is an analog of

610

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the radiation pattern of two monopoles (Ref. 3] with accuracy to the angle

"-f'ﬁl/i +£. For a given all this angle depends on the ratio of the

velocities of sound in the medium and the string. and also on the ratio of
densities of the medium and the string material.

Shown in=Pi'g. l_. 2 are exam les of radiation patterns of the coherence func-
tion when c/qeg 1/2. VI deg/p.31, Curve 1 corresponds to the case where
lel 30. i. e. where the points of application of forces f1(t) and f2(t)
coincide the radiation pattern of the coherence function is a circle of
unit radius.

Curves 2 and 3 correspond to the cases where xz/l Ill? and x2/A =1 respec-
tively. These figures show that as the distance between the points of
application of the forces increases the lobes of the radiation pattern
become narrower. This property of the radiation pattern of the coherence
function is determined chiefly by the distance lel between the points of
application of the forces, whereas the deviation of the maximum of the
radiation pattern from the straight line perpendicular to the axis of the
string and passing through the middle of the segment that lies between the
points of application of the forces is determined by the parameters that
characterize the string and the adJacent medium.

REFERENCES

l. Dzh. Bendam, A. Prisvl, "Measurement and Analysis of Random Processes,"
Moscow, Mir, 1971i.

2. P. M. Morse. K. Ingard. "Theoretical Acoustics," McGraw-Hill Book 60.,
New York, 1968.

3. L. M. Brekhowskikh "Volnv v sloistykh sredakh" [Waves in Laminar Media],
Moscow Academy of Sciences USSR, 1957.

A METROD 0F VIBRATION DAMPIm Ill 80"! ROD STRUCTURES
V. M. Ryaboy. V. V. Yablonskiy

Multidimensional linear oscillatory systems enable damping of vibrations
by redistribution of perturbing forces (velocities) at the input of the

system while maintaining the integral characteristics of their intensity on
the same level.

Fundamental problems that are associated with the possibility of implementing
such a method of vibration damping were discussed for general linear systems
in Ref. 1. A specific example of damping of the oscillations of a structural
member (cantilever rod) by selection of the optimum distribution of perturbing
forces was considered in detail in Ref. 2. In our paper we examine the

possibilities of this type of vibration damping, analyze some special cases,

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and evaluate the effectiveness of vibration-damping rod structures that
utilize the given principle.

Minimizing the flow of vibrational energy in multidimensional linear systems.
The flow of vibrational energy radiated to supporting connections is

expressed by a Hermitisn form of the vector of complex amplitudes of
eneralized forces or generalized velocities at the input of the system

Ref. 1]. It is possible to minimize this form, i. e. to achieve an effect
of vibration damping by matching the optimum relations among the different
components of these vectors. As an example we consider a system with a
harmonic force Q and torque H applied at the input. For the sake of con-
venience in subsequent calculations we introduce a constant of proportionality
r with dimensionality of length between the force and the torque:

M-IQ. . (1)

Using the notation y; (i, J-l. 2) to denote the elements of the complex
matrix of input mobility Y (reverse resistance) of the system. we write the
expression of active power Ii at the input in terms of the complex amplitudes
of force Q and torque M:

~ - 0-3 R9 (”HQ 4' the (QR + 6M) + Ulle‘ (2)

The problem of vibration damping in the given instance reduces to minimizing
quadratic form (2) for fixed Q and constant y; . i. e. to the proper choice
of the value of r. Let us note that the minim zation we are considering
here with fixed force Q differs from the minimization studies in Ref. 1
under the condition of constancy of the sum of the squares of the components
of the input parameters. In the given case the optimum vector of the input
parameters (Q. N) is no longer an eigenveetor of form II. In the given
problem there is no difficulty in finding the optimum vector (i. e. deter-
mining the optimum r). Substituting relation (1) in formula (2) we get

N

m-ﬁﬁ‘i'z'ﬁ‘r'P‘s “ll-Reyll' (3)

Since g3; >0. quadratic trinomial (3) has a unique minimum that is reached
when r I r'I

" "' “In/3n
and is equal to

(”IN ("ohm - 1-5::(luln- (4)

As a consequence of the positive definiteness of form N. the value of (it)
lies between zero and unity.

Re have examined the problem of minimizing the flow of energy by redis-
tributing perturbing forces for a two-dimensional system, i. e. a system
with two inputs. no formal generalization of this analysis to the case of
any number of input parameters presents no difficulties. The direct gener-
alization of the given problem is a problem of quadratic programming with
constraints of the equality type. Methods of solving this problem have been
thoroughly worked out (see for instance Ref. 3).

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ..-..I

Damping of flexural vibrations of a rod or plate. In the following discussion
we will concentrate attention on development of one version of a system of
the given kind, namely an elastic rod or plate in flexural vibration and
attached to some load. The rod vibrations are considered within the framework
of elementary beam theory. The complex amplitude of transverse oscillations
u(x) is represented as a linear combination of A. N. Krylov's function of

the argument ks, where the wave number k is expressed in terms of the angular
frequency a by the relation (for a plate) It” whoa/D (D-Eh3/12(1 —w2) is

the cylindrical stiffhess. o is density. h is thickness. v is the Poisson
ratio .

He have
u (x) - c.s (ix) + 0.70“) + C;U (lax) + CJ’ (ﬁx). (5)

The complex amplitudes of the bending moment [4 and the transverse force Q
are defined by the formulas

Q - Du" (x). M - D!" (x). (5)

0310?. the subscript l to denote the values of the quantities where x- Z,
we write the conditions on the right end of the beam:

on 0. Mn- r0. ‘7’

For the sake of simplicity we will assime that the matrix of mechanical
resistance of the load is diagonal. Then the conditions on the left end of
the rod are written in the form

Q. — Dk‘z.l«u.. M . - DQ'zJuuUk. (8)

where the zero subscript denotes the corresponding quantities when 3:80.
The active power radiated to the load is equal to

N - 0.5 Re (QM + mm). ' (9)
Relat ions (8) imply that
N - swam". la. I’ + Re Mai/k p). (10)

The quantities uo, ué/k are related to 0;. M; by equations that derive from
(5). (8)

mo» - (u - (mm. + (V + («2.8) uS/k.

QI/Dka " (T — “313)“. + (U + “NJ/MUM

in which the coefficients contain A. N. Krylov's function of the argumnt kl.
ﬂelat ions (8)-(ll) enable us to write the enery flow as a quadratic mnction
of IQI in which the coefficient is a quadratic trinomial of r. After this
we can easily minimize the energy flow with respect to r.

(1‘)

it is of interest to consider the limiting case of infinite mechanical
resistance of the load to transverse force 2}. This case can be analyzed

by replacing the first condition of (8) with the condition uo ID, or passing
to the limit in (11) as 11-0.. uo-to. zluo <-. Elementary calculations ShOU
luol as well as N vanish at rar':

r’ll - wins. “2)

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us note that the optimum choice of r‘ll (12) is independent of the turning
resistance :2.

The second important limiting case is the case of infinite turning resistance

:2. Proceeding by analogy with the foregoing. we find that N vanishes
when a I a“:

r‘ll - S/le.
In both cases considered

N/Nbs-ur/rv— n'. - '04)

It is easy to verify that on high frequencies the influence that the me-
chanical impedance of the load has on the quantity r‘I becomes negligible.
When kl-N', r'~l/k regardless of the values of :1, :2. In the case where
both 7.1 and 22 are large (the rod is clamped). the degree of vibration
damping is evaluated not by the quantity N. but rather by the value of the
coefficient of transfer K with respect to force. 1his coefficient is

K- Qo/Q - (krV - S)/(S' — VT) (lb)
and vanishes at the r defined by formula (13).

(13)

We have discussed vibration damping by matching the ratio of the generalized
forces at the input of the system. In some designs it may be convenient to
match the ratio between the generalized displacements at the input. In this
case

In - u. u} - («In I (15)

Let us give the formulas for enery flow in limiting cases:
as n *- N/Nbu- «rm-1r. 'r'II- mm.

as :2 “t " N/N In. - [(r‘lr) — 1P. '7! - Wk“). (17)

'ihe preceding general examination shows that by varying the quantity r'll
we can achieve appreciable (in limiting cases total) vibration damping.
Now let us consider the use of this effect in some specific structures.

Hinimizing the vibrational energy that travles through a 'r joint between
plates. “any elements in building construction. shipbuilding and other
structural elements can be modeled by an infinite rod or an infinitely long
thin plate. Here we investigate the propagation of waves through structures
of the type considered above in the case vhere the load is an infinite plate.
The problem is considered plane. By using the equations of oscillations of
an infinite plate excited by a force and torque, we get the relations among

the complex amplitudes of the forces and displacements at the Joining point 0
in the form

0. - - 21a..A.u.. M. - 2 (1 + o D.k.u;. (i8)

llere aH is the wave number of longitudinal oscillations. kH is the wave
number of flexural vibrations of an infinite plate,

68

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

0: - Maw/An: k: " Pahau'lon:
o. .. and/mt — Va). A. - sum/(1 -. vi)

are the flexural and longitudinal stii‘i‘nesees respectively. Comparing (18)
with (8) we get

on. as —p.. on, -(1_ 05,, (i9)

3: - 20-Jul-99. 5. - 2D.h./Dk.
within the framework of applicability of the theory or thin plates the

quantity 6; is large. To be recite.
:- i l/ Evil-v9 h M
17 7 Eur u-w) 7|.— °

i. c. 1/8: has the order of the ratio of the thickness of the plate to the
wavelength.

where

'ihe flow of enery throudx .the Joining is equal to
N-+Dk‘olﬂllmi‘+ﬂnlwh|)

Expressing the quantities Iuol. Iué/kl in terms of IQ] with the use of rela-
tionu (ll). (19). (l). we get the following expression for Nil-Mr):

~(r)--.ﬂﬁ,.L—’d‘ﬂ'-1#I‘Ltb-. (20)

”'£[(%+S)'f9]+%+r‘

m--t[({:+s)(%+v)+sv]-.—”{.-sra
»--s[<%+v)'+v'1+%+vz . _
w-+(e+a-+15.—r++(e-%-+.rs

A-2(ST-UV). s-eu'u-sv). n-am-uz). s-2(sz-'rv) are known combinations
of A. ll. Krylov's mnctions.

Here

it is easy to see that p; >0, pl <0. Consequently the quantity Mr) has a
unique minimum that is reached when r-r': r'llu-pl/klpz.

As was noted above, the quantity 8} is large compared with unity (31~(kh)").
For the purpose or a qualitative analysis we can take 81+. in (20). 'ihis
limiting case has been considered above. The result is expressed by formulas
(l2) and (110). and does not depend on 82. The frequency dependence or the
ratio of Mr) to "(0) is shown in Fig. 1. This ratio remains close to zero
over a wide range of frequencies.

Let us now consider the case where the displacement at the input of the
system is fixed and the angle of turn (formula (15)) is matched. By using

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

the relations between the generalized displacements on the left and right
ends of the plate

w- (S- Invm+<r+ (I mama/Ia.

uJ/h - (v - than. 4- (8+ (1 + 1mm».
we get
”I" I... - In M" :5 2n or)" + «1/9.. (2'1)

where . ’

n-m-(THM + ﬁlm-3% +.V':

l pl
ﬂ - ' ‘ 8V
«1. Emma +nw-{gru + T: + w:
e. - ,5;(S+n.n'+ﬁr+-§- +w.
I

'ihe value of (21) reaches a minimum when r I-qzlkql. A general idea of the

'nature of (21) can be obtained as above by exenining the case 8; we. After
passing to the limit we get formulas (17).

Il’I’.’

Our study shows that the vibrational energy
that passes through T-Joined plates depends
strongly on the method of excitation. By
properly choosing the coefficient of pro-
portionality between the input force and
torque, we can make this energy close to
zero on any given frequency and in a fairly
wide neighborhood of this frequency.

Fig. l

    

. . molesting the effectiveness of a vibration
’ " ’ ’ a damping structure. Let us consider a vibration

. damping rod structure that uses the described
effects. Let a vertical perturbing force fo exp iut act on a body of mass m

that rests on n identical cantilever plates of length 1 so that the force and
torque that act on the end of each plate are related by expression (1). The
degree of vibration damping is evaluated by the coefficient of transfer of
the force '1‘! [Po/fol. where F0 is the complex amplitude of the force that
acts on the base. It is natural to evaluate the effectiveness of vibration
damping by comparing this coefficient to the coefficient of transfer of a
system of the same static structure in which the cantilever plates are
replaced by springs. An implied by the expression for the coefficient of
transfer of a unit plate (15). in the absence of damping we can make the
coefficient of transfer '1‘ vanish on any predetermined frequency by matching
the parameters of the plate and the value of coefficient r. The required
static etifmesn in ensured independently by appropriate choice of the number
of plates and (or) their width. Thus the given system removes the usual
contradiction between the requirement of sufficient static stiffness of the
shock absorber and the requirement of vibration damping. Simple calculations

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

show that the mass In“ of the plates in related to the man In of the obJect
by the formula

Imlm - u («loaf-

of the Young modulus E, we aunt introduce the
complex modulus Beau-in). 'Ihe damping.
factor n will be taken as independent of

frequency. The calculations of the coefficient
of transfer were done on a computer over a
wide frequency range for different parameters.
The table summarizes the lower limits of
vibration damping over the frequency range
0.9&u.susl.02u., u. = 2100 (in decibels with

means of

vicinity of frequency to“. At different r/l the frequency responses may
differ considerably. The value of r/Z should be selected on the basis of
the nature of the perturbation. the desirable features

 

3:3.

27.
13.
15.

7
I
5

.
.
94!ng
. .

woo

0
cu

:J‘OOJJ‘
Lu...
azun

in!»

Zeb—c
.3.
. . .
one.
. .

0

.-
MUN
o .

a.
a

o
CHI

‘63:-

3.‘ .
“00“"
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

weight of vibration damping systems that operate in the wave region. they
should be used in frame structures. It is feasible to improve the effec-
tiveness of vibration damping systems of the given type by using inhomogeneous
rods with lumped masses and composite systems. For instance if we replace

a homogeneous plate by a plate with periodically placed weights, we can
reduce thshtransverse dimension of a vibration damping system by a factor

of (l'tf) , where f is the ratio of the mass of the weights to the mass of
the plate. A comparison with other known designs of vibration damping
supports shows that a system of the given type may be preferable, especially
on frequencies close to the natural frequency of the system.

REFERENCES

1. Yu. I. Bobrovnitskiy. V. V. Yablonskiy, "0n the Eigenvalues and Vectors
of the Resistance Matrices of a Passive Multiterminal Network" in:
"Vibroahusticheskaya aktivnost' mekhanismov s zubchatymi peredachami"
[Vibroacoustic Activity of Mechanisms with Gear Trains]. Moscow, Nauka.
1971.

2. J. C. Snowdon. "Response of Internally Damped Cantilever Beams to
Sinusoidal Vibration." JASA. 1965. v. 38. No 2.

3. B. N. Pshenichnyy. Yu. M. Danilin, "Chislennyye metody v ekstremal'nykh
zadachakh" [Numerical Methods in Extremal Problems]. Moscow. Nauka, 1975.

ON TBS OPERATION OF RUBBER-METAL SNOCK ABSORBERS

R. I. Veytsman, II. M. Ostapishin, s. V. Tarkhanov

An investigation of rubber-metal shock absorbers in the low-frequency band
of 10"3-10'2 Hz is of interest since the question frequently arises in
computational practice concerning the extent to which low-frequency dynamic
characteristics can be considered as static.

 

An invostigation was made of the characteristics of shock absorbers of three
types (Fig. 1): angle (a), ring (b) and a cube to which end blocks are
vulcanized (c). In the frequency region up to 1 Hz the strain curves were
recorded on a pulsator with harmonic change in the load relative to the pre-
determined average valuc. The static stiffness was taken as the ratio of
the pcak-to-peak amplitude of the load to that of the deformation on the
first loading cycle on a frequency of 10-3-10'2 Hz, while the dynamic stiffu
neon was taken as this ratio after stabilization of the hysteresis loop.

The loss factor was determined from the ratio of the area of the hysteresis

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
loop to the amplitude of the potential cncrm of deformation of the shock
ulmu n rlmr .

Stabilisation of the hysteresis loop occurred after 15-20 loading cycles.
'ihe shape of the loop is close to elliptic, enabling representation of the
stiffness of the shock absorber in complex form 00(1 +ia/s), where the

logarithmic decrement of vibrations a is equal to half the loss factor
R3!) 1 0

Above 1 iii. stiffness was determined from the natural frequency, while the

logarithmic decrement was determined from the width of the resonance peak of
the investigated systea.

0n frequencies of 1-30 ii: the system consisted of a shock absorber with a
weight 0 that was excited by a vibrator through a force sensor.

On higher frequencies the studies were done in a frame where the weight was
pressed between two shock absorbers and excited by vibrators. At the same
time the system was compressed by a predetermined static load.

The studies showed that in the frequency range from 10'3 to 10 ii: the logs-
rithmic decrement increases smoothly from 0.2 to 0.3-0Jo, and when the
excitation frequency is raised to 103 ii: it reaches a value of 0.8-1. The
logarithmic decrement increases by no more than 10-20! with an increase in
the static load from zero to double the rated value.

(”ﬂu when the static load is increased from
3:! 50 to 100$ of the nominal value, dynamic
F18 2 stiffness of the rubber-metal cubes and
' angle shock absorbers increases by
2 20-305. while in the ring shock ab-
' sorbers the stiffness remains almost
unchanged.
4.!

  

The change in dynamic stiffness with
frequency is due both to the way that
the elastic modulus of the rubber
depends on frequency. and to the change
in the ratio of the height of the rubber
mass to wavelength. The experimental values of this dependence are of par-
ticular interest in the low-frequency region, where wave effects are still
week. 'lhe relative values of dynamic stiffnesses Cf/Coml, where f is the
excitation frequency. increase with frequency (Fig. 2): (tr/co.“ I
(0.15-0.25) lg (100f) +1 for fleO. 'ihis change in stiffnesses corresponds

approximately to the change in the elastic mdulus of rubber with frequency
Ref. 2 .

  

.‘

’u/ ax / II tar/aw
. ﬁr:

For rubber-metal rings (b) and cubes (c) the dynamic stiffness on a frequency
of 0.01 Hz is appronmately equal to the static value, but for an angle shock

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nlmm'luer (a) ll. enccmin the "tatlr value by a factor or [.65. 'l'huu the
hyuterenlu iwolertleu or rubber-metal shock absorbers with harmonic excitation
can be taken into consideration by introducing a complex modulus of elasticity
beginning with frequencies of 10" -10‘2 Hz. In this connection the modulus
or stiffness and the logarithmic decrement must be determined from the
steady-state strain curves after 15-20 loading cycles. The ratio between
static and dynamic stiffnesses depends on the type of shock absorber.

REFERENCES

l. G. Kol'skiy, ”Volny napryazhaniya v tverdykh telakh" [Stress Waves in
Solids]. Moscow. Foreign Language Press, 1955.

2. 0. s. Rossin. "Izmereniye dinamicheskikh svoystv akusticheskikh materislow"

[Measuring the Dynamic Properties of Acoustic Materials], Moscow. Stroy-
izdst, 1972.

EVALUATING Th8 LOADING CAPACITY OF AN AIR-CUSHION SUPPORT

R. l. Veytnnsn

in recent years. air-cushion supports have come into use in a number of
branches of engineering. The air flowing under the support raises it above
the surface of the bed, enabling movement or heavy equipment installed on
supports without great effort. The use of these supports requires determi-
nation of such characteristics as loading capacity, static and dynamic
stability. In this article I will discuss the engineering evaluation of the

loading capacity. which is the foremost characteristic to be determined in
choosing a support.

 

FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY
‘ihe devices considered here [see for instance Ref. 1) contain an elastic
annular plate or an axisymetric shell in the lower part. Airflow takes
place radially in a gap with a height that depends on the lift of the
support as a whole and on the local deflection of the plate due to the dif-
ference in air pressures above the plate and in the gap beneath it. 'ihe
most difficult problem is to determine the total force F acting on the plate.
'iVo determine 1“ it is necessary to solve the interrelated problems of defor-
mation of the plate and change of the air pressure in the gap.

The law of change in air pressure lengthwise of the gap depends on the type
of flow“ It will be assmsed here that the air velocity is low and that flow
is laminar. Without complicating the problem with questions of calculating
three-dimensional flow and the theory of shells. let us consider the simplest
example. we will assume that the plate is initially flat, and its width 1

is so much smaller than the radius that the problem can be solved as a plane

problem. Flow is taken as plane-parallel. The edges of the plate are taken
as fixed.

'Ihe lower part of the figure shows the computational model: in the cavity
above 0X over the plate. the air is under pressure p0. ‘me sir flows through
orifices close to the edge of the plate x30 into gap OABX, and here it
expands from p-po at auto to p-O at x-Z. Since the size of the gap 6(x)
changes smoothly. we use the law of flow of a viscous fluid between parallel
walls:

dP/dx - —1'2 pole.

The deflection y of the plate is determined from the equation

EJd‘y/dr‘ - p. — p.
‘me notation used: Q--volumetric flowrate per unit of width of the flow:
u--coefficient of dynamic viscosity of air; EJ--stifihess of a unit of width
of the plate; I’m-force acting per unit of width of the plate; lip-concentrated

force acting on a unit of width of the plate in section xk where the plate
is in contact with the support.

Let us use dimensionless variables and parameters:

E - XII; ﬂ " (as — 1016.: A - Elbe/Pa”;
1' lWlQ/Po“: D - - 515312990: 1 " FIN-

me sought relation between parameters A and Y can be found after solving
the main nonlinear equation

M's/d? -= W-

Let us use the notation

.I
ma) - Sea/r. J. - mi).
0

Uoim; the conditions of the problem on the edge € I0, we write the integrals
of the main equation

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on” - ma) - (I - mm. ‘ a)
M" -C.+;J.c)—I.m-c.+(e-S-’5.- )ll. (2)
w - ce+ 1%.? + +91. (a) - %w. (a) +
+ 4414:) —-.',—I.(e). (3)
Mn - t) - +ce' +-,',-c.e= + ﬁrms) 4+rme) +
+44”. (9 4-541. (a) + 3‘71. (2). (6)

The conditions of fixing on the edge {-1 give equations for determining
the coefficients C; and 02:

oc.+ac,-—J.+ 31,—3J.+J.. ' (5)
12c. + 40, - - J. + 41, —6I. + u.— 1.. (5)

The method of successive approximations can be use? to solve the problem.
After assigning the initial approximation, e. g. n 0 I1, we determine Jo I1,
and find the dimensionless gradient A =l/Jo from (1). 'Ihe initial gap A is
an assigned quantity, and we can determine 8= -A/A. From (S) and (6) we find
tithcoefficients C; and c2. Now from (h) we determine the first approximation
n . We get the next approximation in a similar way. After n has been
found, the forcs y-l-JllJo is determined from (1) and (2). 'Ihis p cedure
can be successful only in cases where none of the approximations n( (E)
vanishes anywhere on 0 5 e 51.

Let us note the good convergence of the iteration process. For the force
parameter Y we can limit ourselves to the first approximation. 'IVo approxi-
mations are sufficient for flexures n. For hydraulic drag A, the necessary
number of approximations increases with a reduction in the parameter A of
the gap, where A approaches the limiting value Ak. It can also be noted
that the position of the throat of the channel (1. e. the value of i where
n has a minimum) is almost independent of A. 'ihe quantity Y is also little
dependent on A.

When A <Ak the plate touches the base at E 8 6k, and flow is blocked. The
defamation of the plate in this case follows the equation n“ =0 on section
05!. 5%, and nIV- -l/A on the section 5k st: 51. Assigning the value of 5k
and using boundary conditions r .1 and n' -O in cross sections (=0, (=1,
and also n- n' -0 in cross section Ceck, we determine n_ at C 55k» and n,
at E z Ck. 'me requirement of continuity of the moment n: =n'+' at 6 ”ix de-
termines the relation between A and 5k under conditions of contact. 'Do
determine the force parameter it is necessary to account for the reaction of
the support at the point of contact. which is proportional to the difference
n','- n: at g =- ck, accordingly 1 .. 1 — 5k - (n2 - n11)A.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The upper part of the figure shows 7 and 1/1 as functions of A. He de-
termine the loading capneity of the support by adding the force that acts

on the plate to the force" that are created by the pressure differential"
to other pnrtn or the device.

REPERENCEZ

l. M. D. Genkin, G. V. Tarkhanov, "Promising Arrangements for Shock-Mounting
Marine Equipment" in: "iietody vibroizolyatsii mashin i prisoyedinennykh
konstruktsiy" [Methods of Vibration Damping of Machines and Attached
structural Members]. Moscow, Hanks. 1975.

psostms or 'Acous'rIc DIAGNOSIS
Yu. 1. Bobrovnitskiy. M. D. cenkin, M. P. Dimentberg

One of the new areas of science that has been formulated in the last decade
is acoustic diagnosis. 1. e. diagnosis of the state of an investigated
obJect from its noise or vibrations. The development of acoustic diagnosis
has been fostered to a great extent by the development of methods of analyzing
statistical signals (by using computers , and also by the development of such
fields of science as identification of dynamic systems and pattern recog-
nition. Some of the results found in these fields have been used directly
in acoustic diagnosis. However. the particulars of the obJects and goals of
the study here require the development of new approaches and methods. It is
no accident that the most significant advances in acoustic diagnosis have
involved the development of specific research techniques.

'ihe class of problems of acoustic dynamics is constantly expanding. In
addition to "traditional" problems associated with checking the state of
engineering facilities, these problems include many questions of investigation
of the oscillatory properties of systems of various natures, including bio-
logical systems. With respect to their goals. all these problems can be
divided into five interrelated types, partly considered in Ref. 1, 2. In
this paper we give their characteristics and briefly review the principal
methods of solution and results that have been found.

Estimates of the structunal parameters of an engineering object. This is
the most important and general problem from the standpoint of applications.
It is also most typical for machines and mechanisms. Its purpose is the
measurement (evaluation) of structural parameters (or in other words --
parameters of state. internal parameters) of the investigated obJect with
respect to the characteristics of its acoustic signal. Sometime the problem
also includes classification of the object with the measured parameters in
some state or another. The signal characteristics are termed informative
diagnostic features. Naturally the structural parameters to be measured
must influence sound formation within the obJect as otherwise their changes
could have no effect on the acoustic signal or diagnostic features.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'lhe use of noise and vibration signals to diagnose the state of machines and
mechanism on a nelsnti fie huuln wan apparently first described in Ref. 3.
where a relation wan entahllnhed between errors in gear manufacture and
anncmbiy on the one hand. and the spectra of acoustic signals on the other.

it was shown that the mean square levels of vibrations or noises in certain
spectral regions are typical features that can be used with a certain degree
of accuracy to evaluate the quality of gear manufacture and assembly. 'mene
results were then further developed and used in many fields of engineering,

in particular in the motor vehicle industry to develop systems of acoustic
diagnosis of transmissions and other parts of motor vehicles. Ref. 1; contains
a general formulation of the problem of evaluating the structural parameters
of machines and mechanisms and presents simple schemes for acoustic diagnosis
of machine components. Subsequently a large number of papers were published
dealing with the investigation of possibilities and the development of
facilities for acoustic diagnosis of engineering objects of a variety of types.
A survey of the moat important of these works is given below in a discussion
of the maJor approaches and techniques in solution of the given problem.

'Ihe general assumptions for the formulation of diagnosis in evaluating the
structural parameters of an obJect are outlined in Ref. b, 5. Mathematically
the problem reduces to solution of the system of equations

PI - [1(01. 4.. . . .. (1.). i- 1.2. . . ..m. (1)

that establish the relation between the independent diagnostic feasures P1
and the independent internal parameters of the obJect aJ via functions f1.
Here the features P1 are known. and it is required to determine the quantities

BJ.

Obviously the solution is determined by the form of the functions f1 that
can be found from a theoretical examination of the mechanism of sound for-
mation within the object. or in an experimental way. In the latter case

it is convenient to represent them as polynomials of finite degree in a
that approximate real relations (1). For instance. limiting ourselves o a
linear relation and considering only the two parameters a; . a2. we can write

PI - is + in“: + Ina; + RI. I (2)

where 1'10. f“, f” are constant coefficients, R1 = f1 3113 + ... is the part of Pi
due to the influence of the parameters a3, a......, an. 1he quantity R: can be
considered constant only in those cases where features [’1 are independent of
unconsidered parameters a3. a....... an or when these parameters remain un-
changed throughout the entire course of diagnosis. Otherwise the value of R1
will vary from experiment to experiment. which is equivalent to an increase

in the errors of measurements of P1. and accordingly the calculations of
parameters a, and a2. Errors of diagnosis are described more completely in
Ref. 6.

Let us examine in more detail two points that are of practical importance:
a) how many features are needed to define parameters a1,..., ak when relations
(1) or (2) are known; b) how many different states of the object with known

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPE‘ICIAL USB ONLY

values of ‘51, a2..... ak must be assigned so that they can be used to de-
termine the specific form of polynomial relations (2). '

‘me first question has no single answer. In the case where the features P1
are monotonically dependent on the parameters a1, a2...., ak. It features are
sufficient. In the presence of extrema, the number of features increases.
For instance in the case of two parameters when there is one extremum we can
limit ourselves to a quadratic dependence of P1 on a1 and a2; then the
maximm number of features is five. This is equivalent to saying that
relations (2) in the given instance are linear equations in five linearly
independent unknowns a1, a2. a}, 3132 and a3.

The answer to the second question is simpler. Experimental determination of
q unknown coefficients in expansions of type (2) requires assignment of q
different states of the ob.) ect with unknown values of internal parameters.
For quadratic polynomials of the parameters this number is q-l +2k+cﬁ.
when cubic terms are considered. the number increases to q-l +3k+k(k-1)+
c§+c§ and so on. In the ideal case. one feature depends on only one param-
eter. In this case the least number of features and preliminary tests are
needed for determining the specific form of the relations.

The selection of the informative features is the most difficult part of the
given problem of acoustic diagnosis. In the case of unsuccessful choice of
the features, their changes from an increase or reduction in the parameters
aJ may be insufficiently large, as a result of which the incidental changes
in conditions of measurements may be perceived as a change in the internal
state of the object. In this case the features are said to have low infor-
mativeness or low sensitivity with respect to the given structural parameters
(3P1/3a ). 'me main requirement for a diagnostic feature is maximum sensi-
tivity 0 one of the structural parameters and minimum sensitivity to all
the others [Ref. 7).

In determining the most informative diagnostic features it is necessary to
know the structure of the acoustic signal. and to do this a detailed in-
vestigation must be made of sound formation inside the object of diagnosis.
Knowing the structure of the signal and the way that its different components
depend on the internal parameters of the obJect we are able to find the best
features and construct a model of the signal that is equivalent to the actual
signal with respect to the given features, or to design a circuit for forming
a model of the signal. 1. e. to construct a model of the obJect of diagnosis
as a sound generator. Thus a most important stage in acoustic diagnosis of
the state of an obJect is the construction of its acoustic model of diagnosis.
By such a model we mean a circuit that contains sources of random and (or)
deterministic signals. and also linear and nonlinear elements. a signal being
formed at the output of the circuit that is identical to the acoustic signal
of the object to be simulated with respect to the set of diagnostic features.
The characteristics of the sources and component elements of the model bear

a one-to-one relationship with the structural parameters to be measured in
the obJect. These parameters are measured (evaluated) by identthing the
obJect and model with respect to closeness of diagnostic features.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The acoustic models of diagnosis used at the present time can be arbitrarily
divided into two types (determlnlutlc and statistical) depending on the kind
of uiunain that are used.

The deterministic models have been developed more than others. Associated
with these models are the most signiﬁcant advances in the field of acoustic
diagnosis of actual obJects. 'ihe output signals are deterministic periodic
functions: periodic series of pulses caused by collisions between parts,
or harmonic functions associated with the rotation of parts of the machine
or mechanism. 'ihe informative diagnostic features here are amplitudes,
duration and times of appearance of pulses, and also frequency. amplitude
and phase of harmonic signals. As a rule. the relation between these features
and the internal parameters is determined on the basis of an analysis of the
physical processes of sound formation without the aid of cumbersome ex-
periments. Models with deterministic signals have been substantiated and
give good practical results for comparatively low-rpm machines with a small
number of internal sources of sound in which it is possible to distinguish
the pulses caused by separate collisions of components. Such models are
used in acoustic diagnosis of electrical machines (Ref. 8], minin machines
[Ref. 9]. internal combustion engines [Ref. 11]. bearings [Ref. 10 and many
other objects [e. g. Ref. 11-13]. Let us mention that for deterministic
models there are a number of hardware realizations of diagnostic systems.

it is much more complicated to set up acoustic diagnosis in the case of
high-rpm complex machines and mechanisms with a large number of internal
sources. In these devices the vibrations and noises have a continuous
spectrum where there are no pronounced discrete components and the indi-
vidual pulses follow each other so closely that they merge and become in-
distinguishable. ‘ihe acoustic signals in this case are random processes.
and statistical models of diagnosis are needed that have output signals that
are also random. For instance the signals of modern speed-reducers are
modern. the main sources of vibrations and noises in these mechanisms are
processes of tooth engagement and the errors of gear manufacture, installation
of gear trains. imbalance of shafts and the like that influence these pro-
cesses. The problem of sound formation here is very complicated and is con-
sidered in many articles (e. g. Ref. lit-18) in connection with problems of
acoustic diagnosis. 0n the basis of existing concepts a diagnostic model is
presented in Ref. 19 for the simplest spur gear train with consideration of
the following factors: profile errors of engagement, variable stiffness of
engagement, errors of the main pitch and deformation of teeth that lead to
collisions as the teeth engage. In this model the variable stiffness of
engagement is represented by a step function of time with random amplitudes
and random duration of the intervals of one-couple and two-couple meshing,
the amount of defamation of a pair of teeth is modeled by the sum of two
harmonic signals with random amplitudes and phases, and impact excitation is
characterized by a series of momentary shocks with random amplitude synchro-
nized with random moments of tooth engagement. 'ihe diagnostic model of a
pair of teeth is thus represented as a linear system with random parametric,

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I. :‘v-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

kinematic'and pulse excitation. In a number of cases the characteristics of
these random quantities can be selected in such a way that the output signals
of the model become equivalent to the signals of an actual gear couple with
respect to a whole series of diagnostic features [Ref. 20]. It should be
noted that the informative features here are rather complex signal character-
istics (bispectra, bivariate probability distribution functions, lines of
regression, [kepstry] and so forth) that can be determined only by using
high—speed digital computers. Analysis of some of them shows that in speed-
reducing mechanisms there is a strong nonlinear relation among the different
components of the acoustic signal [Ref. 21]. This shows that there are
nonlinear elements in real objects and that it is necessary to further ‘
improve the model of diagnosis of gear meshing.

Another complicated object of diagnosis that is considered in Ref. 22 is an
aircraft engine. 0n the basis of analysis of the fine structure of acoustic
signals by probabilistic methods the authors have constructed a model of
diagnosis that contains sources of random noise and sinusoidal signals as
well as linear and nonlinear elements. The model is the equivalent of an
engine with respect to a number of features that characterize bivariate
probability distribution laws and nonlinear correlations of different signal
components. This statistical model can also be classified as phenomeno-
logical since it does not reflect the physics of processes of sound formation
inside the object.

In conclusion. let us mention one more phenomenological model [Ref. 23].
in this model the acoustic signal is represented as an expansion with
respect to the powers of structural parameters with random coefficients.
For instace for one parameter a the signal model takes the form

y(0-x.(!) HM!) +a'jx.(!) +.... ' (3)

where xo. x1, x2 are steady-state random intercorrelated functions with
characteristics selected from the condition of closeness of signal (3) to
the actual signal with respect to certain features. If the features selected
are the mean square level and components of the Laguerre spectrum of the
signal, the model is amenable to simple hardware realization. Such a device
was made and used to diagnose one of the parameters of a speed reducer

(Ref. 210]. Since "instructing" the device requires experiments with known
states of the object, which may be large in number as demonstrated above.
this model (and device) can be recommnded for diagnosis and continuous
acoustic monitoring of large machines and mechanisms with complicated
acoustic signals.

Evaluation of stability reserve, wear, reliability. 'Ibe next class of
problems in acoustic diagnosis consists in evaluating the stability reserve
of a machine or structure based on analysis of acoustic signals. Let us
assume that in the space of parameters of the system a;, a2...., an there
exists some boundary of the region of admissible working modes such that the
condition of stable operation is determined by an inequality of the form
l-‘(a|,.... an) >0. It is required to evaluate the quantity P, which it is

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

natural to call the stability reserve, on the basis of analysis of oscillatory
processes that arise in the system in the normal mode of operation; in this
case the values of the parameters ah... . an are unknown; however. there is

u dymunlv model of the :Iyntem that dcflncu the form or the functional
Ilupmulmuw of P on “I lliul‘. :‘51. ()l' cum-m: the choice of the function P in
always ambiguous (e. g. the quantity 1-" can also be considered the stability
reserve) however. this circumstance is insignificant from the standpoint of
most of the applications where this characteristic can be used.

Quantitative indices of the stability reserve are used first of all for
comparative evaluation of the stability reserve of different systems that
are obtained when certain design modifications are made. In the second
place, on the basis of experience in the practical utilization of systems
of the given class quantitative norms can be set up for the admissible
values of the stability index. In the third place the stability reserve as
a rule characterizes the degree of sensitivity of the system to external
factors. or interest in this respect for instance is Ref. 26 where a clear
correlation is experimentally established between the stability reserve
(with respect to rpm) of a circular saw and the quality of the saw cut.

Let us also note that if it is possible to introduce special signals into
the system during testing we can even do away with assigning the form of the
function i-‘(a1..... an) and express the stability reserve directly in
terms of the parameters of the useful signal. For instance in Ref. 27 it
was suggested that the system be set into self-oscillation with limited
amplitude during testing by using controllable positive feedback; in this
case the value.of feedback gain corresponding to the limit of self-excitation
of oscillations can be used as the stability reserve.

However. here we consider some examples of evaluation of the function F for
a system with unknown parameters a , i I1,..., n, under conditions of normal
operation in the presence of some natural" wide-band random perturbations.
The simplest example is a system model described by an ordinary differential
linear equation with constant coefficients. In this case it can be assumed
that Faun, where an is the minimum among all values of the real parts ck
of the roots Ag of the characteristic equation of the system. The quantity
all can be evaluated by correlation or spectral analysis of the process x(t)
at the output of the system. If the natural frequency 9k of the system

(lk uak #ink) are sufficiently far apart, the best estimate will apparently
be given by the following procedure: x(t) is passed through bandpass filters
tuned to frequencies (11‘. and the envelopes at the output of each filter are
analyzed. For instance one can evaluate aI from the normalized correlation
function r(t) of the envelope: without consideration of the influence of
the filter r(t) -exp(-cmt) and at 1 that are not excessively small. the
filter has little influence. We can also evaluate a from the average period
or the average number of extrema of the envelope (see the corresponding
relations in Ref. 28. 29); such methods afford simple hardware realization
and are convenient for fast operational analysis (without use of a digital
computer). when methods of this kind are used it is important to select the
bandwidth A of the filters in the best way: the smaller the A the better will

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol'FICIAL USE ONLY

be the "cutoff" of oscillations with respect to "extraneous" degrees of
freedom with frequencies 91‘1“)"; however in the case of A that are too small
(comparable in order of magnitude with an) the useful signal is strongly
distorted and the estimates of on are imprecise.

As another example (Ref. 25, 30] let us consider the model of a system
described 'by the equation

. i + 243 + 9's (1 + 1. sin 2v!) — C(O. . (4)
where a, A. Iv-nl are smell constant quantities.

The condition of parametric stability of system (It) can be written as
p .. my: [(v' — 9')! + 4v’u’l'h < 1.

0n the other hand. as shown in Ref. 25. 30. the probability density function
u“) of the phase of process x(t) can be represented as

rum-Cl“ —ueos(2o—¢)L

where C, 0 are constants, so that the parameter u can be evaluated as a
"coefficient of nonuniformity" of the phase

P ‘ (Wm-x "' mum/(Wins + Wills)-
The quantity 1"]. -u2 can be taken as an index of stability reserve.

The second proble: in acoustic diagnosis of this class is determination of
the degree of wear of machine components in normal operation. Hear is
accompanied by changes in a number of structural parameters of a component.
The main difficulty of the problem is to determine the appropriate function
of the parameters F(a1,..., an) that would characterize wear. An example of
solution of such a problem is given in Ref. 31, where it is proposed that
the so-called generalized effective error of engagement (deviation of the
transfer ratio from the nominal value) be taken as the characteristic of
gear quality. This error is related in a simple way to the characteristics
of the autocorrelation function of the acoustic signal.

An analogous formulation is possible for the problem of evaluating the

degree of reliability (strength) of given components of engineering obJects.
As a rule, failure of a component is preceded by a continuous change in
structural parameters and accordingly in the characteristics of the acoustic
signal (for instance the intensity of ultrasonic vibrations with the formation
of cracks in a material). It is obvious that the approaches described above
can be applied to solution _of this problem as well.

Emblems of classification of states. The goal of the problem of acoustic
diagnosis of this class is to use vibration or noise signals to determine
what state an investigated obJect may be in out of several possible states,
or to which of several possible obJects an acoustic signal may belong.
Typical examples of such problems are found in quality control of finished
items (adJusted-unadJusted. suitable-unsuitable). classification of ship

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

noises in hydroacoustics or heart noises in medicine and so forth. Problems
of the quality control type are typical for machines and mechanisms. In
thin connection the “machine in adjustment" state can be broken up into
several "substates" that are characterized for instance by a definite

service life. In the limit with increasingly finer gradations we arrive at
the problems considered above.

The classification problems in such a formulation are essentially problems

of pattern recognition Inst. 32], or more precisely recognition of sound
patterns (the central problem in this area of science is automatic recognition
of speech sounds [Ref. 33]). The usual approach in solving them is as
follovs. The aggregate of features of an acoustic signal (P1, P2,..., Pn)
forms a so-called image (n-dimensional vector) in contrast to the pattern

to which the state of the machine or mechanism corresponds. Compact regions
correspond to patterns in the n-dimensional space of images. The problem

is to define these regions on the basis of some kind of similarity of images.
Frequently a standard image is put into correspondence with each pattern.

Then an investigated image is compared with all standard images and classified

with the pattern that has a standard closer than the others with respect to
a selected measure of similarity.

In acoustic classification of the states of machines and mechanisms the mean
square levels of vibrations on characteristic frequencies of the object are
most frequently used as features, e. g. on the tooth frequencies of speed
reducers (Ref. 9, 3h, 35], or the amplitudes of periodic components in the
function of autocorrelation of vibrations [Ref. h, 36]. The recognition of
states is accomplished by using the threshold values of levels (over the
threshold means "machine out of adjustment") that are set after examining a
sufficient number of machines in known states. More complicated character-
istics of the signals and more complicated functions can also be used as the
features and as the measure of similarity of images [Ref. 1, 32, 37].

Another approach that is used in solving problems of classifying states is
based on recognition with respect to conditional probabilities [Ref. 32, 38].
In this procedure, a matrix of conditional probabilities w(P1/Vk) is set up
during the instruction period, where P1 is some value of the i-th feature,
Vk is the k-th state of the investigated object. Then the elements of this
matrix are used to determine the most probable state of the object that
corresponds to predetermined values of the features. This approach involves
a large number of instruction experiments needed to find the elements of the
matrix of conditional probabilities.

Let us also take note of methods that involve conversion of acoustic images
to visual images [Ref. 33. 39]. This enables us to use algorithms developed

in the theory of visual pattern recognition or to utilize more fully the
capabilities of a human operator [Ref. ho].

Separation of sources of vibrations (noises). A very important problem in
acoustic diagnosis is the so-called problem of separating sources of

8h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vibrations; the Job is to detect the sources, and may include quantitative
evaluation of the contribution made by each source to the observed vibration
process. First let us consider this problem in the qualitative aspect

where it is required to distinguish the predominant mechanism of excitation
of vibrations.

In Ref. hl, he an examination was made of some problems of recognition of
types of quasilinear oscillatory systems with one degree of freedom on the
basis of statistical analysis of the processes in systems.

I The systems examined were of the form

3i+h(x.i)+9'xll+t(01=t(o. 4 (5)
se+n(x.x)+a'x(l+ioos2.n_un. (6)

Criteria of recognition are based on analysis of the probability density
functions w(y) -- the square of the amplitude y(t) of process x(t) -- and
9(9) -- the phase 9(t) of process x(t). Let us introduce the following
classification:

1. Self-oscillatory system -- system (5) having a stable periodic solution
when {(t) E0. ((t) 50-

II. System with external rrndom excitation -- a system of type (5) in which
(y)::P(y)z. where always x(t) 50 when €(t) 50, C(t) 50. Here <y>c is the
average value <y> of the square of the amplitude when C(t) 50, <y>€ is the
value of <y> when C(t) 50.

III. System with parametric random excitation -- a system of type (S) in
which <y);<<y)x. where always x(t) 50 when €(t) 50, c(t) 20.

IV. System with periodic and random external excitation.

V. System with periodic parametric and random external excitation (6) having
a stable periodic solution when ((t) 50.

The criteria of pairwise recognition of systems of types I-V are summarized
in the table. Here the amplitude criteria are denoted by Y, where Yo means
that the function w(y) decreases monotonically for all y >0, 1; means that
w(y) has a finite interval of increase. The phase criteria are denoted by 0,
where the subscript associated with the 0 indicates the number of maxima of
the function w(e) on interval [0, 2:). Each cell of the i-th line and the
J-th column (1, J =I,.... V) gives the criteria according to which the
hypothesis of membership in class i is valid as opposed to membership in class
J. For instance, according to cell II, IV, the satisfaction of conditions
00. Yo indicates that the system belongs to class II rather than to class IV.
Satisfaction of conditions Y1, 0] shows in accordance with cell IV, II, that
the system belongs to clasu IV rather than to class II. The biased criterion
Y? is valid with a condition: it indicates membership to class IV only in

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the case or a sufficiently high relative level or the periodic component of
the oscillations [Rein 1:3]. 'Ihe criterion Y1 has the same bias for systems

V as well (see Ref. he. where the limit of mnotonie behavior of the Function
why) is round).

Let us discuss special variants of the criteria Y as applied to systems with
cubic nonlinesrity

I(b)IQ " 2‘19 +915.- “I > 0. “I > 0.

u
where ’00- Sh(bsln0.i!bc030)m0dn. 'Ihc criterion Y3) is of this type: for
I

the function w(y) found in an experiment two relations are constructed
N‘Iv (Iu') -V‘Iv(lo.n-)l slat! (y—Uan') and NW (IV) -'V\' (lav)! “EMU-'9“) and the
system is taken as belonging to class IV (or V) if relation 01v (or w)
is closer to linear. Here

¢w (v) ... III Iy"v(ll)l. 1M5!) In [Mu/)1.

IW " Wu" 9:”), 3‘8" (9 -' 90. w)-

:v - (ll-00.v)'5'ln(!/-ih.v)-
and y...“ y“ are points of maxima of the functions va and 9V respectively.
As far as recognition of systems II and III is concerned, two simple rough
criteria are possible: we classify a system as III if y...<‘<y> (where ya
is the square of the most probable value of the amplitude) and if the curve

of ln w(y) has positive curvature everywhere. The third criterion is that
the experimental curve be approximated by the theoretical relation [Ref. Isl]

My) - Crust + 50"".

where C, c, B, K are constants. Rhea a<l the system belongs to class III,
and when a >l -- to class II (the value 0 =1 corresponds to the limit of
stochastic stability or the linear system obtained from (5) when h(x.:'t) Back.

Angler-as
rm" ———————'———_____
I l I I I I I I [v I \‘

1 .
I — Y. r. I o. e.
ll Y. - r" .V.. o. - r. 0.
III Y. Y" — n. o. r.. :9.
IV o. 31’. o. ’1'. o. — r-‘t 0.
v o. r9. «9, r9. 0. W'- 0: —
KEY: l--Hypothesis
2--Alternative
86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although these criteria have been derived theoretically only for systems
with one degree of freedom, they can be taken as the basis for analyzing snore
complicated systems, checking out the possibilities for extrapolation of this
kind in numerical experiments. For instance in Ref. No the feasibility of
determining critical velocity from the realizations of random vibrations was
demonstrated for the simplest model of flutter (systems with two degrees of
freedom). The criteria given in the table can be used in particular for

determining the predominant mechanism of transverse vibrations of rods in a
longitudinal fluid flow.

'The following problem [Ref. hs] can also be classified among qualitative
problems of the "separation of sources." Assume that oscillations are ob-
served in a multiple-mass system that are caused by a wide-band random load
applied to one of the masses; it is required to determine this mass. It was
shown in Ref. 1&5 that when the generalized coordinates to be measured are
selected so that the matrix of generalized masses is diagonal, a frequency
a, will be found for any J #1: such that the function “x - OJ («U/ﬁddle) will
be a monotonically decreasing function for all u no... Here ((1a) are the
spectral densities of processes that correspond to the subscripts. This
property can be used as a criterion for determining the number k (which has
been confirmed by analog computer experiments). However, unfortunately this
criterion is exceptionally sensitive to the hypothesis that there is only one
source of excitation. The fact is that u, may be greater than the natural '
frequencies of the system. 'merefore the representation of the system may

be distorted by the presence of an additional source that is weak (compared
to those being detected) but high in frequency. In this respect, it is
desirable to get a more "stable" solution for the formulated problem.

Quantitative problems of separation (localization) of sources of vibrations
or noise consist in determining the contributions of several simultaneously
operating sources (for instance machines and mechanisms) to structural fields
of vibrations or the atmospheric noise in a room (engine room, machine shop).
Frequemly in solving this problem a representation of the room and sources
as an (n +l)-terminal network is used. Its n inputs on which steamy-state
random signals x1(t) of the sources are given are connected through linear
links that have pulse transfer functions h1(t) to an adder at whose output
(the n+l)-th terminal) a signal is formed at the observation point:

a I
2w a 2, S n,(t—o)x.(0)de+tw. 0’

lv-l ..

where {(t) is noise uncorrelated with x1(t) that is caused by extraneous
sources.

'Ihe problem was first solved for the case of statistically independent sources
in a medium without dispersion for which the pulse transfer functions have
the form h1(t)=h16(t-T1), where the h}, are the transfer coefficients,

6(...) is the Dirac mnction, T1 are delay times [Ref. 106]. the contributions
H1 of the sources to the energy of the output signal z1 (the line denores
time-averaging wherever it occurs) are calculated in terms of the maximum

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

values of the mnctions of mutual correlation of the signals x1(t) and 2(t):
W.-ntF:-|z‘x.(n)|vx7|.

For arbitrary functions h1(t) and independent x1(t) the problem is solved
analogously with replacement of the correlation functions and the mean
square levels by the corresponding spectral densities [Ref. 1:7]:

W1(0)- l H: (w) I "'3: (u) - l Sn (0!) l '0'}: (u).

where w is angular frequency. H1(u) is the spectrum of the function hﬂu).
F110») is the energy spectrun of signal x1(t). Sum) is the mutual spectral
density of signals x1(t) and 2(t). For the case of correlated sources,

the solution of the problem consists [Ref. 1&8] in determining the quantities

I
Hﬂu) from the system of equations 513(0)) - ‘2‘ H419) Fl. (0). where i =1, 2, . . ., n.

Pub») in the mutual spectral density of signals xo(t) and xk(t). and in the
next calculation of contributions um) I lHk(u)l2Fkk(u). The problem was
considered in a similar formulation in Ref. 1:9, 50 as well.

Use of the solutions noted above for the problem of separation of sources is
Justified in cases where it is possible to measure the signals x1(t) directly
in the sources. Most frequently in practice there is no such possibility,
and it is necessary to use the readings of sensors located in the space
between the sources and the point of observation as the signals y1(t) that
characterize the sources. In the case of machines and mechanisms such
signals are the vibrations on their frames. 'me computational scheme here
is represented as an (n+l)-terminal network within which there are n
independent sources with signals x1(t) that are not accessible for measure-
ment. In passing through the linear links. these signals form input signals
that are accessible for observation,

I! I

ﬁlm-.2ShuU-ONMOMO. 5:1.2.....n.'. (8)

-l --

and output signal (7). Despite the independence of signals x1(t). the ob-
served input signals (8) are statistically related due to the presence of
cross connections that are characterized by the transfer functions h kHz.
In the absence of these connections (h k(t) 50 when 1 ﬁt) each signal 3'1 t)
is linearly dependent on only one x1(t§, and then the given system reduces
to the preceding computational scheme with independent sources [Beth 1&7].

The approximate solution of the problem for the case of weak cross connections
was found in Ref. 51. Corrections are given there for the solution of

Ref. '6. The case of arbitrary connections is examined in Ref. 52. This
work shows that knowing the autocorrelation and mutual correlation functions
of signals (7) and (8) or their corresponding spectral characteristics
enables us to find the contributions that the sources make to signal (7)
only in special cases, e. g. for known mnctions huh) [Ref. 53] in a mediun
without dispersion and with infinite velocity of propagation of perturbations
[Rcr. 5"]. when the sources can operate autonomously if only in unnatural
conditions and so forth. However. in the general case these data are

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'I-V'” ton orncw. uss ONLY
insufficient for determining the transfer functions, the characteristics
of the sources, and consequently the desired contributions since the re_-_
sultant nystsm contains an2 +n+l unknowns and only (n +1)2 equations. ,
lntrmluelny. nurse-characterizing nlgnalo auxiliary to (8) such as yn+1(t).
ynwh.) :qu no nu don" not change mtteru since the mld!tlonal npectrnl and
correlation characteristics are linearly dependent on the original charac-
teristics [Ref. 55, 56]. 'Ihus to solve the problem of separation of sources
in the quantitative formulation, in addition to all possible spectral and
correlation characteristics of the sessured signals (7) and (8) we need
supplementary data on the investigated oscillatory system that are obtained
without utilizing these simals. As far as we know, this problem has not
been solved as yet in sufficiently general fom.

Determining the dynamic characteristics of mhantcal systems. Finally, an
important class of problems in acoustic diagnosis consists in quantitative
identification of given elements of a system, i. e. in determining the
dynamic characteristics of these elements on the basis of analyzing input
and output signals. For systems with lumped parameters this is a classical
problem; it reduces to solution of a Hiener-I-lopf integral equation relative
to the unknown pulse transfer function of the system. This problem has been
fairly well examined in the literature (e. 3. Ref. 51); here we will discuss
only certain aspects of quantitative identification that are specific to
mechanical systems. In mechanical systems it frequently happens that the
input excitation is inaccessible to measurement, although it can be taken as
wide-band. A typical example of such a situation is vibrations of an element
of an elastic structural member stimulated by turbulent pulsations of liquid
or gas pressure. In the general case the problem consists in approximating
the spectral density of the vibration process by an assigned function.

It should be noted only that in such an identification scheme that does

not utilize measurement of the input signal, severe requirements are made
on the accuracy of measurements and on the duration of the analyzed
realization.

when high-frequency random vibrations propagate in extensive elements of
machines and structural members it is often feasible and advisable to analyze
the oscillations as traveling waves. Such problems have been studied most
completely for one-dimensional systems [Ref. 59]. Here it is possible to
evaluate the rate of propagation of waves (with respect to the quantity rm
corresponding to the absolute maximum rIll of the coefficient of mutual
correlation rh) of vibrations in two points), the coefficient of attenuation
(with respect to rm), and also the coefficients of transmission and reflection
of waves from identical barriers. In the case of media without dispersion
such an analysis is done directly for the measured processes. For media
with dispersion the analysis is done separately in narrow frequency bands

by preliminary passage of the processes through band filters. In this case
the group velocity of wave propagation is found from a series of values of
In, while the coefficients of attenuation, reflection and transmission must
be evaluated with consideration of the reduction in the values of rm due to
"racing" of the wave packet within the limits of each band [Ref. II9]. As one

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the numerous applications we will mention evaluation or the elastic

characteristics of pipelines with flowing liquid for purposes of diagnosing
cardiovascular disorders [Ref. 58].

l.

2.

39

10.

11.

REFERENCES

M. D. Genhin et al., "Problens of Acoustic Diagnosis" in: "Metodv
vibroizolyatsii mhin i prisoyedinennykh konstruktsiy" [Methods of

Vibration Damping or Machines and Attached Structural Members], Moscow,
Nauka, 1975.

M. F. Dimentberg, "Statistische Aurgaben der Diagnostik mechanischer
Swingungssystene," MASCHINENBAUI'BCHNIK. 1975. v. 215. No 5.

M. D. Genkin. "Principles of Methods 0! Evaluating the Quality of Gear
Manufacture with Respect to Noise" in: "Puti povysheniya tochnosti
obrabotki zubchatykh koles" [Hays to Improve the Quality of Gear
Machining], Moscow, Mashgis, 1962.

B. V. Pavlov, "Akusticheskaya diagnostika mekhaniunov" [Acoustic Diag-
nosis of Mechanisms], Moscow, Mashinostroyeniye, 1911.

M. D. Genkin, "Some Problems of Machine Acoustics" in: "Mekhanika i
akustiha nashin" [Mechanics and Acoustics of Machines]. Moscow, Rauka,
1971.

V. V. Bardachenko. "Research and Development of Analytical Methods

of Technical Diagnosis of Complex Objects with Respect to Vibroacoustic
Processes," author's abstract of candidate's dissertation, Riga, Riga
Polytechnics]. Institute.

I. A. Birger, "0n the Diagnostic Value of Giaracteristics" in: "Prouhnost'
i dinamiha aviatsionnykh dvigateley" [Strength and Dynamics of Aircraft
Engines], No h, Moscow, Mashinostroyeniye, 1966.

Ya. S. Brownan, K. S. Denirchan, S. A. Shmuter, "Diagnostika istochnikov
vibratsiy ssinkhronnogo dvigatelya" [Diagnosis of Sources of Vibrations
in an Induction Motor], ENTROTEIGXNIKA, 1973. No l.

Ye. Ye. Sidorov, "Search for Fundamental Parameters in Acoustic Diagnosis
of the Technical State of All-Terrain Combines in the Operational Pro-
cess," author's abstract of candidate's dissertation. Moscow Mining
Institute, 1972.

B. T. Sheftel', V. A. Gushchin, G. K. Linskiy. A. A. Shanitsyn. F. F.
‘(udin, "Ball Bearing Diagnosis by a Vibration Method." in this collection.

"Novyye metody issledovaniya shumov i vibratsiy i kiberneticheskaya diag-
nostika mashin i mekhanizmv" [New Methods of Studying Noises and

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00060R000100020026-1
12.

13.

1h.

16.

17.

18.

19.

21.

22.

Vibrations. and Cybernetic Diagnosis of Machines and Mechanisms]. Kaunas.
Kaunas Polytechnical Institute. 1970.

"Kibernetichenkaya dingnostika mekhanicheakikh eistem po vibroakuati-
cheskim protucsanm" [Cybernetic Diagnosis of Mechanical Systems with

Respect to Vibroacouutic Processes]. Kaunas. Kaunas Polytechnical
Institute, 1972.

"Kibcrnetichenkiye methody issledovaniya diagnostiki i konpensataii
vibroakusticheskikh polcy" [Cybernetic Methods of Studying the Diagnosis

and Compensation of Vibroacoustic Fields]. Kaunas. Kaunas Pblytechnicnl
Institute. 1975.

"Vibroakuaticheskaya aktivnost' mekhanizmov s zubchatymi peredachani“
[Vibroacoustic Activity of Mechanisms with Gear Trains]. Moscow. hauka.
1971.

"Dinamiku i akustikn mashin" [Dynamics and Acoustics of Machines].
Moscow. Nauka. 1971.

"Akuutichenkaya dinamika mashin i konstruktsiy" [Acoustic Dynamics of
Machine: and Structural Elements]. Moscow. Nauka. 1973.

"Vibroskusticheskiyc protsesay v mashinskh i prisoyedinennykh konstruk-
tuiyakh" [Vibroacoustic Processes in Machines and Attached Structural
Members]. Moscow. Nauka. 197k.

ietody vibroizolyatsii mashin i prisoyedinennykh konstruktsiy" [Methods
of Vibration Damping of Machines and Attached Structural Members].
Moscow. Nauka. 1975.

P. Ya. Balitskiy. M. D. Genkin. A. A. Kobrinskiy. V. I. Sergeyev. A. G.
Sokolova. "0n Mathematical Modeling of Vibrations of Spur Gears in
Connection with the Problem of Acoustic Diagnosis" in: "Akusticheskaya
dinamika mashin i konstruktsiy." Moscow. Nauka. 1973.

. M. D. Gcnkin. A. A. Kobrinskiy. A. G. Sokolova. "On Parametric Vibrations

-.r n aunr Train with a Stepwise Change in the Firmness of Engagement"
in: "Vibroakusticheskiye protsessy v mashinakh i prisoyedinennykh
konatruktsiyakh." Moscow. Nauka. 197b.

P. Ya. Balitskiy. M. D. Genkin, M. A. Ivanova. A. G. Sokolova. "Determi-
nation or nonlinear Modes of Operation of Gear Trains by Bispectral and
Dispersion Methods" in: "Vibroakusticheskiye protsessy v mashinakh i
prisoyedinennykh konstruktsiyakh," Moscow, Nauka. 197%.

S. T. Gershman. V. D. Svet, "Experimental Investigation of Some Statis-
tical Characteristics of Vibrations of an Aircraft Engine." AKUSTICHESKIY
ZHURNAL. 1975. V. 21. N0 5.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
25.

26.

27.

28'

31.

32.

33.

Yu. I. llobrovnitukiy. M. D. Genkin. K. D. Morozov. "A New Method of
Acoustic Diwznosiu" in: "Dinamika i nkuutika mashln." Houcov. Nullku.
1971.

Yu. I. Bobrovnitskiy. ii. D. Genkin. K. D. Morozov, "Measurement of the
Internal Parameters of Machines by an Acoustic Method," Doklady na
Vos'moy Vsesoyusnoy Akusticheskoy koni‘erentsii [Reports to the Eighth
All-Union Acoustic Conference]. Moscow. Acoustics Institute. Acadew of
Sciences USSR. 1973.

H. P. Dimentberg, N. Ye. Iaikov, "Oscillations of Systems with Peri-
odically Varying Parameters in the Case of Random Excitations." IZVESTIYA
AKADENII NAUK SSSR. HBOMNIKA TVERDMO TELA, 1977. No 1..

c. D. Note. Jr., 8. Roloyen. "Confirmation of the Critical Speed Sta-
bility Theory for Symmetrical Circular Saws," J. BNGRNG. INDUSTRY, 197'“
No 3.

v. v. Belyy. M. r. Dimsntberg. "Using Controllable Feedback to Identify "
and Evaluate the Stability Reserve of Stochastic Objects," DOKLADY
mmam RAUK sssn. 1967. v. 177. No 5.

M. F‘. Dimentberg, A. A. Corbunov. "On a Statistical Method of Evaluating
the Coefficients of Damping of Oscillatory Systems," IZVESTIYA VUZov
LITOVSKOY $83. VIBRO‘I’EKIINIKA, 1971, No ’1 (13).

M. P. Dimentberg, 8. F. Kulikov. "On the Determination of Damping Coef-
ficients from the Average Number of Extrema of the Envelope of Random
Vibrations," MASRINOVEDERIYE. 1972. No l.

H. P. Dimentberg, "Vibrations or a Linear System with Periodic Parametric
and External Random Excitation," DOKLADY AKADDIII RAUK SSSR, 1975. v. 225,
No 2.

A. N. Gibert. "Investigation of the Relation Betveen Engagement Errors
and Parameters of the Acoustic Signal of Gear Boxes for Purposes of
Diagnosis." author's abstract of candidate's dissertation, Moscow,
All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Agriculture.

V. I. Vasil'yev. "Raspoznayushehiye sistemy (spravochnik)" [Pattern
Recognition System: (a Reference”. Kiev. "Raukova dumka." 1969.

L. L. Myasnikov. Ye. N. Kyasnikova. "Avtomaticheskoye raspoznovaniye
zvukovykh obrazov" [Automatic Recognition of Acoustic Patterns]. Lenin-
grad. l-Inergiya, 1970.

Yu. A. Abramov. A. A. Graehev. H. s. Kozlov, "Equipment for Detecting

Flaws in Gear Trains from Their Noises and Vibrations." Dokladv na
Shestoy Vsesoyuznoy Akusticheskoy konferentsii [Reports to the Sixth

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
31.

1.0.

kl.

1‘2.

Mo.

All-Union Acoustic Conference]. Moscow, Acoustics Institute. Academy
of Sciences USSR. 1968.

E. A. Dostakyan, "Investigation and Optimization of Acoustic Evaluation

of the Characteristics of Change Gears in Metal-Cutting Machine Tools,"
author's abstract of candidate's dissertation. Yerevan. Armenian Scientific
Research Institute of Construction Materials and Structures. 1972.

F. Ya. Balitskiy. "One of the Applications of Correlation Analysis" in:
"Vibroakusticheskaya aktivnost' mekhanizmov s zubchatymi peredachami"
[Vibroacoustic Activity of Mechanisms with Gear Trains], Moscow, Nauka,
1971.

G. V. Vasil'yev. 2. A. Malina. "On s Constructive Method of Quantitative
Differentiation of Reel Sources of Steady-State Noise Processes Given

on Finite Time Intervals" in: "Metody redstavleniya i apparaturnyy

analiz sluchaynykh protsessov i poley“ Methods of Representation and
Instrumental Analysis of Random Processes and Fields]. part 2, Novosibirsk.

Stgge Scientific Research Institute of Measures and Measuring Instruments,
19 I

I. A. Birser, "Use of the Bayes Theorem in Problems of Technical Diag-
nosis." VESTNIK MASHINOSTROYBNIYA, 196k, No 10.

R. K. Hotter, G. A. Copp. H. C. Green. “Visible Speech,“ New York,
Van Nostrand, l9h7.

V. G. Grishin. "Dynamic Spectroscopy in Problems of Visual Analysis and
Recognition of Complex Acoustic Signals by an Operator." AVTOMATIKA I
TELEMEKHANIKA. 1967. No 2.

M. P. Dimentberg, A. A. Gorbunov, "Some Problems of Diagnosis of an

Oscillatory System with Random Parametric Excitation." PRIKLADNAYA
MEKHANIKA, 1975. V. 11, No ‘1.

A. A. Gorbunov. M. F. Dimentberg, "Some Problems of Diagnosis for an
Oscillatory System with Periodic Parametric Excitation." IZVESTIYA
AKADl-‘MII NAUK SSSR. MEKHMIKA TVERDOGO TELA, 197's, No 2.

. u. R. Levin. "Teoreticheskiye osnovy statisticheskoy radiotekhniki“

[Theoretical Principles of Statistical Radio Engineering]. part 1.
Moscow. Sovetskoye radio. 1966.

A. A. Gorbunov. "Experimental Evaluation of the Boundaries of the Region
of Stability of Systems Loaded by Nonconservative Forces in the Presence
of Random Actions." MASHINOVEDENIYB. 1971. No 3.

M. P. Dimentbers. A. A. Gorbunov. "A Problem in Determination of a

Source ongandom Perturbations in an Oscillatory System," MASHINOVEDERIYE.
1912, No .

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
h6.

51.

52.

53.

55.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

K. H. Goff, "An Application of Correlation Techniques to Some Acoustic
Measurements.“ J. ACOUST. SOC. AMERICA, 1955. v. 27, No 2.

A. K. Novikov. "Application of the Method of Mutual Spectra to Some
Acoustic Measurements" in: "Bor'ba s shumani i vibratsiyani" [Con-
trolling Noises and Vibrations], Moscow, Stroyizdat, 1966.

Dzh. Bendat. A. Prisol, "Izmereniye i analiz sluchaynykh protsessov"
[Measurement and Analysis of Random Processes], Moscow, Mir, 197k.

A. K. Novikov, "Korrelyatsionnyye izmereniya v korabel'noy akustikc"
[Correlation Analysis in Ship Acoustics], Leningrad. Sudostroyeniye, 1971.

N. A. Rubichev, "A Method of Experimental Determination of the Contri-
bution of Individual Sources to Overall Noise" in: "Kiberneticheskaya
diagnostika nekhsnicheskikh sistem po vibroakusticheskim protsessnm,"
Kaunas, Kaunas Polytechnical Institute. 1972.

F. Ya. Balitskiy, M. D. Genkin, A. G. Sokolova, "A Correlation Tochnique
for Localizing Statistically Dependent Sources of Noise" in: "Bor'ba s
shumami i vibratsiyani metodami stroitel'noy akustiki" [Controlling
Noises and Vibrations by the Methods of Structural Acoustics], Moscow,
Stroyizdat, 1966.

F. Ya. Balitskiy, Yu. I. Bobrovnitskiy, A. c. Sokolova, "Measurement of
Vibrations in the Presence of Correlation Interference" in: "Analiz i
vosproizvedeniye vibratsiy" [Analysis and Reproduction of Vibrations],
pagt 2, Leningrad. Leningrad house of Scientific and Technical Propaganda,
19 1.

H. D. Ccnkin. V. I. Sergeyev, A. G. Sokolova, "Application of a Corre-
lation Technique to Calculation of the Dynamic Characteristics of
Mechanical Systems Under Conditions of Normal Operation" in: "Vibro-
akustieheskaya aktivnost' mekhanizmov s zubchatymi peredaehami," Moscow,
Nauka, 1971.

D. 0. Levchenko. "Problems of Separating Signals that Differ in Fluctu-
ations of Autocorrelation" in: "Metody predstavleniya i apparaturnyy
analiz sluchaynykh protsessov i poley," section 1. Leningrad, All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of Electrical Measuring Devices, 1970.

D. G. Levchenko, "0n the Problem of Measurements in an Inaccessible
Region" in: "Metody predstavleniya i apparaturnyy analiz sluchaynykh
protsessov i poley." section 1. Novosibirsk, State Scientific Research
institute of Measures and Measuring Instruments, 1968.

C. J. Dodds, J. D. Robson, "Partial Coherence in Multivariate Random
Processes," J. SOUND AND VIBRATION, 1975, v. be. No 2.

9%

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
51. Ya. Ya. Gel'fsndbeyn. "Netody kiberncticheskoy diagnostiki dinamichoskikh

sistem" [Methods of Cybernetic Diagnosis of Dynamic System], Riga.
Zinatne, 1967.

58. v. c. Chang, A. Lin, 0. A. Secor, K. 5. Su, "Determination of the Pulse
Have Velocity by a Filtered Cross-Correlation Technique." J. BIOMECIMNICS,
lngg-Vs b, "O 6.

BALL BEARING DIAGNOSIS BY A VIBRATION METHOD
8. T. Bheftel', V. A. Gushchin, 0. K. Lipskiy, A. A. Shanitsyn. F. F. Yudin

Spectrograms of ball bearing vibration show a background of a continuous
spectrum against which characteristic discrete components are observed to
var: in proportion to the speed of rotation. These spectral cOmponents

arise because of deviations of the races from circularity in a pattern called
waviness. To evaluate the vibroactivity of waviness, a spectral method is
used that enables the derivation of analytical relations between the param-
eters of the harmonics of waviness and the parameters of the resultant
vibration: frequency and amplitude. On this basis, solutions are found for
the following problems in ball bearing diagnosis:

by a 'Iisration method, without disassembling the bearing. the technical
state of the outer and inner rings is determined, which is characterized
by the presence of harmonic components with high vihroactivity in the
spectra of waviness of the races;

Before a bearing has been assembled. the harmonic components of waviness on
the ball races of the inner and outer rings are established (by a vibration
method). and a prediction is made concerning the corresponding frequencies
and amplitudes of vibration of the bearing assembled from these rings;

for each harmonic component of waviness of the outer or inner ring, the

admissible value of its amplitude is determined as a function of vibration
requirements .

The information on the technical state of the ball races of the rings can

be used to select rings for assembling low-noise ball bearings; to determine
the degree of suitability of a bearing under working conditions; to calculate
the vibration of bearing units that arises as a consequence of kinematic
perturbation due to waviness of the ball races of the bearing.

The spectral method of evaluating waviness is to use a Fourier series to
represent the deviations dokhk) of the ball race from circularity

Am (9.) = a. + .2... 0n cos (iv. + Bu)-

where i I2s/A1 is the number of the harmonic that shows how many waves of
a given angular pitch A1 fit into the nominal circle; a“ is the amplitude of

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the i-th harmonic of the k-th ring; a“ is the phase shift; no is the average
value of the functiOn And“) for the period; 0k is the polar angle (for the
inner ring R Il. for the outer ring he 2).

 

H91

The set of amplitudes a“ of the Fourier series forms a spectrum of wavinesn
of the ball race for each ring of the ball bearing. By using the electronic
equipment described in Ref. 1, 2 this spectrum is automatically recorded (as a
probe runs over the surface of the rotating part) in the form of a diagram
(Fig. l) on which the numbers of the harmonics are plotted along the axis of
abscissas. while the corresponding amplitudes are plotted along the axis of
ordinates. In this way, the harmonics of even very high nmbers can be

fixed with amplitudes of hundredthes of a micrometre.

'lhe vibration frequencies in Hertz of the harmonic component: of waviness are
calculated by the fornula

1., _ woo (k - I. 2). ' (I)
where

n. - nll —- 1720 + rIR)); n, = mu + r/R).

here m and n2 are the speeds (in rpm) of the inner (m) and outer (n2)
rings relative to the separator); R is the radius of the ball race of the
inner ring; r is the radius of the ball; n is the shaft speed.

The vibration amplitudes with respect to acceleration of the harmonic com-
ponents of waviness are determined by the expression

Wat-j 4ﬂ’nﬂu- (2)
which "is transformed to
Vu- WWI”. * - ‘0 20 (3)

Since the vibration acceleration in this expression is directly proportional
to the quantity in parentheses, even very small amplitude components an of
the spectrun of waviness that could have been disregarded at low numbers of
the harmonics can cause considerable vibration accelerations if they are
related to harmonics of sufficiently high numbers. Therefore the discrete
components of the spectrum of waviness should be evaluated from the standpoint
of vibroactivity as a function of the products ‘kiiz rather than with respect

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the values of the amplitudes a“ of these components. To illustrate this.
Fig. 1 shows the spectrogram of waviness of the ball race of the inner ring
of one of the ball bearings. and we give here the values of the quantities
“hi and aMi2 for a number of harmonics of the spectrum -

i 2 3 18 58 120

a)“, um 0.11.0 0.055 0.170 0.052 0.050
“112.1... 0.56 0.50 55.0 115.0 720.0

As we can see, the harmonics of low numbers (i=2, 3) that are associated
with a flat spot have low vibroactivity with respect to acceleration. while

the 120-th harmonic of waviness. despite low amplitude, has very high vibro-
activity.

'Ihun the most dangerous from the standpoint of vibronctivity are the harmonics
of waviness of higher numbers.

In machine building, low-noise ball bearings are often required to have a
spectrum of vibration recorded with respect to acceleration at a given
rotational velocity that is bounded throughout the entire frequency range
by some line, e. g. a sloping straight line with equation

wan-Fm (4)
'lhis requirement also imposes limitations on the amplitudes of harmonics of
different numbers. After substituting the value of (It) in expression (2),

we get a formula for calculating the limiting admissible amplitude of the
i-th harmonic of wavinesn

an - F (fad/419m. (5)

Relations (1), (2) and (5) enable solution of all the problems formulated
above for ball bearing diagnosis. To get the solutions, these relations
must be represented as tables or nomograms plotted for a given bearing size,
predetermined rotational velocity and vibration requirements.

As an example, Fig. 2 shows a nomogram plotted for ball bearing No 306 at
a rotational velocity of n-lSOO rpm.

Straight lines 1 and 2 on the nomogrm establ‘ 'h the relation between the
numbers of harmonics of waviness of the inner .1) and outer (2) rings and
the frequency f of the stimulated vibration. For instance the 27-th harmonic
of waviness of the outer ring causes bearing vibration on a frequency of

255 Hz, while the same harmonic of waviness on the inner ring causes vibration
with a frequency of '020 Hz.

The parallel straight lines 3 on the nomogram relate the amplitudes of the
harmonics of waviness, the vibration frequency (number of the harmonic) and
the vibration level. For instance the 27-th harmonic of waviness of the

outer ring with an amplitude of 0.1 ms on a frequency of 255 Hz causes

bearing vibration of 55 dB. The reverse relation also holds: in the vibration

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 2

to vibration imposed on the bearing shove the relation between the
vibration frequency (number of the harmonic)‘and the limiting admissible
amplitude of the harmonic of vaviness. For instance in order for the vibra-
tion from the 27-th harmonic of waviness of the outer ring on a frequency

or 255 R: to stay below the admissible level, the amplitude of this harmonic
mat not exceed 0.11 um.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'ur‘ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus the described nomogram enables solution of different problems in the
diagnosinng a ball bearing. The accuracy of the solution depends on the
resolutionjof the analyzer and the scales of the nomogram.

REFERENCES

l. B. T. Sheftel', “Evaluation of the Haviness of Rolling Surfaces by the
Method of Spectral Analysis,“ STANKI I lhBTRUMENT, 1970, no 7.

2. B. T. Sheftel', 0. K. Lipskiy. "Investigation of Radial Vibrations of a
Ball Bearing due to Errors of Surface Shape by the Method of Spectral
Analysis," PODSHIPNIKOVAYA PROMYSHLENNOST'. 1969. No 1.

LOCALLZATION 0F ACOUSTIC SOURCES
I. P. Biryukova, A. M. Medvedkov, V. V. NaumOVa

Determination of the contribution that individual mechanisms operating as a
group make to the overall acoustic field is usually handled by appropriate
analysis of synchronous multichannel recordings of signals taken from micro-
phones set up close to the mechanisms as well as at the investigated point

of the field. The signal taken from a given microphone is determined not
only by the physical parameters of the acoustic field that is formed by the
mechanism closest tothemicrophone, but also by the parameters of the acoustic
fields that are induced simultaneously by the working mechanisms. In this
case the signals that are usually taken as steady-state random processes of
second order are statistically related or partly coherent.

Coherence in this case is understood in the sense of the definition presented
in Ref. 1.

 

Let us introduce the following notation:

v1(t) -- component of the random vector of unobservable signals that corre-
snonds to the i-th source (mechanism);

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
x1(t) -- component of the random vector of observable signals that corre-
sponds to the i-th microphone;

y(t) -- observable random signal of the microphone set up at the given
point of the acoustic field;

3”“) -- impulse transfer function of the linear system that connects the
i-th and J-th sources;

h(t) -- impulse transfer function of the linear system that connects the
i-th source to the investigated point of the acoustic field;
t .. t1”.

In these definitions. an unobservable signal is understood as the microphone
signal determined by the corresponding parameters of the acoustic field that
is formed by a given mechanism in autonomous operation. while an observable
signal is understood as a signal corresponding to the superposition of
acoustic; fields that are formed by the combined operation of mechanisms

Ref. 2 .

'ihe Fourier transforms of the signals and the impulse transfer functions will
be denoted by the corresponding capital letters.

A schematic of the formation of observable signals in the case of N sta-
tistically independent sources for 11-6 is shown in the diagram on the
preceding page, where the time dependence of the signals is not indicated.
Symmetric dynamic systems are considered for which 61J(=f) 6“”). and it
is also assumed that 61(f)l,l where f is frequency” This enables us to
get an exact solution of the problem in the frequency region. He will look
for the solution on the basis of the example of two acoustic sources; the
case N >2 can be examined in an analogous scheme.

In accordance‘with the diagram we write

1'10)“ "mg 814(03'10— 1’) dr. (1)
. I
N) - a}. k.(:)'w.(t— our. ' (2)

After carrying out Fourier transformation on both members of the equations.

[x .I' [an H” 1.] (3)

Y- .11.. 11,1 [2]. . - .(4)

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in thcne'analytical expreanlonn and the ones to follow. frequency dependence
In not indicated for the sake of brevity.

Let us set up the direct product of the two-component vector [x'], the complex
conjugate to vector [X], with its llermitian conJugate [X“]", and then carry
out the operation of mathematical expectation for both members of the re-
sultant equality and integrate it in the vicinity of the investigated fre-
quency, and as a result [Ref. 1] we get

[SM- slm]_[ I on]. sun 0 [i 0“ 5
[Sun 8m. an i 0 sun as: ' i )
where 8x”1 is the spectral density of the observable signal x1(t); 8x1,“1 is
the mutual spectral density of the observable signals x1(t) and xJ(t); s'iVi

in the spectral density of the unobservable signal w1(t); 61 is the frequency
response of the linear system that connects the i-th and J-t sources.

By analogous calculations we can get the following expression for the spectral
density of signal y(t):

S 0 ”
SW4”, "ﬂ 7;" 8m.][”;]'

To study equation (5) we introduce a complete orthogonal basis system of
Pauli spin matrices

to so 0: o:
“'[tli' “"10-1' “*‘to' 6"'[-10'

'Ihe algebraic properties of the Pauli spin matrices are determined by the
following relations [Ref. 3]:

M - _ 5‘51: " to"

where a. B. y represent a cyclic permutation in (1)43) .
(o,)’ - a.. I .- o. l. 2. 3. (6)
o.o.-o.s,-o, U-O.I.2.3). - _ (7)
SP (ml) "' 2‘11] (I. I - 0. l. 2. 3): (8)

where Sp is the Spur of the matrix; 01.1 is the Kronecker symbol.

In matrix equation (5) the unknown quantities are the elements of the matrix
of spectral densities of the unobservable signals [8,“le and of the matrix
of frequency responses [on].

Let us expand the matrices that appear in equation (5) with respect to the

complete system of Pauli spin matrices. With consideration of equalities
(6)48). the matrix of spectral densities of observable signals is written as

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE GREY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3
[81”,] " +2 slab (9)
u.

where the S‘— Sp(a,lS.,.II) are Stokes parameters.

Introducing the notation
an - at + (up
for the matrix of frequency responses we get the expression

3
lat/l - 11-; Mt: ‘ _ (10)
”

“he" as -139: - 03 5| -¢: + (as; 33 - 0-
'l'he matrix of spectral densities of observable signals can be presented as

.
[8-H] - +2 5, i]. (1 I)
[-0

where S. - S. - 0.

Substituting expressions (9)-(ll) in equation (6), we get
3 . U .. . , S i (12)
- 5 .
[g Sm g. 3:0! 1?. 1°! “.51 I

By using relations (6). (7), let us simplify the second member of equation
(12) , and then by equating the coefficients before spin matrices with identi-
cal indices standing in the first and second members, we reduce this equation
to the following system

Soli+(n}+cbl '30. Snli-(uHabl-SI.
2a.s. - 3,. ms. .- 8..

Using the representation of the complex frequency response 612 in trigono-
metric form

(13)

au- UI + (as -|a..|oow+1|a.,|sln¢.

we get the following equations for determining the elements of frequency
response from system (13) when 031940 and o; #0:

'80 - Sosa" — I Gish/3:841 4' leaf): (‘4)
[an]. +2AIGnP +1 - 0.

where

A - 8:82 - S383 — 2830/6383 + 838:)-

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It can be simply shown that A satisfies the inequality Ail. This condition
implies that there is always a unique solution of equation (11:) that lies

in the interval between zero and unity. with the aid of the resultant
solution we get the spectral. densities of unobservable signals from (5)

saw. " (Sm. "" Ian PSMMU '- I an I‘ I on P).
Sm ' (3w. "' I on I’ sully“ - I an N an F).

To determine the contribution of the first and second sources it is necessary
to find expressions for the frequency responses H] and H; of the dynamic
system that connects the sources with the predetermined point of the acoustic
field.

From form (3) we set the following expressions for the Fourier transform :of
the observable signals:

W: " (X‘ — Oaxaml - Gustaf
W: " (X: -' auximl -’ 6:26:0- ('5)

Using formulas (h), (15) for the mutual spectral density of the observable
signal w1(t) and signal y(t) we get the expression

3... - (s... — 6;.s.,)/(1,— 0:43;).
Taking into consideration that H; 'SVW/SVIVI’ we finally write

(1 -lals|'|0u P)(81! " $181.1) . (16)

H - .
‘ (8....—|6..ps,,.,m—a,,an)

Analogously for H2 we get

(I - IanPlau VHS," — 5;,Sml . (17)

ﬂ - o I
’ (3.... - | 0:. I‘smm — one“)

By using formulas (16), (1?), frequency responses H] and H; are expressed
in terms of the spectral densities of the observable signals and the compu-
tational values 012.

Considering that the unobservable signals are statistically independent,
the contribution of each source to the overall acoustic field is determined
from the formula

sum " ”Ill. S'M'

It is easily established that the given method of localizing acoustic sources
in related to existing approximate methods, and specifically to the method
of residual spectra presented in detail in Ref. 1.

In accordance with this work, we have the following expressions for the
spectral densities of the observable signals:

8.... - éioursw s.... - ans... + 6&8...» . as)
l-i

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
With consideration of relations (18), the coherence function of observable
signals is written as

I“. (”.+ |: MN m+| “I. up.)

As a result. for the residual spectrum of the observable signal x1(t) we
get the expression

sun-la " Sm. (1 "' Yam.) "' sun-.1!-
where
”manicur-Onau-ata; _ 8....
1 +| a ' I3 1— '

X:-

In this formula 612-621 is found from the solution of equation (1h). After
simple calculations it can be shown that the contribution of the source to
the overall acoustic field as calculated by the method of residual spectra
SW’M [Ref. 1]. and the contribution SW'Vz determined by the proposed

method are related by the expression

8"... - 1‘48”...

RBF'ERENCS

l. Dzh. Bendat, A. Pirsol, "Izmereniye i analiz sluchayrykh protsessov"
[Measurement and Analysis of Random Processes], Moscow, Mir, 1971:.

2. 1“. Ya. Balitskiy, Yu. I. Bobrovnitskiy, A. G. Sokolova, "Measurement of
Vibrations in the Presence of Correlation Interference" in: "Analiz i
vosproizvedeniye vibratsiy" [Analysis and Reproduction of Vibrations),
pagt 2, Leningrad, Leningrad House of Scientific and Technical Propaganda.
19 7.

3. Ya. Perina, "Kogerentnost' sveta" [Coherence of Light], Moscow, Mir, 19710.

OR THE PROBLM 0F VIBRATION DIAGNOSIS OF TECHNOLCXJICAL FLAHS IN ELECTRIC
MACIKINES

V . A. Avakyan

The main Job in vibration diagnosis of electric machines is to establish the
relation between the characteristics of the spectrum of vibrations of the
housing (measurable parameters) and technological flaws (diagnosed param-
eters) [Ref. 1-3].

Let us consider vibrations of an electric induction motor and use the model
of force factors and the model of isolated actions of flavs that were

developed in Ref. 13: a force element that consists of zc poles (balls) and
is characterized by the function Fch) rotates relative to a stationary system

101:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ,-.

with velocity uc and interacts with flaws Ag“) of the rotor barrel and
grooves of the rotating bearing rings (rotational velocity is equal to mg).
and also with flaws AM“) of the stationary rings and the stator. The force
action of system zc on a solid can be represented by the function Hoe. ea)
(Oc-uct. eunuot) that permits spectral representation. Obviously the
Fourier expansion here should be carried out in the complex region (Ref. 5].

'ihe force fields Fc(O.A) are nonlinear functio:.s not only of angle 9, but
also of the depth of action a. which in turn is a mnetion of the deviation
of the shape that is due to the flaws. Expanding in a series with respect
to small quantities A". A5, and leaving only the first terms, one can get
the following expression of the complex amplitude ck of the Fourier series
for frequencies ch"c in the case of isolated actions of flaws:

' c. - z.6.(zm(o— zmn -
-Z¢6.U(KZ¢-i))I¢(—IKZ¢)I2:I. Z-Ili'le-i-o. n--I.
(1)

Now let us consider the case of simultaneous action of numerous flaws. As
the characteristic of the force field here it is necessary to take the
system of all poles Pct“) rather than the single pole Fe“) (flaws may be
multiple -- flat spots, waviness) and to represent them in a generalized way.
After a number of simple trans formations we can get a generalized expression
for the amplitude of complex oscillations

c. - e;- mm: (s - Z)l,.,.+‘M._, .-

- {76. um — mum-1K). (2)

It is difficult to give preference to any one of these approaches: q‘ is
expressed more simply in (2) and corresponds better to the concept of
harmonics in Fourier analysis (for instance we can draw the conclusion

that only harmonics that are multiples of 2c show up rather than any har-
monic“). but this expression is more coaplicated in pracitcal use since it
requires a more cosplicated image of the force field; on the other hand.
expression (1) in many instances is much more convenient (for instance the
conclusion of appearance of harmonics that are multiples of Z follows from
this expression automatically without any additional analysis . Therefore
expression (1) can be used for specific analysis of versions of simple inter-
actions, while generalised expression (2) can be used in the general case of
complex interactions. .

He consider a typical spectrum first on the basis of the example of inter-
action of an isolated flaw A“ and the poles F of fairly general form -

a sinusoidal half-wave; the flaw has width I/ , and the pole has width ﬁlm,
where l and m are any positive numbers (integers or fractions). We represent
the Fourier transform of the flaw as follows:

6. (IS) =- Zsos (nS/2)l"(l — S')"cxpl-— Mp. + n/2!)l -
- Ac US)upl- so (ML (3)

The first cofactor in (3) characterizes the modulus of the spectrum Ads).
and the second cofactor characterizes its phase ”(5) (which is more con-
vaniently expressed in absolute frequencies). Let us note that (3) coincides

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the expression for the same spectrum (Ref. h] derived from other initial
assumptions. 'lhe spectrum of the pole fciJS) is expressed also by formula

(3) if 1 is replaced by m and is assumed that the phase shift of the flaw 0.90.
As implied by expression (1), the width of the vibration spectrum is de-
termined by the more extended element (pole or flaw). while the scale of its
amplitudes is determined by the product of dimensions (l/tm). It is easily
shown that the shapes of the elements (rectangular, triangular, bell-shaped,
trapezoidal) do not have such an appreciable effect on the spectrum: the
product of the equivalent values of its width multiplied by the dimension of
an element is approximately constant for different shapes.

The phase spectrum of cornplex oscillations is not their essential character-
istic; it is much more important to determine the position of the axes of
the ellipses of vibration, i. e. the characteristics that can be determined
in vibrodiagnosis. It can be shown that the axis of the ellipse is directed
along the axis of the flaw independently of the dimensions and for all
harmonics. Calculation also shows that this direction is independent of
the shape of a flaw as well. In the general case the question of the direc-
tion of the naJor or minor axis of the ellipse with respect to the axis of
the flaw requires more precise definition since some amplitudes (see formula
(3)) W take on negative values. 'ihe same thing applies to the case of a
zero value of one of the amplitudes. which correspond: to degeneration of
the ellipse to a circle. In this case of course we must change to analysis
on other harmonics.

The validity of the theoretical models has been repeatedly verified experi-
mentally. Diagnostic studies of the deterministic components of the vibration
spectra of machines were done with a narrow-band spectral analyzer of hetero-
dyne type with passband of 6 i 2 Hz at 3 dB attenuation. For exact measurement
of the frequencies of the discrete components of the spectrum and comparison
with the calculated values. the investigated signal was combined with the
signal from a tone generator. and then it was measured by a digital frequency
meter. This brought the frequencies of the detected components into corre-
spondence with the calculated values within 0.5-1}. The vibration ellipses
were studied from the LissaJou figures displayed on the screen of an elec-
tronic oscilloscope by using signals from mutually perpendicular vibration
sensors.

An example of a study of a vibration ellipse on the frequency of rotation
can be found in Ref. 1. where it is shown that in the case of one-sided
tightening of a bearing cover that leads to misalignment of the outer ring
of the bearing. the circular vibration field is deformed into an ellipse,
the major axis being directed along the axis of tightening. (flaw).

An example of determining the nature of a flaw on the basis of measurement
of machine vibration is described in Ref. 6. which gives the results of an

experimental evaluation of the nonuni formi ty of an air gap with accuracy that
is fairly high for practice.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REFERENCES

l. V. A. Avakyan. Ya. S. Brovman. K. 8. Demirchynn, S. L. Shmuter, "Vibration
and Imbalance of an Electric Machine." BLEK'I‘RO‘I‘NNIKA, 19711. No 7.

2. B. V. Pavlov. "Akusticheekaya diagnostika mekhanizmov" [Acoustic Diagnoz'is
or Mechanisms]. Moscow. Mashinostroyeniye, 1971.

3. R. I. Pisarchik. 8. A. lOIarlsmov. "Spectral Analysis or a Radial-Thrust
Ball Bearing Dependent on Flaws of the Rings and Balls." IZVETIYA
AKADEMII NAUK SSSR. MEKRANIKA 'I'VBRDOGO TELA. 1971, Mo 1.

lo. Ya. 8. Brovman. K. s. Demirchyan. S. L. Shooter. "A Model of Vibration 01‘
an Electric Induction Motor." IZVESTIYA AKADD‘III NAUK ARMYANSKOY SSR.
SERIYA TaiﬂNICH-KIKH NAUK. 1972, v. 25. No 3.

5. N. Viner. R. Pcli. "Preobrazovaniye Fur'ye v kompleksnoy oblast" (Fouri er
Transformation in the Complex Region], Moscow, ﬂasks. 1961:.

6. V. A. Avakyan. Ya. S. Brovman, K. S. Demirchyan,s. L. Shmutcr. "Evaluation
of the Nonuni formity or the Airgap or an Electric Induction Motor Based
on Measurement of its Vibration" in: "Tekhnologiya elektrotekhnicheskogo
proizvodstva" [Technolog of Electrical Engineering Production], No 32.
Moscow, Informstandartelektro, 1911.

SCI-”WARE SYSTEM FOR CHECKING All) DIAGMCBIM ELECTRIC MACHINES
V. A. Mailyan. 0. A. Martirosyan, S. A. Sargsyan

'ihe creation of an automated system for quality control of production in
sectors with mass production such as the production of electric machines in
a general industrial series cannot be realized without using automatic test
equipment controlled by a computer. For effective operation or the entire
system it is necessary that the automatic test equipment must operate in
real time. In this case the program software is complicated by the fact
that it must contain controlling. support and applied programs.

In this paper an examination is made or the problems of software for applied
Jobs. 1. e. applied programs. 'lhe principal applied problems associated with
checking and diagnosis of electric machines are: checking the overall
vibration velocity (or vibration acceleration) in certain points or the
machine: analysis of the vibration state of the machine and recognition of
the sources of significant components of vibrations; determination or the
nonuniformity of the air gap; insulation strength tests; taking the loading
characteristic and determining the nominal values from this characteristic
and the like.

In connection with such a considerable variety of problems. the applied
programs are iaplemented as blocks, both the number and content or the blocks
themselves being capable of continued growth.

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPXCIM. USP. ONLY

Except for the last of the Jobs indicated abOVe. all applied problems are
based on spectral analysis of vibrations. specifically the detection of
deterministic and random components and classification of the latter for the
purpose of vibrodiagnoaio of the flaws of an electric machine. Therefore
this paper describes a complex of algorithms intended for realizing and
detecting sources of significant (in the sense of Ref. 1) vibration com-
ponents.

'ihe complex operates with a limited amount (only 512 readings) of input data
since it is time-oriented for information input to the Minsk-32 digital
computer via the hairi-l digital computer.

Let us denote the vibrations of the housing of an electric machine by x(t)
and yit). we will treat these processes as the real and imaginary parts of
a complex process z(t) I:t(t) eiy(t) and study its spectrum (Fourier transform)
in the complex plane in the form of vibration ellipses on which the flaw
detection technique developed in Ref. 1 is based. A vibration ellipse on a
given frequency is a hodograph of the vector-sum of two rotating (forward
and reverse) vectors whose moduli are defined in terms of the complex Fourier
coefficients of the positive 2(m) and negative Z(-m) frequencies of the
corresponding harmonic. 'ihe semimaJor axis am of the vibration ellipse

on the given fre ueney is I2(mll + I2(-m)l, the scmiminor axis is

"0(a) I IIZ(m)I - 2(-m)". and the angle of inclination of the major axis of
the ellipse

9n - 10mm!!!» + srg(Z(- m)))/2.

Obviously when one of the vectors 2 is missing, the ellipse degenerates into
a circle, and when 2(m) and Z(-m) are close to the moduli the ellipse
degenerates into a line. Such a representation of the results of analysis

is associated with the fact that the ellipses are informative for diagnosis
since they enable evaluation of the nature of a flaw (rotating or pulsating,
i. e. a circle or an ellipse-line), its position (from the inclination of

the maJor axis) and dimension (from a "harmonic series" of ellipses) [Ref. 2].
111a ellipses also characterize the degree of coherence (phase ratios) of the
vibrations along the X and Y axes.

Besides, to get the Fourier image of the functions Z(t) on a digital computer
it is convenient to use a fast Fourier transformation algorithm that is
designed for a complex form of input data (Ref. 3, 10], i. c. it gives a gain
(in time) of calculations as compared with the fast Fourier transformation
of two harmonic oscillations.

Deterministic vibration ellipses are used for frequency recognition of flaws
that show up on frequencies determined by the corresponding kinematic equa-
tions (Ref. 2]. Recognition is realised by comparing the calculated fre—
quencies of the assumed flaws with the frequencies of the components found
in the vibration spectra: in a predetermined 51 interval.

it should be noted here that while ellipses are quite informative for de-
terministic vibrations, they are physically unrealistic for random processes

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"" FOR orrtcmt use mm

in the general case as there is no constant rate of turn of the vectors.
However. random vibrations are quite extensive. and there should be a spectral
model for them. On this basis, and retaining uniformity of approaches.-wc
will also study random vibrations in the complex plane and use an elliptical
model for them.

Let us note that nor the two maJor forms of random vibrations -- narrow-band,
i. e. passing through the resonance of the electric machine, and coherent,

i. e. those for which the minor axis is negligibly small in power compared
with the major axis -- the elliptical models correspond to physical reality
and there is no need for mutual spectral approaches.

Let us express the Fourier images of the processes with respect to axes X
and Y in terms of the Fourier coefficients of positive and negative fre-
quencies by the following formulas [Ref. 11]:

X (In) n [2011) + Z'(N - 001/2.
Y(m) - [Z (In) — Z'(N — sol/2). m =- 5. W — l. (I)

where Z'Ui-m) is the conJugate value of the Fourier coefficient of the
(N -m)-th harmonic. i. e. of the negative m-th harmonic of the complex
process (2(N-m) -Z(-m)). N is the number of readings of the analog
process z(t).

Considering that for a complex process in the general case Iz(m)l # Iz(-m)|.
let us use the notation 2(m)-a+Jb, zgn-m) Ic +Jd. Bearing in mind that
.2 +b2- lz(e)|2, and c2+d2 . |z(n-.)| , we easily get from (1)

2llX(M)|'+lY(M)PI -'I2(m)l° +IZ(-In)|'-

'ihe resultant equation implies that statistical averaging for Rh) 2 and
IZ(-m)|z does not differ from statistical averaging of [MIMI2 and Y(m)l2.

'ihe angle Om at which the vectors 2(m) and 2(a) meet (the angle of incli-
nation of the ellipse) should be statistically averaged for classification
of random ellipses. 1he classification is done on the basis of the quantity

I
s - émoum) / g1 snow).

{-1

where maﬁa) is the square of the semiminor axis of the ellipse of the
m—th harmonic obtained on the i-th segnent of realization; l is the nusber
of segments of realization.

'lbe quantity 8 characterizes the resultant average ellipse obtained from
ellipses on the same frequency.

'Ihere is no rigorous mathematical basis for elassiiying ellipses with

respect to the parameter S. ind therefore a classification is given below
that is based on evaluation of the geometric parameters of ellipses of

powers e

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If 8 20.5, the process on the given frequency is treated as circular, whereas
if 8 >0.9 -- the process is classified as partly circular, and for cases
where 0.5 5550.9 the process is approximately circular. 0n the other hand
if 5 < 0.5 the ellipses are taken as lines, and the process on the given
frequency is classified with respect to the variance of the angle of incli-
nation of the anor axis of the average ellipse. When narrow ellipses have
sharply pronounced directionality, i. e. they are concentrated in a very
narrow angle range (0(0) 525°), the process on the given frequency is classi-
fied as coherent; if the ellipses are completely narrow, i. e. $50.25. the
process is taken as partly coherent. and if 0.25 <8 < 0.5 -- approximately
coherent.

In the case where the angles of inclination of the axes of narrow ellipses
are spread over a wider range (0(0) >25”), the process is classified as
uncorrelated in space. and in the range of 25°<o(e) sh0° the process is
taken as approximately uncorrelated in space, while at 0-19) > h0° it is purely
uncorrelated in space. Such a classification of random ellipses gives an
idea of random vibrations with respect to orthogonal directions in real
machines.

The complex of algorithms developed is intended for analyzing vibrations of
electric motors and hand-held tools (up to three mechanical transmissions).

‘ihe results of the analysis are put out in the form of a table showing the
following information: the number of the harmonic, the (central) frequency
or band (in he) of the isolated component, the type of diagnosed flaw and the
deviation from the design frequency (1), the equivalent residual vibra-
stability i. e. the square root of the residual power (am/s). the ratio
molsno; lz(m)| and [2(4)] (In/s); mathematical expectation and mean square
value of the angle of inclination of the resultant ellipse, and the type of
process on the given n-equency according to the accepted classification.

REFERHCB

l. V. A. Avakyan, Ya. s. Brown, K. S. Denirchyan, S. L. Shmuter. "Vibration
and Imbalance of an Electric Machine,” Emma, 1911!, No 1.

2. Ya. s. Brovman. K. 5. Demirchyan, S. L. Shmuter, "Diagnosing Sources of
Vibration of an Electric Induction Motor," EMTROMHNIKA, 1973, No l.

3. A. Bergland, "Rukovodstvo k err" [handbook on Fast Fourier Transforaation].
musmam Rasrommraomxa. 1971, No 3.

1:. Dzh. Bendat, A. Pirsol. "Izmereniye i analiz sluchaynykh protsessov"
[Measurement and Analysis of Random Processes], Moscow, Hir, 1911:.

OOi'YRlGliT: Isdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1977

6610
$0: sum/0596 am

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY