APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040010-6

Un- . .- 3
4 “IL 1979

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040010-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spas L/8374
4 April 1979

STUDY OF THE SEISMIC CHARACTERISTICS
OF LARGE INDUSTRIAL CENTERS

l1 S.J()"JT'PUBLJ(JAJ1CHNS RESEJKRCJi SER‘IHCE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040010-5
NOTE

JPllS publications contain inforution primarily fro. foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also froo news agency
trancnicsiono and broadcasts. Heterials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
ere transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing snd
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and usterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of s brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was marked or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated ere
enclosed in parentheses. words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion lurk and enclosed in parentheses were not clesr in the
originsl but have been nupplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed perentheticsl notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Tines within itens «are as
given by source.

‘me contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGH' “"3 AND REGULATIONS GWERNING mnsmr 0?
MATERIALS ”PRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHDM‘I‘ION
0P TRIS PUBLICATIOII 8! RESTRICTED MOFFICIM. USE ONLY.
FOR 0??!01”. 083 GIL!

JP” 13/8374
‘ April 1979

STUDY OF THE SEISHIC CHARACTERISTICS
OF LARGE INDUSTRIAL CENTERS

Hoecov 13mm SEISMICRBBKOGO mum mm PWSRW
TSBN‘I'ROV in Russian 1978 signed to press 5 Jun 18 pp 1-108

(Book by Ye. I. Gel'perin. 1.1.. Nersesov. et el., Irdetel'stvo
'Neuke,‘ 900 copies]

Conﬁrms Pass
Abstrsct 1
Foreword . 2

rm 1. DID-"ILL sum

5

Chepter l. Iquipuent for Borehole Observstions 5
5 l. Deep-Hell Selena-store 6

5 2. Pressplifiers 0

5 3. Aeplifyio; sud Recording Unit 3

Chspter II. Sensitivity of Deep-Hell Oheervetioue sod Structure
of the Seiseosre-s 16

I l. Stste of the Art with Respect to Seiseolosicel
Observstious in loreholes (Brief Survey of

Published beta) 17
5 2. sts of Vsristion of Noise Level with Depth 25
5 3. Deckground Stability st Differeat Depths 32

i 6. Useful Signsl sud Sensitivity of well Ohssrvstions 62
i 5. Noise Becksrouad in the Cess of Stetiooery

Noise Sources 58
3 6. Observations in Shellov Hells Opening Up the
Crys. .lline Descent 67
-e- [I-OSSR-BNUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE MU!
I'OR OWICIAL US! ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued) Pege

PART II. MIMIC RECORDING

Chapter 111. nine-Ate Seieeologicel ledioteleletric 'reet Aree 77
6 l. Geological-Geophyeicel Cherecterietice of the

Region 77

8 2. Structure end Technical lndexee of the Teet Aree 83

6 3. Rediote1eeetric Chennel 87

i 6. Bquipeent of the Centrel Recording Stetion 96

8 5. Bquipeent for Controlling the Teyge Recorder

During Triconponent Recording oi Rerthquekee

in the sleved Node 103
9 6. Keene of leproving Rediotele-etric Equip-ent 108

Chepter IV. Pield Dete and Proceeeing Procedure 112
i 1. Operetion of the feet Aree end Cherecterietice
of the Dete Ohteined 112
i 2. Proceeeing Procedure 119
i 3. Energy Cleeeificetion 133
8 6. Recording of Exploeione 138
I 5. Effect of Oheervetion Conditione on Structure
of the Seienogre-e 150
Chapter V. Oheervetion Reeulte 182
i l. Seieeicity of Zeiliyekiy Aleteu 182
5 2. Seieeic Cherecterietice of AlIe-Ate 196
5 3. Azinuthel Devietione of the Seienic lease of
Dietent Eerthquekee 218
I 6. Directione of Future Reeeerch 228
Conclusione 231
Bibliogrephy 233

Appendix 1. Bulletin of Locel Eerthquekee Recorded by Redioteleeetric
Syetee fro. 1 June 1972 to 1 July 1976 for Hhich Bpicentere
Are Constructed 280

Appendix [1. Bulletin of Reerhy lnduetriel Exploeione Recorded by
the Redioteleletric Syetel iron 1 June 1972 to
1 July 1976 267

- g -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040010-5

POI omcm. US! ONLY

PUNJCA‘HOI DATA

Englilh title 2 STUDY OP m SEISMIC C
01 um momma. Cl

Rania: title : nucmm 8319110838!
mm mm

Author (o) 3 Yo. I. m'porio. I. L
at cl.

Editor (0)

Publishing Rom

ladltol 'Itvo Wank."

Place of Publication : Nolcov

Date of Publication : 1970

Signed to prcu : 5 Jun 78

Copies : 900

COPYRICIIT : Izdatcl'ntvo ”Elm." 1
- c -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-00860R000100040010-6
’OR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

ABSTRACT

Thin book tnvaattsataa the develop-ant of tha proceduraa and aqutpaant for
studying tha aata-tc condition. of larsa industrial cantata 1n aatallcally
hazardoua ragtona. Stationary ohaarvationa 1n daap horaholaa par-ﬁtting

a aharp incraaae 1n aanaittvity of tha equip-ant and cantraltaad radio-
tala-atrtc racordtns which incraaaaa the accuracy of datarltniu; the
coordinataa of the cantara 1n apaca vara uaad aa tha baata for tha atudy.
A daacrtptton 1a praaanted of tha aataatc charactariattca of Alla-Ata
atudtad by :ha aatartala of A yaara of obaarvationa.

Tha hook to daatsnad for scophyalclata. aalaaologiata. 3aoloatata. danish
anginaara and butldara.

There are 17 tablaa. 92 111uatrat£ona and 3? ratarancaa.

I
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

FOREHORD

The Soviet Union hes eeny lerge industrisl centers loceted in seismicelly
dangerous erees. In psrticuler. these include the cepitels of union
republics such es Ales-Ate. Prunee. Teshkent. Dushsnbe. Ashkhebed. end so
on. and tens of obleet centers end cities with developed industry.

The development end construction of cities loceted in these regions require
seissic regionelizetion. the stetement of the problems of predicting eerth-
quakes. They ere unthinkeble without further study of the seiseicity of

the territory end isprovement of the instrument observetion network. with
en increese in construction intensity the requirements on the detsiled

study of the seiseicity grow. however. the successful solution of the prob-
lsm is connected with consideretion of certsin specific peculierities. The
basic one of them is the high level of seismic interference ceused by the
vitsl sctivity of lerge centers which limits the sensitivity of the equip-
sent end eskes it impossible to record week locsl eerthquekes which ere of
epeciel interest during periods of ”quiet" in the seismic regime. The
stetions loceted st sufficiently greet distencns free e city stop "noticing”
week locsl eerthquekes even before the city hes ”felt” them. In eddition.
for ell esrthquekes which csn be recorded. the sccurscy of the constructions
falls off es s result of the dietence between etetions. At the seme time
when studying the seismic cherecteristics of s locsl eree it is necesssry

to insure high prrcision of ell of the construction. including trscing of
the zones tnet ere seismicslly ective et the present time.

These contredictions greatly complicete the study of the seismic cherscteris-
tics of large industriel centers in seis-lcelly heterdous regions.

Accordingly, during the lent decades the Institute of Berth Physics of the
USSR Acsdely of Sciences in coeperetion with the institute of Geology end
Geophysics of the Kssekh SSR Acedemy of Sciences hes performed reseerch in
the develop-eat of procedures end equipment to study the seiseic cherecter-
istics of lerge industriel centers. Studies heve been perforled in the
vicinity of Ales-Ate. which is loceted in e force 10 zone for which e
"quiet period" in the seiseic ectivity is now cherecteristic. The bssic

areas were to increese the sensitivity of the equipment end improve the
occurscy of the constructions.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It appeared that it is possible to achieve increased sensitivity of the
equipnent under the specific conditions of a large city by organizing

. observations in deep boreholes. Let us note that there is no experience in
daep-vellseielology in the 088R.

In order to increase the accuracy of the constructions. first of all it

was necessary significantly to increase the accuracy of the tile service.1
This could be achieved by centralised eultichannel recording of the signals
at all stations located in the research area with a united tile service.
The prospectiveness of this recording vas deter-ined by one of the basic
trends in sodsrn seissology realising the transition free observations by a
network of scattered stations located at great distances (hundreds and sore
kiloseters) free each other to observations by a large nulber of stations
located niece-paratively asall area. The groups for-ed in this case per-it
use of the directional interference procedure. correlation analysis of the
waves and ieproveaent of the resolution of the seisaic aathods.

The principles of this area of study were laid dovn by the aorta of
6. A. Goeburteev on the correlation eethod of studying earthquakes in
Northern Tyan'-Shan'. Panir and Turksenia in 1951-1953 [21. 23, 27-29].

In this book a study is made of the probless connected with the oentioned

probless and also the results of 6 years of study of the seismic regile in
Alua-Ata.

The first part of the book is on deep-wall seisnology. Descriptions are pre-
sented of the equipsent and the specific peculiarities of perforsing
stationary highly sensitive seiseologic observations in deep veils

(Chapter I). the laws of decrease in level of seismic noise vith depth.

An estinate is Isde of the possibility of increasing the sensitivity of the
borehole observations under various seiseogeologic conditions (Chapter II).
It is dsaonstreted here that in order to increase the sensitivity and
accuracy of the constructions it is significantly sore advantageous to

go "under the city" than avay free it to the side.

Th- second part of the book contains a description of the Alla-Ate testsren
of sutoeatic green! surface and deep-well stations and also the redioteleeetric
recording systee (Chapter III). A detailed description is presented of all
elesents of the set of radiotelenetric recording equipeent. The basis for
the radio channel was the system developed by V. G. Katrenko [37].

In spite of the fact that the studies were basically of a procedural nature.
the data obtained as a result of operation of the test area Isde it possi-
ble to study the seismic conditions of Alla-Ate. These results not only
confire the effectiveness of the developed procedure but also are of
independent interest (Chapter IV). A detailed description is presented of
the initial sateriel and the procedure for processing the eultichannel
seisnogrses. Considering the novelty of the operations. we have considered

it expedient to present a quite large nulber of primary seissograls in
the description.

 

l [accurate hour's service] 3
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

In the concluding Chapter V a description is presented of the basic
peculiarities of the aeiaaic conditions. A study was asde there of the
effect of the observation conditions on construction of seisaograas and
the azimuthal deviations of the seisaic beans.

The accumulated experience has shown that the developed procedures and equip-
aent can be recoonended for studying the seismic conditions of large indus-

trial centers located in scisaically dangerous zones and also to solve other
probless of asisaology. Therefore the procedure and equipment are described

with a degree of detail which is sufficient for organization of analogous
studies in other areas.

This is all the sore significant in that the study of the weak local earth-
quakes is acquiring greater and greater interest in the problem of earth-
quake prediction. Thus. in the second phase of the national progrss of
Japan for predicting earthquakes which was started in 1976. in order to
record the weak local earthquakes in the vicinity of Tokyo provision was
made for the creation of a test area of three highly sensitive stations.

the seisnographa in which will be located at depths of 2500 and 5500 aeters
[76].

The book was written on the basis of reports free the coworkers of the
Laboratory ofDesp-well Seismology Ya. I. Gal'perin. L. H. Vorovskiy.

R. H. Cal'perina. P. A. Troitskiy. A. K. Trofiaov. A. 1. Chesnokov. The
material was prepared by L. N. Vorovskiy (Chapters 1. 11. Chapter 111.

51. 2). A. l. Chesnokov (Chapter‘lli; 53-5), R. H. Cal'perin: (Chapter IV,
Chapter V. 52. 3). 51 of Chapter V was written by 1. L. Nersesov. the fore-

word was written by Ya. I. Csl'perin and the conclusion by Ye. I. Cal'perin
and I. L. Nersesov.

In addition to the authors. the research was participated in by

V. P. Kharin and H. l. Hoahul. and in individual phases also by

P. A. Troitskiy (1970) and A. K. Trofinov (1972-1973). V. C. Katrenko was
of significant assistance in organizing the rsdioteleletric recording (1971).
A. P. Vorovskaya. C. L. Suzdorf. L. A. Ditler and A. V. Prolova basically
participated in the processing and interpretation of the aaterials and the
fomttingof the aonograph.

All of the studies were perforsed under the direction of Ye. I. Cal'perin.

The authors express their appreciation to all of the coworkers participating
in the studies and the preparation of the aonograph.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFIICIAL US! ONLY

PART I. DﬂlP-UILL SEISHOLOGY

when solving aany of the problels of seisaology. highly sensitive operations
are the basis deter-ining the level of investigation. This pertains. in
particular. to the study of the seisaic characteristics of large industrial
centers. One of the possible leans of increasing the sensitivity of the
equipaent is observation in wells or boreholes.1 The new area is develop-

ing as deep-well seiaaology. end with each year it is finding breeder and
breeder application.

The seismic noise for-ed basically by surface waves decreases with depths.
However. even the useful signal at internal points of the again. is
weaker than on the surface. This is explained by the fact that on the day
surface the wave alplitude is doubled as a result of reflection fro. the
earth-air interface. The possible gain in sensitivity of the equip-ant on
burying the seisaograph is deter-ined by how such faster the noise level
decreases with depth than the useful signal.

For the Jeveloplent ofdeep-well seisaolotv it was first of all necessary to
build equip-ant which could be used for observations in the wells, to study
the laws of variation with depth of the aeieaic noise background under
various seisaogeological conditions and to estiaate the possibilities of
increasing sensitivity of the equip-ant for observations in boreholes. The
resolvability of the seisaic recording is detersined not only by the signal]
noise ratio. but also by the coaplexity of the shape of the useful signals.
Therefore. along with the wave-noise distribution with respect to depth it
is necessary to study the laws of variation of the shape of the useful waves.
These problems are the subject of this part of the book.

CHAPTER I. EQUIPMENT FOR BOREHOLE OBSERVATIOIS

Observations in deep wells are connected with a nuaber of specific peculiar-
ities of both a technical and theoretical nature. 0n the one hand. the

 

1here and hereafter we shall use the word sensitivity to lean useful

sensitivity. that is. laxi-uaelplificatioa that can be talked with en
adaissible noise level.

5
P03 OFFIClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

decrease in seismic noise level.with depth makes it possible to increase
the uenultlvity of the equipment. 0n the other hand. an n result of high
teeournture nnd pressure. long length of the cable and other reasons. the
equipment noise increases. In addition. the performance of the observa-
tions in the boreholes is connected with ecological difficulties. The
basic means of increasing the signal/noise ratio under these conditions
is the lowhnoise equipment which has been developed and used for short-
term (vertical seismic profile) and stationary observations.

51. Deep-Hell Seismometers

Before the beginning of the described research in the Soviet Union there
were no low-frequency scissometers for stationary seisaological observa-
tions in deep wells. Comparatively few observations of a reconnaissance
nature were performed in 1961-1962 using ground seismometers designed for
regional studies ("8’3 with a natural frequency of 2-6 hertz). however.
during the first years after the beginning of studies (1966-1967) low-
frequency seismometers were developed for seismologicel observations in
deep wells. For deep well observations of both short-term. profile and
stationary type. aeismometers of two types were used which were developed
at the Institute of Earth Physics of the USSR Academy of Sciences - the
sou-v (designed by c. L. Shnirman) and 80-1? (designed by N. Ye. Pedoseyenko).

The ssu-v seisaometer. The deep-well vertical magnetoelectric SIB-V
seisnometer (e high-gain. vertical seiamometer) is designed for recording
the vertical component of the seismic oscillations in deep. specially
equipped wells [59]. The general view of the seismometer without the pro-
tective case is shown in Fig l. a. In the upper part of the device there
is an automation compartment which provides for performance of the
instructions transmitted over the logging cable from the control panel
located on the surface. In the lower part of the device there is a
pendulum compartment. The pendulum system (fig 1. b) is in the form of

the mass H and the extension arms P1 and '2 on which the operating coils

K1 and K are fastened. The entire system is suspended on a cylindrical
coil spring n with zero length so that the axis of rotation of the pendulum
and its center of gravity are in the same horizontal plane. 0n oscillation
of the pendulum. the operating coils are shifted in the annular radial

gaps of the two magnetic systems rigidly connected to the base of the
instrument (not shown in the diagram).

The basic parameters of the seismometer are as follows: coil resistance
about 300 ohms. the oscillation period is regulated from 0.8 to 1.2 seconds,
the reduced length is lot: cm. the electromechanical constant is no less
than 11 Ushers/rad. the moment of inertia of the pendulum is 7-10'3 kg-mz.
the sensitivity on a frequency of 2 hertz is 0.5 mv/micron. the damping is
0.6. and the operating temperature range is from 0 to +so'c. The container
insures a seal at a pressure to 20 “Pa. The seismometer set includes the
following: the seismometer itself. the ground control panel. the feed

unit and the connecting cable. The ground control panel permits remote
realization of the following operations: locking and unlocking of the

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY

scissoneter: switching the eystsl on and off regulating the position of
equilibriu- of the pendulum; Isasuresent of the natural oscillation period
of the pendulu: feeding of the calibration pulse to the coils. The panel

feed can be realized either iron the 26 volt storage batteries or the
220 volt ac network.

 

Figure 1. SBU-V Seislosater
a -- General View with automation (l) and psndulun (2)
conpartnents: b -- schematic of the pendulum.

Although the SBU-V seisuoneter is designed for stationary observations it
is necessary to note that it has been used successfully for profiling,
withstanding more than 500 cycles of unlocking. swinging and locking with-
out nny significant failures. During the stationary observations the
SBU-V sets-ouster can operate for years. In practice all of the station-
ary observations were performed by the SBU-V seisnonster.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OVFICIM. USE ONLY

lib-Ill ‘ieiaisoaeter. Thin aaieaoseter [57] is a device with a asgnetic
cushion and zero reduced length. The testing of the seisaoaeter and the
developsent oi the control systes for it were carried out with the partici-
pation of the authors of this paper. The structure and the operating
principle of the seissnoaeter are obvious in Pig 2. a. No asgnets
(stationary 6 and paving 3 distril-uted on springs of the aeebrane type ii)
are turned with the like poles toward each other. The aoving asgnet is
the pendulusn of the seisaograoh. in the gaps of the two Isgnetic systems
there are operating coils: a stationary coil 12 rigidly connected to the
housing of the device end located in the gap of the saving aagnet. end the
soving coil 16 which is fastened to the loving asgnet and in the gap of
the stationary magnet.

The pendulu of the instruent (the loving asgnet) is adjusted and suspended
by using additional aognets: astasing 1 end supporting 2. The instrtnent
is locked by pressing the pendulua into the eatreae lower position which is

realized remotely using a reversible electric notor 15 fed a direct current
iron the day surface.

The basic parsneters of the odometer are as follows: aaplitude range
of oscillations of the inner uses :5 see: dasping 0.6: resistance to the
operating coil 600. damping coil 600 ohas; the period of the natural
vibrations is 1 second: the coefficient of electroaechnnical coupling of
the operating coil is 1.2 volt-seconds/ca.

For remote control of the seissograph (the seieaoaeter) a control panel was
used which has been developed and manufactured by V. O. Katrenlto. The
panel in node up of four basic units: the pulse generator. stabilizer.
pre-anplifier and switching devices (fig 2. b).

by using the panel it is possible to feed a voltage to the electric motor
or the eeiswograph and test pulses to the calibration coil of the pendulua.
to switch the input of the pre-ssplifier and the operating coils of the
pendulum. and to aonitor the feed conditions. The pendult- is unlocked by
feeding a voltage to the electric actor 15 (Pig 2. a) which drives the
locking aechanisn. when swinging the pendulua. its position is controlled
by heteropolar adjustable pulses generated by the pulse generator.

The period of the seisaograph is determined and regulated directly in the
well using a panel specially aanufactured for this purpose. The electric
rchponse of the pendulu systea to the test pulse is alplified by the
high-resistance nc anplii’icr and is fed to the pointing indicator. After
swinging the pendulua and establishing the required period. the seisaograph
is switched to the operating aaplifier. and the control pulses are fed to
the recorder tape. The aaplitudes of the pulses of opposite polarity aunt
be strictly the sane in this case.

The 50-17 device which is structurally siaple and easily controlled can be
used successfully for deep-well observations of the profiling type when
aultiple repetitions of the unlocking-.winging-locking cycle are required.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

1.

FOR ONE!“ I388 ONLY

I! ll'lIR/IN l7

  
  
  

  
 

      
     
   

l—— ——
21/; VIII 'IIII ”I”

- _ t‘L..---\.‘_\

;\“\\\\\\\“. \\\\\ ﬁ‘w (\\\‘ A\\\‘ .\“ .‘\:\V~\A ‘
:i ~“—\\- ~| -\;‘
\W .\\V\\\“ “1-.
22‘3””, 3;. 9‘2; _....7——'"‘_i:1( 53:” —/-/

:QII’I~’;:-Zﬁ€'—:T I'mrrmrrﬂ .. ~EJ Wm $§

 

 

 

 
 
   

ymwmmmw- —\
i' él—Illlllllll’l/II.‘ [" J::-\- -“I:_‘3:_\_\_\>~ '
—i A” \\\\‘ Pfﬁ'n‘r' - -
\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\‘.\'\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\ \\'\\'\\\ '

    
 

   

II I/
I grew-
:,.m - ’I‘" 1; m5) ‘
b n 6“] ‘nl
- I x»
-— lulu
“ .
III - '1’" hm! (l)

lei (6) . *1

Figure 2. 50-1? Sole-meter

:- - pnernl view: 1 ~ eeteeing usnet. renotely controlled
electric notor. 2 -— eupportine uznet. 3 - principal mnet.

b -- magnetic circuit of the upper converter. 5 - celibretion coil.
6 -- principel ngnet of the lover converter. 7 - ugnetic circuit
of the lover converter. 8 - houeine. 9 - guide rod. no - eplit
buehins for regulating the poeition of the supporting meet.

ll -- diephrege type eprinu. 12 -- operetin; coil. 13 .. out for
regulating the poeition of the n; .-‘t end the lunatic circuit of
the lover converter. lb - novin; operetin; coil. 15 - m or

usv electric notor;

b - control pend electric circuit: 1 - pulee eeneretor. 2 -
etnbiliter. 3 -- preeeplifier.

output; 2. SM: 3. Pile. P35; t. 1'1; 5. Pr: 6. Inl.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL 053 ONE?

lt lust be noted that. as the experience of 5 years of observations has
indicated. the sensitivity of the existing seissogrsphs cannot be considered
sufficient. For ground observations in the different-phases of the

research -- profile. senistetionary end ststionery -- series seisnosetere
of the SH-ZN. NSF-2 and VEGIK type were used. lnaasuch as all of the. are
nonufsctured in series. they are described in the literature [5]. and

they have long been widely used in seissic research. their characteristics
and paraneters are not presented.

Protective Housings and Clasping Devices. The protective housing of the
deep-well instrusent is designed to protect the elesents of the instrusent
iron the extrese environsent. For both of the deep-well seissosetera -

the SBU-V and the 80-1? -- field protective housings were used which were
covered by plugs on both ends. The upper plug or head of the protective
housing is designed to seal the housing. connect the instrusent to the

cable and place the electric leads connecting the cable strends to the
instrusent circuitry in it. A specially developed standardised head was
used in which conical insulators with internal electric leads were inserted
in the plug bridge. The inside voluse of the head (Just as in the series
sou-V) was filled with chesically neutral castor oil which prevents eccess
of weto' or drilling sud to the electric lead. The sesl of the seissngraph
housing wee reelired using rubber sealing rings. The lower plug of the
protective housing is designed only for sealing the housing. The protective
housings with a universal heed that were used desonstrated good reliahility
and operation not only in the case of short-tern but also long-tern station-
ary observations lasting several years.

For the observations at sny given depth and "disconnection“ of the device
iron the day surface (when it is necesssry to slsck the cable). s clanping
device was used which serves sisultsneously for rigid fastening of tho
seissoseter to the well wells. Out of the nsny types of existing clsnping
devices. a sechanical type unit wss selected as the sisplest one. not
requiring additional cable strends. The basic pert of the device is the
spring (one or two springs. depending on the weight of the well unit)
mechanically released on raising the device end holding it at the required
depth. The displsccnent of the instrussnt in the well is iron bottos to

top in the closed position. with proper adjust-eat the unit operates quite
stably and reliably.

52. Preenplifiers

In connection with the difficulty of isproving the sensitivity of seep-well
seisnoseters. it appeared expedient to anplify the electric signal directly
at the point of instsllation of it for which a pressplifier was installed.
The following besic require-onto sre isposed on the preasplifiera operating
in deep wells and conbined with saissoseters (the deep-well preasplifier):
a) nininun disensions: b) low natural noise level at operating tespereture;
c) operating stability: d) teed econosy.

10
For OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OHICIAI. "8! ONLY

It is necessery to note that the difficulties in using the existing
eeplifiera during stetionary observations at depths of about 3000 .sters
and tenperatures of non than 100‘!) are deternined pri.arily by the
tenpereture chsracteristics of the uplifiera and the netural noise level.

Several types of anplifiers were tested in the verious stages of the
observations. in particular. the K8! end the It'll-T. Por observstions

at low tnperatures (to 30'0) corresponding to depths of 1000 to 1300 .eters.
e pree.plifier with negatiVe feedback was used which was developed st the
Earth Physics Institute of the 088R Acade.y of Sciences (fig 3. a). The
unlifier hes the following pera.eters:

Input inpedence. kilohns ebout 2
Noise reduced to the input. .icrovolte no .ore than 0.5
Tranuiseion coefficient with respect to

voltege. Kn 200
Peed voltage. volts . 1.5
Intake current. .illienps 0.5
Operating tuperature renge. 'C fro. ~15 to +65
Operating frequency renge fro. 0.6 hurt: to

several hi lohertt

The circuit dngre. of the pres-plifier co.bined with the Sill-V
seie.o.eter is shown in Pig 3. b. Although the preelplifier itself has
snail dineneione. plecuent of it in the housing of the seis.o.eter

sinultsneously with the two More or Ssturn type power supply elusnte hes
involved so.e structural changes. It was installed in the lightning
protection co.part.ent. revving the diechsrgere.

The duration of the continuous ststionsry observations by the deep-well
seis.o.eter with the pres-plifier is basically lilited by the discharge
tine of the feed elnents and mounts to about 1 year. Then the instrnent
.ust be lifted out of the well and the power pact replaced. In order to
avoid excessive lifting and lowering operations. s power peck has been
deVeloped which is plsced in the eeis.o.eter end is fed fro. the surface.

The schnstic diegre. of the power peck is depicted in Pig 3. c. It is

a squsre-pulee generstor asse.bled fro. two transistors. A 6-volt oc volt-
age is fed fro. the surfsca. it is converted by the generator to the high
frequency equare voltage. On being picked up fro. the secondery windings
of the Tr-l transfer-er. it is rectified. filtered and fed to the pre-

uplifier power supply circuit. The current intehe by the unit is l0-lJ
.illims.

in order to evoid feeding high voltage to the power pack end preamplifier
fro. the control penel of the sou-v seismgreph (as e result of which they
cen be put out of order). the RPS-20 type '0 relay is introduced into the
circuit diagra. (Pig 3. b). This relay disconnects the power pack
and the prenplifior input fro. the control lines during the operations
of locking (unlocking) and swinging the pendulu of the seiuogreph.

11
FOR 0971(3th US! ONLY
Key:

(12) Iguana

POI OWICIM. 088 ONLY

 

luawraﬁnnnauwkll)

input
output

-I. 5 volts
+1 . 5 volt-
”16!

Cl SOOXGV

Vigor. 3. Preamplifier
a -. achmtic diagram 1: -- circuit dicgrcl with sw-v
coin-outer: c -- circuit diuru of thc povar pack

7.
8.
9.
10.

ll.
12.
13.
1‘.
15.

12

cable ctrandc

anor

uplificr power pack

I" it located in tha cutoutiou
co-partmt

to the! cutoution conpartnnt
kDrZ. m3. con-on

-105 Volt.

co-on

+1.5 volts

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 098 0.1.?

The ploceuent of the prcanplifier directly at the obeervetion point peraite
the treneeieeion of a eufficiently aeplified eignel over the cable to the
eurfecc end at the cane tile ukee it poeeible to decreaee the electrical
inductione eignificently and increeee the eeneitivity of the equipeent.

53. Amplifying end Recording Unit

The electric eignel of the eei-oeeter uplified et the obeerwation point by
a preaeplifier ie fed over the rec-o or RSI-6 logging ceble free the
borehole to the aplifyim and recording equipnent.

Devicee developed er the Earth l’hyeice lnetitute of the USSR Med-y of
Sciencee were ueed ee the power uplifiere in the different obeervetion
etegee. The recording wee done by the RVJ-T type vieible recordere [l].
Stenderd pen recordere were connected at the output of the device.

In perellel with the vieible recording by the pen recordere at cone of the
obeervetion pointe a recording wee lede by e cuss frequency eelection
eeienic etetion with octave filtere (the reeonence frequenciee of the
filters were l.‘. 2.8. 5.6. and ll hertz). The recording wae node on
photographic paper ueing the Its-ll recorder. The block diagree of the

eeieleic recording channel and frequency cherecterietice ere ehown in Pig e.
At the auto-etion etatione included in the teet area. the recording wee

node by e rediotele-etric unit which ie deecribed in Chapter Ill.

The control of the uplificetlon end etebility of the charecterietice of
the deep-well eeieeic chennele wee cerried out ueing the calibretion
eignel of the conetent aeplitude Iegnetic generator MPA).

Thue, the eituetion with inetrulent eupport of deep-well eeieeology ie no
followe:

l. The exieting eete of equip-ent for tho eeieeic obeervetione in deep
welle nor-ally operete at tennereturee to 50'0 which in the vicinity of
Alec-Ate correeponde to depthe of 1200-1300 Ietere.

2. The one of e preeeplifier directly at the point of inetalletion of the

eeiemeter in the well eeeentielly increeeee the ueeful eeneitivity of the
equipment.

3. The eeneitivity of the deep-well eeieeoeeter ie ineufficient for
obeervetion in deep welle. for profile well obeervetione it ie expedient
to uee the 50-1? eeie-oeetere dietinguiehed by ei-plicity of control. 'end

for prolonged etetionary eeeeureacnte. the SlU-d eeieloleetere which ere
eteble end relieble in operetion.

13
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
an

FOR OHIO!” US! ONLY

 

Z \
4, AM

u .41: c It (mm

Figure 6. Seielic Channel
I -- block diagram 5 - frequency cheracteriatica of the
acianoneter (l). the nonlifyin; and recording channel (2).
the entire channel (3) end the reproduction filters of the
Chi“ [frequency aelection eeinnic etation] (In)

Chrometer h. Filter unit
'l'erlinal aaolifier i. Galvanonetere
Pen recorder J. cntss [frequency aelection aeinnic
Recorder station]
Control panel In. Seimgraph
Borehole or well 1. Preanplifier
Electric pover aupnly n. f. hertz
lb

POI 077101“. US! ONLY
FOR OHIO!“ US! ONLY

Io. Por tho furthar develop-ant of daap-voll roiaaoloay it ia nocoaoary to
inprova tha deep-well equip-ant. The basic araat horo are tho following
develop-onto: a) single cocoonant and triple couponont dun-wall
aoia-onatoro with a natural oscillation pariod of 5 aaconda. tha aanaitivity
of uhlch in 20-40 tinaa sraator than the existing ona: h) uplifiara with
low noiu lavol and channel aultiploxing oquipnant for trananiuion of
information (to. tho all over tha nan-core cable; c) varniona of tho
dean-won aquipnant with thar-al atahility to 120'0.

15
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

CHAPTER II. SENSITIVITY OP DEEP-”ELL OBSERVATIONS AND STRUCTURB OF 133
SBISWS

At the preaent tine the operationa with reepect to increaaing the aenaitivity
of eeiaaic operationa are developing in two areaa.

The firat of than in connected with wave eelection by 'thain para-etera
characterizing the wave field. here. in addition to the traditional wave
eelection with reepect to frequency. the wave aelection with reepect to the
direction of propagation and velocity ia acquiring acre and acre aignifi-
cance in recent tiaee. In procedural reapecte it ia connected with groupa
of aeiaaographa located along the line or on the obeervation plane. In
addition. wave eelection with reepect to the polarization attribute (the
polarization filtration) haa developed which in haaed on wave aeperation
at the point with reepect to the direction of action or with reepect to the
nature of the trajectory of action of the particlea oi the aediua. The
aeneitivity increaaea aignificantly on coahination of both typea of wave
aelection with reepect to direction of propagation and polarization of the
wavea [16].

The second area ie haaed on the renewal iron the aurface. that ia. the
ohaervationa in the walla [17]. In each apacific aituation. depending on
the goala of the reaearch. the nature of the wave interlerence and ohaerva-
tion conditiona. different aethoda of ilprowing the uaeful aenaitivity or
coahinationa of than can he aelected.

when etudying the aeiaaic characteriatice of large induatrial centera. the
apecific ohaervation conditiona greatly coaplicata and aoaetiaaa exclude
the poaaihilitiee of uaing the aethoda haeed on wave aelection with reepect
to direction of propagation. At the aale tine. the wave interference
priaarily aade up of aurface waveo givea riae to effectiveneaa of the
aecond area. Therefore when atudying the aeianic characteriatice of local
aectlona of large induatriol centera the aeialic obaervationa in horaholea
acquire apeciel intereat. Thia chapter diacuaaea thia area.

Let us characterize the etate of the art with reepect to the available
publiahed data and thua deecrihe the experiaental atudiea perforaed by the
Earth Phyaica Inatitute of the USSR Acade-y of Sciencea in walla drilled

16
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

to a depth of 3000 meters basically in terrigenic deposits and located in
areas with high (Alua-Ata. Tashkent) and low (the village of Chilik) noise

levels and also in shallow (to 100 asters) wells revealing the crystalline
foundation.

"hen estisating the sensitivity of the aquipeent it is necessary first of

all to discover the laws of variation with depth of the level of seissic
noise and useful signal.

The variation in noise level with depth was investigated by the sathod of
Vertical seisaic profiling (V8?) [15]. however. the background interference
not only changes with depth. but it is also characterized by great variabil-
ity in tise. In order to study the tise laws. long-tern seaistationary

and stationary observations were perfornsd in the wells. During these
observations a large number of different earthquakes were recorded in a
number of wells at different depths.

The perforned observations sade it possible to eatisate the possible gain
in sensitivity during the deep-well observations and also to cospare the
shape of the recording of individual wells end the structure of seissograns
obtained at different depths and on the day surface.

51. State of the Art with Respect to Seissological Observations in boreholes
(Brief Survey of Published Date)

In the last 20 to 25 years studies were made abroad (especially in the

United States and Japan) with respect to the develop-ant of seissologic
observations in wells. Sets of deep-well equipsent were developed. and
studies were nade in areas of different structure in the depths range free
several tens to 6000 seters. It is necessary to note that in the published
materials the data on possible gain in sensitivity of the equip-ant are
presented only in sale of the first papers; prinary attention in the sajority
of the papers has been given to the wave interference characteristics and

a discussion of their nature.

One of the first papers on estiaating the possibility of increasing the
sensitivity of the equip-ant during recordings in wells sust be considered
to be the experisent of [00] perforsed to isolate wsves reflected free the
Hohorovlchich surface. The observations perforsed in three boreholes at
depths of 1000 seters desonstrated that the natural noise background at
the surface is appreciably greater than at depth. Thus. whereas on the
surface the noise level reached ‘0 nicrovolta. at s depth of 1000 seters
it was about s sicrovolts. and in one of the wells it was 1 sicrovolt and
did not differ from the natural noise of the asplifier. The fact of a
decreased noise level with depth indicated the important role of the
Rayleigh waves in surface noise. The results of these observations have
confirsed the theoretical proposition of the possibility of increasing the
sensitivity of the equip-ant by burying the seissograph.

17
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
'08 OFFICIAL US! ONLY

The seisnolosicsl observetione in wells begsn to develop quickly et the
end of the 1950's. This wes pro-oted to s greet extent by the specisl
studies to conpere the recording edditions in ceesd end unceeed wells.
which denonstreted thet under the condition of e well-cemented well end e
relisbly clenped seiesogreph the recordings in' the frequency tense of
15-70 hertr were not distorted by the effect of the casing [71]. The
complete identicelnees of the recordings in the cesed end unceeed wells
wee also proved end. et the seas tine it wee denonetreted the: the ceeed
wells cemented to the heed did not distort the recordings in the frequency
rense fro. 1 to lo hertz. These results sreetly simplified further studies,
for the recording in en open well is elweye freusht with the deeper of
losing the eeienosrephgnd feilure of the well itself.

For convenience of investisetion. ell of the borehole obeervetione cen be
provisionelly divided into three groups: obeervetions in ehellow wells
(to 100 Ietere) [66. 77, end so on]. nediuI-deep wells (to 600 esters)
[77. 78. end so on]. end deep wells (sore then 600 Deters) [66. 70, 72-75.
and so on]. The drilling of shellow wells ie eppreciebly cheeper end
observation sinpler in connection with which the evelustion of the feosi-
bility of increeeins the sensitivity here is of epeciel interest. The
obeervsoione in deep wells ere coupled with use: technicel difficulties
csusod by increesed pressure and tenpersture.

Let us present the beeic obeervetion results.

Observetione in Shellow end liedius-Deep wens. ,The soot cosplete studies
of noise in shellow wells ere presented in reference (66]. which peruitted
its authors to for-ulete certein conclueione.

Apeche Hell (Oklehons). This eree is one of the "quietest" pleces in the
continentsl United Stetes. The depth of the borehole is 18.3 uters. The
weethorins zone is very thin. end the ground seisnoneters were inetslled
directly on lisestone. The bechsround in tne period rsnse of 0.3-1. 6 seconds
is node up nlsost cospletely of oecilletions with e period of 0.5 2seconds:
the 0. S-eecond spectrel peek hes e seen enplitude of shoot 0.2 n- 2lhertt.

0n n still dsy no significent difference wss observed between the noise
level on the surfsce end in the well. The probsbility of the occurrence

of e background of the given or suller esplitude is illustreted in ti; 5. e
by which the decresse in noise level connected with wind at e depth of

18.3 netere is obvious. Pron the humerus of noise of different
periods on e still dey with e wind velocity of 20-‘0 III/hr it follows thet
the noise is represented beeicelly by oscilletions with e period of

0.5 seconds; the insignificant predouiunce of the lens-period conponent

in the borehole by cosperieon with the eurfece is noticeeble. The depth of
the borehole is insufficient for couplete dieeppeerence of the wind noise.

Hichino hountsin Hell. The surfsce snddeepdwell seissogrsphs were instslled
on bedrock (grenite). 0n e still dey the beckaround interference level on
the surface differs little fro. the beckground interference level in the
borehole. During windy weather with s wind velocity of 30 h/hr st depths

13
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ontcm. 083 MY

 

:3— 3: .30»: new on: 55.653 003
canon—0.3» also: and Han-m 5 0302 .n. 0.5»:

sh u a .Q 3 s~ s 3 a
a n a . hwy» _ o
3 § § 3 t ‘ shez'ih
)QIN
N‘Vbﬂ‘Ilix
lIIIIJ\ s 33 .a
s... {v p
.e ~ §
~V
z
h~
‘N
ts». §§~ . t§ .
. 5
3s» -§3§IR§ s
1?... 1‘ s
§~
\s
h‘
.
\~
\§
er

19

FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL US! ONLY

[Legend and key for Fig 5, preceding page]

a -- probability of occurrence and percentage content of noiee in the
period range of 0.3-1.6 aeconde at the eurface end at a depth of 18.3 a
(Apache. 0k1ehone): 1 - etill dey. eurface and a depth of 18.3 latere,
2 ~- wind velocity 20-60 kn/hour. depth 18.3 netera. 3 -- wind velocity
20-60 kl/hr. eurface;

b - energy epectra of the noiee in the Pinedele well ("yo-ins) on the
eurface (1) end at a depth of 32 aetere (2) and in the "inner well
(South Dakota) at night (3) end in the daytime (6);

c -- amplitude retioe of the noiee ahifte in the well at different deptha
and on the eurface (Jepan) for different frequency intervala (1. 2 ~-
horizontal coeponente. 3 -- vertical conponent).

Key:
1. nnzlhert:
2. T. eec
3. X. n-
4. f, hertz

of 61-36 letere. no wind interference waa detected; at a depth of 18 I
only an inaignificent part of the background ie connected with wind.

Finedale Hell (“yo-ins). A well 61 aetera deep wee drilled in ehely clay
having a longitudinal wave velocity on the bottoe of VP'3'0 ka/eec. On
a still day the background level with reapect to 50! probability level
decreeeed with depth and at the botton wee 0.7 of the eurface value. The
aaplitude of the ueeful eignel at the acne depth decreeeed to 0.9 of the
eurface amplitude. Table 1 ehowa the reaulta obtained when analyzing the

recording at different deptha. At a depth of 61 letere the noiee connected
with wind ie not obeerved in practice.

The peak in the borehole noiee epectrul (Pig 5, b) between 0.7 and 0.6
aeconda ie ceueed by the fact that the noiee connected with wind doea not
dininiah at thie ahellow depth.

Table 1

 

o-a 2,5 ' 2.0 a: 0.15

36-50 0.3 ~ 2.15 a: one
M 2,1 2.0 as 0.14 .

ms 4.0 2.3 e: ~ o.oe

ao-eo e.e 2.3 e: 0.34

 

. on; 3. borehole; a. ‘borehole' on;

Key: l. V. ka/hr; 2. A’“"‘ix
eurface

5. H. I: 6. “borehole

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

winner Well (South Dakota). The level of microseisaic background in this
area is very high -- 26 nm: therefore the “wind" background is not isolated
on the surface recordings. The decrease in background with depth takes
place on the average from 20 nm at the surface to 16 nm at a depth of

56 aetera and 5 nm at a depth of 302 meters. The mean amplitude of the
signal at a depth of 302 naters was 0.33 of the surface amplitude. and
therefore the signal/background ratio increased by only 1.9 times. The
peak at 0.35 seconds at night (Pig 5. b) is appreciably less than in the
daytime. and this indicates the "cultural" origin of the background.

In the opinion of the author of reference [66]. a reduction in background
level with removal from the surface is explained by a decrease in intensity
of both surface waves and volumetric waves. The decrease in amplitudes of
the surface waves in the presence of a low velocity zone takes places
especially rarely. The decrease in the noise with depths. which is
especially fast in the upper part of the section. is also caused by a
decrease in the noise of "wind" origin.

Tokyo Meteorological Institute [78]. "hen studying noise at depths of
10. 20. 50. 100. 150. and 200 meters the following results are obtained.

1. The decrease in noise level is more significant for high frequencies.
which is obvious from Fig 5. c. The noise amplitude ratios in the well
and at the surface for different frequency intervals are indicated. For
example. for a depth of 50 meters (vertical component) the noise amplitude
ratio in the well and at the surface is about 0.05 in the frequency range
of 6.3-10 hertz.

2. The low—frequency noise amplitudes (less than 0.5 hertz) decrease
weekly with depth.

3. Significant improvement of the signal-noise ratio is achieved at a
depth of 50 meters. In general the optimal depth depends on the geological
structure.andfor each area it must be determined experimentally.

6. The noise connected with a passing series of transport vehicles or
with falling of heavy weights is not sensed by the borehole instrument
even at a depth of 50 meters.

In reference [77] a description is presented of the observations in bore-
holes 66 meters deep (ﬂokogiriyama) and 380 meters deep (Bongo) performed
to increase the signal/noise ratio when recording microearthquskee in a
frequency range of 5-100 hertz. The noise ratio at the surface to the
noise in the well 66 meters deep is equal to two. and in a well 380 m deep.
10. The signal/noise ratio at a depth of 64 meters is only somewhat
greater than on the surface. and at a depth of 380 meters. three times
greater. The useful signals are recorded more clearly in the boreholes;
therefore it is expedient to observe microearthquakes in the well even if
it is not very deep.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL 083 OIL?

Observations in Deep Hells. A detailed analysis of the observation eateriels
in three deep wells is presented in reference [65].

Grapevine Hell (Texas). The Grapevine Hell is 3060 eaters deep. it is
cased. and the casent is raised 30’. eaters iron the bottoe. The noise
characteristic in the well is show in fig 6. s. The curve for the
decrease in noise aeplitude depth is constructed with respect to the
50: probability level. The greater part of the noise is in the period
range of 0. 3-0.6 seconds. The noise decreases rapidly with depth and
approaches a constant value of 1.5 nu: this is caused. in the opinion of
the author. by the volunetric waves. the noise level iron which. in
contreet to the surface waves. does not change with depth.

The Robert Hall (Oklahons) is about 3000 eaters deep. it is cased. and the
cement is raised 306 eaters iron the bottos. with respect to the noise
variation curve with depth (Pig 6. b) it is obvious that to a depth of
2130 neters the law of variation of the noise eeplitude is the sees as in
the Grapevine Hell. which indicates the seas type of wave. Lower down.
the noise level again begins to increase. This depth corresponds to the

low-velocity layer. and the increase in noise level can be connected with
wave guide phenonene.

Orlando Hell (Florida). The Orlando Hell (Ploride) is 2080 esters deep. it
is cased and ceeented 96$ eaters fro- the bottoe. The surface noise is
highly unstable es a result of low-frequency interference (0.3-0.5 sec)
connected with the uctivity of esn. At depth the long-period noise pra-
doninatee (0.8-1.5 aeconds). Along the curve (Fig 6. b) the noise varia-
tions with depth constructed by the $02 probability level it is obvious
that the noise decrease corresponds to the denping of when node of the
Rayleigh waves. A sharp ieproveeent of the signal/noise ratio (or high-
frequency signals is a characteristic feature; the high-frequency noise
slnost conpletely disappears at a depth of 1975 eaters.

In the opinion of the author of [65]. observations in three wells d-on-
strsted the following:

1) The noise level decreases with depth: the degree of the decrease depends
on the frequency and the seiseogeologicsl characteristic of the section;

2) The sqlitudes of the useful signal decrease with depth and reach a
eininu at a depth equal to half the wavelength reflected iron the surface:

3) The Rayleigh waves predoeinate in the noise;

I.) The recording divisions in each well are different. and the estiestion
of the gain in sensitivity for each of thee lust be especially detenined.
in general. the suboersion of the seiseogrspha will per-it us to obtain a

signal/noise ratio of the sane order as in the "quietest" continental
areas.

22
FOR O'HCIAL "8! ONLY
'Ol ORIGIN. 088 ONLY

      

1 1/4.!

figure 6. Noise in Deep Helle
e -- probability of occurrence of noiee end vorietion of it with
depth in the Crepevinn wen (Tune) in the period range of
0.3-1.3 eeconde: 0 - eurfece. l -- 0.2. 2 -- 0.5. 3 -- 0.6.
b -- 1.3. 5 ." 1.8. 6 n 2.5. 7 n 3.0 no COW. I V.‘
conetructed for e predoeinent period of 0.3 eeconde;
h -- the ebeolute end reletive noiee elplitudee in the llobert
wen (Oklehoee) (curve 1) end the Orlendo Hell (Ploride)
(curve 2). The nubere et the dote ere the predoeinent periode.

l. X. n-
2' l‘reletive

Nature of the Noise. 1! the lewe of verietion of the noiee level in the
well according to the dete of verioue euthore egree eeong eech other. then
the opinions of the euthore diverse in the prohlee of the neture of the
noiee. In eoee pepere [64. 7‘. 75] the noiee ie interpreted ee e colhine-
tion of different eodee of the Reyleixh weve. in [69] end other pepere the
heeic propertiee of noiee ere expleined fro. the point of View of the
etetionery conpreeeion wewee. In reference [67] where the reeulte of eeny
yenre of etudying the noiee hecluround in the welle with different geologicel
etructure ere et-ed up. the neture of the eeienic noiee ie expleined ee e
nixture of woluetric end eurfece wevee. Defined coohinetione of different
typee of wewee correepond to different period rengee. Thue. the retioe

of the noiee epectre et the eurfece end et e depth of 5200 eetere end eleo
the theoreticel curvee of the firet three Rayleigh Iodee end P-wevee for
not-eel enslee of incidence for the fort Stockton Hell (Texee) perldt the
euthor to coneider thet the ceuee of the noiee in the well cen be the

23
M 077161“. US! ONLY
m ONICMI. 088 01“.?

preaente of different typee of wavea in the adjacent period rangea and aleo
the preeenca of Love wavea. The ruulte obtained in the Pinedale Hall

("yo-log) are explained beat of all by a conbination of P-wavee and the
bnaic Rayleigh node.

For the Apache Hell (Oklahona) the experinental aaplitude-depth ration in
the period range of 2.0-0.0 aeconde agree well with the theoretical curvee
and the P-wavea in the Rayleigh node. The autocorrelation analyeie of the

retordinge after digital filtration parforeed to eeparate theee two caeee
denonetroted that the noiee ia aade up of aurface wavea. The noiee in the
period range of 0.8-0.3 eaconde ia uaually connected with reapect to ite1
nature to the cloaeneae of populated placea and their greater ”cultural”
activity. The noiee epectra for the Grapevine Dell located near the large
induetrial center of Dallae. Texaa. are characterized by a vaet decreaee in
noiee with depth which in detereined by the prinary Rayleigh node. At
deptha where the aqplitude of the priaary aode ie mil. the aaplitude-
depth ratio can be explained either by a coabination of higher nodea or by
voluctric wavea and interference of two typee of wavee.

Reference [82] containa a deecription of the obeervatione in the Grapevine
Hell perforled ainultaneouely by four three-coeponent devicee located at
deptha of 139. 1062. 1951 and 2883 latera. The reeulte obtained confirl the
fact that the aeieeic noiee in node up of a net of Rayleigh wave nodee.
but. in addition. different Love wave nodee are alao preaent. The volu-
Ietric wavea were not detected in the area which in connected with the
pretence of a high level of ”cultural" noiee. It ie noted that in the
areae where there ie no high level of ”cultural" noiee. the voluetric
wevee ate a aignificant contribution to the aeienic noiee.

in addition to the above-noted baaic worhe. othera [72. 73. 79] are known
in which atudiee were nade of the eeielic noiee and ice nature. he a
reeult of analyzing the' publiehed papere it ie poeeible to draw the
following conclueione.

The noiee level decreaeee with deptha; at great deptha the differencee in
noiee inteneity for different areae and variability of noiee with tine
within the liaite of one eection ere appreciably leae than on the day
eurface. The degree of decreaee in noiee with depth for different area
in different and depende on the frequency and the eeienogeological
characteriatic of the eection. The feateet decreaee in noiee with depth
in obeerved in the area with a high level of "cultural" noiee. for low-
noiee arcae. the decreaee in noiee with depth in obeerved only for the
high-frequency coeponenta of the epectru. In the individual aectione
of the well againat a background of general decreaee in noiee. local
buildup of the noiee can be obaerved connected with the waveguide phennnena.

The aignal level decreaaee with depth and reachee a nininu at a depth
equal to half the wave length.

 

1 ("Cultural“ ie uaed th ut to refer to noiee guereted by
eepecially ea in citiee.

2‘
M OHICIAI. US! ONLY
POI OPPlClAL 088 oats

Useful Sensitivity of the borehole Stations. This index lust be specially
estisated. The greatest gain can be obtained in areas with high ground
noise level. In all cases the subaersion of the seissograph ashes it
possible to obtain a signal/noise ratio of the seas order as for ground
observations under the aost favorable conditions.

The signal/noise ratio at a depth of 100 asters increases by 3-4 tises
for frequencies of 2-l0 hertz. The nuber of isolated earthquakes in the
presence of borehole observations increases by 2.2 tines.

The application of cosplax vertical systaas is effective only for areas
with a high level of ground noise and a sharp decrease in then with depth.
here the signal/noise ratio can reach values of lS~25 decibels.

92. laws of Variation of Noise Level with Depth

The observations were perforled by the V8? (vertical seismic profiling]
aethod in wells located in different areas with respect to noise level.

The Tashkent and Alss-Ata Hells are located under conditions of high ground
noise level connected with the vital activity of large industrial centers.
In the Novo-Alekaeyevahaya Hall the high noise level is connected with a
concentrated source located nearby (the building sstarials coabine) and
the Chilik Hell is located under high noise level conditions.

Observations in Large Industrial Centers. Tashkent. This borehole is
designed specially for geophysical seasuresenta and it was drilled in 1968.
It revealed Quaternary. Naoganic. Palaogenic. Cretaceous and Triassic-
Jurassic deposits and went into the Paleosoic at a depth of about 2‘00 a.
The basic observations were perforled in June and October of 1970. The
results of the observations of different series agree with each other.

According to the graphs of the variation of anxious noise asplitudes with
depths (Pig 7. a) it is obvious that on the day surface the noise level is
very high and fluctuates at different tiaes of day with brocd lilits.
Hhereos in the davtise (the dotted curves). ..-.3.;: 1'3: on. at night
(the solid curves) it is a total of 80 ns.

with an increase in depth. the interference background disiniehes. The
sharpest decrease in noise level is observed in the upper part of the
section. At a depth of 350-000 asters the noise level already decreases
by approximately 1-1/2 orders. At greater depth the decrease in noise
takes place appreciably sore slowly. In the depth range of 600-1000 asters
the interference background disinishes on the average only by 2 tiles.

In the depth range froa 1000 to 1800-1900 asters. a total of two series of
observations were aade at different tiles. The interference level
decreases still sore slowly here. and at taxi-us depths at night it is
2.5-3.0 and 9-10 no.

25
’0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
"1.5.8.3! .« “I. .u A 3.

5.7—. an and doom»... 2.»
do can.» .33"... 1.59502... I .— 330v no .3383 a 3 ~25— ooaououuounu Ilia- I u
3:: 33:3: 98:33 won
a: use: I.» 3 7053 3303 clans 2.» 5
vol nag 3.33 ya!!— u. gouge!— qu-uuuuouan K 0.59:
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

A steble difference is observed in the noise bschground level et night end
in the deytise. 0n the dey surfece the noise beckground level in the
deytise can be en order higher then st night. with en increeee in depth
thie difference disinishee. end in the depth renge of 300-1000 seters the
retio of the bechground noise level on the everege is two.

The sinista noise bscItground both on the dsy surfece end st internel
points of the sedius wee observed et night on e holidsy. For this series
signiticently sneller decresse in noise esplitude with depth is cherecter-
istic then for the other nighttise ohservetion series.

For cosperison with the bechground esplitudee on the surfece end in depths

anchronous recordings were sede of the borehole end ground eeiseogrephs.
e vsristions in beckground retio on the suriece end st depth ere pre-

sented in Pig 7. b. For the dey series the retio in the upper pert of the
section incresses sherply st first. Thus. in the depth renge of 0-200 s
it Veriee by sore then en order. with e further increese in depth it grows

significsntly more slowly. end in the 200-1000 teeter renge it triples in
ell.

At night the retio of the noise enplitude in the well end on the surfsce
in the upper pert of the section increeses sore slowly. end the veins of
ten is reeched only et e depth of ebout 600 setere. At greeter depths
the ”night" end "dey" grephs coincide. The sundey obeervstion series for
which sinisun noise saplitude retios ere cherecteristic constitutes en
exception. it e depth of 1000 setere thie retio is 14.. et the use ties
so for the ressining series it is 50.

A cosperison of the grsphs constructed with respect to the testim- sspli-
tude level end with respect to the evelege sexisul esplitudes indicetes
thet the everege velues ere sneller then the unint- velues for epprox-
isetcly 20-302.

The predoninsnt interference weve periods on the dey surfece snount to
about 0.2 seconds. At the interns! points of the sedit- elresdy beginning
st 50 Deters. the periods ere equsl to 0.3 seconds. end they very very
slowly with depth. At night the predoeinent noise period is sosswhet
greeter then in the deytise.

Ales-Ate. A well 2000 seters deep wen drilled in the terrigenic coersely
clestic deposits for which continuous increese in velocity with depth is
cherecteristic. In the upper pert this growth tekes plece sore sherply.
end with depth. the velocity buildup grsdient decreeses. The curves for
the esplitude verietion in the depth renge of 0-950 setere for three dey-
tise obeervetion series end {our nighttise series (Pig 8. e) indicete

that the observetione of the diiterent series egree well with esch other.
grouping quite nerrow bends into two: dey end night. The interference
background in the deytine end st night differs on the everege by two tines.
and the neture o! the ssplitude decresee with depth is epproxisetely the

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OPPICIAL 088 ONLY

eane. tn the upper part of the aection (50-250 aetera) a aherp decreeae
In noiae with depth ia obeerved: the noiae aaplitude decreaaea at night
in prectice by an order (free 270 to 25 nu). and in the daytina by a
halforder (free 220 to 60 0-). In the depth range of 250-930 latera the
noiae anplituda dacreeeea a total of 3-3.5 tieea (free 60 to 13 n- in the
daytile end free 23 to 7 he at night).

The atetiatical proceeeing of the lO-aecond noiae recording interval of
the deytine aeriea made it poaaible to conatruct the probability curvea
for the occurrence of noiae of given or lower aaplitude (Pig 8. b). by
the curvea it ie obvioue that. for axe-pie. at a depth of 150 aetera the
probability of occurrence of noiae with an aaplitude of 60 us end leea
ia 601. At a depth of 850 letera it ia poeaibla to expect a ahift of

8 nn or leaa with the aeee probability of 60!. for the aaae depth the
probability that the background elplitude will not exceed 17-10 n- will
be equal to 1001.

For coapariaon. in the eaae figure the data are part of the curve obtained
in the Grapevine Hell (Texea. 03A) in which a very large volune of work
wee done to atudy noiae. Coaperiaon ahowa that on the aurfaca the noiae
level in Alla-Ate ia eaaentially higher than in the Grapevine Hill. Thus.
whereea the probability of the occurrence of noiae with an amplitude of
loo na .r leaa in Alla-Ate at a depth of so Iatara ia 151. on the aurfece
of the Grapevine Hell it ia eore than 902. At the aale tile at a depth

of 650 netera the probability curvee differ in practice little. The
difference in interference levele obvioualy ia explained by the fact that
the Grapevine Hell. in contraat to the Alla-Ate hell. ie a diatence of
about 50 he free a large city (Dallaa). The curve for the noiae amplitude
ea a function of depth for the day aeriea of obeervationa in the Crapevine
Hell conatructed with reepect to the 50: probability level (the heavy

line with circlea in Pig 0. e) liea in the region of the "night aeriea”

of obeervatione in the Alla-Ate Hell.

Free the grapha of the noiae apectre at different deptha (fig 0. c) it ia
obvioue that eaninmn noiae eaplitude both at the day aurfece and at
greater deptha correapond to the long-period coeponenta of the apectrul.
In the frequency band fron 0.2 to 0.0 hart: the nature of the decreeae

in noiae with an increaae in frequency at the day eurface and at depth ia
identical. At a frequency of 0.8 hertz the noiae level at the day aurfece
will be 0.08 n-. The noiae level at a depth of $50 aetera in thia frequency
range ie approximately an order lower than on the day aurfece. beginning
with l and up to 6 hertz. the nature of the decreeae in noiae variea
aharply. At the day aurface egalnat a background of aherp peeka. aole
increaae in noiae level ia obeerved at the eane tile ea at a depth of
"-550 Ietera the noiae level decreaaea. but thia decreeae taken place
appreciably lore alowly than in the low-frequency range. In the 5-7 hertz
bend. the noiae eaplitude at a depth of $50 aetere la 60 tilea leaa than
at the day aurfece. for the entire inveetigeted frequency range the ratio
of the apectre at a depth of ho9$0 eatere and at the aurface (fig 0. c)

. 28-
IOI OFPICIAL US! ONLY
POI O'PICIAL 088 ONLY

ie leeo then one. The retio becoeee ninieel in the 1.7-2.7 herte bend.
The neture of the decreeee in noiee on frequenciee in the renge or

0.2 to 1.0 herte pereite the coneideretion thet the beeic eodee o! the
Reyleigh wevee predoeinnte here. In the higher frequency bend the noiee
can be repreeented by e cenbinetion of beeic. firet end eoeetieee eecond
Reyleigh eodee end the volueetric vevee. Ineeeuch ee the vell ie

located directly on the edge oi euch e lerge induetriel city ee Alee-Ate.
the noiee cen be expleined prieerily by the "culturel" activity of the

city.

Oheorvatione in Areee with Low Level Noiee et Depthe of 300 end 600 hetero.
The obeervetione in velle eeverel hundrede or eetere deep ere of greet
intoreet. Thie ie expleined by the lect thet the velle ere eleo coepere-
tively cheeper end cen be drilled by porteble drilling rige. In eddition.
fro- the technicel point of view the obeervetione et theee depthe ere
eppreciebly eeeier end equipeent ie eppreciebly eiepler. At the eeee tile.
ee wee deeonetreted. the eherpeet decreeee in beckground occure in the
upper pert of the eection.

The poeeihilitiee or the obeervetione ere eetieeted by the eeteriele
obteined in the Chilik borehole. In contreet to the Teehkent end the
Alec-Ate voile. the Chilik Hell in loceted et e eignificent dietence (roe
the lergo citiee which ceueee eppreciebly eeeller beckgrouod of the ebove-
ground interference end pereite eynchronoue obeervetione on the dey eurfece
end in the well.

The Chilih well. the depth of which it 600 eetere. ie loceted on the edge
of the reyon center of Alan-Ate Obleet with the eeee nene epproxiletely

too he eeet of Aime-Ate. In geologicel reepecte thie eree differe (roe the
previouely inveetigeted onee by leee thickneee of the eedieentery depoeite
which reech e totel of 1350 eetere here end ere repreeented. juet en in
Alon-Ate. by terrigenic coereely cleetic rock. The verticel eeieeic pro-
filing by individuel eeriee in the dey end night with e etep of 50 eetere
over the entire depth intervel eede it poeeible to ohtein the curvee for
the verietion of the noiee eeplitudee for two night end two dey eeriee

(eee Fig 8. e). In the deytile the noiee level quickly decreeeee with
depth. and et :00 eetere it in en order lower then on the eurfece. end et
300 eetere. 20 tinee lover. In the renge iron :00 to 600 eetere the noiee
eeplitudce ere cut epproxieetely in helr. At night the noiee beckground on
the day euri‘ece ie eeeentielly lower then in the deytiee. end it decroeeee
with depth lore elowly then in the deytiee. Thue. et e depth of 300 letere
the noine bechground ie 3 to e tieee leee then on the dey eurfece.

The predoeinent noiee frequency on the recordinge obtained on the eurfece
ie ebout 3 hertz; et e depth of 600 eetere it decreeeee to 2.5 hertz.

The epectrel enelyeie ehove (ti; 8. c) thet the neture of the epectrel curvee
for the Chilik Hell ie enelogoue to the eeee curvee (or the Alee-Ate Hell.

29
I03 OIPICIAL "SB ONLY
Key:
1.
2.
3.

 

FOR ORIGIN. I18! ONLY

0 '(3).
III. II Udﬂllur'

 

Figure 8. Noiee securound et night (eolid lino) end in the
deytiee (dotted line) in the velle of nee-Ate
end Chilik
e -- noiee eeplitwle ee e function of depth (or the nee-Ate end
Chilih Hell-z b -- probebility curvee of the occurrence of mine
of the given or lover uplitode et depthe of l - 850 eeterc.
2 -- 750 noun. 3 - 650 eetere, l. - soo eetere. 5 - 650 e.
6 - 300 utere. 7 .. 150 Ietere end 8 - $0 ectere in the
Alla-Ate Hell. The dotted curvee ere the dete on the Crepevine
Hell (Tenn) for e depth of 630 utere (the circle) end the
eurfece (croeeee):

Ala-Ate
Chilik
X. ne

30
m OHICIAL US! ONLY
POR 0P?191AL 088 ONLY

       
   
    

    
    
  

  

   

a. ' ' I (2)
:5; """""""""" _-......._.::::::::
= ==IIIIHIEHIIEHH
I -_ !!!IIIIIIIJIIIIIIII
El-...:ii._.__.::..: :=.-.;== :in
=:=:‘=:I"""=:::ii:: =1-

IIIIIII --II

iaaigi" wan-
g3?! H 'I!!I! ___.
ii, ii; iii
"'5“ I" III
ELL ............
==== ' . 5'55; ...............
555:? mu
-IIII Ill
§E§§i=s-a=~' 5. viii
==Iii mm: =""

-IIII||‘|IIIII 1|“

0 5" (1)

Figaro a (continued)
c -- upcctro and opoctral ratio at depths of 1 - 50. 2 - $50.
3 -- 950 noun (or the Alla-Au "on and lo - surface.
S. 6 - 600 nun for the cmm Hell.
Kay:
1. f. hertz

2‘ “nun-urine.

31
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI OHICIAI. 088 ONLY

The Ieexinun noiee eeplitudee ere obeerved in the low-frequency pert of
the epectru. end the differencee in levele on the eurfece end et depth
are nininel hero. Hith en increeee in frequency by epproxieetely up to

l hertr the noiee level decreeeee eherply. At frequenciee of nore then

1 hertr. the decreeee betonee leee eherp. On the dey eurfece the noiee
level decreeeee very little with frequency, end e reletive union of

the noiee ie obeerved et e frequency of 2.5-3 hertt. At e depth of 600 n
the noiee level .reechee veluee of ‘-6 ran on e frequency of 6-7 hertt.

For the Chililt Hell. the nininun retio of the epectre et e depth of 600 I
end on the eurfece ie 0.02 on frequenciee of 3.5-6.5 hertz (Pig 3. c).

Lewe of Verietion of noiee leckground in Three Helle. For the dey eeriee.
the bechground level in the Chilik Hell ie epprexinetely helf the heck-
eround level in the Aloe-Ate Hell end four tinee leee then the beckground
level in the Teehkent Hell. Let ue reneeher thet the generel bechground
level in the ‘l‘eehltent Hell ie greeter then in the Alle-Ate Hell by
epproxinetely two tieee [2]. At n depth of 900 netere. the noiee elplitude
in the Aloe-Ate Hell it 12-13 tee in the deytine end it ie cloee with reepect
to velue to the noiee level in the Teehhent "ell et night. the different
noiee levele in the welle cen he expleined by the fect thet the ‘reehkent
Hell in in the center of the city. neer lerge induetriel enterprieee end
other eourcee of noiee. end the Aloe-Ate well in on the edge of the city
end in conperetively ruote from the beeic explicit eourcee of interference.
At e depth of 600 netere inohedeytine the noiee enplitudee in the three
welle reech l0 (Chilih). 20 (Ala-Ate) end ‘0 :- (Teehltent).

The neture of verietion of the beckground in the Chililt Hell for the dey
eeriee coincidee with the verietion of the dey beckground in the other
M ”.11.-

At night the decreeee in beckground in the Chilik Hell in eppreciebly
ueeker then in the Aloe-Ate end the Teehkent Nelle. Hhereee for the leet
two welle the retio of the bechground on the eurfece to the bechground et
e depth of 600 oetere ie 30-60. for Chililt it in It to 6.

Sole increeee in eeplitude of the beckgreund on the eurfece in the frequency
bend free 2 to b hertr ie obeerved for the Aloe-Ate Hell. It ie poeeible
to think thet thie intreeee ie connected with the ”culturel" ectivity.

The neture of the peel: in the epectnne of the eurfece noiee in Chilik et

3.7 hertz ie etill uncleer. Poeeibly. it ie tweed by e locel eource

which hee ite effect only when recording on the eurfece.

l). Beckground Stebility et Different Depthe

The noiee etebility hee inpartent eignificence in eetiuting the eeneitivity.
The noiee etebility hee been epecielly inveetigeted. Stetionery end eeni-
etetionery ebeervetione heve been net up in two welle - Ala-Ate which

ie cherecterixed by e high level of ground noiee. end Chililt. where the
ground noiee level ie low.

. 32
”8 OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
lOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Observations in an Area with high Ground Noise Level. The noise background
in the presence of stationary observations in the Ales-Ate Hall was
investigated at deptha of 1950. 950. 700. 300 and 300 asters.

Noise Level at e Depth of 1950 eaters. stationary observations at a depth
of 1950 esters were perforasd in the first phase of the operation. and they
were recorded by the eeisaogreph without a borehole preaaplifier. Under
these conditions the basic source of the noise limiting the useful sensitiv-
ity of the equipment was electrical interference. The nicroseisaic oscilla-
tione caused by stores on lake tssyk-Kul' constitute an exception.

Electrical interference is unstable with respect to intensity and frequency.
and it varies both during the course of the day and on different days end
in different aonths. Frequently this type of interference is associated
with one tins of day. Along the electrical interference it is possible to
isolate several types which are noted during various tine periods. If we
do not consider the individual pulses. then the low frequency intense
irregular oscillations with a frequency of 0.6-0.8 hertz were observed for
the longest tine. For noise of this type a strict tine coordination is
characteristic. This type of noise appears in the evening free 2100 hours
to 0200 hours local tine. Soaetiaes cooperatively high frequency (2-6
hertz) oscillations are recorded which for- long arcs on the eeisuographs.
Observation experience has deaonstratad that the basic electrical inter-
ference is connected with leaks. Usually after starting the seieaograph
for the first tine the interference level is cooperatively low. however.
later leaks appear in the lines and the intensity of the inductions
increases significantly. The following law has been noted. In the day-
tiae there is basically ccamaretively week and high-frequency noise. In
the evening and at the beninning of night. the long-period noise predoa-
inates. At night. as a rule. the noise stops. and this tile is character-
ized by a coapsretively quiet background.

Seioeic interference has been investigated only in the periods when the
electrical interference level was coaparatively low. which has aade it
possible to raise the gain of the channel. However. it has not been possi-
ble to deternine the quantitative eaplitude of the seisaic interference.
with respect to nature of variation of the amplitude with depth which is
typical of the aajority of wells (including in Tashkent). it is possible

to consider that the eaplitudes of the background are included in the

range of values from 2 to 5 no. Even at depths of about 2000 aeters the
"cultural" noise is felt. In the daytiae the interference background
usually is one or two tines higher than at night. This increase in sapli-
tude of the day background is characteristic approriaately for 65-702 of the
total observation rise with the erception ofthenight hours and holidays
when the industry of the city is not operating and the noise level is the
sale in the daytime and at night.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Out of the eeieeic interference during oheerwetione et e depth of 1950 e.
the noel: intenee ie the interference ceueed by etorne on Leke Ieeyk-Kul'.
but the level of thie interference ie eppreciehly lower then on the dey
eurfece. Frequently even intenee etorn Iicroeeieee recorded et the
Telgor etetion by the K88 chennele (To-l hertz) end the 3m chennele
(To-0.6 herte) with e recording eeplitude of 5-10 no heve not been noted
in the well or at ell. or were very week elthough the ueeful eignele (the
eerthqueke recordinge) in thie one were coeeneneurete with reepect to
inteneity (Fig 9. e). In theee ceeee the eignel/noiee retio in the well
turne out to be elnoet en order higher then at the 'relger etetion. Thie
difference in interference eeplitude ie expleined not only by the depth
of the obeervetion point but ohviouely by the feet thet et the Telger
etetion the frequency cherecterietice of the rst chennel end. eepecielly.
the 8m chennel. ere eonewhet ehifted in the low-frequency direction

(Pig 9. c). The etorne ere obeeryed on Leke Ieeyk-Kul' Ioet frequently in
the winter when than cen he 15 to 16 etorey deye per Ionth.

Noise Level or e Depth of 950 Hetere. At e depth of 950 eetere the
etetionery obeervetione ere perforled with o well type preenplifier pleced
directly in the eeimgreph. Thie hee nede it poeeible eignificently to
reduce the noiee background of electricel origin. The electric interference
releeine only in the for:- of individuel. conperetively rere puleee. Ae e
reeult. the ueeful eeoeitiwity ie linited only to the eeielic interference.
the eeplitudee of which mum to from 6 to 15 nu. however. for the greeter
pert of the recording tine (75-80!) the veluee of the enplitudee ere 7-16 m.
Theee dete agree with the reeulte of etudying the interference beckground

by the eethod of verticel profiling. At e depth of 950 eetere the effect of
the vital ectivity of the city ie felt to e higher degree then et e depth

of 1950 netere -- in the deytine the noiee beckground increeeee by
epproxinetely 2-2.5 tinee by coeperieon with night, reeching veluee of

12-15 :3.

Noise Level et Depthe of 100. 500. end 300 Hetere. The increeee in noiee
amplitude with e decreeee in depth in thie intervel ie colpnretively enell.
The veluee of the lininun end minu- beckground enplitudee of depthe of

700. 500 end 300 eetere eeount to 5-20. 6-30 end 7-50 I. reepectively. but in
the greeter pert of the recording tine theee intervele ere eppreciehly leee
brood.

The chengee in the noiee with depth in the renge of 950-300 netere were
eetineted by the verietion in eeplitude of the etorl nicroeeieee of
leeyk-Kul'. For this purpoee. the enplitude retio of the licroeeieee wee
doternined et eech depth on the SIG! chennel located in e drift end ecting
both an the etenderd end no the well chennel. The negnitude of this ratio
veriee within the lilite of 3 to 5, thet ie, no cleer dependence of the
retio on depth wee obeerwed in e renge of 950-400 netere. An exelple of
recording the etorn aicroeeim in the well et e depth of 700 Ietere and
on the SICK chennel in the drift in preeented in Pig 9. b. 0n the sun
chennel the ueeful eignel cennot be ieoleted egeinet the noiee heckground
in general. A coaperieon of the recordinge of the store Iicroeeieee et
depthe of 700 end 1950 II indicetee thet their level hee increeeed eignificently
et 700 netere.

3‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A M153: HIW’I" '1'!“ 715.
”'11.“

   

J v :1 turn (2)

Pisute 9. Recordings of storm I1crose1slo and distant earth-
quakes at the Talgar station (SKH channel. upper
recordings) snd 1n the Alla-Ate borehole st depths
of 1950 meters (s) end 700 letets (h);

c - frequency characteristics of the equip-eat:

1 - well channel. 1969 (“-1950 I). 2-- the seas.

1971 (“-960 a). 3 - KS! channel of the Tslsst station.
1969. lo -- the sane. 1971, 5 - SIOI channel of the
Tslgar station

Key: 1. V,..; 2. f, hertz; 3. 10 seconds; 5. 12 June 1969; 5. 0‘48 houts;
6. 0512 hours ._35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI onicm. US! ONLY

Oheervetione in en Aree with low around hoiee Level. The low noiee level
in the vicinity of Chilih hen eede it poeeihle to perform eynchronoue
oheervntione uelng identicel equipnent in the well et depthe of 600 end

300 eetere end on the euriece. Unfortunetely. the reeulte of etudying the
noiee in tine do not clein to high eccurecy. Thie ie expleined hy the
feet thet the recording of low enplitudee depende etrongly on the cleeping
of the pen. Oheervetlon experience indicetee thet quentitetive proceeeing
ie neeningful for enplitudee exceeding 2.5-3 -. end the eetinetee ohteined

for the verietion of the noiee level ere. in our opinion. of defined
intereet.

Dbpth of 300 lietere. The totel recording tine et e depth of 300 netete
wee so deye. During thie tine the noiee level veried with reepect to
enplitude frog 6 to so u. The noiee eeplitude dietrihution with reepect
to the recording tine le illuetreted below:

A. n. 6.0 8.3 12.5 17.0 33.0
t. X 1.0 b0.‘ 5.5 52.7 0.5

Thun. during 982 of the totel recording tile the nolee level It e depth
of 300 netere wee included in the renge of e-plitudee fro. 8 to 17 u.
and it veried hy no more then 2 tilee.

Depth 600 Hetere. When seizing the treneitlon free e depth of 300 to 600 n
the noiee nnplitudee decreeee by epproxinetely 2 tinee. The eeplitudee
end the renge of their verietione (eee Pig 0. e) egree quelitetively with
the verticel profiling dete. At both depthe (300 end 600 I) e etehle
difference in noiee level ie oheerved between night end dey. At night tine
(frol 2100 houre- to 0600 houre locel tile) the noiee level decreeeee by
elnoet 2 tinee. which confirm the "culturel" neture of the noiee. 0n
holideye (Seturdey end Sundey) the noiee level in the Chilik Hell. in
contreet to Teehkent end Aloe-Ate. doee not decreeee. which in ohviouely
connected with the eheence of induetriel enterprieee in the vicinity which
are the heelc eourcee of interference.

The nolee level on the dey eurfece veriee with tine within eignificently
greeter liaite then in the well - front 15 to 500 m. thet ie. by non

than 30 tieee. Since the oheervetione were perforled during the quieteet
eu-ner nonthe. it in poeeihle to coneider thet thie renge will increeee
eignificnntly in the fell end winter ee e reeult of wind interference which
In not recorded in generel et e depth of 300 end 600 Ietere.

For illuetrntion of the verietion of the noiee level fro- the dey eurfece
and in the well let ue preeent eeverel eeienogre-e. With equal chvnnel
goine (It-2) the ground noiee level ie eppreclehly greeter then et e depth
of 300 netere. but on increeeing the ground chennel. it ie helf thet in
the well (It-l). the noiee eqlitudee ere coIperehle (fig 10. e. eee the
ineert). At e depth of 600 utere (Fig 10. h) for lt-2 the noiee level ie
conperehle to the ground chennel - the upper pert of the eeie-ogrel --

36
'0! OFFICIAL USE OIL!
...-..—. NR omcm. gm 9.“ - ~

 

   
    

”‘51:;W...‘

  

 
         

"3 ;.. ‘ ’ ._, . . . .
. . “.5:- 4'. \: . .' . r ..
5-1- ..'::'.'.wzéﬁfruztétﬂﬁhhéﬁmﬁi.iii-5"". . -
— ".1 ~0- ~.§...- .

-- - - 37
Figure 10 [See following ”1'” omcm. use ONLY
POI OFFICIAL 088 MY

 
 
   

. 33 '
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI 0P?IC!AL US! ONLY

713ure 10. leee precedlnn pesel Notee beckeround on the dey eurfece
end tn the Chiltk Hell et depthe of 300 (I) end 600 letere (5).

Key:
1. A Aunuet 1971
2. 0500 houre end 38 eecende
3. 2317 houre end 7 eeconde
6. 27 July 1971
S. 2007 houre end 56 eeconde

 

Figure 11. Recordings of eerthquekee by the ground etetton
(1) end deep-cell etetton at e depth of 1950 hetero
(2) in the city of Alla-Ate end the K53 chennel (3)

of the Telger etettee. The errove Indicete the
errtvel of the P end S vevee.
Key:
1. 15 Yebruery 1969: 2. 1357 heart; 3. 23 July 1968: 6. 2012 houre

39
’03 OPIICIAL USE ONLY
Kny:

POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY

’/ I
5.4mm l

       

I A! (I: n .v when)

rigor. 12. Alplitudco and period. of near (I. b) and dint-n:

(c) earthquake. by ch. any station (1950 nun)
and the Tulsa: stution (K8! channel. dtilc.
Jana-July 1969)

“11:03:01. of the value. o! T, and Ts in the wall and tho drift

are .100 presented. The figutcn at the points on tha graphs are
the number of coinciding vain...

é¢:::::5?::::3‘r;: 3: ;:-..;,,
ts.,. no: 8. v:ll
T?.$(drif¢)' no: 9. Ts. 00c
T?(drif:)’ one 10. 1'. one

‘0
FOR OFFICIAL 08! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

  

 

)II:—IIIIII.':-IIIIII

   

Uzi-III-

nﬂlulgxltlUnunH'lH"

Ylllll

m II:_=-IIII_:=-IIII
(.I"=__=IIII:==IIII

II:—

=IIII=:=II
I==I=IIIII===II

:llll:::llll
_:IIII::=IIII

u—IIII===IIII

          

 
  

   
 

    

:5: a.

        
        

       
 

 
 
     

” III .....|
a mlmmwiHﬁH
I'lIII—Z'
a "Human
‘ luau,
um
W IIIR==I
mwmumnmm
u uu‘ﬂnﬁﬂ
0 ll nn-El
c III-:EI
III-E:-
a III-==_I
.I III===I

 

 

M) [In key. preceding page]

‘1

m OFFICIAL US! OIL!
'Ol ORIGIN. "8! ONLY

but then the noiee level on the eurface ie eherply enplified. and the
signal (2311 houre) on the ground eeieeogre- beta-e typical. At the em
tine. et e depth of 600 netere no increaee in noiee occurred. and the
eigneln were reliebly eepereted during the entire recording tine.

Thue. for obeervetione in welle not only doee the noiee level decreeee.
but ite etebility imreeeee eharply.

M. Ueeful Signel end Seneitivity of Hell Obeervetione

The etudy of the ueeful eignel in the welle wee lid. in ereee with high
ground noiee level (Men-Ate) and low ground noiee level (Chilih). In
order to eetieete the gain in eeneitivity the obeervetion eateriale in the
nee-nth mm were coepered with the recordinge of the two ground etetione.
one of which (Alla-Ate) wee loceted within the city with high ground noiee
level. end the other (Telger). under fevoreble ceieeogeological conditione

with low noiee level. The eeienoeetere of the eecond etation were pleced
ln a deep drift [line tunnel].

Obeervetiona under high Ground Noiee Level Conditione. Stetionery obeerve-
tione in the Alla-Ate Hell were perforned at different fixed depthe.

Depth 1950 Metere. A coeperieon of the obeervetion Interiale of the well
etation with the ground etation in Ala-Ate duonetreted thet the eeneltiv-
ity of the letter ie 20 to £0 tinee lower. The recordinge of theee etetione
are in prectice lncoepereble. Berthquelree (dietent nr neer) which ere
leolnted on the eeienogreee of the deep-well etetion either ere not

recorded it ell by the ground etation equipped with ntenderd equip-eat or
they heve e very low eeplitude (Pig ll. eee the ineert).

It in expedient to cerry out the conperieon with the Telger ground etation
eeperetely by the recordinge of dietent (ts.,>l einute) end neer (twd ein)

eerthqueltee includltn local earthquake. (ts.,<lo aeconde). Ae e reeult of

coepering the periode end the elplitudee of 130 eerthquehee (fig 12) it ie
poeeible to fomlete the following conclueione.

For near eerthqueltee the predoeinent periode of the P-wevee in the well
are 0. 3-0.5 eeconde: on the K32 channel of the Telger etetloo they ere

0. 5-0.7 eeconde. The periode of the S-wewee ere 0.3-0.5 and 0.6-0.9 eec
reepectively. The predoeinent veluee of the retio of the periode in the
drift and in the well Tdrift’Twell for the P end S wevee ere included
within the lieite of l to 3. The difference in periode of the Swene ie
eoeewhet greater than for the P—wevee which ie unifeeted eepecielly
clearly on recordinge of locel eerthqueltee.

The neplitudee of the recordinge of the K58 chennel and the well recording
in generel are ei-ilnr: out of ell of the inventigetu-d eerthqueltee in 80!
of the ceeee the valuea of the retioe Adrift/“well for the P end 3 wewee

‘2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL 088 OﬂLY

are included within the liaits of 0.3.2.0. that is. the aeplitudes differ
hy no nore than 2 tines (Fig 12. b). The local earthquakes are alsost
elwnys more intense on the deep-well seisaograas than on the tar channel.
and especially the 8K" channel. Soae of the local earthquakes have not
been recorded in general by the Talgsr station or they are hardly isolated
nlthough the recordings of the snore resote earthquakes are co-ensurete
or sore intense on the K58 channel (Pig l3. s. earthquakes 0118 hours).

The difference in saplitudes of the 8 waves on the recordings of the K33
channels and the deep-well channel are nore significant than for the
P-waves. for for 3-waves the difference in periods is greater. The ratio
ASIA, for the Talgsr station and the deep-well station can be different.

Cases haVe been observed where the ratio As/AP in the well is greater than
in the drift and vice versa. This is eaploined by the fact that in addition
to the difference in frequencies of the waves recorded in the woll and on
the surface (in the drift). the difference in directions of approach of
these waves also influence the nagnitude of the ratio. For observations

in a borehole. the low-speed sediaentary rock deternines the direction of
approach of the waves close to vertical. Therefore the ratio Ag/Ap in

the well can be less than in the drift where there are no such rocks. 0n
the other hand. the thick series of sediaents in the well under the
instment which reaches 2200 asters on subeerging the inatrment to

2000 aeters causes a stronger absorption of the high frequencies in the
longitudinal wave spectrun of local earthquakes than in the drift. and it
has less effect on the absorption of the lower frequency 5 waves as a

result of which the ASIA, ratio can be larger in the well than in the drift.

Depending on which of the factors pradoeinates. one ratio or another occurs.

A coaparison of the recordings of the channels of the deep-well and the

sun stations of Talgsr indicates that the predoeinsnt periods of the P-waves
of near earthquakes diverge significantly on both channels and alount to
0.3-0.5 seconds. The amplitude of the near earthquakes on the well
chnnnel usually is 2-6 tines greater than on the SIM channel (Pig ll. h).

For distant earthquakes. the predoainsnt periods of the P-wavee on the
recordings of the well channel are 0.S~O.6 seconds: on the K38 channel.
0.7-1.0 seconds. the oscillation aaplitudes in this case on both channels
are either close to or greater then on the KS! channel (see fig 12. c).
There are. however. recordings that are core intense on the well channel

(Fig 13. c). The clear dependence of the amplitude ratio Adrift/Awell on

the period is detected: beginning with T-0.8 seconds this ratio becoaea
greater than one and with an increase in T. it increases (fig 12. b).
which is caused basically by the difference of the frequency characteristics

of the channels and periods greater than 0.8 seconds.

‘3
'0' OYPICIAL 088 ONLY
I0! OIPXCIAL US! ONLY

 

M. n. In. niun/

WWW

 

Elgure l). Racordlnsa of local (a). near (5). and diatant (c)
earthquakee by a well etatlon at a depth of

1950 netere (l) and by the K82 channel (2) and
SIM channel (3) o! the Talger etatlon.

The arrove indicate the arrlvala of P and S vavee.
Key:

l. eeconde

The predo-lnant periods of the P-vavea on the recordlnse of the SIM
channel are 0. B-l. 0 eec. and although on these frequenclea the saln of
the SIM channel to 1.5-2 tlnea greater than the gain of the vell channel.

the recording a-plltudee on the two chennele are approximately identical,
and eoeetlnee they are even nore lntenee 1n the vell.

‘6
F0! OPTICIAL US! OﬂLY
POI 0P?ICIAL 088 ONLY

      

'\ '
h‘hh! -- 1
I

     
  

33'

Plsuto lb loco following page]
m OFFICIAL 088 OIL!
(a). naar (b) and
a: a depth of 960 lacaro

SIN channal (3) of aha Tainan atatton.

Racordtnga of local
wall channal

'0! OPPICIAL US! ONLY

3 mo).
hquakaa by eh.

pracedin
) aart
channel (2) and

(l) and the K88

Key:

1.

Figure 1‘ [oaa
dtatant (c

m =_........~.. N

  

 

 

~ ~_=.m@w§ J,
. was .. 1...... . .u
: 1m =
_ ZN r a
L” .2“: . . ...1. 2.

 
 

‘6

’0! OPPICIAL US! OIL?

Plgure 16 (Conctauad)
’0R OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

in the case of stationary observations in a well. in addition to the
earthquakes. explosions were also recorded (Ado-100 ks). the recordings
of which differ free the recordings of the ground stations at Telgar and
Alas-Ate by the absence of intense surface waves.

Depth 960 Meters. The useful sensitivity of the deep-well station. just
as in the case of a depth of 1950 neters is in practice incmarsble with
the sensitivity of the ground station at Alas-Ate.

A conparieon of the deep-well station was ads with the Talgsr station
basically with respect to the 8101 channel. the frequency characteristic
of which was the closest to the well channel (see Pig 9. c). For this
purpose an analysis was nade of sore than 130 recordings of earthquakes
obtained in July 1971. Per the near earthquakes. the predosinsnt periods
of the [letter sissing] will“ in the well are 0.8-1.0 seconds. and in the
SKV channel. 0.3-0.5 seconds. that is. alsost 2 tines less.

The nnplitudes of the recordings of the well channel are sisilar or
exceed by 1.5-2 tines the asplitudes of the recordings of the 8101 channel;
on the given RS! channel the asplitudes are usually larger (see Fig 1‘. a.b).

For the distant earthquakes. the predosinsnce of periods of the P-waves on
the two channels are npproxisately identical and asount to 0.8-1.0 seconds.
Since the recordings of resets earthquakes are lower frequency. the effect
of the sedisentary series is less felt in this spectrun.

The asplitudes of the recordings of the distant earthquakes and the wall
and the sum channels are couensurete (Fig 16. c). with an increase in the
period. the asplitudes on the SIQi channel predosinate. for a difference
is felt in the frequency characteristics of the coopered channels. 0n the
list: channel which is 1.5-2.0 tiles sore sensitive than the sun channel.
the recordings of the distant earthquakes are. as a rule. sore intense.

Depth Interval of 960-300 Haters. in order to estisste the useful sensi-
tivity in this interval let us consider the recordings of aftershocks of
near earthquakes obtained in the well at different depths (Pig 15. b).

The recordings which are sisiler with respect to shape were cospared. and
the $101 channel recordings were used as the source control (fig 15. a).

The growth of the noise background as the depth decreases can easily be
seen in the figure (all of the recordings were obtained in the daytioe).
At a depth of 300 asters the increase in the well channel has dininished
by 2 tines by cooparison with the relaining depths.

The variation of the useful sensitivity of the recording with depth was
estisated by the recordings of aftershocks and earthquakes with ts- '32 sec.
a study was made of the distribution of the ratio Avon/Asp; (Pig 5. c)
with respect to depth by the recordings of the aftershocks of near
earthquakes.

47
'0)! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI ORIGIN. 088 ONLY

1.: m. I‘u“

 

u. m. 05'

autumn—wanna”

W‘JIWFESIHWJC «1. '3. '

Figure 15
‘8
m omcm. 083 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

 

Figure 15. Recordinse of efterehoche by SIG! chennel (e) end

veil chennele et different depthe (1:) end vith the
srephe of “well/‘89! (c)
Key:

1- Avon/Am

The reeulte obteined indicete thet on euhlergins the eeienoeeter {roe
300 to 960 eotere. the eignel/noiee retio increeeee by 5-6 tinee.

Coeperieon of Reoordinse in e Well et Depthe of 1 end 2 la. Pro- inveeti-
getion of the hietogrele (Fig 16) ohteined by the reeulte of proceeeins

the recordinge of dietent end nee‘r eerthquekee et depthe of 960 end 1950 n.
it follow thet with e decreeee in depth tron 2 to 1 In:

l) The recording periode of the dietent eerthquekee increeee fro- 0.5-0.7
to 0.8-1.0 eeconde (Fig 16. I). In the SIG! chennel the periode of the

4- recordinge ere identicel in this ceee both (or 1969 end 1971. end they
’enount to 0.8-1.0 eeconde (Fig 16. II);

2) The periode of the recordinge of the neer eerthqoekee increeee still
more (by twice on much) from 0.3-0.5 to 0.8-1.0 eeconde (Fig 16, III). In
the 3m chennel. the one periods predoeinete -- 0.3-0.5 eeconde (Fig 16. IV);

3) The eeplitode ratio «"1 “SE! of the dietnnt eerthquehee decreeeee:
et e depth of 2 lo- the recordins eIplitudee on the well chennel end the
sun chennel ee n whole ere co-eneurete, end at e depth of 1 in they ere
either niniler or on the SKH chennel 1.5-2.0 tines lore intenee (Pig 16. V);

6) The amplitude retio “well/“SIN of cloee eerthquekee eleo decreeeee. out
it done not dieeppeer (Fig 16. VI).

0n the whole the recordinge of the neer eerthquekes et depthe of 1950 end

960 Ictere end in e drift either ere clone or on the avenge-‘2 tilee nore
inteneo in the vell.

69
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

POI OHICIM. 083 MY

MEL

Figure 16.

A /

vel 1 AS”!

 

(I ”I’ll!!!“ (I ('07.:

--- I

 

hietosrane of the valuea of periodo and the alplitode
ration Nell, m for longitudinal vavee by the
recordinu of intent (I. II. V) and near (111. IV. V!)
earthquakeo. l. 2 - lo a well at depth. of

960 netere. 1911. and 1950 utere. 1969. corrupondinsly.
3 -- Nell/“‘39 1969: Ins .- by the recording. of the
$101 channel n July 1971 and in June-July 1969.
respectively

2' “sum/“v.11

Thus. noting the transition Iron a depth of 1950 octet-a to 960 neteu. the
increase in thickneu of the oedinentary rock under the well tool leado to
significant reduction at the (requenclee in the imeetigated oacillatione
and none decrease in neneitivity of the equip-eat.

Observations under the Conditions of Low-Level Ground Nolae in Snell (Brenna.
In order to eotiute the eenaltivity of the equlpnent at deptha of 300 and
600 netera. let on conpare the diotant and near. including local earthquake.
recorded during oynchronouo obaervatione uains identical equip-eat on the
day eurface at the nooth of the well and in the well itnelf.

$0
'0! 0016141. US! OIL!
’03 OPPICIAL 088 ONLY

an ”a I‘ I" 1
WW

(5!

Figure 17.

neconda

 

--“-——o u. -o eaa

adv-.- ..
. .~.. 5 0—-
~ -elv.

. .
.- .. . _.~—a——. - .
.... . -. .- -
. .h-‘- .0 a...
e

Recordtnsa of diatant (a). neat (h) and local (c)
earthquakea by the ground channel (upper) and the
well channel at a depth of 300 aetera (lower trace)
at vatuea of k-l and 2 1n the Chillk Hell.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 0“ ONLY

W_l
no 'Hh

It! 71:. IN!“
POI OPIICIAL "II outv

M m ”-3 .
mmliu :g‘IUM -
—

   

  
 

mm-vuvaF-q-‘W'L ' ..
u.r...._u.w. 1913:" mm“
I—-lul'- '
'. l—‘~_

    

 

. .
. ..-—_ ——.e - -sOOQQ- - o .. - - e . L..-

Figure 18. Recordinge of dietant (a). near (b) and local (c)
earthquehea by a ground channel (Hover) and a well
channel at a depth of 600 letere (lower trace) by
channele with valuea of h-d. 2 and l in the Chilih Hell.

The gain in aeneitivity ie deter-ined prinerily by the aignellnoiee ratio.
The greater the difference in aeplificationv the noiee level on the eurface
and in the well enter it poaaihle to realise. the greater the gain in un-
eitivity at depth by couparieon with the day eurface.

Depth 300 Hetero. For ebaervetione at a depth of 300 netera it turned out
to be poeeible to seize a recording for ltd-10. ltd-68 end Roi-22: of the

total recording time (”vwell/veurface)‘ ‘l'he baeic conclueione obtained

or e reault of conparing the ground and well eeie-ogrene are the following.

For distant earthquekee at k-b the recording a-plitudee in the well are
twice u greet ee on the aurface. however. too few auch recordinge were

obtained in order to lake a reliable eetinete of the gain in the uaeful
eenaitivity.

For k-Z. which in predoninant with reapect to rec-:rding tine at a depth of
300 netera. the intenaity of the recordinge of l r dietent earthquakee in

the well ueuelly ie 1.5-2 tinee higher then on the aurfece. and lore rarely
it coincidee. For k-l the amplitudes of the well end ground recordinge are
co-eneurete or the ground recordinge are 1.5-2 tines greater (eee Fig l7. a).

For near enrthquehee. the Iaterial obtained will ate it poeeible to eatinate
the ueeful eenaitivity at a depth of 300 netera only for k-Z end 1. However.
on individual available recordinge when k-ﬁ it in obvious that when the
signal at the aurfnce ie coQarahle with the background end it ie eeperated
with difficulty. at n depth of zoo netera the aignel enplitudee exceed the
background by approximately 5 tinea.

53
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IO! OFFICIAL "8| ONLY

In the ceee where h-2 the recordinge oi nee: eerthquekee on the eotfece
and in the veil either ere conperebie with teepect to inteneity or they
are 1.5-2 ti-ee note intenee in the well. For uni. the ground recordinse
ueueily ere 1.5-2 tinee lore intenee then in the well (Ii; 17. h).

Teble 2

 

 

Key:
1. depth. netere 6. neer
2. earthquake 5. loan!
3. dietent
Teble 3
3'“ ' ~ 1'
. (n W
2 0.0 . 1.0 0.:- 1.0
$3 a... 0.8- 0.1 0.0- 0.7
(i) m 0,3- 0.1 0,2- -o.s
—-————_—'
Key:
1. earthquake J. nee:
2. dietent 6. locel
Teble b
‘ ‘ f
.- (1) n ‘°°
8) neon-e 0.0- 1.0 0.0- 0.0
Ellin- 0.0 - 0.7 0.4 - 0.0
(d) Mug-e 9.5.0.1 0.4-0.0
Key:
1. eerthqueke 3. nee:
2. dietent d. local
5‘

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ink OIIIOIAL "8! ONLY

when recording local earthquakee. the gain in aeneitivity in the well
turns out to ho nrnatur than for the dietent and near once. for k-Z the
recordinge at n depth of 300 aetera are elweye on the average 1.3-2 tieee
lore intenee than on the eurface (Fig 17. c). and with an identical
channelaapiificatioo. the recording anplitudee are ueually cloee.

Depthn 600 Hetero. At a depth of 600 latere. the noiee level it half that
at a depth of 300 eetere. which hee cede it poeeihle to lake a recording
for k-d during 352 of the entire recording tine. for k-z, for ‘52 of the
tile. and he‘. 20: of the tile.

The dietent eerthquahee et k-b on the recordinge in the well are on the
average 1.5-2 (llee more intenee than on the eurface. Tor II: the
recordinge in the well are either clone with reepect to inteneity to the
recordinge on the surface or they are 1 to 1-1/2 tieee lore intenee. for
k-l (few ouch recordinga were obtained at a depth of 600 aetere) the
recordinge on the eurface and in the well are ueua11y equivalent (Pig 18, a).

for k-b the near eerthquakee are recorded in the well 2-4 tieee lore
intensely than on the aurfece: for k-Z. 1.5-2 tieee. For h-l the record-

inge nre clone or opprexiaetely 1.3 tiaee lore intenee then on the eurfece
(Pig 18. h).

The majority of the recordinge of local eerthquekee at a depth of 600 a
were obtained for k-2. The gain in eeneitivity in thie ceee ie the cane

on for near eerthquakee. end it ie on the average 2 tinee (eee. for era-pie.
Fig 18. c).

The ration of the eaplitudee of the eerthquakee recorded by eurfece end

deep well eeieaoeetere “well/“eurface at different depthe are preeentcd in
Table 2.

For- of the Recording and Structure of the Seionogreae. In addition to
eetienting the ueeful eeneitlvity. the eynchronouo oheervetione by identical
equipment in the well end on the eurfece note it poaeible to coopere the
fore of the recording of the individual wavee end the etructure of the
ecieaogreae. In thie reepect the oheervetione in the Chilik Hell differ
odventageouely free the oheervetione in Alla-Ate. where. an a reeult of the

very high ground noiee background the recording on the day eurfece ie
lepoeeihle.

A coeperieon of the fore of the earthquake recordinge leade to the follow-
ing conclusione.

The recordinge of all of the eerthquahee -— dietent. near and local -
usually are more high frequency at a depth of 300 netere than on the
eurfoce. The difference in frequency coepoeition ie more noticeable for
the high-frequency eerthquakee. it in eeeller for the near once and etlll

$5
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
IOl OPTICIAL 088 OIL?

leee for the dietent onee. the periode of which et a-o end 300 netere ere
cloee. The predoninent veluee of the periode (in eeconde) of the longiv

tudinel wevee on the eurfece end in the well for equelly relayed eerth-
quekee ero preeented in Tehle 3.

The low-frequency eignele et e depth of 300 netere ere frequently lore
intenee then on the eurfece for coeleneurete high-frequency eignele.

The ehepe of the low-frequency eignele on the eurfece end at e depth of

300 letOfl in prectice ie identicel et the eene tine ee the ehepe of the
high-frequency recordinge in the well ueuelly ie lore coupler end leee
reguler. here the heeic fector influencing the fore of the recording of
the individuel weve ie the euperpoeition of the weve pulee reflected fro-
the dey eurfece on the incident weve pulee. The fore of the recording of
each individuel weve in the well in deter-ined hy the conditione of inter-
ference of theee wevee which. in turn. depende on the depth of the oheerveo
tion point. weve length end velocity eection.

Fig 19. e ehowe the reeulte of celculeting the ehepe of the pulee in the
well for two of the eilpleet puleee token fro- the eeieeogren. The puleee
were celculeted coneidering the velocity cherecterietic of the eection with
reepect to the Chilik Hell. The periode of the initiel puleee veried
within the renge of o.) to 1.6 eeconde. which covere the renge of verietion
of the periode of the recorded eignele. It ie ohvioue thet in the upper pert
of the eection there ie euperpoeition of the puleee. end the puleee ere
eepereted only free eoee depth. Thie depth ie invereely proportionel to
the frequency. Thur. whereee for e period of Th0.l eeconde the wewee ere
eepereted or e depth of 300 eetere. for Tbl.6 eeconde thie depth to 1500 e.
The ehepe of the high-frequency eignele with e period of 0.2 eeconde et e
depth of 300 eetere ie conplex. Additionel extre-e eppeer et the eeee tine
no for the lower frequency puleee (Tho.‘ to 1.6 eeconde) only the elplitude
retio of the firet extreee veriee. In Fig l9. e the leet two exeeplee
correepond to euperpoeition of eeverel lore couplex puleee.

At a depth of 600 netere the recordinge ere etill lore high frequency by
coepnrieon with the eurfnce then et e depth of 300 eetere. which ie
connected with on increeee in thickneee of the eedinent over the eeieeooeter
(rig 19. h. c). The veluee of the predo-inent periode (in eeconde) of the
P-weVee on the eurfece end et e depth of 600 letere ere preeented in

Table i.

Fhr the low-frequency recording the difference in ehepe decreeeee. which
eleo ngreee well with the celculetion dete. The dependence of the retio
“too/“o on the frequency in expreeeed not eo cleerly ee et e depth of

100 nature.

Thue. for cloee ond locel eerthquekee or e depth of 600 netere the geln in
eeneitivity ie 1.5-2.0 tieee greeter then et e depth of 300 uetere. for
the recordings of the dietent eerthquehee thie geln ie identicel et both depthe.

56
'0! OIIICIAL OS! OIL!
Key:

‘0

All

A“!

I.”

Figure 19.

eeconde

      

IO! 0!?ICIAL 083 out!

 

  

          

0 u u (24' (I (I (I 04"“)

Theoretical eeieeogre-e celculeted for too for-e of
pulnee in different periode (e) end hietogre-e of the
veluee of the periode of the longitudinal vevee for
neer (b) end dietent (c) eerthquekee with reepect to

the Chink um et e depth of 600 eetere (the eolid

line). 300 eetete (the dotted line) end on the eutfece
(the pointe).

57
FOR OiIIClAL 08! OIL!
POI OIPICIAL US! ONLY

However. the lower noise level and its stability at 600 asters pereit us

to realise the lesions possible sensitivity for 3 tines longer tise then
at a depth of 300 seters.

35. Noise background in the Case of Stationery Noise Sources

in the preceding itees a study was wads of the results of the observations
in the areas characterised by high and low ground noise level. In both
cases. no noise source was concentrated in the vicinity of the well. The
background was the result of superposition of the interference waves
caused by a large nueber of distributed sources. The Novo-Alehseyevekaye
Hell is distinguished fro- the investigated ones with respect to its
conditions. it is located far fro- large populated pieces (at the edge of
a sasll village). end the noise level here is very low. but the presence
of a large building sateriels coebine near the well (approxiastely 3-6 he
to the east) and a rock crushing plant (about a he to the south) hes led
to a sharp increase in noise level and specific variation with depth.

The basic source of the interference waves is the cruehers operating at
these enterprises. With respect to the nature of their operation they are
siuller to stationary vibrators. end the study of the waves excited by
sources of this type is of interest not only free the point of view of
estiasting the possible gain in sensitivity of the equip-ent but also free

the point of view of the possibility of using such sources for seissologicsi
It‘.‘ ‘0. e

The Neve-Alekseyevskaye Hell is located between the Ales-Ate end chilih
Hells 22 he east of the Alma-Ate Hell. The thickness of the coersely
elastic sediaentary rock is 2960 aeters here. Let us relenber that in the
Alas-Ate and chilik Hells this thickness was 4200 end 1350 aeters
respectively.

Observations in the Neve-Alehseyevshaye Hell were used to study the laws

of variation of noise with depth along the well stew, the stability of the
noise on the day surface and at certain fixed depths. the frequency cosposi-
ties of the noise on the surface end at fixed depths. and the gain in
sensitivity of the well observations.

The noise background was aessured synchronously on the surface end at the
well by the method or vertical seisaic profiling (the variation of the
noise with depth) and stationary observations (the stability of the noise)
when the well seissograph was located at one fixed depth.

During the stationary observations. the set of equip-eat did not differ
from that described in Chapter 1. for observations by the VS? lethod. the
noise was recorded on the magnetic tape using a ‘-channel R—351P type

tape recorder built by the Tree Coapsny. On one of the recording channels
the ground scienograph recording was wade. and on the other. the well
seisnogreph recording was made with constant increase. on the third channel
the well seisaograph recording was wade with approximately constant

58
'0‘ OPFICIAL US! ONLY
P0! OPPICIAL US! ONLY

ulplitudo, but with enhance-eat from point to point. 0n the fourth

channel a recording was made of the second and minute tine marks. in
parallel with the recording on the sagneric tape. a visible control record-
ing was snde of the some channels using the RV3~T recorder. The 80-1?
sols-ouster was used as the seismic signal converter. A preasplifirr was
nounted directly in it. For connotation of the seissograph with a pre-
amplifier. a special control panel was built.

The control panel was used to perfora such operations as locking and
unlocking the seissograph. adjusting the period of the penduius. control
of the operating voltages and also Various types of cossutations.

Eight vertical profiles (series of observations) were worked out. of which
the first seven were on working days. and the eighth was on Sunday when
the noise sources were not in operation. The depth of the observations
was limited by the high tesperatures at which the preamplifier placed in
the well seisnograph failed. The observations points during VSP were
every so seters iron the head of the well to a depth of 600 seters. and
helow that. every 100 Ieters. The recording tine at each point was

3 minutes.

in order to study the variation of the noise level with depth recording,
photooscillograns were node from the magnetic tape. In order to study the
frequency coepoaition of the noise. the spectral seissograna cf the fre-
quency selection seisoographic station were obtained from the nngnetic
tape. During the processing. basically the recordings frol two other
channels were used -- the ground channel and the well channel with approx-
imately a constant recording noplitude.

Study of the Laws of Variation of Noise with Depth. The results of the
processing indicate that with respect to noise level and nature of its
variation with depth there are two noise regioea differing sharply fro.
each other. The first is "quiet" or "nonoperating." It is characterized
by a comparatively low noise level and coincides with respect to time with
the period when the crushers of the construction coshines were not in
uperntion (Sunday and shorthreaksforeating and preventive asintenance).'
For the second regime -- the noise or operating regime -- which takes up
the main part of the time. a high noise leVel is characteristic which is
connected with the operation of the crushers.

hefore proceedlng to an investigation of the relations obtained. let us
briefly characterize the noise background on the surface for the two
regimes. The average value of the noise amplitudes on the surface for the
"quiet" regine represented hy the Sunday series of observations fluctuates
within the limits from 30 to 70 an. The value of the noise wlth respect

to the 502 prohahllity level corresponds to AS no. The maxi-us values
reach l20-ILO no of shift.

59
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL "8| ONLY

A characteristic feature of the nonoperating background is its sherp
instability and great variability with respect to ssgnitude. iron 12 to
160 as. that is, by more than 10 tises.

The second regise is characterised by the average value of the ssplitudes
equal to about 250 as with respect to the 50: probability level. The
saxisun values of the asplitudes reach 550-600 as.

A distinguishing feature of the "operating" background by cosparison with
the "nonoperating" one is its significantly greater stability: the noise
level varies fros 90 to 600 as (by less than 7 tises). The great stability
of the ”operating” background is explained by the stationary operation of
the crushers.

An example of recording the background noise at different depths is shown
in Fig 20. a. The magnitude of the noise level of the two regimes is
sharply different. which is obvious by the graphs for the variation with
depth of the scan noise esplitudes and also by the probability curves

for the occurrence of the noise of given or lower amplitudes (Pig 20. b).

For the "quiet" regine there is a comparatively weak decrease in the

noise with depth which is characteristic in general for the "quiet" regions
(in particular. Chilik). At a depth of 1250 asters the noise asplitude is
about 0 as. that is. the decrease with respect to the surface is 8 tises.
The sharpest decrease. however. takes place in the first $00-$00 asters
where the noise level decreases by 5.5-6 tiles. Then the decrease proceeds
such more slowly. and at a depth of 1200 seters. by conparison with 600 s
the background decreases by only 1.5 tines.

For the "noise” regine the nature of variation of the noise with depth
differs not only fro. the "quiet" regime but also free all of the previously
investigated cases (Tashkent. Alua-Ata. Chilik). basically this refers to
depths of lore than 600—500 meters. In the upper part there is a sharp
decrease in noise analogous to the areas with their high ground level
(Tashkent. Alla-Ate). Thus. already at a depth of 5 meters the background
level decreases by cooparison with the surface (with respect to 502 prob-
ability level) by sore than 2 tines. at a depth of 2h0 asters by 7 tiles.
The aaxinun decrease in background level is observed at a depth of 500 I
-- approximately by ll tines (from 200 to 10 no with respect to 501 prob-
ability level). Below 500 meters. with an increase in depth not only is

a decrease in background amplitude observed. but. on the contrary. there
is a trend toward some increase in the noise level. Thus. at a depth of
1000 meters the backgrOund amplitude is 20 an. that is. 1.2 tines greater
than at 500 actors. and at a depth of 1700 seters the background level is
larger by 1.3 times.

60
F0! OPYICIAL US! ONLY
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

W mmwmww
W: WWWWWWM
_ m»- » WMWN‘MHW

WM

if]
I I II I: a II II um
I III :4 m” .m 1mm
Key:

FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

  

’I I l I i II II I .V U I” I'M MING)
" 4—. Vi_-. .4 ,
/ , ‘
M M" g?
c “ oil/K3
‘ OI
if 1;) 9 0::
0
III? . "
..../ .
o M:
I
I,” .
lull (S)
”I?
I
I
l \ ‘
III k V e ‘
I V“‘
' \
c \!
' E! i
[I ﬁx»
\3‘
I \
Iii
All
I III
-" a u u .r/ [I u /..r at mam '
Figure 20. Noise in the Novo-Alekseyevsknyo Hell

a -- recording by the ground channel and the well channel at
different depths. The increases in the around channel ere
80.000. and in the well chnnnel. 140,000 at all depths. 0n the

left we see the calibration signal of the constant «uplitude
magnetic generator (HGPA).

b -- Probability of occurrence of noise of given or slower ampli-
tude on work days (solid line) and Sundays (dashed lines) at
different depths (the numbers on the curves) and the neon alplie
tudes of the noise as A function of depth for the different series
of observations (the triangles indicate date for the Alas-Ate
Hell).

c -- The frequency components of the noise as a function of

depth (at the top) and its average spectre in the frequency range
of 0.6-10 hertz for Sunday and uorking series of observations at
different depths.

I. seconds: 2. X, no; 3. hertz; 6. f, hertz; 5. X, nn

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For comparison. Fig 20. h shows the graph of the variation of the noise
amplitudes in the Alma-Ate Hell constructed by 50: probability level for

the first series when the majority of industrial enterprises are at work.

The Alma-Ate chart differs sharply from the curves of the Neve-Alekseyevskaya
Hell. whereas in the upper part it approaches the "noise" picture'and

above 100 meters it is shifted still more to the right in the direction of
large amplitudes. below 500-500 meters, the graph is similar to the "quiet"
regime and decreases smoothly with further increase in depth. For the
"noise" regime of Novo-Alekseyavks. a smooth increase in noise level with

an increase in depth is characteristic below 500 meters.

Variation of Noise with Time. Inasmuch as for Novo-Alekseyevka the primary
source of interference is the operation of the crushers. they also determine
the variation in noise background time both on the surface and in the well.

When the enterprises are not in operation. the background noise level is
low although it varies within quite broad limits. The maximum noise ampli-
tudes are detenmined on the day surface basically by the motor transporta-
tion and they are represented on the recording by individual comparativelv
high-frequency (10-15 hertz) blips. In this case, on the ground channel
during stationary observations it is possible to realize amplification of
about 20.000. and in the well channel. at a depth of 1200 meters, about
200,000. The amplitude of the background noise recording on both channels
does not exceed 1 mm. However. it is necessary to note that on the ground
channel at this time the background noise can periodically increase by

2-3 times which is connected primarily with transportation.

In the case where the combines are in operation. the background noise
level increases sharply both on the surface and in the well. The realised
increase in the ground channel is a total of about 5,000, and in the well
channel about 50,000. that is. on the day surface and in the well the
sensitivity decreases by 6 times. however. the background on the ground
channel can periodically increase. complicating the isolation and analysis
of the useful signals.

Since the enterprises operate almost continuously with the exception of

one Sunday a week. lunch breaks and brief shutdowns for preventive
maintenance of l to 1.5 hours. the conditions for seismological observations
in the well. and the more so on the surface, are highly unfavorable. The
Novo-Alekseyevskaya Hell is similar with respect to observation conditions
to the Alma-Ate Hell located in the large industrial center.

Varintlon of the Frequency Components of Noise with Depth. Let us consider
how the intensity of the frequency components 10. 5. 2.6. 1.3 and 0.6 hertz
In noise varies for the "quiet" and "noisy" conditions (see Fig 20. c).
"hen constructing the graphs for the "noise" regime the results of
averaging the working series were used. and the Sunday series was obtained
on a single day; therefore the representativenese of the graphs is not
identical.

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I0! OfflClAL 083 OILY

The strong dependence of the noise level on frequency both on the day

surface and in the well is a cosson law: the curves for the higher fre-
quency components are left shifted.

Let us consider the variation with depth of the frequency cosponents of
the Sunday series. Let us note that all of the curves in the series are
shifted in the direction of lower amplitudes by cosperison with the
corresponding frequency cosponents of the operating series which is caused
by a different noise level for the "quiet" and "noisy? regines. In
addition. the laws of decrease in the conponents with depth are distin-
guished. Thus. the l0 hertz couponent of the Sunday series has a very
snail value (3 as) at the day surface (at a depth of S actors). and it
decreases sharply with depth -- at £00 eaters it is_not recorded. The
decrease with depth is also observed for the components at 5. 2.6 and 1.3
hertz. However. the gradient of the decrease falls off with a decrease

in frequency. If we cospare the background leVel at depths of 50 and
loo-ion meters. then the decrease takes place by sore than 6 tiles for the
5 hertz components. 6 tines for the 2.6 hertz component and only 3 tines
for the 1.3 hertz component. The still olower decrease takes place for
the 0.6 hertz component -- the asplitude ratio of depths of 500 and 50 a
is two. Below 600-500 meters. the decrease in noise for all of the
cosponente is quite insignificant.

The analogous picture is observed when investigating the spectra of the
Sunday series constructed for different depths (see Fig 20. c). A compari-
son of the spectra indicates that all of the frequency components decrease
with depth. The 10 hertz component is recorded only in the upper part of
the section. The 0.6. l.). and 2.6 hertz cosponents decrease nore slowly.
The 5.! hertz component decreases still less sharply. for which at depths
of 100 and. to a lesser degree. 200 meters. even some relative increase in
spectral amplitude is noticeable by comparison with the 2.6 hertz frequency.
Deeper than 200 meters the decrease of the 5.! hertz coeponent is analogous
to the other components. Thus. all of the components of the Sunday series
are characterized by quite monotonic decrease in amplitude with depth.

An essentially different variation is observed for the components of the
working series (Fig 20. c). In the upper part of the section to $00-$00 n.
a sharp decrease in noise takes place at all frequencies - the greater.
the higher the frequency. For lo hertz the level ratio at depths of 500
and 5 aeters is 20; for 5.1 hertz it is about 18. for 2.6 hertz. it is

less than 10. for l.) hertz it is k. The anomalously sharp decreases are
ohserved only for the 0.6 hertz coaponent -- by more than 10 tiles. At a
depth about 500 meters the variation of the noise level for the different
component» also is not identical. whereas for l0 and 0.6 hertz. a decrease
in noisv with depth is ohserved evon though it is a slow one (approxieately
1.5 times at a depth of l700 meters by roaparison with 500 meters) and a
still slower decrease takes place for I.) hertz. for 5 and 2.6 hertz the
picture is quite different. Beginning with a depth of LOO-500 seters the
background level increases slowly. and at [700 ueters this increase is
equal to l.5 and 2 for 5 and 2.6 hertz respectively.

66
V08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Per the working series the same picture is ehservad when analyzing the
spectra. The spectra in the upper part of the section (3, too and 200 m)
are characterized by the relative predominance of the 1.3 snd 2.6 hertz
components and a quite sharp decrease in the remaining ones. especially

l0 hertz. Below 200 meters the 0.6. 1.3 and to herts components decrease
with the same gradient. and 2.6 and 1.5 hertz decrease more sharply than
at depths of 100 and 200. Beginning with 600 meters the gradient of the
decrease at the 0.6 hertz component decreases. The noise amplitudes
decrease still more slowly at frequencies of 1.3 and 10 hertz. For a fre-
quency of 5.1 and especially 2.6 hertz. both relative and absolute
increases in spectral amplitudes wi:h an increase in depth are character-
istic (see 1400 and 1600 meters in Fig 20. c). whereas the spectral
amplitude of 2.6 hertz for a depth of 900 meters is 16 nm with respect to
shift. for a depth of 1400 and 1600 meters it is 25 and 30 nm respectively.
that is. the total increase in amplitudes of the noise with depth below
too-500 oeters basically take place as a result of the 2.6 herts component
and to a lesser degree as a result of 5.1 hertz.

Thus. the results of studying the noise in the Novo—Alekssyevshsya Hell
indicate that in the "quiet" regime the nature of the decrease of the
noise with depth corresponds on the whole to the results of the observa-
tions in other wells.

The working days are of special interest when the noise is formed by
concentrated sources. The curves for the variations of the noise amplitudes
can be provisionally broken down into two parts: with high negative grad-
ient in the upper layers of the section to a depth of 600-500 meters and

low positive'at depths of more than 500 meters. It is possible to consider
that two opposite laws of variation of the noise level correspond to
different types of waves which predominate in the noise at different depths.
In the upper part of the profile the noise is formed primarily by surface
waves. and this determines the sharp decrease in noise amplitudes with
depths. however. beginning with depths of 600-500 meters when the surface
wave level has dropped sharply. obviously the volumetric waves acquire
special significance. and their intensity increases smoothly with depth.

The observed. sharpest increase in spectral amplitudes of the 5.1 and 2.6
hertz components obviously is to a great extent determined by the vibration
EQUICO.

Useful Sensitivity. in order to estimate the sensitivity of the well
observations it is necessary to study the useful signals at the surface
and at depths in addition to the variation of the noise background with
depth and in time. For this purpose let us consider the earthquake and
explosion recordings in the Hedeo area recorded on the day surface and in
a well.

The studies in Novo-Alehseyevkn demonstrated that the sensitivity of the
well observations when recording local earthquakes (ts_Prln seconds) at

a depth of 1200 meters is 8 to In times higher than the gruund observations.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ran ontcw. us: my

   
 

 

i3‘~4I-3-"3 - -

    

. . . I] ”t“. - {Ilimllﬂli .-
c '1': ......_,__~_.____”

' ‘ ‘ YR nation
cy:
1. seconds

FOR OFFICIAL use my
ran OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

The earthquake on l0 February 1975 at 19‘s hours was recorded by a ground
channel with aspiificstion of 10.000. and by the well channel with asplifica-
tion of 50,000. If we consider the background noise on both channels and
the ratio of the useful signals. then it turns out that the sensitivity of
the well channel is 9-1] tines sore than the ground channel.

For the earthquake at 0818 hours on 21 February 1975. the analogous value
is approximately 7 times. and for the earthquake at 1028 hours on

10 Hatch 1975. about 7-10 tiles. Let us note that on the ground channel
the noise can increase periodically. complicating the isolation of the
useful signal. For exasple. the earthquake at 0818 hours on

21 February 1975 was difficult to isolate on the ground channel in connec-
tion with the sharp increase in background. 0n the well channel. the
increase in noise background does not take place. and the signal is clearly
separated.

Cosparing the recordings of local earthquakes by the Nova-Alekseyevskaya
station with the recordings of other stations in the test area (see. for
example. Pig ‘8. a; 56. c). it is possible to state that its sensitivity
is somewhat less or cosnensurate with such stations as Alla-Ate or Ali.

The sensitivity of the Novo-Aleksayevskaya station when recording close
earthquakes (these include earthquakes with ts,r>lO seconds) is approximately
6-8 times higher in the well than for ground observations (Fig 21. b).

For distant earthquakes the gain in sensitivity of the well channel is
less than for near and local earthquakes. and it is 5-6 lines (Fig 21. c).

The sensitivity of the well channel when recording industrial explosions
in the Nedeo (Fig 21. i) is spproxiuately the sane as when recording near
earthquakes. that is. 6 to 8 tines higher than the ground channel.

Thus. in spite of the high interference level caused by the operation of
the combines. the sensitivity of the well observations in Nova-Alekseyevka
is essentially higher than the grOund observations both in recording earth-
quakes and when recording industrial explosions.

J6. Observations in Shallow Hells Opening Up the Crystalline Baseuent

The investigated results indicate that under the conditions of great thick-
ness or the sedimentary series. for a significant increase in useful
sensitivity it is necessary to bury the seisnoneters to significant
depths.

it was possible to expect significantly better results when sub-erging
seisnographa in the wells opening up the crystalline basement at shallow
depths. In order to estimate the gain in sensitivity for the well observa-
tions under such conditions on the Ukrainian shield. studies were made

In shallow wells (several tens of meters) opening up the crystalline base-
sent. The observations were node in three wells located at distances of
about 20—25 ks from each other.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR O’TICIAL "8! ONLY

Inasmuch as the results of the observations in all of the wells are
analogous. we shall limit ourselves to s description of the results in

one of them located several kilometers from the rayon center and distin-
guished by the highest level of ground noise. The depth of the well is

86 meters. The thickness of the sediments represented by alluvium of

the Neogenic age (sand. clay. loam) is 56 meters. Prom 55 to 71 meters

is weathered granite. below 71 meters to the bottom is fresh. hard. massive
fine-grained granite in which the SlU-V deep-well seismometer was installed

The ground seismometer was installed in the slluvium directly at the head
of the well.

The study of the laws of variation of noise with time and the useful sig-
nal was performed by the semistationary observations in the frequency
range of 1-5 hertz. In order to obtain average statistical estimates of
the noise at different times (the hours of the day. days. weeks). brief
recording sessions were held with large increases of the equipment with
a pass band of 1-20 hertz.

Noise Sources. for observations in a well. the primary noise source is
the crushers of several rock crushing plsnts located approximately b km
to the northeast of the well. If we do not consider the lunch breaks and
short-term preventive maintenance shutdowns. the crushers operate contin-
uously. in the steady state mode. The noise level is determined by the
number of rock crushing plants operating simultaneously. Another source
of interference is the industrial explosions in the open pit mines. but
they are very short-lived. they are produced in the majority of cases at
one and the same time (usually about 1800 hours local time). they are
easily recognized on the recordings and do not limit the sensitivity of
the observations.

0n the day surface the basic sources of interference are transportation
(automobiles. tractors. and so on). farm machinery operating in the
surrounding fields and various machinery in the lumbering section in direct
proximity to the well (beginning with 200 meters and more). The rayon
center located at 6 km and several villages near the well are also sources
of noise. In addition. interference can be connected with the reservoirs
located 200 meters from the well and the dam over which the water is
discharged into the river flowing out of it.

Observation Data. The semistationary observations were performed in

April 1976. The amplification of the ground channel was given depending
on the noise level. 16.500 or 33.000. and the well channel. 160.000 or
280.000. The stability of the equipment was controlled by systematic
recording of the calibration signal. An example of seismograms from a
visible recording is shown in fig 22. a. By the seismogram obtained in the
daytime (from 0900 to 2100 hours local time) it is obvious that on the
ground channel with amplification of [6.500. the recording was broken by
transport noise with an amplitude of 25-30 mm. At the same time at a depth
of 86 meters. with channel amplification of 150.000. the amplitude of the
background noise does not exceed 1 on. At night (from 2100 hours in the

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
u..—£—:.__.. . 5-..". . ...2 .;......;2:'
3.4.2.2 -; ..-.. .11-?“ . ... __-... .. .
v - on.“ .- . . p 75.5.7. 7 mm you
7‘: WWW
mm t
v-zmm my
W'WWW
In: M .
v-Jmao. luv. 7:; m- In
, V-nmaw a.»
.l .9-
., MWW‘WWWA
v-zoam 11.17. m. am» In
v'zazmm my
Va mm; mm. m Im- an
mﬂWMW-HW
v-zaoama my

MWWWWW

Figure 22. Selauogrom of the nolae and a distant earthquake recorded
by the well and ground channels during neuiscntlonary recording. (e)
and photoosctllograns of the notoe with high anpliftcntion (b).

69
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
POI OIFIOIAL 088 ONE!

evening to 0900 hours in the earning local ties) the transport noise sakes
up 502 of the total observation tine.

During continuous observations. the well channel was used to record sore
than 70 different signals. including 15 distant earthquakes. Out of the
55 near signals the majority are industrial explosions fros various
distances. The ground channel was used to record a total of about 20
signals. and of thee none was a distant earthquake. This is explained by

insufficient sensitivity of the ground observations lieited by the high
interference level.

The highly sensitive recording of noise was carried out in three Iinute
sessions every 2 hours for h days (Thursday. Friday. Saturday and Sunday)
from 15 to 18 April 1976. ass-plea of seissogreas are shown in fig 22. b.
The seisaogrea at 1630 hours was obtained in the dayti-e. end at 0200 hours
at night. but the basic interference in both cases was the noise of the
crushers recorded both by the veil and by the ground channels. The noise
froa sotor vehicles was also auperiaposed on the ground channel recording
of the aeissogran at 1630 hours. The eels-ogre: at 0203 hours illustrates
noise under conditions where not ell of the crushers of the rock crushing
plants were in operation. and the seissogras at 1550 hours. when all of the
crushers were not in operation. 0n the recordings of the well channel, the
low-frequency interference is quite visible with a period of about 3.5 sec
which is hardly noticeable on the ground channel recordings in connection
with the snail realised asplification-and the high aspiitude of the high-
frequency noise of the motor vehicles and the crushers.

Observation Results. Analysis of the saterisls shows that in the wells
three noise levels are observed which differ significantly with respect to
amplitude and duration. The highest level with displace-cot asplitudes of
about 10 n- occupies about 702 of the total observation ties and is
deterained by the operation of the crushers of the rock crushing plants.
The frequency of this interference is about b hertz.

The nininua interference level with displace-eat saplitudes of about 2.5 n-
occupies a total of 101 of the tile out of the total duration of the
observations. and it is tied to the periods when the crushers of the

rock crushing plants are not in operation. The intermediate noise level
of about 5 no is obviously associated with tines when part of the crushers
are operating. with respect to duration. this level takes up about 202 of
the total observation time. The niniau- background level corresponds pre-
doainantly to the period between 0200 and 0600 hours at night local tile.
occupying short intervals of 1-1.5 hours. The noise level of S on is
observed basically from 1600-1700 to 2100-2200 hours in intervals lasting
l-2 to 0-5 hours.

The statistical processing of the date was carried out to estiaate the
noise fro- the various sources. The average noise level free the rack
crushing plants in the well is 6 as (line 2 on Fig 23. a). it is constant
and does not depend on the rise of day. The transport noise (region 3

70
PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Fig 23. a) does not exceed the plant noise with respect to level. that
Is. It is no more than 6 am. They are observed on recording only in the
case where the crushers are not in operation and the sotor transportation
moves directly at the head of the well (10-20 meters). Hhen motor trans-
portation soves at distances closer than 20 meters from the head. the
noise from it is not isolated on the well channel recording.

In the well low-frequency noise is also recorded with a period of about
J-b seconds. the arithmetic mean level of which fluctuates around a value
of 300 an. During the observations in the well. the low-frequency inter-
ference was continuously observed. Th" interference level in Fig 23. a
is provisionally illustrated without a time scale. Inasmuch as this
noise is outside the pass hand of the equipment. its.amplitude does not
exceed 2 mm on the recording.

0n the day surface at the head of the well. the noise level reaches 2000 nm
(region 3 on fig 23. a). and it is determined basically hy the transport
interference. Uith respect to time it occupies 752 of the daytime record-
ing. attenuating only at night. The transport noise level on the surface
depends on the distance at which the moving transportation is located. and
to a lesser degree on its form (nsss). For example. during movement of

a motor transport at a distance of about 150-200 meters from the observa-
tion point the noise leVel reaches 400-600 nm. and with a decrease in
distance to l5-20 m. this value increases to 2000 nm or more. that is.

300 tines higher than in the well. in the absence of transport interference.
the noise amplitude on the surface reaches 50 nm in the daytime and 30 nm
at night (line 1 on Fig 23. a). The decrease in noise at night indicates
that some part of the total noise level is determined by the "cultural”
noise connected with the vital activity of nearby populated places. 0n

the surface. just as in the well. a low-frequency interference is recorded
with a period of 1-6 characteristic in general for the given area. The
interference level on the surface is somewhat greater than in the well.

and it reaches about 600 nm (region 4 on Fig 23. a).

As a result of the statistical processing of the data for the surface and
the well. curves were constructed for the probability of occurrence of

noise of the given or lower amplitude (Fig 23. b). In the absence of
transport interference the noise in the well is determined by the crushers
(curve I). the mean amplitude of the noise with respect to 50! probability
level is 6 no; the noise amplitude varies from 2.5-3 to 12 nn. 0n the
surface under analogous conditions the noise reaches values of 65 nm

(curve 2). The variation of the noise amplitudes on the surface is 15-90 nm.

In the case where only part of the crushers are in operation. the probabil-
ity curves are shifted in the direction of smaller values of the noise
amplitude (for example. curve 3 for the well and L for the surface). "hen
the crushers are not in operation, the average noise level in the well is
1.5 nm. varying within the limits of 0.7-4 nm (curve 5 in Fig 23. b). In
this case on the surface (curve 6) the amplitude varies from 8-10 to 50 nm.
and the mean value is 25 nm.

71
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

P03 OFFICIAL 08! ONLY

For observations on the surface 352 of the time is characterised by the
presence of transport Interference. Curve 7 (Fig 23, b) is constructed
in accordance with the noise recording in the presence of transportation
moving nt a distance of shout 200 meters from the ohservation point. A
large range of variation of the noise amplitudes (from 30 to 500 am) is
characteristic. and the mean value with respect to the 50! probability
level is 150-170 nm.

The spectral analysis of the noise in the well at a depth of 86 meters
indicates that the saxisum amplitudes correspond to the low-frequency

part of the spectrum (Fig 23.c). With an increase in the frequency. the
noise level decreases sharply. For example. with an increase in frequency
from 0.2 to 0.8 hertz the noise level decreases by more than two orders.
with further increase in frequency. the noise amplitudes decrease signif-
icantly more slowly. In the 3-& hertz range. the relative maximum connected
with the operation of the crushers is observed. The nature of decrease in
the noise with increase in frequency in the 0.2-1 hertz range will permit

us to propose that the basic mode of the Rayleigh wave predominates here.

Sensitivity of Hell Observations. In connection with the presence of a

high level of ground noise the recording on the surface under the condition
or recording on the seiamogrsn of normal background with an amplitude of
more than 1-2 no is realizable only for amplifications not exceeding
500-l000. inasmuch as the high level of ground interference is characteris-
tic for 751 of the observation time. the stationary high-frequency observa-
tions are in practice impossible.

The sensitivity of the well observations is more than 2 orders higher than
that of the ground observations. Distant earthquakes considered as useful
signals which are clearly recorded by the well channel are not separated
in the ground channel under these conditions.

In the absence of transport interference (about 252 of the total observation
time) the sensitivity of the well channel is approximately 5-6 tines

higher than the ground channel. For example. if the earthquake at 1730
hours (see Fig 22. a) is recorded by the well channel with an amplitude
which exceeds by 10 times the background level. the snplitude of the signal
on the ground channel recording will only exceed the background level by

a slight amount.

A comparison with the ground seismic station. the seismometers of which are
installed on outcrops of hedrock approximately 10 km from the well indicates
that the sensitivity of the two stations is comparable (Fig 26). The
higher low-frequency noise (T-3-6 seconds) on the ground station is
explained by the fact that the natural period of its seisnometers is

1.5 seconds (the natural period of the well seisnoneter is 1 second).

Let us Identify the results of the well research.

73
FOR OPPICXAL USE ONLY
roe ORIGIN. 088 OKLY

For a high level of ground noise

1. Under the conditions of the large industrial cities the noise level on
the day surface is very high and unstable. The range oi variation of the
noine neplitudes with ties exceeds 2 orders. however. approxi-ately to
100-600 eeters the noise level is stabilised and basically varies iron
day to night by 2-3 tiles.

2. The sharpest variation of the background taltes place in the upper part
of the section (the first hundreds of esters). with further increase in
depth the gradient of the saplitude variation oi the noise decreases rapidly.
Thus. whereas on going from the day suriace to a depth of 600 esters the
noise eeplitudes decrease by 30—00 tiees. on asking the transition iron

1000 to 2000 eaters the noise aeplitude decreases by a total of 2-3 tines.

J. The eaxieua noise aeplitudes both on the day surface end at great depths
correspond to the low-period coeponents of the spectrum. ﬂith an increase

in frequency the noise level decreases significantly faster in the well
than on the day surface.

A. The recordings of the ground and deep-well stations located in Alla-Ate
are in practice not coapatable. The earthquakes, the recordings of which
are readable at the deep stations are not recorded by the ground station
and. vice versa. the earthquakes recorded by the ground station are coe—
pletely washed out on the recording by the deep station.

A couporieon of the recordings of earthquakes obtained under city conditions
in a well at a depth of 2 In with the recordings of the Talgar station
located far fro- the city in a drift in crystalline rock indicates approx-
inately identical useful sensitivity of the stations.

5. The results obtained sake it possible to recotnead the creation of
highly sensitive stations with seiseogrsphs buried in deep wells to study

the seinsic characteristics of large cities located in seiseically active
zones.

For a low ground noise level

I. The noise amplitudes decrease with depth significantly less sharply
than in areas with n high noise level. The nature of variation in the
Chiliit Well for the day series coincides with the variation of the day
noise in the Tashkent and Alma-Ate Hells. At night the noise level in
the chi] 1k wen decreaees significantly more weakly than in the daytine.
whereas for the Tashkent and Alla-Ate Hells the ratio of the noise level

at the surface and at a depth of 600 meters is 30-60, for the Chililt Hell
it is 0-6.

2. 0n the day surface the noise amplitudes can vary by several tens of
(lees with time. At a depth of several hundreds of teeters (300-600 teeters)

76
IOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF?ICIAL USB ONLY

lhv unlue anel vnrles. nn n rule, hy nn sore than 2-3 tines. These
dlrfvrvnvvn nru utnhly vnnnvniod with an increase in noise in tho daytise.
The gain in useful sensitivity is appreciably lover than in the areas with
a high level of ground noise. llowever the high stability of the noise oven
at shallow depths increases the effectiveness and the value of the well

observations sharply.

(1) [£12 In. ”I”.

l-lw

    

VII IR!”

    

 

Vinﬂtﬂﬂ

"mun”. l w In

Figure 26. Recordings of a distant earthquake by the well and
ground stations, the seissographs of which are
installed on outcrops of bedrock (upper trace)
and on sedisentsry rock at the head of the well
(lower trace)

Key:
1. ll April 1976

3. In the well the shape of the recording of each individual wave is
determined prisarily by the superposition of the pulses of the incident
wave and the wave reflected free the day surface. In the section of the
well adjacent to the day surface. the shape of the recording of the
Individual wave can be sore couples than on the day surface. The length
of this section depends on the shape of the pulse of the incident wave.
its predominant frequency and the high speed section. At depths where the
pulses of the incident and reflected waves are resolved. the shape of the
individual wave is newly sisplified, but in this case the number of waves
recorded on the seisnogras increases. and the structure of the seisnogran
becomes significantly sore cosplicated.

For noise from stationary sources

l. Under the conditions of the effect of stationary noise sources their
level at the surface can be very high. However. the range of variation

75
FOR OFPICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OIPICIAL 083 ONLY

of amplitudes with time in appreciably lower than from the standard sources.
Thus. whereas in Alan-Ate and Tashkent the range of variation exceeds two
orders. in Nova-Alekseyevka it is less than an order (7 times).

2. There are two "noise" conditions for stationary sources differing
sharply between each other with respect to level and nature of variation
of the noise - ”quiet" and "noisy." The former is characterized by a

low noise level and a monotonic decrease in noise with depth. For the
latter. a sharp decrease in amplitude in the upper part of the section
(600-500 meters) and smooth increase in amplitudes with furrher increase
in depth are characteristic. This decrease in noise indicates various
types of waves predominant at different depths: in the upper part the
surface waves predominate, and deeper than 500 meters the volumetric waves
predominate.

The higher frequencies decrease more sharply from the surface to a depth
of 500 meters. Below 500 meters the total increase in noise amplitudes
with depth takes place primarily as a result of the 5.1 and especially
the 2.6 hertz components.

6. The gain in useful sensitivity for well observations in NovenAiekseyevka
when recording at a depth of 1200 meters for local earthquakes is 8.10.

for nearby earthquakes 6-8. and distant earthquakes 5-6 and industrial
explosions, 6-0 times.

Uith respect to useful sensitivity the ﬁevo-Alekseyevsksya station is
comparable with the other well stations of the test area (Alma-Ate. Ali).

For shallow wells which open up the crystalline basement

1. Even under conditions of high ground noise level, completely excluding
the possibility of high frequency ground observations, submersion of the
seismograph in a well to the crystalline basement permits amplification of
about 300.000. that is, it makes it possible to obtain the sensitivity
which is commensurate with the useful sensitivity of the station located

on the day surface directly on outcrops of bedrock under unfavorable con-
dltionn.

2. The gain in sensitivity obtained is connected primarily with the
transition to the crystalline basement. It is possible to seems that
this gain depends little on the thickness of the sedimentary series and
will be ohserved in other regions of analogous structure.

3. Considering the high velocity gradient in the upper weathered tone of
the basement. it is expedient to bury the seismopraph 10-15 meters
into stronger rock.

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0! 0P?ICIAL US! ONLY

PART II. RADIOTKLEHETRIC RECORDING

The centralized radiotelenetric recording with a unit tine service permitting
the accuracy of the constructions to be increased is one of the basic
features of the developed procedure. A more detailed description is pre-
sented of the Alas-Ate radiotelenetric test area and the equipment of the
automated well and ground stations and also the radiotelenetric recording

system. Special attention has been given to a description of the experilent
and the observation results.

CHAPTER III. ALHA-ATA SEISMOLOGICAL RADIOTBLENETRIC TEST AREA

The observation conditions in the vicinity of Alas-Ate are characterised
by the presence of a very high level of seisnic noise caused by the vital
activity of the city and its high variability in tine.

At the ease tine the seissogeologicai situation near Alma-Ate which is
located in a force-10 zone requires a detailed study of the seismic char-
octeristics of both the city itself and its environs. The necessity for
highly sensitive observations arises also free the fact that at the present
tine the basic characteristic of the seismic regime is "calaness" of seisnic
activity. In order to discover and trace the'seisaically active tones it

is necessary to increase the accuracy of determining the coordinates of the
earthquake centers.

Thus, the basic specific requirements on the observations in large indus-
trial centers are. first of all, high sensitivity of the equip-ant and.
secondly, high accuracy of determining the coordinates of the earthquake
Centers. The satisfaction of these requiresents has led. on the one hand.
to the creation of highly sensitive deep-sell seissic stations and. on the
other hand, to the organization of centralized nultichsnnel radioteleeetric
recording of the signals of all stationary observation points. Both of
these areas were basic to the creation of the Alma-nth test area.

5|. Geological-Geophysical Characteristics of the Region

in administrative respects. the observation region belongs to Alma-Ate
Oblost and includes the city of Alas—Ate directly.

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OIPICIAL US! ONLY

The region includes areas that are different with respect to their geo-
morphological appearance -- fro- plains and uildly illy areas in the north
to the mountainous area in the south. The lliyshay basin is located in
the north. It runs in a suhlatitudinal direction along the Zailiyskiy
Alatau Ridge vhich is located in the southern part and is separated free
the Kyungey Ala-Too Ridge located farther south by the Chen—Kesin River
valley. In the west. the Zailiyshiy Alatsu is split into two branches --
the Kastekskiy and the Chon-Keainskiy Ridges. The highest altitude of the
Zailiyskiy Alatau reaches $000 aeters. Strong disaeaberuent of the ridges
is a characteristic feature.

Tectonics. 0n the regional level the district is in an area of joining

of the Caledonian structures of Northern Tyan'-Shan' with the Hercinian
structures of the Dzhungaro—Ialkhash Province which is cosplicated by

alpine discontinuous tectonics. The Kungeyakiy. Zailiyskiy and Chu-Iliyskiy
anticlinoriya and Iliyskiy synclinoriun are large structures.

The Kungeyskiy anticlinorius is made up of uetanorphic series of the
Proterozoic with inclusions of large masses of intrusions of Silurian and
Ordovician age. In the north the anticlinoriu joins the Zailiysltiy
antlclinoriun along the deep Chilik-Kesinskiy fault of ancient occurrence.
In the core of the Zailiyskiy snticlinoriua. on a aodern section Proterozoic
deposits are noted which are highly intensely dislocated and fora snall
isoclinal folds. The lower Paleozoic series are represented by a systea

of narrow folds of the sublatitudinal direction. Together with the
Proterozoic. they are the only Lower Paleozoic structural state.

The surface effusive-sedimentary series of the Devonian and Lower Carbonifer-
ous occur unconfornabiy on the Caledonian folded base in the for: of a

nuaber of comparatively gently sloping synclinal folds, forcing the ﬂiddle
Paleozoic structural stage.

In the north the Zailiyskiy anticlinoriun borders with the lliyskiy
synclinoriun through the Zoiliyskiy zone of faults of sublatitudinal strike
which is a structural element of the Upper Paleozoic stage. There are no
Devonian deposits here. and the Carboniferous and Upper Paleozoic deposits
of basically effusive-tufogenic origin occur unconforlably on the dislocated
rocks or the Silurian. for-log gently sloping brachyaynclinal and anticlinal
folds. The gently sloping bell-shaped poles are made up of Mesozoic for-a-
tions. and the lliyskiy intermontane trough with a flat bottom and several
uplifted limbs in made up of Cenozoic deposits which maintain allost un-
disturbed horizontal bedding or their depth corresponds to the slope of the
Paleozoic base.

In Quaternary time the most intense vertical displacements of the blocks
t0uk place both with respect to the renewed ancient tectonic futures and
with respect to the newly occurriig faults which has created a stepped
relief system so characteristic of the region. The systems of deep faults
are illustrated in Fig 25. a.

 

l [111 River Basin]

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR orrtctas US! ONLY

Geophysical Study. The first large-scale seisnic studies in Northern
Tyan'-Shan‘ are connected with the asses of 0. A. Gaaburtsev.

K. i. Satpayev and D. I. Katanli. They were started ianediately after
the disastrous Ashkhabed earthquake. The first studies were eede of the
deep structure of the region by the deep seissie sounding technique in
1969 [22. 2b]. and the basis was laid down for the regional network of
seisnologicsl stations (Alas-Ate. lli. Chilik. Kuraenty. Rybech'ya.
Preheval'sk. Krasnogorka. liaryn). These stations ssde it possible to
record earthquakes beginning with the eighth energy class.

here. in the vicinity of Alla-Ate in 1951 G. A. Gaaburtsev began the first
highly sensitive observations to study the weak local earthquakes in the
high-frequency range (5-30 hertz) by the correlation method of studying
earthquakes (min) [20. 21]. It is necessary to note that the application
of this nethod at the present time is the basic trend in the developeent
of seisnology.

During the period from 1965 to 1967. in connection with the designing of a
nuaber of hydroengineering structures in the lli. Charyn and Chilik River
basins. a set of operations were perforeed to study the degree of scisaic
danger of this region. in addition to the regional network of stations
in the Chilik and Charyn interfluve. a group of four teaporsry stations
were organized which made it possible to record weak shocks and sore pre-
cisely to define the paraseters of the earthquake centers.

Since l966. the couple: regional geophysical studies. including scisaologi-
cal studies with the Zealya [earth] stations have been perforsed by the
Kazakh Geophysical Trust and the regional network of seismic stations of
the Institute of Geological Sciences of the Kazakh SSR Acade-y of Sciences.
However. these observations have insufficient detail to study the sciatic
characteristics of the city of Alas-Ate and its environs.

Deep Structure. The earth's crust in this area is characterized by sub-
horizontal layering and it is separated into individual blocks by vertical
or steeply dipping fractures [31. The thickness of the earth's crust is
free 60 to 60 ka. According to the geophysical data, the roofs of the base-
ment. the Conrad and Mohorovichich boundaries are isolated (see Fig 25. b).
The Conrad surface is submerged froa west to east to a depth free 20 to

35 he and it is characterized by a couples structure. It is cut by the
Kurtinskiy. Altyn-Enel'skiy. Kcain-Ushkonurskiy and the Chilik-Keninskiy
deep fractures in the northeasterly direction coinciding with the strike
of the structures of the Kungey—Zailiyskiy snticlinoriua. The Rewin-
Ushkonurskiy and Altyn-Enel'skiy faults are traced in the entire series of
the earth‘s crust to the ﬂnhornvlchich interface.

The "hasaltic" layer hounded by the Conrad and Hohorovichich surfaces
has a thickness tron 20 to 35 kl. increasing toward the. east in the
direction of the submersion of the Hohorovichich surface.

79
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

FOR OPIIOIAL 088 ONLY

[Legend and key to Pig 25. preceding page]:

a: I -- epicentera of destructive earthquakes in the past. 2 - deep
faults (l -- Yurhno-nthungarekiy. ll .. Halay-Sarayskiy. ltl -«
Knahelenshiy. 1V -- Altyn-Bsel'skiy. V -. Ksraksstahshiy. VI -
Knrngayly-aulakskiy. Vll -— Resinanhkonurskiy. Vlll -- Aktyusskiy.

Ix -- Severe-Keninshiy. X - Chilik-Kemkiskiy. Xl -- Severo-Kungeyakiy.
XII -- Tyupakiy): 3 -- active deep faults;

b: l -- isohypscs of the interfaces. 2 - deep faults.

Ke :
y l. Alma-Ate 7. Altyn-Bmel'skiy fault
2. Lake lssyk-Kul' 8. Kenin-Ushkonurskiy fault
3. Altynesmel'skiy fault 9. Alsa-Ata
L. Kemin-Ushkonurahiy fault lo. Chilik-Keminshiy fault
5. Alma-Ate

6. Chilik—Kelinskiy fault

The "granite" layer uhich includes the series bounded by the roofs of the
loser Paleozoic basesent and the Conrad surface has a thickness of 16-22 kn.
The Paleozoic baseaent is distinguished by a block structure and it is cut
by a series of differently oriented tectonic fractures with amplitudes
reaching 500 meters. The depth of occurrence of the basement is different
in different parts of the area. In the south and southeast the Paleozoic
formations emerge at the surface. The Paleozoic series in the north and
northwest are also close to the surface. In the central part the depth of
occurrence of the basement is laxisal. The series of tectonic dislocations
with a break in continuity - deep fractures -- roofs of the Paleozoic bese-
ment in the vicinity of Alma-Ara -- are broken down into three blocks:
southern. central and northwestern. The southern block is a monoclinal
uhich dips steeply to the north to a depth of up to 3000 actors. The central
block is separated from the southern and northwestern blocks by faults
complicated by a series of sssll discontinuities of latitudinal and north-
easterly direction. and it is the nest submerged. The thickness of the
sedimentary deposits here fluctuates from 2.5 to 3 km in the vest and to

4 km in the center. The northwestern block is also separated from the
adjacent fractures and is characterised by uniform (quiet) bulging of the
basement in the northwesterly direction.

According to the data of geophysical research. the propagation rates of the
longitudinal waves in the earth's crust have the following values:

the sedimentary layer is 2500-2700 a/sac, the "granite" layer is 5700-6600
n/sec. the "basaltic" layer is 6600.7300 n/sec. the subcrustal layer

(the Nohorovichich surface) has a velocity discontinuity to 8100 Ilssc.

The velocity on the surface of the Paleozoic basement does not depend on

the depth of its occurrence within the limits of accuracy of the determina-
tions.

81
P0! OFVICIAL USE ONLY
POI 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

Seismicity of the Region.1 A characteristic feature of Northern Tyan'-Shen'
is the fact that in a short interval four disastrous earthquakes have
_m‘(‘ui’l’ud hero: Vornenskoyc (1337. "-7.7.25). Chilﬂt (1889 "-7.54).
Kehinukoyc (1911. "-8.7) and Kemino-Chuyskoye (1938. "-6.5 . B. Gutenberg
assigned a maximum possible magnitude of 8.7 to the strongest of then. the
Kebinskoye earthquake. Stronger earthquakes did not occur later. and the
seismicity is connected with the appearance of week and medium earthquakes.
For the area nonuniform distribution of the earthquake epicentera is
characteristic (see Figures 73. 7b). The basic number of them is concen-
trated in the central and eastern parts. A separate group of earthquakes
is located in the Chilik and Charyn interfluve in the epicentral sons of
the 1889 earthquake. A clearcut law is observed in the mutual arrangement
of the epicenters of the week (KelO) and stronger (K111) earthquakes. The
stronger earthquakes are systematically located at some distance from the
accumulations of epicenters of earthquakes. They outline the tones of
increased activity formed by the weak earthquakes.

A characteristic feature is the almost complete absence of earthquake
centers beyond the limits of the crust and coordination of the majority of
them with the "granite" layer. The basic number of centers with Ka9 have

a depth of 5-12 km: the earthquakes with K<9 have a depth basically within
the limits of the first S-km from the earth's surface. Considering the
accuracy of determining the centers (:5 km) it is possible to state that
the majority of the earthquakes have a depth of 5-15 km; the deeper centers
are a rare phenomenon. The majority of strong earthquakes of the past were
also located in the earth's crust at shallow depths.

It is indicative that migration of the maximum density of epicenters is
observed over the area for the observation period of 1956-1967. In 1956
the maximum density of the centers was observed in the eastern part: sub-
sequently in 1958-1959. the maximum shifted to the west. and in 1960 the
central and eastern (the Charyn and Chilik interfluve) parts of the region
were active. From 1961 to 1966 basically only the eastern part was active:
certain sections were active at different times. In 1965 the central part
begins to become active. in 1966 the activity spreads farther to the west.
and in 1967 a general decrease is observed. However. whatever changes took
place in the seismic situation in the region its eastern part turned out to
be consistently more active. and the western part. including the city of
Alma-Ate and its environs was characterized by significantly weaker activity.
especially in recent years.

The presented brief characteristic of the region gave rise to the necessity
for using a theoretically new approach in studying the seismic characteris-
tics of Alma-Ate and the creation of the Alma-Ate radiotelemetric test area
of automatic stations with central multichannel recording of the signals.

lSeismicity of Zailiyskiy Alatau is described in detail in ‘1 Ff
Chapter VI.

82
FOR OPfICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I2. Structure and Technical Indexes of the Test Area

Alma-Ate and its environs are located in the foothills of Zailiyskiy
Alntau. The southern part of the city approaches directly to the north
slopes of the ridge. in individual cases being located even on the slopes
themselves. The northern part of the city is located in the foothills of
the lliyskiy basin made up of a thick series (more then 6000 meters) of
sedimentary deposits.

The geological situation and the level of seismic noise require the creation
of a test area of stations of two types: deep well stations located in

the sedimentary rock (in the north) and ground (southern) stations located
in the mountains on the bedrock outcrops (Pig 26).

Deep-Hell Stations. The northern stations are located in the Iliyskiy
hnsin in a thick series of sediments. and they are characterised by a very
high level of noise connected basically with the vital activity of Alma-Ate.
In order to insure maximum sensitivity for the given conditions at all of
the stations. the seiaaometars of its northern stations must be placed in
the deep wells. For this purpose. random wells were used which were drilled
in their own time for one u rpose or another. The location of these wells
cannot be considered optiaal; indeed with respect to technical condition
and structural design they are not suitable at all for stationary seismolog-
ical observations.

Alma-Ate. The station was built on the basis of a deep hydrogeological
borehole located within the city, at its eastern edge. in the central,
most submerged part of the Iliyakaya basin. The total thickness of the
terrigenic deposits is according to the geophysical data about 6200 meters
here. The well was drilled in 1962 to a depth of 3238 meters. but at the
present time it has been drilled only to a depth of 2000meters where a
cement Plus is set. The geological section of the well and a graph of“
the temperature variation with depth appear in Fig 27. The five-inch casing
ls cemented only in the 2030 to 3230 meter range. Hater comes out of the
well with a discharge rate of about 1 liter/minute. This fact and also
the fact that the casing has not been cemented throughout reduces the
value of the well for observations somewhat.

Rove-Alekseyevsksya. The station is located 25 km to the east of Alma-Ate
and it is organized on the heels of the well drilled to find thermal water.
The depth of the well is 2985 meters. the Paleozoic basement is discovered
at a depth of 2960 meters. The well has been cased with a 5—inch casing
along its entire extent. and it is cemented in practice to its entire depth.
In this regard it differs advantageously from the Alma-Ate Hell. but the
building materials combine located several kilometers from the station
where the powerful crushera are in operation causes a high interference
leVel. The geological section through the well and the temperature curve
are also shown in Fig 27. The seismologiats of both stations, Novo—
Alekaeyevskaya and Alma-Ate. were lowered to a depth of 1200 meters. The
central recording station is located on the first of them.

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Ali. The station is the northernmost station of the test area located

10 km to the north of Alla-Ate, A well drilled to find the structures
under the gas sternno in used for observations. The Paleozoic basement
Is ruvualnd at a depth of 850 asters, but the well has been opened up only
to a depth of 800 meters where a ceasnt plug has been installed. The
casing has been cemented to the heed of the well. but the quality of the
ceaent is low. Between the 8 and 12 inch casings there is an ertesien
flow of water fro- the upper horizon with a high discharge rate. By
cooparison with Alma-Ate and the Novo-Alekseyevskays stations. the con-
ditions for the observations here are cooperatively favorable which is
explained basically by the closeness of the base-ant and also significant
reeoval fro. the city of Alla-Ata.

Ground Stations. The southern stations are located on the slopes of
Zailiyskiy Alatau directly on the outcrops of the crystalline bedrock and
they are characterised by a low noise level which sakes it possible to
realize high amplifications of the equip-ant. The location of the stations
under conditions of sharply broken relief creates definite difficulties
transmitting information to the central recording station by radio in the
ultrashort wave band. and it has a significant effect on the structure of
the seisaograss (see 55, Chapter IV).

Tnlgar. This station is located 7 kn south of the city of Tslgsr in the
foothills of Zailiyskiy Alatau. The seisaonoaeters were installed in a
deep lZO-aeter drift drilled directly in the crystalline rock of the
Paleozoic basesent which energes at the surface. The elevation above sea
level is about 1200 asters.

The station is renoved from various sources of noise of artificial origin;
therefore the conditions for the seislological observations are highly
favorable here. The only disadvantage is the closeness of the nountain
river of Tnlgar which lowers the sensitivity of the station sosewhat.

Ozero. The station is located in the lountsins at an altitude of about
3000 meters above sea level. 25 kl south of the city of Alla-Ate and 5 k-
froa the Bolshoye Alla-Ate Lake in the territory of the observatory of the
State Astronoeical Institute ineni P. K. Shternberg. The scisaoaeters are
installed in a prospecting hole. The noise level at the 02ero station is
very low. which is highly favorable for seismologicsl observations.

Portable stations. In addition to the described stationary installations.
portable stations have been_used which are periodically located in the

most interesting places. In particular. one of the temporary stations
(Plato) conducted observations in Malaya Alma-Atinka Canyon near the center
of the local earthquake at 0066 hours on 6 June 1972 in order to locate it,
and the other teaporary station (Kurty) was set up on outcrops of bedrock
approximately 100 km northwest of the central recording station near the
village of Kurty. Some of the inforuation about the stations in the test
area is presented in Table 5.

8‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

10.
ll.
12.
I3.

IOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

 

Figure 26. Diagram of the arrange-ant of the deep-well (l).

the ground surface (2) and portable auto-atie

stations of the Alma-Ate radioteleletric test area.
The black triangles are the stations of the regional

netuork.

Kurty 14.
Kapchsaayskoye Reservoir 15.
Kapchagay 16.
111 17.
Kaskelen l8.
Nikoleyevka 19.
Ali 20.
Dnitriyevka 21.
Chenolgan 22.
Burunday 23.
Fabrichnaya

Kaskelen

Uzunagach

Ozaro

Talgar

Plato

Talgar

Alla-Atn

Isayk
Novo-Alnkaeyavskaya
Tursen

chilik

Kurnenty

Let us note that when selecting the locations of the stations, the con-
ditions of insurance of stable reund the clock radio communications in
the ultrnshort wave range and also the presence of stable electric power
lines for the system transnitters had decisive significance.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040010-5

'0R OPPIOIAL USE ONLY

0

   
    

   

I
" "'77:— ";3} I. 1 ,

I
i

  

3‘
a

9%?é

m

      

“i E!
‘55“ m a:
23-“ 6-3;:
*- 8 E!
5’ up .l

. E7
5% m. Ev
éﬁ

I“.

lﬂ'

”a
'. J/u '
mv

" 86
m ontcm. us: ONLY

I 1;,l' 1' IV I

    
    
 
  

Figure 27. 61
sections (a) a
cure curves (t
respect to thl
will (I) and I
Alekscyevaknyt

The provision:
as follows

For a(II): 1
2 - gravelitc
stones. 6 -- <
argillites, 5
clay. aleuroli
clay with sand
7 -- clay, [in
B -- carbonact
deposits

Key:
1. group;
3. depth;
column: s
6. depth;
8. Paleom
9. Paloog<
lO. Nengel
Quaternar

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102108: ClA-RDPOZ-OOBWROO0100040010-6
M OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

 

(5) Tune 7 «'°u.aa 11°13.“ uoo - - a? so no 1:
“)um oummvuusmo- v -u ”at“.
(7) Mrs M 4317.23 we snas ,sooI-DOO. :0 as - at as 04 u
(8) As- a «30.0: 7103.1: 'sso sec 40 as .‘ll - as u u
(9) mums-a...- u-A ”23.00.1110.“ 1001200 u a; as as . sea
(10) m 3: 4353.0 ruao sso - notes 04 72 as -m
(11) nan. n . . 1190 -. :1 s l! as as tos .
(12) Wmh-mmmmu-rmmoassm
Key:
1. Station 7. Alma-Ata
2. Notation 8. Ali
3. Coordinates 9. Novo-Alekseyevskaya
a. Distance between stations. kn 10. Kurty
5. Talssr ll. Plato
6. Ozsro

12. Note. h is the elevation above sea level. II - depth of instrument
in the well.

53. Radiotolemetric Channel

in 1971 the laboratory of deep well observations began work on the
development of the equipment and the process for centralized recording of
signals. In 1972 V. G. Katrenho took the radio channel in Tashkent as the
initial one. The develop-ant ended with the construction of the radio-
telemetric test area of highly sensitive auto-atsd stations in 1972.

Later the equipment was ieproved significantly and a great deal of experience
was accusulated in its operation. Let us consider the individual ease-bliss
and units of equipment which are not series manufactured by industry.

For this purpose we shall use the materials of reference [37] in part.

The rediotelemetric channel includes the equipment at the transmitting and
receiving stations. The equipment makes it possible to input seismic

data to the communications channel for which the series radio relay RRS-lﬂ
stations are used.

87
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Basic technical specifications of radiotelemetric equipment
(without a comunications channel) are as follows:

Frequency band of transmitted seismic data. hertz 0.5-10
Dynamic range (without the co-unications channel).
decibels 60
Nonlinearity. 2 50.5
Operating temperature range. '0 from -15 to
+40
Peed voltage (from storage battery). volts 12

The functional diagram of the telemetric channel is presented in Fig 28. a.
The basic links of the channel are as follows: a ssismogrsph with pre-
amplifier. an amplifier-modulator. transmitter. receiving radio station.
demodulator. low-frequency amplifier and recording device.

The sou-v eeismometers are used as the seismic converters in the deep-well
stations. and the 814-2" at the ground surface stations.

Amplifier-Modulator (UH). The UN module (Fig 28. b) is made up of the
amplifier. modulator and feed voltage stabilizer. The low-frequency
amplifier. to the input of which the seismic signal is fed after being
picked up on the preamplifier is a low-noise five-stage amplifier with
direct couplings between stations.’ It is encompassed by two loops of
comaon negative feedback which rigidly stabilize its parameters and shape
the frequency characteristic. Par compensation of the characteristic of
the pendulum conversion. the transmission coefficient of the UH in the

frequency range of 1-10 hertz is inversely proportional to the first power
of the frequency.

Basic parameters of the amplifier:

Input impedance. kilohu 8.2
Output impedance. ohms £600
Natural noise fed to the input, microvolts s 1
Transmission coefficient with respect to voltage

(on s frequency of l hertz) 1000
Dynamic range. decibels ; 10

Free the amplifier output the signal goes to the frequency modulator which
transfers the seismic signal spectrum of 0.5-10 herts to the frequency
range of 300-3500 hertz, that is, it modulates the telephone channel
frequencies of the radio station by the seismograph signals.

The frequency modulator is ‘a tunable multivibrator with separate functional
circuits which permits us to obtain a linear conversion characteristic in
a wide frequency band. The Ts-T input circuits assembled by the system
with a cannon base are the capscgtor charge current generators. The
circuits with a cannon collector T10. Tu. 1'13. 1‘“ (the rxultivibrator

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ml OFFICIAL US! ONLY

       

‘3 3- in
eke x x :5.

.323.
#5ka

 

 

v.5.

   

89

P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.nuao> «NH .cN .uOuonaooﬂ 0:» o» .nu “ﬁaauw0Ibuoo .NN .coalau .mN .nuuo> cu .ON .muHo> -H .oH
.usnuso .am .uancu .NH .uuvuOuou hN>m .su .>w~anuv .on .uuuuunalu vco .mH .auouuan

sunbeam .Qu .noquDHOU 0>uuwuuauo .nH .uuuulwmtno«uuualo .NH «Aneuausvoaovv a snow: .HH
.xuouuaa .on .uOuuwﬂua-uu :Hnwxx .o .nuumunalhoua .m .znwunoanuoa >n=om .n .usoa .o

“Abouuqa awaken. .m .unaa vuou .e .uOuaaanOI :m .n .uu«uanaau .N .uucn ncuauanoaauwuuauan< .n
"ads

on nowuwunao boson «cu

and Avv voou manna. Houunou ecu .on nan-navoﬂov .AAV nauausvoﬂluouuuumau ozu
uo alunnwuv uuuulUAu. use any noccagu oauuQCOuOuOuvau 0:» mo iaumauv Mancuuucam .om unawuu

 

haeSPK$

I: u§§£
.pfuxxé \
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

itself) play the role of the controlling switches. The multivibrator
frequency depends on the charge current developed by the input circuits.
and it is controlled by the output current of the amplifier.

Basic parameters of the frequency modulator:

Central frequency. hertz 1850115
Frequency deviation. hertz e1600
Frequency stability. hertz l-lO“
Output impedance. ohms 600

The frequency modulator signal of the amplifier modulator unit is fed
to the radio station modulator which takes the signal to the ultrashort
wave band.

The ultrnshort wave signal goes through the air to the receiving radio
station. from the output of the receiver of which the frequency-modulator

signal is picked up in the 300—3600 hertr band and it is fed to the
modulator-amplifier unit.

Demodulstor (0). The basic purpose of the demodulator is conversion of the
frequency spectrum obtained in the receiving radio station (300-3‘00 hertz)
to the low-frequency spectrum of seismic information. Let us briefly dis-
cuss its operation (see Pig 28. c).

The demodulator is executed from five triodaa and five diodes. The output
signal of the subcsrrier frequency with an amplitude of 5-8 volts. similar
with respect to shape to sinusoidal, goes from the radio to the demodulator
input where a threshold unit of the Schmidt trigger type (Tl, T2) converts
it to square pulses.

The shaped square pulses are differentiated; then they go through the C3. R7
circuit to the slaved multivibrator (the triodaa T3, Tb) uhich shapes the
pulses of constant duration and amplitude independent of the input signal
parameters. Only the frequency of shaping of the pulses determined by the
input signal frequency is a variable. Then the pulses go through the emitter
repeater Ts directly to the demodulator 05. 06. R15. 08'

The advantages of the described demodulator circuit are the following:
a) Economy -- the demodulator does not require a separate feed and is
connected to one power supply (a 12 volt storage battery) jointly with other

units of the channel;

h) Absence of mutual effects between the channels and, as a consequence.
quite high noiseproofness;

c) Resistance overload, simplicity. reliability. a small number of parts.

91
lOR OFPICIAL US! ORE!
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040010-6

Ur L

4 ﬂPRlL 1979
POI DIVICIAL US! ONLY

The low-frequency signal is fed from the demodulator output to the recording
equipment.

Channel Calihratlnn. The prohlena of callhrniing the aeisnic cquiplent.
that is. deter-ination of the frequency-amplitude and phase characteristics
of the seismic channel and also amplification of it have been investigated
in many papers. for exaaple. in [65] and other papers. The calibration of
the radiotelenetric channel has its own specific characteristics.

Actually. on an ordinary seianic station all of the channel elements are
located in direct proxinity to each other. in the radiotelesatric channel
un-individual elements are located at great distances. in particular. the
receiving and transmitting parts are several tens of kiloneters apart. In-
asnuch as the transaittinn radio station is rigidly "tied" to the ac network
power supply. in the search for a "quiet" place it is necessary to reeove
the seisnnneters to significant (up to loo-L00 eaters) distances. Sieul-
tnneously. in order to avoid induction free the transmitter itself. the
Preamplifier and the amplifier-modulator are noved there.

Additional difficulties occur vhen calibrating Hell channels. the seiseuneters
of which are located in the Hells at great depths and are connected to the
ground equip-cot by long lines (the construction length of the series-pro-
duced armored logging tables is about 3500 neters). The influence of such
long lines on the parameters of the entire channel lust be taken into
account. In addition. at great depths (to 1000 netera) under high teepera-
ture conditions reaching lOO'C. the seisnoneters change parameters. This
is taken into account by introducing the corresponding directions or
approaching the actual operating conditions to the naxisu- when calibrating
the channel. lnassuch as the radiotelesetric channel is nade up of seissic
and radio csenmnications channels. the latter sust be individually tuned
and adjusted before calibration in order to avoid its influence on the
scisnic channel parameters.

Frequency characteristic of the Channel. According to fig L. b. the
characteristic on the 0.7 levai has a pass hand of 0.8-7 hertz. In order
to conpensate for the amplification of the seisnoaraph elf with an increase
in frequency. an integration cell is provided in the amplifying-recording
equipnent (nee curve 2. Fla 6).

When preparing the radiotelenetric channel for operation when all of its
assemblies are located on the central recording station. the frequency
tharncteristlc of both the entire channel and its individual ole-eats can
he picked up by any of the known procedures. “hen part of the equip-eat is
Installed at the seismic and data transaission point. the lost convenient
for determination of the frequency characteristic of the entire channel as
a whale is the procedure for which the signal is fed from the generator on
various frequencies directly to the input of the control coil whether it is
a nruund aeianoaeter or a deep vell seisnonctcr. This procedure is con-
Venient for daily nonitoring -- feeding the signal of a constant anplituie

92
FOR OIPICIAL USE QNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY

angnetic generator (Mars) to the auxiliary coil. it is possible to con-

trol both the shape and level of the frequency characteristic of the
channel operatively.

It Is nlno possible to pick up the frequency charncteristic of the asplify-
Inn and recording channel. feeding the signal frou the generator to its
input. Then sultiplying it by the frequency characteristic of the
seisnooeter and introducing a correction for the seisuooeter converter. we
obtnin the frequency characteristic of the entire channel.

channel Anplification. Under laboratory conditions. before setting up the
channel for operation. the amplification. just as the frequency character-
istic. can be detereined by various aethods (for ens-pie. electrodynasically
or by the nethod based on direct seasuresent of the displace-ant of the
pendulum by a sicroscope [32]). Usually the recording of the frequency
characteristic and deter-ination of the a-plificstion both in the labora-
tory nnd in operation are handled in the sane way. For deter-instion of the
aspiification by the procedure nost convenient for an operating radiotele-
Ictric channel. first it is necessary to deter-inc the sensitivity of the
amplifying and recording channel as a function of frequency. feeding the
signal fro. the generator to the input of the preanplifier. here we
silultaneously obtain the frequency characteristic of the asplifying and
recording channel.

The alplification of the channel is calculated by the for-ole

v's“2'°“input alpiifierlt‘ainput alplifier+ ).

where s'Arecordluinput‘ n/volt is the sensitivity of the anplifying and

recording channel equal to the ratio of the recording anplitude on various
frequencies_to the voltage fed from the generator to the input of the pre-
amplifier: U is the frequency characteristic of the seiasooeter for the
adopted damping coefficient 0 which is taken fro. the standard curves;

6 in the clectrodynasic constant of the seissograph coil; 1 is the reduced
length of the pendulus: R‘npu‘ Iﬂvllfltf is the input ispedsnce of the

amplifier; R is the resistance of the operating coil of the sols-ograph.
k

Let us note that the values of the asplification of the sale channel taken
by different procedures usually are quite close and do not differ by lore
than 5 to 102. Therefore the choice of procedures is deter-ined by the
arguments of convenience under certain specific conditions.

Controlling the identity of the Receiving Parts of Radioteleletric
channels. This control can be realized by two procedures. The first
consists in the fact that one transnitting station in organized at the

central recording station to which all of the receiving stations are tuned.
Feeding the Voltage on various frequencies to the input of the nodulntor

(or seisnoneter) fro. the generator. it is possible to construct the
osplitude-frequency characteristics for each receivar ard then colpsre than.

93
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL 083 OHLY

A'scrond. stricter and more objective procedure consists in tuning all of
the.rereiving stations to any one transmitting station located at the
seismic data transmission point and recording identical seismic information
for some time from the sane seisaograph.

Channel Control. For operative control of the parameters of each channel

on the transmitting station. automatic feed of the control signal of the
"GPA to the control coil of the seismograph has been introduced. The
control signal makes it possible to determine the parameters of the entire
radiotelemetric channel and trace their stability. For this purpose the
circuit has been developed (see Pig 2b. d) for automatic feed of the control
signal. The control signal from the "GPA is fed to the control coil of the
seismogrnph through a potentiometer by means of which the required amplitude
of the control signal is established. The circuit diagram of the "GPA
[constant amplitude magnetic generator] contains a rectifier. a time relay
P'. servoralays P2. P3 and the electric motor 0. the shaft of which is
installed coaxially with the shaft of the "GPA. and both are connected to
each other by a spring coupling.

On closure of the contact K of the alarm of the Slave electromechanical
clock. the relay P1 is connected through the normally closed contacts to
the relay P2. and the electric motor spins the HGPA. After 10 to 12 seconds
-- during this time the frequency of the "GPA reaches lO—lS hertz - the
relay P] is switched on. and the power is disconnected from the electric
motor. simultaneously connecting the output of the "CPA to the control coil
of the seismometer through the contacts of the relay P3. This relay
remains connected until the contact K of the alarm on the clock is broken
(approximately 2.5-3 minutes). The duration of the control signal is

1-1.5 minutes. The power supply for the circuit is realized from the power
supply unit of the RRS-lh radio station (12 volts DC and 127 volts AC).

56. Equipment of the Central Recording Station

At the Novo-Alakseyevskaya central recording station. after demodulation
the seismic signals are recorded in two modes: continuous and slaved.

Continuous Recording. The recording is made by a pen recorder. and it is
basically a display. It permits observation of the seismic regime. opera-
iiVe determination of the directions of the sources of distant earthquakes
and the coordinates of the centers of nearby earthquakes. The direction of
the source can be determined without interrupting the recording several
minutes after recording the first wave of the earthquake. in addition.

the display recording permits continuous control of the operation of the
stations. the noise level. and so on.

For continuous recording. the RVJ-T visible recorder is used in which power
amplifiers have been utilized which were developed at the Earth Physics
institute of the USSR Academv of Sciences (Fig 28. e). The amplifiers are
assembled from five triodes in a circuit with galvanic coupling and

9‘
P08 OPPICIAL US! ONLY
TOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

symmetric enitter repeaters at the output. In order to insure stability
of the parameters, the anplifier is encoapassed by two coo-on and two

internal negative feedbacks. and it has five positions for aanual regula-
tinn of the gain (6 decibels ench).

Basic paraseters of the amplifier:

Maxi-um amplification coefficient with respect to

voltage 800
Hiniaun input impedance. kilohss 9
Output impedance. ohns 50

Structurally the recorder contains four saplifier modules loaded on the

pen recording heads with a resistance of 800 ohas and a resonance frequency
of 8 hertz. inorder to record the signals from the rsdiotelesstric systea.
each unit of the amplifier also has demodulators nounted in it. Instead of
n collectorlesa DC motor. s 05" electric actor is used to wind the paper
tape. It is fed free the 220 volt network. The power supply for the
denodulntors and the amplifiers comes from the sane 12 volt storage battery.

Slaved Recording. The slave recording systel organised at the central
station sakes it possible to record only the useful events. the recording

of which is used for basic processing of the saterials. analysis and cooper-
ison of then.

The four-channel slaved recording system was first organised on the basis

of the device with magnetic memory developed and aanufactured by the special
design office of the Earth Physics Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
however. the significant deficiencies discovered when checking out and test
operating the equipsent led to the necessity for significant alteration and
inproveaent of its assemblies and units. The specific peculiarities
connected with the multichannel rsdioteleactric recording led to the develop-
ment and sanufscture of a special analysis and switching unit. A description
uf the slaved recording system is presented.

The basic elements of the system are the analysis and switching unit and
the magnetic recorder.

Analysis and Switching Unit. This unit switches on any of the recorders
(one or several simultaneously) on appearance of a useful signal confirmed
by three radioteleaetric channels and it disconnects the recorders when the
signal intensity drops helow the given level with respect to all three
channels. The circuitry of the unit (Fig 29) includes a control panel.
threshold circuits. logical filters. disconnect relay. connect relay.

servorclays. selector circuits. and comparison circuit. Let us briefly
consider the operation of the elcoents of this unit.

The threshold circuit is made up of matching stages executed from the Tl-T3
trindes and the Tahi-Tsh2 Scheidt triggers. It is used for shaping
square pulses at the output in the presence of the seismic signal at the

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rot orrtcm. use ONLY

input exceeding the given level. The regulation of the response
threshold is realized by the Rl-Ra potentioseters.

The logical filters which generate the instruction to switch on are
executed from triggers connected by the counting circuit in such a way that
the triggers Tg3. Tug. Tag are set to the one condition when four start
pulses arrive Eros the threshold circuit (which corresponds to four periods
of the input signal). The ~10 volt level is taken as the ones condition.
Thus. the filters filter out ones noise.

The disconnect relays periodically clear the logical triggers of the filters
in order to erase false information. This information is stored by the
logical filters on randos arrival at the threshold circuits of signals
exceeding the given response threshold. The disconnected relay is nade up
of the trigger Tglo. the time relay based on the triodea T6 and T7 and the
Pl relay. 0n appearance of the pulse from the threshold circuit of any
channel and passage of it through the 0R collecting circuit (T5. 010-012)
the trigger Tglo is set to the ones condition. it starts the time

relay and after 10 seconds the P1 relay is switched on. through the contacts
of which the clear signal is fed on closure to all triggers of the circuit.
including T310. The signal light Ll indicates the passage of a single or
periodic signal the given level through one or several channels. 0n clear-
ing. the entire system is initialized. and the light burns. With the arrival
of a single signal the operating cycle repeats. This condition of the cir-

cuit is slaved even in the presence of a regular signal at two diodes
simultaneously. ~

The switching on relay closes the circuit of the servorelay IR in the
presence of a signal at the outputs of all of the logical filters simul-
taneously and it disconnects IR after diappearsnce of the control signals
iron the threshold circuits. The switching on relay is made up of the
trigger Tgll, the time relay TB'Tlo and the relay P2. On arrival of a
regular signal above the given level at all three inputs. the threshold
devices develop the start pulses of the triggers of the logical circuits
with frequencies equal to the frequencies of the incoming signals. After
passage of four oscillation periods along each of the channels. the triggers
Tg3. Tgﬁ. Tg9 flip to the ones condition and thus switch on the cosparison
circuit (T4. 013. 015). The signal passing through the comparison circuit
trips the trigger Tc 1 which leads to response of the relay P; which by
one of its contacts includes the servorelay IR. and the other. the preset
input 2 of the trigger 7‘11 to the output of the 0R circuit.

in this node the trigger T‘ll is periodically initialized by the clear
signal from the disconnect relay and it is again set to the ones condition
by the input signal of any other channels. The relay P2 will stay in the
on state until the input signal level falls below the threshold value on
all channels. After disconnection of the relay '2 the recorders are
disconnected. and the connect relay again connects only to the output of
the rasparison circuit. The system goes into the slaved regime.

96
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"ICIAI. 083 ONLY

0

“ha—on goo-=50 In a

7m... 933033 :0 has oom—
nhonou 30588:. .I GA 33050 unsung—loo In 8

9.300200 II 3395.0 «3 SH:

3. 3.5!... new ens—XI can we 93.59:. 3v 0335- 2.- AS ”2.33:3...

on

33:.— gauze“ :1 OH

 

>333»: .i A:

uuuauuuo

33930 32.3.2» unh—
ucuvuoocu ago: of :0 9.203:-

.ON 0.59:
a: \II
{x as -§I$ku¢k 355.5 .ul
\wﬁ u~§nsixufx K~u§$$u9 _ a
ll.- lllllllll .. lllllll I. I

 

97
IO! OPPICIM. USE ONLY
I0! OFPICIAL US! ONLY

[Key to Fig 29. preceding pnga]:

1. Channel 1 6. Tg...

2. Channel 2 7. Teh ...

3. Channel 3 a. Input 1

6. control panel 9. Input 2

S. to the recorder 10. Input 3
11. to the recorder control
12. Cos-mm

13. ~12 volts
1‘. +10 volts

The control panel contains the potentioaetere regulating the connect
level. a control light and the switches n and n2. The switch n is

used for selective connection of the required channel when ndjus ing the
connect level. In the fourth position. all three channels are connected
to the nodule. The switch ashes it possible to perforl stepped variation
of the amplification of the channels by two or four tines.

The power supply for the unit cones from a DC voltage -12 volts source.
In order to feed the circuits with a bias voltage of 12 volts an internal
power uupply is provided in the unit which is Iade up of a square pulse
generator. rectifier and filters.

Magnetic Recording. The aagnetic recording is organized on the basis of
the four-channel station for recording surprise phenolena TEAS Sl-ZlOlC.
operating in coabination with the TEAC R-3Sl! reproduction tape recorder
(built by the Japanese Cospany TEAC).

Basic technical paraneters of the TBAC station:

Magnetic aeoory tile. sec 30
Nuaher of operating channels 6
Alplitude of the input signal. volts 3}
Amplitude of output signals. volts ti
Frequency band. hertz 0-25 ~
Dynamic range. decibels . 40
Tape speed during recording. cslsec 6.75

, Operating teaperaturc range. 'C 0-60
Intake power. watts 700
Feed voltage. volts 220
Recording principle frequency

nodulation

Basic para-eters of the TEAC R-3SlF reproduction unit:

Tape speed. cllsec 9.5: 19 and 38
Output signal amplitude. volts 1}
Number of channels 5
Dynasic range. decibels 60
98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR 0F?ICIAL 083 ONLY

Output impedance. ohms 600
AC power supply. volts 100
Frequency band. hertz 0-300

One of the channels is used for recording and reproducing voice from a
microphone. The starting and stopping of the tape drive mechanism to
record date with continuously rotating drum for the magnetic memory on

magnetic tape is accomplished by a starter which controls the analysis
and slaved recording connected unit.

Let us discuss the operation of the station for recording surprise
phenomena. The input signals with an amplitude of :1 volt go from the
RV3-T amplifiers through the emitter repeater to four recording amplifiers
which convert the analog signal to a frequency modulating signal with a
mean modulation frequency of 250 hertz. Prom the recording amplifiers
the signals go to magnetic heads. The information is recorded on a con-
tinuously rotating magnetic drum. A stable frequency from a quartz
oscillator is also recorded on the drum. A fifth signal is used for
compensation of the knocking of the tape drive mechanism. After rotation
of the magnetic drum by 330' (which is 30 seconds with respect to time)

the information is read by the reproduction heads. it goes to the reproduc-
tion amplifiers. then it is demodulated. filtered. and fed to the four out-
puts of the magnetic memory unit with a time delay of 30 seconds from the
time of arrival. Then the information that is delayed in time goes without
transformation of amplitude and velocity to four recording amplifiers of
the unit for automatic storage of the information where the analog voltage
is again converted to a frequency modulated signal with a mean carrier

frequency of A hilohertz. This signal is fed through the recording heads
to the magnetic tape.

On arrival of the record instruction from the start-stop starting unit.

the tape drive mechanism is switched on. and information about the event

is recorded on the magnetic tape with the 30—second delay. In the informa-
tion storace element there is one amplitzsr for reproduction of the signal
from the magnetic tape which offers the possibility of channel by channel
reproduction of the recorded information for monitoring or copying on
other recorders.

The distinguishing feature of the magnetic memory module is the fact that
the drwsa with the head is placed in an oil bath in which a constant tempera-
ture ls maintained by using a thermostat. as a result of which constant
viscosity of the oil is insured. Therefore the clearance between the
magnetic drum and the heads formed as a result of the oil tila is strictly
constant. For recording. a type 10 magnetic tape 6.3 mm wide is used.

The cassettesinatallud on the recorder hold 375 meters of magnetic tape
(it in possible to install cassettes with a lOOO-meter capacity). Depend-
ing on the seismic activity of Alma-Ate, during one period or another

this amount of tape will be sufficient for from 6 to 8 days. The number
of recorded useful events reached 30-40 on the average.

99
FOR OFPICIAL US! ONLY
’03 OFPICIAL USE ONLY

The R-lSlF reproduction tape recorder is analogous with respect to
circuitry and parameters to the tape recorder which is part of the record-
ing station for surprise phenomena with the exception of differences in
the speeds at which the magnetic tape is driven.

The slaved recording system based on the station for recording surprise
phenomena is reliable and will operate stably for several years.

Time Service. One of the basic advantages of the centralised recording
system is the single time service permitting significant increase in
precision of all of the instructions.

In order to feed the time signals to the central recording station. the
PKCh-Z type electronic quartz clocks are used. In connection with the
fact that the correction for the daily running of the clock does not
exceed 39.1 seconds. there is no necessity for introducing it. This has
significantly reduced the primary processing time of the seismograms.

The circuit for forming the minute time marks with the application of a
quartz clock differs from the analog circuit using chronometers. and it
has a number of advantages. In particular. eliminating the electro-
mechanical relays increases the amplitude and shape stability of the time
marks. This is explained by the fact that the parameters of circuits

with weak currents which are comauted by mechanical contacts depend
sharply on the surface state of the contacts themselves. In addition.

the given electronic circuit permits superposition of several second
pulses on the display seismogram at the time of disconnection of the
slaved recorder. The presence of such pulses indicates that an earthquake
has been recorded on the magnetic tape. and it permits accurate establish-
ment of the times it was switched on and off.

Let us describe the operation of the circuit for shaping the minute marks
(Fig 30. a). The minute pulse signals from the PKCh-z go through the
switch 31 to the time mark pulse shaper. from the output of which T5

the pulses go to all of the RVJ-T amplifiers. The transmission of the
marks is controlled by the l ght L1. For recording the exact time radio
signals they must be fed from the radio receiver to the input of the
shaper using the switch 31.

In order to plot several second marks on the display seismogram. which
are required for coordinating the recording on the slaved recording
magnetic tape. the relay P1 is used which controls the contacts of the
servorelay of the analysis and slaved recording connect module through the
T7 transistor.

The minute marks are simultaneously plotted on the display seisnograms
and on the slaved recording magnetic tape. Each slaved recording seiamo-
gram contains at least one minute mark by which after reproduction on
photographic paper it is coordinated with absolute time.

100
’0‘ OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P0! OVFICIAL USE ONLY

      

all!!!
14m (16)

0mm),

Figure 30. Schenstic disgrsns of the shsping of the Iinuts (s)
end 10 second (h) tins works

Key:
1. iron PKCh—Z 8. from the slsved recording systes
2. from the receiver 9. >12 voltn
3. minutes 10. from the PKCh-Z
6. seconds 11. minutes
5. +10 volts 12. seconds
6. to the RW-‘I' 13. cos-on
7. too nilliseconds 1A. +10 volts

15. ~12 volts
16. to the RV3OT. 100 oilliseconds

The lO—sccond tine lurks from the quartz clock are plotted else on the
magnetic tspe with respect to one of the chsnnels. The circuit (Fig 30. b)
includes the decimal counter and the tise nsrk shsper. The decinsl
counter in ends up of four triggers of the two-input conpsrison circuit.
lt realizes division of the repetition treouency of the second pulses
cosine fros the PKCh-Z hy 10. in order to elininnte summation of the
error when there is a failure of any of the triggers, s clesr signsl is
induced on the preset input of sll the triggers from the PKCh—Z sinute
output. Each tenth second pulse starts the slave sultivibrstor which
generates the pulse lasting 100 milliseconds and amplitude of 12 volts.
which is then fed to the corresponding RV3~T power ssplifier.

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Reproduction Equipment. The TBAC R-351P reproduction unit combined with
tvo oscillographs and the mass [frequency selective seismic station]
iiiter circuit is used to reproduct the recorded signals from the slaved
recording magnetic tape.

  

(mac

2;. 3;ll '2’. -

Anne-Ase we ate: . .' alas .
(114),” sin me - an en - sin - s/u -
8530... e141 alas .. us no - - - . -
(17)“ 12/85 vs - us us - an? en: ale -.
Kay:
1. Station

2. Absence of electric power for transmission
3. Transmitter

a. Receiver

5. Cables 13. Central recording station
6. Modulator 1‘. Alma-Ate

7. Demodulator-aeplifier 15. Talgar

8. Preamplifier lg. Otero

9. Seismograph 1 - ‘11

10. Antennas
11. Radio interference
12. Hetrologic amplifier

   

Note. The number of failures is indicated in the numerator. the percentage

failures for a given cause are indicated in the denominator.
The shutdown of equipment for preventive maintenance operations.
changing power supply. improvement of the equipment. and so on.
were net taken into account in the table.

The cassettes uith the magnetic recordings obtained on the recorder are

reproduced on the R-lSlF module with copying on the oscillograph photo-
tape.

The marking of the eVent consisted in recording the earthquake - dates
and times - before each earthquake. The recording is made by the head
through a microphone. Then the cassette is placed in a film holder for
long-term storage and a label is attached to it with indication of the
location of each event (meters), its duration and the number of the
RVZ-T display tapes vhere it was recorded.

102
FOR 0F?ICIAL US! OILY
TOR OFFICIAL USE OILY

The filter nodule of the frequency-selective station (chlss) [33] is

node up of a set of octave resonance filters with dasping steepness on

the order of 20 decibels per octave on the left and right slopes. The
channel required for spectral analysis froe the reproduction unit gees

to the ChTSS input. and the roa~1zs oscillogrsph is connected to the output.
Soee of the frequency characteristics of the filters are depicted in

Pig e. b (the pass bands of the channels are plotted on the 0.7 level

as a function of snplitude on the resonance frequency).

Analysis of the Operating Reliability of the Equip-ant. It appears sig-
nificant to estimate the operating reliability of the equipment of the
rediotelenetric systee. For this purpose a study was made of the causes
of failure of the equipment of the basic automated stations and the

central recording station. The results of this analysis are presented in
Table 6.

From the table it is obvious that for automatic stations the basic cause
of equipsent failure was loss of power supply at the transsitting stations.
At the Osero station located at an altitude of about 3000 setera, this
loss of power occurred 8 tiles. which is 47! of all the failures. For the
Alan—Ate and Talgar stations this figure is 15 and 21! respectively. The
failures because of the transmitter at the Alas-Ate and Ozero stations
occurred in 8 end 6 cases (31 and 352 of all the failures of the etstion).
The next cause of equipment failures is failure of the sodulstore. It

is true that their failures pertain to the initial phase of operations.
The preamplifiers operate in practice fail—safe. During a 6-year record-
ing period. the failures for this reason occurred twice at the Alma-Ate
station and 3 tiees at the Tslgar station. The Ales-Ate Hell station
failed 3 times because d!”the seismogreph. but this also pertains to the
initial stages of the operations. The Alma-Ate and Talgar stations failed
2-3 tines each as a result of breaking of antennas -- basically in the
winter under high wind conditions. The recording was disrupted once or
twice each during powerful thunderstorms in the sniper.

The failures of the central recording station are connected with the
absence of electric power in 282 of the cases and radio interference in
401 of the cases. The latter were caused by the presence of transeitters
near the CChlfﬂl recording station operating on very low frequencies. The

failure of the receivers accounted for 112 and as eany desodulators also
failed.

Analysis shows that in order to increase the operating reliability of the
radieteleeetric systea it is necessary first of all to insure reliability
and provide a stationary power supply for the transmitters and the
receivers.

55. Equipment for Controlling the Tayga Recorder during Tricomponent
Recording of Earthquakes in the Slaved Mode

The Tnyge recording station is designed to record explosions in the
slaved node.

103
FOR O’TICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Joint use of explosions in earthquakes not only significantly lowers
the cost of operations. but it also sakes it possible to obtain a nore
cohplete idea about the environ-eat. The majority of the recording
:stntions designed to record earthquakes on magnetic tape (for example,
Zeniya and Cherepakha) operate in the stationary regise. At the ease
time the recording of the earthquakes in the slaved modes significantly
siaplifies and reduces the cost of the observation equip-eat in the field
and the processing of the ssterisls. It also persits improvement of the
quality of the asterisl by using less economical equipment having the
best parameters.

In order to study the polarization of seismic waves caused by earthquakes.
materials were used which were obtained by the Tsygs recording station
installed at the Tslgar seismic station.

In this_section a description is presented of the control equipaent. The
possibilities of the application of analogous sets for profiled and area

earthquake recording systems in the slaved node are discussed.

The tape drive nechsnisn of the Tsyga recorder was switched on by the
radio channel by using a circuit specially developed for this purpose.
The additionally manufactured devices noted the time the tape drive
uechaaisa was shut down after recording the earthquake on the magnetic
tape and its and by the signals on the visible recording tapes of the
central recording system. Changes were introduced into the circuitry of
the recorder and the Taygs station reproduction equipsent, and the
necessary changes were introduced for improvement of the quality of the
received material.

Control Circuit for the Taygs Recorder. The Tsyga recorder located at

the Tslgar automated transmitting station of the Alma-Ate radio tempera-

ture test area is connected over the radio channel to the Novo-Alekseyevskaya
central recording station (see Fig 31. a).

The control circuit operates jointly with the circuits for analysis and
switching on the slaved recording of the central recording station. The
operating principle of the control circuit consists in logical summation
over two channels of the Ali and 02ers stations. The control signals are
the voltages froa the terminal amplifiers of the RV3-T visible recorder
operating in the continuous mode. The response of the circuit takes
place on arrival of the first negative halfperiod over any of the two
channels with an amplitude exceeding the given threshold which is regu-
lated within the limits from 0.‘ to 8 volts. The operating state of the
circuit is maintained for the time necessary to analyze and switch the
slaved recording in the case of a useful signal. If the nodule does not
respond. the circuit returns to the initial position. In the case of a
useful signal. the analysis and connect sodule keeps the circuit on to
the end of the earthquake. -

104
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OPPICIAL USE OKLY

The recorder control circuit is ends up of two threshold circuits
(Schmidt triggers) T1. T2. T3 and T5. to which the input signal is fed
from the connect level pntentiometera Ri' R . The shaped square pulses
fit the trigger Tgl through the on circuit 6,. 06. T . As a result. the
role) R i- included through the contacts of which the voltage is fed to
the cal circuit of the RRS-lH radio station where the transmitter
generates the service signal and transmits it.

In the receiver of the radio located at the point of installation of the
recorder. the service signal causes the appearance of a voltage in the
call buzzer circuit. This voltage is fed to the recorder to feed the
motor of the tape drive mechanism.

Simultaneously with inclusion of the relay P1. fast charging of the
capacitance C5 takes place. In the case of a false inclusion caused by
seismic or radio noise. a clear pulse goes from the analysis and slaved
recordings connect nodule through R 5. D7 to Tg . and the circuit returns
to the initial state after a defined tine given y the R13. 6‘ circuit.
If there is a useful signal. the P1 relay does not diacoanected. In this
case its contacts are also blocked ay the contacts of the P relay of the
module for analysis and inclusion of the slaved recording 02 the central
recording station.

Recorder Inclusion and End of Magnetic Tape Hark Circuits. Short (5-6 see)
sinusoidal signals are fed to the radiotelenetric channel with subsequent
recording on the RVJ-T continuous recording display tape to mark the
inclusion of the recorder (just as to mark the end of the magnetic tape).

The schematic diagram of the marking of inclusion of the recorder is
presented in Fig 31. h. A sinusoidal generator is assembled from the
transistor 11‘ The magnitude of the fed signal is adjusted by the
potentiometer R10. The time relays T3. I connect the output to the
control coil of the seiseograph for a def ned tine. In turn. the time

relay connected to the recorder control circuit is controlled by the
contacts 91‘

The end of magnetic tape working circuit (see Fig 31. c) differs free the
described inclusion mark circuit (Fig 31. b) only by the time relay con-
trol which realizes the photodiode autostop D2. T5.

Changes in the Tayga Equipment. During the operation of the Tayga equip-
ment difficulties arose with the reproduction of the information. In
accordance with the technical specifications. the reproduction level was
30-300 eicrovolts which with lowered quality of the tape is commensurate
with its natural noise.

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

ova/I00)

  
   

      
      

I “page” 0011'

pm"
14) ‘

drummed

 

Figure 31. Scnmtic diagram of the Toys. control station:

.1 -- rccordor control: b - recorder inclusion hark: c -- end

of magnetic tape Inrlt

Key:

1. input 1. input 2: 2. +10 volro; 3. :12 volts; 6. onolyoio nodule;
5. to tho roe-order inclusion anrlz circuit; 6. clear; 7. fro. the
end of ugnt-tlc tape mark circuit; 8. Unetope driva nechnnion:
9. RRS-lli; l0. RES-l0; ll. to the recorder control circuit;
l2. to the neionogrnph control coil: 13. to the recordor control
circuit: 16. to the scionograph control coil

106
M OHICIAL US! ONLY
’0! OIPICIAL US! ONLY

 

Figure 32. Variations in the recording aeplil’ier circuit (a)
and the reproduction aspliiier circuit (h) and one
oi the veraiona oi the control of the Taysa station

coaplex (c)
Key:
1. to the collector T10 7. recorders
2. HP623 8. dispatch panel
3. 5 volts
lo. 63

5. to the collector 75
6. to the base 19

The low level of the reproduction signal is explained by the unsuccessful
selection of the recording nethod (pulse-frequency nodulation) and the
terminal stage cirruit of the recording a-plifier of the recorder. The
short pulaea recorded an the tape. especially on the low carrier frequency.
give nnny harnonica on reproduction which greatly distort the shape of the
aignal. This leads to the appearance of false pulnes. The constant
coeponent of the current (loving through the head during the recording tile
accnopanien the high noise level of the lie on reproduction. Finally.

the single-polv‘ nethod or recording itself artificially lovers the
efficiency of the output of the Iaenetic carrier by $01.

107
'0! OFPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

The changes introduced into the record amplifier circuit (Fig 32. a) and
the reproduction saplifier (Fig 32. b) made it possible: a) to replace
the PPM sethod by the FM sethod (which significantly iaproves the shape
of the reproduction signal); b) to exclude the persenent sagnification
c) to asks a dipolsr recording without returning to 0. As a result. the
asplitude increased to l.5 sillivolts on reproduction (the recording
current is the acne). with quite good shape. excluding false pulses

(noise). the tape noise was reduced by 2 tines. and the signal/noise ratio
increased by 6-8 rises.

Theoretically the sethod of recording the seisaic signals (earthquakes or
explosions) by the Tayga recorders in the slaved mode can also be used
during profile and area observations required to solve different probleas.
including the study of exchange trenssission waves. In this respect the
developed Tayga sutoastic recorder control systea is the initial step.

.The proposed control system for the set of Tsygs recorders can be repre-
sented in the (ore shown in Fig 32. c. The network of prinary ("alert")
radio stations A1. A2. A, and A“. which are sisultaneously transmitting
stations of the radioteleletric test area trans-its the signals of the
first arrivals of the seissic waves at the central station A of the
dispatch panel. These signals go to the control circuit c which generates
the signal for inclusion of the transmitter B of the dispatch panel
including all of the recorders with respect to the internal radio network
of the set of Toygs equipment (1. 2. 3...) which are inside the loop
for-ed by the radio stations A1. A2. A3. ‘6' The nunber of recorders
and their autual position depend on the problem to be solved.

$6. "cans of Improving Radiotelesetric Equipment

The experience accusulsted during several years of observations at the
radioteleaetric test area lakes it possible to indicate the paths of
isproving the radioteleaetric equipnent. The probles basically reduces
to expansion of the dynamic range and increase in infomtiveness of the

radioteiesetric channel. that is. sultiplesing of the co-unications
channel.

Dynamic Range. The dynaaic range of the radioteleletric channel is

60 decibels. The recording systea (display and in slaved node) used at
the present time makes it possible to realise no aore than 40 decibels.
Inasmuch as the channels of the teleaetric recording systee are tuned to
the reception of the weakest earthquakes exceeding the level of the
seismic background at the infatuation transmitting point by no sore than
33-40 decibels. all of the stronger earthquakes are unreadable on the
seismogroas. In addition. when recording strong signals there are
restrictions in the converting eleaents of the equip-eat and strong non-
linear distortions appear on the recording.

108
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

In order to expand the dynenic range of the equip-ant used. experisents
were run to develop autosetic gain control at the input of the asplifying-
transmitting channel.

Let us consider sole of these circuits.

The two-channel two-level recording circuit is depicted in Fig 33, e.
Its dynanic range can reach 80 decibels, the esrthqueke recordings are
clear. and they respond conVeniently. The operation of this systea is
simple. A deficiency is the necessity for continuous recording on two
channels, which leads to high consumption of paper and also involves
additional equip-ant (aodulstors. desoduletors. recorders). If the
indicated deficiencies do not play a significant role. the systeu can he
used effectively for operation of the rediotelesstric channel.

The stepped gain control circuit on one recording channel is included in
the transsitting spaces between the preesplifier end the soduletor

(Fig 33, b). "hen the signal reaches a defined magnitude. it is attenuated
by the divider 31' R in the given ratio and it goes to the soduletor
input. The advantages oi the systel include siwplicity end reliability

of operation.

The deficiency is the trenssission process at the tile of switching fro-
one level to another. the duration of which is two or three periods of the
seisnic signal. This can coaplicate the processing of the recordings sons-
what.

The eaplificstion regulation systes with a cen-on sodulator end separate
sodulator amplifiers (Fig 33. c) is a coeprosise by cospsrison with the
first two versions. here on switching free one level to another the
transition processes are several tines shorter with respect to duration
(no sore than one period). end they are sssller with respect to saplitude.
for the switching takes places after the esplifier.

in the investigated procedures the control of the switches Kl end K2

in realized by the control circuit (Fig 33. d). The circuit is assembled
free the transistors T‘-T . It is a threshold elenent and is connected to
the output of the prenapllfier or to the output of the soduletor esplifier.
The rest of the circuit perforss the function of a tile relay. The
potentlo-eter R2 regulates the switching level. end “ll regulates the

tine for returning to the initial state (recording on the basic level).
The circuit feed is con-on with the enplifier-noduletor nodule.

The srrunulated experience of b years of operation of the seislologicel
radiotelenotrir test area for the nutoanted stations desenstrsted a number
of theoretical advantages of such systele. They include the following:

a) Operativenesn: dntn on earthquakes (direction of the source for
distant earthquakes and position of the center for nearby earthquakes) can
he deternined a few sinutes after srrivol of the first wave:

109
'0! O'PICIAL US! ONLY
POI OHIO!“ 083 ONLY

 

Figure 33. Block diagram of the twrchonnol two-level recording
(a). atcwod autooatic gain control with respect to
one channel (1:). autonatic gain control vith the canon
oodulotor and aaparate amplifiora (c) and a achaoatlc
diagram of the switch control (d).
'3 - aciaoograph: [Iv- praaaplifiar; M - nodulator;
Y - aaolil'ier; VI“ - mlifier-oodulator; cam - avitch control
circuit: .1 wdmdulotor; K1. K2 -- witches; l‘ - galvamctar
Key:
I. RRS-l)‘.
2. Input

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IO! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

h) high precision of nll constructions as a result of a united tile

service and high scanning speed of the oscillogrnss obtained by the
slaved recording systea:

c) Economicnlness of operation and saintensnce. The stations operate in

the nutonstic mode. and the entire test area is serviced by three to-
workers.

The improved eeuipaent and the developed procedures and techniques for
auitichennei stationary radioteleaetric information trans-lesion on
satisfaction oi the required conditions of stability of radio cos-unice-
tions and reliability of the never supply can be used as the basis for

area observation systess. Nevertheless. it appears expedient to isprove
the equipment further in order to:

a) Increase the dynnaic range of the recording;

h) Multiplex the canaunicntions channels for transsission of the signals
of the tricosponcnt seissoueter setup over one radio channel:

c) increase the noiseproofness of the systel:

d) Isprove the slaved recording systea for resote earthquakes for
regional research:

e) Develop econosical receiving and transaitting units vhich insure
nutonoeous station records in the absence of an AC network.

111
I0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
'0‘ OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

CRAPTER IV. FIELD DATA'AND PROCESSING PROCEDURE

The observations in the radiotelesetric test arena with autoaatic stations
are beginning to be used at the present tile in different seissological
research [61-63]. The experience and the results of 5 years of operation
of the Alas-Ate test area is of procedural interest in this connection.

in spite of the fact that the study of the seisnicity of Rorthern
Tyan'-Shan' has been the subject of many studies [9. 12. 26. 30. b7].

the activity of the local section of Alas-Ate and its environs has heen
inadequately studied. This is explained to a great extent by the quiet
of the seissic activity characteristic of recent years in a given area.
The deep-wall seisnoiogy and radioteleletric recording system have opened
up theoretically new possibilities of discovering and studying weak local
earthquakes. The observations of local earthquakes (the Values of t -p
at the Talgar station do not exceed 10 seconds) are providing new informa-
tion on the peculiarities of the seismic characteristics of a territory
of sore than 18.000 to? with Alaa-Ata at the center.

Si. Operation of the Test Area and Characteristics of the Data obtained

Station Operating Tiles and Characteristics. in the creation of the Alan:
Ata radiotelenetric test area of automated high-frequency stations it is
possible to distinguish two stages. The first stage is connected with

the introduction of two automated stations in Septe-ber l97l -- the
Alsa-Ata deep~well station and the Talgar ground surface station. The
second stage begins in March 1972. and it is connected with the introduc-
tion of the third Ozoro ground surface automatic station. Since that tine.
which is taken as the beginning of operation of the test area. the Talgar.
Aiua-Ata and Ozero stations have in practice operated continuously. in
this paper a study is made of the observation data obtained up to June 1976.
During this tile all three stations operated simultaneously for about

1500 days. Fran the end of Hay 1973 the fourth autosatic well station of
the Ali test area began operations. The signals froo these stations were
recorded continuously on a display seisnogran. and they were recorded bv

a slaVed recording systes on magnetic tape (beginning in July l973). Tue
centralized recording data of the four automated stations were the basic

initial data for studying the seismic characteristics.

112
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

02 Ml? 01
~ ”that; am». 71 1760 1020 .
ll (19p 1. VII. 70 u
:12)” (we auxn: rm zoos to 1m
. (19)» l.\'ll. 76 «0 0O
1
3 c lo.|u.12 1674‘ 146? 03 _
gum-w 39;» mm. 70 _ .
'(m... c at. v.73 nan 1067 u too? too
. no l.\'li.70
W cums): on 588 .91 ' "
«atom no O.\'ll.72
(5) not $78
.o :J‘ll. 10
c “All.” 83 84 - " "
(169 um. Ixna
C 28. IX. 12 120 03 - " '
(17,” .31. mo
Key:
1. otatton ll. Alua-Ata
2. operating tine 12. Talgar
3. date. Ionth. year ll. Oeero
5. No of daye 16. Alt
5. recording III! 15. Novo-Alekeeyevekeya
6. No of dayo lo. Pleto
7. I of the calendar work deya l7. Kurty
a. tlee of atnultaneoua 18. Iron
operation of 3 or note l9. to
otatlona
9. No of days

10. 2 of retordlng daye

'l'he oheervatlona at the llow-Alekaeyevohaya central recording atatlon

in the well and on the aorface were of an export-ental nature. The
tenoorary oohlle etatlona. Pleto end Korty. functioned for a short perlod
of the: the for-er. for a oonth. and the latter. about 3 Ionthe. They
were need to teat varlouo ohoervetlon conditiona.

113
M OFFICIAL 083 OIL!
M OFFICIAL 088 M3

The inforsation on the operating tines 6f the different stations and the
recording tiles of each of then are presented in Table 7. It is indicsted
there how ssny days each of the stations Iade recordings eilultaneously
with two or more stations of the systes. The recordings of no less than

three stations are required to construct an earthquake epicenter end
detersine the depth of the center.

Pro. the table it is obvious that the recording ties on each of the

reference stations was no less then 922 of the total nueber of calendar
work days.

The quality of the recordings was good'on the whole although at the
different stations of the test sres it differs eoeewhet. The Oeero station
is characterised by better quality of recordings. for it has saxilul
sensitivity and is closest of ell to the regions with increased density

of the epicenters. Here then 15: of all of the earthquakes are recorded
only by it and not by other stations of the systes. The Talgar end Ali
stations which are siailar with respect to sensitivity ere characterized

by identical recordings with respect to quality which are sosewhat inferior
to the Osero station. During the deytine the Alla-Ate station has the
lowest sensitivity. This is connected with the fact that even at a depth
of 1000 esters here the vital ectivity of the large city does not stop
being felt. At nighttiae the recordings of this station are coeperable
with the recordings of the Talger end Ali stations. The increased noise
background level at the Alla-Ate station frequently leads to a reduction

in accuracy of noting the tile of arrival of the P-waves on the recordings
of weak local earthquakes.

Ere-pies of the display eels-egress of local. nenrby end distant earth-
quakes recorded by the basic stations of the tel; aree ere shown in
Fig 34 (see also i5).

Local Earthquake Recording Date. During 6 years of operation of the test
eree. the eutosatic stations recorded sore then 18.500 earthquaher --
dietent. nearby end local. lnassuch es the sein problee wee to study the
seismic characteristics of the local area - the vicinity of Alla—eta.
prissry attention was given to recording earthquakes with ts_,510 seconds
which we shall provisionally call local earthquekes hereafter. in Table 8
date are presented free the recordings of all of the stations with

t -Prlo seconds illustrating the operation of the radiotelesetric systeu
eiong with internation on the local earthquakes.

In order to characterize the operation of the R15, the Talger seislological
station which is equipped with standard equipeent and operates stably in
practice without interruptions of recording was selected as the control.

If we take the nusber of earthquakes recorded by the Tslgar station as

lOOZ. then. so is obvious free Table 8. the first 2 years (1972-1973)

the cysts. recorded 92-982 of the local signals (earthquakes and explosions).
In subsequent years ([976 and [975) this indes rose to ll2-1262.

110
M OFFICIAL US! OIL!
tangle: of tag. by that
. nearby (b) and distant (r) eorlhqun

3h A‘ﬂ'All " a
3. Mom.

icy:
1. 2h ﬂay 1913; 2. Tatspr art mt ‘
1:3 Jun 1913. 1. n mat duh:

teen on!
FOR OP?ICIAL 083 ONLY

Table 8

 

.4673:

"70-6

 

' amoo romeo 906/100
u- 9”!!!- OOIIOO 318/100 ”1’100 2

(10%” 0/7 43/10.0 80/21.5 07/“.6 14’14 1W30.0

"C(9ﬁspﬂw- 79/01.. 210/970 soc/111.0 261/1336! ”I00 070““

(11) w 1 a 012.: mm mm 4014.4
EEK-m 351‘... 3,431” 110.4 HM 0’0 am
I“
nus-
0.... w. «4.1 33/10.: «110.0 43/19 10/10 too/11.5
(13) mm ~
was
a“
at? 3...... . :31. 33910.0 liaison um noun?
- 0m
(15) mo ““5
Ilsaa (23)
s. «123.: some: 22/22 211123..
(173“c mfggﬁgfa” 33.91 a 212.5 “14.0 4M 35!”
5,»-
mm . 1 4/3: 411.0 m 3713-0
82; W. . $51.4 #123 3/1.: — 131M
3:: 1mm 34/23.: 02133.: 00143.2 31/27 3001315
(22) as..-
m §
Key:
1. Station or systel 15- $th '
2. Group attribute )6. Recorded fro. June 1973
3. No of signals 1?. RTS
i. June-Decelher I972 18. Hedeo
S. January-June I976 19. Kotur-Bulok
6. June 1972 to June 1976 20. Xspchagay
7. Earthquake and explosion 21. Other stations
8. Talsar 22. Total nuaher
9. Recorded 2). Exploaion
no. Shipped
ll. RTS
12. skipped during adjustsent period
I). anro
l6. Recorded only by this station
Note. The nuaber of the signals is indicated to the left of the slash.

and the percentage of the corresponding nulbsr of signals recorded

by the ‘I‘alxsr standard station is indicated to the right of the
clash.

116
f0! OIPICIAL US! ONLY
NR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

0n the whole. during the entire investigated period the RTS recorded

73 sore signals than the Talgar station. The interruptions in operation
of the R13 are connected vith loss of electric power. thunderstorms.
replacement of tapes. preventive anintenancc of the equip-ent. and so on
(see Chapter IV). The number of niascd recordings as a result of
interruption of recording was reduced as operating experience use accu-u-

lated tron 11-162 in 1972-1973 to 0—0.6! in 1976-1976 with an average of
5.61.

        

Km W macs»! s nocrpoesnux Table 9
2 sasus
unsupe-
use—or-
:edpu 107:". 197‘ r. 1075 r. use In“
1972 r. ' 197 r. 1976 r. S)
(6) We no
64 188 217 183 72 092
(7) 'W m 121
(3)110 sew cras- le 47 38 24 3
(”men 21 34 as 31 i: 1::
(1mm m s 0 6 42 24
cease

“”06.an «can 30/01 8957 116/84 79/433 28138.9 351150.?
(12) Me aacrpoes amp

17 41 61 83 107
“new“. sea-cu 1: 39 $9 ‘4 11 1”
(15)" mum 07/43 101146 lee/56.8 «161.3 341/19.“

“more" sscno 26I39
(7.7) ﬂoc-rposs onus-Np

u. mu .- m was 29/48 18/18 - - -
(18) an!!!” pone- -

M cers Ks- . .

user-u -

Key:
1. Group nttrihute 10. By four or sore stations
2. No of recorded earthquakes 11. Total number

and constructed epicenters 12. Epicenter not constructed

3. June-Decenber I972 13. Weak recording
lo. January-June 1976 114. Recorded by one station
5. June 1972 to June 1976 )5. Other cause.
6. Recorded by the R78 16. Total number
7. Epicenter constructed 17. Epicenter constructed
8. By two stations 18. By three or more stations oi
9. By three stations the Kazakhstan regional here

[see note on following page]

117
P0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OﬂICIAL US! ONLY
[Note to Table 9. preceding page]: ‘

Note. The percentage 0! corresponding nunhsr of earthquakes recorded by
the ms is indicated to the right of the slash. The percentage
is calculated with respect to total nuber of epicentare constructed
by three. four or more of the nrs stations in the last row.

A fifth of the local earthquakes and explosions recorded by the RTS sta-
tions are not observed at the ‘ralgar station. and the us skipped on the
average 4.6% (see Table 8). These are predominantly signals recorded only
by one station of the Otero systen. the most sensitive and closest both to
the most seisaically active region and to the location of the lost frequent
explosions -- liedeo. One such signal can be seen in Fig 66. a. The auto-
matic stations of the Talgar teat area. Alas-Ate and especially Ali hardly
recorded this signal at the sale tile as at More its intensity was limited
by the dynamic range of the equip-ant.

The slaved recording systen (SZhR) was put into operation in the middle of
1973. and in the first half of 1976 it was shut down for preventive
asintenance; therefore we shall estimate its operation free One point of
view of recording local signals in 19710 and 1975. In 1976 the elaved
recording system recorded ‘72 of the total nuaber of all local signals.
and in 1975. 50! ot' the total masher of all local signals (explosions and
earthquakes) recorded by the RTS. however. if we exclude the recordings
of weak local earthquakes and earthquakes recorded only by one station
from the total number of local signals in 1974 and 1975. which should not
be recorded in accordance with the logic of the slaved system, the pre-
cision of local signals recorded by the SIM! on aagnetic tape increases
on the average to 802 in 2 years. The basic causes of niesing signals by
the SZhR are the following in order of significance: weak recording -
below the response level of the logic of the systso. the "including" or
"confirming" stations are not in operation. low quality (warped) Iagnetic
tape. replacement or end of magnetic tape. and so on.

Let us briefly characterize the signals with ts,P‘lo seconds. the statis-
tics of which are presented in Tables 8 and 9. Out of 978 signals

recorded by the 31's in I. years. the local earthquakes anounted to 692.

and the nearby industrial explosions where explosions predoainete (about
75!) free the construction site of the data in the Hedeo Canyon a-ount to
286 (321). The intonation on these explosions in the period tron

1 June 1972 to 1 July 1976 are presented in the explosion catalog presented
in Appendix It.

Out of 692 recordings of local earthquakes it was possible on the average
to process only 351 (512); 226 hypocenters (6‘2) were constructed by the
recordings of three or more stations on the whole. and 127 epicentera were
determined by the sections according to the data of two stations (Table 9).
with the years. as the operation of the MS inproved (starting up of new
stations. increasing their sensitivity. and so on) the analyst of hypocenters

118
PO! ORIGIN. US! ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL US! Oil!

determined by the recordings of three or sore stations increases per-
centsgewise to the total number of constructed epicenters. Thus, whereas
in 1972-1973 the number of hypocenters was about 50:, in 1976-1976 it
was 70 to 902.

The basic causes for which the epicentere could not be constructed were
weak recordings (impossibility of exact reckoning of the time of arrival
of the P-wave) and the presence of a recording at only one of the stations
of the system.

The earthquake bulletin for which the epicnnters were constructed
(Appendix 1) contains information about the number of stations by which
the position of the center was detected. In cases where the data of the
stations free the Kazakhstan regional network (Kuraenty and Chilik) were
involved in the processing marks are made.

At the end of Table 9 a comparison is presented of the nuaber of epicenters
constructed by the recordings of three or more of the RTS stations and the
regional network in 1972-1976. The stations in the regional network
occupy an advantageous position with respect to the investigated earth-
quakes inaamuch as the latter are inside the polygon formed by the
Kurmenty. Chilik. [ii and Pabrichnaya seismic stations. however. by the
regional network data. as a rule. only the earthquakes of higher than
seventh to eighth energy classes are processed. Therefore. it is natural
that the number of epicenters of local earthquakes constructed by the
regional network data does not exceed 502 (and in 1976 only 18%) of the
number constructed by the RTS data for which the sixth energy class of the
earthquake is represented.

52. Processing Procedure

The basic advantages of the radioteleaetric recording systea are increased
accuracy and operativeness of processing of the data. The centralised
multichannel recording with a united time service noticeably decreases

the errors in reckoning the time of the first and last arrival and it
increases the reliability of generation of useful signals. The united
time service permits determination of the coordinates of the local and
nearby earthquakes and also the azimuths of the direction of the epi-
centers for distant earthquakes by the time difference of arrival of the
first waves at the system stations. In connection with the exclusion of
errors of the time service for each station. the accuracy of reckoning the
difference in time of arrival on the display recordings is :9.2~0.3 seconds.
and for the escillographic copies from the magnetic tapes :9.03«0.05 sec.
which gives rise to the high accuracy of all of the subsequent construc-
tiona.

In many cases during operative processing it is very important to determine
the direction of the center in time. The qualitative determination of the
direction of the epicenter within the limits of the sections can be

119
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
F0! OFFICIAL 08! OIL!

eade einnly hy the dieplay eeienogran. using the eequence o! errivaie
of the tiret wave at the diiierent etetione. For thin purpoae it is
convenient to uee a tenplate (nee Yin 35). The direction aactor in the
outer circle in deter-ined by the etation tor which the tile oi arrivel
of the P-weve ie einieal. The narrower eector of the ineide circle in
determined by :he etation where the P wave errivee eecond. The location
of the etetione in the tent area ineuree a large aeount of detail in
deterelnine the atieuthe oi the eaetern and eoutheaetern directiona end
lean detail in the aouthern end eowthweetern directione.

 

Figure 35. Telnlate for deteninin; the direction aector to the
epicenter by the eequenca of arrival of the fire:

wave at the tent area etatione
Key:

1. Ali Hell 3. Telem-

2. Novo-Alekeeyeveknya Hell 6. (hero

5. Alla-Au Roll

In the quantitative proceaaing we have linited oureelvee to invutigation
of local cortMuekee with a value of (3.? not enceudin. lo eeconde (for

the Tolgnr etation). thue outlining the inventinatcd territory by the

circle with ite center at the ‘l’alger etation 71 he in radiue with on area
or note than 10.000 no.2.

he in known. for ouch snail epicentral dietancee the difference in time
of arrival of the longitudinal and traneverae wevee in reliably deter-ined.
‘l’hln pernneter woe need when finding the coordinatea of the center. but

it in neceanary to know the fictitioue velocity in thin caea.

120
M OFFICIAL 08! MY
'0! OPPICIAL 088 ONLY

Deterelnetion of the Fictitious Velocity Vf-VPVs/(VP-Vs).

The Velocity ratio of the loneitudinel end trensveree weves wee detereined
by the direct P-s weves of lecsl end neer eerthquehes recorded by the
Itntions of the test eree. The redioteleeetric eultichennel recording
insured high eccurecy of detereining the tile difference of r-rivele of
the P end the s wowes on the etetion recordings; 160 eerthquskee were
selected. in the first nrrivsle of which the direct weve wee recorded
(ts,,<25 seconds) with cleer errivele of the direct P end 8 weves. ly

the tine difference of errivsle of the P end s weves for three peirs of
stations the reletion wee constructed for the difference dts es s function
of otp (o totel of 280 points. Fig 36). In order to deeignete the direc-
tions of the epprosch of the weven in Fig 36 on the hottoe right the
regions of positive end negative veluee of At ere indiceted echeeeticelly
for three peirs of stetione. The reletione for the velocity retio V'Iv8
ee n function of the direction of epproech of the weves wee not
discovered. he is obvious free the greph. the dispersion of the veluee of
At with respect to the diepley ceieeoxreee (the eepty synbole) neer the
evcreging line is 39.5 seconds. end the dispersion of the veluee of At

by the oecillogrele of the sleved recording eyetee (the derk ey-bole)

in reduced to 30.2 seconds. The dispersion of the experieentel points
exceeds the eccurecy of detereinetion of At which csn he expieined by the
possible errors in deternining the rise of srrivei of the s-weves by

the recordinge'of the verticel eeieeogrephe.

By the slope of the greph of dts/dt'. the velocity retio VPIVs-dtsldtP-l.767

end the propegetion rete of the fictitious weves v‘-VP/(V,le-l)-7.7 klleec
were detereined.

The velocity of the longitudinel weves VP-S.9 kI/sec wee teken by the
regional hodogreph coepiled by the date on the eerthquekee [30. 31]:
it agrees with the deep seiseic sounding dste [25].

Deter-instion of the Position of the Hypocenters. when processing the
materials in the different stegee. various eethode of constructing the
hypocentern were tested end used.

Nonagrnn Procedure. In the first processing pheee. nonogreee proposed by
v. a. Kntrenko for the Teshtent redioteleeetric test area [38] were used
to define the epicentere. Only the tines of errivel of the longitudinel
wowee reckoned with high eccurecy end insuring operetivcnese of the pro-
conning are used for thd construction.

The noeoereee are e felily of isolinee of the epicentral dietences R
calculated for fixed depths of the center a end constructed in the
coordinates of the differences in tile of errivel of the P-weves st three
pairs of stetione. Each isoline is celculeted for e specific epicentrel
distance end direction eeieuths to the epicenter verying free 0 to 360‘.

121
'03 OFTICIAL US! ONLY
M OFFICIAL ll“ MY

Tho Ionian accuracy (ti-2 ha) io achiovod whon dotorainins tho
coordinatoa of tho contora of local oorthqualtoo locotod within tho aroa
of tho circlo with a dinotor of approxinatoly twico tho avorasa diotanco
hotwoon tho toot area atationo. lIith an incroaoo in opicontral diotanco
the accuracy fallo off.

Tho noaosrawo oro conotructod in polar coordinotaa. for tho contor of
which tho Alao-Ato atation woo firot ooloctod. hut oinco tho accuracy of
dotorainins tho arrival o! tho P-wawoo woo not olwayo auﬂiciontly high
an a rooult of the high background noioo. lator tho ‘l‘aloor otatioo woo
taltcn no tho cantor of tho oyoton. ‘l'ho nonograaa woro calculatod on tho
liir-l coaputor. An oxanplo of ono of thou with tho Alla-Ata otation on
tho cantor io prooontod in Pin 37. Tho noaogrono woro conotructod (or
dil‘foront pain of otationo. ‘l'ho hoot pair with roopoct to rooolution of
tho ioolinoo in tho diroction of tho opicontor io oaloctod for procoooina.
in the cooo of a 5-h- otop oioo with roopoct to dopth in tho intorval of
ii iron 0 to 25 to it io nocoooory to ooloct 12 nonoarala (with ono contor)
to procooo tho data of four ototiono. ‘l'hio ia a doticioncy of tho invoati-
gated acthod. and it pcrtoino to tho local oarthquahoo. For oarthquahoo
with R>60 la the paraaotor ll io oxcludod. and tho nubor of noaosraao in
reduced to throo. For oarthqualtco with l>200 in tho group coaooa to
operate for dotorlinotion of It and only ono noaogran io outticiont to
dotoroine tho aziauth at tho opicontor (ooo Fig 90).

in addition to inconvenionco oi‘ ooloctinc a largo nuhor of nooograno.
their doficioncy io low accuracy of dotorainins tho dopth of tho cantor ll.
l'or tho poooihility of incroaoins the accuracy of dotoninin; tho hypo-
contoro which aro inhcront in tho rodiotolonotric lultichonnol rocording.
tho ooloction atop oito for tho doptha of 5 la io too largo. and docroao-
ing the atop roquiroo additional noaograao. Thio in not juotitiod. for
tho accurocy of dotoninino ll quickly docrooooo with an incroaoo in tho
opicontral diotonco (Fig 38). At IMO la iron tho control ototiono
(Alon-Ma or 'l‘algar) tho rooolution with rcopoct to dopth ia low. and

for 8-30 to it io in proctico toro. At tho ooao tiao undor tho conditiono
of tho Alaa-Ata toot oroa for tho aojority of tho ohoorvod contoro tho
opicontral diotoncoo iron tho Alla-Ma and ‘l‘algor ototiono aro aoro than
30 ha.

lo the nanosraa procoduro only the P waves aro uood. Excluoion of tho

5 wavoa Iran the invoatigation. tho arrivalo of which uoually aro cloar
on tho rocordingo of tho local oorthquakoo oliainotoo additional infom-
tion which ponito control oi the convorsonco or all of tho data and tho
cxcluoion of groao orrora. Thoroi'oro tho noaograao woro mood to
dctoraino tho position of tho induotrial oxplooiono (ll-0) and for opora-
tivo opproxiaato dotoroination of the coordinatoo of tho opicontoro.

122
m ONION US! ONLY
”5.0)

Figure 36. Difference in tile of arrival of the S-unvaa (Ats)

at two etationo aa a function of the difference
in the tile of arrival of the P-vavea (dtp) according

to the data on the local and nearby earthquakes
for three pain of ocationa.

l - Ocero-Thlgar. 2 - Alan-Ata-Talgar. 3 - Ali-Talgar.
The light eylbolo are in accordance with the dloplay
recordinge. and the dark eynbola, by the elevad recording

aeielograno.
Key:
l. dtp. seconds 3. north
2. dts. eacondo 6. aouth

laikouo Procedure. It turned out that the detoruination of the poeitiona
of the centere by the lolkava procedure [‘I ue

V, gives large erroro. The determination. node by diff
stations gave error triangle. with l0 kl d

the centern were also found to be different. ﬂea-plea of auch conatruction
are shown in Fig 39. For example.

epicenter of earthquake No 126.

three triangles of etationo Alan-Ata-Otero-Talgar. Ali-Al-a-Ata-Talgar.

are of interoection of the chordo
station triangles they are 16. 20

123
’0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
roe OP'ICIAL 083 OIL!

nod 22 he reepectively. The obeerved conetruction etrore, ee enelyeie

hee ehown. were beeicelly ceueed by neglecting the different eltitudee
of the oheervetion pointe.

Actually. the difference in ebeolwte eltitudee for the teet eree etetione
exceede 3000 eeteret the 0tero etetion ie loceted high in the eounteine
with en eltitnde of 3000 letere. the Aloe-Ate etetion le in the pleine.

end ite eeieeoeeter ie euheerged in e well to e depth of 1000 wetere.

fn eddition. the eeielogeologicel conditione ere different for the etetione.
The 03ero end Telger etetione ere on bedrock. At the All etetion there
ere 50 eetere of eedieent between the eeieeoeeter end the roofe of the
beeeeent. Under the eeieeoeeter of the AlIe-Ate etetion there ere 3200 e
of eedieentery rock. All of thie led to the neceeeity for eelecting e
eingle reduction level. The depth of the beeeeent under the Aloe-Ate
etetion -- £200 netere under the dey eurfece -- wee teken ee thie level.
The diegree of how the etetione differed with reepect to elewetion reletiye
to oech other end ehove eee lewel end eleo the poeition of the reduction
level ere indiceted in Fig bl. e.

Tine Pleld hethod. The neceeeity for introducing tine correctione for the
relief gewe riee to expediency of conetructing the noicentere by the tine
field eethod. In order to recelculete the obeerved tieee for the P-weve
to teeth the reduction level it ie eufficient to tehe oroee eectione of
the tile field by the horitontel plenee et depthe equel to the e-ounte

the etetione ere ebove the reduction level end to tehe thee ee the torn
depth lewele. For the different etetione the depth of theee lewele it
different. for the 02ero etetion it ie 6360 eetere if we coneider thet
the tile field ie conetructed with the center et the point where the deoth
ie equel to zero: for the Telger etetion it ie 6600 letere. for the

All etetion it ie 3500 eetere. for AlIe-Ate it ie 3240 eetere. The only
tile field of the P wewe. juet ee for the uniforl Iodine with Vp-S.9 hlleec
wee conetructed for the firet three etetione. For the nine-Ate etetion
the tiee field wee conetructed for e two-leyer horitontel-etretified

eediue: the eedieentery eeriee 0.2 he thick with Vp-d.0 k-Jeec end the
helfepun-Vb-S.9 kI/eec.

Further operetione to deter-ine the noeition of the centere ueing the
tile fielde were of e etenderd neture (I, 52]. axe-plee of theee
deter-inetione cen be eeen in Fig 60.

lot we consider the deterninetion of the hypocenter of eerthquehe lo 203
by the tine field eethod with end without coneideretion of the relief by
the four etetione (Pig ‘0. e). The epicenteretwrned out to be cloee.

2 he (too eech other. end the depthe of the centere. 16 end 20 he
reenectively. ﬂoweVer. in the firet ceee 1‘ kn wee reckoned fro: the
reduction level. end in the eecond ceee. fro- e dey ewrfece. the elevetion
of which ie unknown. Reducing the depth by 6 he (1‘ ineteed of 20 kl)
inereeeee the error triengle by 10-13 ti-ee. Thue. the rediotele-etric
recording eede it poeeible to reiee the eccurecy of deteriining the depthe
et dietencee not exceeding 30 in to the neereet etetion to :l-Z h- which
led to the neteeeity for coneidering the eoetiel poeition of the etetione.

126
'0! OFFICIAL USE OIL!
--
ww .-
IIIILMl
Ila-lull-
II III-
II III-
III-Ill:
III-

         

Kl...-
[NI--

7
All

Ill
llllllllll
IIII:

nnnn nnnnn

E?

 

.I'...
III--
III-INII

      

I.
a:
aﬁﬂ

{4

“I...-
NIIle-I-II
UNI-II...
.Lllllllh.

  

III
III
II!-
Flu“-
. .

In“...
thlll
Illlll
.Illllru
III
II. .
““rJ-A"I“=-I
lluvnnl
Illll
Ill-l .
III-I /
III-II
Illlllll
III-III

  

“:5
'v

           

       

2F

  

E

       

 

"Ra-W

«all

ii-

VA

  

III
I

)K‘

    

Isl-III.
Ill-III-

/ﬁ y.
I

d:
ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬁ

       

FOR OPPXCIAL "8! ONLY

Iww‘

 

     

IIIIIIll-l
III-ll...-
JI’IIIIIII

'all

   

picentere
tlmuiudhulsmwu

he exee.
epicenter to the

ﬂu

e ere the ext-nth-

the poeition of the e
l of the dire:
etetione ere plotted on t
the dietence fro. the
The nunbere of the ieoline

urea for detereinin;

Win
The differencee in tilt of arrive

at different peire of
ieoiine pereneter R in

Alla-Ate etetion.

Figure 37.

of the epicentere.

k
.
u
U
m 4
“mm
L.
.NK
12]

Key:

125

'0! OIPICIAL US! ONLY
POI OPPIOIALU US! ONLY

IIIIum
gr gall
¢Mu IM“~
n/anl IImL
1Q:IIIIB~
1III II. a;

1?

     

I I“.
“if,
POI ORIGIN. 0” ONLY

 

127

M OFFICIAL 08! MY
'0‘ OYPXCIAL 08! OIL?

 

Pigutc 39.

Key:
1. Ala-Aw
2. “lulu:
J. Ozcro

Deter-tunic» of the unhquakc oplcmtcu try the
tuna proudun vtthouc commuting mm (1)
‘04 “ch tnuodocuon of a correction for thc

relic! (2). by the noaogroll (3) and by the till
Hold .0th concldcﬂng relic! (b)

128
'0! OFFICIAL 03! OIL!
m omcm. "II at“

 

Plan" 60. Deter-lunch of :32? earthquake ”lento" by the
tlu Hold utlml
[Soc following page for legend and key]

129
M O'NCIAI. IISI “LY
M OFFICIAL 083 MY

[Legend end key torigoreio, preceding pegel:

e -- coneiderine (1) end without coneidering relief (2); h - eccordin;
to the dete of three. four end fiVe etetione of the teet tree;
c -- ueins the dete fro. Chilik end the lureenty etetione

Key:
1. Ali 5. Novo-Aleheeyewekeye
2. Aloe-Ate 6. Kuroenty
J. ‘l‘elger 7. Chililt
h. Ouro

Correctione for Relief. The coneideretion of the difierent elewetione of
the oheervetion pointe cheneee the poeition of the hypocenter deternined
without coneideretion of the relief. thet ie. it leede to e chenee in the
coordinetee of the center I. e (in the poler coordinete eyeten) end ll. In
order to eetinete the nesnitudee of theee corroctione under the conditione
of the Aloe-Ate teet eree. celcoletione were node for three etetion trienglee:
‘l'elger-Oeero-Aii. ‘l‘elger-OLero-Alne-Ate. ‘l'elger-Ali-Alee-hte. four depthe
--- 0.5. lo. 20 he -- end for to pointe loceted in the circle to In in
rediue with ite center er the ‘l'elger etetion. 0n the correction nope
(euaplee ere preeented in fig ll. h) the ieolinee on.“ end All heve e
cooplex ehepe. eepecielly he; their configuretion veriee for different
depthe end different triplete of etetione. for the deep eerthquekee
(nus-20 he) the correctione chenein; the poeition of the epicenter cen
reech ell-03 ha. lie-615' end even exceed then. "ith e decreeee in depth of
the eerthquehe centere theee correctione decreeee. on heconee no eore then
gl 5 he. end emu-5r. ‘l'he correctione for the depthe of the ceotere
for ell of the eerthqoeltee ere identicel. end they ere within the notice of
0-0-7) he. The introduction of the correction for the relief into the
poeition of the hypocentere deter-lined hy the leikewe procedure by the
‘l‘elger-Oeero-Ali etetion triengle (fig 39) Iede thee cloee to the hypo-
centern fodnd hy the tile field lethod. however. in connection with the
lehor coneuption of the proceeeios hy thie oethod. the cooetroction of the
hypocentere heeicelly wee done by the tine field nethod coneiderin. relief.

Final Proceeein; Schene. For eerthnoeltee recorded by no leee then three
etotione. the following eeqnence of operetione wee need to deter-inc the
:toeition of the center.

1. The eeerch for the hypocentrnl dietence Ill-7.7 tw h end the tine
ot the center To-tPl-R‘ISJ hy the recording o! the etetion for which
154» ie deteroined ooet reliehly.

2. Calculetion of the tioe to get fro- the center to the ruin”; etetione
t“.‘P 'T e
n 0

3. Selection of the depth of the center correepondin; to the intereection

of the ieochrone with einim error by the ieochron teepletee or tile
flelde.

130
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The constructions were done on a 1:300000 scale. The values of t3-p were
detorlined with respect to all of the stations; redundant infornation was
used to estimate the internal convergence of all of the deterninations.

Only some of the fictitious woves failed to be used. for the value of t ,p

is deternined by the stations with a different degree of reliability (the
npplicntion of only the vertical seienosraph is fraught with inaccuracies

in determining the arrival of the 5-wavea at the sale tile as the arrivals

of the P-wevee are deteroined nors reliably). Ewe-plea of construction of
hypocenters in different directions fro- the test area according to the

date of three. four and five stations are presented in Fig 60. b. For ell

of the detersinationa the intersections of the ieochrons are within the
liaits of the circle (a diaoeter of 2 he on the scale of the Iap) designating
the epicenter.

For cstisstion of the accuracy of the constructions. in particular for sore
reeote easterly epicentere. data are presented free the regional network
stations of the Kasakh SSR Acadely of Sciences. Chilih and Kurnenty. As
can be seen in Fig ‘0. c. the egreenent of the data is good: ell the
isochrons intersect within the circle.

Theoretical calculations to estisste the accuracy of detersininx the position
of the epicenters end the depths of the centers by the described procedure
considering the position of the else-Ate test area stations were not per-
forned. The experimental eetioetes of the accuracy of deter-ins the posi-
tion of the epicenters end the depths of the centers of the basic nu-ber

of enrthquohes (within a radius of 50 km from the Osero station) 3iVe

values of 11-2 to. for the edge earthquakes adjacent to the eastern part

of the circle bounding the test area. the accuracy drops to 33-5 ha.

in cases where the earthquake was recorded by only two stations. the position
of the center could not be deternined by the indicated procedures. however.
in order to use these recordings to estimate the seissic characteristics

(the nuober of such eerthquakeshes reduced with the years. Table 9) the
determination of the epicenter was aede by the intersection sethod. the

radii of which are equal to the hypocentrel distances for each station
R“-7.7 ‘s-r- for the construction. the intersections of the circles at

two points are obtained. the azimuths of which differ by 180'. however. do
a result of the actual position of the centers of the earthquakes south of
the northern Tyan'-Shen’ fracture tone (see fig 79) it turned out to be
possible to exclude one of the two points free the investigation. for it

fell in an oneisnic territory. if this exception could not be made. the
earthquake was not oroccsncd. The accurecy of deterninins the epicenters

by two stations is significantly lower. and for swell R depends primarily

on the depth of center inasmuch as with the described sethod of construction.
the hypocentrol distances were identical with the epicentrsl distances.
Therefore. the deeper the center. the sore renewed the epicenter fro. its
actual position. For ssell centers located west and south of the tect area
(see the depths men in Pin 82). the epicentere are deter-ined by two

131
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
IMO

«so «0 auto—v .n

«25.— uouuusvou .0

~25... no. .r

Oman-«bu down-u. «3:332:38. 0;»
new he I: sun «0 banana no 5...... .Q u
and n3 1»: 8303.0.— 05 0.53- .93

 

c «0:... 28 3333.33 05 no an!

«3- on» «0 33.31. 2—» we .933: .
FOR OFFICIAL 083 OIL!

stations with greater accuracy than for the southeastly deep earthquakes
for which the epicentral distances can he 5 to 10 km high. This is quite
clear by the summary map of epicentars {see Fig 79). In the southwesterly
direction the epicentera found by the two stations are grouped together
with the epicenters constructed by three or more stations. In the south-
esaterly direction the epicenters as s whole are shifted somewhat farther

to the southeast with respect to the entire mess of epicenters determined
by the three stations.

53. lnergy Classification

The energy classification of earthquakes is of primary significance. for
the distribution of the earthquakes in space and time is considered as a
function of their energy. The observations at the Alma-Ate test area

were made only by vertical seisnographs; therefore we used the energy
estimates of the earthquakes by the data from the Talgar seismic station
where one of the test area stations was located. The accuracy of determining
K considering the damping of the seismic energy in the givan area is high
-- dK-0.2 to 0.3 [36]. Unfortunately, energy estimates were not available
for all of the earthquakes in the bulletin (the high background of
lssyk-Kul' microseisma or skipping of recordings at the Talgar station).
Therefore in order that the incomplete representativeness of the data not
distort the estimate of the recurrence rate of the earthquakes of different
energy classes. an effort was made to use the recording time r-of the

weak earthquakes for the energy classification.

The correlation between the energy class K and the oscillation time r was
used by numerous authors for different areas [11. 39, 60], and good
agreement was indicated with the data from direct determinations of K by

the amplitudes of the P and s oscillations. We selected 122 earthquakes
recorded by the Talgar station and the stations of the Talgar and Ozero

test areas and thus having an energy estimate. The value of K of these
earthquakes fell within the range from 6.5 to 10; the majority of the earth-
quakes are characterised by K-5.S to 8.0. The number of shocks with K>8.5
and K<5.0 is small. and it amounts to individual cases.

In addition. 79 recordings of explosions from the different areas were
taken into account: Pedeo (57 recordings). Kotur-Bulak (ll). Kapchagsy
(ll). Thus. in all more than 200 recordings were considered.

The recording time was determined from the beginning of the oscillations to
the time of merging of the recordings with the micromeisma. The data
obtained were plotted on a nap (see Fig 62). where the value of lg r in
seconds was plotted on the x-ssis, and the values of k-lg E joules were
plotted on the y-axis determined at the K83 Talgar station by the energy
template for the given area. The observed values of lg r by the recordings
of earthquakes and explosions of the different stations were plotted by
different symbols. No separation of the symbols on the graph was observed:

133
IOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
M ORIGIN. 08! 0'“

all of the points occupy a quite hooad region with explicit tendency
toward increase in r with an increase in I. The dotted lines on the ease
graph indicate the region of values of r for Tadshiltiaten [t0]. Ilere the
dispersion of the points with respect to the It scale is of the same order
(about :2). but the duration of the recordings: for the sauce values of x is
approxinetely twice as large.

 

Pigure 52. Duration of the recording of local earthquakes and
explosions as a function of the energy class K

1. 2 - hy the recordings of earthquakes at the ‘l'algar and

02ero stations respectively; 3 - by the recordings of explosions:

I. .. the data of ll. 5. Hikheylova [60] {or ‘l'adzhiltistan:

5 - the data of A. s. Helsnuda [39); 6 - the line averaging the

observed swar- of points
Key:
1. joules
2. seconds

The extrapolation of the graph to the region of snail values of K was of
interest for the aejority of recordings for which there are no energy
estimates belong to weak earthquakes. Certain authore [39) propose a linear
dependence of r on K (curve 5 in Fig 62). and others [11]. close to linear.
Re have adopted a linear relation between 1 end K. the sore so in that the
interval of interest for extrapolation to the region of values of K-3.5-S.0
where there are (cw or no observed points at all is snail. The accuracy
of deternining K for the observed dispersion of the experinental data is
low. and it it included within the Units o! “-51.

13‘
’0! OFFICIAL 083 MY
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The correctness of the averaging of the observed points (in Pig ‘2. curve 6)
was checked by an independent sethod with respect to the slope of the
sue-ary envelopes of the tail section of the seisnograss. the so-called
c-wave Ill]. The individual envelopes of the c-wsve A(t) are constructed
as n function of the tine t-to beginning with t-to-(Z-d) (tP-to). where

to is the tine at the center. and t is the current time on the seissogras.
The general fors of the envelopes C(t) is obtained by displace-ant of the
individual graphs sit) for earthquakes of different energy parallel to the
y-axis so that the overlapping sections coincide. As is shown in [ll]. the
value of r basically detersined by the duration of the Cowave and the level
sir) are related by the shape of the eﬂVclOPOI C(t) which. in turn. per-its
determination of the ssisnic event H end recalculation of it to K. He have
used only the relatiVe slope of the graph C(t) without absolute coordination
with the K scale.

The suanary envelopes C(t) for four stations of the test area are presented
in Fig 63. They are compiled according to recordings of earthquakes end
one explosion (Medea). the data for which are presented in Table 10.

For the Deere and Talger stations. low dispersion of the points is observed.
and averaging of then causes no difficulties. For the Alla-Ate station.

and especially Ali within the tile interval of t-to-20-60 seconds. large
dispersion of the points is observed which is caused by buildup of the
intensity and the tail section of the recordings. and averaging of then

by one line is impossible. (0n the graph C(t) for the All station the
envelope is shown for the explosion in Hedeo not inscribed in the law for
the earthquakes. see SA).

Thus. judging by our data. the shape of the envelopes C(t) can undergo
significant variations obviously in connection with the different station
conditions. This sust be considered when selecting the naterisl. In
reference [ll] the stability of the shape of C(t) is discussed for differ-
ent regions. However. a conperison of the enVelopes C(t) for the Telgar
and 02ern stations with the data presented in reference [ll] indicates
their different slopes -- with an increase in t-to by an order C(t) for
the Tnlgar and Ozero stations decreases by an order sore than in [ll].

A comparison of the graph of C(t) for Talgsr and Ozero stations with the
line averaging the observed points on Fig 62 indicates identical slope of
them. which confirss the reliability of the interrelation between t and K.
Using this relation. the energy of the earthquakes for which there were no
data for K was estinated by the recordings of the Talgar and 02ero stations.
in particular. this energy classification was node for signals recorded
only by the 02ero steticn. It turned out that the predosinsnt values of K
for these signals are included within the limits of 3.7-6.5. and the pre-
dominant values of ts_P'l.S to 2.8 (fig 66). The mini-us recording tine

of signals with t 9-1.5 to 2.5 seconds is 13-16 seconds. which corresponds
to values of K-3.;.to 3.8. The estimation of the energy of the weakest
shock gives a value of K on the order of two.

135
POI OFFICIAL US! QNLY
POI OFFICIAL 08! MY

“4-:
. (3) ' 0' (.6)

 

Figure 63. Salary envelope. of the recording; at local earth-
quakes of “Reno: energy clue“ and en exploeton

in Rodeo
. Ouro i. All.
Telnet S. eecondl
. Alan-Ate 6. m

136
'0! OHICIAL US! OIL?
m omcm. I!" OIL?

 

Figure 61.. Dietrilmtion of eerthquekee of different energy cleeeee
I recorded only by 02ero etetion. depending on t3-p.
The nubere on the pointe ere the amber of coinciding veluee.

 

       

Key:
1. eeconde
‘l'eble 10
“" Mn.
.h M“
(B I‘M“ 3" l 3 _
to 7.2 in 0 0.02 0.1 zoo
: as: 0.0 177 7 0.30 7.7. 214
a 32.2: 6.0 too O a.” . 220
4 12.01 8.8 107 9 10.20 0.7 340
a 0.27 0.8 :07 to loathe-0(4)
Key:
l. In. No
2. Tile. houre. ninutee
J. Huber

6. Exploeion in Medea

00rder nuhere of the eerthquekee coincide with the nubere of the
provieionel notetion in Pig ‘2.

“The number on the up of the eerthqueke epicentere.

137
m OWICIM. 08! OIL?
I0! OPPICIAL US! OIL!

ii. Recording of Buploaiona

Along with the earthquakea. the RTS atationa recorded induatrial oxplooiona
both within the linite oi the inveatigated region ( «no he) and outeide

it. lnforoation about the exploaiona woe need to at ioate the accuracy of
the conatruetione and eolect the velocitiea. In connection with the large
nuuber of induatrial orploaiona within the territory of the teat area. the
quoetion aroae of the neceaaity for recognition and excluoion of than free
the invaatigation when etudying the aaianic characteriatica of Alla-Ate.

The recordinga of induatrial exploaiona (aoo Table 8) in tho territory of
tho teat area amount to about 30: of all tho recordinge of local aignala
(ts.p(T)el0 aaconda) obtained by the RTS otationa. About 75! of all the
exploaiona are in tho vicinity of hedeo which it in direct proxinity to
Aloe-Ata (lo he) near which oorthquakea are concentrated. Therefore.

apeclol attention it given to the analyeie of the recording of thoao explo~
aiona.

Location of Industrial Bxploaiona within tho Toat Area. The locationa of
tho conotontly occurring exploaiona are tho conatruction aitea for tho
Hedeo don aoutheaat of Alla-Ate. tho hotur-lulah quarry between Alla-Ata
and Tolgar. tho conatruction aito on tho veatahoroof the Kapchagay
roaervoir. in oddition. individual exploaion) boaically are need for
eonotruction purpoaea in different porta of the teat area. pradoainantly in
tho northern, plaina oection. The aection of the teat area aap with tho
rogiona plotted on it (nadeo and tho Rotur-lulah quarry) and aloe the
epicentera of the individual orploaiona oppoora in Pig ‘5. The data on
the explooiona - tile. location. energy claaa K -- can be found in
Appendix ll.

The deter-ination of the location of nearby exploaiona woa node by tho
difference in tile of arrival of the firat longitudinal wave at tho teat
oren otationa. In order to deter-ino the coordinatoa of the exploaiona R
and o the nooograea turned out to be convenient for "-0 with the center

of the coordinate ayatee at the Tolgar and Alla-Ate otationa. The poaition
of the Kapchagay exploaiona renewed by 70 to 100 to free the Talgar end
AleeoAto atationo van doteruined by the tine field Iethod. for for ouch

diatoncea the accuracy of dotereining the opicontora by the nooograaa
decreoeoa significantly. ‘

The differencea in tile of arrival of the firot longitudinal wave at the
teat area oration fro. the exploaiona in Nedeo and Kotur-lulah are the
coat etahle. The differencee in tine of arrival of the wavoa (in aeeondo)

fro- the erpioaione at the Talgar, Aloaqnta atatione are oreaonted in
Table ll.

138
'0! OPPICIAL US! OILY
POI OPPICIAL "83 OIL!

Figure 65. Diagra- of the
location of tho araaa (1) an! the
Individual exploaiona (2) within
the teat area

Key:
1. Ill
2. Ali
3. Talgar
a. Iaayk
s. Alan-Ate
6. Kotur-nulak quarry
7. Medea
8. 02ero
9. aeconda

 

Table 11

m MW m-m "Wm.

M' 0) o.o -o.o mo :3 4.1 9.3
Kan-Bun“) 4.4 0.4 «1.0 4.: 4.2 9.2 -

 

Key:
1. Location of exploaion 3. Hcdeo
2. Error. aeconda , A. Kotur-Bulak

The large diaperaion of the ti-ea of arrival or the unvea tron the cxploaiona
in Medea by co-parlaon with the exploalona in the quarry ariaeo fro- the
fact that the exploaiona in the vicinity of Nedeo were in a large area .-

the dos conatruction aite. the conatructlon of roada in Goral'nik. exploaiona
on tho Nolaya Alaa-Atinka River and in other locationa.

139
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
I.

2.
Tha second. of the
crouhatchad

Mara-a corrupondln
to It; 66. Th

a cxparlaantal
than rcctanglea. la the f

It (all within
axploaloaa an
a valoclty of Vp-S

true poaltlon cc

.9 blue.
cutrcd let: an axplalucd by
of th ty. Tba calculation of h arm with a
veloclty of Vp-SJ kl/aac aractatlatlc of
acted lluea 1» Pl; 6) ca 0 1t
Uatanln a; tin
I0! OPPICIAL "8| ONLY

indicetive. The dieeeter of the circie in Pig ‘3 in which e11 of the
repeated detereinetione fen doee not exceed 1.0 h: on the eceie of the
eep.

Cherocterietic Feeturee of Recordinge of Bxpioeione fro. Different Areee.

in order to find the criterie of the difference in the recordinge of the
exploeione free the recordinge of eerthquehee. the eneiyeie of the explosion
recordinge. eepecie11y et piecee where week 1oce1 eerthquehee occur hee
prieery eignificence.

Exploeione fro: the Rodeo Aree. Theee exploeione were recorded during the
entire tine of operation of the rediotelenetric eyeten (1972-1976). In
e11. 211 recordinge of erp1oeione were obteined not coneidering the un-
recognized eigneie. for ere-pie. recorded by only one etetion. Orero
locetod cloee to hedeo. The lergeet nunber of exploeione. 6‘ end at. were
recorded in 1976-1975. ft in intereeting thet ee e reeu1t of deterninetion
of e iorge nunber of eeieeogrene end finding the defined criterie for
recognition of exploeione eeny of the recordinge ohteined before the
beginning of operetion of the RTS (in 1968-1969) which were cleeeified ee
eerthquoke recordings turned out to be recordinge of exploeione. The
exeeplee of each recordinge by the well etetion et Aloe-Ate end the ground
eurfece etetion et Te1ger cen be eeen in fig 61. The recordinge ere cher-
ncterizod by different ehepe (two typee) end the negnitude of the perenetere
ts,,. Pig ‘8 ehowe retordinge of exp1oeione in Hedeo by the RTS etetione
- diepiey end oecillogrephic.

Let ue coepere the recordinge between eech other end or the different
etetione. The conditione of the exploeione in the vicinity of Hedeo ere
uneteble -- the exploeione ere over e lerge eree in proepecting holee.
borehoiee end quorriee. The nininun chergee noticed by the ITS etetione
are about e helf-ton. eoeetinee 0.3-0.6 tone. The predolinent veluee of K
which were eetineted in Telger etetion by the recordinge of the explonione.
Juet do by the recordinge nf eerthquekee ere 5-8. The dependence of K on
the eite of the cherge cen be eeen in Fig 49.

The ehepe of the recording of exploeione et different locetione - et the
den. on the Hedeo-Corel'nik roed, end no on -- in different. which cen be
eeen from Piguree 67 end ‘8. however. there ere revere] cherecterietic.
eore etoble typee of recordinee (Pig £8. e).

Let ue conpere the recordinge of the different etetione. The noet intenee
recording ie oheerved er the Oxero etetion no the neereet to the eource.

and the weekeet. et the Ali etetion. the noet removed. 0n the whole. the
ratio of the recording inteneitiee et the different etetione ie no follower
“OzAT’AA-A'Au-A’AA (fig 58). The cherecterietic ehepe of the recording

ie obeorved er the Telger etetion. The firet longitudinel weve hee e
specific eteble ehepe here. It ie cleerly expreeeed .. two or three eetrene.
low frequency (‘p'fs) -- it predoninntee with respect to intensity on the

recording or ie coeneneurete with the enplitude of the eubeequent oecilletione

1‘1
I0! OFFICIAL USE OIL!
M omcw. "I! ONLY

 

“sun ‘7. Recording. of explosion. in Nedeo by the Aim-Au
eteuone (well) and Tel.» (drift) in 1968-1969.
Key:
1. 7 June 1968
2. Alla-Ate well
3. no eecoode
A. his" 4:“:

u the use the u e: othet nation. - Onto. Mae-An «- eon frequently
Apms and fr"? the: II. the longitudinal veve 1e higher frequency. tee

shape 1e cowl“. unexpreeeed and unstable (7!; 40. 5).

1‘2
M OFFICIAL 08! m1
run OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

 

Ptgulc ‘8. Display tota-ngtn-o (a) and slaved recording
cot-logrllo (b) o! cxplootons in H.400

Roy:
1. 1.13.: dtlft; 2. 10 secondu: 3. Alla-At. v.11. ﬁ. 030:0: 5. A11
9211: 6. Novo-Alckneycvokaya v.11.

163
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0. OFFICIAL "8| MY

(1)
(2)

(3)
(‘)
(S)
(l)

(3)

(‘)

 

figure on. b (continued)

Key:
1. Talgar drift 6. ‘0 seconds
2. Alas-Ate well 7. 30 seconds
3. auto 8. 50 seconds
lo. Ali well
5. 20 seconds

Another characteristic feature of the recording is obeerved at the All
station where 20 to )0 seconds ricer the first arrivals an intenee lov-
irequency train of surface wavee is recorded frequently predoainant with
respect to intenaity over the anolalooaly high-frequency initial part of
the recording (including the P and s waves. Pig ‘8. a). No ouch ”tails"
are observed at the recordings of other stations. and the saplitode
decreases sharply with an increase in recording rise t. An anslogooo
characteristic. but lees clearly expressed. is observed alao on the
recording: of earthquakes at the Ali station.

For the exploeion recordings on unclear arrival o! the transverse new: is
characteristic which is sort frequently observed at the Talgar station and
eooet ion at the Orero station. At the Ales-Ate station the arrival oi
the Swan uauaily is good as a reeuit oi the difference in frequency
roeposition and the P and s oscillations.

Mlonione in the Rotor-hula Quarry. Just as the explosions in iiedeo.
they are recorded syateeatically. but ouch aore rarely. on the average
8 to lo orploeions a year (see Table 8 and Appendix: 1!). Here. lore
frequently than in liedeo. there are large explosions. and the excitation

I.“
m 07716“!- 083 OIL!
IO! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

conditione ere different. Thie ie reflected in verietion of the dependence
of K on the weight of the cherge (Pig ‘9). The etebility of the excitation
conditione end the conetency of the locetion of the exploeione give riee to
e etoble cherecterietic ehepe of the recording. Let ue coopere it with

the different etetione.

The exeeolee of recordinge of exploeione in the Kotur-Iulek querry ere pre-
sented in Fig 50. The nest intenee recordinge ere obeerved et the cloeeet
Telger end Aloe-Ate etetione. end er the reet the eeplitudee ere coepereble.
The recording et the All etetion ie dietinguiehed by the preeence of
intenee low-frequency oecilletione in the toil eection 25 eeconde efter the
firet errivele which exceed with reepect to enplitude by two tieee or eore
all of the preceding oecilletione (Pig 50. e). At 02ero etetion the ehepe
of the recording eleo hee e typicel configuretion - the 3 wave ie eleoet
not expressed with reepect to inteneity end frequency. The treneveree weve
ie poorly ieoleted et the Telger end Alan-Ate etetion. but for e different
reeeon -- the velue of t3.p ie eeell. end the inteneity of the P-weve ie
lerge (rig so. e). The P end 8 wovee ere eepereted lore reliebly ee e
reeult of the difference in their frequency coeooeition by the oecillogreee
of the frequency eelection eeielic etetion (fig 50. b).

explosione fro. the Vicinity of Kepchegoy. The recordinge were eterted in
197). There ere couperetively few of thee (eee Teble 8). The exploeione
were in e lerge eree (eee Pig ‘5). end the ehepe of the recording ie uneteble.
Sleeplee of eeioeogreno ere ehown in rig 51.

The nexieun inteneity of the recording in obeerved er the Ali etetion which
in cloeeet to the exploeione. The errivele of the s-wevee etc even. At the
reeeining etetione -- Telger. 01ero. Aloe-Ate - the recording ueuelly hee

e cherecterietic ehepe which 1e typicel of renote exploeione. It ie weekly

expreeeed dynenicelly.

Difference in Recordings of leoloeione end Berthquekee. Hhen etudying the
ecieelc cherecterietice of the city. e greet deel of ettention euet be given
to the dlecovery of the criterie for recognizing the exploeione in Hedeo.
for they are in e eeielicnlly active region. There ere eeny of then. end
unreliable cleenificetion of thee ee eerthquekee ie freught with the con-
struction of fictitioue centere ehifted in the eoutheeeterly direction with
respect to Hedeo.

Let us foreulete the beeic criterie for dietinguiehing the recordinae of
explosione in Nedeo fro. eerthquekee.

The hineeotic eigne ere neceeeery end of prieery eignificence. Theee
include the veluee of ‘s-r end the differencee in ti-ce of erriwel of the

waves at the teet oree etetione (eee Teble ll). In the ceee where there
are insufficient kineentic eigne. it ie neceeeery to refer to the dynenic
elgne.

1‘5
'0! OIPICIAL US! ONLY
10R OFYICIAL "8! ONLY
er (1)

ll
’llllllu

’------ma

!!!Illlﬂ

       
  

 
  
  
 

I
l
l
H
H

    
   

 
 
 
   
 

   
 

 
      

EEEEEE==
-----I‘----
I'll-IIIIIIIIIIII'IIII
Illllllllllligﬂ llllll
III-1;.-
III-gn-I
n!!!!L!!!
,EEEﬁ'EEE
---7L ---
'IIIIIIIrq' ‘IIIIIIII-I
IIIIIIIIKI’ IIIIIIIII
i-IND I.-
iifd E=---
I)!

”aﬁg:sﬁ%§

inn-re... - sgnyo

==m==-m-
mun-unu-
,lmllul-l
--------

“ll-Ill-

! I I I! I

 

Figure 69. Energy of the oecilletions K es s function of the

weight of the cherge Q for the explosions in
Hedeo (1) end lotur—Bulek (2). The dotted line
wee constructed by the dets of P. P. Aptikeyev
for en explosion in Hedeo [6]

Key:

ls Q. kg

2. yeer

we shall distinguish two dynenic signs 90 frequency coeposition end
recording shepe. The frequency coeposition of the recordings of eerth-
quakes and explosions in hedeo differ stehly. The evereee spectre of the
frequency selection seiseic stetion of the P end s nevee free eerthquekee
end explosions ere coepercd in fig $2. the spectre of the S vevee fro-
explosions nt ell of the stations ere sisnificently lower frequency:

on the 1.3 end 2.6 hertz filters the reletive eeplitudee Af/A5.1 herte

of the explnsion recordings ere 2 to b tines sreeter then for the eerth-
quakes. The intensity of the recording on the high-frequency filters of
5 and lo hertz for the enrthquehes is essentielly greeter then for the
explosions. For the P-veves this lev is cleerly expressed only et the
Tslgsr stetion.

166
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY
l0! OFFICIA. US! ONLY

The criterion for the recording shape is less specific than frequency.

The general characteristic of the recordings of explosions includes less
clear arrivals of the S-waves, worse dynamic expression of the S-oscilla-
tions and the worse. the greater the epicentral distance (this is
especially noticeable on the recordings at the Ali station). The ratio
Ag/Ap for the explosions is less than for the earthquakes. The specific
shape of the envelope of the recording A(t) at the Ali station for
explosions is expressed significantly more sharply than for the earthquake
(see Fig 63). whereas for earthquakes the intensity of the tail part of
the recording is smaller or, in the best case. comparable with the intensity
of the preceding oscillations. for the explosion the low-speed coaponents
predominate with respect to intensity on the aeismogran. Finally. another
dynamic characteristic. also pertaining to the Ali station, is that the
recordings of the explosions are always much weaker than at the other
stations. Frequently they are in practice absent (except Kspchagay).

At the seas tine the recordings of earthquakes at the Ali station are
conporeble with respect to intensity with the recordings of the other ste-
tions.

The time of day when an event occurs can serve as an indirect attribute of
the explosions: the majority of the explosions occur in the range of
10-12 hours Greenwich (1600 to 1800 hours local time. see Appendix II).

The recordings of an explosion and an earthquake in the vicinity of Hedeo
are illustrated in Fig S3 for comparison. The differences in time of
arrival of the waves at the test area stations for groups of recordings I
and ll are close. The consideration of the dynamic criteria helps to
distinguish an explosion from an earthquake. nsaely:

l) The earthquake recording at all stations is essentially higher frequency.
This is quite obvious by the oscillograms fro. the frequency selection
seismic stations -- on the S and lO hertz filters the disturbance free the
explosion is almost absent at the same tile as the intensity of the earth-
quake recording on all filters is comparable;

2) At the All station the intensity of the recording of the explosion is
much weaker than an earthquake (by colparison with other stations);

3) The clear arrival of the s-wave is not as obvious on the seiaaograe of
an explosion at the Ali station as on an earthquake recording;

6) The intensity ratio of the tail and initial sections of the oscillations
on the explosion recording (Ali station) is more than on the earthquake
recording.

167
'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
toy:

I. Tulsa: “fifc; 2.

4.;

 

Ila-Au u.) 1; .

168
POI ORIGIN. "8! ONLY

:31). "a 7‘1).

 

Figure 51. Explosion sets-onus in the vicinity of Kspchssoy
Key:

1. Talus: drift 6. All. well
2. Alas-Au well 5. 10 seconds
3. Ouro

169

M ORIGIN. US! OILY
m M161“. 08! M?

'm, u) , um) I

WV, ”AI

     
     
   

   
    
  

      
  
  
    

I!IIE , ,

,— {/I" :- ;;/A'///AV_-'II is:

, Ilvilrt/k 1111722:::= =1:
_I"‘m

" —I‘—== ——_—=

  
  
   
     

1737'?”
, f//////.;I-

’QZ/ﬂﬂ

_ rill, I: '71 - — A“
- - L‘

I’l="'(‘
— ‘
”==——— —===:

   

IIIIIIIIIII52KIIIIII

[EB/WA

  

(I (1 £1 47 A! (I &' (I'JVIQKI)

Figure 52. Avenue spectre of the P end 5 seven of ssrthquskss
(solid lines) snd explosions in Woo (dotted line).

Key:
1. hertz b. 'l‘slssr
2. Ali 5. Ouro
3. Alas-Ate

55. Effect of Observation Conditions on Structure of tho Scissogrsns

The develop-out of seismic research end. in psrticulsr. the trend town!
more couplets interpretation of the wave field sre lore and lore frequently
lending to the necessity for considering the effect of locsl ststion con-
ditions on the structure of the seisnogrsss.

The seisnologicsl situation in the resesrch ores and the use of tendon wells
for the ohservstions have caused locstion of the stations in the rsdio-

telemetric test sres under sharply differing conditions (Ice Chspter II, 111).

He hsvs studied the effect of the reception conditions on the shops of the
first vsve end structure of the initisl port of the recording of re-ots
esrthquokes and also the shspe of the recording of locsl estthqusltss.
Unfortunately. the single-conponent recording hss sssentisl ly nsrroved the

150
m ONICIAI. 08! (Jill?
'0. OIIIOIAL ﬁll OIL!

possibilities of analysis. and hereafter it vill be necessary to keep in
aind that all of the presented estinates are given by recordings of the
vertical coeponent of the oscillations only.

affect of Observation Conditions on the Recording of Distant Earthquakes.
The initial part of the recording of distant earthquakes in the various
seisaological studies is of special interest. This pertains. in particular.
to the probless of interference reception in order to isolate the useful
signal. study the exchange transsitted waves. and so on.

The initial parts of the recordings of distant earthquakes recorded at one
station. as a rule. differ free each other. The recordings of a single
earthquake obtained at different stations also differ. These differences
are connected with the conditions both at the source (center) and in the
reception area. The large voluse of seissologicsl research perforsed in
recent years basically when studying exchange waves has sade it possible

to study the effect of the source area. It was demonstrated [51] that
first of all the depth of the center has a strong effect on the initial
part of the recording. The si-ple initial part of the recording represented
by one vnve out of tvo or three oscillation phases corresponds usually to
depths of centers of 200 ks or sore. Hith a decrease in depth. the initial
part of the recording is cosplicsted. The earthquake recordings are the
lost cosplicated. the centers of which are located in the crust.

 

Table 12
Asinuth free No of
the Talgsr earth-
Area stationI degrees guakes
Alaska. Aleutians 20-50 10
Kurils Kamchatka. Japan 50-80 17
Marianas Islands 80-100 10
Indonesia 110-150 60
Afghanistan. ﬂindukush 2'0-230 1‘
Chile. Argentina. Bolivia. Peru .'M0-320 16
Arctic Ocean 330-0 10

151
'0! 07110143 03! OIL!
T0010 13

 

 

a 00 84 4 O 10 a u .
13;: 08 02 0 0 1 03 08 81
1010 00 as - . . 00 00 00
(11) m 100 111 0 10 11 00 00
00y: .
1. 100: 7. 20130:. 000:0. Ku::y
2. T0:01 00000: 0! :000:01030 8. 10100:. A1I0-A:0. 000:0. 011
J. No 01 000p0:00 :000:01000 9. 10130:. 000:0. 011
A. 10130:. Al00-A:0. 000:0 10. 10100:. 0100-A:0. 011

S. 10130:. 0100-At0. 000:0. lurty 11. 10:01
6. T0130r. A100~A:0. Ku::y

8:00100 v0:0 0100 0000 of :00 00000 01 :00 :000:01030 00 0 {000:100 of :00
0:000 10 00100 :00 00::0000000 0000:. 100 01-0100: 10:- 01 :000:0103 10
0000:v00 000: f:0qu00:1y f0: :00 00::0000000 10 K00000:k0. :00 00:110-
an00000 0000. :00 P001110 00000 000 100000010. No 0100: 0000000000 of
:00 00000 of :00 f1:0: v0v0 000 :00 0::00:u:0 of :00 101:101 00:: of :00
0010003:000 00 :00 001:00::01 010:0000 10 00:00.

100 01100: of :00 :000pt100 00001:1000 000 0000 0:00100 000:001001y 1000.

90 0:100:00 010:00: 00::0000000 :000:000 by :0:00 0: £00: 0:0:1000 0! :00
:00: 0:00 10 2 y00t0 - 1:00 00:00 1972 :0 00:11 1970. 100 00010 0:1001010
for 00100:103 :00 00:0:101 v00 01001101:y 01 00000 of :00 :000:0103 of :00
11:0: v0v0 - :00 0:000000 of 0 000:: pul00 - 0: 0'00 000 of :00 :00: 0:00
0:0:1000. F0: 0001y010 188 :000:010;0 01 010:00: 00::0000000 00:0 :0000
00100 0:0 000:0100:00 «1:0 :00 01:10:00: 0p1000::01 00000 1000:00 10 01110:-
00: 0:100:00 01:0 :00000: :0 :00 :00: 0:00 «0100 0000 1: 00001010 :0

0001000 :00 01100: of :00 01:00:100 01 0::1v01 of :00 00:00. 10010 12 00000
:00 00010 0p1000::01 00000. :001: 0:100:00 000 :00 00000: 01 10v00:130:00
00::0qu0k00 10 0000 of :00 00000.

10 0001:100, 0 0:00y v00 0000 of :00 :000:01030 0f 1001v10001 00::0000000
(:00 80:090. 10010. 0000010. 1:00 000 0:00: 0:000.

$00rply 01:10:00: 0:0:100 00001:1000 1000 :0 :00 100: :00: :00 :000:01000
n: :00 011:0:00: 0:0:1000 01110: 0130111000:1y 1:00 0000 0:00:. 100:0for0.
even :00 0130 00011:y of v10001 00000:10000 00:000 00: :0 00 10000qu0t0 :0
010:0v0: :00 00010 1000 of :0000 01:10:00000.

152
III.IIIIIIII»III ﬁll!
"sure 53. [Su fououlng page]

153
an mm 088 an

figure 5) [See preceding pege]. Displey eels-egress (e) end sieved
recording seissogress (h) end oncillogress of the frequency selection
seissir station it) of en explosion (I) end so esrtheueke (If) in the
vicinity of Hedeo

Key:
1. 10 seconds 6. Novo-Alekseyevshsye well
2. Teiger drift
3. AlseaAts well
4. Osero
5e A11 ".11

Is it II ‘t’*

' L

I I‘lﬂll f '1‘ti'. f I lull

figure 56. Esrthqueke distribution with respect to nsture of

recording st the Telger. 02ero. Ales-Ate end Ali
ststions

a -- the sisplest (1) end the sost cospliceted (2) structures of
the seisnogress of the initiel pert of the recordings;

b -- shepe of the recording of the first vsve silplest (l).
sost cosplicsted (2);

c - frequency of the first veve. highest (l), lowest (2)

The recordings of groups of stetioos presented in Tehle 13 were used for
cn-purison.

The rcnults of cospering the recordings er the Telgsr. Ales-Ate. Osero
end All ntetionn are presented in Pig 5‘.

Initial Pert of the Recording. when enelyting the structure of the initiel
port of the recording (shout ‘0 seconds) consideration use given to the
nu-ber of veves, their intensity. sutusl nrrengesent. correletehility on
the recordings of the different stetions. The results of the enelysis

lesd to the following conclusions.

Along the ground stations of 02ero. Telgsr end Kurty loceted on outcrops of
bedrock. but under essentielly different conditions of the ground relief -
high in the sountoins. in the foothills end on the pleins -- the sisplest
initiel part of the recording is observed st the Telger ststion. The
silplest structure of the recording is recorded lO-lS tiles sore frequently
here then st the 02ero station.

155
ID! OIIICIAL ill ﬁll!
I

 

Figure 55. nonpartuon of the recordlng: of dint-n: earthquakco
by the stound surface and deep wall. on RTS stations
(cl-on o! arrival n: all otottona are couporablc)

second-
l6 Scptc-ber 1972

156
'0' 0.113115 III III!
The coat cooplex structure of the initial part of the recording is observed
at Osero station in 70 to 90: of the cesee (when cospering the recordings
of dlffrrent groups of stations). The initial part of the recording hers
is the cost extended. Intense and least resolved by coennrison with the
recordings of other stations (Pig 55).

Such a sharp conplication of shape of the recording on the station located
in the sountains was of greet interest. in order to exclude the effect of
any strictly local causes connected with the installation site of the
instrusent. observations were made at three points within a few hiloseters
of each other -- on the shore of lolehove Aloe-Atinshoye Lake. at the
coronary station and the GAISh Observatory. At ell of these points the
recording differed persistently by significantly greater cosplexity than
at the reaaining stations of the test area.

Although the Kurty station is located in the plains. it is characterised

by a significantly nore cospliceted structure of the initial part of the
recording then the Tslgsrstation and eosewhst silpler or cos-ensurete with
respect to coeplexity of the recording of the Ocero station. All the sub-
sequent part of the recording at the Kurty station (Fig 55. recordings. 5. 6)
is represented by groups of oscillations. soeatines inferior with respect
to intensity to the first wave. at the sane tile as at the other stations
the first pulse predolinates with respect to intensity. The conplex struc-
ture of the recording at this station obviously is caused by nonuniforai-
ties of the upper part of the section. The observetione at the Kurty ste-
tion were short-tern. and they are inadequate for statistical estisetee of
the usterial.

Deep-well Stations. It is not possible to coopare recordings in a well

and at its head on the day surface directly. The wells of the test area
are located in populated places, under conditions of high surface noise
lowels; therefore the recordings at the day surface and at depth are not
comparable. Usually earthquakes which are recorded in a well with readable
alplitudc are not recorded at all on the day surface. On the contrary. the
recordings of stronger events which giVe readable esplitudes on the day
surface are cospletely washed out at the deep-well station. Therefore the
oscillogrsss of the well stations can be coopared and they can be coepsred
with the eels-egress of the ground stations of Telgar. Osero and Kurty.

At the Alon-Ate. Ali and Novo-Alehseyevekeye well stations the initial part
of the recording. as a rule. is such sispler than at the Telger ground ete-
tion and the sore so at the Deere and Kurty stations. The recording in the
well is characterized by a short first pulse and a slaller nulber of waves
or their absence in auhnequent arrivals. The subsequent oscillations are
sore frequently weaker than the first wave. The seisaograss of distant
earthquakes in Fig 56. n illustrate this relation in the exasple of record-
ings in the Aloe-Ate and Ali Veils and in the Talger and Otero ground
stations.

157
'0! Olilﬂlll Ulliﬂlll
IO! OPIICXAL US! ONLY

The nueher of ceeee where the einpleet etructure of the recording et the
Alla-Ate etetion ie oheerved ie 70!. et the eeee tine ee er the Telger
eterion it ie 201. end et the Oeero etetion. 1.52 (Fig 36. e). Thie fore

of recording et the Telger end Aleeohte etetione ie oheerved eieulteneouoly
in the eejority of ceeee.

The difference in etructure of the recording et the Telger end Ali etetione
ie leee eherply expreeeed. Mere ehout 302 of the recordinge ere conperehle
with reepect to conplexity. end out of the reeeining once the eiepleet
recording et the Ali etetion ie encountered on the ewerege 2 tieee lore
frequently then et the Telger etetion. Thue. hy rig so. e it ie ohwioue
thet in is: of the ceeee the All etetion hee the eiepleet fore of recording
(in 252 of then it ie conperehle with the recordinge of the Aloe-Ate
etetion) et the cone tiee ee et the Telger etetion the eiepleet fore ie
obeerVed only in 201 of the ceeee. in the nejority of thee thie ie ei-ul-
teneouely with the Aloe-Ate etetion.

if we connere the etructure of the recording of the deep-well etetione to
cech other. then it turne out thet it ie coeperehle on the whole. If it
differe. then the eiepler fore ie oheerwed nore frequently et the Aloe-Ate
etetion. The eeieeogreph ie hurled to e depth of l he in the A-he eeriee
of terrigonic eedi-ente. The eore couple: ehepe of the recording it
cherecterietic of the All etetion where the eeieeogrephe ere loceted in
direct proxility to the here-ent (fig 56, h).

At the Novo-Aleheeyevekeye deep-well etetion. oheervetione were perforeed
in e eignificently eeeller voluee then et the Aloe-Ate end Ali etetione.
The recordinge ere the cloeeet with reepect to ehepe to the recordinge of
the Aloe-Ate etetion. Let ue note thet the conditione of the oheervetione
at the Novo-Aleheeyeveheye end Alec-Ate etetione ere eleo cloee. The
exelplee of coeperieon of the recordinge of theee etetione ere ehown in
Fig 56. c.

It hunt be eephoeited thet the ei-ilerity of the ohepe of the initlel pert
of the recording of the well etetione ie greeter then the ground etetione
(sec. for exenple, Pig 56. h). In ceoee where the low freoueociee predo-n
lnote on the eeieeogreee. which in cherecterietic of dietent eerthouekee.
the ehepe of the recording of not only the firet weve. out eleo ell of the
predoeinent wevee in the euheequent errivele cen repeet well et ell of the
tent eree etetione - ground end deep well - in epite of euch different
oheervetion conditione. The ere-plee of theee recordinge cen he eeen in
Pig 56. b. eeieaogrn-o 3. i.

Fig S7 ehowe the eeieengren of e dietent eerthquehe reproduced fro- the
Iegnetic tepe of the eleved recording eyetcl. "hen netching the tinee of
erriwel et all the etetione. good correletehility of individuel intenee
oecilletione in euheequent errivele ie cleerly ohvioue on the recording.

136
P0! OPIICIAL US! ONLY
POI OHIO!“ US! ONLY

~ 00’.--—- 5.. o— o.

l .b‘u, 'IU. .:I( 7y.
‘ N n- (2) “x71.- 9 nqu
~t~OM
:N.+W

47411717"

 

.‘rzmm mam. r :a ,, m law
1', - ‘ ‘ . "-
IN» 11‘:- u‘u- ”w.
0-:
i M I

f 1 t—J

 

m OFFICIAL I182 ONLY
M OFFICIAL 088 OIL?

Figure 56 [one preceding page]. Simple ahape of a recording in the veil
ntntinne of Alm-Atn and Ali (a). cononrioon of tho recordinna of the
deep well and ground aurfaca atatione (h) and peculiaritiea o! the
recordings of the Now-Alekeeyevekaya well station (c)

Key:
1. 10 aeconde
2. 7 Decenher 1973

Shape of the Pirat Have. In order to aolVe aone of the epecia’i problem.
for exanpla, eetinate the operating efficiency of groupa of atationa
for-in: the interference ayatene. to etudy and interpret the exchange
uavee. and an on, the ehape of the lirat oscillation hae greet ainnificance.
The ahapo of the firat ueve vea eetinated by the maker of extra-e and the
nature of the envelope.

when conpnrin; the recordinga of the ground etationa at Otero. ‘l‘al'ar

nnd Kurty it ie poanible to draw the conclueion that the ailpleat torn of
the firet wave. Juat aa the entire initial part of the recording. ia
obacrved at the ‘l'alsar etation. Sonetinee the ahape of the tirat oacilla-
tion at thia etation ia the ailpleat - it ie Iade up of tvo to three
oxtrene (Fig 58. a). llovever. even in caaee where the firet pulae ia not
diatinsuiehed by auch a aiapla ahape. it in atili ainplar than at the
03ero atation.

 

Figure 51. Slaved recording acienogru observed (at the top)
and after netching the tile. of arrival (botton)
Key:
1. Tnlger
2. Alna-Ata
3. Onto
6. AH

160
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
- ’0! OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

((2)1! thII' mm
1 r __
I I”. 'lﬂ

   

. , I.

I an m II‘Pn N r

I“!

    

 

 

-—%r¢-(1)
W

Figure 58. Initial part of the recording of distant earthquakes.
a -- sinilar structure of the initial part of the recording at
all stations; b -- shape of the recording of the first wave
different (1) and conparable (2); c - complex interference nature
of the initial part of the recording at the Ozero station

1. 1 second
2. 23 August 1972

Although a complex shape of the initial part of the recording is observed
at the Kurty station. the first wave turns out to be frequently just as
simple as at the Tnlgar station (see Fig 55, seismograms S. 6) and some-
tiues even-simpler (Pig 55. recording 7).

The simplest shape of the first wave. just as the initial part of the
recording. is observed in the overwhelming najority of cases (70-80%) at
01ero station located in the mountains and it is an unbroken train of
oscillations of great duration (see Fig 56. a). In essence even here it
is impossible to talk about the first wave. for a large nunber of waves
are imposed bn each other. This law is stable, and it does not depend on
the area where the event occurred.

Conparing the recordings of the Talgar, AlnanAtn and Ozero stations out

of the investigated 111 earthquakes in 762 of the cases the first Have has
the most complex. extended torn at the Osero station. at the sane time

as this is observed in only 161 of the cases at the Tslgar station (see
Fig 56. b).

161
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

however. it is necessary to note that recordings are encountered (about
152) where the pulse of the first wave at the More station has the
simplest shape. Frequently this is noted aisulteneously also at the
Tnlgar station (see fig 56. b. seismogrsa 3; Fig 58. e. b. seisaogras 2).
This occurs when the first pulse turns out to be outside interpretation

with the complex train of oscillations following it (fig 55. recordings
5. 6: Pig 56. b. recording l).

in rare csses the shape of the first wave at the three ground stations is
cosparable. Thus. in fig 58, b. two recordings are presented. the first
of which is typical and illustrates the difference in shape of the record—
ing of the first oscillations at the three ground stations. The second
recording is characteristic, end it is encountered rarely. It illustrates
the good repetition of the shape of the recording of the first wave at ell
of the ground stations.

At the deen-well stations of Alas-Ate. Novo-Alekseyevskays. and Ali, the
shape of the first pulse is usually much sore conplex than at the Talgar
station. but it is essentially simpler than at the (hero station (see

Fig 58. n). Thus. for example. when comparing the recordings of the Talgar.
Alma-Ara and Oeero stations it turns out that in 632 of the cases the

shape of the recording of the Alma-Ara well is the simplest (here in 12:

of the cases. simultaneously with the ‘l'algar station). At the same time
the simplest shape of the wave at the Talgar station is observed in 552 of
the cases. and at the 02ero station. in ly 152 of the cases (see fig 55. b).

The recording of the wells is distinguished by a larger number of extreme
(by one or two) and greater duration than at the Talgsr station (see Fig
58. a). In Pig 38. c. a seismogram of the initial part of the recording

of a distant earthquake is presented with matched times of arrival at three
stations -- Talgar. Alma-Ate and Osero. It is obvious that at Talgsr
station the pulses at the beginning of the recording have the simplest
shape. At the Alma-Atn station they are such more drawn out. and at the
Ozero station they merge into a long. unresolved train of oscillations.

For explanation of the observed changes in shape of the recording of the
wells by comparison with the simplest recording of the first wave by the
Talgsr ground station. a calculation was made of the interference oscilla-
tion formed as a result of superposition of wave reflected from the day
surface on the wave approaching from the bottom. The pulses of sisplo
shape and at different frequency observed at the Talgar station were
selected as the initial pulses. The time of arrival of the reflected wave
at different depths was determined by the vertical seismic profiling data
in the Alma-Ate well.

Fig 59 shows the results of the calculation for three earthquakes. the first
pulses of which differ significantly with respect to frequency. The

pulses recorded in the Alma-Ate well and in the Telgar drift are shown in
Fig 59. a. b for each earthquake; in all cases those at Tslgar are simpler.
In Pig 59. c calculated pulses are presented for different depths from

162
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY

700 to 1600 meters. It is obvious that a depth of 1200 meters the pulses
are extended by comparison with the initial pulses._snd with respect to
shape they approach the pulses observed in the Alma-aka well. The compli-
cation of the pulse shape is different for different frequencies. Thus.
whereas in e pulhe with a period of 1-1.1 second at a depth of 1200 meters
only the amplitude ratio of the second and third extrema varied. for the
pulse with a period of 0.8 seconds the complication of the shape is
expressed in the manifestation of additional extrema. and for a pulse with
T-0.5 seconds. two hole extrema. which increases the pulse duration by

1.5 times by comparison with that observed on the day surface.

At the different well stations - Alma-Ate and Ali or Alma-Ate and
Novo—Alokseyevsksys - the shapes of the first pulses are frequently

close (see Fig 56. b. Fig 56. c. seismogrems l. 2) or somewhat more complex
at the Ali station (see Fig 55. seismogrsms 3. 4). 0n the whole the number
of cases where the simplest (just as the most complex) shape of the first
wave is observed at the Alma-Ate and Ali stations is commensurate.

Out of the ground stations. the one closest to the well stations with
respect to the shape of the first wave is the Telgar station. In Figures
55 and 56 it is possible to see the similarity of the recordings of the
Telgnr. Alma-Ate (see Fig 55. seismogrsms 2. 3; Fig 56. h. seismogrem 6).
Talgsr and Ali (Fig 56. a. recording 3: Fig 56. b. seismograms l. 2).

and Talgsr and Novo-Alekseyevsksya stations (Fig 56. c).

A comparison of the recordings of different well stations leads to the con-
clusion that the difference in shape of the first wave. just as the initial
part of the recording is appreciably less here than between the earthquakes
of the ground stations (see. for example. Fig 56. b. seismograms l. 2).
This is obviously esplained by the fact that the Hell stations are located
in n comparatively uniform series of terrigenic deposits.

In rare cases good similarity of the shape of the first wave on the record-
ings of all of the test area stations is observed (Fig 56. b. seismogrsms
3. 6).

Frequency Peculisrities of the First Wave. The estimates were made visually
by the display recording and in small volume. by the oscillograms of the
frequency selection station (Chlss) obtained by reproducing the magnetic
tapes of the slaved recording system.

it must be noted that the predominant oscillation frequencies at the differ-
ent stations differ little from each other. and in 301 of the cases the
recording frequency of the first wave at all stations of the test area are
identical. This is explained basically by the fact that the maximum fre-
quency spectrum of the first oscillation of the distant earthquakes is
usually outside the pass band of the frequency characteristic of the seismic
channel. As an example we have the frequency selection seismic station
oscillogrsm of one of the distant earthquakes in Fig 60. a. inasmuch as

163
P08 OFPICIAL USE ONLY
ros ORIGIN. I183 OIL!

             
      
  

... .0.

mmm nam ham
. «Amy-u, 1'qu via-mu:

."VVV'

 
 
   

 

l

I
, h
e

«W
”W
.W

  

I

W <-e
E'V‘NV'W'JW‘
. W W
2.“. WW

Figure 59. Recordin; of the first wave in the Alla-Ate well.
11-1200 neters (a). in the ‘l'algar drift (1:) and

calculated for different depths (c)
Key:

1. seconds

the recording with 0.3 hertz filtration is di-inished by 6.6 tines with
respect to uplitude. it is clear that the nsxi-ul of the spectra of the
first oscillation is on a frequency not exceeding 0.3 hertz.

In cases where the spectral of the initial signal contains components with
frequencies above 1 hertz. the frequency of the recording as a function of
the thickness of the sediments under the station is neat clearly nenifested.
The highest frequency oscillations are recorded at the Kurty and raiser
ground stations located on bedrock (aee Pi; 55). On cosparison of the
recordings of the Talaur. Oeero and Alla-«ta stations in 532 of the cases
the recording at the Tuner station is the highest frequency Oilultaneously
ll! .1: the Alla-Ma station and 72 at the Orero station) and in only

I22 of the cases. the loves: frequency. half of that simultaneously with
the Maw-Ate station (see Pig 54. c).

164
m OFFICIAL USE OILY
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

 

Figure 60. Oscillogress of frequency selection seiseic stetion

of distent eerthquekes
e - Telgor stetion. recording amplitude with 0.3 hertz filtretion

dieinished by 6.b tiles; h - Telgsr. Alla-Ate. Ozero end Ali
stations. recording elplitude with 0.6 hertt filtration
diminished by 6.6 tines. The sleved recording seiseogree is
presented at the top.
Key:
1. seconds

At the Kurty stetion located in quiet relief. the highest frequency record-
ings are observed by coepsrison with the rest of the stetions of the test
area (see Fig 55. recordings 5-7).

The lowest frequency recordings ere received et the Alas-Ate ststion where
the thickness of the sedinentery eentle under the seiseogreph is shout

3 Re. In 60 to so: of the csses the recordings er the Ales—Ate stetion

turn out to be the lowest frequency. more then helf of the. ei-ulteneously
with the Osero stetion. The low—frequency neture of the recording of the
first wave er the 0:ero stetion locsted in the nounteine is in ell prohebil-
ity connected with the phenoeenon of interference of e lerge nulber of

waves under the conditions of the complex relief et the dey surfece.

In the Ali end Novo-Alekseyevskeye wells the frequencies-of the first
oscillstion are usually higher then in the Ales-Ate well, end they ere often
coenensurete with the frequencies of the recordings at the Telgsr stetion.

165
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f0! OPPICIAL 08' OIL?

This is observed especially frequently for the Ali station (Fig 56. b.
Fig 36. c. seiaaograa 3). uhich is the result of the effect of the
sedimentary series (under the seisaograas in the Ali well a total of 50 a
of sediaents. in the Novo-Alekseyevskaya well. about 1.7 kl).

For illustration. Fig 60. b shove the recordings of the stations of the
radiotele-etric test area and the aeiaaograaa of the frequency selection
seianic station of a distant earthquake by which it is obvious that the
oscillation coeponents above 2 hart: have low intensity (one the 0.6 hertz
filter the recording snplitude is disinished by 6.6 tiles). If no eatilste
the ratio of the asplitudss of the oscillation coaponanta at frequencies
of 0.6 and 1.3 herts for different stations. it turns out that wherever
the instruments are located on bedrock (the Talgar ground station) and in
direct proxiaity to bedrock (the Ali vell station). the relative intensity
of the high frequency consonants (1.3 hertz) is greater than at the
Alas-Ate station located in a series of sediaentary deposits.

Effect of Observation Conditions of the Recording of Local Earthquakes.

In order to study the effect of the reception conditions on the shape of
the recording of local earthquakes (t Pslo seconds). the seisaograas of
all local earthquakes recorded by no see then three stations in the test
area over a 3-year period free 1 June 1972 to 1 June 1975 were analysed.
It turned out that there were about 160 of thee. A coapsrison of the
recordings was aada qualitatively for the ground stations (Talgar. Deere)
and the deep-well stations (Ali. Alas-Ate. hovo-Alekseyevekeya). priaarily
by the slaved recording seisaograse where the scanning rate is 6 tiles
greater than on the display aeieuograaa and also by the frequency-selection
station sets-agrees.

whereas for the distant earthquakes the structure of the initial Plrt of
the recording in the shape of the first wave were investigated separately.
for local earthquakes the duration of the recordings of which usually is

20 to 30 seconds. it is natural to investigate the entire recording and to
consider the number of waves in groups of P and S-oscillations. the
intensity ratio Aplhs. the overall duration end frequency coeposition of
the recordings of different stations for its characteristic. It lust be
noted that in the case of nearby earthquakes such factors as the epicentral
distance. the azimuth to the center. the depth of center and the earthquake
energy can have defining effect on the nature of the recording and seek

the effect of the observation conditions on the shape of the recording.

It is necessary to take these peculiarities into account.

The results of comparing the recordings of local earthquakes obtained at
stations under essentially different conditions lead to the conclusion that
on the whole for local earthquakes the sane laws are observed as for
distant earthquakes.

Effect of the Parameters R. H and K on the Shape of the Recording. It is
necessary at least qualitatively to estimate the effect on the shape of

166
ton OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OIPICIAL US! ONLY

the recording of the epicentral distance I. the depth of center h and the
energy of the earthquake K under the conditions of the Alas-Ate test area.

The distance R has a strong influence on the structure of the recording

of the vertical coaponent. especially when the center of the earthquake is
located close to any station. It attenuates with renewal of the center
free the test area. Although the centers of the local earthquakes occupy
a different position with respect to the test area stations (sea the esp
in Fig 79. Chapter V1). for the sajority of then the 02ero station turns
out to be nearest. the All station turns out to be the seat reacts. in
order to study the effect of the observation conditions. it was necessary
to select earthquakes so that the effect of the paraseter R will be
excluded for the coapared recordings insofar as possible.

The effect of the paraseter R on the intensity of the longitudinal wave.
rather on the AP/AS ratio and the recording tine. is clearly illustrated.
for exnnple. by the seissogras of earthquake No 265 (see Fig 68). This
ratio on the recording of the vertical cosponent depends strongly on the
direction of approach of the wave. For the ease earthquake the maxi-us
value of aplas and the greatest duration of the recording are observed at
the Talgar station closest to the center (see the nap in Fig 80. d). On
going away from the center the ratio Ap/As on the recording of the vertical
coaponent decreases. and it because sinisal for the seat rasote Ali station.
This is connected both with absorption of energy and with a change in
direction of approach of the waves. On going away fros the epicenter. the
recording tile is also reduced (the Ali station is an exception in this
respect).

The other two parasetera h and K. which also influence the shape of the
recording. can be neglected when coaparing the recordings of one earthquake
at different stations. However. when discovering the effect of the station
characteristics on the recordings of different earthquakes. they cannot be
neglected. As an exasple of the effect of the parameter H on the shape

of the recording Fig 61 shows the recordings of three earthquakes with
different depths of center. All of the centers are located south of the
Oscro station (see Fig 80. c) and they are characterised by values of
K-6-7. As is quite obvious by the saissograls, with an increase in depth
(for Riconst) the intensity of the longitudinal oscillations and the

AP/As ratio decrease.

The effect of the parameter K characterizing the energy of the earthquake

is expressed in an increase in the ratio APIAS and the recording tine
with an increase in K.

The geographic position of the center of the earthquake has defined
influence on the shape of the recording.

Thus. when analyzing the recordings of local earthquakes it is necessary
to deal with the total effect of sany paraneters on the shape of the

recording. and it is not always possible to isolate the effect of only the

167
!OR OFIICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 OIL?

 

. U: ,(1)

Figure 61. Recording of local earthquakee at different depthe
of center ll

1. seconds 5. Otero

2. 26 June 1976 6. Ali well
3. Telgar drift

6. Alla-Ate well

observation conditions in pure fore along thee. Therefore we ahall die-
cuse only the one: etahle lave.

Ground Stations. A comparison of the recordinge of the ground etetione

at Deere and Talgnr for earthquake. identically reloved froa both atatione
indicetee eore coaplex ehnpe of the recording at the Oxero etation. which
not also noted for dietant earthquakee. If the epicentral distances for
the two etetione are different, then more coaplex recording ie oheerved

at the station which is cloeer to the center. Let us illuatrate what hae
been acid by none exelplee.

168
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig 62 shows the recordings of four earthquakes, two of which are located
closer to the Telgar station (a). and two closer to the Osero station (b).
0n the recordings in Pig 62. a. the aoet unresolved and prolonged oscilla-
tions are recorded by the Talgar station. and in Pig 62. b. by the Osero
station. This can be seen aoet clearly on the slaved recording eels-egress.
The fast deaping of the high-frequency conponents and predoainance of the
low frequencies in the tail section of the recording aost characteristic
for the Tslgsr station on all recordings attract attention. This is
especially clearly exhibited in the oscillogrsaa free the frequency
selection soisaic station. Tor exasple. earthquake No 231 (Fig 63) at
02ero station located two tiaes closer to the center than Talgar has a

sore complex recording -- sore extreaa. sore prolonged and resolved record-
ing on all filtrationa except the lowest frequency 0.6 hart: (recordings
with 0.3 herts filtration frequently turn out to be unreadab1e as a result
of the high background). On a frequency of 0.6 hertz the recording of the
Talgar station predoainates with respect to intensity and duration. The
analogous picture can be observed also on other oscillograaa of the fre-
quency selection seismic station.

Now let us consider some exaaples of recordings for which the effect of
the parameter R is excluded. that is. for the two ground stations Tslgsr
and Osero the epicentral distances are close (Pig 64). The depths of all
centers "-13-15 kn. end the energy class of the earthquakes K-T.‘ to 7.7
vary within their own lilite. On all the seisaograss the recordings at
02ero station turn out to be sore couples. more prolonged. less resolved
than at the Tslgsr station.

The recordings at Ozero and Tslgsr stations, which are slailsr with respect
to shape. are encountered rarely. and they are basically characteristic

of the nest resote earthquakes. Sole axe-plea of such recordings can be
seen in Fig 65.

The most useful sensitivity realized at the anro station and closeness to
the basic centers give rise to the recording of part of the signals (on

the average 15:) by only this station (Fig 66). These are predominantly
very close shocks with ts_p-l.5-3.0 seconds. Sons of the recordings are
characterized by significant aaplitudes, at the ease tile as at other sta-
tions the useful oscillations hardly exceed the background (Fig 66, a).

The largest number of such signals were recorded in 1976-1975 (see Table 8).

Hhen analyzing the shape of the recording of local earthquakes at the
ground stations of the test area it was of interest to coapare the record-
ings of the earthquakes froa closely located centers (possibly the seas
center) obtained at different tines. The selection of such recordings was
snde in Fig 67. The centers of these earthquakes are approxiaately 27 kn
southeast oi Osaro station (see Tig 80, c. d). The depths of centers
Hell-16 kn are close. All of the earthquakes are characterized by in
practice the sale values of K-6.6—7.4. The stability of the shape of the
recordings at the Tslgsr and Osero stations attracts attention. L“ the
deep-well stations the recordings are such weaker. and analysis of their
shape is complicated.

169
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
’0! OP’XCIAL US! ONLY

lll'lblI lullllv\

(f Iguana 1?}.
. j.“ -..% _l :

 
     

1.17. m: m

   
   

Ill ”WM (3)

a,“ ( ”I ”I

 

--—~« :- Im lion-r . , my lulu ‘
‘1‘ an m min. I". In Mu-

       

lLi m‘

't aw 5)

Figure 62. Recordlnso of local earthquakes for different
opiconcral distances and location of the contort
clone: to the Tulsa: (a) and Ozoro (b) atottona

Key:
1. 28 January 197‘ 5. All voll
2. 1.13.: drift 6. oocondo
3. Alan-Ate vcll
A. Ozoro

170
FOR OFFICIAL 083 out?
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

35.. «.0 .n
noun: 3 .c :2. 34.3.: .n
22.. :< .m 32.. .323. .~
0.38 .o 8:89: 2 .n
">02
3» «'38::
8:3- 03: guacamo- hooosvouu 23 can A: 3.533: 95:30»
was. on» .3 All «an: .n. 0.5 an on 33.26»: M33 a no 9.3333. .3 95w:
E 3 . 5
a Q!‘ utkﬁtéuﬁ {3‘ 3‘3»
2.. Q3
\%
3
m
\Q

“ages: {1 _ .3 and ~

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0! OIIICIAL 088 OIL?

  

 
  

mum mu-
Athlhanor (2)
”57 Ill!
mm ”all" 3 NM

Ahfduvnrnﬂ
(3)

  

i I l in. I
(when) .1“, (6)

Figure 66. Recordinga of local earthquakee.
Earthquake centere equidiatant froe Talgar and 02ero etatione
Key:
1. 27 Auguet 1973
2. Telger drift
3. Alla-Ate well
6. Ozero
5. Ali well
6. 10 aeconde

The tile intervalehetveen adjacent earthquahea are not the aale - 2 daya.
l7 dnye. 8 nontha. 0n the upper two eeieaograea (an interval of 2 daye).
inpreeeive aiailarizy of the recordinga at the aane etationa ia oheerved.
Not only the low frequency contiguration of the recording characterietic
of Talusr etation repeate well, but even ite coaplication with high
frequency. The next eeinnograe vee obtained 8 loathe later. but the
correlation of the recording at the Talgar etetion in good, juet aa before:
only individual high-frequency contractione are dietinguiehed. The high-
frequency recording of the Ozero etetion ia reproduced voree. It ie
poaeihle to propoee that in the eegaent of the trajectory iron the center
to the Ozero etetion a change in etate of the medium took place during thia

172
FOR OPPICIAL 083 Oil!
'0! OFFICIAL 088 ONE!

3 I. N ’1‘!- ezJu 1‘
11159-0; #14" Id MM’

       

Figure 65. Earthquekee with cioee ehepe of the recording of
ell of the tent eree etetione

Key:
1. 9 hey 1976 6. Alan-Ate well
2. 10 eeconde 5. Ozero
3. Tniger drift 6. Ali veil

tile which was "noted" in the high-frequency coenonente. at the ease tile
an on the peth of the center to Telger either the Itdiue remained unchanged
or its variation wee not reflected in the lounfrequency couponent of the
recording. Actually, betveen the center end the Otero etetion eeverel
enrthqueke centere occurred during theee 8 nonthe, end between the center
and the Telger etetion they were not obeerved (eee the nape in Fig 80. c. d).
0f couree. it ie inpoeeible to exclude the poeeibility of nonidenticelneee
of the center influencing the high-frequency probability recording.
Finally. on the last eeie-ogree for both etetione einilerity ie obeerved
(in general features) between the ehepe of the necilietion recording end
the ehnpe of the uavee in the first two eeienogrene at the some time ee

173
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
rot orncm. oer our

l'
.mzm (1)
lililnuvodhne (2)

rem

-
t:*7“r- .. . .u.-.
C O O 0. MO 0 - no J. 0 , 0
ea. -0. e - _~ . p... . u—owuuue
....

..-4’;,

Co's-Int

L;;.-' '*

...~ . e . ..
-0‘r:

.. . . . . .
s__ a.‘ O
2.’ w'a, .9. .aJVam-n

«‘u 0' e0 o -

‘ We... .,
. .. ..

 

Figure 66. Recordings of earthquakes recorded only by
Osero station
Key:
1. 31 Hay 1973
2. Alas-Ate Hell
3. 02ero
‘. Ali well

the relative intensity of the longitudinal oscillations (and shape at the
0:ero station) changed several times. The last seissogrsn use obtained

9 days after an earthquake occurred 60 kl to the west (4 January 1975)
vhich was the strongest during the observation period (K-ll.5), which could
be (elt in the condition of the environment and could lead to an increase
in longitudinal wave absorption. 17‘

I0! OFVICIAL US! ONLY
FOR 0!?ICIAL USE ONLY

. “I [an hm: gglggﬁﬂ‘w I ,-

H
W-

Iur In" lie]! 5 ‘ ; 11 7“ ”'F'

Ill/I"
/I/II‘
/III,.
ml"

2 a

«I

Illn-

IIIII
‘IIIIII"

WWWMMMW
' 4-:
WWW ’

I

IIJI tau v 1.75th r

I-l

 

I
W

Figure 67. Recordings of earthquakes at the Talgar. Alua-Ata.

02ero. and Ali stations occurring in one place

Deep-Hell Stations. "here the shape of the recording of distant earth-
quakes ot the deep-well stations is much sinpler than at the ground
stations. this is not so obvious for local earthquakes. "hen comparing
the shape of the recording at the deep-well and ground stations for
local earthquakes it is difficult to exclude the effect of the factor R,
for all of the deep-well stations are north, and the majority of the
epicenters are in the south and southeast. closer to the ground stations.

175
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
'08 OFPICIAL "8! ONLY

Frequently the shorter and sinpler foras of recording at the Alas-Ate well
utntlun and especially the Ali well station. as the nest reacts. can be
connected with this (see Fig 62. No 190; Pig 61. No 161).

in the case where RA :8 . the recordings of the Alas-Ate and Talgsr
stations are comparab a 31th respect to shape (see Pig 61) at the sass

tine as the recording of the Ozero station which was closest to the epi-
center is the lost coaplex.

For the western centers RA.A:R0 the recordings of the Alas-Ats end 01ero
stations turn out to be sisilar with respect to shape at the seas tile as
the Telgar station. which is far free the western centers is characterized
by a simpler shape of the recording (see Pig 68. Re 186). The recording

of earthquake No 265 (Fig 68). on the contrary. is sore couple: at the
Tslgar station. for the center is close to the station. and at the Ales-Ate
and Novo-Alekseyovskaya well stations the recording is sinpler and close
with respect to shape to the recording of the Otsro station (Fig 62. No 232).
The recordings of note reacts earthquakes can turn out to be coapsrable

with respect to shape at all of the test area stations - ground and deep-
well (see Fig 65).

For the observations at internal points of the nediua. the waves reflected
free the day surface can have significant influence on the shape of the
recordings. For the high frequency local earthquakes the interference of
the incident and reflected waves. as the calculations have demonstrated
(see Fig 59). can lead to the most different effects. in particular. to the
appearance of additional entrees and extension of the recording. however.
the experimental data frequently give the inverse picture - the recordings
in the wells for local earthquakes. just as for distant ones. are character-
lzed by simpler shape. Obviously. the effect of the day surface on the
shape of the incident pulse turns out to be frequently more significant
[15] than its distortion by superposition of the reflected waves when
recording at the internal points of the sedius.

s» an exaaplc let us coapare the recordings of the earthquake of 8 June 1968
in the Alma-Ate well and at the Talgar station (Fig 68). On the well
seisnogrn- the recording of the S-wave is shorter; soletines by one or two
extreme. and it is more cosplex than the Talger station.

Let us cnﬁpnre the shape of the recordings at different deep-well stations.
This problem is not silple. for in addition to the influence of the factor R.
which is especially strong for the northernlost statio of Ali. Inosalous
recordings are observed at the station —- intenaiVe low-frequency oscilla-
tions appear in the tail section. The number of recordings in the
Novo-Alekseyevskaya well is limited. The recordings of all three well
stations are compared in Fig 53. a, II. The recordings of the 10cal earth-
quakes at the Aloe-Ate and the Novo-Alekseyevsksys stations are similar

with respect to shape. At the Ali station in~the tail section of the
recordings low-frequency intense oscillations are recorded with reduced

176
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

 

aunzn
(1)

Figure 68. Recordings of ssrthquakes at the ground surfscs sad

deep-well ststtons
Key:

1. 10 Hsrch 1975
2. 10 seconds

velocity frequently con-ensurste with respect to Intensity-with the group
of s-osctllottons (see Fig 64, P13 68. No 265). On sole of the recordings
the intensity of the "loop” decresses (see F1; 61. No 157; P13 62. No 138.
No 190); in rsre csees the low speed oscillsttons are absent (P13 61.

177
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
M OHIO!“ 08! OIL!

ho 161; Fig 65), and than the Ali station is characterized by the simplest
shspe of the recordings. It was not possible uniquely to relate the
peculiarities of the recording at the Ali station to position and para-stare
of the center R. O. H. It is only possible to note that the neiority of
recordings with low-frequency “loop" ere caused by deeper earthquakes
located to the southeast of the test area. end the short recordings are

connected both with shallow end deep centers located to the northeast and
southwest.

      

Table 16
_3)‘ium. n- (9) «mu- '
ores (2)
I‘ll 0.3 “on” (3)
(5) 0.0/0.7
. . ' (10) rues-II
3 ‘l‘enap ' 24 2.04.0 lit-8.6 3.4 Q” 0.00
85 Deep 10 1.0-4.8 1.8-0.2 2.0 0.70 0.10
(13) All 0 . Jud-0.0 0.0-0.0 0.0 0.00 0.00
(lb) Ame-Ara 28 3.1-0.0 1.1-1.0 4.2 0.00 1 0.01
n ('15) Siam - . _
Tune '23. 3.0.3.6 o.e.s.s - 1.1 o.eo o.ee
12 Ocean .10 annexes-an 1.1 0.00 0.01
(13)“ ' 0 LHJ ' «9.0 3.4 - 0.08
(1‘) Anne-he ' 24 1.04.2 ~03 2.3 . 0.01
Key:
1. Station 10. Pwave
2. No of average spectre ll. Telger
3. Frequency. hertz 12. 02ero
4. on the 0.7 level 13. Ali
5. on the 0.5 level 1‘. Ales-Ate
6. predosinent 15. S-usve

7. left slope 0.5/0.7
8. right slope 0.7/0.5
9. Steepness

*By the predosinent frequency we neen the geouetric seen of the values of
the liniting frequencies of 0.7 level.

Everything that has been stated about the peculieritiea oi the shape of
the recording of local earthquakes at the ground and well stations of the
test area reflects the complexity of the situation and coeplicates the

solution of the probles of the effect of the reception conditions on the
shape of the recording.

178
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OIIICIAL US! ONLY

Frequency Characteristics of the Recordings of Local Earthquakes and
Explosions. Let us consider the effect of the observation conditions on
the frequency conposition of the recordings. It was reasonable at first
to analyze the frequency characteristics of the explosion recordings in
Modes Canyon. which took place in practice at one location. and their
nusher was the greatest by comparison with other explosions. The fre-
quency selective seismic station oscillogrsns of 26 explosions were
obtained. the energy class of which is basically equal to KPG-S. he
dependence of predominant spectral frequency on the class K was observed
in this narrow energy range.

If we exclude the effect of the epicentrel distances, it is possible to
expect thatdiffsrances in the frequency spectra of explosion recordings
at the stations of the test area are connected with the peculiarities of
the observation conditions.

The basic infatuation about the spectra of the P and S-waves of explosions
in Hedeo is presented in Table l4. and the average relative (reduced to
E-5.l hertz) frequency-selective seissic station spectra of these waves
are presented in Fig 69. a. The spectra were processed by the generally
accepted procedure [35. 58].

As a result of analyzing the spectral characteristics. it is possible to
draw the following conclusions.

1. The spectra of the P-wsves of the explosions in Medea at the different
stations differ from each other. The differences are observed both

between the spectra of the ground stations and the well stations. as well

as between the individual spectra at the ground stations (Talgar and Deere)
and the well stations (Alsa-Ata and Ali). The observation conditions at

the Talgar and 02ero stations are approximately identical. and their spectra
are also similar. The differences which exist nevertheless (at the 02ero
station the spectrum of the P-wave has more gently sloping sides and is
somewhat broader than the Talgsr station) can be explained by the fact

that the 02ero station is located closer to the explosion point.

2. The spectra of the P and the S-wsves of explosions at the All and
Aloe-Ara well stations are broader and higher frequencies than at the
ground stations. which is connected with the complete (Ali) and partial
(Alla-Ate) exclusion of the sedimentary series.

3. The spectra of the S-waves of explosions in Hedeo at all of the sta-
tions on the whole are similar to each other, especially with respect to
their right slopes. In the exasple of the Sewave spectra it is obvious
that the observation conditions are felt in the frequency characteristics
essentially more than the differences in distances: thus. the spectra

of the S-wnve at the Tslgar and Alma-Ate stations located at an identical
distance from the explosions (approximately 16 km) but under different

179
!OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OIPIOIAL 083 ONE!

 

”a u I (I 1.! “4(1)

Figure 69. Average noraslised spectra of the shift of the
P and the S-waves of explosiOns in Nedeo (a)
and local earthquakes (b) at the Osero station
(1). Tslsar (2). Alla-Ate (3) and Ali (6)
Key:
1. f, hertz

conditions. are different fros each other. At the ease tine the spectra
of the 5-waves on the recordings of the Alla-Ata and Ali stations

although located at different distances (about 16 and 50 in respectively)
but under identical conditions, are identical.

lnorder to study the effect of the observation conditions on the frequency
characteristics of the recordings of local earthquakes. more than £0
seisnosress were selected for which it was possible to obtain high-quality
frequency selection seissic station oscillosrass. For the selected earth—
quakes the predominant value of K is included within the range of 6.0-7.5:
H-o-xs ks, ts.p according to the false: station it is equal to 5.0-7.0 sec.
In order to exclude the effect of randos factors, average normalized

shift spectra of the P and s oscillations were constructed for all the
stations of the test area (Fig 69. b). An analysis was sade of the
anplitudc ratio. which does not depend on the signal level nAf/A5.1 hertz'

The first thing that attracts attention is the anomalously high-frequency
nature of the recording at the Ali station. This pertains to the P and

the s-oacillstions. and it is a consequence of the observation conditions
(it is resarkable that the Ali station usually is removed to the sexine-

180
'08 OPPICIAL US! OﬂLY
FOR OIITCIAL US! ONLY

free the opiccntera). This anoaaly was observed sometimes also for
distant earthquakes. The average spectra for the remaining stations
(Tnlgnr. Ozero. Alma-Ate) agree with respect to shape. but with small
differences and sore expressed for the Phwave. The spectra of the
longitudinal waves at the Ozero and Talgar stations are very similar.

and at the Alla-Ate station they are lower frequency. This is connected
with the fixed series of sediments under this station.

The noted spectral characteristics of the recordings of the different sta-
tions are well illustrated by the frequency selection seismic station
oscillograns for local earthquakes. Thus. according to Fig 53. c. 11.

it is obvious that at the Ali station the naxisum recording asplitudes
are noted on the 2.6, 5.1. and 10 hertz filters. For the other stations

the relative intensity of the P and the S waves on these filters is such
lower.

Thus. during the tine of the a-yeer observations from 1972 to 1976. the
automated stations of the test area recorded more than 18.000 earthquakes.
distant. nearby and local. including 978 signals with ‘s-P‘IO seconds.

which were investigated when studying the seissic characteristics of
Alma-Ara. 0f the. there were 692 local earthquakes and 286 explosions.
Among the letter 70: were explosions in Hedeo.

More than 852 of all the earthquakes recorded by the test area stations
belong to the fifth to seventh energy classes which are not representative
for the Kazakh regional station network. The estimate of the energy of
the weakest earthquakes recorded only by Ozero station gives a value of

K on the order of two. The sinimum recording time of the earthquakes
with ts_P-1.$-2.5 seconds is 13-16 seconds. Under the conditions of the
Alma-Ate test area the earthquakes of energy class 6 are representative.

The relief of the day surface has the strongest effect on the structure
of the seismograms. The recordings of the stations located in the
mountains are distinguished by the greatest cosplexity and low resolvahil-
ity. Many waves. polarized in different directions. are recorded here.
The nonuniformities of the section under the conditions of azisuths of
ground relief can have a strong influence on the structure of the seiamo-
grass.

The developed procedure for processing the multichannel seiemogrems of
centralized radiotelemetric recording considering the spatial arrangement

of the stations in the test area made it possible to determine the hypo-
centers of the earthquakes with high accuracy. The study of the peculiarity
of the recording of explosions. including those occurring in Medeo in
comparative proximity to the locations of greatest concentration of local
earthquake centers desonatrated that the basic criteria for recognizing
explosions and earthquakes are the frequency cosposition and the shape of
the recording. The local earthquakes can be higher frequency than the
explosions.

181
’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I03 OIIICIAL 083 ONE!

CHAPTER V. OBSERVAIION 3330138

The bssic eree of work wee the equipnent-procedurel study. The seisnic
resins wes studied by the way. however. the results obteined not only

confirn the correctness of the developed procedure, but they csn be of
independent interest.

it is sppropriete to consider the eeisnic resins of Ales-Ate in connection
with the oversll seisnicity of Zeiliyshiy Alsteu.

51. Seissicity of Zeiliyskiy Alsteu

The nine-Ate seisnicslly sctive region is wholly within the linits of
Northern Tyen'-Shsn'. In the north it is bounded by the Drhunssrskiy
Alsteu end its spurs; in the west it is bounded by the line iron the

city of Toknsk to the nouth of the Kurty River; in the south it is bounded
by the north shore of Lake Issyk-Kul' end Kyunsey-Als-Too. end. finslly.
in the esst. by the lower course of the Chilih River. The centrel pert of
the eree is occupied by the Zsiliyskiy Alstsu Ridge, the sxisl pert o!

uhich extends in northeasterly direction. reschins the highest elevetion
on the Tslgsr Peek.

The north slopes of the Zsiliyskiy Aleteu ere expressed by low terrsced
foothills. The foothills nuke s sharp trsnsition to the lliyskdye basin
which drops with insignificsnt slope to the Ili River besin.

The north slopes of the ridge ere cut by the deep trensverse slopes of the
following rivers: Ksstek. Ksrsstek, Ksskelen, Aksey. lol'sheys Ales-Atinks,
Hnlnyn Alnn-Atinkn, Levyy Tnlger, lssyk, Turgen' end the longitudinel

Prevyy Tnlgsr and Any River velleys. The south slope of the Zeiliyskiy
ridge is dis-enbered by short trsnsverse river canyons, end in the
western part it belongs to the lol‘shoy Kenin system; in the esstern pert

it belongs to the Chilik River systen.

182
I0! OP1ICIAL US! ONLY
ONLY
808 OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

The basic large structural elements of the investigated part of horthern
Tyen'-Shan' are separated by deep faults existing since the Paleozoic.
The intensity of the love-ants along the faults in the last stages of
geological development was the greatest. The schematic of the deep
fQUI‘O 18 dOPictOG 1“ Pin 70. The faults controlling the movements of
the investigated region oust be considered to be the AlmaaAte fault with
the Zeiliyskiy fault adjacent to it separating the mountain systsa of

the Zsiliyskiy Alatau fro: the lliysksys basin. and the Kamino-Chilik
with the Tyupskiy branching from it. These faults have the greatest extent
and are characterised by especially intense latest movements along thee.
Obviously. an important role in the tectonic development of the region is

also played by the faults of short extent. the activity of which is
exhibited in the Holocene.

The differentiated nature of the tectonic movements of Northern Tyan'-8han'
(the intense ascending displacements of the mountain structures and the
descending basins) finds its reflection in the nature of the seismicity

of the region. Hith respect to level of manifestation of sodern weak
seismicity Northern Tyan'-Shan' differs comparatively little free the
seismicity of all of Tysn'oShsn'. however. against this comparatively
"quiet“ background the largest seismic disasters quite frequently occur.
Thus. at the end of the last century and the beginning of this century

four earthquakes occurred here. one of which (Kebinskoye 1911) is the
largest; its sagnitude reached 8.6a8.6. Close to it with respect to
intensity was the Chilik earthquake of 1889. The magnitude of this shock
is estimated at approximately 8. The weakest, but most destructive for
Alma-Ate (previously Vernyy) was the Verdy earthquake (1887 and. finally.
the weakest of them. the earthquake of 1938 (H-6.S). the center of which
is located at the confluence of the Chou-Kamin end the Chu Rivers. The
three strongest earthquakes appeared at the earth's surface in sections

of significant extent of residual deformations (Fig 71). All of them have
been preserved up to the present time.

The center of the earthquake of 1887 was located between the valleys of
the Aksay and Talgar Rivers [a1]. Here the earthquake deformations were

exhibited most clearly on the Zailiyskiy fault. The degree of these
deformations decreased from Akaay to Talgar.

The earthquake of 1889 was accompanied by large dislocations with a break
in continuity and landslips in the valley of the Chilik River from its
source to the meridional turning of the river to the north [42]. The die-
turbances of the surface and the landslips were also observed somewhat to
the south in the vicinity of Dzhalanesh settlement. The eastern edge of
the center of this earthquake has a more intense manifestation at ground
surface by comparison with the western edge. After the meridional turn

1Compiled by V. N. Krestnikov, N. V. Chigarev. T. P. Belousov.

18‘
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 71. Map of strong earthquakes in Northern Tyen’-Shan'
Provisional notation: i - K-IZ; 2 -- K-13; 3 - K-lb;

4 -- K-IS; 5 - K-17; 6 -- K-ls; 7 - 1929-1950; 8 -- 1951-1967;
9 ~- 1965-1975; 10 - deep faults; 11 -~ regions of detotnation
of the day surface

Key:

1. Kurty . ll. Tcrskey—Ale-Too Ridge
2. 111 12. Lake Isayk-Kul‘

3. Kapchsgsy reservoir 13. Rybsch‘ye

é. Pantilov lb. Zeiliyakiy Alatsu Ridge
5. [Ii 15. Kyungey-Als-Too Ridge
6. Chnryk l6. Chu River

7. Chilik 17. Uzunasach

8. Ketaben' Ridge 18. Alma-Ate

9. Takes
10. Przheval'sk

FOR OPPICIAL 088 ONLY
I0! 0!?ICIAL 033 ONE?

in the northeast to the south shores of Lake Issyk-Kul', and iron Chundehi
in the east to Talgar in the west. The axis of this recording is
stretched to 260 kn in the northeasterly direction and 160 ha in the
subletitudinal direction [31].

The Kebin earthquake of 1911 exceeded all of the preceding ones with respect
to force [7]. The nest clearly deiornstion processes were expressed in the
Chen-Kenin River valley over its entire extent and on the Tyupskiy fault
fro- where it branches of! the Kenino-Chilik fault to the northeastern shore
of Lake lssyk-Kul'. Significant deiornetions are also observed now in the
eastern section of the entire center region of this earthquake. In addition
to the basic disturbances along the faults. deforletions and landslips were
observed on the Tyungey-Ala-Too Ridge end the Zeiliyskiy Ridge. Thus. the
entire southwestern pert of the investigated region of Northern Tyen'-Shan'
was encoepessed by this earthquake. The rotation of the center of the
earthquake iron subletitudinel in the Chen-Resin valley to southeastern

along the Tyupskiy fault is a highly characteristic and important character-
istic of it.

The Kemin earthquake of 1938 had a snell region of forceo9 tre-or at the
confluence of the Chu and the Chon-Kenin Rivers [10]. Its force 8 iso-
seisn was observed only in the westerly direction, end the force-7
enconpeesed a significant territory of Central Kirgisie and the entire
region of Northern Tyan'-Shen' of interest to us.

The noted earthquakes are not the only ones according to the catalog data
[63]. The earthquake of 1807 is known in the hedeo Canyon. There is
undefined information about the earthquakes of the 18th century.

K. I. Bogdenovich [7] reports a destructive earthquake in the 9th century.
The geological data indicate the seisaorectonic nature of the rock-das-ed
lake Issyk in the upper course of the lssyk River. There are substantiated
geological date on the seislotectonic processes in the Kirgis Ridge.

At the southern boundary of the investigated region 13 kn east of

Preheval'sk the Serykenyshskoye earthquake occurred in 1970, the Isgnitude
of which was 6.8 [13].

A brief description of the utrong earthquakes in Northern Tyan'-Shan'
indicates that their centers have significant dinensions. end the residual
phenomena are in the Iejority of cases coordinated with the zones of deep
faults controlling the tectonic life of the entire region. In addition,
some of the peculiarities of the shape of the isoseisna of theee shocks
indicate that the centers of these earthquakes can be coordinated not only

with the explicitly expressed faults, but they are also connected with
the newl; iorned tectonic zones.

These data indicate that both with respect to strength of the known earth-
quakes and with respect to their recurrence rate. the region of Northern
Tyen'-Shan' nust he considered one of the potentially most dangerous
regions of the USSR in seismic respects.

186
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
concept of
. in particular.

 

0 y Alacau Ridge
3. II. Rybach'ye

4 8. Frunze 12. Issyk-Kul' Lake

13. Przheval'ak 16. Terakey-Ala-Too Ridge 15. Naryn River

16. nrvnr 17. Chatyr-KOI' kc
FOR OFFICIAL US! OILY

The year 1951 was the turning point in the development of seisnological
studies of Central Asia and especially Northern Tyan'—Shen'. Beginning

in that year a new. significantly broader network of stations began
operation in Asia. and Academician c. A. Gamburtsev organised the regional
network of stations of the Earth Physics Institute of the USSR Academy of
Sciences in Tyan'-Shan'. permitting determination of the epicenters of
earthquakes with quite high accuracy. in individual cases also their
depths were determined. and making it possible to compile the energy
classification of the seismic shocks [9]. This network included the
following stations: lli. Talgar. Pabrichnaya. Kurnenty. Chilik. The
Alma-Ate station operated as before. The Praheval'sk and Rybach'ye sta-
tions supplemented the network on the south. As a result. sixth and
seventh class earthquakes began to be recorded. although from the point of
view of rapresantativeneaa. the existing observation system for these
classes of earthquakes was still insufficient. The increase in number of
stations up to l961 and their reequipment with the new SKH devices insured
a further increase in accuracy of determining the geometric parameters of
the earthquakes and also the energy classes.

Beginning in 1969 all of the seismic operations in Northern Tyen'-Shsn'
were transferred to the Geological Institute of the Kazakh 558 Academy
of Sciences. and in 1976. to the Seismology Institute of the Kazakh SSR
Academy of Sciences where the development of the seismic operations in
Northern Tyan'-Shan' is continuing Jointly with the Seismology Institute
of the Kirgia SSR Academy of Sciences.

The maps of the epicenters in Figures 71-76 give an idea of the seismicity
of Northern Tyan'-Shan' in the vicinity of Alma-Ata for different time
intervals. Figure 71 shows the epicenters of the strongest seismic shocks
from energy class 12 and up during the entire period of instrument observa-
tions. A complete idea of the nature of the seismicity of the region is
given by the map of the epicenters of energy classes 9 and 10 (Fig 73).
inasmuch as these classes are the nest representative for the entire
observation time. however. it is necessary to consider that the accuracy
of determining the epicenters before 1951 was essentially lower by compari-
son with the subsequent years.

In Fig 76 it is possible to isolate several localized seismic zones. First
of all. let us note the seianically active zone extending from the sources
of the Chou-Kemin and Chilik Rivers along the southwest slopes of the
Kyungey-Ala-Too Ridge. This zone approaches the city of Alma-Ate with a
snail turn somewhat to the west and breaks off sharply. Then in the
western part of the region. primarily along the north slopes of the
Kyungey-Ala~Too Ridge to the Chu River a seismic belt is traced which has
comparatively low activity. From the northeast corner of Lake Issyk-Kul'
to the epicenter of the earthquake of 1889 there is a region of highest
seismic activity. The dimensions of this zone are not great. but the
greateut density of earthquakes in Northern Tyan'-Shsn' is observed within
its limits.

188
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
one of th:
I volley after its turn in the

e a northwesterly strike in the
Ie-Atinke Rivar.

It is possible to note
epicenter. in the

ction. end the other he
direction of the mouth of the Al

noll meridional nccunuletion of

region along the
ntrel part of the first of t

 

l. 111; 2. Kopchegay reservoir; 3. Al
Aletau Ridge; 6. Ky

na-Ate; 6. Cheryng S. Zailiyekiy
ungey-Ala-Too Ridge‘ . ' 8
Kul’: 9. Przhevel'ek; IO. Chilik.

189
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEA8E: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP02-00850R000100040010-8
10! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

 

Figure 74. ﬂap of earthquake epicenter; from 1965 to 1968.

The nunbera on the earthquake aynbola indicate the energy claaa
K.

Key:
1. Iii: 2. Altyn Enel' Ridge; 3. 111; 4. Kapchagay reservoir;

S. Churyn; 6. Knakelen; 7. Talgar: 8. Turgen: 9. Chilik;

In. Alma-Ate; ll. Tnlgar; 12. Zailiyakiy Alatau Ridge; 13. Kyunsay-

Ala-Too Ridge; 16. Chon -K.nin; 15. Toknak: l6. Chu; l7. Ryhach'ye;
In. Lake laayk-Kul': 19. Karen

0n the nap of the strongest shocka (aee Fig 7]) on the whole an analogoua
picture of the earthquake distribution is observed. The noat active ia
the earthquake heit coinciding with the Kyungey-Ala-Too Ridge and ita
pnultinn in the direction of Alnaanta. Sone "fuzzineaa" of the ohaerved
distribution of the epicenter: is explained by the lover accuracy of
determination for 1951. it is neceaaary to pay attention to the fact that
stronger and stronger shocks in recent years have occurred in the eaatern

parts at the region along the line coinciding with the Ieridional direc.
tions of the Chilik River.

190
FOR OFVICIAL US! ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL USE OILS

Finally. let us discuss the sap in Fig 7b constructed by the observation
data for 1965-1968 separately. During this tile the couples seismological
expedition in Northern Tyan'-Shan' opened up a number of temporary eta-
tluna which made it possible to increase the accuracy of detersining the
epicenters and their depths (fig 75). from investigation of Fig 75 it
follows that the majority of the earthquake centers of low energy classes
are associated with the narrow range of depths from the first kilometers
to 12. The deeper centers are encountered significantly more rarely
(according to the data for recent yearn). and in the sajority of cases
they belong to the strong seissic shocks of class 11-12.

In Fig 7b the basic nature of the earthquake distribution is analogous to
the earthquake distribution on the preceding maps. Nevertheless. it is
possible to note some characteristic features. In the west two clear belts
of epicentera of northwesterly strike are isolated which intersect the

deep belt zones. The basic number of earthquakes in this map. the region
of propagation of which occupies a significantly greater area. belong to
energy class 7. Beginning with energy class 8 the earthquakes are located
near the basic seismically active zones (see the beginning of this item).
The "contraction" of the earthquakes of stronger classes into narrow sones
is a quite characteristic feature of the sanifestation of seismicity.

Thus. the seisaic material indicates that the aodern :eissicity appears
quite stably in different observation tiles. and the use of weak earthquakes
to isolate the seismicelly active zones turns out to be justifiable in

spite of the high degree of "diffusion" of the epicenters of the weakest
shocks.

On all of the naps of the epicenters it is obvious that east of the city
of Alma-Ate on the Alas-Ate and Zailiyskiy faults no clearly expressed
grouping of the weak earthquakes is detected although the strong earth-
quakes of the past were connected with then.

The region of increase in modern seismicity is closely connected with the
sections within the limits of which the disastrous earthquakes at the end
of the past century and the beginning of this century were strongly
exhibited. The available material does not permit a definite conclusion

to be drawn about whether the modern weak activity is aftershock activity
of the strong earthquakes of the past or the tones isolated with respect

to weak seismiciry will be future locations of strong earthquakes. Never-
theless. the fact that the seismic activity of recent years is gradually
increasing in the eastern part of the region (on the meridian of the Chilik
River) deserves fixed attention. The experience of studying strong earth-
quakes in the different seissically active regions of the earth indicates
that the strong earthquakes occur most frequently against a background of

a general rise in activity of the region adjacent to the center of a strong
shock although before the shock itself on this background of increasing
activity weakening of the seisaic activity can be observed.

191
roa omcw. use ONLY '
FOR 0!?ICIAL US! ONLY

 

Figure 75. Diagram of the distribution of the depthe of the
earthquake centere in the directions free the
northeeerern corner of Lake Ieeyk-Kul' to
Alla-Ate (e) end to the epicenter of the eerrh-
quote of 1889 (b)

Key:
1. energy cleee

 

Figure 76. Recurrence rete of the earthquake. of Northern Tyen
l -- 1929-1950; 2 -- 1951-1961: 3 -— 1962-1967; 5 -- 1972-1975

192
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

I
me Im an m: as

Figure 77. Banioff graph for Northern Tyan'-Shan'
Key:
1. years; 2. joules

Let us consider the graphs of the recurrence rate of earthquakes for
different times of instrusent observations (Fig 76). The period from

1951 to 1961 is marked by increased activity by colparison with the later
times. During this period the activity A10 reduced to an area of 1000 knz
and the time interval of 1 year had a value of 0.2 for an angular coefficient
of the slope of the graph 7-0.67. The next tine interval of 1961-1967 has
Ala-0.1. and the slope of the graph 1-0.55. The increase in the slope is
connected with general attenuation of the activity for the 1962-1965
period. During this period the nuaber of earthquakes of energy classes 9
and 10 was minimal for the entire observation tile. The later tins interval
of 1968-1972 (not presented in Pig 76) is simmlar with respect to level of
activity to the preceding one. 7-0.5 [55. 56]. A co-pariaon of the graphs
with the radiotelesetric system data (ITS) of the observations in recent
years indicates that the graph of the recurrence rate 6 turned out to be
somewhat higher with respect to activity level. Ala-0.13. and the angular
coefficient of the graph 7-0.66. which is connected with general weak
increase in activity of Northern Tysn'-Shan' in recent years. It is sig-
nificant that the weak earthquakes of sixth to seventh energy class are
indicated with a counon behavior of the recurrence rate graphs in the
preceding years. This fact justifies the study of the characteristics of
the region with respect to weak seismicity. and the relation of the weak
earthquakes to the stronger ones (K-lo-lZ) can indicate the nature of the
activation of the region in the future.

The graph for the isolation of seismic energy of the region of Northern
Tysn'-Shsn' is presented in Pig 77. On construction of it. the assusption
was made that during the periods of weakening of the seismic activity

of the region the course of the energy release differed little from that

193
IOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
'0! OFFIC!AL US! ONLY

observed by the instrument data for the period since 1929; the energy of
the seismic shock of 1807 was approxisstcly the sane es the earthquake

of 1887. Free the graph it is possible to draw the conclusion that the
relative quiet in the seismic activity observed in recent years must be
replaced in the near future by significantly growing activity. The avail-
able tine reserve lust be spent on the development of more detailed geo-
physical and seisnological operations in order to predict the time of a

possible strong shock. One of the phases of this work is the radio-
telesetric recording system.

32. Seismic Characteristics of Alma-Ate

The Alma-Ate test area is in s seismically active territory which has been
studied by seisnologists for a long time. The most complete information
on the seismic conditions of the entire region and also the Alma-Ate
seismically active region for the period from 1951 to 1967 were obtained
as a result of the work of the complex seianologicsl expedition of the
Earth Physics Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences for the period
from 1966 to 1972 —- the lliyskoys expedition. and in recent years, the
Institute of Geology and Geophysics oi the Kazakh SSR Academy of Sciences.
The specific nature of the observations of the test area of highly sensi-
tive (even in the territory of the city) automatic stations with radio-
telemetric multichannel recording and a united time service insured more
cosplete reccrding of the weak shocks and higher accuracy of determination
of the position of the centers of the local earthquakes in this area

(31-2 km) at the same tine as in the preceding papers the accuracy of
determining the position of the epicenters and the depths of the centers.
as a rule. did not exceed :9 to 5 km. This made it possible to study the
time-space laws of the distribution of the weak local earthquakes in a
Very local region adjacent directly to the city of Alma-Ate which is
impossible to do by the regional network observations.

Let us proceed with the discussion of the results obtained by the observa-
tion of the seissic conditions for the period from June 1972 to July 1976.
“hen studying the seismic regiae. in addition to determining the spatial
position of the earthquake centers (the construction of the epicenters)
estimates were also node of the mean recurrence rate of the earthquakes
and its variations in time for the area as a whole.

Epicenter Maps. The maps of the epicenters reflect the spatial position of

the centers in the investigated region. In order to construct naps of the

epicenters under the conditions of the test area, the fixed energy class

of earthquakes is representative, for the epicenter distribution does not

depend on the location of the stations for it. The epicenters of the

fifth energy class earthquakes are basically constructed by the two southern

stations of Talgar and Ozero; for then t§_9 usually is 3-5 seconds. These
iti

earthquakes characterize the seismic con one in a radius of 25—30 km of
the Talgsr and Ozero stations.

19‘
IO! OFYICIAL US! ONLY
' roe onrcm. use can

The depths of the centers are reckoned from the reduction line (see Fig 61.
a). Their gradation on the epicenter naps is given every 10 kn; on the
depth naps it is given every 5 kn. The maps of the epicentere are pre-
sented both with respect to years and for the entire observation period.
The center depth nap was compiled separately.

Over the extent of the entire period of instrusent observation fro. 1929

to 1967 according to the data fro. the coupler seissological expedition
and from 1966 to 1971 according to the research data of the lliyskaya
expedition with the Zenlya type equipaent [3, 50. 56, 55]. the Zailiyskiy
and Kungey Alsteu region appeared to have the sale seisnic activity.

Fig 78 shows a nap of the epicentere of the nearby earthquakes of the
Alma-Ate seismically active zone for 1966 to 1971 from reference [56].

The territory that we investigated is outlined on it. The results of these

studies are of interest as directly preceding our observations in the
radiotelenetric test area.

As follows fro. investigation of Figures 78 and 79. the epicenters of the
earthquakes in the investigated territory are distributed highly nonunifornly.
The greatest density of the epicenters of all the energy classes on both

maps is observed south of the test area. This is the central part of the
Zailiyskiy and Kungey Alatau Ridges.

A line running through the sections with increased density of epicentere
according to the l2-year observations of the couple: seisnological expedition
(l9S6-l967) and also the belts of high aeiseic activity according to the

data of reference [3] is plotted on Fig 79. According to our data, it is
possible to reelize a lore detailed breakdown of the region of high seislic
activity and locate the individual sections of concentration of the earth-
quake centers. We have provisionally isolated three zones of high seiseic

activity. Let us call then the “western" zone. the "central" zone and
the "eastern" zone.

The "western" zone of concentration of epicenters extended in the for: of a
strip with a width not exceeding 20 kn in the southwesterly direction fro-
Alma-Ata is more clearly outlined (it is also noted in Fig 78). The earth-
quakes are observed here in a wide range of energy classes, including K-9.
10 and 11. The western zone in the southwest ends with the epicenter of
the strangest earthquake during the entire observation tine in the test
area with K-ll.5 on 6 January 1975. The direction of the strike of the
strip forms a snail angle with the direction of strike of the Alma-Ate

and Zailiyskiy zones of deep fractures (fig 79).

The second zone —- the central zone e- is separated from the first section
by reduced seisnieity; this is a section of naxiuuu concentration of epi-
centers of all energy classes. It is located to the uouth and southeast
of the stations of the test area and it is associated with the central part

of the Zailiyskiy and the Kungey Alstau Ridges. The zone does not have
a clearly expressed direction of strike. In the south it is surrounded by

19$
'0! OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 78. Schematic of the epicenters of nearby earthquakes of
the Alma-Ate seisnically active region for 1966-1971
[54]

Provisional notation: l -— deep fracture zones penetrating into

the mantle (a) and into the basaltic layer (5): 2 -- deep fracture

zones renewed in alpine tine; 3-10 - epicenters of earthquakes

of the following energy classes: 3 - fourth, é -- fifth. 5 --

sixth, 6 -— neventh. 7 -- eighth. 8 - ninth, 9 ~— tenth, 10 -

cleventh; ll - epicenter of the disastrous earthquake; lZ-l6 -

location of hypocentera with respect to depth in kn: 12 -- to 10,

I3 - 11-20. lb ~- 20-30, l5 -- core than 30, 16 -- depth not

determined.

The fracture zones (the numbers in the figure) are as follows:

1 -— Taukunskaya, 2 -~ Central Kazakhstan, 3 - Bakpatinakaya.

6 - Yuzhno-Dzhungarskaya, S - Sarykunskaya, 6 .. Altyn-Elel'akaya.

7 -- Dzhalair-Nnynanskaya, 8 - Cheaolganakaya. 9 - Severo-Tyan’-

Shan'akaya. 10 - Chlliko-Keninakaya. ll .— Severo -lasyk-Kul'akaye.

[Sec key on following page!

196
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
m'omcm. use ONLY

[Key to Fig 78]:
a. Belkhash block: b. Taukunskiy block; c. Chuiliyskiy block;
d. Noyunkunskiy block; e. Duzhungarskiy block; f. Koskudukskiy
block: g. Targslskiy block; h. Chilikskiy block; i. Chuyskiy block;
1. Alas—Ate: k. Zailiyskiy block: 1. Kungeyskiy block;
n. lssyk-kul'skiy block

a region of quite sharp reduction in seisnicity (at a distance of 40 to
65 kn south of Ozero station) although the earthquakes vith K>6 would
have to be recorded by the Ozero. Alma-Ate. and Talgsr stations. To the
east the density of the epicenters decreases gradually. and the outline
of the zone is blurred. 0n the whole the strike of the zone close to
latitudinal which matches with the strike of the sountain ridges in the
general ache-e of the tectonic structure is noted.

The section with three zones of deep fractures joined is characterised
by the greatest activity: Severe-Tysn'-Shan'skaya from the vest and the
Kenino-Chilik and Tyupskays from the east. Hithin the boundaries of the
zone there are two centers of disastrous earthquakes in the past: at the
southwest extremity. the most serious disaster in the world. the Kebin
earthquake of 1911 (N~8.7). in the central part of the zone. the
Vernenskoye earthquake (H-7.2). The zone spreads to the east. and the
epicenter concentration increases.

The third zone of clustering of the epicenters is located on the eastern
edge of the region of investigation. It separates the strips of relatively
low activity which are less clear in the southeasterly direction free the
"central" zone. The position of the epicenter concentration belt agrees
generally speaking with the zone of high seisnic activity isolated in
reference [3]; it is true that the epicenters are shifted solevhat to the
east. The density of the epicenters in the zone is not very high. It
increases in the southern part of the zone in the eastern spurs of the
Zailiyskiy Alatau. In this zone the eighth energy class earthquakes are
concentrated to a higher degree than all the rest (especially in the south).

This is partially connected with the resoteness of the zone fron the station
network.

"hen investigating the sun-ary nap of the epicenters (Fig 79) the coaplete
absence of centers north of Alla-Ata and 2ailiysksya fracture zones is
noticeable. indeed even in the central part of the zone. This fact was

not noted earlier (see, for exasple, the esp in Fig 78). The high accuracy
of the construction provided by the radiotelenetric recording made it
possible to locate both the regions of accusulation of centers and the
aseisnic regioas.

Activity of Individual Seislic Zones in Tine. The annual naps for 1973,
19“. and 1975 and the semiannual traps for 1972 and 1976 give qualitative
representations of the variation in activity.of the investigated region on
the whole and individual zones of it in time. Pros Fig 80 it follows that
the migration of the centers in time and in space is significant. This was
also noted in a nunber of other papers [3. 56. $5]. The activity of the
zones is manifested differently in time.

197
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omguu. use our

 

observation data in the Alma-Ata teat area for the
period from 1 June 1972 to 1 July 1976.

-- deep fracture zones: Severe-Iyan'-

. ), Kenmo-
ﬂh1ltkskaya (d). Tyupakaya (e); 2 -- zones of high aelontc

\ complex eelanolontcal expedttlon;

trips for which the tile-
apace lawn of the earthquake diatributlon were analyzed.

1. Energy class: 2. K not deter-ined; 3. depth' 4

10 11-20 21-30; 5. K.okelen; 6. All] 7. Talgar; 8. Ioayk;
9. Knlchagay reservoir; 10

12. Talgar; 13. Ozero' , .
l6. Kyungey-Alo~Too Ridge; 17. Lake Ioeyk-Kul'.

198
FOR OFFICIAL USE LNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the second half of 1972 (Fig 80, a) the seismic activity is low.

The accumulations of the centers are observed in three areas: southwest
of Alma-Ate —— the greatest concentration in the "western" zone; south
of AlmanAta, in the area of the ”central" zone where two earthquakes

of energy class 9 were recorded in direct proximity to the city, one of
then was felt as a force 3 to 6 earthquake. and in the eastern spurs of
Kyungey—Ala-Too Ridge where the accusulation of epicenters is associated
with the Tyupskaya deep fracture zone. An earthquake with K-9 was
recorded here. In the eastern zone only individual earthquakes were
observed. one of the. with energy class 10 on 6 November 1972.

In 1973 (Fig 80. b) the seismic activity of the area increased signifi-
cantly basically as a result of the weak earthquakes of the sixth energy
class and lower. The nuaber of earthquakes of energy class 9-10 decreased
from 8 in 1972 to 3 in 1973.

The seismic activity in the "western" zone and in the vicinity of the
Tyupskaya fracture zone was reduced significantly. South of Alma-Ate.
no earthquakes were observed. Than the "central" zone of Zeiliyskiy and
Kyungey Alatau became active. The high concentration of epicenters here
encompassed a large territory of latitudinal strike. Two energy class 9
earthquakes occurred. A separate group of centers appeared east of the
Talgar station (by 25 to 30 km).

Finally. the seismic activity of the eastern zone increased. in the northern

part of which an earthquake occurred on 26 January with K-lO. the only one
in 1973.

In 197$ (Fig 80. c) high seissic activity resained in the region. but the
internal structure of the epicenter distribution changed. Again the
western zone became active. An earthquake of energy class 10 occurred
here on 6 May. Near Alma-Ate a snail accumulation of centers of week
earthquakes was observed (Kto). The concentration of the centers in the
central zone did not decrease. Only the configuration of the area of high
seismic activity changed somewhat -- it moved toward Alma-Ate (close to
Ozero station), growing in the southwestern and northeastern directions
where it encompassed a group of epicenters to the southeast of the Talgar
station. In the central seismicslly active zone an earthquake occurred on
27 April with K-lo. one out of three in this year. The "eastern" zone
became active in the south. An accunulation of centers with K-8-lO was
observed here (an earthquake with K-lO occurred on 31 December) characterized
by shallow depths of occurrence.

by the epicenter map for 1975 (Fig 80, d) it is possible to detersine sole
decrease in seissic activity in the "central" zone and in the southern part
of the "eastern" zone. The activity of the "western" zone resained. 0n
the southwest end, at the very beginning of the year (b January). an earth-
quake of energy class 11 occurred (K-ll.$). Two months later in the oppo-
site. northeastern edge of the "western" zone an earthquake was recorded
with K-9. one out of three in that year. and then an earthquake with K-8.

199
FOR OP?ICIAL US! ONLY
(e)

y.
\. enersy ¢‘°"
K “M deﬁned

200
you «new. us:
1n the central can

the epic ntera again changed ..

11! group at epicen r i the aaatern part c this zone
Zauiyski and the lime; Matau Ridges was ainsied out here at the
of the ye r an earthquake 01 energy clan 9 occurred. A 1 arm
of epicenter. has been 0 urved in the northern part of the zone near
Talsar atation.

2.01

FOR OIPICIAL 088 ONLY

 

Key:
1. 9. 02ero
2. A11 10. Zoillyokty Alatau
3. Talgcr 11. Kyunaey-Ala-Too Rldge
6. Inoyk 12. Ch111k
5. Kapchasay reservoir
6. Novo-Alekeeyevskaya
7 Alma-Ate
8. Talgar

Out of the highly active broad centre
of I973-197S) a

small chain of epicen
:htllk River in 1976. The

zone was represented by fou
{nukes on the northeastern limb.
. 700807411400 ““80
12. cum

Kapchagay reserve"

uOVW‘lekIeygv.knya

Al...‘tﬂ

Talur
FOR OFPIOIAL US! ONLY

Tine-Space Graphs. To auppleeent the annual:nape of the epicenters let

us consider the sequence of earthquakes of different energies and tine
within the linits of the lieited sections of the inVeetigated area. Three
strips were selected about 12 he wide each -« two along the direction of
strike of the northern zones of the fractures end the nountein ridges
(I-l' end ll-II'). end one across the strike. encoupaesing the region of
nexieue concentration of the epicentere (Ill-111'). The longitudinal

axes of these strips are shown in Fig 79. The earthquake. the epicenters
of which fell into the stripe. belong to the axial line.

The Belt l-I' (Fig 81) stretches along the Alla-Ate end the Zeiliyekaye
fracture zone. lts seiseic activity is Very nonunifore. The “western"
zone of increased activity isolated by us was encompassed by this strip
and extended free 0 to 60 he (to Aloe-Ate). The seismic conditions of the
western tone were analyzed in tine by the annual epicenter eepe. Let us
give attention to the fact that the strong earthquake of energy class 11
in the westernmost end of the zone (0-20 kn) where there were very few
earthquakes was essentially saeller then in the eastern half (20-40 he).
It occurred against a background of elnost complete eeieeic quiet end
was not sccoepanied by subsequent shocks. The center of the earthquake
is 15 k- fron the center of the disastrous Kebin earthquake of 1911.

The central part of the fracture tone. as has already been noted. is in
practice eeeiaeic. The northeast end of the strip (110-150 he) encoepeeeea
the northern part of the "eastern" tone. The cooperatively high eeiaeicity
was observed here only at the end of 1973 end the beginning of 1976.

belt 11-11'. which is einilar with respect to strike tobelt l-I'.
encoupessee the Zeiliyakiy Alateu Ridge and the north slopes of the
Kyungey-Ale-Too Ridge. that ie. it passes through the section of the
"central" tone (20-100 km) with greatest density of the epicentera. he is
obvious free Pig 81. over the extent of 3 years of observetione the central
part of the tone (40-60 he) is characterised by increased eeieeic activity
end the lenieun coeee in 1973 end 1976. A tenth cleee earthquake occurred
here which was preceded by eoee increase in activity and then quiet
directly before the earthquake. There were few subsequent shocks. The
leVel of activity wee high in the central part. decreases sharply to the
southwest and northeast where individual. rare earthquakes are observed.
The wevtern edge of the belt (0-20 kn) looks in general aeeieeic (although
the Kebin earthquake wee located here) and it reflects the week activity
of the west end of the Alatau ridges during the entire period of the
instrument observations since 1951.

The tine-space graph of the seieeic conditions in strip Ill-111' clearly
illustrates the displeceeent of the centers for \JC 1972—1979 period free
the southeast to the northwest.

Center Depth Hap. By the data of the preceding studies I), 30, 31) the
earthquakes with K<9 for the nest part have depths within the lieite of
the first S kn free the earth's surface. It is noted that with low

205
POO O'PICIAL US! ONLY
I0! OYPICIAL 088 OIUY

accuracy of datersining the depth. in the best case :5 kn, the sajority
or the earthquakes of Zailiyakiy and Kyungey Alatau have depths of

lo-lS ks; the deeper centers are a rare phenoasnon. The relation of the
depth of centers to the energy class of the earthquakes is discussed in
reference [3] where attention is given to the fact that the centers or
the weak earthquakes of energy classes 6—? are in the "granite" layer
(to 22-25 ks); the earthquakes with centers in the lower part of the
earth‘s crust have the highest energy corresponding to classes 7-10.

In reference [36] it is noted that in the investigated region all of the
centers are located within the lisits of the earth‘s crust. Sose 802
are associated with the "granite" layer. It was discovered that the
centers concentrated at different hypsonatric levels are characterised
by their own distribution in plan view.

The center depth sap (Hg 82) constructed by the RTS station is of special
interest. for in practice all of the epicenters of the "western" and
"central" tones and the sajority of then are round free the Orero or
Tnlgar stations by no sore than ‘0 la. The neutral arrange-ant of the
stations and the earthquake centers with high accuracy of taking the tins
of arrival of the P and S waves under the conditions of sultichannel
rodiotelenetric recording insured high accuracy of datersining the depths
of the centers (within the limits of 31-2 kn) of these tones. for the
snore renote centers of the "eastern" tone the accuracy of deter-ining

the depths drops to 35 Ire.

Our data also indicate that all of the centers are within the lisits

of the earth's crust. According to the available data on earthquakes
with #10 no relation was detected between the strength of the earthquake
and the depth of the center. No differences were observed in orientation
of the centers associated with the different depth intervals in plan view.
At the sane ties the relation of the depths of the centers to the location
of the epicenters within the lisits of the investigated ssall territory
was established for the first tine.

An explicit predoainance of shallow centers within the lisits of the first
5 kiloscters fro: the surface is characteristic of the "western” tone.
(The depth of the center of an earthquake with K-ll.5 is. howaver. 20 kl.)

General subsersion of the centers in the direction from the southwest to
the northeast is observed in the "central" zone. Separation of the
"central" tone into three sections is noted. within the lisits of each of
which the depths of the centers vary little.

The first section is located 15—20 ks south of 02ero station and it is
characterized by shallow depths 84-3) to S In; Ii increases occasionally
to 10 he. The second section is adjacent to the Osero station on the

southeast and is extended in the sane direction. llere depths of centers

 

1here and hereafter we are talking about depths reckoned free the reduction
line.

206
rue ORIGIN. 08! OIL!
’ﬂﬂ?

FOR 0F1ICIAL "8! ONLY

ﬁz~s~nl §
M...

' my F"), mm 1.
ﬂfgihijl .2.) .Z/// [/i

I in_
II .

:25. , _ -
'93 ii iii
4.39% 9.. ﬁ §§ \ F ~ 3 a h ~IF‘~'§U3

m3 Pﬂmﬂ FQﬁ'THTTTT JP""ﬂF
I”. H Ll- I.II IIr. II I“
I:IIﬁ#Eﬁi:ifl|lrﬂl. iﬁ¥mluu

 

rm’mqirrn

ii: iii ..

 

.DUI I...- k.‘--.

u~~ ~k §~q~| a

    

    

 

l I':. --|_ ll 'I

I' i' glitz: | ‘I: --""'i':I :3: '-
bﬂdubt undaldLscc uob ;
h h ~ ~ | h §§ :5:

     

 

  

LUbd-qu-UdJ

7‘07 vnuv In“? I

207
'0! OFFICIAL USE OIL!

of the seismic conditions along the I-I', 11-11' and III-111'

Tine-space gruphs

figure 81.

lines (one F1; 79)

cy:

K

K not desert-1nd: 2. south; 3. north; 6. years

1.
FOR OFFICIAL 08! OIL!

oi 11-15 kn predoeineto. Between these sections there is a narrow belt
of earthquake centers characterised by great spottineaa of the distribu-
tion of the depth -- free 5 to 20 ks. The depths of earthquake centers
nearest Alas-Ate with energy class 8 and 9 usually are zero. For one
earthquake "-9 kn. The third section is in the eastern part of the zone.
the depths of centers here are 15'20 ks. and up to 30 ks is encountered.

In the "eastern" zone in the north. along with the shallow centers.
centers with a depth of up to 30-35 kl are observed; in the southern part
of the zone the depths are. as a rule. zero.

It was of interest to analyse the center distribution with respect to
depths in the vertical plane n—n'. In Fig 83 where this distribution is
presented. the subnersion in the northeasterly direction of the centers
of all earthquakes located both in the strip 12 kn wide and in a wider

strip essentially enconpaseing (ll of the earthquakes of the "central"
zone is clearly obvious.

Thus. our observations. which have high accuracy of deternining the
epicentera of the earthquakes ends it possible to break down the seisnically
active region of zailiyskiy and Kyungey Alatau into several sense
characterised by defined distribution laws of the depths of centers.

Against a background or described pictures of the epicenters and depths

of centers it is of interest to consider certain laws once-passing all

of the recorded earthquakes. including those the centers of which cannot
be plotted on the lap.

Earthquake Distribution with Respect to ts-p and in Tine. According to
the observation data for the highly sensitive test area beginning in 1972
first an increase in the number of recorded local earthquakes with
ts-pr10 sec is observed (1972. 127; 1973. 156: 1976, 217). and in 1975
their nuaber is reduced to 183. These changes occur basically as a
result oi the earthquakes of energy classes 5 to 7; the annual number of
eighth class earthquakes alsost does not change in this case. and the
annual nunber o! ninth energy class earthquakes decreases. A few -- S to
ex -- weak shocks (KaS) are recorded. As for the stronger earthquakes
(Res). their contribution to the total nulber of recorded shocks also
does not exceed 5-82. Thus. sore than as: of all of the earthquakes
recorded by the stations of the Alas-Ate test area belong to a quite narrow

range of energy classes K's-7. that is. just those energy classes which
are not fully recorded by the regional network of Kazakhstan.

It was of interest to analyze how the centers of the local earthquakes

are distributed as a function of ts_ . For the Talgsr station this dis»
tribution averaged over the years within the different ‘S-P intervals

is shown in Fig 8‘. a, and the total distribution (or s years. in fig 86. b.
It is obvious that the annual number of earthquakes with t ,-0e3 sec

does not on the average exceed l0! (N with t P<2 eec is on y 2-31). and

in the range of 3-6 seconds it is about 50: o the total nuaber of recorded

208
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI 0!?ICIAL 088 ostr

earthquakes. The greatest variation of the number of earthquakes in
different years is observed in the range of t3-p-2«4 and ﬁve seconds

where N varies within the limits of lSeZOl at the same time as the annual
mean N in other ts.p intervals is more stable. and its variation does

not exceed 5—82. According to the annual distribution graphs it is also
obvious that the value of ts.p for the majority of earthquakes decreases
from 1972 to 1975. Hhereaa in 1972 the naximun N came for t pub-6 sec.
in 1973 it was 6-5 see. and in 1976 and 1975. in the range 0 ts.p-3-5 sec.

The migration of the earthquakes is clearly illustrated in Fig 84. c.
where the annual changes in the relative number of earthquakes recorded
by the Tnlgar station within the range of ts.p-3-S and 5-6 seconds are
presented: from 1972 to 1975 the nuaber of the former increases. and
the latter decreases.

The southern-est and most sensitive station of Oeero in the test area turns
out to be closest to the area with maximum density of the epicenters. It

is of interest to analyse the distribution with respect to ts-p of all

the earthquakes recorded by the station and to compare it with the distribu—
tion of the earthquakes for which the position of the center was determined.
This comparison was made in 1976 and 1975 (Fig 85). It turned out that

in the range of ts_p-l-4 set (that is. within a radius of 30 km of the
02ero station) there are 10 to 152 more earthquakes than plotted on the
epicenter map at the same time as in other ranges of ts.p the growth in
number of earthquakes is insignificant and more uniform. A comparison of
the distributions of the earthquakes not recorded on the epicenter map.
depending on ts-p for the two stations of Talgar and Otero is presented in
Fig 86. a. For the Talgar station all of the earthquakes. the epicentera
of which were not determined. are distributed by the values of ts-p more
uniformly than for the Otero station. and in direct proximity to the
station (ts,p-l-3 seconds) their number even decreases somewhat. Thus.

the complete processing of the information with respect to the Tslgar
station should not essentially change the distribution picture of the
centers of local earthquakes presented on the epicenter map.

In order to characterize the seismic activity in time for all of the
recorded earthquakes. graphs were constructed for the 10-day number of
earthquakes as a function of time (Fig 86. b: Fig 87). and by the epicenter
maps. the time-space graphs were constructed characterising the variation
in time of the seismic activity in individual sections (see Fig bl).

Let us discuss the invostigetion of the first type of graph. "hat is the
distribution in time of the earthquakes recorded only by the Osero station
and not figuring into the epicenter naps? The graph of the lO-day variation
of the number of such earthquakes with time in the various ranges of ts.p
for I976 and 1975 is shown in Fig 86, b. It is not excluded that among

the earthquakes with t .2.3 seconds weak explosions from the vicinity of
"once could appear whic are not recorded by more remote stations (for
example. during August-October 1975), The nonuniformity of the distribu-
tion of the earthquakes in time - the periods of increased activity

209
10R O'PXCIAL US! ONLY
energy class

10. Mun-Au

2. It not determined 11. Tulsa:

3. depth 12. Ouro

Io. Knokelcn 13. Zalllyckty Mann

5. Ali 16. Kyungcy-Alan'l'oo Ridge
6. Tnlgnr 15. Chill):

7. Knpchagay ruorvoir 16. Lake Inoyk-Kul'
8. Inyk
9.

Novo-Alckacyevnknya

210
FOR OPPXCIM. 08! 010.!
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

 

 

w (i “
,, ) . . . , , , .
’ . u
, w . . . . . .
”m
, w" ‘ ' .
m". g
” m“ '
. my"; .
” .mw o
”In ’ _
”43—" ‘7‘!—
_—"17. ,.
" u . -
=._:..
u .
I?
‘l'l II I! 1' ' ﬂl' ﬂ? NW A”

Figure 83. Distribution of centers with respect to depth
in the vertical plane along the ll-ll‘ direction.
The epicenters located within the limits of 6 km (1) and
20 kn (2) on both sides of the ll-ll' line are taken into
account. The reduction level is 4.2 kl.
Key:
1. southwest
2. northeast

are replaced by almost coaplete quiet -- attracts attention. The sharp
increase in the nu-ber ot earthquakes within a radius of 15 kl of Otero
station (ts-p-l-2 seconds) is observed in Septeaber-October l976 which

is correlated with the observation data at the Talgar station (see Fig 87).
in 1975 the same increase in August-Septeeber is noted. but basically as

a result of lore reaote earthquakes (t -P'2’3 seconds). For the rest of
the time the 10-day nuaber of earthqua es does not exceed two.

For the Talgsr station the dependence of the 10-day number of all recorded
earthquakes on tile is presented in Fig 87. In order to reflect the
distribution of these earthquakes with respect to ts.p schematically,

they are broken down into three groups (tones): ‘s-P is less than a sec.,
that is within a radius of 30 ha of Talgar; in the range free A to 6 sec
(30-65 km) and free 6 to 10 sec (45°80 kn). This gradiation o! the
earthquakes is caused by the sari-us aigration of the centers in the

range of ts_,°2-4 and 6—6 see.

211
FOR OIPICIAL US! ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL 08! ONLY

 

"A '.
JV: '
"'5
GI "' '
:4 -
a
.d
u
v
’1 I I y n”; ' I 1 tame“)
a as -’ II
. ll
. if
have 1 I
a, N .1
”I:III§.,.: ” ”7! ma ‘(2)

Figure 86. Distribution of the number of earthquahea aa a

function of ts”, at the raiser atation.
a - in different obaervation yeera (l -- 1972, N-121;

2 -- 1973. "-165; 3 -- 1976, "-189: b -- 1975. 8-139):
b -- total ("-635) from 1 June 1972 to 1 July 1976:
l - recorded. 2 - plotted on the lap: c - angle veriationa
in the relative number of recorded earthquakea (l - ts-,-3-S sec.
2 -- ts-P'b'b eec)
Key:
1. oeconda
2. year.

212
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

POI OHIO!“ USE ONLY

1' 36 0' S‘
a ‘5
II a ’
.v . ”I!
" ”n
u (I
”I!
”zvt:av”:ctn;.,,t

Figure 85. Dietribution of the number of recorded earthquakes
(1) and those plotted on the nap (2) as a function
of ts-p et Ozero atetion for 1976. "-162 (a).
and 1975. "-139 (h)

    

e n a a e I I
i."e.(2) 0090a

Pigure 86. Distribution 0! the m-her of eerthquakee not plotted
on the nap A for the raise: etation (1) fro-
1 June 1972 to 1 July 1976 and 02ero etetion (2)
for 1976-1975. as a function of t (a) and a 10-day
variation in tile oi the nueber "so? eerthquakaa not
plotted on the nap and recorded by the 02ero etetion (b)
in the range of veluea of t5.p-l-2 (1). 2-3 (2) and
3n6 eec (3)

l. eeconde; 2. year; 3. eonth

213
roe omcuu. US! ONLY
FOR 0!?IGIAL 083 ONLY

 

Figure 87. Distribution of earthquakes recorded by the Talgar
station iron March 1972 to July 1976 in the range
of values of 33.p5‘ (l). 6<ts_P<6 (2). ts_P;6 sec (3)

Key:
1. year
2. sonth

A study is node of the 10-day variations of the total nusber of earthquakes
for the entire period of centralised radiotelesetric recording free

10 Nnrch 1972 to 1 July 1976 (fig 87). Attention is attracted to the
nonuniforsity of the distribution of the earthquakes in tile. The periods
of alsost couplets quiet Eros Septesher to Nova-bar 1972. free June to

July I975. ueak activity fro- Hay to August 197‘. free August to October
1975 and from April to June l916 and increased activity fros October 1973
to April 197‘ are observed. No eaplicitly expressed cyclicity is noted

in the Ianifestation of seismicity (in [31 the presence of a 2-sonth
cyclicity is noted). The periods of increased activity of different
duration (5-! sonths) are replaced by shorter (2-6 aonths) intervals of
quiet. The predoninant tise intervals between peaks on curve 3. that is.
for the entire region. asount to 70-80 days on the average. sore rarely
50-60 or loo-160 days. The ssiaaic conditions of the equally resoved
zones is not always synchronous: the increase in nusher of earthquakes

in one zone is frequently accolpanied by a decrease in the other. for
ens-pie. the increase in the overall seissic activity during periods

free "arch to Septesber 1972 and fro- Decesber l97‘ to March l975 are
observed as a result of the near cone, during the period fro. hove-her l972
to May [973 as a result of the tar cone, and iron October 1976 the nusber

of earthquakes increases in both tones. The seisaic conditions of the
nearest cone (no more than 30 ks fros Talgar station) are expressed lost
clearly. Beginning with the end of 1973 e fluctuating but unsverving
grouth in the number of earthquakes is observed here, reaching a taxi-us
during the period fros Septasber to Dace-her 197‘. The nu-ber oi earth-
quakes in the other tones dropped off. This shift of the spicenters
closer to Talgar in 1976 was noted when analysing the earthquake distribu-
tion with respect to ts.p (Pig as. a. c). After the earthquake in
January I975 with K-ll.S. a sharp decrease in activity is observed in the
near tone.
21a
’0! OVIICIAL use our!
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

The shift of the epicenters of the earthquakes of all energy classes from
the aoutheaat to the northwest during the period of 1973-1976 is clearly
obvious on the tine-space graph of the anionic conditions for a strip

12 ha wide (see Fig 81. the axis of the Ill-III' strip) running from the
southeast to the northwest along the zone of highest seismic activity.
The tins-space graphs of the aeisnic conditions are projections of the
epicenters of the earthquakes located within the linits o! the strip on
the map of the epicenters. on the line running through the siddle of this
strip. Pros Bl it is obvious that during the period from the beginning
of 1973 to the siddle of 1975 explicit migration of the centers in the
northwestern direction takes place. In 1975. this law is violated which
possibly is connected with the January earthquake in 1975.

In order to discover the relation of the strong and weak earthquakes in
Fig 87 in the corresponding sone tines are noted (by 10-day periods) for
the occurrence of earthquakes of no less than energy class.8. The majority
of then are in the far sons. In 708 of the cases association of these
earthquakes with the times of increased activity of the weaker shocks is
observed. This fact can also be accidental. for the coincidence is observed
only in 501 of the cases for the earthquakes of energy class 9 or higher.
Judging by the graphs (Fig 87). the earthquakes higher than energy class 8
are observed more frequently in groups of two to five. that is. they are
concentrated in lisited tine interval sonetises lasting 1 to 2 sonths;

then coses a period of absence or than or a sharp individual manifestation.
The centers of the earthquakes grouped in ties are not associated with

the ease region.

Recurrence Rate of the Earthquakes. One of the basic characteristics of
the seissic regime is the recurrence rate of the earthquakes. The
parameters of the recurrence rate graph which is a relation between the
logaritha of the energy of the earthquakes (the energy class) and the
logariths of the nuaber of earthquakes for one energy class constitute a
quantitative characteristic. The level of the straight line on the graph
of lgN-f(K) averaging the experinental points for the energy class
preliainsry for the given region detarsines the seisnic activity A on
the given energy level. The slope of the graph 7 characterizes the ratio
of the weak and strong earthquakes.

The graph of the recurrence rate was coapiled for the region as a whole
for the 1972-1975 period. Table 15 shows the data on the nunber of earth-
quakes of ditterent energies by years; the values of K were taken from
the bulletins of the Talgar station of the complex seismological
expedition. inasmuch as not all of the investigated earthquakes turned
out to be classified with respect to K and about 151 were not recorded

as the Talgar station of the complex seienological expedition in general.
nunbers are presented in parentheses in the table which include the
skipped earthquakes for which I was detersined by the duration of the
recordings.

215
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IO! OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Table 15
Wﬂﬂﬂlllln n
mar. 10 ea ,0; " 0 1 1 -
1010 r. 20 - 07 01 a a 1 .-
1014 r. 27 so 01' s a s '-
1010 r. so so 27 0 a - 1 ‘
Besross 107 - 222‘ 120 so 14 s 1
1012-1070 (100) (204) (127)
W. ‘ . .
ace-sea 2010 so‘o 0010 s so 1 o a
sane (47:0) (71:0) (01:0) .-° .20 '2
em " 2.20 4.00 2.00 0.70 0.21 0.10 0.02
asuson (8.00) (5.90) (2.08) . .
14’ 0.207 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 o.o1zso.0oas
10.470) (0.710) (0.010) .
Key:
1. Group attribute
2. year

3. Total for 1972-1975
6. 0n the average for the year
5. Monthly average

In the last row of the table the noraalited density of the recurrence
rate of the earthquakes N. is presented. It is equal to the nunber of
earthquakes reduced to 100 klz of area (or a volume of 2‘103 ka3) and a
tine interval of 1 year. The area occupied by the epicenters (the north-
western sector where centers were not observed is excluded in the area
of the circle) is about 10000 kaz. The weak earthquakes for which K<S
are incoapletely recorded by the Talgar station. In order that the
southern stations of Talgar and Ozero record earthquakes with (<5. their
centers lust be located no farther than 25-30 in fro. these stations.

The number of earthquakes with K-S. as is obvious fro. Table 15. is lov.
Consequently. the earthquakes of energy class 5 lust be considered the
representative for the entire investigated territory.

The graphs of the recurrence rate of the earthquakes for the investigated
regions by years and the sunnary graph for 6 years are presented in Pig 88.
The values of N. for energy classes 5 to 7 are taken considering the
earthquakes for which class K is defined by the duration 0! the recording
(Table 15). As is obvious iron Fig 88, b. the sixth energy class of
earthquakes can he considered representative for the investigated area.

On the annual graphs of the recurrence rate (Fig 88, a) significant
dispersion of the points is observed basically for the large values of
K-9bll. lowering the reliability of the averaging and detersining the

216
’0l OFFICIAL 083 ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

angular coefficient 7. The value of y is determined more reliably by
the summary graph of the recurrence rate for 6 years (Fig 88, b).

The aeisnic activity for the Alua-Ata region based on the 6-year observa-
tions is A -0.70. The angular coefficient of the recurrence rate graph
7-0.66. Tﬁe mean value of 7 for the vicinity of Alla-Ate detersined for
the entire period of instrument observations according to the data of the
complex seianologiccl expedition also is 0.66. In the papers of the
complex aeismological expedition it is noted that both for the entire
region of Zailiyskiy and Kyungey Alatau and for the more local Alma-Ate
region. a systematic increase in value of y is observed. For the entire

region it is characterized by the following figures: 1929-1950 - y-0.3;
1951-1960 - y-O.46; 1961-1967 -- ye0.58.

w' "I b

  

37' .
{;1I72:(1)U7Ja max 1.97::

     
      
 

’é e
"‘ {-II!I|"|
gnu-mu
a.
a. 5! i: a.

rigure 88. Graphs of the recurrence rate of earthquakes for

the Alna«Ats region by year (a) and summary graphs
for 6 years (b)
Key:
1. year

For Alan-Ara the especially intense growth of 1 occurred during the
1961-1967 period. reaching values of.0.56.

This agrees with the data of reference [55], where the variation of y
is analyzed for the Alaa-Ata region for the period of 1959-1970. Thus,
in 1953 the value of 7 was 0.28 and to 1959 it varied within the liaite
of 0.67-0.39. From 1959 to 1966 1 increases from 0.39 to 0.67; in
subsequent years (1966-1969) the value of 7 decreases to 0.39, and in
I970 it again increases to 0.49. In reference [56] information is pre-
sented on the variation of y for the 1966-1976 period preceding the work
in the test area. During this tine the value of the coefficient of the

slope angle varied froa 0.60 to 0.67. For 3 years before the Sarykanyshskoye
earthquake (S Jvne 1970. K-15) the value of 1 reached a maximum. and

217
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! O'PICIAL "I! OIL!

then it began to decrease sharply to a value of 0.67 in l970 which is

close to average value of y with respect to our observations for the
period from 1972 to 1975.

53. Azimuthal Deviations of the Seisnic beams of Distant Earthquakes

in the practice of seianic studies. the azimuth of the source usually is
determined by the direction of the seismic beam of the first longitudinal
wsVe. here it is proposed that the asimuth of the direction of approach
of the wave coincides with the azisuth of the epicenter. This condition
which is satisfied in uniform or axisylmetric media is far from always
adhered to in real sedia. 0n passage of waves through inclined boundaries
and nonuniformitiee the seismic beams change direction in space [16. 68].
The laws of variation of the directions of the beams in the case of
refraction are investigated. for example. in ibference [lb].

In order to determine the direction of approach of the wave. either the
kinematic or dynamic characteristics of the waves can be used [1‘. 19].

In the former case the direction of approach is determined in general

for- by the direction of the field gradient vector (or an individual ele-
ment of it). For this purpose area observations are required. a special
case of which are the observations with respect to two mutually perpen-
dicular profiles.Then the azimuth of the beam is determined by the formula

u - arc tg (V'x/Vﬁy).

where Vex and V.Y are the apparent velocities with respect to perpendicular
direction.

when using the data on the dynamics. the azimuth of the bean is found by
observations at one point along the direction of motion of the particles
in the first longitudinal ane. la the region close to the wave front.
the azimuths deternined by both procedures must be equal. in the non-
uniforn media they theoretically can differ somewhat. It is nstursl that
the calculation of the azimuth by the data from area observations is the
moat representatiVe and accurate.

Thus. the accuracy of determining the direction of the epicenter is caused
primarily by whether the bean azinuth coincides with the azimuth of the
direction of the epicenter. that is. the presence or absence of azimuthal
deviations. The magnitude of the azimuthal deviations depends on many
factors (the ratio of the velocities above and under the retracting inter-
face). the slope angle of the interface and orientation of it in space
with respect to the plane of incidence of the wave, and so on). It is
difficult to predict the azimuthal deviations theoretically. Accordingly.
we have used the observation data from the Alma-Ara radiotelemetric test
area to obtain experimental data on the azimuthal deviations of seismic
beans of distant earthquakes. in this item a study has been made of

the problems of procedure and accuracy of determining the azimuth of the
epicenters. and the azimuthal deviations are discovered.

218
'0! GIVICIAL USE ONLY
POI OIPICIAL 083 ONLY

Procedure for Detereining Arinuthe. The eei-uths of the epicenters of

the distent earthquake. were determined by the differences in tile of
errivel of the first longitudinel wevee er the three etetione. In order
to deternine the etisuth it is convenient to use noeogre-e ei-iler to
those described in iZof Chepter IV. The no-ogree wee celculeted for the
rose at e plene front where the epicentrel distence exceeds by 10 tisee

or note the nexieun distance between the test eree stetione. The Mir-l
couputer wee used to ceuculste the field of the difference in tine of
errivel of the eeienic wevee st three stetione for e weve with en

opperent velocity of V‘-8.0 kI/eec. for other veluee of V. the recelcule-
tion is esde by nultiplying by the coefficient n-vt/e.o. The eeisuthe

are selected every 10'. The noeogre-s were celculeted for three triengles
of etntionsi Telger-Oeero-Ali. Teiger-Otero-Alee-Ate. Telger-Ali-Alee-Ate.

Exsnples oi the noeogren ere shown in Fig 89. The coniiguretion of the
isolines on the nonogrees for eech triengle is deter-ined by the position
of the obeervetion etetions. The experilentel pointe ere loceted with
respect to the entire field. Their position on the plene of the noeogree
depends on the ezinuth of spproech of the wevee end the engle of exit of
the been which is releted to the eegnitude of the epperent velocity V0

by the known bendorf equetion cot e-lb/V'. where V0 is the velocity et the
obeervetion point. Inssnuch se the eerthquskee were investigeted in e
Very wide renge of epicentrel dietences. fro- R-600 to l200 he (Penir.
Afghanistan. Chine) end to 3-15000 to 17000 h. (Hexico. Chile. Argentine).
the values of the sngies of exit veried within breed lieits ceueing greet
dispersion of the point. In order to consider this feet. the nonogrens
were euppiesented by isolines cslculeted (or the different vsluee of

V. (5.9. 10. 12. IS. 20. 30. 60. 60 kn/eec).

An ens-pie of this type oi telplete for the triengle oi stetione Telgsr-
02ero-Ali is presented in Fig 90. The lines of the different seiluths
ere streight lines or converging st the center of the teeplete. The
experieentel points ere plotted in fig 90. end eress are described to
which they belong. ly the figure it is obvious thet the points correspond-
ing to the neerhy regions -- Aighenisten. rseir end Chine .- ere grouped
near the ieolines et Vﬁ-7-B kllsec. As the epicentrel dietence incresees.
the points ere shifted toward the center of the te-plete. towsrd the
large values of V‘: Jepen. Keecheths - VO-lo-lz hulsec: the Philippines.
Indonesia -- greet dispersion oi the points. V‘Oll-SO hlleec: Hexico.
Chile -- V0-30-60 kl/sec. by the noeogreu not only is the stiluth oi the
direction of epproech of the weve deter-ined. but eleo its spperent
velocity or angle of exit e.

The diiierences in tines or nrrivel oi the first longitudinel weve et the
stations are plotted on the ones: 1 - Telger-Alea-Ate (tT-t Odtl)

end Tnlger-Oeero (it-& -At ); 2 -— Telger-Alee-Ate (At!) end Te get-Ali
(tr-tA-&I,), 1 -. Tengr- i (At3l end Telger-Oeero (0(2). The

theoretical end experieentel date for eech triangle of stetione ere
illustreted by their own synbols. circulsr end line respectively.

219
’0‘ OFFICIAL US! ONLY
”I OPPICIAI. 0” ONLY

 

Figure 89. Noeogra- for deter-min. the ninth of the
directione to the epicentere of dietent earthquake
for ”-0.0 bleec

By the atinuthel deviatione we lean the difference in axilutha of the
epicentere detenined by the teat area data and over the globe. Thin
deviation will be poaitive if the experinentaliy deter-ined etimth
exceede the actual value.

Eetiaatins the Accuracy oi Detenination oi the ninth to the Source.

The error in deteninin; the azimuth of approach of the vavee ie nade up
of the errore oi two typea -- inetn-ent errore and etetion eme -

vhich depend on the direction of approach of the wave. that la. on the
atieuth t and angle ni‘ exit e. For the dietant earthquakee the predoninant
obeerved valuee of V. are included within the lin'ite of 8.20 bleec. The
errore are detenincd alao by the nutuel location in 'epace oi the cheer-va-
tion atat lone, and they do not coincide vith the different trianglee of
etationa. In each specific case thia penita eelection oi the beat
triangle of etatione (ran the point of leaet errnre to deter-me n-

220
M omcm. US! OIL? ,
m omcm. 08! OIL!
ID

no“ of tin poulblc mama: and nation «to

 

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ID! OFFICIAL 0.! ONLY

lnatrueent Errore. The errore connected with the tile eerwice belong to
the A‘inetrunent' For centrelited redioteleeetric recording with a

united tine eervice theee errore reduce only to errore in reckoning the
tine difference on the eeieeogran end depend on the ecenning rate end the

predoeinant oeciilation frequenciee. In our ceee thie error doee not
exceed 10.l-0.2 eeconde.

Depending on the aeieuth of the eource. A‘inetrulent were calculated for

two valuee of the apperent velocity Vf-O end 20 he/eec (e-dd end 17').
The error in reckoning the difference in tine of errivel of the wevee
at two etatione wee tehen ee a noxious at 30.2 eeconde. The veluee of the
leeat end greeteat inetrueant errore of tﬁ‘inetrueent (in degreee) for

the large triangle of etetione Telger-Orero-Ali are preeented in Table 16.
For fired valuee of V. the neuinue end eini-un errore differ by 1.5-2 tinee.
with an increeee in V. the error “‘inetrunent increeeee (according to the

data in Teble 16. by 2-3 tieee).

For the large triengle Telger-Otero-Ali A‘inetrunent ia half that for the
triangle Telger-Oeero-Alee-Ate.

Table 16
W

Aeieuth free the Tel er tation
V‘. h-Ieec 50-90. 160-5l0.
230-230‘ 350-30‘

8 2-3 5-6
20 6-9 12-16

Station Srrore. to contract to the inetru-ent errore which are of e rando-
neture end deter-inc the width of the fiduciel interval. the etation
correctione are eyetenatic. The etetion deviationa ere ceueed by e
different poeition of the etatione in epece end geological etructure in

the vicinity of the etetione. Ae hee already been lentioned. the etetione
in the firet eree ere under the conditione of eharp variation in relief

of the day eurfece -- the automation difference between Deere end Aloe-Ate
etotione reachee 3‘00 letern, and between Otero end Telger. 1760 letere.
The Otero. Telger end All etetione ere located on bedrock. end AlIe-Ate

end Novo-Alehneyevehaya on eedilent.

The depth of the beeeeent under the Aloe-Ate etetion equal to £200 letere
wee selected an the reference level for the depths. The errore ﬁt in
the tile delay a: considering the cepecity of the etetion eyeten depend
on the apparent velocity. lnneeuch ee the correctione are not introduced
into the absolute travel tieee, the valuee of dt era the difference in
trnvol theee of the wevee to the different etetione of the teet eree in
the eectlon above the reduction level. For large valuee of V‘ (e-90')
the difference in pethe of the woven in close to the difference in heighte:
with e dccreaee in V“ it increaeee and the correction for the relief
increeeee correepondingly.
222
roe OFFICIAL 033 OIL!
FOR O'PICIAL US! ONLY

The grapha of the corroctione for the relief dtl, dtz, dt introduced

into the obaerVed tile ditferencea atl, dtz. At3 for the ghree trianglee
of atationa depending on V“ are depicted in Pig 91. The correctiona for
the relief are eaxieal for the difference Atz-tT-to. and they are +0.3
novundn or more; the correctione are ninienl for AIIIK -tA,A and they

are equal to about -0.l aecond. To valuea of V*-10 kn eec the corractiona
6t very little with variation of va. For aealler valuea of the apparent
Velocity th~ increaee in 6t becoeea aharper.

The atation azimuth correctione da.t were calculated by the tenplatea of
the noeogran type ehown in Fig 90. The atation azimuthal correctiona.
Just as the inetru-ent correctiona. for the triangle of etatione

Tolgar-Oeero-Ali are half thoae for the triangle Talgar-Otero-AlIa-Ata.
the area of which ia half ea large.

Let us consider Aa,t (Fig 92) for the large triangle Talgar-Otero-Ali.

In the atinuth range of 40-220“ the correctione are negative: in the
range of 220-bO‘. poaitive. 0n the eel-nth of 60 and 220' the corractiona
for relief are 0. The naxinun correctione for relief cone for aziluth
ranges of 100-150 and 290-320'. and they are 7-9' for v.08 kI/aac and
ll-lS' for va-zo hn/aec. The lini-un correctiona are obaerved in the
dlrectione of 30-50’ and 210-230'. with an increaee in V. from B to

20 kl/aec da.t increaaee by 1.5-2 tieee.

 

Figure 91. Graphe of the correctiona for relief as a function
of V.

Key:
l. aeconda
2. kl/aec

when proceaeing the recordinga with reapect to the nonograla (Fig 90).
the azimuth of the approach of the wave a1 and the apparent velocity are

223
’03 OIPICIAL US! ONLY
POI OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

determined for which the tine correction for the relief 6t is found for
each At by Fig 91. Then for each pair of stations a new asiauth a2 is
detersined considering the correction for the relief. This par-its
calculation of the asiauthal deviations without considering the relief

cal-al-a and considering the relief dag-az-a (a is the asiauth with
respect to the globe).

The asiauthal deviations defined by the differences in tiaas of arrival
at the Ali. Osero end Talgar stations for five earthquakes in 1973 are
presented in Table 17. The values at the introduction of the corrections
for the relief essentially decrease the asinuthal deviations dag. and
they turned out to be within the liaits of instruasnt errors.

Thus. if the observations of the group of stations are made under the
conditions of couples relief of the day surface and the geological struc-
ture, then without considering the letter when detersining the asiauth

of the source. significant errors can be permitted. For the Alla-Ate
radioteleaetric test area they reach zlS-20'.

Aziauthnl Deviations of Directions to the Source. For processing. record-
inga of distant earthquakes (R>400-500 kn) were selected which have been
recorded during the 1972-197b period and which had sufficiently clear
arrival. of first wave insuring accuracy of detersining At no lower than
19.2 seconds. The aajority of the earthquakes were recorded by the

slaved recording systea where the accuracy of deter-ining dt was :9.l0-0.05
seconds.

The pejority of the processed 366 recordings of distant earthquakes are
grouped with respect to defined regions. each of which characterises the
predosinant values of V“ (see Fig 90). The observed values of the
apparent velocity lie within very broad linits (from 6.5 to 60 kI/ssc).
the angle of arrival e varies from 25 to 85°. The predoeinant values of
V0 are 10-30 ha/aec (e-55n80°). The representativensss of the regions

is not identical. The noxious number of recordings were obtained fro-
the regions of lndoneaia. the Philippines. Japan and the Ranchatka-Japaneae
zone; the ainiaus number. free the areas of Chile. Argentina. Peru and
Mexico. The processing results are illustrated in sun-ary graphs of the
aslauthal deviations as a function of sci-uths of the epicsntsrs (Fig 92).
The curves for the naxinu- instruaent errors for two values of V. are
depicted on the seas graphs. The azimuthal deviations are of interest.
the asgnitude of which stably go beyond the liaits of possible errors.

Let us consider the azimuthal deviations defined by the Talgsr-03sr0ehli
triangle (Fig 92). The values of dal and 6&2 for the earthquakes are
plotted on the graphs free the provisionally isolated five sectors
located in different directions.

216
FOR OVPICIAL 088 all?
IOI OPPIOIAL "8! ONLY

Table 17

 

 

30 XII 2i.“ Wee o-es Xenon (5) 8.8 11.6
20. XI 2.38 “pa 7 2.3 13.4
id. XII 0.10 W nope 2.8 10.0
80. XII 1.30 Bones-II“ (10) 80 32.0
Key:
l. Date 6. Southeastern Honshu Island
2. Tine of day. hours. ainutes 7. lran
3. Region 8. Caspian See
0. Epicentrel distance. l03 he 9. More landa. Indonesia
5. V‘, kl/aec lo. lolivia-Chile

l. The Kaechatha-Jspanese sector (asisuth 50-80') corresponds to the
range of saall instrument and station errors. The introduction of
corrections for the relief insignificantly change the position of the
experi-entel points. but it grouped then lore cupectly. The nail. but
stable negative sci-uthal deviations on the order of 5’ are still observed
after introduction of corrections for the relief.-

2. The Indonesian sector includes asisuths to the epicenters of 90-160'.
For this sector a sexisua number of recordings were obtained. and sig-
nificant scattering of the experimental points is observed. The large
corrections for the relief in the sector essentially dininish the dispersion
of the points. The sci-uthsl deviations of the beans in the sector of the
azisuth 90-130' are stable. They are negative and they amount to 10'. that
is. they coincide with respect to sign with the do for the Xanchatke-
Japanese sector. but they exceed it by 2 tine: with respect to Iagnitude.

l. The Chinese sector contains eeieuths of 110-190'. The number of
observation points is sasll. end the centers are near; therefore the
values of Vﬁ are snail. The large tile corrections for the relief 6t
which can turn out to be soaewhat high and the sci-uth range correspond to
the casino» da.g. The introduction of the corrections for the relief
shifts the points beyond the lisits of possible errors; the veluee of the
exisuthel deviations becoae positive and equal to 5-10'. The results of
estissting As for the earthquakes froe this sector are not very convincit .

A. The Hindukush sector is the art-nth of 2l0n220'. In this very narrow

sector of directions there are oany observation points which are piled
together. The corrections for the relief are in practice zero. Stable

ponitivo etiouthel deviations of lO-lS' are observed. The lost relieble
results are obtained in this sector. '

225
FOR OFFICIAL 088 OIL?
l0! OIPICIAL 088 ONE!

Table 17 [continued]

INDE-
70 CO 73 i384 -4523

(2)

IE8
m

C '-!8 ‘7

      
     

ate as zoo «es Mi cs 1 d
a" zoo zoo on 4.31 -e is a
no es ii? 0.80 480 as as 4
sea as as «so 430 -ao is -e

 

 

Key:
lo .‘i‘l‘h. .
2. aeisuthal deviations. '

3' A‘inatr

S. The Latin Aserican sector (asisuthe 30-350‘) has fev data and great
dispersion of the experimental points - da-:}0'. The corrections for
the relief are large: their introduction has decreased the dispersion
of the points sosevhst. All of this and also the large values of Va
reduce the accuracy of detersining da. hovever. on the whole it is
possible nevertheless to say that the positive signs of asisuthsl
deviations predooinate. the aagnitude of vhich is difficult to eetisste.

Thus. the esperinentel observations of the distant earthquakes by a group
of stst ions in the Aloe-Ate test area revealed stable deviations of the
directions of propagation of the first longitudinal eaves free the esisuch
to the epicenters caused apparently by nonuniforsitiea on the path of the
beans. The values of the site of the deviations are different for beans
and different aciouths. The accumulation of this infer-nation is of great
interest free the point of view of studying the nonuniforlities of the
sedius. The development of the procedure for such observations under
couples conditions of the ground relief and also the discovery of aeisuthel
deviations as a function of the epicentrsl distance are of interest. This
analysis has not been specially performed. It is only possible to give
attention to the fact that tvo such regions as lndonesia and China. which
are in the ease sci-nth sector but at different distances fro. the observa-
tion point. are characterised by atisuthol deviations of the seissic beans
of different sign.

226
'0! 077161”. US! ONLY
IO! OFFICIAL "OI ONLY

  
 
 

  

--L-IB(ZT'.’.
u [MIND U
K] [EH/HID“

    
 
     

DEX" U'L'IJ
“(Jill-7"]

   

’ x U, . . '
u , .
w ..... m.
n” ‘ ‘ o ..
.V . 0

Figure 92. Azimthel devletione ee e function of the ninth
of the epicenter. vithout considering (I) end
considering (b) the etetion correctione
The eexieu- inetrunent errore (1) end the correctione for the
relief (2) were celculeted for two veluee of the epperent velocity
- 8 blue (the eide linee) end 20 blue (the dotted linee).

Key:
1. Kurile 6. Hindukueh
2. Jepen 7. Chile
3. Keeehetke 8. Argentina
6 . lndoneeie 9. Peru
S. Chine 10. Hexico

22)
m ORIGIN. 0"»! DULY
'0! 0"!CIAL ”II ONLY

55. Directions of Future Research

The investigated results of the highly sensitive observations with radio—
teleestric recording indicate that the general nature of the ssisaic
picture obtained in the Allaneta highly sensitive test area and by the
ordinary network of stations turns out to be approsisately identical.

This sakes it possible to asks a nuaber of reaarks with respect to further

inprovesent of the highly sensitive operations with the radioteleaetric
recording systsa.

First of all. it is necessary to note that under the conditions of fixed
series of sedisentsry deposits with a high level of nicrossisaic inter-
ference in the vicinity oi a large city the seissic observations in deep
wells are the only aesne of recording earthquakes of veeker energy
classes which increases the representstiveness of the seisaogeological
data for e cooperatively low level of overall seissic background. The
possibility of using the weaker shocks to characterise the seisaic con-
ditions in tiae is the seat isportant result of the research.

One of the basic probless oi the dsvelopaant oi seisnological studies in
the regions of probable occurrence of strong aeissic events is the use

of instrunent observations to predict the tile of occurrence of strong
earthquakes. In order to expand the forecasting possibilities in the
investigated area the first step is the expansion of the observation systes.
first to the east. and then to the west. end then south. beginning with
the noise level of the area. the new eastern and western stations aust be
located in especially drilled wells. The developeent of observations in

the south is possible under the condition of using low-power and econosical
radio coasunications channels. the operation of which is insured by the
autonoanus power supply. The iaproveeent of the entire radiotsleastric
observation systen. es s siniaul. requires the organisation of tvo or three
stations in the west. one in the east and two or three in the south. The
experience in operation of the srs indicates that after expanding the
entire observation systes it will be possible basically to do avsy with

the application of ordinary seissic stations and etthe sass tias signifi-

cantly siaplify the entire organisation of the seisaological work in
Northern Tyan'-Shsn'.

it is necessary to conVert fro- the vertical seiasogrsphs to the observa-
tion systea with tticosponent instrulents. This observation system will
per-it sore reliable study of the variation of the ratio of the velocities
of the longitudinal and transverse vaves in Alas-Ate aeissically active
region. The expansion of the pass band oi the oeissic channels in the
direction of the low frequencies vill per-it us to study the spectral
coaposition of the seissic recordings. including at the tines of scattering
of the voltage at the earthquake center.

These characteristics can be used for forecasting strong earthquakes. The
systcs of observations aust also provide the possibility ot reliable

228
I0! OPIICIAL US! OIL?
POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY

deter-ination of the mechanism of thecente s. The experience of such
studies in the Oar-akiy Rayon of Tadrhik 88R indicates that during the
period of preparation of strong earthquakes, a change takes place in the
eechanias of the centers of the weak shocks. It is significant that the
centralized recordings can insure reliable determination of the difference
in path of the seismic waves through the sons of the prepared strong

shock. The available data indicate that this characteristic can also be
of n forecasting nature.

Thus. the centralised high-frequency recording of earthquakes can insure
significant enpansion of the seiseological data obtained as applied to
the problee of predicting strong earthquakes. The effectiveness of the
prediction studies can be increased as a result of the use of large
stations not only for studying the seissological observations. but also
as a reault of the organisation of observations of other geophysical and
geocheaical attributes in the ease walls. In particular. in the wells
observations can be asde of the acoustic noise. threshold pressure in the
deep water-saturated horizon. the parameters of the geocheaical regiae of
groundwater using autosated geochesical analysers. The expansion of the
range of obsered paraseters will require the application of sore multi-
channel radioteleeetric systess respectively. This systea can be created

at the present rise by the industrially sanufactured Konteynsr [Container]
station.

In order to increase the operativeness of the forecasting observations
it is necessary in the near future to organise the input of all of the
infatuation to the coeputer and insure its autosatic processing.

The areas of subsequent experiaents noted here will depend in the future
on a nunber of technical possibilities. but the prospectiveness of such
experiaents is quite obvious.

Thus. as a result of the 4-year operation of the radioteleaetric test area
a study is node of the seisaic characteristics of Alla-Ara for the period
from 1 June 1972 to 1 July 1976. The basic peculiarities of the regiae
are as follows.

i. The ssissic activity for the Alas-Ate area is A6-O.7. and the angular
coefficient of the repetition rate graph 7-0.i6.

2. The seiseically active region of Zailiyskiy and Kungey Alatau known
by the data iron the preceding studies is broken down into several zones
characterized by defined laws of the seisaic regime. The activity of the
different zones is exhibited differently in rise. The highest activity
is associated with the section where the three zones of deep faults join
- Northern Tyen'-Shan' with the west. KcainenChilik and Tyupskaya with
the east -— located 25-30 ha in the southeasterly direction fro- Alla-Ate.

3. Significant aigration of the centers occurs in tile and in space.

229
rue OPYICIAL US! ONLY
IDR OU'IGlAL US! ONLY

A. There are sectors of the arisuthn to the distant earthquakes for
which the stable deviations of the directiOns of propagation-o! the
first longitudinal waves are characteristic. tor the Japaneseakanchstka
sector negative azimuthal deviations of 5' are observed; for the
Indonesian sector. negative deviations of 10°; for the Hindukush sector.
positive aeinuthal deviations of lO-lS'.

The experience that we have accumulated indicates the expediency of
further work in the following areas:

a) Expansion of the geophysical research and creation of equipncnt for
such observations in wells:

h) The development of sultiplexins equip-en: for the radiometric
recording channels and the use of series. economic radio relay systems;

c) The developsent of the method of studying the set of physical
pnruseters;

d) The study of the polarisation of seissic waves. in particular
transverse vaves.

230
!OR 0!!IC!AL USE ONLY
’0! OIIICXAL “8! DIET

CONCLUSIONS

The seat significant difficulty with the detailed study of the seismic
characteristics of large industrial centers located in seismically danger-
ous regions is the high level of interference connected with the vital
activity of the city. The basic requirements on the procedure are
insurance of highly sensitive observations and high accuracy of determining
the centers of local earthquakes. These. to a great extent. contradictory.
requirements correspond to the developed procedure based on seismological
observations in deep wells permitting a sharp increase in useful sensitivity
of the equipment under the conditions of high ground noise level. and in
centralised multichannel recording with a united type service significantly
raising the accuracy of all of the constructions.

The effectiveness of the seismic observations in the wells arises from

the fact that the noise level decreases were rapidly with depth than the
useful signal. The gain in useful sensitivity during observations in
wells for different regions is different. and it depends primarily on

the noise level on the day surface. The higher the ground noise level.
the higher the gain in sensitivity. At shallow depths (to 100 meters)

in loose sedimentary rock the gain is determined primarily by the absence
of the interference of wind origin which is not felt at depths of 60-50 n.
A lerge gain can be obtained for observations in shallow wells discovering
the basement. here even at a depth of 30 to 60 meters with a very high
level of ground noise sensitivity can be realised which is close to the
sensitivity of the ground stations located under favorable conditions.

At average depths (to 500-600 meters) the gain is determined by a sharp
decrease in noise level in the upper part of the section and also stability
of the noise. Under high noise level conditions the observations in loose
sedimentary series at depths of several hundreds of meters can give a
significant gain.

The observations at greater depths (2000-3000 meters) in practice in all
cases permit us to obtain sensitivity which is close to the sensitivity

for ground observations under favorable conditions. However, the diffi-
culties of working at great depth under the conditions of high temperatures
and pressure justify such observations only in cases where there is no
free choice of the investigation point. In particular. this pertains to
the study of the seismic characteristics of large industrial centers.

231
I03 OIPICIAL 082 OIUY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

The 6-year experisent in the operation of the test area of autosated
highly sensitive deep well and ground stations created in the vicinity

of Alas-Ate with centralised sultichannel radiotelesetric recording
confirmed the effectiveness of such observations systess for studying the
seissic regine of large industrial centers. Such systess are characterized
by high useful sensitivity of the stations. high accuracy of the construc-
tions. operativeness of processing permitting detersination of the posi-
tion of the centers one to two sinutes after the beginning of the earth-
queke and also econohicalness of the operations based on the autosscic
node of operation of the stations. A total of three specialists service
a test area of fiVe stations.

Under the conditions of seissic quiet characteristic of the north slopes
of the zailiyshiy alatsu. the autossted stations of the test area recorded
about 700 local earthquakes in lo years with t3.ptlo sec and about 300
explosions. More then 851 of the local earthquakes recorded by the

test area stations belong to energy classes 5 to 7 which are not represent-
ative for the regional network of stations. The weakest earthquakes
recorded only by 02ero station belong to energy class 2. The strong
effect of the observation conditions on the structure of the seissograss
is felt. The effect of the day surface relief and also the nonuniforsity
of the upper part of the section have the greatest significance. Uhen
studying the seismic characteristics of the city it is necessary on the
recordings to discover the local explosions and exclude the. iron the
subsequent processing of the local earthquakes. The explosions in the
vicinity of liedeo differ fros the local earthquakes with respect to shape
of the recording and lower frequency cooposition.

The procedure for processing the sultichsnnel seisoograss fro. centralised
rediotelesetric recording considering the spatial arrange-cot of the
test area stations insures detersination of the centers of the local

earthquakes with an accuracy of 11-2 kl in plan view and with respect to
depth.

This makes it possible to reconend the developlent equipnent end the observa-
tion procedure to study the eeissic characteristics of large industrial
centers or other local sections in seissically dangerous areas and to

solve various problens of seissology.

232
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
M OHIO!“ I!" M?

l [LIOOMI’IIY

l.

2.

1.

Se

6.

’.

Akeenovlch. a. la Below. I. 0.; eretev. Yu. 0.. et el.
"Recordere vlth Vlelhle lull lecordlng." mvmmwme
snmwcm {hurl-eon! Sen-ole”). HOeeov. Neuke. 197l.

Aheenovlch. c. 1.; cel'pertn. Ye. 1.: Gel'perlne. R. 11.. et el.
"Study of the Den of Decreeee ln lecheround of Selnlc Interference
vlth Depth to the Cltlee of Aloe-«Ate end Teehhent." IN. All 8388.

mm 2911.! [New ol the 088R Aoedeny of Selencee. north
Phyelcel. No ll. I972.

Al'ter. s. N.; Kunln. h. “.3 Lyeyekov. L. m. et el. "Reeulte and
Further Dlrectlon of Cooplex end Geophyelcel Studlee of Seleelcelly
Doneeroue Areee euch ee Aloe-Ate." ZDDMYA ROM snacoousmm mm.

[The urth'e Cruet In Seleeleelly Dengeroue Zonee). No ll. Hoecov.
Neuke. 1973.

Andreyev, s. S. "Hethode ot Interpreting Neerhy Betthquekee.”
TRUDY at All 3538 [Harte of the Berth Phyeice {Mtttute of the USSR
Made-y of Seleneeel. No 25. l962. p 192.

APPAMTUM 1 “END!“ SEYSMICIIESKIDI momma“ V 8583 [hatpoeut
and hethode of Sela-lo Obeervetlone in the 085R]. Hoecov. Neuke, I976.

Aptlkeyev. r. r. SEYSHICHESKIYB KOLIMNIYA PR! zmmusmm
l VZRWAKII [Seleelc Decllletlone During Berthquekee end Keploelond.
Hoecov. Neuka. 1969.

Dogdenovlch. K. 1.; Klerk, N. 21.; Korol'kov. D. Ye.) Nuehltetov. D. l.
"The urthouehe tn the Northern Tyen'oShen' Chelne on 22 Decuher 1910
(I. January 1911)." TRUDY cmmcxcnesxoco W115“ (MAYA SERRA)
[worhe of the Geoloxlcel Co-lttee (New Serieen. No 89, 191‘.

Dune. V. 1.; Czovekly, H. m Zepol’eltty, X. L, et el. "ﬂethode of
Detailed Study of Setnlclty," TRUDY In AN $85!! [Uorke of the

Earth Phyetce Inetltute of the USSR Anode-y of Sclencee]. no 9.
I760. p 176.

233
not ORIGIN. 03! our
9.

10.

ll.

12.

[3.

M.

15.

16.

17.

[8.

19.

20.

2|.

Vvadennhaya, N. A. "Prohlen of Ueins lnetrunent Data on Strong
Serthquakea of Central Asia During Saienic Resionaliration."
TAUDY 1?: AN SSSR, No l7. 1961. p 10‘.

Vll’gel'lcon. P. I. REHINO-CRUYSKOYB ZENLSTRYAYBNIYE 21 YUNYA 1938
[Kenino-Chu Earthquake of 21 June 1938]. Alma-Ate. 19‘7.

Voetrikov. 0. A. "Betinatins the Seienic Event of Local Earthquahee
by the Tail Section of the Seienoaran." DAN SSSR [Reporte of the
USSR Academy of Scienceal. No 2. 1975. p 220.

Vyrupayeva. c. P.: Dastyareva. L. A.: Kalnyhova. N. A. "Earthquake.
of Northern Tyan'-Shan'." ZIHLITRYASBNIYA V SSSR V l969 [Barthquakee
in the USSR in l969). Moscow. Nauha. 1973.

Vyrupayeva. c. P.: Degryareva. L. A.: Kol-yhova. N. A. "Earthquaheo
of Northern Tyan’-Shan'." ZEHLETRYASENIYA V 8888 V 1970 [Earthquahea
in the USSR ln I970]. hoecou. Nauha. 1971a.

Gel'parin. Ye. l. "Ari-uthal Deviation. of Seinnic Sea-a." 12V.

AN SSSR. sea. GEOPIZ. [Neva oi the USSR Academy ot Sciancee. Geophyaica
Series). No ll. 1956.

Cnl'pnrin. Ye. I. VBRTIKAL'NOYE SEYSHICEBSKOYE PROFILIROVARIYI
[Verticnl Seinic Profiling), Hoecou. Nedra. 1971.

col'parin. Ye. l. POLVARIZATSIOSNYY METOD SEYSHICHSSKIKU
ISSLEDOVANIYA [Polarization Method of Seianic Reeeorchl. hoacou.
Nauka. 1977.

Cnl'perin. Ye. 1.: Vorovehiy. L. ".3 Cal'perine. R. h. ”Seinnolosical
Obeervatione in the Hello and the Poeeibilitiee of lncreaaing the
Unaful Seneltivity of Equip-ant." 12V. AN SSSR. PIZIKA ZEHLI [Noun

of the USSR Acedc-y of Sciencea. Earth Phyeice]. No 2. 1976.

Gel'perin. Ye. 1.: Frolova. A. V. "Variation of Direction of Saieaic
Scale on Refraction on an lnternedinte Interface." PRIKL. 680712.
[Applied Goonhyeice]. No 68. 1966.

Gonburteev. c. A. "Deter-ination of the Azimuth to the Epicenter
when Recording Local Earthquakes." DAR SSSR. No 2. 1952. p 87.

Conburteev. G. A. "high Frequency Sein-onctry," DAN $553. No S. 1953.
P 830

Gnnburroev. c..A. "Correlatlon Methods of Studying Earthquakes."
w sssn. No a, 1953, p 92.

236
'0‘ OFFICIAL USE OIL!
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

3|.

)2.

3).

FOR OVPXCIAL 08! ONLY

Genburtsev. c. A. "Deep-Nell Seisaie Sounding oi the Berth's Cruet."
TRUDY GEOPIZ. lN-TA AN SSSR [Norks of the Geophysics institute oi
the vase Aeadesy of Scieneee). No 23. 195‘, p 152.

Oahurtsev. 6. A.: Gal'perin. Ye. 1. "Procedure (or Norlting by the
Correlation Method of Studying Earthquehes,” 12v. AN 8888. SSA.

csortz [News of the ”SSA Aesdely oi Seieneaa. Geophysics Sariee].
"O l. 19".

Genhurtaev. c. A.; Veytseen, P. 8.; Tuline. Yu. V. "Structure of tha
Berth‘e Crust in the Vicinity of Northern ryan'-8han' by the Data
from Deep Seissie Sounding.” DAN 383R. No 1. 1955. p 105.

caﬂb“rt..V. 6a Aa‘ V.".‘.n. Po 8.: DavydoVC. No 1-; Tul‘n.. YUe V.
"Deep Saisnie Sounding of the Eerth's Crust in Northern Tyan'-Shen'."
BYUL. SOVETA P0 SBYSHOLOGII [Bulletin of the Council on Saissolosyl.
No 3. 1957.

Geehurtsav. 6. A.; Veytsnen. P. s. "Paeuliaritiae of the Structure
of the Earth's Crust in the Vicinity of Northern Tyen'-Shsn' by the
Date fros Deep Saiesie Sounding and Colpariaon with the caoloay.
Seisnology and Gravisetry Oats.” IYUL. SOVITA ro SEYSNOLOGII. No 3.
1957.

Goshurtaav. c. A. "Sane Nev Nethode of Scissologiesi Studies."
12V. AN SSSR. SEN. GEOPIZ. [News of the USSR Aeade-y of Sciences.
Geophysics Series]. No 12. 1957.

Gesturtsev. 6. A.; Gai'perin. Ye. I. "Results of Studying Nash Loesi
Earthquakes in the Southvestern Port of Turk-enis by the Correlation

Hethod.” TRUDY 6.A. GAHDURTSEVA [Norks of c. A. Cssburtsev]. Moscow.
lZD-VO AN SSSR. 1960.

Goshurtsev. G. A.: Gal'perin. Ye. l. "Experisent in Studying ﬂesh
Local Earthquakes of the Khsit Epicentrs1 Zone of the Tsdshik SSR."
TRUDY c. A. CAHBURTSEVA. Moscow. ltd-v0 AR 8553. 1960.

Corbunova. i. V. “Detailed Study of the Seisnieity of Northern
Tynn'-Shsn'." TRUDY IFZ AN SSSR [Norhe of the Earth Physics institute
of the USSR Acndesy of Sciences], No 25. 1962. p 192.

Gorhunovs. 1. V. "Study oi the Seisaie Chsrseteristics of Dehunserin
and Northern Tynn‘-Shan’." TRUDY 'FZ AN SSSR. No 32, 1966. p 199.

Gontev. H. A. "Cslibrntion end Control o! Seissic Stations by the
Electrodynnnic Method." TEDDY 1P2 AN SSSR, No 25, 1962, p 192.

Zepol'ekiy. K. K. "Chlss frequency-Selective Seis-ie Ststions.”
EKSPENINENTAL‘NAYA SEYSHOLOOIYA [Experieentsl Sets-01037]. Moscow.
Nnuka. 1971.

235
)0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
31a.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

£0.

1.1.

£2.

63.

66.

POI OPHCMI. 118! ONLY

Zapol'akiy, K. K.; Solov'yeva. R. P. “Spectral Charactariatica of
a Strong earthquake in A1aaka on 28 tiarch 196i. and ita Mtarahocka."
BKSPBRIHMAL'NAYA SEYSHOLOOIYA. Moscow. Natalia. 1971.

Zapol'akiy. K. K. "Spectral Analyaia of Saiaaic Vavaa of Heat

Local Earthquakea." EKSPBRIHBNTAL'NAYA SIYSHOLOOIYA. Noacov. Nauka.
1971.

Zepol'akiy. K. K.; Naraaaov. 1. 1.; Rautiyan. T. 6.; Khalturin. V. 1.
”Phyaieal Principles of the Hagnituda Claaaiiication of Earthquakaa."
MAGNITUDA 1 WBROETICRBSKAYA MSSIPIKIIATSI‘M ZMETRYASBNIY

[Magnitude and Energy Claaaiiication of Earthquakaa]. Vol 1. hoacov.
Nauka. 1979 .

Kntranko. V. 0. ”Method of Analyaing Saiaaic Information." SEYSHICHBSKIVE
PRIIORY [Saiaaic lnatru-antal. No 6. Hoacov. Nauka. 1972.

Katranko. V. 0.: Uloaov, V. 1.; Gal'perin. Ya. 1.. et a1. "Saiaaolog-
ical Obaarvationa in a Deep wall Located in Taahkent.” NOVYYE

MW]! P0 SBYSMLOGII I SIYSKDGEOLOOII UZBEKISTANA [New Data on
Seiaaoloay and Seianogaology of Vthakiatan]. Taahkent. Pan. 197‘.

Halanud. A. 8. "Relation Between the anarsy of Earthquakea and the
Duration of the Recording.” sronnxx STATE! PO sarsnonoclz. TtUDY
lN-‘I‘A smnosrorrooo STROI‘I’EL'S‘I'VA I 881811010611 [Collection of
Articlea on Sela-olosy. Vbrkara of the Inatituta of Earthquakeproof
Conatruction and Saianology], Vol 10. Duahanha. 1962.

hikhaylova. R. 5. "Study of the Saiaaic Characteriatica of tha Local
lona Vain; a highly Sanaitiva Saiauograph.” SEYSHlCﬂESKlY R2231".
KATRINA“ 1 1188801021601!) 3110021111“ 12-17 DMRYA 1966 [Saiaaic
Charactariatica. Hateriala of the lat All-Union Sylpoaiua on

12-17 Daca-bar 1966]. Duahanhc. Doniah. 1969.

Huahkutov. 1. V. ”Vernanakoya Earthquaka of 28 May (9 June) 1887."
TRUDY GEOLOGICIIESKOGO KWI‘I’ETA [Horka 01‘ the Ccologlcu Co-ittaal.
No l. 1890.

Huahketov, 1. V. ”Chilean Earthquake of 10 June (12 July) 1809."
MTBRIALY DLYA IZUCRBNIYA ZMETﬂASINIY 1105811 [Ilatoriala for
Studying the Earthquakaa of Ruaaial. Vol 1. 1891.

Huahltatov. l. V.; Orlov, A. P. MTch 2911:!!!”le ROSSIYSKOY
lHPERﬂI [Catalog of Earthquakaa of the Ruaaian Empire], St. Petarahurg,
1893.

heraeaov, I. 1.: Nikolayav, A. V. "Proble- of the Dependence of the
Predoainant Iroquenciaa noting Exploaiona on tha Size of the Charge,"
TRUDY 1ft AN $553. No 25, 1962. p 192.

236
M omcm. US! ONLY
’05.

£6.

67.

‘8.

‘9.

$1.

52'

S].

56.

roe OPPICIM. "8! ONLY

Noreeeov. l. L.) Tot-nun, N. Kh. "Graphical Nethod of Selecting
Frequency Cherecterietice." TRUDY m AR 8881!. no 32, 196‘. p 199.

Nereeeov. I. In; Cel'perin. Te. 1.: Vorovekiy. L. 8.; Cal'perina. R. H.
"Alta-Ate 8eieeolosica1 high-Frequency Radio Temperature feet Area."

tzv. M “en [New of the 038R Acedeey of Sciencee. Berth Phyeice],
No 7. ' :‘e

Nereeeov. I. In; Kurochkine; R. I. "Berthquehea of Northern Tyan'-Shan'."
ZMETRYASEMYA V 8881! V 1968 [Earthquakes of the USSR in 1968].
Hoecov. Neuka. i972.

Nikoleyev. A. V. SBYSHIKA NEODNOROONYKII I m 8RD. [Soto-it
Characterietice of Nonunifore and Turbid Medial. Hoecov, Nedre. 1973.

Pavlova. I. N. ”Dyneeic Peculiaritiee of the Aleutian Earthquake
of I. February 1965 and Ito Alterehocke According to the Recordinse
of the Frequency-Selective Seieeit Station.“ “SPERWML'NAYA
SKYSHOLOGIYA [Experimental Seienolosyl. Hoecov. Nauha, 1911.

Pevrner. L. In; Popov. K. A.; Puahkerev. I. L. et el. "Ceophyeica
Research During hicroresioneliration of the City of Aha-Ate.”
CBOPRIChESKIYE POLYA 1 SEYSHICIINOS‘I" [Cecphyeital Pielde and
Seieuicityl. Hoecov. heuka. 1975.

Poecrantaevn. l. V. ”Ieolation and Correlation of PS Havea Recorded
by the Zulya Stations." TmRETICIIESKIYE I atsrummu'mn 188L800-
WJIIYA onlanmm VOLN 'ZMETRYASENIYA {Theoretical and Expert-ant“

Studiea of the Exchenge Uavee of Earthquake]. Hoecov. WI!
Ceofieika. 197).

Rirnichenko. Yu. V. ”nethode of 21a" Deteninetion of the Coordinatee
of the Centere of Nearby Earthquakee and the Velocitioe of Seieaic
waver in the Area where the Centere Are Located." 12V. AN SSSR.

38R. CBCPIZ. [News of the USSR Medeuy of Sciencee. Geophyeice
Seriee]. No b. 1958.

Rozova. Ye. A. "Earthquakes of Central Arie." TRUDY SBYSHOWICDI.
Ill-TA AN SSSR [Horne of the Seieeolosicel Inetitute of the USSR
Made-y ol Scienceel. No 123. 1967.

Urnxayev. l. N.; Akiehcv. 1'. A.; Antonenko, A. N.. et a1. "Reaulte
of the Forecaating Bork at the Aime-Ate Geophyeica ‘l'eet Area,"
POISKI PREDVESTNIKOV INSTRYASENIY. MEZIDUNAR. SW02.
27.0%).06.“ [Search for Earthquake Predictora. International
Sympoaiu 27 |by to 3 June 1976]. Teehkent. Pan, 1976.

237
M OFFICIAL IJSI OIL!
$3.

$6.

$7.

$8.

59'

6°.

61.

62.

63.

66.

65.

$6.

67.

68.

POI omcw. "SI OIL?

Ureteyev. B. “.3 Antonenko. S. “.1 Oepanov. A. B. "Seienotectonic
Special ceophyeicel end Seieloloslcal Studiee in Alnannta Seianicelly
Active Regiona." SBYSRICRBSROYS HlKRORAYONlROVANlYB [Seinic
Ricroregionelieation). Alnenhte. Reuka. 1976.

”IIIOVCV. I. Ha} OOPOﬂW. Ae ’e. utmv. 2". A0. 0‘ .10 "ur‘h’
quakee of Northern Tyen'cShan'." ZIMLSTRYASBNIYA V SSSR V 1972
[Earthquakes of the USSR in l972]. hoacov. “nuke. 1976.

Pedoeeyenko. h. Ye. "Slectrodynanic Seieeogreph." USSR author‘-
certificete. kl. 62 0.. No 675581. OTKRYTIYA IZOBRBTENIYA.
OBRAZTSY I TOVARNYYS ZNAKI [Diecoveriee. Inventione. Hodele and
Trade-erlte]. No 26. 1975.

Khalturin. V. l. ”Procedure for Setinetins the Spectral Conpoeition

of Seienic Oecillatione by the Recordinse of a Frequency Selective
Station (ChlSS)." TRUDY m AN SSSR. No 25. 1962.

Shnirnen. 0. L.; Razorenov. A. A.; Asafonov. A. c. "Syet. for
Renote Control of Seieeic lnetruente in Belle." OSOPIZICIBSMYA
APPARATURA [Geophyeice Squipeent]. No 59. Leningrad. Nedre, 1976.

Afenety. It. "Hicroeeiee in Prequency Renae 1-200 cpe." BULL.
WTRQUAKB RES. "‘31.. Tokyo 0niv.. No 39. 1961.

Brune. J. ".3 Allen. c. K. "A Microearthqualte Survey of the

Sen Andreee Pault Syeten in Southern Californie." BULLSBIML. SOC.
AMERICA. No 2. 1967. p 57.

Creepin. 8.: Hill-ore. P. L. "Snell Bertlnuekee Oheerved with Local
Sole-outer Networhe." PRILOS. TRANS. ROY. 806., LONDON A. 1973.
No I239. p 274.

Croeeon. R. S. "Snell Earthquakee Structure end Tectonic of the Puget
Sound RC‘ton." WU... 38‘9”!" 50C. m1“. "0 3, 1972. P 62o

Douee. E. I. "Rayleigh Uavee in Short Period Seielic Noiee."
BULL. SEISHOL. SOC. MERICA. no 6. 1956. p 56.

Douee. E. 1. "Signal and Noiee in Deep Hello,” GEOPNYSICS. No S.
1966. p 29.

Deuce. E. l. "Noiee AttenuatiOn in Shallow Ilolea," SULL. SEISMOL.
soc. mutton. No 3, 1966. p 56.

Douee. a. 1. ”Short Period Seieaic Noiae,” «n.1,. semm. soc.
mm. No 1, 1967, 9 s7.

Eaton. J. P.; O’Neill. H. 3.; Murdock, J. N. "Afterehocke of the
I966 Parklield-Cholene. California Earthquelte," BULL. SEISML. SOC.
mmcw. so 6, mo. p 60.

23B
roe ORIGIN. US! OIL!
69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

76.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

so.

82.

Oupu. l. N. "Standing Hove Phone-on: in Short-Qoriod Soiuic
Noioo." OEOPIHSICS. no 6, 1965. p 10.

7...... K4 Rosina. 1‘. "Observation of Hicrourthquoku with o

Doopeﬂoll Soionoutot." ML. mmm. R38. “81.. Tokyo unim.
1960. p ‘6.

Levin. P. R.; Lynn. R. D. "Doopoliolo Coophono Studioo." cmmstcs.
No ‘. 19”. p 23o

Radon. R. a. "lloritontol and Vortitol Attoyo for 'roloooiolio Signal
Enhance-ant." OEOPRYSICS. No 6. 1965. p 30.

Roden. R. I. ”Seismic Bxperinont vith Vertical Arrivoo,"
GEOPRYSICS. No 2, 1968. p 33.

Sex. R. In: Rortonbouor. R. A. "Thoonticol Prediction of Soiuic
ﬂoioo in a Deep Borehole." GEOPHYSICS, No 5. 1966. p 29.

Sun. R. L.: Rartonbotgor. R. A. "Soionic Rom Attonuotion in
Unconoolidotod Material." cmmsxcs. No lo. 196‘. p 30.

"Socond PhIIQ oi sot-thou“. Prediction Prognn in Tokyo Aron,"
TECNNOCMT. No 3. 1976. p 9.

Tohno. Ra Rosina. r. ”Prolininory Oboorvotion of Kicroontthquoku
with n Duo 9.11 Soiuonotor." mm. mm R23. "‘81.. Tokyo
Univ., No 3, 1966. p N.

llirono. 1.; Shyohiro. 8.: Panto. 14.; Roido, K. "Roi-o Attonuotion
1n Shallow “Olen." PAPL m1" AND WIN”... No 2. 1956. p 19.

Hirono. 1.; sumac. 5.; rerun; n.; ma. K. up mutton. m
GEOPHYS., no 2. 1961. p 20.

Total. Ii. 8.; Two. H. A. "Soiuic Oboorvotion at Ono Kiloootor
Depth.“ Contribution in Geophyoiu in lionot of Reno Gutonbon.
Vol 1. Motion. 1959.

word. P. L. "Conparioon with Data (to. o Hotvork of Station and
Small Tripartite Arroyo on Kilom, ﬂovnii," BULL. 3319401.. 900.
menu. No 2, 1973. p 63.

Zoltonn. A. D. "Sutfoco Hove Couponcnto in Microooiol," m.
sermon. soc. mama. no 2, 1969, p 54..

239
FOR OFFICIAL I138 ONLY
M ONlCIAL "8! ONLY

APPMIX I. BULLET!“ 0' WM. mmmm ”CORD!!! I? MIMIC swarm
PM 1 JUN! 1972 1'0 1 JULY 1976 I0! "MCI! "ION!!! All! COESTRIJQTID

   

9.VI.72r.(b) 19. mm 4.4 m 'a , a:

1 .
I 2
2 "NI.” r. ' 2.1.30. 3&3 4.1 3.. 80 ‘I .
a 120‘...” '4 ' 2,4”42‘02 . . . a o
‘ 13.“.72 I‘. 0.10.80.0 8.0- . 0.9 . 20K 0
0 UNI.” ' O ' 2743243°01 .9. 7.7 M “(3) 7
C UNI.” l'. 1.04.000 3.3 04‘ 3
7 I9.Vl.72 fo‘ 0. 2.03.2 - 0.2 - 2 '-
0 0N...” Po ' 8.4 2.28.4 - 0.0 .4. 2 a
O LWIJ: I“. ' IQGQSOJ 5.. 3.8 .‘H 8 O
11 19M”. 0. 18.22.8043 44. .41 8
1 2 ”All.“ 3'. ‘ 3.83. 20.. 7.0 0.. 2 3
:3 29mm: r- n.1o.44.o 4.4 0.4 a

14 7.Vlll.72r. $182833 3.0 0.0 0934'! 1

1.Vﬂl.72 r. - 1 2.30.132 0.0 0.2 2 .
:1 15.\'Ill.72r. 1.34.3.0“ 0.4 0.0 3 - n. .
:0 ”Mil-72 r- 21.51354 - - a so
:9 “VIII.” '4 2830.212 ‘0. .91 2 .7 ... .M
3° solx'n '4 ' 048““0‘ 8.. .g. 3 ‘ O. 0‘ t.bl..
21. “NJ: r. ~ 1400.400 0.0 7.0 3 - 2“
22 SJXJ'.’ r. - 10.04. 20.: 2.: :3 g 0 N00
23 74'X472 '4 ' 200800.200 I . -
’34 a.lx.72r.- 2119.30.15 . 0.0 0.4 a so
20 0.0072 c; 23.20.07.2 0.0 0.0 3 -°
20 IOJXero' 0.20.3.0 g: 0.0. g I.

,~ 4.30.031 . - -
:70 13%;; 2- 159.40.: 1.2 1.4 a so
20 16.x.72r. 21.2.3. 0.8,. 9.2 - a so
00 16.x.12 r. ° 21.413?! 0.0 - a 30
8‘ 2‘4X4n '0 ' £2.48“. ‘7 0.0 2 .
02 4.)“.12 r.' 000.30.: 0.0 0.0 0 00
00 20.Xl.72r.' 10. 0. as 0.1 0.7 0 :0
04 2|.XI.72 r. - 1.40.103 7.4 0.1 2 -
85 23.Xl.72 r. $00.00.? 0.0 0.0 2 .-
” 34x'l072'0'. ”4’14 “0° ‘qo 8.0 2 -
37 ““472'0' to A .08 ‘07 M 8 ‘.
00 10.10:.72 r. - . 1130.443 4.0 0.0 - 0 :0
39 .4201; '0 ° 80‘7ot7lv .02 '5‘ ' 2 '
40 ”.135; 10. 0.01.1 0.0 7.0 24K 0
01 18.”va 0.32.403 4.0 0.2 ' 268.“ 0
02 19.”) m 1.10.09.3 2.0 - 0 0.0
“‘3" 1° 10"“!qu umber; 2. date: 3. an. Mun. limit“. «coating
0. t . «condo; s. K 6. nub" of m union. plus an
"stem network;

(4) fm the nation bulletin 1' (Comic: Sotmlogtcol audition)
(b) day. conch. year (c) Ch 2‘0

70!! OFFICIAL US! MY
Appendix I. continued

* null“
43

44
. 40
40
47
40
40
' 01
02
00
04
00
00
07
00
00
0O
01
02
00
04
00
00
07
00
00
70
71
12
.74
70
70
77
70
70
00
1
. 2
00
04
00
00
07
00

01
02
00
04
00
00
07
00
00

'00 ONIOIM. "8! ONLY

'00 ORIGIN. 080 ONLY

2am. 7.07.221 7.4 0.0
20.070 f. 2.02.220 0.0 0.1
20.073 r. - 0.17. 0.0 4.0 0.4
LII.” r. ‘ 20.1040.0 7.0 0.0
4.0.70 r. 11.17.20.2 0.0 0.0
ulnar. 131.24.: 0.0 7.4
- 5-0073 '0 4.01“? 0.0 0.0
10.0.73 r. 14.40.41.0 0.0 0.0
"LII.” r. 14.40.10.0 0.0 0.0
".0.” '0 2 1‘70‘09‘ ‘3 .9.
I9.II.73 r. 20.00.10.0 4.1 0.0
”II.” 7‘. 1Q0°.a0o° ‘0 .0.
“Juan. 10.13.34,. 3,5 0..
22.IV.73 r. 2.07.44.1 0.7 7.0
29.".73 r. 2&40.00.4 4.0 0.2
00'073 '0 ‘00”.“0: :“o 0..
2.V.70 r. 0.11.40.0 0.4 0.0
0.V.73 I'. 17.40.10.0 0.0 0.0
53.73 I'- 17. 0.10.0 .0.0 7.0
ON.” I'. 2.17.40.0 4.0 0.2
IO.V.73 r. 10.12.40.4 0.7 0.0
020Vc73 '0 8 124.19.? 0.0 - .
030.073 '. .0 310.39, ‘0. .03
I’.V.?3 'o ' 00.00.40.4 ‘5. so.
21VJ3I'. 20.02. 0.0 4.2 0.0
”N.” '0 2. 0 2. ‘3 7.1 7"
31.V.73 r. 21.00.14.2 0.1 0.1
. I.VI.73 r. 10.24.400 0.0 0.0
Mm r. 2243.310“ - -
ISVIJJ r. 10.41.11.0 0.0 -
“NI.” r. 10.20.40.7 0.0 0.1
20.“.73 r. 20.40.44. 2 0.0 7.4
2,0“073 to .0 ‘0 at! - 0.1
0.VII.73 r. 10.10. 4.0 0.0 7.0
' I3.Vll.73 r. 0.01.01.3 4.7 7.0
”Nil.” r. 22. 2030.0 4.0 0.0
2$.Vll.73 r. 0.04.40.0 0.4 0.1
2S.Vll.73 9. 21.40. 20.0 4.2 0.7
wuaar. 1.42m , 1.9 3.4
0.VIII.73 r. 20. 2‘0‘900 0.0 -
13.3%.;3 r. 20.44. 1.0 4.0 -
0 0 '0 210 27051.:
marl: '- “w '° ‘-“ ’i’
. o' r. 20.00.0 0' 0
' I9.VIII.73 r. 13.39.331” 0.. .2.
27.VIII.73 I'- 10.00.00.1 4.0 7.7
IO. “.73 r.-11.00.00. 2 0.0 7.7
IMX. 73 r. 21.14. 20.0 4.0 0.0
I6.IX.73 r. 22.1 0.00.4 - -
I7.IX.7JI'. 10.01.10.2 0.0 0.0
22.an r. 10.04. 10.0 0.0 -
ﬁc'xxga '0 ' 11.18.”.0 '91 -
. . I'. 7.40.0 4.0 0 0
13.x.nr. . 7. 3.24.9 3.0 0::
241
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040010-!)

m 071161“. 088 ONLY
Appendix I. continued

* “null-

1” 11.11.73 I“. ‘ 7.20.10.0 4.7 0.0
202 15.1.1315 . 7. 4.40.2 0.0 0.0 ‘ .
10: 15.x.” I". 10.17.00.7 0.7 0.2
100 17.x.” l’. 20.40.00.4 0.0 0.0 0 ‘1
104 19.1.73 f. 0.40.02.4 4.0 0.0
100 20.1.73 1'. 14.02.40.0 - 0.0 4.8 ‘
100 ”.XJJ f. 10.14.07.0 4.2 0.0
107 29.1.70 1'. 22. 24. 0.2 0.1 7.0
2“ ”.1.” 1'0 310000.20‘.. ‘0‘ .
100 1.11.73 1'. 7.10. 14.0 0.0 0.0
110 12.11.73 l'. 4.00.00.0 0.0 0.4
111 13.11.7315 7.04.00.1 0.0 0.0
112 19.11.73 P. 21.00. 2.2 0.0 7.3
110 19.3.7013 20.01.21.0 1.0 ' 0.0
114 20.x1.73 I’. 1 2.21. 01.4 4. 2 0.0
110 “$1.73 r. 12.24.10.0 0.0 0.0
110 27.”.73 l‘. 22.40.40.4 0. 2 . 0.4
:27 ”$1.73 '0 . 21.47.1103 ‘00 .
110 9.31.73 1'. 17.41.10.0 0.1 7.4
110 15.111313 f. 0.44.110 . 4.0 0.7
1“ 19.11131". '7.04.40.2“ 8.8 .
‘32 ° 21.111.731'. 28.3000 248 ‘02 0"
1 33 23.10.73 r. 21.03.10.0 0.0 0.7
184 unmar. 10.22.47,: - 4.3 0.7
138 woman ‘ use. 3.3, 0.0 0.4
1 20 “X1133 P. 21.00. 01.4 4.0 0.4
12" 28.1mm r. 12.00.01.0 0.0 0.0
i a 30 0x11.” '0 7.”. 10. 3.0 5.1
0” 31.111.” 1'. 170.2021.“ 0.0 7.3
100 2.1.7415 20320.0 2.2 0.0'
:8: 701014 0'. 10.14.00.. ‘9. .g:
102 0.1.74 1'. 4.3.44.0 0.0

100 14.1.74 1'. ' 7.01. 7.2 0.0 0.0
104 19.1.7“. 4. 1. 0.2 0.0 0.0
“0 20.1.74 r. 0.40.03. 2.. 0.4 0.1
100 ”.1574 f. 2 2.00.40.0 0.2 7.0

wuwbwwbowwOObuuw»uouuooo»uoonuupuonno

0
100 3.11.74 1'. 14.14. 0.1 0.7 0.0 4
140 6.11.7415 20.07.11.0 0.2' 0.0 4
141 0.11.74 1'. 10.00. 30.4 0.0 . 0.0 4
14 2 0.11.74 1'. 28,30.37.3 0.0 0.0 2
3“ 00011014 '- 10.00.17.0“ .. - a
140 15.11.74 1'. 0.34 21.0 0.0 0.1 4
140 16.11.74 r. 10.44. 20.0 4.3 0.1 0
1.1 16.".74'. 11.23.2243,, “ 0.0 - 2m
2“ 07.11010 '0 1 234.2198“ ‘0‘ - 2
140 20.11.74 I'. 4. 0. 20.4 0.0 7.4 4
100 23.11.74 1’. 7. 21. 40.4 0.0 0.0 0
16: ”001074 '0 7022-”.2 89° 7" ' a
062 24011074 '4 21:”.220“0.2 - a

21.2
m OFFICIAL 083 0111.!

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00050R000100040010-6
NI ontcm. US! ONLY
mpoodtx I. continued

21:1" :

 

I“ ”34!? 9.43.340... M . I15 _
' 168 2.0".1‘ '0 5.18.403“ ' .
35° 2.10.74 l‘. “01.1307 9.. 7.0 ' O
1.7 all.“ f. 0.‘ 2.33.9. 0.3 7.‘ . O
830 6.31.1". ’ 10". .05.: 1.. O 0
1.0 ‘c'to7‘ f. ' .28. ‘0“0‘“ ‘. - .
‘00 'Ou'c7"o ‘ t. ”t 3.: 7» 1.. 33
10‘ 7JnJ‘ f.‘ 30:“ 0.5 7.0 .03 I.
{.3 lull.” l'. : 22.3..89.‘ . Q3 7.0 I. ’ ‘
. ‘03 ‘5."‘34 f. 23. 0.45.0.1‘ ‘03 ' 30
’06 :‘cu'o7‘ l‘. :O.‘:‘ .01 - . - .
1°. 22...." h 0.49.3“) b». 7.7 o
‘07 ”.mJ‘ fa 12.40.48.$ .. 3.0 .‘

lCB . CJVJC h ‘OJOJ'IJ 7.0 0..
‘09 UV. " r. 22.2“ 28..“ 3.1 -
’7 0 7JVo7‘ f. ‘6."0”. I. ".0 .0.
‘71 74W“ 9. ' 31. ‘a’... 3.. ‘1
17 2 ”JVJ‘ I'. ' 003.c23.’ ’00 .0.
‘74 '50'Vo7‘ f. ' ‘ 0.86.54d. .0. .‘7
:78 15W.“ '0 ' 1.0 ‘0“. ‘0’ 70:
170 "Many manna 4.0 3,3
17, ’.Ilv07‘ to ' auo‘too ‘0 . M
m 10.1mm. “saw“ 8.4 '3
379 ".JVJQ I“. 4.40. 1.5 0.. 3.3
180 ”Jyo7‘ l'. ' 32. thud 3.0 .0.
181 27.".74 l'. ' 7.1 1. 31.2 4.7 1.‘
182 27.”.7‘ f. 7.30. 0.5 ‘3 0..
27.".7‘ f. 10.80.47» £7 9‘.
, tV.“ l'. 33.31. 3.8.0 3.5 9..
“v° 1‘ '0 23.91.”.4 ” I“!
,OVOT‘ P. ‘ 12- ‘. 2.8 it .03
- tumor. 0.9.37.1 -” ' - «-
20.V.‘l(r.; 23.4 240.3 .13 0.2
- ”OVO1‘rO - 30.18.33.° &, .
3' 0'07‘ l'. 21.49. 2G°.. - O
ltv'a7‘ r0 ' 1:0‘8. .g‘ ‘1 C
Mil.“ r. _‘ 8.27.89.120 4. 2

issbuoébgnggzuuoloSogalo

§§§§§§§§§§§EE§E§§E§§§§§§

5N1.“ r. ' 8.11. 4.5 3.8 0.8 u '

7.“.7‘ r. 14.30.88.4' 8.0 1.0 .
11W.“ 1'. ' 11.37.1QG 3.0 8.7 12
19.“.76 r.~ 0.21. 28.7 8.3 0.0 o-
20.“.7‘ '- ' 7W '0’ . -
utmoz‘ r0 ' .0 182.7 .0. “ o
IZWIJ‘ r.‘ 2143.410 3.7 3.8 33
25mm 1’. 1944.274“ 5.: - 10
acvuo1‘ I'. ’13- {“0399 2 ‘9. O ‘3
23.Vll.u r. a.«.27.s 4.0 - . as
2&VIIJ6 r. 21.“.1ﬂ0 7.8 0.8 28.5
2&VIIJC r. ' 21.84.813 3.8 8.8

u‘u0‘50.»AuuonoOAwwb‘owb.bonus»;bubuvoobuvoubbwbbvub

10.Vlll.76 r. 5.89.833 3.8 4.9

263
POI ontcm. US! OIL!
Appendix I. continued

III-ll

208
208
, 210
211
212
218
214

218'

218
217
218
219
220
221
222
224
228
228
227
228
228
280
281
282
288
284
238
238
287
238
‘ 288
240
248
244
248

- 240 ' _
241

249
240
280
281
282
2.88

10mm 0.
333"“. 74 r.
”NIH." l‘.
23.W".74 r. '
”NW." 0. ‘
3'X47‘ l'. ‘
13.|X.74 r.
18.IX.74 r.
18.“.74 f. ’
200'X07‘ 9.

22.01.11 1‘. -
25M." 1'. '
2011.1 1 r.
270IX018' 0 '
”4IX07‘ '0
‘0X01‘ r0 '
5.x.u 1'.
mm. 1'.
10.11.11 1'.
10X.“ 0.
15.11.11 1-.
”4X078 f. '

. 20x I078 r 0 '
1.30.74 1'.
4.)“.74 r.

20.Xl.74 r.
23.)“.74 r.
23.)!le r.
270X'07‘ r.
2.Xll.74 r.
9.Xll.74 1 .
l2.Xll.74 r.
10.11074 1'.
2|.Xll.74 1'.
22.Xll.‘11 r.‘ '
22.)“! 74 1'.
27.101.“ 0. ‘
$.Xll .14 r.
30.10111 1.
30.Xll.10 r.'-
30.201.“ 1-.
31.XII.T4 r. .
4.1.75 1-.
4.1.15 1'.
SL1!» r. -
13.1.1515
- 1.1.1.750.
_ 9.”.75 r.
10.".15 r.
16.0.75 1'.
21.".15 r.
l.lll.751'.
3.lll.1$ r. -

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

20.10400” 0.0

0.212200 22
040400 00
1200000 00
10. 0. 1.0 0.0
0.01.4000 2.0
-000200 00
00400 00
1.02400 0.0
1. 2.41.0 0.0
020001 00
040000 02
000100 02
11. 200.0 00
. 0.0mm 00
11. 1.02.2 0.0
0 0004 00
211.400 4.1
0uawz 00
10.00400“ 0.0
200220 00
2uu00 an
0 0400 01
10.40.11.0 2.2
uuL1A 00
0.20 0.0 0.1
010200 00
2210400“ 00
1a0ua 00
10.40400 10.
1012220 00
1020100 00
020101 00
0mw20 -
04000.0 0.2
21.00201 1.0
001» 07
02220.4 -
1.20. 1.0 0.0
040101 01
10.20102 0.0
14.2201.0 10
0. 0.00.1“ «-
.2040401. 00
200. 1.0 .-
2000100 00
020.201 00
140120 -
1040000 00
150m@ 00
010400 40
1210100 00
1.00. 1.0 ~ 4.1
2“

8:8
8.7

0.0.

8.8
4.8
7.7
8. 2
7. 2
8.0
8.0

8.4 .

0.0
070
0.0
0.0
1.2
‘ 0.0
0.0

8.0-

8.8
0.0

358

0?.
8.7
0.4
8.0
8.2
7.2
8.8
8. 2

8.8
20

11.8
00 ~ .ﬁ.
8.0
7.8
7.0

7.8
6.1

9.8

'02 0171mm. USE ONLY

0”“9‘”.w0”§

00010001001002on.0:20.1250anauuwufowbb0wbuuooww2uA

o
I
0

0

Q

4

unsunuo

0....
.8
.
a
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY
Appendix I, continued

* III-nu

204 calms r. 9.09.10.4 4.9 7:0
200 I0.lll.75r. 10.29.10.2 2.0 7.0
200 1001.750 17.00.07.9 10 0.9
207 23.Ill.7$r. 0.40.47.0 2.9 0.0

200 23."le l‘. 0.43. 10. O 4. 2 0.7
200 2$JIIJ$ r. 0.00.47.7 7.4 0.0
'17 0 “JIIJS r. 0.47.17.8 4.0 0.3
27 1 ”.IIIJS l'. 0. 0.80.0 0.0 7.4
272 ”.lllJSl'. 13.43.07.0 0.1 7.7
273 3JV.75 r. 3.10.31.7 7 0 7.0

0
274 27.IV.7Sr. 10. 4.91.0 0.0 0.0
270 20.Iv.7sr. 20. 9.13.0 4.7 9.0
270 ll.v.7sr. 9. 4.27.9 9.9 0.1
277 - l2.V.75r. 0.20.00.4 0.9 0.0
.270 12.v.75r. 10.47.29. " 9.7 -
'279 l3.V.7$r. 17.29.49.4 7.9 7.9
200 lS.V.15r. 12.40.02.4 4.4 0.9
201 luau. 1.40.200 9.7 7.0
292 I£.V.75r. 10.49.1504 9.9 0.4
200 l9.V.7$r. 11.91.009 0.0 7.0

204 20mm. 9. 2.02.9 9.9 0.9
290 30.V.75r- 29. 2917.0 0.0 0.9
290 l.VI.75r. 9.10.009 0.4 , 7.9
207 10.Vl.75 r0 ' 0.260 802 .01 .78

200 IONIJS r. 10.30.4Q7 0.0 0.7
200 tVllJS r. 0.40.22.2 0.0 0.0
.200 11.“le r. 0.00.250 2.3 -
201 20.Vll.75 r. 4.07.“.0 . 0. 2 7.1
292 zsvqu r. 17.11.14.0 ._ 0.0
299 20.vn.7s r. 10.99442 4.4 0.4
204 2.Vln.75 I‘. 10.03. 24.0 4.4 0.0
200 5.V"I.75 r. 10. 1. 20.0 0.0 7.0
200 6.Vlll.7$r. 0.20.30.0 7.0 7.2
207 9.Vl".7$ l'. 0.00. 0. 2 1.4 0.2
”0 ISVI‘LTS I”. 0.40.10.0 0.0 '-
000 I9.VIII.7$ 1-. 13.40. 20.0 1.4 0.0
002 27.Vlll.75 r. 10. 4.400 4.0 0.7
300 ”NIIIJSI'. 20.10.20.0 4.0 0.0
304 6.IX.75 l'. 7.00.203 0.0 0.0
303 6JXJS r. 0.10. 3.0 4.0 -
a” 60'x97s '0 230 30. 31.8 7. 2 -
007 7JX.7$ f. 23. 12.37.3 &3 7.0
000 .110'X075 r0 190320‘606 0.0 ‘
010 10.“.751'. 2221.432 1.1 0.7
011 230'X07s ’0 7o 903‘33 . O
012 24.“.75 r. 0.10.00.0 0.1 -
, 013 I.X.7Sr. 0. 0. 3.0 2.0 - -
014 9.x.75 I'. 10.10.00.2 4.2 0.7
010 16.x.75r. 0.04.00.0 0.0 0.0
010 17.x.75r. 0.47. 0.4 7.7 7.1
017 - 26.1015 l‘. 10200.40.2 4.3 0.0
010 31.x.75 r. 10.2 2.20.0 0.0 7.0
310 2.Xl.75 f. 0.40.40.0 4.7 0.0

265
FOR OYPICIM. 083 ONLY
Amu-ml 1 n I. «mm: Imwd

320
321
322
323
324
328
328
327
328
328
330
831
332
333
334
338
388
337
338
338
340
341
34 2
34:
344
348
348
347
348
'348
880
381
382
. 383
384
388
380
387
388
388
380
381
382

Notes. The depth of the bssenent under the Alan-«ta station of 6.2 In

8.11.75 r.
13.10.75 r.
16.075 r.
20.10.75 1'.
22.70.75 1'.
24.10.75 r.
”$1.75 r.

2.701.75 r.

3.701.75 r.

6.101.75 r.

9.70075 r.
12.10075 r.
’9. x1135 1’.
19301.75 r.
20. 101.75 r.

2. .76 1*.

1.0.76 r.
14.0.76 r.
16.0.76 r.
10.0.76 r.

' ’.0.76 r.
1.11.78 '0
6.0.76 r.

Jmun
10.76 t.
.:'1.76 r.

r' '.76r. -

L76 r.
th76r.

2°...ll.76r. '

2.1V.76 r.

12.1 V.“ r.‘ ’

”.0076 r.
6.V.76 r.
15V.“ r.
27.V.76 r.
1.V1.76 r.
1. V1.76 r.
3".“ r.
20.".76 r.
21 .Vl.76 r.
27.".76 r.
28.“.76 r.

'08 022181“. 08! ONLY

1 nnnn— "

. 7.88.22.7
7. 1.81.3
1.38.428

22.40. 1.8

21.84.84.3

20.88. 8.1

18. 8.34.8
8.41.81.8

18.18. 8.8
3.47.18.3

14.31.38.3

23.88.83.7

21. 8.14.7

21.44.102
3.88.28.8
3.88.88.4
0. 8.48.4

10.10.20.8
8.28.21.8

12.41. 8.8

12.18. 7.8
21. 8.41.8
4. 4.48.3
3.33.34.4

17.40.37.4

11.38.48.4

20. 8.12.8

14.84.88.1

18.48.41.8
1. 0.32.7

13.18.”.7
2.22.82.1
7.38.48.8
2.20.88.8
3.28.14.0

17.48.88.7

17.12.48.3
17.13.82.0
8. 3.88.8

2027.313
20.51.2896.

8262191863

21.48.11.3

ls taken as the reduction level 10-0.

*The Kumenty (K) and Chink (Ch) stations of the regional network are
indicated. the data of which were used to find the coordinates of the system.

“The earthquakes not recorded by the complex setmlogtcal expeditlon
stntlon. The the was taken by the 10178) station.

266

7.8
8.8
701
4.7
4.0
091

.4.1

8.4
90 1
308
4e 2
3.8
058
8.0'
.01
8.7
402
8.8
8.8
4e4
4.8
3.1
4.7

7.8
8.8
4.0
8.1

8.3
3.8
‘08
4.2
8.1

4.1

003
7.0
4.0
40°
3.0
8.4

8.7

4.7

8.8
3.0

7.7
8.8
8.3
0.3
8.4

8.5
- 8.8
8.0
8.7
8.8
8.8
8.3
8.8
8.4
8.8
8.3
8.8
,8.8
8.4
7.2
7.8
8.7
8.8
7.2
8.7
8.2
7.8
0..
7.0
7.0
0.3

' 0.3

7.4
7.3
9.3
0.9
8.0
7.8

FOR OFFICIAL 08! 001.7

aubwdﬁobwuuwubo

.09.“..00‘0300900N00&5.

poouoaaacuo

ooooaoaaaoo

85°

b”
.388 I I I

ﬂ

at 00.0.

ﬂ

18
APPENDIX II.

m ONICIAI. US! ONLY
BULLETIN 01’ NEARBY INDUSTRIAL EXPLOSION!» RBOORDED BY THE

WIO‘I‘EI.MRIC SYSTEM PROM 1 JUNE 1972 to 1 JULY I976

 
 

     

. 2
‘ & “on r. o. ‘58:. a 7.. M”
2 ISOV'on '0 ' $81.46.? 9'. ﬂ
3 1,."572 to ' 1 ‘0”.67.‘ I *. H
4 f SMMZ r. - l 2.57 7.1 "
5 Mimi-.7 11.5mm o.o “
e I|.Vll.72r.- 1.“. 1,4 - "
7 lS.VII.12 r. - o. 1.33,. - u
. 3.“..721‘. ' 0.0. ‘0‘. ' B.“ IO
0 IJXJ: r. . 1 1.55.4“! 7.5 Kocur-Iulok
1o INK.” r. : (2:22.22. 2.6 ‘ $0 ' H0400
11 20.002 rv 20. 3.50.0 - 5.4 Knew-mus
1 2 22.IX.72 r. 0.54.05.2 4.4 ”Moo
‘3 30x07: '0 : 591‘.1..° 04°. “tut-M“
.14 3.10.12 r. 10. o. 3.2 7.5 "
~15 2.Xll.12r. 10.20. 0.2 0.0 "
lo l3.l.73 r. - 3,51. 9,4 5,7 "
n 3|.IJ3I'.‘ 10.50.40,: 7.: "
16 5.8.73 r. . - 5.55.55.5 5.5 Hodoo
10 23.".133'. _. 6.66.432 7.6 Rotor-Mal:
2° "0 ".73 f. .0 .oaua c- M”
21 $.VII.‘I3I-. : 14.40.: 1.5 1.5 [pent-Mal:
22 ‘9.“‘013'. 0.:3o‘1.. 7" ‘. ”k
33 l’.V"J3 r. . ‘092793‘00 ... h?“’m.k
35 JINIIJJ '- ' 1 101.000.: ' f. M”
26 mum r. 5.20.523 1.5 nachos”
27 6.Vlll.73r. 2' 16.26. 6.6 6.6
26 IO.VIII.73 r. ' 10.37. 6.6 1.6
20 "AMI.” r. ' 20.87.61.6 - North of AIM-At.
:0 4.le13!’. 941.50.. 5.5 Kotur-Iulnk
31 SJXJJ r. - 5.40.25.4 - ' cum
32 mung.- 11. 2.54.2 '5.5 x.”
35 szxJa r. . 10. x . 10.2 5. 5 Kotur- 5k
3‘ ‘0 X.73 r. ' 1:: 33.33602: 602 '
35 5X33fw - ' z - ch53.
36 6X.” r. 1 2.40. 6.0 6.6 m: y
67 um. ll.50.20.6 6.7
66 9.1.1”. - 1 236.27.? 6.0
39 10.x.73 r. 1 1.25.55.5 - z:
40 12.x.13r. 1143.4” 5.0 ..
‘1 “ox-n r. ' ! 1.31048.“ 6.3 M
42 mum. . 12.61.64.6 6.4

Key: 1. date; 2. time, hours, Maura, seconds; 3. place of explosion;
a. day, oonth, your; 5. *nt Tolgor otauon

247
M OFFICIAL USE OIL!
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040010-!)

1900110111 [1. cont 111000

a n..—

43 “3.73 r.
44 la}. 7131-.

‘ ‘5 . '11‘13'0
1°. 193.7315
‘7 204.7315 1
4’ 251%?!“ '
8° ' 21 .XJ31‘. '
5‘ 'ﬂoXo'n '0 '
.2 ' ZXUUI'.

‘ 03 3.”.131»
84' 3.11.131.
88 “$1.73 I'.
80 ”H.731.
07 25.”.73 r.
80 20.Xl.73 r. _ .
80 ' ”$1.73 I'.
00 3.”.73 f.
' 0‘ tXIIJJ l'.
. 03 . ‘ 03"..” f0
.3 ILXILUI'. '
0‘ ’ "0xu073 '0
08 l9.X".73r.
00 2$Xllﬂ3ro
Q? “ﬁll.” r.
as 12111.13»
00 294".” r.
. 7o LUMP.
‘. 11 8.1.141.
72 OJ.“ 1'.
73 . 94.74 1'. _‘.
74 ° 22.!.74r. :
73 ‘ 23.57013 '
00_ 25.1.1415: .
77 “I07‘ '0 '
10 29.1.7415 °
70 30.l.14r.
60 5.".24 r. '
01 7.".741'.
32 ’JIJ‘CI‘. ‘
08 , . 12.11.14 6.-
B4 ' ”JV“ 1'. '
' 90 16.".7‘ l'. “

, ' , BO _ 1,0ﬂ07‘r0 '
01 . 22.1mm v

30 23.0.70.

50 -. ' I.!£l.71r.

00 3J0.“ r.

01 4411.7“.

92 IZJIIJM'.

93 ”MI.“ I'.

94 ' ' 22.11131 1'.

FOR OPHCIAI. 08! ONLY

8.28.203

' 8134.141?

8.40. 0.8
11. 1.81;0 °
11.18.“: .
12.28. 0.4
0. 0.88.0
11.14.84.1
11.08.28.4
11. -;.10.0
8.22;18.0
11.21.01.0
11.88. 4.0
8. 0.24.2
10.4128
11. 0.84.0
11.10.82.8
11.11.11.0
10. 0.28.8
11~.81.'80.,8
11. 8.28.4
11. 8.14.8
10.81. 0.0

' $83.28.}

11.10.44,:
1.34.81.4
11.80.10,:
11.81.240
8.10.01.4
12. 2.81.1
11. 1.88.0
11. 0.21.4
0.44.11.0
0.10.18.0_
11.80. 8.1

' 10.60. 3.0

10.42.02.0
1 1.14.28.’
11.11.42:
1.87.41.0
11,10,141 _ ~
11.88.141
11.10. 1.:
21.211.82.13

12.20. 1.8 _
0.20.10.1
11.20.44.0
12. 8.81.4
11.22.1100
12. 1.80.4
1. 8.24.0
8.41.28.0-

260

P03 OWICIAI. USE ONLY

1;:
1.8

.g.

1.9

’0.1

0.8
0,7

' 1.0

7.0

8.2
0.? ’

_ 1.2

4.8
0.0

310000
0 . '

é

'0'0000000000090'..8

incur-801011
110000
. . ,
. .

gum-w

3:32:01“
H0000

000°»

9000 of Aim-A80
Inuit-3111011

.0
I

0. -
_O
O
O

npclupy

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040010-6
”POM“: II . 0011011111041

101 .

102
103

104'

108
100
107
108
100
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
126
120
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
130
187
138
139
140
141
142
143
144

148

20.01.11».
10.10.10.
'0'V0z‘ I“.

113:; ::

1‘0I’V07‘ '0 ' .

124V.“ 1'.
‘60'Y07‘ '0 '
1.0'V0?‘ f. '
221W.“ 1‘.
23.1%“ r.
24JVJ4 1'.
”JV.“ I”.
aJVJ4 r.
70V07" f.
.0 Vot‘ f. ‘
”0V07‘ '0
”0 V07‘ '0 '
”oVo?‘ '0 '
Io.Vl.14 r.
’20V‘07‘ '0
13“.“ r.
a0w07‘ '0 '
”Ono" '0 .
”a “01‘ '0 '
”a "07‘ to
9.1mm r.
llVll.“ r.
IlVﬂJC f.
"ﬁll." r.
:0. WI." '0
ZSVIIJA r.
6.V"'I.‘N 1'.
9.Vﬂl.74 r.
1 I .Vm.74 r.
BLV‘IIJC l'.
24.Vl|l. 74 r.
27.V"l.74 l'.
20.VIII.14 I'.
ZIXJ‘ r.
JJXJN 1'.

4.1101“.
7. IX. 74 0.

1.1.14 0. -
6.x.“ 0.
19.11.11 0.
22- X." r.
”$.74 r.
2.Xl.74 0.
310.14 0.

I2.Xl.14r.

FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

0.42.02.0
10.00.11,!)
10. 0.10.0,
11. 6.34.4
11.10. 0.3
0.21.100
11.01.40.1
10.04.01.0
11.10.40.4
11.40. 0.0
11.11., .0
12. 1.00.4
11.20. 1.0
0.44.163
11.12. 2.2
11.10.20.0
11.11.10.2
11.21.20.4
12.10.14.0
11. 0.24.0
11.10.04.0
11.10.00.2
0.11.20.4
0.00.14.4
1. 0.00.1
0.00.40.0
11;00.24.4
1. 0.12.0
4. 0.10.0
11.20. 0.4
11. 0.20.0
0.20.10.0
0.20.00.0
0.40.01.4
0.20.20.0
0.10. 0.0
0.40.100
11. 1.10.1
11. 0.44.2
11. 0.21.2
20.22. 2.1
11. 0.00.0
1. 0.04.1
11.20.20.0
0.02.40.0
10.01.41.0
11. 1. 0.0
11.01.4o.2
0.41. 4.0
0.20.00.1

11.17.2‘3

249
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

L806.»
0

100112-301“

K000040101:
000011000: of 03m

80000
\ppoml tat It . continual

1

140
147
140
140
100
101

102-

100
104

100
100
107
100

100
100
101
102
100
104
100
100
107
100
100
170
171
172
170
174
170
170
177
170
170
100
101
102
100
104
100
100
107
100
100
1”
101
102
100
104

FOR OPHCIAI. US! ONLY

-|7.Xl.74 f. '

20.ch r.
2mm r.

22.1”“.
29.1”".
1.1".“ r.

mime.
15mm».

16.XII.‘N 1‘.

1mm r.
'90 ”.070 f.
22.XII.‘Nr.
20.1“.” r.

27. X1134 '0
”JUL“ r.
31 .XII .71 r
90'075 r0 '
11.1.75 r.
”0' I15 I'.
21 .1575 r.
“.1075 '9

3| .le r. _
13.25:»

6.“.75 r.
”1.759.
IOJIJS r.
I I .IMS r.

IGJMSI'.

20.". r.
21a". 5".

LIJIJS r.
IMIIJSr.
NJIIJS r.
ILmJSr.
IMﬂ‘ISr.
I 0.01.75 r.
15-"le r.

1 $111.75 f.
I 0.01.75 r.
um.“ I'.
20cm.75 I'.

000v.” '0

0o'Vo7s l‘.
0.1VJSr.
10.1%"; f.
1 $.W.70 l'.
15.“.75 I'.
10.".75 l'.
IINIJS r.

0.07.40.7
22.40.40.0

10.22.20.0 '

11. 0.40.0
7.33.40.0
10. 0. 2.0

0. 0. 0.0
0.40.07.0
10.00. 0.0

7.21.01.4
11. 1.20.1
0.00.21.2
0.04.11.0

0.02.00.0
10.40.49o4
10.20.40.0
74 80.0..
11. 7.04.1
10. 1.41.0
7. 0.02.7
0. 1.14.0
0.40.10.0
7.02.20.4
11. 0.20.0
7.40.21.0
11. 2. 0.0
11.10.”.0
2.02.04.0
0.00.20.0
11.20.”.0
11.00512
11. 1.00.0
11. 7.40.0
0,5045;
1:. a. 4.0

12.00.41.0 ‘

1 1.20.21.0
1 1.24. 10. 1
1.00.20.0
0. 10.01.2
0.10.00.1
0.02.42.2

‘ 11.2mm; '

12. 4. 0.0
7. 7.04.0
0.40. 0.7

11.00.24.0
7. 2.21.0

. 1. 2.”.o -

0.:
1.0
0. .
an
9.1
1.3

0.2

1. 1
7.4
0.0
7.0

.3

.0
7.0
a.»

7,9
0.4
9.0
3.0
5.2
0.5

7.0

0.0 .

.g 2
7.0
7.3
4.0
0.0

0.4
6.0 -

0.2
0.4

9:4
0.:
f0
5,9
5.0
5,1
250

' Moo I
_ Impetus”
. .. .

nod»
“palms"
North of Ala-Au

.m.

north of Alla-Au
Moo
, _ ,A.

--. .. ..

I ”out: of Alﬁ-Au

um...»
Kant-lulu
. m?

o
a
o
o
o
o
o
' o
o
a
o
o
o
o

unﬁt-sunk
Rodeo

'02 onzcw. US! ONLY
Appmdix 11. 0000101100

108
100
101
108
100
200
201
202
208
204
208
208
207 '
208
200
210
211
212
218
214
218
218
217
218
210
220
221
222
228
224
228
228
227
228
220
280
281
282
284
288
288
287
288
280

2.40
~ 2.11
242
240 .
‘ 244
240

MR OHIOIAI. 088 ONLY

l9.lV.75 r. '

N W38 1‘.
”JV.” 1'.

23.IV.75 r.
6.V.?5 r.
RAMS r.
IDA/.75 r.
a0v01s r8
23.V.75 r.
25. v.15 r.
31.V.75 r.
2.Vl.75 r.
3.Vl.7$ r.
INNS r.
13.Vl.7$ r.
I 4.Vl.75 r.
I 7.VI.1S r.
22.Vl.15 r. .
- 22.Vl.7$ r.
27.Vl.75 1'.
l4 V0.75 I‘.
7. VIIJS r.
1.Vll.75 r.
9.Vll.75 r.
I] .VIIJS r.
ILVIIJS r.
ILVIIJSI'.
l9.Vll.7$ r.

'21 .Vll.75 r. '

2$.Vll.7$ r.
27.Vll.7$ l'.
”NIIJS r.
I .Vlll.75 r.
3.Vlll.75 r.
IO.VIII.75 r.

l‘l.Vll!.75|". '

"XIIIJS I'.
23.Vl".7$ l'.
”NHL”: 0.
”NIH.” I”.
”a ""075 1'0
”.VIIEJSI‘.
4.0013 r.

~ 5.111.150 :

MXJSI'.
16.|X.72r.
2$.|X.7$t ,
25,111.19. -

24x35“
"$556

- 18.41.18.0

14.01.20.4
0.22.0.0
11.14.00.0
11. 0.00.1
11.00.40.0
0.00.00.1
12.10.14.o
11. 0.40.0
1.01.200
10.00. 1.0
11.40.20.o
11.02.00.1
0.00.01.o
0.11.10._0
0.02.42.0
0.01.04.4
0.04.42.0
0.00.02.0
1. 0.44.4

1 7. 8. 8.0

11. 0.22.0
11. 0.01.1
1.20. 0.4
20.“. 0.0
1o.20.40.4
1.00.24.0
11. 2.41.1
11. 1.02.4
4.20.41.1
0.40.20.1
11.10.42.o
12.40.11.0
0.00.21.4
14.00.41.2
1.12.209
10.00. 0.2
0. 0.00.1
11.10.21.0
0.00.00.0
11. 0.21.0.
4. 4.10.0
20"....°

7.10.20.1

12. 1.02.2 ‘

11.12.80.8
8.18.843
11'. 0.09.2

. 1 1.22.333

8.80. 10.2

4

251

7.8
7.0 .
v:
0.
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
8.0
0.7
0.0
0.1
70..
7.0
7.7
7.0

'2
3:.
0.0
0.0
0.8

K000000031
110000
[cent-lulu:

0.000.0‘9-

nvcE-uy
Rout-M102

.W .

I knit-011101

000000000'

0 _ . .
1'0 0110 uorthmt
of Aim-A00
Moo

.0.

O

Roar-I'M

FOR OFFICIAL 088 081.!
1 2 4

240 Inn». 0.20. 0.7 ' ‘ 0.0 .' -32

247 17.30750 11.10. 0.0 0.0

240 30.107». 10.24.10.0 7.7 5:
2" ”JUN". 80:00 8.8 _ C m
280 LXIJS r. ‘06 ’4‘7.‘ ‘06

281 5.)“.75r. 0.40.87.0 0.0

282 14.110750 0.20.00.4 7.0 , w
2” 2$X|175h 708.020., 0..

204 10.100750 0.40.1” 7.0 ' a.
200 'Il.xu.15r. 0.3.13.0 ' . 7.0

200 22.XII.75r. 0.40.20.1 7.0 m
207 23.XII.7s:-. 10.00.40.2 0.0 1.40:
200 “.160. 20.00.10.0 0.0 _

200 10.1.70r. 11.42.00.0 0.0 '
20° 270'016 r. 20.! 8.1.0.8 . 0,? “I
. 201 31.l.76r. 7.12.00.7 7.1 not
2.2 3' 0.016.“ 9.81.35.4 893 u.‘
20 10.10100 0.00.11.1- 7.4

204 29.10160 0. 2.00.2 0.0

200 29.11.70 1*. 11.02.10. 1 . 0.0

200 9.lll.16r. _ 11. 0.40.0 0.4

207 21.11010. 11. 2.02.0 0.7 w
200 24.III.70r. 11.27.20.0 0.1 _ Mod
200 20.III.76r. 4.04. 2.0 0.0 '
27o 0.Iv.76r. 11.10.30.0 0.0 ‘
271 mm.» . 0.00.ao.0 7.0 '
272 21.1mm 11.20. 0.7 0.0 '
270 30.IV.76 r. 7.02.11.7 7.2: ‘
274 mm». 0.42.001 7.4 K0:
270 7.v.16 r. 0.02.20.2 0.0 M
270 I0.v.76r. 11. 4.02.4 0.0 '
272' 29.V.16r. 10.44.42.0 , 7.0 b
270 2M.“ 7. ' 11.00.07.o - . ‘
270 9.".160. 0. 2.40.0 7.0 M
200 II.VI.70r. 11.10.40.0 7.2

201 ”NM“. 11.27.00.0 0.7

202 24.1mm. 11.20.22.0 0.1

2". ”.WJOI'. 001‘. 1., 6.8 ' ‘
COPYRIGE‘I': Isdatel'otvo "huh." 1978

10865
630: 8166/0935 ' END '

252
FOR OFFICIAL "$8 ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDPOZ-OOBSOROOO100040010-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040010-5

END OF
- FICHE
DATE FILM

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040010-5
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040010-5

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPGZ-00860R000100040010-6