APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/0’: CIA-Ropoz-ooosonooo1oooaooe1-o
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8415
23 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 23/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040051-0
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

llcadlincs, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was eumrised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliteratcd are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MON-101M. USE ONLY.
P518108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 12/8415
23 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SClEHCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND. TECHNOLOGY
(rooo 23/79)

Commas

The Influence of Optical Byeten Ahez-ratione on the Main
Para-etc" of a Theml Scanning View:
(a. V. Whov, et a1; onmmcmam
mm', no n, 1%) OQOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

An Analyeie of the )btmlocical capability of a Coherent
Optical Method of Ibnitorins the Dupe oi’ Couple:
Surfaces

(V. A. Kudryavteev, V. 8. Bhapov; cum)-
mcmn mummy lo 11, 1978)

Reeulta and Develop-ental Proapecte in Optical Ceranica
(t. K. Volynete; cum-mncmmn
mm”" ’0 n, 1978) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOO

The Baeic Principles of the Autontion of the Ptoceea
oi’ Shaping Astronomical Optica
(A. u. Prokhorov, et a1.; mum-mum
”mm" m n, 1m) OCOIIOOOODOOOOOOOOOOIIO

The Selection of the audition for the Wing or
large Optical Couponente
(A. P. Boedanov, et al.) ammo-momma
mm'. no 11' lm) OOOIOOOOOOOOOOODOOO'OOO

Cent Couponente of Buperinvar for Optical Inatrunnte
(8. V. Rahinovich, ct al.) cam-mm
”mm" '0 n, 1m) OOOOOOCOOOOOIOOOCOOOCOO

The Statistical Characteristice of Optical Radiation
Attenuation in the Ground layer or the Atnoephere
(Swine. Mt“)

(V. L. Pilippev, et a1.) cum-momma
mmm" no u, 1W8) 0....0"........I.....

oa- [:u-ossn-nscr

P‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PAGE

110

30

F000]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm-s (Continued)

.

A Hut Scanning Viewer for Quality Control in the
humbly o: the Stator. o: mectricnl inching:
(I. II. manhunt», at 3.1.; camo-
mumn mamm' , lo 11, 1978)...

WMIGS
hinder of matron-neitntton Energy in Condensed
lbdia
- (V. n. Acranovtch, M. D. mania) Panes

mu ammo vozmmm v
mmanmm 83mm, 1978)

ob-

POR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSICS

UDC 621.385.326

THE INFLUENCE OF OPTICAL SYSTEM ABERRATIONS 0N T“! MAIN PARAHBTBRS OF A
TNBRHAL SCANNING VIBHBR

Leningrad OPTIxo-HBKHANICEESKAXA Paouxsunannosr' in Russian No ll. 1978
pp 3-5

(Article by B.V. Ukhov, v.6. Klochhova. 0.x. Krasnihov and 3.x. benza.
manuscript received 16 Nov 77]

[Text] Questions related to the influence of the aberrations
of the optical system of a thermal viewer on the angular
resolving power and the signal to noise ratio are treated.
Quantitative results are derived for various values of the
time constant of the photodetector.

We shall assume that the thermal viewer observes an object which takes the
form of two infinitely long strips. perpendicular to the direction of the
line scanning. The width of these strips and the spacing between them cor-
responds to the instantaneous viewing angle of the thermal viewer, which we
shall assume to be equal with respect to the line and frame. Let the x
axis coincide with the direction of the line by line scanning, while the y
axis corresponds to the frame scanning direction. we shall attempt to take
into account the influence of the dimensions of the effective circle of con-
fusion of the optical system on the waveform of the anplifier output signal
and the basic parameters of the equipment.

In a real optical system. aberrations and diffraction scattering Il] wash
out the images. where this blurring can be characterised by a scattering
function h(x, y, x'. y'). According to the literature [1], the distribution
of the irradiance B(x. y) in the iasga plane of the optical system for the
case of an irradiance 21(x'. y') in the objective field is determined by
means of the convolution integral:

etm- 3‘ I £.(a’.r)h(x.y.t'-y’)a‘ey'.

He shall approximate the scattering function with the gaussian function, some-
thing which is justified with a sufficient degree of precision for many actual

optical systems:
_ -r74 -'
N:.y.r.r)- .21}. J’JLHLM.

1

MD AWFVIV new MV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this case. the distribution of the irradiance. correanonding to the object
in the form of one strip, will be defined by the expression:

on.

Bunk-£0 f Is'nﬂlﬂmx

xw-hiiRlmaids-arr:-

l
.0
em- 2’: e"? a
vhere 0(2) - V is the probability integral; a u
a constant; a is the size of the area of the photodetector.

The sensitive eleaent of the photodetector observes the iaage by virtue of

moving the letter along the x axis. This leans the change in the irradiance
of the receiver urea 8(x. t) with respect to tine has the fora [l]:

emu-eu—mug-[eHag—meg”-
«boa-an.

vhere v is the rate of travel of the image with respect to the receiver
area.

The signal level at the output of an inertialeas photodetector vith uniform
sensitivity c over the area is:

a. ' f %
“0-1-3; faunas,-
4-;

a .
--5;[(a+u)om-+un-monw)+
+(a-w)0h(a-ml+

‘ ' +725-%exp[--¥(a+u)']-
~7m-xv(%"'£)+y—2-%wl-¥<~-~rll-

Here, the factor lla2 is introduced in front of the integral for the purpose

of normalization. To siaplify the writing, we shall introduce the diaension-
leee para-eter 6 - ya. In this case, the function I(t) Hill assuaa the fora:

I(o--:‘-[(l+7')e [so 4.31-5100 {)4}
+(I-é)e[o(l—é)]+
+7?m'-"v[-%'-(I+%)'l-

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

~73:%“P[-;(%)s]+

+v’x%°"[-¥('-'1-)'ll-

(1)

where r - e/v.

One can find the signal et the output of a photodetector with s pulse response
of

9| (0-’.-~s

where B is the tile constant. by wesns o! a Duhslel integrsl [l]:
a
{I'm-JIMMI-na. (2)

By substituting 1(0) iron (1), and tskina the integral (2), us find

aim-PHI +é--,';)e[t(l +%)]+
+ ”,-epr-n1+v)+-§][I+0[t(n+é—
puree-440%)?
-~(=-w)o('é)-%-»(-~+::)x
xl'+°['§-?g)]l-I%éwl-~?(%)'J+
“+T('-7+F)’['('-é)]+
+mexp[-w-n+§]{l “Hé-I-
_-%)H+v%-‘-«v[-¥(%-t)'l~

The signal is fed iron the output of the photodetector to the input of en
amplifier. which hes a finite pessbsnd At. He shall easule that the scanning

rate is rather high, so that (a >> fa [f3 - fupper' in - (1°..,] and the
equivalent noise bendwidth of the snplifier at“ S f3. i.e., the influence of

photodetector noise with s spectrel density of l/f can be disregarded. Under
these conditions, one can sssune that the pulse response of the snplifier is:

3
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
vhere

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”(O-ca“.
"h/s-

(6)

He derive the signal at the output of the amplifier by secondarily enploying
the Duhsnel integral of thefunction (3) for the case of pulse response (6):

l
uw-‘fmw-ua.

As a result of integration, we have:

where

Figure l.

- [h :
U(')-T(.e]-2~+..|)n (s)

..-(é+n-'—$;'-)o[t(-:-+n) -
-f7rl—.m[-m+m+
+$l{'+°['(%+~-%)I}+
+7’ﬁm[-¥(%+-)'J+
+ %|_',—.np[-t(l+m)+-$-lx

xth-(éu-em-

  

a; ammmmmmmr u u

The quantity 5 as a function
of the circle of confusion

D; The numbers on the curves
correspond to the values of
Br

Expression (5) defines the signal
when «canning one strip in the field
of the objectives. To obtain the
signal vhich appears when two strips
are scanned. based on our hypo-
thesis, which are located in the
field of the objectives. it is nec-
essary to add to the signal defined
by function (5) the ease signal
shifted in time by the alount 21’:

"and” ' U(I)+U(I—‘.’e). (6)

The output signal corresponding to
the following values of the diameter
of the circle of confuction D, de-
fined vith respect to the 0.5 level
was computed on a ”Minsk-32” con-

puter using forlulas (5) and (6) when 8 - l and c - l: 0, 0.2a, 0.3a. 0.ba.
0.5a, 0.6a, 0.7a. 1.0a and 1.3a for a set of values of or ranging in an

h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

interval iron 3 to 12 with a atep of 0.05, and for at I 2, A. 8 and O. The
reaultina curves have two mine and Iinila between then. He ahall deaisnate
the value of the function at the tint naxiaun 01 and at the ainiaua 02. and
03 at the eacond mime. laced on than extra-a1 valuea o! the function.
the aitea o! the relative dip in the curvaa were coaputed:

£5422... _ u,

t-—v-u—,;,
“W-.. (7)

0 +0
where the quantity u - "' 27: is proportional to the ratio of the

average value of the aisnal to the aean aquara value of the noiae. Aa followa

froa expreaaion (7). the quantity E. which is proportional to the ratio of the
value of the dip to the scan aquare value of the noiaa, can eerve aa a charac-
teristic for the optinality of the optical-electronica ayetea.

Shown in Figure l is t ae a function

(g o! the dinner of the circle of con-

as Euaion for varioua valuea of the tine

a! constant of the photodetector; the

g: plotted curvee correapond to the opti-
a: ‘ n- choice of the paaaband of the

m uplifier. i.e.. to that value or or,

g: which providea (or a nan-In of z.

a:

0 Sioilar curvaa are shown (or the
ma’”“‘”“" ”‘1” quantity 3 in Figure 2. The calcu-
lation deaonatrated that the optima
value of or practically doea not de-
pend on the dinner of the circle of
contuaion. and la approxinately equal
to 3.75. It followa fro- thie that
the value of the aianal wavefor-
factor. It“, in the ferrule for cal-
culating the upper boundary frequency
[2] ia:

Figure 2. The relative dip 3 aa a
function of the diabetar
of the circle of confuaion
D. The nunhera on the
curvea correapond to the
valuea of 81'.

in equal to 0.6.

5
ton orucm. use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The curvee ahovn in Fisurea l and 2 can aerve aa the basic for quantitative
aatiaatee o! the power and angular reaolvins povere of a thermal viewer when
the circle of confueion o! the optical ayatea variee within broad li-ita.

BIBLIOGRAPIIY

l. Sheatov N.S.. ”Vydeleniye opticheakikh aignalov na tone eluchaynykh ponekh"
{'"I’he Diecrinination of Optical Signele Against a Background of Random
Interferenca”], Moscow. Sovetakoya Radio Publiehere. 1967.

2. Karlzhanakiy Ye.Ya., Kiroahnikov HAL, GI? [OPTICAL-ECWICAL INDUSTRY].
1970, No 9. p 39.

COPYRIGRT: Optiko-ﬂekhanicheakaya Pro-yehlennoat’. 1978

8225
cs0: 811M976

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSIC8

UDC 620.179.18:681.786

AN ANALYSIS OF THE HETROLOGICAL CAPABILITY OF A com OPTICAL mam OP
MONITORING 1113 SW8 0? COIN.“ SURIACBS

Leningrad OPTIKO-MANICHBSKAYA PRMSELWOST' in Russian No 11, 1978
pp 8-10

[Article by V.A. Kudryavtsev, v.s. Shapov and candidate in the engineering
sciences v.1. Shanin, asnuscript received 17 Feb, 1978]

[Text] An estimate is given for the astrological capa-
bilities of an optical nathod of aonitoring the shape .
of couples: surfaces, based on the spatial coding of in-
foraation and optical filtration. The dependence of

the mim- of the correlation response on the change

in the radius of the surface and the paraaeters of the
encoding grating is deaonstreted. The requirements
placed on the orientation of products during the test-
ing are deternined.

An optical procedure for autonatically Ionitoring the shape of couple:

surfaces, based on spatial encoding of the intonation and optical natched
filtration was studied in the literature [1 - 3]. Its physical principles.
specific features and areas of application were discussed. and taco-enda-

tions were also given as regards the selection and topology of the eleaents
in the structural configuration of the nonitor system

This article is devoted to a theoretical analysis of the netrological capa-
bilities of the nethod and the deter-ination of the requirenents placed on
the orientation of the products at the aonitor position.

In accordance with the algoritha adopted for inforaation processing. the
characteristic of the surface being monitored (suitable or reject) is given
based on the magnitude of the correlation response of the quality control
system, which is mathematically described by the expression:

K..a(0)-l'n¢x.r. Oh may: 0+I0w. (I) (l)

where Q is a variable parameter which characterizes the state of the
surface being checked; 1: and y are the coordinates of the filtration

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plane; t1 is the amplitude'transmittance of the transparency with the image
of the reference standard surface; t2 is the amplitude transmittance of the
transparency with the image of the surface being monitored; * is the sign
for a correlation operation.

Thus, to calculate the correlation response as a function of the change in
the shape of the surface and its orientation with respect to the original
position, it is necessary to know the amplitude transmittance t(x. y), the
synthesis of which in the procedure proposed here is sccosplished using the
configuration shown in Pigure l. The collimated light flux of source 1.
which is produced by optical system 2, passes through the encoding grating
3 and falls on the surface of the product being monitored 6. As a result,
a pattern is observed on the surface, the shrne of which is uniquely re-
lated to the curvature of the surface and the viewing angle a, forced by
the illumination and observation axes. Objective 5 forms the image of the
surface being checked in its rear focal plane. It is represented on trans-
parency 6 which is fed to the input of the information processing channel.

The structure of the image on the transparency is determined by three factors:
the encoding grating, the condition of the surface and the viewing angle.
Hhen checking a batch of identical products. the parameters of the encoding
grating and the viewing angle are constant. and consequently, the structure
of the image depends entirely on the condition of the surface.

The research which has been carried out in this direction has made it possible
to establish the fact that the images of such surfaces. such as cylindrical,
conical, spherical and all possible combinations of then. when illuminated
through an encoding grating in the form of a system of alternating transparent
and opaque lines, take the form of a set of bands of an elliptical type.

Taking into account what has been presented here, as well as the fact that
the majority of products produced by industry consists of surfaces of the
types enumerated above, we shall limit ourselves to a treatment of the case
of the quality control of products with a cylindrical surface. we shall per-
form the calculations only for the maximum of the correlation response, some-
thing which corresponds to the physical conditions for estimating it.

Let the product be positioned so that the direction of illumination is perpen-
dicular to its surface and the generatrix of the surface is parellel to the
horizontal plane. If the radius of the cylindrical surface is called R,

and the width of a line in the encoding grating is a. then the transmittance
of the transparency for one line in the surface image can be written as
follows:

' 'P'lr|'=lh V’Ei- ue--+
Ill-F" +ec0se>a>V -ys'u... (2)
0s ocuseuon oceans.

[0 in the remaining region]

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

I 3 g
I . Such e formulation for the tronuittence
: "B ‘H w proeuppoeoe 100 percent noduletion o! the
‘ X recording Iediu- of the treneperency.
ooeething which ie eeeured by the euiteble
>( . eolection of the exposure tint and the way

it ie proceeeed.

Figure l. The configuretion for
mtheeie of the tune-
perenciee.

Following the eubetitution of (2) in (1).
integration end noneliution. ve obtein
the following expreeeion for the deter-i-
netlon of the minu- of the correletion
reeponeez

[. +£3.22 +3;
_ n! i=7»?!- erteln gun) I (3.1)

up. A>n—I+VI'-:".~<I:
e-c

Film" ‘7)”
-(’%‘)VT-"-f—‘)"l+
+g'z{u+c)YI‘-ﬁﬁ_cf‘-

—mm(e+e)]r (3.2)
epA<-—I+Vi———al".l<l:
[" 3'“'(";)‘a‘+
+ m.-::.l}l' (u)
mA>l—-+V-":\.l>lz
[ﬁ‘enmI-I W17)!-

+ a (encoac- q YEW].

A n— 1:1. l.
I” < I+Ya at“)

K.‘l. A) -

when

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIlLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

no is the radius of the reference standard surface. and 0' < a < 90'.

Portulas (3.1) and (3.2) correspond to the case of monitoring a surface with
a radius less than the reference standard one, while (3.3) and (3.6) cor-
respond to the case where the radius is greater than the reference standard
one. Curves for Ka(n) are shown in Figure 2 for three different values of
the parameter A and a viewing angle of o - 65'. The family of curves to
the left of the ordinate corresponds to n < l, and those to the right. to
n > i. It can be seen fron the graph. that the sensitivity of the asthod

to the ascertaining of deviations in the shape of the surface being tested
from the reference standard surface increases with a decrease in the line
width a in the encoding grating. A quantitative analysis of expression
(3). taking into account the actual characteristics of objectives which

are produced. denonstrated that the relative sensitivity. defined as the
ratio of the amount of the deviation 63 to the size of the requisite radius.
R. is on the order of 10’3 - 10“. Its noxious value is achieved when:

a - 10%?

where D is the size of the objective aperture in the inforlation processing
channel; P is its resolving power.

The nature of the sensitivity (AR/R) an a function of the para-eter A for

several threshold levels of K“ of practical interest is illustrated in
Figure 3.

  
     
    

bemoan.”
\

leﬂ’l‘dl ma:

Maseruaywuu 13“ In

 

Figure 2. The laxisun of the figure 3. the sensitivity AR/R as

correlation response as a function a function of the para-star A.
of the variation in the radius of

the surface being sonitored.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

my.

0‘ Having on to the classes of precision
1‘ ‘ in the nochining of ourtsces which
ere in (ores in the systen of the
industriel sector stenderd. it is not
diﬂicult to cone to the conclusion
thet the neth developed here per-

- - nits the nonitoring of products nonu-
I i ' '0 ”'5 lectured in eccordence with the sec-

ond clone of precision.

  

Figure lo. The snount of the reduction It use presueed up to now thet the
in the noxinun of the cor- positions of the nonitored end cel-
relotion response es s tunc- ibretion reference producte coincide.
tion of the orientstion of Under ectuel conditions.though. by
the product in e trensvsree virtue of deetebilising tectors.
plone. nisnetching is to be onticipeted
between the positions of the prodcute.
He shell conoider its influence on

the nognitude of the correletion re-
sponee noxinun.

It is well known iron the theory of opticel notched filtrstion [6] thet the
nognitude of the correlation response tells off when the onguler orientstion
of the insge being onelyzod does not egree with thet of the reference stenderd
(in the horizontel end verticel plenee). In our cose, s rotetion of the pro-
duct in the horizontel plsne is equivelent to e chenge in the viewing engle c.
It io not difficult tron expreesion (3) to (ind the reletive reduction in the
correletion reeponoe min. which will be equol to:

mum-{I-lr-Erﬁ—“ll-

An enelysis of the resulting function ehowe thet s dewietion of the product

fro. the requisite position by 10 - 15' leodo to o reduction in the correle-
tion response noxinun by l2. i.e. to e chenge in it by on enount which cennot
be relisbly recorded beceuee of the instebility end fluctueting noise of the
photodetector [5]. Providing for the precision indiceted here in the orien-

tstion o! the products et the test position preeents no difficulties using
existing equip-sat.

To determine the requirernmts plsccd on the otiontetion of products in the
tronsvsrse plone. we shell nshe use of the feet [A] thet the corroletion re-
sponse of the opticel devices for notched tiltretion. when the onguler posi-
tion of the inege being onolysed chonges, depends on it contiguretion. In
this csse. the greetest criticslity is observed when enelyting inogeo with
e contour in the torn of streight lines. Por this reeson. we eetineted the
influence or the precision in the setting of the product in the troneverse
plene on the correletion reeponoe using the exenple of the product in the

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

tern of a rectangle. The trana-ittence oi the transparency in thie caee hae
the torn:
I (a. y) - mi tar/I) mu (m).

(0
where I m [ale m

m'(‘)"0 a man. More;

h ie the width of the rectangle and l ia ite length.

Alter eubetituting (6) in (1). integration and nor-alizetion. we derive the
expreeeion for the calculation of the correlation reaponee maxi-um

Km: Lin-[I -[(-'i$;£)u wrap»-
- ll: am] It (0],.

where y ie the angle of rotation of the product in the traneveree plane.

Shown in Figure 6 are the auounte of reduction in the correlation reeponae
maxim- ae a function of a geonetric factor (l/h) for three valuea of the
angle 7. It can be aeen from a conparieon of the curvee that in the cane of
e geonetric factor 3 5. a reduction in the correlation reeponee latitu- by
12 ie achieved with a deviation of the product fro. the requieite poaition
lOulS', vhich, ae haa already been noted. can be aeeured.

Conclueiona

1. An optical procedure for auto-etically Ionitcring the ehape of couple:
aurfecee haa a relative eeneitivity on the order of 10-3-1040, i.e., allove
for the quality control of producta belonging to the eecond clue of pre-
ciaion.

2. The deviation of a product when it in oriented in a teet poaition fro- the
requieite poaition by 10—15' haa practically no effect on the quality of the
teat operation; it in not difficult to aoeure ouch precieion in the orientation
of the product.

“BMW!“

1. Hirovitekiy 0.1.. Saneonov G.A.. Shanin V.l.. union-mm I amour“.
1972, Vol 17. No 6, pp 1280 - 1285.

2. Hill 9.3.. ?ennington K.S., PROC. 1228. 1972, No 6. p 22-36.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Van der Lost A.. 1333 TRANS.. 1966, Vol 2, p 139-1‘5.

a. m an mt. e: .11., mummnm mxommonm [mum mm.
nacrmrcsl. 1968, No 3. pp 53-67.

5. Kovalcvakiy V.A.. "Howdy opctul'nykh ruheniy v rupozmvanu

izobruhonty" ["th Solution nothodn in has. Recognition"), Moscow,
Nnu‘u Publishers. 1976.

COPYRIGIIT: Opuko-mmntchuhya Pro-ynhlennou'. 1978

8225
cso: ems/976

13
to: 07mm. 033 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 MY

PHYSICS

UDC 663.3:666.22:562.68
RESULTS AND DBVMPHENTAL PROSPECTS IN OPTICAL 633M168

Leningrad OPTIWICHESKAYA PRNYSWST' in Russian No ll. 1978
pp 39-61

[Article by candidste in the sciences. F.K. Volynets. manuscript received
12 April. 1978]

[Text] The main optical. physical and chenical charac-
teristics of optical ceramics. obtained by the nethod of
gas pressing are given. Its most promising arena of
application are indicated.

The birth of optical ceramics - the polycrystalline class of optical materi-
als - was due to the developmental needs of optical science and engineering,
and in particular, to the widescale introduction of thernal viewing into the
national economy which started at the beginning of the 1950's. Optical
natsrials were required in this regard which have a high nechanical strength
and good transparency in the IR region of the spectrum. Classical optical
materials. silicate glasses and monocrystals. did not possess the indicated
combination of properties. The former. though having good structural charac-
teristics, as is well known, are opaque in the region of the spectrun above
3.5 um. while the letter, on the other hand, while having good transparency
in the IR region are nechanically anisotropic. and for this reason. as a rule.
are no: structural materials. In this regard. the development of polycrystal-
line optical materials proved to be necessary. since only they could conbine
isotropicity of mechanical properties with high transparency in the IR range
of the spectrum. Such an assessnsnt and prognosis were confirmed by three
factors:

1) Nature has created a number of polycrystalline silicate minerals, which
are distinguished by exceptionally high mechanical strength (nephrite.
agate. etc.):

2) Spectroscopists have developed the so-callcd lnr method of studying the

absorption spectra of various materials by pressing then into potassium
bromide;

lh
P0! OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3) The development of ceramic technology led to the creation of a production
technology at the and of the 1960's for a very dense tool ceramic.

In this way the problem use reduced to the development of fabrication

technology procedures for polycrystalline materials. uhich possessed the
following:

a) A porosity one to two orders of magnitude lower then that of tool
ceramic (0.3-0.03 vol.!, instead of 3-52). because of which they be-
coae transparent in the optical andevenin the visible range of electro-
magnetic radiation;

b) Considerably greater strength then tablets of rat;
c) Transparency in various IR spectral ranges. right up to 30-50 us.

This condition necessitated the applicability of the procedure being worked
out for the fabrication o! polycrystalline optical materials lrom substances

belonging to various classes of chemical conpounds: oxides, fluorides. chal-
cogenides.

He started work on the creation of ceramics in 1959. Seaples oi various
materials were obtained during l96l-l967. however. intense developmental
vork on the physical and chemical fundamentals of the production technology
for optical ceramics and all of their coaponents (rsu materials, production
equipment, uays of producing blanks o! the requisite dimensions. shapes and
quality) were started in 1968.

The so-celled "hot pressing" asthod tor a dispersed powder was taken as the
basis for the solution of the problem. The factors governing the choice were
as follows: in the first place. this procedure is distinguished by its
universality and provides for obtaining optical ceramics from various sub-
stances, including those from lov temperature variants in some cases, and
secondly. lov relative pressing temperatures (II 0.66 IT, fusionl) open up

the possibility or deriving blanks with a fine crystalline structure, with-
out turning to the introduction of additives which inhibit secondary recrys-
tallization. A reduction in the average size of the grain is important fro-
tha standpoint of increasing mechanical strength, heat resistance. as well as
reducing light scattering in the case where ceramics are fabricated from op-
tically anisotropic materials and the electro—opticel characteristics of
optical Eeroelactric care-ice: thirdly. the method is distinguished by its
econoay: the simultaneous action of temperature and pressure per-its not only
a substantial in the compaction temperature, but also approsimately a
doubling of the compaction rate. In this case. the derivation of the material
and the blanks in simple shapes are combined in one operation. The fact that
the blanks were characterised by a very small ratio of height to disaster
(1:10) promoted the selection oi this production technology procedure.

15
POI! OFFICIAL nee mm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The kinetics of the colpaction of both Ionaphese dispersed powders and
powders alloyed with different additives was studied in particular. The
investigations were carried out using three different schemes:

1) The degree of cospaction o is a function of the teaperature t' for a
constant heating rate dt'ldt and a constant pressure p:

O-“rhr :
'7‘.)
2) The degree of cospsction is a function of the pressure for the case of
a constant defornation rate I dtldt and a constant tesparsture:

o - up)“ .t:
3?

3) The degree of coepaction is a function of ties with a constant temperature
and pressure: 9 ' f(t)to.p.

The studies of the coepaction kinetics using these scheees were necessary
in the theoretical plan to establish the operative ele-entary nechanises

of the lease transfer: and along with this, they were analogs of the basic
stages of the technological process: cold pressing. heating, the application
of pressure and ssintainance under pressure at the pressing tesperature.
These studies were carried out using both specially designed dilatoeetric
installations and an all—purpose teat eachine. The structure of the sasples
obtained. the kinetics of secondary recrystallization. the texture for-ation
sechanisu, the dependence of sicrohsrdness 'and transparency on the pressing
conditions. and in some cases, the teaperature dependence of the ultisate
strength and yield limit. as well as the radial gradients of the density and
texture in the blanks, were all studied simltaneously using the lethods of
density neasureuent, spactrophotosetry. optical interferometry in white and
polarized light. as well as buy structural analysis and optical polariza-
tion analysis.

The studies were carried out using samples of eateriala of interest for op-
tical science and engineering. and additionally. which differed substantially
in the type of chesical bond, the structure of the crystal lattice. and which
also belonged to different classes of chesical cospounds: ngz. Hgo, Zns.
ZnSe, Cds, Cd'i'e, BaPz, Ca? . PbClz, Pbtz. Cal. Y203, u253, etc. The powders
which were studied differe by were then two orders of Iagnitude as regards
the degree of fineness (the average grain size fluctuated fro. 0.1 to 10.0
ml and more).

The studies were conducted in a broad range of tharsodynenic paraneters:

tesperatures up to 1.600' c. pressures up to 5.0 t/cnz. exposure tines of up
to 180 sinutes and a residual pressure down to 10" In ﬁg. '

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A decision in favor of the vacuum praseing variant was made right at the out-
set of the work for the following reasons. The presence of air in the pores
retards the compaction of the briquetts and induces selective absorption bands
due to the interaction of the material with the moisture and oxygen in the air.
Horeover, the presence of gases at high pressure in the pores oi the resulting
optical ceramic reduces its mechanical strength, something which is especially
pronounced when the temperature increases, and along with this, complicates

the process of cooling the blank and its subsequent annealing. Pressing in a
vacuum permits obtaining an optical ceramic from materials which oxidise

easily in an air atmosphere. as well as the use of easily oxydizable heat

resistant molybdenum alloys for the fabrication of the components of compres-
sion molds.

The extensive experimental material made it possible to establish the fact

that the basic elesenary mechanism of mass transfer during the action of s
relaivc temperature of 0.5-0.8 If“. and a pressure of l.0-3.0 t/cm2 are slip
along the crystallographic planes (translational and twinning). and slip along
the boundaries of the grains, as well as the ascertaining of the exceptionally
important role played by the secondary recrystallisation processes in attaining
erelativedeneity of the briquette of more than 0.99. The secondary recrystal-
lization activates slip along grain boundaries, and when a certain temperature
is reached, causes the transition of the briquette to a state of superplssti-
city. The degree of intensity of secondary recrystallisation which provides
for attaining a level of compaction practically equal to the theoretical level,
over an exposure time of 30-60 minutes under a pressure of I2.0 tlcm2 has

been quantitatively determined. It consists in an increase in the average
grain size of three to five times. Pressing at temperatures which provide for
meeting this condition is equivalent to pressing during phase transformations.

In fact, the entire volume of the briquette is subjected to recrystallization
in this case.

The important part played by recrystallization processes is also determined

by a number of other factors. In the first place, the relationship of the
velocities of grain boundary migration and the movement of a pore located at
the grain boundary determines the probability of pore capture by the growing
grains. Along with an increase in the probability of pore capture, the level
of compaction end the transparency of the ceramic are reduced. Secondly.
secondary recrystallisation produces the structure of the ceramic, and along
with this. also a number of its properties. The mechanical strength of a
polycrystal is related primarily to grain size. when deriving optical ceramics
from anisotropic substances, grain size determines the position of the short-
wave boundary of ceramic transparency, and in connection with the fact that
when the grain size approaches the wavelength of the light passing through,

its losses increase sharply due to scattering. inhibiting secondary recrystal-
lization in these cases by means of changing the pressing conditions or intro-

ducing special additives permits a substantial increase in the transparency
of ceramics in the shortwave region of the spectrum.

1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And finally. there is yet one sore governing law which underscores the excep-
tional part played by the secondary recrystallization processes when fabri-
cating optical ceramics: performing the pressing with the indicated intensity
of secondary recrystallization makes it equivalent to the process of growing
monocrystals. The difference consists in the fact that in the case of prea-
sing, the specific crystallization surface is quite large (=l-10 mzlg). where
this crystallization occurs at low temperatures (-2/3 Tgu.,’K) of the material
being pressed and at very high pressures (-2.0 t/cmz). Establishing this
governing law pointed out the possibility of obtaining luminescent optical
ceramics. alloyed with those additives which cannot be introduced into a
crystal lattice when growing crystals from a melt.

The facts adduced above allow us to call the pressing process under the con-
ditions indicated here "recrystallization pressing.” Such a designation un-
ambiguously defines the nature of the physical and chemical processes which
provide for attaining the theoretical density. as well as the conditions for
its realization. The establishing of the governing laws considered here
permit the determination of the parameters of the pressing process. by working
from the physical and chemical parameters of the powder. In particular, de-
creasing the averaga grain size in the initial powder from 10 to 0.1 um makes
it possible to reduce the relative pressing temperature Eros 0.75-0.8 down

to 0.55-0.6 Tfu. 'K. or by 200-500' on the Kelvin scale.

Moreover, it also became possible to formulate the technical apecifictions
for the original powders, in which their suitability for the fabrication of
an optical ceramic is determined not by a technological sample test, but by
their physical and chemical parameters. which. in turn, derive from the re-
quisite microstructure of the ceramic being obtained and the capabilities of
the production equipment. Along with this, the capability of fabricating an
optical ceramic from any optically isotropic or weakly anisotropic material
was placed on a solid footing. The justification for this position is con-
firned by the photograph of samples of optical ceramics. which is shown in
the figure.

Simultaneously with the working out of the physical and chemical principles

of the fabrication technology for optical ceramics, a procedure was created

for synthesizing the starting materials and equipment. which permitted as early
as 1968 undertaking the development of a production process for the fabrics-
tion of the requisite blanks of optical ceramics based on magnesium fluoride.

A number of production processes were worked out which provide for obtaining
blanks in the smplest shapes with a diameter of up to 350 mm at pressing temp-
eratures up to l.200° C. Series production of optical ceramics has been organ-
ized on the basis of these blanks.

Searches for heat resistant structural materials based on molybdenum. which
assure operability of compression molds at temperatures up to 1,500' c and
pressures up to 2.5 t/cmz were undertaken in the past decade in conjunction
with institutes engaged in the development of metals. This circumstance will

18
ran OFFICIAL use ONLY
IOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

produce a completely new situ-
ation in the plan for the de-
velopment and application of
optical ceramics. A decisive
factor in their development is
not the capabilities of the
production equipment, but
rather the vital needs of op-
tical science and engineering.
In this case. in accordance with the mutual conditionality of the phenomena.
such broad, essentially unliaitad experimental capabilities in the design of
optical ceramics with new optical, physical. chemical and operational proper-
ties, or new combinations of them. in turn permit optical ceramics partici-
pating to a more marked degree in accelerating the development of optical
scinece and engineering. It is well known that the products list and the
quality of optical materials will serve as one of the indicators of the level
of the nation's optical science and engineering.

 

Of course. it does not follow from this that the technological production
procedures for the fabrication of blanks of optical components using the
method of recrystallization pressing, both one-sided and isostatic pressing
are not subject to refinement for the purpose of reducing the manufacturing
labor intensity and increasing their quality. One of the most urgent tasks
is the automation of the production process. It is becoming economically
justified and necessary in connection with the large series production of
blanks of optical ceramics. This is an extraordinarily complex problem.
However. it should be noted that several of the physical and chemical pre-
requisites for its solution have already been found.

Extensive and systematic research into the physical, physical chemistry and
operational characteristics of optical ceramics has been undertaken simul-
taneously with their development and introduction into production.

The study of properties of optical ceramics has not only promoted an expan-
sion of the applications areas and an acceleration of the rates of intro-
duction of optical ceramics as an optical structural material. but has also
made it possible to ascertain the effectiveness of their application in other
fields of optical engineering. we should primarily point out the construc-
tion of objective lenses. Chalcogenide and certain optical oxide ceramics
are the most promising, which possess a refractive index equal to or greater
than 2.0, as well as fluoride ceramics. which permit compensating for their
chromatic aberration. Because of the monophase aspect (single component
aspect) of optical ceramics they are characterised by a rather high optical
homogeneity (in - 10-3-10'§ at a wavelength of l um), which completely
permits their application in lane systems. This is also being promoted by
the success achieved in recent years in increasing the transparency of opti-
.cal ceramics in the visible region of the spectrum. which permits not only
the visual adjustment of instruments, but also their operation in this region
of the spectrum. The index of absorption of optical ceramics amounts to

19
ran omcm. use our
FOR OP7ICIAL USE ONLY

' 10‘1 cn'l. However, there is a basis for obtaining optical ceramics with
an index of absorption one to two orders of magnitude lower. The solution
of this problem will permit the wide utilisation of optical ceramics in gas
laser engineering, and expand the possibility for their application in the
construction of objectives.

An important factor which promotes the introduction of optical ceramics in
the construction of objectives would be the development of a production
process for the manufacture of blanks with even one surface. including an
asphcrical surface, which does not require additional cold working machining.
The theoretical possibility of solving this problem has been confirmed for

a long time by individual experiments. but there is as yet no technological
process. Such a situation is explained by the complexity of the problem,
and it can be said, its elegance, which requires knowledge of the quanti-
tative relationships between the shape generating surfaces of the compres-
sion mold and the resulting blank, which are due to the relationship between
the modulus of elasticity. the coefficient of thermal expansion and the co-
efficients of heat conductivity of the material of the compression mold and
the ceramic being fabricated. Moreover, the deserved attention has not been
devoted to the solution of this problem, although it promises a considerable
technical and economic effect.

Also promising is the application of optical ceramics in spectral instrument
construction as the windows of cells, the substrates of absorption and inter-
ference light filters, reflective light filters, etc., especially in a spec-
tral range of lZ-oZS um.

The study of the physical and chemical nature of the processes involved in
the fabrication of optical ceramics by the method of recrystallisation pres-
sing has indicated the possibility of obtaining luminescent optical ceramics.
These ceramics are promising for devices which visualise radiation: neutron,
electron, x-ray, ultraviolet and infrared radiation. Such an assessment is
due to two arguments. On one hand. optical ceramics, in contrast to lumi-
nescent glasses and monocrystals, possesses a high luminescence light yield,
which is comparable to the light yield of powder luminophors (2-10 candles/U).
0n the other hand, it is just as strong as glass and monocrystals, and com-
bines the batter qualities of all of the well known luminescent materials.
Along with this, the technological process of recrystallization pressing
provides for the capability of fabricating a luminescent optical ceramic from
practically all of the well well known powder luminophors.

Considerable effectiveness is anticipated from the introduction of electro-
optical ceramics into optical information processing equipment as the working
medium for high speed multichannel modulators and page generators for holo-
graphic systems. The use of electro-opticel ceramics will make it possible
to boost the operational speed by three to four orders of magnitude as com-
pared to liquid crystal cells. The promise of magneto-optical ceramics
should likewise be noted. Experience has demonstrated the effectiveness of

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the application of optical carnica in tha aolution ot a nun-hat of spacial
problem (tho input window of radiation racaivara. directional radiation
acattcrara. high intanaity plaau light aourcaa. coating optica, atc.).
Tho proniaing outlook for tho application of optical «rallies in various
acianca and ansinoarins. which won diocuaaad hora, allov for tha conclu-

aion that tha clan of polycryatallina optical utariala has juat boson
its period of intanaiva dualopaant.

COPYRIGIm Optiko-Kakhanichaokaya Pro-yahlannoat', 1978

8225
cs0: 811M976

21
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSICS

UDC 535.313.2

THE BASIC PRINCIPLES 0? TB! ADTOHATION 0? TBS PROCESS OF SHAPING ASTRO-
NOHICAL OPTICS

Leningrad OPTIKO-HBKHANICHBSKAXA PROHYSHLENNOST' in Russian No 11. 1978
pp 62-65

[Article by Academician A.H. Prokhorov, and candidates in the sciences
Ye.V. Truehin and E.A. Vitrichenkol

[Text] Possible methods of controlling the process of
shaping optical surfaces with the use of computers are
analyzed. It is shown that an efficient way of auto-
mating the shaping process is real time program control
of the local pressure of a small tool on the component.

A whole series of difficulties arise in the fabrication of astronomical
optics with large dimensions. These difficulties are primarily related

to the fact that it is necessary to maintain a certain mathematical surface
within a precision of a few hundredths of a micrometer on a large optical
surface area; figured in square meters.

The solution of the problem is impeded. for example, by the following factors.
In the first case, nonuniformity of the hardness over the surface of the blank
itself leads to a differing degree of removal of the material with equal ma-
chining conditions. In the second place, the imperfection of the optical
machine tool. as well as effects of its alignment lead to various types of
errors in the optical surface. Ihirdly. temperature effects related to in-
homogeneous heating of the component and the tool in the machining process
also lead to errors. Pourthly. nonuniformity in feeding the polishing sus-
pension to the point of contact of the optical component with the tool also

has an effect. Fifthly, the imperfection of the tool and its wear cause
additional errors [13].

The existing practice of optical manufacturers is based on experience and
intuition. and not on precise data concerning the technological process.
Such practive leads to the fact that the process of fabricating the optical
surfaces is not a convergent one, i.e.. in the process of working on a com-
ponent, the practicing optical worker improves the quality of the components

22
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
1'0! ORIGIN. 08! 6M?

aone of the tine. but part of the tine ie involuntarily apent degrading it.
For thie raaeon. outlaye for the fabrication of large optical aurfacea
prove to he unjuetifiahly high.

with the operational method adopted. the quality of the finiehed optical
product dependa on the ekill of the experienced optical worker. Ihie intro-
ducee a euhjective factor into optical technology. for exanple. one optical
worker "can” nanufacture a certain conponent with high quality. vhila another
vill not achieve thie quality in any amount of machinging time.

A any out of the eituation which haa developed can he the autonation of the
shaping prouaee ueing computer equipment. In thie cue. the technological
procaea vill hecone a etrictly convergent one. i.e.. in each proceeaing

aeeaion. the optical eurface vill only he inprovad. and noreovar. the pro-

ceee would hecole independent of the peraonal experience of the experienced
optical vorker.

It vould be extremely tempting to deeign a fully autonated installation for
the febricetion of optical eurfacea. In thie caae. checking the ehepe of
the eurface and the ahaping proceea iteelf (grinding or poliahing) ehould he
acconpliahed in real tine. Unfortunately, not only ia Ionitoring of the
shape of the eurface during ita proceaaing not realized at the preaent time.
but there are not even any ideaa of how to do thie in the i-ediate future.
For thie reaeon, the proceaa can he done only in an autonated manner. but
not autonatically.

The noat important guarantee of aucceaa in fabricating an optical eurface

ia operationally tinely quantative nonitoring of ita ahape. ae well aa the
linking of thie nonitoring to the technological procaea. Thia quaation ie
not diecueaed in thie article. Since quantitative checking of ground eurfacea
ie juat now being developed [26]. it ia nore convenient to begin the auto-a-
tion vith the poliahing etage. where the methode of checking are rather vell
corked out.

The repid development of digital engineering haa opened up new poaaihilitiee
for optical technology. It it well knovn that the application of computera
has caused a revolution in mathematical optica [6]. Digital end analog elec-
tronic equipment haa exerted a conaiderahle influence on the proceduree for
etudying optical componenta and ayatema. In particular. the procaeaing of
memaurementa ueing the ﬂartman method ia carried out vith a computer [2.

22, 25 - 27], and work hee begun on the automation of liartman photograph
neaeurenente [28). Analog equipnent it need for the quantitative ahadov
Foucault-Pilhert method Ill, 19, 23]. Digital and analog equipment in uned
in the interferonetric teating of optical componente [17, 18].

The firet atepe have alao been taken in the field of the application of digi-
tal engineering to the autonation of the eheping proceea Illa, 16. 29].

23
Iron outcm. use om
FOR OPVICIAL US! ONLY

Possible Hays of Automating the Shaping Process

In accordance with a hypothesis of Preston [20. ll). the justification for
which has been repeatedly verified [8. 16]. the following relationship is
observed in the process of machining an optical surface (grinding or polish-
‘ng) for each of its elements:

db " K (51a 520 “3) mt» (1)

where dh is the amount of material removed; dt is the elemental machining
time; p is the specific pressure of tool on the component: w is the veloci-
ty of the tool with respect to the component. It is atechnologicel constant
which depends on the component material al. the tool material a; and the
properties of the abrasive material a3.

An elementary analysis of formula (1) shows that in principle, we can con-
trol four technological functions:

«The machining time for each elemental area:
"The velocity of the tool with respect to the component:
—The trajectory of the tool on the optical surface;

«The pressure (force) of the tool on the component.

A combination control procedure is also possible.

It is difficult to control the first three functions independently of the
influence of the other functions. In this sense, the breakdoam in control

methods discussed in the following (with the exception of pressure control)
is conditional.

Control of the local pressure of the tool on the component does not depend
on the remaining technological parameters. This is the most important
merit of the method.

Control of the Machining Time

We shall consider two methods of controlling the machining time: direct
control and the mask method. These methods can also be considered control
of the tool trajectory.

Direct control of the machining time was realised in the following manner
[10]. Three small tools were positioned on guides. making an angle of

120°. The component (a plane mirror 1 meter in diameter) was broken down
into annular zones with a width of 0.1 m. and the machining time for each

2’;
NR 05710:“. US! ONLY
[0R ORIGIN. 083 ONLY

zone was cosputed fro. the fornula of [1). The tool pressure was constant.
and the change in velocity was taken into account.

The advantages of the aethod are the sinplicity of the realisation and the
possibility of total autdaation. There are two drawbacks to this procedure.
In the first case, it is inpossible with this nethod to elininste local
errors: soreover. it is well known that for astronosical nirrors. it is
specifically this type of error which is characteristic [3). Secondly. he-
cause of the discrete nature of the sachining. there is an edge effect. i.e..
tonal errors arise. the site of which are approxisately equal to the sire

of the cones into which the couponent is subdivided.

The suit aethod, worked out by the Taesnek group [9] was based on the use of
s full-site tool. the working surface of which was node in the for- of lohss.
The shape of the lobes was conputed so as to provide the requisite renoval
o asterial.

A nerit of the nask nethod is the sbsccnco of edge effects inherent in netth
in which a snail tool is used. included anong the drawbacks are the couple:-
ity of realizing the nethod. which is related to the necessity of fabricating
a special tool for each nachitring session. and the fundanental inpossibility
of eliminating non-axial ay-etric errors.

Controlling the Tool Speed

The velocity of the tool with respect to the cosponeot has three conponents:
the rotational velocity of the conponent. the rotational velocity of the tool
and the velocity related to the notion of the carrier. Because of the large
anoun: of systen inertia. control of the velocities is difficult for astro-
nomical nirrors. but in nachine tools of the"Start” type. velocity control
has been realised for the upper link using a stall tool.

In a mother of foreign patents lilo. 15]. netth of velocity control of the
conponent have been described. hut these nethods are hardly applicable to
large products.

Controlling the Trajectory of the Tool

This nethod was realized .by the Anerican conpany ”ltek“ us. 16]. A tra-
jectory which provided for the requisite renoval of laterial was realised
using a specially designed nachine tool. which per-itted arbitrarily sowing
the snail tool in two nutually perpendicular directions. The trajectory is
calculated beforehand on a cosputer. The nethod was successfully tested in
the fabrication of nirrors with a dimter of about a neter. Over several
hours of finishing. a surface quality was successfully achieved with a neon
square error of AMO. sonething which satisfies flarechal’s condition [30].

2S
roe onxcuu. use ONLY
PO! OWICIAI. USS ONLY

The control procedure reelited by the ”lteh" coepany can be applied to the
eethod of eechining tiee control. eince the trajectory ie figured by work-
ing free the proportionality between the expoeure tiee end the requisite
level of reeovel.

An article by eeeocietee of enother Aeericen coepeny. ”Perkin-Blur".
appeared not long ego [29]. which deecribee en even eore refined techno-
logical eyetee. including e coeputer.

The eejor eerit of the eyeteee indiceted here ie the poeeibility of eliei-
neting local errore and febriceting coeponente with e coeplex ehape. for
exuple, off-exie pereboloide. The tingle drewbeck ie the neceeeity of e
epeciel eechine tool.

The febrication of euch e eechine tool. ee well ae e epecial tool for the
eirror ie e neceeeery condition for the reelieetion of all control eethode
deecribed above. eoeething which eubetentielly coeplicetee the epplicetion
of theee eethode in indeetry. eince two difficultiee eriee here: the firet
of thee ie of en econoeic nature end ie releted to the neceeaity of replet-
ing the cot of eechine toole. eoeething which leade to large outleye of
tint and equipeent. The eecond ie of e peychologicel neture. end to over-
coee it cen prove to be even eore coeplex. Optical eechine toole heve
changed little over recent decedee. and experienced opticel workere have
becoee ueed to then end eccmleted coneidereble experience in working with
thee. In the ceee of the repleceeent of the eechine toole. the experience
acquired in working with thee in loet and there erieee the neceeeity of
edditionel treining of the opticel febricetore.

The eutoeetion eethod beeed on controlling the preeeure of a eeell tool in
free of theee drewbecke. Any opticel eechine tool need in industry cen be
eeployed without eubetential reworking for the realization of this eethod.

Controlling the Tool Preeeure

in one of the firet etteepte to echieve control of the eeteriel reeovel by

eeene of werying the preeeure [6]. the control effect wee not obtained. The
reaeon wee found in the feet thet e full-eited tool wee eeployed. lt ie ob-
vioue that in e preeeure control eode. it ie neceeeary to uee e eeell tool.

the theory for which wee developed in [7. 8 end ll].

We ehell poee the following problee. ly eeene of reel tiee control of the
locel preeeure of a eeell tool on e coeponent in e conventionel opticel
eechine tool. it ie neceeeery to gein the cepability of fabricating optical
eurfacee of high quelity end elieinete any errore. bet the tolerence of
the coeponent heve the fore h(x. y). In eccordance with foreule (1), it
ie neceeeery to produce a force p(x. y) in the fore:

I“. y) m II (3. WWW). (2)

26
M ORIGIN. US! OIL?
FOR OWICIAL 088 ONLY

Here o in the current radiuo of the zone; the function Ho) deter-ineo the
eeteriel renoval at a conatent praeaure [12]; It in a technological con-
atant; and ‘1‘ io the aachining tine. In the derivation of formula (2).

ve neglect the iinite eiee of the tool. but exporinonte conducted by no ohov
that thio eethod can be oucceoefully onployod.

The noot important Iorita of tho nothod are: tho capability of autonating
any optical nechino tool without aubotantially reworking it; autonation
ainplicity ueing e conputor in the control node; the poeoibility of eachin-
ing conponenta with a couple: ahape and eliminating any typea of errore;
the abocence of edge etiecte related to the uae of a nail tool.

Becauoa of the convergence of the ahaping proceoa being controlled. the
tiniehing operation can be accelerated by tone of tineo. and it ie aleo
poaoible to ilprove the quality of the iiniahed coeponont by oovoral tinea.

Concluaion

Tho proceao of ohaping optical ourfacoa can be autoloted in any vaye, but
it ia preferable to employ real the control of the local preaouro of n
onall tool on the conponent ueing a control colputor. when thio nethod ia

uaod, there ia no need to nenufacturo new nodela of optical eachino toola
or complex toolo.

Because of the uae of the conventional notion of the tool over the ourface
of the part (opindle rotation and hernonic oocillation of the upper link)
in the propoood control ayeton. edge etfecta related to e onell tool do
not ariae. It proveo poeeible to fabricate conponcnto with a coeplu ahape
and eliminate any typee of orrora in the optical ouri’aco. The technical
automation oquipnont oxieting at the preaent tile pernit the aolution of
thio problem. Laboratory and plant tooto of e breed-boarded oyaten which
realizeo the principle cited here have dalonetrated the pro-ice of thio

approach.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. leskin, 6.11.. et a]... IZV. SPE‘I’S. ASTROPIZ. OBSEV. [PROCEEDIMS Ol’ THE
SPECIALIZ. ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORIZSI, 1975, Vol 7. p 182.

2. Vitrichenko 3.5., Katogerov P.K., Lipovetokaye V.6.. 12V. spars. AS‘I'ROFIZ.
OBSERV.. 1975, Vol 7. p 167.

3. Vitrichenko E.A.. A511“. 2m. [JOURNAL 0' AW], 1976, V01 53.
p 660.

6. Dvornilwv Adi" et al., GD [onrxo-mmrcmsuu PRMSIILMOST' «-
[TIIE OPTICAL MECHANICAL INDUSTRY]. 1960, No 11, p 6.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
18.

19.
20.

21.
22.
23.
26.
25.
26.

POI! OPPICIAI. US! ONLY

Krupenkovn 2.1.. Grudinn 11.1.. Below n.s.. (HP. 1973. No 9. p 30.

Leonova V.II.. "Mao-aunts!” ruchctov opttchuktkh tutu” (“Automating
iggofalculutonn of Optical hum"). "new. Hanhinouroyoniyo Pubuuhon.
Lyoyannyy Yu.|t.. our. 1972. No 7. p 5.

Lynyannyy Yu.K.. «1P. 1976. No 5. p 21.

Lyoyannyy Yu.l€.. Tunnnk l..8.. (MP. 1973. No 7. p 51.

Popov 6.11.. Popova H.I.. MP. 1970. No 3, p ‘6.

Sutbrntov 11.11.. (HP. 1958. No 9. p 37.

Sutbntov 11.1!” ”Spuvochntk “Woman-printoutrattan” (”The Inuruun:
Builder's “Indirect”, Moscow. mobs“. 1962. Gupta: 6.

‘l'uonck 1.8.. (HP, 1970. No 8. p 60.
Mpden R.. US Patent. 1971. No 3.556.576.
Mpdcn 3.. Punch Patent. 1971. No 1.601.566.

Mpdcn IL. chonoush 3.. Ritchie P.R.. APPL. 0PT.. 1972. Vol 11, No 12.
p 2,739.

button 0.. Connie A.. Lat“ 11.. APPL. MP” 1968. No 7. p 125.

Munnorlin 6.11.. Tcyutu 6.11.. OPTICAL SPECTRA. 1975. Vol 9. No 13.
p 3.2360

Philbort 11.. OPTICA AC'I'A. 1967. V01 14. No 2. p 169.

Preston P.. MACHINES 100101. 0? m soc. 0P cuss mower, 1927, Vol 20.
No 2.

Preston P.. Till GLASS INDUSTRY. 1928. Vol 9. No 2. p 3.

Shulte 0.11.. APP!“ 0PT.. 1968. Vol 7. no 1. p 119.

Hilton 8.6.. APPL. 0PT., 1975. V01 16. No 1. p 2.286.

labia LY... Kuzncuov A.I.. Roxov VJ... (HP. 197‘. No 11. p 80.
Zvorcv V.A.. 0: n1., (MP. 1977. No 2, p 16.

ZVC".V VOAO. .t .10. m. 1977. NO 3. P 3.

28
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

270 Zvorev Ver. at .10. W. 1977. No ‘. p 30

28. Cheben Yu.V.. et ah. "Noveye cekhntke v celeekopoetroyenu” ["Nov
Equipment in “releecope Conetmctton”]. 1978. No 6.

29. Jon.. ReAe. APP!” 0913. 19". v01 16. p 257e
30. Herechel Ae.me D'OPTo. 1977. Vol. 26, p 257.

OOPYRIGIIT: Opuko-Hekhentcheekeye Pro-yehlennoet'. 1978

8225
cso: emu/976

29
FOR OFFICIAL I183 ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL US! ONLY

PHYSICS

UDC 681.7.02

TN! SELECTION OF THE CONDITIONS FOR THE MACHINING 0? LARGE OPTICAL CON-
PONBNTS

Leningrad OPTlKo-NEKRANICNBSKAYA PROHYSNLBNNOST' in Russian No ll, 1970
pp 65-49

[Article by candidate in the sciences A.P. logdsnov, Phd. in the sciences
L.S. Teesnek. and V.A. Ivanov. nsnuscript received 16 March. 1978]

[Text] Questions of the choice of ways of machining
optical cosponents with large overall dimensions are
analysed. A procedure is described for selecting the
machining conditions. the basis of which is an ele-
mentary law governing the wear and a gradient method
of seeking the linimum of e function of several vari-
ables. .

Increasing the precision end curtailing the tile end labor intensity of
the fabrication of the surfaces of large optical components is usually re-

lated to the precision in forecasting their weer during grinding end polish-
lnss

Although new methods of sachining large components with a ”mask”. a flexible
tool [1] are beginning to find application in practice, a study of the pos-
sibility of controlling the process of shaping surfaces on eristing machine
tools by means of calculating the nachining modes is of unquestionable
theoretical and practical interest. It is also important to perform such
research for the case of machining slell optical components. including nodu-
lsr ones, since the kinesstic characteristics of the sachine tools are
practically the same in both cases. we shall assume that the optical ma-
chine tool during the machining process provides for constant angular ro-
tstional velocities of the conponent A and the tool in as well as oscille-
tions of the surface of the tool either in some plane parallel to the axis
of the component and offset free it by a spacing I. or around sane axis
which is parallel to the axis of the part. In the projection onto a plane
perpendicular to the axis of the part. the indicated types of trajectories
of the center of the tool are shown in figure I.

30
ION OPTICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

He ehall eeeune that the quantity E. which in accordance with the type of
trajectoriee indicated characteritee the diaplacenent of the center of the
tool with reepect to the center oi oecillationa in the direction of the
plane of oecilletiona of the tool center, or perpendicular to a atraight

line which peeeee through the point Q1 and 0'. changea in accordance with
the einueoidal law:

3 - A ein r(t + to)

where r. A. t and to are reepactively the angular frequency of the oacil-
latione. the anplitude o! the oecilletione. the nachining tine, and a con-

etent. which without violating the generality of the argunente can be con-
eiderad equal to care.

He ehall characterize the nachining
node by the eet of waluea of the
paranetera n. w. r, A. B. c and D.
He ehall conditionally underatand
the control of the nachining proceaa
to he the eelection iron the epecified
rangee of veluea of the indicated
para-etera of the nechining node
which providee for a ninilmn of the
aun of deviatione of the deeign value
for natarial renoval iron the requi-
eite value. expreeeed in tarne of
Figure 1. For the explanation of the the ahaolute Iagnitude. at all pointe
fort of the trajectoriee: on the eurfece of the optical part.

Key: 1. Optical pert;

 

2 An hi i The wear of the eurfece of an aeper-
‘ '; t"'¥ 9° “‘ icel part with enall deviatione iron
, ;:.;.:‘:'r‘i, a ephere in the direction to ite nor-
" The centiz o; the al at the point "1/2 for a fixed value
° £11 : £ of n2]: (Pigure l), aaeuning that the
oac " on; o ale-eatery law governing the wear in
t""°‘°” ° accordance with the reeulte of paper
[2] ie oheerved, can he repreaented
in the torn:

41%.}. v)-2c.5‘p:g.21. ,): 1,!)x

xU(-’,’l . ’7", p. V)dp.

where V ie the rate of travel of the center of tool 01. the conponenta
on the 0K, 0! and 02 axee are V‘. V, and V, (ehown in Pigure l in a picture
of the pointe oi the part and the tool in the 0!! plane): P and U are
the contact preeeure and the relative velocity at the point “1/2 and a of
the eurface o! the part reepectively; C. ie a conetnat for the given

(2)

31
’0! OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

machining node; 00 it e iixed velue of the angle 0: "/2 ie helf of the die-
noter o! e circle at the euriece of the tool which peeeee through the point
ll [2. e of the eurtece of the pert with the center loceted on the 001 exit;
2 h/Z) in e coefficient which ehowe whet pert of the indicated circle be-
longe to the working eurtece o! the tool.

It wee deemed in deriving fornule (2) thet the weer within the bounde of
one ennuler tone of the opticel pert ie the eene, i.o.. it doee not depend
on the engle e. The ferrule for the velocity lion/2. Ila/2. e. V), which
entere into tor-ule (2). hee the following tore:

(3)
where U- V'U.I + 3+ U2. '
U.--0y-(z-2e)-,+(.v-N ~.- v.,..
Uy-m-(x-x‘)”l+(z-xﬂ)'l-V". (O)

U,-(y-y“)0.+(x-&.)'y-Vm.

The quentitiee :01, ml end :01 incorporeted in fort-ole (6). for exeeple,

for e trajectory of the tint kind cen be computed from the following
fomulee (Figure l):

“-8, y“: t V(Tln).—-B'.
where the+or- eigne ere teken depending on whether the center of the tool
in loceted in the poeitive or negetiwe helf-plene on with reepect to Y:

’S-R“(3:, 4')”. V8,: =0.

(1 -C) I (5)
V.,,-Anlgn(y,,.—C)toe ‘éT—T .

Vuu- Vaudm).

(C can eeeme both poeitive end negetive veluee).

'l'he weer of the eurfece of the pert et the point “1/2 in the lechining

proceee coneidered here for the firet kind of trejectory cen be towputed
front the fourth:

rm
4: twill-Jr glean, V)“
O

“UP-4" -V)l‘=(~’4’)+
rm

+ i [*(~’-1-'o-’:”~V)*-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I188 ONLY

“(4'5"- V)]"(4‘)+

+1, 4.3: —v)]d:(4jz). (6)

where the I. I! end 1!! being conpered correspond to the I, I! end 11!
sections of the trejectory (Figure l); «(Hz/2) is the ties the center of

the tool 01 is loceted et the point Ila/2. ‘l'he ersuesnts ere sinilsr for
the second kind of trejectoriee.

The tine «Irma/2) cen be expressed in terns of the perenetere'indiceted
ebove by neene o! the tomlex

”1 aly
d‘ (3 )O-V'ei .
In which the nuleretor end denoeinetor correspond to the position of the
center of the tool cherecterieed by the coordinetee (5).

Thus. with the essuaptions Iede here in the eyebols edopted. the set of -
vslues of the pereneters n. r, u. A. l. c end D correspond to en
efficient eechining node when they setieiy the equelity:

TI» 4:1 -”'t'%‘)ld(%)~

not (as ’I ”o A. B. C. D)=Bll'l|ﬂ.
(7)

where h3(ll1/2) is the requisite uteriel remove]. iron the surfece of the
optics]. pert.

He shell seerch for this Iinieul in the following feshion. teking into
account the iect thet in the reuse of verietion in the pereneters n. r,

m, A. B. c end D, generelly epeekins, there cen exist e number of locsl
mini-s of expression (7). The renge o! verietion of eech of the pereseters
is broken down into eubrenges. which ere equel for the seke of definitenees.
Tekins the centers of the eubreesee es the velues of the perenetere. we

coepile ell possible sets of these veluee. excluding only those which do
not setiety the nechinin; process. for which:

WW>%~-p..

where ”l is the einieun penissible species between the center of the tool
end the edge of the pert.

Further, teking the sets indiceted here sequentielly es the initiel sp-
proxinntione, the einiee of the function gun, on, r, A, B. c. D) ere

33
ron onxcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

nought by the gradient method of [3]. The eet correaponding to the leaet
of than

one... 9.0., r-r“

A-A,. 8-3,. c-c,. 0-0,

in taken aa the deaired eolution. The volune of calculation work in earth-
ing for the linin- of function (7) can he curtailed if the following func-

tion is lonula (6): .,
”('3'1. '3’"- V(Vn V3" V1,)

in repreaented in a Taylor'a eeriea in the vicinity of the point (111/2,

(€1.43. V(O. v,. 0))

depending on whether leI ; IVyI or not:

Ia(-’,’L, 41:. mm. v,. v»)-
=a(.';L,-’;t. V(V,. 0. 09+
+‘|(V;) V,+C.(V,) "at
441.4%. mg. v,. V.))--
“(41.41. no. v,. o»)+
+0.06) V.+Ca(V,)V..

(8)
where 010,). b1(vx), a101,), and C20,) are certain conatant coefficienta.

To calculate the valuee of the function h(ll I2, 82/2, VW‘.V"V:)). it it
nacneeary to coapute the valuaa Mill/2, 32A, V(Vm0,0)) and hall/2,
“2/9, V(O,V,.o)) beforehand for fixed veluee of V,‘ and V, fro- the region
o! their variation. ea well ae the coordinatea a101,). bﬁvx). 01013;) and
cam). and to lie: than in a table.

The valuee of the functiona (8) ahould he couputed by uaing the property

of their aonotonicity in the following unner. we ahall detenine the

fire: ten on the right aidee of equatione (8) from the data of the indi-
cated table, eaeuing that the veluee:

h $.41. wv. 0.0)).
a -’,’t.-’,"-. we. v,.0))

3h
’0! OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the intervals between two adjacent tabuler values change in accordance

with a linear law. The reaaining terns are found by means of the table
coefficients.

'rabla: Grinding Nodes for a Mirror with e Diaaetar of 1.260 I.

A. --

£ 93 8 g
M N O 32
980 OIO O |
220 N O 20

W m 0 l0
"0 m 0 O
no N 0 I.
I lo a: O 8
l” N 0 0
110 an 0 l0
"0 mo 0 O
I IO m 0 I
"0 M O l
I 10 2.0 O 0
"O 223 O 7
I” m 0 7

 

The proposed procedure for the calculetions of the aechining nodes for
large optical cosponents was run on a Minsk-32" electronic digital cow-
puter. A spherical uirror with a disseter of 1.260 an and a radius of
the sphere equal to 50.000 - was ground. end a large parabolic reflector
was polished. The first of the reflectors indicated was sachined with

a tool having a diueter of 850 n. In both aschining instances, the
center of the tool moved along a trajectory of the first kind. The range
of variation in the values of the parsuetere 9. A, I and c in the first
machining case were as follows:

0.15 g n g 5 r.p.s.; 0 g r g 9 vath/uin [unknown units per minute];
03a. 3. cacao-n.

The precision which was achieved is characterized by a uni-u- deviation
of the actual shape of the surface iron that required shouting : 0.6 um.
After this, the grinding was terminated. Shown in Figures 2 and 3 are
curves Kl—Kld (K1 is the original curve) which characterize the deviations
of the actual shape of the surface frou that required over 17 sechining
sessions. and the aachining nodes are given in the table. The radius of
the requisite surface shape following each aschining session was i-pre-
cieely detersined. since the require-cuts placed on the precision of its
determination were not high. Calculations showed that the curves hull/2)
are saooth. with no uore than two taxi-a. and by selecting the wachining
lode using the procedure proposed here. and executing a number of grind-
ing sessions, one can assure a reliable approxi-ation of the actual shape
of the surface to that required.

35
ron orncm. use om:
Figure 2. Curves characterizing the deviation of the actual shape of the
mirror surface free that required.

Along with this. a redistribution of the contact pressure occurs during
the grinding process in the region of contact between the surface of the
part and the tool. due to the excursion of the tool beyond the edge of the
part. Thus. in the fourth end eighth sessions (the i-th session effects
the transition from one surface shape to another, vhich is characterized
by the i-th and the (i + l)-th curves), which were also designated for

the purpose of determining the pereissible excursion of the tool beyond the
edge of the part end the departure in which was equal to lore than 212 an,
it was recorded that the design value of the wear differed free the actual
wear (the actual was greater than the design value) at the points ill/2 -

I 450 II and 625 Is by 1.35 and more than 2.7 tines respectively. In
the eleventh session, during an excursion of the tool of 82 II, differences
at the points cited above were recorded in the aeount of 1.25 times and
1.9 tines greater, while in the majority of the retaining sessions, when
r/a .<_ 10 and the excursion amounted to about 50 an. the differences were
1.2 and 1.5 tines greater respectively. The differences in the predicted
surface shape. 'I'nich are characterized by the P. K and i curves can

be seen in figures 2 and 3.

Since the laws governing the surface wear of the part when the tool runs
out beyond its edge are stable ones, two cases of accounting for this are
of interest: replacing MRI/2) in foreula (7) by h(l11/2)k(ﬂ1/2), where
hall/2) are coefficients which have to be determined experinentelly, as
in the grinding variant considered here (such accounting, as shown in
Figure 3. per-its successfully dealing with a difficulty traditional for
optical workers - the elimination of the "hunp" in front of the edge of

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0R OFFICIAL 083 ONLX

the pert): the deteninetion of the design value for the wear hon/2,
“2/2. V) and h(ll1/2. "2/2. -V) taking into account the nonunifonity in
the distribution of the contact pressures. based on methods for solving
contact problem in the shaping of optical surfaces. During the polishing
of the pert in different machining sessions. the instability in the ro-
tational speed of the tool was registered in n vide range (the sire of

the velocity varied by three tines, while the direction changed to the
opposite direction). with large swings in the oscillations of the tool

(2A). such instability leads to errors in the predicting of the surface
IhIpee

To increase the precision in forecasting the shape of the surface during

polishing. it is expedient to stabilise the ansulsr rotational of the
tool.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Tecsnek L.s.. (HP [m OPTICAL maxim. INDUSTRY]. 1970. no 8. p 60.
2. Bosdsnov A.P.. 'rsesnek L.S., M. 1976, No 3. p 52.

3. Korn 6.. Korn 1.. ”Spravochnilt po utsustilte dlye neuchnykh rebotnikov“

["Kotheaetics handbook for Scientific Workers"). Hoscov, Neuka Publishers,
1973.

COPYRIGBT: Optiko-Hekhenicheskeya Proayshlennoat', 1978

8225
CSO: 81hh/976

37
ran onlcm. us: omr
FOR OFFICIAL 08! ONLY

PHYSICS

00¢ 669.018.28: “9.018.672
CAST coupomms OP SUPERINVAR FOR OPTICAL tumours-rs.

Leningrad OPTIKO-HZKIMNIORBSKAYA "MSWST' in Rualian No II. 1973
pp 69-51

[Article by SW. Rabinovich, Candidate of the Sciencee ILA. Sidorenlw.
NJ). Kharchult, and candidate of the Sciencee Ada. Ioffa. nanuecript re-
colved 3 April, 1978]

{Text} The uae of structural lateriala which have a Iinilul tenperature
coelficient of linear expanaion (ms) ie eaaential in aeauring operational
preciaion in a clinatic range or talparaturea of dewicee for varioua pur-
poeea. The correct choice of letal ntariala with a epecified 110.: ie of

particular inportance for the fabrication of nountinse for optical coupo-
nontl.

Hhen ueing nateriala with a rm cloee to that of slaea. the ninilun level
of etreeeee ia Iaintained in the slum-to which the abacence of Motor--

- tiona in an optical ayotcn ia related. ‘l'o fabricate natal conponenta which
operate in conjunction with quartz slate. the uae of euperinvar (alloy
32m. 6081‘ [State Ste ardl 10996-66) ie the noet pro-ieins. lte m
doea not exceed 1 0 l deg-1, which it very clone to the m of quartz
glue (0.2-4.5 1 . 10-6 deg-1, cost 15130-69). but the 32 m Alloy ie
aupplied only in the for- o! roll atock, eonethins which becauu of the
poor nechinability linita the poeeibility of ueing thia alloy. eapecially
for parts with a couple: ahape. In thia regard. the production of caat
parte from 32 m alloy ie an extrelely urgent problea for the nechenical
optics induatry. eince it ellowa for expanding the producte list and eharply
reducing the labor inteneity of co-ponent fabrication.

The neceoaity aroaa in the naatery of ehaped caating fro- the 32 an alloy
to carry out a nulber of atudiee. eince ita apecial featuree were aacertained.
such an the pretence of a cellular aubetructure and a coneiderable tendency

 

* Eda. Kaufun and In“. Lunina participated in the work.

38
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

to fore hot crecks. ‘l‘he liquetion of the eejor coeponente of the elloy
with respect to the cross-section of the cello wee studied with the
"Rush-$46” x-rey epoctrue enelyeer. It wee detenined thet nickel end
copper liquete et the bounderiee. while cobelt does so towerds the center
of the cello et e mime scetter in the concontretions of 4. 0.5 end
0.52 reepectively (tor essples with e dieeeter of 10 u). leceuse of ii-
quetion oi the ole-onto over the croee-section. e celluler substructure ie
undesirehle. end ior this reeeon. conditions were found under which it ie
not formed. Seeples of 32 m elloy were welted by the nethod of zonsl
Belting with herdenine retee of iron 0.55 to 8 n/ein. The triele were
cerried out ueine en “Kristell nu" inetelletion in e vscuu (5 . 10’5 ton»).
It wee round thet the celluler substructure for sseplss of with e dieeeter
of 5-7 1- does not eriee st herdenine retee which do not exceed 1 -lllll.

IABEB l
The Chemical Composition of the Costing Alloy 32 m

 

ﬁle-eat Content Blelent Conteni
“m“ by Height. x “m“ by Height, x

 

 

 

 

Nickel ”-32.5 Rere eerth fro- the 0.06—0.20
group: ceriue. lenthe-
nue. preseodyeiue,
neodyliua. totel

cob.lt 3oz..‘e2 sulfur : 0002
Copper 0.6-0.8 Phoophorous ; 0.02
Si]. icon 0 .02—0. 15 Iron lie-e inder

 

It is well known thet to elieinete e celluler euhetructure. it ie neceseery.
along with e eini-ue herdenins rete, to heve e minu- teepereture gredient
[1]. but for the cut elloy m. such conditions ere herdly feeeible in
prectice when ueing the nethode of sheped outing need in industry. In this
regerd, further reeeerch wee cerriod out to deter-inc the chuicel coopoei-
tion of the ceet elloy which essures the working cherecterietice where the
celluler euhetructure is present.

The cheaicel coepoeition of the elloy wee detenined for the febricetion of
ehepe costings coins invent-out petterne (Teble 1) [2], which provide for
e me of no Iore then 1 . 10-6 deg-1 in e tenpereture tense of 1 100’ c

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I188 ONLY

TAB 2

The Statistical Processing of the Results of “assuring the reaperature
Coeiiicianta of Linear Expansion of Cast Superinvar as a Function of the
Nickel Content

 

Co.“ a.
I”! m

 

. a ran-
nm-mo-o ‘12:?! m sutepo W
“.0“. MN “0
s 20-: °c l“

3| .13 LO! 0 30.3 0.11
31.18 0.7:! II 7
no no: m :33? 31

 

32.0 0.03 '0 $0.57 0.97
m 0.30 M $ 0.“? 0”
39.9 0.05 2| 3°55 0.“
m 0.07 35 20.53 0.90
m ".50 II 3'03) 0.73
3” 0.75 N was 0.6.
0‘." 0.0!, In 30.3 0.“
35.0 I.” 0 20.3 m

E

Key: l. Nickel content by weight. 2;
2. Teaperature coefficient of linear expansion.
deg‘1 - 10'6 in e range of 20—100' c;
3. Number of leasurenents:
6. Confidence interval. deg"1 . 10-6;
5. Confidence level.

Notes: 1. For alloys with a 11m of lean than 1 . 10-6 deg'l, the confi-
dence interval was chosen so as to detenine the confidence level fro oh-
taining a m of no son than 1 - l0“6 deg‘l.

2. Seaplea having deviations in the nickel content of 1 0.151 were
coabined in one group as regards nickel content;

3. The content of the reaaining couponenta (by weight. 1): Co 3.37-
6.03 Cu 0.68—0.93: c 0.01—0.028: Si 0.037—0.l$; s g 0.02; P g 0.02.

In. The statistical proceesing was perforled in accordance with the
procedur. described in the literature [3].

 

as well as optimal production technology properties. It was detenined

that the oinim rm of the alloy is achieved when the nickel content is
increased by 0.52 (Table 2) as coapared to the rolled product (0081' 10995-66).
The introduction of rare earth Ietale perlitted an increase in the cracking
resistance of the alloy. An investigation of the influence of ceriue.
lanthanum yttriua and the H1173 and lﬂ‘s60 nixed Ietala showed that the last-
inue crack resistance was assured when rare earth netala were introduced in

b0
'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

the tern of nixed natal «mo in the aaount of 0.25! of the weight of the
charge. The nechanical propartiaa of the alloy were atudied uaing aaaplaa

fabricated by inveataant pattern caeting. and their average valuaa are
given in Tabla 3.

TABLE 3

1‘ r Cut in Allo

      
 

 
   

   
  
    

 

 

11 . .
‘I‘mepary- w' “" "pom 9n e
Wane mm
no ntnma- m «an. mum eastern.
m.°c ‘37:: ' "’dw ’“"'""" menu. S lure-Ila. -

   

~10. m «.0 20 an
'g 4&3: % 3’: 602% I:
no no 20.0 m m no.0

 

Kay: 1. ‘i'eat teaperetura, 'c;
2. ‘raneila atrength. "-1;
3. Yield point. Raf/u 3
6. Percentage elongation. x:
5. Relative reduction. 2;
6. Iapact atrangth, kg! - talc-2;

"area: 1. Seaplaa in accordance with 0051' 1697-61. 1150-65 and 9656-60. The
tenaile teata were periorned on an lit-63 oachine at a rate of 1.25 n/ain.
Five aaaplea were teated at each teaparature. To deter-inc the impact
strength. eeven anplea each are teatad on an 21-30 pendult- he-er in
accordenca uith 0081' 9455-60 and 9656-60;

2. The chalical coapoaition of the alloy fro- uhich the aaaplea were
tabriceted (by weight. 1): Ni - 32.9; 8o - 3.73 Si - 0.12; Cu - 0.73: lin -
0.32: Ce - 0.061; La - 0.031; 3 - 0.02; P - 0.02; c - 0.027: P - the rain-
dar.

 

 

The induetrial proceae (or Ielting 32mm alloy for ahaped outing Innufacture
doea not differ aa a whole (to. the production technology adopted for pre-
ciaion nickel-iron alloya, and there are only a few apecial featurea. The
oclting in the open high frequency induction furnace ahould be forced. For
couple: caatinga. it in deairable to perforn the Ielting and pouring in a
vocuua. The li'l'ahO nixed aetal ia introduced into a ladel under a jet fol-
lowing the prelilinary denudation of the alloy. for which ferrouanganeae,
ferroailicon and alulinun vara uaed in our caae. The teoparatura for fil-
ling the petterna uea 1.510-1.sso°. Uaing the developed technology.

'01
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Cuttings of the JZNKD alloy.

Shuped culling: for five denigntttona unto fubrtcnted, tun of vhtch are
shown in the figure; the III. of the castings vac 0.25-1.7 kg, and the
thtckncnn of the walls um. 6-15 In.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Chalnorl 3., "Teortya :ntvordevcniya" ("The Theory of Freez1n3"]. Moscow.
Hetlllurgtyn Publishers. 1968. p 153-162.

2. Ioffc A.Yl., at n1., Patch: No. 501111. IYUL. IZOIR. [BULLETING 0P
INVENTIONS], 1976, No 6.

J. Zaydel' A.N.. "Olhtbkl ignoranty {latchelkikh vollchin" ["Brrors 1n the
Heanutenont of Physical Quantities”). Leningrad, Rank: Publishers, 1975.

COPYRIGHE: Optiko-Hckhnntchcnklyl Pronylhlennult’. 1978

8225
cso: emu/976

he
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

PHYBICS

"DC 351.521.3:593.52

‘l‘llS STATISTICAL CWCTKRISTICS OI OPTICAL MIA?!“ ATTWM'ION IR 11!!
GROUND LAYER 0? I‘ll! mom (SWIM, ADM)

Leningred OﬂlWlmMﬂ PRMSWST' in Ruesien No ll. 1978
pp 58-62

[Article by V.L. Pilippov. v.9. lvenov end A.8. Hekerov, senuecript received
16 Novesber. 1977]

[Text] The sein etetieticel cherecteristice of dete ob-
teined in the study of eeroeol ettenuetion of visible

end infrered redietion in hetee, foggy hues end heree
with driule ere enelyted.

Deepite the incressed value of intonetion in recent yeere concerning the
veriebility of the spectrel opticel density of eeroeole under werious weether
conditions. the feeeibility end conﬁdence level of the forecesting of the
IR trenesittencc of e turbid etloephere fro- the dete of seesureeents in the
visible renge of the spectrum renein. ee before. disputed issues. The pro-
blee tekes on perticuler urgency when discussing the penieeibility of ex-
trepoleting the dete of locel seeeuresents to regions with eieiler geogreph-
icel end clisetic conditions. Teking this into eccount, the euthore con-

sider it expedient to continue the diecussion of the uteriele obteined. be-
ginning in 1970.

Considering the conclusions of e nuaber of euthors of the coneidereble
weakening of the correletion between verietions ofthe coefficients a; in the
visible renge of the spectru- end when X z. 2 us, the renge of wevelengths
which is discussed in this peper. without de-eging the quelitetive infom-
tion conteined in the leteriel es e whole. wee limited to l I 0.55-6.0 III,
end the eerosol ettenuetion fectore were determined in the treneeittence
”windows" close to wevelengthe of 0.55. 0.83, 1.06, 1.18. 1.66. 2.09 end
3.97 we. The weether conditions considered here ere eeeocieted with the
spring end eutuen periods. A coepsretively lerge diversity of opticel con-
ditione is cherecterietic o! the ground leyer of sir. where theee conditions
cennot be successfully described by e single sodel. even in the cese where
the sodeling encospesees only individuel cherecterietics of the nedius, es
for exuple. the epectrel dependence end veriebility of the redietion et-
tenuetion fectors in e breed renge of the epectrus.

'03
m omcm. use ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The analysis of the results of the experinental studies of the variations of
the aerosol attenuation factors shows that for the spring and autusn periods.
the nejority of recorded spectral relationships e - 0(A) can he associated
with four qualitatively different classes. types of "optical weather” [2):
haze. foggy haze, fog and haze with drizzle. we shall consider in particular
the analysis of the results of the statistical processing of the spectral
functions of the aerosol attenuation factors for hares. hates with drizzle and
foggy hates. Based on the conditions of the experisent. the factors urea

in r
ax . e- Lx .

where r is the spectral trensaittence in the range of l; L is the length of
the opt cal path. specified by a finite nusher of spectral points. This scene
that the result of a single seasurssent of the attenuation factors. which takes
the fore of a tendon function [3]. can be treated as the realisation of an
n-disensionsl vector. where n is the number of values of l chosen over the
spectrum. The Iain statistical characteristics of this Vector will he the

average values: . ' u
.‘o-wz .h‘

(N is the nusher of realizations in the sasple statistical enseshle). the
correlation astrix is:

’W-J'v’rSiva-"att-E.)

or the norlalised correlation satrix is:

5132-1

h}.- 5's“ (1. l. 2. . N;
‘0 k-'. 2. u. , II),

 

where the dispersion is

o2 - s l .
A1 at i

The average spectral functions I}. which detaraine the conditions for horse
(N - 700. 3 I. g g 20 In. 1.01 g f 5. 901). hsses with drizzle (N - 150).
and foggy hares ( - 300, 1 It: 5 5H g 10 in, f > 902) in various weather
situations, which can be characterized by specified limits on the meteorological
visibility range $3 and the relative husidity f, are shown in the figure. The
results of calculating the nor-slised correlation Iatrices for the statistical
ensembles indicated above are illustrated in Table 1 (A is for hazes. B for
fogs. and c for hazes with drizzle). Table 2 contains the corresponding esti-
estss oi the confidence intervals. cosputed for espirical correlation coef-
ficients of 90.55; Mk)’

hh
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

The deta of Tables 1 end 2 indicate that
for the eerosol stetes or the steosphere
studied here, e characteristic feature is
‘ the close interrelationship between the
“b"; vsristions do; in various sections of the;
1 apectrun. including where l - 0.35 - 2 no
end l > 2 un. The infatuation obtained
with this contradicts the conclusions'of
the suthors of pepers [1. 6. 5]. in accord-
ence with which the observed substantial
weakening of the correlation between veris-
'a! tions in the "eerosol trsnnittance" of
g the steosphere in the visible end IR regions
m of the spectrun is related to the difference
between the sources end nechenisls for the
trenstonetions of finely dispersed psrti-
cle trections which are responsible for the
ettenuetion of rediation in the visible
A: y 1 3 4m renge end the lsrge dispersed aerosols
which deternine the ettenuetion of IR red-
istion (in our cese. the sonewhat lower
values of the correlation coefficients p; A
:ﬁ:u::;°.:he.::::::::°:u::::o:: in the Table (A) are undoubtedly prinsril§ k

due to the neesurelent errors of the optical
"l “M" the following conditions: density of the hates. the sverege value of

.,.
§§

e. "see;

b. F088! M“: which for l > 1 in was 3 0.1).

c. lieu with driule; Thus, the esseurensnt results penit once
The stall circles are the cel- sgein noting the fact that the proqu of
culstion results. reproducing the spectrel curve of the

aerosol ettenuetion factore ox on the
basis of neasurenente of "0'55 or 5H has s good besis.

The results of a quentitative conperison of the cheracteristics obtained touch
on a second inportant sspect, where these chsracteristics correspond to the
conditions of the Zvenigorodsh scientific ststion o! the Institute of Atone-
pheric Physics of the USSR Acede-y o! Sciences [1. 2]. This circustence
gives direct evidence of the (set thst the processes of the conversion of
aerosol fornetions in the regions of the treasure-onto are likewise the seas.
Also to be tsken into account is the fact thet the justification for the
conclusions reeched follows fro. the results of the eynchronous neeeurennts
of vsrietions in the dispersion couposition of the aerosols for the case of
particle sizes tron 0.1 to 10 u- (61. The letter hsve shown thet in (h.
process oi toning s foggy hue. the lerge dispersed frection of the aerosols
is pri-srily (or-ed es s result or the condensetion-coagulstion growth of

the sesllest psrticles (r g 0.1 .. 0.8 on).

with tho "breeking up” of a foggy hate, the lsrge aerosols upon evaporating
agsin change over to the region of null particles, i.e.. the ettenuetion of
rodistion in both the vieible and IR regions of the spectru- is spperently
due to psrticles of an identicel neture.

'6
run omcm. usr ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

nuts 1
mass

w w m m m w I’”"" "
m LO 0.9M om as o 4 mu m o u
o.» I.0 0.952 «oim 0331 m om 0393 3‘35
Loo In on em on om «no mo

A m to am mo 0.»: mos om
{‘33 1.0 $3” 0300' ”a; 31:?
W In ohm w
0.» Lo m m 0 ms I
w 1.0 3233 33.1 323 on «'33 mm: 1.7%

5 I.“ 1.0 0.“ 0,990 0.”) 0.57 0.” 1”
m m on: w on: om mo
52:: m an m cm mu
m ‘ m m ml
0.85 l.0 ms 0 n m on m om m m
m 1.0 0:331 om on 3.913 on m 3'.»

a Leo I.» om om on em on: mu
m 1.0 on can on on m
'23: 0.: nn'u'" 033': 323 3?:
am l.o m was

 

\

For the purpose of obtaining sore conplete infatuation on the ststisticsl
chsrscteristics of serosol sttenustion. the eigen-wslues sk end the eigen-
vectors Sk(h) were cosputsd for esch of the correlstion Istrices BIAoi!An1kl.
The eigen-vslues sk end the first two eigen-vectors 81(1) end 52(1)

sre given in stles 3 end 6 respectively. It csn be shown [7. 8] thst even
the first two eigen-vectors are sufficient to reproduce the spectrsl curve
ox with so error o: no sore then 31.

 

TABLE 2
M
(1) 1“ I. Ins
mm" ' on “min-[El 3”
2 a»... :0." um um gm: gem sou:
tyisms susu e. 0.00! t 00)! 1 0.00 W 0.” 0.0!?
{3; nm. c «we.» tom 30"” *om ﬁns icon iom

Key: 1. type of situstion;
2. ﬂexes
3. toggy here:
6. “see with drizzle.

R6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIM. US! ONLY

my: 3
l 2

K lulu __Tylueeee men llum e to

‘l h ‘0 I I. ‘h 74
I mo 01 0.2) 90 2.01 09
2 07 o 8
2 $333? a '5’ F” 3.2? :ﬁ"
6 ml In W IN 0M” IN
3. M23 ”20 w
3. m QM WI

 

Key: 1. Item
2. foggy here;
3. here with drirtle.

Regerdleee of the poeeihilitiee repreeented hy the dete of Tehlee l -— 6.

in prectice it ie frequently lore convenient in celcnleting the coefficients
of eeroeol ettenuetion to «ploy the procedure propoeed in [12]. Per thie
reeeon. in thie peper, juet en in [12]. the following reletionehip wee
edopted for the epproxiletion of the neen etetieticel curvee heing die-
cueeed. which deter-nine the epectrel curve of the coefficient u in the
windowe of eteoepheric treneperency:

“A - “0.55h0 + all-“2

The weluee of the capiricel coefficiente no, n1 end n; which were ohteined
by the method of leeet equeree. end which define the epectrel curve of a},
erc ehown in Tehle S for no.” 0 l. The circlee in the figure for the
indicated weether conditione correepond to the reeulte of celculetione
ueing the expreeeion given here for the epectrel curve of the coefficient
I), which etteete to the good egreenent of the dete (the epproxinetion error
ie 3 51).

 

mu ,. (1) (2) (3)

lum- luue new-m M t m

3.0) 3.0) 3.0) 3.0) an)

0.4. ~02 0M6 -o.m 0.46 — I
$3 as: w an 2952 as: -°'”
:3 an? 325 a -°m w ‘W
zoo on m m a: ‘33:: :33
W 0.25! 0.0! 0.267 0.113 0.300 MI!

Key: 1. lieu;
2. foggy here:
3. here with drizzle.

h?
roe omcm. use our
POI! OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

TABLE 5
mmtm' | .. l -. | ., |"“""::::::r"°°~<2>
3 nuns 0.1 0.“ l3 l-M
' M -
§3§ mm :: :3: a: 2:. ”

 

 

Key: 1. Heather conditions (spring-eutunn);
2. beta fro- the literature on n2 us - l9];
3. llese;
lo. Peggy here:
5. here with drizzle.

The corresponding welues of the lore precise coefficients no end n1. end the
expor 4t n2 for the types of opticsl weether considered here ere close in
ten“ of their size to those known from the litereture (see [9—131), end
elso correspond to the reco-endstione of [12]. It is necessery to note
only the difference of the qusntity n2 from ‘l'eble S, where this difference
is of precticel eignificence end releted to the lore cereful breekdown of
tho initisl dets in this paper for the purpose of eliminsting fros consid-
eretion those spectre which were ectuslly ohteined under conditions of rein.

In generelizing the enslysis seterisls presented here for the results of
en orthogonel breekdown of the field of eerosol ettenuetion of redietion
in the ground leyer of the etnosphere. we shell egein underscore the right-
fulness of using the expression given ehove for the purpose of celculeting
the coefficients ox for eech of the opticsl situstions under discussion.

In conclusion, the euthors consider it their duty to express their grsti-
tude to r.v. Spiridonovs for essieting in processing the seesureeent results
on coeputer.

BIDLIOGMPRY
l. Georgiyevskiy Yu.8.. et sl., 12V AN 8588, FAQ [PROCEEDINGS 0? 11m USSR

ACADDW OP SCIENCES. ATMOSPHERIC AND 00th PWSICS], 1973. Vol 9. No 6,
P 655e

2. umber: c.v.. 12v. AN sssn, no. 1961. Vol 3. no 9. p 936.

3. Pugechew V.S.. "‘l'eoriye slucheynykh funktsiy" ["‘l'he Theory of Rondo-
Functions"). Pimtgi: Publishers. 1962.

6. Georgiyevskiy Yu.S.. IN. AN 8588. FAO, 1969, Vol 5. No l», p 376.

B8
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.
6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

POO. OWICIAI. USE ONLY

Lakttonov A.c., at 11.. IN. All 8883. no. 1973. Vol 9. No 2, p 138.

Filippov v.1... at 31., GI? [m OPTIWICAL INDUSTRY], 197‘. No 1.
p 3b.

Obukhov A.N.. 12". M 8883. 801'. "Goofizﬂu" [PROCEEDINGS 01’ m3 088]!
ACADM OF SCIENCES, GBOWYSICS SERIES]. 1960. No 3. p 632.

Holkovich ".8” "Opttchookiyo toolodovontyo amour)- oo oputntkov“

["Opttcol Invoottsationo of tho Atnoophoro fro- 8ot3111too"], Moscow.
Nouko Publtohon. 1973.

Vol: P.. "Opttk do. Dun-too. Ilandbuch do: Oooph." ["‘l'ho Option of Rose.

Goophyoico Handbook”). 3“.th by 3. Make and Moon". Vol III. Borntnogor
Publishero. Berlin. 1956.

Yunze Kl», "Khhtchukty oootov 1 udtookttvnoot' ntoootory" ["Tho chemical
Composition of tho Atooophoro"). Mir anohoro. 196$.

Zuyov VJ... “Ruprootanyo vtdtnykh 1 IK-voln v otnoofero” [”‘l'ho
Propagation of Viotblo and Infrurod Haven in the Atmosphere”. Sovotokoye
Radio Publtohon. 1970.

Filippov v.1... Him-yout- S.O., 12V. WZOV, PIZIKA [PROCEEDINGS 01’ m
“1688!! EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTES, PHYSICS], 1972. No 10, p 103.

Toropovo ‘r.P., ot o1.. 1n the co11octton. "Polo nuoyonnogo uluchentya
v :anoy atloototo” ["‘l'ho Field of Scattered inﬂation in the Barth's
Atmophoroﬂ, Ann-Au. Pubnohln; Home of tho Kazakh $81!. 1971..

COPYRIGHT: Optiko-Horhlntchukoya Pro-yohlonnoot'. 1978

8225
cso: emu/976

#9
you onxcm. use ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

P318108

UDC 621.386 .326. 23

A REM? scmnoc VIM FOR QMLITY CONTROL IN m ASSDBLY OP m STA'I'ORS
OF ELECTRICAL WINES

Leningred OPTIKO-WANICKBSKAYA msnmmr' in Rueeien No 11, 1978
pp "-75

[Article by Phd. in the eciencee Hm. Hiroehnikov, 11.x. lvenve. P.P

Rudehee, LA. Zhukov. K.S. Kerepetyen end ‘r.D. Katine. eenuecript received
19 April. 1978]

[Text] In recent yeere. coneidereble ettention hee been devoted in our
country to the introduction of nondeetructive quelity control nethode for
induetriel producte for teetins then during tebricetion end operetion.

:4, 7 e 9
I" ' '

 

Figure 1. Functional diesren of the thee-eel ecenning viewer

A epecielieed eodel of e thee-ml viewer wee deeisned to reeliee the thernel
viewing nethod o! nondeetructive quelity control of the eeeenhly of the
etetore of electricel nechinee. in perticuler. the etetore of high power

turhogeneretore end eynchronoue conneneetore. for the purpoee of eecertein-
ing ehort-circuited leninetione in the eolid leee of steel.

A functionel echenetic of the but viewer ie ehovn in Pisure l. The rout-
ing ecenner, which incorporetee the objective 1 end inclined reflector 2,

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL U58 ONLY

effects the element by element circular inspection of the internal surface
of the stator being studied. Infrared radiation from a surface element is
focused by the objective on the sensitive area of photoresistor 3. where

a temperature difference exists between two adjacent surface elements. an
electrical signal is generated at the terminals of the photoresistor. which
is proportional to this difference. and which following amplification in
voltage amplifiers 6 and 7 and current amplifier 8, is fed to the electrodes
of the recording block 9. where a line by line black and white half-tone

image of the object is reproduced on electrochemical paper in the form of
n "heat map."

 

Figure 2. A "heat map" of the interior surface of a turbogenerstor
stator.

Simultaneously with the amplification of the signal by gamma corrector 8,
the volt-ampere characteristic of the recording block is equalized. some-

thing which permits increasing the number of visible half-tones in the
image being reproduced.

with the simultaneous rotation of thescenner and the travel of the optical
head at a fixed rate along the stator by means of the self-propelled chasis,

fhe entire internal surface is sequentially examined along the threaded
drive line without omissions and superimpositions.

A "heat map" of the internal surface of a turbogenerator stator is shown
in Figure 2.

An uncooled photoresistor of lead selenide (SFé-l) with a sensitive area
size of l x 1 mm is used as the radiation detector.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. General view of the inetrunent.

The objective haa three leneea (one lena in nade of lithium fluoride and
two are made of calcium fluoride) with a relative aperture of 1.33. a

focal diatance of 133.6 In and a magnification of 0.2. The diameter of

the circle of confueion in a apectral range of 1.8—4.8 um ia no sore than
0.5 In.

The heat viewer haa the following technical and operational characteristics:

Angular reaolution 20 angular minutea
Threahold aenaitivity to a temperature

drop at a level of +25' c 1'

Focusing range 500-4500 III
Range of working tenperaturea +10-O-70' C
working apectral range 1.8—6.8 um
Inspection travel rate along the

length of a product 10 m/aec

The aize of a horizontal record line 180 m

The heat viewer ia etructurally deaigned in the for: of two blocka: an

optical head mounted on a self-propelled chaaeia, and a recording block.
Both blocks are connected together by an electrical cable.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A general View 0! the device is shown in Figure 3. This inument can
also find application in tho study of the hour. field of the ourfncu of
various cylindrical products.

BIBLIOGWKY

1..Hiroshnikov “.11.. "Tcoruichukiye omovy optiko-cloktronnykh priborov"
["rho Theoretical Principles of 0pcronic Devices”). Leningrad,
mohinouroyaniyo Nut-hon. 1977, p 600.

2. Bykov VAL, mmzcnasxm STARTSII [ELECTRICAL mm STATIONS], 1977,
No 5, p 31.

3. Hiroohnikov Km, 0: 11.. Patent No. 612825, 31:01.. 12033. [BULLETIN
or Imam-Ions]. 1976, No 29.

COPYRIGHT: Opciko-Hekhnnichuluya Proayohlonnou'. 1978

8225
cso: emu/976

53

4% ran ontcm. usefomx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

006 539.1
TRANSFER OF lLBCTRON-BXCITATION INBRGY IN CONDENSED MEDIA

Moscow Panznos runner: BLBKTIDNNOGO VOZBUZHDENIYA v KONDBNSIROVANNYKﬂ SRBDAKN
in Russisn 1978 signed to press 13 Apr 78 pp 3-20

[Annotetion. table of contents. preface end introduction froe book by

v. H. Agrenovich end M. D. Gelanin. Isdstel'stvo "Route." 6.000 copies.
383 pages]

[Text] This eonogrsph is the first book in world litsreture dedicated to
the sequentisl presentation of the besic results of theoreticel investige-
tions of the trensfer of energy from electron excitation in condensed eedie.
The special feetures of energy trensfer in amorphous and crystelline media
are considered in close rsletionship to their opticel properties end. in
psrticulsr. in relstion to the effect of energy transfer on the lueinescence
chsrscteristics. verious nechanises of energy transfer are discussed
(resonance transfer of excitations. excitons. radietion trensfer). as well
as speciel feetures of energy transfer at high excitation levels. The
ieportsnt role played by the energy transfer of electron excitetion in the
analysis of numerous opticel, photoelectric redietion end other properties
of crystsls. solutions. biologicel substances. etc.. is widely known.

This book is intended for scientific workers (physicists. cheeists. biolo-
gists). es well as gredusts students and upper class-en in these specialties

who. in their investigstions. encounter prohieee of energy trensfer of
electron excitation.

5" .
YOK orncm. use our
I’OR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

‘l‘ehle of contents

Prefeoe
Introduction

Ohepter i

Ric-emery ect of energy trensfer

Approxiution of e two-level syste-
Dipole-dipole interaction

Trenefers in e queei-continucue epectrun.
Foreter's theory

Effect of polerisehility of the nediul

Dipcle-quedrupcle end exchen‘e interecticne

mepter 2

Energy trenefer in solutions

1.
2.

Dipole-dipole trenefer in eclid eclutione
Dipole-dipole energy trenefer in liquid eoluticne

Ohepter 3

Effect of sediun on the epeed of energy trensfer end epectre
of soleouler cryctels

1.
2

32
u.

5.
6.
7.

Introduction. Nethod cf the ective field

Psrnittivity of cubic crysteh

Active field end permittivity of enisctrcpic cryetele
Pereittivity of nixed cryetelline solutione end poleri-
setion of ebcrpticn doped bende

mercy of reeonence interection between ilpIn-ity
noleculee

m teking into ecccmt higher nultipclee in the active
field nethod
Concluding rend-kn

Chepter to

Problem in the theory of electronic ercitsticne in molecular
crystels

1.

2.

Introduction. ﬂesiltonien of the crystel in the concept

of secondery quentieetion. Prcoeceee of urging end
division of Icleculer emitstione

Bucitcn-phcnon interecticn. Coherent end incoherent
(“locelised”) mitcnc

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'reblo of Oontente (continued)

3. hoohenicel end couloeb oxcitcne when teking into ecccunt
eixing ecloculer configuretione. Oertein identitiee

lb. Oecilletion exoitcne. Biplane“

5. Collective proportiee or e eyetoe o! long-lite
oecilleting oxcitcne

6. Electronic biencitono of hnkol'

7. Theory of reeonenoo interecticn betueen eoleculee ct
iepm'itiee. leoheniee ot virtunl excitcne end virtuel
phonone

8. Dipole eceent trenei‘er. thet detereinee the inteneity of
ebeorption of light by the ilpurity

9. Abeorpticn epoctre end lueineocaleo of the iepurity
center

10. Probebility of energy treneter of electron excitetion
iron the donor to the eccoptor end the role of
correletione between the diepleceeente of the etcee
eurrounding thee. not trenefer

11. Poleritone. long we‘re-length edge of exciton ebeorption
bends end the poleritcn Iocheniee ct exciton lueineeoence

12. 8tcoheetic nodel of exciton-phonon interecticn in
eoloculer cryetele

Ghepter 5

Theory of kinetic perenetere thet deternine the epeed of mergy

trenefer by excitone

1.
2.

3.
u.

5.

6.
7e

8.
9o

Introduction

Generel expreeeicn tor the diffusion coefficient of
eeell redive exciton.

nobility of incoherent ('locelieed") exciton-
Length of free peth end diffusion coefficient of
coherent excitone

Scettoring of coherent excitone by inuritiee end
defects in the oryetelline etmcturo

kcitcn trnpping by inpurity eoloculoe

Btcitcn ditto-ion in the etocheetic ecdel. Coherent
end incoherent notion of the exciton

Bieoleculer ennihileticn of excitcne

Effect of inhoeogeneoue broedening end Anderecn
lccelieetion cf exciteticne on the epoed or energy
trenefer to iepm-ity ecleculee. lonreeonent tan-fer
proceeoee

56
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

116
122

128
131

1'59
151

162
168
18"

189

191
195

210
216

230
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents (Continued)
Chapter 6
Phenomenological theory of exciton eigretion

1. Boundaries of applicability of diffusion approxieation.
Quasi-single diaeneional end quasi-two diaensional systeas

2. Theory of trapping an exciton by the ispurity. use of
anal]. concentrations

3. Probability of trapping exoitone by the inpurity in
the asth of Viper-hits cells

10. Effect of fluctuations in the trap distribution on the
speed of exciton trapping

5. Special features of exciton condensation in seni-
conductors ‘

6. Effect of radiation transfer of energy on the
exciton distribution in space and tine. hecroscopic
characteristics of exciton luainescence

7. Attenuation tine of luainescence of a seai-infinite
crystal

8. Spectrun and attenuation ties of lueinescence of finite
thickness crystals. Annihilation of excitons and the
role of reabaorption

mapter 7

hperiaental investigations of kinetic paraaetere that
detersine the energy transfer of electron excitation in
crystals

1. Introduction. coooperative lunineecence
2. Radiation energy transfer. Gasparison with the

theory of reabsorpticn
3. nperiaental investigations of the exciton diffusion

in soleoular crystals

a. Investigations of energy transfer of electron
excitation in crystals by spectroscopic asthcds with
tine resolution

Chapter 8

Metallic attenuation of excitons. Miton rearrange-ants and
exciton reactions on the aetal boundary

1. Introduction. mergy transfer of electron excitation
on the surface

2. Theory of snall radius surface excitons taking into
account field penetration of the netal. General

correlations

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

310
312
316

323

336

339
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Teble of contents (Continued)

3. Surface excitons in the urea of frequencies of intre-

soieculsr transfers 3“
u. Metallic attenuation of incoherent excitons. The
role of the "deed” sons 351

5. Attenueticn and adsorption of esell radius excitone
on the boundary dividing the eclecular cryatel --

estel or saniocnductor 355
6. hetellic sttsnusticn of coherent exoitons effects

of spstial dispersion end W [expeneion unknown] 390
Bibliomphy 370
Alphsbeticel Index 382
Preface

hergy transfer of electron excitetion in liquid end solid bodies is one of
the host Mantel problems in condensed-state eodern physics. This.
problss is univereel since the energy or electron excitstion is en inter-
nsdiste process between the initial sot of electron excitstion end those
finsl processes in which electron energy is utilised. In this connection.
the study of sechsnises of electron energy. transfer end. in psrticulsr.
the study of their efficiency is found to be necessary in investiptins

the intersotions between verious kinis of rediations and s substance in all
those cases where one is interested not only in the very fact of absorption

of radiation energy. but slso in those phone-ens thet originste. in this
osse. in the absorbing sediul. -

Lusinescence. redistion physics snd redistion chesistry. photosynthesis.
biochesistry end bioensrgetics -- this is e for iron colpreheusive list of
nodern science erees where sass-5y trsnster of electron excitstion is of
principsl isportence.

In the lest 30 yesrs. slang with investigstione of liquid solutions. investi-
gations of energy trends: of electron: exoitstion developed ecst intensive-
ly in crystels. This wee due not only to the general progress of the
developeent of sxperinentsl end theoretical physics of solids. but she to
nuserous sppliosticns. In particular. energy transfer of electron“ excite-
tion in cryetsls is used widely in dot sloping various kinds of lu’ainsscent
solids, scintillstcrs end esterisls used in qusntue electronics (laser
crystals end solutions). One resson for the stilulstion of wide investig-
tions of energy ligation of electron excitation in organic crystsls is

the presence of sensitised lueinsscence. so well es s possible role of energy
sigration in biclogicsl systeas. These investiptions are used in en sttespt
to ensue:- a cudinsl question for bioenargetics - "how does energy control

Eiﬁsl sctivity? How does it put s live mohine in lotion?” (stint D'yerdi)

58
Pan OFFICIAL use out?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problea of electronic excitation energy transfer as e whole.bas be-

ccse so broad and aultifaceted that it is very difficult to reflect it in
all its aspects. Therefore. the authors of this book do not pretend to have
exhausted all sides of this probles. To a certain extent. the selection

of the saterial presented is subjective. In choosing the uterial. we strove
to cover. besides the theoretical bases. those probleas which appear to be
the scat developed at present and are scat frequently used for the inter-'
pretation of an experiaent. 0n the other hand. we strove to indicate the
liaits of the applicability of the theory as well as to point out problesa
still unsolved. Regrettably. certain important areas of energy transfer in-
vestigations have still not been touched upon or touched upon only in the
fora of references to respective original papers. These areas include the
effect of the aagnetic field on transfer with the participation of triplet
levels of organic aoleoules. transfer in biological systeas and a great nua-
bsr of other. acre special problens. '

Excellent systea nodels scat frequently used for studying energy transfer
are solecular liquids and solecular crystals. as well as crystals activated
by rare-earth ions. The basic rules for energy transfer of electronic ex-
citation ltnown at present were discovered precisely by investiating the
optical and photoelectric properties of these substances.

This monograph is dedicated to discussing the theoretical results obtained
in such studies. hperisental data is used only in cases where it ssh-en it
possible to show how well the theory sex-see with the experiaent.

A fuller presentation of experimental investigations say be found in the
sonogrsph "Non-Radiation Transfer of Electron Excitation Energy" by Ye. N.
Boduncv. V. L. Yereolayev. Ye. s. Sveshnikova and T. A. Shakhverdov.

The special features of energy transfer in amorphous and crystalline Isdia
are considered in close relation to their optical qualities and. in particu-
lar. in connection with the effect of energy transfer on the lusinsscence
crnracteristic. Various aechanisn of energy transfer (resonant transfer of
excitations. excitcns. radiation transfer) are discussed. as are special
features of energy transfer at high excitation levels.

Host of the problese touched upon in this book were practically untouched on
in literature. Therefore. it is possible that there say be inaccuracies in
the book. The authors will be grateful for any critical resorts which they
hope to take into account in acne fore in the future.

He would like to express our special gratitude to those nunerous Soviet and
foreign colleagues who sent us copies of their papers. The authors are
grateful to P. P. Peofilov for a nusbar of criticisms which were taken into
account in the final version of the unuscript.

59
ron OFFICIAL us: 0va
NR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Introduction

mergy treneter tron excited etc-s. ions and noleculee to unercited ~- in a
phenclencn occurring widely in neture. we encounter this phenclenon m-
quently when the concentration of interacting particles and the life of the
excited state are great enough. Il'he sinpleet and cost graphic nnifeetaticn
of energy transfer is attenuation of the lunineecence occurring es a result
of the interaction of excited and unencited noleoulee or. ccnveceely. the
eensitisation ct luninescence. i.e.. the origination of nolecule lunines-
cence previously unsuited.

In condensed Iedia. phencnene related to energy transfer and deectivetion of
excited nclecule were alreedy discovered in early investignticne of fluores-
cence in solutions of organic paints. It is precisely in these investigations
that depolariseticn ct luaineecence end ettenmtion ct ite concentration.
occurring when the concentration of the solution increeees. as well an atten-
uation of luninescence by extrenecus substances. were observed for the firet
tile.

Originally. attenpts were node to consider luninescence attsnmtion in liquid
solutions enalcgoue to the interecticn between nolecules or stone in gases on
the beeis o! a concept of "collisions of the second kind." This tern, in-
troduced at first for designating procesees of collision: between excited
atone and electrons. sccclpsnied by the clungecvsr c! excitation energy of
atone into the kinetic energy of the electrons. cue to be used later for
all processes leading to the deectivaticn cf the excited state [2].

8. I. Vavilov firet attenpted to explain fluorescence attenueticn or liquid
soluticne es s reg-alt or collisione of excited noleculee with noleculee cf
the attenuator [ . this cpproach led to succese in the cone of ﬂuorescence
ettenustion of solutions by extraneous colorless attenuators. especially
sfter the special features of nclecule notion in liquide were taken into
account. As is well known. the nunbar of collisions in ideal solutions is
deternined by the gee-kinetic {mule end does not depend on viscmity. how.
ever. the statistic of collision in liquids differs fro- the statistic of
collisions in genes -- collisions in liquids are not distributed unifcrlly.
but follow in certain series. Since the first ccllieicn (so-celled 'wm')
already usually leade to attenueticn. the kinetics of attenuation in deter-
nined by diffusion and, therefore, depende greet]: on the viscosity of the
solution. 8. I. Vavilov was the first to turn his attention to this circul-
etance. The diffusion theory or attenusting lusinescence by extraneous
colorless ettenuatcre. which he developed with 3. Is. Sveshnikov [to]. bond
on Sholukhcvekiy's theory of ccsgulnticn. agrees well with the experinsnt.

However. an attenpt to apply mum concepts to concentrated attenuation
and depolarisaticn. crigineting under the street of interaction between
equsl ncleculee. wee found to be msuccesstul. The weak dependence of these

phenccsns on the viecoeity of the ecluticn indiceted thet under these condi-
tions the short period of action taken into account in [3, b] is not enough
and. eecenticlly. another appcnech is needed.

60
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
NR OVPICIAI. USE ONLY

J. Psrrin H; was the first to suggest and later I. Porrin [6;] suggested in
greater ds 1 thet concentration phencaene in luainesoent so uticns any be
explained by “nolecular induction." i.e.. reacts acting interaction between
the excited aolecule end the unexcited one. sinilar to the interaction be—
tween classical electronic dipole oscillators. within the framework of this
ettreotive end basically correct ides there were not. however. taken into
cagsideration the effects of relaxation that led to quantitatiVely wrong re-
s ts.

In connection with the lac): of a satisfactory aicrctheory of energy transfer.
8. I. Vavilov. in hie following papers [7] on concentretion phenom. pro-
ceeded along the my of building the phenoasnological theory. he introduced
the probability of transfer es en eapirical value proportional to concentre-
tion. His idce wee thet concentration phenoaena -- attenuation and depolari-
zation -- are due to one end the ease process of energy transfer. It was
accused thereby that attenuation occurs beceuae pert of the trensfer acts is
eccoapenied by deeotivetion of both interacting nolecules (”transfers with
attenuation”). Such a process appeared probable at one tine in connection
with the drop in luainescence output at anti-Stokes excitation [8] pre'snt
in fluorescent solutions.

Subsequently. however. the viewpoint on concentration depolarization and
concentration attenuation as a single process was not confined. As shown by
V. L. Lovshin [9].in a case of concentration ettenuetion. it is due to energy
transfer fron excited aoleculee to nonluainescent ( or luninescent in another
eras of the spectrun) diners. Nevertheless. s. I. Vevilov'e ideas on the
role of "inductive resonance" in energy trensfer were fruitful end greatly
stiaulsted experimental and theoretical investigations in which any iapor-
tent rules for energy transfer were later estebliehsd. It has thus been
shown that attenuation of luminescence b absorbing substances is related to
the value of the overlapping of spectra E10]. The pepcr by P. P. Feofilov
end 3. Ya. 8veshnikov [ii] established t a relationship between attenuation'
and the period of the excitation stats etc.

The first satisfactory theory of energy transfer in a condensed asdiua for
aolecules with brand spectre was developed by Forster [12]. This theory is
based on the perturbation theory in the adiabatic approxintion. It proposed
that energy transfer occurs due to week dipole-dipole intereotion between
nolecules. The interaction is essuaed to be so week that it does not change
the initial cpticel spectre of the aclecules. Under these conditions. ibrster
was able to show that the probability of energy transfer can actually be
expressed by the intesrel of luainescence spectre overlapping and absorption
of interacting aoleculss.

Forster wee also the first to average probabilities of transfer in accordance
with the totality of aolscules in the solid solution end obtain fornulas that
could be substantiated by experiasnts. Forster's theory preserved its full
iapottance and is borne out by experinents in cases where conditions for its
epplicability are fulfilled.

61
non orncm. use own
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

Subsequently Forster's theory was generalised in the paper by Better [13]

for cases of sultipcle and echisage interactions. Its further developsent
consisted of taking into consideration various cosplicating circuntances
such as. for axasple. the diffusion action during the lifetise of the excited
state. In view of the fact that ibrster's theory is an approxisation. lisits
for its applicability were discussed any tiaes in the following years. In
particular. in' 8] in using the classical scdel of two dipole oscillators
with friction. ter's forsula was obtained only to such an approxisation
where the lifetiae of excitation in the acceptor is any tiles less than the
tise of the reverse transfer. Robinson and hosch [in] case to a siailar
conclusion within the framework of quantu-sschsnical considerations. Fbrster
hinself diacmed the applicability conditions of his theory [‘05 . lie pro-
duced a classification of interaction types. according to which initial
theory applies to the case of a ”very weak relationship.“

The question of the applicability liaits of Porster's theory was also con-
sidered in a great number of papers which used the satrir density sethcd.
It is precisely in these papers that the role of relaxation processes and
energy transfer phencsena are clarified scat fully. and clear-out criteria
for the applicability of those or other approxisations are given (see fur-
th” 0111). s

Thus. the elesentary act of ”inductive-resonance" energy transfer is con-
sidered as the result of weak interaction between two sclecules -- a donor
and an acceptor of energy. The effects of energy transfer observed in the
experiaent. for exasple. eensitisation or attenuation of luainescence. say be
considered a result of action of independent elesentary acts of transfer.
This concept is correct for sufficiently diluted solutions in an optically
inert transparent solvent.

As a rule. ispurity solecules in the solution fora a spatially disordered
systen. Therefore. the excitation energy of the ispurity and the energy of
its resonance interaction with the environaent are randcs values. generally
speaking. different for various ispurity centers. As a result. the analysis
of the problea of clergy transfer of electronic excitation to scleculee of
the inpurity is essentially cosplicated relating it. in principle to the
problel of electrical conductivity of spatially disordered asdia 150].

This aspect of energy transfer to ispurity solscules in crystals becoses
especially isportant at low tesperatures and in cases where the nonunifors
width of the ispurity absorption line is great. not only as coapared to its
unifors width. but also exceeds the energy of resonance interaction between
the iapurity solsoulea at an average distance between then. In this case.‘
in particular. nonresonance processes of enarq transfer. accoapanied by
generation or destruction of phonons of the lattice or by an other of its
eleasntary excitations. are also essential. It is precisely these kinds of
processes that destroy the localisation of states in disordered aedia and
asks it possible to transfer energy to ispurity scleculee at fairly low con-
;gotrations of the ispurity. predicted by Anderson in 1958 (chap. V. section

62
FOR orncm. use cum!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An essentially different physical picture of energy transfer of electron
excitation originates in crystals where. due to the translation sysaetry.
excitation is possible of any elesentary cell of the crystal or of any of
the conponent crystals of the scleculea. As is well known. in this case.
energy transfer say be due to the action of quasi-particles ~- exoitons.
The fundssental idea of excitons put forth in i931 by Ya. I. Frankel' 15].
which plays such a great role in the sodern physics of solids. is rela ed
directly also to the energy transfer seohaniea in crystals. This was es-
pecially clearly realised in 1938 when Frank and Teller.in an article
entitled ”Migration and photocheaical action of excitation energy in crys-
tals" [16] for the first tile posed the question on how the energy. absorbed
by sons cell in the crystal. can migrate in the crystal and then can be
utilised for a photocheaical or sose other process at any other fairly re-
loved point. In this connection. it is stressed in [16] that a "crystal
consists of identical eleaentary cells for-ed by atcas. solecules or groups
of stone. acleculee or ions. If the crystal is excited. the excitation my
be localised in any of these elssentary cells. Such localised excitation

does not ccnfcrs to a stationary state. The relationship between particles
in the crystal and resonance. due to the identity of elesentary cells. will
lead to the excitation energy sigrating free one cell to another." Quali-
tative discussions in [16] based on results of investigations by Ya. I.
henkel' E15] and Peisrls [1?] touch upon my probleas. to acne extent. of
nonradist onal energy transfer of electron excitation in crystals which
also reasin urgent at present. In 16]. energy transfer by wave packets. as
well as energy transfer by lccalis (noncoherent) excitons .ere talked about.
In the latter case. theme-activated transitions. as well as the tunnel ef-

fect (at low tenperatures) are indicated as the causes for exciton sigrstions.
Although in the characteristic of exciton propagation in the crystal. the
words "diffusion process" are used only for incoherent axcitcnsa for wave
packets there is also used the concept of the length of the free path and the
strong change in the direction of motion of the exciton (but not its energy)
which must originate when excitons are scattered by phonons. Also a nuaber

of state-ants is rule in [16] on the aechsniea of interaction between excitcns.
crystal defects and its surface and. in particular. on the sechaniea of trap-
ping'an exciton by foreign sclecules. 'rhus. Frank and Teller [16] actually
forsulated an entire progras of theoretical investigations.

In about the ease years. intensive experisental investigations of energy
transfer in crystals began. In particular. Bowen [18] undertook. for the
first tine. a broad study of the effect of snll ascunts of ilpurities on
the lusinescence of aoleculsr crystals. lie showed that lusinescence of crys-
tals is subjected sostly to the effect of ispurities that absorb light
strongly in the spectrua area of pure crystal lusinescsnce. The presence

of such ispuritiee reduces the lusineecence intensity of the basic substance
and the reduction in intensity is sccospanisd by a reduction in the length
of the drop in the glow of the crystal. Bowen stressed that the nonradio-
tion transfer aechsniss plays the basic role. i.e.. the sechaniss that does
not accospany the forntion of luainescence photons of the basic substance.

63
roe orncuu. use owu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first uperiaents on energy transfer by emcitons in halide-alkaline
crystals were nade by Apker and Taft 19]. They observed the transfer of
energy by ercitons to F-osnters (for tar axperisents on halide-alkaline
crystals. see [20]. [21]). The results of investigations of the scbilities

of excitons in crystals of inert gases (Ne. Ar. Xe obtained recently are
cited in [22].

The nobility of excitons in seniocnduotor crystals (Ven'ye-llotta ercitons).
due to stall effective assess and corporatively weak exciton-phonon inter-
action. was found to be so high (the diffusion coeffic ant for ercitons for
acne crystals reaches a value in the order of Dg1030I /eso: for cczarison
we will indicate the v lug of the diffusion coefficient for singlet excitons
in enthrsoene DsJXiO‘ on /sec). that its study required using special sethods
E23]. Successful seam-Lents of D in seeiconductors were lads only recently
n connection with the investigation of their lunineecence at 'high concentra-
tions of excitons.

energy transfer in seeioonductors is made by coherent exoitons (diffusion of
wave packets). In such crysta . due to the noroscopically large values of
the Bohr radii 3f eroigona r; z 50 to 100A). already at concentrations of
excitons as r' 43 10 1/c . an entire series of new phenosens is observed
(biexcitons. electron-hole drops). the study of which constitutes at present
an entirely new direction of seaiccnductor physics [2‘0 . In particular. in
investigating the phenosene sentioned. not only the so ility of individual
excitons becosss urgent. but also the nobility of various kinds of exciton
ccaplexes (for exasple. electron-hole drops). effects of interactions between
these conplexes etc. [25]. Boss of the results discussed in this book say
also be used to characterise the properties of the Van'ye-lbtta axcitons (for
exasple. the tssperature dependence of the diffusion coefficient. individual
probless of kinetics and lusinescsnce of excitons). Moreover. to stress the
nature of problem originating thereby. special features of the growth of
electron-hole drops in gsrmniue are discussed in sosewhat greater detail (in
Chap. 6). aowever. a full discussion of the collective properties of excitons.
biexcitons. electron-hols drops and other possible exciton cosplexes is be-

yond the scope of this book and will require. without doubt. the writing of
special reviews and nonographs.

Returning to the theory of exciton energy transfer in eoleculsr and ion crys-
tals. we will note that at first this theory developed. to a certain extent.
independently of the theory of energy transfer between sclecules in solutions.

Only such later. at the end of the fii‘ties.was the closest tie between then
realized to the full extent.

Concepts on the diffusion nature of exciton action were used for the first
ties in a paper by In. I. Xarkhenin and V. Ye. lashhrev [26] for interpret-
ing experisents (for calculating the relationship between the intensity of
surface annihilation of excitons in cuzo and abs ion coefficient of the
exciting light It): in a paper by A. II. Paydysh [35‘ for calculating the de-
pendence on k of the speed of trapping scroitons in aolecular crystals [28]
by i-purities; as well as in paper [29] (when evaluating for anthracene

6b
ran orncm. us: 0va
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

controlled by diffusion of excitons the speed of their trapping by nephthacene.
see Chap. 7). Later. in [30]. Si]. there was forsulated a sore general
integral-differential equation or exciton concentration in which. along with
exciton diffusion. account was also taken of the change in their concentration
due to reabsorption of the lusinescence light.

The idea of exciton diffusion was found to be very fruitful and describing
exciton sigration in the diffusion approxieation was Justified in nest cases.
At present. in spite of the difference noted in the transfer sschanisss in
solutions and crystals. their ccmson nature became clear to a considerably
greater degree. This oceson nature consists not only of the fact that an
elementary act of transfer is due frequently. in this or another case. by one
end the ease type of intonation (for sxssple. dipole-dipole). but also by

the fact that there is a continuous transition fro- cases of transfer solecule-
donor -- solecule acceptor in solutions to the case of energy sigration along
identical sclecules in solutions and. finally. to sigration of excitons in a
crystal. The diffusion approach spans not only considering the diffusion of
molecules in a solution. but also the diffusion of excitations along molecules.
as well as diffusion of excitone. Finally. the concept of energy transfer by
coherent and incoherent excitons corresponcs (according to Forster) to cases

of strong and weak interaction between solecules.

The concept of the contents of this book can be obtained by the reader by
acquainting himself with the table of contents and leafing through the book
rapidly. here. therefore. we will lisit ourselves only to several ressrks.

The first two chapters of the book are dedicated basically to the theory of
energy transfer in solutions. In particular, the first chapter considers en
elssentary act of energy transfer between two interacting solecular systems
located at a given distance from each other. In this. and a nuaber of other
chapters. the authors strove to eisplify the presentation as such as possible
in order to lake clear the physical bases of the theory. At the ease tine. we
considered it advisable to utilise in the first chapter the concept of a den-
sity matrix as applied to a two-level systes.i.e.. the approach which becess
popular in connection with the developaent of quentus electronics. In spite
of the prisitive initial model. this approach sakes it possible to understand
the physical essence of various approximations in the theory and asks rough.
but realistic evaluations of the order of ngnitude of the probability value
of energy transfer.

The first chapter also presents For-star's theory which. as already noted.
played a nest isportant role in the develop-ant of the entire energy trans-
fer problem.

The second chapter considers netth and results of averaging the probability
of transfer according to the totality of sclscules of energy donors and ac-
ceptors. In this chapter. Forster's result is reproduced as well as certain
of its refinesents. Also presented in detail is the theory that takes into
account the effect of solecular action in a liquid solution. 01' the huge

65
ran OFFICIAL use 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0
the second chapter shows only maples of several neasureunts which indicate
how well the theory is confiraed by experiaent. if conditions of applicability
of the theory are set and the necessary expariaental precautions are observed.

physical values and those siorcecopic characteristics of the crystal which.
in the final result. detersine the intensity of the processes of energy trans-
fer of electronic excitation in crystals.

How. on the basis of experiaental data of energy transfer in crystals. can one
Judge which excitone (coherent or incoherent) sake the basic contribution to
the energy transfer? Row to find the diffusion coefficient of excitone in this
or another crystal? that is the aechanisn of interaction between excitona and
ispur" ice and division boundaries of aedia? that is the role of radiation
transfer? that are the special features of energy transfer between iapurity
Ioleculee in crystals and what is the role of the satrix in this case?

This is a partial list of questions which not be answered to soae approxi-
aation in deriving the above-sentioned correlations. Chapters 3 to 8 of this
book are basically dedicated to discmaing these.

In particular. Chap. 3 considers using the ssthod of an active field. the
effect of the crystalline aatrix on the energy of the resonance interaction of
the ispurity noleculee with each other which leads to a nonrediational energy
transfer of electronic excitation between then. If the distance between is-
purity soleoules is great oospared to the else of the eleaentary cell of the
crystal. the effect of the Iatrix on the energy of the resonance interaction
is deterained aainly by the pernittivity of the Iediun. In this connection.
calculations of the energy of resonance interaction between the solecules of
the ispurity as well as calculations of the tensor of the peraittivity of the
matrix are found to be inseparably tied together as shown in Chap. 3. Since.
on the other head. the peraittivity tensor deter-nines the optical properties
of the nediua. the above-sentiened nature of the presentation sakes it possible
to trace sequentially the relationship between the speed of nonrediational
energy transfer asong sclecules of the ispurity and optical properties of the
aatrix and. in particular. the structure of its exciton spectra.

mapter '6 contains the presentation of those individual results of the exciton
theory (for exasple. the proble- of exciton-phonon interaction is discussed).
which are used in Chap. 5 for calculating their kinetic para-stars that deter-
aine the speed of energy transfer. Also diseased are the properties of bi-
phonon and exciton states. the presence of which. generally speaking. my af-
fect the kinetics of collisions between owl-particles (in particular. the
speed of bisolecular annihilation of excitons). Horsover. in Chad: is se-
quentially developed a aicroscopic theory of electron excitation energy
transfer between ilpurity aolecules which the it possible to trace the
effect of virtual axoitona on the speed of transfer as well as to take into

66
ran orncm. use 0va
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

account the effects of resonsnce interaction between the impurity aoleoulss
and the satrix.

In the exciton area of the spectrua. electronic excitations -- excitona and
quanta of the electrosagnetic field in any crystals and. in particular. in
sany luminescent crystals interact so strongly. unlike gases or vapors. that
in order to describe correctly their properties (nobility. luminescence and
absorption spectra) at low tesperatures.it is sore adequate to use concepts..
not of excitona or photon. but polsritons. i.e.. quasi-particles originating
at strong exciton-photon interaction. In this connection. Chap. It shows how
the use of these concepts sakes it possible to tie-in within the fraaswork of
a single physical picture a rather wide circle of phenosena such as. for ex—
asple. the nonradiational and radiational energy transfer of electron
excitation. exciton absorption and luainescence etc.

Chapter 5 is dedicated to the theory of the nobility of excitons end the
theory of their interaction with aolecules of the ispurity and with each other.
Also discussed in this chapter are the special features of energy transfer of
electron excitation. along the ilpurity eolecules. Anderson's localizations
of excitations and nonresonance processes. In Chap. 5.the basic attention is
concentrated on calculations of respective kinetic paraseters which. in Chap.
6. where the phenomenological theory of exciton sigratione is developed. are
assused to be already given. It is precisely the results of the phenosenologi-
cal theory that are usually coapared with experiaental data.and the values of
kineeatic paraaetsrs are detersined on the basis of such a coaparison. In

this connection. in Chap. 6. there is made a calculation of experissntally
determined values such as. for exasple. the quantus output of luainescence

and the ties of its attenuation, the quantus output of sensitised lusinescence
etc.

A review of the results of the experinental investigation of energy transfer
by excitona is given in Chap. 7. This chapter is basically devoted to a cos-
parison with the theories of rsdiational and nonradiational energy transfer.
in particular. of that experimental data which say be used for the evaluation
of kinetic para-stars and. in particular. for the evolution of the diffusion
coefficient of excitona and its tesperature dependence. It is precisely
according to the nature of this dependence (chap. '6) that it is possible to
judge whether coherent or incoherent ("localised") excitona transfer the
energy in this or another crystal. in other words. is diffusion of wave pack-
ets or diffusion in accordance with a sodel of tendon transitions of excita-
tions along the nodes of the lattice taking place.

Chapter 8. the last. discusses physical phencsena which say occur due to the
interaction between excitona at the boundary of the crystal and attenuating
excitona on the natal surface. In a certain sense. questions and situations
originating here are very sisilsr to those discussed in Gap. 13 when analysing
the sechsnisn of interaction between the exciton and the attenuating impurity
(thore -- excitona localised in the ispurity. here -- excitona localised at
the boundary between aedia etc.). At the same tine. when analysing natal

67
you ovncm. use 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attenuation. a nunber of interesting possibilities open up. Thus. by the
speed of aetal attenustion of excitons it is possible to Judge not only the
value of the diffusion coefficient of exoitona and the nature of ite notion.
but slao electron resrrsngessnts on the dielectric-sets). boundary. capable
of tor-ins a “dead lone” etc. This direction of investigations or energy
transfer by exoitons (energy transfer to the surface) is still in the initial
stage of its developsent and. We hope thst the discussion here of problems

relgted to this direction will stimlete the formistion of further investi-
gat ona.

OOPYRIGM‘: Glsvnaya redskteiya fisiko-natenstioheskoy literstury isdstel‘stva
“ﬂank”. 1978

229!
(SO: 1870 m

68
FOR orncuu. us: ONLY