FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY

JPRS L/8273
12 l-‘obruuy 1979

TRANSMTIGIS (NI SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOUO No. 622

U. S. JOINT MLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE (MLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00020018-9
E: 1 ' a to: 013 H" :-:I’L |I1|:I||I|III;-‘

NOT 1".

JPRS publicatien‘ contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
ur [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

.vPVRlGiT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP 0F
XATERL\LS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
”F ‘ﬁlS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100020018-9
7. Antonio) I- acclaim. Qua-um“! Re",
a.

  

O. Pulmma‘ Omanuauoa New end Adana
Joint Publication heearch Service

1000 North Cl.“ load “Camel/00am No.
Arlington. Virginia 22201

0.. Heml/Iuh‘ou Can No.

2. cacao: e' "macaw e lt‘l’ elle caPeo-ed
u. “manna to C1” pa:

Ae above
A.

ll. Souk-none" Nance

 

Abanana

The upon conceiua infatuation fro- Aftican and apecialieed Heat sump.“
publications and radio on political. econoaic. and eociolosical developaenta.

l). m Verde m Octane: Aaalyeie. "o. Deuoluen

Political Science Luca-African Aft. Laban __lvanda
Sociology Lingola Locum __Sao Tome and
Econoaice _lenio _Guinea-Biaeau Ptincipe
Cultute (Social _Iotavana _Ivory Coaa: LSeoegal
Sciences) __lurundi _x__Kenya _Seychellee
Technological ___Caaeroon __l.eaotho __Sierta Leone
_Cape Verde _Liberia _Soaalia
_Central African _Hada;aacar __South Africa
Sapire _llalavi _S|oaeiland
Laud _§_llali L. Tanzania
__Coaoto Ielanda __x_liauritiue _x__‘l'o¢o
__Congo Luna-big“ __Ugauda
___Dj ibouti _llaaibia _Upper Volta
_£quatorial Guinea _Ni;er L. Zaire
"L Hemohue/O'eo-Eaded Tet-e Tattzpu —=:::::: —w‘.
__Galbia :lhodeeia

m. (203”: Full/60°09 oz,so.sc.sx

l.- Aveilaeuu, Sun-cu ' 1!. No. 0' 9a."
FUR UFFHIIM. USE ONLY. Limited Number of W 33

n" "m" ""‘ ""' nus son an ac nepaoouceo meow-o: nan-On
TWSLATIMS (I! SUB-SAHARA! AFRICA

9000 No . 622
Commas

mini-ARIN AFFAIRS

Tanzania-Min Railroad hcing Robles-s
(mam momma): Er mums, 12 Jon 79)

Briers
Zaire-Angola Rapprochenent
Review 01‘ W8 Financing
Novel-ant of Burundi Remgoeo
Guinea-Bissau-Guinea Cooperotion

MBOIA

China‘s View or Angolan Government Av Be Softening
(mom TROPICAOX m NEW, 5 Jun 79) ........

Adverse Cal-ants on 0.8. rulicy Tm Anson
(Watt chhiglia; ARIN-ASE, 8 J“ N) ooeoonooooo

CHAD

Paris Wine Interviews FROLIN blender Abba Siddick
(Abbe Siddick Interview; am m, an Jan 79)
O: : : ' l ‘0, 3:; II" ;-:I'; H; 3:... OH H ;-3

M OFFICIAL 08! mu

mm (mm)
om

hutch-Guiana htente N Give Rise to Second
(magma nan-m; mm, mm 79

Blight thmumﬂun

run
”meted hychiltric cantor (no-«i

warms

Brien
Indian Aid Praised

mm):
Fishing Industry, Pucc- Bitmtion Reviewed
(mmmnm, 5.1.1.79)

hie“ ' .
ageing haunting for Minerals

Quarries thawed
large Food Input-to

Seneglcse Delacratic My Activity noted
(Amun- Asa, 8-21 Jun 79)

WW

hie i'a
Liz-cram mlivery

-b-

M OHXCIM. US! MY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020018-9
' ~ 0 .0 o .
'°°.'. I 0?: ‘ ‘ I 0. 0' . II' ‘.I . Il.l.llllllll

FOR ()FFICIM. USE ONLY

commas (Continued)

TOGO

Briers
Ibtroleum Company Council Changes

ZAIRE

Briefs
Sects Regulated

-C-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020018-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE OllLY

I'm-AFRICA! MAI”

TANZANIA-ZAMBIA MILIIDAD FACING PROBLEMS
Paris meats TROPICAUX B‘l‘ norm in French 12 Jan 79 p 93

[Text] The Tanzania-Zambia railroad. nsnaged by the state enterprise IAZAM
l‘l'anssnis-anbia Railway Authority] was coqleted two years ago. It is the
host anbitious illustration of Chinese cooperation with the Third World. The
Al? [’rench Press Agency] recently investigated its functioning.

Peking granted a loan of $358 nillion whose repay-ant is spread out over 30
years beginning in 1983. not to mention the labor furnished by thousands of
Chinese. The railroad is 1.859 kilo-eters long. Its functioning has run
into any technical difficulties and its profitability seeas doubtful.

TAZAIA was conceived at the tile when Angola and Noaanbique. under tortuguese

sdninistration. encircled Zanbia. This railroad was to free labia through
the port of Dar ea-Salsmn.

Since it was put into service. a railroad workers strike on the Mien end

has interfered with operations. The workers are dennding a raise in pay. The
initial goal of transporting 2 nillion tons of narchandiae per year has not
been achieved: in 1977, only 1.3 nillion tons and in 1978 scarcely 1.1: nillion
tons have been carried. If the deficit has been constant for freight.

passenger transport has been a success with 1 nillion passengers in 1977 and
1.3 nillion in 1978.

However. with a profit of $1 nillion last year and scant hopes for naking as
much in 1979. the future of TAZAIA is not assured.

Tanzania and table were obliged last year to request Chm to take over the
adainistration of the railroad again and Peking sent back about $00 techni-
cians without :uch enthusiasa.

At the end of the year just passed. the turnaround tine for the rolling stock.
which should have been six days between the coast and the end of the line at

Kapira Hposhi. was as long as three weeks.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
O: t z ' o '0. oz; ”3' :-:I'3 Hi It.” I” H ;-'

II OFFICIAL 08! “LY

um uses only a quarter of its capacity because. although it began with
2.100 cars plus about 100 passenger cars, it now has 500 of thu cmletcly
out of service. About 1,000 urn have been stopped in “is share the
iqorters prefer to use thss as warehouses instead or unloading th- and

paying warehouse costs (or their urchssdise. lbreoser. one-third of the
100 diesel loeontivcs have broken dosn.

S. tens of thousands of tons of horts destined to mu have then been
stopped in the Port of Mr es-Salasn. and copper exports has thst country
are traveling very slowly over that slotted route. It is hecanse of this

catastrophic situation that the “inn president decided in October to
reopen the ”southern roots“ across Ihodesia.

Copyright: lane )breu et Cic., Paris 1979

12.116
sss: “00

M OFFICIAL US! MY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020018-9
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1’55 Bil-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

ERIEFS

urn-mom mmoaum-JM, were the people who believed. or still
do. that the Angola-hire rapprothaent would be without consequence and
that the union would have no future. Yet. they were wrong," writoa the
Zaire-Preese hewa Agency (AZAP). "Ever aince the process of reconcilia-
tion between the two countries was i1itieted in brasseville, sanctioned
by the Kinshasa and Luanda presidential neetinga. parnenent contacta have
been established." "The Republic of Zaire which signed with Angola a
peace. solidarity, and cooperation treaty has elweya respected its pronisea
and the sovereignty of the reciprocal countries. 'lherefore. there could
be no possibility for Zaire to interfere in Angolan doneetic affaira
even ii the railroad which connects the Sheba copper nines to the Angolan
port of hobito. on the Atlantic, in indispenaible to us in channeling our
exports." [Text] [Paris mans TROPICAU! 31' Ingram in trench

5 m 19 p M.) 5157

mm 0? ms imam-on» perauaaion drive. carried out by the chie’
of etate of Mali. Senegal. and Mauritania in dealing with financing aourcea
in an effort to cover the costs of senegnl River control projects, led
to co-itnenta anounting to 8‘43 nillion tron Doha. Kuwait, Iiyadh. Abu
Dhabi, Paris, bonn. and Ottawa. 80 (at. the (INS (Senegal liver Develop-
nent Organization) has received $225 out of the $61.3 proniaed. ‘I‘III 0le
is prinerily concerned with actually eterting construction on the Dine
and Henateli dean which are the two baeic projecta here. the bidding
invitations for the conetruction of the first den have already been ieaued.
Advance election of enterpriaea that will build the llanateli de- in
scheduled for this nonth. He recall that. out of the “b3 nillion in the
anticipated budget. the ahare oi the Arab countries cone to 50 percent while
the share of Europe and Canada cones to 39 percent and that of the PA!)
[African Development Fund} cones to 10 percent. Col Ould Salak. of
Mauritania, was choaen to be conference chair-an, tlua succeeding preaident

louasa ‘l'reore, of Mali. [Text] [Perla move-A51: in French lo 118. 8 Jan
79 p 62) 5058

3
roe orncm. use our
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

mm 0! mm: umcarsum 23.000 refugees fro- lurundi ere to he
transferred iron Ulyenhulu. near “reborn in weetern Tanzania. to a can
recently created at Itieheeo (150 hilonetere eoutlweet of Kigone). according
to e reaponeible ofﬁcial of the Tennenian Interior Kinietry. This nave

hae been canned by the leek of water end lends in the Ulyanlmlu region. while
in Kieh-o. the citizens of lumdi who fled iron the 1972 neeeacree will
find a region of hille tron 1.500 to 2.000 netere high. eieiler to thoee of
their native coutry. In addition to the occupante of the Ulyenhulu can.
llieha-a will ehelter 3,000 other refugees who heve been living in the Kigone
region. The progran ie the reeult of cooperation between the Tanzanian
Gowermnt. the United letione high Conieeion for Refugees. the World Food
Progran end the Lutheran Uorld Service. [Text] [Peril nears MIMI! n
MIME in French 12 Jen 79 p 93) 12,116

curm—nssnu—cmm momma—Ac the tire of the eiping of the recon-
ciliation between Guinea end Portugal. the Guinean adageedor to Iieeeu.

Mr Barry Biro. epecified thet Guinea-linen end hie country were drawing up

a plan for the come exploitation of the Combel River basin which 1a to be
finenced by the United Iatione and which will penit the agricultural develop-
nent of thet border region. Al for the conflict over the territorial wetere
in which lieeeu and Conehry are engaged. Hr Biro declared thet hie country
deeires only that the border egreenente signed between the toner coloniel

powera (Irence and Portugal) be reepected. [Text] [farie ms MIMI
IT mm in French 12 Jen 79 p 85] 12,116

C50: Moo

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ursday. June 18. 2009: CIA-RDP82-00860R000100020018-9

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Th
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHINA'S VIEV 0F ANGOLAN GOVW MAY BE 30mm
Paris mucus maxcmx ET mxmnmzms in mm. 5 Jan 79 p M
[Unattributed reporc: "Change of Chinese Attitude Mard Luanda")

[Text] China seens to have nodified sonevhat its attitude tuard the
Angolan regine which it had refused to recognise so far.

The New China News Agency has interpreted as a sign of Angola’s ”strengthen-
ing of independence" the dismissal of Prins liinister Lope do laseinento and
Second Deputy Prine Minister and Minister of the Scone-y Carlos Rocha
Dilolua. It recalled that Mr Dilolua. president of the nixed Angolan-
Cuban co-isaion. had recently concluded an agree-ant stipulating the send-
ing of another 6,000 Cuban technicians to Angola.

The New China News Agency further nentioned the econonic and political
difficulties experienced by President Agostinho Neto's regine caused,
specifically. according to the agency. by the "er-ed struggle waged by the
National Union for the Total Independence of Angola mum."

So far Peking had been charging; the USS! of having supported only one of
the three Angolan nationaliut organizations, Hr Reto's HPLA. and of having
fought the other two (PNLA, mum). "to profit iron the situation so that
Soviet forces could be infiltrated into the country.”

officially China considered Hr Nero's regine as being donineted by the
Soviet Union and as an instrunenc of ”Soviet-Cuban occupation" of Mgola.
siailar to Portuguese colonialism It was unwilling to recognise the

Angolan regine "in o:der not to grant the Soviet Union the right to control
Angola through armed intervention." was the official statement.

He learned fro. diplonatic sources that the first indication of a bending
of China's attitude toward hr Neto cane in the course of the visit paid to
Guinea.last October. by a high Chinese diploeat. Vice Frasier Gang liao.
Answering the Conakry leaders. Hr. Geog Biao vauld have then indicated that
China "greatly esteened" President Neto, the one source indicated.

5
RR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
II" :-:I‘; II;.I:III III II L-'

I
I
I

VI

.

U

O

at

at

I.

,

FOR ORIGIN. US! OILY

Aecordia; to oheervera thia overture to Angola aiaa nt cowetiog on ite
ova grouda Soviet influence vhoee progreaa n4 threat China he demoed
ateadily.

Co-etia; oe Preaideut lleto'a seven-eat“ aeaauree. the official Guinea:
one ageacy had an equally favorable reaponaa to the eatahlidnat of dip-
loaatic relatioaa with the Ueetern pouera and to the vieit ﬁich hericaa
Senator George McGovern peid to Angola. It uphaalaed that the thited
Statea ia the lee: Ueatern power not to have a diplnatic aiaeiou in that
eomtry.

corrucnr: Iene lbreux et Cie.. Paris. 1979

5157
C80: “00

6
FOR onrcuu. us: on?

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020018-9
ADVERSE CWM‘S 0N 0.5. POLICY TOMRDS MOM
Perle Armour-mm in French No 178. 8 Jan 79 p 62

[Article by Auguste Conchiglia: ”in the Pace of Harlike Cemeign")

[Excerpts] The Americana think that they can etill change
the Luanda regine. That will cont thee none.

"The withdrawal of Cuban forces froe- Angola ie not negotiable with third
parties," the deputy chair-en of the Council of State of cube. ﬂr Carlee
Rafael Rodriguez. juat declared in Liebon.

This official poeture coeea at a nonent which ia all the core
opportune aince the Heatern preea and eapecially the Anglo-Saxon preea
continue to dietort the reality of the Angolan poaition by advancing

ueny shaky aaeuwtiona and epeculatione. I‘or A-erican'journaliata who
accczpcaied Senator McGovern to luanda and who had an opportunity to be
received by President Agontinho Nero. the preeence of the Cuban internation-
aliet arny in Angola has to do with the obecure and urgent atrategic re-
quirenenta of certain powera.

They forget that they are dealing here with a real and prieordial neceaeity:
the need to contribute to the eafeguarding of the aowereignty and territorial
integrity of the People'a Republic of Angola in the face of the very apecifie
threats fron one of the world'a neat powerful areiee. the any of Pretoria.

This by the way in ao-ething which Senator Hccowern aeena to have under-

stood rather well in the couraa of hie tellte with Angolan leadere. eepecially
with the chief of atate and the Cuban diplonata.

Of course. the Carter adeiniatration. which ia looking for eacueea and
juatification in order not to nornalire ita ralationa with Angola. refueee
to take apocific neaeurea to force the raciet South African leaare to
abide by the UN reeolutiona on Nanibia and to exert the necaeeary preaeure
no that they will atop all aid to the puppeta of "RNA [Iatioeel Union for
the Total Independence of Angola] who are operating with the South African
troopa to violate Angolan territory. to kill. Iaeeacre. and deetroy.

7
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
U 0:: : ' n on: .2; H" ;.:s'. H; 3:”. III M ;-:

FOR OVPXCIAL USE ONLY

Nonalignaent

Did not Ambassador Young. his assistant hcﬂenry. [and] American assistant
secretary of state Noose submit successive reports to the Hhite House to
indicate very specifically that these really responsible for the Angolan
govern-rat's recourse to the Cuban internationalist fighters were precisely
those who persitted the South Africans to invade Angolan territory right
after the proclamation of independence. in November 1975, in order to
overthrow the popular regiae of the NPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation
of Angola]? in other words. in fact. the Uestern powers themselves and

the united States (through Dr Kissinger) at their head? Did not Mr Young
declare that he saw no problem arising from the Cuban military presence

in Angola?

But. then. how can one explain this outburst in the American press which
"suddenly"--to tell the truth. with a delay of 3 years-discovers that the
interest. which Heshington is expressing in Luanda, is due to the fact that
"Dr Agostinho Neto is a sincere supporter of nonalignment?" Did they never
read or hear an Angolan leader proclaim an option different item that of
nonalignment?

Are they forgetting or are they pretending not to know--for reasons that are
not difficult to guess-that nonalignment has never ceased to be one of the
fundamental facts of life of the HPLA's foreign policy ever since its
creation. that is to say. the logical pursuit of a policy of independence

in all areas and with respect to everyone?

The fact of life is that this press campaign is remote-controlled by the
moat warlike circles in the Hhite House. those who, gathering around

Hr Zbigniev Brzezinski, the chairman of the National Security Council,
want to use blackmail and pressure to force the Angolan government to
modify its options and, if possible. to move it into the camp of a "non-
alignsent" favorable to the Best.

Of course, there is no contradiction between the Angolan options and the
existence of a policy of privileged relations with all countries which,
from the very beginning of the national liberation war. actively supported
the HPLA. This is true even though these privileged relations, as president
Neto often underscored, do not prevent Angola from maintaining bonds of
cooperation with other c0untries. even if they have different political
systcns. .

if Angola today feels a sore pressing need for intensifying its trade

and cooperation relations with all countries of the world, this is due
above all to an .{fort to overcome the consequences of isolation into
uhich the western powers had plunged it during the war and to guarantee
tne recovery of all branches of the economy.

0
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00860R000100020018-9
FOR OVI'ICIM. USE ONLY

Th1- therefor- 10 not an anon-on «nun Uncut-u mun chi-“cu ”two

may" (to- th. nutunl all“ of Angola. omcully ch. occult" count“.
became. an puoldcnt Nun up: uputln; wu- uul ow: lﬂtll. tho I“
[Mpln'u Republic of Angel.) vlll was: no coudlelou. «.0:th- o! m:

it my be. am to a nomllutloa o! 1:. "lotion. vlth my Intern coun-

try. not my put-mud ucoacllutlon vlch the ethical. of mu. not 0
rducclon 1n tho 0“ 31m: to the 8900.

amateur: 1978 Magoo-M1.

5058
680: “00

9
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PARIS mm mam rumor more MIA Sill)!“
Paria am ANGUS in French 2‘ Jan 79 p 35 Ll)

[intent-v with i‘orncr momm leader Abba Siddich by sm Serindc
Diana 1- Pal-1:. aroum "aid January: "I an lot a ayatal Genoa-j]

[Text] M a forner leader of the and National Liberation front [Mllﬂ].
Abba Siddich ia deaed to be one of the hiatorical leadere of die Glad
rebellion. he ia aupported both by Algeria and by France which. it mld
appear, tried to propoae hin aa candidate for the pr-ierehip in the a-er.
Min; the interview which he gave ua in Paria in nid-January. an rather
gained the inpreaeion of neetin‘ a political ﬂoat. Let the reader judge
iron hie aneneu.

man "1100!: when Iliaeeine Iabre wee appointed prine niniatar. you aaid
that thie nae a d-agogic publicity operation. low do you non aaeeaa hie
nove in the light of hie firat 5 nontha in office?

Abba Siddick: To be nore preciae, I aid that the Ikllun-Iieuina lahra
tanden wee a political device with no future. I have not shawl ny nind.
aince ae far ea the raeulta of that lover-ent'a action aince Sept-her
1978 are concerned. I can only aee a nebula. 'l'hie nae unavoidﬁle aince
Gen l’e lix Hallm- and lliaaeine labre have a different concept of power.

mm APIIQUI: Can you explain what you nean by thie?
Abba Siddick: I believe that the point ia aufficiently clear.

3m amour: Doea thie different approach explain the tanaion eniatin;
between the tvo nen?

Abba Siddick: I I: not aware of any teneion between thu. Ivan if it doea
exiat, it ia a fully quarrel and l a not intareatad in it in the leaat.

JEUNE unique: It aeena that the policy of national union haa reached a
deadlock. In your opinion. who holde the key to a aolution to the aim-
tion in and?

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
II onxcm. 08! MY

Abba “Click: 1 do aot Ian I‘. in on can. an pobl- doaa not hap
no “a aigbto. I cant tall lacuna (on taa lama. ht - I a
cryatal 3am.

_ m: no you ha, ia ooatact with tho aatbotitiaa of your eta-try?
Abba “ﬂick: b. .4 I do aot ﬁt to.

m. m: Eva tb- Gad autboritiaa triad to contact you!
mama: Io.aollcanotoaaﬁythyobould_bavadoaa.

m W: hat bio! of ralatiou ban you with tho Algerian leaderaf

And are you not afraid that tiny mld Me aa a uoult o2 Maidaot
Mim' I “at“

Abba Mulch: 1 lion in Algal“. 1 can tall ya: no no“.

manna: koyuuiocontactvithubyaudmrl

Abba “Mich: Iitb nitbot.

I" mm: A“ vltb Ira-ea?

Abba Siuick: lot with truce. All on if x no I nuld not tall you.

“imam: huldyoubu mparadtoratuntomuaad. ifoo, “or
ﬂat coaditiun

Abba Siddick: l ban no plan on this.
JI- M: “at tutu" lo and facing at punt?

Abba Slouch: hot at tapaat that l I not a ctyatal war. I do not cite
political fistloa. I - aot man-tad in tbia noblu.

comm: Jana Aftiquo. mm 1919
C”: 44000

11
M OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“IBIS

tun-rm. POLICE Wufnrsmt to e decree by President bongo. vho ie
ninieter of netionel defenee end euprene chief of the eniee. cheneee hevc
tehen piece in the Ceboneee police torcee es of 3 Jencecy. Gen Jeen-Ionitece
Aeene. ninieter of netionei edncetion end ct youth, eporte end 1eieute.
who is eti11 the cc-mder in chief of thet cot-9e which is now integreted
into the Geboneee Areed Forces. in essieted by the chief of the "horn steti.
Lt £01 Georges Alvees ldonc. who vee deputy conclude: in chief. e position
vhich hes dieeppeered. M out! chiete beck-w Col I‘ve-e Moos. One

of thee in in cherge of technicel oer-vices end the other ie in cheue o!
edninietretive end finenciel eervices. Lt co1 Geeton leiicien 01m. who
even eerlier chief of stett oi the hetionei Ponce Yorcee. hes been Isde
eveileble to the Presidency of the Republic. [Text] [Perie W
narrow: tr animus in French 12 Jen 79 p 90] 12.116

PDG NATIONAL 001161388 SET-obsident Our Bongo hes decided to convene the
single. Gehoneee Deeocretic Petty in e netionsl conaees in Libmeville in
Jennery. in order to nice it the "cetelyet for notion). unity us! e11
politicel activities.“ In en m interviev on 30 Decenber. the chic! ct
etete ceid thet henceforth e11 eppointssnte to ieportsnt poets will be
node in eccordence with ”the eilitsncy“ of thoee necking thu. Stream;
the politicel inportsnce of the Gentrel Cc-ittes which will be nened in
Jenuery by the congress. the chief of etetae seid thet he will tehe over
the presidency of the Centrel Omittee in coder to he clone: to the sili-
tnnte end the petty. According to President Bongo. hencedorth the esebere
or the Politicnl harem ohould obliastcrily be choeen tron mm the see-
bers of the centrel Conittee. The Politicel Doreen net on 30 Deon-bet
with President Done to net conclueively the seem; at amusing the ne-

tionnl conaeee end to curry out the chengee in the pert motions.
1he lent conaeee nee held in Libeeville st the beginning of 1973. [Text]
(hue mucus mncwx ET momma in French 5 Jen 79 p 35] 1193?

cam “‘00

12
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WA

BRIEFS

APPEAL FOR VOLTA SCION Wu“ the beginning of Deceeber. Meander
in Chief of the Gheneien Netionel Nevy Vice Ade J.K. Aeeduee ieeued en ep-
peel to locel investors to coee end creete induetriel enterprieee in the
Volte region which. he said. will soon be eupplied with electrich energy free
the Akoeoebo etetion. Vice Adnirel Anedune lentioned the inteiiet the
government hes shown in the developeent of thet region which hee been con-
whet neglected for e long time. end eeid thet it conteine eoee excellent
cley depoeite which would lend theneelvee perfectly to the creetion of ce-
reeic. paint end brick fectoriee. He pointed out in our 20 October ieeue
thet. thenke to new Heat Ger-en aid. the region in queetion wee tinelly to
be supplied by the etetion end we etueeed then how eurwieiw. my. pere-
doxicel it wee thet eeid region should go for euch e long tine without the
expected electricity. thet the ertiticiel leke hed bromht it rdpeeted die-
egreeeente end thet the etetion itself hed begun cervix; neighboring coun-
triee firet. before it. (Text) [Perie ms mm IT

in French 5 Jen 79 p 31] 11937

0801 M00

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOI-601M rum HAY cm RISE ‘l‘O 830m mavens
Perle JEN AFRIQU! in French No 950. 10 Jan 79 pp 30. 31, 32
[Article by Abdelatlt Oalllui: "What vill be “37"]

llxcerpta) ‘l'he deliriu- in Conakry. Kanhan. taranah. or
Lahe. intoxicated with ite ehoute of ”Long Live France,"
nay have acne hitter toeorrove.

that will renain within a few nontha of thie aetoniehing voyage hy Valery
Ciacard d'utaing to Conakry iron 20 to 22 Deceﬁer 1978; the feetivitiee
were grandioae, quito moving at certain aoeente. end, in epite of an organ-
ization that waa a little hit too perfect, it did not loae any of ite
aincerity.

hut all of theae "hiatorical" voyagea alao had leee brilliant eeqpela. like
the hangover after the Hardi Cree. am the voyage to Guinea eacepe that
rule? It ie difficult to think an. The enthueiaen of the (hineane can

he explained ahove all by their profound deeire to get out of the ghetto,
one of the noat dra-etic onea an African comtry haa ever ewerianced. And
they want to get out of it aa faet ae poaaihle, they want to breathe and
live freely, not juet with elogane and adoration for the venerated chief.
the grand atratagiat of the revolution, preaident Sekou toure.

Thie deliriu in Conakry, Kankan, Paranah. or hehenintoxicated a_e it tree
with ite ehouta of "lot; Live France" and ”long Live Valery"-can have none
hitter tenorrowa aince the hope placed in France ia powerful and urgent.
mat haa been done in order to take up for loet tine edda up to anch a
gigantic effort that France eeene rather etartled hy the hill and noted for
tine to think it over. French induatry niniater Giraud, who accopanied
hie preaident, did not hide the fact: "The operatione envieaged here,
especially in the energy field, involve each a treandoua volt-e that one
would have to provide for international cooperation."

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL US! MY

hence in now fecing e difficult choice. To not enpectetionn. it will

hove to co.“ iteelf totelly to the “wt end devolopnent of

doinee. low. plunging into thin tundoue mderteking. ei-d et pulling
Gninee out of the renkn of the poorent countrien. ell hy iteelf. quite

epert free the queetion of the noney involved, enteiln the rink of eetoninhieg
ite treditionnl friendn for when it in not doing enythiog reel hig.

foo Ihy deeueln

People in “angel. in ivory Ooeet. end elnewhere ere elrnedy beginning to
eel: none quetionn. Are roletione with hence going to rennin within the
purview of the einietry of cooperetion or are they going to he nwitched to
foreign effeirn! (h: requnut of Guinee, llr Jeen-Prnncoin foncet. the bone
et Quei d'Orney [Drench rarely: Office). end not he Culley. went elong on
the trip. for the Guinenne. the Iinietry of cooperetion in etill too rich
ewere of the eequele of colonielin. Other Africenn eight elno winh to

telh to Quei d'Ornny which would elno per-it th- no longer to depende on
one enclunive pertnnr. The choice for then could he between ntrengthening
e certein degree of independence or priority to he given to nenege-nt end

eupply.

Velery Giecerd d'lnteing in rether thinking of interdependence. At Conehry
he revieed end coqleted hie propoeel for e trench-Africa noliderity pect,
e noliderity which would ehove ell involve defenne. Sekou 'i‘oure lintened
to the trench proponeln with en ettentive oer. he known thet Gincetd would
like to hen ”revolutionery Guinee" with hie no en to cleer up hie policy
of defending the mderete hench-epeeking countrien. Sekou route. who hen
loet none of hie h-or. replied: "lie will eneiet in the reetoretion of
Pr-ce'n internetionel inege." In neid thin with the quelifying renerk,
”ed the world'n firnt people'n dencrech'

The nucceen of Giecerd'n vinit would heve been totel without the prenence
of hie neered Journelint. In the courne of e prone conference. with newn-
nen who are forbidden to enk quentione. he punched to then. eecuning thn.
elong with no. ”npoiled intellectueln,” of being nolely renponnihle for
the druee end hed reputetion of Guinu. Sekou 'l'oune hi-elf went in for
e little hit of chent-henting. for hin. everything chenged in input 1977
when thoueendn of wonen went out into the etreetn in order to ehout:
Enough! In known thet hie country wente e chenge et ell contn. he known
thet it would he difficult for hi: to go heck to the way thingn were.

And he hen enked thet he no longer he judged in the light of the pent hut
in the light of whet will he in the future.

amour: June Afriqne cwnn 1979
5050
C30: “00

15
ton omcm. usz own

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100020018-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIILY

GUM

sum momma»? IN GUINEA" room 5m
Parie JIUNE W003 in French No 960. 10 Jan 79 p 31
(Article by s. 3.: "honour-Slightly letter")

[Text] Cuinea'n econonic aituation ia not an cataatrophic today an it wee
aeweral yeera ago. This in the opinion expreaead by enperte fro. the
ﬂorid bank in a report drawn up thia autm. following a loan application
fro. the Guinean govern-eat. Once upon a tine conaidnred one of Heat
Africa'e richeet countriee, Guinea they found. went through a period of
regreeaion fro- 1958 until 1972: conatant decline in per capita incone,
proliferation of a public eector which ehowed a tragic deficit and abeorbed
mat of the government revenuea. naaaive recourae to foreign loane. turning
the [foreign] debt into n inaoluble problen. mawey inflation pronoting
a flouriehing black nnrket in the citiaa. accentuation of the inhalnce
between the cities and the rural areen-oin abort. a aituation bordering on
tateetr. .pha.

lot the bank found an inprovenent etarting in 1972. due to two Iain factora:
an awereneaa on the part of reeponeible officialn which cnueed than to

be nore realiatic and the opening. in 1976 of the two loot inortant
bauxite ninea which helped increeee export earninge iron $61 nillion in
1973 to $312 nillion in 1977. my neaeurea were alao tahnn to break with
the deciaiona of the peat and the Inn experte only welconed thoee neaeurea
which included the reorganization of the public aector to echiewe nore
efficiency. greater tolerenca for private co-erce. priority for productive
inwaatnente. eapecially in the rural aector. and reetoration of the nonetery
aituation. Uhile Guinea in atill auffering iron the aewere handicape due
to pant "errora." the proapecta are good and the new guidelinee adopted

by the governnent teen to aatiafy the Heatern comtriea and the financing
organizationa in thoae countriea. lt reunion to be aean whether the
Guineene "at the graaa roota" are aleo aatiafied.

cannon: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

5058
€80: 6600

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
O
O
n
n
..
-

s... 3:3 II" ‘ {I'; ll; I:Ull III II ;-°

M MICIM. 08!! 0.1.?

mean we mu CLOSE—The daily meme! H mm. of
m. reports that the psychiatric ward of the Benny Hospital in
Conakry Ins closed after the visit of President Valery Giscsrd D'lstaing.
The nevspsper does not quote any source. but it specifies that the vsrd
”directed by Soviet physicians. ves reserved for the reedmatioe of Guinean
dissidents.” According to the daily, the “prisoners” were not put at
liberty, but President Sehou Toure ”has given orders for an inrov-ent in
their trestmt," as he ”fears a new csqsip by Anesty Intemtionel st
this not when he is he‘innin; to inrove his relations vith the outside

world.” [Text] [Paris mm: MIC”! 31' some in French
12 Jan 79 p 85} 12.116

1'!
roe ontcm. use can

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100020018-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KENYA

H01 SAID '10 um HIS POPULARITY 10 CONTROL T318106
Psris Jams MIQUE in French 10 an 79 p 32

[Tag um. on 10 October 1978. Dsniel Arsp ﬂoi officislly tool: over his
duties ss president of the Kenysn republic. he sppesred only es the fsithful
heron of Jose Kenystts in whose shsdou he hsd held the office of vice presi-
dent for 12 yesrs. Pom-nor tescher. seldos ssiling snd reserved, this sen.
5h yesrs of ego. seesed soeeuhst dull in ccspsrison with his tuo principsl

friends: the brillisnt Minister of Finsnce liusi tihski snd the eloquent At-
torney Gensrsl NJonjo.

This use underestissting Arsp Hoi's politiosl skill snd his profomd knouledge
of the Kenysn people. Uithin the spsce of '5 sonths. the neu president use sble
to soquire the ststurs of s true ststesssn. To be sure. his winery concern
use to ssintsin the ststus quo snd not distm‘b the hslsnce estsbliM in the
Kenystts ers on hehslf of the nest sissble ethnic group: the Kikuyu. He did
not sslus sny euhstsntisl chsnges within the govern-eat snd he chose Kihski. s
Kikuyu. ss vice president. The fsct thst he hiuelf blongs to s lull ethnic

sinority sede it possible to svoid sny displsy of exssperstion by the Luos. the
Kikuyue' ssin rivsl group.

Politicsl Liberalis-

llousver. it is especislly the relesse of shout 15 politicsl prisomrs on 12 De-
cesher. in celehrstion of the 15th snniverssry of independence. uhioh lsrgely
helped use the stsosphere. Sons of the individusls relessed uere: ssshsrs of
the Luo opposition snd certsin Scselis-ouhcse secessionist tendencies in the
country's North ere still tested-and the rescue novelist. lgugi Us Thiou'o.

Detersined to plsy s csrd of confidence snd politicsl lihersliss. the Xenysn
hesd of stste did not hesitste to sske s trip strand. only 1 south after tsking
over the presidency. to give s strong ispetus to his diplosscy. First xenysn
president to go to Psris, he subsequently instslled neu sshssssdcrs in the
Cos-on Hsrlcet countries snd in Greet Britsin. For the first tise. s high “con-

eissionei" use sppcinted to Csnsds snd sn eshsssy uss estsblished in Jspsn.
Lsstly. the Kenysn Bsbsssy in Peking. closed since the Cultursl levolution. use

reopened snd. on 22 Deoesher. Arsp lei use invited to sslue sn officisl visit
to Chins.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I 0:: : ‘ I 0. I22 ll" '-:I’£ ll; ttlil III H L.‘

'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The third itea. of great iapertanoe in Arsp hoi's policy is the social aspect
and the struggle against comption. The first steps taken were in regard to
unsaploy-nt. Ihioh exceeds 10 prcent in so. of Nairobi's districts. After
having obtained the unions' ponies to lower their Inge deaands. the president
suthorind an increase of 10 prcent in the hiring rate in both the public and
private sectors tegimisg l Janmry 1979.

The little people of Kenya are also snare of the caapaign launched against
certain leaders the diverted pahlic funds. are corrupt or engage in specula-
tion. Investigations ue underway. particularly in essentially wblic organ-
isations. such as the National Wheat Board or the national slamhterhouee. An
stteapt is being aade to destroy the network which is snuggling coffee froa

Uganda into Kenya. Too high police officials sore forced to resign and parlia-
sent is attuned by that affair.

Can as truly say that Arap Moi has taken a definite stand? After 3 years of
preeprity for Kenya. he is facing a difficult econoaic situation. Shosing
great pofit in 1977 ($280 sillion). the tnlance of py-nts any show s deficit
of $300 aillion in 1W8. This is due particularly to s heavy trade iabalance
caused by an increase in the value of iaporta. Inﬂation is not checked and
there use a sloudoen in the growth rate of the GDP: accordilg to the IF. it
eill not exceed 1‘ prcent in 1978 capred with 7.3 prcent in 197?. lhst has
happned? The excellent revenue obtained in 1W7. thanks to abundant coffee
and tea hanests and a rise in eon-id aarhet pices. has hen ahead-ted by the
aray. national organisations crested following the easrgence of the East Afri-
can Co-unity and the financing of iaporte. This situation. inch is unhealthy
to say the least. is not adequate to offset the effects of the breakdown in
coffee and tea prices ehich occurred in 1978. Prices dropped 50 percent in

1 year. And the overabundant reins of the last weeks of Deceaher 1W8 endanger
the 1979 harvest.

Harsh lessures

Stabilisation nessuru have been taken to straighten out Kenya's finances.
loreover, in Noveabr 1978 the III" granted Kenya credit assistance aaounting
to 822 aillion. Other aeseures being conteaplsted are: strict liaitstion of
iaports. control over the outflow of foreign currency and perhaps even a de-
valuation of the Kenyan pound.

Arap loi will undoubtedly have great need of his newly acquired popularity to
control social tensions aggravated by the crisis and iapose unpopular aesmres
on the siddle class. particularly as rivals aight eaerge. First of all. there
sight be Ogings Odings. head of the Luo ethnic group. eho. for 7 years. has
been asking an effort to return to the political life free which he use ex-
cluded in 1966. Then we sign have Dr ljoroge Iumi. likuyu and lender of

the nest conservative aiddle-claes group. Iho use not able to wore his way into
the presidency upon the death of his uncle. J. Kenyatta. Both have expressed

19
FOR orncm. use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: CIA-RDP82—00850R000100020018-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their feith in the preeident. but. they ere expecting e gaunt of veekmee

between now end the tile of the legislative elections. which use to h; held
in October et the leuet.

COPYRIGHT: dell). Aﬂ‘lque. GNPJIA 1979

856‘?
080: M00

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OPHCIAL "8! ONLY

BRIEFS

INCREASED 1979 mmcm ADOPI‘EDuAppr-oved on 28 Deco-her by the govormont

on its proposal by Minister of Finance and Connerco col Aeodou Din-re. mm
1979 budget plan is balanced on revenues and expenditures at the on of

70.1 billion Halion francs, as compared to 60.8 billion in 1978. colonel
Diam stated that the new budget takes into account the 19?? rectification
progru which foresaw a growth threshold and ceiling for rewonuee on! expen-
ditures of 20 and 8 percent. respectively. In the budget. the part eodo up
by taxed is 150 percent: tariffs. 38 percent: contributions free the regions.
10 percent. and miscellaneous revenues. 12 percent. ﬂewertholeee. the bud-

getary impasse. which was 5.26 billion in 1978. will be earkedly reduced.
(Text) [Paris HAROHES TROPIOAUX ET MIRW in French 5 Jan 79 p 2?]

mama-mm NININC SYNDICA‘IInAn ogreeaont eetobliohing a eining research
syndicate was signed on 2? December in Boaako between tho goworment of Kali.
represented by Hinister of Industrial Developent em Tourioe mine toite.
and the Geological and Mining Research Bureau anon. a French public ootob-
lishaent. represented by its director. Jean Lupine. ‘mo purpose of this
syndicate is to prooote research for and then tho exploitation of depcoito
of gold. copper. tin. dioeonde and other eineral eubetomoo in Keniebe (in
the southwestern part of Roll) and also to prospect for gold in the Rambo
and Bagoo regions (Bougouni-Sikaeso . To carry out this firet-etege work.
the syndicate funds were estieated at 300 aillion Italian francs. 70 percent
of which is the 3801's responsibility and 30 percent Mi'e. (Text) (Patio
mucus TROPIOAUX ET HEDITEWNS in French 5 Jan 79 p 27] 11937

rac HATERVORKS. comm unwise--111. Federal Republic of Ger-aw ie to pro-
vide a contribution of 150.000 on (about 3M5 eillion mun trance) to nan
for the financing of a project to supply water to the town of Xoulikorc.
under the tens of an ogreoeent signed in Boaako on 30 Doceeber. On that
occasion. the signatories to the egreeaent also effected an exchange of let-
ters stipulating that the PRC will also furnish Holi with a contribution of
3 million Dll. or about 690 aillicn Holian frence. for the financing of a

project for a second ceeent plant in Keyes. [Text] (Par-1e W menu:
ET WINNERS in French 5 Jan 79 p 27] 11937

680: M00

21
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OWICML US! OIL!

MAURITIUS

BRIE”

INDIAN AID PlﬂllSlb—Pott Louie. 29 Jan. INTER-4nd“ ia to increeae ite
oaaietence to independent block countriea in eoutharn Africa end aleo
incrceee eid to lihotetion taovenenta in the region, Indian Intern-l Alfeitea

Hiniater Atel liiheti Vejpeyee eeid. Speaking to teporteu dutiu a ehort
viait to hauritiua vhile on hie vey to Maputo. hoe-bique. to attend a

niniatetiel council neetiu of the nonalined menu, lit Vajpayee aaid
”lie hove decided to increase our eeeietante to lihetetion nova-onto end
etatoa (eting attecka iron the white rociot resin.” Referring to
develop-enta in Nanibie (Smith-«eat Africa) he aaid 1978 had paeaed vithout
political povar being tranefenod to the black nejority. ”lie feel that if
the attitude of the teciet tau-e of South Attica continuee ae it ia nov

there would be no alternative but to intanaiiy the aned attuule." treat]
[London um in anglieh 0307 GMT 29 Jan 79 PA]

650: “20

22
M OFFICIAL I13! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mill-IOU!

"SHIN INDUSTRY. PIS”! SI'I'IM‘I’IW mm
Porto malts TROPICAUX 31‘ mxnmm in Ranch .5 Jon 79 p ‘5
ﬂrtlcla: "Fishing and Poocon'o Holey

[Excerpt] Houohiquo hu ioportont iiohing rooourcoo which. currootly.
no for iron hoing fully oxploitod. ‘Iho throo ooctoro—do-ootic. ototo
(loopooco) ond ”into-account for no can than 10 porcont of tho country'o

commotion. Their output-with tho oacoption of tho privoto ooctor mich
hoo oooc of its own co-orciol chonoolo--io chmolod through tho hrooo

Nocionol do Courciolinooo do Produtoo Pooquoiroo (Poocol).

Tho octivitico of this ontorprioo which. no woo rocootly oqhooiud hy
Maputo'o doily MICIAS. ooployo 800 pooplo. io hoodod by tho liniotry of
Induotry and Energy. through o Stoto Socrotoriot (or Piohiog.

mo Council of Miniotoro rocontly ootohliohod a now ototo ootorprioo. Poo-
coo Iatornocionol. undor tho jurisdiction of tho lliniotry of toroigo 'l'ruo.
which will ho in chorgo of oil i-port-oxport octivitioo oo for corriod out
by Poocoo which will dodicoto itooli’ oxcluoivoly to «antic trodo.

io oovo woo lode nocoooory by the growing inortonco to ﬁndiqoo of
exporting ccrtoin fiohing prducto ouch oo ohriw (90 porcont of oxporto in
this ooctor) and lohotor on well co. to o loooor oxtont. holothuriono.
lotwoon Jonuory ond lovonhor Poocoo oxportod 1.200 tooo oi til-hing producto
worth 179.591 contoo.

Poocol ioporto fro- ohrocd oooontiolly froton fish n woll oo. ovon though
in lcooor quontitioo. driod ond comod fioh. occouting for 9,0 porcont of
the fioh con-mod in Hozoohiquo. In 1978 ouch inorto Iodo it poooihlo to
ouvply tho comtry 1.500 tono per loath. on noun: quito highor :hon tho

previooo you. 1979 ioporto will ho roiood to 2,500 tooo por moth. Son

of th- coco fro- thc USSR. . . . Int fiohod in mmicon wotlrl hy
liconood Soviot trowlcro.

23
m onxcm. use om!
M OFFICIAL US! MY

Mitt its rich food value, par capita fiat: caution rennin vary low
in ha‘iquc. ‘l'hia coutry. with its 2,500 hilt-arc" of shoreline,
.mtly mm by incruain. it. catch and try to modify the nutritional
habit. of its population and to norm ita diatributioo nomrta. Our-
raotly par capita annual counties in no lore than 1.5-2 kilogram; it
could roach J kilogra- vithin one you. cmred vith 22 kilogra- in Cuba.
and 50 to 60 kilogra- io Portugal. Spain. Romy. or Japan.

mum: he lbrou ct Ci... Paria. 1979

5157
cso: “N

eh
m omcm. us: on!
I’Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WNW

BRIEFS

ONOING PROSPECTING 90h lilﬂﬁMLSo-csologicel prospecting for the purpose of
deterusining reserves of nsrble, copper. grenite end other Iinersls is being
carried out in the Hozsobicnn provinces of Nenice. Zeebesie end cebo Delgedo.
It will be coordinated by the Stste Mining Enterprise. now being for-ed,
whose entry into ectivity will permit exploitetion to be intensified. The
geological core-drilling in progress is being done or Neglecete, Alto
Logonhe and Nontepuss. They ere investigsting deposits of block grenite.
copper, asbestos, nagnetite end nerble. end will endeevor to dstprnine the
quantity end quelity of existing reserves in order to permit plepning the in-
vestnsnts to be suede and the tonneges to be exported. They ers elso proceed-
ing with the work of recovering nechines end equip-ent end of reprgenizing
the existing eining enterprises for the purpose of increesing productive ce-
pscity. The Stete Mining Enterprise will reserve 60 percent of the querrisd
nerble for the donestic esrket, the reesining 60 percent being eyeilebls for
export. The coupeny hes its Iein office in llsputo end brench offices in the
three offices where the prospecting is going on. The coupeny will be divided
into two eutonouous sectors et e leter dete. One will tehe cers of Iining
and production in the strict sense of the terns end the other will hendls the

marketing. [Text] [Peris NAMES TROPICAU! 2T DIEM!!! in Trench
12 Jun 79 p 99] 12,116

WARRIBS smmxm-rhe querriss in lleputo Province ere being reorgenised
in order to resch their planned output: 20,000 cubic esters of rock per
eonrh. The use effort is being undertsken in the rest of lbsQieus so

a result of the netionel survey with s view to purchesing the necessery
equip-ent for the operations of this sector whose current output rsngss
free 7.000 to 8,000 cubic esters nonthly. en snout insufficient to nest
the country's renuireeents. The Goestsl-lioeetsl Ooepeny is scheduled to
begin the unufecturirg. stsrting with the first quertsr of 1979. of sons
100 specisl freight cers for grevel heulege. This will Iehe increeeed out-
put possible. Turthereore. two new qusrrisre will be exploited. one in
Cece Province (loo hiloneters froe Chobwe. in Liwopo District). end the
second in lnheebene Province. The equip-sot for such exploitetion should
be received in the course of the first helf of 1979. The letionpl Industry
and Civl lien Construction Office (DllllC). in cherge of querriss. will

nrgeniec vocstionel trsining courses. [Test] [Perle mums Ml“!!!
ET "consumer” in French 5 Jen 79 p 65] $157

25
roe orrrcw. use 0111.!
'l" :-:I’£ Ill IIIIU III II l.’

to: 011101”. 08B I!

an I“ W!- the (in: In" of m: 197. mm» received
nut-m1 noun 0! imported food-cuffs: 550 to. of nut (to. Anna--
nn “(and 1- quto; 10,000 tons of tie- vou aloud tn lhpum (to be
fun?“ migrant); Can. and M prowl-m). “on with 12.000
0. 0 con. I! Part. W man: If mm Mach
5 Jan 79 p 45] 5157 h

080: ‘W

26
to: OFFICIAL 05! (IL!

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: CIA-RDP82—00850R000100020018-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WI.

SENEXMLBSB WRATIC PARTY ACTIVITY NOTED
Psris MIQOE-ASIB in French 8-21 Jen 79 p ‘08

ﬁery Represented st the ilstionsl Assesbly by 18 deputies cospsred with 82
tron President Songhor's Senegslese Socislist Psrty. Abdoulsye Isde's Senegsl-
ese Deeocrstio Psrty (m) is being systessticslly boycotted by the ”ssjority.”

All its initistives. suggestions snd refon projects us being rejected by s
collusion of neocolonisl interests within psrlissent.

Thst is why hr Fsrs Ndiyse. chsimn of the P15 ysrlissentsry group ststed re-
cently thst. since his psrty csn no longer tshe sny initistives st the Netionsl
Assesbly. those initistivee hswing been ”confiscsted by the gowernsent. the
presence of the P15 in psrlissent hss no sesning.‘

In sddition. sn ertrsordinsry session of the no will be held in April to de-
cide if the FIB will boycott the Senegslese hetionsl Aseesbly.

Moreover. we sight point out thst hr Ndiyse. whose psrty is contesting the pro-
vioions of the Senegslese constitution which specify thst the pesident of the
republic will be replsoed by the prise sinister in csse of desth. «emotion
or ispeschsent. hss snnounced thst the ms will plsoe before psrlissent s res-
olution dessnding thst s referendus be held on this srticle of the constitution
so well so on secrecy st the polls. Us know thst this secrecy wss not observed

st the lost elections. which were lsrgely sorry-snared.
COPYRIGHT: 1978 Afrique-Asie

3568
080: “500

27
FOR orncm. use ONLY
FOR OPF‘ICIAI. USE ONLY

BRIEFS

AIRCIhrT DELIVElX--A Fokker ?28 Mark 3,000 ha. juat been delivered to the
Tanzanian authorities. Thia ia an aircraft that will he need tor official
travel. It haa a apecial interior arrange-ant. and it ia decorated in an
African atyle. It haa a 68-paaaen3er capacity. Let ua recall that Air
Tanrania ia already equipped with three tokker ”127 Iriendahip" planea which
cake doneatic and international flighta over ahort diatancea. [Text] [Patio
means ‘1'”le El“ HBDIWS in french 12 Jan 79 p 93] 12.116

080: £600

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

ETROIBW comm 000N211. CHANCES-4 mosidontm doonoo pro-alum on 28
Docosbor 1978 brought sbout tho dissolution of tho ministrstivo council
of tho Togoloso Potrolom Coop-my (8TH). All tho tochniosl ssoiotuno con-
trscto binding tho coupony to porsonno]. outsido tho country hsvo boon sus-
pondod. A non gonorsl dinctor hos boon nnod, tho docroo otstoo. on! tho
functions of s11 tho Togoloso osployod by tho 81}! no st on ond. ‘l'ho now
diroctor is suthorisod to nocruit s no! toohniosl start "indioyonooblo to

tho rosl hoods" of tho oonpsny. It is folt in Loso thst thoso docisions
soon to bo linkod to tho difficultios of s toohnicsl sud finsnoisl nstuzo

oncountorod s for months ago by tho 8TH which is rooponsiblo for running

tho oil notinory oponod nou- Loos s you: ago. t‘l‘oxt] this mass
noncwx tr Dilemmas in Fronch 5 Jon 79 p 30] 11937

030: M00

29
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

III "8

8801‘s IMAM-The Zeire Preu Agency ennounced on Io Jenuery thet neerly
400 religioue eecte. tort of the: functioning illeully. hed been ordered
to ceeee their ectivitiee in Zeire without deley. With the exception of
the loan Cetholic Church. the Church of Chriet in Zaire (Proteutent).
Kinbenguieu end lelen. officieny recognized, e greet nulber of religioue
conieeeione are not in eccord with the diepoeitione of the low uhich require
the churchee to orunite the-eelvee ee non-profit eeeocietione with civil
pereonelitiee. Only Preeident Iiohutu her the power. utter en eminetion.
to grunt freedo- oi expreeeion to thoee churchee econ. uhich Jehovah'-
ﬂitnenee end'other roots of e trihel or regionel neture ere included. In
order to evoid en erroneous interpretetion of thin moure. the lineheee
euthoritiee heve invited the leedere of the churchee concerned to preeent
their petitione for civil pereonelity in the ehorteet poeeihle tile. [‘l'extl
[Perie meats TROPICAUX 21' alarms in irench 12 Jon 79 p 91) 12.116

080: 4400 m

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY