APPROVED FOR RELEASE; 2007/02/00; CIA-RDPOZ-OOOGOROOO‘I00020019-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82~00850R000100020019-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JI‘RS 1/8274

12 February 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FUUO 11/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020019-8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last ligg,ef a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service. Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Repgrts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. 0.5. Government Printing Office, ﬁsshington, 0.0.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names.
title and series) are available thrOugh Bell a Howell. Old
Mansfield Road. Rooster. Ohio, 06691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service.
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington. Virginia 22201.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA
SNEEY

I. Kr N . )- ﬂ ' “mu . .I.

‘ rpm Date
12 Februa 1979

   

  
  

 

TMNSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE. (FOUO 11/79)

   

—-———————————_—_—-

   
 

7. Anal-nus)

  

I. gala-in; Opaaiumn lit-pt.
u.

   
  
  

   

. I'Hlulnuﬂ‘ Hun-MIN» New and Addin-
Joint Publicationa Roaearch Service
1000 North clebo Road
Arlington. Virginia 2220!

I0. l’tokri/Taai/Iuk Can No.

   
  
  

  
  

   

ll. ”nan/Grant No.

llTy ellrauuPetoJ
an.“ V I

l3. supple-canny Nam

I6. Mun.“ n

 
      

    
 

11. woman-n Oman-lube Neale and “due-n

    

As above

 
     
    

The serial report contains political/economic information on Heat European
energy. finance and trade policy matters as well as developmenta and trends
in the doctrine. programs and problems of the major communist parties,

including their relations with communist partiee outside the Heat European
area. '

 
   
       
  

  

. Key had. an! Dun-rm Amalyaia. e. lkauipeon

    

 
       
  
           
         
        
 

         
  

Political Science _x_Internatione1 Affaire _Luxcmbourg

Sociology _Auetria ___ﬂether1anda

Propaganda _3elgim _Norvay

Ecomm 1 cs _Canada _Portuga1

Energy _Cyprue x_ Spain

Indus t ry ___Denma rk ___Sueden

Trade _Fi nland _Svi t zarland

Finance X_France _'l'urkey
_Grcece __Uni ted Kingdom

     
  

m. ”imam/(manage rm“ Iceland 3: Heat Germany
Litaly

   

    
   
  
 
   

”a. rush" I-arl-lli-mup SC. SD. 10
II. Annual-uh” Vain-rm:
For Official Use Only.
Limited Number of Copiea Available From JPRS.

   

   

IO. Secumy Clue (Thu

2!. .\u. ai Page
66

TIHS FORM MAY IIE REPRODUCED 'nco-w-oc man-Du

   

oouuul-a-ls Ina e.- In
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.‘I’PRS 13/82 7:

1 2 Februa rx

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE

(POUO 11/79)

CONTENTS

IMHMATIONAL AFFAIRS

Function, Mpooc oi‘ 'Brundt Comission’ Discussed
(mu. Fischer; EUROPA ARCHIV, 10 Dec 78)

ulxmiuh-Gormn Agreement of Solar Energy Inninent
(cmsxo 16, 1h Jan 79)

NANCE

New Post-Election Policy Tendencies Viewed
(Halter Schuetze; mom ARCHIV, 10 Dec 78)

Mittcrrund-Rocnrd Question Seen Headed for Showdown
(Robert Schneider; L'axmnss, 16-22 Dec 78)

CERES Said To Be 'Cut in 'No'
(Jacques Rom; L'W, 16.22 “C 78) coco-suooeo-oo

Analysis of Pierre Mmroy's Political Strategy
(Robert Schneider; mm, 6.12 Jan 79)

Karim: of PC? Strategy, Tactics .
(Annie Kricgcl; mm, Nov-Dec 7s)

iTALY

H~mlu-rshi.p, strucLurc, Fiscal Policy of Labor lbions
(:‘ulvatore Col; 11. sous-21; one, 30, 31 Dec 78)

SPALN

Goverlmunt Presents 13 Percent Economic Solution
(cmxo 16. in Jan 79)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

court-ms (Continued)

Social Implications of lackluster Econow Studied
(mo 16' 1" Jun 79) ODOOCOOOOIIOOOOIOOOOOOIOCII

VEST OW

Prospects for Various Industries for 1979 Given
(CAPITAL, Jan 79) COCO-00.000000000IOIOOOOOIOIOII.

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu m-‘FICIN. usr: mm

INI'I'IINA‘I‘IONA L A l-‘l’A IRS

FWC‘I‘ION, PURPG‘ W 'BRMDT MISSION DISWSSD
Bonn EUROPA ARCIIIV in Cotton 10 Dec 70 pp 701-1")

[Article by Dr. i'rite Fiacher, LI..H. of Bonn, aaaietant to the chairnan of the
Independent Co-iaeion on International Develop-ent quea, repreaenting the
author'a peraonal opinione'l -

' Text] Previoua lliatory

The Independent Co-iaaion on International Development laauea began ite

vori: in Decelber l9”, under the chair-anehip or the tor-er Ger-en chancel-
lor and chainan oi’ the SPD [Social Denocretic Party of Gerunyi. Hilly Brandt,
and will conclude ita deliberationa in apring of W” with the publication or
a report. Thie report vill be tranenitted to the Secretary General or the
United Natione, and eleo nade aveilehle to all intereeted govern-ante, in-
ternational organiaationa, end the public.

lie in the caae or the Paar-eon Co-iaaion acre 10 yeare ago, thia tine aleo the
inapiration tor the ionation of auch a co-ittee cane fro- the preaident o!
the ﬂorid Dank. ln‘a epeech before the Uorld Mtaire Council in Boeton at the
beginning of ion, looert 3. Hell-era auggeeted the eatabliahnent or an in-
dependent co-ieaion. under the poaaiole choirlenehip of lrendt.

In the opinion of the liorld Dent preeident. the current international nego-
tiatione tor the eolution of the coat urgent North-South [noble-e had reached
e deed end. In order to get out of thie eituetion and thue to inpme the
poeeiollitiea tor agree-enta, a group or independent peraonagea ahould vorl:
out a tev problel areea by neana of an inpartiel analyeia, and develop pro-
poeale for then that could gain aupport in rich and poor countriea alike.

Naturally, it uae poeaible to evaluate the procpecte tor a realieetion of
world Bani: Preaident Hcﬂaoara'e propoael only after the cloee or the Paria
Conrerence on International Econooic Cooperation (um). vhich vaa etill in

aeeeion at that tine. Then the unaatietactory conclusion of Klliz itaeii proved
to he detrinentel to the initiel chencee of ouch e co-ieelon. In the viev

or a nuer or developing countriee. thie experi-ent .. for aolving ao-
eejor prohiene in a eeall group outeide the United Nationa .. had failed, and
ooreover had given the induatrielieed comtriee 2 yeare to “catch their hreeth.‘

.1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR HFFICIAL USE ONLY

This also explains their fir- resoiutionzin the K192 final report to carry
out all future deliberations only in the context of the UN organisations,
esPOcially since they have a Iajority there.

in the many discussions led by the future co-ission chairman in the following
period, it thus had to be sade especially clear that such a mission would
not be similar to a Kiilz couittee, and that in perticuiar the mission
would not try to take away the responsibility of the governesnts and inter-
national organisations. Therefore there could also be no question of interrup-
ting the official negotiations for the duration of the coo-ission's activ-
ities, as was largely the case during the Paris conference. lnstesd, such a
co-ission should use the wane at its disposal to contribute to the isprove-
want of the prospects for negotiation.

In retrospect, it can be stated that seanwhile -. after the ensuing establish-
Ieent of the couiesion .. this group has been supported even by those repre-
sentatives of the Third world who had earlier expressed reservations. in the
usesn tine, sooe of these countries have even invited the emission to neetinga.

After a final foreation of ideas in washington (amual outing of the world
bank and the International Monetary Fund) and New York (UN General Aaseebly),
Brandt infoned United Nations headquarters in Septeober [977 of the for-nation
of the ”independent Con-lesion on international Develop-ent issues.” This step
was decided by two considerations: the increased awareness that s settle-ant
of ﬂorth-South relations represents the social question for the rest of this
century, which cannot be solved by govern-ants and international organisations
alone, end which requires the support of all; and the confidant encourage-ant
for the mission chair-an to nails use on a worldwide scale of the experience
In peaceful settleeent that he had gained through his test Suropean policy.

Conposition of the Co-isaion

At the and of Noveeber 1977, 2 eonths after the establish-ant of the cow-
eieaion, its coapoaition was announced. in this connection, the following
views were aseng the central considerations:

0n the one hand, all i-portant political and regional noveeents should be
represented, insofar as possible. Thus it was only natural that the represen-
tatives of the developing countries had to be clearly in the eajority. On

both sides, feeale leaders should also belong to the emission. bong the
ens-bars frost industrialised countries, a representative of the labor Dove-ant
should be included, as well as fro: banking and industry.

with a total of 11 coeniesion embers (lo fro. developing countries and 7
froe industrialised comtsiea, the above-named criteria could be adequately
taken into consideration. The executive secretary of the conission, as well
as the director of the secretariat an: the honorary treasurer, belong to the
emission by virtue of their office. In addition, on approxialtely equal
nusber of ”eeinent persons” were asked to put their experience at the service
of the emission.

2
FOR DFFICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in. secretariat of the omission consists of 8 to to international develop-
nent experts, and its work will be largely based on the docunentatlon that
already exists in excess. as well as calling on appropriate institutes and
epecisiista in particular cases. For reasons of expediency and on accomt of
the general significance of trade questions, this staff is located in Geneva.

In contrast to the Pearson emission, which was supported by the World bank,
the secretariat and the conission Ieetings are financed, in the interest of

eainteining their independence, by a higher of unrestricted contributions
free various countriee and foundations.

Purposes end Potential

Iirendt alluded to the potential end limitations of this mission in his
opening speech t2 the constitutivo assembly in Gymich Castle near bonn on
9 Deceeber 1977. then, after this first neetlng. the cost-lesion chainan

infer-ed the public of the b,sic organisation of the future work, on the
occasion of a stay in lndis.

The points of departure for the coanission's deliberations are deter-ined to
a large extent by the fact that the relations between industrialized and
developing countries heve changed considerably since the Pearson emission
around i0 years ago. At that time, bases for an analysis and prediction had
first to be set up, with the aid of a very independently working secretariat.
and the race-endetlons were neiniy directed to the industrialised countries
and principally concerned increased efforts in development policy.

Today, in view of the profusion of available uteriel, it is Inch more urgent
to "recognise the forest along the many trees"; end here the mission is

faced with the task of lleiting itself to specific problees, in order to
guarantee that its voice will also be heard.

in this task, it oust start from the political fact that the oil price ex-
plosion has resulted in a previously unknown solidarity anong all the develop-
ing countries. These countries have been expounding their global demands for

a new world economic order for any years on a broad front, and with their
eajority in the United Nations, they have put through corresponding resolu-
tions. Thus it is no longer mainly a question of greater results in development
policy alone, as inportant as these still main. Rather. they are delmding

a thoroughgoing transforaetion of the international economic systee, that
would make than into equal partners in world trade.

The exceedingly nany intemetlonel conferences of the last few years have for
the most part brought only verbal progress to the co-unity of developing
countries. On the contrary, the prospects for a speedy inple-entation of their
very extensive denands have scarcely inproved, so that bitterness and frustra-
tion increasingly overshadow the debates. This feeling is fu her accentuated
by the growing protectionism in the industrialised countries. and strengthens
the desire for a permanent structure of econolic conditions that would be as

free as possible free large variations and that would siiow then to lake
reliable plans for the future.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR UFFHIIM. USE ONLY

Neverthi‘leld, the eiiitent deeends of the Third ﬂorid have strengthened the
reelisetion in the Industrialized countries thet considereble chengee ere
necessery in berth-South relstlonshlps. At the use time, however. they heve
found the-selves for severel yeers feced with serious end pertly novel pleb-
lens in their own econoeies, which cen be treeted only to e limited extent by
tredltionel nethode.

These epperently contrery tendencies -- redicel deeends on the pert of the
developing countries for s new world econoeic order on the one hend, end
Persistent econoeic problees in the industrialised countries on the other hend ..
represent both e chellenge end en opportunity for the ”Brendt emission."

It cen contribute to the process by which the long unproductive exchenge of
proposels, which hes lergsly deter-lined the conferences of the lest few yeers.

is trensforeed into s phese of sore pronising end freer efforts towerds solu-
tions thet cen ectusily be put into prectice.

M en independent cos-ittee, the mission hes the sdventege thet its lee-
bers can discuss openly, free free instructions end deteched frost considere-
tlons of prestige, end cen eveluete the problems fro. ell sides without eny
tsboos. The guideline of its deiiberetions will be to expose the con-unity of
interests in soee ieportsnt eases; these elone can yield e lesting besis for
ecceptsble solutions.

At their very first nesting. et which the emission neehere were ebie to
egree on e working progru, these "urchins orders” for future work were
eiresdy set up. The recognition of the increesine pertnership interdependence
eiso inspired the comission to depert from the treditionel concept of "sid."
in order to tests the new stert cleer in the public eind in this wey else.

The independence of the mission eekes it both possible end necessery to
present e cerefully weighed picture in its enelysis of the previous develop-
osnt end the prospects for future cooperetion, in which the opportunities end
potentiel of ell the countries concerned ere discussed. So the prospects for
strengthened econoeic reletions eeong the developing countries themselves, es
well es the necessity of setisfying the besic needs of the poorer segments
of the populetion in the Third world comtriee, ere eiso to be investigsted.

here es in other erees, the mission will be conscious of the increesed
sensitivities end will try to evoid the inpression thet e certein superior
knowledge fro. outside end ebeve will deter-ins whet is good for the indiv-
iduel countries. It will elso sets it cleer thet the setisfection of beeic
needs does not stend in the wey of progress in other erees (for exeeple,
lndustrlelisetion), but thet the increesed efforts lust coupleasnt eech other,
rether then being lutueily exclusive.

The mission will else not be ebie to close its eyes to the feet thet the
comtriss of the "South“ hsve developed very differently. end will continue

to do so in the future. Sees will elreedy be considered industrielised coun-
tries in the foreseeeoie future, while others heve felien ferther behind in
their develop-alt. In view of the growing iepetience of eeny of these countries
end the equsiiy persistent expectetion of s quick chenge, en indicetion of

e reeiistic tine scele eey else he given.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The werioue tone of future cooperetion eith the induetﬂelired countriee,
but eleo eeong the developing countriee the-eelwee, nut tele thie differen-
tietion eore etrongly into coneideretion. but ouch e recognition of greet
eccnoeic differenoee in the Third iiorld ehould in no wey endenger the polit-

icel eoliderity of theee cwntrine, which lende collective eeight to their
“lentil.

In the co-ieeion'e viee. the Co-niet-controlled comtriee ehould eleo be
included to e greeter extent in thie etrengthened cooperetion. eepecielly
eince the developing cormtriee increeeingly eeeociete theee countﬂee with
the induetrieiieed world end thue with the ”North.” Hhil: the Peereon
co-ieelon regretfully eee no poeeibility of going deeper into thie inportent
eree, now the intereet in e greeter integretion of theee camtriee into the
eorld econoey ie to be evelueted by contecte on the epecieliet level, eo
thet it will be poeeible to give e cerefuily weighed. non-poleoicel deecrip-
tion of thie in the co-ieeion report. A fee eonthe ego, neebere of the

Geneve eecretericz held the firet diecueeione on thie eubject in Hoecow, end
there ie hope for e continuetion.

The conieeion will eleo try to lehe e connection .. ee elweye, to be con-
ditioned by the perticuler ceee .. beneen defence eevinge end increeeed devel-
op-ent efforte into e eejor topic for internetionel diecueeion. In the co.-
eleeion'e View, both fectore .. the continuing exploeion of defence outleye
end the pereietence of econoeic differencee between North end South end eith-

in the verioue countriee -- eoueliy endenger world peece. To thie extent, there
ie every eotivetion to treet theee potentiel eourcee of exploeion In the

freeeeori: of e globel policy of detente end equeliretion. Iiere North-South
probleee touch upon the sect-ﬂeet queetione.

In ei-eery, it can be eteted thet the co-ieeion doee not intend to concern
iteelf eich ell the probleoe preeently being diecueeed. it till eepheeire e
few of thee in ite long-tern proepecte for cooperetion, end in doing eo will
not lieit iteelf to econcelc concerne eione. The conieeion eiil eee ite prin-
cipel tee): end thue ite only potentiei in eeking en exect enelyeie of

the "co-unity of intereete" in ieportent ereee, end in deriving initlel
eolutione froe thee.

in thie connection. we note the encoureging fect thet the direct connection
between eeployeent end eore tepid grovth in the developing countriee ie geining
e greeter plece in the generel diecueeion in the induetrielieed countriee, end
thue eekee poeeible e concrete reference to NorthoSouth problem. At the

use tiee, thie interdependence ie projected to en increeeed extent in the
next decede in the inveetigetione end predictione of internetionel orgeniu-
tione, in egreeemt with the eieilerly directed efforte of the co-ieeion.

The Co-ieeion'e Procedure

Fro. the firet eeeting on, the eeebere of the col-lotion have nude full uwo of
their epeciei edventege of openly diecueeing, in ccepleto independence, ell

the queetione thet eppeer ilportent to then, end epproeching thee froe ver-
ioue pointe of view. In thie connection, there in en obvioue effort to

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Fl)“ (WI-'ICIM. “SF. ONLY

ovaluato tho viowpoint of tho ”othor aido" aloo, and not to atick to fixod
pooitiono. Tho cloaod noturo of tho co-iooion nootingo, which havo no
audionco and alwaya talio placo in a ootting that oncourogoo dialoguo, lay
contributo to thia oituation aa mch aa tho fact that no ninutoa with nanoo
aro kopt concorning tho prooontationo, and oopocially that no proparod otato-
oonto concorning thoo oro givon to tho proaa. Attor tho and of tho nooting,
tho public io iniorooo througha lamination fM tho chair-an.

lotono tho actual (1-day) co-iooion nootingo on varioua contlnonto bogin,

a tow "oninont poroono" ao woll aa loaooro tron tho hoot country and tho rogion
aro gonorally aokod to oxproao thoir opinion on North-South quoationo. In
cortain caooo, tho coniaoion Ionhoro an aloo giwon tho opportmity to naho
thoaoolvoo ("ilior with all aopocta of a opocialiud aroa in a hoaring hotoro
tho looting. For tho oooaiono tho-oolvoa, tho haaic data (or diacuooion aro
proparod in mgliah by tho oocrotariat according to a working prograa that .
lo kopt llaxihlo: thoao poporo aloo contain optiono tor poaoiblo rocoonondationa.‘

Botwoon oootinga, tho oocrotariat. tho oo-iooion Ionhoro, and oapoclally tho
chair-an naintaln nany contacta with high-ranking loadoro and intornational
organioationo. Thua, for oxanplo. in tho laot tow Iontho Brandt hao takon tho
opportunity 0! intoning alooat all tho hoado o! govornnont of tho iiaotorn and
loatorn induotrialiaod comtrioa of tho co-iooion'a work. and ooking (or

thoir auggootiono. in addition, ho haa aloo hold talks with any political
loadora in tho dovoloping countrioa, viaitod ilportant intornational organica-
tiona, and opokon with high church dignitarioo.

Tho Comioaion'o l'inal loport

Tho couiaaion'o roport, which will ho conplotod in oarly opting o: 1979,

lo to to oinoci at oddroaoing o wido audianco. ‘lho oo-ioaion'o "ooooogo"
ahould not ho too hulhy, ahd ahould ho prooontod in ouch a way that ovon tho
ovorago citicon undorotando it. Spocialiood diocuooiono of particular caooa
aro to to puhliohod in a ooparato woluno. Tho roport itaolt la to ho ottorod
in nany languagoa at an affordahlo prico, ao an to ho availahlo to largo
ooponto of tho population. Ito Iain purpooo will ho to convinco tho docioion-
nakora in North and South. and public opinion in thoao countrloa, that
thoroughgoing chongoa in intomationol rolotiona aro nocoooary to

croato a noro oquitahlo ordor on tho worui-wido lowol. ln thia connoction, tho
co-ioaion hopoa to hallo it cloar that ouch a davolop-ont dooa not ropto-

oont a throat to tho induotrialiud oomtrioa, but rathor an opportunity

that, in tho long run. corrooponda to thoir own intonoto, oopociolly in tho
ocononic ana.

Naturally, an ottort will ho nado to obtain tho agroonont of all tho co-ioaion
oonhora on tho noport. But it unanility cannot ho roachod on oortain indiv-
idual quaotlono, doopito co-on ottorta, thon diooonting opiniona appoor to

ho noro convincing and noro honorahlo than conproniao tomlao that covor owor
oaoontial dittoroncoa.

Although no unroaliotically high oxpoctationa ohould ho tiod to tho conniaoion'o
work, it ia to ho hopoa that ito roport will contrihuto to changing tho clinato

6
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
end (remark of internetionei diecueeion, eo thet leeting eolutione cen be
round on uhich ell the pertiee concerned cen egree, heceuee they comepond
to their reepective intereete. the mini» would like to note e contribuo
tion to the ec«leretion of thie proceee with centully coneidered, objective.
end convincing propoeeie. Since it eieo turne to the people in thie proceee.
it would eleo like to erouee enough intereet in thie vey to tecilitete end
eupoort the deoieione of the .overmente. which ere tinelly nemeibie.

Appendix: lie-here or the Cannon

1. Abdietir Y. Al-Hened (Kuweit). director generel o! the Kuweit Find tor
Areh Bcononic Develop-mt.

2. Rodrigo hetero (Colo-hie), econouioe writer, tor-er tin-ice Iinieter.

1. Antoine Kipee Dekoure (liner Volte). preeidentiel edvieer, for-er coor-
dinetion ninieter (or the tight egeinet the drought in the Sehel.

5. Sduerdo I'rei (Chile). loner prioe ninieter end their-en of the Chrietien
Denocretlc Petty.

5. Ketherine Grehe- (United Stetee), wolieher of the HBHIMION K81” end
NMUIIK.

6. tduerd Heeth (Greet Sritein), tor-er priee einieter end cheinen of the
Coneervetive Perty.

7. hir ii. Jenni (Tentenie). ninieter tor treneoortetion end intonetion,
toner finence end trede ninieter.

8. Khetijeh ﬂied (Heleyeie). bent director, toner edninietretor or the
rice hoerd.

9. Lehehni Kent Jhe (Indie), governor of Je-a end Keeheir, toner preeident
or the lent of indie.

10. Me- Meiill (lndoneeie). vice preeident, toner foreign ninieter end pree-
ident of the UN Generel Meeehly.

ii. iieruki Nori (Jepen). lenher of the hoerd of directore o! the Society (or
lnternetionel Ooooeretion, tor-er deputy foreign ninieter end e-heeeedor.

l2. Joe Norrie (Cenede).heed or the Cenedien lehor oomnt end cheirlen ot
the edeinietretive come“ of the lnternetionel labor Orgenieetion (no,
Geneve), vioe preeident of the lnternetionel Federetion of Free Labor Unione.

13. our Pei-e (Seeden), cheirleen of the Sociel Deucretic Petty. tor-er
prise Iinieter.

M. Peter 6. Petereon (United Stetee), chew-en of the boerd or the Lon-en
Iroe., Kuhn, ioeh Dentin; houee, toner eecretery of oo-erco.

7
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

l3. Edgard Piaani (Franco), oohotor, for-or agriculturo oiniotor (vaa rocontly

naaod inotoad oi Piorro Homioo-rronoo, oho hod to withdrao from tho co-iooion
on account of iiinoaa).

lb. Shridath S. haphai (Guyana). aocrotary gonorai o! tho Co-onvoaith Soc-
rotatiat, tor-or toroign liniotor.

l7. Layachi Yahar (Maria). vico orooidont of tho National Aaaoahiy. (oraor
trodo oiniotor.

Di officio oooboroi

Goran mm (Svodon). protoooor of oconoaico at tho Univoraity of Unooia,
tor-or otati ooabar for tho Pooroon Co-iooion.

Dragooiov Avrnovic (Yugoslavia). tor-or diroctor of tho ﬂorid bani: ond
not opocioi adviaor to UNCTAD.

Jan Prom! (Nothoriahdo). noubor o! parlialont, tor-or dovoiopaont liniotor.

9mm
i. Soo tho tort of tho final roooriio of thio opooch on p. D 601 t.

2. Cf. tho tort o! tho tinai "port of tho KW! (vithout oupoio-onto) of
2 Juno 1977 in u [7. 1977, p. D 693 ff.

3. Soa tho apocitic iiot of tho couiooion ooabora abovo.

6, lb“.

3. 0n tho baoio of o piodgo troa tho Dutch [ovom-oht, tho britioh ond tho
throo Scandinavian gown-onto hovo Iooo'hIio undo (inanciai donation. to
tho total cooto, which aro ootiaatod at orouhd 3 6-8 Iiiiion. Contribution
hava aioo boon Iado by tho Cor-on Harohali ﬁnd of tho Unitod Stotoo and
announcod by tho Ford Foundation and tho cahadion lntornatiohai

Dovoiopoont loooarch ammoii. Tho Japanooo govotn-ont hoo aioo oodo piodgoo,
ohiio on tho Goran oido, it io ooinly political tomdatioha thot an

portioipatin; in raiain. (undo (or co-iooion lootingo in dovoiopin;
countrioo.

6. fort of lrandt'o opooch in Cynich caotio, p. D 603 It.

7. font of tho Doihi dociaration on tho Irondt Oo-iooion, 22 Docoobor l9”,
p. D 60!. (t.

8. Soo oioo tho ﬂorid Dovoiopont loport I978 of tho World Bonk (p. ll: (2.)
and ﬂorid bank Prooidont Hello-Iran opooch at tho annual nootihg ot tho

rovaninn oouncii of tho [if and ﬂorid tank on 25 Soptoobor 1978 in
Uaohington.

8
ran orrtrm. use ONLY
9.

‘0.

ll.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At tho aootIn; In tho UnItod Stotoo, tho toIIooIng. anon; othoto. opoto

ao oopnooontatlvoo of tho hoot oomtryt Sonotor Jacob JavIto. Undonooro-
tary ot Stato lIohoM Coopor. IIonry KIaoIngor, Max-Ion CIovoIond, and
OtvIIIo hoo-on. Fro- tho International mu. than voroI Konnoth Dadolo,
1m gonoroI «III-«tor (or oovoIopaont and IntornotIonoI octane-Io cooporotIon:
ldrIoa JaoaIry. ohoIrIon ot tho 0N Co-Ittoo of tho \lhoIo: Mhaooador

Don hIIIo (JuoIoa). opoahot of tho amp o: 773 Dr. Raul ProhIoch. tor-
oor ooorotaty .OI'IOl'Ol ot matron and of tho UN mono-Io Co-IooIon for

Latin AaorIoo: and Jacquoo do lorooIoro. oxooutIvo dItootor ot tho Into:-
natIonoI "notary had.

Thuo hotoro tho oootIn‘ In Moll (III-I7 Hay 1978), an oxchongo ot vIovo vlth
a «tho of onootto on no nototIoIo took olaco In London tron II to I1
Hon tho oajorIty of tho coquoIon ooohoto toot pott. SIaIlorIy, a
“thou-In; on tho ouhjoot ot “Strongthonln; ot Trodo and Cooporotlon anon;
tho DovoIopIn; CountrIoo,” to toto pIaoo In Now DoIhI. Io oohooqud

hotono tho Novoahor aootIn; In KuoIa WI.

rho toIIo-Ing outlooto voro doaIt vIth at tho Hay nootIng In HoIII pI-oh-
Ioao of tho pootoot dovoIopIn; countrloo, oatIotootIon of baoIc noodo, and
too aotooIan ouootIono. In tho UnItod Statoo. tho toIIovIng voto dIocuoood:
eo-InIty of Intotoato. ouootIono o! doht. IIgratvt-y notion. and tho
ouoIgtatIon ot opocIoIIoto to tho IMuotI-IoIIooo oountrIoo (tho oo-coIIod
hraIn droIn). rutthomso, thoro no a pnII-Inoty dIocuooIon on quootIono
of nutrItuon and agtIouItuto. At tho ooaIng oootIng In HoonoIo, tho tol-
IooIng ouhjooto vIII ho troatoo, non; othotot ooonoaIc ooooorotIon along
tho dooolopIn; countrIoo, lottot aooooo, and oodIua-ton oconoalo dovoIop-
cont In tho vol-Id: thon, onom «Id onvItonaontoI ouootIono. ouch oo
non-romahIo raw ootorIoIot and ﬁnally, tho ovoa of Invootaont and
mltlnatIonaI ontorptlaoo. MI togothor. tho oo-Ioolon hoo pIannod olght
aootIn‘oI attot Gymloh (Data-hot I977). Ht. PoIotIn. SIIttotIand (Hat-ch
I978), I-aho, am (May 1978). tarrytovn, UnItod Statoo (Auguot I978).
and Kuala Lunar. HoIaona (Nov-hot- I978), lootIngo In I979 ato ochodulod
for Sam“ AtatIa (Pohmary). LotIn hot-Ito (Nov). and VIonna (July).

COPYRIGHT: I978 Vorlog toot IntotnotIonan PoIItIt anon, Bonn

8629
GO! 3103

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIM. USE ONLY

INTENTION“ AFFAIRS

SPANISH-6W mm 0)! SOLAR WY mum
Madrid 00610 l6 in Spanish 14 Jan 79 P 48

[Text] Within 1 month Spain and Germany will sign an agreement to
build, over a 6-year period, the world's largest solar powerplant in
Almeria or Badajos.

Within 6 years solar energy could be supplying electricity to a city of
150,000 inhabitants, such as Cadiz or Almeria, if plans forthe world's first
industrial-scale solar energy plant, to be put up in Spain, are

successml.

In early 1979 the Spanish Govement will sign an agreement with the
Meral Republic of Ger-saw for the construction,in Almeria or Badajoz,
of a 20 megawatt powerplant to produce electricity iron solar energy.
Total investments for the project will hit 13 billion pesetas, of which
Spain will contribute 25 percent.

Il'he powerplant will cover a total surface area of one-half million
square meters, 120,000 of which will be taken up by the reflectors.
Participating for Spain in the construction, engineering and installation
arc the firms Construccionss Aeronautioas, S.i.. the National Institute
for Aerospace Research. the National Alminum haterprise, Baron and
Haquinista Terrestre y Maritime. Re senting the m are the companies
Interatom and m (nuclear equimnt , Han and can (machinery) and m
and Dornier (aeronautics).

In terms of its power output and comercial scope, the project is
unprecedented worldwide. Mthmore, it is geared towards “an
ambitious objective," as Luis Hagana, the enery commissioner, describes
it: saving energy equivalent to 400,000 tons of petroleum a year over

a period of 10 years. This would represent savings of 4 billion pesetas
in our balance of when“.

According to Hagan, this project, which could put out up to 100
megawatts by multiplying the nodules, is designed "to spur the
manufacture and design of the equipment during a first phase, and then,
if the results are good, to enable us to utilise them industrially."

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Not all experts share the optimism of the energy conicsioner. "What
Spain is doing in the field of solar energy," Bilbao expert Andres
Hedrano told CANDID 16, ”is stupid. misguided and a fraudulent use
of taxpayer money." He advances the following arguments to back these
descriptions: "Stupid. because they are trying to convert solar energy
into electricity through the heliothenal wstem, which even American
enerts have advised against; misguided, becmse we are ignoring other
methods that are more within our reach, and fraudulent because foreign.
not domestic technologies are being used."

Solar Experiments

The Spanish projects currently under way to develop solar energy are
merely experimental in nature. 'me three existing ones are located
in the Almeria region and cover an area of 120,000 square meters;
investments there total 5 billion pesetas.

The only totally Spanish project is CBA I, a 1 megawatt plant that
will be completed by 1980. The other two powerplant projects (each 0.5
megawatt) are multinational and promoted by the International Bnery
Agency. Sixteen countries. including Spain (with 30 percent of each
project). are taking part in them.

In Spain. the Center for Query Studies has budgeted 800 million for
to promote new energy sources. and the Ministry of Industry has kicked
in another 150 million: both figures are for 1979.

Iorael is the number one country in the application of solar energy.
The United States has two 10-mesawatt projects under way. Another 10-
megawatt powerplant is being planned in Italy, and Japan is building a
1.2 megawatt plant.

comm-r: IIIIOMACION I MICAOIONIS, S.A.. 1978

8743
(SO: 3110

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

new rosr-tttcnon saucy massacres Vitus»
Bonn aunora ancmv in Germ 10 Dec 78 pp 771-782

[Article by Dr Halter Schuetse. reporter at the Centre d'Etudes dc Politique
Etrangere [Center for foreign Policy Study], Paris (study committee for
German-French relations): "New Tendencies in French European Policy and
Security Policy after the Elections of March 1978"]

[Text] More Freedom of Action for Giscard d'Estaing?

The unexpected outcome of the parliamentary elections of March 1978 opened
the way for new initiatives in the area of French foreign policy andsecurity
policy. The most important and immediate consequence of the victory of the
government coalition was the stabilization of the position in all of Hestern
Europe and in NATO. The hypothesis of a fundamental new orientation of
France and of a far-reaching change in the social and economic system de-
manded in the joint governmental program of the leftist union has been
dropped. and for the next 5 years. the length of the term of legislature.
the Fifth Republic will remain a predictable partner. The authority of the
president of the country was appreciably strengthened. which also increased
his chances of being able to put into action the internal reforms and ex-
ternal (foreign policy) course corrections which he has aimed for since his
election a years ago. in the euphoria of victory, in which many even within
the coalition had ceased to believe. such an optimistic perspective seemed
to be completely justified. Six months later a certain disillusionment has
spread whose causes are certainly determined by the state of the economy.
for one thing: rising unemployment accompanied by continuing "stagflation."
and also a growing skepticism about the prospects for success of the neo-
liberal economic experiment introduced by Prime Minister Raymond Barre. Here
important is the fact that President Cistard d'Estaing had not succeeded in
breaking up the rigid sociopolitical ideoligical fronts and creating the
conditions for a "government of the center" with the socialists-and if
necessary without the Gaullists.

Abroad. in view of the relief about French continuity which is felt in the
west as well as the East. it is all too often overlooked that in the first

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ballot of 12 March the majority of voters voted against the coalition
(which received only 06.65 percent of the vote) and that the final ballot
was primarily a vote against the parties of the left which had fought
themselves out and lost credibility as partners in government.1 The large
parliamentary majority of the middle-class camp may be able to gloss over
the very close election Eesults. but the complete polarization into left
and right was unchanged.

The president's attempt to shake up the middle ground was still not a
completely hopeless undertaking. The Socialist Party, which was now in-
stating on putting a clear distance between itself and the communists and
was canceling the joint governmental program. showed itself ready for
parliamentary cooperation. and the large union headquarters let it be

known that they would not reject out of hand the social concert offered

by Giscard d'Estaing. Meanwhile. this "opening to the left“ was nipped

in the bud by the Gaullist group movement (BER) when their parliamentary
group refused to grant the chairmanship in two of the six standing house
committees to the opposition. For their part, union leaders felt duped
when the prime minister, having been confirmed in office, announced a
structural improvement plan. the so-celled Barre plan. without consultation
with representatives of the workers, a plan which demanded wage discipline
and consumer austerity along with decontrol of industrial production prices.

The balance of power in the parliament had in any case changed only in-
significantly, for as before the Gaullists made up the bulk of the govern-
ment coalition (with 155 representatives as opposed to 122 representatives
for the Union for French Democracy-UDF--the joint parliamentary group of
the three middle-class parties loyal to Ciscard). and thus they have the
possibility of blocking every decisive change of course in domestic and
foreign policy. On the other hand, the scope of the president in the
executive area has certainly grown, and the Elysee Palace has been trying
silently but systematically since spring to displace the supporters of
.lacques Chirac from key positions in administration and diplomacy which
they still hold. Presidential democracy has become a reality, at least

in the realm of foreign policy (but far less in the realm of defense)

As will be shown in detail, bounds have nevertheless been set to Ciscerd
d'Estaing's scope by the necessity of not encumbering the relationship to
the RPR by a too obvious break with the Gaullist tradition and of maintaining
the precarious balance of power by constant compromises. On the basis of
this silent modus vivendi Chirac agreed to a parliamentary truce until
next spring. His scope is even more limited. for he cannot threaten a
breakup of the coalition--es demanded particularly by Michel Debre--all
the less since the greater part of the parliamentary group would refuse

to follow him out of fear of the new parliamentary elections which would
then be unavoidable.

The situation today is therefore characterized basically by institutional
and party political blockage. which still allows the head of state a
relatively large amount of freedom of movement in the "domaine reserve"
[private preserve] of foreign policy and security policy. If there is a

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
?0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consensus in Prance today. then it is this: that it is not a spectacular

diplomatic success but the success or failure of the Barre plan that will

decide in the coming spring whether Giscard has his way in the face of the
powers of persistence in both camps and is able to put the clock of French
progress on European time.

New Beginningsin European Policy

This effort to adapt French structures--and mentality-~to the European
Economic Cos-unity should be regarded as the leitmotif of the initiatiVes
undertaken by Ciscard since March. In the election itself European policy
did not play a decisive role. even if Prime ministernarreemphasized again
and again that under a leftist regime France would not be able to stay in
the Common Market. The leftist union had an understandable interest. in
view of the deep differences of opinion that exist here. in not putting the
European theme in the foreground. The president himself used this argument
with great force on the eve of the first ballot in his televised address
when he said "that France. if it were to enter on a period of uncertainty
and weakness. would ensure in a single stroke the econosic and monetary
primacy in Europe of our strong partner. the ERG. And who among us can be
content with that?"

if it is hard to say how many undecided voters were impressed by this. it
is beyond doubt that Ciscard d'Estaing here expressed his basic conviction
that the further development of the SEC in all areas not only requires
political harmony between Paris and Bean. but also demands above all the
approximate equality of the two main partners. In a televised discussion
on lb October he even designated it as being France‘s goal to catch up
with the FRO economically within 10 years.

This fixing on the F86 as the model of a modern industrial and commercial
state is certainly not new. Georges Pompidou was setting up this "German
norm" for his countrymen as early as 1969.5 and his successor (but not his
first prime minister. Chirac) then personalized this relationship. character-
ized by Ponpidou as exemplary. by the constant emphasis on his good and even
friendly understanding with the Federal chancellor. The duo of Ciscard and
Schmidt has already become the real driving force in European policy. even
in externals. through the encounters which precede EEC sum-it meetings and
by the state document in the cathedral at his. the counterpart to the docu-
ment of reconciliation between Adenauer and de Cualle in the Cathedral at
Rheims. which has a very marked Carolingian character; thus it is certainly
not a case of pure symbolism intended to conceal an inability to act. The
new ispulses emanating from this league of two are bearing fruit in many
ways: in interest in direct elections to the European Parliament. in the
mutual will to achieve expansion of the Community to include the three
mediterranean states. in the building up of the political consultation
mechanism of the 892 [European Political Cooperation]. in the strengthening
of the functions of the European Council and in particular in the area of
currency policy.

1“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Currency Problems

The idea of a European currency league. called 398. is even considered to

be the personal work of the French president and the German federal
chancellor to such an extent that in the process the real context. i.e.. the
Community of Nine.6 threatens to be obscured. quite aside from the fact that
the national camp followers in both countries. the parties. the central banks.
the economic alliances. etc.. can hardly keep up with such a rapid pace. It
can hardly be an error to assume that the currency plan is primarily a means
of political stabilization for Giscard as well as for Schmidt. i.e.. on the
German side an honoring of the president's election victory. and a readiness
to strengthen his position and to further the process of adaptation to the
FRO vanguard as much as possible. That may well correspond to the intentions
of the Oiscardians in France as well. From the French point of view. a
further fall in the dollar is a matter for concern. it is true. but not the
main motive for the creation of the £95. The top priority is to assure the
prospects for foreign trade in spite of the constant inflationary trend by
giving the franc solid parity in a system of reference which is-faute de
mieux--not worldwide. but western European.

For this reason the initial positions in Bonn and Paris were also different:
from a technical point of view. in Paris they wanted a package of all

eight EEC currencies with an average value as a unit for calculations. by
which means the weakness of their own franc would be covered and the DH
would be depressed: the more conventional system of clearly recognizable
bilateral currency parities which is envisaged in the present stage of the
discussion. on the other hand raises reservations in financial circles even
reaching as far as the government. because in view of the discrepancy in
economic development in comparison with the FRC--the increase in cost of
livingwillbe around 10 percent again in France in 1978. that is. four times
that in Germany--the franc can only be drawn into an extended currency snake
after a devaluation. Recently the word "rattlesnake" has been making the
rounds in Paris: not because the EH5 has rattled from the beginning-~which
cannot be ruled out. considering the nonparticipation of Great Britain and
hesitation on the part of ltaly--but because the goal of currency stabiliza-
tion aimed for by the president.7

From the point of view of experts. simply because of the current phase dis-
parity on the two sides of the Rhine--a moderate business upswing in the PRC
and a period of "austerity" in France which can be overcome no earlier than
summer of 1979--changes in structure of the economy can only be achieved in
the course of a long process. and it is therefore not very advisable to want
to overcome the results of being in arrears (the currency weakness) by quick
solutions alone and to make this into a question of political prestige.

Further Development of the EEC

it must further remain in question whether the initiative in the matter of
a currency alliance. which is felt by the other EEC partners as a solo effort

15
iron onrcw. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the Germans and the French. can really strengthen the coummnity context.
Some critical voices are elseady speaking of the innutabiiity of the pre-
eminence of Bonn and Paris. but such a development is not accepted every-
where and certainly not in France by the Gaullists, socialists and communists.
The factual severing of ties with weaker EEC members of which willy Brandt
once spoke with a very negative echo cannot be reconciled with the declared
goal of the French president of strengthening the concert of the heads of
state and government of the Nine. The "European Council." after all arose
out of an initiatiVe of Giscard's. and since 1975 it has developed from an
informal fireside that more and more into a real decision-making body. In
view of the Elysee Palace, even today it forms the superstructure of the
confederation of Europe which is structurally still lacking. Consistently,
Biscard turned on 12 September to the heads of government. and not to the
EEC organs in Brussels. with his suggestion that the European Council should
.decide at its coming session at the beginning of December about the summoning
of "three wise men." whose task it would be to examine the institutional
problems which result from the expansion of the EEC. In the Elysee Palace it
is characterized as being completely unrealistic to use the existing mechanisms
of an integrative and/or cooperative nature which were originally created for
six states for 12 far less homogeneous states.9

For the strongly bureaucratized structure of the BBC in Brussels, the semi-
annual rotation of the presidency of the cabinet council creates fewer
problems than it does for the cooperation of the Foreign Offices in the
context of European political cooperation (EPZ). French considerations on
giving the "diplomatic traveling circus" more permanence by giving each
president two vice-presidents10 (in each case the foreign minister immedi-
ately preceding and succeeding him) lead back to the old Pompidou plans for
the creation of a standing political secretariat. Looking at the party
political differences in France, it is significant here that the emphasis
on nonobligatory. intergovernmental voting (a federation of states rather
than a federated state) is an attempt to finally overcome the dogmatic
struggle over supranationality.

Hith direct election to the "European Parliamentary Assembly"--the term
"European Parliament" is banned from the official vocabulary in France--
the old ideological contrasts still break out. The de facto alliance of
the extremes is forming itself anew here: arch-Caullists as well as com-
munists are conjuring up the spectre of German-American hegemony in the
context of an SEC parliament which sees itself as a constituent assembly--
and here the former are polemicizing against the imperialistic aspect and
the latter against the capitalistic aspect of such an integration through
the parliamentary back door. The socialists want to help their conception
of a socialist Europe make a breakthrough in Strasbourg, 1 and theGiscardians
see themselves forced onto the defensive and paradoxically forced to hold
to the traditional line of de Caulle that the French government will not
permit an independent extension of jurisdiction for the Euro-assembly.12

A coalition crisis about the European election in June 1979 is improbable.
since neither Chirac nor the RPR party wants to come to open conflict about

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this question. which is basically of secondary importance to them. For

the other parties it is also not so much a question of Europe, but more

of a domestic show of power: since here for the first time proportional
voting (with lists) is being used, each of the four great camps is appearing
separately and free from concessions based on voting tactics. and socialists
as well as Caullists are counting on profiting from the unpopularity of the
government and the failure of the Barre plan which they foresee13 and being
able to put their respective rivals into a clear minority.

The an and the PCP [French Columnist Party] also find themselves together
in the categorical rejection of the expansion of the BBC to include Greece.
Spain and Portugal-~in clear contradiction to their traditions. After all.
it was Georges Pompidou who demanded the balancing of the BBC by the entry
of the Mediterranean countries from 1969 on, while on the other hand it
should be in the interests of the PC? to encourage the Burocommunist element
through joining forces with the relatively strong communist parties of these
three countries. But here the deciding factor appears to be the desire to
broaden their voting base by making themselves the advocates of the wine
growers and fruit growers of southwestern France. who are afraid of over-
powerful Iberian competition. The socialists and the center parties as well
as the government, on the other hand, are trying for compromises in agrarian
policy to prevent a flooding of French markets. Thus it will depend among
other things on the skill in negotiation and the authority of the president
whether a majority can be found in the National Assembly for the ratifica-
tion of the treaties for entrance into the BBC. Giscard d'Bstaing will have
to aim to gain time in this difficult domestic situation, and the suggestion
of summoning a council of "three wise men" should also be regarded in this
light.

The liberalism ordained by the prime minister of the French economy, finally,
must not be confused with a late conversion to free trade. Raymond Barre
spoke out for a "regulated" (or regimented?) foreign trade for the EEC even
before the elections. and the acute crisis situation in important economic
branches (steel and shipping industries, textiles and synthetic fibers, etc.)
forces him rather to innovative protective measures which must necessarily

be adopted unilaterally. These problems, i.e. a very restrictive French
position in the current GATT negotiations and in reference to the steel
crisis plan of the BBC. to cheap imports from third countries, etc., cannot
be presented here in detail. But it is still to be hoped that Barre will
not act here according to the motto which the industry minister, Andre Giraud,
(until April 1978 leader of the Commissariat for atomic energy). announced

in reference to the energy policy of the EEC in the senate's European debate
of 25 October 1978: "Hhat is good for France is also good for Europe."

Ciscard d'Estning's Initiatives in the Area of Disarmament and Arms Control

in the area of disarmament and arms control the French president has taken
steps which mean genuine innovation and differ significantly from the negative
attitude adopted under his two predecessors. The reasons that moved Giscsrd
d'Estaing to give up France's abstention in international disarmament nego-
tiations are manifold. It certainly went against his "universalist" attitude

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to stand apart here and be able to exert no direct influence on the course
of events. In addition. there was a growing concern about the increased
arms race even in the Third Worldla and about the further vertical and
horizontal distribution of atomic weapons.ls Besides, it could be foreseen
with specific reference to French conditions that the refusal to take up
the empty seat at the Geneva disarmament conference (CCD) and the continua-
tion of underground nuclear tests in the Pacific would again incur strong
criticism, particularly on the part of the Third Horld states. on the
occasion of the special general meeting of the United Nations in New York
in the spring of 1978. Here attack appears to be the best defense, and so
the head of state had a plan of his own worked out in the fall of 1977 which
he was to present in New York.

The genesis of thisproject.in which besides the responsible offices un-
official institutions also took part. showed that the conceptual scope was
quite narrow. It was out of the question, if only considering Gaullist
taboos. to include nuclear weapons in a disarmament proposal. and so this
reef was avoided by the master stroke of dividing the world in two, into

a zone of conventional weapons and the northern hemisphere covered by the
atomic stalemate of the two world powers. in which Hashington and Moscow
were assigned the sole responsibility for a reduction in the nuclear arms
race. Correspondingly in the first drafts there were no suggestions for
the European region. Giscard d'Bstaing and his advisors, however, felt
obliged at the end of 1977 to add the idea of a disarmament conference in
Europe to the principles which were then published in January 1978, for the
first secretary of the Socialist Party. Francois Hitterrand. had put forward
an inclusive plan on his part with the central point that a standing dis-
armament commdttee of all cscs [Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe] states should work out measures for the limitation of nuclear and
conventional weapons and armies.1

The Significance of the Giscard Plan

Significantly. the declaration of the French cabinet council of 25 January
was accompanied by a detailed endorsement of the doctrine of independent
nuclear strategy and defense policy. In this, as in the formulation that

a conference of signatory states of the Helsinki accords would have to have
the whole area from the Atlantic to the Urals as its object. one should see
a concession to the Caullists. particularly since shortly thereafter it was
made clear that such a conference would have to be limited to conventional
weapon potentials. That is “fortiter in re, sauviter in modo" [firmly in
substance. pleasantly in manner], a denial of all expectations that France
would take part in the current arms control negotiations. Hhile the leftist
union demanded a radical change of course and subscribing to all partial
arms control agreements concluded since 1963, including the ratification of
the treaty banning nuclear weapons, the government held to the dogma of not
letting itself be bound by a "super-Yalta" decree by the two world powers.
This was more a question of Caullict philosophy than of utility in view of
the circumstance that these partial agreements with universal applicability,

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which were worked out in the framework of the 660 in Geneva, do not even
touch the technical development of the French nuclear arsenal. 0n the
complete atomic test ban. which is not yet ready for signature, would

be acceptable for Paris on the basis of the great need to catch up which
exists in this area.

Thus it was no surprise that the conception which the French head of state
presented to the tenth special general assembly of the United Nations on

25 Hay 1978 placed emphasis on the marginal or formal aspects of disarma-
ment. This included primarily the readiness to cooperate in a new expanded
Geneva committee which was to take the place of the CCD and put an end to
the previous procedure of the American-Soviet copresidency, as well as
specific suggestions for creating a world institute for disarmament research
and an agency for supervision by space satellites. which were explained in
detail in French memoranda.17 For the purpose of stemming the tide of the
conventional arms race, the countries of the Third (nonnuclear) world were
further to summon regional conferences and create nuclear-free zones on the
example of Latin America. In the same regional context it is a matter of
achieving regulations on the limitation of weapons sales.

The European Aspect

A further memorandum18 was devoted to the suggestion of a disarmament con-
ference of the CSCE states. which are dedicated in the first stage to the
elaboration of the confidence-building measures already set down in the
Helsinki accords. and is to have as its theme the limitation of conventional
weapons systems with great offensive power (with the exception of naval
forces). The exclusion of nuclear carriers stationed in the continental
European area makes such a procedure appear questionable from the beginning,
and a limitation to conventional weapons leads inevitably to the problem of
the reductions aimed for in the more limited HBFR [mutual and balanced force
reductions] area. where with an increased number of participants difficulties
would be bound to increase exponentially. Further, it remains completely
open how the neutral or non-treaty states should be included in such a
process, since the principles of parity and collectivity accepted in Vienna
by the two alliance systems in the reduction of military potential cannot

be applied to them. and it would be necessary to proceed according to the
principle of proportionality.

Ciscard d'Bstaing returned from New York with the-~justified--feeling of
having achieved a great personal success, but in the following months showed
that he was disappointed at the limited response that had been accorded

to his concrete individual suggestions-apart from the reform of the Geneva
disarmament conference, which after all is advocated by a large number of
other states. among them Great Britain.19 The French government announced

on 27 September 1978 that it would take part in the new organization. which
is to become active at the beginning of the coming year.

The interest of western and Eastern European chancelleries understandably
concentrated on the European aspect of the Giscard plan, which has already

19 .
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been the subject of several diplomatic feelers without it being evident as
yet whether and when the French president will issue an official invitation
to the 34 governments. Both the framework and the central point of the
suggestion fit in with considerations made both in East and Heat of resuming
conversations about new confidence-building measures but without linking
them formally with the execution of all the stipulations of the Helsinki
accords, as had happened at the Belgrade CSCE follow-up meeting, and thus

running the danger that the discussions will run aground on the problem of
human rights.

That the Soviet Union will agree to steps which concern its entire European
area up to the Urala is improbable. Nevertheless the reaction in Moscow

to the Ciscard initiative was friendly, and the French contribution to
military detente was singled out for praise.20 For the PRC it would also
be an optical advantage not always to appear in the role of advance guard,
or of driving force in matters of military transparency and arms control,
and to reach a consensus with Paris at least in the area of European security
policy. Interpretations according to which Giscard brought up the thought
of a disarmament conference in Europe mainly to block the HBPR negotiations
in Vienna are in error; this would be a presumptuous undertaking which
would overtax his powers. It is just as little a question of a first
cautious step in the direction of the Vienna conference. France rejr :s
the goals of the discussion on reduction of forces in Central Europe under
any conditions, less because of concern for a possible limitation of the

defense capabilities of NATO than from motives of traditional German and
Eastern policy.21

Similarly during this fall Paris refused to take its place at a hypothetical
"third table" beside the current HBFR circle and in connection with the
future SALT III at which the concern would be to gain recognition for the
interests of the Western European allies, who would be the ones primarily
affected by the limitations of the strategic weapons systems located in the
continental "gray zone." The challenging words "from the Atlantic to the
Utals“ really do apply to this geographical area. The objection that a No
from France would prevent the European voice from being heard in the dialog
of the world powers above all in this question of security policy which is
so important for the partners of America is answered by French diplomats
with the argument that this is regrettable, but it is more important not

to become involved in a negotiation process which would inevitably lead to
tying France's nuclear forces into future strategic arms limitations.

The Perspectives

In view of this unconditional insistence on full national liberty, the
positive effects of Franc's participation in the new Geneva disarmament
committee should also not be overrated. Rather an institutional uprising

against the superpowers--whom china may possibly join-and thus an effective-
ness for this committee which is significantly lower in comparison to the
old CCD should be expected.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The detached attitude to NATO has been characterized by great continuity
--ln spite of Improved ruoperntlon on individual point» In the personal

and practical area. The president again nutcntatiously did not participate
in this year's Atlantic Council session at the summit level in Washington.

Thus we can speak of a flight to the front in matters of dis;rmaaent policy
only in a very limited sense. since in Paris they are substantially holding
to the maxim of not entering into any international obligations which would
affect the status and the developmental possibilities of the Force de Frappe,
even indirectly. 0n the other hand, the Ciscard plan and the concrete
individual suggestions which accompany it are not mere window-dressing.

It is significant that the Fifth Republic has given up its self—isolation

in this regard and in future efforts for the nonproliferation of nuclear
weapons. Certainly the gentleman in the Elysee Palace is shadow-boxing

in the case of the great majority of parties and the public in this matter.
There is some indication that Ciscard d'Estaing is closer to the disarmament
philosophy of Francois Hitterrand than to the Haginot complex of Jacques
Chirac and the barons of Caullism. That is scarcely significant for im-
mediate practical politics. but for medium-range perspectives for a change

in the party political landscape of France, on the other hand, it is of
significant concern.

FOOTNOTES

1.

2.

3.

The disappointing performance of the
ballot it received only 22.5 percent
under the share of the RPR--weakened
vis-a-vis the Communist Party (PCF),
voters that the socialists would not
government against the PCP. It also
of the leftists that the three party

Socialist Party--in the first

of the vote and thus ranked just
Hitterrand's negotiating position
and raised the fear among crossover
be able to win through in the

had a negative effect on the image
leaders agreed on the following

day on an "up-to—date" government after the PS and PCP had led a bitter

battle against this since September 1977.

In addition, publicly this

agreement was misinterpreted as an admission of participation in the
cabinet by the communists based on the principle of parity.

la the final ballot of 18 March the vote gain of the former coalition

was n little over 300,000, with a total of 26,206,000 votes cast.

The

surplus of more than 80 seats for the government parties is explained

by the majority voting principle and
the opposition a great disadvantage.

the lectoral districts, which gave
In more than 50 electoral dis-

tricts the differences between the two unity candidates was less than

1 percent of the votes.

The Gaullist veto against a communist chairman caused the PS to withdraw

its own candidacy for the second chairmanship.

The RPR also blocked

the initiative of the Giscardians (UDF) to introduce proportional repres-
sentation for the National Assembly--and thus to create a basis for the

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02J08: CIA-RDP82-00860R000100020019-8

6.

S.

f).

7.

8.

FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

P5 to be able to get out of the voting alliance with the PCP forced by
majority vote. A further Initiative of the president to introduce the
proportional system at least for local communities (in cities with more
than 30.000 inhabitants) also runs into opposition from the RPR.

a very characteristic example of this is the unexpected decision of the
president (at the end of September 1978) to allow construction to begin
on the sixth atomic submarine demanded by the Gaullists, even though
the Defense Ministry and navy leadership had spoken against it on
technical and financial grounds and had advocated a new generation of
missile-carrying submarines beginning in 1985.

in the year 1972 Giscard d'Eatsing. who at that time was minister of
finance and economy. had requested from herman Kahn at the European
branch office of the hudson institute a study which was published in
January 1973 and reached the conclusion that France would have surpassed
the German economy in the medium term (1985).

For details cf Rudolf Herlt. "After the Summits in Bremen and boon:

New Strategies in Economic and Fiscal Policy being Tested." in
wacm-nncmv. 16/1978, 9 507 rt; cf also the speech by Foreign

Minister Louis de Guiringaud before the National Assembly on 8 June 1978:
"Shaken by the currency chaos which is disturbing the conditions of
competition and encouraging the compartmentalizing of markets. the
Community saw itself being hindered in its development and even threatened
in what it had achieved. because it had not attacked the real problem.
the harmonizing of national economies and currency solidarity. For

years France has stressed the fact that the resumption of the process

of currency union is an unavoidable prerequisite for any progress in
Europe.“ Text in: ”Documents d'actualite internationals" [Documents

of International Current Events). Paris. No 33. 19 August 1978.

Currency speculation has already anticipated such an adaptation: the
exchange against the DH stood at 2.31 at the end of October. and almost
reached the catastrophic low point again just before the parliamentary
elections in Hatch. In addition. a devaluation would have a negative
effect on the balance of trade with the PRC. since imports would become
even more expensive and the French exporters on their side would not

be able to take advantage of the price advantage achieved in the German
market because of rising production costs.

Article by Antonio Ciolitti. Italian member of the EEC commission, in:
CORRIERE DELLA SBRA. Milan. 25 October 1978.

See Glscnrd d'Estaing's piece in LB HONDE. 14 September 1978: "it

is clear that a simple revision of the arrangements initially intended

for 6 to apply to 12 members is inadequate, and that greater efforts

to adapt are necessary if we want to preserve the effectiveness and the
climate of solidarity which have made possible advances in European re-
construction and if we wish to create the conditions for a true confedera-
tion of Europe.“

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I0.

ll.

12.

I].

1‘.

IS.

16.

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The foreign ministers of the Nine decided at the session on

la September I978 in Bonn on such a procedure for the special case
of Turkey. which will participate in future in the political con-
eultationa intended to avoid a direct confrontation between the two
countries in the EPZ context.

it has often been explained from the side of hue French government
in the struggle for the venue of the new European Parliament that
they insist on Strasbourg and would veto a change of venue.

it was only a short while ago. at the end of September 1978. that the
French foreign ministry again let it be known that the resolutions of
the European Parliamentary Assembly for industrial cooperation. which
also referred to the arms sector. exceeded the authority of the assembly
as that had been established in the Roman treaties. The Paris govern-
ment is further of the opinion that the western European Union and its

parliamentary assembly located in Paris has the sole responsibility
for defense problems.

The NPR finds itself here too in an ambiguous position as govern-
mental partner. while the PS. as the results of the last three
parliamentary by-elections (following the annulment of the voting
results in March by the Constitutional Council) prove. was able to
attract the "protest voters" from all the other camps. The socialist
candidates asserted themselves in two voting districts with signifi-
cantly larger majorities and defeated prominent like Servan-Schreiber
(in Nancy) and the RPR representative de la Helene (in Paris). Party
leaders are counting on a share of the votes of up to 30 percent for
the European election.

Cascard d'Eeteing announced in the race for the presidency in June 1974
that he would "moralite" French arms sales. In the year 1977. however.
these shipments. the majority of them to countries of the Third World.
reached the record level of over 27 billion francs. Unilateral bans

on the shipping of military equipment are not under consideration-~except
in the embargo of South America imposed by the Security Council of the
UN. It is not being ruled out in Paris government circles that France
could take part in the international agreement about the limitation of
weapons sales and purchases which are still to be decided on.

See Pierre Lalouche. "France in the International Dispute about Nuclear
Energy: The New Foreign Nuclear Policy under Giscard d'Bataing." in
HUROPA-ARCNIV. 17/1978. p 154 ff. The French government concluded an
agreement on safety with the IAEO in Vienna on 27 July 1978 which refers
to the control of a number of civilian nuclear plants following the
example of the two Anglo-Saxon nuclear states.

LE NONDE. lA/lS December 1977. See also Jean Klein. ”The French Left
and the Problems of Defense." in POLITIQUE STRANGERS. 5/1978 p 505 ff.

23
ran orncm use ONLY
17.

18.

I9.

20.

21.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The French UN delegation conveyed on 1 June 1978 to all member states
of the UN: a memorandum on the "creation of an international body for
satellite supervisioni" a memorandum on "creation of an international
institute for disarmament research" as an autonomous body in the
framework of the UN. 0n 1 June the French UN delegation also announced
that they would in the near future present another memorandum on the
"creation of a disarmament fund for development.“ This thought takes
up the suggestion made by the French prime minister. Edgar Faure. at
the Geneva East-Nest summit conference of 1955 of using 5 percent of

the worldwide armament expenditure for aid to development in the Third
world.

Memorandum on "project of the disarmament conference in Europe."
conveyed to the member of the EEC on 26 Hay 1978. to the other KSZE

states on 25 hay and to the other Mediterranean countries on 26 May
for information purposes.

Cf No 120 of the final document of the 10th Special General Assembly in
EUROPA-ARCNIV 19/1978. p D 538 F: "Formation of a disarmament committee
as successor to the 660. The membership of the committee. which is to
function using the consensus process. is open to the nuclear states as
well as to 32-35 other states. Chairmanship of the committee will
rotate among all the members on a monthly schedule."

At the conclusion of his consultations with the French government and

of a conversation with the president. the Soviet foreign minister.
Andrey Gromyko. explained on 28 October 1978 in front of the press in
Paris that the USSR welcomed the fact that in future France would
participate in the disarmament talks. On both sides the conclusion

had been reached that political detente in Europe had to be supplemented
by military detente.

See Jacques Vermont. "Chronique Diplomatique." in DEFENSE NATIONALS.
Paris. Dec. 1978: With reference to an HBFR agreement. the fear is
here again expressed that the creation of a zone of lesser armaments
which essentially consisted of the two German states would lead to a
dissociation of the PRC from the Western European confederation which
is on the point of coming about. and would encourage tendencies to a
neutralization of Heat Germany. The weightiest French argument against
the HBFN process from the beginning. at any rate, was that the creation
of a Central European zone with special status would inevitably make
the responsibility of the b powers for all of Germany an empty one

and thus reduce the possibilities of France's influencing the develop-
ment of German policy.

COPYRIGHT: Verlag Fuer Internationale Politik GmbN. Bonn

9337
C80:

3103

2%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

HITTERRAND-ROCARD QUESTION SEEN NEADBD FOR SNOHDOHN
Paris L'BXPRBSS in French 16-22 Dec 78 pp 78-79
[Article by Robert Schneider: "Hitterrand Ready For Showdown"]

@extiﬂedneoday 30 December, 2030 hours. Iaths cold night, hancois Mitten-and
accompanied only by Claude Estier. leaves the socialist party headquarters
at Palois Bourbon Square on font. Pierre Mauroy leaves by car in the
opposite direction. Michael Rocard has already reached his offices nearby
at University Street. where several party leaders join hie.

is this correct. this picture of a socialist leadership split at the end
of a so-celled long day of "verification"? Six hours of discussions did
not allow the group. which has controlled the PS since 1975. to agree on
the sinplest text. The socialist general staff scheduled a new meeting
for Wednesday. 20 December. But the gap see-s to have been created again
between the first secretary and his friends. more inclined to do battle
than to negotiate and the others. all the others who decided to meet again
before this second explanatory meeting.

Convinced that he has a broad aajority in his party. the first secretary
wanted to demonstrate on Wednesday 13 Deceaber that he did not fear the
confrontation. He declared. "it is not the unity of the PS which is in-
volved. only the unity of its leadership. Let those who no longer agree
with ac say so clearly!" he knows that on the day before Rocard announced
his intention to the English press to cake a contribution. that is to say.
in the socialist jargon. to subnit a sort of preliminary action for the
Met: Congress in April, which the members will be asked to consider. but
not to vote on. Hitterrand also knows that Gilles Nartinet and Dominique
Taddei, the leaders of the so-called "Critical" faction close to Record
had their own text distributed on the some morning. Likewise, he really
intends to force both to declare thenselves. And thus. he expects to iso-
late hieself.

But Hauroy himself promised to avoid the test of strength. 0n 7 December.
he saw Hitterrand and Record. and on the 12th. Hartinet. He said to all
of then: "th should we be divided since we agree on the essentials?"
Again. he nukes himself the champion of unity.

25
iron ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rornrd apparently understood him. "0 does not any a word about his ven-
trlhntlun. hut vuunternttncha in another area: He asks ”can one speak the
truth in this party without being abused? If one continues to compare with
me Laval--like Gaston Deferre--or with Deat--like Francois Mitterrand--l
will ask for the selection of an honorary jury.“ Hartinet also avoids every
reference to his text. which. however. the Hitterrand supporters already
have in their possession.

For several hours the socialist leaders will mark tine. like in a bicycle
speed test. where the one who starts first rarely leads at the finish line.
In submitting the initial text. no one wants to assume the responsibility
for a split which the members would misunderstand. however. the well known
divisions appear clearly. Hauroy. Rocard and their friends demand a more
collective leadership. But on nationalisations. Hauroy appeared closer to
Hitterrand than to Record.

About 1830 hours. Pierre Joxe. one of the trusted lieutenants of the first
secretory finally gets to the point: "Are we still capable of reaching an
agreement?" he enumerates all the texts published or announced since the
defeat in March which no one dares to mention: the contribution of
Mitterrand‘s friends. of the so-callcd "Thirtu" in June; Hitterrand‘s speech
before the executive committee on 8 July; the contribution of Martinet and
Taddei; that of Record: Jean Poperen‘s book etc. He asks hauroy. yes or no.
whether he intends to submit a contribution in the name of the Federation of
the North.

Mauroy seized the opportunity thus offered to place the responsibility for
the present division on Hitterrend's supporters who signed the first dated
of these contributions. he said. "I propose. to all those who have not
signed the text of the "Thirty." that they decide whether they can agree."
It is the first time that the mayor of Lille publicly contemplates an
alliance with Rocsrd and with all those who challenge the first secretary.

Nitterrand who feels threatened with isolation preferred to see each one
make up his mind on their own initiative rather than the positions of their
friends. Anger appears in his words. "I an the subject of public attacks
by party leaders. No agreement is possible with them. if they do not re-
tract their statenents." Thus it will be difficult to reach an agreement on
20 December.

"The others. all the others." will they oppose him with a joint text. as
Rocard desires? That would be to inediately challenge Francois hitterrand
and participate in the test of strength.

COPYRIGHT: 1979. S.A. Croupe Express

8690
050: 3100

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

CERES SAID TO BE 'CUT IN THO'
Paris L'BXPRESS in French 16-22 Dec 78 p 79
[Article by Jacques Roure: "CERES Cut in Two”)

[Text] Hill CERES [Center for [Socialist] Studies Research and Education].
the leftist minority in the PS, succeed in escaping its long purgatory
thanks to the division of the party majority? Expelled from the executive
committee since 1975, the friends of Jean Pierre Chevenenent--a fourth of
the party-~have always proved since then to be determined adversaries of
what they cell the "American Left" embodied by Michel Pocard. So that in
recent months they appeared as "impersonal allies" of Francois Hitterrand.

Ales! At the very moment when the minority could regain hope, its conference

at Epinay-sur-Seine on 16 and 17 December indicates that there is no longer
one CERES, but two.

On one hand the "gang of four": Cheyeneaent, Didier. Hotchane. Georges Sarre
and Pierre Guidoni. the historic leaders who sanctioned the organic union
with the PC. as if March 1978 was only an accident on the way. On the other
hand. we have the "neo-crnrs" members headed by Christian Pierrot. 36 yesrs
old. deputy from Vosges. who have also agreed to maintain unity with the PC.

but on condition that the PS becomes more independent and takes into account
more the economic situation.

At the beginning of Socialist renovation, CERES was the spur and think tank
for the Ps. It is Chevenaeent who allows Hitterrand to win the party in
1971 at Epinay. It is he who holds the post of first secretary in 1972. at
the time of drawing up the common program. But CERES' haughty dogmatism
rapidly proves incompatible with the party's development. Ever since. pic-
tured as the Pc Trojan horse in the PS. CERES was rejected in the minority.
It is true. it provides its detractors with sound arguments: moreover
recently when Chewenement criticises the "swing to the Right” in the social-
ist party. his speech was published in communist leaflets.

2?
ron omcm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The radical criticiel of the Iinority has appealed to ssny socialist
members for 3 years. But today many see in Cheyenesant a nationalist
hybrid of Harchais and bears. Nov sany of these dissenters are there?
A third of CERES. according to their leader, Christian Pierret? In any

case. enough to be isportant. should the occasion arise. in the Hittcrrand-
Rocnrd showdown.

Chevenenent. on his part. indicates that he could he a socialist presiden-
tial candidate in 1981. to this to put hinaelf in a good negotiating
position with Hitterrsnd against Rocard?

COPYRIGHT: 1979 S.A. Groups Express

8690
(ISO: 1100

NR Offlcﬁl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

ANALYSIS OF PIERRE HAUROY'S POLITICAL STRATEGY
Paris L'BXPRESS in French 6-12 Jan 79 pp 67-08
[Article by Robert Schneider: "th Mauroy No Longer Follows Mitterrand")

[Text] Designated heir apparent in 1976. arbiter
since March 1978. Pierre Mauroy is responsible for
the initial political event of 1979: His alliance
with Michel Rocerd. Robert Schneider analyses this
strategy. which is only half a surprise.

"Those who took me for a weather vane here were wrong. I do not reject the
[position] papers I presented on 20 Decesber 1978 together with Michel
Record." There was no asbiguity whatever in the lively tone of

Pierre Mauroy at the time of the latest conciliation meeting among the
leaders of the French Socialist Party [PS] on Hednesday, 3 January 1979.

at the party's headquarters on the Place du Paleis Bourbon. The one when
Francois Mitterrsnd had designated as his heir in 1976, the one when the
Socialist activists considered as the arbiter of the Socialist Party decided
to ally himself with Michel Record and for the first time not to follow
Mitterrand. On Saturday. 6 January 1979. the party‘s executive co-ittee
chaired by its first secretary [Mitterrand]. who had been deliberately
absent on 3 January, will have no alternative but to take note of the break.

This is an event even if it is only half a surprise. On several occasions
already. since the defeat of the Socialist Party at the legislative elections
of March 1978. the Mayor of Lille [Mauroy] had opposed Francois Mitterrand.
But each tine he had accepted coupronises. Even on 20 Decenber Mauroy had
given the impression of rallying in the afternoon to the first secretary

of the PS whoa he had opposed that sane aorning. Hence the ironic connent

of sole of Mitterrand's sen that Mauroy "would always end up giving in."

It is true that Pierre Mauroy hesitated a lot. On one hand there is his
profound adeiration for Mitterrand. Mautoy's account of their first private
meeting should be heard. This was in 1965 on a train which was bringing then
back free Lille to Paris. ”The renewal of the left would necessarily occur
if 100 detersined individuals were available torealize it."tha presidential

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

candidate running against Gen Charles de Caulle had told Nauroy at that
time. Mnuroy was to be one of those sen for 13 years and without the

slightest weakening even when Mauroy had to break with his “boss."
Guy Mallet.

offsetting this loyalty was Heuroy's conviction that the first secretary of
the Socialist Party did not wish to draw lessons from the party's setback

at the legislative elections as well as Mauroy'e old friendship for
Michel Rocard.

The first break between Hitterrand and Mauroy occurred in the spring of
1978 when 30 hardline Hitterrand followers published a paper recalling the
major principles of the party's Epinay Congress. The Mayor of Lille saw
in that the confirnatien of what he feared: Hitterrand. leaning on a few
trusted allies. wished to reassuns control of all the party‘s command
levers. In short. Hitterrend wished to increase even further his personal
power that Hauroy already deemed to be excessive.

It was at the party convention of 25 November 1978 that Hauroy decided to
ally himself with Michel Rocard. On that day Hitterrand once more took
shelter behind the "Epinay line" to distinguish between those who were
really Socialists and those who were no longer so. Hauroy's reaction: No
one. not even Hitterrand. has the power of excommunicstion. he. Hauroy.
was Socialist by birth. The son of a lunberjack from Nerd Department who
had become an elementary school teacher. Hauroy joined the Socialist Party
at the age of 16 and has never left it since.

No one. Hauroy still figures. not even Hitterrand. has title to the "Epinsy
line." that is. to the strategy of the Unity of the Left. This is a line
which. in Hauroy'a eyes. does not justify theological discussions on the
break with capitalism. even less the slide toward a nationalist stance which
he thinks he perceives in Hitterrand at the approach of the European
elections. and Hitterrand's refusal to take account of the consequences of
the betrayal of the Socialist Party by the French Communist Party. A certain
shift to the left by Mitterrand. approved by CERES [Center for (Socialist)
Studies, Research and Education], worries Mauroy to the point of jeopardizing
the unanimity of appearance of the party executive. The activists will decid

has Hauroy definitively given up playing his role as arbiter? If one were
to go by what he says. not at all. "I don't want war.“ Mauroy answered.
Sinply. he felt that a trial of strength was the only way to force the
party's first secretary to discuss matters. Hauroy's goal is not to remove
Hittarrand who continues to be in the farmer's eyes the best qualified to
keep unity within the Socialist Party. Hauroy merely wants to force
hitterrnnd to share responsibilities. The prospect of facing his two najor
rivals joined in a coalition will pronpt--so Hauroy thinks--the party's
first secretary to negotiate a coeprenise. either at the nesting of the
party's executive committee on 11 February 1979 where the papers. if they
are validated. will be transmitted to the sections to be voted upon by the

activists or. if necessary. at the Congress of Net: to be held on
7 and 8 April 1979.

30
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Between now and then the bridges are not burned. "There is st111 an umbilical
cord between us.“ the followers of Rocnrd say ironically. Let the first
secretary finally sake concessions and Hauroy will join him. But does not
Hitterrand. like Retard. hope for a confrontation? "he will undoubtedly

be obliged to reach an understanding with us since no one will have a
sajority," the Mayor of Lille said. He would not concede that in order to
produce a saksshift majority the deputy from Nievre Department [Hitterrand]
sight strike an alliance with CERES. which is anti-European and subject

to communist influence. '

"The interest of the Socialist Party" explains this obstinscy of Hauroy

in wishing to arrange a Hitterrand-Rocard reconciliation. He does not
forget the electoral deadlinea--at the canton level in March. at the
European level in June 1979. But the two Ian have an imperative individual
ambition on their part. namely. each one wants to be the standard bearer

to face Valery Giscard d'Estsing at the presidential elections of 1981.

[a Pierre Hauroy not seeking. than. to reconcile the irreconcilables?

COPYRIGHT: 1979 S.A. Groupa Express

2662
0502 3100

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

RIVIEH OP PC? STRATEGY. TACTICS
Paris PARADOKRS in French Nov-Dec 78 pp 35-60
[Article by Annie Kriegel: "communism French-Style"]

[Text] A historian and sociologist, Annie Kriegel is one
of the outstanding specialists on communism on which she
has written numerous works. He asked her to analyze for
the readers of PARADOXBS developments in the PCP [French
Communist Party. The critical analysis she hes made of
those developments and which for lack of space we were
not able to publish in our lest issue, is not incompet-
ible with the dissidence that some observers perceive
springing up within the PCP.

In the course of the significant year running from the spring of 1977 to
the spring of 1978, the PCP triumphed in one sphere at least: It suc-
ceeded in keeping its secret and its mystery from those professionally re-
sponsible for observing it. The latter merely went from registering their
apprehensive awe to scornful indignation.

it must be recognized that it was lucky. Circumstances helped it: The de-
feat of the Left having been virtually achieved in the first round of the
elections (which surprised even the rare experts who continued to believe
that the majority would win out in the end), it managed not to reveal it-
self as it would have been forced to do (for example by not accepting
reciprocal withdrawal [on the second round of the ballotingl) if on the
evening of the first round the results had turned out to be the reverse or
merely less clear-cut.

A Complex but Logical Arrangement

The Pet, of course, does not deserve either the excessive honor paid it

prior to March nor the subsequent contumely. 0n the whole it handled its
undertaking as could have been foreseen the moment one understood the com-
plex logical arrangements and the satisfaction which. to the amazement and

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

indignation of its former allies, it is fiaunting for having oxtricetod
itself properly, does not seem feigned to me.

Bringing a party (which people are convinced remains a social democratic
party insofar as its majority and especially its voters are concerned)

by means of an alternating and complementary interplay of general entice-
ment and pressure on its left wing gradually and progressively to take on
a program whose internal logic should lead it in due course, even at the
cost of a possible break on the right, to an undertaking somewhat ambiguous
at first so that its communist nature will be exposed only after it may be
too late. is indeed an unusual exercise.

it may of course also be that the entire communist undertaking is affected
in its very logic by a faulty concept of such a nature that union of the
Left must always and under all circumstances, at least in a country like
France. be broken after a long upward phase. That is the situation if, for
example, it is thought that its initial success can only benefit inexorably
from an excessive inflation on the socialist side, an inflation which after
a certain point imperils the communist capacity to control the whole affair.

The only strategy for union which worked right up to the end-othat is, until
the establishment of a socialist dictatorship--the strategy of national
union in the people's democracies after 1905, perhaps only succeeded for
reasons which strictly speaking had really nothing to do with it: It was
perhaps "doomed" to succeed because the source of its success lay elsewhere,
in the Red Army's occupation of the terrain ahead of time.

If this hypothesis were accurate, it would indeed be absurd for the commu-
nists (and incidentally the socialists) stubbornly to persist from time to
time in relaunching a strategy which can lead solely to what it has already
produced 3 times: a final rupture (1978) before or (1937, 1967) after ex-
ercising power. The unbelievable power of French style political mythology
is sized up here: Not a single socialist, not a single communist dissident
was found even just to suggest that such a hypothesis should be carefully
studied. No. on every side they prefer to explain that if the communists
(or socialists) had played the game, the game would have worked.

The Critical Point

Yet this hypothesis has the advantage of determining precisely where the
critical point is found: ln recent years the communists have been able on
an immediate or future basis to accept rearrangements in the traditional
forms of their control (for example by abandoning the concept of dictator-
ship of the proletariat) but they have not brought back into question the
principle itself of a control over which at all events and in whatever form
it may bo they intend to retain command however discreet. however far-
removed, however flexible it may need to be.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

So if no progress has been made on the matter (and now that they have
reached the stage of seeking in particular to "perfect" democratic central-
ism. it is virtually certain that the 23rd congress will take advantage of
it to neglect this excessively crucial issue), one must either think that
union of the Left is a completely absurd idea or else that the communists
are not interested in its final outcome which to their experienced eyes
could in no way be in doubt. Save in an exceptional situation in which

the socialists by repeating their aberration like that seen in Prague or in
Budapest from 1946 to l948 were to seek their own downfall. Which, more-
over, is not in itself impossible but which implies that everything can
inevitably lead to general elections: For if a majority of socialist
leaders and militants are apt to go astray out of power madness, including

accepting excessive risks. the socialist voters for their part are far less
rash.

Prom Social Legitimacy to National Legitimacy

Then do the communists have only an instrumental concept of union of the
Left? Don't they go back to it periodically solely for the advantageous
by-products it ensures for them? It is true that in 1936 the Popular Front
enabled them to make two capital points. They then established their legit-
imacy and laid the foundations for a permanent existence no longer just on
a single theoretical claim but on the practical capability of representing
the labor sector; in addition and specifically they ensured control for
themselves over the reunified COT [General Confederation of Labor]. Simi-
larly, from 1963 to 1957, it can be considered that they managed to broaden
the source of their vitality moving free a legitimacy that was only social
(labor) to a national legitimacy. The party which was at that time made up
solely of a limited network of regional nuclei based in the heart of the

"labor fortresses“ developed as a consequence into a ramified circuit at
the level of the whole country.

It is also true that this time this kind of by-product is less easy to de-
fine. Unless one considers as a by-product of the union of the Left stra-
tegy from 1965 to 1978 the PCF's very recent capacity to wrench itself out
of the Stalinist rut, away from Soviet fascination, to place itself in a

position where it would have plenty of time, without any break at all with

the socialist sphere, but guaranteeing more autonomy in it for itself to
exploit its own patrimony.

Two Processes

French style Eurocommunism whose meaning and substance are of course quite
outside of the union of the Left as such, would nevertheless have found in
It the additional vitality, prestige and potentialities which made that
daring and that renewal possible for the PCP. It is here and only here

that these two praccsses,which have tended either wrongly to confuse or
excessively to separate, are linked; union of the Left has temporarily
provided a rather favorable situation, it has permitted what a provisionally

3h
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unite). So to the same extent the PCP deployed its efforts to contribute
to the socialist renaissance. it can from now on deploy them to contribute
to its collapse. With the same relative success. It is regrettably true
that the Socialist Party, today as yesterday, is in fact lining up with com-
munist views. It accepts having as its sole alternative either bleating
for union md fighting in a ridiculous void (the lover whose "beauty" has
become indifferent or scornful is always ridiculous), or else that of
seeking elsewhere and consequently on the Right, the help and consolations
the Left denies it--so it "veers" to the "Right." confirming a posteriori
what the columnists had avorred with unworthy anticipation.

0n the other hand,F*rench style Buroconlmnism has now acquired a consistency
which removes most of its initial ambiguities and clearly allows predicting
the PCF's ability to jog quietly along. It is sussaed up in a remodeling
full of delicate nuances as to the communist identity: The columnist make-
up is jealously preserved, French deep-rootedness is emphasised, its in-
volvsment in imitating Sovistisn is minimized. So to say that nothing is
going on is an exaggeration: but to say that there is a Chinese style schism
or even a sometius acute Yugoslav type of heresy is also going too far.

in some way. if it convinces the Soviets not to get upset over complex maneu-
vering but whose results are as essential as they are modest (and to reas-
sure them, the public condemnation of a few dissidents who had especially
irritated them, might do the trick), the PCP may even be able to offer it-
self the luxury of at least once again becoming "the elder daughter of the
church in the Heat" to the extent that it would be to the Heat what the
Romanian Communist Party is to the East: Intractable as to the basic prin-
ciples of the system, but capable of giving an out-and-out nationalist
version of them.

The Best of the Three

To lay claim once again to that status which for a long time was its own
within the international cot-moist movement, the PCP is in a good position
to win out over its two rivals, the Spanish and Italian Comnist Parties.

The Spanish Comnist Party in fact has been severely affected by the quar-
rel which the Soviets picked with Carrillo; for its part, the PCP carefully
saw to it that the chill between Brezhnev and Harchais remained of a per-
sonal nature. Not to derive arguments from it against Brezhnev or against
Harcheis. but so that any process of accomdation between him and the CPSU
[Columnist Party of the Soviet Union] might remain open.

Similarly, the Italian Con-mist Party has been thoroughly marked by a sort
of complaisance with respect to a suspect liberalism. It has also become
too identified with a strategy, the strategy of historical compromise which
it wanted, somewhat arbitrarily and for the sake of a petty triumph, to
make the current strategy. Now, in addition to the fact that its results
have in themselves been mediocre and its short-term prospects even more so,

35
FOR orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ample supply of funds does for an entrepreneur: To go ahead with invest-
ments and improvements that have long been necessary. investments and
improvenants which under the circuiaatances have found a common shelter
under the label of Burocoasnunisn.

within the PC? these "ample funds" are found in the currency of its most
valuable resource: its militant recruitnent. Now, what would have been
impossible to attempt with an anemic party and especially one made up of

a majority stratum of old militants whose memories cannot be shifted, it was
possible to achieve when the strategy of union of the Left, its first suc-
cesses and the hopes it raised (though ill-conceived and fated to be disap-
pointed) brought to the Comnist Party a sizable young and new generation.
it was from that standpoint that the average annual jump in Iceberahip free
1.0.000 in the 1960's to 70,000 in the early 1970's and more than a l00,000
since l976. in addition, the quick rise in the nunber of adherents in-
creased froe 1.00.000 to 700,000 (it utters little whether these figures
are accurate in theeseives, what counts is their ratio).

it will be recognized that if union of the Left from 1963 to 1978 supplied
the energy needed to put French style Burocoesnunism into orbit, the cosm-
nist leaders are not alarmed by their dissidents who precisely because of
Eurocoeumnisn think they oust snake connon cause with socialist grievances
according to which the final defeat of the Left, which was so close to its
announced objective, would retroactively impose sterility on those 15 long
years.

For an imperfect Socialist Society

what Thorez neither wanted nor was able to obtain in 1956, Narcheis suc-
cecdcd in securing without any trouble: To get the commnists to agree to
live from then on without any guarantee that somewhere to the east there
exists a perfect society; to nuke theta climb down quite a bit from their
expectations and hopes so that they might no longer be exposed to the dis-
appointments stenning from the cold and that they would still nonetheless
prefer an inparfect socialist society to Western society; finally, to exalt
the strictly French dimensions of their comnist identity, sufficiently so
that the evils of western society arise from not being comnist whereas
the evils of socialist society cone from not being French.

This is how one expia ins that far from experiencing the disarray to which
the entire Socialist Party has been a prey since deprived of the prospect
of governing it is deprived of all prospects, the PCP seems to have so such
on its plate that it can nourish its own dissident with it right up to the
point of choking them.

On the one hand union of the Left being to the comnists only one strategy
smug others, they can continue to claim adherence to it in the abstract
at the same time as they actually destroy its foundations, that is, the
existence of a socialist party (any union requiring that there be two to

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is superfluous to identify a party with some strategy or other because
there always cones e time when it is more advantageous to change it. Even
if e strategy nay appesr more suiteble than others at a given tine, it is
sheer weete to appear to decide a priori that by its very existence it
eliminates past or concurrent strategies. The PCP has yielded to neither
teeptation. it declares itself in favor of freedoms, yes. it does do thst:
nut liberalism. that is enother matter entirely and it does not give evi-
dence of being keen on it st all. After all, of all the freedons. the one
it prefers above all of then, is certainly its own freedom to choose its

strategy.

809&
050: 3100

37
FOR orrtcm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

MEMBERSNIP, STRUCTURE, FISCAL POLICY OF LABOR UNIONS
M110“ IL SOLE-24 ORB in Italian 30, 310ec78
[3Erles or articles by Salvatore Col7

[30 Dec 78. p 3]

[Text] Today's and tomorrow's articles wind up Salvatore
Cel's investigative series on how organized labor is ergo.

nizcd. In these two articles. he deals with union
financing.

Of all the topics that gre treated with caution in organized
labor circles, top position assuredly goes to financing. The
figures the unions release for publication in this connection
are generally regarded with a severely jaundiced eye, even in
union circles. despite all the effort expended over the past 4
years in an attenpt to make the budgets of the various struc-
tures approach cenprehensibility. The only group really to put
some muscle into the job is the CGIL, which managed in 1976 to
pull together for the first time the year-end reports of all its
99 locals (Codi); the DISL did not go beyond publishing some
scrappy figures on the budgets of the provincial unions. From
the UIL there is not a trace of information on this extremely
important aspect of its internal workings. But if you want to
get a look at the financial reports of the category deferations,
you run into total, Stygian darkness, even in the COIL, which,
of all three organizations, is the one that gives least coverage
to its vertical structures.

Despite the extreme paucity and the fragmentary nature of the da-
te, it is possible to piece together the main features of an

area all but unknown to the general public, and even to the un-
ions theaselves.

The sources of revenue for Italian organized labor can be clas-
sified as internal sources, including the various types of quotas
(dues, contributions, service) paid to the union by the workers

38
ton ontcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

who belong to it and often by those who do not, and external
sources, which include contributions from government agencies,
the attendance fees collected from union members who sit on the
boards of directors of all sorts of agencies, and for the ser-
vices of union members detailed to work in company offices.

And then there is still another source of financing for Italian
labor, and again it is an "external" source. It is the hidden
funds paid by organizations, Italian or foreign, having noth-
ing to do with organized labor per so, but which, for reasons
best known to themselves feel it would be a good idea to contri-
bute to this or that union. On this score we can merely suppose.
It is enlightening, though, to look at what a high-ranking CGIL
official has to say about it: "The CGIL has gone through times
when, as a labor organization, it could survive financially only
with the support and solidarity of unions in the socialist coun-
tries.... Even today, there is an area, and it is not a little
one, of labor organizations which are not self-supporting. They
are CISL and UIL unions, which do not live solely on contribu-
tions provided by the workers.“ He could not, however, go be-
yond those assertions.

Membership Fees

The first internal source we shall look at is the membership fee.
That is the fee paid by a worker when he decides to join the
union, when he is issued his card. The membership fees are di-
vided among various union structures, specifically between the
union's central office (which gets more than half) and the hori-
zontal structures at the provincial level and the regional offices.
The membership fee is the main source of financing for the cen-
tral office. CGIL, for example, shows on its 1976 year-end report
that it took in 4.65 billion lire 3 under the single entry of
"cards," is a sum of more than 4 billion. This is the only hard
figure in the report: the rest are headed as deriving from "for
various activities" (attendance fees, centributions). Among the
various structures that benefit, one way and another, from mem-
bership fees, the zone council deserves special attention. 0f
the 2,000 lire every COIL or CISL worker pays for his union card
(UIL members pay 2,500), only the CGIL earmarks 50 lire for this
new structure. The other two federations just use a dash in
place of the figure that goes to the 002. A clear indication of
how often you can talk for a very long time about a plan without
having the least intention of implementing it.

The second internal source of financing is the dues the member
worker, and sometimes the worker who is not even a member, pays
every month to his own category union. It is up to the employer
to collect these dues by Vldmonﬂns them from the pay envelope of
any worker who explicitly requests that this be done. This means

39
ton omcm. use ouur
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that workers must fill out the form authorizing the company to
wlﬂmold their dues. The authorization, once made, is permanent,
unless explicitly revoked by the worker himself. The amount of
dues is then paid by the industry associations (or by government
agencies or the INPS for civil servants, migrant farm workers,
and pensioners) directly to the category unions. This wiﬂmold-
lng idea became fully effective across the board at the start of
the Sixties for State corporations, and was later extended to

the Civil Service (1964), and to private enterprise (in the 1966
and 1967 contracts).

from the financial point of view,wldmoldhm is a major security
factor and a stabilizing element for the union, which no longer
needs to get itself up, year after year, for costly conscious-
ness-raising campaigns among its members and workers. The plan
is not, however, from arm-twisting here and there. It often
happens, for example, that category unions will go directly to
the workers and ask them to sign the witholding authorization

for the combined union organizations (without specifying which
one they want to belong to), and then divide the take among them-
selves on a prearranged percentage basis. 0n the basis of these
percentage figures, the organization membership cards are paid
for (but never delivered to the workers). This direct relations
with the workers are often sacrificed on the altar of labor unity.

Let's try now to put a figure on the "dues" phenomenon. In 1976
CCDL revenues entered under this heading came to 10.616 billion
lire, or 64 percent of the total revenues of these structures.
when we romesber that the distribution of all CGIL dues alloca-
ted 20 percent to the CCDLs, we can reckon that this single item
of revenue, with 1976, brought the CGIL no less than $3 billion
lire, most of it channelled through the vertical structures.

The provincial organization offices actually get 67 percent of
that sum (around 35.5 billion), while another 10 percent (5.3
billion, again in 1976) is paid to the national category unions.
For the horizontal structures other than the CCDLs, another 3

percent (1.6 billion) is earmarked for the regional confedera-
tions.

When we come to the CISL, things are not quite so clear. In

the first place, there are a good many gaps in available data.

In the second place, the CISL's vertical structure, its "asso-
ciation of unions," leaves ample room for maneuvering on the part
of the category federations. It is possible to say with certainty
that the provincial labor unions (the CISL's horizontal struc-
turcs, although they are entitled to 20 percent of total dues
collected, only rarely manage to get the agreed-upon cut from

the category unions. 0f the 6.4 billion lire in revenues shown
on the 1974 budgets of the provincial labor unions (USPs), only
3.8 billion (less than 60 percent) came from dues. It is by no
means unusual for USPs to have to go into debt to stay alive.

to
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

While we are on the subject of dues, it should be noted that
they are highly disparate, and vary widely among the Various
categories, provinces, and often from one company to another.
They may be either a set amount, or a percentage of the work-
er's actual pay and, not infrequently, they give rise to grumb-
ling because the people who have to pay the most are often the
poorest of the workers. The national organizations are trying
to clear out this real "dues Jungle" so as to arriVe, within

a reasonable length of time, at a standard l-percent levey on
all members. Putting this laudable principle into effect, how-
ever, is turning out to be a somewhat more difficult operation
than was anticipated.

Cost of "Services"

The third and last internal source of financing for organized
labor is the service levy. The service levy is the amount the
companies in certain areas of production (including construc-
tion, commerce, and agriculture) take out of each worker's pay
envelope and pay to the union in return for its contract service.
The service levy is actually a kind of tax which the workers pay
the union for the services it performs for them, particularly in
contract negotiations. Collection of the service levy occurs in
many cases just when the national contract is up for renewal or
when negotiations are opened with the corporation.

In some categories, the workers are required to pay a specific
sum every month (0.1 to 0.2 percent of base pay) as a service
levy. These categories (building trades, casual farm labor,
commerce) are distinguished only by their organizational weak-
ness, because their Job security is negligible and the vast ma-
Jority of employers are so small. In these cases, the service
levy constitutes the major source of revenue, more than $0 per-
cent of the total union income.

The service levy, instituted originally in what were hard times
for labor as an emergency source of funds, has been and still

is a frequent target for furious criticism. Singled cut for
special complaint is the antidemocratic nature of this kind of
levy, which forces all the workers to finance the union, without
at the same time encouraging their participation in union af-
fairs. None of the national organizations, however, has gone
further than token men culpas when the heat rose, knowing full
well that without this kind of income, life in a great many
category unions would be impossible.

we might recall -- so as to get some idea of the sums going to
labor from the service levy -- that in 1974 these levies consti-
tuted 6.5 percent (420 million lire) of the revenues of the pro-
vincial labor unions (USPs) which, apparently, get only the
crumbs from the tables of CISL's provincial category unions.

hl
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPiCIAL USE ONLY

L31 Dec 78. p 31

[Text] with this second article on labor financing.
we conclude Salvaton:Col's Investigative report on
the structures of the national labor organizations.

As for labor's outside sources of reVenue, the first is contri-
butions from government agencies. While the labor organizations
do not get direct contributions from the State, they do collect
considerable suns from various public institutes through their
own collateral agencies (onployers' groups and vocational train-
ing institutes). In 1974. the CISL's USPs receiVed more than a
billion lire in the form of regional contributions from INAS

(the CISL's employers' agency). The CGIL's CDLs in 1970 received,
directly fro- the regional govornnents, around 102 million lire;
this organizations relations with its enployors' group, INCA, are
more than a bit unusual. The records of its 99 CDLs for 1976 show
that they paid INCA a total of more than a billion and a half
lire to lighten the burden of debt their employers' organization
had incurred during that year.

It should be kept in mind, however, that the employers' agencies
are abundantly subsidized by the Social Security Institute (INPS)
through the Labor Ministry. In 1976, of almost $0 billion lire
made available to the 23 enployers' organizations of all kinds
scattered over Italy, INCA got at least 11 billion (the percen-
tage of subsidy is calculated on the basis of the amount of ac-
tivities engaged in by each group, and INCA stands at the top

of the list with 22.698 percent of the total, followed by ACLI
20.970 percent, and INAs-CISL with 17.526 percent; ITAL-UIL
cones in a poor sixth with 5.256 percent). If we add to this

ll billion we add the 1.5 billion coming in from the CDLs and
the sums that those receiving services that turn out to be pro-
fitable voluntarily pay to INCA, despite the fact that this ser-
vice by law must be rendered free of charge, we find that INCA's
revenues (and hence its expenditures) tend to be even higher than
those of the CDLs themselves.

And this seems to us, to say the least, highly unlikely. It looks
still were unlikely when many people in the national organizations
will tell you, and the CISL annual report specifically shows,

that the money flow actually runs the opposite way, from the
employers' groups to the national organizations. Unfortunately,
there are no hard data to back up these allegations. The fact

of the matter is that the enployers' groups jealously conceal

the mysteries of their books and budgets, which they have kept
hidden sinCe 1972 even from the Treasury, which is supposed to
dole out the subsidies annually on the basis of actual services
rendered. There is matter for grave concern in this connection

he
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

in the enormous amount of time it takes the Labor Ministry to
audit the reports filed with it by the employers' groups (the
latest audit report dates from 1972). Serious doubts and mis-
givings as to the real role played by the national labor organi-
zations' employers' groups in this area have been voiced in a

number of quarters, and the unions would do well to set then at
I‘OBC o

The second outside source of financing consists of the /attendance
fees/ received by union members as members of boards of directors
in most public agencies. This revenue item in the combined COIL-
CISL budgets for 1976 amounted to l98 million lire, and that re-
flected only the percentage which officials in the horizontal
structures are required to pay the CDLs out of their attendance
fees. I have already had occasion to say that a very high per-
centage (5,000 to 6,000 people) of union officials sit at the
board tables of at least one government agency.

Among the many aspects we night examine here in this context it
will be illuminating to look at one which is indeed aui generis.
I am talking about calculating, roughly, the average living stan-
dard of the union official. In the annual reports from the 99
CDLs for 1976, the item “staff expenses" amounted to around 7.7
billion lirc (49-2 percent of total expenditures). If we divide
this sum among the 1,500 or so officials of the CGIL‘s horizon-
tal apparatus (excluding those on assignment who are not paid by
the union), we find that the gross annual pay per official is a
little oVer 5 million lire. That is really not terribly high,
and it may be that its very exiguity explains ”a sort of race
for those commissions on which the union is represented and for
which attendance fees are paid" (Amoretti). It is therefore
quite likely that union officials eke out their modest salaries
by witholding most of the attendance fees, and pay only a tad
more than a nominal percentage into the organizational coffers.

The annual salary cited above is of course only an everage, and
does not allow for the wide disparities still persistent from
Region to Region. The case of Liguria is typical. Liguria has
217 full-time CGIL officials at work, 80 of whom are union mem-
bers taken out of the enployer's work force to do union work,
and paid by the company they were taken from. Remembering that
the horizontal apparatus counts 49 officials, of when at least
15 are "distaccati' who are paid by their erstwhile employers,
not the COIL, and recalling that staff expenses for 1976 came

to better than 267 million lire, we find that every CGIL official
in Liguria cashed an average gross annual paycheck of about 8
million. On the other side of the coin, we are left wondering
about the annual earnings of CDL officials in Sicily, which ave-
raged only a lire or two above a million and a half in 1976.
These disparities, which are often more apparent than real (par-
ticularly in the last case cited) can certainly be found if a

#3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
n
:39 a... 33...... a. 3!... 53.11 8 3.53:8 .1843: 33:3
2.98... 283.8“ a 88 2.338...“ tap—J g

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

“’39 ad “'0 “N ‘l. a ”lo... Awu 30:10.8.
”kg-id n.- ﬂlo ﬁl- Hp 0.0 .3: 3.
8:30: «a a» z 3 «o m: A: :5» a.”—
39 Q.- 06 awn a 2n 9... I. :3 28
all in! i 498.- 31.... id 5‘
E ll.- .Il. 9.8.3 9. ‘c In: do .3

A: A2380». 9.3.38 .3 3 .5 can. a. A8» =33...—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

58-93 «o M". N. 3 v... AI... 37.5. .5..—
luak: no A. 9”. o... .an 4'. 1.. 3 3....
. 38.83 A: A... ...e A.» :s “2 A: :5. 3:.
.Mull: an .o _-n 2 ml... II A... l -I I..I 1:3...
2:. I“, s “3‘ ‘2'.‘ “h”, .0035. “50“!" 0‘ 1“. "to. h.
{IQ-:11. .3... 3.3.6 4‘3. .15.. 2|... 215 an .4

 

-k-..:.Am. ._A|A 3 1...: AA I:
8:8 9.58:» 2.28... 388 .A... .3 .5 83.5 .3 8A: .4928.—
KEY

(1)
(2)
(3)

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)

(*)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to table, p 3 of original, 31 Dec 78 issue IL SOLE-24 ORE

FINAL 1976 FINANCIAL REPORT OF THE 99 FEDERAL CHAMBERS OF LABOR
PRINCIPAL REVENUE ENTRIES (in i of total actual revenues)

Geographical
Areas

Membership Fees, CCDL

Monthly dues

CGIL Special Assessnents
Attendance Pees

Public Agency Subsidies
Extraordinary revenues

TOTAL ACTUAL REVENUES (in lire)

North Italy
Central Italy
South Italy
Total Italy

PRINCIPAL sxranonune Inns (in x of total actual disbursements)‘
Apparatus (staff)

Organization (meetings, congresses, etc.)

I.N.C.A. (I)

Joint Activities

Union Cadre Training

Miscellaneous Expenditures

TOTAL ACTUAL EXPENDITURES (in X of total actual disbursements)
SOURCE: INCA-COIL Data Processing and Statistical Service.

NATIONAL FEDERATION SERVICE INSTITUTE (the CGIL's euployers'
agency

[INSERT AFTER PAGE 6 OF TRANSLATION]

'05
Iron omcm. use can
FOR OfﬁiCiAL USE ONLY

comparative study were made of them, from one organization to
another and between the horizontal and vertical structures. In
any case, it is legitimate to agree with Caviglioli's assertion
that the scale of union officials' salaries nowadays "permanently
rolegates to the somewhat mythical memories of the past the pic-
ture of the union official /who works for nothing/ or pockets a
more pittance. At the same time, however, it must be said that
salaries, apart from possible exceptional cases, have yet to
reach the very high levels of executive salaries in general."

The third and last source of outside reVenue is the "distacchi."
When the costs, in whole or in part, of salaries paid for union
work come from the employer, you have in fact nothing more or
less than a form of financing the union. The individual assign-
ed to union work (distacco) should always be covered in contract
agreements or by law (in the ease of public servants). The fact
that this is not always done makes it hard to discern the dimen-
sions or the areas of the phenomenon and, chn more serious,
makes it easy to appoint people as distacchi who have little or
nothing to do with union business. It is by no means rare to
hear criticism from many executives as to the way many of these
people exploit the prerogatives they enjoy for their own personal
ends. As I have already noted, the number of people pulled off
the Job ranges somewhere between 5,500.and 6,000, 3,000 of them
inVOlved with the rank-and-file bodies (union representatives and
members of the council of delegates executive), and another 2,500
to 3,000 working outside the employers' premises. Not all of the
latter are paid by their erstwhile employers. So, even though
they do not show up on the books, workers thus assigned to union
tasks make up an invaluable source of income for organized labor

in Italy, and never mind the perplexity this may occasion inside
and outside the unions.

In addition to the revenue headings we have looked at so far,

the 1976 reports from the CDLs also shows something called "extra-
ordinary rcvenues." This item piques one's curiosity, if only
because of its size: almost a billion lire (6.2 percent of total
revenues). It is hard to figure out just where this money came
from, since the detailed list of entries furnished by the CGIL
already includes every possible conventional avenue of income.
Since in some CDLs this item accounts for a very large share of
total income (it is 28.9 percent of the total revenues of the
Verona CDL, 24.3 percent of Lucca's, 37.5 percent of Naples',
40.4 percent of Matera's, etc.), some additional clarification as
to the source of these sums would remove any possible suspicion.

The horizontal structures at the provincial level are in good
financial shape insofar as the COIL is concerned, but it is still
fairly shaky for the CISL. The CGIL in fact has a number of very
thriving CDLs (Turin, Imperia, Bologna, Modena, Reggio Emilia,
Leghorn, and Perugia), and with some help tram the central office
manages to carry the deficits for its southern CDLs (Avellino,

#6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USR ONLY

Naples, Salerno, Potenza, Palermo, Syracuse, and Snssori). In
the CISL, out of 90 provincial labor unions only 35 ended 1976

in the black, while the other 55 reported often massive deficits.
In this national organization, sany of the category unions in
fact flout the national's standards when it comes to distribut-
ing dues, thereby working a severe hardship on the provincial
horizontal structures which are often obliged to go deeply into
debt in order to do their own Jobs.

What has been revealed here is only an initial quick reconnais-

sance flight oVer the world of organized labor. There are still
a lot of places left in the shadows. Bringing then out into the
light of day will be an indication of institutional and politi-

cal eaturity for the entire Italian labor nOVesent.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Bditrice Il Sole-24 Ore s.r.l.

0132
080: 310‘

“7
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

comm PEBBH'S 13 PERCBH‘ memo SOLUTION
Hadrid OHIO 16 in Spanish 14 Jan 79 PP 34-35

[Text] Four human workers um have to mm. this month whether
they are soil-g to accept the govermont'e wage ceilings or not, and
some 75.000 employers will have to see whether they can boost wages

13 percent. It's bargaining time. Seconds out of the ring.

On the night of Tuesday 26 Decanber. superminister abril Martorell
arrived at the Cortes Building with a tired look and a 5 o'clock shadow.
His hasty arrival was to prevent Spaniards ken thinking that the
decree-lav announcing wage ceilings was a naive blunder. The allergency
Legislative Conission had been unable to meet all day long, and if the
decree were not approved that aid: through the emergency mcedure,

it would be published in the NE Official State Gazette on

28 Decenber.

"Handpicked” Economic Program

When Abril Hartorell ultimately announced to the country that work
ought to increase between 11 and 14 percent (an average of 13 percent
in 1979. the "sessions to think things over" had lasted almost 2 months,
during Ihich time the goverment appealed to unions and employers
associations to humor out an econolic policy past for 1979. ‘Ihere
were 58 days of bilateral meetings, tripartite meetings, then bilateral
neetings again, maemus personal contacts, non-negotiable points,
promise of pasta by Christmas, doubts, more promises...“ finally

a 00!) Democratic Center UnionJ-imposed decree-law.

The Abril-Leal team seems to have taken "the middle way" when it one

down to resolving the union-employer dispute over wages, Jobs and other

labor matters. althoual Nicolas Redondo, the secretary general of the

UG‘P [- General Union of Workers] accused the govemnent ever Spanish

'1' levision of being "the representative of the interests of the CEDE
Spanish Confederation of Employer Organizations].

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With the idea that prices should not be allowed to rise more than 10
percent (a 12.5 percent annual average foreseen for 1979). the goverment
is trying to cut back wages to a 15 percent boost, while, on the other
hand, giving a push to public investment in order to create between
100,000 and 150,000 job posts throughout 1979. As far as the goverment
is concerned, if public investment and wages were increased to a greater

extent, inflation would run rmpent, the consequences of which would be
ominous.

In essence, the Eccnm Ministry's well-known philosophy has this time
been converted into specific figures and a program this country has

a disadvantaged sector of society, those out of work and the four million
pensioners. Based on a principle of economic solidarity, those who have
jobs ought to moderate their wage boost demands so that there can be
more investment earmarked for the creation of Jobs for those who are out
of work. Our enterprises are on a very tiat financial system, and if
an increased payroll cuts into it, they will make up for it by paring
back investment, reducing the amber of personnel or, in difficult times,
being forced to close down.

“It is difficult for me to believe that the moral basis of this economic
program," Abril Hartorell said in submitting it, "can be questioned by
the union crﬁannations." Nevertheless, 30 hours later, 0000 [Workers
Comissions and the 061' signed a Joint ocmnique rejecting the
decreed wage ceilings and ridiculing the economic program and the
philosoﬂay behind it. ”It is entirely feasible for the companies and
the eccnoau to absorb the 16 percent wage boost that we are backing,"
Nicolas Redondo told CAHBIO 16.

Lower Pay, More Jobs

As far as the CED!) is concerned, however, the unions are hurting their
own cause by calling for wage boosts even higher than those approved
by the government, which, in turn, the employers organisation cells
"excessive." "They are concealing from the country," Carlos Ferrer,
its president, pointed out, "the stark reality that increasing wages
too much (without enhancing productivity labor relations and the
financing and profitability of companies; is the major factor in
unemployment."

But the unions hemer away. "Unemployment is not going to be resolved
under the government's economic policy; it requires an in-dspth

program to salvage the economy," Camacho told Abril in mm of the TV
cameras. Nicolas Redondo also expressed his doubts that the Abril plan
can handle the unemployment problem by paring back wages: "that could
happen by the end of the year is that a person with a Job is worse off

in 1979 than 1978 and that at the same time more Spaniards are out of
work."

1&9
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To the case and the (ET. the wage ceilings ordered by the goverment
"entail a wage treese that works against the purchasing power 01‘ the

workers,” and they are unwilling to sign contracts with less than 16
percent boosts.

The government‘s theory is that the purchasing power of the workers is
goiw to increase in 1979 with the decreed boosts. ”If an item costs
100 units new, by the end of the year it will cost an average of 12 to
12.5 percent more," Abril armies, "but in any case wages will have risen
1) percent, also an an average basis."

The unions. however. feel that in the first place the government will
not succeed in holding price rises to an average of 12-126 percent.
"Furthermore," the (two‘s Marcelino Camacho points out. "prices always
outstrip wages; if prices increase about 19 percent in 1978 (16 percent
from December to December), and wages rise 1} percent in January. we've

lost 6 points in our buying power. You have to compare 1979 wage boosts
with 1978 inflation."

No. All Companies Will Be Able to Handle the Rise

'Ihe GEE, which officially proposed a 10 percent increase during the
negotiations and unofficially said it was willing to go up to 12 percent.
believes that the recommended 13 percent will be a heavy burden on
companies. "We realize," a conunique ircm its Executive comittee

says, "that many Spanish companies will not be able to handle the
reconnended wage boosts without a serious risk of author losses,

greater debt and even going out 01‘ business."

Although they regret the increase. not all companies are against it.
According to quick poll taken by CANDID 16, opinions on the issue of
higher my run a wide gaunt. "He are going to take a look at what

the decree states," said a spokesman of Kodak (820 employees). As far
as Manuel Angel de la Quintana. an associate director general, "Urbis
(1,400 employees) will observe the approved legal provisions."

Adolfo Garcia Rodriguez. the director general of Bptisa-Ghesa. thinks
that "the indicated wage ceilings are an acceptable homework. and
inflati estimates can hold up under them." Authorized spokemnen of
mama Leasing Company of t e Petroleum Monopoly. Inc] and mm
[Spanish National Railroads have indicated to this publication that
they will operate "within the limits set by the government." hey are.
in any case, obligated to do so, pursuant to the text of the decree-law,
because of their status as public enterprises.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Other individuals surveyed were not as quick to agree. "I think that

the 13 percent wage increase is an emeeschly ambitious objective that
will be difficult to achieve," said Plorencio Lasega. an adviser to

El Corte Inglee (20.500 employees). Jose Antonio Seguredo. the

president of the Independent Elnployere Confederation of Madrid, feels

that “ for the great majority of business sectors the decreed ceiling is
absolutely untenable and out of the question.” Juan Hire, the director
general of Batploeivcs Ric 'i‘intc (12,000 employees), agrees with this:

"Many companies will be unable to implement the average 13 percent rise,

or eVen an 11 percent increase. Basically. it all depends on productivity."

'vlith the parties face to face, close to 3,200 contrasts comprising some
75.000 companies are going to be on the bargaining table these days.
There are already specific instances. such as hotel and restaurant
workers. mm or banks, where the stmegle for ceilings above 13
percent has led or will lead to strikes. Are we looking at a "long. hot
winter"?

“Nothing is goiter to get out of hand,” Nicolas Sartorius, from the CWO
Secretariat, has pointed out; "there will be conflicts and strikes, but
0000 and 001‘ are in sufficient control of the situation so that things
do not get out of hand. We have to exert vigorous, responsible pressure,
although ultimately everything depends on the bargaining stand of the
employers association."

Contracts. the First Assault

' In response, the cam feels that en upshot of greater labor conflicts
"should be avoided through a rational process of negotiating the

labor union contracts, during which the union organizations oudat to

take a responsible look at the serious situation that companies are in."
When we pressed Carlos Ferrer. the president of the CEDE, for an indication
as to how the group would respond to a stubborn union stand, he told us:
"The right to engage in a lockout is in our favor." This recourse has
already been backed up b the BaJo Llobrega businessmen who are members
of the combative SEEKS expansion unknown employers organization.

In private. neither the unions nor the employers association feel that
anything serious wlll happen, and everything seems to indicate that
after protest comuniquea are issued as "fireworks," the parties will
sit down over many tables to negotiate. For the time being, the CEDE
has alrch femally smoned the coco and the 061' to post-Abril plan
negotiations with an eye towards their contracts, and everything seems
to indicate that they could take place in the next few days.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F011 (WNCMI. IISR ONLY

1979 was“

1978 Gnu "use. 1978 lot “egos 1979 Gmee Wages Tax Percent Hitimeld
(after pmont (with 15 percent

r my wage boost)
female
unkno

345.600 316.123 390.528 4
4509800 4179504 5200704 7
576.000 518.880 650.880 9
691.200 620.256 781.056 9
805.000 720.400 909.550 10
920.000 820.200 1.039.600 10
1.035.000 919.100 1.159.550 11
“150.000 1.017. 000 192999500 12
1.580.000 1.210.200 1.559.400 14
1,610,000 1,403,400 1,819,300 15
1919 Not Hagen Real Men in 1979 Hegee

374.907 18.59

484.255 15.99

592.501 14.15

710.761 14.59

818.685 13.64

935.640 14.07

1.040.900 13.25

1.145.560 12.44

1.541.084 10.81

1,546,405 10.18

Note: In all cases figures meter to a worker with tvo children.
mimcm': INFOIIIMCION Y PUBLICACIOIIES. S.A.. 1978

8143
050: 3110

52
ron omcru. use om
FOR Ol'l-‘ICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

socm. moments or immune Booms 310nm)
Madrid cmuo 16 in Spanish 14 Jan 79 pp 42. 43. 45. 46

[Text] The year 1978 took quite a toll among Spaniards. II'he one
million unemployed and the four million pensioners were the ones hardest
hit by the crisis, but others were hurt too, whether by a loss of overtime
or an extra Job or by a wage cutback.

People's savings, in particular, were the mar victims in recent months,
even to the benefit of superﬂuous consumption. Savings, which rose from
11.5 to 13.8 percent of available income from 1970 to 1973,havedrcpped
since then to 10 percent. lhe response of the Spanish people is

totally unrelated to the tennis followed in other countries. ILL.
Jenna-Dekker, the vice president of the Association of Dutch Housewives,
told this magazine how the hitch people behaved when faced with the

same crisis now contronting Spaniards. although it had been anticipated:
"We weren't able to drive our cars on Sunday and we began to think more
seriously about our war of life. ibday, in general, the Dutch people
save more and spend less."

"But wlv save it money is worth less every day, and inflation is sneaking
havoc with a family's budget?" wonders Jose Maria hendez, a Madrid sales
agent with three children.

Half of Wages to” Red

The other side of the coin is that consumption has increased, "a typical
developsent during inflationary times," according to Antonio Fernandez,
the head of the Statistics Section of the General Customs Office.

Spain earmarks 68 percent of its gross national product to
consumption, whereas the airspesn average is 60 percent. Another
statistics that underscores the gap is this: 45 percent of a Spanish
family's budget goes for food (in sons areas more than 50 percent),
while the airopean average is about 30 percent. Before the crisis,
there was a steady trend in Spain towards the Biropean levels.

53
FOR orncm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'i‘o Elena de la 'Iorre, the secretary general of the coordinating Commission
of Hadrid Housewives. this increase in consunption ”is irrational and
geared more towards the superfluous than towards basic needs.” Il‘his

view is corroborated by Nicanor Fernandez. the technical director of

the Office of Data and Applied Research. "Luxury consumption," he

notes, ”is basically centered around housewives. who are using more
cosmetics and buying more Jewelry as a defense mechanism to cope with

the anguish caused by the crisis psychosis." Among men. superfluous
consmption involves basically alcoholic beverages.

Filling Ono's Stomach

As far as foodstuffs are concerned. the consumption of so-called

filler items has also increased: bread, soups. pasta. peas and beams
potatoes, etc. mile fresh fish md meat consmption, except chicken
and pork. has declined. According to nadrid City Hall sources. this

development has brought about notable changes in the makeup of the
garbage that is collected.

Not Even on a Recounendation from the King

The family of Seville's Manuel Baona Haceda. the father of 18 children,
is perhaps one of the most severely lashed by the crisis. In his
forties. Baena, a construction worker, is out of a Job and collects
16.000 pesetas a month in unemployment.

Despite the four adjoining apartments that house his family, a

reward from France for his reproductive efforts. Manuel Beans is not
happy in Seville. "We used to live in Utrera," Manuel cemented to
0mm 16's correspondent, "but we had to come to the capital when
they gave us the apartments. Life is more difficult here. Back there
people trusted you in the stores. and you could get a bit of work in
the field. Now you can't land a construction Job even with a letter
of recomndation from King Juan Carlos."

The family's meals are scanty and frugal. "Today, for example,” his
wife says, "we had rice with artichokes, and dinner is often bread and
butter for everybody." The Baena family spends 300 pesetas a day on
bread alone, ”when we can buy it. Chicken is completely out of the
question," she adds, "and when I go to the market. the fish dealer
gives me 2 or 3 kilos for 100 pesetas because he knows what sort of
condition we're in."

United in the Face of the Crisis
Out of work for a year, Dailic Espinar is 40 years old, has two children,

lives in the Hadrid district of Palomeras BaJas and has been a member of
the Revolutionary Organisation of Horkers (CRT) since 1970. He

5“

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

currently collects 15,000 pesstas a month, half of what he earned when
he worked as a carpenter-panel installer in the construction trade.

“I spend n time looking for work," Bailio begins, “going from project
to project, like asking for a handout. I'm also involved in the union
struggle. Hem used to save sons 5,000 pesetas a month; now, nothing.”

"we avoid unnecessary outlays," his wife, Imalia Iman, adds. "More
than half of our income goes for food. I make our clothes mseli‘.
Ming loose material is cheaper. We haven't bought ourselves anything
new since my husband has been unenployed.”

Like millions of Spanish families, they have cut down on the quality of
their food intake. ”We eat more chicken, potatoes and eggs than before."
They have also eliminated weekend outings. movies and eating out from
tine to time.

No More Movies and Weekend Outings

Another one or the one million Jobless, Yanuel Morales, married, 26 and
with a five-month old boy, told CANDIO 16 about how they are coping

with the crisis. "there was nothing else to do but restrict our

intake of certain foods. ”We eat less meat and fish than before, and have
more potatoes, peas and beans, eggs and chicken, because it's less
expensive."

“they have also avoided superﬂuous expenditures. They were planning to
buy a television set and mmish the house a bit, ”but we've put it
aside because it's not a priority matter.” ‘lhey don't go out on
weekends, have stopped going to the movies, and "I've even had to
eliminate the two beers a day that I used to drink," Manuel cements.
His wife states in a resigned tone: "Since I got married, I don't know
what it's like to buy myself clothes," adding: "Lotteries and quinielss
are out of the question, of course."

Lotteries and Quinielas: The Big Escape

They are an exception, because in times of crisis genes of chance
"are very easy for people to become dependent on, especially along
the lower wage-earning classes, in an anguished attenpt to bring a
few extra pesetas hone," asserts Mercedes Comabella, the president of
the Federation of Madrid Housewives Associations.

This year Spaniards will spend a total of 170 billion peeetas on
lotteries, quinielas and chances sold by the blind. Some 200,000 Jobs
could be created with this money.

55
roa orncuu. use ONLY
FOR OI'PICIM. USE ONLY

Pensioners are in the sense boat as the unemployed. ammo 16's
correspondent in Valencia. Mercedes Aranoibia. reports that the Caspallo
family. emigrants iron albaaete. have lived in the city of Turia for
any years now. The husband. 63. has been on partial disability for

the last 3 years, collecting a pension of 5.100 pssetas. They have Just
not now granted him total disability, and his pension will go up a bit
acre than 7,000 pesetas.

The Caspallo fuaily squeeaes its budget to the maximum "We don't eat
seat. thcudx fortunately we don't like it too much. We eat out of the
stew pot. we have forgotten about slMtering the pigs this year and
about vacation. He used to spend 1 month during the stunner back in

our home town. At least our married children help us out at tines,” they
say with relief.

Back to the Stew Pot

In general throughout Spain visits to restaurants, cafeterias and bars
"have diminished considerably, especially at dinner time,” authorised
sources of the sector's federation told this magazine. They also
pointed out that those who cannot do without this luxury ”are spending
less and eating worse."

Andalusian peasant farmers, who had been replacing their traditional
"stew pot" with meat and fish, have had to go back to it again; "but
with very few ingredients. and moreover, a single dish has to do for
both the afternoon and evening asal," notes Ramon Lopes. mom Puebla
dol Ric. Other people's fruit orchards. wild asparagus and poached game
often provide Andalusian peasants with their daily sustenance.

The crisis is not as noticeable among the middle classes. :11th they
are having their problems. This was acknowledged by Francisco Romero
bias. from Seville, married and with three children, in his talk with
our correspondent Santiago S. Travers "We can feel the crisis, but it
has to be worse elsewhere. You can feel it because the children are
older, clothes are expensive, and they're in private schools, which are
expensive too."

Having a Drink at Home

The Romero family (he is an executive in Seville's iron and steel
industry) is also cutting back. "You forget about going out." he
confesses, "going to the cafeterias with a bunch of people. and most of
the time you have a drink at Mae."

The bar and restaurant sector business is quite aware of this development.
Sector sources consulted by this magazine stated that the earnings of
bars. restaurants and cafeterias have dropped with the crisis.

56
FOR omcm use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"even though these places always seem to be Ml." they note. "The fact
is that people cannot deprive themselves so easily of this social mnotion,
but they are eating worse than before."

The family food basket has also felt the pinch. "Markets," asserts Elena
de la Torre, the secretary general of the Coordinating Comission. of
Madrid Housewives. ”have to close 1 day a week because of the lack of
customers." Housewives have been forced to shop at the cooperatives

and oomiseariee, where prices are lower.

Another phenomenon. which is particularly noticeable in working class
neighborhoods, is the increase in ”credit buying." An owner of a small
grocery store in the Madrid district of Paloneras. who preferred to
remain anonymous. engages in this practice. "I didn‘t used to give
credit, because people paid in cash. For a couple of years now, though.
I've had no choice but to give credit. otherwise I would be selling
almost nothing."

The shcpowner showed this magazine's writer a lined notebook in which
he caremlly writes down the name of the customer. what he has bought

and whnt it costs. he adds: "In general. people are honest and pay
when they can."

Time for Mending

Another cutback that housewives have had to make in the fanily budget
involves clothing. Jose Antonio Garcia de Castro. the secretary general
of the Association of Large Distribution Enterprises, describes the
problem thus: "There is no way that you can talk of increased sales.
Fewer clothes and household appliances are being sold, and sore thirgs
are being repaired and led. at hone."

Elena de la 'i‘orre elaborates on this view. Housewives are returning to
the almost abandoned practice of buying clothes for the entire family
one single tins and then paying in installments. They are also busy
making and sending clothes.

But housewives know that this is Just patching up the family budget,
"and what they want," says Elena de la lbrre. ”is to work and bring home
some cold, hard cash." Thus. requests for work are piling up at both
neighborhood and housewives associations. "what can we when do?"
Hercedes Conabells asks herself

Looking for Rel p

MIC 16 correspondent in Valladolid German Losada reports that Josefina
Garcia, the host of the radio prewar "You're the Bose" ("Ustedes Kantian").
asks herself the same question every day. Emery homing Josefina looks

57
ron orncm. uss ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with anssoent at the pile of letters that she gets on her progress askim
for all kinds or help: mrniture. money. food, whatever. Bury little
bit helps in alleviating somewlut the poverty into which the crisis has
plunged thousands or Vallsdolid families.

'no its savor. Valladolid is a "proletarian city. for better or worse."
One-hundred and fifty thousand Valladolid residents earn less than

30.000 pesetes a month. In the words or Caritss adviser Jose Ranires.
"this causes very worrisole unenploysent among youth." Requests from
youths for money and work "have risen alaniwly. and there is the danger
that these boys will become persons without roots, criminals." the Caritas
adviser warns.

Promoting Luxury Comption

Alongside these shortages. the consumption or superﬂuous items has been
constantly on the rise. Hhislq inports went from 740 million pesetss

in 1972 to 2.1 billion in 1977: sales of pearls and precious stones
quintupled, and imports of perms, toiletries and cosmetics rose

from H} million peeetas to 210 million over the ease period.

In the view of Ascension de Gregorio Ssdeno, the president of the
Spanish Federation of Housewives and Family Consumption Associations.
much of the blame for this superfluous consumption belongs to
advertising. "It makes housewives unable to distinguish clearly between
basic needs and superfluous itm. They used to have a clear-cut idea
of the difference."

The Hultinationals in Col-and

Hercedes Conabells delves deeper into this issue. ”The administration
permits and enooursses luxury consumption," she says accusinsly.

"mus. consusrs bw unnecessary thins. go into debt to maintain
their living standard and deprive themselves of basic necessities. This
attitude on the part of the administration,” she adds. "is due to it

being subordinated to the big scenonic interests of the multinational
corporations."

Solutions to the problem? Elena de la hm outlines them: "In the
first place. encourage more rational consumption, in keeping with the
country's economic situation; then. adopt economic measures to improve
consumoro' buyiw power and to educate them about consumption."

58
son omcm use any
l‘orcontoeo Broakdovn of the Pauly Budgot
Rural Fully Urban Fully

ﬂood and Worms. 52.32 42.14
cum and rootvur 7.60 7.90
Rousing 12.35 14.82
Household oxpondlturoo 5.98 8.59
“Cal‘h cm 500‘ 2046
Trmportotlon and

oo-unlculon 1.84 10.22
Recreation and oulimro 5.48 5.30
Eduootion 1.55 2.
Other oxpondlturoo 5.87 6.01

'Tho Mp0"! avorogo to about 30 percent.
oopmcm': INFOMACIOR Y 3131164010165, S.A.. 1978

8743
6:30: 3110
f0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"581‘ GERMANY

Pnosrccrs ma vmous mwsmss non 1979 61sz
Ila-burg CAPITAL in Genan Jan 79 pp iO-ii
[Iii-mic: "State or the Econony by Branches for 07937

[Fort] me progress figure for 1979 calls for It percent growth. This tiae
there is agreesent on this prediction by politicians and experts alike --
free Bonn 's Bconoeice Minister Count Otto Laabsdorff to the Five Economic
Ulse Hen. To be sure. even the '”percent mark is only the average figure
for the eoonoay as a whole and one that says little about the prospects of
the individual branches. The CAPITAL survey of coepany heads and sssocia-
tion presidents shows that on the whole. business is looking toward 1979
with cautious optiaiss. There is aoae question. however. whether the con-
fident eood in business is already so firsly ensconced that it could with-
stand new labor disputes or sonetary turbulence without changing course.
Doubts such as these are fostered by the steel industry develonent. for
exaeple. Up to the ties of the strikes. the branch that had been caught in
a slack period since the end of 197': had been evidencing a surprising up-
ward treml. chiefly es the result of rising foreign orders fro- states out-
side the Duropean Coaeunity. Taking all of 1978 as a base. the asnagers
were able to calculate a production surplus of 9 percent. ﬂothing case of
this figure. and it is doubtful that the losses can be offset by corres-
ponding overproduction in 1979. This is because products of the iron and
steel industry are for the cost part hoeogeneous products that are also
offered by coepaniee in neighboring Vest European countries. They are
only too willing to step into the breach for the Ger-ans. If domestic
aanufacturere' delivery connections are disrupted. however. the labor dis-
pute could entail a pereanent loss of markets. Consequently. it is not
expected that the steel producers will be able to iron out the effects of
the labor dispute the ease as the printing and autoeobile industries.

Host printers do not have to subject the-selves to international coapeti-
tion. and the autosobile coapenies can rely on custoeer loyalty. Also
benefiting the aanufacturers has been the still uninterrupted boos in deland.
But a noraalisation is developing for 1979 in this regard. In any event.
vehicle eanufacturers are including in their calculations a decline in
sales and registrations. It can therefore be said with sons certainty that

60
FOR OFFICIAL use om
the overall economy. A re;
used by the construction 1:
housing and subsurface co:
he rue from a low level.

porcelain breaches as well
tu- up on the scale. In cc
so number among the econou
or because the basic econo-
ncreesed their volume of 1:
trial engineering and not
9 12.0

Despite the still poor
desand for credit on
the part of industry.
vigorous expmion of
the value of business
as the result of gov-
ernaent. private snd
foreign loans. Rising
costs have flattened
out. leaving sizable
excess profits.

Dr Johannes Voelling.
board chain-an. Vest
Serum Landesbank:

"the cyclical tendencies

that I foresee indicate
a call trend but stiff
competition over terns
or. the money markets.

Banks can therefore not
expect to see an is-

provenent in the earn-
ings situation - with
a aild slowdown in the
growth of balances."

99

9 3.2
- 0.9

Rise in incoming ozdezs
with each quarter. In-
creased demand. chieﬂy
from abroad. Orders
cushion of 5.9 aonths
once again -- corres-
ponding to long-tern
average. Particular
benefit to machine
tools and refrigera-
tion and printirg

equi pent .

Dr Manfred Iennings.
board chairman, SH}! -
Guetehcffnung Etetal-
works:

”If monetary turbulence
and the wage negotia-
tions do not upset our

plans, aachine constnac-

tion can count on s
rise of about 3 per-
cent. More than that
is virtually iapossi-
ble since domestic de-
aand nust increasingly
be shared with foreign
suppliers."

94

96‘
9“

Strong inc1
ing orders
for cheaicl
bulk synth‘
of worldwiz‘
itiea: p201
fore reduce
lively trad
ties. auto:
and cosmeti

Prof Hatthi
board chair
ﬁaden Ani]
actorx7:

'rhe cheaic
pects a fur
in its sale
1979. Howe
scan a real
us only if

adjusted to
trend in co
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.303000
5.000." 00 0:96 5.30030

O

3.00:5 3
000520 00 3 30: and.

O

.. . 0000090.: 00.20

00:30.00 0:: £323.35 00030:.— xau 00000-00? .«0 2.2000 0:: 05:50.?"

0:0 6000083 0.“ 00....00

0:... no 0.03 0 .0uou

100:: no :0300000 05

0:0 20.30.3030: :0: :0: 00:0 0000 05 08. 3 00 53.35350 0 on 00:

5 A000 0.383% 0 .3
coin 3310300000 0000.."
00 503,000.: 0009.00:
UuHOO .I HO aOdﬂadEd I50
-005: 0nd 090:9 .3003
[0:023 none 00 00.50 a."
-093 0:» 0009.0 00: 00 H:

.530: upon 50.-
1.30:0 0300. £0.30: uoaom

£2,000: .Haohlui

0050 0000.": 0!. 0:.3000
£200.30 m.n~ av ”3003
000 «0:00:00 VON IV 0003
40:00.39 «.3 Iv 9.00.5 ho
00.300003 0.3 :a 054000
0309.5 52350 30.20:,
0090000: :« 00080:."
0000000.: 7:03.300 :0
4000..” 5.2 0 00 .3000:

N.” 0
0.5 9

one 0:25:33 5:80
4.00.: 0:0ohonun 0:0

4235 H2: :3 3022. :0. 82:. .5280 2:

yuan—=0 Add: acid—:00
3.300 00.70 0:0

004.00 5 c.5900 HRS-0: 0.30.3 93,000..." ho 15>

0:00.50 W.“ 00098 :00
03 3:93:00 D0>000u

02°58 2: 092m.

Cop—.38. .3020
023 3-2:. nine:

0:0qu

:08 9530A 300.30..
00302025 0030:."
in. 03303 0:333
00800.; 600082.2—

20 0000.“ 4.0.3.3000
3:0: 0:0 0.330080
.0000:sz 0:: 0000»
003.300 .0030 now
289qu .0303

00:00:00 050.0» 09.5.

030.3 05 :05 0.3-
05.308: .083 3.8.:

o.n o

-8 20:. a 033::
82858? 23 9.03
20:. 0&0 38» 2F.

303:...“
Ioaoankyanloo 0.0.3003
20:03 a .330
2.009 09.8 H030: .5

:Qodoeﬁooo 000.300."
13-000 0:0 93000008:
340 3 a: 35.090.

0338 no 8505

loan—Ed: Mom 30:50

I?» 0:300:08 .090
nun—0030:0- 00:03.30
32.0000: 00.“ on:
003 :0300000." 00:“:
503000 H3033...“
:« 80.30? 0000....

c6 0
n6 0

9.80

20-0000:
0. 50000500:

.3306

00000.79 scam

N . «:03002

“0:030 05100:“

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Further decline in production.
A reversal of last year's orders trend.
when inconing orders dropped by 5.5 per

0n the upturn: particularly the uenufe
turere of textiles for automobiles and.

recently. of carpet: and drapery uteri:

Karl Kaufele. been! chainen.
Six-nee works:

I'It will be increasingly necessary to f:
the special needs of the oonsuner with

products that meet luket demand. Succc
Ln 1979 will cone to only those textile

mice which offer products noted for IN
I!“ quality.”