APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010044-1

23 m 1979 soon '
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010044-1

I‘UK UI‘I‘ILIHL Ubl‘. UNLI

JPRS L/8237

23 January 1979

EXPERIMENTAL SEISMIC STUDIES
OF THE EARTH'S INTERIOR

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010044-1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Repgrts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.5. Government Printing Office, Hashington, D.c.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell & Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio, 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
30"!“ l

WY oocuuturmou
PM

i. "I. all “4“

EXPERIMENTAL SRISHIC STUDH'S OP Tllli FARTII'S INTERIOR

 
 
   
 

    
 

 

   
   

1‘ «non! no.
JPRS L 8237

___.- n

!. Mann‘s hens-an I.

 

  
    
    
   
 

    
   

 
  

1. WI”

     
  
 

L. V. Antonovn F. P.
M MW!“ M W “in“

Joint Publicationn Research Service
lOOO N. Glebe Rd..
Arlington. Va. 22201

ll. eon-«mm or M Na.
in

(O

u. Wanna»

EKSPPJIHFMAL'NYYE SEYSHICHBSKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA NBDR 2M1. Hoscw, 1978

Antikayev. at al.

 

 
   
 
 

Itmmnmmmm

 
 
  

  
 
 

As above

 
 
  
 

lawns-schemes;

 
   

  

This report contains an examination of the procedures and results of an
experimental study of patterns of seismic wave propagation in the
inhomogeneous earth. Principles are worked out for resolving the
observed wave field into a regular (background) component and
fluctuations. New morphological wave field characteristics are
introduced as well as methods of quantitative evaluations of these
characteristics.

      
       
      
   
 

ins-mm s Mus

USSR Fluctuations
Geophysics Travel tines
Seismic unves Gravitational anomalies

U er mantle
I “has

       
         
  
 
 

  

“Mum
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS Immum'm

 
 
 
 

MM!- auMuI-om mus-mum:
mom mum
mum
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB 3/8237
. 23 January 1979

EXPERIMENTAL SEISMIC STUDIES
. OF THE EARTH'S INTERIOR

Moscow BKSPERIMBN‘I‘AL'NYYB SBYSMICHBSKIYB ISSLBDOVANIYA NBDR 28MB!
in Russian 1978 signed to press 23 Dec 77, pp 1-159

[Book by I..V. Antonova, LP. Antikayev, et al., Rauka, 1,350 copies]

Counsurs PAGE
I.
Annotation 1
Introduction 2
1. EXPERIMENTAL S'IUDY 0P PATERNS 0F PROPAGATION 0P SEISMIC "AVIS III
THE Immoczwzous EAR‘I'iI 6
Chapter 1. Seismic Haves in the Inhomogeneous Earth 6.
1. Relation between radial inhomogeneity of the earth and
travel times and amplitudes of seismic waves 7
2. Correlation between scales or fluctuation in seismic wave
° parameters and horizontal inhomogeneities or the earth 15
(mapter 2. Using Regional Calibration (harves to Improve Magnitude
Determinations 27
1. Regional calibration curves of wave propagating in the
crust and mantle of the earth 2?

2. Calibration curves of waves that have passed through the core 35

Discussion of the Results 38

II. REGIONAL PBCULIARITIS 0F SEISMIC HAVE AND S'I'RUC'NRE 0P ‘1'"! UPPER
I-IAN'I'IJ': IN CENTRAL ASIA 310
(mapter 1. Spectral Characteristics of P, P; and L3 Haves bl
l. Amplitude curves of different frequencies ’52
2. Spectra of Principal Haves 57

-a- [I-USSR-BPOIDI
FOR I ' USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00850R000100010044-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

Chapter 2 .

2.

Differentiation of Large Horizontal Inhomogeneities with
Respect to the Characteristics of P. [.3 and R5 Haves

Mapping of spectral characteristics or P waves

Particulars of propagation or L3 waves on path that cross
Central Asia

Regional differences in the characteristics of ﬁg waves

Particulars of the Structure of the Upper Mantle in Central
Asia

Structure of the upper mantle along the Baykal-Psmir profile
Evaluation of absorbing properties or the medium

Discussion of the Results

1“ . MAN! FESTATION 0F INIIOHOGBNBITIES OP STRUGURE IN PLUC'IUATIONS
OF THE CIIARACTBRISTIGB 0F LONGITUDINAL WAVES

Chapter 1..
l .

2.

Chapter 2.

Fluctuations of Amplitudes and Travel Times

Presentation of experimental material and methods or
processing it

Variations of magnitude deviations for the system of stations

deployed over the entire territory of the USSR

Amplitude fluctuations on the North 'i‘yan'-8han' station
81’0“?

. Magnitude deviations on stations of the Central Nam-Sham

group

Fluctuations of intensity or the P wave from materials of
the North Kazakhstan group of stations

Variations of travel tines on stations deployed over the
entire territory of the USSR and in the North 'iyan'-8han'
ENS-P

Investigation of Fluctuations in the Shape of a P Have
Recording

. Study of the shape of the recording or a P wave on stations

situated in different territories or the Soviet Union

. investigation or detailed structure of the shape of the

i" wave

Discussion of the Results

. g, -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

91
91
100
108

110
111

111
112
11’:
1'15

118

120
12h
12';

127
138
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued) Page

[\I. RELATIOII BETIIEEN THE AMPLITUDE PEC‘ILIARITIBS 0F SEISMIC UAVES AND
GEOLOGICAL-GEOPHYSICAL F‘IELW 11:3

Chapter 1. Investigation of the Hay that Amplitude Peeuliarities of
Seismic Haven are Related to Gravitational and Magnetic

Annmaliea of the Nrritory of the USSR 1“!
1. General intonation on gravitational anomalies 1M:
2. Investigation of the relation between gravitational and
magnitude anomalies on the territory of the USSR 1'16
3. Investigation of the relation between magnetic and magnitude
anomalies 150
Chapter 2. investigation of the Relation Between Amplitude Anomalies
and Geological Conditions 153
1. Influence that general features of geological structure have
on the level of amplitudes of seismic waves 153
2. Influence that breaks have on the parmneters of seismic waves 15’:
Conclusion 160
Refereneen _ 161
- c «-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010044-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATION DATA

English title

EXPERIMENTAL SEISMIC STUD]
BARTH'S INTERIOR

EKSPERIHBNTAL'NYYB SBYSNII
ISSLEDOVANIYA NBDR ZEHLI

Russian title

Author (a) L. V. Antonova. P. F. Anti

Editor (I) A. H. Bpinat'ova

Publishing House : Naukn
' Place of Publication : Moscow
Date of Publication : 1978
Slgned to press : 23 Dec 77
I
Coplco : l . 350
COPYRIGHT : Izdatel'otvo "Nouka". 197E

- d .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-ROP82-00850R000100010044-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Annotation]

[Text] The book examines the procedure and results

of an experimental study of patterns of seismic wave
propagation in thc Inhomogeneous earth. Principles
are worked out for resolving the observed wave field
into a regular (background) component and fluctuations
(deviations from tho background); new morphological
wave field characteristics are introduced as well as
methods of quantitative evaluation of these charac-
teristics. In a number of regions of the Soviet Union
and throughout the earth with appreciably different
geological structure, a study is done on the mutual
relation between fluctuations of the characteristics
of longitudinal waves and the inhomogeneity of the
earth's mantle. A detailed analysis is given of the
particulars of propagation of Pn, Pg. P, Sn. 8. Lg
and Rg waves over an extensive territory of Central
Asia. The interior structure or the crust and upper
mantle of Pamir-Baykal are studied in detail in accor-
dance with data on the seismologic profile of this
region. Crust-mantle blocks with different velocity
characteristics are distinguished, a quality cross
section is obtained for the medium down to the mantle-
core boundary, and regional calibration curves are
plotted for an extensive class of waves. New experi-
mental data are given on the mutual relation between
the amplitude characteristics of seismic waves and

1
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gravitational and magnetic anomalies observed within
the territorial limits of the USSR, as well as the

position of seismic stations relative to tectonic
ntructuren. Hemmendntions are made on choosing
points for netting up high-sensitivity seismic stations.

Introduction

The present concept of the internal structure of the earth is based on
fundamental results provided by experimental seismology. In the last

decade experimental seismlogy has made appreciable progress in studying
the interior of the earth. At the present time there are several thousand
seismic stations and several dozen grouping stations in operation throughout
the earth. Hundreds of thousands of earthquakes are recorded every year.
However. despite the enormous volume of material accumulated. the structure
of individual regions of the earth is known only roughly. Remaining unknown
until recently have been what would seem to be primary facts about the
structure of the earth such as the range of natural regional and local
variations in seismic wave velocities and depths of interfaces and the nature
or these variations for the principal shells of the earth and geological
structures. This book is devoted to a study of these questions.

Formulation of the problem of study requires solution of two maJor problems:
selection of a model of the medium whose parameters are to be determined.
and selection of the informative characteristics of the wave field. 'Ihese
problems are closely interrelated and ways to solve them are informal; they
depend on many additional circumstances: the available preliminary infor-
mation on the obJeet of study, quality and quantity of experimntal data.
the possibility of processing them, and finally, the specific problem of
study.

Model of the Media. As the volume of experimental data increases and

methods of processing them improve, the ideas about the earth change and the
models of its structure become more complicated.

The development of ideas about the structure of the earth progresses from a
uniform spherically symmetric model to a complex three-dinensional model
that contains horizontal inhomogeneities of different sizes.

The development of recording technology and the creation of dense networks of
seismic stations have improved precision in determining the coordinates of a
focus and the magnitude [of a disturbance]. and have enabled establishment of
the considerable influence of horizontal inhomogeneities of different scales
(from thousands of kilometres to tens of metres) on the formation of a wave
pattern. This in turn has raised the problem of studying inhomogeneities.

At the present time. intense development is taking place in methods of study-
ing the horizontally inhomogeneous earth, and even though they are in the

developmental stage and still have not been formulated as a definite system,
they can be classified and described to put a model of the medium together.

2

son orrrcm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I". lionrmumoun (miner-innit” nymutm'c model of the earth. For many decmien
thlu wan the only model. During Its formulation It was established that

the earth in layered In shells. and the main characteristics of the layers
were found: velocities of longitudinal and transverse waves. mechanical
quality of the medium. 'ihese results were based on enormous experimental
material of quality sufficient to show the deviations of the model from
spherical symtry. However, the efforts of researchers were concentrated
on perfecting this "ideal" model, on finding unified global patterns. In
recent years, the concept of a horizontally homogeneous mantle was formulated
with a comparatively homogeneous crust of variable thickness. Such a model
Justified extensive use of surface waves in research, the interpretation
being done on the assumption of spherical symetry or horizontal stratifi-
cation of the medium. The success of experimental and theoretical research
associated with this model, support on the part of other geophysical methods,
and the authority of leading scientists have dictated a certain conformity

in ideas about the structure of the earth and unmerited vitality of the
spherically symmetric model right up to the last decade.

2°. Locally homogeneous model. According to this model. individual large
structures -- continents. oceans, mountain chains. platforms -- are hori-
zontally homogeneous regions distinguished by the nature of change in seismic
parameters with depth. Developed methods can be applied to investigation of
such regions; however, the preparation of experimental material requires a
certain sampling of data.

In the course of detailed studies carried out in regional seismological
observations and depth probes of the earth a pronounced horizontal mosaic
structure has been detected in the crust and upper mantle. ibis has led to
the development of a laminar-block model in which the medium is divided into
comparatively small; horizontally layered blocks. At present this model is
widely used in seismoloy and in deep seismic sounding.

3°. Spherically aymtric model containing large horizontal inhamgcneitias.
it is assumed that the velocity contrast of these inhomogeneities is low, and
therefore seismic rays lie in the vertical plane.

Profile observations yield data that enable redefinition of the coordinates
and depths of earthquake foci and parameters relative to the profile. his
method was developed at the computing center of the Siberian Department of
the Soviet Academy of Sciences (Alekseyev et al., 1969).

h". Inhomogeneous block model. 'ihis is a three-dimensional model made up
of several layers broken up into comparatively small blocks. To solve the
inverse kinematic problem with respect to travel times of the P-wave. it is
assumed that the anomalies of velocities of seismic waves in the blocks are
small, and theremre rays travel through the medium without refraction.

The initial information is provided by data on the travel times of waves
from remote sources lying in different azimuths to stations of an area group.

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Solution of the problem reduces to finding anomalies of velocity in the
individual blocks that best correspond to the observed anomalies in travel
time. To determine the velocity in some volume of the medium beneath a
group nl‘ stations the seismic rays must penetrate elementary volumes re-
peatedly and in different directions. Such an approach to solution of the
problem was proposed independently by A. S. Alekseyev and K. Aki (Alekseyev
et al.. 1971; Aki, 1973).

This method has been used in practice for determining the velocity profile
of the earth's crust and the upper mantle in a number of territories --
Kamchatka. California and elsewhere -- and has given rather good results.

The comparatively thin network of stations and the incomplete range of
azimuths of arrival of seismic waves limit the possibilities of determining
the structure of the medium beneath the stations. This requires a quali-
tatively different statistical approach to investigation of the medium.

5°. Random inhomogeneities, ssismioally hazy media. This is a complicated
model comprised of a deterministic background constructed according to one

of the schemes l°-h° given above. and a random field of fluctuations in
velocities and absorbing properties that approximates the difference of the
actual medium from the deterministic model. Usually it is assmned that this
field in locally homogeneous, isotropic, smooth and low in contrast. As a
result of interpretation such characteristics of the medium are determined

as the predominant size of inhomogeneities. their contrut and the coefficient
of turbidity (Nikolayev, 1973).

Initial Stage of Investigation of the Three-Dimensional Model of the Earth.
Statistical models take on especially important significance on the initial
stage of investigation of the horizontally inhomogeneous earth. This is due
to a lack of data that might be used to construct a deterministic mdel. At
the same time, even a comparatively incomplete system of data (thin network
of stations. small number of earthquakes) is sufficient to establish some
general characteristics of inhomogeneities. These characteristics are of

independent geological interest, and can be used besides in planning future
studies.

Basic Problems. Our study deals with three problems: 1°. To establish the
natural range of variations in velocities of propagation of seismic waves
and absorbing properties. their characteristic scale and coarse stratifi-
cation. 2°. To determine the main characteristic features of the vave

field associated with horizontal inhomogeneities, to evaluate local and
regional variability of characteristics of body and surface waves. 3°. To
work out the elements of a simple and constructive research technique that
corresponds to conditions 1° and 2°; this requires first of all the intro-
duction of new morphological characteristics of the wave field that are based
on statistical estimates.

Research Technique. The study is based on resolving the observed seismic
fields into two main components: the background and the deviation from the
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

background -- fluctuations. Depending on scale. the background component
characterizes the average value over a larger or smaller territory.

Such an approach requires introducing a certain hiernrchy oi‘ scales. We have
introduced five scales: global, continental, regional. local and detailed.
Corresponding to the global scale are patterns found by averaging data over
the entire earth, to the continental scale -- over parts of the earth of the
continent-ocean type, to the regional scale -- over areas with a transverse
size from 3000 to 6000 km. to the local scale -- from 200 to 2000 km, and

to the detailed scale -- less than 200 km.

The spherically symmetric model of the earth corresponds to the global scale.
The general patterns of change in the characteristics of the major types of
waves have been well studied. and therefore existing data (hodographs, cali-
bration and amplitude curves) are taken as the background characteristics.

'Ihe level of detail or the research depends on the detail of the system of
observations. Low detail, scant experimental material enable investigation
of only deviations from the global background, including the inﬂuence of
regional, local and district conditions; the most detailed studies that use
data of observations of dense networks of seismic stations enable investi-

gation of the fine spatial structure of fluctuations distinguished relative
to the local background.

Initial Experimental Data. This work is based on experimental material
obtained by the Comprehensive Seismological Expedition 01‘ the Institute of
Physics of the Earth in various years in the course of carrying out a variety
of seismological research aimed chiefly at solving problems of seismic zoning.
earthquake prediction and investigation of the degree of seismic danger of
hydroelectric plants being planned and under construction in the northern
‘l‘yan'-Shan' , in Kirgizia. in the Naryn River basin, in Garmskiy Rayon or the
Tadzhik SSR, in the Central Sayan Mountains and in the territory of the

Zeya River. The system of observations in each region was a network of

stations usually numbering up to 10—12 separated by distances of from tens
to hundreds of kilometres.

For the purpose of getting more general material on the nature of regional
inhomogeneities of the earth, short—term observations were organized by
groups of stations in regions with low earthquake danger: the Ukraine,
North Kazakhstan. To supplement the detailed systems of observations
described above and the system of observations in the European part of the
LBSR and the central territories of the nation. in many instances data were
included from the Unified Network of Seismic Observations [YeSSN service].
Seismographic material used in the work is provided by observational data
from more than 100 stations.

The observations were made with standard seismic channels SK, SIG—3M. SM-2
and (mm: (Zapol'skiy, 1971) with photographic or visual registration.

A description of the corresponding equipment can be found in the book
“Apparatura i mctodika seysmometricheskikh nablyudeniy v SSSR" [Equipment
and Methods of Seismometric Observations in the USSR] (197k).

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-2 (INLY

llnre tirm (1000 urinnumrmnn of earthquakes cnverinr. the entire range of
rplrvrntrul uiintnneen and located at the mar-t diverse azimuths relative to
the rerorvllm', ntntlmm were used tn different extents -- from inolateci

Ir Ilium-hr nix: ul' thu- mnplll-I-Ia- vm-l Lim- nl' m‘rivnl ni' n |'-Hntl‘ Ln nimctrnl
mmiynlu. More (II'IJIIII'II Information an Initial lintn In contained In the
(‘nl‘i’tiiilmiitlllm sections of the book. Measurements of the dynamic character-
istics of waves -- amplitudes. periods -- were done in strict conformity
with the scheme described in the hook (Antonovn et al., 1968).

A. i'. hndrcychenko, 1.. I4. Vlusova. l’. 5. Glazkov. A. M. Soholova and S. G.
litureimuke took part In the production of this monograph.

‘Ihe hook uses seiunographlc material obtained by the Comprehensive Seismo-
Inﬁlmil Expedition ol‘ the Institute of Phynles of the Earth in different
tcrl'il.urlc:: of the USSR. The considerable work of the members of the ex-
;mlitim. ll; incormrnted In the organization and successful completion of
field observations and also In the processing of experimental materials.
The authors express their gratitude to all of then. and especially to
(It-IJU‘IIW'HL leaders 0. i. Aksenovich. Yu. P. Kolobashkin. V. N. Krivosheyev.
K. K. Kuisnetsov. V. ii. Pavlov. G. 0. Sturchenko. G. G. Tarasov and V. I.
:iIu-Iopuiov.

I. EXI‘I’IRIHEIITM. STUDY OF PATTERNS OF PROPAGATION 0P SEISMIC WAVES III THE
IIIIIVMIHENEUUS EMI'I'II

Hunter I. Seismic Haver- In the Inhomogeneous Earth

The first experimental evidence of stratification in the deep interior of
thr- earth according to seismlogical data was found in the early twentieth
century. iiodographn of mndanental modes of elastic oscillations -- longi-
tudinal and transverse -- were the foundation on which a model of a radially
inhomogeneous and spherically symetric earth was constructed over the next
25-!) years.

The development of radial inhomogeneity on a planetary scale was shown by
;‘.I|-‘h typical features of hodographs an splitting of refracted and reflected
wuvex: into branches. sharp bends and breaks. The most pronounced of these
features were confined to the interfaces of shells of the earth: crust and
mantle, mantle and core.

In: n result of coronal analysis of the hodographs of fundamental waves. other
divisions were distinguished in the earth's cross section, and numerous
n‘lvronml models of its structure were found. lijnziieally. all these nodels
were in "mood" agreement with the data of observations. In the final analysis

this caused uncertainty in choosing a suitable standard cross section of the
earth.

This ambiguity was the impetus for numerous refinements in the model of the
earth. This process led to the conclusion that the structure of the shells

6

FOR OFFICII‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deviates on various scales from spherical symetry. and to the necessity of
expanding the class of models of the earth that account for radial and
horizontal inhomogeneity of the structure of its shells. The problem of
standardization assumed the aspect of refinement of general patterns in the
structure of the shells based on specific stipulation of deviations from
spherical symetry in different regions.

The leading area of experimental seismoloy is becoming the study of com-
paratively fine details of the structure of the earth's interior, especially
those parts characterized by different types of geologicrl-tectonie evolution. .

Obviously the selection and refinement of a model of the earth under specific
conditions should be oriented toward some characteristic scale of inhomoge-
neity of structure matched to the detail of studies and the accuracy of data.
in this connection it is of considerable interest to establish the co-
dependence of scales of inhomogeneities of the structure of the earth's
interior and their manifestation in the seismic characteristics of the medium.
as well as the correlation of scales of seismic inhomogeneities and the
characteristic elements of schemes of geological-tectonic zoning.

in particular. according to materials of geological-tectonic zoning of the
folded complexes of Central Asia it has been established that the most
frequently encountered structures are elongated with predominant longitudinal
dimensions of about 500-600 km. and transverse dimensions of about 100-150 in-
(Belysyevskiy. 1971:).

According to materials of deep seismic sounding in various regions of Siberia.
typical values of the horizontal extent of surfaces of the crystalline base-
ment and the Hohoroviéie discontinuity are loo-200 km. predominant dimensions
of undulation of the Mohoroviéic discontinuity are 5- 8 km. and for the crys-
talline basement -- 3-5 km. Variations of the boundary velocity on the
surface of the basement may reach values of 1.0-1.2 its/s (with a predominant
value of about 0.3 lull/s). and the horizontal extent of such anomalies is up
to 160 km (Puzyrev et al.. 1975).

Available experimental data on travel times and amplitudes of body waves
and on the phase velocities of surface waves enable us to differentiate the
inhomogeneities of the internal structure of the earth in the first approxi-
mation into five characteristic scales: global. continental. regional.
local and detailed. which were discussed above.

Radial spherically symtric inhomogeneity corresponds to the global scale.

This model satisfactorily explains the major experimental patterns observed
over the entire earth.

1. Relation between radial inhomogeneity of the earth and travel times
and amplitudes of seismic waves

in a homogeneous and infinite elastic median a wave field has comparatively
simple properties. Seismic recordings in this case would be represented by

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Jam. LU-l mum": lmwlaulilml l' null trannw-rzw :‘-. in particular. for a
lunnumvnunns :qdu-rv we can vmultruul. IIU‘IUI'J‘llIIllﬂ nl‘ i' and u Vavcu. hut. they
will differ appreciably from the hodographn observed in the actual earth.

1n.- maln ulirrv-rnm-o: in that the travel times of l‘ and S waven Increase with
v-nIu-u-nl.ral dintnmco much l‘mllm- In a lmmnnenmun uphcrc than In the actual

.mrlh. 'l'hin lmpllen in particular that in the real earth velocity in general
inc reason vl th depth .

it is: also known that on the whole the hodogrephs of P and" o waves are

rather well approximated by smooth mnctions such as a parabola (liales et al..
[968) The greatest deviations from smooth functions are observed at epi-
nentral distances below 30°. and from 105 to 1h2°. In general. as data are

analyzed more intently and in greater detail. more Justifications shov up
rm- differentiating them into separate parts.

Analynin or the derivatlve or a hodograph «No of a longitudinal wave vith
ro-mect to data or direct measurements on groups of seismic stations for

|.l|" distance range of 30-100“ shows that characteristic dips can be observed
In the behavior of thin function most frequently close to distances that are
mum] to approximately 3“-36. h8-ll9, 60, 68-10 Bit-85 and 95° (Corbishley,
19%(0) This is an indication 01‘ a possible anomalous change in the velocity
‘rl‘fldicnt close to depths equal to approximately 850-900,1200.1550. 1800-1900.
250:) and 2800 km. Analysis of data on d 2"’t/dli also indicates the presence or
-.-.in;;ularities within the limits or the mentioned depths. Fig. l smarizes

(It/(in. u/dcg

 

Fig. 1. Direct measurements or hodograph derivative dt/dA tron non-Soviet

.ata (the epicentral distance A is plotted in degrees along the axis of
ab. closes)

l-olso‘latcd measurements
Lin-E. llcrrin's standard curve (1968)
5-4mm or K. Kaila and D. Sarku' (1915)

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

iiochcr. the most pronounced changes in travel time are observed at distances
of less than 30°. For instance let us consider the data or the Narramunga
group in Australia (Simpson et a1.. 19710) shown in Fig. 2. The SMAKI :sodel
includes a crust 3') km thick with n Jump in velocity of longitudinal times
on the Whoroviéic discontinuity from 6.5 to 8 halo. At depths of from 150

to 110 km a low Velocity gradient zone is observed with change from 8.3 to
805 “ll/Bo

Such a fine differentiation of the upper mantle is reflected in the structure
or the hodograph and the derivative dt/dli.

The radial inhomogeneity of the earth shows up in other parameters of seismic
waver. as well. A previous monograph (Antonova et a]... 1968) gives extensive
composite data on variation in the way that the predominant period of the
recordings of longitudinal and transverse waves depends on the epicentral

distance. and also on the ease dependence for the minus Al? ratio of these
waves.

Pig. 3 shows distance dependences of the ratio (Al?) and apparent period
for P waves as found from data or 8K channel registrat on on a group of
stations in Northern 'iyan'-Shan' and on the 'i'algar station respectively.

Let us examine these data in more detail. The behavior of the apparent

period or a P wave with distance is determined by the characteristic stepped
form or the curve. The lower level or the step is observed at a distance of
from 200 to 100 km and is equal to approximately 1.5 a. while the upper level.
equal to approximately bins s. stretches from about 2.000 to 10,000 km,

a relatively smooth transition being noted between these levels.

Particular attention should be given to the presence of relative maxim on
the curve. that are confined to distances of approxilately 2,500. 6,000 and
beyond 10,000 his.

The curves for the ratio (A/T) x as a function or distance that are shown
in Fig. 3a have rather interesting properties. If we compare the intervals
or distances where characteristic Jumps in the Motion dt/dA are observed
(see Fig. l) with the position of the sharp minim on the graph of 0/7).“
for a longitudinal wave, we can see that they coincide. iie can convince
ourselves that this agreement is not accidental by comparing our data with
those found by M. Sengupta and 8. Julian (1976) for roughly confocal earth-
quakes (see Fig. 3a).

Besides. the relation between amplitude and profile parameters can be analyzed
if we consider the following expression (Volkov and Yanovsksya. 197.6):

I (e. 6) - H7 (I) m (-01. iv». (0)

where A0 is a constant that determines the intensity of the P wave in the
vicinity of the source.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WPICMI. liSli ONLY

ou)-R-'[nui-plr'(a».§£)“]"‘.
tm- (mwuuvr-ew.

'-
l
u. - u. i :4 unvr - Arm.
'sa

a-RIViR). h-uvir-L
ilere rIll is the radius of penetratior of a seismic ray; p. is the parameter of

this ray; lipII is the epicentrai diutance at which this ray penetrates to r i

Virn) is the velocity corresponding to the radius rm; R is the radius of t e
earth; Q is aechanical quality.

The expression (') describes: the behavior of the unplitude curve Mme) as
a function of the geometric divergence of the wave front 0(p) that in turn

in determined by the velocity profile V(r) and also as a function of the
parameters of the inelastic profile Q(r).

if for the tile being we disregard the influence of the profile Q(r) and

the loan of wave energy at interfaces. the main contribution to the behavior
of the amplitude curve A(u.!i) comes from the term 6(p). In this case expres-
nion (') can be conveniently represented as

A (A) ~ K («In A)“ W“) ("Wm

hence it in apparent that the behavior of the an litude curve is determined
by the second derivative of the hodograph dzt/dd . and consequently the
curve should be sore sensitive to peculiarities of the velocity profile.

lit the some time. there are grounds for asnming that the change in the

quality factor with depth may also have a considerable effect on the ampli-
tude curve.

To illustrate this asmmption let us use the calculations of K. Kaila and
D. Sarkar (1915). In their work. the authors med data of L. Johnson (1967,
1969) on dt/da and calculated the second derivative dat/dbz for coaparison

with the known amplitude curves of B. Gutenberg and c. Richter (1956) and
o. Nuttii (1912).

'mene data are reproduced in Fig. 3a together with the amplitude curve of a
i‘ wave found on a group of stations of iiorthern Tyan'-Shan' . and the ampli-
tude curve of N. Seagupta and ii. Julian (1976) for stations in the United
States. A comparison of the renults convinces us that the behavior of the

amplitude curves can be attributed only in part to the influence of the
Nnction dat/daz.

Noteworthy in this connection is the work of K. Veith and G. Clawson (1972)
in which the authors used data of amorous amplitude measure-eats to study
the influence of the inelastic profile Q(r). They calculated and eliminated
from the observed data the effect of geoaetric divergence 6(p). As a result
it is shown that the inelastic profile does indeed have an appreciable

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Influence of the behavior of the amplitude curve. the greatest effect of Q(r)
hclng observed at epicentral ullutanceu of lens than I)“.

In runnrnl outline, the rmllal Inhomgenelty oi‘ the earth has now been rather
well :ztudled. The physicochemical evolution of the earth has led to the
formation of shells with appreciably different properties. The mat pro-
nounecd changes in the seismic properties or the medium are confined to
depths oi‘ 10-70. 150-270. 350-Ia50 and 620-870 km (Press. 1975). 2885-2889

and win-5156 km (Mum, Bngdnhl. 1911:: Dziewonski. lladdon. 1971:).

The depths of 10-70 km are associated with the earth's crust. which is
thinnest under the occnna.The interval of depths of 150-270 km is generally
nanoelatce with the anthenospheric zone, whose distinguishing features are
low values or the velocity of transverse waves and mechanical quality. The
depthe From 350 to 870 km are associated with a transition zone in which a
relatively high increase In velocity and quality is observed. The region
rrnm 810 to 2085 km belongs to the lower mantle for which lover gradients of
Velocity. density and qualicl factor are characteristic on the average. The
depth range of 2885-2889 km is associated with the boundary passing between
the lower mantle and the outer core. The boundary between the outer and
inner core is situated at depths from Slhl to 5156 km.

AI. thv.‘ present time the internal shells of the earth have been coaparativcly
little investigated. lhercfore it is of considerable interest to study the
travel times and amplitudes of waves that have traversed the outer and inner
Curt/3:2, particularly waves of the PK? type. in this section an examination is
Mtit' of the travel times of PR? waves; the amplitudes of these anes are
considered in the next section.

The investigation of the characteristics of PK? waves is of fundamental
importance for studying the structure of the earth. From these waves we can
alno determine the characteristics of foci. which usually are determined from
P waves (moment of onset. coordinates. depth. magnitude. parameters of the
mechanism). At the some time. an improvement in the effectiveness of using
"(P wavo: requirer. accounting for the peculiarities of their spatial struc-
ture. which show up primarily in characteristic distortions of amplitudes

and travel times that are inherent in individual seismic stations and epi-
central regions.

0a the territory of the 058R PK? waves are recorded from earthquakes in
:touth America. the region of underwater mountain chains to the south of
Africa and in the southern part of the Pacific Ocean. In the investigation
nr kinematic characteristics. about 700 recordings were used. To get more
reliable data. only the strong earthquakes in South America were selected.
All recording stations are equipped with short-period instruments with
standard frequency responses and magmi fieation from l00.000 to 250.000.
Earthquake information -- time of onset. focus depth. coordinates and mag-
nitude -- was taken from seismological bulletins of the United States. the
USSR. and the International seismological Center.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In plutunp, Hm Inn-lunmlim ul‘ i‘lrui nrrlvnlx: and maximum phnscn oi‘ PKP waves
no assumptions were lnmic ulmut the form of thc hodograph itself. As a

result it was possible to trace some clear branches that do not always coin-
cide with the veil-known hodogrsph of 3. Bolt (1968).

In the range of epicentrul distances from 12,000 to 18.000 ion the most
stable phase of the PK? vnvc corresponds to the DF branch 01‘ the hodosraph
(Fig. la). lit distances A-15,300-15.900 kn it copies the B. Bolt hodogrsph
with a land oi‘ 3 n, with a delay of up to 1 a at 6-16.600-16,700 ha. and
with a delay of 2 u at All'!.'IOO-17,600 kn. ﬁne observed leads and lags do

not cxcccd the standard deviations calculated for the corresponding dis-
tnncm.

Hal

 

Fig. 1-. Hodoarnph or first arrivals (solid line) and times of sexism phases

(points) or PK? waves. . Bolt's hodogrsph (1968) is shown by the broken
curves.

Arrivals or the PK? phase that are identi ”ed as the 6H branch (see Fig. ’1)
are distinguished only in fairly stronp. ( 5” >0.6) earthquakes at rplccntral
distances A name-15.700 km and A-16.7 47.100 kl. Let us note that at

a distance equal to 15.100 its the travel time or this phase according to our
estimates corresponds to B. Bolt's hodogrsph. At the same tine the derivative
for thc hodograph here reaches values or p- 3 s/deg. i. e. somewhat greater
than for B. Bolt'a case. The second section of the 0H branch deviates fro.

Bolt'n hodograph by about ’1 s. and at A Il‘l.000 kn has a paraseter p'2.15
n/dcu.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nun lllrhl. think thal. with nm-h values ni‘ the parameter p the nbserveci sections
or the «m brunch nould scarcely belong to a single straight line as suggested
by is. Belt. and possibly are independent branches. Besides. the observed

Valuer. or the parameter p eliminate the possibility of intersection of the
GI! and 0? branches.

Let us note that the parameters obtained relative to the GI! branch are quite
close to T. B. Yanovskaya's results (1971).

The standard deviation of the experimental data does not remain constant with
a change in epicentral distance. responding sensitively to inhomogeneities

in the structure of the medium. In the distance range of 12,100-15.100 km
the DF branch is characterized by a standard deviation of o- 21.5 a. 0n the
15.100-15.600 km segment the standard deviation for this branch increases

to o- 22.1 s. The increase in variance may possibly be due to the fact that
on this section one sees waves of the Oil branch in the first arrivals. while
waves of the DF branch are in evidence in the second arrivals. The standard
deviation in a II 11.8 s for the Gii branch on this section.

on the 15.600-16.000 km section one cannot see the first entries of the

Oil branch. and at later tines. interference of several wave groups is ob-
served. the most stable among them being the group corresponding to the DP
branch. The standard deviation on this section is on 23.1 s. Beyond

16.000 km the vaves of the DP branch again go out to the first entries. and
the standard. deviation once more falls to o- 31.9 s on the 16.000-16.500 km
section. with a further increase in distance. the Oli and 0? branches diverge
still more. and the standard deviation decreases: to s- ilJo s for the

DF branch. and to o I 31.28 for the Gii branch.

has it turns out that the wave pattern in the given range of distances is
very complicated and the differentiation of different branches will inevitably
be accompanied by errors. particularly in the case of slid". earthquakes.

Analysis of the hodographs of maximum PKP phases shove that the maximun
amplitudes may also correspond to different branches. It is clear from

Fig. la that at distances up to 16,000 km the maadmu amplitudes as a rule
corresmnd to the Dr branch. They are observed on the average in s after the
first entry of waves of the given branch; the variance in time of arrival

01‘ the maxim in not much greater than for the first entries. In the interval
or epicentral distances between 15,000 and 16,000 km the first entries of the
GI! branch are poorly distinguishable. although the maxim amplitudes in
approximtely 151 of the cases correspond to Just this branch.

in the 16.000-16 .200 km interval the DP and Gil branches are indistinguishable.
and in the 16.200-16Ja00 interval the maximum amplitudes fall to the Oil branch
in the overwhelming majority of cases. In the l6,h00-11.200 km interval the
maximum amplitudes are associated vith the DP branch in only 105 of the cases.
and fall to the 6H and AB branches each in about ’00! of the cases. 'lhe AB
branch predominates alter 11,000 km.

1':

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Correlation between scales of fluctuations in seismic wave parameters and
horizontal inhomogeneities of the earth

'lhe horizontal inhomogeneity of the earth has been little investigated even
though it has a very strong influence on kinematic and dynamic wave charac-
teristics. 'mc effect of inhomogeneity on level. shape and phase difference
(travel time anomalies) depends on the size of the inhomogeneity. "intensity."
and the relative placement of the source and the observation point. With
respect to "intensity." 1. e. the deviation of velocity (quality factor) from
the average. it is known that in most instances the magnitudes of anomalies do
not exceed n few percent. Thin circumstance considerably simpli fiea the
calculations of wave fields. since the effect of the action of the inhomo-
geneity is linearly dependent on its "intensity."

A great deal of theoretical and experimental research has been devoted to

the propagation of seismic waves in plane-laminar and spherically sysmietrie
media. Although the effect of horizontal inhomogeneity of the medium shows.
up rather clearly in isolated instances. it has been very little investigated.
Therefore. we have examined chiefly the problems of wave propagation in
weakly inhomogeneous media where slight (horizontal or three-dimensional)
inhomogeneity is superimposed on one-dimensional. plane-laminar or spherically
symmetric inhomogeneity. Corresponding to such differentiation of the

median is an analogous differentiation of the field.

Influence that Inhomogenaity of the iiediu has on the Level and Phase of a
Seismic Have. Terminology. The natural logarithm of amplitude of an oscil-
latory process is called the level (ln A). and the product of travel time of
the wave by angular frequency is called the phase. In the following discus—
sion we will be concerned only with deviations of travel time or phases from
the average. He will call these characteristics simply the time deviation 6t
or the phase deviation 60- (2sf)6t. Without going in detail into the theory
of wave propagation in inhomogeneous media that has been worked out in acoustics.
optics and radio physics. we will take up only the main results. To do this.
we introduce concepts that are not used in the seismies of horizontally
layered and spherically symmetric media.

Random inhomogeneity of a medium is small-scale inhomogeneity that is
approximated by a three-dimensional random field. We will asst-1e that the
actual field of the inhomogeneity is one sample of a general set that contains
all possible specimens of the random field. The simplest and physically most
applicable model of a random field is a smooth, homogeneous and isotropic
field. Smoothness means continuity in variation of the field and its deriva-
tive: homogeneity means steadiness in space. samnesa of the statistical
characteristics of the field throughout the entire region of the medium under
consideration; isotropy means equivalence of all directions. i. e. the absence
of directions in which the statistical characteristics of the medium will
differ from the average characteristics taken in other directions.

The term "size of inhomogeneity" can have two meanings. In the case of a
local isolated inhomogeneity it merms the average size of its thickness.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the description of a field with homogeneities of different sizes. the
mnxlmum also is usually considered, which is identified with the interval

of spatial correlation a of fluctuations in seismic wave parameters. This
Interval -— the distance between two points where the correlation coefficient
reaches some threshold such as 0.2 -- may serve as an estimate of the average
sizes of inhomogcmities. It is necessary to distinguish longitudinal and
transverse correlation intervals: longitudinal meaning correlation along
rays. and transverse -- along wavefronts.

The geometric region is the part of the medium filled with the "shadow" .ast
hy the inhomogeneity. 'lhc boundary of this region extends to a distance of
about ll? from the inhomogeneity; l is the predominant wavelength.

'lhe diffraction region lles beyond the geometric region at distances greater
than A; from the inhomogeneity.

The point of observation for nearby inhomogeneities lies in the geometric
region. and for remote inhomogeneities -- in the diffraction region. As a
consequence of the principle of reversibility it turns out that if the re-
ceiver is in the geometric region relative to some inhomogeneity and seismic
source. then when the source and receiver change places the latter will also
be in the geometric region. 'i‘hus. inhomogeneities located close to the
receiver cast a shadow over the entire length of the seismic ray.

in media with large inhomogeneities wave propagation takes place in ac-
cordance with the laws of geometric seismics. We will call such media in-
homogeneous. In media with small inhomogeneities wave propagation takes
place in accordance with the laws of nongeometric diffraction seismics.

we will call such media turbid (Nikolayev. 1972). Actual media contain
inhomogeneities of different sizes and are simultaneously inhomogeneous and
turbid.

'lhe main peculiarities of the wave field in an ithomgeneous medium (we mean
here a large three-dimensional inhomogeneity rather than a change in velocity
in one direction): a) good correlation is observed between fluctuations of
amplitudes and phases; b) the anomalies of wave field characteristics on the
Mane of observations coincide with the region into which the seismic rays
proJect the inhomogeneity; c) seismic oscillations are subJect to a change
of amplitude and phase. but their shape is preserved. i. e. the amplitude
fluctuations of individual phases of an oscillation are strongLv correlated.

The main peculiarities of the wave field in a turbid medium:

a) fluctuations of amplitudes and phases are uncorrelated;

b) longitudinal correlation of fluctuations extends to the same distances

as the region of geometric shadow. The transverse correlation of fluctuations

for plane woven is the name as the correlation of the inhomogeneities them-
;zelvce. and the correlation interval is equal to a. when waves with complex

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wavefront surfaces paus through the medium the correlation interval is ally/l},
where l1 is the geometric divergence of the wavefront close to the inhomo-
geneity. and 12 in the mom-trio divergence close to the surface of obser-
vation. 'ihe quantity 1; In nearly always greater than h. which means that
the interval of transverse correlation increases as the inhomogeneity
approaches the source and gets further away from the plane of observation.

'ihc quantities l; and Z; are directly proportional to the cross sections of
tubes of rays;

c) in a medium with large inhomogeneities (a»l) scattering is directed
forward and is concentrated in a cone with small vertex angle. In a medium
with small inhomogeneities (as: A) scattering is isotropic, and therefore a
comparatively small fraction of the energy of the scattered field follows in
the direction of propagation of the transmitted wave. Fluctuations in the
times of first entries occur chiefly under the effect of a large inhomo-
geneity. Scattering by small inhomogeneities is accompanied by a sub-
utnntial exchange of the INS type. The scattered waves arrive at the point
of observation with large delays from different directions. and therefore
the intensity of fluctuations increases with depth of the seismogram:

d) fluctuations of amplitudes and times are related by the following
expression:

DdhA udu’l‘Dﬂ-D”.

llere A in amplitude, t is time. D is the symbol for the mean square or
variance, 6 is the symbol for fluctuation. 0 is phase. This relation means
that the variance of fluctuations in the natural logarithm of the amplitude
is equal to the variance of fluctuations in phase. Let us note that

sum-suit. 1r “<17
where M is the fluctuation of amplitude, and I is the average amplitude.

in a turbid medium. the fluctuations of amplitudes and times increase as
the wave propagates. 'ihe quantities D6 lnA and Mt in a homogeneous turbid
medium are proportional. to the path L traveled by the ray:

NhA-um-do.

where g is a proportionality factor called the coefficient of turbidity. It
has the dimensions of [length ]"l and characterizes the scattering action of

the medium. In the case of large inhomogeneities. g coincides with the
coefficient of scattering.

Method of Studying the Spatial Structure of the Field of Amplitudes and
Iiodographs. investigation of the spatial structure of amplitudes and travel
times requires first of all the differentiation of the observed fields into
components that correspond to change in velocity with depth, large horizontal
inhomogneity. small inhomogeneity -- turbidity, inhomogeneity close to the
source and receiver. 'ihis resolution is carried out by spatial averaging

of the characteristics of the field. and therefore is based on combined

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pmceunlng of data of a large number of seismic stations and sources. De-
pending on requirements for detail. the seismic stations must be situated
more or less closely together.

The investigation of the influence that a change in velocity of seismic waves
with depth has on the amplitudes and times does not require a dense network
of stations. and has been well studied both for the earth as a whole and for
its individual regionn. The results of these studies are hodographs of waves
and calibration curves of A and MT.

investigation of the influence of regional inhomogeneity associated with
large velocity anomalies and anomalies of the absorbing properties in the
crust and upper mantle requires a well developed regional network of seismic
stations. The procedure for distinguishing anomalies consists in averaging
or data over areas. and calculating the corresponding background values and
deviations irom the background. 'i‘hese deviations in turn are averaged over
smaller sections (local sections), which enables determination of the local
background of the anomaly and deviations even from this background that are
associated with still smaller inhomogeneities. The systematic deviations
for each station depend on seismogeological peculiarities. i. e. inhomo-
geneity of the upper part or the profile close to the stations. 'ihe remaining
fluctuations are caused by the minor inhomogeneity of the earth on the tra-
Jectories of rays from the sources to the seismic stations; they cannot be
localized. and are described in statistical term: the mean square of the
fluctuations is determined, their law of distribution is studied and so on.

Possibilities of Using the Kinematic and Dynamic Glaracteristics of Haves for
Studying the Structure of the Earth. The amplitudes and travel times are
unequally sensitive to inhomogeneities of the earth. The travel time is a
stable parameter that depends primarily on change in velocity with depth

and the large-scale inhomogeneity of the medium. Minor inhomogeneities of
the medium cause very small fluctuations in the travel times with little
distortion of its characteristic features associated with the most appreciable
elements of the structure of the earth. Therefore the kinematic character-
istics of waves play a maJor role in the study of the principal large-scale
features of the earth's structure.

The amplitudes of oscillations are a less stable characteristic that reacts
sensitively to both large and comparatively small inhomogeneities. merefore
the amplitudes of oscillations are used as an auxiliary parameter in plotting
velocity profiles. However, small inhomogeneity. turbidity. is revealed
better by amplitudes than by the travel times of waves.

A detailed study of the space and tile structure of the P-wave became possible
comparatively recently: simultaneously with the deployment of dense networks
of recording stations and seismic groups. At present we have only preliminary
results on space and time organization of the longitudinal wave (Aki et al.,
[976; ilcdova, 19?")-

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the general case the space-time structure of a P wave can be represented
as follows:

H8." "AWNSJ-i-M.

where MS) is the amplitude of the signal recorded on area 8(X,Y); 6(S,t)
is the pulse shape of the longitudinal wave normalized with respect to
amplitude and registered at the instant corresponding to the hodograph t(8)
and the travel time anomaly 6t. Thus the variations of space-time organi-
zation of the P wave are associated with fluctuations of amplitude 6A.
travel time 6t and pulse shape do.

The spatial variability of shape 6 is associated with distortion of the
signal spectrum that can be expressed in terms of the spatial fluctuations of
the spectral components of the signal. 'Ihe spatial variation of the spectral
components of the pulse of the P wave can be evaluated by using the coherence
function. For instance if on some area S(X.Y) the waveshape 9(S,t) can be

described by the spectral function 0(S,u), then the spatial coherence is
determined by the expression

c(s,.s..e)-neos(30¢s.e)~urwes).

where 0(S.U) is the spectral function of the P wave; k is a constant; SJ
and SR are the points of observation on the area S for which O(s,u)* 0.
By studying the spatial variability of coherence G we can get an idea of
the nature of distribution of wave numbers in the investigated medias.

In practice it is more usual to estimate the coherence function of time
realization of a process taken as a steady-state ergodic random process.

If at points SJ and SK we get realizations fJ(t) and ndt), then the estimate
of their coherence function takes the form

ag, M .. m. (erur, (e) r. MI". M

where who) 18. the mutual spectral density of realizations rim and mu):
1’3“») and PMs) are the spectral densities of individual real nations.

Analysis of the known results of evaluation of the coherence of the P wave
on groups and systems of stations (Capon et a1., 1968; Hasegawa. 1910-.
Jansson. Husebye. 1968) shown that the coherence of the P wave on the average
attenuates with an increase in the relative distance between points of
registration. Simultaneously with this the coherence function undergoes
appreciable spatial variations, probably associated with spatial inhomo-
geneities in the earth's interior.

There is a direct analogy between the estimate 6 k("') that is equal to the

square root of the expression (') and the estima e of the correlation ratio
Kn - '0’: ('M‘I". .

when: a“ in the mutual variance of the signals f1(t) and f (t); of and 03

are the variances of the individual signals. Therefore in Jtudving the

spatial variability of the shape of the P wave, an estimate of the correlation
ratio in frequently used.

19

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
NR iWPliilM. llh‘li ONLY

Hunt-r'n z-tc-nt In ordinarily umnl to check the accuracy of the correlation
ux
ll+h(1=-‘J:)dmhxu.

For n , m. 'l. conform" approximately to normal distribution with average

I. as 4- III (+454
and variance
q-ua—n

where It in the correlation ratio. n is the sample space.

'inu confidence limits for u: are determined froa the relation

-l.<Vm(l-ml<1..
where la is the quantile of noraal distribution for confidence level a.

Time the true correlation ratio with probability a will be in the interval
-.<.<-..

I'lnlhl—lslg-Ilhli-lsi-Vym.

in many Instances simpler methods are need to estimate the reliability of
the correlation ratio. In particular. it is convenient to use the estimate
of the mean square error of the correlation ratio

01-0-th
in this case it can be approximately snowed that with probability 0.95 the
random error will not exceed 2oK, i. c.

s-Ktﬁa-

iii-nidtm, ii‘ the ratio (ii/ox) > 3 when n 250. it can be assisted that the sample
correlation ratio is reliable and reflects the sought relation.

where

in our atudies. wherever necessary. the reliability of the correlation ratio
was evaluated in accordance with the rules we have described above. Shown in

 

I II I U [I’ll "Mnuwlﬂ H”.
0.

Fin. 2». Dependence of the correlation ratio of the shape of a P wave on
distance between stations and epicenter: of earthquakes for different
regions of the world. luv. Din's data (1968); 2--dats of 3. Jamaica and
E. Iluaebye (1968); the horizontal lines represent averaging intervals:
the vertical lines show the 70$ confidence interval of the‘ average values.

20

M OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY

Fig. ') an: average entinateu of the correlation ratio of the shape of the
I’ ane an a funrtlon of the relative «lintance between recording ntationn
found by V. Din (1965) on the Tonto-i‘oreot group. and by ii. Janseon and

i2. liunebye (1968) on ntationc of l-‘ennoncandia and the man world-wide
"O‘VOrkt

Analynis of these data nhovo that a characteristic feature of the spatial
correlation of the shape of the i’ wave In a tendency toward systematic
attenuation with an increane in the relative dietance between recording
station. and aloe the prenence of comparatively aharp apikca and extinctions:
ouperiugnned on the general pattern of the curve. ‘lhe trend component of
the function RUM) aoynptotically approachen the 0.5 level. 1he most
clearly pronounced spikes and dim in the function Knit) are confined to
dlntance intervals of '50. 120. 1500. 9500. 5000. 8000 and 11.000 kn.

'l'n :xtudy the npatial structure of fluctuations of the parametera d 13 A. 6t
and 69 of the P ane. the structure function introduced by A. l. Kolnogorov
(WM) In of (great interest. Sometime thin in called an autontructure
function. 'lhe ntructure function in umlerntood an the mean square of the
difference in values of the function x(r) separated by interval t:

I-Q
cm..(|xm- xu+ or) -iN M)“ ‘13. Ilium-1w +tif~

if we take the deviation of the Xir) from the average rather than their
actual values. then

cm-«mm-x'wmn.
xw-xw-txei).ro+nnXiH-d-(xim-

There in e definite relation between the structure function and the corre-
lation ratio. As a aatter of fact. from the preceding expression we get

cm-anml-uxmw“meromo-
Since drum-crown»... where 02 is the standard deviation. we have

em . sic. — K («it

A: t ~-. Kit) e0. whence 0(0) .902. and the normalized correlation ratio is

k' (a) - K (1100' a i - C am. (so)

Formula i") eotablinhes a nlnple relation between the structure function
and the correlation function: when t 80. 0(1) '0. and K'it)'l; when t-u-.
C(I)8;’o’ and K'h) *0.

For the mate of convenience we arbitrarily denote the structure mnction of
fiuctuationr. 6 15A. 6t. 6. by <66A2>. <66t3>. «69’» Pig. 6 shows the
structure functiono <66t2> for fluctuations of travel tine of the P wave. and

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

 

Pig. 6. Structure thtiuh of fluctuations in travel tine and variations
in thickness of the earth's crust for the territory of the MBA group in
accordance with data of Ii. Iyer and J. Healy (1972). l--variations in
thicknenu of the earth's crust; 2--i‘luctuations of travel time; 3--saoothed
ntructnrc function of variation» in crust thickness

nino the structure function <ddli2> for variations in thickness of the
earth's crust on according to data of the LASA group and 20 portable
”568 stations (iycr. Iiealy. 1972).

As can he seen. the structure. function has an absolute saxinus at a distance
al' 100 km and a nericn or relatively lov extrema. If we consider the
umoothed function <66il3> we can see that the first Isaxilsua coaes at a distance
equal to 100 ha. and the first niniaun is close to 180-190 ius. ‘ihis indicates
that in the change of crustal thickness in the territory of the MBA group

a characteristic rhytha can be observed that has a period of the order of

180 ha and accordingly a half-period of the order of 90 ka. In addition,
other characteristic rhythms are observed as well. but less pronounced, e. g.
of the order of 35. 110 ha. etc.

If we look at the structure mnction of fluctuations of travel tine of the
P wave. we can see that it is practically identical in shape to the func-
tion <66ii2>. 'ihis indicates a direct genetic relation between fluctuations
of travel tine of the P vave and variations in the thickness of the earth‘s
crust. and apparently the upper Iant1e.

¢Ill'l s'
(I

   

W ~' Fig. 1. Structure mnctions of
” fluctuations in travel time and
logarithms of aaplitudes of P
waves for stations of the United
States and Canada: 1--travel
tines from California stations
(Robinson. Iyer. 1976); 2--travel
4" tines for U. s. and Canadian

stations (Carder et a1.. 1966):

3-alp1itudes fro. data of U. 8.
. stations (Olen-y. 196?)

ll

'0! OfﬂCIIJ. I188 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. ”I shows structure functions cMt“ and «sub according to the data of
a nyntum of seismic stations in the United States and Canada. ‘ihe structure
function <66t2> for relative distances of up to 150 his was obtained from data
of a system of stations in California (Robinson. iyer. 1976). Analysis of this
structure function shows its considerable similarity to the structure
function of the than group. At the same time some differences are observed:
for instance the absolute maxiaum here comes at a distance equal to 70 its.

in addition. relative laxima are observed here at distances of about lo and
L5 ha. and relative ninima -- close to 20 and 55 its. These facts show the
appreciable difference of the structure of the core and mantle within the
limits of the central and extreme western part of the United States.

The structure functions <66t2> and <66A2> within the limits of distances
from 70 to I0500 its (see Fig. ’i) are plotted from the data of a system of
seismic stations in the United States and Canada (Carder et al.. 1966;
Cleary. 1967). Analysis of the structure function of fluctuations in the
travel time of the P wave shows that the mean square of the second differences
<66t2> systesatically increases with an increase in the relative distances
between seismic stations. in fact. for distances between recording points
of less than loo km the mean square <66t3> does not exceed 0.2 of a log unit,
while for A Ili.000-h.500 km the mean square is equal to aproxilately 0.7-0.8
log unit. 'ihe behavior of the structure mnction <66t2> shows relative
minina and marina that show the presence of characteristic scales of fluc-
tuations in the travel time of the P wave. The presence of maxilla and
minina of the mean square of fluctuations in the time of arrival of the P
wave. Just as in the case of the USA group. show the probable presence of
characteristic scales of inhomogeneities in the structure of the earth's
crust and mantle. Minima in the structure function are observed at distances
of the order of 80-90. 200. 1:00. 1000 and 1.000 km.

An examination of the structure function of fluctuations in the logarithm

of amplitude <66A2> shows its considerable similarity to the structure
mnction of fluctuations in the time of arrival of the P wave. It is worth
noting that fluctuations of the parameters 6 igA and it were obtained on the
same system of recording Nations the new. time. the systems of seismic
sources were different: the deviations of 6 lgA were found froa earthquakes,
while the deviations of 6t were found from underground nuclear explosions.

in contrast to <66t2> the structure function <66A2> has an inherent somewhat

greater expressiveness of shape. Besides. it is evident that the structure
function of fluctuations in amplitude contains "phase-wise" the structure
function of fluctuations in time of arrival of the P wave so that the
maxima of the mean square of the fluctuations in the logarithm of the

amplitude as a rule have corresponding minima of the mean square of the
time fluctuations.

1he reason for the observed peculiarities of structure functions of fluc-
tuations in travel time and logarithm of the amplitude of the P wave can

be seen if we compare the velocity profiles of the crust and upper mantle
for the territory of the United States and Canada. shown on Fig. 8 are the

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90R OVPICIM. USE ONLY

’1" In I , ) ”inks/s

  
  

Pix. 8. Velocity profiles of longitudinal waves for a nunber of territories
of North America. The HOB profile (broken line) is taken as the reference:
luliwh profile for southwest territories of the United States; 2-4191! profile
for northwest territories of the United States; 3--.-v1c. 3 profile for southeast
territories of Canada; suuca profile for coastal territories of western
(fanndm 6--Hcc profile for northwest territories of Canada

velocity profiles of longitudinal waves found by R. Higgins and D. Helnberger
(1973). by a. HcMechan (191s) and also by s. Dey-Sarkar and s. Higgins (1976).

An examination of relative differences in the velocity profiles of the crust
and mantle of different territories of North America convinces us that the
observed fluctuations in travel tins and aaplitudes of the longitudinal wave
are engendered by hori sontal inhososeneities that contrast lost highly near
the principal divisions in the crust and upper aantle.

Horizontal inhomeneity is apparently inherent in the deeper interior of
the earth as veil. Shaun on Fig. 9 is the structure Nnction of fluctuations

<ddt2>. 92

Fig. 9. Structure function of fluctu-
ations in travel tins of a PcP were

calculated from data of the Dom-8H0?
underground nuclear explosion (herrin,

1968)

 
 

I

 

M I~ n J,“

in travel tips of a PcP vars plotted fros data or registration of the Loss.

Slim underground nuclear explosion reduced to the well known s'u-sary of
2. ilerrin et al. (1968). '

The scan square of fluctuations in travel time for a PcP vave depends quite
uniquely on distances between seismic stations. For a relative distance
equal to approxiaately loo-zoo km the mean square of tile fluctuations

2'.

P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

reaches 0.6 n2 on the average. With an increase in distance to 3000-3500 km.
the mean square of the fluctuations decreases to OAS-0.5 s3. with a
further increase In relative distance. <66t3> increases rapidly. and at a
distance equal to npproxiaatcly 1000 kn it reaches a value of LBS-1.9 a”.
With an increase in distance to 8000-9000 km. the mean square decreases to
0.5-0.5; 92. and Nrther. by 12.000.13.000 kn it. becomes equal to 0.05.0.1.
i. c. it falls alnost to zero.

The uniqueness of the structure function of fluctuations in travel time of
the For ane consists in the nature of its oscillations. Actually. the

lost pronounced spikes in the mean square of fluctuations are confined to
distances that are multiples of the radius of the outer core (ii. I 3"“ i 3 kn)‘.
an absolute anxiswn is observed at a distance equal to am: the second and
third anxian with respect to magnitude are observed at distances of 3“! and
Mi. respectively. in addition. the observed ninimun in the lean square of

the fluctuations is confined to a distance equal to half the length of the
circunference of the outer core.

Ii comparison of structure functions <66t2> for l’ and Po? waves convinces us
that they reflect essentially different elements in the inhoasgeneous struc-
ture of the earth. A confirmation of this conclusion can be found if we
examine tutorials on the amplitudes of i’ and PK? waves of 11 stations of the
Comprehensive Seismological Expedition that were used to plot calibration
curves to be discussed in the next chapter. and also the azimuthal amplitude
curves of the P wave plotted froa data of the 8K channel of a group of
stations situated in the Northern ham-Shank

rm. data of aeasureaents of sore than 50.000 recordings of P and PK? waves
hy short-period channels. individual stationary calibration curves and a
nunaary calibration curve were plotted. Graphs were plotted for each station
for the way that the absolute value of the deviation 6 13A depends on epi-
central distance. which were then averaged (Fig. 10). 'nius, corresponding to

        
  
    

                  
       

   

‘
s
a
V
0.
§
§
§
9
C
so
3
8
3'

Fig. 10. Ahsoiute value of deviation of the logarithm of amplitude of P and
PKP waves as a function of epicentral distance froa data of 11 stations of
the Coaprehensive Seismological Expedition

each value of A on the Iain graph is a broad set of stations and epicentral
regions. Therefore the fluctuations in the graph of 6 lgA characterize the
inhomneneity of the earth's structure on the average. irrespective of any
specific region.

25
FOR ONION-l. USE ONLY
I'Oli (WPICML iliili ONLY

We ran nee tron Fix. it) that at epicentral distances of LOGO-15.800 km the
average deviation or amplitude at an arbitrary station for arbitrary earth
hrs-mrn In equal to about 0.13 log unit. The greatest differences between
individual calibration functions are observed at epicentral distances of
woo-3600. Iozoo. 11.600. 13.h00. 1h.ooo. 15.900 and 16.600 kn. Minimum
differences are confined to distances of 1800. 8200. 10.000. 10,600. 12.000.
"I"! i').0l)0-l').W0 kill.

Fig. 11. Structure function or fluc-
tuations in the logarithm of the
amplitude of P and m waves from
data of ll stations or the Compre-
hensive Seissologicsl Expedition

 

thous . kn

HIT)...” urn/s

  

Azimuths
Fig. 12. (“ﬂux as a ’40.”
function or distance for
longitudinal waves vith my a
respect to different
azimuths. Data obtained 3"“ 1’
from the entvork ol‘ .
ntationn or Northern was "
ﬂaw-Shaw by GK ~‘NI“I
equipment.

Shown on Fig. ll is the structure function round from data on I6 lgAI (see
Fin. 10). One can see that the mean square or the fluctuations of the
logarithm of the amplitude has minimum values with displacement in the epi-
central distance equal to 1300. 21:00. 3800 and 5300 km, and vice versa. the
aaxiaum values are observed at displacements of 600. 1800. 3&0 and 5700 in.

Fig. I? shove the azimuthal saplitude curves of HIT)“, obtained from data
or the SK channel or the group of stations in the Northern 1yan'4han'.

Analysis or these data shows that the individual amplitude curves have con-
siderable deviations fro: the average trend. A nuaber of peculiarities

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
indicate that in the area of location of the stations the isotach surfaces
of divisions in the crust and upper mantle experience a considerable slope
in the direction vith azimuth of 180-??S°. This question is examined in more

detail in the third part of the monograph with interpretation of aaterials
obtained on the i’arair-iiaykai seismic profile.

Chapter 2. Using Regional Calibration Curves to improve Magnitude Deter-
ainations

1. Regional calibration curves of waves propagating in the crust and uncle
of the earth

Estimation of the namitude of earthquakes is subject to rather wide variance
as a consequence of the effect of factors of the focus. path of propagation
and the relative location of the station and the source. as well as deviation
of the characteristics of the reception equip-eat from standard. iiulerous
studies have been aiued at finding methods to compensate for the action of
specific nechanlans of fluctuations in magnitude.

in the first approximation. foraation of the wave process can be described
by the following linear system:

J M O 4. i8. .. 9) ﬂail. 6M. (0). (0)

where MN) is the spectral amplitude of the wave recording, an is the spectral
function of the source. Al is the transfer mnction of the mediu- in the
vicinity of the source. the receiver. and on the path of vave propagation:

a, is the transfer Nnction of the receiver.

in practice. seiaaic services estimate aannitude according to the following
ashore:

at - awn + dais).

iiere Quid) is an empirical function of damping. In accordmce with (')
Ulid-K‘o‘H‘CM'PUAJ. (00)

where in no in principle corresponds to the estimated value of ii. so that
the function mill) is deteruined by the am of the factors in parentheses
in expression i”) and has the purpose of compensating for their action.
'ihc function Quid) has come to be called the calibration function.

There are two methods of plotting calibration curves: the first is to plot
individual calibration curves for each separate wave. and the second is to
plot a unified calibration curve for the maximum value of MT regardless of
which group of waves of the given type this maxi-tn belongs to. he first
method requires identification of individual phases since each wave uses its
own calibration curve. incorrect identification of waves is an additional
source of errors.

Brroncouxx identification of waves is associated not only with insufficient
skill of the analyst. but also with such objective factors as fluctuations

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In trnwsl time". issues of first entries in the case of weak signals. a large
number of waves with close travel tines including some waves that are unstable
in xumcc that thc a nature about which we are still uncertain. The use of

a :zynimrn of calibration curves with respect to each type of wuVes. e. g.

with respect to many l‘n phones can ensure higher accuracy only under condition
that the system of magnitude corrections in known with respect to each group
of vavua for each station relative to each epicentral region. In the final
nulalynis. such a system of calibration functions will be extremely immune
and unstable. 'nm integrated amplitude curve MIT)...“ is more stable. par-
Lleularly in regions of wave change, where a coapiicated interference pattern
is observed. Therefore calibration curves plotted by the second aethod.
«lecplte a number of simplifications. frequently ensure higher accuracy.

lit the sane time. the reliability of calibration can be improved by using
Integrated calibration curves of other types of waves such as Pg. Lg. Sn. etc.

The mmzt extensively used have been magnitude scales plotted for surface and
longitudinal waves. Scales in which surface waves are used will be designated
by the symbol M in the following presentation. while those in which body waves
are used will be denoted by the symbol in. For longitudinal waves. scales

have been developed with the use of both a vertical component (we will denote
the vertical component by the subscript V) and a horizontal (ii) component.
betel-a! nation of magnitude from surface waves is based on the total horizontal
displacement vector. Calibration of earthquakes with respect to other types
oi‘ waves has not been extensively practiced. Magnitude scales of both types

hiIVe numerous modifications, depending on the equipment used and the measure-
ment technique. -

Analysis of station discrepancies in evaluation of magnitudes has shown that
sonictinies even the very determination of sagnitude leaves room for subjective
evaluation or experimental material. For instance in determining the aaxiaum

values of MT on two horizontal components. synchronism is violated (Aranovich
at. 9.1., 1966).

Our studies have shown that using only a single component does not reduce
the convergence of magnitude estimates. and at the same time simplifies the
measurement procedure. considerably weakening the role of the subjective
factor. In this connection, when plotting calibration functions for longi-
tudinal waves and Rayleigh waves we used the vertical component, and for
trwverse anes -- the coaponent on which the value of Al? is maxim.
This is usually one of the horizontal components.

The convergence of magnitude estimates with respect to body waves depends to a
large extent on the method of measurement. and first of all on the choice of
the time interval used for the mitude estimates. A careml analysis of
this assumption was made with respect to earthquake recordings on seisaic
stations of Tamar. Frunze and elsewhere on standard 8K. Sim-O and SIN-31
e-mipmnt. It was established that more than 953 of earthquakes with nag-
uituclv u exceeding 7.5 have maximum values of the ratio Al? in the longi-

tuliinnl wave within the first 20 s of the recording. and in only 55! is the
maximum A/T recorded in the first 5 s.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVNCMI. USE ONLY

Apparently one of the principal reasons that the Nos service of the United
States consistently underntateu estimates of earthquake magnitudes from

W wave data as compared with the YeSSN service of the 088R is that a short
interval of measurements in used for the maximum value of the MT ratio.

resides. it should be borne in mind that for strong earthquakes with magnitude
M: 7.5 the maximum value of MT in a W wave may be delayed relative to the
first entry by 60 a or more. Let us note that analogous results were found
by K. K. Zapol'skiy (Zapol'skiy. 1971; Zapol‘skiy et al.. 19710) with respect
to data of analysis of frequency-time fields.

in plotting calibration curves from longitudinal waves which are shown below.
the maximum value of MT was sought and measured in a 20-second interval for

earthquakes with M <7.S. and in an interval with duration of 60 s for earth-
quakes with H a 7.5.

Quite appreciable blunders leading to systematic errors of the order of
0.1-0.19 unit of magnitude can arise as a consequence of imperfect methods
of finding and measuring the actual maximum ratio Al'r. For instance in a
number of cases the quantity Aux/T is used instead of (Alﬁm. It is
appropriate to mention here that B. Gutenberg's magnitude classification
(1963) was based on the maximum ratio (“ﬂux-

Experience has shown that the best estimate of MIN.“ is given by the ampli-
tude A measured from the zero line of the recording. and the corresponding
half-period T/2.

tn plotting the calibration curves we used recordings of seismic stations at
Alma-Ate. Shchel'-Da.l'nyaya. Talgar. Nbach'ye. Kadshi<8ay. Prsheval‘sk and
Frame for earthquakes with normal depth of focus. 'ihese stations are
equipped with sets of standard equipment SK (sum-o) and Sim-3M that have
fairly similar amplitude-frequency responses. Constant mamification is
observed in the range of periods from 0.3 to 10 (15) s for the 8K (Sim-0)
channels. and from 0.1-1.2 s for the Sim-$4 channels. With increasing
periods the amplitude-frequency responses fall off as the third power.

To improve the convergence of the calibration curves during plotting. the
well known method of B. Gutenberg was used that consists in tying the cali-
bration curve of a body wave in with data of the calibration curve of surface
waves. In doing this it is important that the step of the new scale be
constant. and that the curves be parallel in different ranges of magnitudes
of the reference scale with respect to surface waves.

'ihis coordination of calibration curves was done for all the wave types
indicated above. To do this. individual (A/T) curves were plotted as a
function of the epicentral distance for six leve s of the scale of magnitudes
MW of the YeSSN service: 3. h. S. 6. 7 and 8. For each wave type. about
1500 earthquake recordings were used in the distance range from 200 to 11,000
km. and a range of mamitudes "LII from 3 to 8. The data on the Mm were

29

VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .
Luke" from the bulletin of the YeSSN service and spot checked with respect
to recordings of the stations at Frunze, Alma-Ma nnd Przhevai'sk.

It mm found that earthquakes with Mm- 3 are representative for distances
up to Icon km. with rim-h up to 1800 km, with Mm . 5 up to 6000 km. earth-
quakes with him-6 are representative for the entire distance range. with
Mme"! from 1500 to 11,000 km and with Mw-ﬂ for distances greater than
5000 km.

in averaging experimental data of lgUi/Th," the step with respect to distance
was usually equal to 200 km. The averaging curves were plotted within
confidence intervals estimated from the formula

01" Volum’yﬂc - I.

where the q; are confidence limits for the true value of QM in the i-th
epicentrol distance interval; the 01 is the corresponding value of the lean
square deviation; n1 is the number of data of lgiA/‘i‘imx‘. t( .k) is the
Student test for a confidence coefficient of p-0.68 and mm r of degrees
or freedom k In - l.

'ihe mean square deviation 01 was estimated by a simplified method. Since the
distribution law for the quantity lg(I\/T)ux is close to normal, the mean
square value in the i-th distance interval was estimated on the graph from
the width of the 685 interval of values of ids/‘1‘)“. A check of estimates

of 01 by the formula
'"V gnum-Whm-h

showed that when n 10 the discrepancy in the estimates does not exceed
lO-l'ﬁ. The calibration curves found in this way are shown on Fig. 13.

Fig. 13. Calibration curves for
m‘- ‘ longitudinal a. 6 , transverse
“kW-”‘0 -- -~ . (s) and surface (a) waves: In
from data of Northern ﬂaw-Sham
stations. SK equipment; 2--from
data of the 'i‘algar station, 8K
equipment; 3--Ye88)i sanitary
curves; burrom data of Northern
ww-smn' stations. Sim-3 equip-
ment; axis of ordinates marked off
to the right (6).

  

’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ d,thous. km

3)

Nil OFFICIAL USE ONLY
or change in (Alivmx in ‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 1

Average values of coefficient b in regression iii-bum +a

Magnitude ML"

    
 

Distance
ranges . kin

 
 

zoo-2.000 0.39 0.68 — —
2,000-5,w0 — 0058 0061‘ Os
5,000-7.000 - 0.50 0.62 o
7,000-10 .000 — — 0.60 —

Analysis of calibration curves of longitudinal PV waves obtained on medium-
perlnd equipment SK (rig. lli) shove that in general the parallelism of the
(Ii/'1‘)“, curves for different amplitude intervals is not violated. 'ihe
average values of the step betveen these curves or the regression coefficient
in the equation IIIme N: for different distance ranges are smized in
Table l.

'lhe data of Table 1 show that only for the amplitude range Mw-li-S and the
distance range of zoo-2.000 kn is the regression coefficient appreciably
different from the average value of 0.63 found without consideration of

this anomalously low value. A scale step equal to 0.63 was obtained by

B. Gutenberg (1963) in a vorld-vide sumary. At the sane time, including
the estimate of the coefficient b for "Liii'h's in the average reduces the
scale step to 0.57. This value in turn a close to the estimate receuisended
by the Comittcc on Earthquake magnitudes at Zurich on 3 October 1916.

It Is suggested that two branches of the calibration curve be used for
calibrating earthquakes on distances up to 1000 his: one with respect to Pn
waves. and the other with respect to Pg waves. 'lhis will appreciably expand
the dynamic range of calibration on such distances.

For comparison with the calibration curve of the North 'iyan'-8han' group of
stations in Fig. 13a. calibration curves of the YeSSh service are presented
(shown by the light line) and the Talgar station for the SK channel (broken
line). Note that the calibration curve of the YeSSN service is extremely
saoothed out and cannot account for regional peculiarities that are rather
veil differentiated on the North 'fyan'éhan' data.

Fig. 136 Juxtapoees calibration curves with respect to longitudinal vaves
obtained on North haw-Sham stations on two types of equipment: medium-
period (solid line) and short-period (broken line). It is clear that the
calibration curve obtained frost data of the 8104-3" channel is considerably
complicated by fine details. At the same time, it clearly shows the mailer
elements of the calibration curve for the redial-period equipment SK (SKD-O).
Mini: the detail of the 8304-34 curve as excessive and noting that it is an
average of 0.3 log unit away from the 8K curve, are can recoauaend the calibre-
tion curve for the SK channel with a correction of 0.3 for calibrating
earthquakes from data of the Sim-3H channel.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 130 shown calibration curv-m for i; and I.“ wavea. In plotting them as
00 function of the value of Mill 0000 Identical :Icale ntep is obtained that is
equal to 0.60 log; unlt. However. wave damping in the distance range from
200 to 2500 km differs appreciably. For the SniS) wave, damping on the
average taken place according to the law A"°”. For Lg waves this law takes
the form A"-". which agrees on the average with damping of the Raylclnh
wave. as was uhown above.

It in interesting that attenuation of the L3 wave differs somewhat for
distancca A>1000 and A <1000 km. In fact. if expression U“) is used to
approximate the amplitude curve of the L3 wave. assuming that it is related
to higher modes of surface waves propagating with minimum group velocity.
then the bent agreement of the theoretical curve with experimental data is
observed for 7:0.20 when A < 1000, and v-IO.13 when A >1000 km. Taking into
connideration that T is approximately 3 s. V- 3.57 km/s for A < 1000 km and
V8 3.65 km/n for A > 1000 km, we get for the first case a Q of approximately
160. and for the second case a Q of approximately 250. Such a simpliﬁed
estimate allows us to assume that the L5 wave recorded at distances A> 1000 km
propagates in a relatively high-Q medium.

TABLE 2.

Values of calibration functions 0"“) for longitudinal P3 and Pv waves from
from shallow (ii <60 km) earthquakes

~- “HI-ﬂ“ ~
6.. l“ 0.0 1“ W O.”

a . . ”00 0.00
80 0.00 0.. _ 0000 1.00 0000 0.00 0.0 0'.
.000. '03 ' 0.00 0000 0.00 0000 0.. 0100 g.“
000 1.00 0.00 0000 0.. 0100 0.00 000 g.
0a 0.10 0.00 0100 0.10 0000 0.00 000 0,00 .
In 0.01 0.00 In 0.10 0000 0.00 00.0 1..
an 0.00 0.00 an 0.10 1000 0.00 00000 1.00
u 0.00 0.. 00's _ 0.10' 1001 0.00 00000 1,00
00» . 0.00 0.2 0001 0.10 1000 0.00 0080 0.00
0000 _ 0.00 an 0.10 , 1:00 0.00 0000 1.10
0:10 .. 0.00 000 0.10 1000 0.00 00000 1.00 ‘
0a .. 0.00 0000 0.10 1000 0.00 00000 1.00
000 — 0.00 0000 0.10 1000 1.00 mm 1.00 -
00¢ — 0.00 0000 0.10 1100 1.00 00» 1,. '
0000 — 0.00 0100 0a 1000 1.00 ' 00000 1.»
I” — O.“ m C.” m tﬂ “ u '0‘
0001 - 0.00 0000 1.00 0000 0.00

0000 -. 0.00 _ 0000 0.01 0000 0.00

0000 — 0.00 0000 0.00 0000 0..

0000 _ 0.: 0:00 0.00 0.0 0.00

0:00 — 0.. 0a 0.6 0010 0.00

0000 - 0.00 0000 0.00 0000 0.00

0h -. 0.00 0000 0.10 .00 0.00

0000 — 0.00 0000 0.11 0100 05

I00 — 0.00 0100 0.00 .00 0.00

3" - 0.8 0000 1.00 .0) 1.00

III - 0.00 0000 1.00 0000 1.00

0000 — 0.01 0000 1.00 0000 1.00

0100 — 0.10 0000 0.00 0000 0.-

0000 _— 0.00 0000 0.00 0000 0.00

0000 - 1.00 0000 0.00 0000 0.00

0

I

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'MIRIJ'I 1

Calibration i‘unrtlunu (1,400) I‘m' tramway-an :1" and ﬂ wuveu and 1.3 unwed
of shallow earthquakes from mcmmrementu of (Alﬂmx
on the uingie most intenne component

u unnum-
an . 0020000

an 0.00 0.00 001 . 0:10 1.00
an 0.01 0.00 1010 0.00 0000 0.00 0000 1.00
000 0.10 0.00 00.0 0.. 0000 0.10 0001 M!»
000 0.00 0.00 0000 0.01 0000 0.. 000 1..
a» 0.00 0.10 I. 0.10 .01 0.01 0000 '1..
10) 0.00 0.00 01. 0.. 0100 000 0101 1..
000 0.00 0.01 .10 0.00 0:01 0.11 0.0 31..
001 0.00 0.00 .01 0.00 0001 0.00 0~,1..
0010 0.00 0.10 0001 0.10 1a» 0.. 000» M0
0000 0.00 0.00 00. 0.10 10. 0.10 00000 1.00
0.0 0.00 0.. 0n 0.. 1. 0.10 00h 1..
0.0 0.00 0m 0:. 1.00 1.0 0.00 00.0 9.00
0000 0.01 0.00 00» 0.. 1000 0.00 00000 1..
1000 0.10 0.00 «no 0.. 1000 0.01 000. 1.00
In 0.. 0.00 .00 0.10 1000 1..
01m . 0.00 0.00 0100 0.. 1100 1.00
II» 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 1.0 1.01
0000 0.00 0.00 .01 1.. 1000 1.00
0000 0.00 0.00 0010 1.00 0000 1.00
0000 0.00 0.. 0000 0.00 0000 1.00
1.0 0.00 0.. 0.0 0.. .01 1.01
0:» 0.. 0.. m 0.00 m 1.00
0000 0.00 0.00 0000 0.00 00. 1.00
0000 0.00 0.00 0000 0.00 .00 1.00
0000 0.00 0.00 0000 0.00 In 1.00
0100. - 0.00 01d) 1.00 In 1.00
0.0 .. 0.. 0000 1.00 .00 1.11
.00 - 0.00 0000 1.. as 1..
.00 — . 0.10 an 0.00 0000 1,10
0000 - 0.11 00. 0.01 00. 1.10

 

in comparing the morphological peculiarities of calibration curves for longi-
tudinai and transvcr wavea given in Fig. 130 and a one can note a considerable
similarity of both average tendencies and a nuber of details. such an
agreement or the minima of curves in the vicinity of 3300. ’0300. I0900.

5800 and 9000 km, and of the maxima in the vicinity of 0000. 5600. 6600

and 9600 km. At the same time. there are some discrepancies in the behavior
or the curves at distances of from 1000 to 3000 km. This may serve as an
indirect indication of asymmetry of the elastic profile or the earth with
respect to longitudinal and transverse waves.

In comparing the calibration curve for s waves obtained on stations of the
Northern 'ryan'-8han' with the SH curve used in the YeSSN service (Vanek ct
ai.. 1962) we are convinced that the use or the regional calibration curve

will improve the convergence of amplitude calibration with respect to
tramverae waves on the whole.

Table 2 gives the values of calibration functions 001(0) for longitudinal Py
and Pr. waven from shallow earthquakes obtained from stations or the llorthern

'Z‘ynn'-Shan' . and Table 3 gives these functions for transverse waves and Lg
waves obtained on the North War-Shaw station group.

3‘0
FOR OFHCIIJ. USE ONLY
It should be noted that in recent years there has been considerable interest
in using a series of colonic waves for calibrating purposes that have not
been traditionally used in amplitude calibration (Racer. 1967; Evernden.
WM; Nuttli. 191?; litreet. 1916'. Zoltnn M. ul.. 1975). it is to he hoped
that the calibration functions found in our work for a series of body and
surface waves will help to expand the possibilities of calibrating seisnic
sources and considerably inprove the reliability of magnitude determinations.

2. Calibration curves of waves that have passed through the core

”(P waves have not been widely used as yet in magnitude classification of
earthquakes. M. the sane time. the use or waves of this type would enable
us to include processing of data for earthquakes sore than 12.000 km away.

'Ihe analysis done in the preceding chapter showed that differentiation of
nose branches 01‘ WP waves is very uncertain. and therefore the construction
of magnitude calibration curves should be done with respect to two groups
of waves. In one group we have included the clearly differentiated AB
branch (90:). and in the other -- the or and Gil branches considered
together. He will use the convention of designating the aggregate of these
two groups of branches as the WP, group.

In constructing the magnitude scale it is necessary to solve the following
problems:

1) proving the validity of the basic principle of construction of magnitude

scales .. parallelism of aaplitude curves for earthquakes of different
energies;

2) evaluating the relation between the given scale and known scales that
have been plotted with respect to other types of waves.

The time intervals in which the naplitudes of seisaic waves were measured
were chosen in accordance with the plotted hodograph.

0n the section up to 15.000 kn the aaxina or the PK? waves lie no further
than 10 s beyond the first entry. (in the lS.000-l6.000 kn section where
waves of the Oil branch can somtimes be seen in the first entries, to avoid
errors the interval of measurements was increased to 15 s after the first
entry regardless of which branch these entries belong to. Beyond the zone of
interference. the interval or measurements in the first group of waves

(the DP and Gil branches) is bounded by the instant of entry of the m: (Ali)
branch.

For the PM; branch. the time interval in which amplitude maxim is observed
is somewhat greater than for waves of the first group, and averages 20 s
after the first entry of the PKP; group.

Data processing was done separately for the two differentiated groups. The
Al? values were reduced to the level of tub-5.5, and were then averaged in

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFi’iClM. USE ONLY

i-uiulrmiohilumtcr intervals of epicentral distance. The resultant curve
van the basis for a calibration curve in units of the U. S. magnitude scale.
'l'n check satisfaction of the basic principles of construction of magnitude
:urlilczi. a cmpnv-izznn was made of the deviations of the reduced MT values
(Turn the averune curve on the one hand. and the magnitudes of the corre-
--'-un.iing chucks! ml the other hand. Such comparisons were made in different
range» of epicentral distances. No relation was observed betveen MT devia-
tions and mannitudc or cpi central distance.

'nn- measurements were made on seismgrans obtained on standard channels.
The materials were processed in such a way that the level oi‘ the amplitude
curves corresponded to a magnitude evaluation of 5.5 in at, scale units.

Tu reduce the calibration eurVes plotted from type PKP waves accordance
with the W scale. an empirical curve relating the lb and n scales was
mm! (Pin. 15). Let us note that close to the value lab-5.5. scaling of

- -. Fig. 15. Relation between the ab (United
' States) and SW“ (Comprehensive Seismological
Expedition) magnitude scales

 

thc‘magnitudes to convert from one scale to the other takes place with
minimum errors since the formulas obtained by different authors close to
the value %.5o5 yield practically identical results.

Besides. for eartlnuakes with normal focus depth we had magnitude estimates
in units of the “Lil scale (about 50 cases). These estimates were also
converted according to known formulas (Antonova et al., 1968; " itude
and Energy Classification of Earthquakes" 197“ to units of the scale.

For some earthquakes. our station network simultaneously recorded waves of
the P and PK? types (about 1:0 cases . This enabled a direct cuparison of
the N? values for PK? waves with magnitude estimates.

'n:e differences in the calibration curve tie-in level found by the three
minods did not exceed 0.1 magnitude unit. Estimates cording the
constructed namitude scales that we will designate miﬁ‘ and 2 coincide
on the average with the mp5“ scale.

The accuracy of separate determination of magnitude by scales for PR? waves
is approximately the same as for P waves. increased regional variability
of magnitude deviations is observed only close to the minimum of the cali-
bration function. This error can be eliminated by introducing regional
magnitude corrections. The calibration function is given in 'llables 5 and 5
and on Fig. 16, where data from reference sources are shown for comparison.

36

FOR OPTICIIJ. USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

   

.a. V-” '

‘I \ wtéiii
Iv gym-
tum-
-m—

II n I: II I) A. thnun. It)

 
   
      

Fig. 16. Calibration curven for PKP waves: inaccording to data of the
Conprehenoive Seismological Expedition; the upper branch corresponds to
the PKP. group, the lover .- to PKPz; 2--according to data of I. V. aor-
bunova and N. V. ahatornaya (1976); 3--accordin5 to data of 8. Miyuuro (1913)

TABLE la

Magnitude calibration curve for PKP; waves

 

I“. ”will? a *ll

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFi’lClM. USE ONLY

TABLE 5

Calibration function Q" for I’Kl’; vaven

 

'd . thous . km

himrmnlon of the Results

investigation of the travel times and amplitudes of body vaves. phase veloci-
tier. of surface waves and free oscillations of the earth has given an idea of
the layered structure of the earth and enabled construction of a radially
inhomogeneous and spherically symetric model. At the same time. many

known facts cannot be explained within the framework of a radially inhomo-
geneous model and require expansion of the class of models of the earth

that account for both radial and lateral inhomogeneity of the structure of
the earth.

Experimental investigation of the horizontal inhomogeneity of the earth
requires the development of detailed cross-sectional and areal seismologie
system that in accordance vith the degree of detail of the investigation
should be oriented toward some characteristic scale of inhomogeneity of
structure. To do this, it is necessary to establish a hierarchy of natural
scales of inhomogeneities of the structure of the earth's interior and the
relation betveen these scales and the scales of variations in parsmeters of
the wave field.

To detect and study the scale effects that determine the regional variability
of elements of the vave field. it is necessary to introduce a number of nev
morphological characteristics of the field and to develop relatively simple
and effective techniques for data analysis.

in the first part of the monograph on the basis of experimental data about
the patterns of propagation of seismic vaves in an inhomgeneous earth it is
shown how the anor elements of the wave field are related to the nature of
distribution and the scale of variation of velocities of propagation of
::ei::mic saves and the absorbing properties of the media.

The min procedural technique used to analyze regional variability of the
vlmmctvriutlcn of body and surface waves is to separate the observed vave

fields into two main components: the average field (background) and the
deviations from the average -- fluctuations. Simple and comparatively

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
i’OR OFFICiAL USE ONLY

effective techniques are proposed for analysing the statistical structure of
fluctuations. Characteristic examples are giVen to show the actual possi-
bilities of methods that have been developed for studying the scale effects

in manifestation of inhomogeneities of the structure in the pattern of fluc-
tuations of wave field patterns.

it is shown that to analyse the structure of fluctuations of the vave field
paraseters, such statistical characteristics as functions of coherence.
correlation and structure functions have great possibilities. A suuary
curve for the correlation ratio as a function of epicentral distance in

the range of 10 km to 12.000 kn is plotted from the data for P wave pulse
shape correlation found in different parts of the world. Analysis of these
data shows that by using a spatial correlation function in essentially
different geological-tectonic regions of the earth one can distinguish the
scales of fluctuations in parameters of the wave field that are typical of

these regions. and put them into correspondence with the scales of inhomo-
geneities of the nediun.

Spatial structure functions are especially convenient for evaluating the
spatial scales of inhomogeneities in structure from the nature of fluctu-
ations in wave field patterns. 'ihey were calculated for fluctuations in
the travel time of the P wave for the [ASA group and 20 i508 stations located
in the continental region, and also for a group of seismic stations in
California in the zone of transition from continent to~ocean. and for a
system of seismic stations in other territories of the United States and
Canada. A spatial structure Motion of fluctuations in the logarithn of
the amplitude of a longitudinal wave is plotted from station data on the
territory of the United States. The resultant data are compared with the
structure function of thickness of the earth's crust in the territory of the
LASA group and with the system of velocity profiles of the crust and upper
mantle of six regions of the United States and Canada. A direct relation

is established between the structure function of vave field elements and
horizontal inhomogeneities of the structure of the crust and mantle.

A structure mnction of fluctuations in the times of arrival of the PcP wave

is plotted for a system of world-wide seismic stations from data of regis-
tration of the LONG SHOT mderground nuclear explosion. It is shown that
by using structure functions. horizontal inhomogeneities can be traced to
atrcat depths. including in the region of transition from the lower mantle
to the outer core.

it is also shown that use of the system of regionally differentiated curves
of Pa. l'g. P. Sn, 5. Lg and R waves can appreciably extend the dynastic range
and the range of epicentrsl distances in solving the problen of estiaating
the maglitudes of seismic sources.

39

FOR OFI’ICIM. USE ONLY
: 5. 6“r°lded
0
NR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

It in considered a characteristic feature or the folded systems that belong
to the first group. including the Snynn-Nnykni. KazakhstunoTyan‘ Shsn' and
Khingun-liohl systems. that the folded zones or this group were formed on a
basement with a continental type or crust “with a thick granite-Uncles layer
or Archean age." The primary geosynclinal systems of Proterozoic-reerogenic
age comprise the framework of the Siberian and Chinese platforms and mainly
represent structures or the Sayan-Bayksl rolded system. The regenerated
geosynciinos showed up mainly within the limits or the Kazakhstan-Tyan' Shan'
system: the Kokchetav-North Tyan' shan' geosyncline of the Caledonian Era.
and the Zhungar-Balkhash and South Tyan' Shan' geosynclines or the Hercynian.

Belonging to the third type or folded systems that were formed on s basement
with oceanic type of crust (without a sialic layer) is the Zaysan-Oobi folded
region that "extends for more than 2000 km in a continuous strip 150 200 km
wide from Semipalatinsk on the west through the Zaysan-Ulengur cauldron.

along the southwestern slopes of Mongolian Altsy. across Gobi Altay to the
lowlands of the Eastern Gobi."

Thus Ye. N. Altukhov et al. assume that during the evolution of the earth's
crust in the Ural-Mongolian zone. the Archean granite-metamorphic layer of
crust from the Lower Proterozoic and later period was converted by successive
geouynclinal cycles to a new type of crust. The Baykal-Sayan and the
Kasahhstan-Tyan'shan' folded systems with continental type of crust were
formed in the process of the primary geosynclinal cycle in the Proterozoic
and the regenerative cycle in the Caledonian and Hercynian epochs. A crust
of intermediate type was formed within the limits of the Mongolian-Altsy
roidcd system in the lower-Upper Paleozoic epoch. It is assumed that the
growth or the crust took place from the edges or the system toward the center.
in the Ordovician-Silurian. as a consequence of disintegration and "stretching
of the crust nearly from the axial part of the Ural-Mongolian belt the
Zaysan-cobi system arose with a crust ofoceanic type.”

The given pattern of evolution of the crust of the Ural-Mongolian belt is to
a certain extent hypothetical. The extent to which such a treatment is
realistic may depend directly on the possibility of explaining a number of
facts discovered in recent years by geology. geophysics and geochesdstry.

It seems that some of the assumptions stated by geologists on the basis of
generalization of various data relative to the origin and tectonic structure
or the eastern part or the Ural Mongolian folded region (Altukhov et al.,
l97h; Znytuev et al.. l91h; Zonenshtayn, l97h. Shul'ts 1975) may be confirmed

to some extent by the results of seismologic studies presented in our
monograph .

Chapter 1. Slmetral Characteristics of P. Pg and Lg Haves

investigation or the structure or the upper mantle is based mainly on the
travel times or body waves. the phase velocities of surface waves. and on
data about free oscillations of the earth. The use of dynamic characteristics
of seismic waves for these purposes opens up new possibilities (Asbel' et al..
1966; Yanovsksya et al.. 196M). 0f greatest promise is the consideration of

hi
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ssnctrnl amplitude curves (Volkov. Yanovskaya. 197%). however. so far this
question has not been given adequate attention. we know or only an extremely
anal! number or papers in which satisfactory data would have been found on
the ogmctral amplitude curves of different phases of body and surface waves
(Malinovnhaya. 1971: Archanbeau et al.. 1969). So much the more deserving
of interest are the data on amplitude curves of different frequencies found
by the Comprehensive Seismological Expedition as a result of more than a
decade of observations using the ChISS frequency-selective eels-dc stations
(Zapol'skiy. 1971L

i. Amplitude curves of different frequencies

The Materisls Processed- Recordings of earthquakes by a seven-channel
cnlss station located in Talgar were used for experimental investigation

of the general structure of seismic waves in the range of epicentral dis~
tancee from 500 to 3500 km. For the sake of brevity. this distance range

is sometimes called the intermediate zone. The average frequencies f of the
registration channels of the station were 0.35. 0.1. l.h. 2.8. 5.6. 11 and
?2 "a. Data of about 800 earthquakes were processed in all.

Information on earthquakes (ties at the focus. coordinates. depth. magnitude
and class) were taken from the seismic bulletins of the USSR and the United
States. and also from data of regional networks (Bayksl. Altay and North
Tyan’ Shan'). Host of the earthquakes in the zone up to 1000 km have a

value of K from class 9 to 11. and in the zone beyond 1000 km. the aagnitude
H is from h to 5.5.

The entire aggregate of epicenters of the earthquakes was divided into four
directions. In accordance with the location of the epicenters relative to
the Tnlgar station these directions were terled: Northeast. East, South
and Heat. designated from here on for brevity by NE. 3. 8 and U. The epi-
central distances within each direction with varying detail covered the

range from 200-300 to 3000-3500 km. The distribution of the number of epi-
centers by directions is shown in Table 6.

TABLE 6

Data on the number of earthquakes as a
function of distance interval and direction

 

A. kl NE W

200-1000 59 153 60 -
1000-3000 108 12? 130 132

 

 

The Northeast direction is formed by the epicenters of Zaysen. Altay. Sayan.
Pribaykal’ye and Trans-Baykal. The East -- by earthquakes of Dzhungaria.
Northwest China. Mongolia. Comprising the South direction are the epicenters

h?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of Kushgnria. Pakistan. Nepal. India and the day of Bengal. In the Rest

direction are South Wan' Shan'. Psmir. the Tadzhik Depression. Kopet-Dsg.
[run and the Caucasus.

Measurement and Processing Methods. In each of the four directions. spectral
amplitude curves were plotted for the maJor wave groups reliably differ-
entiated in the intermediate zone: Pn. P. Pg. 8 and Lg. The hodograph
compiled by i. L. Nersesov and T. 0. Rautian (196*!) was used in data analysis.
Maximum amplitudes were measured in intervals lasting 10-15 s for longi-
tudinal waves. and 15-20 s for 8 and Lg waves.

Due to strong absorption. high frequencies could not be followed throughout
the distance range. For instance the recordings on the seventh channel
”-22 Hz) were made at distance; up to 300 ion. on the sixth (fill its) --
up to 500-700 km. on the fifth (f-S. 6 Hz) -- up to 800-1000 km. The ampli-
tude curves for the four low-frequency channels could be followed throughout
the interval of investigated distances.

'lhe single-station method was used in data processing. The amplitude curves
were plotted from recordings of many earthquakes with epicentral distances
covering the range of interest. Intensity estimates were known for all these
earthquakes -- either the energy class K (at distances up to 1000 km) fras
observations of regional networks. or the magnitude M determined from surface
waves (at distances beyond 1000 km). It is important that these estimates
do not depend on the behavior of the body waves in the intermediate zone.

If we have an estimate of earthquake intensity M1 or K1 and we know how the
spectral amplitudes A(f) depend on M or K (Nurmsgambetov et al.. 1915). we
can normalize the measured amplitudes. reducing them to a fixed value of
M0 or Ko. It was such normalised maplitudes that were used to plot the
amplitude curves.

All measured spectral amplitudes were reduced to the reference class Ko =10
or to the reference magnitude no I 5. Normalization was done by the formulas

AU.K.)-AU.KJ.1W“M
or
IMHO-Amm-iﬂmnm,
Values of functions 8(f) for average frequencies of a 01138 station obtained
experimentally (Nurmagambetov et al. . 1975) are sunnarised in Table 7.
'me function 8(f) was taken as the same for different waves and regions.
The values of “K and B“ are related by the formula

p. I o.“ '1.

implied by the energy relation between the M and K scales that is valid

within the limits of the dynamic range of the earthquakes used (Zapol'skiy
et al., 197'.)-

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

TABLE 7
Values of M?) for channels of a ChIBS station

     

0.. 0.10 I.“ 0.. I.“ it.“
0.“ 0.“ 0.0 0.“ 0.“ 0.00
.. .3. 0.. .su .0“ .u” .3.

 

KEY: lui’grameter
2-- f. H:

Since the amplitudes were normalised to Ko '10 in the near tone (up to 1000
km) and to Ho IS in the far zone. in comparing the amplitude curves suma-
rizing the data for the entire distance interval (from 200 to 3000 ion). the
curves of the near zone were shifed by an amount proportional to 8K until
they coincided with the curve of the far zone on the section of coverage.

Since 8 depends on frequency. this shift was different for different recording
channels.

inns in plotting the spectral amplitude curves we used normalised values of
the maximum amplitudes of wave groups Pn. P. Pg, Sn. 8 and Lg.

Graphs for the dependence of maximum amplitudes on distance were plotted
from six frequency channels for each wave group. The experimental values
(from 60 to 250 points) were averaged. and a smoothed curve was drawn through
the centers of gravity of the individual distance intervals. The method is
described in detail in another work (Antonova et al.. 1968). As a result.

families of spectral amplitude curves were obtained for each direction by
wave groups.

Shown on graphs plotted from recordings of the 01168 station at ‘ralgar are
amplitude curves for approximately the same azimuths according to data of
wide-band instrunents of the general type SK for six stations located in
Northern Wan' Shan'. Graphs for the ratios of amplitudes of Pg and Pa waves
as a function of epicentral distance are plotted for each direction.

Let us go on to a detailed examination of the amplitude curves.

Spectral amplitude curves of Pa and P waves for the four directions are shown
in Fig. 18. Characteristic peculiarities of all curves are: unifon drop
in the interval from 250 to 3504100 km. increase in intensity at about
350-500 km. and a second spike at 500-600 km that shows up more reliably in
all directions. and then a section of strong decline from 600 to 800-l000 km.

The structure of the amplitude curve of the Pn wave on the section up to
1000 km is the most unstable in comparison with all the wave groups con~
sidered. he amplitude curves are characterized by strong oscillations that

Ma

[’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    
    
 
    
     

~il\
Ni~
I

I ‘

  

    

Ii‘

 
  

\

a%&-
'52

    

RITA“
'11:.»—

__’_’_/2.2'"

   

"fur a u w m use
4- ,
Fig. 18. Spectral amplitude curves of P and Pn Haves for Northeast (8).

East (b). South (c) and Heat (d) directions: l--avera3e channel frequency

0.35 llz; 2--0.T; 3--l.|a~. h--2.8; 5-6.6; 6--ll Hz; Tui‘rom recordings or
vide-band SK equipment

are difficult to dintinnuiah with the methods used for the observations and

«into procemzinn. As: an example. we give a version of possible approximation

0!“ experimental data for the spectral mplitudes of Pn waves for the South
direction (Fig. 19).

’05

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.Ii/‘I‘. um/n

       

I I?
, iii
Ii ill
Iilli

.av as In an m M av‘ “M
Fig. 19. An example of possible approximation of experimental values of
the spectral amplitudes of a Pn wave on the 300-1000 km section for each
direction: channels are separated; see Fig. 18 for designation of curves

    

One can clearly distinguish three sharp spikes of intensity at too, 600 and
800-900 hm. where the amplitude differentials reach one and a half orders of
magnitude. An example of another technique for averaging experimental data
is shown by the curves for the Heat direction (see Fig. 18d) that are plotted
with strong smoothing, resulting in revelation of the most "long-period"
component of the attenuation curve and total filtering of the "short-period"
(oscillating) component.

The given two versions of averaging show the inhomogeneity of structure of
of the spectral amplitude curves in the near zone.

bet us continue the examination of curves for all directions (Fig. 18). The
frequency-selective nature of attenuation on the section up to 800 km shows
up weakly. The curves of the first four channels (frequencies from 0.35 to
3 ilz) are nearly parallel, the attenuation curve of the fifth channel (5.5 Er.)
has a somewhat greater slope, and it is only the curve of the sixth channel
(11 ilz) that is appreciably steeper. The most pronounced differences in the
behavior of spectral curves of different frequencies are observed on the
800-1000 km section. At a distance of 600-800 km the amplitudes on the
fifth and sixth channels ( 5-10 Hz) are approximately equal to the amplitudes
on the first and necond channels (0.35-0.T its): at distances of 1300-1500 km
they become 20-30 times lover.

From n comparison of curves of different directions on the section up to
1000 km it is clear that as there is a change from IE to E. and then toward

H and 8 there is a reduction in the slope of the curves and displacement of
the position of extrema toward greater distances.

3:6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On curves for directions NE and E near 1000 km. oscillation is observed with
a minimum at 800-850 km and a maximum at 950-1050 km. This feature shows
up very weakly on curves for directions 5 and w.

lit distances greater than 1000-1500 km the general attenuation of amplitudes
decreases sharply, the curves flatten out. reaching a minimum at distances
of about 1500 km, which is clearly distinguished on curves of directions

NE, E and 8. Apparently for the Heat direction the minimum is shifted toward
2000-2200 km.

Further on a maximum is observed that is most pronounced on curves of direc-
tions NE and H, where its ”amplitude" reaches 0.7-0.9 log unit. For directions
E and S. the "amplitude" of the spike is lower: 0.3-0.1: log unit. The
position of the maxim of the amplitude curve gradually shifts from 1800 km
to 21:00 km with a change from directions NE and E to S and H. This msximus

has a complex structure and can be resolved into two maxima located at
distances of about 2000 and 2500 km.

Unfortunately. it has been nearly impossible to determine the spectral
structure of this spike, i. e. to trace stable differences in the behavior
of different frequencies. The curves of frequencies from 0.35 to 2.8 Hz

behave about the same. and the higher frequencies disappear at distances
greater than 1500 km.

For a quantitative description of regional differences we introduce several
parameters that characterise the major features of ‘the amplitude curves:
11min. or lgmax. - the position (in km) of the extrema of the curves;

r11 -- the logarithmic steepness of the slope (negative exponent of the
approximating power function) within the limits of a certain distance
interval; 61 -- the "amplitude" of the maximum of the curve (in log units);
and the characteristics of level -- the value of the ratio MT (in um/s) at
a certain distance. we will determine the values of these parameters for
three frequency intervals: 0.35-0.T, L’s-2.8 and 5.6-1.1 Hz, that we will
designate for brevity by the values of the average frequencies -- 0.5, 2 and
8 Hz. All values of the parameters for the amplitude curves of P and Pa waves

as well as Pg waves are sumnarized in Table 8. The unreliable determinations
of parameters are enclosed in parentheses.

‘ihe amplitude curves of Pg waves are shown in Fig. 20. These curves also
show a characteristic oscillatory structure; however it shows up much more
weakly than in Pn waves. Two sections of monotonic fall-offlin amplitude

are observed: the first from 250 to 350-500 km, and the second from 500-600
to 800-1000 km. These two sections are separated by an oscillation that

shows up clearly on curves of directions NE and E, and to a much lesser extent
on curves for s and w.

0n curves for directions NE. E and S one can distinguish a minimum located
at distances of 3'40, 1:20 and 1:50 km respectively, and a maximum -- at dis-
tances of 1000, 500 and 520 km. The average values of logarithmic steepness

1!?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘I'NilJ-i 8

anuen or pnrnmotcrn or npcctrnl nmplltucin curven nr Pn. l‘ vow-n and Pa vaveu
l‘nr four directions or promnnuon anal three overuse frequencies: 0.5. 2. 8 Hz

(l) “mm? W
m" "II-nu— "II“-

l’n and P waves

\ M - L. I M ml 3.! i. 1.0 LI (0.“ M 1.0
4. mg) M - no no «0 u u an an - - - -
I. In: M - «o «- m In m m w - - - -
M (.0 0.! 1.0 0.. I0 |.I 8.0 {.0 - 0.‘ I.‘ M
Alt no u D i. I 0 u N D - I” I0 I
:1? I!» I: 8 I I I! O I I0 - M U -
lh-llw mo nan - II. on - an MD - - - -
[M III! M - mo m: - an» II. - - - —
nan-m 0.1 0.3 - 0.8 0.! - 0.“ 0.8 - - - -
’2 nu uO-Im M M - III) m - m D» - am an. -
non-mo 0.” 0 l5 - 0.“ 0.” - 0.8) 0.0 - 0.0 0.“ -
. Pg unvc ’ a) ' ’ a .

a. ale-em 3.0-: s n a: 3.2 3.1 H 8.0 0 0 | - . -
'h M 1.. O I. I.) ‘J 8 «.l) D - 3.3 8.0 6.6

 

KEY: l--Pnrnnctcr; awning 3--mux
MT. nun/a

- -A_-E

i
i
i

ii

 

Fig. 20. Spectral amplitude curves of P; waves of the Northeast (3). East
(b). South (c) and Heat (d) directions; see Fig. 18 for designation of curves

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in nnul In or thcnc twn nectlmm ni‘ the amplitude cnrvm'. are (given in Table 8.
11m my, vav-m «Imp mil. very utrnngiy (approximately an A"-A‘ within the
ilsitn oi‘ the first nection. and still more strongly within the limits of

the uecond nection). 'ihe extent of attenuation weakens with a transition from
direction NE to P. and then from 3 to H. The npectrally selective nature of
attenuation In weakly oxprenned. no that general damping cannot be attributed
to the effect of absorption. A conparinon or the Pg and Pn waves vith
reupect to level shows up that at a dintanee or 300 km they differ by a
factor or 5-15 on frequencien oi‘ about 1 Hz. and by a factor of 3-10 on
frequencies of 3-6 iiz.

From a comparison of the amplitude curVeu or i‘g and Pn waves with respect

to nhape. we see that the exponent oi‘ the approximating power function for
W, waves in about two units higher than for Pn waves. Particularly deserving
of attention is the coincidence of positions (with respect to the distance
axis) or the extrema or the amplitude curves of both types of waves. For
lnntnnce their ninina coincide and cone at film-1:20 lie for the directions NE
and E renpectively. Similarly coincident are the positions of the next
maximum: at hoo-tso and 500-520 its for the given directions. For con-
venience in comparing the opectral amplitudes of Pg and Pn waves. graphs were

  

4:2:-

A

      
 
 

 

, um! cIl

“KIWI

  

III!
IIV

    

  
      

 

         

   

   

 
        

’Ing-III n!!ﬂ°

,Eﬁy-lllll . _§=::
ﬁa‘..." .==Eii
mum ii:
= §=:u §\!l
— __5:_'=.§;33
u a av eon.— as a-

Fig. 21. Amplitude ratio 01' Pg and Pn waves as a mnction of epicentral
dintance for the northeast (a). Best (b). South (c) and Vest ((1) directions;
the curve numbers correspond to the conventional designations in Fig. 18a

’09

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ("’I’ICMI. "SR 0le

plotted for the change with distance in the ratio of their amplitudes wuh
respect to each direction (Hg. 21). These graphs also have an oscillatory
ntructure that to a considerable extent copies (with reverse sign) the oscil-
lation of amplitude curves of Pn waves.

The graphs of the amplitude ratio enable one to readily deter-inc the limiting
distances to which the Pg group dominates on the recording. 1. e. how such

it exceeds the Pa wave in amplitude. 'ihey show the interval of tracking

of the Pg group in different frequency ranges. 'ihe values of these distances
are umarized in Table 9. It can be seen from this table that the interval
of tracking of the Pg wave decreases with increasing frequency -- free 1000 its
for a frequency of 035-0.? Ilr. to too he for a frequency of 22 he.

TABLE 9

Values of epicentral distances (km)
at which amplitudes of Pa and Pr, waves are equal

We as“. to

I 0.. 0,. I3 u M Q U
ace - an an an as us so
{is «is use an 0: a I: Z
3? a s s .. .. - -
(7)“ m us Is no as as M

—————_——__I—_

KEY: l--Direction of propagation 5--8

2--Channel frequency . ii: 6-40
3..-:{3 TnAverage
b --8

Another quantitative characteristic of these graphs is their logarithmic
steepness n1 within the limits of certain distance intervals. The values
of this parameter with respect to each distance and for all frequencies are
swarmed in 'Table 10. The differences in steepness of the ratio of ampli-
tucier. of i'g and Pn waves with respect to directions are slight. But it can
he noted that the highest steepnesses are observed for the directions ii! and
long distances in direction 5. while the lowest steepness is shown by it.

or importance in understanding the nature of the Pg wave is the way that

the slope of the graphs depends on frequency. Table 10 shows that the effect
of absorption in about the cane for both types of waves.

Amplitude curves of S waves are shown in Fig. 22. 'lhe Sn and s waves are
the weakest among the groups of waves considered. In many instances it is
almost impossible to distinguish them on recordings. It should be noted

that the Sn waves in general are poorly observed over the entire territory
of the southeast USSR. Besides. additional difficulties are caused by the

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SH ONLY

TABLE 10

Average valuen or the logarithmic steepness n or the ratios
of amplitudes or Pa and In waves

Mi M? T- [ﬂu-

' g - Li no no OJ
as in IJ as id

7

( )

(an OJ IJ as in
a.» M u M M
1.0 u I.’ M M

0.. Id 3.! I.O 1.0 (I

f'se-c
2m:

 

KEY: l--Direction of propagation 5--E

2--Distance interval. km 6--s

3--Channel frequency. Hz 7--"

h--NE 8--Avcrage
A/To Iii/8

        
 
 

  
     
 

 
 
 

 

 

   
 

,nmu mun-Inn up:

uum Immun- nu

mun Illllh'lll .uI
“MES!- »-
Illlllh!!!
nus: a
"maxi:
llllIlII a
u Ill-Ill IIIIIIIIIII

     

“NIH” leuﬂnl~Ln

Fig. 22. Spectral amplitude curves of S waves of East (a). South (b) and
West (c) directions; see Fig. 18a for designations of curves

use of recordings or the vertical component on which these waves show up

much more poorly than on the horizontal components. For cases where the

5 wave does not have clear entries, and the recordings show only sous increase
in amplitudes. measurements are made within a time segment differentiated

in accordance with the hodograph. The resultant amplitude curves of Sn

waves are less reliable than the curves of other types of waves.

For East and South directions, the amplitude of the Sn waves of epicentral
distances up to 1000 km was not measured because of their very low intensity.
And for the Northeast direction it was impossible in general to distinguish
these waves within the limits of the entire investigated interval of epi-
central distances. The amplitude curve of this direction was not plotted.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Let Im Lake up the nhnrheterlutlc of spectral amplitude curves in more detail.

0» the section up I." I000 km nnrordlnr. to data of recordings hy wide-hand
5K Im.l.r-w-ntu Liu' gum-ml slope of the curvuu for the three directions is
approximately constant: they decline in Inverse proportion to the cube of
the distance. Ii relatiVe maximum can be distinguished in the interval of
1050-600 km. i. e. in the same region as for P waves. A second. less pro-
nounced maximum can be seen at distances of 800-900 km.

N. greater distances the decline of the curves decreases somewhat, and close
to 1500-2000 km a relative minimum is observed. followed by a maximum at
distances of 2200-2500 km. 0n the 1500-3000 km segment of the spectral

curves of the Heat direction the level is approximately 1.8-2 times as high
as in other directions.

One can Judge the spectraliy selective nature of attenuation of s waves

at distances from 300 to 700 km only from curves of the Rest direction. ‘l‘heir
parallelism shows that the spectrum of S waves remains practically unchanged.

in the distance range from 1000 km to 2000-2500 km one can see an appreciable

frequency dependence of attenuation: damping increases strongly with an
increase in frequency.

Amplitude curves of Lg waves are shown in Fig. 23. They also have an oscil-
latory structure, though much less pronounced than for longitudinal waves.
Clii'Veu of the Heat direction are monotonic, and have no oscillations at
distances up to 1000 km. Several characteristic sections can be distinguished
on the amplitude curves.

The initial section up to distances of 350. 1000 and 550 km for directions NE.
E and S respectively is characterized by relatively weak damping, and the
logarithmic steepness a; shows little frequency dependence.

Hithin the limits of distances all of boo-800 km a spike appears on the
curves that is most strongly pronounced for the NB direction. with a tran-
sition to other directions the "amplitude” of the spike decreases. and the
interval Ali itself shi i‘ts toward greater distances: 350450 km for NE.
too-550 km for E and 550-800 km for 5.

0n section Al; the amplitude curves decline monotonically, being well
approximated by a power-law mnctiOn with exponent '12 approximately equal

to 5-7. Section Ala occupies the distance intervals of 500-800. 600-1200.
800-le and 700-1500 km for the curves of directions NE. E, s and ii respec-

tively. 'lhc degree or damping n2 gradually decreases with a transition from
the Northeast direction to the Rest.

In the distance interval from 800 to 1500-2000 km, the frequency selective
nature of attenuation shows up strongly. For the directions NE and B the

spectral curves of frequencies 0.35 and 2.8 iiz approximately coincide in level
at a distance of 500 km; at 1500 km they differ by 1.5-2 orders.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 23. Spectral amplitude curves of L3 waves of Northeast (a). East (b).
South (c) and west (6) directions; see Fig. 18a for designations of curves

Section Al; terminates with the next oscillation of the amplitude curves.
which shows up moot clearly for the NE direction. The position of the minimum
15' n and the maximum I?” gradually shifts toward greater distances vith an
increase in the azimuth of the direction into the epicentral region. 'lhe
"amplitude" of the oscillation also decreases at the same time.

For the South and Heat directions in the distance interval of 2000-2500 km
one can distinguish a relative increase of intensity - l3“.

Table 11 gives the parameters of spectral amplitude curves of L3 waves.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
i’Oli OFFICIAL USE 0le

TABLE 11

Parameters of spectral amplitude curves of L3 waves for four directions
or propagation and three frequencies: 0.5. 2, 8 Hz

 

 

a aa-an at s a - 3 i3 L1 in «a an is -
a us-ww «A as u I» as as as an - as. «as -
a” a» as an I an an c an on - In a -
Air up an n - we a — a a - m a -
lo «Ii ) - Io en - me use .. up an .. .. .. .-
h-u‘ 3 - an an - am an - an an - - - -
’o I!“ | - III) M - - , - .. I” u .. .. .- -
Note: unreliable data are shown in parentheses
KEY: l--Parameter 3--ndn
2--Distance. kn h--max

The general level or amplitudes of waves of the La group at distances of up
to 1000 km is approximately the same for all directions considered. An
exception is the Heat direction for which the amplitude level is 1.5-2

times lower. In the interval of 1500-2000 km the greatest intensity of L3
waves in typical of the Northeast direction. while minimum intensity is
typical of the South direction. which is due to the sharp increase of ampli-

tudes within the limits or the northern border of the Tibetan plateau. This
effect will be examined in detail below.

Scattering of individual experimental values of Al! relative to the amplitude

curves depending on frequency. wave type and epicentral distance is shown
in Table 12. Frequency dependence of a is not noted.

TABLE 12

Values of standard deviations a (log units) of individual ueasurenents
of spectral amplitude curves as a function of frequency and type of wane

(l OHIO-eas- Ef- o-see-n-

0.8 0.8 h w.
0.1. 0.8 '1 0.. ] ﬂ-M
me 0.8 ls 0.9
3.. am h s I 0.8
I... O." 8 O.“ l M
ii.“ 0.3 It . 0.8

Note: The overall average of the
standard deviation of an individual
measurement is 0.32. -

KEY: l--Averauins with respect to wave types 3--?. Hz
2--Averaging with respect to frequencies h.-wave

5h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFXCIAL USE ONLY

An examination or the de1mndcncc or u on wave type and distance shows that
up to 1000 km the Lg wave has the minimum scatter. and the Pn wave-- the
maximum. ncyond 1000 km in the Northeast direction the Pn waves are more
stable. while scattering for the Lg wave group rises sharply: 0 increases
from 0.30 to ()JaO; in the South direction the value or o for Lg waves is low.
This can apparently be attributed to the fact that the measurements here
properly apply not to the Lg wave. but to the "background oi‘ oscillations,"
which is formed as a result of repeated scattering of the longitudinal and
transverse waves that form the P-code and S-code.

The code waves diffuse the energy of seismic oscillations and level out the
inhomogeneity of radiation that is associated both with large inhomogeneities
or structure and with the mechanism or the focus; therefore these waves

are characterised by low scatter of individual measurements.

The direction dependence or a shows up rather noticeably. For instance at
distances up to 1000 km 0 increases with a transition from the Northeast
direction to the South. and at distances beyond 1000 km 0 increases with a
transition from the South direction to the Northeast. This is apparently due
to the fact that distances of the order of 1000 km to the south of Talgar
correspond to exit of the seismic ray beyond the limits of the mountain
system or the Tibetan Himalayas. onto the Hindustan Platform. where the
structure or the crust and mantle is more uniform. whereas in directions
toward the east and northeast the seismic rays remain within the limits or
large mountain systems and the inhomogeneities or structure that are
associated with them.

Apparently we can treat the quantity 0 as an estiante of convergence of
magnitudes with respect to corresponding waves if the amplitude curves that
we have plotted are used as calibration curves. An analysis of the spread of
the data leads us to the conclusion that in order to increase the accuracy
of magnitude determinations. a calibration curve should be used on distances
up to 1000 km that is plotted from Lg or Pg waves. and at distances beyond
1000 km -- from the P wave. An appreciable improvement in accuracy can be
realized both by using several types of waves and by simultaneous use of
recordings or several frequency selective channels.

Comparison of the Parameters of the wave Pattern with Respect to Different
Directions.

Typical of recordings of the Northeast direction are intense phases of Pg and
Lg waves with a clear entry and a steep leading edge; the Pa waves are the
weakest. 'lhe considerable di i‘i‘erenccs in the amplitudes of the initial and
subsequent parts of the recording in weak earth tremors frequently leads to
loss of the true first entries. in such cases, the subsequent waves in the
Pn group or even in the Pg group are mistakenly taken as the first entries.
This happens most often at distances of hOO 100 km.

0n amplitude curves of three types of waves -- Pn, Pg and Lg - the intensity
spike at a distance of 350460 km is most pronounced in comparison with other

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

directions. and in the 500-1000 km intcrvni these waves damp out more
strongly than in other directions.

within the distance interval of 800~1300 km the longitudinal wave group is
extremely insignificant. the amplitudes are very low. 2-h times lower than
In other directlonn. The greatest spike or P wave amplitudes is noted at
a distance or about 2000 km. The entries or all waves (in the interval up
to 1000 km) show the highest frequencies in their spectral makeup in com-
parison with other directions.

Showing up most poorly in this direction are 8 waves. which could be dis-
tinuuished only in rare instances at distances beyond 1500 km.

The amplitude curves of the East direction have much in common with the
curves for the Northeast. The first spike on the Pn. Pg and Lg curves was
shifted here to hOO-SSO km. and its "amplitude" was noticeably decreased.
Curves of these three types of waves are much more wekaly damped. At dis-
tanecu or 800-1300 km the Pn group is more compact. the maximum amplitude
usually gravitating toward the initial part of the group. In general the
amplitudes of the main groups of waves at these distances (in the shadow
zone)nrenoticeab1y higher than on recordings or the NE direction. The

20-degree spike (distance about 2000 km) is almost unexpressed for this
direction.

All waves are somewhat lower-frequency with respect to their spectral compo-
sition at distances up to 1000 km. On some recordings of this direction
the phases of Sn and 8 waves could be distinguished. The amplitude curves

of Lg waves have a maximum at 1600 km. after which their intensity decreases
sharply.

1ha South direction is characterized by clear entries of waves of the P group
within the limits or the entire tracking interval. by low intensity of the
high-frequency components (above 2.8 Hz) in the spectra of the major wave
types. and a pronounced 20-degree spike for longitudinal waves.

Neat direction: the longitudinal waves are most intense; transverse waves
can be distinguished that become stable at distances of more than 1500 km.
The L3 wave group shows up here most poorly: there are no clear entries.

the amplitude is 3-h times lower than ﬂor the NE and 3 directions.

The amplitudes of the main groups of waves on the average damp out more
weakly than in other directions.

The lowest-frequency are the Pg and Lg waves.
Characteristic Features of Amplitude Curves of Main Have Groups.

1he parameters of the spectral amplitude curves for different directions of
propagation are summarized in tables 8. 9. 10 and 11.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. The spectral amplitude curves of Pn. Pg. 8 and Lg waves have an oscil-
latory structure that is most strongly pronounced in the Pa group.‘and
sore weakly pronounced in the Lg group. 'ihe positions of the principal
extrema on the distance axis approximately coincide for all wave groups.
One can distinguish several sections of comparatively monotonic change in
amplitudes separated by maxima and minima.

2. The first section of the curve is from 200-250 to 350-500 km. Damping of
amplitudes is moderate. tn the distance interval of 350-550 km a minimum
shows up that is replaced by a maximum at LSD-550 km. The amplitudes of the
various frequencies within the limits of this section damp out practically

identically Apparently the oscillatory structure of the Pa waves on this
section is more complicated, and spikes occur at 350. 500 and 600 km.

3. The second section of the curve is from 500 to 800-1000 km for longi-
tudinal waves. and up to 1200-1500 km for Lg waves (South and Rest directions).
Within the limits of this section, waves of all types experience the strongest
damping. and its frequency selective nature shows up here most clearly.

la. 'lhe Pg wave is 5-15 times more intense than the Pn wave on frequencies of
0.3-2 Hz. and at distances of 3004000 km. With increasing distance this
ratio decreases noticeably. approximately as 5-2 Pg waves predominate in
the group of longitudinal waves up to distances of 800-1000 km on frequencies
of 0.3-2 ii: and up to distances of 500-100 km on frequencies of 3-10 Hz.

5. Ii‘he Lg wave is predominant on recordings up to 1500-2000 km (and mrther
for lower frequencies). For the Northeast direction in the distance interval
of 800-2000kmon frequencies of 0.35-0.7 Hz the Lg wave is 8-15 times as
intense as longitudinal waves. This ratio decreases with increasing
frequency and with a change to other dierctions.

6. Major features of amplitude curves in the interval from 100 to 1600 km:
oscillation with minimum at 700-900 km and maximum at 900-1100 km is typical
of the amplitude curves of Pa waves and to a lesser extent of Lg waves; a
minimum can be seen at about 13100-1600 km. after which the attenuation of
amplitudes (particularly for longitudinal waves) abates noticeably -- the
curves flatten out. and frequency differences in damping decrease.

'I. At distances of about 2000 and 2500 km, intense maxims are noted on the

amplitude curves. most clearly for longitudinal waves, and weakly pronounced
for Lg waves.

2. Spectra of principal waves

This section gives experimental data on the shape of the spectra of the
principal waves -- Pn, Pg, 8, Lg -- and their variation with distance as

a function of the azimuth of the direction of propagation. Regional dif- .
fercnces of the spectra are demonstrated that arise both during the formation
of seismic waves and during propagation. The distances are determined for
the most considerable changes in spectra.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCML USE ONLY

 

Fig. 2h. Change with distance in the spectral shape or Pn and P waves
(Tamar otation) for the Northeast (a). we (1)). South (c) and Heat. («1)
directions

‘-“‘ a b c

sou/cl (Ill/ll Multan;

Fig. 25. Change with distance in the spectral shape of 8 vaves (Talgar
utation) for the East (a). South (1:) and Heat directions

 

UUIIIIUUU’ lll'ﬂul III'UCI’ lit. a;

Fig. 26. Change with distance in the spectral shape of L3 waves (Tags: .
station) for the Northeast (a). East (1:). South (c) and West ((1) directions

58- r

FOR OFFICIM. USE: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘1
Fla. 2?. Change with distance in the

spectral shape of La and Pa. P waves
In (Temporary station) for East (a) and
Southwent (h) directions

{32
g/Jv

i i

I). I”

W
2%.

I.

w
um "I; r. a,

232%.
2.1

2
3
C
Q
S

b

A»
A»

c

I

I

a\\
hLH—L—iJ-L Lug—1.1.44.1. W
alto/(Ill! tau/nail (Ill/1110f.ﬂz

Fig. 28. Comparison of spectral shape (Talgar station) of Pn (a). P; (b)
and 1.3 (c) waves for the Northeast (1). East (2), South (3) and Heat (lo)
directions at an apicentral distance of 300 km

The amplitude curves given in the preceding section constitute the basis for
consideration of the spectral characteristics of the waves. liere we M111
ntudy the "cross sections" of the amplitude curves that enable comparison

of the spectral shape of the principal waves without reference to their level.

Fig. 211, 25. 26 show families of spectra of Pa, 8 and L3 waves for certain
values of epicentral distances from 350 to 2500 Inn and various directions of
propagation of waves relative to Talgar station. The experimental materials
used are described in section 1 of this chapter. The spectra are normalized
to M15, and their level is arbitrary.

Fig. 27 shows similar families of spectra for Pn and L8 waves plotted fro-
datn of Temporary station for two azimuthal directions. the first coinciding

approximately with liorhteast and East, and the second - with West as taken
for Talgar station.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'ihe spectra of Pa waves are shown on Fig. 2b. Their shape is influenced by
two main factors: syntematie differences in the shape of earthquake spectra
with different directions. which nhow up on the initial tracking stage:

difference In the nature of variation of the upectre with distance for the
«lirectionu of propagation conuidered.

First let us consider the differences ausociated with the azimuths of direc-
tions that are illuntrated by the selections of ChISS spectra given in

Fig. 28. here we compare the spectra of Pn, P5 and L3 waves of four asi-
muthai directionu at a fixed distance of 300 km. We can see that the spectra
of directions NE and E are considerably higher in frequency than the 8 and

H spectra. This also shows up in the position of the maximum of the spectra
(which is at a frequency of 2.8 Hz for two directions and at 1.16 ii: for the
other two) and in the steepness of its slopes. For instance the ratio of the
amplitude on a frequency of 2.8 lie to that on 0.7 ii: for the first two

directions is equal to approximately three. while these amplitudes are equal
for the second pair of azimuths.

TABLE 13

Parameters of the spectra of principal waves in different directions
for distances of 350 and 800 km

 

I . 8.. ml 8.3 LI l.‘ l.‘ i.‘ L0

v.37”: 4.0a 4.0 —o.n 4.11 4.: an 4.. e

" mm.» 4.» -s.u .4.» 4.:- m m o 0.0
«1.05.» 4.0 not 0.0 s.“ 0.6 - 0.0 M0

I . :.s :.s s.s M M M 1.4 m

is 10.570.» 0.» -s.u —e.cs -s.u —s.n 4.» o _ 9
mm.» -e.ll 4.0 4.. 4.“ 4.“ 0.0? MI 0.“
“1.03.00 0 s.» am 0.53 s.“ a." 0.01 us
I. 1.6 0.3 M 0.1 0.1 (0.8 «a 0.8
1. Mai.» e a." on m 0.11 0.“ us
mm.» 4.» use 0.3 0.0 ass us on an
«HMO 0.0 us an as! me - -

 

KEY: l--'l‘ype of wave
2--Pnrameter

Data on the parameters of spectra of different directions ibr two distances
(350 and 800 km) are sumarized in Table 13. The parameters shown are

rmx -- the position of the maxim of the ChISS spectrum. and y(f1/fJ)-- the
iogari thm of the ratio of amplitudes on two frequencies.

Mn. 2!: and 28 and Table 13 imply that the spectra of Pa waves in directions
NH and E differ from each other insignificantly. 'lhe same can be said about
the spectra of the other two directions: 8 and H. 'me differences in the
parameter 1 within each pair do not exceed 0.2 log unit, whereas between
pairs these differences amount to 0.5-0.6 log mit on the average.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us examine the other peculiarity of the :tmctra. For all types of waves
the amplitude of the 0.35 Hz frequency is anomalously high on near distances
for NE and E. 'ihe spectra of Pa waves show how the noted low-frequency slope
is interrupted by a rise in amplitude on the 0.7-3.5 Hz section, even though
under conditions of absence of the effect of absorption one should expect
constant steepness of the low-frequency slope.

Turning to the nature of the change in spectra with distance, we see that _
the strongest damping of high frequencies occurs in the 800-1500 km distance

interval. The spectral shape changes insignificantly both preceding and
following this section.

'ihe most graphic representation of this pattern is given by graphs of the
change in spectral ratios with distance (Fig. 29). Let us note that oscil-
lations of graphs of v(A) are confined to the sam intervals of epicentral
distances where oscillations were noted in the amplitude curves described
in detail in the preceding section.

Fig. 29. Graph of the change with
distance in the spectral ratios Y
(011188 Temporary station) of fre-
quencies 0.117 and 0.9 H: (l) and
frequencies 0.9 and 0.25 R: (2) for
Lg (a) and P (b) waves

lily/”m

      

Fig. 30. Ratio of spectral
amplitudes of P1 and Pn waves
for epicentral distances of
300 (a). 500 (b) and 800 (c)
km for the Northeast (1).
East (2). South (3) and

West U!) directions

      

I

own [III/l

 

000/ II Jill I!
f,Hs

‘ihe spectra of Pg waves differ considerably from those of Pn waves in their
relative low-frequency nature. Typical spectra of Pg waves can be seen in

Fig. 28b, where they are shown for a distance or 300 km with respect to all
four directions. The spectra of the Pg waves steadily repeat the amplitude
differences that we found previously for Pn waves.

A more obJective idea is given by the ratios of spectral amplitudes of these
two waves (Fig. 30); the graphs are plotted for three values of the epicentral

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

distance (300. 500 and 800 km) and four directions of propagation. The
values of the ratios were calculated from direct seasureaents of the

amplitudes of these waves rather than with respect to amplitude curves or
art-ctru.

I.:.-I. ml consider the nraph for ”0 km in more detail (see Fig. 28b). At this
distance one begins to track the ['3 wave. From recordings of the Talgar
station this wave is distinguinhcd from distances of 250-2m kin. By 330 km
the l'q wave is usually delayed relative to the first entry by no more than

. s. it can be assumed that at this distance the conditions of propagation
have not yet had any appreciable influence on the spectra: of the Pg wave.

Detailed studies of the spectra oi‘ local earthquakes undertaken by us
previously on materials of the Talgar ChISS station showed that the spectrum
of the Pa wave inherits the spectral peculiarities of the direct P wave
propagating in the earth's crust. 'ihis gives us a basis for assuning that
the difference spectra shown in Fig. 300 can be interpreted as the frequency
response of the mechanism of formation of the P3 wave.

The amplitude differences of this response are quite considerable. For
instance the greatest relative intensity of the P3 wave is noted for earth-
quakes of the Northeast and Heat directions for which the ratio of amplitudes
of P3 to Pn is equal to 10-15 on a frequency lower than 1 lit. The ratio of
these waves begins to decrease from a frequency of 1.1: ii: in the NE direction.
and from 0.7 ii: in the Heat. and is inversely proportional to frequency with
exponent 0.7-0.8.

For directions 5 and l: the frequency dependence is such less pronounced.

in the frequency range of 0-3‘3 ii: the wave ratio is approximately constant
and equal to 10-6. For higher frequencies the ratio decreases weakly: in
inverse proportion to frequency to a power of 0.3-0.5.

with increasing distance the azimuthal differences damp out, and at 800 km
(l-‘ig. me) they become insignificant.

The spectra of s waves are shown on Fig. 25 for three directions of propa-
gation. Of all the investigated types of waves. the data on transverse
waves are the least reliable and representative. Therefore let us deal with
then briefly.

Just as for longitudinal waves. the highest-frequency spectra are those of
the East direction. The spectra of the west and South directions are
appreciably lower-frequency ones. For directions 8, 8 and H the ratio of
amplitudes of the frequencies 0.7 and 2.8 Hz at a distance of 1000 km is
0.22. 0.70 and 0.68 log unit respectively. By a distance of 1500-2000 km
the differences in spectra of different directions abate.

For the spectra of transverse waves of the East direction the effect of the
increase in amplitude on a frequency of 0.35 Hz is observed to a still
greater extent than for longitudinal waves.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The spectra of 5 waves show a more stable change with distance than longi-
tudinal waves. [in appreciable change in the spectra taken place in a more
extended interval: from 800-1000 to 2000-2500 km. The principal oscil-
lations are confined to 2000 and 2500 km.

'ihe spectra of Lg waves as a mnction of distance are shown in Fig. 26 and 2'!
for the Talgsr and Temporary stations.

'lhe amplitude differences of the spectra of Lg waves that show up at short
distances repeat the peculiarities of the spectra of longitudinal waves.

'ihe spectra of the NE direction are the highest-frequency. with an increase
in azimuth one notes a considerable increase in low-frequency components of
the spectrum. For instance Table 13 shows that the maximun differences in
the ratio of amplitudes of frequencies of 0.1 and 2.8 ii: reach 0.7-0.8 log u.
The maximum of the spectrum of directions NE and B is at a frequency of

LI: Hz, and for the west direction -- at frequencies lower than 0.35 liz.
'lhese estimates apply to epicentrnl distances of 350 km.

Anomalously high amplitudes of the 0.35 liz frequency can be seen on the
spectra at short distances for all directions except the South.

Now let us examine the change with distance in the spectrum of Lg waves.
Fig. 29 shows a graph of the distance dependence of spectral ratios as

plotted from data of the Temporary ChISS station. The plot of the graph
repeats the main peculiarities noted previously for other types of waves.

in the interval from 200-250 to 500-700 km the spectrus of Lg waves changes
more weakly than at greater distances. The strongest changes take place

on the section between 600-800 and 1300-th km. At distances of 1300-1700 km
the oscillation shows up clearly, after which the regular change in spectral
shape with distance abates noticeably.

In conclusion let us repeat the main peculiarities of spectra of different
waves and their change with distance.

In comparing the spectra of different azimuths of propagation for all waves,
one trend shows up: the spectra beeon'e lower-frequency as the azimuth
increases, i. c. with a transition from the NE direction to S. For Pg and
Ly, waves these differences show up even on the initial tracking stage, and

consequently they are due to a greater extent to the mechanism of formation
than to the conditions of propagation.

The patterns of change in spectra with distance are most graphically described
by curves for the dependence of spectral ratios on distance. 'ihese graphs
show several distance intervals within which the changes in spectral shape

of all waves are approximately uniform. In the initial part (from 200-”0

to 500-700 km) spectral changes are insignificant. In the next distance
interval (from 500-800 to 1300-1700 km) the strongest change in spectra
occurs with principal damping on higher frequencies. Between 1330 and 2000 km

63

FOR OPI’ICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an interval of the opposite change in upectra can be distinguished, i. e.
stranger damping of lower frequencies. This shows up as oscillation on
uruphu or the distance dependence of spectral ratios. The next oscillation.
wiIh a iower "runpiitude," in noted at distances of 2000-2500 kn.

At distances greater than 1500-2000 km there is practically no systematic
component in the change with distance in the spectra of longitudinal waves
for frequencies lower than 3 ha. At these distances the spectral shape of
P waves on the average is the same as in the teleseismle zone. 'Ihe spectra
of S waves and especially Lg waves continue to change, but noticeably more
weakly than at shorter distances.

lit distances up to 800-1000 km the amplitudes on a frequency of 0.35 Ii: are
anomalously high for the spectra of all types of waves (especially 8 and Lg

waves). This effect is characteristic to a greater extent of recordings in
the NE and E directions.

The spectra of P and Lg waves at Temporary station are appreciably higher-
frequency spectra than on Talgar station. However, the general patterns of
change in the spectra with distance and the distance intervals with charac-
teristic changes of spectra for both stations are the same.

Chapter 2. Differentiation of Large Horizontal Inhomogeneities with Respect
to the Characteristics of P, Lg and Rg Haves

in this chapter an investigation is made of the spatial structure of the
azimuthal differences of amplitude curves and the spectra of seismic waves
described in the preceding chapter. It is shown that these differences are
formed chiefly on certain sections of the paths of propagation of seismic
rays when they cross certain geological boundaries or structures.

The principal form of representation of experimental data is by spatial
constructions: comparison of amplitude and spectral characteristics on
different paths, mapping of these characteristics. localization of sections
of abrupt changes in the kinematic and dynamic parameters of seismic waves.

In section 1 an investigation is made of the spatial distribution of the
spectral characteristics of longitudinal waves from remote earthquakes.

It is shown that regional differences in the value of this parameter are
statistically significant. A description is given of the spectral charac-
teristics of P waves as distributed for earthquakes of the maJor seismicalLy
active zones of the earth, and in more detail for Central. Asia. the region
of the most minimal values of spectral parameters is confined to the Tibetan
massif, and a region of somewhat higher values -- to the Persian Plateau.
They are interpreted as regions of elevated absorption of seismic waves in
the upper mantle.

Lg and Rg interference waves are registered only in the case where the entire
path of the seismic ray traverses a crust of continental type. Consequently

t
6h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by comparing the intensity of these waves on different propagation routes
one can localize the blocks in which there is no "granite" layer. or other
appreciable changes are noted in the structure of the earth's crust.

in sections 2 and 3. an investigation is made of the peculiarities of propa-
gation of these waves on different paths that cross Central Asia and the
adJoining territories. From observations of the system of stations. the
boundaries are localized at which a change in the intensity of Lg waves
occurs. These waves disappear completely in those cases where the paths of
the seismic rays even partly intersect the Tibetan massif. 0n the boundaries

of this massif. sharp changes are also noted in the parameters of a train of
ﬁg surface waves.

1.. Mapping of spectral characteristics of P waves

In this section an analysis is made of the results of mapping of the spectral
characteristics of individual earthquakes done with respect to observations
in the intermediate and teleseismic zones. The regional differences found
in the spectral characteristics of P waves are interpreted as a manifestation

of horizontal inhomogeneities of the absorbing properties of the upper mantle
in the vicinity of the focus.

Spectral Characteristics of Remote Earthquakes and Absorbing Properties of
the Upper Hsntle. The experimental data resented helm and the results
obtained by other authors (1'quiura. 1969? show the stability of regional
differences in the spectral composition of longitudinal waves according to
observations at remote stations. The spatial degree of ordering of the
spectral differences can be attributed either to the particulars of focal
radiation or to horizontal inhomogeneities of absorbing properties of the
medium along the paths of the seismic rays.

He assuae that the particulars of the focus. which are definitely important
in formation of the spectral composition of an individual earthquake. may not
be predominant in a set of earthquakes over an extensive territory. Experi-
ence in studying the spectral particulars of focal radiation of local earth
tremors of a number of regions (Molnar et al. . 1976; Hanks. Hyss. 1972:
Thatcher. Hanks. 1973; Tucker. Brune. 1973) has shown that within the limits
of each region there is a considerable variety of spectral characteristics.
primarily of the angular frequencies. that is due to the difference in the
mechanisms of foci and to variations in the stress field. Spatial ordering
of spectral parameters is noted only for quite small epicentral sones.

For extensive global scismically active regions. no systematic deviations of
the spectral composition are noted in observations at small distances.
Therefore we assume that the spectral differences observed in the teleseismie
zone are formed mainly on the path of the seismic ray.

It has been established that the greatest distortions are introduced into the
signal spectrum when a seismic ray crosses the low-Q layer associated with the

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uutheunsphcnr. Many nineareheiu hnva detected considerable regional dif-
ference: in the absorbing properties of this layer. Apparently it is the
mosaic nature of the absorbing properties of the upper mantle that determines
the great variety of steepness of the high-frequency slope of the spectra

of remote earthquakes.

The presence of the asthenoupheric layer has an effect both in the region of
the epicenter and in the vicinity of the station. For a tectonieally homo-
geneous region. the influence of the asthenonpheric layer in the vicinity

of the exit of the rays can be taken an identical in registration of earth-
quakes at a single station from different azimuths. Use of a system of ob-
servations from several stations almost completely eliminates this influence.

Thus we assume that the observed differences in the high-frequency slope of
the spectra of remote earthquakes reflect mainly horizontal inhomogeneity
of the absorbing properties of the upper mantle in the vicinity of the focus
(with consideration of drift of the seismic ray). Spatial mapping of the
,uculiarities of the high-frequency part of the spectrum (with reference of
these peculiarities to the epicenter) will reveal the regional differences
of absorbing properties of the upper mantle in seismically active regions.

The Materials and Technique Used. About a thousand recordings of earthquakes
of the territory of Central Asia and adjacent territories, recorded at ChISS
stations (Garm, Talgar and Temporary) were processed. Besides, about 700
recordings of earthquakes from different epicentral regions of the earth
were processed at these same stations. The magnitudes of the earthquakes
were from “.5 to 5-5.

The sgmctrai ratio of amplitudes for channels with average frequencies of
2.5 and 0.7 u: or 2.5 and 0.35 Hz was determined from the seismograms. The
value of this parameter calculated from each recording was mapped, i. e. it
was assigned to the epicenter of an earthquake. Maps were then constructed
for an intermediate smoothing stage in which the average values of the
parameter were calculated for a group of 5-10 closely spaced earthquakes.
0n the next smoothing stage the values of the parameters (the averages for
large regions) were calculated, or maps of isolines of the parameter 1 were
constructed.

Zoning of the Earth by Spectral Peculiarities of Remote Earthquakes. On the
first stage to determine the stability and scale of regional differences of
the spectral composition of P waves an examination was made of the materials
of the telcscismic zone, where the conditions of observations are more
favorable for detecting the investigated effect than in the intermediate zone.

As is known (Antonova et al., 1968; Carpenter et al., 1967) in the teleseismic
zone the distance factor can be disregarded, the seismdc signal is simple in

shape, and consequently the measurements of the maximum amplitudes are more
unambiguous.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lhe experlmntal data on remte earthquakes that were used were obtained at
Temporary station. Materialn of the 0am and 'i‘aigar stations were utilized
only in part.

More than 700 recordings of remote earthquakes from all major seisaica‘ny
active zones of the earth were processed. 'lhe logarithm of the amplitude
ratio on frequencies of 2.5 and 0.5 "2 was taken as the characteristic of

the spectrum

The average values of this parameter for thirty epicentral territories are
shovn on the nap in Fig. 31. It can be seen that the spectrua does not
depend on epicentral distance. Earthquakes in relatively near regions --
Tibet. Iran. the 'iyan' Shan'-Pamir chain -- are comparatively lov-frequency.

  

Fig. 31.‘ Map of the spectral ratio v(2.5 lit/0.5 Hz) for the major seismically
active zones of the earth (from data of the Temporary ChISS station)

In examining the map, we can see certain patterns in the spatial distribution
of values of the paramter. All seismically active zones of the earth vere
classified into four groups differing in the parameter 1 by 0.20-0.25 (i. e.

by 50-805) .

The first. highest-frequency group, included earthquakes of the Aleutians,
the Kuril-Kanehatka arc and Japan. The average value of the parameter 1 for

these territories is 0.16 log unit.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The earthquakes of Soviet Middle Asia and the part of Central Asia situated
to the north of Tibet are also high-frequency. Here the average value of the
parameter is 0.20. But these regions are located rather close to the
recording station (distance 1000-2000 km), which may explain the high-
frequency nature of the earthquakes.

The earthquakes of indonesia and the Philippines. for which the average
parameter is 0.33. make up the next group.

Still lower-frequency are the recordings of earthquakes of the Alpine belt ~-
the Mediterranean. Turkey. the Caucasus and Iran -- where the parameter
averages 0.55. About the same values of the parameter are typical of earth-
quakes of South America and the continuation of the Indonesian belt to the
east -- New Guinea. the Solomon Islands. the Fiji territory.

'lhe lowest-frequency group is comprised by earthquakes of Tibet (73 -0.?0).
North and Central America (vi-0.72), South and East Africa (vi-0.82).

The differences of the parameter between adJacent groups are significant
since there were from 20 to 100 earthquakes in each regional sample. the
average value of the standard deviation of an individual measurement within
a sample being 0.25 log unit.

Analogous zoning, but with respect to a smaller number or epicentral regions.
was also done from recordings of remote earthquakes at (Barn and Talgar
stations. Joint examination of the materials of the three stations shoved

a systematic influence, col-son to all zones, introduced into the spectrum

by station conditions. In comparison with the Cars station, the spectra of
the Temporary station were on the average more hiya-frequency, while those
at Talgar station were more low-frequency.

The relative spectral differences or the epicentral regions were retained
with respect to the recordings or the three stations as well. For instance
the highest-frequency spectra were those of Northern Japan. the Aleutians and
Indonesia. The spectra 01' the Mediterranean, South America and new Guinea
occupy an intermediate position. The spectra of liorth America, Tibet, the
Arabian Peninsula and South Africa are definitely low-frequency.

or course one should not overestimate the generality of these data. The
stations that were used are situated comparatively close together (average
distance about 1000 km). It is possible that observations on completely
different azimuths of propagation of rays, especially for seismically active
zones, that extend along oceanic arehipelsgoes, will show other tendencies.

'ihe spatial structure of the spectral parameter was studied in more detail

for the northern and northwestern part of the Pacific arc of seismicity.
The results of mapping of this region with respect to the parameter 1 on the

intermediate averaging stage are shown in Fig. 32. iiere the average value of
the parameter is shown for each group of epicenters made up of 3-6 earthquakes.

- 68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .
FOR ()Fl’iClM. USE ONLY

 

Fig. 32. Map of values of the spectral ratio y(2.5 lit/0.9 Ha) for the
northern and northwestern parts of the Pacific Ocean seismically active
belt (from data or the Temporary ChISS station)

KEY: l—Sea of Japan 3--Pacific Ocean
2--Sea of Okhotsk h-n-Aleutian Islands

On this map, one can clearly see the pattern of spatial distribution of the
parameter 1. For instance for the Aleutian are as one advances from east

to west. the values of the parameter first increase iron -O.7 to +0.15, i. e.
the spectra become higher-frequency, and then they become lower-frequency
once more. the parameter decreasing to -0.25.

For the Kuril-Kamchatka are one notes a tencency for the parameter to in-
crease with movement from the northeast to the southwest from -O.|o to +0.25.
For northern and Central Japan the patterns show up more weakly. Nevertheless
two tendencies can be noted: concentration of high-frequency foci near the
island of iiokkaido and intensification of the high-frequency character of
earthquake spectra in the direction perpendicular to the axis of the trend

of seismicity -- from a deep-water trench toward the continent.

To evaluate the statistical significance, we present the following data.

The total masher of epicenters with respect to which the values of the
parameter were determined for the investigated part of the Pacific Ocean

arc was 2'17, the average value of the parameter for the entire region was
-0.17 log unit. the standard deviation of an individual measurement with
respect to the entire region of investigation was -0.27 log unit. the standard
deviation of an individual measurement within each group was -0.16 log unit.
me difference of average values of the parameter for groups of earthquakes
appreciably exceeds the standard deviation of an individual value.

The statistical significance of the results is also confirmed by the pattern
of change in the value of the parameter 7 along the Pacific Ocean are.

Mapping of Spectral Parameters for the Central Part of the Asiatic Continent.
Observations within the limits of this territory covered an interval of
epicentral distances from 1000 to 10000 km. Here. in contrast to the

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

telescismlc zone, the influence of distance on the spectra of earthquakes
becomes appreciable and the results of mapping should in principle reflect
the patterns of change in the spectra for different directions. Such
mapping will enable detection of regional differences in the values or the
parameter v not with respect to directions that are selected a priori, but
will reveal their spatial structure.

The strong dependence of the spectra on distance impedes quantitative com-
parisons and estimates, making them possible only for regions that are
located at different distances from the station. However. the actual situ-
ation is more favorable for quantitative comparisons of spectral parameters
of different regions, since the spectra of longitudinal waves at distances
greater than 1500 km change insigni ficantly. at least on frequencies lower
than 2500 ha. Most experimental data used in this division apply to distances
in excess or 1500 km, vhile estimates of the steepness or the spectrum apply
to frequencies lover than 2.5 Hz. All this has enabled us to apply to the
intermediate zone as well the method of mapping spectral parameters already
used above in the processing of observations in the teleseismic zone.

Estimates of the spectra of the same epicentral regions from data of different
stations diverge more strongly in the intermediate zone than in the tele-
seismic zone. and it is difficult to make a quantitative comparison of maps
plotted for the three stations. Nevertheless, even for these distances the
results of the studies show coincidence of the position of regions of

reduced and elevated values of the paraemter.vith respect to all three
stations.

 

Fig. 33. Maps of isolines of values of the spectral ratio y(2.5 hz/0.5 Hz)
for the central part of the Asiatic continent (from data of the ChISB stations
or manporary (a) and Garm (b))

Shown in Fig. 33 are maps or isolines or the spectral ratio y for the central
part or the Asiatic continent plotted from data of the Temporary and Sara
stations. The region of minimum values of the parameter'is confined to the

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tibetan plateau. According to the Germ data it is situated between 85-100°
8 long and 30-36° N int. and according to data of Temporary station --
between 81-97° E long and 29-35° N lat. According to the data of Talgar
station. the region or minimum values is less pronounced, and is situated
between 810-100° E long and 29-35° N lat.

If consideration is taken of drift with respect to the directions of propa-
gation of rays from the region of the minimum to the recording stations

(for Germ toward the west-northwest. for Temporary toward the north, and for
Talgar toward the northwest). the coincidence of the position of the dif-

ferentiated minimum values with respect to the data of all three stations
can be considered good.

Judging from the map of isolinea. the maximum difference in values of the
parameter within the limits of the region from its center Ward the
periphery is 0.6 log unit for Temporary station, and 1.0 log unit for Garm.

The number of determinations of the spectral ratio for territories inside
Tibet and its framework (conventially taken as a strip 300 km wide) is

21 and 2': respectively for Temporary station, and 11 and 22 respectively
for Garm station. The average values of the parameter inside and outside
of Tibet are 0.75 and 0.35 log unit respectively according to Temporary.
and 1.2 and 0.3 log unit respectively according to Garm. The value of the
standard deviation of an individual determination from the average in all
cases is equal to 0.2 log unit. The simplest analysis of these estimates
confirms the statistical significance of the values found for y in Tibet.

The few determinations of spectral ratios for Central Asia that have been
made from recordings of ChISS stations at Novosibirsk and Bodon also show
a minimum of the values of the parameter in the territory of Tibet.

Another region of minimum values of the parameter is located in the territory
of the Persian plateau. approximately between 50 and 63° E long.

In more detailed zoning of the territory of Soviet Middle Asia from the data
of Temporary station a strip of low-frequency earthquakes is distinguished
that runs along the 'iyan' Shan'-Pamir zone between 67 and 19° 2 long. within
the strip the average value of the parameter is minus 0.6. and along its
periphery -- minus 0.2.

According to data of 0am and Talgar stations. a minimum is noted in the
territory of Mongolia with a differential in values of the parameter between
the center and the periphery that is equal to 0.10 log unit.

A region of high-frequency earthquakes is situated to the north and to the
west of Tibet. These are the territories of Northwest China, Dzhungaria,
Altay and Zaysan. Karakorum. the Hindu Rush and Kok-Shaal. However. the
regions of maxima are not as pronounced as the regions of minima. The differ-
ential in values of the parameter 1 between the center of the maximum and

its periphery averages 0.10 log unit.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3%. Map diagram or the location of regions or elevated (light shading)
and reduced (heavy shading) absorption for the central part of the Asiatic

continent. Regions are shown that are repeated vith respect to the data of
the three stations - Germ. Tnlgar and Temporary

The most general peculiarities that are steadily repeated in observations on
the three stations are shown on the map diagram in Fig. 3%. Regions of
negative values of y. i. e. elevated absorption. and positive values. i. e.
relatively weak absorption, are distinguished.

The results. in particular for the regions of Tibet and Mongolia. agree well
with independent determinations of the absorbing properties of the upper
mantle within the limits or the investigated territory made by L. P. Vinnik
and A. A. Godzikovskaya (1975).

2. Particulars of propagation of Lg waves on paths that cross Central Asia

The intensity or interference groups of waves or the_Lg or Rg type depends
considerably on the type of structure of the earth's crust on the path of
propagation. It the path crosses even a small section with crust of oceanic
type or transition type. this leads to sharp damping or even total disap-
pearance of these waves. It is possible that other peculiarities in the
structure of the earth's crust (disruption of the granite layer and the like)
may also lead to effects of this kind. This is what makes it possible to

use Lg and Hg waves as a simple and promising tool in studying the earth's
crust.

In this section an examination is made of particulars of propagation of Lg
waves on different routes that cross the central part of Asia. It is shown
that Lg waves propagate over an appreciable part of the continent situated
approximately to the north of the 35° parallel of north latitude. 0n routes
that cross the Tibetan plateau these waves completely disappear. The study
technique that is used reliably localizes large horizontal inhomogeneities
in the structure of the crust. and possibly the upper mantle as well.

72

FOR OFFICIhL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Region of Studies and the Materials Used. The intensity of Lg waves was
studied on paths crossing Central Asia and the contiguous territories of
China. Mongolia. the Soviet Union (Middle Asia. Kazakhstan. Siberia). India
and in part Pakistan, Afganistan and Iran. The paths were within the terri-
tory hounded approximately by 75 and 125 E: long and 20 and 55 ii lat.

The particulars of propagation of Lg waves on routes crossing the Tibetan
plateau were studied in more detail. This territory has received very
little geophyscial study. even though information on its structure is
extremely important for tectonic constructions and for an understanding of
the mechanism of convergence and motion of tectonic plates. Therefore the

dynamic peculiarities of propagation of Lg waves and the dispersion properties
of surface waves are so far almost the only sources of information on the
structure of the earth's crust within the borders of this mountain region.

Recordings of earthquakes on two groups of stations situated to the north
and south of Central Asia were examined. Included in the northern group
were the Soviet stations of Talgar (Till'). Novosibirsk (HCS), ﬁction (511")
situated 50 km to the cast of Lake Baykal, and in part Germ (I'PM). Included
in the southern group were stations of the world-wide seismic network
(HHSSN) situated in India and Southeast Asia: New Delhi (NDI). Chiangnai
(cut). Shillong (sat). etc.

The four Soviet stations used ChISS seismograms in the frequency band from
h to 0.05 ha. The stations of the world-wide network used recordings of
standard short-period and medium-period equipment. An analysis was made of
several hundred recordings of earthquakes from different focal zones located
both within the investigated region and on its outer border. The magnitudes
of the earthquakes lay mainly in the range of 5.5-5.5. Bpicentral distances
were from 300 km to 3300-3500 km.

Regional Differences in the Intensity of Lg Haves. In most cases Lg waves
have the maximum amplitude on earthquake recordings. This applies to the
seismogram of short-period instruments or ChISS channels in the range from
0.5 to 3 s. The wave group as a rule has clear entries.

Particularly clear and intense entries of Lg waves are observed on recordings
of the north group of stations for earthquakes of Altay, Sayan, Pribaykal'ye,
Mongolia and Eastern Siberia. One of the most characteristic features of
the dynamics of Lg waves in the investigated region is that this group of
waves always predominates on the recording of all earthquakes of the eastern
and northeastern azimuths of propagation (relative to the northern group of
stations). For earthquakes of the western and southwestern azimuths of
propagation, Lg waves are reliably observed and predominate on the recording
only within the limits of the first 2000 km of the epicentral distance.
After that their intensity gradually declines. and the spectrum shifts
toward longer periods.

The Lg wave group shows up on all earthquakes situated to the east of the
Caspian. to the north and northeast of the Persian plateau and to the north

73 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Tibetan mannlf. Within the limitu oi‘ the extensive territory con-
ventionally bounded by the enumerated regions. Lg waves propagate without
undergoing any appreciable changes. These entimatea apply to routes of
northeast. north and south (to the limits of Tibet) directions of propagation
relative to stations located in the USSR (north group).

An exceptionally abrupt change in the amplitude of Lg waves is noted when
paths of propagation cross the north border of the Tibetan massif. As long
an the epicenters of earthquakes are to the north of this boundary, running
approximately along 35" N lat. Lg wavenare clearLy apparent on the recordings
of all northern stations and predominate in amplitude. On the recordings of
earthquakes with epicenters located close to the northern border of the
Tibetan massif. the Lg waves are noticeably attenuated, and are totally
ahaent if the epicenters are 100 km or more to the south of this border.

For instance. for two earthquakes with approximately equal amplitude of

P waves. but situated on different sides of the boundary with a distance of
the order of 150-200 km between epicenters. the differences in intensity of
the Lg waven may reach a factor of 100 or more. In this connection. on
scismograms of the focus mrther to the south in the pair being compared.
no ane groups at all can be distinguished at the place where one would

expect the entry of Lg waves.

Everything that has been said here is illustrated by the set of recordings
of earthquakes of two azimuths of propagation shown in Fig. 35 (Baykel and
Tibet) obtained at Temporary station. The coordinates of the epicenters of
these earthquakes are given in Table 11:. It is apparent that on the
recordings of the Baykal direction (Fig. 35a) the Lg waves can be confidently
identified and predominate at all distances right up to 3000 km.

TABLE 1h

Coordinates of epicenters of earthquakes with recordings
shown in Fig. 35

I". "was“

I" :E SIL— In

I up .3 II 40.0 ”A
3 “.I NJ I! 81.4 ".0
I OJ .3 I) 87.. ‘.0
I “.0 “.0 II 8.! IA
I “J “.0 IS “.0 Int
0 “.0 (“.0 II “.0 37..
7 It! “.1 I1 83.! NJ
I “.1 “3.0 I. ”.5 “.1
O “.0 “1.7 1. DJ “.3
I0 “.1 I.I

i

KEY: l--Baykal direction 3--o° N lat
2--Tibet direction h--A° B long

7h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
   
   

H
1 minute
W
' "WM.

r

‘51 d
‘ “"‘ "Hm-w

I .
(y’r '
""““""'"“’"“‘"' W
l
‘11

Fig. 35. Examples of recording
u__a or Lg waves at the 01188 Temporary
1 minute station for earthquakes in the
northeast (Baykal) and south
(Tibet) directions: passband
of the channel Lia-2.3 s. The
numbers correspond to the
earthquakes shown in Table 1b

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

 

Pin. 36. ann of op! centers of earthquakes shoving qualitative evaluation of
the relative intensity of La waves from recordings or 'ralsar (a) and Temporary
(b) ntutlonn: 1-4.3 waves predominate with respect to uplitude on the
:znismogrnm; 2-4.3 waves have low amplitude; 3-48 waves entirely absent;
major fractures are shown by solid and broken lines.

16 ‘-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘illi (WPHIIM. "HI-I ONLY

An approximately nimllar pattern is observed on recordings of the Tibet
direction (Fig. 35b) ax: long an the epicenters are to the north of the Tibetan
massif (No 10-13). Epiccntcrn situated directly on the boundary of the
massif (recording No lb) are characterized by a noticeably attenuated Lg
wave. A still sharper contrast in apparent between the recordings of earth-
quakes No 15 and No 16, located directly on the boundary of the massif and

90 kl to the south respectively. On the recording or the south earthquake

the Lg waves are totally absent. They cannot be seen at all either on
earthquakes still further to the south (No 17-19).

Such strong difference in the intensity of' Lg waves enabled us to use a
simplified method of classifying recordings. All seismograms considered
were broken down into three groups with respect to amplitude level. The
fl rat group included recordings with an intense Lg wave (of the type of
No l-12. Pig. 35a, b). in the second group the amplitude of the Lg waves
1:; approximately equal to that of P waves or somewhat lower (type 13-15 On
rm. 35b). and the third group included no Lg waves at all (type No 16-19
on Fig. 35b).

The results of such sorting of the recordings obtained at the Talgar and
Temporary stations are shown in Fig. 36 in the form of maps of the epicenters

of the given earthquakes. ‘Ihe type of recording is arbitrarily assigned to
the epi center.

Unfortunately. such maps were constructed only for northern stations since
we had little available experimental data on southern stations.

A comparison of the recordings of the same earthquake at di fferest stations
shows that the intensity of the Lg waves is practically independent of the
source. but is determined by the location of the path. For some earthquakes
fnr which we had recordings made at several stations. the positions of the
cpicenters are indicated together with the paths of the seismic rays corre-
sponding to the system of observations (Fig. 37). iiere we selected only
those cpicenters such that their position relative to the recording stations
enabled more precise determination of the boundary where the Lg waves
disappear. The prevailing system of observations does not permit an answer
to the question of whether the disappearance of the Lg waves is connected
with the influence of this geological boundary or these waves do not propagate
within the limits of the territory of the Tibetan plateau.

Fig. 38 shows the amplitude graphs of Lg waves for two directions: Baykal
and Tibet. On these graphs. plotted from data of the Talgar and Temporary
stations. the shading shows the interval of epicentral distances that corre-
sponds to the north boundary of Tibet. It can be seen that for the Tibetan
direction in this region the amplitudes decrease by at least an order.

Such an estimate is the lower limit of the change in amplitudes since on the
earthquake recordings where the Lg waves were absent the phase amplitudes of
scattered oscillations were measured on the section of existence of Lg waves
that was isolated in accordance with the average hodograph.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3?. Maps of epicenters and paths of propagation of L3 waves toward the
northern (a) and southern (b) groups of stations: 1--seisnie stations; 2--
cpicenters; 3--"sharp" boundaries that totally screen Lg waves with position
fairly reliably determined; h--the sane boundaries drawn hypothetically:
S--"weak" boundaries where Lg waves are appreciably attenuated when they
cross; 6--paths corresponding to recordings with intense entries of L3 waves;
T--pathc with recordings or intermediate type; 8--paths corresponding to
recordings with total absence or L3 waves: 9--deep-1eve1 breaks that outline
the Tibetan massif according to the tectonic map or Eurasia

From the graphs of the Baykal direction we can see that the intensity of L3
waves changes weakly when they cross such a large tectonic structure as
the Bayknl rift zone.

The position of the boundaries that cause disappearance of L5 waves or that
separate regions (blocks) that are "favorable" or "unfavorable" for the

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1'.- A/Ts “ll/3

_ -—.—_—_-—_————_—-

    

               

m u: my ms an A,- '4' ms nu raw In a.

Fig. 38. Graphs of attenuation of the amplitudes of Lg waves according to
the data of 'i'algar (a) and Temporary (b) stations for the Bayksl (a) and
Tibet (b) directions. The shading shows the distance interval that corre-
sponds to the north boundary of the Tibetan plateau

propagation of Lg waves can be more precisely determined From analysis of
the maps shown in Pig. 5 and 37. First let us consider the north boundary.
This boundary passes approximately between points with coordinates 3h° Ii lat
and 78° 3 long. and 35.5° N lat and 90° E long. Its position with respect
to latitude is most reliably determined with an error of less than 100 km.
This is apparent from the maps (see Fig. 36) when a comparison is made of the
intensity of the Lg waves from recordings of two closely spaced epicenters
(No 8 and 9 on Fig. 37a). Analysis or all data confirms that the north
boundary is the sharpest and its position is determined by the accuracy of
calculation of the coordinates of the epicenters, which is apparently not
high here, and according to our estimates amounts to m-SO km, which is due
to the unilateral location or the stations.

He cannot speak so confidently of the western and eastern ends of this
boundary. For instance the west end is apparently at 78° E long, which is
verified by the data of the maps (see Fig. 36) and the sharp difference in
the intensity of Lg waves on paths going from epicenter No 2 toward the
northern stations (see Fig. 31a).

The position of the eastern terminus of the boundary. according to data of
different stations. is ambiguously determined. with respect to the recordings
of 'i‘algar station (see Fig. 36a) the boundary that separates the two types

of paths goes along the parallel of 36° N lat and terminates at about

97-98° 3 long. 'ihe few determinations from recordings of the Novosibirsk
station indicate that beyond the point with coordinates 36° N 1st and

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90° E long the boundary nose in the northeasteriy direction to approximately
96° 8 long. coinciding with the deep-level break that hounds the Tibetan
massif on the northeast. ibis hypothesis is also confirmed by data on the

intensity or Lg waves on different routes according to the recordings of
Hodon station.

'er southwest and south boundaries of the block, which do not transmit

Lg waves. are localized by recordings of the southern group of stations

(see Fig. 37b) with less surety. On the section between 78 and 90° 8 long
they apparently coincide with the system of deep-level breaks that separates
the Tibetan massif from the Himalayas (the Karakorun break on the southwest
and the "Indian suture" on the south). Further on this boundary goes off
toward the southeast. apparently coinciding with the general trend of geo-
logical structures. but in view or the dearth of experimental data on the
intensity.or Lg waves, it can be only hypothetically drawn.

The effect or disappearance of Lg waves is observed. in addition to Tibet.
on paths that cross the Zagros break zone separating the Iranian plateau

from the Zagros Mountains. However, we have not examined this region in
detail.

Along with the "sharp" boundaries. one can distinguish "weak" boundaries at
which a reduction in amplitudes of Lg waves takes place. Such a boundary
(Fig. 31) passes along theHinduKush-Karakorum arc. and its continuation

to the southeast. Among the "weak" boundaries is the strip that coincides
with the Kopctdag Foothill downwarp. and further to the east with the Herat
break. and also the northwest border or the Indian shield (Beluchistan, the
Sulaiman Range). Thus an investigation of the relative intensity of Lg

waves on routes crossing Central Asia and the contiguous territory has
shown the following .

Lg waves are reliably registered over the entire extensive territory of the
Asiatic continent that is situated to the north or the Kopet-Dag and its

continuation. Hindu Hush and the Tibetan plateau, and also on the territories
or the Indian shield.

Lg waves are attenuated as they cross Pamir-Hindu Kush, the north border of
the Indian shield, in propagation along Tyan‘ Shan'.

Lg waves are completely absent on recordings if the epicenter is located
within the Tibetan massif. or the path of the ray even partly crosses this
territory. Even 100-150 km of travel through Tibet is sufficient for total

disappearance of these waves on recordings.

3. Regional differences in the characteristics of kg waves

The Rg wave group in most instances is observed on seisnograms simultaneously
with Lg waves. The properties of both wave groups are to a great extent

analogous. They propagate only on continental paths, have comparatively
clear entries. their velocity is independent of distance.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the intermediate distance zone under the conditions of the southeastern
USSR. iig wnves usually predominate in nmplitude through the entire train of
surface waves. and have a group velocity or about 3 km/s (Ruzeykin. Khalturin.
19710). For earthquakes with mamltutie of less than 5.5. this group is
frequently the only one to be distinguished in a train of surface waves,
especially at distances of up to 1500-2000 km.

The Ry, wave group usually takes the form of s short train on the seismogram,
consisting of several extrema without pronounced dispersion. The apparent
period of the oscillations in the group is 8-12 s. The Mil-frequency charac-
ter as well as the fact that other poorly identifiable surface waves follow
this group make it difficult to distinguish Rg waves on seismograms. There-
fore, parameters that characterize the entire train of surface waves were

picked out as the obJect of measurements. In the great majority of cases
they applied directly to the Rg group.

In this section we give the results of investigation of the parameters of

a train of ﬁg surface waves -- its duration. shape of the envelope. time of
onset of maximum amplitude -- observed on different paths crossing the
Central part of the Eurasian continent. It is shown that the changes in
these parameters with transition to more remote earthquakes take place in
many instances abruptly rather than gradually. This made it possible to
localize the territories responsible for such changes. and then to interpret
them as large horizontal inhomogeneities in the structure of the earth's
crust. The Tibetan plateau is the largest such inhomogeneity in the investi-
gated region.

Moreover. to check the methods developed. the characteristics of the train
of surface waves were studied on different paths corssing the Black Sea.
According to data of several stations, we have reliably localized the
deep-water part of the Black Sea Basin for which a crust of suboceanic or
transitional type is typical.

Materials Used. Method of Measurements and Processing. The recordings of

a channel with passband of 10-20 s of the Temporary ChISS station were used
for studying the parameters of ﬁg waves. The data of a total of 300 earth-
quakes of Soviet Middle Asia, Siberia. Mongolia. China. India. Pakistan. Iran
and the Caucasus were processed in all. The range of epicentral distances

was from 600 km to 1600-5000 km. The use of band filtration with magnifi-
cation of the order of 15,000-20 .000 enabled confident differentiation of
trains 'of surface waves even for comparatively weak earthquakes with magnitude
of i.S-5.

The apparent periods of maximum amplitudes ranged from 7-9 s at the beginning
of the tracking interval to 12-113 s at the end.

At distances up to 1500 km in all cases. and at greater distances in nearly
all cases. the train of surface waves was simple in form and consisted of
3-10 extrema with a comparatively clear entry and very weakly expressed

81

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dluperuion. The group velocity was equal to approximately 3.0 km/s. varying
uvm‘ a range of 7-81 In different directions.

To describe kinematic peculiarities the parameter t'max'tmax' (ls/3.0) was
uzwd, where ”max in the time of onset of the maximum of amplitudes in the
train of surface waves at epicentral distance of 6 km.

‘lho form of the train was characterized by duration 1 -- the time of existence
on the seismogram of amplitudes of at least 1[3 of the maximum.

'ihe amplitude change; on the route were characterized by the magnitude
correction ANN-lat, -M, where M3; is_calculnted for the given station, and
the average value 01‘ the magnitude M is determined with respect to the
network of stations.

'me further technique for representation of primary data was identical to
that used in processing the materials of Lg waves. Curves were plotted for
the parameters t'max and 1 as functions or distance for several directions
of propagation. these parameters were mapped by assigning their values to
epi centers, and the values or the parameters were compared on different
paths crossing the investigated territory.

Changes in parameters with distance were considered for four directions of
propagation relative to Temporary station: Northeast -- Altay, the Savans.
l‘ribaykal'ye. East Siberia, Kamchatka, the Aleutians; East -- northwest
China, Mongolia, Northeast China. Sakhalin, Southern Japan; South -- Northwest
China. Tibet. South China, India, the Indian Ocean: Southwest -- Soviet
Middle Asia. Ai‘ganistan, Pakistan, Iran, the Caucasus, Iharkey.

The time of onset of the maxim amplitude t'w reduced to a group velocity
or 3.0 km/s is shown on Fig. 39 as a function or epicentral distance for the
four directions of propagation relative to Temporary station.

It can be seen that on the graph of the Northeast direction (Fig. 39s) the
velocities lie in a range of 3.0-3.2 km/s for the entire continental segment
or the path within which the ﬁg group is distinguishable. At distances of
more than uooo km (beginning of oceanic routes) the times t'mx and ac-
cordingly the average group velocities increase sharva.

Typical of the East direction (Fig. 39b) is approximately constant time t'max:
group velocities are 2.9-3.1 km/s. The most remote earthquakes (Sakhalin,
Southern Japan) are situated on routes with a continental. type of crust.

For the South direction (Fig. 39c) the Rg group is reliably distinguishable
only up to 1500 km, beyond which it disappears on all recordings for paths
that cross the Tibetan plateau. On other routes in the same direction the
Rg wave group gradually stretches out, the number or extrema increases.

0n Tibetan routes, recordings show up with large values of Van: while for
other routes this quantity increases gradually. The average group velocities

82

FOR OF? H: I Id. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

I" I”! I” C" If?! LII

Fig. 39. Time of onset or maximum amplitude t' in a train of surface
waves reduced to a group velocity of 3 km/s as Wunction of epicentral
distance from data of the Temporary ChISS station (passhand of the channel
10-20 3) for the Northeast (a), Bast (b). South (c) and Southwest (a)
directions

lie in a range of 2.7-3.0 kin/s. and are much lover for recordian from foci
located inside Tibet (distances from 1600 to 220 km).

In the Southwest direction (Fig. 39d) up to distances of 1500-2000 km the
(iroup velocities are 2.8-3.0 Rule. and then they gradually decrease to
2.6-2.8 km/s with increasing distance. Crossing the Caspian leads to total
transformation of the train or R3 waves; it is considerably stretched out.
and the times of onset of maximum amplitude increase sharply to 150-300 3.

Duration of Recording of a Train of Surface Haves. Graphs of the change in
duration with distance for three directions are shown in Fig. '10.

Typical of the East direction (Fig. hOa) is a weak change in duration: within
the limits of the continental section of the path (up to 3700 km) it remains

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

'.
" m mu ran an my arm

Fig. ho. Distance dependence of duration of a train of surface waves for
the Northeast and East (a), South (b) and Southwest (c) directions

approximately equal to 15-30 3. For earthquakes from the territory of the
Pacific Ocean the duration increases sharply to values of 100-300 s. The

Ru group follows and retains its simple shape over the entire continental
path. It is lacking in more remote earthquakes; a complex distended pattern
or surface waves is observed.

In the South direction (Fig. h0b) the investigation or duration with distance
follows another pattern. Here the train keeps its original form, and accord-
lngly a short duration or the order of 12-30 3 up to distances of about

1300 km. A bend then takes place in the train that is especially noticeable
on recordlngs of earthquakes located within the Tibetan plateau. On these
recordings the compact Rg group disappears, and a distended group of surface
waves shows up at later times. The overall duration increases sharply and
then changes but little, remaining within limits of hO-ISO s.

In the Southwest direction (Fig. hOc) the duration increases approximately
in proportion to the square of the distance. A sharp increase in duration
-- up to 150-200 5 -- takes place on the recordings of earthquakes on routes
that have crossed the Caspian Sea.

The parameters of the train of surface waves t'max and t were mapped by the
method described above an applied to the spectral parameters of longitudinal

8%

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

waves. uhe value or a parameter was nominally unsigned to an epicenter and
intermediate averaging van then done with respect to 3-6 closely spaced
epicenters. Maps of thin stage or averaging of the parameters t'max and t

are shown on Fig. bl. They illuutrate the major trends in variation of
parameter" in different directions, and indicate the spatial confinement of
points of greatest change" in the paramaten: (maximum values or the gradient).

 

Pig. bl. Maps of the parameters t'max (a) and T (b) from data of the Tempe—
rary ChISS station

Within the limits of the transition zone from the Asiatic continent to the

Pacific Ocean, abrupt changes in the parameters occur only where the routes
cover a section of crust of oceanic type.

Among those territories with a maximum gradient is the Caspian Sea. 0n
routes that cross or even graze the southern part of the Caspian Sea Basin
(with crust of transitional type) the train is completely Broken, resulting
in an abrupt rise in the measured parameters.

Somewhat less of an increase in the values of the parameters also takes
place when the Persian plateau is crossed.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A auction of the ntrongest changes in the parameters of a train is situated
on the territory of Central Asia. confined to the northern boundary of Tibet.
For instance on recording," of earthquakes with epicenters to the north of
Tibet within a “trip approximately 500 km wide the values of the parameters
“max and i are equal to 35 and 28 s: on the recordings of earthquakes
situated inside Tibet, the values or the parameters increase right away

to 60 and .125 s respectively. A comparison of the parameters of earthquakes
clone to the boundary of Tibet but on both sides of that boundary showed that
the parameters change sharply rather than gradually.

   

P

 

Pin. 102. Specimens of recordings of trains of surface waves for directions
that pass to the vest or'l'ihet (a). cross the Tibetan plateau (b) and pass to
the east of Tibet (c). For the direction that crosses the Tibetan massif (b).
we distinguish recordings from earthquakes located to the north of Tibet (b1)
and within Tibet (b2). The vertical line corresponds to a group velocity or
3.0 kin/5. The arrows indicate the times on the aeismograms that correspond
to group velocities of 3.1, 2.9, 2.8, 2.7 and 2.6 kin/s. Temporary cuss
station. channel with passband or 10-20 3

The influence that the boundary oi L‘ibet has on the shape or the recording of
a train of surface waves is illustrated by the set of seismgrans shown in
Fig. ’42. Shown here are specimens of the recording of a train or the Rg

group for three comparatively narrow directions of propagation: aufor

paths to the west of Tibet; b--for paths that cross Tibet, and c--for those
mini: to the east of Tibet. A distinction is made between the recordings

or carthquakes ”on epicenters located to the north of Tibet (b1) and directly
in the Tibetan massif (b2).

Up to distances of 1500 km the shape of the train is approximately the same
and comparatively simple in all directions. After crossing the northern

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

boundary of Tibet or its continuation (1600 km for the western sector. 1700 km
for the Tibetan sector and 2000 km for the eastern). the shape changes
noticeably. especially sharply on the recordings of earthquakes located

inside the massif. The time of onset of the maximum amplitude of the train

increased by 100 a relative to the velocity of 3.0 km/s. and the shape of
the train was noticeably stretched out.

Gradually. with increasing epicentral distance in the South direction. the
train is somewhat consolidated. and its shape becomes closer to that of
the neighboring directions at the same distances.

Thus when the northern boundary of the Tibetan plateau is crossed there is
a loss of the ﬁg phase and associated strong changes in both parameters of
the train. These changes have the same scale as with a transition from

paths of_propagation along an oceanic type of crust to routes with a conti-
nental type.

Propagation of Surface Haves on Paths that Cross the Black Sea. As has
already been stated. to evaluate the possibilities of the method and compare
the scales of distortions that arise in a train of surface waves when hori-
zontal inhomogeneities are crossed in the earth's crust. analogous work was
done for the territory of the Black Sea Basin.

It is known (Balavadze, Mindeli, 1966; Neprochnov. 1962) that the deep-water
part of the Black Sea is characterized by a crust of intermediate type in
which there is no granite layer. The boundaries of this section and its
structure have been independently studied by several geophysical methods
with the maximum possible detail.

Seismologists have established (Savarenskiy, Val'dner. 1960: Sikharulidze.
1963) that Lg and R3 waves are totally screened by this part of the Black Sea
Basin. The belt of active seismicity that passes to the south and west of
the Black Sea. and the presence of a network of recording stations provide
good conditions for "x—raying" the entire Black Sea area and adJacent terri-
tories by using Rg waves from seismic sources on different paths.

All this makes the region of the Black Sea an ideal testing ground for
evaluating the possibilities of the method and quantitative comparisons of
the scales of measurements of parameters here and in Tibet.

To study changes in the parameters of a train of surface waves on routes that
cross the deep-water part of the Black Sea and pass outside of it. more than
300 recordings of 120 earthquakes on stations of Obninsk, Simferopol' and
Bakuriani were processed. The parameters t'max and I were measured on

seiamograms of SK and SKD instruments. Besides. the magnitude correction AM
was calculated for each recording.

I

The resalts of measurements in the form of maps of the intermediate stage of
averaging are shown in Fig. h3. Given here for each of the three stations

87

FOR OFFICIaL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 1:3. Maps of values of the parameters All (a), t'm (b) and 'r (c) [next
[mun] according to data of stations at Obninsk (top),

Sinferopol' (center)
and Bakuriani (bottom)

considered are maps of the magnitude deviation AM (Fig. 1:33). the parameter
"max (Fig. 1531)) and the parameter 1' (Fig. h3c).

FOR OPPICIﬁL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 133 (continued)

separately for routes that cross the deep-Hater basin and pass by it are
summarized in Table 15 along with the standard deviations of the individual

determinations of the parameters.

89

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R0001000100‘4-1

23 3mm 1979 PM
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tim”? I '1

Parameter” oi‘ a train or surface wavon for routen that cross
the 'I""I‘-\ﬂ|'-‘Pr banin (l) and mm: by It (9)

a Ea": -.

 

 

. .0.» m is as in

ig m... 3.: 4... ... .0 .. ..

Icon-u- -e.| s is: It ”I N

5 en- -o.si 4.0 its is as: M

e 0.“ O.“ U 8 b 81
Ki-Zi': l--Station ho-Bukurinni
2--0hninnk SuAversge

3-4; i Infernpol'

Analysis or the data in the Table shows that crossing of the deep-water basin
by the path oi‘ a ueianic ray shows up in the following changes of parameters:
reduction or the maximum amplitude of the train or surface waves by a factor
of h. increane in duration by a factor of 2.5. and in the parameter t'w

I",- a factor of It.

We statlutlcai significance or this effect cannot he douhted since the
difference or the nveraaea exceeds o .. the standard deviation of an indi-
viviunl determination or the parameter -- by a factor of 5-5. accusing that

the average value was determined Mn samples containing 20-25 individual
determinations.

Comparison of the Influence that Largo Inhooogeoeitiea have on the Parameters
of a Train of Surface waves. An exanination was made or the largest inhoao- '
uenuities or the earth's crust of the investigated territory whose influence
on the parameters or the train was detected in analysis of seisuologic
materials. Surface waven experience strong distortions when they cross the
'i'ilu:tun nnnuir. the Caspian and Black seas. the Persian plateau and the

transition zone from the continent to the ocean in the territory of the
Kurl I-Kancnntka arc.

‘21".- uvoranc values or the parameters or the train t'w and I were determined
for the enumerated structures from the recordings or earthqudtes with toci
located on both sides or the structure within a 310-500 ins strip. me

i‘imt group (1) includes earthquakes whose routes cross the investigated
structure; the paths of the second group (2) do not cross (Table 16).

'iln: magnitude deviation M4 was also determined for the Black Sea territory.
The value of this paraneter for the transition zone between the continent

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mul the ocean in the vicinity of the Kuril-Kamchntka are is taken from the
work of :1. .. :iolov'yev and V. Ii. :iheln (1959).

TABLE l6

Parameters of a train of surface waves of groups of earthquakes with paths
that cross (1) and do not cross (2) large structural elements

n.“ u
(1)‘""'"' ' a i u a
2 xaeaaka. use no a a.» a - -
e u..- use. m u an in -o.i -o.n
W um I: to no is - -
a tuna-a users. an m m m — .-
Km - Inns in) u up I) .0 e

——_.__-——————-————

KEY: l—-Structural elements hui'ersian Plateau
2--Caspian Sea 5--'i‘ibetan Massif
3--Black Sea 6--Kamchatka-Kurils

Analysis of the data in the Table shows that all three structures where
routes pass over a crust of oceanic or transitional types -- the Black and
Caspian seas, and also the transition zone between the continent and the
coean -- distort the train of surface waves to an approximately equal extent.
Somewhat lesser distortions take place with crossing of the Tibetan massif.
and still smaller -- when the Persian plateau is crossed.

'nnus "x-raying" of extensive and varied territories by Lg and ﬁg waves

has demonstrated the feasibility of distinguishing and localizing the
largest inhomogeneities in the structure of the earth's crust. and possibly
the upper mantle. The developed technique can be used primarily for
studying the position of boundaries of continental plates in little investi-
gated regions or localizing sections of the earth's crust characterized by
the absence of a "granite" layer.

Chapter 3. Particulars of the Structure of the Upper Mantle in Central Asia
1. Structure of the upper mantle along the Bayital~Pamir profile

The structure of the upper mantle of the territory of Central Asia was
studied on the basis of seismzraphic materials obtained on the profile of
i'anir-llaykal seismic stations (ilersesov. Rautian. 1961:). Observations on
this profile were begun in 1961 and completed in mid 1963. In 1952 the
number of stations reached 5".

Earlier. on the basis of a detailed study of the deep-focus zone of Fair-
iiindu Kush earthquakes. the structure of the upper mantle in this territory
had been studied to depths of the order of 830 km (Lukk. Nersesov. 1965).

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Later cm. the nuterinlu of ohucrvutionn on the Pamir-Bayknl profile were
proceunml on the basin of methodn developed at the computing center of the
.".Iherlm. III-[nirtInL-ni. or the Soviet Academy of :lciences for numerical solution
or invcrm: tin-en-ullmm;iImnl kinematic problem (Alekseyev et a)... 1969.
19'“). The results gave a general idea of the structure of the upper mantle
in the central part or the profile.

This section given reaulta or u more complete analysis or the structure or
the upper mantle baned on the use of profile data on the kinematic character-
inticu or first and subsequent entries as veil as spectral dynamic character-
l:st.|cn of longitudinal waven from the materials of the Talgar ChISS station.
in the procenn or interpretation. experimental hodoaraphn were compared with
theoretical hodographs calculated by M. V. Alekseyeva for a number of crous
section or the upper mantle. The authors are aineerely grateful to her

for furnishing these materials.

TABLE 17

List or the earthquakes used in constructing graphs
for the Paair-Baykal profile

Soviet Middle Asia and Kazakhstan

 

mmmu u u as an: w a m
mam 5 en cm a a: n u 33—» In
sum u a no.0 «a ms 5-» a...
sum an a up as: me we m
mum u a v.0 . a. as He an
1mm o u an «o no a an
cum :2 a no as as s ”.0
Altay and the Swans
mm a a w
.,....... .. .. .3: :r. z': t: 3;:
name: a a use an on s-a on
mm a a «.0 a a an a s—a m
Pribaykal'ye
sum 3: a «.0 a“: W 0-3: a.-
21mm on u 0.0 u a as a a-u nu
"MI! u u 11.: u an m a 0-: ".4
Km: innate 6--Coo: iinates or epicenters

2--1‘ine at focus Tuii lat

3--houra 8“! long

10-minute: 9--D°Pth9 ‘us

Susecomio lO--Energy class K (10" J)

The seisaonrw of earthquakes vith data sumarized in Table l? vere used
for the hineaatic constructions. The earthquake materials were supplemented

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nu sections or the profile. plotted
interpretation or hodoy
{on Fig. 55 (hr

.raphs and spectral amplitude curves.
synbolc. The shading "
ntton of depth and veloci
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by seismograme of three comparatively large explosions (600—700 metric tons)

In the Eastern Sayans set off in late 1961 and early 1962 in construction of
the Ahakan-Thynhct Rnlin)ud.

'hhe hodographs of the earthquakes and explosions were plotted in a scheme of
contrary and overtaking systems along a profile with overall extent of

about 3500 km as shown in Pig. hh. The entire system of hodographs was

tied in with respect to first entries at mutual points with reduction of the
foci of earthquakes to the earth's surface. The accuracy of this coordination
was tl.5 s. and can be taken as aatlsfactory considering the great extent

of the profile, the displacement of the epicenter: with relation to the
profile and inexact knowledge of the depths of the earthquake fnci.

The hodographs of two earthquakes -- 31.1.1962 in the Vakhsh Mountains on the
southwest of the profile. and 28.x.1961 in the northeast direction in the
vicinity of Eastern Pribaykal'ye -- were the reference base for the entire
system of observations. A comparison of these two hodographs with the
standard of E. Herrin's commission (1968) shows that in the northeast
direction (from Pamir to Baykal) at distances up to 3000 ha the experimental

hodograph is more high-velocity, and in the opposite direction contrsriwiae.
ieua high-velocity.

Thus the general tendency of the structure of the upper mantle in the east
is characterized by lower velocities. and on the west -- by higher velocities.

For epicentre! distances that correspond to the position of the interface at
a depth of about 700 km. both hodographs have about the same velocities.

At the same time, waves that are tracked in the second entries and are
associated with this interface are better distinguishable on the eastern
branch of the hodograph and more weakly distinguishable on the western
branch. which may indicate a difference in the sharpness of this interface
in the territories of Soviet Middle Asia and the Sayans.

Subsequent entries associated with a too km interface are also identically
expressed on both hodographs. For the eastern direction the reflected waves
(or loop sections of the hodographs) are observed in fragments, and for the
western direction -- they are clearly tracked at a great distance. A com-
parison of the experimental hodographs of second entries with theory for
the interfaces at depths of too and 700 km shows disagreement in the times
of delay of the second entries relative to the first. According to the
experimental data these delays are shorter.

in the western direction the velocity of longitudinal waves of the initial
part of the hodograph (earthquake of 28.x.1961) in the first entries has a
value or 1.9 kale, and does not increase to 8.0 kn/s until a distance of the
order of 1000 km. in the vicinity of 2000 km the velocity increases abruptly
from 8.7 to 10.0 kale. and then at a distance of 2800 km -- to 12.6 kn/s.

The contrary hodocraph (earthquake of 31.I.l972) has considerably different
velocities. Up to approximately 600 km the velocity of longitudinal waves

9h
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in about 8.0 kill/ii. 'Ihen II. increases to about 8.3 kale and gradually rises
to values of {Lia-8.5 km/n. At about 2200 km the velocity of longitudinal

waves increases abruptly from 9.6 to 11.0 kale and at 2800 km reaches values
or 12.6 kin/n.

'ihe contrary-overtaking hodograph from the earthquake of 26.1V.1962 in the
eastern direction has a velocity of longitudinal waves of 8.1 km/s in the
first entries in the intial part. which gradually increases to 8.5 ins/s with
a Jump to 9.7 inn/s at about 2000 km. The hodographs of the central part of
the profile (earthquakes 28.111.1962 and 13.1V.1962) are higher-velocity in
the initial part; here the velocity lies in a range of 8.2-8.3 kale. The
hodograph of road blasting in the territory of the Eastern Saw/ans is a lower-
velocity hodograph, the velocity in the first entries being 8.0 kale.

in the western direction the velocities of the first entries for the explo-
sions in the initial part of the hodograph have a value of 8.0 kin/s. For the
earthquake from the territory of the Swans (l3.IV.1962) the velocity is
higher. and comes to 8.3 Rule. The more easterly earthquake (28.III.l962)
shows a change in velocity of the first entries in the western direction
from 8.0-8.1 to 8.2-8.3 km/s.

0f definite interest is the behavior of longitudinal Pg interference waves.
since they give some idea of the average velocity of longitudinal waves in
the crust. On the eastern end of the profile their average velocity is close
to 6.0 kin/s. and they are tracked to a greater extent than on the west. In
the vicinity of the Hestern Sayans and Altay the velocity of these waves
increases to 6.2-6.3 km/s. Such a velocity is typical of all of Kazakhstan
as well. Within the limits of Soviet Middle Asia the velocity of Pg waves
ranges from 6.0 to 6.3 km/s. In comparison with the western direction a
general tendency is observed toward a reduction in the intervals over which
longitudinal interference waves can be tracked.

A general exasination of the wave pattern done with the use of data on the
dynamics of longitudinal waves obtained with the use of the Ch188 station
at Talgar gives us a basis for some remarks on trends in the structure of
the crust and mantle in the territories that are crossed by the Panir-Baykal
profile. In the preceding chapter a detailed examination was made of the
spectra) amplitude curves of Pn, Pg. Sn and Lg waves (Fig. 18, 20, 22, 23).

The average velocity in the earth's crust in Pribaykal'ye and the Eastern
:iayans iz: close to 6.0 km/s. The upper part of the mantle from the underside
of the crust and down to 100-130 km has a weak gradient and is characterized
by velocities from 7.9 to 8.0 km/s. In this connection, difficulties arise
in evaluating the existence of the low-velocity layer that is usually asso-
ciated with the asthenosphere. In any event, it can be assumed that if it
occurs. it is very faint.

The interface at 1100 km is evidently upheaved. and should not be deeper than
360 km. This interface is clearly expressed and is characterised by a sharp

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gradient. “slow this interface. the velocity approaches 10 kin/n. A deeper
boundary (700 km division) is located in the Gino-660 Iun interval and is not
very clearly expressed. It probably has a weak gradient.

in the vicinity oi‘ the transiton from the Western Swans to Altay the crust
has an average velocity of 6.2-6.3 inn/s. Beneath the underside of the crust
the mantle becomes more high-velocity. An abrupt decline in amplitudes of
seismic oscillations (Fig. 18a) according, to data of the 'iialgar ChISS station
in the distance range from 700 to 1700 km. and the presence of a small
Increase in amplitudes at a distance or about 1000 km show the existence 01‘
an anthenospheric layer of reduced velocity. and beyond it -- an interface.

A clear boundary is distinguished at a depth or the order of 360 km. Asso-
ciated with this boundary is a sharp amplitude spike observed at a distance
of 1800 km. The deeper 700 km interface is much more weakly expressed.

In this territory it is at a depth or 650-700 km.

Ii comparison of mantle velocity data for depths ranging from 350 to 630 km
in the territories of Pribaykal'ye, Kazakhstan and Altay shows that the
velocities in this interval are higher in the east than in the west: 10 and
9.6 inn/s respectively. Thus in the eastern section of the profile the lower

velocity in the upper part of the cross section is compensated by higher-
velocity low levels.

’ihe presence of an amplitude spike on the amplitude curves of the Northeast
direction (Fig. 18a, b) at distances of the order of tso km. and a branch
that can be tracked on the hodograph at the same distances of a weak reflected
wave with short delay with respect to the first entries indicate an inhomo-
nenelty in the topmost levels of the mantle at depths of the order of

80-90 kn. It can be seemed that there is a boundary of low rigidity at

this depth. 'Iierritorially, this inhomogeneity is confiend to the section of
the profile between Lake Balkhash and the boundary of the Northern 'l‘yan'-Shan'

In the environs of Northern '1‘yan'-Shan' the earth's crust has an average
velocity close to that observed in Kazakhstan -- 6.3 kin/s. Further toward
the southwest the average velocity in the crust decreases to 6.0 km/s.

In the first entries, deep longitudinal waves have a velocity of 8.1-8.3 km/s.
These velocities are close to those observed for the territory of Kazakhstan;
however. in contrast to the northeast direction (recalling that the azimuth
is read from 'i‘algar station), the amplitude curves are situated considerably
higher with respect to level, and they have no characteristic spikes. This
circumstance. as well as the absence of pronounced waves or loops in the

hodograph show that the low-velocity channel in the Middle-Asiatic direction
is poorly expressed.

The poor show of the 20-degree spike on the curves leads us to assume that
the deep-level boundary close to too he is also less pronomced. The 700 km
boundary in this region can be such better tracked on the amplitude and
kinematic curves of reflected waves (Pig. 18c. d).

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Filli OFFICIAL llh‘i’. "NLY

A much higher-velocity cross section is typical of the southern part of the
profile -- the region of the Pamir-Hindu Kunh earthquakes (Lukk. Nersesov.
1965). Here the main difference between the deep-level cross section and
those examined previously is observed in the upper levels of the mantle

to a depth of hOO km. The high-velocity cross section of the mantle to the
south of Pamir is confirmed by research of Indian seismologists as well.

in evaluating the peculiarities of the structure of the mantle of Soviet
Middle Asia as a whole we can note that it is apparently transitional between
the high-velocity upper mantle of Pamir (with poorly expressed deep-level
interfaces) and the mantle of Kazakhstan. It is quite significant that the
asthenoapheric channel in Soviet Middle Asia is much more poorly expressed
than in the territory of Eastern Kazakhstan. It is a triking fact that the
presence of the low-velocity channel in the asthenosphere of Kazakhstan is
accompanied by somewhat of an increase in velocity at a relatively greater
depth (down to too km). while in Soviet Middle Asia the absence and weak

expression of thin channel is associated with somewhat of a reduction in
velocity at these depths.

Unfortunately. the available material does not penait detection of clear
boundaries of division of the upper mantle among the individual noted blocks.
He can only present a few considerations. The boundary between the mountain-
ous Pamir block and the central part of Soviet Middle Asia runs in the zone
of the Darvaz-Karakul' break zone (Vinnik, Lukk, 1975). The transition from
the Middle Asia type of mantle to the Kazakhstan type is noted in the region
of the northern spurs of the Trans-Ili Mountains on the border of the Ili
Basin. The boundary between the Sayans proper and Altay is quite pronounced.
In deep-level structure. these two regions differ considerably. Besides

the materials that we have used. confirmation of the existence of this
boundary is to be found in the results of study of Lg waves (Nersesov.
Rautian. 196%). The pattern of change in velocities in the upper mantle for
the territories crossed by the profile is shown in Fig. uh.

The principles governing the relation between the spectral amplitude curves
and kinematic curves lead to a number of considerations of a more general
nature for the eastern and southern directions (see Fig. 18b, c). In the
eastern direction (western territories of China) the spectral curves have a
poorly expressed amplitude spike associated with a depth of 360-500 km.
Apparently this boundary is fuzzy, which is also confirmed by the relative
spectral width of this spike: the low-frequency components of the ChISS
spectrum come close together. The spike at 25° is located at a comparatively
great distance. and is more pronounced on the high-frequency components,
which indicates that it is associated with a rather sharp boundary at depths
of around 700 km.

A comparison of the eastern and northeastern directions shows that con-

siderable changes take place in the structure of the upper mantle to the
south of the profile: the low-velocity asthenospherie channel dies out:
the hOO km boundary loses clarity and rigidity. and its depth apparently

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

increases; the sharpness of the boundary of the upper mantle at a depth of
700 km increases somewhat,-the boundary ltseif also becoming somewhat deeper
an compared with the northeast. New data agree with the particulars of the
utructurc of the eastern part of the given territory found previously as a
result of processing of the materials of observations on the Pamir-Bsykal
profile (Bugaycvskiy et al., 1971).

it can be assumed that the enumerated considerable changes in the structure
of the mantle occur between Altay and northern Dshungaria both within the
borders of the USSR and in China.

In the southern direction (see Fig. 18c) oriented from Talgar mainly toward
Tibet and the northern provinces of India. the deep-level cross section

also changes considerably. The low-velocity channel again begins to be
tracked. although weakly. and the presence of a small spike in amplitudes at
distances of about 1500 km indicates either that its depth increases to
approximately 200 km, or that the nature of the boundary itself changes.

The hOO km boundary in this region is weakly expressed. It is characterised
by narrowing of the spectrum of the reflected wave, which is evidence of a
strong gradient. In addition. the lower boundary of the upper mantle is
much more clearly expressed than for previously examined directions. The
two-hunped nature of the amplitude curve is an indication of the complexity
of this boundary. and the configuration of the first maximum confines a
tendency to increase. In comparing the southern direction with the southwest
direction considered above. one can note an increase in expression of the
lower boundary of the mantle, as well as less rigidity, which shows up in
narrowing of the spectrum of waves reflected from it.

The use of the spectral curves of longitudinal waves obtained at Germ station
and at Temporary station situated in Northeastern Kazakhstan to study

general patterns of structure provides additional information on the structure
of the mantle within the limits of the southern and southwestern sections,

and also on the eastern continuation of the profile. All available data

are shown in the diagram on Fig. RS.

The shading on the diagram shows regions of development of mountain struc-
tures. A number of interesting conclusions derived from the given data.

The prairie regions of Kazakhstan are characterized by a higher-velocity
crust and the presence of a low-velocity channel in the upper part of the
mantle. Also striking is the circumstance that an asthenospheric channel can
be noted both in the vicinity of the Tarim plate and in the western parts of
Soviet Middle Asia. In the mountain regions of Asia and the Sayans, the
channel is lacking or poorly expressed. It shows up again in the territories
of the Tadzhih-Afgan depression and is weakly pronounced in northeast India
between the hindu Kush and Himalayan mountain systems. The boo km boundary
is less well pronounced in the mountain regions than in the platform areas.
More stable is the lower boundary of the upper mantle, which can be clearly
traced in the prairie regions of Soviet Middle Asia, the foothills of the
Tibetan plateau and the intermountain regions of Altay and the Eastern Sayans.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. hS. General nature of deep-level boundaries of the upper mantle in
Central Asia: aymbols--l--isolines of regions of reduced velocities of the
upper mantle according to G. N. Bugayevskiy et a1. (1971): 2--mountain
systems; 3~-region or tracking of the mantle channel along the Pamir-Baykal
profile; h--regions of differentiation of the mantle channel from spectral
amplitude curves; S--points that are weakly tracked; 6. 7--sections of the
profile and points that are poorly tracked; 8--regions that are well
tracked for the hOC km boundary; 9, 10--points that are weakly (9) and
poorly (10) tracked; l--regions in which the 100 km boundary is well
tracked; l2. l3--points that are weakly (12) and poorly (13) tracked: 1h--
tendency for depression or elevation of the corresponding boundary

KEY: l--Caspian Sea 6--Tyan'-Shan'
2--Lakc Balkhash 7--ﬂindu Kush
3--Altay 8--Pamir
h--5ayans 9--Himalayas
'5--Lake Baykal 10-~Tarim

One observes a general tendency toward an increase inthedcpth of the lower
boundary in the eastern regions or the investigated territory and an elevation

of this boundary in the western regions. An analogous tendency is tracked
for the too km boundary as well.

Data that have been obtained give grounds fer some considerations on the
peculiarities of seismically active regions. From the standpoint of the
relation between seismically active regions and the deep-level structure.
they are typified by the absence or weak expression of the low-velocity
asthenoopheric channel and reduced velocities of the longitudinal waves in
the upper part of the mantle. The reduced velocities of longitudinal waves
in the crust of these regions can apparently be related to the existence of
a layer of reduced velocities in the crust. This channel is lacking in

99

FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

non-nelumlc regions (lielyaycvakiy. 197M. The latter assumption needs more
careful verification; however. extensive experimental material on the struc-

ture of the crust in non-seismic regions shove that the crustal channel has
not been dlntingulnhed in these regions.

The MO km boundary is more poorly expressed in aeismically active regions
than in non-seismic regions. 01‘ course, the notion "poorly" is a qualitative
one, but nevertheless it can be stated that sharpness of the boundary falls
off. it becomes "higher-gradient" or more complicated in structure. The
detailed investigation of this boundary in seismicallv active regions can
probably give significant information on the degree of seismic danger of
individual regions of seismically active territories. It is also striking

that the deeper mantle boundary at 700 km is more poorly expressed in
regions of elevated seismic danger.

He can assume that the elevated mobility of the upper mantle of seismically
active regions. the difference in the temperature conditions of stable
platform structures and active sections of the earth's crust are causes of
nonuniform structure of the upper mantle of these regions.

Thus we arrive at the conviction that analysis of the general patterns of the
structure of the upper mantle in the regions of Central Asia enables us to
formulate the question of distinguishing sections of increased seismic danger

on the basis of the seismological characteristics of the crust and upper
mantle.

2. Evaluation of absorbing properties of the medium

Absorption and Scattering of Transverse Waves in the Lithosphere. ' [in im-
portant peculiarity of near and intermediate epicentral distances is the
formation of numerous secondary waves that arise in the upper layers of the
earth as a result of reflections. refractions. exchange, conversion at
boundaries, interference in layers distinguishable by acoustic impedance.
and scattering on small inhomogeneities. The number of such vaves is very
great, and their superposition is conducive to the formation of an excep-
tionally complicated and prolonged seismic recording. The propagation of
seismic waves in such a case is very close in its nature to the process of
diffusion of seismic energy in the plane layer close to the earth's surface.

The idea that the flow of seismic enery at a great remove from a spherical
source may be described by a diffusion equation was suggested earlier Wesley,
1965) and found application in the investigation of the internal structure

of the moon (Dainty et al., 197") and in such a field of physics as acoustics
(Ponomareva, 1969).

According to J. Wesley (1955) the expression for the energy flux density 3
in a narrow frequency band can be found as a result of solving the following
differential equation

as» M - (wows - en - :1»qu
100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J. Wesley's solution takes the form
E’ujﬂnfua' ( - 1%- - 30,—) - (0)

llcre u is angular frequency; r is cpicentral distance; t is time: Q i's the
mechanical quality factor of the medium; B is the spectral function of the
source; L is a parameter with dimensions of length that can be referred to
the mean free path of the wave, to the effective size of a scattering inhomo-

geneity or to the size of the region that takes an appreciable part in the
process of energy transfer.

The expression U) can be used to evaluate parameters of absorption and
scattering in the surface layer of the earth as dependent on available
experimental data. For instance J. Wesley (1965) used for these purposes

the relation between the apparent period on seismogrsms of explosions on

the one hand, and time of registration and epicentral distance on the other.
In our case it is convenient to use the envelopes of ChISS recordings at
fixed distances from the source and the relation between epicentre]. distance
and the logarithm of the ratio of amplitudes of the envelopes of two frequency
components of ChISS recordings calculated for a fixed time. The logarithm of
the ratio of closest frequency components of ChISS recordings is called the
spectral ratio r (Khalturin, 1971; Pasechnik. 1970):

m " “I (AIMJMII (ram): ' (‘0)

where A1. AJ, T1, T_, are the amplitudes and periods respectively of the
i-th and .i-th components of the ChISS spectrum. More detailed information
on the cams spectrum can be found in the work of r. Molnar et a1. (1976).

Within the framework of our materials it can be assumed that (Ti/T3) =0.7
since Chlss stations have a filter setting of an octave with respect to

frequency. Taking the square root of (') and substituting the result in U“)
we get

In - ¢?s(A:IA:)-¢[-éi7 m - r.) + 13-41? - 1751+ m.
where c I const .

Of interest is the special case r/t-V-const. Then

mum ~T.)(1ﬁr-Va§7'- thrust. (-0-)

or
m -'sr‘.+ 6.

where
a-Cﬂg-Tl)(-érr —wiy;): . Om.

no we can see. the spectral ratio vii is a linear function of the epicentral
distance. which in apparently true w thin the first hundred km. Table 18
sumwizen estimates of the coefficient a of linear regression for several
pairs of frequency components found by the method of least squares for
spectral ratios within the limits of sections of seismgrams beginning with
the first entry of an 5 wave.

101

FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 18

Average estimates of regression coefficient 4

Ratio of frequency
components (Ks)

Regression coefficient
a-lo-S, km-l

0.35/03! 3.9
o.7/1.h 5.2
1.b/2.8 7.8
2.8/5.6 10.1:

'Ihe ChISS station (Talgar) registers the velocity of displacements of the soil
and therefore to approximate the envelope of the recording of each frequency
component Wesley (1965) used the expression

sugar-+04%“... {Inc—{n -+I(a'+ir‘-II(' ++)I-
where

P-IIL%'-h(lm:fa-IIV:A-w.

The approximation was done by selecting the theoretical envelope that best
coincides with the experimental envelope plotted in coordinates my and
ln(t/to), where time t is counted from the time at the source. An example
of matching of the theoretical envelope is shown in Pig. h6a. Matching of
th envelopes of ChISS recordings w done with respect to the parameter
L . Btimates of the parameter are summarized in Table 19.

TABLE 19-

Estimstes of parameter In" from data of
envelopes of (21188 recordings (Talgar)

Average frequency Range of the
of channel (Hz) parameter M?5
0.35 130-160
0.7 130-150
1.1: 80-100
2.8 60-65
5.6 no

The use of equations (“) and U") enables us to plot a nomogram (Fig. 1:61))
to evaluate the reciprocal relation between frequency to. quality factor Q
and the effective size L of the scattering inhomogeneity. m! using the data
of tables 18 and 19 we get estimates of L and Q as functions of frequency.

as is shown in Fig. h6c. It was seemed in doing this that the velocity

V-h Dun/s corresponds to the average velocity of transverse waves of the
lithosphere within the limits of the investigated territory. Given in

Fig. h6c for comparison are estimates that we obtained for data of the 8104-3“

102

FOR OFFICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KEY: -- pi:
l--Mode.l of '-

di ffuuion ‘Ag‘!!%
aura '3 ll: 32,}; 1' I

.42“

'A"

’
i
‘\
,1. its“
. :‘kﬁi’x
' ﬁne S

.III
.l"

I"!
Irma

 

Ill

Fig. )6. Matching of the theoretical envelope of a ChISS seismogram and
estimate of the ratio between parameters of absorption Q and distance L for
8 waves: a--example of approximation of experimental data; —-nomogram for
the 0.7-1.1: H1. frequency band (average frequency 1.0 ha); L scale from 60
to 1100. scale of the coefficient of linear regression from 10’“ to 2-10'3.
Shaded rggion in confidence limits (on the 0.9 level) of the matching param-
eters [Q and coefficient of linear regression; c--sumary of estimates of
L and Q for average frequencies 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 and h.0 Hz. V is the region
of estimates from our data (em-3n channel) and from J. Hesley's data (1965)

channel in analogous arrangement to J. Hesley's (1965), and also Wesley's own
estimates. Agreement of the results can be considered satisfactory.

'Ihe regions of solutions for different frequency components form a regular
sequence in coordinates of lgL and ng, showing a linear relation between
quality factor Q and frequency w. The quality factor increases with frequency
approximately as the cube root of frequency. A rise in frequency, as was to
be expected. is accompanied by a reduction in the effective size L of inhomo-

geneities of the medium that take a significant part in transfer of seismic
energy.

Absorption of Longitudinal Waves in the Mantle. Let us evaluate the absorbing
properties of the mantle in accordance with a simplified scheme (Sato, Espi-
noza. 1967; 'l‘eng, 1968). we. will assume that the hodograph and the cross
section of velocity are known for longitudinal waves in a spherically
symmetric earth. He will also assume that radiation at the source is iso-
tropic, and that any possible relation between Q and frequency can be dis-
regarded in an octave frequency band. within the framework of these assump-
tions we can use the data we have derived from spectral ratios 71‘; (Fig. ‘47)
to evaluate the change in Q with depth:

may

V
until-"’27:?
M

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPP’ICML USE ONLY

is A/T‘. un/ s

 

 

PM. W. Spectral ratio v of Chiss components 0.7-1.1: ha and amplitudes for
the Sim-3M channel an functionn of epicentral distance for the Panir-Baykal

direction: 1--imtiui data for 1(a); 2--averased data for 7(A)z 3--anplitude
curve of HT

wilcrc fi. fi art.- the average frequencicn of the ChISS channels; tk(d) is the

travel time or the wave along a ray in the k-th spherical layer of the earth;
qk in thc averaue value of the quality factor in the Roth layer.

Moreover. we take as the average value of the quality factor in the earth's
crunt Qsl-ao-hso, bearing in mind that

Qr--}(';%.Qa
and (1,, - 180-190 for f I 1 Hz.

111:: method of calculation (Tens. 1968) consists in inverting the aatrix 'i‘ of
trove) tines AT and solving the atria equation

e-T‘V.

where Q is the sought vector (l/Qh l/Qg,.... 1/03,), 3 is the vector
(u. 72“... yn).'l‘is the matrix

.4 u: a: act.

at Mi Mi ff- ;

04' ‘4' N7 N:
Atf; in the travel time of a P wave along the i-th ray in the k-th layer.

An algorithm proposed by V. P. Valyus (1971) was used to calculate the tﬁ.
me initial data were the hodograph and velocity cross section with respect
to tho Panir-Baykal profile described in the preceding section. and also
the data found by L. P. Vinnih and A. V. Nikolavev (1970). The spectral
ration y! are obtained froa aateriale of registration of earthquakes by the
'i'aigar an?) Temporary Q1188 otations in the northeast direction coincident
with the direction of the profile.

Analysizz of the 7 data nhown on Fig. 51 shows that several characteristic
section: can he oggerved in the behavior of the average line. he first

10):
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’Oli OFFICIAL USE ONLY

section. up to 60-70 km. is characterized by an approximately constant value
of 7U and is apparently related to the the Influence chiefly of the upper
layers of the earth's crust. The second section. from 70 to 150 km, is
associated with n relative reduction in the values of 7U by approximately
0.3 lg unit. The section from 150 to 100 km is associated with the very
lowest values of n 1. apparently due to the influence of the lower layers

of the earth's crust and the lithosphere. The next section from 700 to

1500 km is characterized by a steep rise in the graph of 7” by approximately
0.16 log unit. after which a gently sloping section is observed, coinciding
in position with the 20-degrce feature. in the distance range from about
2500 to Woo he an increase is observed in the values of n by approximately
0.2 log unit. Then a sharp drop is observed that reaches t e lowest value
at a distance of 6000-6500 km. The amplitude of this minimum is about 0.3
log unit. lit a distance of about 7000 km a steep rise begins in the graph
of 'U‘ flattening out somewhat at a distance of about 8000 km.

Note should be taken of the oscillatory structure of the initial curve of
v”. the main spikes being confined to characteristic sections of the
smoothed line. The strongest oscillations are observed in regions of
relative declines in the function of the spectral ratio as well as in its
transitiOnal sections. in our opinion it is quite characteristic that
there are two relative minima on the initial curve for 7 (see Fig. 107)
that are confined to distances of “800-5300 km and 5800-7500 hm. If the
data of spectral ratios are compared with the amplitude curve of a longi-
tudinal wave shown on Pig. 1"! (for greater detail see Part I), one can see
that there is an inverse relation between the two curves. Corresponding
to the general decline of the MT curve is a general rise in the 7 curve.

and corresponding to relative rises in the MT curve are flat sections and
relative minima on the v curve.

Apparently the observed relation is not accidental since the data were
obtained for a single frequency band: 7 -- from materials of a 0:188 station
(0.1 and 1.1: iiz channels). M? from 8104-39! materials (frequency band about
0.1-2.0 iis). 1his relation shows that a drop in amplitude of a 1’ wave is
accompanied by attenuation of its high-frequency comonents.

with respect to the distance range beyond 65°. it is scanned that the spectrum
of a P wave may be influenced by the PcP wave. which is delayed in arrival

by less than 30 s at these distances. in our case such an influence, if
significant in general at these distances from the source. may show up at

n remove of 80° or more since in deriving the data on y the measurements were
made in a time interval equal to 10 :1. Moreover. special consideration was
given here to the time interval from 10 to 20 s. and it was established that
on this section the spectral ratios have appreciably greater values.

in the inversion of the spectral ratios. indirect use was made of their
relation to the Al? amplitude curve. we point out the usefulness of such

an operation. bearing in mind the results of inversion of amplitude curves
to the cross section of mechanical Q as undertaken by K. Veith andO. Clawson

105

FOR OFFICE“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SK ONLY

(1973!). Alan uned in an Indirect wny were the npectrai amplitude curven

of l' waven considered above; the usefulnena of these curves was pointed out
by '1‘. li. Vanovnhaya ct al. (196%) and also by a. Kennett (1975). In particu-
lar, theme authorn turned their attention to the significant way that the
characteristic elemntn of spectral amplitude curves are related to the
poultinn of the low-Q section and to the absolute value of Q.

in addition to the indirect criteria of consistency of the results of inverting
y to the. cross section of Q. use was made of average quantitative estimates of
u that are known for the aantle as a whole (markov et al.. 197M Kanaisory.

1967 a. b. c. d; 'fcng. 1968) and also for the crust and upper mantle of the

inventigated region (Vinnik. 1976i Zhadin. Dcrgachev. 1973: Khalturin. i971:
Khalturin. Urusova. 1962).

As has already been pointed out. we have taken the value (2-1020-1050 as the
average estimate for the crust. There are grounds for assuming (aiadin.
Dcrighchev. 1973) that the lower and upper layers of the crust have quality
factors appreciably different from this average. it) analyze this hypothesis.
we use the data of A. Nuraagaahetov (1971:) and the inversion equation (Sate.

Espinoza. 1967)
.0
n: -+v+(+»|§w-Ir'

where p is the parameter of a ray. V is the velocity of a P wave. 6,. is the
epicentral distance at exit of the ray that has radius of penetration r.
and”). dIo/dd is the derivative of the dupin function of a P wave in
a medium with velocity V(r) and quality factor Q r). In agree-ant with
Dergnchcv (1975) we approximate the velocity cross section of the crust in
the investigated region by the exponential law

V - Va".

where W) is the initial velocity of the P wave. and ii is depth frca the
surface of the earth.

For A. ﬂuraagaahetov's data. the derivative din/dd can be represented as

5'5»..- .

Here n; and n; are the coefficients of attenuation of cuss coaponents of
the 1' wave in the distance range fro. A. to 6;. do is the difference in
annular frequencies of the two catss channels.

The average value of the quality factor of the layer bounded from below by the
tip of the seisaic ray with exit at distance 02 is evaluated in accordance
with A. A. Dergaehev (1915) by Q"- A"B"'. where

“=5'z‘as" " '. ’ .
Taking v.-h.o halo and V50 -8.l Its/s. we get Iii-0.01M. Using the data for

r. -o.a and f3-1.5 u: no. Table I: in A. hunagaabetov's work (1975) we find
that when a, -mo Rs. ”12.8. ”2.58010". e..,-30. The calculated estiaate

106

M OFI’ICIIJ. USS ONLY
tum-J. u- referred to the very upper layer ur the erunl. that has a thlcknenn
ul' fun new" ”In" ’lo'; Inn.

The estimates of the quality factor obtained by V. I. Khalturin (1971) for
the territory of the Northern 'l'ynn'-Shr.n' from observations at distances of
100-200 kn for frequencies clone to 1 ll: do not exceed values of QI 350. and
apparently correspond to depths of 15-30 km. Thus it can be expected that

appreciably higher values or Q will correspond to the bottoms of the crust
and the asthenoaphere.

’ a _ “ n: Fig. '08.

    

Cross sections of mechanical quality factor
'1 of the crust and mantle: l--our model: 2.- the
model of C. Archanbeau et al. (1969); 3--K- Veith and
O. Clawson (1972); Io---'i'. Teng (1976)

Shown in Fig. he is the ROI) cross section found by
inversion of 7 data with observance of the following

limitations: the average values of the quality factor
in the crust must be of the order of 1:50. and throughout
the mantle -- of the order of 1500-600 (Kananory. 1967
a. b. c. d; Kovach. Anderson, 196“. For purposes of
comparison of results. Fig. 1:8 shows relations for Q
as a function of depth H according to the data of

c. Archsabeau et al. (1969). K. Veith and G. Clavson
(1912) and r. Tong (1968). ms the set of nodels

of the distribution of quality factor with depth,
these were chosen for the reason that they were
derived by similar techniques for inversion of sapli-
«I tudc dut‘s

Analysis of the relations for quality factor as a function of depth that

are shown in Fig. us shows that all models are in satisfactory agreeaent
with one another only in the region of the upper 150 Due layer. The lost
contrasty differences are observed for the model obtained by c. Archanbesu
at al. (1969) for the territory of the United States. In constructing the
node] . data were used on spectral amplitude curves frost two explosions along
four profiles. in this model. values of 0-8000 were found at depths free
1000 to 1100 ha. which is apparently excessive. and cannot be snatched with
the latest data on free oscillations of the earth (Zhukov et al., 191'!)

and surface waves (Kanatsory. 1970).

A coaparison of the resultant aodel of MR) with that of K'. Veith and

G. Clawson (1972) shows that they agree satisfactorily down to depths of
the order of 100 km. For greater depths the data of K. Ueith and G. Clavson
rise abruptly to a value of 1100 and renain constant right down to 2800 kl.
For their calculations these authors used data on the velocity cross section

and amplitude measurenentr. for a frequency f-l Hz. obtained by E. lierrin
(1968).

10?

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Characteriutln featureu of this model are two relative minima in the region
from 150 to 300 km. and from 650 to 750 km. and an abrupt rise in the

vicinity of 760-170 km. An noted by the authors themselves. the increase

in Q may, in particular, he a consequence of the weak increase of velocity

in E. ﬂerrin's model. At the same time. they note that that an increase of

Q and V in this region in entirely possible. Moreover. it is suggested that
the decline in the region of 350-650 km might be entirely due to the monotonic
increase of Velocity in E. herrin's model in this region. with respect to

the evaluation of quality factor for the lower mantle. the authors feel

that the available data permit only an estimate of the average, equal to 1100.
relative to which the individual determinations fluctuate.

'ihe greatest agreement is observed between the model of Q found in this

book and T. Teng's model (1968). T. Teng's model is based on relatively
low-frequency data of stations of the world-wide HHSSN netowrk found for two
deep-focus South American earthquakes. 'l'. Teng used a method of inVerting
the spectral ratio to the Q cross section by successive approximations.
utilizing two computational schenes with considerably different initial
approximations. In the first scheme. the initial variant was taken as the
simplest model of a three-layer mantle: low-, intermediate- and high-Q
layers. in the second scheme, the initial approximation was a model close
to the m8 model (Anderson et al., 1965). The final result of selection was
the model shown in Fig. h8. A characteristic feature of this model is first
of all the relatively low Q in the layer from 36 to 950 km. where it is
equal to 75-100. Moreover, an important detail of the cross section is

a relative maximum of the Q in the 1500-1875 km region and the considerable
reduction of the Q in the region of transition from the lower mantle to the
outer core. from 2000 to 2800 km. which has recently been confirmed by

data of free oscillations of the earth (Zharkov et al., 1971:).

Let us note that our Q model has nearly identical cross sectional details,
particularly in the vicinity of transition from the upper to the lower
mantle and then to the outer core. 0n the whole, the model is in agreement
in the region of the upper mantle as well. In our model. the upper mantle
is somewhat higher-Q, particularly below the too km interface. At the same
time. in the resultant model the region of the asthenosphere is much more
clearly delineated by a relative reduction in Q.

If T. Tcng's model of the mechanical quality factor of the mantle (Tens,
1968) is taken as the average world-wide model of an anomalous mantle in
activated regions. our model can be classified as one of an essentially
normal mantle of platform regions. or at least as the model of the mantle
of a weakly activated region.

Discussion of the Results

The second part of this monograph has presented a detailed analysis of the
particulars of propagation of seismic waves over an extensive territory of
Central Asia. MaJor emphasis has been placed on problems of the mutual

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reiatlnn hntwmm lecullnritien of tho: Internal structure of the crust and
upper mantle of the territory on the one hand. and the kinematic and dynamic
characteristics of fundamental seismic anen on the other.

It was shown in Chapter 1 that amplitude curves of different frequencies

and the spectra of different types of waves are a comparatively precise tool
in solving problems of outlining and delineating regions of the crust and
mantle with considerably anomalous properties. These characteristics were
successfully used in Chapter 2 for mapping individual blocks of the crust
and mantle. It was shown in particular that from a number of dynamic
properties of fundamental types of waves one can outline boundaries of

what are apparently essentially dissimilar blocks: Tibet and the Tarim
platform. Taria and ham-Shank Dzhungaria. the Balkhash region and Northern
1yan'-Shan'. Dzhungaria and Altay, Altay and the Ssyans.

in Chapter 3 a detailed analysis was made of the internal structure of the
territories crossed by the Pamir-Baykal neisaologic profile. Regular alter-
nation of crust and mantle of platform and activated types is demonstrated
as a result. For instance at the southeast end of the profile in the terri-
tory of Pamir one notes a high-frequency type of upper mantle with poorly
defined deep-level boundariesz as one moves in the northeastern direction
within the limits of the 'lyan'-Shan' and adjacent territories of Kazakhstan
there is a characteristic transition to a different crust-mantle block. 'lhis
block differs from the preceding one in an overall reduction of velocity
throughout the cross section, and more pronounced naJor interfaces, whose
depth is somewhat reduced. Further on toward the northeast a block can be
distinguished with still more elevated boundaries of anor physicochenical
interfaces with velocity increasing on the average through the cross section,
and the presence of a pronounced low-velocity layer. with consideration of
the drift of seismic rays. the given block of the mantle is assigned to a
region with axial part coincident with the position of the Zaysan-Gobi
folded zone.

The next crust-mantle block is distinguished within the limits of the
Hongolian-Altay folded zone. It is differentiated from the previous one

by a relatively weakly expressed asthenospherie layer and increasing thickness
of the upper mantle on the average. The velocity characteristics remained

an before on the average.

0n the northeast end of the profile in the vicinity of the Saysns still
another crust-mantle block is noted in which a characteristic feature is
redistribution of velocity characteristics along the entire cross section:
in the upper part the velocities decreased considerably, while in the lower
part they increased. The position of interfaces with respect to depth is
close to that of the preceding type of cross section.

For the northeastern direction of the profile, a cross section of the
mechanical quality factor of the median vas constructed for the crust and

mantle that for the first time gives an idea of the distribution of absorbing
properties of the nediua to a depth of 2800 km in Central Asia.

109

FOR OHICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.On the whole. in evaluating the results presented in the second part of the
monograph. it should be emphasised that this is the first time that such a
detailed analysis of seismological materials has been made for the territory
of Central Asia. It is to be hoped that this will enable a still sounder
interpretation of the data of other geological-geophysical methods.

III. NANIPETATION 0F INUOIIOOENBITIBS 0F S'I'RUC'NRE IN PLUC'IUA'I'IOIIS OF THE
CHARACTERISTICS OF LONGI'IUDINAL WAVES

no detailed spatial structure of P waves has been comparatively little
investigated. This is due in part to a lack of sufficiently dense systems
of seismic obicrvations. and in part to the fact that seismology uses mainly
averaged characteristics of travel times and amplitudes of seismic waves
from which the coordinates of the focus and energy of earthquakes are
determined. In doing this. major emphasis is placed on the stable determi-
nistic characteristics of the wave field: average station corrections,
systematic changes of amplitude, travel time and apparent velocity. 80 far.
little attention has been given to the structure of small-scale fluctuations
of travel times and amplitudes: intervals of spatial correlation and the

relation between fluctuations of various parameters have remained practically
unstudied.

The first data on the structure of fluctuations of amplitudes and travel time
of the P wave were obtained from deep seismic sounding (Galkin et a1. . 1970:
iiikolavev. Tregub, 1969). A detailed study of the spatial structure of
fluctuations in travel time from seismic observations was done only from data
of the [ASA group (Aki. 1973) and from the North Tyan’-Shan‘ group of
stations (Nersesov et al.. 1912; Sedova, 1971a).

Systematic differences of the parameters of seismic waves carry intonation
on the difference of deterministic components of the inner structure of the
investigated regions; random fluctuations of these parameters carry infor-
mation on the nature of inhomogeneities. The detail of investigation of
inhomogeneities with respect to fluctuations in the parameters of seismic
waves depends on the density of the network of observations. the nature of
the experimental material and the method of processing it.

This section gives the results of a number of studies by the K8: [Kompleksnaya
seysmologicheskaya ekspeditsiya Instituta fisiki Zeali: Cusprebensivs Seismo-
logical Expedition of the Institute of Physics of the Earth] based on data
obtained chiefly by expeditionary stations deployed in various years in a
number of territories of the Soviet Union.

'Ihe greatest dimensions of the network of seismlogical stations of vhieh
materials were used in studying the fluctuations of parameters of longitudinal
waves were determined by the area of the Soviet Union, and reached an area of
z’OOOxNOO km. The network included 16 stations situated in different terri-
tories of the Soviet Union.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For more detailed studies. regional notwnrks of stations were used with the
following dimensions: Nurthnrn Tyan'-Shan' ,- 200 thO kmx Central Tysn'-
Shan' -- 100x250 km; Northern Kazakhstan - 150x250 km; 0am - 50 x100 km.

The most detailed studies were done on specially created compact groups of
temporary expeditionary stations of the KSE. For instance in the Zeysk
group the maximum distances between them were about 2 km. selected groups of
stations were deployed in such a way as to represent territories with
different geological structures. The Northern Tyan'-8han' group was placed
on the Junction between mountain and prairie sections, while the Central
Tyan'~8han' group was situated in the center of one of the largest mountain
formations; the Northern Kazakhstan network of stations was placed within
the limits of the Kazakh folded region; the western group of stations was
located on the European platform; the Oarm network -- in the region of con-
Junctlon of two colossal tectonic systems -- Tyan'-Shan' and Pamir. etc.

Chapter 1. Fluctuations of Amplitudes and Travel Times
1. Presentation of experimental material and methods of processing it

The aeiamoiogical experimental material from the different groups of stations
differs in quantity and quality. 'lhe temporary groups of field stations
sometimes were operated for the duration of a single field season, and
therefore for such groups many epicentral regions are not represented due
to lack of data. Depending on the amount and uniformity of the material.
the earthquakes were grouped by epicentral zones in different ways. For
instance in studying fluctuations of seismic oscillations. all earthquakes
of Indonesia on the Northern Kazakhstan group of stations were considered
Jointly. while for the aggregate of stations deployed over the entire terri-
tory of the 0888. earthquakes of the Bands region of the sea were considered
separately. Earthquakes of Alaska, the Aleutians, Kuril-Kamchatka and other
zones were grouped differently for different sets of stations.

Let us introduce a nmber of symbols and definitions. The symbol e will
denote a set of earthquakes of one epicentral region: one set of epicentral
regions; 8--a set of seismic stations: angle brackets 0 denote the operation
of statistical averaging: dudeviations from the mean. A subscript will
indicate the parameter of averaging. e. g. 0, denotes averaging of data

with respect to all earthquakes of a given region. and 6. will mean deviation
from the calculated mean.

To study the inhomogeneity of a medium one can use not only the ﬂuctuations
of amplitudes and travel times themselves. but also the correlations between
these fluctuations. Actually, similar fluctuations should be observed for
closely spaced stations. In the limit when the instruments are located on
the same pedestal their readings should be identical.

for the sake of convenience in calculations and re resentation of results.
the absolute values of differences I6 lg M - 6 lg A3 8 66 lg A” and

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POM DFFICIAL "SH UNIX

Int|- nLJI rantii are calculated with rneiwct to each pair of stations (i,Jl.
For the nuke of brevity we will call these quantities the second differences.
if the values of 66 lg A” are considered as a function of the distance
hetvecn the corresponding stations AiJv we get a representation of the
renuite in a form that in close in content to the reciprocal structure
function. The difference is that in this instance the abnolute values of
differences are used rather than their squares. In a similar way one can
find the second difﬂerences with respect to regions and plot their values

as a function of the average distance between regions.

2. Variations of aegnitude deviations for the aystea of stations deployed
over the entire territory of the USSR

We begin our analysis of fluctuations in anplitudes with the systes of
ntntions representing the entire territory of the USSR (Fig. h9). From the
data or this system. the deviations of magnitudes 6n vere calculated for
h92 earthquakea of eight regions (Table 20).

 

Fig. h9. Diagram of deployment of seismic stations

J!»
(U- I

wage“ ++1L+

to a: all I ear l~~~_~
Iv,’

Fig. 50. Average values of the second differences of magnitudes dds for
neiseic stations is) and epicentral regions (b) from observations at
stations deployed over the entire territory of the USSR: the horizontal
lines show the interval of averaging: the vertical lines show the 10’
confidence interval of the average values.

112

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE 20
31c stations deployed over th

 

_'seisu1c stations

I I 8 I O D '

0. IS 0.” 0.9 0.8 0.89 0.8 -
0.. 4.“ 4.“ 0.. 0." 0.“
OJ. 0.” 0.8 0.5 0.“ 0,. -
0.0 0.1. 0.8! 4.. 0.8 4.“ -
O.“ 4.5. 4.” 4.54 M 4..
O.“ 0.3 O.“ 0... 4.0. 0.0 -
0.. 0.3 0.. 0. M d.” M -
0.8 4.01 -0.l3 4.. 4’ 4.‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hot on exumine the dependenccn of the second differences 66m on the distance
between stations. '00 do this, we refer to the graph shown in Fig. 50. It is
clear from this graph that the second differences “In increase with distance
between stations, reaching a maximum in the 600-1000 km interval. 0n the
basin of the analogy between the function of second differences and the
structure function, the position of this maximum on the A1 axis can be
interpreted as half the spatial dimension of the character stic inhomo-
geneities, which agrees with the next minimum of the function in the

1500-2000 km interval. 'ihe second maximum of the given graph is observed
in the vicinity of ALI-1100045000 km.

3. Amplitude fluctuations on the North 'i'yan'-Shan' station group

For utations of the North Tyan'-8han' network (Fig. 51) the second differences
or logarithms of the 1’ wave were considered. The processing technique here
was somewhat different in connection with the fact that

in the case of short distances between stations there

was no need to introduce a correction into the epi-
central distance and average values of the logarithm of
the amplitude for each earthquake were determined as the
arithmetical means, while the fluctuations were determined
as the deviations from these means.

In this way the errors associated with individual

peculiarities of separate earthquakes were sharply
reduced.

The mean values of fluctuations in amplitudes are
sumarized in Table 21. 'lhe experimental data were
selected with respect to the quality and nature of the
P wave recording; obligatory requirements were clarity
or location of of the first entry, pulse shape of the wave and a con-
stations of the siderable, at least tenfold. excess in amplitude over the
North 'iyan'-Shan' aicroseismic background. Altogether, 89 earthquakes
were selected with Hz 5.75.

 

Pig. 51 . Diagram

MWUP

The individual error of measurements of the maximum amplitude of oscillations
in our procedure is about 0.05 log unit. Each value in the table is the
result of averaging of the data of 5-15 earthquakes. Thanks to this, the
relative error is reduced by a factor of I; (n is the number of measurements),
and hence the error of each tabulated value becomes no greater than 0.02.

Let us note that this is considerably less than the variations <6 lg A>,.

The average station values «6 lg A>e>3 lie in the interval from -0.06 to 0.010,
and the average values with respect to epicentral regions «6 lg "e’c lie in
U“.- interval from ~0.l3 to 0.06.

In tweet-dance with the previously introduced definition, the quantities
«6 lg pew- should be equal to zero since for each individual earthquake
<6 lg ”5'6. 1he difference of this quantity from zero that is observed in

11%

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKCIM. USE ONLY

TABLE 21

Average values of the fluctuations of amplitudes 6 lgA of a P wave
on North 'lyanhShun' stations

 

mlW-uJI-om 0." MI o.Is mus-mos 0M s.ss s.“
. 0mm. wheat-0.8 0.»: sm 0." 0.01-0.01 4.. s.»

{2 W's-"- «m 0M «Maw-us o.» 0.0: us 0.» 0.“

ﬁgure- «ml-w mas-o.“ om mans-us -s.a o.»

--_ -o.u-o.u-u.u-o.w mas-om us 0.0 s s.“
7 WNW-OM-an-om s." o.«-o.as-o.as mos-om s.»

(em-fwgmm- om-ams u." ens-us whose-ms us s.u

Jeans

 

(“Hm anus-m: nus om on us 0.0: o

 

“u’s Mn mu us 0.0 m 0.“ 0.! s.l
KEY: l--Epicentra1 regions 6--Indonesia
2--Kodiak Island TuEurope and North Africa

3--A1eutians. Konandors 8--Ice1snd, Greenland, Baffin Island
huKurils, Sea of Okhotsh 9--8eisnic stations
5--Japanese Islands

reality is probably due to the fact that individual averaging operations were
done both with respect to insufficient data and with respect to appreciably
different stations. The confidence interval for each average is equal to o/v’n
where n in the number of terms. Thus the values of averages with respect to
epicentral regions do not exceed the confidence interval. and their values are
not statistically significant. At the sense time. the difference of mean
square deviations is significant. In fact <ae3>a exceeds «20’s. 1. e. the
fluctuations associated with differences of seismologieal conditions close to
observation points are more pronounced than those associated with individual
peculiarities of epicentral regions. No clear correlation occurs between
separate pairs of columns and lines in Table 21.

   

 
     

.v in In minus,“ M

‘0‘”
Fig. 52. Average values of second differences 66 lg'A for seismic stations (a)
and epicentrlll regions (b) from observations on North ”am-Sham stations.
horizontal lines show intervals of averaging. vertical lines show the 70%
confidence interval of averages; the broken line shows the 705 confidence
interval of an individual measurement.

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shown in Fig. 52 are the_average values of the second differences 66 lgkl as
a function of 51 J determined for stations and epicentral regions respect July.
The interval of variation of average values is small. and the confidence of
their relative location is low. 'ihe confidence interval is most cases is
greater than the observed variations. Nevertheless the graphs presented in
Fig. 52 show some regularities.

In Fig. 52a, one notes a reduction in values of 66 lgA with a transition from
the distance range of 75-100 km to 55-75 km; this begins a decline in the
graph that by definition must be at the coordinate origin. Pros this we
conclude that the interval of spatial correlation of amplitudes in the
vicinity of the seismic stations is about 50 km. The local reduction of

66 lgA in the 110-200 km interval and the following slight increase are

characteristic elements that show fluctuations of the spatial diaension of
110-200 km in the field of amplitudes.

Elements of the fort: of the graph of second differences that are similar to
those considered can be seen as vell for the epicentral regions in Pig. 52b.
In fact. a reduction of 66 lgA is observed in the distance interval of
2200-h000 km. and a relative increase can be seen on both sides of this
interval. Apparently a drop in the graph to the zero value should occur
when 61 <1000 km. 0n the basis of the resultant data it is difficult to
Judge t e interval of spatial correlation of amplitude fluctuations. but
one can assume a characteristic scale of such fluctuations of 2200-11000 km.

Bearing in mind the small and commensurate values of the minima noted in
Fig. 52a, b one can assume that they are genetically related. 'ibis relation
consists in the fact that the 2200-10000 km scale of fluctuations in the
amplitudes that is inherent in the relative location of earthquakes show up
in the fluctuations of amplitudes that have a characteristic dimension of
110-200 km and that are inherent in the same relative location of seismic
stations.

lo. nagnitude deviations on stations of the Central ‘iyan'-Shan' group

For the Central 'l‘yan'-8han' network (Fig. 53) data on magnitude deviations
were analyzed as a Motion of the distance between stations. The data

averaged by stations and by epicentral regions are shown in tables 22 and 23
as well as in Fig. 5‘0.

Fig. 53. Diagram of location of
stations of the Central Nam-Sham
group

 

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 22

Deviations of magnitudes from the average group value on
Central 'i‘yan'-8han‘ stations. averaged by epicentral regions

Station

 

TABLE 23

Deviations of magnitudes from the average for different epicentral '
regions with respect to the group of stations of Central ‘ijran'-8han'

   

 

    

Regions

Alaska 0.03 India -0.Sh
'Ihe Aleutians 0.11: The Persian Gulf -0.03
Mongolia 0.17 Iran, Iraq -0.05
Japan 0.11 'ihe Red Sea -0.30
Ryuiwu Retto 0.02 Turkey . 0.19
'Ihe Philippines -0.02 The Mediterranean Sea 0.22
Indonesia. 0.00 'ihe Greenland Sea 0.05
Hindu Kush -0.17 "

”a

l I

" - +1r {

u i {9

+
«I + ++ '

U "a: anuﬂu: III) u
Ivan
Fig. 5h. Average values of second differences of magnitudes 66a for seismic

stations (a) and epicentral regions (1)) fro- observations on the Central
'lyan'-Shan' group. See Fig. S2 for explanation

Analysis of these data shows a more contrasty manifestation of characteristic
scales of fluctuations of the intensity of P waves that were noted previously
on other groups of stations. As a matter of fact a reduction in correlated-
nosn of magnitude deviations with increasing distance between stations is
observed in the 110-50 km interval. Vith increasing A1 J one also notes a

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mxlnmn in the interval of 50-60 km and a new rice in the reciprocal relation
between magnitude fluctuations that rcachen an extreaua for A” > 80 ha.

In plotting the graph of aagnitude deviations an a function of distance
hetwrscn cpiccntral regions. the relatively large nuaber of such regions
cnuhlcd un to narrow the intervals of averaging and to Increase detail

on the graph (Pig. Shh). Here one can also obncrve good agrecaent with
the data of other station groups: the firnt marinua is in the interval of
rum-1000 ha. the flrnt ainiaun -- in the interval of mo-tooo km the
uemnd. and most intenne minus in in the interval of 11000-5000 ha. and
In replaced by a minimal in the interval of 5000-6000 ha. 'ihe maximal
that can be distinguished froa asteriala of the stations of the Central
'iyan'-8han' network in the interval of 6000-7000 ha cannot be distinguished
on other groups of ntatione due to shortage of data. The most remote
nininua to be noted on the Central ﬂaw-Shaw cones in the 7000-8000 he
interval. Attention should be called to the fact that the interdependence

of fluctuationo of amplitude deviation: at this distance is nearly the case
no in the interval of 1000-2000 ha.

5. Fluctuations of intensity of the P wave froa asterials oi the North
Kazakhstan group of station

The relative placement of the seismic stations that take up the North Kesahh-
ntan group is shown in Fig. 55. Data on fluctuations of intensity of the

r wave are represented by amplitude deviations for lbs earthquakes of 16
epicentre]. regions. and are smarised in Table 2h.

Fig. 55. Diagraa of deployaent of
stations of the liorth Kazakhstan
amp

 

The second differences 66 lg a” were calculated free the average values of
nmplltude fluctuations. and graphs were plotted for the way that they depend
on the distance between corresponding stations (Pig. 56a). Just as for the
North wow-saw stations, the interval of spatial correlation of fluctu-
ation" of amplitudes in 50-80 ha. he aininuie on the graph in the 120-150 ha
interval aluo agrees with the data of other groups of stations.

:thmm in Fig. 56b are the second differences of the logarithm of enlitudes
a3 a function of the distances between epicentral regions. Since the
dinenaionn of the regions are being coapared with the distances between
regions. the oscillations on the graph are strongly saoothed out. lever-

i.nelens. there can be no doubt about the mini-u- in the interval of
5000-7000 k-e

118

NR OFFICIM. USE: ONLY
V000 "WWII“. "SH 00".?

TABLE 2"0

Average valucn or fluctuationn or 0001010000600 of P 000000
on North K000000000“ 800000000

 

00-000 4. 0.04. 000400400 000 000 000 mun-0.00 000 000 0004
. 0 I O 0 U . I ‘ O O.
‘3 Ann: 4.00 0.00 0.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 - 0.. 0.00 0.00 4.. 0.. 0.. 0.00 0.. 4..
0.00" 4.00 0.00 0.. 4.00 4.00 4.00 - 4.00 0.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 0.. - 0.. .-
000." _ 0.00 4.00 4.. 0.00 4.00 4.. — 0.00 4.00 4.00 4.. 0.. 0.00 4.. 0.00 4..
00- 0.00 4.00 0.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 0.. 0.00 4.00 0.00 4.00 4.00 4.. - 0.00 0..
00M.» :0: 4.. 3-. 3.: 4.00 4;.“ :0. 4.3 2.0:: 3.: 3:: 0.: 1.3 0.00 0.00 4.00
. - . . - . . 0. 0.. 4.00 4.00
9 00m 4.. - 4.00 4.00 4.00 — 0.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 0.. ‘ 0.. - 000 ,0.»

1 000-00000 0.00 - 4.00 0.00 0.00 — 4.00 4.00 0.09 0.00 0. 4.00 400 4' 4:
i2 0000000 000 1.: - 4.00 4.09 1: 4. - 3.2 :3 31:4,: 0:. 0.00 '. 0:: .4030
1%” 0.004.. 4” 4.. 4.. _ . . 0. 0.00 0.004.. 0.00 4.00
l

(00000000000000. 0.00 A.“ A." 4.0 O. 00 0..-OI 000 400
'40- 4.00 4.00 0.. 0.00 0.. 0.. 4.004.. 0.00 4.00 4.. 4.. 0.. 0.00 0100 0100
. 00000040... 3.00 - - - 0.00 - - 0.. 0.. (0.01 4.00 0.. 4.00 0.00 0.00 0..
than»... .00 0.00 0.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 - 0.00 0.00 4.. 4.00 4.00 0.00 0.00 4.00 0..
0.. - - - - - - 0.00 4.00 0.00 4.00 0.00 0.00 - 0.00 4.00

 

KEY: l-oSelnlc 0000000000 10-40000
2-oftpicentrot regions u--I00dochlnn
3-4100“. 12-4-0000...
10-4000 01000000000 13-4100 Solomon 03100000000
So-Jopan 10.4000,- North ”.10an
ﬁnindonenio 15-43001!
1-4100: Kurllo 16-41002 Hcdltcrnnoan 800
BooKanchukn l7-~Occ0niu
9.4301... 18-4100 Arctic

 

Hg. 56. Average 00010000 or the accent! differenceo 66 150 for 0.00-00¢
0000000000 (0) 0nd 0000000000101 regions (b) from 00000-000100“ on 000010000
or North Kazakhstan. 80:0 5‘03. 52 for explanation

119

M OFI’lClM. USE ONLY
mu (WVIGIM. mm "NM

     

(I (I a ti

0 a
”mam
Fin. 5?. Distribution of second differences High for the group of

ntntirmn in North Kazakhstan: looexperiacntalz 2--theoretical nor-a1
for o ~0.00 log unit

or definite interest In the question of the distribution of second defferences
or intensity of the P wave. for this purpose the experimental distribution
of deviations of the logarithns of aaplitudes was plotted for a” ”:0 kn

(Fig. 51). The experiaental distribution was conpared with a nuber of
theoretical distributions. iiest agreement is observed with the normal
distribution when 000.08 log unit. which is shown for clarity in Fig. S7.

6. Variations of travel tiles on stations deployed over the entire territory
of the "88!! and in the liorth ﬂaw-Shaw group

'lhc sane second-difference procedure as used for the logarithm of aaplitudes
was applied to the travel tins of the P wave. 'ihese data are less reliable
because of the aicroseisaic interference on the seislsographic recordings.

and the related difficulties in distinguishing the first entries of the
P wave. ‘

we bcgin our analysis of fluctuations in travel tines with an exanination of
materials of the systea of stations deployed over the entire territory of
the USSR (see Pig. 59). m average deviations of travel tines for the

16 stations with respect to 8 epicentral regions are smarised in ‘i'able 2S.
The second differences of travel tines (Fig. 58) increase with increasing
distance between stations and reach a aaxiaun in the interval of 350-600 In.
M. distances of 600-1200 ha a shallow relative ainiaua ia observed which

is then replaced by a sharp minu- in the interval of 1200-2000 ha. Further
on there is a ainiaua situated in the interval of 2200-0000 ha.

in interpreting the extreaa of the second-difference functions by analogy
with the structure Mction we can assme that inherent in deviations of the

travel tiaes of P waves within the limits of the i383 and adjacent regions
are characteristic scales of fluctuations of the order of 1000 and 3000“.

120

FOR OI'I’ICIIJ. USE ONLY
nomad—inane he an .UE 00m in”. on» uo Dogs» :3: 05 ~25 shod—0v 30:4»-
uo shun: on» you A3 a: 8-3 3):» ho 32.93:? 1300. «o 39.7» 000.8: 6m .9!

 

 

l

I I .. I I 3t «7 3 I a? «3 <

| ' H a at. o 3 a . Do. 3' v9. 8
.6I RT .6 I «6| of «T :I :I a? m«

l 3| cal %.I «if odI o .I «.7 «RI .JI 0.»! 5| pal . .I l I 1.2.93!a
QT «NI a. I .6 :I of .8 3| 3| .6 .6 .6 3| 3| Sol 3m g
37 3| SI 3| I I I 3| «0| ...I 97 I I u .I I ...l a no
3] .d 3| «7 I ﬂoI «.7 .6 .6I :I 3| 5| . .I o .I .dI .2! cmunw cm
a.» «a Q. .d 3 3| «.7 «.o 1. 3 .2 .6 to . .I .3 0.. an .6

.

  

usual": Uuﬂnutm

mmmb an» no bravura» 0.523 on» .33 0050300
3.033» no 639? «nu .8» 25: m a go an. 3 on: «23.5 23 go 303350 09.35

\I III.

   
  

121
P08 OFI'ICIIIL USE ONLY
FOR OFMCIAL USE ONLY

in calculating the fluctuations of travel tines on ntationn oi‘ the North
1yan'oi3han' group each earthquake had its own straight-line hodograph that
heat approxiaated the observed data. The use of such hodographs has certain
advantages and disadvantages. An advantage is that in this case the fluctu-
atinnu are Independent of the changes in apparent Velocity that characterize
large-nealc anomalies of the hodograph. The linear dimensions of such an
anomaly are coaparable to or greater than those of the station group: the
neanurcd fluctuations of times characterise only the "fine" strcuture of the
wave field. in should be borne in mind that in isolated cases the makeup of
the group was changed (shifts of stations. lack of recordings). and this

must have had an effect both on the parameters of the straight-line hodograph
and on the values of fluctuations in travel tines.

'ihe fluctuations of travel tines it are made up of tvo main parts: the
.xtation anoanly that depends on the structure of the medium directly beneath
the station and is calculable as the average of all measured deviations of
travel times. and the individual fluctuations relative to this average.

The :otntion anomaly can be calculated in different ways, depending on the
earthquake uanple with respect to which averaging is done.

First let uu connider the results of averaging of station fluctuations with
respect to separate eplcentral regions <6t>,. 'lhese data are given in
Table 26. The average values of fluctuations with respect to all stations
for each region <<dt>.>3. as iaplied by our aethod of deteraining fluctu-
ations. should be close to zero. and therefore slight corrections have been
made in the colums of Table 26 so that «mes-o.

TABLE 26

Average values of deviation (s) from the straight-line hodograph <6”.
of the P wave on stations of the iiorth wan'owsrian' group

--‘=*- ETIIIIIIIIIIIII i

t; - -OJO Oﬂ-Oﬁl-i.‘ w 0.0-0.“ 3.. h.

 

Inn-s- aa-sJa-us on us 0.0.3.1: us as
ﬁll-In- -Mt-e.u-s.au I.‘ ea 0.04.. 0.0 ms
Ian-Ion- AI-OJAﬂ-OJO est-e.» ass has 0.0
“-0,-0.0 ”weaken-8.8 us has

{ sane-nae. e.u ep-m i.n-O.I-O.II-O.D-C.il no

(”It-Luna.I hug-as. -m w m-m-m ass-0.x an an

 

 

«be. m eel-em e.“ an eds-Mt has
“J. a. 0.0 no us an ass I.“ ma
KEY: l--Seiaaic stations 6--Japaneae Islands
2--Epicentral regions 7--Indonesia
3-oiiodiax Island 8--Europe and North Africa

’InAleutians. Koaandors 9--Iceland. Greenland, Baffin Island
5--i(urila. Sea of Olthotsk

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WPlGiM. US“ ONLY

A striking peculiarity of the fluctuations is the vide range of variations

in <6“. free -2.12 to +3.11. considerable differences being noted in iso-
lated cases on the some station for edJaccnt regions (for instance for
station 7 and regions iv and V the difference is 3.21 s). 'ihe differences

of average station fluctuations «dtego are considerable: fros al.02 to
“.38. 'lhese values characterise the inhomogeneity of the upper part of the
cross section beneath the seismic stations. if consideration is taken of

the fact that all stations are located on crystalline rocks. and inhoaogeneity
occurs only vithin the lisits of the earth‘s crust, which is about '6 RI thick,
the contrast in velocity fluctuations should be about 103. A prreciable
differences of the scan square deviations °ee (froa 0.25 to 1.55) characterise
the strong contrast betveen inhosogeneities of the crust and those of the
aantle. the latter not being part of the upper cross section. 'ihe presence
of these inhoaogeneitiea shove up vith greatest contrast in the data of
station In. if it is seemed that the characteristic vertical and horisontal
sire of these inhoaogeneities is the ease. and equal to approxisatsu 100 its,
then the fluctuations of velocity must average 10-12%. and the sexist. devi-
ations -- up to 15-20% On the other hand, if such anomalies are iapossible,
ve out all“ that their vertical dimension is appreciably greater than the
horisont . -

Shovn in Fig. 59 are the second differences of the travel tine Git”.

 

Fig. 59. Average values of second differences of travel tines dot for
seisaic stations (a) and epicentral distances (b) fro. observations on the
liorth ‘iyan‘éihan' group. See Fig. 52 for explanation

'ihe structure of the graphs and the behavior of the average ddt are very
similar to vhat was noted in Fig. 52 for the second differences of the
logarithm of saplitudes. The elements of the graph of m have been shifted
to the left vith respect to the data for 66 lg A. The interval of correlation
of fluctuations of travel time is less than the fluctuations of amplitudes,
nnd therefore the inflection and decline of the graph of “t that correspond
to the graph of 66 lgA have been pushed off to the left out of the figure.

Let us note that in uave propagation in media vith randos inhomogeneities
the intervals of correlation of fluctuations of uplitudcs must be greater
than the fluctuations in travel tines.

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

Fig. 60. Correlation of fluctuations in
the amplitudes and travel times of P waves
from data of the horth ’l‘ynn'oehan' station

group

 

Similarity in the behavior of graphs of 66 lga and ddt is also a rather
convincing sign of statistical significance of the results.

he correlation of fluctuations in amplitudes and travel tines is illustrated
by fig. 60 plotted from data of the North 'i‘ynn'-8han' group of stations.

He can readily see that there is practically no correlation. This result is
important for Judging the natureoii'inhonogeneities of the upper part of the
cross section that determine the average station anomalies of amplitude and
travel time: velocity inhomogeneities of the upper part of the lldlll that
cover points of observation should generate weakly correlated functions

6 lgA and 6t that are characterised by a correlation coefficient of OJ: in
the ease of low-contrast anomalies of velocity (Chernov. 1975). Thus the
lack of correlation can be interpreted as comparative homogeneity of the

very top of the cross section. about a 10 Ina layer. Then the average station
anomalies should be considered as the result of inhomogeneities that are
situated nore deeply. right dovn to the underside of the earth's crust.
Anomalies of amplitudes may be generated both by velocity inhomogeneities
and by the inhomogeneities of absorbing properties. Such inhuogeneities
with dinensions of 50-100 km and average Q of about $0 should be charac-
terised by variations of Q ranging from 150 to £00.

Chapter 2. Investigation of Fluctuations in the Shape of a P Have Recording

1. Study of the shape of the recording of a P wave on station situated in
different territories of the Soviet Union

This study is based on calculating the coefficients of correlation betveen
seismic signals registered by different seismic stations. ‘ihe initial
sections of the seisnogruns that contained the recording of the P vave were
quantized. ‘i‘he seisnograms that were med to study the spatial structure of
the P wave vere obtained on 55 seismic stations situated in different regions
of the USSR. and in part included data used in studying the fluctuations of
amplitudes and travel time described in the preceding chapter.

In selecting the material. consideration was given to the following peculiari-
tics of seisaic recordings: the pulse shape of the initial part of the
recording. i. e. those sources that had short-tern action and were

12':

FOR OFPICII-l. USE ONLY
I'OR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

characterlscd by slmpl Iclty of the sham of the first wave and its constra-
tlvely wide-band spectrum; uuffleienl. intensity of the recording -- on
three stations as a minimua; maximum peak-to-peak amplitude of the first
pulse on the seissogrsm of at least lo mm; clear entries.

ﬁne-component recordings of 51 earthquakes with magnitude M > 5 were used
with epicenters removed by a distance of 30-m° fro. the stations. 'ihe foci
of the earthquakes were situated in different regions of the earth: in the

western part of the Peel flc Ocean belt. in Indonesia. in the Mediterranean
Sea, in the North Atlantic and in the Arctic Ocean.

The X-component corresponding to the direction toward the source was pre-
determined free the horizontal compenents of each recording the and "-8.
In this way the vertical and radial x-coaponent of the P wave recording
were subjected to subsequent correlation analysis.

The shape of the recording is analysed by comparing recordings of the P wave
from one source on different stations. A quantitative measure of the
degree of resenblance of shape is the correlation coefficient K1 J of the
recordings of the i-th and J-th seismic stations determined from the formula

K ‘ '(O'MU
. I':"" I”. .

Since K1 J IK“ the entire set of correlation coefficients for n earthquakes
can be represented as a syssactric matrix containing n-l rows and columns.

The value of the correlation coefficient for a pair of similar functions
such as the recordings of remote earthquakes is a maxim with the proper
coincidence of the first entries. In reality. there is no firm certainty
that the beginning of coding of the recording coincides with the first entry.
Possible errors reach a quarter of the predominant period.

In order to keep the errors associated with uncertain determination of the
beginning of readout from "spoiling" the maximum value of K“. the signals
were "synchronized” by calculating the correlation coefficients for several
relative locations. The maxim shift of one signal relative to another was
equal to 10.1: s. which enabled calculation of nine values of the correlation
coefficient for each pair of recordings in the case of a 0.1 a displacement
step cqwtl to the quantization step.

in other words. in the ”synchronization" process the section of the corre-
lation of two signals in the vicinity of their first arrivals is calculated.
After that. only the maximum value of the function on this sectiOn was used.

Since there were comparatively few data of Joint observations on individual
pairs of stations. they were processed all together rather than being

separated by cpiccntral regions. It was established as a result of such an
aneLysis that stability of the shape of the vertical component is higher on

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFNCML USE ONLY

the average than the radial component. This shows up in the fact that high
values of the correlation coefficient K303! appear for the vertical com-
ponent comparatively more often than for the horizontal component.

or interest is an examination of the correlations both within groups of
nelnmic ntationn and between separate groups. It has been established that

the groups of stations of the European part of the USSR and Soviet Middle
Asia are characterized by a relatively high level of internal correlation.
muse groum are unequally related with each other: the Middle Asia stations
show good correlation with Northern Caucasus stations. while those of the
European part of the nation show good correlation with both of these groups.
'Ihc Yukut stations correlate well with all regional groups of stations. It is

not possible to trace the nature of the correlation for other groups of
stations due to insufficient data.

Thus relatively high correlation of the vertical component of the P wave
recording is noted both within separate groups (European. Middle Asian)
and between remtely spaced stations. At the same time. in many instances
weak correlation is observed between comparatively close stations. Hith
regard to the spatial correlation of the X-component it can be stated that
the nature of the correlation dependenccs is basically the suns as for the
vertical component. At the same time. the vertical components correlate
with each other more strongly on the whole than do the radial components.

The distortion of signal shape that shows up in impairment of its correlation
with another, reference eimal. nay be attributed to several causes. In
particular to scattering of seismic energy when the wave passes through a
region that contains inhOmogeneitiee that are contrasty and small compared
with a wavelength. as well as to the distorting effect of the contrasty
relief of buried and surface boundaries.

high correlation of the shape of a P wave may show up at distances of several
thousand kilometres between stations if the deep interior of the earth intro-
duces weak distortions, i. e. if it is comparatively uniform; moreover, it
is iaportant that the signals radiated by the source in different directions
have a siailar shape. even though they may differ appreciably in amplitude.

A reduction of correlation is usually caused by the screening action of
sections of the meditaa in which minor inhomogeneities are strongly developed.
The diaensions of these sections amount to several hundred kilometres, while
the average distances between them are considerably greater - thousands of
kilometres.

having made a detailed analysis of the spatial structure of the P wave, it
is of interest to evaluate the principal scale effects of fluctuations of

wavcshapc and to relate them to the inhomogeneity of the structure of the
c-nrth's interior.

126

'0]! 03710151. USE ONLY
FOR OFI’ICML USE ONLY

2. investigation of detailed structure of the shape of the P wave

The detailed structure of the longitudinal wave vas studied free the data of
observations on dense systens of colonic stations: North 'i‘yan'-8hsn’ . Iiorth
Kazakhstan. European. Central Wan'oshsn' . Carl and Zeysk. 1hese groups of
stations operated at different tines. the nunber of stations and their
relative location in the group also changed. and therefore the study was
hosed on initial data differing in detail.

The data of only the vertical coaponent of the recording are considered here.
'lhe aethod of data preparation and calculations of the correlation coef-
ficicnts is described in the preceding section.

The North ‘i‘yen'-3hen' Group of Sections. li'he recordings of 89 earthquakes
were used. the cane ones that vere used to study the structure of fluctuations
of amplitudes and travel tine. A matrix of correlation coefficients K” vas
calculated for each earthquake; the values of the natrix were rather high

on the average. exceeding a level or 0.5. The natriees of average values of
the correlation coefficients «”5, were found fro. the correlation matrices
of individual earthquakes corresmnding to a single epicentral region: they
are given in Table 27. Although each element of these natriees characterizes
data relating to two stations, the individual characteristic of the shape of
the P vave on individual stations can be found by averaging the «Q y. with
respect to all pairs that contain the given station i. The resultant values
of «K’s’Si are presented in Table 26. '

TABLE 27

Averaged matrices of the coefficients of correlation of the shape
of the initial shape of the recording from asterials
of ntations of north 1yan'-8han'

   
   
        
  

' 0 ,5: O ..| 0 A“ 0 O.” 0."
I V.“ 0. ' 0. .J‘ 0.“
g “M“ "a 3:3

   
 
 

iii-i’”

B-oJapaneae Islands

Sulndonesia
Kasendora 6-«Burope, north Africa

3--l(urils. Sea Twiceland. Greenland.

of Okhotsk Baffin Island
127

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY

   
  
        

2--Aleutai ne .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l‘lililJ‘J 28

Average values of the coefficients of correlation of the shape
of a P vnve recording for stations of Northern lynn'-8han'

a - noes-vs
4“ - in'n‘ Illll -

m e.“ Ms 0.. 0.0 0.0 0.0 Ml .0 .0
Vans-es e.se s.ss s.es e.“ s.“ 0.0 0.01 :0 :5:
Muses-es 0.“ Me us 0.0 all Mi e.” 0.0 0.8
””"" it :d :23 if. :s 3‘. *3 *3 "“
. . I. 0. O."

Mam-assesses ass 0... 0.8 0.0) 0.8 MI 0.0) 0.0
M w 0.. 0.. s.“ 0.0 0.. 0.0 0.00 :3:

 

 

lanes
(10 an. m m s.» as: as: s.» ens ens
KEY: luxpicentral regions 6--Japanese Islands
ZuSeisnic stations 7--Indonesia
JuKodiak Island 8--Europe. north Africa
buAleutiano, Konandors 9--Iceland. Greenland. Baffin island

5--I(urils. Sea of 0khoteh lOuAverege

The average values of the coefficients calculated fro. the rows of the table
are the station characteristics. while those calculated fro- the cola-Is are
the averaged characteristics of the given earthquake salple for a specific
epicentral region. The average values of the coefficients of correlation of
the shape of the recording of a P wave for stations of Northern 'fyan'oshan'
vary froa 0.53 to 0.70. Since each value is found by averaging at least 50
individual estimates, differences greater than 0.02 should be token as sig-
nificant.

For each seismic station the values of the coefficients are varied as a
function of the asiauth to the epicentral region, the amount of the variation
reaching 0.2. for each of the seven regions the values of the coefficients
change little as a function of the position of the recording station, and
variations renain vithin liaits of 0.1. This scene that the change in
spatial stability of the shape of the P wave is related primarily to the
position of the epicentral region. and depends coaparatively little on the
individual peculiarities of the seisaic stations. Let us note that the
differences in frequency responses of the recording channels should show up
in variations of the average values of the coefficients with respect to
different pairs of stations for separate epicentral regions. The coopera-
tively slight values of these variation show that the effect of the differ-
ence in spatial stability of the P vave fro- diffcrent epicentral regions

is reliably detected on the background of variation that m be possibly
associated vith soee non-identity of equipent characteristics.

The appreciable influence that the region of location of the source has on
the spatial structure of the shape of the longitudinal vave shovs up in
cooperatively veal: siailarity of the correlation aatrices for different
regions.

128
'0'! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 29

Correlation of matrices of the coefficients of correlation
of the shape of the recording of s l' wave for all epicentral regions

0.. 4.“ 0.. 0.‘ 0.” 0."

II I -0.N 0.“ 0.00 0.3
III I 0.“ 0." 0.: -0.I

I: I 0.0 0.. 0..
VI I 0.“ 0.’
VII I 0.31

Snuusurpansuue DBﬂOIIH ' Epi central regions

Note: Roses numerals denote I--Kodiak Island
lI-okleutians. Koaandors
lII--I(urils. Sea of Okhotsk
Ill-«Japanese Islands
V--Indonesia
VInBurope, North Africa
VIIuIceland. Greenland. Baffin Island

To find a quantitative measure of similarity of aatrices of «>9. we corre-
lated then with each other. getting the seventh-order astrix shown in

Table 29. In correlating the satrices. they were all converted to mnerical
series. the values of each series being referred to a zero average. 'Nenty-
one correlation coefficients were calculated. of which three are negative. but
have low absolute values. ‘me positive values of the coefficients range in
absolute value free 0.02 to 0.57.

Thus each value in Table 29 was calculated from two series containing 21
tern apiece; the scan square error of the result close to sero is 30.3.

and on the 0.5 level - frea 0.1 to 0.5. Therefore values exceeding +0.5

and -0.3 have a considerable difference fro. the background. A ce-paratively
high correlation is observed in the initial astrices for remote territories
of Alaska and the IIediterranean. No dependence of the degree of correlation
on distance between epicentral regions is observed.

Let us consider the way that the correlation coefficient <30, depends on the
distance A” between pairs of seismic stations 1 and J and on their position
relative to the source. In doing this we separate all data into two parts
corresponding to longitudinal and transverse correlations. In the first case
the source is in line with the stations, and in the second -- in the direction
perpendicular to the line Joining the stations.

Shown in Fig. 61 are data obtained in our observations on north ‘i‘yan'-8hsn'

stations and also in observations by c. M. 'rsibul'chik in the Saysns (1968)
and by V. Din in North America (1965). All these data were obtained by

129
FOR OI’FICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 61. Coefficients of correlation of the shape of the recording as a
mnction of the distance between stations: l--correlations with respect to
all directions; 2--longitudinal correlation; 3--trsnsverse correlation;
Iouour data froa stations of the North Tynn'-8han' group; 5--data of V. Din
(1965); 6--data of o. M. Tsibul'chik (1968)

short-period vertical instrunents. The observations in the Sayans are
characterized by short distances between stations from 1 to 30 ha. The
data on correlation are not differentiated with respect to the position of
stations relative to the direction to the source. The level of correlation
falls off uniformly with increasing A” froa 0.85 to 0.70.

V. Din's data relate to a wide range of distances fro- 2 to 500 km. The

g.aphs of KM”) have a characteristic shape: as A“ increases one first
observes a drop. then a rise and once again a drop to an asynptotic value
of K1 no.5 when a” “000 kn. Din's curve is situated considerabe lower
than ibul'chik's as a consequence of the difference in the length of the
signals being correlated: 20 s for V. Din. and 3 s for G. M. Tsibul'chik.

It is important to note that the graph of longitudinal correlation is as it
were the graph of transverse correlation stretched out in the A” scale.

The same characteristic features can be seen as well on our graphs in the
interval of A” ITO-1500 kn. At 5i 38120-190 kit a maxi-ma K is observed

that can be identified with the corresponding maximum of the Din curve:

the minimum of transverse correlation is at a1 570 ha. Corresponding
characteristics of an eleaent of the curve of iongitudinal correlation are
noted at A1 3 3'10 kn (maximum) and at 61 Ir125 kn (minimum). Thus our data
show generai similarity to those of V. Din as expressed in the identical
structure of the graphs of K(A J) and their close levels at extreme values.
This peculiarity of the spatial change of shape of the longitudinal wave is
probably a consequence of similarity in the structure of inhomogeneities of
the earth in different regions. Let us examine this problem in more detail.

The differences in the intervals of longitudinal and transverse correlation .
indicate that the horizontal inhomgeneities that distort the waveshape lie
at such depths that.their upper edges are below the open surface. In this
connection. the ”shadows” of inhomogeneities that are projected by seismic
rays onto the surface of the earth are stretched out in the source-

1”

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inhomogeneity direction. bet us note that in the given case when remote
earthquakes are used we see longitudinal correlation with respect to some
intermediate direction closer to the wave front rather than in pure form,
i. e. along the rays. 'iherefore the true longitudinal correlation of the
shape must extend to still greater distances.

The interval of transverse correlation of amplitude and phase of a plane wave
is close to the characteristic dimension of anomalies of the field of veloci-
tier. of elastic waves (Chernov. 1958). Thin statement can be applied to
wavcuhape as well since the latter is determined by the ratio of amplitudes

of separate extrema and by their position in time from the initial part of
the seismic recording.

Let us define the interval of correlation of shape as the distance at which
the first minimum in observed on the curve of KM”). Taking into consider-
ation that the wave front in the region of exit to seismic stations has a
low ulope. we conclude that the characteristic scale of a horizontal inhom-
geneity in the vicinity of North 'I‘yan'-Shan' is no more than 70 km; extrapo-
lation of the graph of K(A1 ) toward low values of A J to a level of K13 80.5
(the same as the level of t e minimum on Din's curves gives a value of about
50 km for the interval of correlation of inhomogeneities. In North America
(region of the Tonto Forest group) the corresponding dimension is 30 in.

The North Kazakhstan Group of Stations. In the given case a more compli-
cated technique was used for studying the shape of the P wave from remote
earthquakes. The similarity of shape was studied in three frequency ranges:
up to 1 III. from 1 to 1.5 Hz and from 1.5 to 3 Hz; to do this. three numerical
filters were introduced into the program for calculating the correlation
coefficients. and an a result of filtration, three signals -- P1(t), 92(t)
and l’3(t) -- characterizing clearly hounded spectra, were derived from

each signal P(t).

The correlation coefficients were calculated for two groups of earthquakes
in intervals of epicentral distances of 3000 NHL <10,000 km and (910,000 km;
the latter interval corresponds to registration of the PK? wave.

For the first group of earthquakes the coefficients of correlation of shape
were calculated as well from wide-band recordings -- from 0.5 to 3 Hz (Fig.

Fig. 62. Correlation coefficient for
shape or recording as a function of the
distance between stations of the North
Kazakhstan group from wide-band

(0.5-3 Hz) recordings. See Fig. 52
for explanation

 

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
I’im iii’l’llllM. "HI-1 "MN

'I'Iw vlnL-i ul' Mu-h I'l'mm m-I'o- pluiim-i :w'm'nlmly I'm' three i'l'mm‘m-y rnm'p'n
in the fur»: of the nvnrmze valum; of the correlation coefficient an a

function ur the lilntluwc between ntatlonn A” and are shown in Fig. 63.
'Ih-- imlivluhml values were nvernmil over the nllnimhre interval» It. that
:u'v him-m ivy th' horizmiiml llhm. 'l1w :Iollli vertical line show em: 70%

mml’ldence Interval for evaluation of the average. and the broken line ..
for the individual values.

  

’nuuxnmvv nova,-

i-‘in. 63. Coefficient of correlation of the shape of a recording as a function
nr distance between stations of the North Kazakhstan group: a. h. c--i‘or the

interval of epicentral distances of 3000 <6 <l0,000 Rn, i’ wave; d. e. furor
the interval of epicentral distances A >10.000 kn, PK? wave; a. tin-frequency
interval of 1.5-3 iiz; b, c--l-l.5 Hz; c. rulesa than 1 iii. See Fig. 52 for

explnnnt ion

Fur enruumnum from the teicaeianir region 3000 < A < 10.000 In: good spatial
:zmI-i lity of :zhape iu observed in all the investigated frequency ranges.

For frequency bands of 1.5-3.0 Hz and 1-1.5 ii: the graphs have identical
itclmviur, hut on a higher level in the latter ease. The decline in the
correlation cnei'l'lclent with an increase in A5 up to 9-60 ha should be
attributed to the characteristic inhonozeneity of structure in the locality
ol’ the ntntionr. of the North Kazakhstan group. here is a striking feature
in behavior of the correlation coefficient in the frequency interval below

1 Hz within the Units of this cane range of epicentral distances: coapara-
tlvcly Mr)! correiation of long-period components of the recording at

dintnnccs of more than 3) in: between stations.
132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘Illl iii-'FNIIM. "Bil-2 "NIX

Cnmmrimz the rmmltn with data of nther authors (nee Pig. 5 and 6)). we are
convinced that the neneral nature or the spatial structure of the i’ wave
coincides l'm' u-nnentiaily different renlonn of the earth. Actually. as we
can nee rron Fin. 6'3. the correlation: of nlmnalu at polntn or registration
decreases with increasing distance hetwt-en them. At the sane time. following
a relative nininun in the correlation of signals at distances of the order of
'all-‘N km (for frequencies of 1-1.5 lit and distances of ”0° <0 le.000 kn) one

observes a comparatively strong: increase in correlation at distances about
twice as great.

Attention should also be given to the change in ponitions of the slalom and

maxlaun of the drop and spike in signal correlation as dependent on frequency
and wave type.

We can attempt to explain the indicated peculiarities in the behavior of

Kiln ) on the basis or the rollovimr, concepth. When a i’ wave propagates in

a mill-in with inhomogeneities that are randomly distributed. fluctuations are
uhxmrved nlnullaineounly in the amplitude and phase of the wave. This fact
may he due to the uuperlouitlan of waves forned on inhomogeneities of the
medium on the primary i’ wave. As a result of such superposition. fluctuations
urine in the fora of a train of oscillations of the P wave that are registered
at the hectinnimv, of the recording. Gradual attenuation of eorrelatedness of
ninnain with an increane in the relative distance between stations charac-
terizeu increanlmv, disparity of the parameters of inhonogeneitics in the
structure or the nedium directly beneath the stations. The observed ainina
and aaxlan of correlation of signals are associated with the effect of the
most pronounced inhomogeneities. which are probably fairly extended and
abrupt risen and drops in contrssty seismic boundaries.

'lhc greatest contribution to the formation or the wave registered on the

open surface is made by a certain region of the interface beneath the station
with effective dimensions that can be represented by an ellipse with suinsJor
axis equal to

have;

where V 1:: the velocity of the wave. 1' in the period of the wave, ii is the
Iivvrmzv depth or the Interface, o is the angle of incidence of the wave on

the interface or the angle or inclination of the interface in the case of
normal incidence of the wave (i-‘in. 6h).

Fig. 61:. Diagram of the influence that the
relief of boundary M has on propagation of a
P wave: a. b. c. d--sectiona of boundary M:
h-angle of incidence of the wave on the
boundary

 

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f0" OFFICIAL i183 ONLY

ohvlouuiy the nature of the action of boundary H on the parameters of a P wave
will he eenniderabiy different for cases where the ellipse with senianor
axis in eoVera neetiona a. b. c and d respectively. This will show up in
Hue hehavior of the correlation coefficient for the corresponding pairs of
reulatered algaaiu. According to available Information (Voi'kovskiy. 1973)
the nhnpe of the relief of bomdary M in Northern Kazakhstan where the group
of “ohmic ntationn wan located corresponds to the diagram shown in Pig. 6".
Let an carry out aisple calculations that will give quantitative estimates
of the mnuibie fiuctuationa in waveshape. we will asamse that the average
depth of occurrence oi‘ bomdary M is ii 850 km. and the velocity of a wave

in V of! hula. 'i‘- l a. use". For such conditionn the effective disueasions

of the aediusu that plays an enoentlai part in forsntioa of the P wave train
are determined by the quantity 2m e60 kn.

'fhio mans that for average characteristic diaenslons of undulations of
boundary ii of the order or 60 ha the coefficient of correlation for a P wave
with period of l u nay have a sharp drop (sinimua) in the interval of

.iintnneen between otationu of sou'lo kin. and a rise (anxious) at distances
of the order of 120 its.

Ahalmmun conntructionn can be done for evaluating the influence of the
hnueaont boundary. which occurs at an average depth of 5 his with velocity

of horizontal wave propagation of about 6 its/s. 2R; I12 list. which also
nutrcen with the behavior of the function of npstial correlation of waveahapc.

m. Uh- :zaae tiac. according to the considerations presented above. the
waitiouu of the relative minus and mini-m of the function of spatial
correlation nhould shift with increasing period of the wave toward greater
values of relative distances between stations of registration. vhich is
probably Just what happens in reality.

A close relation between the correlation of shape and frequency is also
obaerved for i'Ki’ waves recorded at distances of more than 10.000 ks frost

the source. it should be noted that the spatial stability of the recording
increases with a reduction in frequency: for the low-frequency range one
observe-i: the highest values of the correlation coefficients. 'ihis is
'uvlﬂr'riltly due to two ciremtances. in the first place the PK? wave
approached! the group of ueiaaic stations practically frost below. and therefore
the auction of its path through the upper part of the medium that is charac-
terized by incrcmied inhomogeneity is shorter than for the P wave. in the
:u'comi place. the predoalnatlng periods of the P wave are longer than for
tiu' lvil' wave. and therefore the anor part of the energy of the signal is
cmueeatrnted in the frequency band below 1 lie; in the processing systes used.

Um uinnni-to-crror ratio of the peanut-clients of experisental data was cosi-
pnrntivcly low.

An examination of the average level of spatial correlation within identical
immli: (nee Fin. 63) shown that some reduction of correlation with increasing

13’:

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
I’llli ill-'Fliiilil. llSl-Z ONLY

v:piv-vmi.rai iliiil-iuu'" i:: nianwvmi for the interval ui‘ 1.9-3 lit: for the
interval of i-l.'; lit the level of correlation in in a range of 0.5-0.8.
being appreciably higher for the telenciunlc region than for the inter-
nmiiate 7mm and the «lintapl. 7.0m (iiii' wave). in the frequency interval
iwluv i II: a renuiar increase ii; uhmsrvmi in thv- npatlal correlation

ul' tin» i’lr:;l. \mw' with an invruaue in epicmilmai dintnncc.

A cannon typical feature or all graphs in also a weakly expressed rise in
the region of a, , a lo kn. which in all probability is associated with the

appearance of lnhomgcncltics situated in the very tomcat layer of the
earth’s crust.

The Central 'i'yan'-8han' Group of Stations. 'nne transverse spatial corre-
lation of the nhnpo of the i’ wave was estimated from recordings of 37
earthquakes from different epicentral regions. For each earthquake, in
accordance with the method described above. the aatrix of the correlation
coefficient was calculated for the shape of the signal recorded on the
vertical coawncnt. The interval of relative distances between recording

stations varied from 2 to 3) kn. 'i‘he epicentral distances ranged fro- 3000
to 9000 kl.

Shovn in Fig. 65a in the dependence of the correlation coefficient on the
distance between seisnic stations. and in Fig. 65b -- on the distance between
the epicentcrr. of earthquakes.

 

 

I

IV . t

(I

’I lllrvunwmmu

Iv.“

Pig. 65. Dependence of the coefficient of correlation of shape on the
distance between station: (a) and between epicenters (b) from observations
on the Central wow-3mm group. See Fig. 52 for explanatiOn

l’nr the function of npatial correlation as related to the distance between
epicenters of earthquakes. spikes and drops in correlation of the shape of
the I' vnve are noted at distances of 1500, 3500 and 5000 kl. 'ihe general
i'nrn of the relation and the location of the characteristic peculiarities
man-e well with the data on other regions of the world (see Fig. 5), as well
at! with the data on fluctuation: of the amplitudes and travel times of the
I' wave that are nivcn in the preceding chapter.

‘ihc correlation function for the shape of the P were as dependent on the
«iintance between ncinnic statiom. Just an in the preceding cases. shove a

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ilFPIClM. USE ONLY

anio-m'] tuwuroi m-mi-mi attenuation with increasing relative distance between
utntluiiu. Moreover. an comparatively clear ainimsn in correlation is observed
in the vicinity of Boll inn. it can be assuacd that this minim on Fig. 65a
nr'u-(tn under the Influence of undulations of a sharp seismic interface in the
Iii-[lrrtnont part or the earth's crust. and the nature of the overall decline in
mrreintiun in a manifestation of the patterns of distribution of inhomoge-

neitimu in the crust and mantle like what is noted in other station groups.

‘ihe Gar- Station Group. The dependence of the correlation coefficient on the
rclhtive distance between ncisnic stations (Fig. 66) is found from the data
at 18 carthquakes with epicentcrs situated chiefly in the seismically active

region“ of the Pacific Ocean belt. The distance between recording stations
did not exceed 2') kn.

Pin. 66. Dependence of the coefficient of
correlation of shape on distance between
stations from observations on the darn group.
See Fig. 52 for explanation

 

(Tomi-ilriiu', the data of the (lure group with the data of stations of Central
'iy:in'-Shan;. we are convinced of their identity. The decline in correlation
ul' the shape of the P wave is soaewhat weaker in the 12 its: region. which

my be due to a less sharply pronounced boudary that is tracked in the upper
part. of the earth's onset.

The European Station Group. 'iio evaluate the spatial correlation of the
:ihnpc of the i’ wave. recordings of 33 earthquakes frog different epicentral
regions were used. 'lhe matrices of the correlation coefficients were calcu-
lated for each earthquake. as in the other cases. The distances between the
recording stations varied from 3 to 100 km. 'ihe epicentral distances were
SSW-10,000 km. The resultant data are shown in Pig. 6? in the for: of
relations for the correlation coefficient as a function of the relative

distance between stations (Pig. 67a) and the relative distance between the
i‘l'il‘cllt':l'3 of earthquakes (Pig. 67b).

V

   
       

Ilaivvdavn mum u"
Fin. 0!. Dependence of the coefficient of correlation of shape on distance

Ivctwccn stations (a) and between epicenters (b) from observations of the
European group. See Fig. 52 for explanation.

136

FOR OFFICII‘L USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USU-a UNLY

Analynln or the resultant iintn shown (Fin. 67a) that in the locality of
stations of the Hurulwmh [group Just an in the vicinity of the North Kazakhstan
station group the decline in correlation of shape of the P wave is neat
pronounced in the region of 50-60 ion. as in the rise noted in the region
close to 100 ha. The drop in the function of spatial correlation in the

vicinity of 10-12 ins that is noted in other regions is practically unexpressed
in this case.

in thin connection we say assume that in the locality of the European group
of stations by analogy with the region of North Kazakhstan there are probably
variations in the dpeth of occurrence of the MohoroviEié discontinuity, which
according to the data in the literature (Belyayevskiy. 19710; Pavlenkova. 1973)
is situated here at an average depth of ho-hs ion.

The graph shown In Fig. 67b for the coefficient of correlation of shape of
the F wave as a Motion of the distances between epicenters demonstrates the
name stable coordination of drops and spikes in correlation that is observed
in other regions. Against the background of a general decline in the fmction
of spatial correlation that asymptotically approaches a level of 0.5, one
observes relative mini-a of correlation for relative distances of 1500. 3500,
5000 and 9000 inn and correlation spikes at 2000. boos and 8000 km.

The Zeysk Station Group. Date on the Myst group of stations were found as

a result of processing recordings of 16 earthquakes of the Pacific Ocean belt.
Epicentral distances are 3000-6000 ion. The relative distances between
stations varied from 2 to 20 kis. The results of calculations of the
correlation matrices are shown in Fig. 68 in the fern of the dependence

on distance between seismic stations.

'0
’ Pin. 68. Dependence of the coefficient of
1111111 fl correlation of shape on the distance between
1ft stations in the Zeysk group. See Fig. 52
t ‘ for explanation

’IIIIIUU,

I an
as
Analysis of these data shown that in the locality of the Zeysk station

uroup one observes two relative minima of correlation confined to relative
distances of ’1 and 7 km.

The overall decline in the relation ids”) toward 20 Its: takes place more
intensively than in the regions considered previously. It can be ftest-ed
that the relntive ninilsusi in the function of spatial correlation that is
distinguished in the regions of the iiorth Kazakhstan and European groups
of stations in the vicinity of 50-60 in: will show up here at sonewhat
closer relative distances.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR III’VIINM. "5H UNLY

Illncuunlon of the Results

‘l'he third part of the monograph has presented experimental data on the

spatial structure of fluctuations in the characteristics of a longitudinal
wave. 'ihe authors act themselves the problem of evaluating the characteristic
scales of naJor structural elements of the wave field and showing their

relation to corresponding inhomogeneities in the inner structure of the
depths of the earth.

To get data on the ratio of typical scales of elements of the wave field.
information was used on deviations from the average (standard) values of
impiitudea. travel times and the shape of the longitudinal wave as provided
by deep seismic sounding on temporary expeditionary stations in different
tectonic provinces of the Soviet Union.

The chain procedural technique on which the study of the fine structure of
the I' wave is based. consists in evaluating the stability of deviations from
average fluctuations of kinematic and dynamic paramters of the wave field
as a function of the relative distances between recording stations or between
the epicentral regions of earthquakes.

Conventional methods of statistical precessing of experimental data were
used for quantitative evaluation of the stability of deviations. In par-
ticular. extensive use is made of correlation and structure functions.

A:-. u result of the studies it was found that the spatial structure of fluc-
tuationn of such elemnts of the wave field as amplitude. travel time and
chain: of the longitudinal wave have distinct characteristic scales. ‘ihe
concept of scale in the (given instance is arbitrary, and has the following
conceptual signiﬁcance. The depths of the earth are characterized by such
a :ztructum that in the selection of a pair of recording stations or a pair
of seimeic sources on the average one will observe an increase or reduction
in the deviation of wave parameters from certain standard values if the
relative distances between corresponding pairs satisfy the observed spatial
:zcaleu. Table 30 oumarizeo data on the spatial scales of elevated and
reduced values on the average in fluctuations in the parameters of a longi-
tudinal wave. Fig. 69 summarizes experimental data on the spatial corre-
lation of the shape of the longitudinal wave.

it in rather difficult to give an ambiguous quantitative interpretation

of the scales differentiated for the fluctuations in parameters of the P wave
and to draw npcciflc conclusions on the structure of the depths of the earth.
At the wane til-c. the-resultant data give such clear evidence that the
coincidence of the characteristic scales of fluctuations of elements of

the wave field that are distinguished in different tectonic provinces is

not accidental. that we must accept at least their qualitative relation to
inhomimnclticx: of the internal structure of the earth. .

138

POI! OFFICU‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Will”: '10

thaweteriutic upatial neaies or elevated (max) and depressed (min)

values of deviations from uvcrmte (standard) fluctuations of the

amplitude 6613A and travel times an. and also in the values of
the coefﬁcient of correlation K” of longitudinal wavashape

    

( 3 )"0 “II-o- utrun-n any M
’0 in. m-nmwcr sin-m ao-Iau (oi-ammo.“

5} Ian-an) mum-sum >lﬂ - -
. um _ - — .- . ~10» 00-!)

6 I I
Kunm— .. -- 30—. nan-us II-NO “0::

Thu...- nun... mam mm mm u-n tan-m o.
shun-us 1’s.- .. — M 'M - "—ll

>~ H
9h»: nu. - .. .. - - n—u
( 0h”... - .. - - -_ 4-1
(llhmmmmuwmw
MO:- mmw - - nus-w" - - .
I a um .. - - - ~Ih ~M
' 23 ”3-" -
Qmm .. - - M - - ,
1mm- lass-ion an "03 ~M - - -
m M

”an.“ t... .. - mm «In «In.
MM «a ~~

”MM -n

 

KEY: l--8patial scales. km
2--rrom data or the KS!) station group
3--wlth reupeet to the relative distances between stations
h--I-:ntire territory or the USSR
u--l’.urope:in part or the USSR
iB--Nortlu:rn Kazakhstan
'!--N-n‘i.ht'rn 'Ime-iilmn'
lL-(tcutrul 'l'ymN-iilmn'
uncarm renlon
It)--'l.vyuk renion
li—with respect to relative distances between epicentral regions

In the first part or the monograph we already discussed the fact that the
distribution or shyuicochemicul properties of the depths of the earth is
characterized primarily by radial inhomogeneity. The most contrasty changes
are associated with zones or Juneture or the sedimentary sheath with the
consolidated crust, the reuion of contact between the lithosphere and the

139

FOR OFFIleiL USE ONLY
FOR OFI'ICMI. USE ONLY

    

I“ M I. ”‘9"

I’m. 69. Summary of data on s tial correlation of pulse shape of a P vave:
i-ofroa the vork of V. Din (l 5); 2—3. Jansson and B. iiusebye (1968); 3--
ntations of Central Tum-Shah". hnhorthern Kazakhstan; Suthe European
part or the USSR; 6--the welt group. See Fig. 52 for explanation

anthemsphere. the transitional region betveen the asthenosphere and upper
mantle. the region or Juncture betveen the lover mantle and outer core and
the boundary between the inner and outer core. hence the radial distribution
oi‘ physicocheaical properties easrges as the lost contrasty inhoaogeneity of
structure or the depths of the earth on a global scale.

'ihc horizontal changes in radial inhomogeneity that are largest in scale
correspond to regions or the earth of the ocean-continent type. In this
connection. the comiderable changes in structure of the interior of the
earth are associated with the outer shells: the lithosphere. the asthma-
:wherc and the tramitionnl zone (The Upper Mantle. 1975; Nature of the Solid
i-‘urth. 1975). iiorisontai variations in the structure or the inner shells at
present are hypothetical to a certain extent.

:nuwimz up with greatest contrast are horizontal variations of radial inhomo-
ateneity on the regional and local scales that are associated vith variability

of the nhysicoeheaieal properties or the lithosphere and asthenosphere. At
present they can be studied by cathode of seisaological profiling and deep

1100

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
mu ill-'PICIM. "SH UNLY

seismic sounding. Regional and local scales of inhomogeneous structure of
the depths of the earth are the least of those that can be distinguished in
analysis of the experimental materials obtained by the K83.

obviously the detail of inVestigation of the inhomogeneous structure depends
both on the resolving capacity of the system of observations and on the detail
of analysis of the wave pattern. it can be assumed that the detail of our
analysis for the case of the densest groups of statiOns of the K83 permits
differentiating an inhomneneity of the medium with linear dimssions of at
least 3-5 km. Therefore from here on we will consider only those details of

the wave field that considerably surpass the detail of our plots with respect
to the region of tracking.

'ihe least of the distinguished spatial scales of fluctuations in parameters
of the i' wave is 10-12 km. As Table 30 shows. this scale is obtained from
data of fluctuations in the shape of the P anes en the densest groups of
stations of the K35. 'ihe given scale is expressed with rather high contrast
and is regionally stable. The proposals introduced in Chapter 2 imply that
this scale is determined by inhomogeneity of the structure of the very
topmost part of the earth's crust bounded by the surface of the consolidated
basement. Consideration should also be taken of the fact that in interpreting
the fluctuations of parameters of the P wave in terms of inhomogeneous struc-
ture it is important to make a Joint analysis of data on variation of veloci-
ties and the geometry of seismic boundaries. Frequently the examination of

the geometry of the interfaces alone may not reveal the causes of fluctuations
in parameters of the i’ wave on the given scale.

inhomogeneity of structure may show up entirely in the change (variation)
of velocity along a boundary that is geometrically not expressed (Pusyrev et
ul- . 1975).

The next typical scale of fluctuations of parameters of the P wave. equal to
Ins-60 km. can be assumed to be caused by inhomogeneity of the lower part of
the earth's crust and the lithosphere. and as in the preceding case is like-
wise a consequence of spatial variation of geometric, velocity. and inelastic
characteristics of media. 1his scale of inhomogeneities shows up with
urentest contrast in fluctuations of the parameters of the longitudinal wave:
amplitude. travel time and pulse shape. Particular attention should be
given to the fact that the spatial scale of fluctuations of the order of
16-60 inn is one of the most contrasty. and is distinguished within the limits
of all investigated territories. Therefore we can expect its occurrence in
hath continental and oceanic regions. At the same time. with a transition
from a continental to an oceanic type of lithosphere this scale is probably
transformed to a scale of the order of 12-h5 km.

A spatial scale of 100-200 km is distinguished from data of fluctuations in
the amplitude and shape of the P wave, and is apparently due to the influence

of inhomogeneous structure of the lithosphere, the zone of its Juncture with
the asthcnosphere. and even the asthenosphere itself. 'ihe comparatively wide

13:].

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

limiting humulurien of the ncnie of fluctuations show that it can be stipu-
lated mneil'lcuiiy in each local reninn.

(tumult-r I‘or exam-Ir the data on ueeond differences of amplitudes 66 13A
found In North Kazakhstan (nee Fig. 56). First we look at the relation
hc-tumm Mi 1in and vilntnncv between stationn (see i-‘ig. 56s). it can be
nunmed that the minimum or values of 66 igli is annociated with a 120 km
characteristic scale of horizontal inhoaogeneitien in the locality of the
station group. 'ihe contribution or these inhomogeneities to fluctuations of
:mplltuden is add lull-0.2. i. e. the "signa" interval reaches about 15 of
the average value of fluctuations in the amplitude of the P wave, vhich
shove comparatively hinh contrast of inhomogeneities of this scale.

Cnnnider now the vny that the second differences of the logarithm of the

map! ltude depend on the distance between epicentral regions. The outvard
nimlinrity or the graphu in Pig. 56a and b is striking. 'ihere are grounds
for assuming that they have an intimate genetic relation. As a matter of
fact. both relations vere found from the sane data. If we imagine a ray
diagram for each such system of observations. it will be clear that there is
h l'nn or rays that converges in the locality of the recording stations and
dlvvrneu tovard the epicentral regions. The first plot was constructed

with the use of fans of rays converging toward each separate station. and
the second -- with the use of fans converging toward each separate epicentral
region. Thus in both cases the same processing scheme is used; hovever. the
proportions of the renultant relations are determined by the relation betveen
the regions of location or the stations and epicenters.

it can be assumed that the characteristic niniaa on both plots are genetically
related and that the ratio or the characteristic scales is thus ~6000ll20-50.
Since the epicentral distances average 6000 km, a rough estimate can be made
or the depth of occurrence of inhomogeneities that correspond to the differ-
entiated characteristic scales of fluctuations. By dividing an "average" ray
Joining the epicentral regions and group of stations in the ratio of 1/50.

ve find that the inhomogeneities are situated at a remove of about 120 km
along the ray from the group of stations, or at a depth of about 100-110 km.
At 90¢“! a depth of occurrence of inhomogeneities it can be expected that the
dimensions of the region that essentially determines the fluctuations in shape
or the P wave pulne correspond to 2R] '60 km.

Ir the relations for the second differences 661gA for the North 'iysn'-3han'
:ztntinn group are analyzed in a similar way, it turns out that the inhomo-
.zclu'ltlo‘n beneath this group are at a remve of ~6000/(3000/200) =h00 km along
Hiv my. or at a depth of 310-380 km. In this case the characteristic
din-mien ol‘ inhomogeneities in 2k; .120 km.

It: mu; shown in the second part of the monograph. within the limits of
Nurthcrn 'iynn'-3hnn‘ the [Rinse transition (3504300 ins) (Nature of the Solid
Earth. 1975) in at In depth of 370-390 kin.

1’02

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus it can be unnamed that a spatial scale of 120-200 km in fluctuations of

the mraneters of the i' wave in associated with inhoaoaeneitles of the region
or [aiysleochomicai phase transitions in the upper mantle.

The spatial scales of fluctuations in parameters of the P wave that exceed
the dinenuions of regional networks of stations are determined from nixed
correlation and structure functions since it was difficult to match up a
sufficient number of pairs of stations that natisiy the construction of
purely transverse or purely longitudinal functions. The same thing applies
to the data on epicentral regions. 'liiia circumstance impedes the determi-
nation of the nature of the differentiated characteristic scales.

it can be expected that consistency of the spatial scales of fluctuations of
(inane. amplitude and pulse shape of the P ane provides the basis for hypo-
thetical notions on correspondence oi‘ the spatial scales of inhomogeneities
oi‘ the structure and fluctuatioaa of the parameters of the wave field.

The spatial scale of fluctuations of the P wave of about 500° km are dis-
tinguished with the greatest assurance. It seems that the scale is a sani-
i‘cstution of a structural element of radial inhomogeneity in the upper
mantle that is associated with a [inane transition at a depth of about 680 km.
For an average relative distance between stations and epicentral regions of
about 6000 km it should be expected that the corresponding spatial scale of
fluctuations in the parameters of P waves according to data of epicentral
regions will be observed at distances of the order of 1000-9000 km. Such a
scale is indeed observed for the Central 1yan'-8han' stations over the
entire territory of the USSR. These data confirm the relation between the
the spatial scale of fluctuations in the parameters of the P wave and inhomo-
geneity of the structure of the transitional zone of the upper mantle in the
vicinity of the 6!!) km boundary.

Than analysis of data on the spatial scales of fluctuations of amplitude.
travel time and shape of the P wave as differentiated from materials obtained
by the Kill: on aroma: of ueinnic stations shown their genetic mutual relation
with inhomogeneities in the structure of the lithosphere. ssthenosphere and
the transitional zone of the .ipper mantle of the earth. As a result we can
speak with assurance of the :‘act that horizontal variations in the radial
inhomogeneity of the earth are confined to regions with the most contrasty
physicochenicnl transitions: along the Mohorovieié discontinuity and the
zone of transition between the lithosphere and the asthenosphere, in the
region of Juneture between the asthenosphere and the transitional zone of
the upper mantle and at the bottom of the transitional zone.

iV. liELA'l'lON "WEI-2N THE AMPLITUDE PECULIARITIﬁ 0F SEIMC HAVES MD
“HOW: I CAL-lil-Xil'li SI CM. HELIX}

The variatimu: of amplitudes of recorded seismic signals may be caused by
van-low; factors associated with the internal structure of the earth and
distributed alum: the entire path of a seismic ray. These factors can be

1'03

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

arbitrarily divided into three groups. in the fi rut place the amplitude of
a I'i'mlmilnr, may he Ianm-nced by geological surface conditions in the locality
ul‘ registration: the commultion of the rocks on which the seismic receiver
is wanted. their cracks. physical properties. thickness of layers and
.p-umtry or the interface and the like. In the second place, the structure
M‘ the lower part of the earth's crust may hava a certain influence. in
particular. the depth. inclination and clarity of manifestation of the
Mohnrovidié discontinuity. in the third place the dynamic characteristics
or neinmlc Haves may be influenced by horizontal variations in the structure
or the earth's mantle. ‘ihe very existence of these variations shows up in
seiumoionicai. electromagnetic and gravimetric studies. iiovever. investi-

gations of this type have been undertaken for only a small nusber of
territories.

ima on the geological and tectonic structure of the earth's crust give a
general idea of the physical properties of rocks and the spatial structure

or inhomogeneities. The most appreciable changes in the seismic parameters
ul' the aeditm -- the velocities of waves and inelastic characteristics --

are observed in zones of tectonic ruptures and breaks. These zones frequently
haw a considerable width comparable with the lengths of seismic waves. and

a large horizontal extent (up to several hundred kilometres) and go to a

depth of several tens of kilometres.

The relation betveen the dynamic characteristics of seismic waves on the

one hand and geological and geophysical fields on the other has been poorly
studied no far. Given below is a comparison of the magnitude corrections of
seismic stations with anoanlies of the gravitational and magnetic fields. as
well. an the position of seismic stations relative to the zones of tectonic
breaks.

Chapter 1. investigation of the tlay that Amplitude Peculiarities of Seismic
Haves are Related to Gravitational and Magnetic Anomalies of the Territory
of the USSR

1. General information on gravitational anomalies

The anomalous gravitational field is the sum of the gravitational influences
of anomalous (i. c. differing from certain standard) masses distributed in
the body of the earth. The (greatest contribution to the observed anomalies
of the force of gravity is made by the influence of dense inhomogeneities of
the upper part of the cross section (the earth's crust). The influence of
the earth's crust on the gravitational field is eliminated to a great extent
by introducing topographic-isostatic reduction. 'Ihe isostatic anomalies of
the force of gravity that are obtained as a result are associated with
disruptions of isostatic equilibrium (on the average this equilibrium holds
to an accuracy of at least 90%) (Wastikh. 1957) and with inhomogeneities of
the crust not taken into consideration in introducing the reduction. as well
ru; with the influence of density inhomgeneities in the mantle. 'me results
of numerous studies of isostatic ammalies show that the anomalies that are
mumeintcd with disruptions of isostasy and density inhomogeneities or the

1“:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()i’l’iCI/il. USE ONLY

crust have a pronounced local nature with respect to area. On the other
hand. isostatic anomalies that are large with respect to the area occupied
cannot be associated with disruptions of isostatic equilibrium of the litho-
sphere since such disruptions will recover very quickly (on the geological
time scale) because of the low viscosity of the asthenosphere.

1n thin connection the authenosphere is understood to mean the layer of
reduced viscosity in the mantle of the earth whose existence is deduced from
the advent of isostatic equilibrium in regions of current and recent glacia-
tionn (Artyushkov, 1970) as well as in other regions of abrupt change in the
external loading on the earth's crust (Artyushhov, 1911). The asthenospheric
layer is usually identified with a layer characterized by relatively low
velocities of seismic waves -- a seismic waveguide (Gutenberg. 1963).

'ihe anomalous masses situated below the asthenosphcre may exist for a long

time. and large regional anomalies of the gravitational field are associated
with them.

These anomalies can be distinguished from isostatic anomalies through the
corresponding transformations of the field.

A map of regional isostatic anomalies in the force of gravity of the USSR has
been obtained by averaging isostatic anomalies of the force of gravity over
squares of 550 x550 km. Such averaging practically eliminates the gravi-
tational influence of masses located down to depths of several tens of km.
Thus the regional anomalies shown on the map are due to masses distributed
in the mantle of the earth. Among these anomalies. planetary and zonal
anomalies can be distinguished. 'Ihe planetary anomalies cover areas of tens
of millions of square kiloznetres. Sections of three such anomalies extend
into the territory of the USSR. The first of these covers the European part
of the nation. This is a region of positive values covering all of Europe,
the North Atlantic and Africa. The second planetary anomaly covers a con-
siderable territory of the sciatic part of the [588, and then extends across
Northern China and India into the central regions of the Indian Ocean. The
third planetary anomaly within the borders of the 1338 covers the eastern
regions of the nation -- from Chukotka to Primsr'ye [the Maritime Provinces].
This anomaly is part of a region of positive values that can be traced in
the peripheral areas of the Pacific Ocean zone.

Altainr-t the background of the enumerated extensive planetary anomalies one
can distinguish regions of smaller area of relative maxima and linima with
characteristic dimensions of the order of a thousand kilometres. Such
ammulicu are called 10ml.

'l‘hure in a difference of opinion on the nature of zonal and planetary
anomalies and on the depths of occurrence of the bodies that cause them.
i-.‘.:I.iswite:: made by V. N. iitrakhov and M. Ye. Artem'yev (1911) showed that
noun-cu of zonal anomalies are situated at depths of about 150-200 km.

it can be assumed that they are associated with a change in the depths to the

1&5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY

un-ivr'..I-I- ur thu- nuiJn-lmnphc‘rt- m‘ with density inhnmoaeneltiea directly
mar-nth |.i|i:'. hnmalary. 'l'he llil'lll.‘ of the planetary anomalies in such that
'.in: mmnum uaualmv, them may either!» located at any depths in the mantle 01‘
um mirth, or they may lw manual by even alight perturbations on the boundary
--I' |h-- earth's cure. liravlnetric data alone are insufficient to determine
their nature. However. there are grounds for assuming that the planetary
mmnallea or considerable parts of them are associated with depths in the
mantle that are not very (treat. This is shown by the correlation of the
Valium ul‘ aummalies with heat flux from the depths of the earth: elevated
h--at l’luxea gravitate toward zones ol‘ gravitational minim. The results ol‘
«-la~vl.u~muu'.nc.-tlr :ztucilv'n «lane in the southern regions of Siberia show that in
r-‘mnuz: ul‘ acnatlvc renlunal mnomalien one observes an elevation in the
l-uulhiury or the conductive layer located in the upper mantle. This is
apparel" ly due to the higher temperature or the depths in these regions.
‘21.... Asiatic reninn or mnatlve anomalies coincides spatially with the
.---c-alled 1.0m: or hootectonic activation. According to the views that have
l-m'u‘nt: popular in recent years. there are large-scale convective movements
m the depths of the earth. it can be assumed that the planetary miniaa

-.r the nravltatlonal field are associated with regions where anomalously

Innate-I senses of deep—level material or comparatively low density rise to
the surface or the earth.

::o-l:-.umlolr.lcal research (Antonova ct al.. 1968) hon shovn that there is I
nation in southern i‘rlbaykal'ye that is characterized by low values of the
velocities of seismic waves in the upper mantle. This region is situated
-'|n:;u to the axial part of a planetary gravitational minimum.

'rha.; there are grounds for thinking that negative planetary anomalies are
a. ..m'|nl.v.'Ii with low-«insanity. and hence low-velocity masses located at com-
paratively shallow depths in the earth's mantle.

'n'e do not yet have data for any kind oi‘ estimate of the factors capable of
producing anomalies in the propagation of seismic oscillations. However.
it can be assured from general geological-geophysical considerations that
the upwrmost levels or the mantle are most inhomogeneous. and it is these
imwmn'pncltleu that must distort the parameters of seismic waves. The
‘UIUL‘IJIIU‘II; sections or the mantle to a considerable extent are reflected by
r'rutiulml anomalies of the gravitational field.

2. Investigation of the relation between gravitational and magnitude anomalies
an the territory of the USSR

:‘nitualvz waves from remote sources have nearly vertical angles of emergence,
:m-' therefore mmnltudc corrections will be primarily influenced by the
differences in the structure or the upper mantle in a comparatively small
vicinity of the recurdim'. stations.

‘l‘lw::-- cmuzlderatlonz: were the basis in seeking the correlation between
magnitude corrections Am and regional gravitational anomalies Ag.

1116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fiiii OFFICIAL llh'ii ONLY

in accordance with the nature of variation in the gravitational field the
influence that the ntrneture of the upper mantle and on vaiuen of Am (if it
exintzl) ulhould ﬂhl’tm’!‘ fairly nmothiy. 'i'ilerc in no doubt that local geo-
logical lumuiiaritlv-n of an Individual ntation can ntrongly distort the in-
fluence of depth factorn. These local perturbation" may to none extent be
nunpreuned by calculating the average valueu of amplitude corrections (in
within the limltn of certain territoriee. 'ihe dimensionn of such terri-
torien were determined in accordance with the actual relatiVe location of
:xtatioazs unified into ground. and the eharacterintic peculiarities of the

field of regional gravitational anomalien. 'lhe ntationn of obnervationu
were mmociatcd into Hi around.

The number of utntionn In the ground in different: from two to fifteen.
l-ziight iuoiated ntationa were connidered aeparately. Data on the gravitational

field of the territory of the USSR were taken from a map with scale of
I : in mm mm.

It in difficult to make a hredeterminntlon of which parameters! of the gravi-
tational and nciamie fieldn are moat cionely interrelated. in and of iteelf
the mvuznitude deviation depend“: to a eonniderable extent not only on the
atrueture of the medium in the vicinity of the seismic station. but also on
the eundltionn of pronmzation of aeinmlc energy on the entire route from the
[helm to the :zeinmic receiver. Mannitude deviations differ considerably for
different epicentral rcnionn. To reduce thin influence. magnitude deviations
were considered for earthquakes only from the northeant direction.

'l‘iu- vullnn: of the urmlient of anomalicu to a certain extent reflect the
variability of limicrtiez: of the mantle. and therefore it is advisable to
attempt to correlate the station valucn of Am with the valuen of the deriva-
tivu nl‘ the uravitationai field or the absolute value of the horizontal
nrruiient of the field in the direetionu to the epicenters of earthquakes.

(in the hash: of nnalynin of relations for Am an a function of the values of
the anomalies Ad. the horizontal derivative (change of the field in the
direction to the source within the limit: of a base of 150 and 300 km) and
the modulus of the derivative. it can be confidently stated that the values
of Am are not related to the values of horizontal gradients (KI-0.1). A

Very weak relation is noted between the values of Am and the absolute valuen
of the derivative (K 80.3).

Pin. “(0 Relation hetween the magnitude correction Am
and the smoothed value of the isostatic anomaly of the
force of uravity Au for the territory of the (BSR:
i--imiivldaal neismie station; 2--group of stations;
3--rer.ion of valued for stations of Siberia. Asia and
the Caucanua; Mean a meal

 

1'07

FOR OVFiCl/ti. USE ONLY
Fill! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fl .1. ‘(n :Shllﬂﬁ the relation I"".V"L‘il the nvurmte values of Am and the smoothed
val-um nr i;;n:il.ai.|c mumuileu or the force of gravity Ag in the localities
of an individual station or groups. [in one can see from Fig. 10. a tendency
1:. observed toward a reluctlou in the amplitude corrections with increasing
valum of Ag. 'l'he coefficient of correlation between Am and lip, for groups
ul' stations is equal to ".55. II. should he noted that if we eliminate the

..l.sil.|:m.; l:il.ulii.ml In the I-hmuuxm part of the UGSR from consideration. the
v-wl‘l'la-ivnt nl' mun-vial inn inereiuien to 0.8!.

11qu the awrage values of Am for groups of stations situated in Ilsia and the
(hm-mun: are closely correlated with the vaiucn of anomalies of the gravi-
tational field due to density inhomogeneities in the mantle of the earth.

Fig. ’(I) also shown the values of (in and Ag for isolated stations. Some of
them haunt)! the general relation found for the groups. but a amber of
inlillll deviate strongly. 'lhe coefficient of correlations between All and Ag
calculated Jointly for groups and individual stations (all values heing taken
with identical weight) was equal to 0.2. However. the closeness of the
relation between the quantities Am and Ag in the given case is worsened only
by ntationn situated in the l-iuropean part of the USSR. if we eliminate from
consideration both the groups and the individual stations of this region.

u... correlation coefficient is equal to 0.15.

'Ihu.: for extensive regions of Siberia, the Far East. Soviet Middle Asia.
Kazakhstan. the Urnis and the Caucasus. where 16 groups of stations and 5
individual :ztutionu were located. a fairly pronounced relation is observed
In-twm-u Au and Ag. Consequently the distortion of the seismic signal may
intensify with increasing intensity of negative anomalies.

within the limits of the investigated territory this might be associated with
the presence of a comparatively extemive anomaly with anomalously low

density in the mantle. and probably one that has anomalously low velocity
of seismic wave propagation.

of undoubted interest is the question of why the observed relation is dis-
rupted for stations situated in the European part of the nation. Apparently
tlu- stations in the European part of the iBSR are too far away from seismic

mum-m: located in the northeast. and earthquakes of other regions should be
:i.:mi to not rpm! results.

An :umlynix: or the dynamics of the F wave as presented in the preceding
:zvvllohzz uivczz grounds for suggesting that the disruption of the relation
between Am and Ag in the given case could be related to the influence of
inlumvmamclty or the mantle of the earth. In particular, data on the struc-
tm'ni analysis of magnitude deviations and their relation to the distance
llt".V'.’L'll seismic stations (see Fig. 50a) or to the distance between regions
ni' :zeinnlc sources (see Fig. 50b) do not contradict the suggestion that the
upper mantle beneath the European part of the nation, while it does not

di i'i'u'r in density from the mantle in other regions that have a similar
n-ginuaJ gravity field. does differ in conditions of seismic wave transaission.

1&8
roe orncud. use ONLY
Milt iii’I-‘ICIM. "SI-2 ONLY

For a now detailed study or the relation Int-tween nelnmie fields and other
nem-hyuleai I‘leldd. an examination was made of data obtained in a nmber oi‘
renionn of Soviet Middle Iinlu and Kazakhstan. These regions on the one hand
have been well studied by geophysical methods. and on the other hand. fairly
varied geological-geophysical comiltlnnn are observed in these regions:
thickness or the earth‘s crust, neiximle wnve velocities. close proximity of
high-neinnicity and maintain menu. It in: in these regions that we have the
densest network of seismic stations. which has provided fairly reliable
resuits. For the regions of Soviet Hiddie Asia and Kazakhstan that are
hounded on the north by the ’IT-th parallel. on the west by the 62-d meridian.
"lid on the south and east by the national harder. we, had data on gravitational
anomalies in the Fay reduction averaged over a grid of 10' xlS'. Such detail
corremnnds to a geophysical map scale of 1:2 500 000. ‘lhese data were con-
verted to maps of isostatic anomalies of the force of gravity “Sisost and
their gradients grad ileum“.

we had the material or ho seismic stations to correlate magnitude deviations

with the parameters of geophysical fields within the limits of the investi-
gated territory.

Comparison of the magnitude corrections with gravitational and magnetic
mnomallcz: requires solution of the problem of choosing the size of the area
for which the average characteristics of the fields are taken since this size
is related to the scale or the investigated inhomogeneities and the interval
of depth: on which they are situated. Since we did not .know of w a priori
concepts of the nature of the relation between on and the geophysical
parameters of the medium. we considered "point" values of the fields
Agguomh). grad 69.1303“ 1) and o'l‘a(l) corresponding to the averages for a
small vicinity of the seismic station -- i0 :10 km. and also 58isost(3)u

grad Missed”. ATa(3). ﬂaw) that correspond to areas of averaging of

'1) x 30 and m :80 km.

The unsmoothed value of the anomalies feels the influence of all anomalous
masses (gravitational or magnetic). while the smoothed values are free of the
influence of anomalous masses situated in the upper part of the earth's

crust and having small predominant dimensions. Averaging with respect to an
area of I) x 30 km corresponds to sealing of an anomalous field into the upper
half-since to a height of 10 km with an appreciable reduction in the contri-
bution of anomalies with linear size not exceeding 10 km.

‘l'iu: mutaltudc or the gradient of the anomaly in the force of gravity
grad Animmt in an indication of the dynamic state of the earth's crust;
him valucz: correspond to renlons that participate in active tectonic
mvmamtzz and may be characterized by anomalous elastic and absorptive
properties .

To compare the magnitude correction Am with the investigated characteristics
of the nravitatlonal field, the correlation graphs shown in Fig. 71 and 12

were plotted. Data corresponding to seismic stations of the liorth arm-saw .
Central 'iyan'-Shan', Germ and Pamir~Afgan groups are shown by different signs.

1M9

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 71. Relation between anplitude correc-
tion As: and isostatic anomaly of the force
of gravity (in for regions of Soviet Middle
Auin unul Knmuumtan: «avenue of Ash)

ut the "point" of observation. ave c for
an area or 10 x10 his; b--velue of Ag 3).
average nor an area of 30 x30 kn; luuorth
Wen'éihan' group; 2--Centra1 Tynn'-8han'
group; 3--0arn group. thanir-Afgan group;
Mean-ngnl

 

Fig. 72. Relation between the magnitude correc-
tion on and the gradient of isostatic anomaly of
the force of gravity grad dg for regions of
Soviet Middle Asia and Kazakhstan: a--value of
grad 63(1). average for an area of 10 x10 kn;
b--value of grad dg(3). average for an area of
30 x 30 Ian. See Fig. Tl for the arbitrary signs

 

The given relations for An and Ag are characterized by a nearly total lack of
system in the location of points. A lack of any relations is observed both
in the overall position of all points and in the position of points for
different groups of stations.

The absence of a system that is observed in the position of individual points
shows up as well in the relative location of the differentiated groups. At
the same tine. the average nagnituds corrections with respect to the groups
of stations correlate well with the averaged isostatic anomalies.

3. investigation of the relation between aagnetic and aagnitude anoaalies

Magnetic field enoaelies d‘i‘a characterize the overall inhomogeneity of lag-
nctization of the rocks of the consolidated layer of the earth's crust and
sedimentary deposits. Corresponding to the anomalies are surface outcroppings
of magmatic rocks. zones of tectonic fractures, and differences in the petro-
graﬂiic conposition of rocks. The chi-aerated characteristics, which are
reflected in the anoaalies of the magnetic field, are also closely related

to the seisaic parameters of the medium 'lherefore we can expect that the

150

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SH ONLY

structure of magnetic anomalies will contain certain information on the
mnnible peculiarities of dynamic characteristics of seismic waves. and
nnecificnlly on magnitude corrections.

To determine the relation between the values of A1}, and magnitude corrections
on seinmic stations a map of the anomalous magnetic field of the USSR in Ufa
luollncu was used in a ucaic of 1:5 000 000 made in 1963. To characterize

the local ntructure of Me the area within a radius of 50 km aromd the
ncinmlr ntntion wan examined. 'No quantitatiVe parameters were studied as
well no one qualitative parameter. The first quantitative parameter was the
average value of the AT“ field within a 50 km neighborhood of the station. and
the second was variation of the anomaly ma within the same region, i. e.
the difference between the maximum and minimum values. The qualitative
parameter was the characterintic dimension of the local anomaly. The follow-
ing three gradations of dimnnionn were act: large anomalies -- more than

100 km acrons; medium anomalies -- from 25 to 100 km; small anomalies --
lcna than 25 km.

'ihe data of 59 seismic stations were used. The results of comparison of the
correction Am with anomalies AT“ and 6A1}, are shown in Fig. 73. 'ihe position
ui‘ the points shown that the values of Am are practically independent of AT“
and “Ta. This negative has at any rate the practical value that it shows
the existing relationship between the nature of the wave field and the
structure of the medium: the average characteristics of the structure of the
medium weakly influence the dynamics of waves. This result is particularly
interesting in connection with the fact that the magnitude corrections

correlate well with Just the average values of the anomalous gravitational
field in the inostatic reduction.

Fig. 73. Relation between the magnitude
correction Am and magnetic field anomaly:
a--anomalies A'i‘a; b--variations “Ta

0 I mill ioersteds

 

151

FOR OFFICIAL US: ONLY
FOR IWI’HHM. USE ONLY

A comparison of the values of Am for stations located in regions that are
characterized by large. medium and small dimensions of magnetic anomalies
shown that for regions of "large" anomalies the average value of Am is:

00.06 '0.0'); for "medium" anomalies: -0.01 20.05; for "small" anomalies:
—o.li £0.06. large-scale inhomogeneities of the medium and the corresponding
M‘u are related to anomalous magnetic masses located in the lower parts of
the earth's crust or in the very top of the mantle‘. Consequently the home-
mmuity of the upper rustic and the consolidated crust impede the damping of
neinmie waves which shows up in negative magnitude corrections. let us note
that distribution of the value of Am within the investigated groups is charac-
terized by mean square values of mat-0.26. Therefore the forecast of mag-
hetle i‘ield anomalies with respect to the scale of inhomogeneity is uncertain
(more qualitatiVe than quantitative); nevertheless it is useful to account
for this relation for decision making in controversial situations.

For regions of Soviet Middle Asia and Kazakhstan we had data on magnetic field
anomalies AT“ averaged over a grid of 10' x 15'. i. a. corresponding to a

scale on geophysical maps of 1:2500000. Just as for the gravitational field.
no relation was observed between the seismic and magnetic field.

An exception is the graph for Am, 6T4. where a linear relation is observed
for points corresponding to North Tysn'-Shan' stations; the correlation
coefficient is equal to -0.'(. however. this relation is based on the data of
only eight seismic stations. and therefore the confidence interval of the
reduced estimate at the 951 level of significance is from -0.10 to -0.95.

from which it can be assumed that the peculiarity under discussion came up
fortuitously .

One of the reasoas for a lack of connection between Am and the investigated
geophysical fields (both gravitational and magnetic) is that in the case of
comparatively short epicentral distances. up to 2000 km. seismic waves go
from the source to the receivers through. the upper mantle. The latter is
chm-acterized by considerable inhomogeneities of the velocities of seismic
waves and absorbing properties. and therefore the observed magnitude correc-
tiom; reflect the influence of all inhomogeneities that lie on the path of
propamtion or the wave, whereas the geophysical anomalies characterize only
.lovui lnhomgeneltien close to observation points. The influence of these
inhomogeneities on the amplitude peculiarities of seismic waves that traverse
the greater part of the path in the very inhomOgeneous top of the upper
mantle is appreciably weaker than for waves that go through the appreciably
more homogeneous lower mantle. Thus the geological-geophysical character-
istics of the medium permit a more certain prediction of the effect of an
anomalous change in the amplitudes of seismic waves only from remote sources
(Ii ~1,l)00-10.000 ha). i. e. for cases where a considerable part of the path
of propagation falls to the lower mantle.

'M. temmmturen in excess of 100°C rocks are completely nonmagnetic.

Anomal lea or the magnetic field can be related only to the topmost layer
of 1:0 km.

 

152
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
?OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Investigation of the Relation Between Amplitude Anomalies and
Geological Conditionn

l. influence that general features of geological structure have on the
level of amplitudes of seismic waves

Geological conditions in the vicinity of a station may have an appreciable
influence on the size of the magnetic correction Am. Apparently it is the
influence of local geological condltions that is responsible for the fact

that in some cases the Am differ by 0.h-0.5 for stations separated by a few
kilometres.

A whole complex of detailed geological studies in the vicinity of each
station is required to determine the way that the amplitude of a recording of
seismic signals depends on the peculiarities of geological conditions. It
would be necessary to study the way that the value of Am is influenced by

the thickness and makeup of loose deposits, the ground water level. sni-
sotropy of the physical properties of rocks of the basement and the sedi-
mentary sheath, relief of the basement, the thickness of the earth's crust
and the inclinations of its boundaries, the petrographic composition of the
basement rock. the presence of deep breaks and tectonic fractures, the type
of geological structures that the rocks belong to and so forth.

Let us try to evaluate the influence of the most general geological and
tectonic conditions on the values of Am. Most stations were located in
territories where fairly ancient crystalline rocks (Paleozoic or older)

crop out on the surface. Such are the stations located on the south of

the European part. within the borders of Kazakhstan. in the Urals, in
Trans-nayknl. on the Kola Peninsula and in the vicinity of ﬂoril‘sk. It
should be noted that all these stations are characterized by values of Am
from -0.1 to -0.6. i. e. they are quite favorable for registration of seismic
signals. An exception is observed in all the stations on the south of the
European part. where the values of Am are about 00.20.

A second group of stations is situated within the limits of ancient platforms
with a thick cover of sedimentary rocks. Such are the stations in the
vicinity of Moscow. Kirov. Riga. on the south of the Ukraine, in the
vicinity of Mirnyy and Yakutok. The values of the magnitude corrections

on these stations vary over a wide range, and in some instances there are
sharp differences between stations located only a few kilometres apart.

in this connection it in quite difficult to extrapolate the values of Am

to other territories.

let us distinguish the stations that fall within the limits of so-called
"tectonic activation." These are stations that are situated in Tyan'-Shan'.
Aitay. Kuzbans, the Western and Eastern Sayans, and in Pribaykal'ye. The
values nr Am here have a range from -0.h0 to +0.30. An increase is observed
in the values of a- in the easterly direction. The region of tectonic
activation is characterised by a differentiated relief, alternation of

153

FOR OFFICIﬂL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unndﬁnnylunu-nnhhlhgu ur rockn of the nildud foundntion and sedimentary basins.
Nu nyntematic [eeuliaritleu could be found in the relation between the
values of Am and geological conditions in the vicinity of the stations.

Finally. a number of stations are situated within the limits or on the
hoununry of the zone of the Meso-Genoaoic geosynclinal region. Such are the
stations in the Carpathians and Trans-Carpathia. in Trans-Caucasia. South
Turkmenln. on Chukotka. within the limits of the Tadshik Depression and on
the lamirs. These stations also differ strongly in values of Am. For
instance in the Caucasus. in Turkmenia and on Chukotka the values of Am

are negative. while in the Tadahik Depression and the Famira they have
positive values.

Thus the general features of geological structure in the vicinity of a
station do not determine the particulars of the nature of registration of
seismic signals in explicit form. Apparently to determine the influence of
geological conditions we need to do ineomparably more thorough. detailed and
comprehensive research on the geology and geophysics of the station locality.

2. influence that breaks have on the parameters of seismic waves

Mire obvious was the influence of breaks on the shape and amplitude level of
seismic signals recorded on stations situated in direct proximity to these
breaks. For seismic waves the fault zone may be a shield on the one hand
that reflects part of the wave energy. and on the other hand may be an
inhomogeneity with anomalously high absorbing properties.

An experimental material. we used recordings of to remote earthquakes from
three epicentral zones: Aleutian, Japanese and Indonesian. The recording
was done by standard seismic channels of the SK-3M seismic receiver. Signal
amplitudes were measured from recordings of the vertical component.

The amplitude of the maximum phase was selected as the parameter character-
izing the dynamics of the longitudinal wave of a remote earthquake. This
choice is dictated by the fact that the maximum phase of the P wave corre-
sponds fairly well to the maximum of the spectrum of oscillations and is

the most stable in comparison with other phases of the given wave group when
the frequency response of the recording channel is used (Antonova et al..
1903; ihnchenik. 1970).

lhree thor factors influence the amplitudes of remote earthquakes: eon-
ditiunu ut the focus (energy. depth. directionality of radiation. etc.).
the elastic [sinumetera of the medium through which the waves pass. and the
.qxihnzicaI-geolhyoical environment close to the recording station.

ibuuiderntion of the influences of the first two factors on the amplitude of
the nulanic signal was taken care of by calibrating the recordings of closely
zuenuuiatations with respect to a single station taken as the reference; the
rathiuq 'Ai/Ast is calculated. where A. is the amplitude on the i-th station.
and A5. is the amplitude on the reference station.

15:.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON (ll-'HCIM. IISH ONLY

*‘Wi" “W‘ My

0—“- We MI.

Fig. 7". Recording: of remote earthquakes on seismic stations of the Oarm .
group: l--Aleutians, 21.II.1968, to-l9h08"; 2--Japsn. Ol.V.l968, to 80811103”;
3--Indonesia. 23.11.1968. to-16hlh'; cm-station number

Taken as the reference was station 1 (see Fig. 16) which is located in
relatively quiet geological conditions and is fairly remote from tectonic
fractures. Besides. on this station one observes a comparatively stable
simple pulse shape of the first wave group for the given recordings of
Japanese. Aleutian and Indonesian earthquakes (Fig. 7b).

The nature of the influence of fault zones on the amplitude of a registered
remote earthquake signal was studied from pairs of earthquakes; Aleutian
earthquakes were taken as the reference. This is explained by the fact that
in comparison with Japanese and Indonesian zones. the Aleutian zone has
higher seismlcity. i. e. practically every math there is a tremor there that
is clearly recorded on the Garm station group. In the second place, this
zone is very stable with respect to the amplitude parameter a1.

The stability of the parameter a‘ was studied as follows. Spatial constancy
of the quantities a; was verified. To do this. pairs of earthquakes were
selected with close apparent periods of the recording of oscillations. and
the ratio of amplitudes of like phases a1 cal/of was examined. The paired
earthquakes were selected within the limits of a strictly homded time
scum-at not exceeding three days. This limitation is explained first of all
by possible equipment instability in time. which had to be excluded as much
an manible.

In: a result of an examination of about fifty independent earthquakes it is
apparent that the value or a] for every i-th station is fairly stable. and

155

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIM. USE ONLY

in fact the averane value in for each station is close to unity, while the
average scatter of individual values deen not exceed 1.5!.

theme in Pulse Shape of a Remote Earthquake as a Function of the Azimuth to
the Epicenter. Preliminary vimml analysis of recordings of remote earth-
quakes allows us to draw the qualitative conclusion that for some stations
the pulse shape or a longitudinal tune is distorted with a change in the
azimuth to the epicenter. Pig. "ii: shows an example or a recording of three
«'nrthquakcs from different epicentrnl zones. It is apparent that the shape
ui‘ the recording or the Aleutian earthquake has the same clear pulse form
on all stations. and differs only in mximum amplitudes. For the Japanese
t‘m‘tiulnukc this clarity of the first wave group is disrupted on stations

'0 and 5. For the Aleutian earthquake. the ratios of amplitudes of subsequent
oscillations to the maximum amplitudes am“ were less than unity; for the
Japanese earthquake these ratios became greater than unity.

Hith rrnpncl. to the rccordinnn oi‘ the Indonesian earthquake the clarity of
the first wave train is disrupted on stations 6 and 13. For the Aleutian
earthquake on these stations the measure of distinctness of the pulse H
mm loss than 1.0. being in a range of 0.35-0.81; for the Indonesian eart -
quake the value of Allin” is in a range of 0.60-1.60.

The pulm.‘ shape on station I does not undergo any appreciable changes.

The value or Alazsx here for all earthquakes is less than 1.0, and is in a
range of 0.9-0. .

In the investigated time period (February-May, 1968) the frequency responses
on ile stations were rigidly standardized. This enabled comparison of the
recordings shown in Pig. 1h not only with respect to shape. but also with
respect to amplitudes for the three asimuths (Fig. 75). As we can see,

the different azimuths are characterized by different values of the reference
recordings normalized with respect to amplitudes.

Fig. 75. Graphs of the dependence of rela-
tive amplitude of on the azimuth to the
epicentral ease. The shading indicates
azimuth intervals of about h0° (Aleutiens).
70° (Japan) and 120° (Indonesia).
cal-station number

  

"is.

uuuum "any!”

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OI’FICIM. USE ONLY

Fig. 76. Tectonic diagram or the (Jam
rcmion. Zones of hreakn: auKarakul'i
(pui'etrnvnk; n-oiiurkhnhuki e-orrnoemento
or Quaternary breaks: do-seiamic stations
with values oi‘ azimuthal sensitivity

 

Quantitative Evaluation of Change in the Amplitude Parameter as a Junction
of Asimuth. Oraphu were plotted for each station for the average 6{ as a
function oi‘ the average azimuth 6° to the epicentral tone. These relations
are shown in Fig. 75. Given for each average value of a; on the graph is
the scatter of the individual values of the data in the orm oi‘ "whiskers,"

and the number of pairs of earthquakes from which the relative amplitudes
u{ were determined.

The value or ii“) is a measure of the azimuthal amplitude sensitivity of
the i-th station with respect to the direction of the average azimuth 0°.
At seismic stations 3. h and 13 this parameter varies in the following way:
it decreases by a factor of 1.1-2.1: for earthquakes of Japan, and by a
factor or 1.7-3.0 for the earthquakes from Indonesia.

Stations 2. '2' and 6 ”feel" the Japanese earthquakes about the same as the
Aleutian ones; their sensitivity in the Indonesian direction is 1.1 times
less. Stations ll and 12 show exceptionally high sensitivity to Japanese
earthquakes. exceeding their sensitivity to Aleutian earthquakes by a factor
of 2.1 and 1.14. The sensitivity of the ll-th station to Indonesia is the
same as for the Aleutians, while for the lZ-th station it is less by a
factor of 1.8.

influence of Breaks on the Amplitude Level of Signals. Before examining the
relation between the position or breaks relative to the station and the direc-
tion of arrival of waves with the amplitude sensitivity or each station.

let us turn to the tectonic scheme of the Germ region. -

Fairly complete data on the geological structure and tectonics of the region
are to be had in the work of M. V. Ozovskiy et a1. (1960). we have taken
as our basis the tectonic diagram presented in this work (Fig. 76).

The Guru renion is an alpine structure comprised of two structural stages

and broken up into individual blocks (structural steps) by deep tectonic
breaks that intersect the earth's crust.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'l'llrm.‘ ulmvlily I'aiiinu, mat-r. nl' drop-level breaks are distinguished: Karakul'.
I'u-trnvuk and :hn'khohuk. '

in addition to the deep-level hruuku. faults of the Quaternary Era are
dlatianulaheui that are shown in fragments on the diagram according to data
taken from the map of recent movements of the earth's crust in the Garm
renion compiled by V. K. Kuchuy.

Pin. '{6 shows only those faults that are situated no more than 5 km from the
acinmle atatioun.

0n the tectonic diagram the magnitudes of azimuthal sensitivity 61(0) for
each station are shown by vectors. It can be seen from the size of the
vectors that the earthquakes with rays crossing nearby fault zones are
"felt" more poorly by the stations. An exception is station 3 for which

the directional sensitivity was lower than expected. 'lhis_can be explained
by the fact that the Surkhobsk fault zone in the vicinity of station 3 is
much wider than shown on the tectonic diagram (see Fig. 76). and the boundary
of the zone passes to the south of the station.

This hypothesis is confirmed by data on recent movements of the earth's
crust from the results of geodetic observations to the south of station 3 .
that show vertical displacements of the earth's crust. although such dis-
placements have not been observed to the north (Bnman. Sambireva. 1971).

The influence of Quaternary breaks is also felt by stations 12 (Petrovak
zone). and 2 (Ksrakul' zone): the amplitudes of Indonesian earthquakes
at the given stations are 1.8 times lower.

'ihe way that the reduction in amplitude of the recordings of remote earth-
quakes in related to the position of the station relative to tectonic breaks
can be explained in the following way. The boundaries of the fault zones
are formed by surface breaks; therefore within the limits of the zone itself
that is filled with crushed rocks the amplitude of the signal must decrease,
and reflections from the surfaces of faults may increase the amplitude.
focuslnr. it in the recording area. 'ihe ratio of these opposed effects is
associated with the seismic wavelength and its path within the limits of the
fault zone (width of the some).

An unatahie value of amplitudes is also noted on stations situated directly
on Quaternary breaks. For instance on station 13 the signal of sleutian
earthquakes in 1.5-2.5 times as strong as at the other stations. Japanese
earthquakes give recordings here that are 1.5-2.0 times weaker than Aleutian
earthquakes. 'ihe name instability of behavior is noted at station 12
situated on a Quaternary fault.

An analysis of the amplitudes of P waves on stations of the Garm group
showed that the fault zones have a considerable effect on the spatial
structure of the wave field. 'ihis influence can be seen in distortion of

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the pulse nhanm and in the considerable fluctuations of the amplitudes of
seismic waves. ihe latter may have two possible causes. The first is the
reflection of seismic waves from the boundaries of fault zones and the
absorption of their energy due to propagation through the fault zones.

As a result of the action of these factors the amplitudes of the first
phones of the P wave are reduced, while those of the subsequent phases are
distorted by interference. The second possible cause is the waveguide
properties of the fault zones. These zones are comparatively thin steeply
falling layers with reduced velocity. The difference of velocity from the
values typical of the surrounding medium decreases with depth, and at depths
of 10-12 km disappears completely. the fault is "healed." The amplitudes of
seismdc waves incident on this waveguide increase as the surface is

approached us a consequence of a gradual reduction in elastic moduli.

in cases where the seismic rays are parallel to the fault plane, favorable
conditions arise for propagation of waves in the waveguide fault zone, and
one notes an increase in amplitude level on the surface as compared with
closely spaced stations. This mechanism is well explained by the increase
in amplitudes of Japanese earthquakes on the ll-th station.

Thus the given analysis shows that in selecting the points of location of
sensitive stations in regions with complicated tectonic conditions it is
necessary to do detailed research that will establish the spatial block
structure of the amplitudes of seismic waves. In doing this it should be
taken into consideration that the strongest deviations from average values
are observed close to fault zones.

1he formation of the seismic wave field is determined mainly by the elastic
and dissipative properties of the earth's interior. At present these
prolnrtics have been inadequately studied. and therefore it is difficult

to carry out a detailed calculation of the kinematic and dynamic character-
istics of the wave field. At the same time, a practically important problem
-- loealization of the horizontal inhomogeneity of acoustic properties in
the depths of the earth -- is completely solvable by using supplemental
geophysical information.

As has been shown, there are certain correlations between the physical
parameters of matter in the depths of the earth; therefore, the magnetic
and gravitational fields for instance may be used to get information on the

elastic properties of the medium, and consequently to predict the dynamic
leculiarities of seismic waves.

The most characteristic peculiarities of seismic waves, that are associated
with inhomogeneities of the structure of the lower part of the crust and the
upper mantle. show up with fairly good contrast in isostatic anomalies of
the gravitational field and in the nature of the block structure of the
anomalous magnetic field. At the same time, small-scale changes in the
dynamic characteristics of the seismic waves are intimately related to the
inhomogeneity of the very top part of the cross section, which is expressed

159

FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
FUN m-‘PNIMI. "SH UNLY

in n VII-'uu'," in l.hi--kn--::;: nl' ue-ilnmdan'y ill‘iul:'.il.i:. annex: of tectonic breaks
and uthv-r pureuliarltimi ui‘ the mmlnnlvul structure.

i'nnv‘ I n:- in"

'I'm yI'3ii':' have panned :ilhce puhlleation of the (tom-rchennlve Seismological
i-zxpv-ditiuu'u miiouruph "Fundamental merlinental Patterns of the Dynamics

nf iii-emit: Haven" (Antnnovn et ui.. 1968). During this time the expedition
him nhtuiuevi new extensive ex|v2rlmnta1 material on which the present
«minimum In based. A eommrinon of two periods separated by a decade gives
an Idea of the direction of development of experlmental ueismlogicai research
from almlyzilzi of general (average) patterns of seismic waves to the study

ui‘ comparatlwrly fine details nf kinematic and dynamic characteristics and
a-vuI-mIJun ui‘ Inhomncneitles of the earth's structure.

‘11... main purmzw ui‘ thir. work hm; been the investigation of the mutual
r--latinu between inhomneneitieu of the earth's structure and fluctuations
M the Haw: field. The solution of this problem has been made possible by
Llw devaiument of dcliiﬂ' systems of seismic observations.

'l‘uv ::I.Iuly of the complicated space-time structure of the wave field has
rt-«llilreil strony, cchemtizution: a rough hierarchy of spatial scales has
lI-um introduced. the field itself has been represented as the sum of con--

|nneutn of different scales in a background-fluctuation relation with each
nther.

'i'he e-m'umentn of the field are separated by geological criteria and methods
ni‘ :qm-v-i'requency filtration.

The umrH-elcmy of the fluctuations is constructed on the basis of the
n-hnriuttcrlzitlcn of a random field. Despite the fact that such an approach
ind law-ll numented fairly 10m: a420, there has been no unified system of
quantitative description of the seismic wave field up until now. The system
described here is formulated on the bible of the traditions of research of
i‘urmr Jean: (Antonova et al., 1968; Nersesov. Rautian. 196M Nersesov ct al.,
191:3; Nikniaycv. 1972); it is fairly complete and universal: any detail of
tin- wave field ir. suchet to sehenatization and division into parts. each
part inilknzi it: own contribution to the quantitative description of the
vurrmziioudlnn :zpntan neuie. This technique is applicable both to analysis
-»i‘ In» :ilinplc‘ characteristics of seismic waver. -- amplitudes. travel times,
and Lu analysis of fairly complicated parameters such as those of polari-
.~.:-I.iun. enemies. in certain frequency bands and so forth.

‘1':.-- results are in slimy instances the first of their kind. From our stand-
;niat the main simii'icnnce of these results is that they provided new geo-
iemic-‘Il :md ueophyuical information on the medium and in this way proved the
commence of the research technique used. This gives us the impetus for
remmnniina that :zeizmolmzintn use our method extensively under conditions
of the widest :iculm: and systems of observations.

160

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Naturally In the courne of reneareh the method will undergo certain changes;
nevertheless the reeultu found in varioun regions of the globe can be com-
pared. unified and perfected.

This work has established the fundmnental rough spatial characteristics of
the structure of the seismic wave field and horizontal inhomogeneities; the
first. an yet approximate, features of distribution of horizontal inhomo-
geneities of various scales in the earth have been established. The re-
finement of these features. the investigation of unstudied regions of the
earth, improvement of the reliability and detail of intonation -- all this

in a matter for the future. The authors hope that future experimental
uciumic otudicn of the interior of the earth vill take the path of development
of the methodu preheated in this book. '

REFERENCES

l. i. Ya. Azbel'. V. i. Keyiis-iiorok. 'l'. B. Yanovskmya. "A Method of Joint
interpretation of Hodographu and Amplitude Curves in the Study of the
Upper Mantle" in the book: "Maohinnaya interpretatsiya seysmicheekikh
voln" [Machine Interpretation of Seismic Haves]. No 2. Moscow. “suite. 196’.

2:. K. Aki. i. i.. Nemeaov, A. V. Nikolayev at al.. "Time Changes in the
Fluctuation of Amplitudes and Travel Times of a Teleseismic P Have
on the Oarm. California. LASA and NORSAR Groups" in the book: "Sovetsko-
amcrikanekiye iosledovaniya po prognozu zemletryaseniy" [Soviet-U. s.
Research an Earthquake Prediction]. Vol 1. Dushanbe. Donish. 1976.

3. A. s. Alekaeyev, M. M. Lavrent'yev. R. 0. Mukhometov, V. O. Romanov.
"A Numerical Method of Solving the Three-Dimensional Inverse Kinematic
Problem" in the book: "Matematicheskiye problem geoi'iziki" [Mathematical
Problems of Geophysics]. he 1. Novosibirsk. Computing Center, Siberian
Department of the Academy of Sciences USSR. 1969.

h. A. s. Alekueycv. M. M. Lavrent'yev. R. G. Mukhometov et al., "A Numerical
Method of Detcnsining the Structure of the Upper Mantle of the Earth" in
the book: ”Matematicheokiyc problemy geofiziki," iio II, Novosibirsk,

Computing Center. Siberian Department of the Aeadew of Sciences 088R,
19'”.

9. Yo. h. Altukhov. K. I.. Volochkovich, ii. ii. Krasil'nikov. A. D. Smirnov,
I'lﬁapeI-ience in Standardizing the Folded Systems of the Ural-Mongolian
lielt with Consideration of the Structure of Their Basement" in the book:
"'l'ektonikn Uralo-Mongol'nkono skladchatogo poyasa" [Tectonics of the
Real-Mongolian Folded Belt], Moscow. Hanks, 1971..

6. L. V. Antonova, P. P. Aptikavev, R. I. Kurochkina et a]... "Osnovnyye

ekuperimcntal'nyye zakonomernosti dinamiki seysmicheskikh vole” [hinde-

mental iixpcrimental Patterns of the Mummies of Seismic Haves]. Moscow,
Manila. 1968.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ii.

9.

10 .

ll.

13.

1’0 .

1').

lb.

17.

18.

7.. i. Arnnovlch. mi” "Appnrutm-n l metudikn ueynmometricheskikh nsblyu-
uhmly v sum!" [Nethudn nncl l-hluipnent for Seismotechni cal Observations].
Moucuv . Nauku . 197’! .

7.. l. Arunoviuh, N. A. valcnskuyn. i. Yc. Guhln ct ul., "Inntruktuiyu

0 mryadkc proiavodutvu i obrabotki nnblyudcniy na seysnicheekikh
utnntniyukh chinoy ulstew eeyonichenkikh neblyudeniy 888R" [Instructionn
on the Order for Carrying out and Proceeoing Observations on Seinnic
Stations of the Unified Synten oi‘ Scionic Observatione oi‘ the USSR].
Moucnv. Institute or Phynicn of the Earth. Made-V of Sciences men. 1966.

M. Ye. Artem'yev. "l'iunetory and Zonal Inhonogeneities of the Upper
Mantle and Their Relation to Peculinrities of Regional Tectonics" in the
hook: "Svynz' neverkhnontnykh struktur zemoy kory s glubinnyni" [The
Relation Uetveen Surface Structures of the Earth's Crust and Deep-Level
Structures]. Kiev. "Nnukova dunku." 1971.

Ye. V. Artyuohkov. "Layer or Reduced Viscosity in the Upper Mantle of the
Earth and Phenomena that are Related to it," BYULLETEN' mSKOVSKOOO
OMGIBS'NA ISPY'I'M‘ELEY PRIRODY, OTDBLENIYE OBOLOOII, 1970. No 2.

It. K. Balavudze. i'. 8h. Mindeli, "Principal Results of Geophysical
Studlea or the Structure of the Earth's Crust in the Black Sea Basin"

in thc book: "Stroyeniye Chernonorskoy vpudiny" [Structure of the ﬂock
Sen liuain]. iioscow. "nuke. 1966.

N. A. Beiyuyevskiy. "Zeunavu kors v predelekh territorii 888R" ['ihe
i-Iurth'n Crunt within the Borders of the USSR]. Moscou. Ranks. 1975.

6. N. Rugayevakiy, I. L. Neraesov, V. A. Rogozhina, "Horizontal Inhale-
ueneities of the Upper Mantle in Central Asia," IZVBTIYA AKADH‘JI NAUK
583R, SERIYA GEOPIZICH'KAYA. 1971, lo 6.

V. P. Valyun, "Algorithm for Rapid Calculation of Refracted News" in
the book: "Algoritly interpretatsii seysnicheskikh dennykh" [Algorithm
for Interpretation of Seisnic Data]. No 5. Moscow. Nauka, 1971.

l. Vunek, A. Zutopek, V. Kamik et sl.. "Standardization of the Scale

uI‘ Mmznltudes." IZVPSTIYA AKADMI NAUK 888R, SERIYA GBOPIZICRIKAYA.
1962. No 2.

A. Ititucm, ed., "Verkhnyaya nentiya” [The Upper Mantle]. Moscow. Mir.
l‘ﬂ')‘.

L. I‘. Vinnik, "Ineledovaniya nantii Zenli seys-icheskini netodani”

[Studies or the Mantle or the Berth by Seismic Methods]. Moscow,
Nuuku, 1916.

l.. l'. Vinnik, A. A. (:ndzikovskaya. "Lateral Variations of Absorption in

the Upper Mantle Beneath Ania," IZVESTIYA WU NAUK SSSR. FIZIKA
'lJ-IMM. 1975. No l.

162
FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
1').

21.

22.

23.

2h.

26.

27.

L. I'. Vlnnik. A. A. hunk. "'lbctunic Interpretation of the Deep-Level
Structure of the Pamlrn." IZVESTIYA AKADEMII NAUK 888R. OEOTEKTONIKA,
1975. NO 5.

L. l’. Vinnik, A. V. Nikolaycv. "Velocity Cross Section of the lover
Mantle from Direct Measurements of dt/dA," IZVES‘I‘IYA AKADEMII NAUK 888R,
PIZIKA 23141.1. 1970. No ll.

I. Ye. Volkov, T. B. Yanovskaya. "0n Determining the Velocity and Quality
Factor in the Upper Mantle froa Amplitude Curves" in the book: "Mashinnyy
analic tsii‘rovykh seysnicheskikh dannykh. Vychislitel'naya seysaol iya"

[Machine Analysis of Digital Seismic Data. Computational Seismology .
Mo 7. Moscow, Nauka. 1971!.

i. s. Vol'vovukiy, "Scysnicheskiye iasledovaniya :ennoy kory v 888R"
[Seisaic Studies or the Earth's Crust in the USSR]. Moscow. Medra. 1973.

i. N. Oalhin. A. V. Nikolaycv, Ye. A. Starshinova, "Fluctuations of Have

Characteristics and Minor Inhomogeneity or the Earth's Crust." IZVBS'I'IYA
AKADEMII NAUK 888R. FIZIKA mm. 1970. No 11.

M. V. Gzovskiy, V. N. Krestnikov. N. N. Leonov, et al.. "Map of Most
Recent Tectonic Moveaenta of Soviet Middle Asia." IZVETIYA AKADEMII
NAUK 8888. SBRIYA GWFIZICHESKAYA, 1960, lo 8.

I. V. Gorbunova. N. V. Shatornaya, "Calibration Curve for Determining

the Magnitude of Earthquakes from PKPIKP Haves,” IZVES‘I'IYA ”(AMI “Alli
SSSR. FIZIKA ZEMLI, 1976, Mo 7.

u. Gutenberg. "Fizika :cmykh nedr" [Physics of the Depths of the Earth].
Moscow. 11., 1963.

A. A. Dcrgachev, "Evaluating the Q of the Earth's Crust at Tuva" in the
book: "Voprosy seysnichnosti Sibiri" [Problems of Seisnicity of Siberia],
part 1. Novosibirsk, Institute of Geology and Geopiwsics, Siberian
Department of the Acadew of Sciences USSR, 1972.

V. Din. "Correction of P Haves and Group Adjustment," "M Institute
lnzhenerov elcktroniki i radiotekhniki" [Proceedings of the Institute
or Engineers at Electronics and Radio maineeringl. so 12, 1965.

. V. V. Zhadik, A. A. Dergachcv. "Measurements of the Quality Factor of

the Earth's Crust from Recordings of Microtrelors." IZVEcITIYA WI
NAUK 888R. PIZIKA 2341.1. 1973, No 2.

V. II. markov. L. l. Doroi‘eyeva. V. M. Doroi'eyev, V. M. Lyublnov, "Zone
or Reduced Values of the Dissipative Function in the Shell on the
Boundary vith the Core.” DOKI.ADY AKADMI NAUK 888R, 1971:, Vol 2131, 110 It.

163

P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3].

‘3.

37.

39.

'i0 .

ii. :5. 'laytuav. 1.. I'. Zonenuhtayn. ii. 6. Markova et a)... "Tectonics of
Mongolia" in the book: "'i‘cittonike Uralo-Mongol'ekogo eklodchatogo
poyaua." Moscow. Naukn. 1971:.

K. K. Zapol'okiy. "cmss Frequency-Selective Seismic Stationo" in the

book: "Bkapcrimcntal'naya seyenologiya" [Experimental Seismology].
Moneov. Nauka. 1971.

K. K. Zepol'akiy. I. L. Nereenov, T. G. Rautian. V. I. Khelturin. "Physi-
cni Principles of Magnitude Classification of Earthquakes" in the book:
"Magnitude i cuergeticheukava kluaii‘ikateiya zelnletryaeeniy" [Magnitude
and Energy Classification of Earthquakes}. Vol 1. $8888, Acadew of
Sciences 088R, int.

i.. i’. Zonenahtayn, "Model of Development or the Oeoaynclinal Process" in
the hook: "'i‘ektoniite liralo-Mongol'ekogo akiedchatogo peyote." Moscow.
Nauku. 197's.

"local Structure of Turbulence in an Incoapreeeible Liquid at Very High
Reynoldu Numbers," DOKLADY WI NAUK SSSR. 19'01, I'D 30.

. Ii. A. Lukk. I. L. Nemeaov. ”Structure of the Upper Part or the Earth's

Mantle from Observations on Earthquakes with Intermediate Depth of the
i'ocun." DOKLADY AKADEMII NAUK SSSR, 1965. Vol 162, he 3.

Yo. ii. Lyuetikh, "Inootesy end Isoetatic Hypotheses," "Trudy Geofizi-
cheukogo institute Akadenii ileuk 888R” [Proceedings of the Geophysics
institute. Acadew of Sciences USSR]. 1957. Do 38.

"Mamituda i eoergeticheokeya klaseiriketeiye zemletryeeueniy." collection
of articles. Vol 1, 2, Moscow, mess, Acedew of Sciences 1883. 191k.

1.. N. Melinovekeya, "Spectral Amplitude Curves of P Waves" in the book:
"Algoritw intcrpretatsii eeyenicheekikh dannykh. Vychielitel'neye
seyemologiye." No 5. Moscow, iiauke, 1911.

i'. Molnar, '1'. 6. Rautien. V. I. Khalturin, “Experience in Studying the
Spectre or Local Earthquakes of the Care Region" in the book: "Sovetsito-

amerikanskiye ieeledovaniye po prognozu zenletryesneniy." Vol 1.
Dushanbe. Donieh, 1976.

. Yu. P. Neprochnov, "Results of Deep Seielic Sounding on the Black Sea"

in the book: "652 v sssn" [Deep Seismic Sounding in the nasal, Noecov.
(:ootekhizdat, 1962.

i. L. heroeuov. 'l‘. C. Reutien, "Kinematics and Dynamics of Seismic Haves
at Diutances up to 3500 km from the Epicenter" in the book: "hoped-
mcutnl'naya ncyomika" [Bxperiuental Scisnice], Moscow, "nuke. 1965.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
50.

51.

I. 1.. Nerneuov. A. V. Niknluycv. Ye. M. Scdovu, "The Nature of horizontal

lnhnmnenelty or the Mantle or the Earth from Seinmic Data." DOKLADY
ADMIN-34H "MIX 113:3", I979, an H”, N0 [1.

A. V. Nikolayev, "Scynnika neodnorodnykh i mutnykh sred" [Seianics of
Inhomogeneoun and Turbid Media]. Moseov. Nedra. 1972.

A. V. iiikolayev. F. S. Tregub. "Results of Investigation of a Sta-

tistical Model of the Earth's Crust," DOKLADY AKADEMII NAUK 888R. 1969.
vol 189. [b 6.

A. Nuraagamhetov. ”Damping or Seismic waves and Energy Classification of
Earthquakes from Observations by ChISS Equipment" in the book: "Nagnituda
i energeticheskaya klaooi tikatsiya zemletryaaneniy." Vol 2. Moscow.

MSSSS. Academy of Sciences USSR. 197ls.

A. h’urmagambetov. T. G. Rautian. V. I. Khalturin et al., "Dependence of
the Spectra or Seismic Oscillations on the Energy of Earthquakes” in the
book: "Voprony kolichestvennoy otsenki seysmicheskoy opaanosti" [Problems
of Quantitative Evaluation of Seismic Danger], Moscow. Nauka. 1975.

N. I. Pavlenkovu. "Volnovyye polya i nodel' zemoy Rory" [Have Fields and
a Model or the Earth'a Grunt]. Kiev. "Nautova dunks." 1973.

I. P. Pasechnik. "Kharakteristika seysmieheskikh voln pri yadermvkh
varyvakh i zemletryaaneniyakh" [Glaracteristics oi' Seismic Haves in
the Case of Nuclear Explosions and Earthquakes], Moscow. Nauka. 1970.

K. S. Ponoaareva. "0n Propagation of Diffusion Sound," UCHENYYB ZAPISKI
Kuasxoco Penmoclcussxoco Ius'rI'rurA. 1969, No 5h.

1“. Press, "Internal Structure of the Earth from Data or 'lheoretical

Models" in the book: "Priroda tverdoy Zeali" [Nature of the Solid Earth],
Moscow. Mir, 1975.

"Priroda tverdoy Zemli.“ Moscow. Mir. 1975.
N. N. l'uzyrev. s. V. Krylov, B. P. Mashen'kin, "Metodika rekognos-

tsirovochnykh nlubinnykh oeyomi cheskikh issledovaniy" [Methods of
Reconnaissance Deep-Level Seismic Studies]. Novosibirsk. Hanks. 1975.

. A. I. Ruzaykin. V. I. Khalturin. "iiodoeraph of the Maximum Phase of a

Rayleigh Have at Distances up to 3500 km" in the book: "Magnituda i
cneracticheskaya klassii‘ikatsiya zemletryasneniy." Vol 2, Hoscov.
K7555, Acetic-y of Sciences USSR. 19?“.

Ye. P. Savarenskiy. N. G. Val'dner, "L3 and Rs Haves of Earthquakes of
the Black Sea Basin. and Some Considerations on Their Nature" in the book:
"Seysmicheskiyc issledovaniya" [Seismic Research]. No '0, Moscow, Academy
of Sciences USSR. 1960.

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'iil .

61.

oh .

fo').

()0.

Ye. u. Hmlovu. "Hmtlnl Structure of n I' ano "nil Horizontal inhomo-

mmcity ol‘ the Cruut nmi Mantle." i'lNBii'l'lYA MANN]! iMUK GBSR. PIZIKA
7.3"“. 197’“ "0 12.

D. l. iiikhnruiidzo. "'ihc Nature or Lg and ﬁg waves and investigation of
the Structure of the Earth's Crust.” “Trudy Institute neoi‘iziki All OSSR"

ll’roccedincu or the Institute of Geophyuics. Academy of Sciences or the
Georgian 88R]. 1963. Vol 21.

:3. Salt. "lionideal Plasticity" in the book: "Verkhnyaya nantiys" [The
Upper Mantle]. Moscow. Mir. 1975. ' -

S. L. Soiov'yev. V. ii. Sheln. "Intensity of an Earthquake from Data
of Far Eastern and Continental Stations of the USSR" IZVE’I‘IYA MADEMII
NAUK 563R. SERIYA GEOFIZICHESKAYA. 1959. NO 9.

. v. I. Khalturin. N. B. Urusova. "Evaluation of the Absorption of Longi-

tudinal and Transverse Haves from Observations on Local Earthquakes.”
"Trudy Institute mm Zenli Akademii Nauk sssn" [Proceedings of the

lnutitutc or l‘hyaics or the Earth. Academy of Sciences USSR], 1962.
No 25.

V. i. Khalturin. "Absorption of Seismic Haves in the Earth's Crust of
Northern 1'yan’-Shan"' in the book: "Bkapuinental'naya seysmologiys,"
Moucov. Hanks. 1971.

G. M. Tnibul'chik. ”Nekotoryye chlslennyye netotiv ansiiza struktury
neynmgram i opredeleniya srednikh kharakteristik zelnoy Rory" [Some
Numrical Mcthodu of Analyzing the Structure of Seismograns and Deter-
mining the Average Characteristics of the Earth's Crust]. Candidate's
Diusertation. Novosibirsk. Institute of Geology and Geophysics. Siberian
Department. Academy of Sciences USSR. 1968.

l.. A. Chernov. "Rnuproutraneniyc voln so sluchaynyai neodnorodnost'yami"

[Propagation of Haves with Random Inhomogeneities]. Moscow, Academy of
Sciences USSR. 1958.

l.. n. Chernov. ”Volny v sluehsyno-neodnorodnykh sredakh" [Waves in
Randomly lulionoacneouu Media]. Moscow, Nauka, 1975.

:t. 1;. ::hui't:z. "Formation or the Continental Crust or Paleozoic Folded
livlta and Their Prenont Structure" in the book: "Tektonika Urolo-
Momgol'ukmzo nklmlchntono poyasa." Moscow. Ranks. 19?“.

V. ii. l-lnnvm. T. G. Simbireva. "Vertical Shifts on the Ninich Proving
Ground-J. and the Mechanism of Poci of Nearby Earthquakes." "'rezisy
dokladov Vnesoyuznogo soveshchaniya po sovrenenm/si dvisheniyan zemoy
kory" [Abstracts of Reports to the All-Union Conference on Recent Move-
nents of the Earth's Crust], Alstn-Ata. 1971.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0'! .

68.

69.

70.

71.

’(2.

73-

77.

'Ni.

1‘).

(ll.

1'. u. Yanovukayu. :. V. Golikova. Yu. A. ﬂurkov. "Amplitude Curves of
l' Haven" in the hook: "Voproay dinmnichenkoy teorii ranprostraneniya
nayonichcnklkh voln" [Probienn or the Dynamic Theory of Seismic Have
Propagation]. No 1. Leningrad. Leningrad State University. 19610.

'i'. B. Yanovokaya. "Bone Data on Sammie Waves in the Earth's Core" in

the book: "Algorith intcrpretataii seyanicheskikh dannykh." R0 5.
Moscow. Rauka. 1971.

R. D. Adana. E. R. Engdahl. "P—Hsve Velocities in the Earth's Core: an
Interim Report." PHYS. EARTH AND PLANET. INTERIORS. 1975. V01 9. NO 1.

K. Aki. "Scattering of P-Haves Under the Montana LABA." J. GEOPHYS. R...
1973. V01 78. No 8.

D. L. Anderson. A. Ben-Mcnahcm. c. D. Archanheau. "Attenuation of Seismic
Enemy in the Upper Mantle." J. csomvs. “3.. 1965. Vol 70. No 6.

E. V. Artyuohkov. "Rheological Properties of the Crust and Upper Mantle

According to Data on Ioostatic Movements." J. csoms. R... 1971. Vol 77.
No 5.

c. B. Archanheau. E. A. Flinn. D. 0. Lambert. "Fine Structure of the
Upper Mantle." J. GEOWYS. 835.. 1969. V01 71!. N0 25.

R. G. Bacer. "Preliminary Study for Determining Magnitude from Lg."
EARTHQUAKE W SBISMOL. SOC. AMERICA. 1967. V01 38. lurch-June.

Is. A. Unit. "Fatimtion or FKP Travel Times." BULL. SEISMOL. SOC.
AMERICA. 1968, V01 58. Mo '0.

I. Capon. R. J. Greenfield. R. J. Kolker. R. '1'. Lacoss. "Short-Period
Signal Pracessing Results for the Large-Aperture Seismic Array." 680-
PRYSICS. 1968. Vol 33. No 3.

D. s. Carder. D. H. Gordon, J. N. Jordan. "Analysis of Surface-Pool
Travel Times." BULL. sstsuot. soc. AMERICA. 1966. Vol 56. No b.

H. K. Carpenter. P. l'. Marshall. A. Douglas, "The Amplitude-Distance
Curve i'or Short-Period 'Deleseionic P-Raves." GDOPHYS. J ., 1967. Vol 13.
N0 1-3a

M. A. Chinnery. M. M. 'l‘oksUz. "P-Mave Velocities in the Mantle Below
700 km." BULL. SBISMOL. SOC. AMERICA. 1967. V01 57. N0 2.

M. A. Chinnery, "Velocity Anomalies in the Lower Mantle," PHYS. mm
nun rum. iN'l'BRlORS. 1969. Vol 2. no 1.

J. Cleary. "Analysis of the Amplitudes of Short-Period P-Uaves Recorded
by Long-Range Seismic Measurement Stations in the Distance Range of 30°
to 120°," J. GEOPHYS. RES” 1967. Vol 72. No 18.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"as

8:1.

90.

91.

92.

93.

I). .I. Cnrhlnhicy. "Multiple-Array Measurements of the P-Have Travel-Time
Derivative." (IEONYS. J. ROY. ASTRON. 800.. 1970. V01 17, No 1.

A. M. Dainty. M. N. mitotic, K. R. Anderson st 111., ”Seismic Scattering

and Shallow Structure of the Moon in Oceanus Procellarum." MOON. 19?“.
Vol 9. No 1/2.

5. K. Dey-Sarkar. R. A. Higgins, "Upper Mantle Structure in Western
Canada." J. GEOPIIYS. RES” 1976, Vol 81. No 1-2.

A. M. lhleuonaki. R. A. lladdon. "'Ihe Radius of the Core-Mantle Boundary
Inferred from Travel Time and Free Oscillation Data: a Critical Review."
PHYS. EARTH AND PLANET. INTERIORS. 1971:, Vol 9, N0 1.

J. l-‘. h‘vernden, "Magnitude Determinations at Regional and Near-Regional
Distances in the United States," 3114.. SEISMOL. SOC. AMERICA. 1957.
Vol 51. no lo.

B. Gutenberg. C. F. Richter. "Magnitude and Energy of Earthquakes."
ANN. 01-201... Rome. 1956, Vol 9. No 1.

A. l.. Males, J. Cleary, J. Roberts, "Velocity Distribution in the Lower
Mantle." BULL. SEISMOL. 80C. AMERICA. 1968, Vol 58, Ito 6.

'l'. U. Hanks. M. Ryan. ”The Use of Body-Have Psectra in the Determination
of Seismic-Source Parameters," BULL. SEISWL. SOC. AMERICA. 1972.
Vol 62, No 2.

u. s. llasegaua. ”Short-Period P-Code Characteristics in the Eastern
Canadian Shield," BULL. salsﬂoL. SOC. AMERICA, 1970, Vol 60, No 3.

E. llerrin. "Introduction to 1968 Seismological Tables for P-Phases,"
BULL. 03151401.. soc. AMERICA. 1968, Vol 58. Mo lo.

II. M. Iyer, I. H. Mealy, "'lleleseismic Residuals at the LASA-USOS Extended

Arrw and 'Iheir Interpretation in Terms of Crust and Upper Mantle
Structure.” J. GEOPIIYS. 8%.. 1972, Vol 71, No 8.

u. Jamison. E. s. llusebye, "Application of Array Data Processing Tech-
niques to a Network 01‘ Ordinary Seismograph Stations." PURE AND APPL.
GEOI'IIYS.. 1968. V01 69, No 11.

L. R. Johnson, "Array Measurement of P-Velocities in the Upper Mantle."
J. GHOPIIYS. “3.. 1967. Vol 72, No 2".

1.. R. Johnson, "Array Measurements of P-Velocities in the Lower Mantle."
111111.. 05109401.. soc. AMERICA, 1969, Vol 59, no 2.

K. L. Kaila. D. Sarkar. "P-wave Amplitude Variation with Epicentral
Distance and the Magnitude Relations," BULL. SBISIDL. SOC. AMERICA,
1975. V01 65. No ’4.

168

I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
97.

98.

996

um.

10]..

[01’ .

[03.

10h .

106.

107.

In”.

10‘) .

iii).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ii. Kananory. "Attenuation of P-Haven in the Upper and Lower Mantle."
HULL. EARTHQUAKE lifﬂ. INST. 10K") UNIV.. 196711. V01 A5, pt. 2.

II. Knmmory. "Upper Mnntle Structure from Apparent Velocities oi‘ P-Havea

Recorded at Mahayana Miero-i-Zarthqunkc Olmervatory." BULL. EAii'iiiQUAKB RE}.
INS'I'. TOKYO UNIV.. 1967!), Vol '05, pt. 3.

II. Kunmry. "Spectrum of P and l’ci’ in Relation to the Mantle-Core

Iloundary and Attenuation in the Mantle," .1. csomvs. m” 1961c. vol 12,
No '8.
II.

II. Kun'unory. Jpeetrum nr Short-Period Core Phases in Relation to the
Attenuation in the Mnntle." .1. ommlvs. 1135.. 1961a. Vol 72. No 8.

ll. Kananory. "Velocity and (l oi‘ Mantle Haves." PHYS. EARTH Aim PLANET.
iN'l‘i-IRIORS. 1970, Vol 5’. No A.

M. I.. N. Kennett. "'nm Hrreetn or Attenuation on Seienograne." BULL.
SEISMOL. SOC. AMERICA, 1975. Vol 65. N0 6.

h. L. Kovaeh, L. D. Andernon, "Attenuation of Shear waves in the Upper
and Lower Mantle," BULL. SEISKJL. SOC. AMERICA. 196.0, Vol 5’1, 1‘0 6.

0. A. McMechan. "Amplitude Conatrainte and the Inversion of Canadian

Shield Early R180 Explosion Data," BULL. SEISMOL. SOC. AMERICA, 1975.
Vol 6'}. No 5.

S. Miyunura, "Determination of Body-Have Magnitude: for Shallow Berth-
qunkes in the New Zealund and Mecquarie Loop Region Using PKP Data."
i'llY1‘-. EARTH AND PLANET. INTERIORS, 1911!, V01 8, N0 2.

0. H. Nuttli. "'me Amplitudea or Teleneianic P-Havea." BULL. SEISMOL.
soc. AMERICA. 1972. Vol 68. U0 1.

M. Nluzi. L. D. Anderson. "Upper Mantle Structure of Western North
Amy-ion i‘roa Apparent Velocities oi‘ i’-Haveo," J. GmPHYs. RES.. 1965,
Vol 70. No 18.

u. kohimzun, II. M. Iyer. "Temporal and Spatial Variations of Travel-Time
lieuidunls in Central Cali Permit: for Novnya Zemlya Events.” BULL. SEISMOL.
soc. AMERICA. 1976. Vol 66, No 5.

R. Unto. A. F. Eupinnzn. "Quality Factor Inversion Determination from

the Analysis or liody Have Data." Pt. 1. was AND APPL. (woman 1961.
Vol. 6". pp 1-26.

M. K. Sew-Junta. R. R. Julian, "Amplitude-Distance Calibration Curve '
l‘rmn [loop-Focus thrthquakea." BULL. SEISMOL. soc. AMERICA. 1976. Vol 66.
NH '). '

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“1‘.

”3.

1M.

11').

116.

HT.

[18.

119.

120.

FOR ("'VlClAl. USE ONLY

I). H. :Ilmlwm. II. I-'. Mm-vu. II. W. King. "An Army :‘uInuIy or I'-ano
Vclmrltllm In tlm “mm Mantle 'I'runnItIon Zone Beneath Northeastern
Australia." BULL. SEISMOL. 800. AMERICA. 197k. Vol 6h. No 6.

II. 1.. Street. "Scaling Northeastern United Staten-Southeastern Canadian

Earthquaken by 'I'hclr Ln Haven." BULL. SEISWL. SOC. AMERICA. 1976. Vol
66. No 5.

'l'. I.. Tenn. "Attenuatlon of Body Haven and The Q Structure of the
Mantle." J. GBOI’IIYS. RI‘B” 1978. V01 73. NO 5.

II. Thatcher. 'I'. 8. Ilanka. "Source Parameters of Southern California
Farthquakea." J. GBOI’IIYS. 1138.. 1973. Vol 78. No 35.

M. TauJIura. "Reulonal Variation of P-Have Spectrum (1).” BULL. EARTH-
qum: ass. INST. vao mum. 1969. Vol In, No II.

II. B. 'Iucker. I. N. Brune. "aeiamograaa. 8-Have Spectra and Source
Parametcra for Aftershocke or the San Fernando Earthquake" in: "San
Fernando. Call fornla Earthquake or February 9. 1971," Vol III. Washing--
ton. 1973.

K. I-‘. Vetth. G. E. Clawaon. "Hamitude from Short-Period P-Have Data."
BULL. SEISMOII. 80C. AMERICA. 1972. V01 62. No 2.

.I. I'. Henley. "Dift‘unlon or Seismic Enery 1n the Near Range." J. 630-
I’IIYS. RI” 1965. V01 70. No 20.

II. A. "main". D. V. Ilelnberger, "Upper Mantle Structure of the Western
United States." J. GBOMIYS. RB” 1973, V01 78, No 11.

A. D. Zoltan. R. P. Manse. J. P. Gureki. "Regional Attenuation of
Short-Period P- and s-Havee 1n the United States." Geophya. ree. ,
1975. Vol ‘00. No l.

commcn'r: Izdatel'utvo "hunks". 1978

6610
G30:

"UNI/0681 - 8ND -

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY