APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00080R00010001001‘4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010014-4

JPRs L/8207
8 January 1979

TRANSLATIMS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(F000 2/79)

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-R0982-00850R000100010014-4
I. heron No. 3. Recipient's Acres-inn Re.

open an
8 January 1979

0. Prlaniag Openiauim lope.

 
 

 
  

JPRS L/ 8207

BIBLIOGRAPDOIC OAIA
WEST

TWSLATIONS 0N "ESTER" EUROPE.

     
 
   
     
     
 
   
 
   
 
     
     
   
      
       
     
   
        
    
    
       

    

 

(P000 2/79)

' . l‘ula-ueg chenucalloe New 4M “Jun 10. Maker/Techno“ Unit No
Joint Publ icetiona Raaeerch Service

1000 North Globe Road . I. Comm/rum 24..
Arlington. Virginia 22201

l2. Spending Otgealuﬁen Sane IN Mame I1. 'cl'ype ol Repon e Pevid
Covered

   

  
   

Ae above

IS. Sceptre-recur None

. Abemru

  

The eerial report contains political/econonic infor-ation on Heat European
energy, finance and trade policy nature as well aa developeente and trends
in the doctrine. progreae and probleaa of the Iajor conuniet parties.

including their rcletione with coemmiet parties outeide the ﬂeet European
area.

 

. ey IaJa eel mount Aulyele.

  

e. Deactipeeu

Political Science Llntemtional Affaira _l.uxeabourg

Sociology _Auetrie _Netherlanda

Propaganda _3elgi|- _Norvey

Booooaice _Cenada _x_Portugal

Energy __cyprue _Spein

Ioduatry _Denaark _8veden

Trade _Finlend _Svitrerland

Finance _Prence _1'urkey

_Creece _x_. United Kingdoa

m Mellieu/Opea-Ea‘ed 1.... :Iceland _Heet Ger-any

    

  
 
  

m. courtraulcmp so, so. 10

- Avenlabuluy Sure-eat

For Official Uae Only.
Liaited Newer of Copiee Available Free JPRS.

  
  

I Summon” hie
Repen)

U..- ~VOFII (.‘V. 5"" TUB '0“ MY .c IEPIWUCED “I‘M“ IOIMA.“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB L/8207

8 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(9000 2/79)

Cameras
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

LDC Debts Pose Problem for North-South Relations
(Ilene J. Peterson; EUROPA ARCNI‘I. 10 Nov 78) .. . . . . .. . . .

FRANCE

Character of PSP'I Nichol Rocard Viewed
(Arthur Conte; PARIS HATCH. 8 Dec 78) ..................

Further Discussion of I979 Defense Budget
(Jenn Laruelle;TAl1, 12 Oct 73) ...

Briefs
Pirat not 10 RC Deliveries
MAS 5.56 Assault Rifle

ITALY

Conantory on Worldwide Iaplieetiona of u.s.-Pkc 'riea
(Prone Barbeiri; LA STAHPA. 17 Dec 78) .................

PORTUGAL

Government Attenpt To Deal With Azorean Rebels Pails
(MKMTER ALLGDIBINB, 25 Nov-78) .

UNITE) KING“)!

British Press React. to 0.8. Initiative on PRC
(Various aourcea. verioua detee) .......................

Editorial Report

'DAILY TELmRAPll', Editorial
'1‘“: GUARDIAN'. Editorial '
"THE FINANCIAL TINBS' . Editorial
UK (to-mist Peper. Editorial

-a- [In-Hz-iso r0001

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

..
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

LDC DEBTS P083 PROBLEM FOR NORTN-SOUTH RELATIONS
Bonn EUROPA ARCNIV in German 10 Nov 78 pp 693-702 --'

[Article by Hans J. Petersen: "The Indebtedness of the Developing Countries
as a Problem of North-South Relations"]

[Text] Background

Besides the problea areas of "trade" and "transfer of resources."1 the in-
debtedness of thc developing countries is e aain issue in the North-South
dialogue. Although an independent topic. it is very closely connected with
the tub other main topics of the "dialog.” Indeed, the uncertainty about
indebtedness exists only because there are problems in the two other areas.

Indebtedness is nothing but the reflection of capital influx. the aost
iaportant coeponent of the international transfer of resources to the
developing countries. Unless it is a gift. each aark that is transferred
increases the indebtedness of the recipient: and the deaand for larger
capital transfers to the developing gountries iaplies by definition readi-
ness to accept greater indebtedness.

But. to be sure. increasing international indebtedness is not a problea so
long as its conditions-i.e., its interest rates and repayaent :eras--corres-
pond to the ability of the indebted countries to nest its debt-service
obligations. But in the past few years. this has becoae aore difficult for
an increasing nuaber of countries. since their export proceeds rose lore
slowly than their debt-service obligations. Thus the ratio between debt-
service costs of public or publicly-guaranteed foreign debt, and the export
of goods and services, the so-called debt-service costs/export quota. was in
1967 above 10 percent in the case of 16. but in 1976 already in the can:

of 23, dsveloping countries, and in the case of 12 countries even above 15
percent; and especially in recent years. it has risen drastically for ease
countries. although this is not sufficiently recognisable froa official debt
statistics.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But the debt-service costs/export quote is absolutely not a reliable indica-
tor of the actual burden imposed on a country by its foreign indebtedness,
or, respectively, of its ability to cope with further indebtedness. For this
purpose, a combination of other indicators“ is of greater value, and there
are examples of countries that have run into difficulties with statistically
relatively low debt-service costs/export quotas, while other countries made
good economic progress with high interest and repayment obligations. In this
connection. it is by no means unimportant that continuous economic progress
attracts additional foreign capital, so that large parts of debt service
obligations actually do not have to be not out of export revenues at all,

but can be refinanced from capital influx.5

But such a "rollover" is the less to be expected and the more difficult to
achieve, the more backward a country is end the more slowly it develops.

On the other hand, poor and insufficiently dynamic countries--and they still
constitute the majority of the Third Horid--sre particularly dependent on
capital influx, but are at the same time the least able to mobilize export
revenues to meet debt service obligatiOns.

This problem can be solved by means of development aid, in other words trans-
fer of goods, services. knowledge, etc at clearly more favorable conditions
than exacted by the market. The scale of noncommercial conditions is wide.
It reaches from services rendered free of charge (primarily technical aid).
via commodity aid at token prices and financial aid at extremely easy credit
conditions, to state subsidised export credits.6

of course, even easy credit conditions do not necessarily give protection
from indebtedness problems. India and Pakistan are outstanding examples

that even under such conditions mountains of debts can accumulate over the
years as repayment dates and interest payments come due that can hardly be
met without additional aid. Just the same, indebtedness problems of develop-
ing countries would hardly play so important a role in North-South discussion,
if the developing countries did not chronically and considerably lag behind
international goal concepts. Hhile most Hestern industrialized countries
envision, as a rule-of-thumb, development aid under easy conditions of 0.7
percent of gross national product, an average rate of 0.35 percent has never
been surpassed since 1970: and. measured by that norm, net contributions7

of Western industrialised countries should in 1976 have amounted to US

$61.4 million, while they actually came to only $13.7 million.8

Especially in recent years. however, would it have been more important than
ever to bring development aid closer to the quantitative goals since, as a
result of the oil crisis, the foreign-currency needs of many developing
countries have expanded further. Their import needs have increased consid-
erably, not only because of higher priced fuel imports but also indirectly
because of price increases of finished goods brought about in part by the
oil-price explosion; the cyclical recession in the industrialized countries
has at the same time not only reduced the exports of developing countries
because of weakened demand. but has also led to increased defensive measures
by the industrialized countries, which do not want to enhance the problems

2
ION OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of their precarious labor-market condition by import competition from the
developing countries.

The "currency hole" of many developing countries. thus augmented by leaps

and bounds. has been increasingly filled by commercial funds with accordingly
short maturity dates and high interest rates. Such credits have not been
difficult to obtain from banks and exporters in the industrialized countries;
they were even in part virtually forced on the developing countries. For
European financial markets--their inclinations to invest weakened as a result
of the economic recession-~wete swamped with excess dollars from the oil-
producing countries. and enterprises made strong efforts to compensate for
reduced development of domestic sales at least partially by increased exports.

The resulting capital transfer did have the positive effect that in recent
years the external difficulties of nonpetroleum—exporting developing countries
were far from being as extensive as had first been feared in light of the
critical development of the world economy. But as a negative consequence.

a debt mountain formed whose structure of due dates and interest charges gave
every reason for alarm. This does not manifest itself so dramatically in
official statistics. especially since problematic debts are not included at
all. The well-known indebtedness statistics overwhelmingly fail to take into
consideration not only military credits but also credits with maturity dates
of less than 1 year as well as those long-term credits which are n t guaran-
teed by government agenciss in the creditor or the debtor nations. But
particularly short-term and unofficial credits. above all from the Eurodollar
market. have in recent years gained enormously in importance in a number of
countries, so that actual debt-service obligations are much higher and ars
rising considerably more drastically than is revealed in the statistics.1

Hence, in spite of reassuring comments.11 we cannot dismiss the danger that
develgping countries may in increasing numbers run into indebtedness prob-
lems. But it is not merely the economic dimensions of this problem that
have induced the developing countries to emphasise the indebtedness topic in
the North-South discussion. Rather. beyond it, the indebtedness difficulties
contain political aspects derived from the fact that the industrialized
countries. apart from their already dominating international position as
trading partner and sources for capital and technology. find further possi—
bilities for economic-political dominance opened to them through the in-
debtedness mechanism. These could perhaps be in the form of levies which

the International Monetary Fund ties in critical situations to assistance
grants, or within the framework of creditor clubs in the case of multilateral
funding operations which--apart from even considerably more numerous bilateral
funding operations--occurred between 1956 and 1977 in 37 instances in the
case of 12 countries.

Demands of Developing Countries

Under these circumstances. developing countries resist the traditional
practice of treating indebtedness problems merely as exceptional situations.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where steps have to be taken only if a crisis comes to a head. i.e.. when
a country has requested debt rcadjustments which then bring only short-term
relief as a rule only after time-consuming and often humiliating dealings.
and which. moreover with relatively high interest rates. develop quite
differently from case to case.1‘ They have. rather. for some time been
emphasizing that when it comes to indebtedness uncertainties. it is a matter
of development-policy scope. making it therefore necessary to proceed here
on a broad front. and to institutionalize oVerlapping mechanisms so that as
much as possible latent debt problems do not become acute at all. and yet
indebtedness crises that do arise be solved according to uniform rules. 15
rapidly. permanently. and in conformity with developmental-political criteria.
The UN Conference for Trade and Development (UNCTAD) first of all. with its
commissions and special global conferences. serves the Third Horld as a forum;
apart from that. the developing countries articulate their demands also within
the framework of other conferences where (as for instance as "nonaligned
countries" "16 or as the "Group of 77")17 they are primarily among themselves.
or--as in the Conference for International Economic Cooperation [6136]18 --are

represented by a few members facing representatives of the industrialized
countries.

In doing so. the developing countries emphasize completely different issues
from case to case. and it is undeniable that during the past few years their
positions have changed. and have in any case become more flexible. after
they first pleaded for radical solutions in the confrontation mood of the
world economic crisis. Thus. at the UN extraordinary general assemblies of
1976 and 1975. and also at the conferences of the "Group of 77" and of the
"nonaligned" at that time. the convening of a world debt conference was
discussed. where in a rather speculative manner. general--and not merely
individual-case--measures for the disencumbrance or the alleviation of debts
of developing countries respectively. was to be negotiated. As regards
public indebtedness. two especially needy groups of countries were given
priority from the outset. For the so-called HSAC group (they are those
developing countries deemed particularly hard hit by the world economic
crisis9 ) a 5-year debt moratorium was to be secured. and for the LLDC

group (they are the particularly backward among the developing countriesz 0)
the cancellation of debts. As regards commercial debts. a 25-year payoff
extension supported by a multilateral fund. was drafted.21

At the Fourth UN Conference for Trade and Development in Nairobi in 1976
(UNCTAD IV). these postulates were pushed into the background and they are
now either not advocated at all (world debt conference. global extension of
commercial debts) or merely in weakend form (relief for “SAC and LLDC
groups). On the other hand. constant emphasis is put on the demand to in-
stitutionalize internationally uniform guidelines for the treatment of cases
of indebtedness. These guidelines are to be applicable in reference to
early recognition and avoidance of indebtedness problems.22 as well as their
solution in acute cases of crisis. The developing countries would like to
replace arbitrary procedures determined by creditor nations with calculable
and neutral mechanisms.23

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Basic Attitudes of Industrialized Countries

Now as much as over. most industrialized countries find it difficult to
recognize the indebtedness of developing countries as a general problem and
an independent field for their development-policy activities. The socialist
countries do not feel that this topic concerns them at all. but rather regard
indebtedness phenomena as inherent characteristics of capitalist economic
relations.2‘ The western industrialized countries which coordinate their
development policy in the Development Aid Committee (DAC)25 of the OECD
continue to emphasize that indebtedness problems have constituted the ex-
ception rather than the rule. that they are by no means uniform, that they
in each ceae have their specific causes and require correspondingly different
therapio.. and that the indebtedness problem could. as it were. implicitly

be solved by an adequate development-aid policy, since all potential causes
of indebtedness problems--namely inadequate capital formation and productivity.
fiscal and foreign trade weaknesses--are in any case primary development-
policy points of departure.26

So far as indebtedness problems have up to now become acute, they have grown
out of inadequate commercial credit transactions which development-policy
authorities of industrialized countries do not feel responsible for (although
private and commercial capital flows into the developing countries are
vigorously advocated by public authorities and also fostered by diverse
measures). It is feared, rather. that expectations of rapid and generous

aid in problem-situations would induce developing countries to follow unsound
indebtedness policies and would undermine the fundamental principal of econ-
raic relations that obligations once undertaken. should be met as far as
possible under all circumstance ("pacts aunt servanda").

The industrialised countries. by the same token, do not want to be pushed
into assuming responsibility for early analysis and preventive therapy of
indebtedness problems. They are willing. to be sure, to so coordinate their
development-policy measures that the capacity of receiving countries to

meet their debt obligations is not outstripped and also to see to it that
they contribute to the strengthening of economic power and to the ability

to meet debt-service obligations. But they consider debt management per se
a job for the debtor countries alone. and beyond that any intervention on
the part of the creditors in this area as harmful. If official authorities
in the creditor countries were to deal in advance with possible indebtedness
crises, there would be the danger of a signal effect that might well pre-
cipitate rather than prevent crises.

Host industrialized countries hold therefore strictly to the principle of
dealing with indebtedness problems only a? exceptions, and of then treating
them in each case as individual actions.2 There is extraordinary resistance
against any kind of "automatism" both in the sense of institutionalising
uniform mechanisms to ward off threatening problems and also in the sense of
generally valid guide lines for the solution of indebtedness crises which
have already occurred.28

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This basic attitude is further reinforced by the argument that it would be
extremely difficult to draw up and follow uniform guidelines for compromises
necessary for the settlement of debts among creditor countries as well as in
creditor-debtor relationships. since the types of credits to be funded and

the structure of creditors changes from case to case. In this connection.

all creditors should as a matter of principle make equivalent concessions so

as to avoid that tougher conditions of some creditors are financed by greater
concessions of others. This principle requires in most cases long-drawn-out
negotiations. since so far no simple formula for "burden sharing." satisfactory
to all. has been found.29

Finally. attention is called to a reshuffling effect of debt settlements. un-
desirable from a development-policy point of view: indebtedness problems
occur primarily in the case of relatively advanced countries which have access
to international capital markets and can cope with commercial indebtedness
much more easily than backward countries which are less integrated into inter-
national financial relations.3° If difficulties thus caused are than taken
care of by public aid. funds are tied up that are to serve development-policy
purposes and that should be employed with priority for backward countries.

Formation of Differentiated Positions within Groups of Countries and Points
for Compromises

The antagonism among principal arguments in the North-South dialog does not
mean that they are defended with equal vigor. and that they are not even
partially ignored, within the camps that stand opposite to each other in this
"dialog." Indeed, clearly differentiated positions in regard to indebtedness
difficulties have emerged in the Third Horld as well as in Hestern industrial-
ized countries. a situation that reduces fundamental counterpositions and in
individual cases hold out prospects for compromises.

It is thus surely a unique fact that the oil-producing countries. which in
the early '70s decisively mobilized the rest of the Third world with their
aggressive raw-material policy, and which assumed a spokesman's role in the
North-South dialog. have not only themselves largely caused or intensified
the indebtedness problems of the developing countries. but are also in part
building up massive creditor positions. 1 while their trade-policy contri-
butions to the intensification of international trade problems of other
developing countries has not diminished the solidarity of the Third World.
it should be difficult for them as creditors to consistently take the side
of the debtors in the framework of indebtedness discussions.

Nor do the more advanced developing countries in Latin America and Asia stand
fully behind the postulates that are being raised in the name of the Third
Horld. Even if, under the pressure of the world economic crisis. they may
for the time being have kept less of a distance from the other developing
countries. still. countries like Argentina. Brazil. South Korea or the
Phillippines. to name but a few especially important countries of this group,
are in no way particularly interested in impairing their already widely dis-

6
POR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

parsed and much utilized credit connections on international capital markets.
through a dramatization of their indebtedness position.

In the meantime. these countries have regained their distance from the global
demands of the Third World at first so vehemently advanced and this surely
contributes considerably to the fact that the North-South debate on debt
alleviation is focusing at this time on the Ltsc and “SAC groups. here.
sooner than anywhere else. can concessions by the industrialized countries be
expected. for they recognize on the whole a development-policy priority of
these groups of countries. and concessions in the indebtedness sector do not
cost very much here. With the exception of India and Pakistan, it is a
question gnly of smaller countries that share minimally in outstanding
demands.3

Since the industrialized countries agreed some time ago to consider the need-
iest countries. especially the LLDC. not only quantitatively more in the dis-
tribution of funds. but to grant them thereby also particularly easy conditions.
it would seem that the conditions of former credits to these countries. and
hence their accumulated indebtedness. would be adjusted to the now prevailing
easier conditions.33 Thus. the industrialized countries have in the meantime
also declared their readiness to accept in principle corres;)nding debt
settlements. Tough negotiations at the ninth extraordinary uession of the
Council on Trade and Development of UNCTAD in March. 1978 led to a declaration
of intent along these lines.3‘

But to be sure. all the industrialized countries do not react alike. Countries
like Sweden. the Netherlands, and Canada which among the industrialized
countries have for some time represented a development-policy line of relative
readiness to grant concessions. have rather readily canceled the public debts
of the poorest countries. horeover. Great Britain. Switzerland, and now also
the PRC, have agreed to the same measures. In the case of the PIC. this step
comes as a complete surprise since until recently it could. together with the
United States. Japan. and France. be counted among the strictest defenders of
"orthodox" positions. But it certainly does not surrender therewith the
principle of settling each case individually. within a year (but retroactive
to 1 Jan 1979) special agreements are to be worked out--albeit according to
co—on guidelines.35 The rest of the creditor countries. especially the
United States and Japan. will take more time for the announced concessions.
and they will in all probability also not be equally generous. They are

also unlikely to relinquish selective debt settlements.

A further result of the ninth extraordinary UNCTAD session--certainly still
less sensational than the above-mentioned "declaration of intent"--is the
resolution to form a committee of government representatives to make further
progress in the area of general guidelines for preventive and curative treat-
ment of indebtedness problems. For the time being it remains unclear which
compomises in particular will be reached here. Nevertheless. it is discern-
ible here also that mechanistic and obligatory global formulas have no
chance; but it appears achievable that on request of interested developing

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

countries, reaction to indebtedness problems be more rapid, in some aspects
more uniform. and under the chairmanship of neutral or even sympathetic
authorities (for instance the world Bank or other developing countries) and
that development-policy criteria play a greater role than before.36

Promising beginnings for it have, to be sure, already been made for some time
for a number of countries within the framework of country-aid consortia and
through advisory committees formed by grantors of development aid.37 Bxpecial-
ly in very recent times. "overt" indebtedness crises (i.e.. requests for
multilateral debt settlements) would presumably come about considerably more
often than is actually the case, if potential indebtedness problems were not
also analyzed within the framework of such committees in their investigation

of development programs and if they were not taken into consideration in the
coordination of international development aid.38

Uith all the search for rules and instruments for the avoidance and solution
of indebtedness problems it must not be forgotten that it remains in any case
more important to find satisfactory solutions for the body of problems
connected with "trade" and "transfer of resources." Uith every advance there,
indebtedness difficulties lose in importance.

FOOTNOTES

1. "Transfer of resources" is the collective term customarily used in develop-
ment-policy discussion for the transfer of capital, technology, knowledge,
etc from industrialized to developing countries.

2. Edgar Kroeller, "The Debt Problem of Developing Countries: A Challenge
to the International Community," TﬂB OBCD OBSERVER, No 90. January 1978,
pp 25 ff.

3. Cf HORLD BANK. ANNUAL REPORT. 1976. Hashington, 1976. Statistical Appendix,
Table 6, pp 104 ff; also HORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT. 1978, Hashington,
1978. Statistical Appendix. Table 9. pp 92 ff.

b. Hans J. Petersen, "Debt Problems of Developing Countries: A Pragmatic
Approach to an Early Harning System," KONJUNKTURPOLITIK. Vol 23. No 2,
1977, pp 94 ff.

5. For the breakdown of debt service components and their varied theoretical
dimensions and practical relevance. see OECD. DEBT PROBLEMS OF DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES, Paris, 1976.

6. Subsidized export credits, to be sure, do not count as development aid
in the narrower sense. For a definition of development aid performance
and for computation of elements of differentially coordinated capital
flows. see United Nations. Th3 CONCEPTS 0P PRESENT AID AND PLO" TARGETS,
New York. 1975.

8
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

110.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gross contributions minus repayments. In 1976, repayments of bilateral
public development aid amounted to 38 percent of the respective gross
contributions. cf OBCD, "Development Cooperation, 1977," REVIEW, Paris,
1977, Table A 10, p 176.

Ibid, Table A 2. p 165.

For the understanding and demarcation of available indebtedness statistics,
see Thomas M. Klein, "Foreign Indebtedness of Developing Countries,"
FINANZIBRUNG UND BNTUICKLUNG, [Financing and Development] Vol 13. No A,
1976, pp 21 ff.

The balance of payments statistics of 15 developing countries, published
by the International Monetary Fund, show for 1976 a total of interest
pay-ants more than twice that of the indebtedness statistics of the
World Bank. See WORLD BANK DEVELOPMENT REPORT, 1978, op cit, p 117.

Cf Helen Hughes, "The International Indebtedness of Developing Countries,"
FINANZIERUNG UND ENTHICKLUNG, Vol 14, No b, 1977, pp 22 ff; also, United
States Senate, Subcommittee on Foreign Policy, washingtOL, 1977, pp 51 ff.

Cheryl Payer, “Third World Debt Problems: The New Have of Defaults,“
MONTHLY REVIEW, New York. Sept 1976.

Edgar Kroeller, op cit, p 29.

"United Nations, Debt Problems in the Context of Development," REPORT
BY ms UNCTAD SECRETARIAT, New York 1974, pp 18 ff.

Ibid; also, "Debt Problems of Developing Countries," REPORT BY THE UNCTAD
SECRETARIAT, NEH York, 1972.

The group of "nonaligned" countries is a union, now of more than 80
countries, which since 1955 net together at seven conferences. See
Bundesministerium fuer wirtscheftliche Zusaemenarbeit [Federal Ministry
for Economic Cooperation], JOURNALISTBN-RANDBUCH ENTHICKLUNGSPOLITIK
[Journalist Handbook, Development Policy] 1978, Bonn. 1978, p 178.

The "group of 77" has been in existence since the First UN Conference
on Trade and Dewe‘opment (UNCTAD I) in Geneva, 1966; by now, about 120
members belong to this group. Ibid.

From the end of 1975 to mid-1977, representatives of 27 states and com-
munities of states participated in the so-called "Paris dialog;" ibid,
pp 156 ff. See also the docunentation about the final conference of
6186 [Conference for International Economic Cooperation]. BA 17/1977,
pp D 469 ff.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By now. 65 developing countries belong to the Most Seriously Affected
Countries. MSAC. DMZ [BERLINER MITTAGS ZBITUNG. Berlin Noon Newspaper].
JOURNALISTEN-UARDBUCN ENTHICKLUNCSPOLITIK. 1978. op cit. PP 176 ff.

Thirty countries belong to the Least Developed Countries. LLDC (the double
L is used to distinguish this apprevlation from LDC which stands for Less
Developed Countries). Ibil. pp 17b ff. (Africa, Ethiopia, Benin.
Botswana. Burundi. Gambia. Guinea. Cape Verde. Cameroon. Lesotho. Malawi.
Mali. Niger. Upper Volta. Rwanda. Somalia. Sudan, Tanzania. Chad. Uganda.
Central African Republic. Asia and Oceania. Afghanistan. Bangladesh.
Bhutan. Yemen Arab Republic. People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. Laos.
Maldchs. Nepal. western Samoa. Latin America. ﬂaiti.)

Deutaches Institut fuer Nlrtschaitsforschung [German Institute for
Economic Research! "Indebtedness of developing Countries: Case by Case
or Universal Solutions?" HOCNENBERICRT. No 8. 1976. Berlin. 1976.

For difficulty in defining indebtedness problems and for hitherto attempted
analytical forecasts. see Hans J. Petersen. "0n Early Recognition of
Critical Indebtedness Situations of Developing Countries." DIN
VIERTELJANRESNEFTE ZUR HIRTSGUAFTSPORSGNUNG [Quarterly Journal of Economic
Research] No 3. 1977 pp 180 ff.

UNCTAD. ”Selected Issues Relating to the Establishment of Common Norms
in Future Debt Reorganizations. Note by the UNGTAD Secretariat.“ TDIAC.2/9.
13 Oct 1977.

UNCTAD. "Report of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on External
Indebtedness of Developing Countries on its Second Session." TD/B/68S.
21 Dec 1977. Sections 43-h6; also Appendix III. "Position of the Experts
from the Socialist Countries of Group D."

SeVenteen countries and the Common Market belong to the DAC (Develop-eat
Assistance Committee). See OECD DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION. op cit.
Statistical Appendix. Table A 9 ff.

For classification of differentiated complexes of causes and development-
policy starting points. see OECD. DEBT PROBLEMS OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.
Paris. 1976.

For practice. up to now. see UNCTAD. "Present Institutional Arrangements
for Debt Renegotiation. Note by the UNCTAD Secretariat.“ TD/B/C3/Ac8/13.
26 Feb 1975.

On this. see Nans-Bernd Schsefer, "Gradual Abolition of Foreign Indebted-
ness in Developing Countries and the German Development Policy." Cuenther
Esters (Publ). "ORB-SUBD-POLITIK-UBBERLEGUNGEN ZU AKTUELLEN
NELTNIRSTSCNAPTLICMEN PROBLEMEN [North-South Policy--Thoughts on Actual
World Economic Problems] Bean. 1977. pp 80 ff.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
29.

30.
31.

32.

33.
36.

35.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For review of the intensity with which this principle is defended. see
Deutaches lnstitut fuer Hirtachaftsforschung. DIN. op cit.

c: world Bank, HORLD osvstoruasr ssrosr. 197a. op cit. pp 30 (E.

For development aid of OPEC countries. see OECD "Development-Cooperation.
1976." REVlEH. Paris. 1976. pp 99 ff.

UNCTAD. "The External Indebtedness of Developing Countries: A Background
Statistical Note. Note by the UNCTAD Secretariat." 10/3/695. 27 Feb 1978.
pp 8 ff.

Ibid.

UNCTAD. "Debt and Development Problems of Developing Countries. Resolution
Submitted by the President of the Trade and Development Board." TD/B/L
501. 3 March 1978.

A press release of the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation published
on 6 Oct 1978 comments on the issue: “The Federal Cabinet has decided
that development aid loans promised in the past years to the least
developed countries can. after examination of each individual case. be
converted into subsidies for the time they still have to run. if the
respective country requests it.... The regulation on procedure decided
on today applies to the group of the 30 very poor countries. as determined
by the United Nations. They are labeled as 'leest developed countries'
(LLDC) and they suffer under particularly severe structural development
problems.... The regulation will take effect at the earliest on 31 Dec
1978. It will apply to repayments and interest payments due on and after
this target date. The existing loans will not be universally converted:
each case will be carefully examined. Those least developed countries
that receive new aid from us can enjoy the benefits of our action. On
petition of the respective country. the conversion itself is arranged

for in a government agreement. On this basis are previously concluded
loan agreements appropriately altered by supplementary contracts. Pro-
visions about utilization of funds. project commitment certain conditions
and controls. are not touched." The Federal government points out further.
that with this remission of debts that supposedly amounts to a grand

total of more than 6 billion DH. it has abided by the March 1978 request
of the UNCTAD council; and it expresses its expectation that therefore,
apartfrom other countries which have already decided on similor measures.
the other donor countries "including donors which do not belong to the
circle of Western industrialized countries." will follow with equivalent
measures. It is explicitly emphasized that the lower revenues of the
Federal budget. caused by the remission of debts. will not lead to a
reduction of new development aid to be budgeted for the affected LLDC
countries; on the contrary. above average increases in the development
aid budget are planned for the next few years.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

36. UNCTAD. "Selected laauea Relating to the Establishment of Cannon Norma
in Future Debt Reorganisationa." op cit.

37. UNCTAD, "Present Institutional Arrange-ante for Debt Renegotiationa."
op cit pp 7 ff.

38. Dana J. Petersen. "an Early Recognition of critical Indebtedness
Situations of Developing Countriea," op cit. p 182 and Summary l. p 185.

COPYRIGDT: 1978 Verlag fuer Internationale Politik Gab". Donn

9011
080: 3103

12
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

FRANCE

CRARACTER 0F PSF'S MICHEL ROCARD VIEHED
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 8 Dec 78 pp 77. 113
[Article by Arthur Conte: "An Untouched Portrait of Michel Rocard"]

[Text] Politics is a hard and cruel business. Not without soae sadism.
chance plays a disproportionate role in it. In ozder to succeed. rather
than talent or genius. it is luck that one needs. Take Francois Hitterrand.
for exasple. One may well wonder whether he was not born under the sign of
misfortune and sischance. He may well wonder hiuself if he has not worked
for 20 years for nothing. pained by vain isaginingsl He will not even be
able to claia the credit -- highly illusory at the outset -- for having re-
invented socialiss. A necked ally. disavowed prophet. wounded soldier and
now a leader questioned by his best lieutenants. he may soon find himself
aith nothing but a shattered crystal ball in his hands. Perhaps. by virtue
of his suprese talent as a sagieian. he will still succeed in safeguarding
the theoretical unity of his party until the European elections in June --
elections that are going to provide him personally with an unexpected way
out. Barring a supreae blessing of chance. it is highly likely that not
only will he not be a candidate for the third time in the presidential
election because of his age and self-exhaustion -- the ease thing that
happened to Adlai Stevenson in the United States following his two defeats
in 1952 and 1956 -- but he will not be able to prevent his party. which got
too big too fast. free experiencing the most serious internal upheavals,
even the splits and quarrels that characterized it "before Epinsy." Re need
a Plutarch to tell the tale of such a drasatic spectacle. illustrated by his
star with an exception theatrical sense.

Hill Francois Hitterrand even know how -- or want -- to prepare for his
succession? The observer ia-ediately wants to take a closer look at how he
acts with the contenders. especially the leading one: Michel Rocard. to

better observe how Hichel Rocard hisaelf works.
And who is this Rocard after all?

I once called his ”Tintin" because of his jerky style. his candid reflec-
tions. his deceivingly artless look. his label as a defender of the innocent

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and his map of unruly hair. I would have done better to dub him "Lucky Luke"
if I had taken a better look at his protruding ears or his nervous mouth. or
if I had described him at n time when his dark eyes burn with anger or sad-
ness. his companions from Scouting days called him the ”erudite hamster."
"is enemies could not find a more cruel nickname than "Haldeck-Roquet."
Others labeled him the "pink squirrel.“ the “little sparrow." the "Arab
among the stubborn.“ and finally. "the fastest man in the socialist stable."
what all of these epithets have in common is the attempt to describe the
man's most apparent quality: his spontaneity. his quickness. You see a
bird perched on a branch: it sings beautifully. You stop. but the bird has
already flown to another branch. sings again. then tries out an oak rather
than an ash. still challenging you with his amused glance. That is Rocard.
Freshness is his first sign.

The second has to do with the zodiac: Virgo. He was born in late August
1930. a year when. in one of Andre Tardieu's cabinets. Aristide Briand.
well-established for years at the Quai d'Orsay. could still dream of making
France "the torch of nations.” when the last French Occupation soldier was
leaving the Rhineland and when Briand had a famous. vain memorandum sent

to the 26 European governments belonging to the League of Nations for the
construction of the European Union. Virgo is the sign of Ronsard. Alfred
Jerry. Goethe. Charles de Poucauld and...Saint-Just. It essentially points
to a nervous temperament. All the strength of those born under the sign is
in their intelligence. They are intelligent because they are curious.
curious because they are restless and because they abhor prolonged stops.
"Apart fros their emotional life. they easily become careful observers.
attentive analysts who let nothing escape their scrutiny of the facts."
Their greatest weakness is perfectionism. They are never satisfied with
others or themselves. Out of self-defense. their principal merit is their

love of culture and work. Our subject is faithful to the description of
the zodiac.

Michel Rocard’s third main sign is that he is a Protestant. He shares this
trait with Gaston Defferre. plus that of loving sailboats and the sea. Ac-
tually. he is basically quite austere. Very strict. Hhile he does not like
high mass and its organ music. he is always impeccably dressed with a neat
suit. well-chosen tie. a casual but confident elegance. He must have remem-
bered the advice of Paul Ramadier. who liked to tell young deputies: "You
do not make yourself look more like the people by being messy. At my public
meetings. with farmers or with miners. I have never taken off my coat."
Rocard certainly also followed the training of his father. a Polytechnical
School graduate. director of the Advanced Teacher Training School Labora-
tory and one of the creators of our atomic bomb. who taught Rocard respect
for proper style. He is so Protestant that for 15 years. he remained

a Boy Scout -- that is. a Calvinist Scout -- and. choosing a pseudonym

for his first articles. be selected ”Georges Servet." Georges being the
first name of his mother's brother and Servet being the name of a 16th cen-
tury doctor-theologian who was burned alive in Geneva under Calvin. This
would rather lead one to intransigence. which is the case. If one looks at
the face a little closer. the smile is charming and youthful. but it suddenly

lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

turns into a network of bitter wrinkles; it is a smile of sternness. His
voice is charming also. like a cello. but he speaks too rapidly. too volubly.
and suddenly there is a whole burst of fire: The cello one was admiring has
already turned into a machine gun.

The fourth sign marking Rocard is that he has character. he knows what he
wants. At the age of 17. he was studying political science even though his
father wanted him to attend the Polytechnical Institute. So what if Daddy
was to get mad, cut off his allowance and stop speaking to the rebel! Rocard
got a job as a miller-turner to pay his way through school and. having dis-
covered socialism through the friendship of a Trotskyite foreman. performed
brilliantly and entered the National School of Administration and then the
Finance Inspectorate. Nor was he to be taken for a page. when he was 39. there
was a presidential election for the successor to General de Gaulle. Georges
Pompidou's main opponent was Alain Poher. Prancois Hitterrand could not get
on the track; Pierre Hendes-France did not want to. but that was no obstacle!
The little Tintia became secretary general of the small PSU [Unified Socialist
Party]. a dissident faction of the Socialist Party. which put Gaston Defferre
up as a candidate. Rocard boldly and fearlessly declared himself to be a
candidate. without complexes or conceit. He was a young man who dared.

An amazed France discovered this tiny. almost unknown imp who had jumped out
of some magic box.

he won nearly a million votes. almost as many as Gaston Defferre.

Other signs: Rocard plays chess. like Napoleon's generals. "hen he skis.
he swoops down better than he does the slalom. When he speaks. he uses
concise language. makes a minimum number of syntactical errors. and then
suddenly. the eternal student. the native of Courbevoie. becomes capricious

and says: "Then bang! What did the kid say?" or "Bang! Right in Harchsis'
noseV'or"You know. Debre's not really a whole lot of fun!" or even "Politics

is a real bawdy house!"

His qualities: promptness. perception. a certain niceness. a great deal of
expertise. which caused him to be named finance inspector by Hichel Debra.
secretary general of the important National Auditing Commission by Valery
Giscard d'Bstaing and adviser by that other great strict Protestant. Maurice
Couve de Hurville. He is also undeniably sensitive.

“is weaknesses: excessive haste. which prevents him from remaining at a
sufficient distance to take the exact measure of an event and a decision;
raging anger that does a disservice to any statesman worthy of the name; the
growing heaviness that can come from a machine. the party remaining the old
party. just as slow. cumbersome and superstitious as always. still distrust-
ful of unorthodox talents. He is small. but he does not act small. He is
perhaps sectarian. but he is very human. He is a technocrst. but he is
capable of denouncing "bureaucratic appropriation." He knows all the ins and
outs of high finance. but he has remained a simple man. One can be sure that
an important role awaits him and that he is even capable of not letting him-
self be devoured in his own party. Above all. while he is a methodical

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

analyst. he is just as capable of synthesis. he is even undoubtedly one of
the few Preach politicians to have an overall view, to serVe a coherent
concept. hitterrand possesses the genius of the virtuoso. Above all. Record
thinks. Despite his jerky style. he confidently follows his persevering

and well-thought-eut convictions. He is a patient. strict. concentrating
chess player. while Hitterrand is rather a poker player. he can therefore
break through. as they say. and break through in high places.

It remains to be seen whether. beyond the in-fighting of the political jungle.

he will be able to pursue something higher: achieve the metamorphosis of
the old machines. impose the real problems of the future. tear away the old

masks. give up the vain fetishes of outdated doctrines. boldly build or help
to build the humanistic front of the men of good will which alone will bring

about justice. save basic freedoms and achieve the triumph of the "open
worlds" over the “closed worlds." and finally. go beyond narrow-minded
mediecrities to reach the potential of the universe. Ales! We are still
far from being able to tell whether our unruly-haired Tintin will truly be
able. even if he is gifted for all the gases of the forum. to escape the

shoals and reach the summit!
For our observers at least. it is a climb that has become extremely thrilling!

COPYRIGHT: 1978 par Cogedipresse SA

11.066
050: 3100

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mum nxsomsxou or 1979 ”I ma
mmnmnnmvepb

[Ax-um by Jun mun ~11» 1979 M M.» um. um in Panama
to Nunavut-1mm You ﬂood To hon“

[m] -x I» n ummahnm xuumuux-m :- sauna ma
hhm.ﬂhn mmumumntmnmnnum-
noun-muommum
.'MWWhIm,nu-mdutm.muht
mucmoqﬂom

z
E:
i
E

:5
“i
i;
ﬁi
a
E
E
i

a:

5:
5
:5
8
g;
FN
g?
a
ei
[i
«s
°a
3
g
E
E

I‘EE
E3
gs;
‘2
E;
E
3.

3

E
E
:1
E
E
35

E
a

i
8
F.
i

{one mu 1. I“. n 92.» M11101: m.’ o: 3.26
ensue pxdue. ml ow 9.0 2.9 M n 1975.
977 m 3.2 pm” 1| 1978. In “1:11.: u tho 1978

an new. of 19 pm. an M :- 413M nub:
“Itof‘howuoftho “Mr-1mm“ (umnllu‘n‘odnﬂ
). m- 1mm. 1. duo pump-u; a mm ”mm m-
nun-u 33.3155 mum m (up 17 pm“). 04: md tom I111 than
Mn equip-om. that 10 m lulu: In! drum”.

*2??? g

i

m M in $1100.91- u tho nua- mun—52.092 lumen tum-
1| the wry significant Ir 1mm. of 23.6 paint 1: 1979. m. 1mm.
I111 punt: 1mm. in Mu form nominees. III 139an 13

wmtwmmmmnummutnm
unupmmgnuo.

0 noun; 15.129 union tum for pom!“ guy-nu.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

II'I'Ie Pint All 10 M

lnecfsr es the lead em in concerned: 60 m Jo'e. 60 m 10 like}

95 All personnel on! P0... 350 mm. 22 Geselieo. 250 lone cergo trucks
OM 2350 tscticsl vehicles sill he ordered. all of which sill incresu the
nobility of the ground nnito.

m mm 5.000 Inn 5.56 rifles will he delivered to units [itersted in
acccnpenyiu brief].

lnsoferss the sirsreyis comer-ma. resenroh oaths ﬂamenco-mun
n53 mm .111 ccntim. Also, a Tron-n11: end 22 up» an. hsvs been
cadend. By 1900 orders for the ’1 sui the 200 series June: will he
ccnpleted. Ani finelly the 1) supplessntery section of the Cattle will he
stsrted elm with 56 of the duel 20a guns for the enti-nironft u-tilleu.

'me See: A "Neal Phn' in Pnpnnticn

Imcfer es the Revy is concerned. ignorim the 3108's. 9,000 tons of use

ship construction will begin in the shipysnis next you. In 1979 there sill
tm 0s unier contraction: 2 Sluts 3 uncles: stteck enhsrinee. 6 ccrvettes
(b mam-m» end 2 gunman}. 7 cahoots. 5 nine sveepsrs can 2
cilers, or 25 ships represent”: sore then 85,000 tons. Between 1980 end

1966 s totsl cf 17 new ships vill enter service.

I
Onthscthsrhsni. nodecisionhssbeenesdeeniscusillhsssdepriortc
1960 restrain Any new eirornft cnuiers due to the fact thnt
the sirornft thet vill he aborted is not yet been. The only mt its-
plnnsd ore for- the prcpuleicn cysts-s for the future corrien
cnse they will he nuclear poured.

Ilwuﬂmtoountiutheml.WeﬂMNWWIMiI
109 count ships end 26 support ships shioh will heve cspehilities for
ouperior to those of the pnesent fleet.

Pupsrisc for the htue
lotioe should nloc be given to efforts nuthorised for the email: of

WWrieenitherelense of initinlhndsfortheconstrncticncfe
new school in Icon for the lilitsry Kenlth Service.

 

immuuunumninmuuuwrmtmtuuqum
ﬁlth the All 10 m.

2 My ere inprvved Tucson's nhle to troncport lb tau. instant! of 8 ton
over s distence of 0.000 b on! cspshle cf\in~f1i¢ht refueling.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A!!! funny, tho coatimiu oftort put forth by tho niniotxy o! oofonoo to
mrutlumtm oillgo om Wumtummoootodtomnoh
on! dovolopoot hoo hool ooooidonhly inonoood. It in tolt thot on on thot

roilod to ma ooriouoly for tho futon-outing in olooo oollobontioa
vith oivilion numb ooatoro on! lobontorioo on! giviu ilpotuo to tho

dovolopont o! numh on! toohniool om toohnolociool imam-would ho
wry quickly loft hohind.

holoor homo still o Priority

m niniotox- oloo ”molds“ thot priority io otill hing civon to tho
not of molar “unto. M I" mm. on plonoodn

Onomnoomomooodiumooirtonomivoopoo. ltiootootiool
Ioopoathotlillbofidemoaoithonloill «stinky-mo of.
ototio-xoootor out». Thio tin-out rill quip tho lingo 2000 ohioh will
ho opontiouol in 1982 oo roll no tho um Suprltondoai'o.

'lho oooood mm involvoo o molar “MM thot will {in o oo- typo
or oiooilo hon oo tho "lofloxiblo'. Tho m niooilo will hovo mltiplo
mmomotutio-ohouporiortothoooofoumottypoow
rill ho noh Ion pmioo and hovo otxoocthonod dofolooo. 'lho ohip itoolf
will hon bottor aviationol oophilitioo but tho ooot incl-tut tutu! io
thot tho oiooilo tiring oyltoo oill ho «mum tho tiring will to non
up“ ond Ion dinot.

lot. Intoooivo raining

Opontin‘ mam (53.766 billion moon) on mm looo but oovor-
tholooo ot 11.72 pomt tho rioo io omblo to thot o! othorcmmolt
mum. no um.” ooditioa will ho W E1050 John to: njon rill
noon-m). thomtordnttooo Iillhoniood Minnow-oath
wining oo 1 July 1979) Ala: with opooiol min W. tho oioo o!
tho mm I111 ho mm (moo puitial mum 63 offioou,
150 ou-oo-iooinod «noon. 567 so“ no 30 ouilioxy (om)
um-unummrum1mmwm.

tho activitioo of our onioo will inonooo «1le in 1979. For tho
Monthiovillooonlooaoyootoutiootorollminootodlhioh
b9 doyo (oolpnd u 55 in 1970-111 u ammo u m musing
tho full oooploooat of o unit°o quip-oat on! nun-in.

mmmunuu-uwamum(musan1m).mo
immooooiooiniﬂooattotholwhtinndityioilportnt
fortniniu.Aotorthooiromitoillhoohlotolqbsomoomof
mun tioo, ooo’ondtobnﬂoo ial978. Ihiohoillooooc othorthiuo
o-uo ooobt piloto to nintoin thou-high opontioul nodioooo.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1h- uum :- w u um mm". name (on; into too and: «mi.
«thyme-cam“ fox-1979 IMohwnl Imhommdbym
minim.

It amen u ”no: QM. :- not content mu comm; a for apathetic-

or amnoumm. b“ mm- is counted to I continua lM pomvoriu
092m tonal | fixed god.

common. 1W1”? Raga-130 do. An...

7779
cso: 3100

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FP‘ANC E

um um 10 m mums-m you 1979 will nut m tint doiiuriu
tow-Mme: mmmmmiunkmhtnhiolu(m10o
h nip“. lhioh In doom-i on in ins All m
.uiipummmmnm
mdowuwnuumiianmndamnmmnmuv
it m1 m1». 1h. ll'n (M min-um
our nits for m ﬂan 20 yous. 'ﬂn
at Nation lunch we 0'» nautical
audition or an m 10 U. m which bu Ii: mob. It in uphibiou.
Mumm- tmntiumo(&0hor18motouhi)ui
in maid by c In out. In :01. is um. of u antitank women. And
vith a high mm. wlooiiy 105 I ounce {ix-in O honour om. mu
wanna by 3 til. it an I nu pneiu {in casual ”lu- utilising
nu: “hum. ruin-nu to:- night vision in tho tun» also um.
i% to cm. in light can“ with noon.“ manna-u. ‘18 9th m
mmtnmuuummtmtummwmmiu
which in 1m. Vohiohl on o :- mind” 1976: 20. 1977' 10. 1978 '0.
1979s 6om19ao-82.zzo.[m [m-mmmnzmnpu 7779

“5.56 ASSAULT m—Itm 11:1975 can cumin-urchin... mud
chunky.»«35.560uibrum1tmm1twmhin-Iiiom
mmm.n,m¢1mmm~m.AWOf
20.0000!ibriﬂuvoxoubndil1977,27.000in1978mb8.000in
i979. mmuuuumhoomomu. Winch.
mmror9s.ooo:unaaao.ooommmmm.m
doiivou mmwuuiumfint Locos-um” 131979. 1h-
Mudmnuultriﬂunmminihm
unmmrummzom).mnus
anaumum.mmnmquum~n mum:
wuumtu..mnumauumumm.ommm5.
in

‘6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unmoffmmuh).1tmfmnmwnm “500m.
unwoMrttmtmm'mi-‘pmrmwmu
cmmmgumumMmmmmn brunet
f13upto100.w.rorauuunkmmuuupnuo not
Win fin to “mum of 100 noun. It 1. 0.1.0 ”on with
.w.[m [mmumnnmvmﬂm

5

33°
5:5.

080: 3100

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

comm ow WRLNIDB IMPLICATIONS OF U.S.-PRC TIES
Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 17 Dec 78 pp 1-2 LD
[Cementary by Frans Barbeiri: "The Triangle Is Closed”]

[Text] Carter and llua took everyone by surprise when they announced

the "historic event" in relations between Rashington and Peking. At
least, Carter was not expected to decide on such a step before meeting
with Brezhnev. But it alaost always happens in top-level politics that
when the most surprising and least expected events occur. they suddenly
appear nost logical and nost nonal. The sane applies here: Indeed one
wonders why it did not all happen before. The normalization of Chinese-
Anerican relations at last closes the triangle of the najor powers, which
has already been outlined for acne tine in the world constellation. The
strict American-Soviet bipolarisa was waning since it could no longer
eabrace all the fernents in an increasingly diversified world.

The triangle which has now been forned does not put an end to the inter-
play: It rather opens it up, spreading it right across the world chess-
bosrd. The two powers representing the two worlds are joined by another
born against the background of the emerging Third World. The picture
of the globe is being changed. Even the picture of Asia is being
altered. America seeasd to be excluded from the continent and to have
withdrawn and entrenched itself on the nearby islands; China did not
manage to fill the gap left by the Aaericans and indeed seemed more and
lore surrounded by Soviet penetration, first into Mongolia and then
India. Indochina, Afghanistan and now probably also Iran; the agreement
with Japan opened up a breach in the encirclenent, which was so inor-
tant that it proapted serious Soviet remstrations in Tokyo.

The bond between Peking and Hashington must not be regarded solely as a
breach. It is a runabout which enables China to roaa politically across
the entire world. Anerica is not setting foot on the continent on the
old strategic terns, but with a easterly stroke of the still disjointed
and contradictory Carter policy it is gaining much more: It is creating
the space needed to strengthen China, a natural Asian force keen to
counter Soviet expansion on the yellow continent.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hua Kuo-geng emphasized two points in the agreenent. First: "Re have
normalized relations with the United States. just as relations between
Moscow and Hashington have been norsaiised." Second. "The new relations
will make a contribution to the struggle against snail and large-scale
hegenonisn." Carter also stressed two characteristic aspects: "The
United States wishes to take part in the current thrust for industrial
aodsrnization which should lead China to adopt the role of an advanced
and strong nation in the industrial field and all other fields." "1 do
not believe that this develop-ant could have even the slightest reper-
cussion on U.8.-USSR negotiations."

Together. Carter's and nua's points indicate that China is entering fully
onto the world scene without being challenged any longer as a pressure
tool in the hands of either of the two superpowers in the bipolar trial
of strength. At least. Anerica is ceasing to regard it in this way.
insofar as China's role as an independent power is useful to it. The
advantage to the Soviet Union is undoubtedly snalier. but if China
Ianages to establish itself as a fully fledged power Moscow will be left
with no alternative but to accept it and treat it as such. One cannot
see how it could. without a rash violent coup. again reduce China to a
giant slave of the bipolerisn on which hoacow's entire strategy still
hinges (and this delay now highlights sore than ever the Brezhnev diplo-
nacy's critical lack of creativity and incapacity for renewal).

however. in view of the latest "historic event." it is difficult to estab-
lish who is the winner and who the loser. except if one naintains that
everyone wins. One can only hazard a forecast of how the forces will

nova in the field. China will take the opportunity to spread politically
and econoeicaily across the world in the quest for its four sodernira-
tions and in an attempt to establish itself as the Third-World anti-
power. America. involving China in the great interplay. will no longer

be teapted to return to the bipolar rules and "hotline" diplomacy.

while hue has managed to deprive Moscow of its position as the exclusive
representative of the coanunist world. Carter is to an extent rendering

the separation between the two great col-unist capitals definitive. The
save is so important that Washington has even accepted the consequences

of the lack of confidence and disappoint-eat which will certainly spread
fros Formosa right across the island fringe of the continent.

what is more difficult to predict. undoubtedly. is lreahnev's attitude
to the historic event. which involves him against his will. Hill he
accept the triangle or will he try to break it. by challenging both
America and China? This is the biggest unknown factor at the Ionent.
0n various sides it is also considered the most dangerous.

0n the one hand it is feared that Moscow night easrge benefited by sons
allied governaents' loss of confidence in America-principally in Asia.
0n the other hand-aainly in Europe--it is objected that the challenge

25
FOR OPPICIAL USS ONLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the USSR is perhaps too great and that the strengthening of Chins is
not worth s clash with Moscow. There night also he a danger if the
Kremlin does not nensgs to adapt itself to the situation. Nevertheless.
it would have been equally dangerous to keep e colossus with a billion
inhehitents isolated. segregating it iron the rest of the world for the
seke of e preosrlous hipolsrisn.

For Burops the innovation liss not only in the need to adapt to a new
trisngulsr. rather thsn hipolsr. policy: it is core a question of enter-
ing as soon as possible into the new dislectic in order to trensfors the
triangle into a rectangle. with s united Kurope as the fourth world
power. In China it could only find on sliy.

COPYRIGHT! 1973 Bdltr. LA STAHPA 8.p.A.

030: 3105

25
FOR OFFICIAL 058 ONE?
fbl OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PORIUGAL

GOVERNMENT ATTEHPT TO DEAL HIT“ AZOREAN REBELS FAILS
Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLCEMBINE in German 25 Nov 73 p 6

[Text] C.C. Lisbon, 2h November. The separstiam on the Azores islands
belonging to Portugal is coming to a head: according to a report of the
Lisbon paper JORNAL have in early October. an attempt at unilateral declara-
tion of independence on the island group failed: now a menber of the mili-
tary revolutionary council. Major Canto e Castro is said to have been in
the Azores and to have tried to nove the feuding wings of the independence
movement FLA (Prente de Libertacso dos Acores) to join together. JORRAL
NOVO is close to the conservative social denocrata. who possess an absolute
majority in the Asores and Nadeira and comprise the regional government.
Concerning the unusual events the Revolutionary Council in Lisbon has now
declared that this body is not involved in contacts with the FLA; Major
Canto e Castro is oaid to have undertaken "individual actions." which he
must ”explain himself."

Minister President Hots Punto spoke for 2 hours with the head of government
of the autonomous region of the Azores. Hots Amsral. in Lisbon. The ep-
pointment of the president of the regional parliament of the Azores. hon-
jardino. as ninister at the initiative of President Banes is welcomed by
Note Amaral. but nevertheless regarded as an “attempt at colonialization"
by the PLA. it is said that in the PLA a radical wing under FLA chief
Almeida. supported by a Cernan resident for some years in the Asores. is
fueding with a moderate majority group: Alseida and the German urge im~
mediate independence of the island group. it is said. and are fighting
against Amarsl as a "traitor,” while the moderate majority group maintains
contact with the regional head of government and is striving with note
Amarel mainly for the realization of regional autonomy. and only later
wants to expand this step gradually to full independence. Due to insuffi-
cient support by the majority group. which has support among the businessmen
of the islands. and due also to the intervention of police and the army
ordered by the regional government. the declaration of independence planned
by Alneida on one of the Azores islands is said to have bogged down in early
October: until new there has been silence in Lisbon about it. October is
said to have seemed favorable to Almeida for his action. because at that
time the Nobre ds Costa had been overthrown in Lisbon and the new government
not yet appointed.

26
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

The Iajor from the revolutionary council is naid now to hava called upon

the moderate opponenta of Alneida and the German, for aetiVea aa yet un-
clear. not to permit a coaplete break between the Eactiona. The Geraan ie
aeid to be on the right politically. es la alao a large part of the PLA:

at the aaue tine Coununiata are laid to link their intereata with thoae of
the FLA. weapona are acid to be present among the PLA. the Coanuniat. and
other left radical nreupu in the Azores. Activiata of the FLA are said

have been trained in South Yemen. The American airbaae Lajee. important for
the aouthern North Atlantic. ia in the Atorea. The head of government of
the autonoloua region of Madeira. Jardin. recently said that the aeparatiata
active on Madeira (PIAHA) have been supported by the Soviet Union. becauae
they aerved the atrategic clue of Hoacov.

COPYRIGRT: r.n.z. Gob", Frankfurt am Main 1978

6108
080: 3103

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED KINGDOM

BRITISH PRESS REACTS TO U.S. INITIATIVE ON PRC

Editorial Report

[Editorial Report Lb] All major British newspapers give extensive cover-

age to the v.3. decision to establish full diplomatic relations with the

PRC and to end the defense treaty with Taiwan. In early reaction on 17 Decem-
ber London's Tﬂs OBSERVER reports on the frontpage that "A political storm
broke in Hashington yesterday" over the decision, with angry republicans

and some conservative democrats saying that "by abandoning a long-standing
ally, the Carter administration would seriously weaken America's standing in
the world."

Also on the 17th. a DAILY TBLEGRAPN editorial on page 18 sees the decision
as the "Natural almost inevitable climax to a process set in motion more
than seven years ago." Speaking of Taiwan's fate. the editorial says "For
the world at large, not excluding America's NATO partners, it is a grim re-
minder that no alliance can last forever and that, ultimately, there is no
substitute for maximum self-reliance to ensure one's own security." The
editorial adds that "This is not to condemn America's decision in those
broader perspectives against which Hashington has seen it."

THE FINANCIAL TIMES on 18 December carries several signed articles on the
subject, including two articles by its u.s. editor Jureh Martin. Hr Hartin
feels the decision was "logical" and adds in his frontpage story that the
administration "Felt that the old 'Pree China Lobby' has lost its once
vaunted steam." he adds: "It is believed that those in the Senate who op-
pose Mr Carter over China were bound equally to oppose him over a Strategic
Arms Limitation Agreement with the Soviet Union.

"Some people here remain nervous about the Soviet response but the adminis-
tration appears convinced that President Brezhnev wants a second SALT Treaty
as much as President Carter does...."

Hore provincial interests are expressed on page 26 of THE FINANCIAL TIHBS

18 December issue. An article by Michael Cassell says: "The move to estab-
liah normal relations between the 0.8. and china will be greeted with mixed
feelings by British industry. Although it should provide further impetus to
China's policy of increasing the scale of her trade with the Hestern world
generally, the full participation of the Americans will inevitably increase
competition for Chinese business."

28
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On page l6. the financial page, the DAILY TBLEGRAPN on 18 December also
considers the financial aspects in a report from its New York correspondent
James Srodes. which says: "Both the American government and United States
business leaders are serving notice that they want to get into the race to
develop China in a big way."

The DAILY TBLBGRAPN's defense correspondent Claire Nollingworth writes on
page four of the 18 December issue: "The strategic scene in the Far East

and the western Pacific, where Soviet military power has increased since the
and of the Vietnam war. will benefit from the establishment of diplomatic
relations between Hashington and Peking. For the Chinese leaders. Chairman
Nua Kuo-feng. is anxious the region should be tranquil in order to enable the

People' a Republic to become a great industrialised nation by the turn of the
century."

The DAILY TELEGRAPN on 18 December also frontpages a report by its Moscow
correspondent Richard Deeston which says that "The new diplomatic embrace
between Washington and Peking has sent a cold shiver down the spine of the
Kremlin leadership. and aroused fears of worse to come, which were voiced
yesterday by the-important Soviet Armed Forces paper RED STAR."

THE GUARDIAN in English on 18 December carries a frontpage article by Nelle
Pick which says the decision "has taken the Soviet Union by surprise" and
"it is already reported as having an unfortunate effect on the SALT nego-
tiations and the summit between Mr Brezhnev and President Garter." He Pick
notes the Soviet attempts to rally Warsaw Pact countries in support of in-
creased defense budgets which it has justified "in terms of the growing
closeness between China and imperialism."

Also in THE GUARDIAN of 18 December, John Gittings writes a feature article
on the decision on page 15. After examining the impact the decision will
have in other Asian countries. he concludes: "If there ever is to be any
prospect of some sort of rapprochement between China and the Soviet Union.
this weekend‘s agreement will...have brought it nearer."

Bditorially, the London Press on 18 December views different aspects of the
decision on U.s.-PRG relations. THE GUARDIAN editorial on page 14 hails

the "cannon sense and courage" of President Carter's decision. The FINANCIAL
TIMES in its editorial on page 10 sees the principal task of u.s. foreign
policy to be maintaining "A global balance of power." It adds that "the
establishment of proper relations with China could contribute to that end,
but not if it is seen as an anti-Soviet alliance..."

The DAILY TELEGRAPH editorial on page 12 appreciates the timing of the decision
and concludes: "The choice lies between-helping China to survive the Russian
threat or leaving her-isolated and disgruntled-eithsr to succumb or volun-
tarily to resume the former alliance with Russia." The Communist MORNING STAR
in its frontpage editorial hopes that "China's leaders will resist the bland-
ishments of the White house, and see that China's future lies in close al-
liance with the other socialist countries and progressive forces throughout

the world." 29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'DAILY TBLBGRAPH'
London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 18 Dec p 12 Lb
[Editorial: "The China Connection"]

[Text] Credit for good timing must go to President Carter and Chairman hue,
for their momentous agreement--except. of course, in the eyes of those who

are outraged at the dumping of Formosa end worried about the possible develop-
ment of a tacit alliance with a communist giant. Otherwise. reasonable and
moderate men, accepting ecumenicity in diplomacy, legitimately concerned about
the world balance of power and rightly eager for mutually beneficient economic
expansion. will find that these factors preponderate. in most cases overwhel-
mingly, aver misgivings. "when 'tis done, then 'twere well it were done
quick y.

There was no chance of China ever stomaching continued diplomatic relations
between America and Formosa or the defence treaty between them. The agree-
ment to disagree over the continued sale of American arms to Formosa was as
far as Peking could be expected to go. On the other hand-the post-Mao govern-
ment of Chairman Bus and Vice-Premier Teng r.i exceeded all expectations in
the speed and effectiveness with'which it has switched to a healthy pragmatism
about the Heat. The remarkable "Democracy Hall" phenomenon in Peking shows
that China is in motion, and that the new regime may be prepared to allow it
some freedom to move.

There were also external considerations. Russia. expanding her influence and
projecting her military power, is getting into the habit of threatening the
west: "Don't develop the neutron wespon...don't sell arms to china...or else!"
If America had withheld full diplomatic relations from china much longer, she
would have look afraid to offend. The agreement with China at the very moment
when the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty seems at last on the verge of con-
clusion adds point to Mr Carter's assertion of his freedom of action. His

move is also timely in view of Russia's apparent intention to use Own-unist
Vietnam as a proxy against china by aggression against China's protege Cambodia.

So far as the balance of power.is concerned, the Soviet Armed Forces' paper
RED STAR has been quick to see a supposed danger that China (20 years behind
Russia and rapidly fallimgfartherbehind). Japan (with exiguous "self-defense"
forces) and Mr Carter's America will gang up to cause trouble. America has
declared that she will not sell arms to China. But the supply of technology
will doubtless now speed up and with fewer questions asked.- Britain should
drop her unjustified inhibitions about the sale of harriers and other items.
And France will see a big green light. Meanwhile China's nuclear deterrent-
still decades behind Russia's-will be gathering weight and versatility.

By the end of the century, China will indeed be in a position to threw her
massive weight about if so inclined. But this is a risk that the Host must
take. The choice lies between helping China to survive the Russian threat
or leaving her-~isolated and disgruntled-oeither to succumb or voluntarily

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY

to resume the former alliance with Russia. The Heat, through neglect and
loss of will, are in the sans boat. The greatest danger now is that the
Heat will find yet another excuse for sitting back-eby leaving it all to
China.

'THE GUARDIAR'
London THE GUARDIAN in English 18 Dec 78 p 15 Lb
[Editarialx "The Peking Special Relationship"]

[Text] President Carter's decision to case to civilised terms with China

and to denote Taiwan from its historically privileged position is an act

of cannon sense and courage canbined. China is too big to be ignored. whaté
ever you think of conmunism. It is cannon sense to recognise the national
identity and government of 900 million people through diplomatic relations.
It is cannon sense also to inform the leaders of 250 million other people

in the Soviet Union about what you are doing and why and when. For in his
efforts to de-iaalate China President Carter seams to have worked hard. with
SALT 2 in the balance. to avoid upsetting America's relations with the Soviet
Union. Both countries and nations are too big and too proud (and their pride
in their achievements deserves understanding) to be ignored. Somehow we must
all learn to live together on this planet end President Carter has ventured
a long stride in the direction of civilisation and aaity.

he deserves nuch credit also for risking the wrath of the China lobby which

was yesterday in full and predictable cry. The China lobby. which new neans
the Taiwan lobby. became convinced by Pearl 5. Buck and others than the only
true and enduring representative of the Chinese people was the late Generalissiao
Chiang Kai-shah. A whole generation of US citizens believe, even now, that
Chisng Kai-shah was God and that Mao Tee-tang was the Devil. President Carter
has now decided. in the interests of cannon sense. to invite the China lobby

to do to him its domestic political worst. when Senator Barry Goldwater con-
dennsthe President of the United States ("One of the most cowardly acts ever
performed by a president") the president is probably right. But no one should
underestiaate the strength of the lobby or the president's courage. In prac-
tice the China lobby has been a powerful force from l9hl, when it became clear,
at least to the soldiers, that Chiang Rai-shek was using American aid at least
as freely to defeat Mao Tse-tung as he was using it to defeat the Japanese.

Mrs Barbara Tuchnan. the historian of Sino-Anericsn relations, has written

that after 1961. "the flow of aid became an investment and the need to protect
the investment increased the flow until it became a silver cord attaching
America to the Nationalist Government. There is no nore entangling alliance
than aid to indigent friends."

bhat rensins true, in spite of yesterday's historionics in Taipeh, is that

the friends--no longer indigent--are still there. President Carter has now
given up the pretence (which. to his credit. was nearly abandoned by Presi-
dent Nixon) that the Taiwan government is the real and chosen govern-eat of
China. But there is no reason why the people of the United States should
stop being friendly to the peaple of Taiwan or of caning to their aid in tines

of trouble. 31
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And there is another sense and direction in which the rendering of normal
relations between China and the United States can be beneficial. If Presi-
dent Carter can remain on speaking terms with both China and the Soviet Union
he can at least hope to be accepted as a mediator in the manifold and murky
quarrels which divide two of the world's largest and most important nations.
Perhaps he could persuade them to behave and talk more calmly (the Chinese

in particular) about navigation on the remote rivers of Asia. Perhaps he
could even persuade them to discourage the war-by-proxy which they are fight-
ing on the borders of Cambodia and Vietnam.

COPYRIGHT: GUARDIAN NBHSPAPBRS LIMITED. December 18. 1978

"run mmcm nurs'
London ms nmcm. mass in English 18 Dec 73 p 10 in
(Editorial: “The Horld as a Hhole"]

[Text] All this year China has been moving outwards. Chinese leaders have
visited Yugoslavia and Romania-in Soviet eyes the'dissident states of Eastern
Europe--as well as South East Asia. There have also been high level visits

to the Rest and there is talk of more to come. At no stage have the contacts
been purely political; As often as'not what the Chinese have been seeking.
especially in the Heat, has been commercial and technological know-how.

Reverberstions

In that sense, it is not surprising that Peking should have wished to accel-
erate the normalisation of its relations with Hashington. If it is access

to technology that the Chinese want, the United States after all is as good
a place to go as any, not least in the key fields of agriculture, mining and
energy. It is also true that the leadership had already come to terms with
the other advanced industrial democracies. The signing of the treaty with
Japan earlier this year was the final evidence of that. It would indeed have
been abnormal if Sino-U.S. relations had remained on a lower level than those
between Chinaandother western countries.

It should not be forgotten either that although the announcement of the Sine-
American agreement may have seemed to come out of the blue, there had in fact
been a steady diplomatic build-up over a period of years. The breakthrough
came in 1972 when President Nixon visited China. The joint communique then
left open a number of questions-particularly that of the future of Taiwan--
but it left no doubt of the mutual desire between Washington and Peking to
put their relations on a normal footing.

The question of Taiwan remains open to this day and is perhaps insoluble in

the short-term. At the same time, however, there is nothing in the behaviour
of the Chinese leadership to suggest that Taiwan will be taken by force. Nor
would it be in the Chinese interest to attempt any such thing. All the signs

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are that China is looking outwards to a wider world, and there is no obvious
reason why it should not come to live with Taiwan in the way that it has come
to live with Hong Kong. These relations. too. can be normalized over tine.

Yet. however foreseeable and however much it can be explained as merely a
logical development of past diplomacy. the establishment of full diplomatic
ties between China and the 0.8. is bound to have reverberations around the
world. In particular, they will be felt in Moscow where the Soviet leader—
ship is believed to be on the brink of signing a second Strategic Arne Lini-
ration Agreement with the Americans. They will also be felt in Indochina
where a bitter war is still going on with the Chinese and the Russians in
many ways acting as proxies. Indeed tensions are likely to increase in any
part of the world where Peking and Moscow confront each other, however in-
directly. The Russians believe. rightly or wrongly. that they are being
hemed in. The Chinese are breaking out. that is hardly a recipe for sta-
bility.

There is thus a special responsibility on the 0.5. In the strict sense of
the world. the 0.3. is the world's only superpower. The Soviet Union may
have achieved strategic parity, but is way behind economically and in most
areas of technology. China is a greet power which is now understandably
seeking to play a larger role in the world. It should be encouraged to do
so. but it is not a superpower at all and it would be dangerous if it came
to entertain delusions of grandeur. Both economically and politically there
have been signs recently that it has been taking on too much. too fast. 0.8.
diplomacy would be wise if it could seek to temper these ambitions.

Strategic

The principal task of ".8. foreign policy must be to maintain a global bal-
ance of power. The establishment of proper relations with China could con-
tribute to that end. but not if it is seen as an anti-Soviet alliance-«as the
Chinese are tending to present it. In other words. there is a difference
between normelisation--which is to be welcomed. and rapprochement--which
could be misunderstood. It is necessary now for the Americans to continue
their negotiations with the Russians and to explain to then what they are
doing with China. Equally, the Chinese need to be told not to let their

own relations with the Russians get completely out of hand. An anti-soviet
confrontation would benefit no-one. not even the Rest. It is a difficult
world in which to maintain stability, but the latest develop-eats are at
least a reminder of the necessity to think-in strategic terms--of the world
as a whole.

COPYRIGBT: THE FINANCIAL TIMES LTD, 1978

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ONPICIAL USE ONLY

UK Communist Pnpcr

London THE MORNING STAR in English 18 Dec 78 p 1 Ln
[Editorials "China's Rightful Place")

[Text] Few things in the Iodsrn world were more absurd than the fact that
Hashington could not bring itself to recognise the People's Republic of China.

Especially since the recognition of that other lusty and development non-
existent land, the one.

If he had left it until next year President Carter would have been three
decades go by before the 0.8. accepted one of the great inevitable necessi-
ties of history.

The way he has acted and the way in which NATO powers are falling over then-
selves in the race to sell area to China prompts one or two questions.

COCON. the NATO Counittee currently reviewing the lift of goods that the
Cold Nar Pact's eenbers cannot sell to China and the other socialist states.
has adjourned for the Christmas break.

Perhaps when it resumes, 0.8. ares will be on the list of potential sales as
well as Harrier jump jets.

laperialists like nothing lore than to see the two his powers of the social-
ist casp at loggerheads.

TN! MORNING STAR hopes that China's-leaders will resist the blandishnents of
the white house. and see that China's future lies in close alliance with the
other socialist countries and progressive forces throughout the world.

080: 3120
END

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY