APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOI-OOOBOROOO“ 000.001 2-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050012-2

FOR UrFlCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8441
7 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
(FOUO 5/79)

_ U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050012-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrer‘ng and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS CWERNIUC WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSLATIONS ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
(9000 5/79)

CONTENTS
HORLDHIDE AFFAIRS

Ratification of Enviromentnl Treaty on Baltic Diacu
(Claus Arndt; EUROPA ARCHIV. 10 Mar 79) .....

ASIA
JAPAN

Acceptable Caduiun Level for Human Body Determined
(111: JAPAN nuts. 8 Apr 79)

Seabed Pollution Causes Red Tide
(HAINICHI DAILY "ENS, 19 Apr 1?) ............

USSR
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NORLWIDE AFFAIRS

RATIPICATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL TREATY ON BALTIC DISCUSSED
Bonn EUROPA ARCHIV in Ger-en 10 Mar 79 pp 151-156

[Article by Claus Arndt: ”Problems in Ratification of Helsinki Accord for
Environsental Protection of Baltic Sea Area."]

[Text] Claus Arndt. LLD. Hadmrg, retired Senat director.
was a mesber of the fifth. sixth and seventh Genan
Bundestag. The article appears eimltaneoualy in
WIDBN, the journal of the Foreign Policy Society.

Copenhagen .

Environmental protection on and in the Baltic Sea has always been one of
the special problems in Europe, because this relatively small inland sea
is exclusively surrounded by highly industrialized populations with high
emissions of pollutants and because it is sisultaneously one of the moat
travelled naritine routes in the world. It is also quite evident that the
danger of a "loss" of the Baltic Sea, the fact that it .could become a
biologically dead sea. can only be successfully met if all the neighbors
work together to find a solution to the problems. Effective environmental
protection is often connected with high expenditures. particularly for
industry. Thus. for reasons of international cmetition alone. there is
hardly a country that will subject its plants to greater restrictions and
costs than would be done by the neighboring country. Consequently. it is
no surprise that no effective agree-ents could come about as long as the
relationship between the two German Baltic Sea states was not settled.

it was not until the conclusion of the inner-German basic treaty that it
became possible for all Baltic Sea neighbors to jointly negotiate a con-
vention on protection of the aaritine environment of the Baltic Sea area.
On 22 March 1975. following several years of negotiations. an appropriate
agreement was signed in helsinki. All of the nations bordering on the
Baltic Sea participated. 'lhe agree-eat provides that all partners in the
agreement was signed in Helsinki. All of the nations bordering on the
Baltic Sea participated. The agreement provides that all partners in the
agreesent will individually or jointly use all appropriate legal. administra-
tive or other assures to prevent and reduce the pollution of the Baltic

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sea. thereby protecting and inn-owing the maritime environment in this area.
It is to be done primarily by issuing bans or restrictions on the eldssion
of certain pollutants and through appropriate monitorial measures.

Transfer of Authority Prom Nation States to Community

The agreement goes into effect after it has been signed by all seven
Baltic Sea nations. To date. however. only Sweden, Finland. Demark and
the CDR have submitted ratification documents with the Finnish government,
which was assigned deposition powers. A particular comlication has arisen
in the interim between conclusion (the signing) of the agreement and the
current situation for those two Baltic Sea nations who are also members

of the European Couunity: whereas at the time of the negotiations and

the signing of the agreement. Denmark and the Federal Republic of Germany
still possessed full sovereignty and with it the authority to conclude
international legal agreements regarding measures for environmental protec-
tion on national and international waters. the European Conunities [EC] have
since then, beginning in 1975. acquired a number of responsibilities which
have effected the transfer of this authority from the national domain of
the member nations to the (humanities as such.

Parts of the helsinki agreement regarding protection of the maritime en-
vironment of the Baltic Sea area are affected by this shift of responsibi-
lities. For instance. it regulates the ban on or restriction of emissions
within its jurisdiction concerning the flow of pollutants which originate
on land as well as those produced by ships and other seafaring vessels.
Hith regard to- water pollution ca-sed by ships, the EC have to date no
jurisdiction; as a consequence. the meaber nations can still regulate this
matter according to their: own (national) directives and. accordingly, enter
into international co-itments. A different matter. however. is the situa-
tion regarding the emission of pollutants originating on land. In this
respect. the European Conunities have assumd the appropriate authority
by issuing directives which regulate this matter for all member nations
uniformly and legally. As a matter of fact, the European Court of Justice
has ruled that medaer nations have no authority, individually or jointly.
to enter in any way into co-itments with third nations that affect the norms
in those areas in which the European Commities have issued directives in
order to realize a joint policy prescribed by the Treaties of Rome (parti-
cularly the EEC Treaty). After guidelines were issued as early as 1975 on
the procurement of quality drinking water and on swimming waters in 1976

a guideline was announced that is directed against the pollution of couunity
ulcers through the introduction of certain materials. In substance, these
materials correspond largely to the list of those materials specified in
the supplement to the helsinki agreement, the introduction of which into '
the Baltic Sea is prohibited or at least subject to restrictions. European
Com-unity guidelines. however. are legal norms which. in accordance with
the meaning of the decision by the European Court of Justice, thus cause a
loss of authority by the member nations because of the transfer of this
authority to the co-lnities.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Denmark and the Federal Republic of Germany. however. cannot even ratify
the Helsinki agreement in such a way as to enter into co—itments limited
to that authority which has not yet been ceded to the BC: The text of

the agreement explicitly forbids reservations of any kind. This means that
it can only be adopted or rejected altogether. Consequently. a ratifica-
tion that is restricted to the area of emission of pollutants by the mari-
time industry is not possible.

Probleas of BC Recognition by can

he a result, the simplest solution to this dilemna would be that by vir-
tue of the fact that certain responsibilities were transferred to the
European Communities. the latter would now assume the commitments which
the member nations. Denmark and the Federal Republic of Germany. were
willing to enter into by signing the agreement; in other words. the simplest
solution would be for the ac to ratify the agreement. acting for Danish
and Heat German interests in the Baltic Sea. This alternative is not
available, however, because the three Baltic Sea nations that are mewers
of the Eastern Coancil for Economic Mutual Assistance (GEM) (the Soviet
Union. Poland and the GDR) do not recognise the ac as a legal entity
under international law with which they would be willing to conclude
corresponding agreements on the environmental protection of the Baltic
Sea area.1 To be sure. the time has passed when East European states
governed by cosuuniat regimes not only did not recognize the European
communities but simply ignored them. The econoaic reality represented
in the meantime by the European Conunitiesnss well as the fact that the
People's Republic of China, a particular rival of the Soviet Union in
world politics. is making a strong effort to develop good and close re-
lations with the EG—has induced OSHA members and can itself to seek

the first tentative contacts with the BC. This has led to meetings in
Brussels and Hoscow between Nikolai Faddeyev, general secretary of CW,
and Wilhelm Haferkamp. vice president of the EC Commission in charge of
foreign relations. Yet. in this matter, as was the case with regard to
the use of fishing grounds and fishing rights, even today there is still
a repeated tendency among cm members to speak at least with the [EC]
Council or the respective presidial power, avoiding if at all possible,
contacts with suuranational organs or the Ec--above all, with the Commission
as such. With regard to the Helsinki agreement. another factor must be
taken into consideration: East European nations are also insisting that
the issue is the ratification of an agreement which was negotiated with
Denmark and the Federal Republic of Germany, not with the EC. With all
this. one must seems that the three cm mabers that border on the Baltic
Sea would prefer the helsinki agreement to fail rather than accept entry
by the EC in addition to or instead of Denmark and the Federal Republic
of Germany. In addition. intonation is available according to which at
least the Soviet Union and Poland seem to have little interest in an
early implementation of the agreement. ‘l'heir interest has decreased

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

considerably because of fiscal and other financial considerations. because
implementation of the agreement would be connected with very high additional
expenditures. particularly for these two Baltic Sea nations based on their
current emission practices.

To be sure. it is very difficult to verify this information. and it has

not been confirmed.2 Considering the incalculable ecological dangers in
the Baltic Sea area. however. it seems hardly defensible to accept the risk
of failure for the Helsinki agreement. Nevertheless. right now the situa-
tion clearly indicates that if Denmark and the Federal.Republic of Germany
do not ratify the agreement on a national basis. it will mean the failure
of the agreement. Consequently. these two nations are faced with the alter-
native of either exposing the Baltic Sea to incalculable damage if their
position prevents implementation of the agreement. or of violating their
cosmitments under the Treaties of Rome through national ratification.
because for the reasons mentioned above this ratification is no longer
within their national authority.

National Ratification By Denmark and the Federal Republic of Germany

In view of this situation. both countries decided to ratify the helsinki
agreennt on a national basis. Denmark has already done so; however, when
the ratification documents were deposited in helsinki. a statement was
submitted according to which it will completer fulfill its commitments
according to the treaty, but that inclusion of the EC would also mean the
certain realisation of this convention.

The Federal Republic of Germany explained to the BC Omission that it
considered the Baltic Sea in serious ecological danger, and consequently

it felt that a national ratification of the agreement was necessary. At

the same time it presented a note to the Cos-ission on 28 February 1977,
indicating its explicit acceptance of the interest and authority of the EC
in the realm of environmental protection in this area. In addition. the

FRG Government pointed out that already in the past it had strongly ad-
vocated admittance of the Be as an observer to the interim cossaission formed
for the period preceding implementation of the agreement. Finally, the

FRG Government proposes that the Federal Republic of Germany ratify the
agreement on a national basis. however, at the same time it gives assurances
that it will do everything to make possible the entry of the BC; until that
time it will proceed in the interim comaission and during the later period
of implementation of the agreement with the EC Commission in such a way

the latter's interests will always be preserved. On this basis. the FRO
Government submitted to the legislative bodies of the Federal Republic of
Germany the ratification law for the agreement in Helsinki. In the memoran-
dum on the agreement, the governant points to the legal problems that have
arisen because of the partial transfer to the BC of authority for conclusion
of the agreement. It calls attention to the fact that the Council of

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ministers authorized the ac emission to begin negotiations for entry.
and it states that the Federal Republic of Germany will also submit a
statement when depositing the ratification document pointing to the partial
authority of the BC and its desire for entry. The text of such a declara-

tion goes beyond that which Denmark indicated when submitting its ratifi-
cation to the partners in the agreement.

The ac reacted to the transfer of authority over environmental protection

of the Baltic Sea area by having the Council of Ministers authorise the

EC Conission on 21 June 1977 to start negotiations with the partners in

the Helsinki agreement. The goal was the entry of the BC into this agree-
ment. At the request of the 3C Commission. the Finnish Government, as

the depository power for the agreement. officially informed its partners

in August 1977 with the BC Council of Ministers had authorized the Commission
to begin negotiations about the entry of the Bc into the agreement. Finally.
on 6 April 1978, a note verbal was delivered by Denmark. which at that

tine was the officiating preaidial power of the Bc. It was addressed to

all the partners in the Helsinki agreement. informing them that the EC
Co-ission was willing to present sore detailed explanations on four
specially listed sets of questions. In addition. the Cos-lesion would be
available for exploratory discussions concerning masuras of accomoda-

tion that are required for BC participation in the agreement. There was.
however, no noticeable response to all these approaches from the three
partners to the agreement who are members of am.

Solidarity in Legal Conflicts

As a consequence, this situation demands that the interest of the BC—but
also of those two countries that are primarily affected. Denmark and the
Federal Republic of Ger-anyube directed at preventing any irreparable

harm that could arise for the European Comanmities out of BC la: resulting
from the decision to ratify the helsinki agreement in spite of opposing
obstacles. Above all. this procedure must not become a precedent for

other cases. Particularly. the impression must be avoided that one or a
number of states or any organ of the Col-unity could at will. for politi-
cal reasons, violate the treaty or fail to oppose partners who are violet-
ing the treaty for political or other expedient reasons, or even give their
approval: The Rome Treaties are not at the disposal of EC organs or members
except when following formal procedures for change (amendment). Much would
be gained. however. if all of the 80 participants would attempt to accomplish
the unquestionable goal (the protection of the Baltic Sea area from environ-
mental dangers) which, at the same time, unquestionably corresponds also

to the goals of the Treaties of Rome. The attempt must be made to reach
these goals through means that are based on the spirit of European solidarity.
This will serve to lessen and eliminate the effect of a precedent for the
future for cases in which the prevailing legal situation and the goal

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

puruucd and sought by all cannot be reconciled in spite of good will. In
internal cases. particularly those governed by constitutional law. such a
conflict between politics (in this particular case this also means ex-
pediency) and law must be decided in favor of the latter. although. as

is well-known. excellent philosophical arguments can be presented for the
two sentences: "Fiat justitin. pereat mundus" on one hand and "Su-Iua
Jus. summs injuria." .Nevertheless. the opinion is at least defensible
that in spite of its supranational character and in conjunction with the
Rome Treaties-which are not a European constitution--internal EC law

is not yet so far removed from international law that the same stmdarda
should already be applied as are used for internal laws. Rather. it seems
admissible to permit a somewhat greater flexibility in this case. Na-
turally, it cannot be a license to ignore the Rome Treaties and Co-aunity
law in the future as disagreeable obstacles whenever they seem to be in-
appropriate or whenever alleged or real circumstances seem to demand it.

A criterion for the permissible solution of such conflicts should be whether
the problem is being solved by the participants in a spirit that an intent
and goal is in agreement with the Rome Treaties, and which is characterized
by solidarity and loyalty in form and in procedure and with regard to inter-
relations among umber states and Commity organs. The fact that such

an attitude. based on solidarity and mutual loyalty. can prevail in spite
of all legal reservations-«even against the Rome Treaties under certain
circumstances-4s demonstrated by certain trends in legal decisions by

the European Court of Justice.3

If these criteria are applied to the attitude of the two Baltic Sea
countries belonging to the BC, nobody can argue the point that the treat-
ment of the question concerning ratification of the Helsinki agreement pre-
served oolidarity and loyalty toward the Commnity: Denmark not only used
its 6-month period as president of the BC Council of Ministers to ask the
three Eastern Baltic Sea nations. by presenting the above-nationad note,
to begin entry negotiations between the partners to the helsinki agreement
and the BC. In addition. it regularly informed the Co-uunity through
Massador Riberholdt and through other means about the progress of its
national ratification procedure. Finally. when it deposited its ratifi-
cation document. it also submitted a statemnt that has already been
mentioned above. The same applies to the Federal Republic of Germany.

The above-mentioned note of 28 February 1977 is explicit proof in this
regard. Others, of equal validity. are the constrnt and intensive attempts
by the PRC Government to procure for the BC an opportunity to actively
participate in the realization of the Helsinki agreement and, finally,

to make possible formal participation by the European Cos-unities.

6
POR- OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POO‘NOTBS

1. As far as can be ascertained. Polish technical literature has to date
not dealt with the helsinki agreesent from the viewpoint of the inves-
tigation as presented here. regarding the ratification by Den-ark and
the Federal Republic of Genany. The discussion is limited to ques-
tions of international law. (cf. for emple. Janucz Giles, "legal Pro-
blens of the Protection of the Baltic Environment," in POLISH HESTBRN
AFFAIRS, Vol 18. No 2. 1977, p 33) if (333). and Ludwik Gelberg,
"Probleny Pravne Hepolpracy Panstvo Baltyckich." Harsaw, 1976. p 81 ff)
or to questions concerning environ-ental protection.

2. To be sure. lyszard Frelek. foreign policy secretary of the Central
Comittee of the Polish United Workers Party and chair-an of the Foreign
Policy Cosmittee of the Sejn. indicated to the editor on 3 September
1976 that environmental protection of the Baltic Sea is a particu-
larly pressing foreign policy problem for Poland. and that 15 years
had already been lost because of the unsolved relationship between the
Federal Republic of Germany and the COR.

3. Verdict of the Buropean Court of Justice of 31 March 1971 regarding case
22/70 (EUROPARBCHT 1971, p 242). the so-called ABTR decision.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Verlag fuer Internationale Politik Gian, Bonn

899 l
050: 5000

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
!
minim body Incl: at end» am
mMIWbﬂm "mammalian:
mm to the MM "MM" mum ”It
mm Murder. mm "mun" disease at
The Japan Association 0! wammmm
Mlkﬂwmhuhundluﬂm dcmhthem
lacuna Communion Emu-v:
with m M I mwmmm
mmumuamtosoo “mammal":
mwmmm(mmcm mm. mm
ammo-om. WWWIMMM
In addition. Mau- lnu ymculoludunku
N mamwm lnﬂaeﬂmpaﬂolmean-
University m that a W Amy's ux-
minimum at an ppm W W bean In W". the

madman o! M W Into mm
”WNW“!!! w mm m can.
lumolndnhm. mm no m a) M a- 3

Many bellmlm mummam
"Um-Nu" M“... and ”um
W I min MMIM
mmmumm "(mm
moduli-mam disease. WWW
«them sun-magma
Am man: have 60m.
mmmw

{JDI'YK 1(2II‘I':
""40:

5000

Tm.- Japan Times 1979

FOR IWFHIIM. IISH (h‘v'iJ'

8

Enatcnea well. ﬂung
mm mm; to an

mummm
mummy”;

Newly-Inn's calculations
BEADED POLHII'ION CAUSE RED TIDE

Tokyo MINICHI DAILY NW3 in English 19 Apr 79 p 12

£ng

COI'IRIGIH':

Seabed poliattoa was
responsible tor a aerioua out-
break of the awaited red tide.
an abnormal muttiplieatioa at
mutton. in the Hartma Nada
Sea Iaat manner. It was an-
nmced by theSeto lnlandSea
Pollution lamination Can-
mlttee.

The commlttee has been
trytnctodeteminethewneot
the red tide tor the past amen
years. and a team mpoaed at
university Instructor: and
studentahtheliauaiareahad
been checking aea water at a
haaeeatahtlshedlaﬂamCity.
Tokuhllna In Maury last

year.

mud-monthhngredtide.
which broke out at late June.
peatedoaJutynandNata
timewhanadenaityoioveru
norm plankton per cum
eaitimeter oi aea water was
imlnumpiucollectedm
centratilarimaNadaahdinan
area hear an Industrial mule:
outhemthahoreltvaamted

matumewlthahlthw-
eelitageatwtriehtetementa

nan been discovered in the
umeateattnpmimyear.
Furtherchacksdiacioaedthat
verticalctmtainthavater
had «need nutrients In the
aeahedsudnetariaetothatop

itstlndhspatameetiuotthe
Japan Societyto
heheidin'l‘okymhaseonehided
that the remain: at ptaaktau
which teed on nutrient: In it»
dnatrtal vaataa torln
Wyatticleaotm
whieharelaterurriedhytidal
alt-rem and depoaited on the
aeahedotcaatralliarhaﬂada.

Mtinicht Daily News, 1979
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 061.3!61'637
CONFERENCE DISCUSSI-z PWION OF AIR BASIN

"cecal! KHIHICHESKAYA ”DREW? in Russian No 8. Aug 78 p 7?

[Article by 0.». Voyevcdohenkca ”Concerning Ilprovesent of sum fic
Research Developaente in the Field of Protection of the Air Basin“

LText] Held in the city of Cherkasey on 22-22“ February 1978 an a
sector coordinstion conference on "The State of Scientific Research
Developnents in the Ministry of the cheaical Industry for Protecting

the Air Basin «3th Industrial Discharges of Cheaical Enterprises
luring 1976-197? and Rays to Isprcve Then." The conference was conducted
by the Adsinietration for Science and Technology of the Ministry of the
Chelical Itdustry and the cum: depart-ent of NIITBkhia [Scientific

Research Institute of Technical and Boononic Research of the Chesicsl
Industry].

Participating in the work of the conference were leaders and associates

of the leading scientific research and planning an! design organisations
of the sector. ‘

The conference was opened with an introductory speech by the head of
the division of the intersectorial coordination coaaission for nature
conservation LJ‘. hokin.

A survey report on the topic sublitted to the conference was presented
by 0.5. Gorbenko-Gerssnov. The attention of the conference participants
was directed to the high responsibility in the utter of protection of
the environsent given to the workers of scientific research institutes.
specialised laboratories. end other research and planning and desiyr
organization.

Every year significant allocations are set aside for protecting nature
against industrial contssinants. At the present tine scientific research
oranisatione of the sector are writing on non topics with a sun of .200

aillion rubles. 100 topics are devoted to protecting the air basin in
some Were chenical enterprise are located.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB 0"“

inst
The ma orit of the problena regarding protection of the air basin aga

the discharges of chemical enterprises has been included in the plans t
of projects of sector institutes of the hinistzy of the Chemical Indus ry
for 1978-1979. and there are already scientific and technical solutions
for a number of problem.

Duri the riod of 1976-1W? scientific research organisations of the
sect: attained definite successes in this important latter. Thus.

ith the participation of the Dneprodsershinsk branch of the CIA?
State Scientific Rearoh and Desi Institute of the Nitrogen Industry
and Products of Organic Synthesis at five enterprises of the nitrogen
industry set up and assiailated were 31 installations for selective
catalytic refining of waste gases from the production of nitric acid
under a pressure of 3.5-6 kgf/csz. The industrial production of the
ARK-10 catalyst was organised in the Severodonetsk "Mot" Production
Association with a capacity of 120 tons per year.

Colle use at IsnllIIgiprokhin [possibly. Leningrad s ientific Research
Instiﬁte for Planning Cheaical Industry Enterprises . KazNIIgipro—
foster chesibly. Kazan Scienti c Research Institute for Planning
Phosphorus Industry Enterprises . and also Kazlh‘l'l [Kazan Imtitute of
Cheaical Technology] have developed highly intensive scrubbers with a
lovable attachment. and also a technology of manufacturing a spherical
attachsent that is stable in corrosive ledia. to be used for refining
the gas discharges of phosphorus production.

The state scientific research institute: for industrial and sanitary
scrubbing of gases have been issued a technological regulation for
planning installations for reloving carbon disulfide from the ventilation

air of viscose production with a productivity of 720.00 cubic asters of
gas per hour.

The Scientific Research Institute of Basic Chemistry has worked out
initial data for planning industrial and uperiaental-industrial
schemes and apparatus for reaoving dust and auonia fro- gases.

According to developments by KNIIKhP [expansion unknown] and the
experimental design office for automation (00A). the Keserovo branch

of CIAP issued a plan for a systes of gas control of the air of chesical
enterprises in the city of Xeserovo. and brand OAK-l gas-analyzing
cosplexes were developed and mufactursd.

Along with this it was noted in the report by 8.0. Corbenko-Geraanov
that there are a nuaber of shortcoaings in the conduct of scientific

research and experisental design projects in the field of protection of
the air basin fro- contaaination by tar-m discharges. In particular.

still not oveacons are cases of parallel research inure work of indi-
vidual sector imtitutes. Despite the existence of ready technical

solution on certain topics. their repeated developsent is included in
the research plan. There are frequent cases of unfounded inflation

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of financing for research projects. In sose scientific research insti-
tutec the oosplction of a nusber of topics does not end with incorpora-
tion of the novelty into production.

Often guilty of this'are the cheaical enterprises which unwarrantedly
hold back the construction of experimntal installations for practical
realisation of scientific research.

Still inadequate are the coordination of scientific research an! the
exchange of inforsation on the development and introduction of effectiVe
sethode of removing harem discharges froa the air aaong the scientific
research institutes and enterprises of the sector.

Speaking at the conference with papers and reports on scientific research
develop-ents ing protection of the air basin were: the deputy direc-
tor of RIIOgas Scientific Research Institute of Industrial and Sanitary
Purification of Cases] v.1. Lasarev. the deputy director of the Daershinek
bunch of NIItgas VJI. Kisarov and the deputy director of the Zapcrosh‘yn
branch of mOgas .t.I. Denisov— ‘On the Status and Prospects of
Carrying out the Projects Conducted RIIOgas for the Chesical Industry”;
the chief of the laboratory of NIUIP Scientific Research Institute

of Fertilisers an! Insectomngioides NJ. Xraynsw-Mn Developsents in
the Field of Purifying Gas Discharges in th Production of hineral Ferti-
lizers”; head of the laboratory of UNIlhIR Ural Scientific Research
Chesical Institute] v.3. Vedernikcv-n-"On the BffsctiVensss chust
Removal System at Plants for Chrose Cospounde"; the chief of the labora-
tory of IemIIgiprokhis 0.8. Kovalev--"On Purifying Gas Discharges in

the Production of Phosphorus and its Inoranic Derivatives": repre-
sentative of the sector laboratory of Kaslh'fl V.V. 8akharov--"On
Developsents and Studies of Highly Intensive crubbsrs Uith a Hovable
Attach-ant“: chief of division of NIOlhIH Scientific Research Insti-
tute of Basic Cheaistry C.A. ’Ikach--"0n Work in the Field of Protecting
the Air Basin - Contasination by Enterprises in the Soda Industry";
head of the RIO scientific research organization] of the Dneprodzenhinsk
CIAP C.A. Skvortsow-‘bn Developaent of Catalytic and Sorption Methods
of Resoving Nitrogen Oxides free it to Cases"; head of the sector labora-
tory of the Kal branch of mm All-Union Scientific Research Insti-
tute of Halogens EN. Dratchuk-"On Developsent of Rethcds of Removing
Dust and Aggressive Gases froa Discharges into the Atsosphere for ﬁlterb
prises of he Potassiup Industry". senior scientific associate of
WIPIsex-a All-Union Scientific Research and Plannings Institute for the
Sulmr Industry] m. Drilimkiyn'On tn. Process of Porntion of
Mrogen Sulfide in Bed Raters of the YaVorovskiy Rining and Chenical
Plant”; chief designer of. the om MR. Drobis--"On the Sector Program

of Project: for Creating Devices and System for knitcring the Air in
1977-1978": chief of the laboratory of mm}! v.0. Dreksono-‘On Develop-
lsnt of a Gas Mauser for Low Ccncentratiom of sum Dioxide in
Bthaust Gases and an Anton-tic Gas Analyser cf Fluorine-Containing Cases”:
head of a laboratory of KNIIKhP Yu.V. below-"On the Creation and

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Assimilation of on Auto-sited System for Control of Air Pollution

(Asmz. svtontioirovannays sisten Izontrolya samuneniya vosdukha)

in the oi y of Keserovo": senior scientific associate of the Pers' branch
of omm State Institute of Applied Che-istz'y] m. know-"0n the

Use of Lou-Tesperature Plans for Utilisatio;. hf Byprcduo iron Gas
Discharges“: head of s sector of the "Plasipoiiler" oupo expansion unlmoun]
V.P. Titow-"On Neutralizing and Recovering Gas Discharges in large-
‘I'onnage Production Facilities for Polystyrene and Polyviwl Ac tats
Plastics". head of a division of VIIIVproyekt expansion unknown

1.6. Shisko--"On the Directions of Scientific Research in the Field of
Neutralization of Gas Discharges of uotion Facilities for Viscose
Fibers”: chief of a sector of MISV All-Union Scientific Research
Institute for Synthetic Fibers] m. Kotolovoyv-“On the Sanitary and
Technical Aspects of Protection of the Air Basin and t Technology of
Synthetic Fibers”: chief of a laboratory of cm W 8 to Research

end Planning Institute of the Paint and Varnish Industry A.V. Hakotkinu
“0n Purifying Gas Discharges During Production of Alkyd Resins". head

of a laborstcry of the Chelyabinsk branch of NIPIDINS («pension unknown]
D.A. Gerasinov-m‘bn Imovenent of the Gas Scrubbing Systes Following

the Calcination Pumaces of Titaniua Dioxide Produ ion”: head of a
sector of lasNIItekhfotoproyekt [expansion unknown v.11. Lebanov-n-“On the
Probles of Protecting the Air Basin in the Chemical Photompw Industry":
head of s laboratory of VNIIiodobron [All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of the Iodine ens Bro-ins Industry] m. Shenker--"On the
Present Status and Prospects of Protection of the Air Basin at Enterprises
of the All-Union Soyuziodoba'on Association”; and senior scientific asso'
ciste of the sector laboratory of the KusPI [Kubssskiy Pole/technical
Institute] 6.8. 8tolvarenko--"0n ﬂew hethods of Resoving Acid Inpuritiee
fro. Bthaust Gases.”

‘lhe conference passed resolutions oiled at nirther isprovesent in scien-
tific research. at its effective introduction at enterprises of the
hinistry of the Chelical Industry. and more extensive utilisation of the
experience of studies of individual scientific research institutes by
other scientific research institutes. laboratories and oranizations.

10908
030: 5000 END

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY