APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOI-OOOBOROOO“ 00040041 -‘I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Jphs L/9405

18 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 17/79)

ll S.J()ﬂ41'PUBlJCJ§]1CﬂNS RESEJKRCJJ SER\N(IE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040041-1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fro. foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
motion was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliteratod are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGlT MUS AND REGUIATIONS GWERNING WHERSllIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0? THIS WILICATIOR 3! RESTRICTED MUFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

am L/ocos
19 April. 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(rouo 17/79)

CONTENTS . PAGE

ASIA
AUSTRALIA

Australis Called 'Vitsl Link' in world Drug Trade
(1113 SME‘! MORNIN am. 3 Her 79) .................... l

Rationel Party in Victoria Takes nerd Line on Drugs
(m “mm. 7m, 79) 0....OOOOOOOOOOOOOIDOOOO0.0.... z

ﬂstionel Approach to Antidrug l'ight Urged
.(m “8mm. lmt 79) .0.0..s...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 3

Australian Government Cmsiders Tougher Antidrug Measures
(Various eources. 9 Mar 79) S

New Regulatiau Described. by Tony Walker
Hore Details Given. by Andrew Kruger
Bugging Provisions Supported, Editorial
Freezing of Assets Condemed, Editorial

Drug Omission ‘rold Air Surveillance To Begin
(m wk!“ “‘10. 7a.: 79) O00....OODOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOO. 1°

Perth Supra-e Court Pronounces Sentences on Drugs Charges
(In! REST AUSTRALIAN. 7 Mar 79).... ll

ﬂarihnans Crop Growers Sentenced in Perth District Court
(m HIST AUSTRALIAN. 7 m! 79) eeeeaeoseeeeoeosee-CCOOOIC 1:

Perth Court Renew Bail on For-er Airline Steward
(m "EST AUSTRALIAN, 20 Feb 79) ......................... l3

Queensland‘s Record heroin Raul Pound at Brisbeoe Airport
(“‘8 COURIER HAIL. 3}“! 79) eeeeossooeeeeessseeeeeeoeeses 1‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

con-mars (Continued) Page

Drugs Defendsnt Bsnned Pron Coechin; School Children
(m "351‘ AUSTRALIA". 7 Mr 79) eesseeeoessoeoosoessoo... 15

Briefs
Quoonslsnd University Reseerch 16
BUM
Briefs
Reroin Seizure et Lochio 17
MALAYSIA
Briefs
Heleysien-‘l’hei Cooperetion 18
PAKISTAI!
ﬂeslth Minister on Stricter Heeeures to Control Drugs
(“in sun. 20".: 79) OOIOOOIOOICOOOOOIOIO0.0.00.00.00.00. 19
Brief 3
Narcotics Seized in Diedyen 20
Chores, ﬂeshish Seized 20
PHILIPPINES
Brief s
$500,000 Drug Seizure 21
‘I'IIAILAIUD

Austrelisn Drug Defendent Deplores Conditions in Thei nu
(me 6002!!!! HAIL. 27 Feb 79). 22

Briefs
'Brovn Suser' Arreet 23
Austrelien Arrested 23
LATIR AMERICA
comm

Extent of Narcotics Industry in Colo-bis Discussed
(Juergen Petschuli, Perry Kretz: STERN, 22 Her 79) 26

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(KNVPKNTR (Continued)

MEXICO

PANAMA

Drug War ﬂeavy Burden for Army
(ml upmma. 19 hr 79) AO0I.IOOOOOOIOOOIO'OOOOCOOOIOO

Druge. Treffickere Seized in Magdalena
(Ulilo Acevedo Silva: BL ESPECIADOI. 21 Her 79) .........

Cocaine, Marihuane. Boliviene Seized
(Ansel “:3; “TIM. 21“.: 79) .OOOO6OOQOOOOOOOOOOO

fretticker Arreete: 6A In A Heek
(a slam. 19 mt 79) D00....OOOOCIIOOOOOOOOIOCOQOCOOOOI.

Briefe
Standarde for Drug Teete

Ar-y Seizee Traffickar Aircraft
(ﬁaieel Nadine Cruz:IICILSIOI. 18 Peb 79) ...............

Harihuana Treffickere in Gun nettle Hith Police
(EMA. 6m: 79) OOO'OOOQOICOOOOOD'QCOOCICCCQOOI.OUO

Traffickere Becepe Pro- Prieon. Soldiere. Guerde Inplicated
(LA V02 DE LA PRONTERA, 1‘. 15 Mar 79) ..................

Three Flee Tijuana Penitentiary
So1diere. Guarde. Innate Involved

Truckload of Harihuana. Cocaine Confieceted
(EL DIARIO DB NUBVO LARIDO. 17 Her 79) ..................

Herihuena, Poppy Pielde Destroyed
(Gonzalo Gutierrez L.; EXCILSIOR. 18 Peb 79) ............

Briefe
aeroin Proceeeing Laboratory
Herihuene Seized in Chiepee
Aircraft with Harihuana Pound
officiale View Harihuana Burning

Driefa
Drug Incineration
Hethequelone Seizure

‘C"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

31

33

35

36

38

39

b0

62

‘6

b7

68
‘8
A9
‘9

SS
ton omcm. use our!

OONTFNTS (Continued)

URUGUAY

Denger of Obscure Hedicetione Pointed Out
(“1t0r1.13um. 21 Pcb 79) OOICOOIOOQOQOIOOOOOOOO.

NEAR EAST AND IORIU AFRICA

ALGERIA

Briefs
Four Iteliene Sentenced

SUR-SAHARAN AFRICA

MAURITIUS

lncreesed Use of Drugs Alleged
(J.Ck 3181.11; 1.! PW, 2 Mar 79) eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

HISTIRN EUROPE

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

ITALY

Government Report Gives Flguree on Drug Use
(DER TAGBSSFIFGEL. 18 Her 79) ...........................

Increesed Violence in Drug Scene Reported
(DER SPIEGFL, 12 Her 79) ................................

Beroin king in West Berlin Broken Up
(N803 ZUERCRRR ZBITUNG, 3 Her 79) .......................

neroin Seized, Five Arrested in Rueseelshein
(FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU. 16 Feb 79) ......................

Six Antidrug Fropoesls Unveiled in Hilen
(IL GIORNALB NUOVO, 6 Feb 79) ...........................

Jeiled Drug Addicte Leek Hedicel Attention But Not Drugs
(Giencerlo Angeloni; L’UNITA. 23 Feb 79) ................

Drugs Concealed in Fostcerde. Hollow Shoe Reels
(L'UNITA, 23 Feb 79) ....................................

- a -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pegs

51

53

SA

56

57

62

63

66

70
[OR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)
“‘11!ng

Editorial Attache Meterdu Policy on Druge
(Mitoﬁll; NRC WELSBLAD. 17 Kll‘ 79) ooeeeeeeeeeeoeeee

Three Chine-e Arrested. Departed for aeroin Trafficking
(NRC “balsam, “KAI: 79) eeeoneoeoeeeeeeeeeoeeeeovoeee

Foreign Orgenized Crime Gen; Involved in Druge Affeir
(Leif Dnhliu; WINS mm. 25 Jen 79) ................

Court liende Down Record Drugs Sentence
(Leif Dehlin; moms mm, 17 Feb 79) ................

SWITZERLAND

Denier Sentenced to Seven Years in Prieon
("m zonal“ 231m. 17 VOID 79) ooeeeeeeeeeooeeooeoeeo

- e -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

71

73

75

77
050:

5300
{‘8

WI
um
9:

am
Nu.
:‘
01 mm! mama: “I: an I!
aim yo

WWO N "W Imam

In up.

.10"): mm out to Nun DUNN

4039"?“qu

m MJMA '91).“

VIII Imuan
bum ' 01 mum a mud Nu.

Imp mm max oi ' ‘ ‘
mama do; mum
mumuu 10 now: «I

'm

Dmmmmum

momma
Mum"

m [FWD It
.umdaqq.

m. ‘IO
«M ml m and mutant ru- 3|
WWI no.
woman: an“ an n mum
"mu-n ﬂux: “21%

90' mutation! ”in!
”P 0! W" 9| ’N'ﬂu‘

new man nu. an:

In «an ”up pun

In“! W on mm mm mu,
.m “l. mu... ml.

cm
don
‘-u~
NATIONAL APPROACR To mmnuc nom- usczn
Canberra ms AUSTRALIAN in English 1 Mar 79 p 3

[Text] The NS“ Government has approached the Federal Government
to set up a Joint police task force involving all States to
fight drug trafficking.

The NS" Premier. Mr Wren. said in Parliament yesterday he had
written to the Prime Minister. Mr Fraser. to urge a ”national
approach to fight the drug menace."

Ir "ran said he had also discussed the task force with the royal
commissioner in the NSW drug inquiry. Mr Justice Woodward.

The Premier was replying to a question in State Parliament on
what the Government was doing to fight organised crime. put by
the Independent MP for South Coast. Mr John ﬂatten.

The task force would involve State and Commonwealth police and
officers of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics. assisted by solici-
tors and other key figures.

manure crime mum acme "V WM 3“ he dﬂn't think
an“ MM"... and "m Into time was much doubt that the
natlenal :1qu mm menu or Mn! Government m
cleser relationship: nu. Ceru- '15“ lo the proves-L
wealth law enforcement I 1 V“ N mm 1m.
was.“ mwnn sald. I‘m with ur June:

1 m mam... that Woodward on hid-710W
greedy Wutbn‘ aw {f‘n'ﬁufom amen. Ir

tween the mm W IN .. '
sun. police mm and um 1 PM now am and on

than have been . number “l «mums would have mit-

netalde om uens mvolvm tad arrangements to be an.
bﬂh the Cannonwulth and “w“ ‘mmﬂ ““9 Gmmmt

and the Pedant Government
euu sum 1m “"0 WI More 1 made public the ram
tremckuar winch hm mm. mm whtch are be! r wu-
ln_the asptdxmlmot cruntnals. Mr Wren slid neurotic not
An “. hoe talk for“ normally have made these con-
apereach In adopted M m" «sullen; men: but It had
mm part at In: rm In "w m mum m't the 0mm-
.‘2..$L"‘:’:..€".:‘....3°5."€§5 """ "‘ “°‘ W" ““"“‘
arm and Jim at alum: mutocemmanwm'.
Mart New and others.”
E. 443: silk 888.
:3- 5: - stéﬁ
8285. 39:... co sop-q .o
cuss—Sq. .3323: 28 a...
a: 265: 0:39..

3:633. (I :3 2-: 3a
5558. 8 25:3. 88..
3:28 28 2.55.

..> 3:33: £523 83.
558 .- 92 5 53:3 58:.
2 33-35 5.3... I. 88.

J .3 :38 5-. v 2585'
855:5 2 a:- 33-88:
Bacon-38:3 33.335
5.538 2. .5356:— 5.
iuag.ﬂ.gou§aon v.33.
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CONSIDERS TOUGHER ANTIDRUG MEASURES
New Regulationo Described
Canberro THE AUSTRALIAN in English 9 liar 79 p 1

[Article by Tony Renter]
[Excerpts]

CANBERRA. — The ederel Govern-
ment is eeelting the power to lteeze
the emu of convicted drug tremol-
on.

The freeze would continue while
civil onion wee token lot the recovery
Materiel yoouoltothemeorned

y.

Action to retrieve the money end
only the ireeze would be tolten under
e new section oi the Custom Act.

Th. Minister (or iiuslneoo end Con-
outoer Mlolro. Mr. rite sold eoterde
the {teen wet desi Hi to eel tint
oophistieoted nieth oi limousine oi
the proﬁts 0! illoool drug troll-clung.

Themlemioporrolosetol
tough new mutation: aimed ot euro-
l the drug trade. _

her matures ennntmoea tn Porlie-
utettt est - included:

0 to into moment (or theintportp
etion oi 'eommhl" queottttes oi
dru :

out!" resuiotiono governing body
notches: ,

O Norootlu agents will he given new
prover! to use electronic eeteedroopln;
m:

e A new oileneo o! oonspirecy.

Mr. Pile oexerlhed the new "Ru"-
tloos oo o “tough low enforcement
noeouto".

”The drug tredo is hooked In on
oooctuoulouo one o totolly ltttutorol
loohlon.“ Mr. File said

“To ﬁght thlt trade. end llht It
within o democratic lumen and
with?! the rule'réiulow. the Govern-
nten noede so powm: power:
that are not commonly «corded low
onloreootont.“

Neurotic: agents oooltloo to only
phone tops will hove to follow the
tome procedures or ASlo ooerotlvee.

This brim the use ol theoo devioeo
by the norootles bureau under the com .
ml or the Attorney-Genera.

Mr. Ptie ooid the me o! listening
dovnero would he directed apimt the
«Poison o! the drug trade.

'Until now. the backroom name of
the involvement of the organisers he!
mode invettlpttion, end «dueoueotly

t in the court. virtuoli MIN
m" he told. y

'l‘heoo oraonieerr hove hitherto been
ouhoiontiolly untouched by the low. The
Government believes that by «Mel
use at o power to nthotise listening
devices. invootigetors will he oolo to
brook down the well currently pro-
noun; this loner eitr-io.‘
Sydney THE SYDNEY HORNING ﬂERALD in English 9 lat 79 D 1
[Article by Andrew Kruger]

[Text] canberra." Peo le convicted of trafficking in large
quantities of drugs wil face a mandatory sentence of life in-
prisonrgent under new drug laws introduced in Parliament

yesto ay.

Trafficking in smaller quantities will carry a minus penalty
of 3100.000. or 25 years in prison. or both.

The tough measures are part of a legal ckage giving Custoas
and A510 new powers to ntercept comun cations and conduct se-
cret surveillance.

They begin a fresh Government drive to iaprove national security
:nd to Lil-ac): down the people who organise and profit from the
rug tr e.

The new measures will also an wer the federal Court of Australia

to order such people to pay f nes equal to the profit they made
from illegal trafficking in drugs.

Under changes to the Customs Act. the Conﬂuent will be able to

ask courts to freeze the assets of people on aajor drug charges.
until proceedings are completed.

no Mam {or Daabcu M at. he. “an. a...
:94 Cowl.“ Aﬂeimuxt :4, “at“ “5%- dvis; seen M
ile.told' Eat-cancel y

bebelievedtheinuoduaioeel 0f can" “a (be new GM
such «monetary names “but sadly. by comparison. Ion. Me W vap-
bdeotbeeememmdehea chamecdm _ . eunbe (she-nu
“mm“: me sophisticated bmiec‘enm: ' 3.2:“ ode-ca Web:

‘ a

hmHtemhm mist...» the bee! pubic legal advice. evaluable m of «up.
Wmlwddi ar— museum“ summons-cm
mndmmuwa- muemkmm swan-genus.
-°‘WM°‘W¢08 Whammy”. Wee-mucous!
“Mb «och and shares. m melammeaeubo
'lntheputyeaaaug negotiable lemma—in Italy-«IMmme
«macaw...» mmmmmm quotes-swan.“-
edneecyeeepodeimoived “modem" ebb wade: cam dug
tummymndzgsn 31 main. :ha mm ‘3 Im a .
m" "‘ "° W” WWW “was”... “WWW“;
' ‘ ' the first of-
n-commerCial drug quantitiea are inVOlvod.
:235: 2:: trafficking will carry a penalty of $100,000 or 25

years imprisonment. or both.

For trafficking in cannabis. the fine will be $h.000 or 10 yeere'
imprisonment. or both.

d ral Bureau of Narcotics smash the highly organ-
Igeseggughgiggsewhich operate in Australia. the Government has

t’ store to its staff and has in raved substanti-
:gg;dt§: :nggmégt and communications network t uses.

Boost for ASIO ‘

Among the poeetlul new
nut-on: tweet-ct ottteen tull
hate «tll he the euthmty to
the. whim to t mmttetiel
natnnt. ltstentne deuce, (0!
electronic On'IWltIrpin‘ end
the euthontv lo tntetetot
telephone enntremtient end
out" teleeotnntttp'teetinnt
, 'l’hete new mete nete-ttiee
eeentt thue nth ASIO agent.

Chance to the A90 Mt.
ﬂung ASIO eddt'linttal men
-— under mmittetitl nmnt
— to enter prrmm to teach
for reeottn. to me l-ttenin;
act-tees. to intercept teleecm-
munieettettt end to open end
impet-t maul. nete iottodt-eed
in the Senate )‘ﬂlﬂdw by the
Attotney-Genetal. Senttot
Duteelt

Emeteeney provisions allow
the timetnhgtnmt ol ASIO
to iwte welt \temntt {or H
hoe" htlore tent-nun; to the
Anhtney-(iene-oL

be new I‘IKI'I'IN totnt put

to! a my»: shale-up or the
I Awe-hen Seevntv Intelltpenee
' Otnent‘elton tollomnp the

Intel “5"" in [977 M the

"one Rout ( mnntm-on tnto

608:":er :n-i u‘xuttly.

Under ttt K‘l‘te' chum.
A5103 eetttttiet etll be men-
tktl to termt to the Gun“.-
tnent on tetrotitnt end on
“eel-Vt uteuutet ot toteotn in-
teevetttioe" - ehedeutne ot

deeeptr-e eetion taken by e

love-3n potter to ptOmote tlt
inletem.

llThe new Ahs¢to act‘eho
e on people! Its. tt ep»
reel to e judicial tttbtmal.
epintt eeetmtv metttltettu
\thteh might etteet then ent-
playntent by the Common-
Health, ntiuatioo. eit-Ieethip
ot the itttte ol pettpcm.

Props!
checks

The Deputy leader of the
Oppetitmn. Mr Bowen. teid
that unite the Oppoutioe ea
nttt arm the new Initiation.
it wanted to be we thete “to
newer cheett end-balsam to
pet-ten belie human ttmtt.

He taunted that the AIM-
net-Geneva] thottld tepott to
l'atltantent each yeat no the
eteteiu of 5510's poem and
that a mote mptete ehttilted
tepott on tte net-vim thunk!
he eutlahle to the leader at
"9C Oppottltoll.

Me Batten elm nut-t! ‘N e
jun-ml not!!! (I ASIO every
thtee teen to eheel. thu tt
eompltett uith I31 ehmet end
the law. thnt tt had not ttttitn-
t-tubty intneged eml l-hetttet
end uhethet tt operated elliet-
eotly. -
[Text]

Bugging Provisions Supported

Canberra THE AUSTRALIAN in English 9 Mar 79 P 6
LEditoriali "Beating the Trade in Narcotics“)

LEGISLATION litlrodilctd in Federal

' Parliament yesterday to dcilne and
‘ control the operations ot
Australian Security and intelligence
Organisation and agents oi the-
Customs Department's narcotics
"m midis? “if air-"i
nctra e - a a a o
gen-Wes and realism along
with the natural caution which must
apply to the study oi any laws which
empower intrusion into personal
privacy. -
it can be said at once that we have

to accept that some protection oi

'acy has to be sacrlliccd it'

we are e protect ourselves against
subscrsion. A ﬁrst reaction to the new
rules governing the actmucs oi IMO,
is that they do not give that
orgamsatlon any more latitude than it
had belore - and maybe less.

.. The Aunrneyﬂwal still has
. overriding power on the use oi
.telephonetapsandlistenlnzdcvices-
the most disturbing activity tor the
private and blameless to
'conte . A510 can be

expected to do its job undcr'

328111990” ”WWW

Narcotics agents. too. will have to
seek the Attorney-General“:
mission in this area. The Customs
inister will no longer have the
authority to permit tapping and
beam. it is probably use to have.

the.

such a contentious matter under one

control...anditshouldnothlnden

- iheasents' activities.

It is most essential that theynotba
hindered. The extent or the trade in
narcotics is too well documented to be
doubted. Our series. The lleroin
Connection, by Dr Iiiired hlcCoy. an
mm?“ ‘Wﬂ'ﬁm" °‘

. we anaary.
pinpointed the evils with chum

Australia has 40.000 heroin addicts
and the heroin traders oi SouthEast
Asia. attracted by our aliluenoe. are

their best to increase that
nu rJVhen raw opium worth all
ona'l‘haiiarmcanbercitnedinto
heroin worth 3:50.000 on the streets ot
Australian cities. we are dealing with
money in some which can buy power
andinituence. -
“0% Mai” “3m xpect h
- we e our
narcotics agents to light it with one
hand tied behind their hacks and the
“iii“ in? l ii Ii. '
. n prom 0 tin; we
are subjected to ni worries
about our personal privacy. that is
sometluig we have to live Willi. ‘i'hat
isnottosaythetbureauc'acyand Big
Brother should have an open go. That

would be an appalllnkand 10%

e

unacceptable prospect.

mustbelinelycombedtoemetht

unpuuumydusuueun. -
(Editorial: “Tops. Bugs. Drugs“)

[Text]

OSOt

Freezing of Assets Condemned
Sydney THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD in English 9 Mar 79 p 6

THE EXTENSION and redeﬁnition ot
the ehartcr ul llt: Athllttlintt Security
Intelligence ()tpattrialitltt. in set out in
legislation lntunlrret-rt yesterday. are very
largely alone the lines recommended by

Mr Justice llopc in hit l9” Royal
Commimitrrt reports or or sulhcquently
I'm'shedottcd by me l'ri'r‘t‘rle ntni‘tcr. The
chain are new .u l ir principle
comrucztds bi-parrm support. [\Slo hat
a much more rliﬂietrlt link than [need it
in its earlier day. as \titnc“ the threat at
who letrurimt nrnl the unacceptably
violent behaviour til mute mph cert.
meted tutti. or on the lrmge or. certain
notimulixt elf ldlglr‘tﬂ oreaniutiom.
The main doubts that vull he felt about
the lcpklution concern m‘otrrrtabrlity.
For ltmance. it h at least arguable that
the [Insert it! the Director-(krwml nl
Security here been increased It the
extreme til the littering-General. to
whom he is neeourttuble tor his action. In
eddition. the report which he must make
each year to the Attuney-Gencral (one
which nill be m by the Leader at the
Opprruion) does not have to contain
information shout the number 0!
warrants applied tut. and granted. which
will uutlmrise [elephant-lapping. the me
of listening device\ or other actions
involving a danger tn puree, and In
inlrirrpnrent til the ordinary rights ol
“ill." ~ i.- t . r
pourttttrt l n t hat. 1‘ a Set e-
;trard mere abuse (for the Director-
(ieneral himwlt. in an eutcrgemy tinting
lot not more than ulll hottn. has putter
to but: tr watrmtl. thew Iigtrm slmuld
he mitten melt )Cat—a is the use in
New chltrntl. 1% it o strand amino.
and the (ittvetrnrtertt \huttld net on it. The
important mm a that there MIN he
ministerial. nut ' bureaucratic.
mobility. to cnwre the! slMlsleltll

5300

ntemtttet such st telephone-topping.
electronic \trrveillttrtee and mail Inter-
ception ttrc carelttlly trotttttrlletl and
resorted to only on the basis at what
attttlher 'ntinister related to u "ohleettve
evidence."

'rhh was the hllnittet tor Business and
Consumer Allarrs. Mr We. who ht
intrrttlucitt; sweeping Initiation to
intensity the Gmerntrtent's sttnek tlt‘l
drtrghirnflicklng. 12h particular ralerenc'e‘t
to t people it artist: on
lrnnt it. Thus. Cut-tongsmtrﬂiccrs are ﬁche
{him the some more or ASIO to the
telephone-tapping and listening devices.
'lhcre will he similar sat torus. It Is I
"mutter 0! bet.“ .\lr File insists. that Ms
departmental‘ ottrccn inmtigatin; nar-
cotic trainees “time and again“ know
alrottt telephone conversations between
drug muticrt and trrtidentrtlcd mom to
thorn they report. It this is to. in it ﬁlly
“Isl" l-e. another aalcguartl seems dair-
n c.

it it that there should be. sttcr l2
month. an ollrcral investigrtion to deter-
mine u-hether the benefits derived lronr
the me at such lnrmitlahle pouch. in to
area other than national security. out-
trcigh the lnlringement oi privacy. As lot
the other draconian penalties in this bill.
moat are iNiht-d In dealing stitlt an
IMMIIlttg Mleial ewl. But one. designed to
deal trilh sophisticated methods 0‘
“meshing" the proﬁts til tllcgal drug
tremekmg. is quite unacceptable. It
intnlm “ﬂeeting" the nets tit persons
hetore s mun until the suhntantive pro-
ccedingt are completed. This it «It 0!
hounds. it meant tart-judging guilt and
throwing titcrbuard the ‘nrineipte the: a
rcrson it innocent ttoti 'l .
The Government's mmmtvtc: tinder“ ”-
Qandahle. htn theenddoonot‘mif the
means. and this provision ll be
anpmuhmmmn
DRUG MISSIM TOLD AIR SURVEILLANCE 1'0 BEGIN

Brisbane T33 COURIER MAIL in English 7 Mar 79 p 9

venom m boon called to «u a» Aumalia's amm'
alt umolllanco gaps, tho Ausmllan Coastal Suwoﬂlanco
Cantu acting «snooty (Mt. P. I. lulu) said yostarday.

He told the cheval 0mg; Royal Cmission: "Wa now have
m up on embryo of o coastguovd."

[Text]

080:

mm Muir-Isn‘-
ur luminance 0mm
wall so (any out-
auanal or My. he an.

ho manual «Mn.
to ovmla W Imr No.
I“ almoﬂ. Md In
owned In It» ueko.
ho odd.

The Montana on:
_ mm ol Illa aanlmn
, man (out Hm
I M In Imam

5300

AIIITIIII IM COIN.
In ”MUM.

'Tvo contacts ha

been H olvour: To
Tum Won mum lo
«aural Immn Omic-
tan and line lama In
“mum Amman on!
“Name leuu Io car-
ef Much the mim-
annoy obacmoal ulst'oa
“I the Nommn 1‘01an
ry m Thar-coy m

 

«unaud manual:

Hint at nu mu m
Km mu m In tho
mm on; an. Ibo
ales out.

The" onus at annual
mi! N: 8213: Maui u
mum “Mom to
mum Damn lo tho
uzllammby “Maul
nub-ion. we Mal-y
mono to Calm

M Noun-a. Mala
be no: annual! fav-
wean ammo": one
would be mam nun.

 

about. m. m
The other that ur-

m. mfg nu (ha ”--
phlulcoua m
would be and loom.
PERTH SUPREﬂE COURT PRONOUNCBS SBNTENCES ON DRUGS CHARGES
Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in English 7 "ar 79 D 29

[Excerpts] A 27-year-old man was sentenced in the Supreae Court

yesterday to seven years' gaol for iaporting 722 grasses of can-
nabis resin from India.

In the same court two people were sentenced to terms or five

yearsland four years for possessing herein with intent to supply
or as 1.

Jennifer Anne Hooper (28). domestic. of Leonora Street. Como.
pleaded guilty to possessing heroin with a street value of $1500.

Mr Justice Lavan said that the disturbing aspect of her case was
her admission to detectives that she had solicited sales for the

heroin from among people at the alcohol and drug addiction centre
who she knew were being treated for heroin addition.

He sentenced her to a four years' gaol with a lininua non-parole
period for two years.

Michael John Blair (2?). mechanic. of Essex Street. lelthaa. was
sentenced to five years' gaol for possessing heroin.

Blair pleaded guilty to possessing 78 packets of powder contain-
ing 7.2 grammes of pure heroin.

The court was told that another nan had given Blair between 2

and 300 similar packets on the understanding that Blair paid 100
a packet for then.

Blair had sold sole of the packets for s1uo each and had been us-
ing up to three packets a day himself.

030: 5300
MRIHUANA CROP GRONBRS SBI'I‘ENCED IN PERTH DISTRICT COURT
Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in Relish 7 Her 79 P 29

[Text] Three non involved in the growing or a big eennebie crop
near Lake Grace hed pieved important parts in the enterprise. 3
Judge said yesterday when he eentenced then to long cool terms.

 

ewe ane we Antonino ‘
-m|hl‘° (239m: . W mnp'. team. mg‘m m N
loueed (an venom 0' “I" 0'0”” V“ over e long he
W n the mum ammo ”rm“ “a,
“mm "W W?" ' Puma» lenlmohe
mlmnmmhb “m"“m "' “maul-h aw
mmW°uwm Illeeenteneln wee-3: hummer ewe-
mm ""k' 53%" at; mm "o" m m
”He-”men Mum! Mle'e ”0 ”9'“- lR‘é‘J‘e’lm wee one o;
mum end ml mu In he t n he hed
tern mm In . n wee mumud I wee y
m n “y: mﬂlﬂﬂﬂ ‘09 W "me New (or eone one.
m ”m... (m mom mm Wlohdlhom
perm» hed :Ireedr 3.0.3.“ W “ materiel (MR Md
Me:- MI: .¢ mmmdﬂmn; never ”Anthem
Ngw t m m
g“. ‘ Inhaler.” .Wulmmm otwhﬂNM
m not. new. in mm W“, mud n,
- Inter.“ A {man MN‘WM»
magn- Dienelle. e! eel-new weighede "WIIIMWh
when tom uh mlyeed then wee etee Ms W.
eme menu M en ee'lmaled mm a he! In
NH: mere! ellm ohm evening the gm. .e k. m
“#03?me an: wmww . ... m .. a.
33:...un'ﬁnn.» .MMMM a telegram:-
mete em et un- eeld. that thus he
°'°°“"°" :3: m3. rein "mwm
me e
Supply m 32.5 end 5 mn- l . 513%
m mined Iuet. It wee elleged. I... ."u‘ﬁe‘: “
{unmounted-eute- '11., “ml
mamas-run In a,” mm»
M 9‘ 3’5 W ee‘nc the «noun: e1
°‘ W“. W“ "M“ cum Injected onto an
to eel! or eupvly 2'. gamma? Invok-
M t n e
mﬁ'ﬁﬁﬂmﬁﬁl . {cent-top All. W3
M the other 0‘ a: emu” in-
.I
050: 5300
PERTH COURT Rmms BAIL ON FORMS}! AIRLINE STEM!!!)
Forth m REST AUSTRALIAN in English 20 Feb 79 p 11

[Text]

IN" Wu dim. III new madly
“Mnﬂthh mlymnbouiuput
“mailman".

cm on M an at mid
who with a dmlhr m” It Ms {$.33
w [or 000m Myiow m hlmﬂm It. did not

w to (M undor- My.
aim mt M m to he Wat-lugs." on the

clan-chum and w to Mill who ho

Nﬂ'M'* uhlhelua kvnc

um a {m 3- mm when
cu m t “manta.“ noted. In. mg
m um. NSW. m- any «menu Iron NI
undue :RJPﬁd".ﬁ:' '“nL‘u~11#:ku'
emu
W mn- mm mm. ‘
«I

Mm touch.
ulatutory.mm
Mmt In 1 hotels

In mum (or

mm
W- A

080: 5300
QUEENSLAND’S RECORD HEROIN HAUL FOUND AT BRISBANE AIRPORT
Brisbane THE COURIER MAIL in English 3 Mar 79 p 10

LTcxt] Heroin 3119
Airport on Thursday
trate's Court was t

gedly round on a company
. had a street value of $
old yesterday.

230:

5300

- tut
l and w Ins-n hon M
(walled a ”Mum.
"gr. In. are 0.10,:
uauunnuuwn
malnuuuonnuba

16

director at Brisbane
300.000. the Meals-
DRUGS} DEFENDANT BANNE

Perth THE WEST AU'
L'l'ox t I

 

3:10 x 5,100

15
BRIEFS

QUEENSLAND UNIVERSITY RBSEARCH--A $2 million scheme to help stop
Thailand tar-ere growing opium will be the Queensland Universi-
ty's largest single'research undertaking this year. University
researchers will use their expertise in tropical agriculture to
help the farmers grow subsistence crops instead of opium. Chief
investigator for the projects will be Dr. Ross Hunphreys. head of
the University agriculture departnent. [Excerpt] [Brisbane

THE COURIER NAIL in English 27 Feb 79 p 32]

080: 5300

16
331878

mom SEIZURE AT LASHIO-Aunsoon. 26 Mar-4 search party seized four packets
of heroin weighing 221 3n... and velued at note than ”.000 fro. a secret
convert-eat of e Jeep (No 1930) from Tang Yang at the entrance to Leonie

at 5 p- on 18 March. Action in being taken egainet drive: 851 Ian 8e: and
owners He Aye Khan (27) end He Aye Nu (32) of Tang Yang. (m) [Text]
{Rangoon m WING W's DAILY in Ensueh 25 Her 79 p k]

cso: 5300

17
BRIEFS

MALAYSIAN-THAI COOPERATION--Kuala Lumpur. Ion: The chairman of
Halayeia'e anti-drug organisation has urged the Govemment to re-
View its current cooperation with Thailand and further strength-
en anti-drug trafficking measures along the Maven-Thailand
border. Datuk Raie Yatim said that stricter checks were needed
on the flow of drugs into llalweia from Thailand.--AAP . -
L‘rext] [Perth THE DIES? AUSTRALIAN in English 6 her 79 p 25]

050: 5300
HEALTH MINISTER 0N STRICTRR MEASURES TO CONTROL DRUGS

Klll’lltill' 'I‘IIK SUN In mum. 20 Hot 79 p (a

I'l‘vxt I

650 :

ISLAM/nub. Much It: The
government In Inca lulu
m In M the win-

lama-my.

«Emmmmmu
huh. kWh-13m
an
mqumwk-tw
”thumb.
u. an ‘mt bu
mulmmlmm
wmmumm
a buoyant
150 mm mm W

the Unllcd mum and later.
wMILMOmIImm Inn
laurel (all cooperotlon lo
munm an onion m In
in m.
mmwunmwmm
who all m ml,

Incl: M can to ma cm.
.0! ammun-
Iq wnnmwmmm
wcl I won." an provldo

mambo
«alum

'lr. Khan on that no In:
«new at 816mm mun and
«he: Soda] Vellum I u to

mull-u all datum
new “canon
Wlhmhmh

5300

19

"£2

.5;

5':
3

i
g

-E

333%
“I 3;
3 5';
M
g

z- 2

me
E?
‘i E

i?
E.
E
E

to extend mu mum hum:
{admin to the harem o! the
min-PP! '
SHIPS

NARCO‘I'ICS 88112!) IN WAN-died)!“ (Swot). March 17: Eighty-three tolee
of Cherae end ll tolee oi opiue vee recovered free one Sher Ali, pro-
prietor of Niger hotel Hedyen in e raid cerried out by sno Gulee lerid
who vae eccoepenied by A8! Abdul Uedood Khen the other dey. Soee other
intoxicente including eorphie, end Hendrcx teblete aleo recovered. [rat]
[Peehevar (RYDER HAIL inlnglieh 18 Her 79 p b]

CHARMS. hASHlSh SBIZBD-‘l'he end-burglary equed of the Civil Linee police
etntion. Kerechi. on Hedneedey eeised 750 kilogreee of cheree end liquid
heehieh worth about Re. two end e half crore. The eeizure wee nede in a
reid conducted in the preeence of a lesietrete on ehop No 18. Liequet Her-
ket. North Nezinbed. However. the were of the shop, Helik Anver end
Halih Min vere not ceught ee they hed dieeppeared before the reid. Police
found 678 kilogram of cheree end 76 kilogree of heehieh oil conceeled in
the shop. Police eeii the eeizure vee e follow-up of en eerlier haul (eleo
eede by the enti-burglery equed) on hatch 2 of cheree worth Re. 13 lekh.

0n Iehie lukeh wee erreeted in thet ceee end thie haul vee due to the
infomtion reveeled by hie. [Text] (tench! BUSINESS ”cornea in

English 10 her 79 p :1

C50: 5300

20
BRIEFS

$500,000 DRUG SEIZURE-manila. 12 nah-Philippine and Mericen anti-
narcoticn agents eeieed about 500,000 0.5. dollere' worth of heroin and
norphine in raide in Henila and the fer eouthern town of unboanga City
over the naet few daya. the Anti-"erection Agency aeid today. The aeiz-
urea cane on the eve of todey'e opening here of the South-eaet Aeien Drug
PJIfOl’CCIeﬂL' Conference. in which anti-narcotics expertn free a dozen
countries in the region, the United States and Europe. are gethering for
four days to diecues neaeurea to cube: the ecourge. The aourcee uid
the hull: of the narcotics were eeized in a reid on a house in Henile'e
euburban Paeay City yesterday at the botton of a euitcaee eeid to have
been brought in by a Puerto Rican neuber of an international eyndicete
baeed in lieu York. They said they found about 1.2 kilogruee (nearly
2.5 lbe) of heroin. Four daya ago, agente in Zenboanga City eeized tvo
bricka of Iorphine aaid to have been nuggled in from the teat Haleyeien
state of Sabeh and worth about 20.000 dollara locelly. A bueineeeeen use
arrested. The Anti-Narcotice Agency eaid an international eyndicate.
apparently working out of the hericdn Pacific inland territory of Gun.
had been broken or e reeult of Philippinee-U.$. cooperation. Three Ien
hed juet been given long eentencee in California following the earlier
arrest of e Philippine-born Aeericen in Manila found with large quenti-
ties of illegal drugs for snuggling to the 0.5. Beet Coeet. [Tut]
[Rangoon The WORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY in Engliah 13 Mar 79 p 3]

(:30: 5300

21
AU'JTRALIAN DRUG DEFENDANT DEPLORES CONDITIONS IN THAI JAIL
Brisbane Tu? COURIER MAIL in English 2? Pob 79 P 7

LText]

a u u n mu m n w
M mm am. my Wm“. M
m» a. WW mwmwmm ”may“ mmmummmm
w w E. . 2. x 2*“
m mmﬁw Wm“ m w aw k
mmwm mm”. m “$5me
mmmmmmm»
m m m £2
.m ammm m.
mm mm nmwm 3
m ”mm" m.”
mwmmmmm
mmmmmmmm

5300

030:

22
BRIEFS

'BROUN SUGAR' ARREST-4M Public Prosecutor yesterday filed charges of
possessing horooin with intention to snuggle and sell abroad against two
lndonnslsns of Dutch nationality. who were arrested with 8.6 kilos of

No 3 'brown sugar‘ on Dace-bar 30 last year. Customs officials in the
departure lounge arrested Siaila Saith Victor and Kaine-a Christian while
they were about to board a Thai international flight to mterdaa. The
heroin. neatly packed in eight plastic bags was found between layers of
clothing in their luggage. [Text] [Bangkok IAthOK POST in English

)0 Her 79 p 3 IR]

AUSTRALIAN ARREST-"Bangkok (MP-Reuter).-- A 22-year-old Sydney
tourist has been arrested here on a charge of possession of hero-
in for export. customs officials said yesterday. he was detained
just before he boarded a flight for Bot-bu on Tuesday night. The
official said that 782 arenas of top-grade heroin was found in
his luggage. shoes and souvenirs bought in Bangkok. The Ian's
passport showed he had visited Thailand seven tiaes in the last
two years. the officials said. [Text] [Brisbane ms comm
mm. in Milan 1 Ilar 79 p 1]

680: 5300

23
FOR OH’ICML 083 ONLY

CW

3m OF WCOTICS MM! IN emu DISCUSSED
“It: 3m in 601.! 22 MI: 79 pp 105-115
[Report by Juorgon Potocluli and Perry trots: “The Norcotico Hot-"j

[Text] Colodoio hoo hoot. tho world'o punior drug ounplior.
Norcodco to tho voluo of [H30 billion-7.5 ti-o tho voluo of
tho coma-y'o totol moat—nu “and out loot you. No-
tiw fox-ore. haulito ond hooooo ohoro in tho «rhino. hut
tho roony his may gooo to intornotionol mu: oyndicotoo.
Nov tho Coldim Govomnt io oonding 6,000 ooldioro to tho

m front.

A dog io yopping in tho for diotuo. In qy roc- tho vontilotin. in mo
tho soot hoot aroma hut foilo to cool tho oir. 'rho oooquitooo oro that!“
no ottock oftor tho othorb-oloop io out of tho quotion. Pinon, I go mt-
oido. I - otoy'itg ot tho ”ct-Ito liotol.” ollogodly tho but in liohoho,
Coldio'o nortlurmot city. A broom co-o {looting off tho Corihhon.
“No ooldioro ore potroning tho hooch. Thoir outlinoood tho homolo of
thoir rifloo oro oilhmottod occinot tho voter. lit up by tho noon.

In Boson, tho copitn, thoy var-nod m tint Riohocho woo o Moro-hon halo,
poaplod by rohhoro. triggor hoppy gut-n and dang ”Ion. A m]. ho-
mn tvo gonzo of drug ought-o rooultod in tho dooth of 92 pooplo within
2amtho. Pro-monthomioouppooodtopolioo thooroo, otoptho
norcotico trotfic and dootroy tho taco. on)! which no 300 on otrau.

‘nuo ooldioro hovo opottod to. My on olovly Win; fro tb booth.
All ioqutot. smiythoro ioonoioo inthookyzAlovndaloooof
thndoropproochoo. thonohlgoo intothonguloruhinooi’oorooqinoo.
bow ow: tho vour a “torch to caning clooor. Sign“ noroo rioo tra
tho 8-floor count m: noxt door. Tho twin-omit» Mott-co nc-a or
poooihly o Cmipothmdoro ovor our hoodo and coho for tho intone.
Tho noioo of tho ominoo i'odoo In finolly dioo any oltogothor. ‘lho do;
otorto min; gun in tho diotnco.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OI'PICIAL US! ONLY

The two eoldiere hed turned their heede in the direotion of the eiroreft.
Now they vhieper to one enother. One of thee tekee the rifle off hie
ehotilder end pointe the berrel in ey direction. The other cello out “good
evening“ end etrihee e notch. evidently to get A better look et ny feoe.

lie ulte: Meet-icon?“ I reply: “Ger-m.“ Vieibly relieved he lighte e eige-
ret. pointe the lighted end to the eky end em ”eeriluene bodaere.“ Short-
ly thereefter two eore eerihim boebere croee the coeet et Rioheche.

5mm photogrepher Perry Krete ad I ere on the Colo-bien Le Gujire Penin-
eule. e wilderneee eree. helf preirie. helf emntein renge. ‘00 in long.
100 In wide. inhebited by 300,000 people.

In October leet the goverment in Bogote declered thie province e var re-

gion. Ever eince the nercotice wer hee reged here. on lend, et on end in

the eir: 6.000 eoldiere egeinet nore that 70,000 people who ere involved in
the ring bunineee. ee plentere. wiggle". fully unborn or ecceeeoriee.

At oteke one 316 billion-according to the Metric-I on [Drug Enforce-ht
Ahiniotrdtion] thie ie the .ount of my epont molly in the United
Stetoe on Colodien eerihuene end coceine by 16 nillion reguler coon-ere.
'rhet ie ee Inch u the totel turnover of the cigeret induetry. 1'he nerlnet
ie etill expmding: the first delivery hes just can to light in the Pederel
Republic. Ouetone egente in Bro-en herbor diecovered 518 kg of Column
urihuem on the freighter "Iloletenkoog." The velue: 0941.5 nillion.

Pilots kicking ‘l'heir Livoe Nightly for $50,000

The my flowing beck to the treditionelly coffee growl“ Colo-birds nil-
lion populetion. 5 then the eine of the Pederel Republic-due produced en
comic nireclo which define officiel explenetion.

Liborel Preeidont nil-boy. elected with e nerrow nejority no recently ee
Jute 1978 by only 35 percent of the regiotered votere, feele thet foreignere
wrongly eccuee hin of being the heed of governent of e "drug denecrecy.”
“He don't bribe the Anericeneuthey bribe no." lnternelly he not only he
to fight e constantly growing group of guerrillee but eleo e rote of infle-
tion which exceeded 30 percent lest yeer. The develuetion of noney hite

the poor herdeet-othe rich benefit fro. the nerihune boon: More end nore
new oltyecrepere end hotels, benlte end luau-y otoree ehoot fro. the roll at
the Ceribbom coeet. Arlored core roll through ehebby villegee, driven by
an whoee fingere diepley dienond tinge.

Behind this glitterim new prosperity ere the boeeee of the internetionel
nercotice eyndicetee. ‘rhey plm end cerry out the treneectione; they eend
ohipe end nircreft to Colo-hie; they eupply gune end radios; they hire
pilots who rielt their livee on every flight-Joi- $50,000 ltd up.

An officer in the ucret police telle tie quite frnkly that night efter
night doenem of “nor-item boaere“ fly in et low eltitndee to beet the

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL "83 ONLY

rodor network of tho Coloobion oi: opoco control. nony of tho foolhordy
Inn in tho fly in orotoo oro ooid to ho Viotn- votormo: ”lhoy uoo tho
lighto of they ooootol oitioo to oriont tho-oolvoo." Riohooho. ytho

oiol copitol. ooooo to ho o porticulorly pendu- guidopootuobmt 05. 00 l
hoor tho fourth oiroroft to fly ovor thio night.

Manor-1mm no on uotlu vlth Gonorol Jooo Mom Villorol. ohlof of tho
ldbrigodo moon-ﬂora tho6,000otrongotwon theolodoimdrug
front. llo fools dooortod by hio ollioo: ”Ho oro ouppoood to protoot Antioon
youth fro- drugo." ho ooyo. “but tho Motion do littlo to holp no. thoy
ought to ly ooto oonoy on! no toolniool oquipnt. no mod holioop-
ooro no no no night tioo dotootion doviooo.” Noroovor tho Column Amy
io ouhjootod to ottooko by totoign novopooon. “An Morioon toportoo oohod
no: 'llov is it poooiblo {or ouch tro-ondou mtitioo of miluono to got
out of Coloobio'l'ul ohot book: 'Ilov io it poooiblo for ouoh trounﬁouo
qumtltioo of tin-rim to got into tho Unitod Stouo'l"

Tho coo-moor hoo tho lotoot rowto of ouooooooo bought out form lnopoo-

tion: within3oontho 3.300 tonootnorihumvoro ooirodondoSOo-aggloro

orrootod. including 103 foooignoro, 101 of who. voro brim; 118 tmoho

3 21119. on! 33 oircroft vooo tobn. l'on ouggloro you killod in onolmoo
iro.

rho gonorol invitoo no to amino tho booty. 'Nonty-ooo ooiood oirotott
otill otmd on the unitary oioport; oight nc-J'o. tvo noll Joto. oovoool
Plporo ad Cooonoo. Still vioiblo at tho toil of o tvln-ooglud m
oro tho poinood-ovor inoignio of tho 0.3mm. tho inooription "Snug“
Alt-Consul" datum-13010.“ Sixohipo ooioodforngglm Ito
borthod in tho hoocltioh noon at room Arturo. rho lagoot io tho
"Form" of obout 10. 000 grooo ugloto: tono.1ho canon canon: It voo
otoppod by tho Coootguord juot hoforo ontorlng intonotionol noon. 0o
boord voro 1.000 oocho of m

Cnloo. tho dork oldmod dtivor of tho co: vo oro uolog to: tho impotion
tour. io o bodauord by Noooion. mntly in tho oot-vioo of do
gown-Int. Tho «mood on: ho drivoo io oloo booty. It uood to bola: to
tho which pork of 3m] Alton. ono of Coldio'o .on 4mg booooo.

luron won oblo to flu to Plot-loo just bototo ho no to ho mood. Ac-
cooding to ropottoroooivodbytbooorot «alcohonoodoMoox'poro-
tion to mhooo o pcticulorly bountiful ootooo in Koy Bloom—tho tot-r
motion ho-o of 0.5.Prooidont “chord Nixon. 0th» Cola-bin m
oillionoitoo took up tooidonco in Nov York City. in tho vollvhoolod dlotriot
of Jockoon Hoighu. W by 200,000 Coloublon “unto. Lat yoor
tho pooco of thio tooioontiol oroo woo rudoly ohottotod. A bottlo botvoon

2 nucotico gm loft lb dood.

‘lho boooco woolly otoy out of tho firing lino-4n mtnot to Harold
Dorbor, o fouor oo-on who inltiotod largo-ooolo on; obtain “no
26

M ONE!“ US! ONLY
FOR OHICIAL ”8! ONLY

between South and North Anarica. Darbor invented the ao-oallad anther ehip
ayetaa. Donene of enall boata and ehipa. laden with nercotioe. left the
Colubim coaet for international vatere vhare Derbar'a unworthy nether
ahip “Night Train“ could be loaded free of the rial: of interference. In
February 1976 the inventive Darbar died in a hail of bulleta upon laavim
hie reeidence in Florida. The under ie atill uneolved. The Wine» con-
time.

Capt Hector Aribar talle ue thia atory of Harold barber. lie ia ll officer
in the ailitary aacret aarvioe. etationad in Iliohacla. the citadel of the
drug trade. lie ia uaignad to no ae nuraauid md cmtrollar: a tart youu
nan \mo hiae hie i‘aca behind a pair of green amglaeaea and a flour-idling
walrus metache. Laadim m acroaa Riohacha hie Mt. hand reate unclu-
lantly on the butt of a Snith & mum dmglim in a holetar at hie hip.
Every few nimtaa we met any patrola. aim 6 nan in paratrooper mifcru.
arned with Ger-alt 0-3 rii‘lea. ”They alvaye heap a certain diet-Ice between
thualvee,“ aeye Captain Aribar. "ao that there abould be no note thm one
killed it a anipar atarta firing.”

In the diareputabla open-air bar ”boa Cocoa” the general convareation cmea
toaatopaevaaitdoun. Ueaakaboutthenoieyair trafficofthepra-
ceding night. Captain Arihar heaitataa but opane up after hia eacond beer.
"Ha camot do anything about that," he em, We have no night fightara."
Ila daacrlbae the procedure of the a-Iggling flighta: The pilot fliea to me
of the any donone of illegal airetripa in the interior of the cumtry.
‘l‘orchea lightup tlaemdorgraee landing atrip forafevnimee: theyana
extinuiahad i-adiataly the plane haa lulled. line aircraft ia raft-led.
the cargo apace filled vith .211!“ About 1 hour later it atarte on ita
return flight.

If the pilot in luclq he landeo-G-s hours after take-off—vhere be c-
i'ron, am in the aouthern lhitad Stataa—ceorgia, South Carolina or
Florida-led geta hie cut. 11' he ia unlucky, hie plma defective or over»
loaded. the aircraft braaka up on tile-oft or neck: into the Coldian
main which riea to a height of up to 15,000 feet. ”Laet nonth alone
we forced eight wracked aircraft in La auajira." Occaeionally an aircraft
noendivee into the ocean; it heppmed only laet veal: at the coaet near
lliohecha. "Next nor-aim the Coaetguend vae able only to ﬂat: a {av aacka
iron the water,“ eaye Captain Aribar, ailing alightly. "aharlxe don't care
for nariluena.“

“You Holley or Your Life“--cmga of lobbare Terroriaa II Entire Provinca

A fee: tablea any eite a fat at: “akin; a cigar and wearing a ueaive gold
vriet «etch. ”lit W." aaye our gum. ”one of the liohacha narcotica
boaaae.” lbndonahae been ataring at ue for acne tine. Finally he riaea
My. throveapila ofpaaoaonthe table, looheacroaa tone and
acornrully epite on the floor. Monoly ha doaa not care for ue. “lore
than 1.000 neriluana augglara are looea in the city.“ the cQtain continue.

27
m 0016!“. US! ONLY
l’OR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

"though we have already jailed more then 300." Incidentally, this is reputed
to be the most violent region of Colombia. For generations pest robber bends
heve terrorited La majire Province; their first rule is “your my or your

life." Quarrels ere still subject to the vendetta: "An eye for an eye, It
tooth for a tooth."

Rafael lguran lbndoee is the governor adeinisteri the mceuth society of
La Ouajira. lie resides in a building at the pole ringed bay of Rioheehe.

guarded by soldiers and policemen. Six bodyguards are statiomd in we ente-
chnbers to protect his: free “mood visitors. me doors are locked

from the outside behind every almouneed visitor-for security reasons.
assassin would be caught in the trep. Does the governor go in fear of the
miles-ta gates? The grayhaired gentleeen with his fashionable horn rinsed
glasses rejects any feeliu of apprehension with a sweep of his am:
”Riohache is a peeeoeble city of peace loving people and with a fanny stee-
sphere.” To prove this astounding assertion he adds: "0n Samrdays I can
bathe l'roeu tho beech. without any bedyguerde."

The governor says: "I do not wish to defend the cultivation and snagging
oi‘ medium-but I do have understuuiing for the people who are forced to

break the low because otherwise they would not have enough to live on."

Present at the interview is Carlos horrors. editer-in-chiei’ of a new nega-
zine 1A mum, promoted by the governor. "we have no intention of hiding
the fact.” he says about the nee-intend lensiness. "that neriluene hes eased
the entire north coast of Colombia to flourish." The friend and adviser of
the governor ed“: "let us not fall for the fairy tale that nrilmene due-
egos the health of American youth. Alcohol and tobacco are just as bad--
and the government still permits both." Finally he suggests: ”The Auricene
should legalize the communion of eerihuana, and the problea would then be
solved for all those involved: The Coloebiens would contimo to leeks my
free cultivation. The U.S.Governeent would take in some billions of dollars
emuelly in taxes. And both parties would be rid of the tiresou emulim
problem.” The governor node his agreement and pours another glass of the
finest chmpegu.

Spectacle in the Sky: A Fighter Plene Forced Into en Emergency bandit;

we went to drive to the interior of the country but no hire car is available
in nioheche. Captain Ariber has the solution. "I . acquainted with a
smuggler who knows we how tint he is up to his neck in thedmg trade, but
there is not yet enough evidence to arrest him. he will certainly be glad
to help us. he has eny aunt of cars."

The am is Jose zmrano-dn his aid-60's, 200 M live weight, mheven,
married. 6 children. lle really is glad to be able to do us a favor. Of
course we can have a car. He even invites us to his home in the sti

old city end—obviously too law-reamebers that the um roan is filled

to the ceiling with annealed liquor—Bourbon of the finest quality. The

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPXCIAL USE ONLY

women of the house. e hefty ledy with curlers in her hair. oven opens a
bottle. The aaetor of the house begins to talk. Yes. he hes heard ruors
that there are narihuane smgglers in Rioheeha. but he regrets to say he
does not know my personally...

Suddenly he romnbers something which might interest the visiting reporter:
Recently. in broad daylight. the pilot of a smgglor eircreft circled
Richecha for about 2 hours become a fighter from the air force was chasm
hie. "The fighter could not shoot his down here. bseeuu the oc-a would
have crashed on the city." The chose in the sky is supposed to heve lasted
nearly 2 hours. Thousands of people watched the spectacle. Then the mili-
tary aircraft hsd to asks an seergeney landing-nit had run out of fuel; the
sunggler plene got my across the water-eccenpanied by the cheers of the
populece. Captain Aribar grineeee on listenim to this story which does
not redound to the credit of the Colombian creed forces.

Just before daybreak the next eorning we sit in Zaabreno's freshly polished
Ford Ranger. Behind us. on the fletbed. crouch six soldiers with rifles.
our guerds. To begin with we drive through an idyllic end BEING world:
Snake tines from the end rants: bindled up lndiens wander elem the roadway
end cowboys drive their cattle herds pest us. Suddenly the road leads
through uounteins of gerbage. Bottles. empty cans. cardboard certom end
styroi'oae packaging utorial border the reed for miles--the refuse of the
black market city of Haiceo. located just ahead of the border with Venezuela.
Here one can buy. at ludicrously low prices. everything that is stolen and
snuggled: Color television sets. canes and watclns. merihuana end cocaine.
No dog is ever buried in Meieao—the bodies of run over eninals stay at the
side of the road. Nobody is bothered.

After hours of driving along dusty dirt roads we get to arm haedquerters
at menaviste, at the foot of the Santa Met-ta range. In the aiddle of the

hatred: square. surromded by barbed wire and guarded by soldiers, we see a
maintain of 600 sacks: More than 30 tons of nerituana. the honest of the
anti-drug unit quartered here. The unit is largely cosposed of local India.
They are led by Lt Patino. nickn-ed "Wye" by his friends. a start md
squat man with weetherbeaten skin. lie tells glowing telos of the chase. in-
volving the location and capture of calms of mocks used for mggling.
wild shoot-outs which alweye leave his men the victors. though both sides
suffer cnsueltios of killed and womded.

world Record: More Than 800 Tons of Mei-iterate Discovered in the Bush

he explains the nerihusna route by none of e stei‘f mop: The drug is planted
on mtain slopes or in remote valleys. hidden among bushes in the men's
land. It is harvested I; tines e year. cut. dried md taken by Indian Inle
tons on secret paths to hidden collecting points. Here the middle-en pay
the plentors 260 pesos per kilcgrn of nerilmsne. a little more than mill.
Largo prrsses coepress the stuff into handy rectemuler packages which look
like peat. Then the eeriluana is taken to the illegal landing strips on

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the count. In the manunc couriers travel to the uaJer trading centers
such as Barranquilla. Santa Marta, Riohooha or oven Bogota end the United
States to furnish the syndicate representatives with suples, haggle about
the 833cc and orgmise transportation. The price to the final comm:
810, per kilogrn. Cocaine wiggling is reported to have declined shes-p-
ly in Colombia. The Colombians are concentrating on the narilama trade.

He join in some raids on Indian villages. In sudden attacks Lt Patino sends
his men into the huts where he suspects smell middlemen to hang out. His
men find no noro than a few kilogrns. the owners having long since fled...
Recently the soldiers had been lucner: Near the coastal town of Dibulla
several storage places were fomd within a single week, including a small
valley full of minions. covered lightly with bushes. The total booty:
More than 800 tons of narilmana valued at $800 million—definitely a world
record.

But, says Coml Silva. cos-mder of Buensvista at dimr, even this i-ense
qumtity is only a saall part of the marihusna always available in be
Guejire Province. hidden until it is carried off. The war against the drug
aafia cannot be won by ailitary means alone. ”As long as so teach my is
at stake. there will always be farmers to cultivate the stuff and even sore
smgglers to take it out of the country."

The nsrihuana destruction operations of the army therefore have little acre
than symbolic value. The seised drug mist be burned under the supervision

of e judge. Judge Alfredo surges is responsible for the Buenwista min.
This afternoon he orders 62 sacks from the mrihu-u mtain on the bar-rack

square to be weighed. They were seized free a 6-mn gmg at the lower
reaches «1' the Magdalena River. The weight is precisely 1,020 kg, 41 little
over a ton.

The expensive substance of which circus are made is emptied on the

to form it shallow mound, gasoline paired over it and the gasoline lit.
Black snobs rises to the sky, visible from far any-J's million dollar
joint.” The east wind blows the smoke over our heads, across the cantryu
side and toward the blue Santa Marta range on the slopes of which the
marihuana was originally green.

The sweetish fragrance slime to clothisg and hair for my days. Conca-
centi small it at once. Before the jammy home a couple awe-caches II at
Bogota airport. The young Ian looks furtively arolmdo-hie pretty mien
hes somethim for sale. She asks: "liarihmns, mister?”

comma: 1979 Gruner 4- Job: M: & Co.

11698
650: 5300

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DRUG "AR HEAVY BURDEN FOR ARMY
Bogotaimmmrwoamsnniahmmw pl-A, 8-A

[Text] The any cannot continue to aake the treaendoua outlaye which it has
had to pay to underwrite the ceapaign against the trafficking of aarilmana
and other narcotice. Thia wee the conclusion reached during a aeeting in
La GuaJira of a gnoup of 601an and 0.8. otticara.

50 hillion Peace

According to reporta on the subject. the Colcabian Am invented 50 aillion
peace laet year. while tau-icon aid only aaounted to l aillion peace, inclu-
ding the coat of eoae cbaolete radare which were installed in that region 0!
the country. They have been abandoned for acne tiae. beoauee the Aaerioan
techniciana in charge of then decided to leave. stating that the cliaate
did not suit thea.

The eaae eom‘cee added that on vehicle pea-ta alone the any hea spent 12 ail-
lion peace. and that the coat of the other itaaa ouch ae fuel, food too: tcoope.
etc. we too heavy a burden. and could not continue.

heager Otter

The Goloabian officers propoaed an increase in 0.3. aid, and it waa reported
that all they got waa an offer ot a total of 2 aillion peace. That aaount
iaincontraettcthejOaillionpeaoetheu-ayhaaepenttodate.

It was aleo revealed that of the MO vehiolea eeiaed in La GuaJira tron drug
trafficked-e and snuggled-e. only 15 have been legally turned over to the any
to aupplcaent the tranaportation equipaent. while the teat have been maen

during the corresponding inveetigaticna.

The traneportation aituation ie ao actions that the troops have to aobiliae
on eoae ocoaeiona in eeiaed vehicles which etill bear Veneauelan lioenee
platea. while the vehiolee that are property of the coloabian Goverment are

being uned ao heavily that they are being worn out.

31
As was stated earlier. when the Colombian Ara! asked for 50 aillion pesos in
aid Pros the 0.5. Governsont in order to cont Lnue the cupaign. the Asericsn
representatiVoe only offered 2 nillion. 'Ihey also wanted the troops of the

Seventh Brigade. headquartered in Villavioenclo, to be consitted to a series
of operations similar to those carried out in Le GuaJira for the purpose of

controlling drug trafficking in this region of the country.

It was learned that during the important neettng. officers of the Colombian
Air Force and Navy also participated. The forest indicated that they could
not contime to play a role in the caspaign because the planes were being
used too heavily in the continuous operations. and that the costs of fuel
and saintenance were enoraous. The representatives of the air force pro-
posed that the u.s. Governssnt provide planes of the ease type as those that
are currently in operation. and that in return they would supply the crews
that are indispensable for the operation of the planes. Apparently that
proposal was also rejected, which could have a long-tars effect involving

a decline in anti-drug trafficking activities.

The naval officers who were present at the seeting also sentioned the high

costs of operating the ships, and the difficulties that have arisen because
of econosio factors.

8926
080: 5300

32
muss. meme salzan Ill wacnmm
Bogota EL 39mm}: in Spanish 21 m 79 p l-A, 5-A
[Article by Ulilo Acevedo Silva]

['15er m m. 20 Harchm-A heavy blow was dealt to the drug traffick-
ing bands in the department of Hagdslena and the Atlantic Coast in general

by troops of the Nuaber 5 Cordoba Batallion here. The troops seized a ship-
nent of aarihuana weighing nore than 35 tone. which was to be ”exported" by
sea through the bow known as Villa Conoha, only 3) minutes fro- the city of
Santa Marta. mating the operation. 16 persons were arrested, anong than three
"top bananas" of drug trafficking in this part of the country, using the words
of the ailitary authorities of this departaent.

"The operation is unprecedented in this year's struggle against the drug traf-
fickers. It yielded very good results, considerim that the action was under-
taken by a patrol that had been following through on soae investigations to
find the ship-ant of a valuable loa'd- of aarihuam," said a high-ranking aili-
Eary emu“ of the Santa Harts Cordoba Batallion. in a statement to BL

Villa Concha

The aarihuana was to be taken out through Villa Concha by canoe, then to be
transported to a large ship that was anchored a few siles off shore. The W
could not arrest any of the people in the canoes during the operation. It
use those people who warned the ship of the any's presence. causing it to
withdraw and leave the territorial waters of Coloabia before it could be
detected by any Colcnbisn naval destroyer.

Due to the absolute secrecy saintained by the ailitary authorities of Hagda-
lena with regard to this seizure. it has still not been established whether
the aaritmana confiscated was acre than the 35 tons originally aentioned. or
whether it is true that aillions in cash were also seized, a sun that was to
be used for tribing authorities.

33
No Details

The couand or the Number 5 Cordoba Batallion has refused to give any details
about the reeulte of the operation. which were toned by the me unitary
opokoeaon ae "extraordinary.”

0n the other hand. El. BsPl-m‘AIDR nee able to eonfira that the aarihuana coined
by the any wee in «aproeeed fore. and van brought in ite entirety to the
unitary headquarters vi the Cordoba Batallion on three trucks. The tmoke
had been uned by the drug tcaa‘t'ickera to transport the weed to Villa Concha
for itn illegal exportation.

Sixteen Arrooted

The ailitary opokeeean also stated that 16 persons were erreeted during the
action, and anon; than were three chiefs or "top bananas" of drug traffick-
ing. One of then was apparently tron Barranquilla. and two no. Santa Marta.

The men of these persona. when the any itmli toned "top bananaa" and
“V.1.P.e" of drug trafficking in this part of the country, have not been
revealed to the preee. for undiocloaed roaeom. All thoee arrested are under

ailitery wetody in this deportaent, and ate being held inoomunicado at the
Cordoba Batallion in Santa Marta.

Depart-mt of the Interior

The secretary of the interior of the depart-eat of headalena. m- Cerloa Flore:
de Agnes, when aokod by KL ESPECTMDR about this any operation, aid that
"we heard about the operation over the radio, hit do of 12]) hours today (yea-
terday) the Cordoba Batallion has not ooeaunioated with thin office about
the action, nor has it turned the arrested people over to the seven-ant."

ﬂe repeated that the batallion Ma 2‘» houre iron the mat the peraone were
arrentod to place then in govern-eat custody. in accordance with the latest
rulings by the government in the struggle against drug trafficking.

9926
CS): 5130

3/.
COCAIIC. WWW. NMVIMIS m2-
BosouﬂLTIDmlnmmaﬂlr7996-A
[Article by Angel llonero]

[Text] Geli. 20 MerchuAuthorities in the Velle del Moe deelt two severe
blows to drug traffickers todey when they seised lore then 80 sillion pesos
worth of ooceine end urihuene.

The fix-ct etteok took plece st Penesece Airport. es three Bolivian: were
getting ofe Lloyd pleno of e Bolivia: eirline with e eillion-peeo coceine
“none

The Boliviens hed four suitceses with {else bottoee in which they curried '10
kilos of high-grede coceine.

Arrested were hncy mun Cedene. Isobel Oonsuelo Reyuel end Leonel de Jesus
Gevirie. They arrived with three children, who were placed in the custody
of the stetf of the Daily Revere dopertsent of the police.

Authorities indiceted thet the cooeine ship-em wee worth 80 sillion pesos.
Thecoceinewubeingwntocelisothetitoouldbeprocessedinclen-
destine leborstoriee operetin; in this city. Leta: it wee to he sent to the
United Stetes.

memvehture

In Dumventure. police sede mother esesult eninet the drug utis.

On board the Greek ship “Golden Penequi.” 75 kilos of mihuem were seized.

Themmpeckedineevenhles. enditevelueweseetintedetovere
nillion pesos.

Mummmloededontotheshipkosenellhoetwmnthem'eekcergo
ehipweesoored ethnoym-ber 13.

Post authorities sneezed the ceptein end other crew lee-hers of the Greek
ship. who were Gteeke sud Itelim.

8926
080: 5300 35
TRAFFIC“)! ARRES‘I‘S: M IN A Hm
Bogota BI. 3mm in Spanish 19 Hu- ?9 p 2

[Text] In the course or the oped-stions that are being carried out on the
Atlantic Guest in order to coshst drug trafficking. Nb persons were arrested
in the last weok. sleng with 3'»? holes or urihunns and various types of ve-
hicles. reported the Ministry of Defense tom.

01‘ the arrested people. '10 are Colo-him end It sre toroigners. Two ships.
e cull plone snd i‘ive euteoobiles were sleo seized. elong with short- and

long-range weapons.

Between 9 end 1? lurch, the report stetee. the following operations were under-
tsken by authorities:

0n 1 March, st the Santa Harte Airport. e enll airplane registered as "-711“.
iron the United States wee coined, with 3 crew on heard.

On 1 Much st Hedi; Lune in the sunicipslity of Hsicso, on P 350 pick-up truck
and s pumping engine were seized.

On 11 March at Urrsise. in the municipality of llribis, en F—GOl truck was
—dieceuered_to_bo__csrrxing__u_§ Pelee of serihuens.

On 12 Hatch. at on» do n Vela, the best "cum One” wee seized. The Wish
vessel had eight crow oonbers on board. three Venezuelan and five Oslo-buns.

On 12 March in Sen Juan. oight persons were snorted with four holes of seri-
hum end short-range weapons.

On 13 Harch in Las Flores an F350 truck which had been carrying 39 bales of
nrihusm. two pumping engines and eight containers of mel, woe seised.

On 13 Her-ch, in Zenorsno, municipality of Sen Juan, ten persons were created
and six bales of serihuans and s revolver worn confiecsted.

0n lb March in Rochoe. nunicipslity or Bottom-s, ’08 holes of not-imam were
seized.

J6
On 15 ﬂuoh. in e eeeroh of e reeidenoe in Manama. eix pereone um I:-
reeted with ehort- end long-rem Ito-pone end e urge enount of emnition.

On 15 Heron. in mother eeeroh of e reeidenoe in the one city. three pereone

were mooted for pomeeion of e eutneohine gun. 5 title, e ehotm dnd e
doun revolver hutte.

On 15 Heron in Polonino. GunJire. 12 moo of urihnene were oeieed.

Onlslnrohonthoroedlronlleheotol’ejuo. fivepereoneuereerreeted
{or poeeeeeion oi‘ 150 holee of mihume. e '78 nodel tuck. e Nieeon Petrol
caper end e m redio device.

These thirteen opentione reeulted in d tom of M meets. including {our
foreignere And no Colo-bum. nine long- end ehert-nnce ueepone. rive vehiclee.

en eirpnne. two hoete. 1001 rounds of emulation of verioue typee. end 3”?
holes or urihuenn.

0926
030' 530°

37
BRIEFS

STMDARDS FOR [RUG MSo-The Supreee Court of Justice issued an doctrine
lieitinc the velidity or eminetione underteken on drug euplee. endeteted
that in no eeee on differences greater then one percent he presented. es in
such cues the difference would be invalid. mis inportent deeieiee

wee Iede yesterday by the Penel Appeals Court. beeed on e study nude by Judge
Jose "Arie Veleeoo Guerrero concerning the enforceeent of the Anti-ﬂuootice
Stetute oi‘ Decree 1188 of 197“. Tho Supreee Court of Justice stuck down the
process followed spinet two elleged drug treffickere who were found with e
urge quantity of cocaine. Booed on the opinion expressed by the professors
et the Institute of Legal Hedioine. which indicates that st no tile can the
purity of e dmg very by sore then one percent and that e wider variation
would be illogicel. the Court decided that the process was invalid. in the
indicteent which led to the legal ruling. three different esseeseente of the
purity of the oocsino had been given. remit; free 60 to 816 percent. The
Supreme Court of Justice hes nullified the process, end orda-ed thst the tests
be done min to determine the quality of the substance in question. [Text]
[Bosote an exam in Spanish 15 war 79 p 3] 8926

can: 5))0

38
Am 881283 rumors: “RCMP!“
Mexico City newton in Spaniah in Feb 79 p A-27

[Article by Rafael Medina Crux: ”Ar-y Saieea Pour hereotica Traffickar
Planea. One 'l'reﬂiclter Deed")

[Text] Asente of the Federal Judiciary police and any eoldiere. aeaisned
to the region of Le berranca del Cobra. Chihuahua. aeieed four aeall planee
which were being uead to traneport earihuena to the United Stetaa. cloead
two clandaetinc air lending etrina. and. in a confrontation with narcotice
treffickera. killed one. wounded two and arreeted another.

The confrontation began when the federal asenta tried to prevent one of
the planee free taking off end the traffickare aboard the craft began

firing at the esente.

Rogelio Martinez Cornejo. the plane'e pilot. died. lienuel Vasquez
Trujillo and Guillereo Gutierrez Lugo were wounded. and Rogelio Arturo
Reyee Eetrada eurrendered.

The planea initially eeiaed were three Ceeenae: one model 3‘0, licenee
xe-m; one nodel 206. licenea XA-M; and another of the eeee nodal.
licenae KA-HUR.

Upon interrogation. the wounded nan revealed that another aircraft wee
hidden under a covering of tree branches on the liilpillee ranch in
' Sierra lindre Occidental between the atatea of Sonora end Chihuahua.

At that location elao. the agente were greeted by weepooe fire, and it
appenre that the pilot fled.

Seeks of narihuano that wee to be cold in the United Stetee were found
aboard the eeited planee.

‘l'hoec arreeted naeed other accoeplicea.

9399

£80: 5300
39
NARlIIUANA TRAFFICKERS 1N GUN Mm! 9111! POLICE
Nuewo Laredo 8|. MARIANA in Spanish 6 Mar 79 See I p 3

[Text] A tragic confrontation involving a gun battle between federal agents
and drug traffickers took place on Sunday afternoon in the settle-ant known
as Bl Venado. in San Luis Potosi, where the for-er shot to death three un-
identified persons who were sttsspting to rescue a criuinal ring that had
been arrested because of its connections with the illegal drug business.

The foregoing was announced yesterday by the coordinator of the agencies of
the Federal Public liinistry. Alfredo Aaron Juarez Jiaenez.

Yesterday. the federal Judicial Police, headed by Cosdr Margarito header
Rico. were conducting careful investigations in order to establish the iden-
tity of the three sen who were shot to death during the gun battle with the
agents.

This all began with the arrest of Pedro Segundo Paloso. in a town near Hon-
terrey, Nuevo been. who. upon being questioned. said that he had concealed
a shipment of nerihuana at the "El Pozo" fare in the aunicipelity of Villa
de Guadalupe, in San Luis Potosi.

Several federal agents detailed to Monterrey went to the aforementioned fera.
where they seized 13 bags filled with narihuana. and 5 kilograas of seed.

At the same tine, they arrested the brothers Manuel and Francisco Segundo
Rodriguez. fro- whon they confiscated weapons and a vehicle.

The letter said that the grass in question wan free a larger wolune which
they had harvested at the "El Refugio" fare in the Iunicipality of El Venado,
in San Luis Potosi. where the agents subsequently seized 7 sore bags contain-
ing cannabis indies.

in that location. they arrested liiginio Arriena Hernandez and Asuncion Ana-
dor Hernandez.

then the federal agents were on the road to Henterrey. upon passing Bl Ve-

nado. San Luis Potosi. they were interceoted by four individuals, three on
horseback. and the fourth on foot. who were carrying weapons.

‘0
“He won't let you take thee.“ ohouted the unidentified eon to the federol

agento. who vote oioultoneouoly otteckod by gunfire. end therefore were
forced to return the ooooult.

During the ohoet-out. tve of the non riding on horooboek end the individual
who voo venting were killed. They vote not identified.

The federal agento were in ooriouo difficulty. hocouoo they were ohout to be
lynched by the rooidonto of Bl Venedo, who vote otteoptin; ot ony toot to
prevent the proouood drug trofiicheto' being token into cuotody. But. fi-
nolly. they left the ten end oonosed to teoeh Monterrey. where the inveo-
tigotione were continued yeoterdoy.

2909
080: $330

61
TRAFFICKBRS ESCAPE FROM PRISON. SOLDIERS. GUARDS IHPLICATED
'l'hrce Flee Tijuana Penitentiary

Mexicali IA V02 DE LA FRONTBRA in Spaniel: 1/: Her 79 Set: A pp 3, 8

[Text] Tijuanan'lhree dangerous drug traffickers who were oerving their sen-
tences at the La Mesa penitentiary escaped soeetiau between the night of the
day before yesterday and yesterday morning. according to a report from the
prison warden hi-elf, Leopoldo Carrssco.

Jaiee Araando Iioyos Jai-e. aged 21 and a native of Mexicali. Baja California;
Juan Luunia Cirerol. aged 25 and a native of :logalee. Sonora: and David An-
thony Brown. aged 38 and of British nationality.are the three inmates who
aanaged to evade the state penitentiary guards and fled inedietely.

According to the prison warden. the three escapees must have left by the
door of the prison. because there were no tunnels nor holes in the. walls.

It was also considered nlsnst “possible for thee to have jawed over the
barbed-wire fence. in view of the efficient surveillance that the any keeps
over i‘e

Carrasco said that. at 1800 hours on the day before yesterday, the disappear-
once of the Englishman David Anthony Brown was noticed after the roll-call
made at that tile. An intensiva search was ende until 2100 hours and. when
he could not be found. the Federal and State Judicial Police were notified.
on were the federal public and local public linistries. of the escape.

A few hours later. at 0700 hours yesterday, the prison authorities discover-
ed the disappearance of inmtes Jaime Araando Noyes Jaime and Juan Lennie
Clrerol. likewise when the roll was called at that tiae. An assiduous search
was nude for then also. until 1000 hours: and. when they were not found, the
federal and state judicial authorities were notified, and inediately began
the necessary investigation.

As of last night. the coaaaander of the State Judicial Police in this town.

Marcelo Aguilera. claiaed that. although there were several clues. he could
not give any information on the matter until the probe of the case was coa-
plated.

(.2
the prison warden. for his part. said that he was certain that the judicial
authorities would at any eonent ascertain the eenner in which the escape of
these three innate-I occurred. and that. in the event that any of the prison's
workers or officials turned out to be involved in this natter. action would
be taken with all the force of the law.

It was also announced that the escapees were confined to different cells that
were rather for reaoved free one another; and hence it is difficult to ine-
gine that they had agreed upon their intentions to escape. In fact. each
one of the three fled on his own.

Also. up until the tine when this article was being written. the police
authorities responsible for pursuing the fugitives had not reported anything
new. and confined themselves to stating laconicelly that they had clues. and
that the escapees would surely be recaptured at any soaent.

The Mexicali native. Jeine Areando lloyos Jain, was arrested by the Federal
Judicial 901111 in ‘l'ecate for crises against health. and entered the La lie-

ue penitentiary in June 1977. having recently been sentenced to 8 years'
inprisonnnt.

Juan Lurania Cirerol was captured in the Federal District by the Federal Ju-
dicial Police, also for the ease cries as the other two escapees had been.
and he entered the La Mesa penitentiary in february 1977. he was serving a
6-year sentence.

Finally. David Anthony Drown was arrested for crime against health. also
by the Federal Judicial Police in this town: and he entered the La liesa
prison on 30 Hay 1978. The English-an had been sentenced to a prison tern
of 5 years and 3 months.

Soldiers. Guards, Innate involved
Hexicali LA V02 DE LA PRONTERA in Spanish 15 lbr 79 See A pp 3. 8

[Text] Tijuana-41x soldiers. two guards and one innate are the individuals
iqlicated in the escape of three drug traffickers free the La Mesa peniten-
tiary which occurred on 11 March.

The foregoing was discovered after an exhaustive investigation by the State
Judicial Police, who provided the details on the nenner in which the escape
took place at a press conference yesterday.

Gilberto liurtado Rodriguez. Draulio Gonzales Gonzales. Benito Garcia Sierra.
Agustin [barre Gonzalez. Guadalupe Bchegaray Lars and Juan Leon Dominguez
are the noses of the soldiers who are suspected of having assisted the cri-
ninals in uniting their escape.

The guards who have also been accused of aiding in this escape are Abel Acos-
ta and Hanoi-l Leon: as well as the innate in charge of taking the roll-call
of the prisoners. Sixto Hertin Donilla.

63
According to the head of the State Judicial Police. l-‘ran:i.m.u l’nlnu, the nine
persons euupeeted of this t'ht‘llpl‘. helped the crisinais to the sale extent. by
providing them with the rope on which they ell-bed the hnrh-wire on the east-
ern side of the prison. making their escape insedistely and fleeing.

As has been reported in a timely manner with full details. the three fugitives
are: David Anthony Bruwa. of British nationality, and the Mexicans Jaise Ar-
sandn lioyos Jain: and Jusn Luzanis Cirerol; concerning whom the state prosa-
cuior. Alejandro Roses Roundia. said at the aforeseniioned press conference:

”Thus far. there have been no clues as to the whereabouts of these three ea-
capees."

Odyssey of the Escape

According to the statements made at yesterday's press conference by both the
prison warden. Leopoldo Carrasco, and the commder of the State Judicial
l‘olice's Second Sector, Marcelo Aguilera. the incidents occurred as follows:

Several days age. using; a perfectly devised plan. the three fugitives huilt

a kind of rope ladder used to hang up the inauues' clvthoa , which was rein-
forced with pieces of wood.

The ladder remained hidden in a tub next to thc- eastern wall. The escapees
took the ladder out through sn opening in the tub, and extended it until it
reached the hands of the soldiers guarding this part of the barbed-wire fence.
who held it firmly so that the inmates could climb up and make their escape.

The first to escape was the Englishmn David Anthony Brown. who fled at about
dawn last Monday: and. a few minutes later. the Mexicans Jaim Armando lioyos
Jaise and Juan Luzania Cirerol did the same.

however. the innate Sixtu Martin nonilla, who was responsible for the roll-
call. did not report the disappearance of the linglishmn Brown until 0800
hours on iimdsy; whereas the report of the disappearance of the two ihxicsns
was rude the next day. that is. at 0800 hours on Tuesday.

The investigation

mu-n the State Judicial Police took charge of the pertinent investigation.
ihey first discuwrc-d that the three (names had not escaped through any
tunnel or hole in the walls; because they found no evidence indicating that
the escape had been made in this manner. there were only are alternatives
remining: the door at the entrance to the prison. or cl inbing over son of
the barbed-wire fence.

however. the big clue came from the fact that the soldiers lsplicnted in this
escape began to absent the-nelves from work on that sane Monday: and there-
fore, the police decided to rake a search for the soldier Braulio Gonzalez
Gonzalez. who- they found at the hour: of one of his sisters just as Brauiio

66
vee preparing to turn over $7,500.20 to hie eieter, whereupon they inediete-
ly erreeted hin.

breulio subsequently turned over enother eu- of eoney. akin; e totel of
$9,200. which ie the enomt of ceeh thet the police heve neneged to recover
thus fer.

This incident ceueed the euthoritiee to eeeuee thet eech of the nine euepecte
hed been given $10,000 by the eeceped drug treffickere in exchenge for ellov-
in; then to eecepe.

After breullo'e nrreet. the police put two end two together end reached the
conclueion thet both the other five eoldiere end the two guerdemnd the in-
nte reeponeible for the roll-cell hed perticipeted in the eecepe of the
three drug treffickere; end hence they proceeded to neke the reepective er-
reete.

At the end of the preee conference. the euthoritiee eeid thet thie wee ell
they could report er the nount. eince ell the euepecte were etill being
inventigeted. end thet they could not edd enything nnre until the probe wee
coupleted.

Federal or Military Penelty
both the proeecutor. Alejendro Roeee Ronndie end Col Mario bernel Ceetillo
of the Fifth Infentry Bettelion egreed in the etetenent that. in the cue

of the eix eoldiere. they dint be eubject not only to the peneltiee etipu-
leted in the federel penel code. but eleo to those of :- vilitery type.

2909
680: 5330

‘5
TRUCKIDAD 0F HARIHUANA, COCAINB CONFISCM‘EI)
Nuevo Laredo 81. DIARIO DE Nlll'lVO LAN-:00 1n Span tall 17 Hur 79 Sec B p 7

[Text] An individual managed to escape the action of the federal spate who
had set up an inspection post on the highway between Reynosa and Monterrey,

Nuevo Leon: but he had to abandon a shipment of urihuana that he was taking
to the Tamulipaa border.

At dawn yesterday. the federal agents seized over a ton of aarihuana. The
harmful ship-sat was being driven to the town of Reynoaa. Tsmulipaa. where
the pertinent investigations are being continued.

The agency for coordination of the entidrug canpaign in the northeastern
zone was notified yesterday of the blow dealt by the federal police assign-
ed to the office of the federal prosecutor in Reynoaa, Tamulipas.

In their report. the federal police stated that. at dawn yesterday, they net
up an inspection post on the Reynosa-Honterrey highway, and that, at a cer-
tain tine. they noticed a trailer truck with license plates 0-9066 stopping,
and its drlver assuming a uysterious demeanor; and they therefore decided to
check it.

Upon realizing that the federal police were approaching, the individual fled
and left the trailer truck abandoned. In a special compartunt. the federal
agents discovered 1,017 kilogram of. packed norihuana.

They Arrest Another Traff lcker

The same federal agents in Reynoea. Tanaulipas. arrested Francisco Torres A1-
vnrez. from whoa they at first confiscated 130 kilograms of mrihuana.

After being interrogated. the individual in question turned over another 22
kilogrsu of the ease drug.

Cocaine Seized ln Hammoroa, Tanaulipas

A total of 225 grass of a white powder which was apparently cocaine was seis-
ed by federal agents in the port of lhtaaoras.

The drugs were confiscated from three individuals nil-ed Jesus Ralirei. Galvan,

Jose de Jesus Hedraao and Francisco Garcia bitumen. who were driving a 1963
Ford Pairlane car in which they were carrying the drugs.

2909

(‘90. C ‘3,“ ‘6
MARINUAMA. POPPY FIELDS DESTROYBD
Mexico City EXCBLSIOR in Spanish 18 Feb 79 p A-27

[Article by Gonzalo Gutierrez L.: "56 Marihusaa and Poppy Fields in
Sinnloa Destroyed by Aray"]

[Text] Mazatlan. Sin.. l9 Peb--Pederal agents and soldiers have, in the
last 15 days, destroyed 56 aarihusaa and poppy fields, totaling 10 hec-
tares. in various townships of the province. Six persons are under arrest.

Attorney Juan Jose Flores Meadellin, agent of the Federal Public Ministry,
stated that the caspaign had been terrentrial as well as aerial.

Those arrestcd are: Antonio Lopez, Victor Manuel Morales. Teofilo Noriega
Canero. Aurelio Quintero Rodriguez. Macnrio Guevara Beltran, and Ienjssin
Raaos Gonzales.

The official explained that it is becoaing increasingly difficult to
locate the sarihusns and poppy fields because they are situated in last-
cesaible places.

In conclusion. he said that this caspaiun is part of Operation Condor
which is being carried out in Sinaloa and "which will not cease despite
the death threats that have been issued by the narcotics traffickers of
the province.“

9399
cso: 5300

67
BRIEFS

IIEROIN PROCESSING LABORATORY --Moxi¢o City. 7 j~iurch----ln the town ol Du-
rango. the Federal Judicial Police discovered a laboratory for procenniog
heroin in which a large portion of the poppy «.rupn planted in Siualoa was
presumably being procecsod. In addition to the discovery oi the laboratory
they found on the site I and three quarters of s kilogram of heroin processi-
ed in that laboratory. the value of which was 3"“),000 on the international
drug trafficking mrket. Also confiscated were spoons. weighing devices and
other laboratory implements. as well as 3 liters of anhydrous acid. 2 kilo-
grass of sweats and l kilogram of "cut." a white powder rnr procenslng hee
rain. with which they were engaged in converting the poppies into heroin
through n cheoicnl process. Arrested and accused of crimes against health
were Alfredo Garcia Aguirre, Jose Mariano Salazar Villa. Jorge iiurillo heal
and Jose Urzeta Garcia, all ofwhoo were purchasluu; opium and selling heroin.
At the time of the capture. Jose liariano Salarar Villa attempted to put up
resistance, but thanks to the suddenness ol the federal police raid he was
overtooe without having an opportunity to pal? the trigger of .1 ‘I-millineter
Colt automatic. In another area. it was also announced that the aviation
services of the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic located two
clandestine landing str.ps for airplanes. one in Oaxaca and the other in
Jalisco. In the first flight over the lsndim; strip. It was spotted in the
settlement of Zoquitsn. in the state of Oaxaca, ahere a partially burned
DC-3 plane was found, which remained traces of sarihuuns on the floor.
[Test] Illuevo Laredo El. HANANA in Spanish 8 Pier 79 See A p 5] 2909

.‘IARIIIUANA SEIZED [N ClllAPAS~-The investigations begun in this town by the
lederul Judicial Police ended with complete Success. since. when the presen-
ed drug trafficker. Benito Adane Luna. was arrested. he confessed that at
the rise of his capture he was seeking a custuser to when to sell 3 tons

of mrihuana which he had hidden in the Chiapus mountains. The agents went
there and. in addition to confiscating the aforementioned drugs. they dis-
covered and destroyed a huge cannabis indies plantation and, at the some
tllae. captured two members of the ring headed by the individual in question.
Fileoon Bustos Rravo nnd Asael. Lopez Roses are the accompl. ices of Adaoe Luna.
Other persona who are fugitives from justice, and the three aforementioned
individuals had plantedsbout 60 hectares of mrihnana. During the investi-
gation begun by federal agents under orders Iron Coadr liarsarito Mendez

68
Rlcn. in this town. forces or the Office of the Attorney General of the
Republic detailed to Tuxtlu. Gutierrez. also participated. as did several
«I' that office's helicopters. The foregoing was announced yesterday by

the agency of the l-‘edoral Public Ministry. It was on 9 March that federal
agents arrested Benito Adana Luna on the highway between Mier and Monterrey.
and he was closely questioned owing to his nervous. suspicious behavior.

he said that. at the time. he was anroute to Ciudad Reynosa in search of

a cuetoaer to when to sell 3 tons of narihuana that he had stored in the
Chiapas aountains. near Nuevo Guerrero. in the municipality of Acoaingo.
[Text] [Nuevo Laredo BL MANANA in Spanish 21 Mar 79 Sec 8 p 3] 2909

AIRCRAFT wrm MARIRUANA POUND-0n Saturday afternoon, the federal agents de-
tailed to the town of Saltillo. Coahuila. located on a site known as "La
Laguna del Rey," situated 300 kilometers from Monclova. Coahuila, a "Beech-
craft" two-engine plane which contained a shipment of mnrihuana that was
mquestionably to be carried to the United States. Yesterday turning. the
agency of the Federal Public Ministry announced the confiscation of the
small plane. which is being subjected to careful investigation by the fede-
ral police. it was reported by the agency for coordination of the antidrug
campaign that. on Saturday afternoon. the federal police were making an in-
spection tour in the Monclova area; and, upon arriving at "La Lagma del
Rey," they found the apparently abandoned plane. and upon searching the in-
side of it. they discovered a shipment of about 750 kilogram of select
narihuana. The federal agents took the aircraft to the town of Saltillo,
Coahuils. and reported the incident to the agency of the Public Ministry
there. On the same Saturday, two arrest warrants were executed in this bor-
der port and in Sultana del "arts. The federal police in Monterrey reported
that they had cowlied with the arrest warrant issued against Gustavo Arri-
aga Caballero. for a crime against health. No suits were pending against
hill. Here in Nuevo Laredo. Julian Garcia Arredondo. who was wanted by the
third district judge for a crime against health, was captured. [Text] [Nuevo
Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 13 Mar 19 Sec 3 p 7] 2909

OFFICIALS VIEW MRIHUANA BURNING-~Yesterday. 3 tons of narihuana were dea-
troyed in the presence of the coordinator of the antidrug cawaign in the
northeastern zone, Alfredo Aaron Juarez Jimenez; the comnder of the lo-
cal military garrison. Gen Mario Murillo Morales; the director of the health
center. Dr Eduardo Taknsita Elizondo; federal prosecutors Nicolas Martinez
Gerda. Luis Esteban Garcia Villalon and Jaime Eugenio Torres Espinoza; and
representatives from the district courts. According to the officials. the
large amount of drugs incinerated were the result of the recent blows dealt
by the Federal Judicial Police under orders from Comdr Margarito Mendez Ri-
co. The federal and health authorities proceeded to destroy the diabolical
grass at exactly 1430 hours. on the grounds of the "General Mscario Zamora"
Military headquarters. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in
Spanish 1‘ Mar 79 Sec 8 p 7] 2909

080: 5330

59
BRIEFS

DRUG INCINBMTION-oﬂore than 1 aillion balboas in drugs were publicly
incinerated this earning. Sons 197 kg of urihuana and 29 kg of cocaine
seized froa drug smugglers over a period of 8 months by Panamanian
authorities were burned today. All the cocaine was destined for the
United States. Host of the aerihuana case free Coloabia. [Pena-e City
Televisora Nscional in Spanish 2315 Gfl‘ 5 Apr 79 PA]

HBTIIAQUAIDNB SEIZURE-dhe Finance Hinistry‘s narcotics agents arrested
Colo-bisns Palairo Jose Valenzuela and Alvaro Alvarez Garcia at Tocuaen
International Airport this norniag and seized two bags containing 20,000
tablets of asthaqualone, a hypnotic sedative. The value of the astha-
qualone was estiaated at $40,000 at street prices. The traffickers also
had 2 grams of cocaine. valued at $1,500. The asthsqualone is also
known by the commercial uses of Qualude. [Penna City Televisors
Nacionsl in Spanish 2315 our 6 Apr 79 PA]

650: 5300

50
DANGER 0F OBSCURE MEDICATIONS POINTED OUT
Montevideo LA HANANA in Spanish 21 Feb 79 p &
[Editorial on unscrupulous physicians and pharsacists]

[Text] Once it was eade public that a pharmacist who retailed presueably
aliasing substances (produced by nixing narcotics and eedication residues)
would be prosecuted. LA HANANA thought it essential to continue investi-
gating the case thoroughly until it could be explained in all its possible
ranifications.

He established then our position by pointing to the seriousness of the
saneuver discovered by the police; according to the investigators thee-
selves the concoction sold by the unscrupulous eerchsnt had alsost caused
the death of one person.

Free the outset it was learned-fron the ease sources--that there were

two others involved: both foreign physicians who were writing the pre-
scriptions filled by the phsrnacist. The scheee had allowed the seabers
of this triangle to profit coefortably at the expense of tens of credulous
patients.

The group's large profit in itself would not be reproachable had it not
coee froe the prescription of psuedotreateents capable of causing severe
hare to the health of those who received it.

Hence. we now consider suitable the decision adopted yesterday by the
appropriate court, which ordered the prosecution of one of the implicated
physicians by charging hie under the provisions of Law ho 15.292 and
Decree No ‘56 of 20 July 1976. while the other was charged with snuggling.
If prosecution was instituted. it was because the investigations went
beyond the first stage of the affair. with the technical cooperation of
the Ministry of Public health. and in this way it was possible to estab-
lish the cannon responsibility of these two professionals.

Investigations revealed the existence of a direct link between the phar-
snclst and the doctors; as well as the fact that the "raw naterial" for
the tablets .n question was illegally brought into the country free
Argentina.

51
The speedy handling of this cute and its tenultn can set an oxaaple in the
nenne nf dlaconrnnlnn nny laltntora of the trlo that vaa aunt to priaon.
The undorntandnhlo anxiety of the human being to solve his phyalcol--aa
well an puvcholnalcnl--prohlena fuvora the appearance of swindlara of all
kinda whose thoughtlana action on the fringa of a truly scientific endothe-

cent can produce irreparable damage. Thia cannot ha allowed; it aunt he
penalizud vith all the severity of the law. Thia ia the way in which the
official. have nnderatood it. taking auitnbla action.

93‘1
cso: 5300

52
BRIE-‘8

mm mums sumac-"In Algeria Alvaro Moscatelli n 32-year old Roman
resident or 26 Vin delle Giunchiglie, has received n 6-year Jail sentence
for attempted narcotics snuggling. Moscntelli was nrrested during Hove-her
in mhahin, near the border between Algeriumluorocco. There was another
Roman with him, 22-year old Filippo lilacrino or 161 Via di 'i'orre 8psccata,
who was acquitted in the trial. II‘ho Mosoatelli case is now being exa-ined
by the Italian Mossy in Algeria and its ofﬁcials are studying the pos-
sibility of requesting extradition of the Jailed mn, who is now being
held in the Oran prison. This is not the first time that Algerian author-
ities have inpooed severe sentences on youths round to he in possession

or drugs. mring Decenher two other Italians, both from Siracusa, were
arrested and sumarily sentenced. They were 19-year old Giovanni Britta
and 29-year old Carmelo Piselli; they are still being held in (h-nn.
[scerpgzﬁmmsmmxmmzm'npg 7961.

(350: 5300

$3
INCREASED USE OF DRUGS ALLEGED
Port Louis LE PEOPLE in French 2 Mar 79 p 2
[Article by Jack Bizlnll: "Hhen Opiun Becomes a weapon")

[Text] Mauritius island. third world country, exploited in the lost
aggressive aanner by the colonialist powers. has become since independence

a focal point in the traffic of drugs. Drugs are sold with the knowledge

of the authorities. They are consumed in large quantities by the popula-
tion of the countryside as well as in the city. and its victins are nuaerous.
The co-ncrcial aspect exists behind the drugs—-as is evidenced by the enormous
profits reaped by the traffickers to the detrieent of the health of the

total population-~howaver. the political aspect lust not be ignored. This
is. no doubt. the lost iaportant fact. since it is indeed these political
considerations which prevent the authorities iron taking adequate neesures
against the drug traffickers.

"he in Mauritius does not know where to purchase drugs. Anost all the
traffickers have absolute freedon. If one could be sure of the support

of the authorities a list of the hotels. restaurants. pharmacies and opiua-
dens could be published. Recently a war was waged between the ilportant
sonopolies and the small traffickers which allowed the police to act severely.
but who will be bold enough to attack personalities notorious in drug
trafficking. it will be said that corruption exists in Mauritius to the
extent that everything can be bought especially silence and protection.
This is quite true. however. if we have a State Security Service which is
aware of everything that goes on. from the nowasenta of a trade unionist

to private nectingr held by political parties. workers. students, etc.

one cannot believe that corrpution is so widespread that a report could

not have been submitted to the proper authorities. he, secret support
exists behind these inport organizations and distributors of the drugs.

Especially since independence the workers have again brought up the question
of the present system. Conscious of their exploitation in the factory as
in the fields. the workers have on several occasions rocked the foundation
of local and international capitalisa in Mauritius. It was necessary for

56
nose to find the eeans to restrain this revolutionary larch. all the sore

so due to the accelerated economic crisis; deeands for wages are numerous

and unemployment is rising. The authorities found that the young who coa-
stltute the vanguard of the working class. are eager for change and that it
was necessary to engage this power at all costs against which beautiful
pro-lees. coenunal conditionality. anti-communist language were not effective.
These young people have their weaknesses. but unfortunately they turn to
Europe to draw their inspirations. Therefore. the ideal area for this regiae
are found in drugs. prostitution in the context of sexual liberation, por-
nography under all its forus. In short. these are the only weapons used

to divert the attention of the workers free the probleea of a political.
social and econoeic order.

Hho does not reusaber how England lulled China to sleep. Opiua iaported
free indie was sold cheaply and in great quantity in China. And China at
that tile. divided and under the doninetion of a capitalistic power. found
itself in an exploited position. The population comprised of tens of
millions of people. fell asleep. It could not face reality. nor could it
awake in order to contend with its eneaies. who does not know that in
America blacks are literally drugged for the purpose of eliminating all
resistance. "he is not aware of the American governsent's tactics which

all to group all the blacks in specific regions and feed thee drugs. harle-
is an exasple asong others.

The island of Mauritius finds itself in the sane situation today. Che-ital
drugs are even sold in the pharmacies. Opiua is available to everyone. It
is relatively much cheaper than gandia. Smoking done are growing like sush-
roe-s. In Roae-hilli. for exaeple. there are at least 12 seeking-dens.
without counting the many "solitaires" who are equipped for those who wish
to get drugged in groups. Who does not know that in barkly City there have
been sany young drug victiss. To fight a workers' nobilizetion all that is
necessary to to silence then through drugs. It is useless to present peti-
tions since those who encourage the proliferation of drugs are very powerful.

it is time for the unions to take a position against drugs and to mobilize
against the distributors who are well-known to us. It will be necessary.

no doubt. to count on our own leans to fight against a dangerous ens-y.

but it is of the utmost iaportsnce to strike a decisive blow against these
eriainals in order to sake it possible for the workers' struggle to continue.

7993
C80: 5300

55
GOVBRWT REPORT GIVES FIGURES on DRUG 058
"set Berlin DER TAGBSSPIEGEL in Ger-en 18 Her 79 p 33

[Text] Bonn-M shift in the drug scene is becoming evident: the nejority
of new drug users are not young people but, increasingly, adults. A report
sublittcd to the nundestsg Interior Cosmittee further indicates that there
are as.ooo-ao.ooo drug users in the no. During the past year there were

600 drug-related deaths; 260 of the victins were in the ie-Zs-yeer ego group.
The totel number of drug violations was 62,500.

In spite of considerable success by police and custom in confiscating drugs,
the illegal trade remains well supplied. The report states that in view of
political conditions and local factors it is virtually impossible to control
drug activities in the originating countries. Greater success may be
possible by close cooperation with the transit countries. Turkish citizens
appear to be most active in drug smuggling end trading. Competent authori-
ties are currently engaged in instituting measures designed to control use
and smuggling. The most imrtant objective, according to the report, is
to save young people from being absorbed into the drug some. The "6
Criminal Justice Department believes that legal provisions for the prosecu-
tion and punishment of drug violators ere adequate.

92 73
(250: 5300

$6
INCREASED VIOLRNCB IN DR!” 8031‘! REPORTED
lla-burg 08!! 8918681. in Gar-an 12 liar 79 pp 10‘. 107. 108. 111

(Article: "The Drug Scene-“Just Like in the Jungle'; Drug-Connected Cries
Has deco-Io “ore Violent"|

[Text] The nethods in the drug Iarkst are becoming in-
creasingly violent. In the hunt for the stuff, fixera and
dealers do not even shy away free nurder. Even the big-
shots of the heroin trade. out of fear, new resort nora
quickly to am or contract killers. The authorities are
afraid the situation will bacoee the sane as in the United
States.

Playing billiards at the "Europa" on Kaiserstrasse in Frankfurt. a Turkish
heroin dealer suddenly felt so-ething sharp pressing against his back.
"Cone outside!" Hith a ”Profi" knife. three Jordanians pushed the an down
the stairs. across the street to the ”Ankara” restaurant and then into a
taxi. in their apartnent in the Nordend. they put the kidnapped an on a
choir.

One "best are in the face, kicked as in the head. and I was bleeding." the
Turk recells. Another. he says. threatened: "You Turkish swine! I'll
throw you into the Main.” The Arabs were paying hia back for having cheated
thee in a deal: for on 3,500 they had received 50 gran- of pure powdered
sugar instead of heroin.

Pro. a neeting with a dealer at Stadtbad Hitta. at noon a couple of black
0.8. soldiers ran down liochstrasse. with a juvenile fixer in pursuit. In
front of 12 Bachersheiaer Landstrasse. an open fight started, now three a-
gainat four.

The Gl'n defended the-selves with knives. One pursuer, according to the
police report, pulled "an air pistol fro. a newspaper he was carrying" and
fired ”several shots at one of the blacks. who was already lying on the
ground." The cause of the dispute: During the drug deal. the Alericana

57
lmd pulled a wallet with oil 5'30 fro- o dealer's pocket.

M linllwlmunlniz In llw center of town. the Jordanian liablh Salihn started
his yt-lluw Por-celw uric-r aidnight. At that solvent n Ian ran toward the car.
fired twice through the windshield and fled. salibe. according to peanuts-

by. not out of "the still saving car and after a few oetera collapsed on the
rlmde"

One of the two bullets had hit the Jordanian in the tip of his lung and
killed his. A 32-year-old countrysnn of his. who had organized a profitable
barter business together with Salibe between Frankfurt and the Middle East.
came under suspicion. "Cars one way. drugs the other way" is how a police
spokessen described the crooked traffic; and presunebly Saliba hnd cheated.

There has been more and core of it in Frankfurt in the past few booths-—
vengeance executed in the open. plunder in the middle of the day. The drug
business has acquired a new crisinal diaension on the Main.

The victius are no longer only the coneuiaers: whoever sells the stuff is also
exposed to danger. "The greatest only of the dealer in the dealer hisself,"
says Chief Conclusion" Peter Loos of the l‘rskfurt drug department. "The
former code of honor not to hurt one another is no longer in force."

The rises are past when the joint node the rounds peacefully along drug
consumers. when a portion of herein was divided up sltruistically in fixer

countries. in the chase for the next shot, iepoverished addicts now do not
necessarily shy away fro. using a knife.

(in the basis of statistics about acts of violence conitted by drug addicts
and dealers in the past year, Chief Conissioner boos fears that "we will
soon have a situation here like the one in the United States." where drugs
play a part in almost half of all arsed acts of violence.

But crime is intensifying also along the sen behind the scenes of the drug
business. Murder is couitted to get even when one of one's own people is
unmasked as a traitor or when people one does business with disobey the rules
of the trade. After "Jealousy, hatred and envy,” notes Frankfurt Chief
Commissioner Oerd liofi'eann, "there is a new Iotive for surderudrugs."

me cautious managers who built the network of trade for the distribution
of heroin in the beginning of the seventies have had to clear the field.

They were textile isporters who partition themselves off well froe their
buyers. or former ares dealers who had always mde it a point not to take a
gen along to meetings in which deals were closed.

These were pushed out by karate fighters and dealers in stolen care, under-

ground people of every stripe. The market, guaranteeing big profit urglns.
was occupied by Turks carrying guns if only to denonstrate their virility.

58
end else Africans. for when iaprisonasntnfigurod to be part of an activity
enrolling violence-«u a heroin dealer wrote hone to iligeris. felt ”like
being in a hotel."

The nenner in which self-adninintered Justice is noted out has been revealed
in e drug trial in Frankfurt. In the proceedings against a ring of inter-
national kerateists and judoists which. with headquarters in Frankfurt,

nsde aillions shipping the basic substance "ergotanine tartrate” for non-
ufscturing L8!) to the United States. an agent infiltrated as a judoist de-
scribed the rough custons.

Tho forner Dutch karate trainer Johannes Cornelius aiming. the witness
cleined. had ”put $0.000 guilders" on his heed. And now he was one of the
hunted. Contract killers had already liquidated five asnbers and accessories.
Uhatever his testinony nay be worth. one Inn has already been found murdered--
courier bee Prickstadt iiassler free Hannever, in a ditch in northern Califor-
nia with a couple of bullets in hie heed.

The criainal element now being revealed in Frankfurt is also already part of
the repertoire in other drug scenes on FRO territory. i’ron Koblenr. for
instance. nddicta went on raids all the way to Cologne and Duesseldorf. ln
fixer districts. it has now cons out in a trial before the Regional Court of
Koblenr. they would lure dealers into their car. take the stuff away free
then at gunpoint and then speed away again.

u.s. soldiers are playing their part in contributing to the rough ways along
drug criainals particularly in Frankfurt. After the end of the war, 61's
with herd dollars revved up prostitution and through heavy deasnd laid the
ground for the drug narketnand now the weakness of the 0.8. currency is
driving then into raids into the districts. "At night they cone down and cut
down everyone." eays Chief Conissioner Loos.

For instance. the 32-year-old dealer when a black attacked in Schillerstrssse.
sticking a knife between his ribs. Perhaps the dealer, Loos says. had
"hawked questionable nerchandisez" or perhaps the custoner siaply did not
want to pay.

Sent-tines nurder is conirted for one dose of heroin. A couple of 0.8.
soldiers stationed in Giessen drove to Frankfurt to supply the-selves with
the stuff. After a traffic accident. according to witnesses. they hid their
guns behind an advertising pillar before the police arrived. when the police
had left. they retrieved their am.

According to investigations. the two blacks had equipped the-selves for a
neeting with their country-an lion David Stuart. who had been discharged

free the any because he had dealt in dope and thereafter was supplying his
old coarsdea free Frankfurt as a civilian. On the Eschenhein grounds. while
negotiating under cover of the bushes, Stuart was shot and killed.

59
nehind the walls of the u.s. barracks between Giessen and Neidelberg, Nanau
and Geinhausen. personnel has long since been drilling in what is then exe-
cuted in Frankfurt-killings and knifing. According to Nco Steve Newton. on
the u.s. bane of Dexheim. for example, where the amount of personnel dead from
drugs. arsed fights and surder threats increased considerably last year.

"it isuall like in a jungle," with "everything being soaahow connected with
drugs.

Hhen Newton reported that three soldiers planned to avenge themselves on a
61 who had stolen sole drugs from then. the NCO hiaaelf found himself in the
line of fire. ”They threatened to kill no." reported Newton; sonabody had
secretly taspered with the brakes of his car.

when soldiers of the Drexheia type then scour the sarket in Frankfurt. they
often do not pay. Even the toughest fixers only husitantly take action to
defend their interests. and "almost always are the victiss" (according to
Loos) .

Even "Boxer Jilly," who before his addiction had done well in the Nesse
championship fights. was not noting out any blows any longer. The great
big fellow, who had a few packages of heroin stolen froa his. instead got
hisself a pawn: he took the thieves' jackets and watches. to be redeeaed
on returning the stuff.

Things looked peaceful when in the aid-seventies Africans started operating
on the market in Frankfurt. They built a new drug route fro- Nest Africa
to Germany on which they smuggled marijuana to the Main.

The Nigerians and Chenaians of the Yoruba and Ashanti tribes. who soaetlmes
had entered the country as "Prince of lvbliolu Luku Ishsn Sunday Kingley" or
hsd changed sane and passport up to 20 tiles. quickly acquired a new field of
activity for themselves. They soon served as contact men between Turkish
heroin importers and American consumers. They attracted addicted prosti-
tutes with their charm and elegance.

The whores paid for the pleasant contact with willing service in the trans-
port of heroin. "Chris" would carry a couple of ounces on her body for
”Amiy" during a train trip; "Gypsy” would smuggle 5 grass in her wig for
her "Ola" into the Butzbach House of Correction.

The love relationship notwithstanding, even the gregarious Africans evidently
were unyielding when it was a question of business. Uhen they arrested a
Nigerian herein dealer. narcotic agents confiscated some letters which kept
mentioning the "dying" of some peopleo-possibly providing clues for a couple
of deaths as yet unsolved:

--1he Ghanaian Edwina Quansah in 197‘ had fallen free a window of the 10th
floor of the Arabella hotel in Frankfurt. In her room the police found a

slit-open suitcase. Next door lived sole countrymen who were known to the
police as narcotic dealers.

60
"The Anericen John Paul, indicted in Frankfurt for a swindle involving ail-
llona. lost his life shortly before his I:rlnl was scheduled to begin~-"because
of poor health." nvcordlng to a companion of Paul's, an African drug dealer.
"Shot and killed in Accra." according to the Nigerian authorities.

According to Prankfurt prosecuting attorney Harald Koerner, who explains how
difficult the investigative work is, whenever African or Chinese drug bosses
got rid of soneone they would steal "around the corner like Hack the Knife."
0n the Main. Turks and Arabs now take care of this openly Middle Eastern way.

At the "Rio Bar” in the railway station district. a Jordanian stabbed a
countryman in the shoulder within full view of the custoners. Cheating in a
heroin dual was also the reason why in Offenbach several Riddle Baaternera
attacked one another with switchbladea and a clothes rail.

And "hecause they are now working with harder bandages at the base." Chief
fonianioner Loos says, explaining the escalation of violence, “the whole-
sale dcaler too is nore apt to carry a weapon," because he too has to
figure "that he may be ripped."

It was with suspicion that a couple of Turks net beginning of January at the
discotheque "Ntasber One" in Grosse Priedhsrger Stresse. According to wit-
nesses, (her Boynikiglu and "Toni" got into a fight over a lib 80,000 drug
deal. which they conducted quickly in a backroom. "Toni" pulled a gun and
shot Boynikoglu twice, leaving him seriously wounded on the floor.

The quick draw is also making Frankfurt narcotic agents nervous. Hhen pro-
secuting attorney Hilfried Degenherdt. with 2 per nill of alcohol in his
blood, felt that he was being followed in the Loray Passage recently by a
couple of people, he innediately pulled out his official gun.

The two surprised sen, who themselves thoughts they were in danger of being
mugged, pulled the gun away fronrthe attorney and beat hill up.

8790
C80: 5300

61
HEN)!" RING IN WEST BERLIN 3mm UP
Zurich NE!!! ZUBMIBR 23mm in Ger-nan 3 liar 79 p 7

[Text] Berlin. 1 her-~1‘he Berlin police. working together with custom,
have broken up a ring of Turkish heroin smugglers and large-scale dealers
in Rest Berlin. Between October 1978 and the end of February 1979.

a total of 16 Turks were arrested. According to the findings or the
narcotics investigators, between the autumn 0! X977 and the autumn of
1978, at least 23 kilograss oi‘ heroin were snuggled from Turkey to

West Berlin and sold in this city by the gang. as a spokes-an announced
on Thursday. This quantity of narcotics has a black market value of

far more than 10 million marks. According to the intonation the police
have, the apprehension of these gang sewers has rattled extensively

the nerves of the large-scale heroin dealers in this city.

The large—scale heroin trade, in the judgment of the police and customs,
is completely under Turkish control. he Turkish gangs of large-scale
dealers have up to new supposed themselves to be invulnerable. since
the top people in the drug scene hardly ever make an appearance.

The sales are transacted via a dense network of snail dealers and

petty pushers. The narcotics are brought into West Berlin in train,
airplane. and automobile trips from Turkey along different and varying
routes, in part across the territory of the Pat; and in part also by

way of Rest Berlin.

12114
C80: 5300

62
HERO!" SEIZBD, PIVE Am IN RUBSSBLSHEIH
Frankfurt/ﬂail! FRANKFURTER RUNDGCHAU in German 16 Feb 79 p 18

[Text] Ruesselsheir-The criminal police of Ruesselsheim have seized
some 3 1/2 kilograms of herein with a market value of just under

1 million marks. It is the largest quantity of narcotics which they
have been able to remove from circulation in recent months in the
mine-Main area. The officers of the narcotics department arrested

as dealers and consumers two women and three men, aged from 22 to 29 years
old. who are being brought before the police-court judge. 1he heroin,
which comes from Turkey, was packaged in 13 heavy plastic bags of

250 grams each, which were contained in a cloth bag. In the apartment
where they found the 'dope,‘ the criminal police also confiscated an
apothecaries’ scale, which apparently was to be used for the packaging
of "standard portions.“

‘i'he apprehension of this quintet--residents of Ruesselsheim and Frankfurt
as well as one woman who comes from the Odenwald area-was preceded

by observations which were made over several months. On the basis of
these, it was pretty clear to the police when the bringing in of the
heroin was to be staged: The offenders, who could be classified as
drug-dependent, were on the verge of getting themselves into a tight spot,
and they apparently were afraid of suffering from withdrawal symtom.
Therefore, according to the criminal police, they planned to make this
great coup in order to stock up for an extended period of time.

Those arrested--as the investigations showed--have without exception
switched over to this hard drug by way of hashish. A role was also
played in this by a ‘Nrk who had at first kept the five persons supplied
to their satisfaction, and in a relatively short time had brought them
into a condition of dependence.

Despite this fresh success on the drug scene-~only a few days ago about
500 grams of heroin had been seized in Darmstadt--peoplc connected with
the Rueseelsheim police spoke merely of the ”tip of an iceberg.“ Our
extensively open borders have for a long time been inducing even small
and medium-scale crooks to procure narcotics in foreign countries, which
is relatively easy to do, and to smuggle them into the PRC. The Rhine-
Mein area is said to have thereby become a focal and pivotal point for
this scene.

12114 63
080: 5300
SIX ANTIDRUG PROPOSALS UNVEILED 1N HIM“

Milan 1L GIORNALE avovo in Italian 4 Feb 79 p 9

lTextI hith aix ”practical proposals,“ the commune, region, province. school
authorities, and the other public and private agencies involved in combating
drugs, plan to fight the proliferation of narcotics here. The six proposals
were unveiled yesterday by Mayor Tognoli, at a meeting at Palazzo
Marine attended by Regional welfare Inspector Peruzzotti, provin-
cial council-en Boioli and Begnis, city councilman Sirtori and
Cuono, Chief Prosecutor Lapiccirella, school superintendent
Tortoreto, Dr Portaccio from the Questura, Dr Ponodoro from
Juvenile Court, Professor Pisapia of State University, and the
field staff from the Antidrug Center, New Community, the Commit-
tee to Fight Drugs, and other agencies. The first proposal

would make the specialized university institutes responsible for
gathering data on the spread of the drug phenomenon in Hilan.
According to the Health Ministry, Mayor Tognoli recalled, in 1977
in all of Italy there were 2,538 people addicted to hard drugs,
and around 800 of them were in Lombardy. "These figures are
wholly out of touch with reality," said the mayor. One need
only recall that over the same period, the Antidrug Center alone
treated 1,500 drug addicts in Milan. The second proposal calls
for setting up courses in health education (with particular on-
phasis on drugs) in the schools, working with the superintendent,
and in factories (there are a lot of young workers addicted to
drugs),working with the unions. Thirdly, the commune plans to
coordinate and encourage all public and private efforts fighting
drugs; for the time being there are no plans to set up a com-
mittee, but merely to hold regular meetings. The commune has
earmarked 300 million lire from 1979 budget funds for the purpose.
The fourth point has to do with urging the hospitals to take a
decisive approach to the problem of treating addicts, who nust

he given care without being segregated any more than absolutely
necessary. For runaway kids who often don't know where to find
shelter and who are usually in the initial stages of drug use,

66
the commune intends to set up -- this is the fifth proposal --
hostels staffed with antitk-ug paramodical personnel. Finally,
and this suggestion cones Pros thn countries most advanced in

the fight against drugs and from the experience of groups working
in our country as well, for hardcnru addicts “no longer capable of
critlcal thought or will," there m a proposal to set up “shol~
tered" agricultural communities, where addicts would live and
work in a state of partial isolation from the outside world.

6182
C80: 5300

65
JAILBD DRUG ADDICTS LACK MEDICAL ATTENTIONBUT NOT DRUGS
Rome uunrrl in Italian 23 Feb 79 p 4
[Article by Giancarlo AngeleniJ

LTcxtl Untreated addicts on a nonstop round trip from
drugs to prison and back again. ﬂair-raising
news reports: drugs in many prisons, lack of
medical attention to addicted inmates under-
score an intolerable situation; Trying alter-
native sentences; Talking to Giglia Tedesco.

Rome: How many drug addicts are in our prisons and jails?

What sort 0: life do they live there? And how many of our chil-
dren -- increasingly younger children -- are winding up in pri-
son for minor offenses somehow connected with drug use? A com-
prehensive answer to those questions would be out of the question
today. The best we can do on the truth about drug addiction, and
about the problems connected with it, is to start picking up the
ever-more-frequent warnings and “signals."

Anybody who has ever had a glinpsn, no matter how fleeting, at
the inside of a prison will have no trouble in surnising that
the problem is most violent where there are denser concentra-
tion» of prison populations and where, as a consequence, rapport
with a prisoner is more difficult, especially if he or she is

an addict.

' Communist Senator Giglia Todesco, who recently inspected the we-
men's section of Rome's Rebibbia prison, says: “Here, 20 percent
of the inmates are being held on (harges stemming from drugs:
some are here for possession or distribution, but a lot are here
forinsulting and offending public officials, or for petty pilfer-
ing as a way to buy drugs. That is a very high proportion -- 20
percent, one person in every five. it is even higher, when you

remember that, as a rule, women fall into the meshes of the law
less often than men.

66
IFurthermore, drugs and prison are becoming increasingly two

poles of the same sentence (of one single hell) that traps the
addict in a spiral of sin, of violence, and often of arbitrary
power; an individual in desperate need of care, not only will

not find any adequate protection in prison because of this spe-
cial condition, but precisely because of his or her vulnerabi-
lity, may well serve months or even years of the cruellest and
hardest kind of imprisonment, subjected as he often is to harrass-
ment, blackmail, or brutality.

”The world of drugs. too, has attracted attention for other
facts, often of a totally different kind, which are uncertain
and hard to explain: they range from picketing pushers to their
physical liquidation, performed by dubious groups or "nuclei"
who claim the right to deal out summary justice (even though it
may be labelled 'people's justice): and from there to neighbor-
hood demonstrations or files of addicts' mothers marching in
front of a courthouse.

“The world of crime itself seems to be riddled today increasingly
with these factors: the motivation for crime (and often for the
most savage and vicious sort of crime) seems to affect young and
often very young addicts.

"These are the dreadful facts we read about in the latest edi-
tions of the newspapers -~ we havu all read them: the case of
the boy from the Roman 'borghettn' of Mandrione, a real casbah
clinging to the walls of the Felice acqueduct) who fired on his
mother and father with two rounds from a shotgun because they
refused to give him money to buy drugs; the other two addicts
who killed an office worker in a Roman trattoria just to rob him
of 45,000 lire; the murder of an old man and his wife (aged 80
and 70), killed in their home on the fringe of the Roman coun-
tryside, by people who may have been acting under the influence
of drugs. All they got from that crime was a paltry 300,000
lire.

"These are terrifying events which, precisely because of their
ultimate finality, demand attentinn beyond the span of momen-
tary recoil in horror. At this puint, it no longer seems silly
to worry over the conditions in which imprisoned addicts live,
at the very moment when, outside these walls, other drug-crazed
youngsters are committing more and equally bloody crimes.

"Let's take the case," Senator Tedesco goes on, "of the Mandriene
kid: he shot his parents, but by luck he didn't kill them: but
if he is taken to prison, what are they going to do with him?

I am not saying, of course, that he ought not to be placed under
court control, but the basic problem is to cure him of his ad-
diction.

67
"No question about it," Giglia Todesce goes on, “the main thing
is to fight drugs and never to go near the prison gates, but if
things no the other way, if the addict is imprisoned, then we
must see to It that when he comes out of there he has been given
practical support in breaking out of his addiction and his drug
dependency; all this. of course, provided we still want to work
on the basic assumption undorlyinn prison reform, which is re-
mhwntimu

"Today, In the vast majority of cases, it can he said that this
concept is completely unhoeded in Italian prisons. In many of
them drugs circulate freely, creating new violence and hegetting
still more crime; there is vastly increased use of mood-altering
drugs (it would even seem that in some cases prison doctors take
the attitude of issuing prescriptions with extreme laxity);

many addicts are deeply disturbed at having to be taken outside
the prison, under escort, to get their maintenance allowance of
methadone at public health clinics."

nut that is not the worst of it, by a long shot. Let's go back
and take a look at some of the newspaper stories. Around January
1973, auto Bullo, who was being held (in an isolation cell) in

the Venice prison, killed himself during a withdrawal crisis;
around the same time in Rome, another prisoner died of an over-
dose of drugs: that was Bruno Santini, who had obtained the drugs
in the prison where he was being held (Regina Coeli). And when
Gigliu Tedosco and another communist senator, Goneroso Potrollo,
raised a question on the floor to the Justice Minister, all they
got was a very tardy answer from the undersecretary, asking "for
more time to look into the backgrounds of all imprisoned addicts.“

There is more. That same December, in Rebibhia, a 25-year-old
man by the name of Claudio Randazzo hanged himself in his isola-
tion cell; he had been imprisoned for possession of 3 grams of

a drug; and in Genoa, just a month ago, another addict, 30-year-
old Cosimo Petrncca, who had just been freed on probation, was
found dead in her cell. Then there is the mind-boggling case of
a Parma laborer, Antonio Montoro, 23, who was caught with 10
crams of hashish in his pocket, wound up first in jail and then in
an asylum for the criminally insane; and there is the case of a
young man beinc held in the Nuovo prison in Turin for attempted
auto theft, who was blindfolded with a pi110wcasc and beaten by
ten men (was never treated For his injuries, but sent directly

to an isolation cell) because he "knew too much" about the drug
traffic.

It is these last several incidents in particular that lay the
accent not only on prison as a place of treatment and recovery
(which, as we can see, is a long way from what it is today), but
also on the advisability of discarding prison terms in many cases
in Favor of alternative sentences. This is feasible, but even

68
more important, it is necessary, as the very high percentage of
prisoners hold in Robibbia on minor charges, for example, goes

to prove. Appellate Court Judge Ignacio Straniero is wrong, on
this count, when (pursuing a line which fortunately has not many
adherents on the bench) he decided to attack, in his opening re-
port for the court year, docriminalisation of possession of small
amounts of narcotics for personal use, arguing in favor of mea-
eurosnthat would keep addicts from becoming "carriers of conta-
gion.

We all know full well that decriminaliaation is not enough, and
one proof of that is the fact that nanny addicts come to grief
with the law for other reasons. But we are certainly not going
to achieve, by moving backward, a cure for addiction, which is the
only true goal worth pursuing. Among the numerous changes that
ought to be made in our penal system there is one legislative tool
ready to hand that offers an initial solution: it is a bill al-
ready passed in the House and now before the Senate, and which
deals with alternative penalties to Jail terms for minor offen-
ses falling within the discretion of the local magistrates (pre-
tors) when the sentence handed down by the court is 6 months or
loss. It is a bill that is not designed expressly for applica-
tion to drug addicts, but it offers a brand new chance to the ma-
gistrate for avoiding imprisoning a drug addict who, precisely
because of his dependency, is more liable to commit a whole
string of minor offenses against property. In this sense, too,
perhaps, we can indirectly approach the work of healing by pre-
venting, avoiding prison, which too often today is a place of
violence and brutality, never one of care and treatment.

6182
cso: 5300

69
DRUGS CONCHALED IN POSTCARDS, HOLLOH SHOE HEELS

Rene L‘UNITA in Italian 23 Feb 79 p a

[Text] There is a multi-billion-lire traffic in drugs running in and out
of Roman prisons. Yesterday the first figures in this rin3--Certainly not
the least important--ended their careers. at least for the time being, as
drug suppliers to prisoners. Twelve arrest warrants were issued by the

office of Dr Vecchione, deputy D.A., against prisonErs and ex~
prisoners, almost all of them charged with armed robbery, at-
tempted homicide, and theft. Seven people were arrested at
their homes, four were already in prison, and one is in hiding.
All were sending or receiving postcards I'stuffed" with heroin,
or were concealing amphetamine pills in hollow shoe-heels; in
one shoe alone 30 such pills were found. The clever system for
delivering the heroin (“almost pure,“ said drug-squad Carabini-
eri) was discovered by accident, after controls ordered some
time ago by the court. Picture postcards of Rome, carrying
best wishes for "a nice stay inside," were half opened, then,
in the square where the stamp goes, a few milligrams of white
powder were placed. This done, tie postcards were sealed back
together again and addressed to Rebibbia and Regina 60011. A
dozen "heroin greeting cards“ were sent by 24-year—old Massimo
Hole, and this was the main track followed by the investigators.
In any case, hundreds of such cards were received over recent
months by prisoners who were “in” on the traffic. The lucky
recipients of this profitable nail were, in addition to Mole,
Roberto Vera, 21; Giuliano Romani, 20, both at Rebibbia; and
Bruno Franzo, held in the Aquila prison, but also a Roman. The
sender-s, too, were Romans. Ruggeri D'Amato, 20; Vladimiro
Pellegrinl, 28; Giorgio Ferru, 263 Fabio Domizi, 21; Giuseppe
Pugliese, 29; Giovanni Orsini, l8, and a minor girl, 6. C. P.,
prepared and mailed the "stuffed postcards." All had done time
themselves, and had kept in touch while they were inside. They
took turns, creating a network of connections among the various
prisons, and inventing several systems for getting their "goods"
into the cells, at prices that were exorbitant by comparison
with street prices on the outside.market.

6182

650: 5300 70
nomam. ATTACKS mm some! on new;
Rottordaa rmc mmsmw in Dutch 1? m- 79 p 7
[Editorial: "Heroin"]

['Dext] 'lhe position of the anyor and aldenen of Aasterdaa in the debate
concerning the drug policy in connection with the notorious reception center
for heroin addicts. the "Stadsdoelen." caused surprise as well it night.
They limited theaselves to the resolution to clear the center without coa-
aiting the-selves to the requested alternative. sore saall reception facili-
ties. Under pressure iron the council soae noises have now been ads in
this direction. but the policy note which is to provide the starting point
for the council debate was nevertheless characterised priaerily by a mat
deal of vagueness. if not distaste.

what do the aayor and alder-nan of Aasterdaa actually want? the first alder-
aan. Hrs Vcrrink. celled the problea extresely difficult. which is true.

and without ready lads solutions. This any be true too -- but this cannot
be an excuse for the practically total lack of policy initiatives ezmihited
by the aunicipal executive.

However. there is probahly a policy in there anyhow: Just let those Junkies
wander through town. Such an approach has a certain cynical reality value:
the nuisances get spread out and the sasll connagrations which take place
can probably still be put out. By the police then.

without wanting to idealise the opportunities for providing help - or to
uni-ice the nuisance which such reception centcrs cause a neighborhood --
a laisser fairs policy aunt still be considered totally inadequate. 10 let
heroin clients run around involves the risk of an oil slick effect in terns
of hard drug use and trade.

Aside from huaan considerations. a. serious effort in favor of eaall scale
reception centers is necessary as support for a directed police policy.

that is to say not to pick up will distributors who are strongly addicted
themselves. but to go after the big villains in the background. ledges have
to be driven into the heroin scene.

71
whether the requested reeepticn plan should be paired with ths se-eslled
free diepcnssticn of herein to addicts. so the comeil echo. is for the tine
being another utter. The necessary controls should first he built into this.

The Mich experience teaches that this is extresely difficult -- let clone

within the up to new hsltins Antonin drug policy. This in itself is 5
reason finally to bscose serious about it.

M63
680: 5300

72
TIIRBB 011N383 ARRESTED, 03mm FOR HERO!“ TWIMN
Rotterdam NRC WELSH.” in Dutch 8 liar 79 p 3

{Text} Three days after their arrest three Chinese heroin smugglers were
deported because the police had used illegal methods to catch them.

The Central Criminal Investigation Department of the Round. police and
the district attorney declared in a joint statement that they decided to
waivo prosecution "because methods used to arrest the emugglers were doened
inahiuible within the framework of Dutch law." The Rotterdam police did
not want to go into details about "the nethoda used.“ [tumors have it that
the police itself trafficked in heroin.

Last February the three Chinese were arrested in Rotterdam. They had more
than 3.5 kilogram of heroin on them. On 16 l'ebruary, 2 days after their
arrest, they were deported.

This decision was taken while a lawsuit against a man from hotterdma accused
of heroin trafficking, was still in progress. The Rotterdam District Court
dismissed the case on 21 February. it believed the defendant's state-rent
that an undercover policemen had provoked him in supplying 3 kilograms of
heroin.

The three Chinese were arrested in the night between 13 and 14 February
during a "routine investigation," as the police called it. In the car of
one of the defendants were two suitcases with false bottom. The heroin
hidden in them would have brought over half a million guilders on the street.

The Rotterdam narcotics brigade had worked many months on this case. The
gang was suspected of briuing several shipments of heroin to Rotter-dds.
There was close cooperation with the police of Toronto, Canada. which
infiltrated the gang with two female agents who posed as messengers.

The drugs were shipped to Europe from llong Kong and Singapore. They reached
Rotterdam by train.

73
Second cheater actor Mrta (chrlotlnn Duocroclc Appeal) responded by
unylny. that: infiltration by pollen personnel in crialml circle. 1- sol-octan-
the only way to obcaln lntomtlon about ccrtoln crluu. Ilovovar, he would
ltkc to and tho Mniacar of Junta luua certain rules on this subject.
bocouau ll: concorna a balancing act on tho border human admissible and

lnoduuibla procedures. no colparod it thh the ﬁnd of procedures used
in intern-clonal eaplonngo cued.

10,319
080: 5300

M
PORBIGJ ORGANIZED CRIME GANG INVOLVED IN DRUG AFFAIR
Stockholm DAGBNS NYHETBR in Swedish 25 Jan 79 p 23
[Article by Leif Dahlin]

[Text] Drugs run like a red thread through the tangled skein of
crime surrounding the million-krona Stockholm Savings Bank
swindle. and the outlines of a drug ring with a big-time foreign
criminal at its head can be discerned. Prosecutor and police
will not comment on the case for technical reasons connected
with search and investigation. Several prison sentences may be
in question.

A 26-year-old woman who is far advanced in her legal studies and has serious
plans to follow a judicial career is becoming increasingly interesting in
the case. She is alleged to be the mistress of one of the arrested bank
employees and the connecting link between him and one of the men in the top
echelon of the robbery and drug ring.

The woman and six other persons in the "robbery division" were questioned
before the Stockholm district court Wednesday [24 January] in connection
with the brutal robbery and rape in a family home on Hagagatan in Stockholm
on 2 November 1978.

The head of the ring gave the woman a diamond ring valued at 100,000 kronor
and other articles taken in that robbery. She presently placed the ring in
n safe-deposit box of one of the bankers'. The woman also served as an
intermediary in several loans between the banker and his friend. The lat-
ter got a total of 300,000 kronor in installments. In another loan case
the ring leader got 120,000 kronor, leaving 5 diamonds as security. They
were supposed to be worth 300,000 kronor.

False Diamonds

The banker had the stones appraised. They were false diamonds and worth

at most 3,000 kroner. The banker appeared as plaintiff in Nednesday's case.
The woman and the ring leader's ox-wife are accused of receiving stolen
goods. They have denied the accusation.

75
‘Ihe :ietunl robbery on Ilogngntnn was carried out by the ring leader and two
other men. Masked nnd armed with pistols. they forced their way into the
hone just as the family were about to go to bad. They had all taken drugs
before they comitted the robbery. hesides the diamond ring. the booty
included it jewel box and contents worth 100,000 kronor. One of the three
involved in the ease denied guilt.

"I was forced to take part." he said.

lie admits that he had doped himself with cocaine and that he got so excl ted
that he forced himself on the woman. who had a pistol oiled at her head.

A few meters from the wife iny her husband, who also had a pistol oiled at
his head. lie was unable to intervene.

'l'wo Robbe rs Seized

l'oliee spies who were owns the leﬂiers of the ring on the track of other
crimes were able to seize two of the robbers, while a third succeeded in

getting away. A fourth person who was waiting outside on the street was
also seized.

’Ihe police were able to recover about 75,000 kronor's worth of the booty ia-
Ilediotciy. Since the diamond ring also turned up later, the couple's claim
for conpensution was 26,000 kronor plus 40.000 kronor damages for "pain and
anguish." The ring leader confessed before the court that he had taken part
in the robbery, saying that the reason was that he needed money for drugs.

The courtroom of the 17th precinct was cmwded with the accused, their at-
torneys, police observers. and spectators. The testilony in the afternoon
concerned the events in the apartment. it was heard behind closed doors.
The trial will continue on Thursday.

8815
(ISO: 5300

76
COURT HANDS DOW RECORD DRUGS SENTENCE
Stockhola DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 17 Feb 79 p 7
[Article by Leif Dahlin]

[Text] "l have never been able to see anything wrong in principle
in selling drugs. My criae is directed against the financial
structure that society represents and not against particular in-
dividuals." So said a 31-year-old businessman froa Soilentuna.
near Stockholm, after the Solna district court had sentenced hie
Friday to lo years in prison for gross violations of the drug
code-~large-scaie selling of alphetaaines and heroin. Never be-
fore had a Swedish court handed down such a long-term sentence
for a narcotics offense. The sentence will be appealed.

The business lam-called "Plastic" in drug circles--had. according to dis-
trict prosecutor Anders Iskander. snuggled large anomts of .photaaines
and heroin fronlidlland and lost Ger-any to the Swedish drug aaritet frol 1972
until he was SOi‘Od in April of last year. He attached a nuiier of assist-
ants to his business. never brought in batches hiasel f, and others parceled
the drugs out, sold them, and rendered accounts.

1972: A woaan who was convicted earlier in the sane case snuggled a kilo-
gram of aaphetaaines to Stockhola on "Plastic's" account.

I973: "Plastic" went to Basel and net the woman, who took over a kilogrn
of anphetaaines and snuggled then to Stockholm. The woman adaitted six
such snuggling trips later.

1974: "Plastic“ brought equip-eat for preparing whetaaines fro. Switzer-
land to Stockholm. in Varberg, in the southwestem part of the city, he
rigged up a hone factory and prepared 300 grams of anphetaaine. After that
he moved his business to a house in Vendelsll, where he wade 500 grams.

l975: "Plastic" cane into contact with herein for the first tin. The

first shipment was twenty-five 0.3 gram capsules; thereafter, forty-five
0.05 gran bags.

77
v
[970: 'Ihe heroin business really picked up steam. One of his assistants
(sentenced to 4 1/2 years) took the heroin over for sale in the subway
stations and at bus stops.

(Ion fess ion

The others convicted in the case. including two other men who spent large
amounts of money on trotting horses, mule confessions which found support
in court that "Plastic" had access to hundreds of kilograms of uphetanlne
that was smuggled in in batches of 10 kilograms each. The accounting price
was 35.000 to 40.000 kronor per kilogram.

1978: "Plastic" admitted that he had contacts abroad for supplying 2 kilo-
grams of heroin. ills "runner" picked up the shilmnt in limlogarden. A
foreign national delivered it early in February. The runner was given

475 grams by his good friend to sell. 11w rest was turned over to the
police'by "l‘lastlc's" and the runner‘s lawyers at the end of the year.

At that time both were in jail and nobod) wanted the shipment to fall into
the hands of others.

In NH “Plastic“ was confined in a psychiatric institution for a narcotics
violation. At the time of his examination Leif djesjd. the head doctor.
said that "Plastic" was a markedly schizoid young nan who sonetiacs used
drugs. Ills psychic abnormality was of such a profound nature that it must
be put on a par with mental illness.

District Pmsucutor lkander found it reaarkuhle that "Plastic" could leave
just a week after he was admitted to the neutral hospital.

Not Sick

In December of last year "Plastic" was examined by head doctor Leif Gjesjd,
who says in his report that "Plastic“ committed his narcotics violation
under a certain psychic abnormality. which, however, is not of such a pro-
I'ouml nature that it can be put on a par with nontal illness. 0a 9 Febru-
ary the prison board said, “in view of what the proceedings show concerning
the man's criminality, neutrality. habits, and living conditions in general.
the board reconcnds that the man be imprisoned."

Prosecutor: h'hen "Plastic" was living anonynously in Sweden, be arranged
for tennis hours. for example, under a false name. Nobody knew where he
lived. He lived a life of luxury. He stayed at the most lavish hotels.
ate at the "in" places. Bought a boat for 95.000 kronor, bought expensive
cars. hired chauffeurs and bodyguards.

"Not Wrong"

I‘lastic: "l have never been able to see anything wrong in principle in
selling drugs. I have never viewed- narcotics as poisons, but have con-
sidered them as drugs. Narcotics addicts have not been able or have not

78
wanted to adapt themselves to society. which in may respects is inhuaan.
I have helped the: to get drugs that they themselves wanted to get. My
criae is directed against the economic structure that society represents.
Not against particular individuals.

"My life as a man about town was an alternative to total solitude."

in setting the length of the ainlaua tine of "Plastic's" confine-ant. the
court noted that he had snuggled considerable aaounts of narcotics, includ-
ing several kilograms of "that especially dangerous narcotic, herein." The
court also decided that the 500,000 krenor confiscated at "Piastic‘s" hone
should be forfeited to the state. District prosecutor [Reader is of the
opinion that "Plastic" has placed considerable sins abroad.

Earlier. a Southeast Asian national was sentenced to 10 years' iaprisonaent
hy the district court of Goteborg. A Nest Gemn citizen also got 10 years
several years ago from the district court of Stockhola for extensive
aaphetaalne snuggling. A short tine age the "narcotics aanufacturer" in
Uppsala get 10 years in prison. All of then have a chance to be freed after
serving half of the sentence. "Plastic" canget about a year off the term to
which he Is now sentenced. Confinement for a period of at least 10 years
corresponds to a nominal 20-year sentence.

8815
(350: 5300

79
DWI! SBNTBMED 10 SEVEN YEARS IN PRISON
Zurich "SUE ZUERCHBR 231m in German 17 Feb 79 p 27

Next] Increasingly, a severe punishing of drug dealers in finding
acceptance in the Swiss courts. Prison sentences of several years
have become the rule, as is also shown by the following axe-pie:

The First Criminal Division of the Zurich Cantonal Court has raised the
punishment for John Bonyhadi, nearly 30 years old, by 1 year over against
what the lower court isposed, to 7 years of penal servitude. In this
sentence, 896 days spent under investigative arrest are taken into
account. What is more, Bonyhadi must pay a fine of 8,000 francs, and
following his release he will still be banished from this country for
a period of 15 years. He evidently sold 168 grams of heroin and 1,000
tablets of LSD within Witterland and thereby took in at least

53,000 francs-more than enough to classify this case as a grave one

in the sense of the Narcotics Act.

Tourist From Canada

The defendant was born in Budapest in 1949. In 1963, at the age of

14 years. he emigrated with his parents to Canada. He worked for sons
years as a machinist and later as a taxi driver. In 1974 he married
in Canada, and at the end of the sane year he took a trip as a tourist
with Canadian citizenship with his wife to Amsterdam. while his wife
worked there for a time as a barmaid, Bonyhadi shied away from any
regular jobs. 0n the contrary, he got into the lucrative business of
drug dealing. According to'hie own statement, he is himself not
dependent on drugs. On 13 August 1976, the Saint Gall police were able
to put an end to his activities.

The “tourist" Bonyhadi because-according to the charge--the foreign
representative, so to speak, of a travel agency in Amsterdam named

"Great China." This was a front for -.a narcotics distribution organization
centered around the Chinese person named sonny. Other ilungarians also
belonged to this circle of dealers. Because of this collaboration,

the offender had dealings not only for his own profit but also as part

of a gang.
”headed" Witnesses

The defendant never made a confession. 0n the contrary, he denied and
today still denies any guilt. his attempt to make himself out to be
the victim of a conspiracy or a mix-up was not successful. and his
protestations of innocence both before the local court of zurich and
before the cantnnal court, to which the defendant and the public
prosecutor's office had appealed, were not believed.

Independently of one another. ll witnesses had named end identified
Bonyhadi as a narcotics dealer. In this connection it should be

remarked that in narcotics cases the examination of witnesses often

turns out to be difficult. This was so here also: Some of the

witnesses seemed drug-intoxicated--they were “loaded,“ to use the slang
expression. Some--namely former accomplices-went back on their testimony
after the first examination, partly out of worry about reprisals on

the part of the narcotics dealers, and partly out of fear of not being
able to obtain any more drugs in case of an incrimination of the
defendant.

One witness could no longer be questioned: he died of an overdose of
heroin. Because of his hopeless drug dependence, some time before the
arrest, Bodyhadi had ceased doing any business with him. But evidently
that was by no means done out of concern for the deplorable state of
health of the addict, but much more likely because customers of this
sort set aside so much of the quantities of drugs obtained for their
own consumption that they get into the “red“ and have to owe the dealers
the sums of money charged for the drugs.

Drugs By Mail

Precisely this attitude illustrates the unscrupulousness of the large-scale
drug dealers. Like his accomplices, Bonyhadi )Enew the effects of his
criminal activities and was again and again able to observe these

effects on his burned-out, mortally ill victims. This degree of gravity
of the wrong connitted, in the opinion of the cantonal court, was taken
too little into account by the lower court; therefore the First Criminal
Division increased the punishment by 1 year. me fine of 8,000 francs
which was pronounced does not merely exist on the sentencing docmsent"

it proved possible to confiscate around 2,300 francs plus checks with

a value of $3,000 along with the seizure of the defendant.

The defendant, as a rule in the company of an accomplice, brought the
narcotics from the Netherlands into Switzerland and sold them in Saint
Gall and in :zurich. But in some cases he also sent them by mail,

postpaid to destination .

12114
cs0: 5300 2ND

81