APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100030004-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82~00850R000100030064-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8361

30 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 17/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030084-7
"OTB

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained. -

lleadlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original intonation was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was sulmsarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trenslitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and encloaed in perentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items ~are as
given by source.

'lhc contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGl‘l' MRS AND REGULATIONS WINNING MBRSHIP OF
MATERIALS ”PRODUCED mum REQUIRE THAT DISSEHDMTION
0P nus PUBLICATION BE ”STRICTBD MOPPICIAL USE ONLY.
' It N
W" “ms man -m

30 March 19 79

. u r .aII- ‘Mdﬂ I

TRANSLATION!) on ussn screuce mo rucuuowcv - PHYSICAL
scxaucss mo racumomcv, (Fouo 17/79)

 

 

' Mohawk)

0- sorter-leg omslutiee laps.
s.

I

’1'.— W ﬂame, “unmann- Nanr 404 Mile u u. PIOMINlIi/Votl Una No.
I Joint Publications Research Service
I l000 north Globe Road

Arlington, Virginia 22201

. sunset/Oust No

e

l). Type oi Report a Pulse

I2, ‘ﬁ‘nsmmg “nonunion Nose and Moe--
overs

As above

a
-.

 

IS. \q-I-Iu-u-nsasy News

N. Mums: u

The report contains information on aeronautics: astronomy and astrophysics;
atmospheric sciences: che-istry; earth sciences and oceanography; electronics
and electrical engineering: energy conversion; uterinls; unthenatical
sciences; cybernetics. conputers; mechanical. industrial. civil. and estine
engineering; methods and equipnent; missile technology; navigation.
commications. detection. and countermeasures. nuclear science and technology;
ordnance; physics; propulsion and fuels; space technology; and scientists

and scientific organization in the physical sciences.

 
 

I . h, Cue-Is .aM I'm-vases AIM”...

Us. I). Mull".

   

USSR Electronics liissile Technology
Aeronautics Electrical Ii. ,incering usvigscion and

I Astronoey Energy Conversion Con-mications

I Astrophysics Materials Detection and

, .unosphexic Sciences datheeatics Comtereessures
Chemistry Hechsnical engineering Nuclear Science and
Computers Civil Engineering Technology
Cybernetics Industrial Engineering Ordnance
Earth Sciences ﬂarine Engineering Physics
(IcnnoxMth Hethods Propulsion and Fuels

"' ""“iHWW-w 01.03.04.07.08.09,10.11.12.13.14.16.17.18.l9.20.21.22

.Nremy l. tau (Thu
Rem)

—-
1.. \. "I II shop ‘0 sla ma M

For ()fflciul Use Only.

In. "u an“. n 'Umn-l Ink-J 1(1"

Equip-ent

Halted

1w...” m Copies Avail..ble From JI’RS

I... .—.....
--...-~n,u p... I-lls

 

THIS ‘0)!“ MAY I" IEI'RODUCED

  

Mt enzyt Ian (Ilse
I‘au
"\l I ~\ 3 0

Space Technology

   
     

1!. No. 90 l'agrt

62

   
 

 
  
  

   

mew-cc nun-NO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/836].
30 March 1979

- TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(rouo 17/79)

Comurs
CYBERNB‘I‘ICS

National Conference in Kaun' on Optimal Control in Mechanical
Syetene

(F. L. Chernoua'ko; TEKNICNESKAYA KIBBRNETIKA.
mwmc 78)..OOIOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOI.0.0.0.0....000.000....

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

A Syetee for 'l'eating Nicroproceaeor Large Scale Integrated Circuits
and Nicroproceeeore

(B. l. Borde. et. al.; AVTME‘IRIYA. Dec 78-Jan 79).......

A Signal Heaaurenent Nethod for Hide Range Information
Gathering and Proceeeing Syeteee

(V. R. Voznyult. et. al.; AVTOHE’I'RIYA, Dec 78- Jan 79)....
GEOPHYSICS. ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

Reeulte of Extrapolation of Gravity Anomalies in Structural
Cravinetric Exploretion

(Yu. V. Antonov: PRIMNAYA GNPIZIKA, No 89. 1977)....

Automation of Computation. of Crevitetional Influence of bocel
Relief

(A.A. Chemov; PRIKLADNAYA GEOFIZIKA. No 89. 1977)

Results of See Tests of CNN-K Autonated Crevinetere
(V. O. Bagretayente;'PRIKMDNAYA GEOPIZIKA. No 89.

l977)...................................................

Hethod for Determining the Second Derivatives of Gravitational
Potential on a Moving Base

(6. 0. Krylov. l. l. Namenko-Bondarenko;
PRIKMDNAYA GEOFIZIKA. No 89. 1977)
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

CONTENTS (Continua)
PUBLICATIONS

Gravity Manon-en: Devices. Methods

(Hedi-1r Boriuovlch Dubovekiy; PRETSIZIONNOYB
IZHERENIYB SILY nAzuaer. 1978)........................

Space Photography Techniques and Equip-on:

(I. P. Podorov. V. D. Par-yam; KOSMICHBSKOYB
mmmtaovmlvs. 1978)....00.000.000.000...000.00....

-b-
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CIDERNETICS

NATIONAL CONFERENCE IN KAZAN' 0N OPTIMAL CONTROL IN MECHANICAL SYSTEMS
Moscow TEKHNICEESKAYA KlBEnNETIKA in Russian No 6. Nov/Dec 1978 pp 209-210

[Article by F. L. Chernous'ko: ”Chronicle -- The Second All-Union Confer-
ence on Optimal Control in Mechanical Systems"]

[Text] The Second All-Union Conference on Optimal Control in Mechanical
Systems was held on 25-27 January 1978 in Kesan'. The conference was or-
ganised by the Institute of Problems of Mechanics of the Academy of Sci-
ences USSR end the Kazsn‘ Order of the Labor Red Banner Aviation Institute
imeni A. N. Tupolev. Roughly 300 specialists from scientific research
institutes. organisations. and higher educational institutions in Moscow.
Leningrad. Kiev. Kaznn'. Sverdlovsk. Novosibirsk. Minsk. and other cities
of the USSR took part in the work of the conference. At the conference
188 reports were presented. four in plenary session and 186 in sections.
Caspared with the First All-Union Conference on Optimal Control in Mech-
anical Systems. held 2-6 December 1976 at the Institute of Problems of
Mechanics in Moscow. the number of reports increased substantially (al-
most triple) and the geographic representation was better.

Let us briefly review the content of the plenary reports.

T. K. Sirssotdinov and A. I. -~molov gave s report entitled "The Chief
Task in Control of Mechanics. -ystems." 1; presents a general formu-
lation of the task of synthesizing control systems from the point of view
of meeting given technical specifications put in the form of constraints
of the inequality type. The existence conditions for a solution to the
problem are given. The report reviews research in this area and points
out solution algorithms. The authors present a series of concrete engin-
eering problems encompassed by this formulation end show the connection
between it and problems of automating the design of mechanical systems.

N. N. Krnsovakiy and Yu. s. Osipov presented a report entitled "Static
Control of Evolutionary Systems." It was devoted to the problems of con-
trol of systems with distributed parameters in conditions of uncertainty.
The authors considered general controlled evolutionary systems. in par-
ticulsr covering systems described by equations in partial derivatives.
with incomplete informstion about phase state and disturbing forces.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The euthors give s rigid eteteeent of the gene problene of control for
such systeee end show the solubility conditions for the prohlees under
cons ideretion . ‘

If. A. Lur'ys end V. A. Troitskiy presented s report entitled "Optimise-
tion of the Structure end Porn of Blsstic Design Blenents.” They cited
results with optinirstion of verious one- end two-dilensionsl elastic
eleeents: cores. pletes. end shells. The controls ere the geosetric or
nechsnicel cherecteristics of en elestic body end the functionels ere dis-
plecenents. the weight of the eluents, their own frequencies, or criti-
csl forces in loss of stebility. The report describes weys to construct
the neceeeery conditions of opti-elity. perticulsrly by verietion tech-
niques. A mﬂer of speciel feetureo of these problems ere noted: dis-
connected end epeciel solutions. tensor control functions. end the like.
A nueber of solutions to probleu of optilising cores end plstes ere
given.

F. 1.. Chernous'ko end A. A. Helikyen presented e report entitled ”Problees
of Intonation Control in the Genes of Dynenic System." The report was
.devoted to differentiel genes with incoeplete intonation in which one or
both plsyers ere uneble to observe the opponent for the entire intervel

of eovenent; tether they csn observe only pert of the notion. st certein
solente or intervels of tile. The set of observetion Ionents is either
given or controlled by the pleyers in the process of the gene. A series
of convergence end pursuit genes with inconpletc infornstion wee studied.
The union- inforietion needed by the plsyers to conlete the gene success-
fully is indiceted.

The conference hed four sections which held 28 neetings. The section on
"Control of Complex Hschsnicsl Systeae" considered prinsrily problem of
control of verious technicsl systems with Isny degrees of freedon. Con-
trol elgorithns were set forth end system dynsnics investigctsd. The
section on "Optinl Control of Honour" covered problens of the theory
of opti-el control of deterministic end stochestic systole. techniques of
constructing optinsl control, problems of differentiel genes. end verious
spplicetions of optinel control to dynenic systees. The section on "0p-
tieel Control in the Hechenics of e Continuous liediu“ wee devoted to the
theory of control of systems with distributed persisters. opti-isstion of
elestic end plestic bodies. end problems of optiniretion in hydrodynenics.
The reports given in the section on "Optinitstion end Autoustion of the
Designing of Hechsnicsl Systm" dcelt with problem of optimizing designs
end their elenents end questions of constructing elgorithuss for eutonetion
end optinisetion of design work.

COPYRIGI‘I': Isdetel'stvo ”Neuke". "Investiye AN SSSR. Tekhnichesheys
Kibernetike", 1978

11.176
C80: 1870

2
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 681.3.181.4

A SYSTEM FOR TESTING HICROPROCESSOR LARGE SCALE INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND
MICROPROCESSORS

Novosibirsk AVTONETRIYA in Russian No 6, Dec 78-Jan 79 pp 33-62

[Article by 3.1. Horde, Ye.A. Vysov, A.A. Zhuravlev and v.6. Cherepanov,
Krasnoyarsk, manuscript received following revision 18 April, 1978]

[Text] The development of the production of large-scale integrated circuits
(815) [L81] is resulting in new requirements on test equipment, since LS!
circuits are no longer simply structural components, but rather a complex
functional circuit housed in a package with a limited number of leads and
having a considerable number of internal states. In this regard. the process
of testing large scale integrated circuits, among which processor components,
microprocessors, memories (main memories and read-only memories) are included,
is not effective when manual methods are used. Various methods and test stands
are being developed for automated testing: specialized ones for testing one
microcircuit type and ell-purpose ones for testing L81 systems [1 - 6]. The
latter have an advantage, since it is not necessary to design new equipment
(or each specific integrated circuit.

I
An all purpose system for testing L81 circuits is treated in this paper, where
these circuits are compatible with TTL circuits in terms of the signals, and
the system is based on a series produced microcomputer which permits the func-
tional parametric and dynamic testingnof large scale integrated circuits.

The system includes (Figure 1): a microcomputer with a set of peripherals, a
well developed control unit for the peripherals and a group of peripherals
(VU), one of which is the LS! testing peripheral unit. The computer is
coupled to the UVU [peripherals control unit] through an input-output inter-
face, to which a group of UVU's can be connected, as well as a PL—80 perfor-
ntor control block incorporated in the computer complex, a peripheral memory,
etc.

One of three microcomputers can be employed in the system, where these comput-
ers are compatible in terms of the instruction system and the input-output
interface ("Elektronika 5-50" [7], and others) and which have the following
main characteristics:

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Block diagram of the LS! testing system designed around a
microcomputer.

Key: 1. Microcomputer;

2. UVV [input-output unit]:

3. lVV [input-output interface);

A. Computer input-output interface buses:
5. BUPR [perforator control block];

6. UVU [control unit for the peripherals];
7. EU? [printout control block];

8. ”Consul-260“;

9. PL~80 perforator:
10. Bit (series) interface;
11. L81 circuit testing peripheral unit;
12. VB 1 [peripheral l];
13. V0 n [peripheral n];

16. Transducers for climatic tests);

15. L51 circuit.

-Thc word format is 16 decimal digits (mantissa sign, 12 decimal mantissa
digits, an exponent sign and two digits for the exponential order of mag-
nitudc);

-The time for executing short operations is 0.5 msec. and 2 msec for multi-
plication type operations;

-Thc volume of the 5-50 computer memory is one Kbyte (without expansion):

-Thc computer input-output interface includes eight forward buses and eight
return buses, four identification buses. five control buses and two prior-
ity service buses;

-The exchange rate with the peripherals is 10 Kbyteslsec;
-The exchange of data is accomplished in a binary-decimal code.
4

FOR OFFICIKL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The structure of the peripherals control unit. The coupling link between

tuh computer and the group of peripherals is the peripherals control unit.
Some eight peripherals can be connected to the DVD. Included among the
functions performed by the UVU are: the reception of instruction messages

from the computer, their conversion to the peripheral format and their trans-
mission to the peripheral interface, the setting of the interval between
resdouts, the determination of the nusber of channels during the interval

time between resdouts, the reception of data from a peripheral, the conversion
of the data to the computer format and its feedout to the input-output inter-
face of the computer. An informational message for the UVU includes: L is
the mark code field (highest order digit of the mantissa), which determines
the number of the UVU and serves to addressand identify it; M2 [11, 12] are
the code fields of the interval between resdouts (two decimal digits), 11
determines the output of the frequency divider, which can be set within a
range of 10’3-10‘ Hz, end I; is a multiplier (which can vary from one to
nine); the interval time between resdouts in seconds is defined by the formula
T - Illlz and can vary within a range of from 10-3 to 9 . 10‘ seconds; K1 and
K2 are the code fields of the number of channels (two decimal digits); P is
the field of the code for the operating mode of the UVU; mantiess digits

7-—12 are not used.

The peripherals control unit (Figure 2) includes the following: s code output
register (RV); input diode gates [VV]; s readout interval setter (0210): a
counter and register for the number of the channels (SChK and ex); an instruc-
tion encoder (ShK); an identification decoder (DshI); a UVU selector (DSh UVU);
a UVU-peripheral unit series interfaceblock;a parallel interface block for
the LSI peripheral unit and the control unit (UU). An input byte trunk is
organised within the UVU for the addresses and data, as well as an output byte
trunk for the data.

The operation of the major assemblies of the UVU was treated in [8]. The
information exchange between the UVU and the peripheral is relized through the
peripherals interface. Included in the functioning of the UVU-periphersl
unit interface are the operations of decoding the peripheral unit address,
synchronization during data exchange,,the matching of the signal levels and
formats of the information representation, the organization of interrogations,
etc. For the purpose of reducing the number of galvanically isolated buses,
used in the system is a series bit UVU-peripheral unit interface, which is
intended for analog to digital conversion and digital to analog conversion
interchange with a peripheral, as well as a half-byte interface to organize
the interchange with the LS! testing peripheral. Its functions include the
operations of information interchange between the UVU and the LSI peripheral.
The LSi peripheral interface includes four forward transmit information buses,
(our return transmit information buses and three control buses.

The analog to digital and digital to analog converter peripherals were dis-

cussed in [91. The LSI testing peripheral is intended for testing processor
elenmnts, memories (core storage and son's). as well as other microcircuits

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Computer lnput-Out;ut Interface

303 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. Block disgrsn of the control unit for the peripherals.

a.
9.
10.

ll.
12.
13.
lb.
15.

RV [code output register];

Main output trunk of the control unit for the
peripherals:

ShK [instruction encoder];

RH [1nsntisss2 register];

UZIO [readout interval setter]:

SChK [counter for the number of the channels];

ax [register for the nulber of the channels];

3?! [half-byte interface block for the LS! circuit
peripherel unit];

Half-byte interface buses for the LS! testing unit];
331 [bit interface block];

Series (bit) interface buses of the peripherals
(analog-digitsl converter. digitsl-enalog converter);
VV [input diode gates];

Hsin input trunk;

DSh UVU [peripherals control unit selector]:

UU [control unit];

DShl [identification decoder].

The structure of the LS! testing peripheral includes the following (Figure 3):
an instruction message register (Pl); a reply lessage register (P2); a counter

(80h) [2] end a decoder

(DSh) [9] for the interface sync pulses; a marker de-

coder (DShl) [3]; a clock frequency generator (UTCh) [5]; receive logic. infor-

nstion output logic and

sockets for the connection of the LS! circuit.

6
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m
a

any

n:

«sun—«U H3
080

III
%

any

0%
Owa

03ml
0a

' —:O

; u
I .
.

  

:uuaaauuh:

10:85::

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Figure 3 on.preceding page]
Q

Kay: 1. SI [sync pulse];
2. SCh [interface sync pulse counter]:
3. 08h l [marker decoder];
6. Clock frequency generator];
5. Sync pulse connecting socket:
6. VV [input diode gates]:
7. Output connecting socket]:
8. Output connecting socket];
9. 08h [interface sync pulse decoder];

Ylh] are the input and output half-byte buses of the interface;
Pl - instruction message register;
P2 - reply message register.

The instruction message register intended for receiving and storing an instruc-
tion message (two wordsO, based on which the clock frequencies are generated

and infra-ation is fed to the LSI. The word for setting the clock frequencies
(word F) is intended for generating a sequence of synchronizing pulses in
accordance with a specified code. where these pulses are necessary for the func-
tioninn of - specific LSl circuit. The information vord of the LS! (the word

H [1]) con.~'ns an operand on which operations are performed, an operational
code and control signals in the case of microprocessor LSl‘s, or an operand

and address when testing memories.

The structure of a message for specifying the clock frequencies is given in
Table l. and includes: the marker necessary for addressing the LS! peripheral.
the Pl field determines the choice of the output of the decade frequency di-
vider (from 10 MM: down to 1 He) by means of multiplexer Ml (Figure 6), the

F2 field. which using multiplexer N2 determines the second frequency division
stage (F2 - l. 2, 6. 8). The remaining eight half-bytes of the word (field

F3) specify the choice of the sequence of synchronising pulses with progremable
time delays, Sll. Si2, $13, and $16.

The structure of an infromation word for the L5! is shown in Table l. The
information word for a LS! includes: a marker. the "1 [ll numerical data field.
the H3 [1)] operation code field (address field when testing memories). and

the In [12] control signal field. The marker code is written into Pl upon the
"receive" UVU signal and the code 08h - 1 [interface sync pulse decoder cede -
- l]. The authorization for the continued reception of the ward P or the
word 1 is based on the agreement of the "receive” signal with the control
signal of the 08h and the signal of the marker decoder DShl.

8
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table |

instruction "orange to n Perigherol

 
 
      

I'.Ilrlnll Imliﬂ'u
r-II-I-uumaum rm
near-an 'IIIM

   

 

 
   
 

 

' . III-.IIV'IIII'III'IIO'IILII‘
IIIFIII1:I—'IlIr.I2_II':I:III.IIIIl;IIIlI.‘II'I.I_I_—

  
   
  
 

II-InI-mlua- “LI
(2) 1. mm Ina-pun
\numrru

. ..—~—.__.—

II.» mndmhmu u

0: 'I 0:... 9
(3) II-Illrllmul ' F3—I_—I

 
   
    
 
 

Ihmnmuw .1:an
(lo) 1mm.- mua me
n I‘

llmumlnt no.1:
) a [W

      

I‘I'II llﬂl' mm

(“J'- N“ I.“
In": Kaunxl

 
  
   
     
  

      

  
 
  

 
 
  

 
 
 

Ila-meme mun ° "- re. a t I‘ i 2

n "V npn nr- «9 cl; 3e Q. £5 w .. 5 . k- 3.
(12) mom . I R? {38 x0 = " X:- Z "9'-
I‘.-u; ’ -- '- ’ E r" I ' ‘

mum we 4' 5‘ a “3‘ #133 9 - "3 “5- ‘ M”

2 i a t~u3§ «a? .: .".' =5: ‘3; a

3 g 3: A{ u. :1; —. = in: E!!! .,

{‘5 a 9:40 Buy 8 o :zaes 2

5 1‘ 7 I. I, 20 2‘ 22 23 1'0 10

Key: . Hantieon digits of the computer information aeeeage:
2. Possible value of e nentiaen digit:
3. Hard field Herd field identifier, P;
A. Possible value of the field of word P;
S. Designation of the field in the peripheral:
6. ﬂuke: 7;
7. Frequency;
8. Divider;
9. Choice;

I0. Not used;
ll. Value of the Herd field H [I] for e Kssblkl L81;

[2. Designation of the field in the peripheral unit when teena-
Iitting the word I for e KSOGIKI LSI;
ll. Operation code word;

9
FOR OI’PICML USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

[Key to Table l continued]:

1‘. Marker 83

15. Input buses 33

16. Input buses 2 - 0:

l7. Shift to the right 1. shift to the left 1;
18. Shift to the right 2, shift to the left 2;
19. Carry input of the prograa counter 0P1:
20. on - ON;

21. OPS - 096:

22. OP? - 0P9;

23. Control of the positions of the 5LT:

25. Increment control. Priority.

The reply nosssge register (P2) is intended for the reception. storage end
output of the L8! reply sessege to the interface buses. The structure of
the reply message is given in Table 2. The signals for writing the inforls-
tion into the register are set by the operator at the connecting socket for
the sync pulses. Data is fed out then to the trunk upon the "trnasnit"
signal using half-bytes.

The clock frequency generator (see Figure 6) consists of an f - 10 NM: pulse
generator. e two stage frequency divider (SChP. SCth. "1 and N2). decimal
counters with decoders. where a sequence of pulses shifted by one-half period
is fed to one of the decoders, eight nultiplexers for selecting two sequences
of sync pulses in accordance with the P lessage. where these pulses are
shifted with respect to each other (811 and $12) and two sequences of pulses
(813 end 816) which are deter-ined by the coabinations of 811 end 812 (see
Figure A). The widths of the 811 end St2 synchronising pulses are determined
by the Pl end 72 fields of the register Pl: r511 - 1512 - P2/Pl, where Pl
specifies the choice of the frequency within a range of 106 - 10‘1 hr. and
F2 specifies a lultiplying factor (1. 2, a or a). The widths of the 813 and
$14 synchronising pulses are dcterained as combinations of 811 and 812 in
accordance with Pigure 6 based on the following for-ules:

ﬂak. r

Mm ' 'cmt'l Tl 'cmu ' Yam 2‘ $3
| . ' . hut-g . 'mm
um um I ‘.—..-- Mm; 'um: -:-:
r.
um "
‘uu. ham l' .2“; hum '01-: 1' ‘—f."—‘.
r -
'«m. "mm 5- it!)

[cu - SI - synchronizing pulse]

10
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL "33 ONLY

The requisite synchronising pulses for controlling e specific L8! are
switched st the sync signal socket.

122l2.3 The no 1 Moses e of s Peri hernl

 

 
   
 
 

lam I—Illll m
(I) uh “lb-0.4.- no-
I

   
 

un - .-.

(2) "".‘..‘.‘.?:"";‘.....‘.".';L
"all! I "ll 8 .

. .~......-..

(3) Ir.'.‘.'.'.'.."'{'."‘"°“

.._ ._ .-. — em.-

(4) I375 “ﬁfu.§;" a

 
 
 
  

o a: I ‘ 1
(5)" "' -5332; §§Lg§ggg
.IIIJ’u-H- Is-I ’. .. ’
3'51: £‘-'~'1ii'£?“ o 2 :3: :1 g4 2 2 lg» 5 :it s E

2 g z :3 a; g a “a a E 5
iﬁéaauag'§§§5§bﬁ
67891011121316 151617

Key: . Hantisss digits of the conputer information lessege;

2. Possible velue of o lentisss digit;

3. I field identifier:

6. Value of the I word field for e xseatx1 L51;

5. Purpose of the field when testing e KSBblKl L81;

6. Harker 8;

7. Output bus 3;

8. Output buses 2 .. 0:
9. Shift to the right 1. shift to the left 1:
10. Shift -o the right 2. shift to the left 2:
ll. Bus A);

12. Buses A2 -A0;

13. highest order hit of the expension register;
l6. Not used:

15. Carry accelerate signals;
16. Incrclcnt control;
17. Not used.

ll

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The automated L81 testing system use used for 12L testing [10] of e KSBAIKI
microprocessor. The requisite conditions for testing the microprocessor are
the generation of a controlling code for the operations. the code for the
nuaber transaitted to the LSI. and the control signals for the positions.

priority. etc.. the reception of the nusber code and the address code of the
L81, as well as the carry signals. etc.

The structure of the instruction and reply messages for a K584IK1 sicro-
processor are shown in Table l and 2. The base eight nuseration systes is
used for the information interchange. In view of the fact that the K586IK1
microprocessor (HP) hes a large number of instructions (512) the testing
program was broken doun into several euroutines. executed sequentially using
the ease algoriths. An analysis of the results of the subroutine run shows
the absence or presence of e dropout in the given group of instructions. and
it is necessary to run all subroutines to check all 512 instructions. The
algorithm for the nicroprocessor test is run in the following sequence:

1. Prisary loading of the peripherals control unit (the computer trans-its

the infatuation nessage for setting the operational mode to the peripherals
control unit).

2. The transaission to the LS! peripheral unit of the word F for specifying
the sequence of clock pulses needed to check the aicroproceseor for its
operating frequency.

3. The input of the first group of instructions for checking in the sub-
routine.

4. The generation of the current information word for the LSi, which deter-

since the type of instruction being executed and the operand on which the
operation is performed.

3. The transmission of the information vord to the LS! peripheral unit.

6. The triggering of the microprocessor at its working frequency to execute
one instruction.

7. The reception of the result of executing specified instruction.

8. The analysis of the coupiction of the specified group of instructions.

9. Checking the result of executing the group of instructions. If the re-
suit is not correct. an analysis is carried out for the chance of a

failure. for which the given group of instructions is executed three
tines after which a failure readout is accospiished.

12
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

'POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Figure 4]:

Key: 1. Frequency divider. 86hr;

2. 6 [pulse generetor];

3. T [flip-flop for triggering the clock frequency generator
to generate a series of synchronising pulses];

e. H [eultiplexdrs for selecting the code sequences to
generate the sync pulses;

5. 80h [counter];

6. 08h [decoder];

cu - Synchronizing pulses.

10. in the absence of a failure, a check for coupletion is made, and if the
last subroutine has been run, the cosputer indicates the good operating
condition of the microprocessor. otherwise. it loves on to the next
processing subroutine.

Core storage with a volume of 8 Kbytes is necesoery for a cosplete check of
nicroproceseor (unctioning. while to check individual groups of instructions.
the requisite volume of the core storage falls in range of one to four Kbytes.

Besides testing Lst's. the systes developed here per-its checking end debug-
ging subroutines which executes specific algorithms, by scans of specifying
a sequence of codes for microprocessor instructions which ere needed to re-
slice e specific operstion (addition. uultiplication. etc.). In this case.
the result of an operation is obtained nver several cycles, detereined by
the depth of the subroutine for a specific operstion, while the result of
its execution is indicated on the cosputer. A progressing change in the
clock frequencies and widths of the sync pulses per-its shecking the work-
ing range ofvfrequencies of s L51. and when other analog-digital and digital-
enalog converter peripherals ere used, per-its the pertorlsnce of clinetic
tests and tests of the power supply paraseter scetter. A drawback to the
systes developed here can be considered the necessity for working in a base-
eight systes. the limited volule of the cosputer eesory end its slow speed.
The systee is designed around K-lSS series integrated circuits of a sidrange
level of integration. A generel view of the syste- is shown in Figure 5.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.

2.

3.

5.

9.

’08 OP?IOIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Smith, "Doutovcrnyy kontrol' kachestva nikroprotaeaaorov putel funktsion-
nl'nogo testirovaniya" ("Reliable Quality Control of Microprocessors by
Means of functional testing"), BLEKTRONIKA. 1977. Mo 6, pp 56-62.

Chang, Makkaskil, "Dva novykh sposoba uproshcheniya teatovoy proverki
nikroprotsesaorov" ["Tuo New Methods of Silplifying the Test Procedure
for Microprocessors"l. ELEKTRONIKA. 1976, No 2, pp 45-52.

Zhorno S.Ye., Makovoz 8.1., Plutonov V.K.. ”Struktura i printsip raboty
uscroystva dlya funktsional'no-vrenennogo kontrolya nikroprotsessorov”
["The Structure and Operational Principle oi a Device for the Functional
and Tineuise Testing of Microprocessora"], in the hook. 'ﬁiikroprotaessory"
["Microproceaaors"]. (Abstracts of Reports of the Second All-Union Con-
Eerence). Vol 1. Riga. Zinatne Publiahers. 1977, pp 170 - 180.

Zelenevskaya Ye.A., Sebadash M.G.. Dbukhovskiy I.P.. Tenchenko V.A..
Platnikov Ye.l., “Spetaifiha organizataii kontrolya BIS nikroprotaeeaor-
nykh nahorov v protsesse proizvodstva i ekspluatatsii” ["The Specific
Ventures of the Organization of the Testing of LS! Microprocessor Assen-
blies During Production and Operation"). in the book, "Mikroprotseesory".
Vol 1. Riga, Zinatne Publishers. 1977, pp 175-177.

Santoni. "Sovershenatvoveniye testerov dlye naledki nikroprotaessornykh

sistel" ["lnproving Testers for the Alignment of Microprocessor Systena"],
BLEKTRWIRA. 1976. No 26, pp 26-39.

Mik. Skopneyer. “Mikroprotseasor dlya otladki nikroprogrann lashin na oanove
protscssornykh sektsiy" ["A Microprocessor for Debugging Microprogras Col-
puters on the Basis of Processor Sections"]. BLEKTRONIKA. 1977. No 9,

pp 51-56.

Cherepanov v.c.. "Progrm-uirovaniye v kodakh EVM 'Blektronke S-SO'"
l"rrogrmlsing in the Codes of the 'Blektronika S-SO‘ Cooputer"l.
Krasnoyarsk, KP! Publishers. 1976.

Dorde 8.1.. Gur'yevich A.S.. Krasnikov V.l.. Romanov v.c., Cherepanov V.G.,
"Avtoenticheskaya obrabotka resultatov isaledovaniya raspredeleniya
torso-EDS v poluprovodnikovykh eineralahh" ["The Automated Processing

of the Reaults of Studying the Distribution oi Thernal e.n.f's in Seli-
conductor Minerals”]. ANTOMETRIYA, 1977, Mo 6. pp 25-30.

Dorde 8.1.. Ivanov V.t., ”Struktury progrsnniruyenykh nnogofunktsionsl'-
nykh anologo-taifrovykh preobrazovateley i kqlautatorov" ["Structures of
Progran-able Multifunction Analog to Digital Converters and Svitchera"l.

in the book, “Tezisy dokladov Vsesoyuznoy konfercntsii po analogovoy i
analogo-tsiirovoy vychislitel'noy tekhnike" ("Abstracts of the Reports

of the All-Union Conference on Analog and Analog-Digital Co-puter Engineer-
ing"). Moscow. Sovetahoye Radio Publishers. 1977. p 35.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. Avnyev N.A., Duehntn V.N.. Neunov Yu.Ye.. ”Bol'ehiye integrel'nyye
ekheny e 1nzhekteionnyn pteeniyes" ["Lerge Scale Integrated Circuits
with Injection Supply"). Hoecow. SONetetoye Redto ?nbltehere. 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'etvo "Neuke." "Avtonecrtya," 1978

8225
653:1870

17
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 681.33

A SIGNAL NEASURMNT METHOD FOR HIDE RANGE INFORMATION GATNERING AND
PROCESSING SYSTEMS

Novosibirsk AVTOOETRIYA in Russian No 6, Dec 78-an 79 pp 91-95

[Article by V.R. Vosnyuk. 8J1. Glinskiy end V.H. Ivenov. aanuscript received
6 February. 1978]

[Text] When designing digital syeteas which realise inforaation retrieval
and processing in reel tine in a wide saplitude range, there arises the
problea ot converting the analog signals to a code with a constant relative
quantization error over the entire range.

For example. such a proble- occurs when processing geophysical intonation
using the nethod of the formation of a field in the near field. where it is
necessary to record the for-etion process curve in wide ranges of tine
(10-4 -- 102) and «puma: (106) [1]. The processing unit should eutouet-
ically record the signal (the e.n.f. iron the receiving circuit).throughout
the entire eaplitude range with a specified error. The e.n.f. curve can be
conventionally broken down into three ranges with respect to tine: "early
times“ (the signal many times exceeds the noise). "It!!! tines" (co-en-
surate with the noise), and "later tiles" (seny tines less than the noise).
In the second and third ranges. it is necessary to use special aethods of

signal detection: storage. and the suppression of periodic and pulse inter-
terence.

The problea posed here can in principle be solved using the device described
in paper [2]. The device contains binary amplifiers. an analog-digital con-
verter. coaperison gates. switches and a computer, which on the basis of two
reedouts askes a linear extrapolation of the signal. and for the point in
tins of leasureaent, generates such a gain that the laxinun nuaber of digits
is used in the analog-digital converter. Such a device will operate effec-
iently when processing cooperatively "ssooth" signals and can lead to sub-
stantial errors when aessuring a signal under conditions of strong interfer-
Ecrence ( the point in tine of the asasureaent can coincide with an interfer-
cncc spike, and the digit network of the analog-digital converter will over-
flow). A drawback to this device is also the presence of a special computer
block torsignal extrapolation. the operational speed of which liaits the use
of the device in aessuring high frequency signals.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The drawbacks indicated here can be ell-install by asses of a simpler method
of selecting the gain of the binary anplifier. The essence of the sethod
consists in the fact that prior to seesuresent, during a specified tine
interval, the nixture of signal and interference is observed, in which case
the greatest value of the nixture of signal and interference is registered,
i.e. . the nininul gain at which the possibility of seasuring signals which
exceed the dynamic range of the analog-digital cosputer is precluded, and

the signal is recorded at this gain at a specified point in time. In this
case, the possibility of quentizing the signal while not completely using

the digit capacity of the analog-digital converter is not precluded, something
which can lead to an increase in the signal measurement error. However, it
was shown in paper [3] that for steady-state interference with a nornal
distribution of the instantaneous values of the amplitudes, the signal nea-
surenent error weakly depends on the analog—digital converter quantum, for
the case of a sufficient number of avoragings. It follows fron an expression
6, derived in this paper, for the measurenent of signal in the presence of
interference, taking the quantization error into account, that when a/q L

g l (a is the nean square deviation of the interference, q is the analog-
digital converter quantum), the seasuresent error practically does not depend
on the sire of the analog-digital converter quantu, 6 II ulna/IT, and is de-
termined by the number of repetitions N (00 is the measure-ant signal).

Shown in P'igure l is the circuit of a device which amplifies and converts a
signal, and which operates using the proposed sethod. The device functions
in the following nanner: at the initail point in time, the flip-flops are
reset, and then at a selected point in time, an instruction arrives which
sets the time interval prior to seasuresent and registers the gain of the
binary enplifier (run). When seasuring a signal without interference, the
width of this instruction can be extremely small, and it should i-ediately
precede the signal meesuresent. In the presence of interference, this inter-
val should be deterninsd by the nature of the interference, and in this case,
the greatest value of the mixture of signal and noise is registered in the
RS flip-flops, which are controlled by comparators (1.13., the mini-us gain

is noted). In fact. if the signal at the output of a particular amplifying
gate exceeds the comparison level of the comparator, then there appears at
the output of the comparator the corresponding logic "1". Thereafter the
flip-flop accuntes, which through the AND gate inhibits the connection of
the output of this clenent to the input of the analog-digital converter and
authorizes the connection of the former [the flip-flop]. It is expedient

to choose the comparison level somewhat lower than the naxiaum voltage being
converted by the analog-digital converter. Upon the instruction to determine
order of mngnitude (0?), a binary exponent a; is generated at the output
of encoder CD, where this exponent describes the selected gain K - 2”.

Upon the sane cocoand, the corresponding switch (K) is turned on, through
which the signal flows from the output of the selected amplifying element

to the analog-digital converter. The "conversion" instruction triggers the
analog-digital converter, which initially stores the signal being measured
at the specified point in time by means of a comparator clamp for the voltage

19

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(5)

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

E;
E;
Ex.
s

 

nagnitude deter-ination;

5. Instructions for the order of
6. Conversion;

7. Annlog—digital converter;

8. CD [encoder].

instruction;

3. Binary amplifier gain
6. Reset;

2. Conparison level;

Key: 1. Input;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

levvl [lo]. and then converts it to a 3A2 code. Thus, the signal being
measured is represented in the fore of a binary number with a floating deci-
nal point. M2 - Z”. This nulericsl forts per-its the representation of
signals in a wide range of asplitudes and is lost advantageous from the view-
point of cquipnent outlays when performing storage operations in a processor.

The tine interval set aside for observing the interference is deter-lined by
the spectral composition of the interference and the variation in the sapli-
tude of the signal being measured. If during the observation interval, the
interference characteristics do not change substantially, then the interference
at the input to the anplifier can be assessed as a steady-state random process.
Then one can detemine the average nunber of overshoots 1’ (81') at a level C

over a time T for normal noise with e uniforl spectral density in a range of
frequencies from 0 up to of [5]:

11V, "16/.“

P C. 1' -.—— _

( ) V3 ,
where c is the comparison level; a is the mean square deviation of the

interference. The tine interval over which P overahoots can occur is de-
termined from this:

 

Let us essune that it is necessary to find the tine interval in which even
only one overshoot occc's at the input of a particular amplifier gate. where

C/o - 1. Then, for the case of a frequency bandwidth of cf - 100 lair, one
can deter-ins the requisite tine interval 1' I 24 usec.

 

Figure 2 .

The given binary amplifier circuit design having autonatic selection of the
gain was realized in the "land-l" equipment, intended for operating on the
basis of the method of field formation in the near field [6]. The tine for

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OfvlCIAL USE ONIN

obnervlug the interference was 1‘ - 25 usec, and the conpnriaon level was

equal to 2 volts. An analog-digital converter with digit by digit equili-
brnting vith 10 digits (including the sign) was used to represent the Inntiua
of the number (U.nx - 12.555. with e 5 av quantum) [7]. The gain KR could
ueuuue the following values: 2°, 23. 2‘, 29, 2”. and 215. The anplifier and
the analog-digital converter, in conjunction with the proceuor. provide for
nignal measurement in a range of Iron 32.555 down to 210-6 volts. The resolv-
ing power of the amplifier and converter channel munte to 30.15 uv where
the nunber of repetition in N - 2".

p-.- .--....1

'P” ".0
2 U, Volts

 
 
  

Imni‘olu:
t we - l uec
moo”

     

Key: 1. "loud-l";
. 2. Power switch;
al 3. 62-12 oscillator.

. as“) I .l i: 0.0 10 a! (o to at,“
t, use:
Figure 3.
22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OffTCIAL "8! ONLY

The amplifier consists of two groups of binary amplifiers: a sultistage

input switch. intended for protecting the amplifier against overvoltages in
the initial stage of the transient process. and for sanpling the signal at
specified points in tine (Figure 2). The input stages are designed in a
differential configuration. sonething which allows ' r a substantial reduction
in the influence of external interference and induced noise.

it is difficult to achieve considerable suppression of in-phase interference
in n wide dynanic range. and for this reason. a circuit configuration was
chosen for the nnplifier which consists of two sections. One amplification
section operates in a range of input signals of free A . 10-3 up to 2.5 volts
and has a suppression factor fro in-phsss interference of 60 dB; the second
is intended for input ulgnsls of less than 6 ° 10-3 volts and has a suppres-
sion factor for in-phcse interference of 95 db. The asplifiers are designed
in a configuration having autoaatic taro drift correction. For this purpose.
the pulses which control the closing of the input switch. sisultaneously en-
nble the fine tuning of the core level of the anplifier gate. connected in

n level clauping (F) feedback circuit. “hen Isasuring the signal. the input
switch is opened. however. the care level of the ale-ant is preserved by
virtue of the correction voltage which is stored in the clamp device. The
shunt-type input switch consists of five series switches using lKTOll inte-
grated Iicrocircuits and can suppress an input effect by 32 - 10s tines.

The input stages of both sections are designed around field effect transis-
tors. which are selected in pairs. the operational point of which is fixed
at the teaperature independent point to reduce the influence of teaperature
on the drift of the input stages. The asplifier stages are designed around
lUTbOla operational aaplifiers and have a gain error of no sore than 1! in
a temperature range of fros -lO° to +60' 0. The internal noise voltage.
referenced to the anplifier input in a frequency range of 0 - 100 Kﬂs.
aaounts to an effective value of 10 uv.

shown in Figure 3 are the results of a calibration curve nessuresent of

the "Zena-l" station. An exponential curve wss fed to the input of the
anplifler. driVen by rectangular pulses fros the power switch. with addi-
tiVeiy superisposed noise. The expodhntisl tine constant was r - L/R -

- l mace. and the noise level was 60 uv (eff). The exponential curve was
recorded at 16 tine points. distributed with a progressive step. Sale 10
curves were reported in tine range of free 0.2 to 9.6 asec where the nusber
of repititions was s - 2‘2 - 4.096 (one realisation). The calculated curve
is indicated in the Figure [6] by the solid line. while the averaged results
«Ver the no realizations are indicated by the dots. while the snail line
neg-eats indicate the aaxlnun deviations of the aessured voltages, ol‘ained
with even just one realization. The serious error for these result' noes
not exceed 262 (t - 9.6 ssec) for the case of a couputed signal value at
this tine point of 00 - 1.8 law.

23

FOR OPFlClkL USE ONLY
l.

2.

3.

6.

Se

6.

FOR OPPICIAL 083 ONLY

DIILIOGRAPHY

Vonnyuk V.R.. Olinskiy D.H.. "Dsobennosti isnereniy pri sondirovsnii
stunovloniyee polye v blishney tone" ("Specific Features oi "assure-ants
when Probing the Per-etion of e Pield in the Near Field"). in the book.
”ltseritel'naye epperatura dlya resvedochnoy geotisiki" ["Measurasent
Equip-ent for Prospecting Geophysics"). Novosibirsk, Publishing House

of the Institute of Autonatsd Instruaentstion and Electronics of the
Siberian Department of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences. 1973. pp 113-118.

Hllhes, Thonpson. Sedgvick, "Multiple Stags Sample Noraalising Alplifier
with Auto-etic Gain Prediction”. United States Patent, N 3813609. kl. R0 33
3/22. May 28. 1976.

Vosnyuk 9.8.. Loginov A.V.. "O vybore shags hvantovaniye ATsP. ispol'suye-
eogo v elehtrornevedochnoy eppereture dlya netode 2382" [”0n the Selection
of the Quantization Step of an Analog to Digital Converter Used in the
Electronic Prospecting Equipment for the Near Field Porsstion Probing
Procedure"1. in the book. "Izaeritel'neye epparature dlye razvedochnoy
geoiisiki". Novosibirsk. Publishing house of the Institute of Auto-seed
lnstruaentotion and Electronics of the Siberian Depsrtaent of the USSR
Aendesy of Sciences. 1973, pp ll9-l2b.

V'yukhin V.l., "Konparetornyy fibeetor urovnya nepryezheniya” ["A Comparator
antege Level Clanp"l. AVTDNBTRIYA, 1968, No 6. p 60-66.

lehonov 9.1.. "Stntisticheshsye rediotekhniha" ("Statistical Radio
Engineering"), Moscow. SoVstskoye Radio Publishers. 1966.

Vornyuk V.R., Glinskiy D.H., lssyev G.A.. ”Blektroraavedochnsye stontsiys
'Zond-l' dlys netode perekhodnykh protsessov i stanovleniya polya v
blizhney tone" ["The 'Zond-l' Electronic Prospecting Station for the
Method of Transient Processes end Field For-ation in the Near Field”),
RAZVEDOCNNAYA GEOPIZIKA [PROSPECTING GEOPHYSICS]. 197‘, No 62.

Solonenho V.l.. "Dystrodeystvuyushchiy likroelehtronnyy enalogo-tsifrovoy
preobrarovetel'" I“A Ulgh Speed Blectronic Analog to Digital Converter”),
in the book. ”Annlogo-tsifrovyye preobraaovateli (Trudy se-insre)"
["Annlog to Digitel Converters (Selinar Proceedings)"l. Novosibirsk.
Publishing house of the Institute of Autonated Instrumentation and
Electronics at the Siberian Depertsent of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
I971. pp 73-85.

COPYRIGHT: Isdntel‘stvo "ﬂanks.” ”Avtosetriys," 1978

8225
680:1870

28

ron omcm‘. use my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UmPHYSICS. ASTROWY AND SPACB

UDC 550. 031.016

RESULTS 0? WOMTION Ol’ GRAVITY ANOHALIIS IN STRUCTURAL OMVIIB‘I'RIC
EXPLORATIOU

Hoacov PRIKLADNAYA GEOPIZIKA in Ruaaian No 89. 1977 an 87-96
[Article by Yu. V. Antonov]

[Text] 'i'hc‘uae of extrapolation in ore graviaetric exploration [5) ia not
accidental. Here the aourcaa of gravitational anoaaliea noat frequently
occupy relatively anall volume and therefore the enouliea are character-
ized by a aore diatinct localization than in structural graviaetry. 0n the
baaia of the diatribution (in the vertical plane :02) of gravitational
anouliea obtained by scene of extrapolation. there can be effective aep-
aration of coaplex anonaliea into local anoneliee and it ie poaaible to
determine exceaa aetaea, denaitiea and other paranetera of anonaloua bod-
iea. uhoae determination by ueuel aethoda it not alvaya atable and auf-
ficiently preciee.

In structural graviaetry the aituation ia aore complex. The aourcee of the
nnoualica noet frequently are different coeplexee of aediaentary roche hav-
ing different deneitiea. Local anoaaliee are created either due to a change
in the thickneaa of the atrata of aedinentery roclu or by their apatial
poaition (deaeity within the atrete ia aaauaed to be honogeneoua). In a
nethenatical aenae in both caaaa the gravity anoaaliea are cowletely da-
ternined by the geoaetq of tue ciecontinuitiea between atrata of aedi-an-
tary rocka of different denaity. In thia connection the final objective of
the inveree problea in atructural graviaetry ia finding the for. of the
contact aurfacaa. In the caae of a tingle contact aurface thia problem ia
solved with an accuracy which ia are or leae eatiafactory for practical

purposes [6. 7]. But the problea it greatly coaplicatad if there are tvo
or rare contact aurfacea.

Due to the peculiaritiea of atructural greviaetry it ie iapoaeible to uae
the npntlal distribution of gravity enouliea (eapecially in the preaence
of nevernl diacontinuitiea) in the ace way as in ore graviaetric explora-

tion. Accordingly. it ia neceaaary to develop a neth for the uee of en-
trnpolntion in eolving the foraulated problaa.

25
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
’0R OVPICIAL USE ONLY

One of the aethods for lolvins the inverse problea for a contact surface

in the presence of several discontinuities was described in [2). The as-
sence of the solution essentially involves discriainstion of the transfors-
ed function 0. free the observed field: this function is related to the
relief of the upper contact surface.

This suthod for constructing a contact surface was tested for detersining
the top of the nukherskiye deposits in the Afghan-Tadahik depression.

which was filled with sediasntary deposits of heaosoic-Cenotoic age. folded
into cosplealy structured anticlinal folds of subasridional strike. The
thickness of the sediasntary cover varies in a wide range. in the central
part of the depression attaining 10 kn or more. In the sediaentery stratus
there are several discontinuities. The clearest density discontinuities are:
l) the boundary between the folded consolidated base-ant and the sediaentary
cover; 2) the boundary associated with the top of the calcareous Jurassic.
above which there are strata of selt-beering-enhydrite deposits and contin-
ontal deposits of the lower Cretaceous; 3) the boundary of doloaitic-cal-
careous deposits of the Upper Cretaceous and the bottoa of the Peleosene
(including the Alayakiye and bukharskiye layers) with the upper part of the
clayey strata of the Paleoaene and terrigenous (creations of Neoaene see;
b) the boundary of unconsolidated deposits and bedrock.

Quaternary deposits in dieconforaity cover the rocks of alsost all age for-
nations: therefore. at this density discontinuity the excess density varies
in wide lisite. The density of the Quaternary deposits was detersined for
the seat part on the basis of graviastric data [5] and was about 1.8-2.0 3/
ca3. individual determinations of the density of Quaternary deposits from
borehole cores gave approxilately the seas results. The excess density at
this discontinuity. depending on the age of the deposits covered by the
Quaternary deposits, can vary in a wide range - froa 0.2 to 0.8 alt-3. The
scan weighted density of the Neogene and Upper Paleogene deposits is about
2.3 slca ; the Quaternary (creations. with the exception of the arched
parts of anticlinal structures. cover precisely these deposits, and there-

fore. on the average. the excess density is about 0.‘ slea3.

The lost studied boundary is that which is associated with the top of line-
stones in the Bukharskly stage of the Paleocene. There have been nuasrous
deter-instions of density free the outcrops of Bukhsrekiye liasstones in
snticlinal structures at the surface and fro. the cores of a great number
of boreholes. The seen weighted density of the lower Paleogene and the
Upper Cretaceous is 2.55 alcaJ. Accordingly. the excess density can be
assuasd equal to 0.25 glcs3.

The calcareous deposits of the Upper Cretaceous undergo transition into
Lower Cretaceous terrigenoua (creations and the density gradually ssoothly
decreases (to 2.b5 alcaa): therefore, it is iapoesible to discrisinate a
significant srsviactivs discontinuity. 0n the other hand. at the boundary
of the Lower Cretaceous deposits and the calcareous rocks of the Jurassic
the density increases in a juap; its excess value here is not less than

26
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. 083 ONLY

0.13 glcs3. The excess density can also be considerably greater in the pres-
ence of a salt-anhydrite stratus associated with the bottol of the Lover
Cretaceous. The Jurassic lisestones are accessible by drilling only in indi-
vidual places and therefore the cospletensss of intonation on the effective
density at this discontinuity to a considerable degree is inferior to the
voluse of inlet-nation iron the upper part of the geological section to the
nukharskiya lisestonea inclusive.

The folded consolidated base-ant is at a depth of euro than 6 Ion. inferna-
tion on the density difference at the boundary with the sedisentary cover

is available only along the peripheral parts of the Afghan-redshik depres-
sion.

Jurassic end lukharskiye calcareous deposits are pronising deposits for pet-
roleue and gas. Petroleus and gas deposits have already been explored and
operated in these deposits. Since the Bultharskiye rocks eleost everywhere
can be reached by drilling. a deternination of the depth of the top of the
Dukharskiye lieestones is of practical interest.

The described region is tectonicelly active. The Bukharskiye linestones are
bent into couple: anticlinal folds which in any cases have a length of
several tens of kiloseters. The tops of the structures usually have steep
dips (up to 60’ or sore). within the linits of the folds in any cases
there are dislocations (prissrily in the for- of thrusts and faults). sose-
tises attaining sore than i In in enplitude. The synclinal dovnvsrps are
filled with Quaternary and Neogene deposits. The thicknesses of the Ileogene
and Quaternary deposits are spproxinately coupsrsble. The excess density
of the entire cowlex of deposits in the synclinss relative to the Bold:-
nrskiye liasstones will be about 0. 30-0. 35 git-3 .

After a brief geological description we will discuss the lethod for deter-
sining the for. of the contact surface for the Buhharskiye lisestones for
the nest studied sector of the Afghan-Tadshilt depression.

Figure l shove a schematic geological section through tvo anticlinsl struc-
tures. The section shows only the boundary of the top of the Iukharskiye
layers. constructed using drilling data and geophysical surveys. both
structures have been well studied by drilling and a gas-petroleu- deposit.
now in operation. is associated with one of then. In the synclinal zones
the top of the Bukhersltiye layers vss deter-ined on the basis of the cor-
relation dependences of the transforled gravity snosslies with data fro-
drilling. seissic prospecting and electric prospecting [5].

The gravitational field has an extresely couple: structure and is governed
by nuerous factors. In particular. the field is characterired by sharp and
intensive change in the regional background. caused by the deep peculiarit-
ies of the region, relating to the alpine tone. 1he anticlinal structures
in the gravitational field are Isnifested in the for: of relatively posi-
tive local anoasliss. These anosalies over the structures reflect the

27
FOR OPHCIM. USE ONLY
NR OFVICIAL 088 ONLY

inﬂuence of all the «Imnity dlncontinuitien. Accordingly. iron the obeorv-
ud fluid it in neceeanry to diacrininnte that effect which in deterained

only by the boundary of the luhharakiy etage.

 

’a

   
 

con Ct
aur CC!

Pig. 2. ancluaion of local gravity anoaelica cauacd by Quaternary depoaita
froa obaerved gravity valuea.

He will begin with the exclusion of local gravity anonaliea which are creat-
cd by the boundary of the mconeolidatcd depoaite with the bedrock. In the

synclinal com the Quaternary depoeita lie virtually in conioraity on the
Seogene depoeite (reference ia to atructural. not atratigrephic conicraity)

and alt-oat horiaontally. So that if the diacontinuity between the lieoaene
and Quaternary depoaita in the aynclinea createa a gravitational anoaaly,

20
FOR OFFICIAL 05‘ (JULY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

it is of an extremely low intensity. however. in the region of local struc-
tures. where the bedrock outcrops at the surface and has steep dips. the
Quaternary deposits exert an appreciable influence. however. if the button
of the unconsolidated deposits is known. its influence is taken into ac-
count by solution of the direct problea. In the specific case it is pos-
sibla to carry out averaging of the observed field and since the anoaaly
created by the bottoa of the unconsolidated deposits is not co-ensurable
with respect to correlation radius with the enoaaly froa the aain structure.
the averaging lessens the influence of the unconsolidated deposits. hovevsr.

here the problaa of the choice of the optima: averaging radius will twin
open.

Unfortunately. it is not always possible to know the behavior of the bottoa
of these unconsolidated deposits and there is not necessarily a significant
difference in the correlation radii froa unconsolidated deposits and froa
the lower-lying graviactive boundaries.

Aasuaa that the fora of the surface between the unconsolidated deposits and
the bedrock. as well as the excess density at this boundary are unknown. we
know only the aaxiams depth at which it lies. Using the distribution of the
vertical coaponent “(A gob.) on the observation profile we coapute the
horizontal cooponent gx. After this we take the profile A-A (Pig. 2) in the
lover half-space situated at a depth of £00 a. This value is selected on
the basis of the fact that the Quaternary deposits are situated above the
profile but the lukhnrshiye liaestones are situated below it.

Then. using extrapolation [2]. on the basis of the distribution of the g;
conponent at the surface. we find the g; values on the A - A profile. Since
the sign of the g,. coaponent on it is not dependent on where the enoaaly-
foraing assess are situated (above or below the profile). the unconsolidat-
ed deposits can aove froa top to bottoa. that is. their airror reflection
relative to A - A is possible (Pig. 2 shows the reflected asssea by a dash-
ed line).

Then. on the basis of the gx distribution on the A - A profile we coapute
the giatribution of the coaponent g; [2]. It is easy to understand that

the 8x values. due to the fact that the gx sign is not dependent on the
position of the aasses, on the A - A profile will be equal to the sun of
the attractions of the llukharshiye linestones and the unconsolidated depos-
lts. although a difference would be obtained on__this profile in the case
or direct gravity aeesureaents. The deterained g; values can also be de-
terained physically as the total attraction of the luhhershiye liaestones
and none fictitious aasaes. being a airror reflection of uncomlideted
foraations and situated below the A - A profile. Such a ghysicel interpret-
ation sakes further conclusions aiapler. After this the g, values are
scaled by scans of analytical continuation upward to the observation sur-
face. Such continuation does not change the spatial position of the top

of the lukharehiye liaestone and the fictitious aasses relative to the
observation profile.

29

FOR OFFICIAL US! 0081.?
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

no u reeult. on the observation profile we obtpin n curve of the eeaaured
gravity veluee and aone tranaforned function g. in which the influence of
the Quaternary depoeita ie replaced by the influence of the fictitioue
leaaea eituated below the n - A profile. If we take the difference be-
tween theae curvee. then. obvioualy. the influence froe the top of the
Bukherekiye lieeatonee and other underlying diacontinuitiee will be ex-
cluded. The coapoaite curve 0. It) will contain only the difference affect
froo Quaternary depoeita aituated below the obeorvation eurface and fic-
titioua eeeeea eituated at a depth of 800 I end being a eirror reflection
of the Quaternary depoeita.

Then we will eolve the inveree problem for the 6. function. ae wee propoeed
in [b]. we ieeediately note that due to the conditione of the probiee on do
not know the exceae deneity. vhich. in addition. can vary vithin the lieite
of the etructure. depending on what depoeita are in contact with the Quater-
nary foreetione..ln aolution of the inverae problen we find the gravita-
tional effect. which ia related only to the upper boundary [6). that ie.

to the unconaolidatad depoeite. 'ihio effect in related to the lean depth
of the upper boundary. Then. in order to find the effect of attraction on
the obaervation profile free the unconeolidated depoaite. it to eufficient
to carry out analytical continuation froe the aean depth to the aurface.
Thea. there ie no need to detereine the poaition of the bottoe of the un-
conaolidated dapoaita and then eolve the direct problea for the purpoae of
evaluating the effect of attraction. The e. value ia aleoet equal to the
attraction of the unconeolidated depoeita. eince the fictitioue aaeeea.
situated at a depth of 800 a. exert no appreciable influence. by aubtrect-

ing the function 0; free the obaerved gravitational field. we obtain an
anoaaly which ia governed by the top of the lukharekiye lieeetonea and the

underlying denaity boundariee. in the next etege it ie neceeeary to get rid
of the influence of boundariee eitueted belov the luhharehiye depoeite.

1he proposed eethod for excluding the influence of the Quaternary depoeita
wee coapared with direct coeputationa. eince the poaition of the bottoe of
the unconaolideted for-etione for the cited etructure (eee Pig. 2) ie ap-
proxieately hnoun. The influence of Quaternary depoeite vaa excluded by
eeene of averaging. A colpariaon of the reeulta of exclueion of the influ-
ence of the upper part of the aection by eeane of coeputation of the func-

tion 6,. averaging end direct coeputatione indicated that the difference
betveen thee doee not exceed 15!. The loot local anoealy fro. the uncon-

eolidated depoeite ie not great in intenaity (up to 1.5 egal). no that euch
n diacrepency in the aubaequent interpretation is acceptable. taking into
account. at any rate. that the aurvey accuracy in e0.2 agal. vhereae the
intenaity of the anoealy fro- the etructure ie about 10 egal.

lt ahould be noted that the tine expenditurea on coeputetion of the G; func-

tion ie not greater then in the caee of ordinary traneforlatione. eince the
entire coeputation proceea ie reduced to the uaa of one quadrature foreula.
Thie for-ole in euch that the regional background to the aecond degree in-
clueive ia excluded autoeatically.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

An exclusion of the influence of the lowor density discontinuities was
also accoeplishsd by ceeputing the 0; function. It is known from geolog-
lcal data that the easieue depth of burial of the nukharskiye limestones

is npproxieately A ks. The 6 function was cosputed relative to a profile
situated at a depth of 6 he (see Fig. 1).

After conputing the 6, function. we obtained a solution of the inverse prob-
lee of the contact surface of the Bukherekiye lieeatenea on the basis of the

Cg distribution. As is well known. the initial fonula for 6‘ has the fol-

lowing fore [3]:
O
at- -1:
0,...n)~%- SM!) 79—13", limel- (1)
0.

here u. (-1) - znfo'luﬁ )(hz ~ ha); h is depth to the profile A - A (equal
to 6 kn). for which the function 3 was coeputed; H“) is the deviation
of the contact surface relative to the lean depth h: h; e h + A.

He will transfer: foreula (l) to the following fora: hl - h - A. where A is
half the distance between the nean depths hl. hz of the syenetric contact
discontinuities "(7.)

d
a
n.(.-.o)u-;:- Senna-35:13:43. , (2)

In“ 2-4»
we) a u (ﬁg-7515517” .

Thus. solution of the problee for a double layer led to solution of the in-
verse problee for one layer. Accordingly. for solution of equation (2) it
is possible to use the quadratic formula froe ll). The foreula is simple.
requires a einim- of tile expenditures on cowutations and gives satisfac-
tory results when there are not excessively great dips of the contact sur-
fsce. when there are no sharp twists. faults. etc. on it. The nuericel in-
tegration interval was 0.5h. After finding the FM; distribution. for
any arbitrary point it can be assueed that x - 0 end - 0. since we have

a choice of the origin of coordinates‘ﬂmen [L'(;) - [A($ "ii. In this case
the deviations "(8) eust be taken relative to the eesn depth In. which is
equal to 3 kn.

who re

The Iaenn weighted excess density of the nultilsyer section of Quaternary.
Neogene and Upper Pnleogene deposits relative to linestones of the Iukher-

nkiy ntnge is difficult to find and therefore for a note precise deter-in-
;ntinn of the deviations of the contact surface "(1) fro. the mean depth

we will proceed in the following way. we will detereine the mean weighted
density in the region of the arch of an snticlinel fold. where the devia-
tion of the contact surface is known precisely on the basis of drilling
data. In our case the excess density was +0.36 g/ce3. which very satis-
factorily corresponds to real conditions. for deter-ining "(5) it is pos-
sible to use the following ratio ll. 2]:

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

II(m-u...-I;7i!l’-.
“' (a)

lace - bore(hola)] where H e is the deviation of the contact surface from
the mean depth in the borahgla: “($0 is the deviation of the contact sur-

face at an arbitrary point; p.50" and #6131) are the values of the double
layer, obtained after solution of equation (1).

The results of deterninstion of the contact surface using formula (3) are
presented in Fig. l (marked by crosses). As a result. we see a satisfactory
agreement of the determined contact surface by the proposed method with
data from drilling and other geophysical methods, except those sectors where
there are tectonic dislocations. In the region of snticlinal structures.
for which drilling data were available, we computed the error in determin-
ing the contact surface. which did not exceed 152. The determined accuracy
for practical purposes is acceptable for such a complex multilayer geolog-
ical section. For synclinal zones it is extremely difficult to evaluate
the accuracy of the constructions because the top of the Bukherskiy stage
is not known precisely. The error in constructing the contact surface by
the usual method leads not only to a considerable quantitative error (up

to 252), but also to qualitative errors (for example, according to the ob-
served field the structure looks two-humped).

A solution of the integral equation (1) is possible in a somewhat different
way. Since the 6, function describes the difference anomaly from two iden-
tical contact surfaces. one of which is situated considerably lower and

its contribution to the total field is less, then in the first approxima-
tion it can be assumed that the 6; function is created only by the wper
contact surface. Then the inverse problem is solved extremely simply. After
solution the determined surface density values are placed at the depth of
the second contact surface. Having the distribution of surface density at
the level of the mean depths of the upper and lower contact surfaces, us-
ing analytical continuation from each mean depth to the observation surface
and the subsequent results of the continuation we commute the function 6';.
If the function 6'; does not coincide with the initial 6;. we find the dif-
ference between them and we repeat the process of determining the contact
surface. As shown by computations with theoretical models. one approxima-
tion is usually adequate. It should be noted that the second approach for
solution of the equation is preferable. since testing with models confirms
this (see Fig. l, denoted by dots).

Also employed was the method for determining a contact surface under the
condition that excess density is unknown. This method is similar to that
given in [3]. For this purpose, using the distribution of the 6, function.
we computed the vertical derivative an and found the ratio of these func-

t ions
6, (I. 0)

uumnm- (lo)

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The rntio R(x, 0) has the dimensionality of length.

Since the sense and purpose of the Mn, 0) value are. coapletely sinilar to
the some value free [3], the entire difference between those will be only
in the netheaatical coaputations. we will vrite a final foraule asking it
possible to express the deviation of the contact surface free the aean depth
through the R(x,0) value .
huh"!
I, (a) c h m . (5)

But this procedure, although it gave satisfactory results in the theoret-
ical ere-plea. in the specific case gives only qualitative results. The

curve R(x,0) itself correlates very well with the surface of the Bukharsk-
lye lnyers, but the amplitudes of the uplifts are less by a factor of al-

Iaost 2. This is evidently associated with the systematic error in colputing
the function Mat, 0).

BIBLIOGMPRY

l. Antonow. Yu. V., "A Simple Hethod for Constructing a Contact Surface."
RAMDOCHNAYA GEOPIZIKA (Exploratory Geophysics). No 44. Moscow,
"Nedrs," pp 60-64. 1971.

2. Antonev, Yu. V.. "Coaputation of the Gravity Anomaly in the Region 0c-
cupied by Disturbing Masses." PRIKLAWAYA 6309121“ (APPlied Geophysics),
No 78, Moscow, "Nedra," pp 176-186, 1975.

3. Antonov. Yu. v.. "Determination of the Discontinuity of “No Media with
Different Densities froa Gravity Annelise." MZVEDOCHNAYA GEOFIZIKA
(Exploratory Geophysics), No 69. Moscow, "Nedra." pp 108-11!" 1975.

1., Antonov, Yu. V., "Solution of the Inverse Problem of a Contact Surface
in the Presence of Several Discontinuitiee.” RAZVEDOCHNAYA GBOPIZIKA.
No 71, Moscow, "Nedre." pp 87-96. 1976.

5. Antonov, Yu. V., Kuznetsow, Ye. 5., Bekker, Ya. (4.. ”Results of Gravi-
Inetric Exploration Vorlt in the Search for Decal Structures in the
Vakhsh Valley," DOKLADY AN TADZIIIKSKOY SSR (Reports of the Acede-y of
Sciences Tedzhik SSR). No 2. pp 410-109, 1971.

6. Berezhnsya, 1.. T., Telepin. H. A., "Solution of the Generalized Inverse
Problem in Cravinetry for a Contact Surface," PRIKIADNAYA GEOFIZIKA.
No 66, Hoscow, "Nedre," pp 110-125, 1971.

7. (:lnsko, V. 3., Voledin, B. A., Hudretsova. Ye. A., Nefedova, N. Yu., "So-
lution of the Inverse Problea in Gravinetry for a Contact Surface on the
Basis of the Regularizstion Method." 12V. AN SSSR, PIZIKA ZEHLI (News of
the USSR Academy of Sciences, Physics of the Earth), No 2, pp 30-60, 1973.

COPYRIGHT: Izdntcl'stvn "Nedre," 1978
5303
680: 8146/0851“: 33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GPDI’HYSICS, ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

UDC 550.837.05;6813
AUTOMATION OP mun-nous 0P GRAVITATIONAL INFLUENCE OF LOCAL RELIEF

Moscow PRIKLADNAYA GEOFIZIXA in Russian No 89, 1977 pp 96-106
[Article by A. A. Chernov]

[Text] Virtually all stages in processing of the results of gravimetric
measurements have now been automated, both in the form of individual pro-
grams and in automated processing systems (complexes) [3. 6]. The programs,
complexes and systems differ with respect to the methods and algorithms

for solution of different problems and also with respect to organisation

of the computations process. Different technologies for automating the
computation process ensure a different level of automation of computa-

tions and the use of different algorithm for solution of processing
problems determines the attainable computation accuracy and also the breadth
ur the range of modifications and variants of the problem.

In virtually all such developments the automation of computations leads to
an increase in the accuracy of processing and a marked reduction in the ex-
penditures of manual labor. The only exception is the procedure for taking
into account the influence of the surrounding terrain. although this proh-
len was solved as one of the first in the processing of gravimetric explor-
ation data. Hidely known and successfully used in practical work are the
programs prepared using the algorithms formulated by 0. K. Litvinenko. V.
V. Iomtndse, 1.. A. Koval' and many others [4, 6]. Despite the great nuaber
of different program, making it possible to carry out computations of cor-
rections for the points of intersection in a regular grid end directly for
gravimetric points, the degree of automation of solution of this problem
still remains obviously unsatisfactory.

The real accuracy in computing corrections for relief is too low and the
expenditures on manual work are so great that the profitability of use of
electronic computers in this case is frequently in doubt. All the methods
and programs which have been developed and used in practical work assme
the stipulation of digital terrain models (m). which requires signif-
icant expenditures of manual work. On this to a definite degree is also

dependent the relatively low accuracy in computations. since the eleva-
tions of the gravimetric stations and the elevations of the digital

terrain models are determined by different methods and in a general case
do not correspond to one another.

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under conditions of sharply dissected mountain relief the influence of the
near (central) zone is taken into account, as a rule. annually. since con-
putations on an electronic comuter require the stipulation of arm with a
snail interval (50, 100 n): this leads to an increase in the expenditures
on manual work and inevitably reduces the accuracy in the representation
of relief. In addition, there are not always maps of the required scale.
The asthods enloyed in serial photogrametry end also correction eaters
do not solve the problea: when the terrain is forested. when there are no
aerial photographs and with the limitations on the effective cone of the
correction asters there is a narrowing of the range of their applicabil-

ity.

The modern method for coeputing the influence of relief using electronic cen-
puters involves a definite paradox: the elevations. representing relief,

are taken from the maps (with relatively great errors). whereas the ele-
vations of the graviaetric stations. determined with considerably higher
accuracies. are not used in creating a digital terrain model. The taking

of the 0111 free topographic nape using an overlay generates not only ren-
doe errors in interpolation and copying, but also involves an error in draw-
ing the isohypses.

The use of the elevations of gravieetric stations, determined with a high
accuracy, premises not only a reduction in the expenditures of manual
labor on the preparation of data, but also an increase in the accuracy of
computations. in the process of creating digital terrain models. Since
the gravinetric stations are usually situated in a relatively narrow hyp-
somatric interval of mean elevations. for the representation of relief

it is also necessary to enploy extra-s1 elevations, that is. the character-
istic relief points. which are trigonoeetric stations, peaks, elevations
of river channels, etc. It is obvious that the amber of characteristic
points in the relief . taken additionally from the topographic naps, should
vary considerably in dependence on the complexity of relief. the peculiar-
ities of the survey network, etc.

The computation of the influence of relief in the central sons in this case
ls accomplished by means of analytical. integration. The influence of relief
is dcternined in the following way:

A III!

_ r n E m 1
[P c e l "V" ”jiglu-.--y'+h’(!-v”" ()

where f is the gravitational constant, 0' is the density of surface rocks.
After integration for h and expansion of the integrand using a binomial for-

mula, taking into account the first two terns of the expansion, the expres-
sion for the correction assumes the following fern [1]:

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to A
”on.“ f II, -—II.‘ n
M, 1...; gm In S. _u(U—-1L-‘ l W ”a: n. (2)

where A. n are the integration limits (that is. tense in which relief is
taken into account). no is the elevation of the computation point; hi
is the elevation of tho "current" relief point. A series of approximaie
methods for computing the corrections for relief [bl is based on use of
expresaion (2).

With the stipulation of Ma. y) by some function. such an a power-lav poly-
aomial, the integral (2) is easily obtained analytically. The procedure
which we described was realised for polynomials of second and third de-
grees and therefore the value of the correction is expressed through the
voefflrlcntl for a polynomial approximating relief and the coordinates

of gravimetric statione relative to the center of coordinates. The program
for applying the method is written in ALGOL-60 language applicable to the
TA-Zm translator; it is based on the method and program for polynomial in-
terpolation developed earlier by the author in collaboration with P. A.
aesprocvaanyy [2]. In this method use is made of the approximation of

an interpolated surface (field) in a "moving window" of variable site by

a power-law polynomial of an automatically changeable degree. ‘lhe approx-
lmation is made by the least squares method with weighting of the nonclo-
sures for the distances of the points of stipulation of the initial function
from the interpolation point, coinciding with the center of the "window"
(8'14)e

N
0“ ﬂ Off; —0 min. (3)

where 81 - :1 - u; is the deviation of the approximating function r from
the value of the initial function u; N is the amber of points in the grid.
The weight of the noncloaure p], is selected in accordance with the recom-
mendations of H. La Porte [6] in such a way that at the center of the win-
dow it is equal to unity and at the edge is equal to zero:
. {'2 ..,

I" "-§-;Ti e
The degree of the approximating polynomial is selected automatically in de-
pendence on the number of points entering into the grid and in such a way
that the number of coefficients a with the selected degree of the poly-
nomial H. equal to n - [(H 4- l)(ri + 2)]l2. is the closest from below to
the number N of points in the grid. The described approach to solution of
the problem ensures an insignificant smoothing with the use of not excee-
xively high degrees of the approximating polynomials [2-6]. The smoothness
uf the interpolated field (surface) is achieved by a considerable overlapp-
ing of adjacent grids in combination with the smoothness of the polynomial
and a bell-like form of the weighting function. Stability of the solution

is ensured by procedures improving the conditioaality of the system of nor-
mal equations relative to the coefficients of the approximating polynomial;

36
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

 

Graphs of differences in corrections for relief counted using digital ter-
rain models obtained by scans of autmtic interpolation relative to correc-

tions obtained with annual processing of digital terrain models. Interpola-
tion with use of: 1) 2,900 characteristic relief points; 2) 2,300 pointa;
1) 1,650 points

the first step is the procedure of rejecting of the equationa corresponding
lo coefficients not supported b-, the arrangeoent of initial points.

The described interpolation algorithm can be used for obtaining digital ter-
rain models on the basin of arbitrarily situated graviaetric stations and
rharncteristic relief points. The simplified computations which we each

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

earlier indicated that this method ensures reliable reproduction of the
out when the ratio of the initial and the resultant points is hi [7].
Since the elevations and the coordinates of the gravinetric points must
be coded regardless of the method for computing the influence of relief ,
and also for subsequent processing on an electronic computer, the propos-
ed method will be economically justified with a ratio of the nuber of in-
itial characteristic points in the relief to the number of m points of
1:3 or lower.

The semiautomatic coder produced at the present time by the "Itatgeofispri-
bor” plant on a practical basis makes it possible to prepare the coordin-
ntes of the points plotted on topographic maps directly on a machine car-
rier with negligible work expenditures. Thus. the use of a coder for the
coding (and readout) of the characteristic relief points considerably
simplifies the introduction of the proposed method and makes it profitable
even with higher values of the indicated ratio.

A determination of the minimum necessary number of characteristic relief
points is evidently a key problem in the proposed method. It is also evi-
dent that the interpolation of relief is a problem which is incomparably
more complex than the interpolation of potential fields because relief is
not a smooth function. But in this case as well there is no need to obtain
n relief model identical to the real relief; it is only necessary to main-
tain an equality of the volume integrals from the reel relief and the cre-
ated models. The latter circumstance is very imrtant because the precise
recreation of relief with scarps and high-rising crags is impossible when
using interpolation procedures.

In order to test the proposed method and determine the influence of the num-
ber of characteristic relief points on the results of the computations we
carried out experimental computations with the use of practical materials
for the mountainous regions of Armenia and Georgia. He used a sector meas-
uring 35 x 45 km. characterised by a variation of elevations from 000 to
3.200 m. In this sector a 01'" with an interval of 0.5 km was prepared man-
ually. Prom topographic maps we read 2.900 characteristic relief points.
taking into account the arrangement of gravimetric points; the latter were
located in the selected sector for the most part in the central area.
whereas the "edge" with a width of 10 km was virtually not supplied with
them and this greatly increased the total number of points used.

We elevations and coordinates of the characteristic relief points and
uravlmetric stations constituted the initial data for the described in-
terpolation program. by means of which it was possible to compute a m
(corresponding to the manual model) consisting of 6.500 points of a regular
grid. The initial ratio of the number of additional and resultant points
was approximately 3:7. but with a maximum thinning of the additional

points -- less than 1:4. The initial number of additional characteristic
points was successively thinned by 25. 33 and $02: each time interpola-
tionwmi then carried out and corrections were computed. In computing the

38
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

correctione in all ceeea uee wee aede of a progrea worked out in the Geol-

03y Paculty Hoacov State Univereity [5). the correctione vere coeputad in
the tone from 1 to 10 kc.

Table l

:ct.:-m:::1.::::t...t:..~ “:-

 

m:
l. Nut-her of cherectorietic relief pointe taken into account in inter-
poletion
2. Standard deviation 4 3,“. Iael
1. Mean deviation 43,“. ml

  
 

Table 2
00- 3
“-
I. 0.1-an
5 “new
6 I'anchoanccm uepeﬁnaom
II ""'
”W 0.13»:
” " Ty“. 2.1m
7 0.1.1an00 uptown-an
.I— 3
0 ‘ m, " Mm
.2 .'O
” ‘41—“: mm
8 llnaueee nae. "may antennae 0-63 x.
“N
KIN:
1. Function 6. llyperbolic pareboloide
2. Theoretical vnlueAgru 7. Elliptical pareboloide
J. A; .1 value obtained under progre- 8. Note. Integration lilitt
1.. snip-old 0-4: a
5. Con:

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. 088 ONLY

Table 3

 
  
  

—aa.aa.

llu -.--' t I if... Dal-ea.
th aha-mu. 1

nan-g...

 

llnenaaus A1,. um.
museum

     

 

Iu net's
s-Iapaann
a], ”.3

        

.099. . . .
3283533

§§§§§§§§§

m:
1. Corrections A3,“. sgal. cosputed
2. sanually

3. under progra-
6. Difference in corrections Agul. ngal

The results are given in Table l and ere partially represented in the fig-
ure. The values of the ease discrepancies in the corrections. counted
using annual and interpolated pm. show that these discrepancies are ran-
dos. The relatively high value of the uni-u- dsviation 0.3 sgel does not
seen excessive because such results are obtained in mutations on the
basis of an independently prepared nsnual 01K. The standard deviations
(Table 1) also do not exceed the errors in coeputing corrections in the
middle tone by traditional nethods (under conditions of sharply dissected
mountainous relief).

For the proper evolution of the effectiveness of the proposed sethod it

is necessary to take into accotmt that for testing use use Isde of a sac-
tor of insignificant area in which the "useful" part, occupied by process-
able gravisstric stations. vas 201: the renainder was the necessary "edge."
ensuring allowance for the influence of relief with the required radius.

In practical cosputations this "edge” occupies no sore than several per-
cent of the 01'“.

The progren for conuting the influence of relief in the central zone was
tested using nodels and a practical exanple. The conputationa nsde using
hyperbolic and parabolic psrabololds. an ellipse and cone as Iodels. nade
it possible to evaluate accuracy and denonstrste the applicability of the
developed nodel (Table 2). The discrepancies in the theoretical value of
the corrections and those cosputed using the described progran were: for
ellipsoids - about 0.03 sgal. cones (the lost unfavorable for approxinat-
ing bodies by paraboloids) —- 0.06 sgsl, parabolic and hyperbolic parabol-
oids - virtually equal to zero.

Practical testing was carried out in a sector of real relief (Iep scale

1:10.000). The results of cosputations, nade for 18 points. are given in

Table 3. It can be seen that the corrections. cosputed using the progras
40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR omcm. USE ONLY

nml annually oepluylnu n Lulmvchenko grid. do not exceed 0.1 legal. eVerog-
Ing 0.0!: man]. or [12 of the mean value of the corrections.

'l'hue, we have proposed a method for coeputing the influence of relief hand
on use of the elevations of gravimetric stations and characteristic relief
points and employing o polynomial approximation method [7]. Por computing
the corrections in the central tone a program was prepared for direct coa-
putation of these correctione by the analytical integration method. The
program was tested using model and practical examples.

for computing the influence of relief in the middle and distant cones it ha
been propoeed that use he made of a program for areal interpolation for
creating a D‘I'H. uaing which the corrections are computed by traditional
methods. Using practical asteriel it vas deoonstrated that the proposed
method can he used and is profitable.

BIBLIOGMPlIY

I. Bereekin. V. IL. PRIHENBNIYB GRAVlRAzVBmil DLYA POISKOV NEH! I GAZA
(Use of Gravimetric Proepecting in the Search for Petroleum and Gee).
Moscow. ”Nedra.” 1973. 261 pages.

2. Besprosvannyy. P. A.. Chernov. A. A.. "Interpolation at Points of In-
tersoction in a Regular Grid Using an Electronic Computer." Bl. 88R.
HATEHATIOIBSKIYE HB‘I'OOY ISSLSDOVANIY V 630L081! (Mathematical Hethode
for Research in Geolosy). Hoscov. ltd. Vials, 1973. 20 pagee.

3. Bcnprozvaunyy. P.A.. ducrnov, A. A.. ”Complexes (Systems) for the Auto-
mated Proceaeing of Gravimetric Data." OBZOR. SPR. RBGIONAL‘NAYA. RAZ-
VEDOCIINAYA I PRMSIDVAYA GEOPIZIKA (Review. Series on Regional, Hin-
ernl Prospecting and lnduetrial Geophysics). lloacov. led. V1913. 1976,
97 pagea.

S. Litvinenho. Yu. 0.. Rua'yanov. Yu. 6., Rudkin, ll. 0.. et al.. Anon”.
IZIROVANNAYA SISTBHA OBMIOTKI I INTERPRETM‘SII RBZUL'TA‘NV cumm-
RlCHFSKlIOI IZHBRZNIY (Automated System for the Processing and Inter-
pretation of the Reeults of Gravimetric Measurements). Moscow. "Retire."
1973. 351 pages.

6. Boldyrev. V. A.. Zhigalina, N. P.. Poletayev. B. 0., et al.. ”liethode
for Processing and Interpretation of Geophysical Observationa on an
Electronic Cowuter,” oszon. SBR. REGIONAL'NAYA. RAZVEDOCIINAYA 1 PRO-
HYSLOVAYA GBOPIZIKA. Hoscou, lad. VIDIS. 1971. 99 pagea.

7. Chernov. A. A.. "On the Problem of Rationalization of Computations of

the Gravitational Influence of Local Relief on a Digital Computer.“
RAZVBDOCHNAYA GEOPIZIKA (Exploratory Geophyaica). No 70. Noacou.
"Nedrn." pp "5-119, 1975.

COPYRIGHT: chetel'stvo “Nedra,” 1978

5302
('30: awe/0854c ‘1

FOR 077101“. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

ONPHYSICS, ASTRONONY AND SPACE

UDC 530.031.23.086

RESULTS 0P 83A 13818 0? (BM-K Ammo OMVIHBTBRS
Moscow PRIKMDNAYA GSOPIZIKA in Russisn no 89. 1977 pp 106-110
[Article by V. 0. Degreeyents]

[Text] Modern surface see greviseters. intended for investigations of shelf
regione end cosstel tones. ere for repleceunt of botton grevieeters with e
low productivity. For this purpose the eccurscy in nessureesnts with surfsce
ggvieeters sust be 90.: + 1.0 sgel with disturbing eccelerstions up to 50-
1 ”lo

The MP see quart: spring grsvineter. developed st the All-Union Scientific
Resesrch Institute of Geophysics. during tests reveeled good possibilities
for its use for geologicel prospecting purposes. 0n short runs on e vessel
with e displecesent of 100 tons the sttsined ssesureeent occurecy wss ebout

to.&l.o “.1 [2].

As e result of inrovesent of the MK grevieeter it wee possible to pro-
duce en sutosetsd see surfece querts grevieeter (GIN-K). supplied. the sees
as the m. vith o gyropendulu stebiliser [6].

See tests of different types of see grsvieeters. including the GEN-K, node
it possible to eveluetc the eccurecy cherecteristics of the greviseters end
to cospsre then with one snother.

The tests were cerried out sbosrd the hydrogrsphic ship ”Deitriy Leptev"
with e displsceeent of 1,600 tons, outfitted with nodern nevigetionsl equip-
sent. In the course of the tests the ship's coordinates were detenined
usicg e “High Pix“ rediogeodetic systel. ensuring deteninetion of the

Rdt s corrections with en error not greeter then £0.5-0.8 sgel.

The processing of ell the collected dste wes ecco-plished using "Minsk-22"
electronic cowuters with use of the "Kospost" progree [3]. ‘mis erticle

gives the principel results of the tests.

The surface grevinetric epperetus outfit used in the tests consisted of
three m spring quertc greviseters No lo end two autos-ted instruents
GIN-K No 1 end GIN-K No S. The GIN-K end can grevieeters heve e sieiler

b2
'03 OFFICXAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

design. The difference is that the CNN-K elastic syates has an additional
narrow-range seasuring cospensation systee ensuring operation of the in-
struneat in an automatic regiee without restructuring in the range of grav-
ity changes 800-1000 ngal.

in order to elisinate auteoaciliations for iepreving the dynasic character-
istics the Gin-K instruent also contains a special device for introducing
into the closed regulation systes a correcting signal which is proportional
to the tile derivative of the aissatch signal. liore detailed interaction
on the design of the graviseters is given in ll. 2]. The Gui-K gravisatar.
the sees as the m, is calibrated quite reliably by the tilt ssthod.

The analog registry of the readings of all three instrt-ents was accewlish-
ed using one 12-point autoeatic recorder of the KSP-d type. In addition to
the electric signals corresponding to the position of the penduluas and
turns of the conpensatien aicroscrews. for sonitoring the operation of the
thereostats there was also registry of the tesperatures within the gravi-
netere.

‘l‘he graviseters were placed in a roos (cabin) on the lower deck at a dis-
tnnce of no Is free the ship‘s setacenter. in order to reduce the errors in
the gyrostabilitars due to the ship's tilts the instrusents (cm-x) were
suspended on supports in auxiliary Cardan suspensions. The pendulua of the
ONO-K grevisetar elastic systen (mm-x No l) was oriented along the longi-
tudinal axis of the ship. and for excluding the cross-coupling effect the
penduluss of the gravieatere m No i and CNN-K No 5 were directed in the
opposite direction.

Gravity deter-inetions st bottoe stations were aade using two standard

60! gravisoters. The working nethod and accordingly the test progras were
organised in such a way that. first. to deter-inc the influence of disturb-
ing factors on operation of the (Iii-K gravieeters and in coeparison with
synchronously executed bottos gravinetric observations. evaluate the ac-
curacy of the surface neaeurenents; second, to carry out an areal survey

In an ocean area. using a systea of batten stations as a reference network.

Observations with surface gravineters were nade continuously during the en-
tire run, lasting about 60 days. both while the ship was on course and
when at anchor. Course observations were made at a speed of iii-13.5 knots
with continuous operation of the autosatic rudder. Using data free the
radionnvigatian systes (accuracy in detenining coordinates ere-loo a)

each nix minutes the position of the ship on the profile was deter-ined
and in the event of its drift the course wee corrected. In order to reduce
the error in operation of the gyrostebilisers caused by rotational nove-
sents of the ship. the changes in course were no lore frequent than once
per sinute and constituted not sore than 1’.

Surface unsure-earn were node with sea waves up to class 1-6 (less fre-
quently up to 5); the aepiitude of vertical accelerations on the average
«lid not exceed 60-50 gal. 0a sees profiles with a deterioration of

‘3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OHIOIAL "8! ONLY

seteorological conditions the vertical accelerations attained 100 gel or
sore. but the horitontal accelerations did not exceed 40-50 gal.

 

Fig. l. Diagraa of location of surface and bottoa stations in ocean area.
1) principal control poznt; 2) botton control point on profile: 3) bottoe
regular point: 4) surface control profile; 5) surface regular profile: 6)

        
         

shoreline
Table l
s run-It N I ram-awn =2.I
emu—1mm =:.o
ﬂIIl-K n) s 3.vu-ao.vn :13
6 man 5% 4 emu-1mm :33
m:

l. Nunber of sraviseter

2. Observation time

3. Null-point displace-tut. anal/day

lo. Mean square error in individual observations. ml
5. GIN-K

6. m

At the anchor stations the seasuresants were node simultaneously vith the
tam-x and the out; such surface observations were successful in all cases
except for those when the rate of the ship's oscillations was lore than

J-S degrees I sinute.

Grovisetric observations in the survey area were sade in the follovin; way.
‘lhe entire area was broken down into appronilastely rectangular sectors with
«idea not longer than 100 Iua. Ordinary (regular) undervater observation pro-
files, spaced 8-10 h- apart. rested on surface control profiles (Cf). where-
as the letter rested on bottom control gravinetric points (360?). In addi-
tion. along the C? a systes of additional bottoa points (361’) was inserted.

‘6

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
Fm’. (W‘FICIM. "HR ONLY

resting on the 3001’, which were used in evaluating the accuracy of opera-
tion of the sea graviletsrs. The surface and botton observations were tied
in to a single eain control point (h6P). situated in the bay, protected
egez'nst see waves (Fig. 1).

In the course of the sea tests a network of botton points (stations) was
established. It consisted of d 306? and 28 86?. ll» GP (sons of which were
processed lore than ones) and a regular network of 22 profiles with a
total length of about 3.000 In. The area of the gravinetric survey was
about 30.000 “2.

The stability of instruent operation was evaluated using the results of
repeated neasureaents et the “OP. These observations were made not less
frequently then each 7-10 days: the duration of eech stop was 1-1.5 days.
The values of the null-point shifts and the standard deviations of indi-
viduel observations with each instrument relative to the straight line
approxinating the linear cosponent of null-point shift. cosputsd on the
basis of these data. a:e presented in Table l.

The sccureey of sea observations while the vessel was on course wee eval-
ueted both on the besis of the internal convergence of the instrunents

and on the basis of external convergence. on the basis of the coincidence
of aeosureosnts on repeated mns. at the points of intersection of the sur-
vey and control runs, end finslly. on the heels of e conperison with the
bottoe welues of gravity. registered using the one.

Evolutions of neasureoent sccurscy with respect to internal convergence
between instrments on each run were sleds using the for-ula

an m :3" L o§di¥¢i——.d+0:.. s

where 01,5. 0'1.“ 0’54 are the dispersions of the differences between
the paired readings of two gravineters (the subscript gives the nunerical
designations of the grevineters).

These values are cosputsd on an electronic conputer in the course of date
processing. For control profiles the 1-1 value averaged 10.6 sgal, for or-
dinary profiles - 10.8 ngsl.

The accurecy of neaeuresents with respect to external convergence was eval-
uated using the for-ula ._ -
my:
war-=1 '

where bi is the difference in the observed 4g values. ngal; n is the nu.-
ber of cowared points.

In a coeparison of the results of neaeureoents on repeated runs (n - 36)
the .2 value was found to equal 10.9 legal, and in a conparison at the
points of intersection of survey and control runs it was 11 agal. The re-
sults of cosparison with bottoe neasure-cnte are of the greatest interest
(7.51: 2). ‘5
.POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to data cited in Table 2. it waa found that I2 - 14.2 agal
with n O 22.

Table 2 ehowe that the accuracy of oheervationa A on profile 939 waa ap-
preciably lower than on the reaaining profile. which can be attributed to
the preaence of iarked changee in the directiona of the ship along the
profile; theae were carried out for the purpoae of the host preciae pee-
eage over prewiouely placed bottoa atatione. In thoae caaea when the
hottoa pointa were eatebliahed after carrying out surface maurenenta
along linear profilea. the conpariaon indicated a aubatantial increaae in
accuracy. For” example. on profile 965. worked in auch a way (Pig. 2), the
error in surface aeaeureaente a; ia evaluated at £0.65 agal, without tak-
ing into account the error in bottoa maeureaentamnd 10.5 Igal when they

are taken into account.
Table 2

 

mm
930
m
m
an
3mm . .
urn-Io 33; 13‘;
nrn-Iz an +0?»
nrn-a 001 +415
a or!” m _”
mm m —o'9 '
urn-27 nos +1: '
“I'll-n ”5 +0)
1mm “5 +0, I
mm 965 +03 .
Jun-22 nos 42:
awn—o: urea P I
KEY:
A) nor

8) umber of run (profile)

c) A. A - A . ngal
D) 86? sent! Qbot

8) HQ
P) an” ' '0o2 ml

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The results of observations at anchor stations, which were lode silulten-
eously with botton measure-ants. are of definite interest. Table 3 gives
comparisons of such observations eade along the profile "ct-7." The very
same point, soap-7. serves es a control point for both surface and bottom
observations. m..." A) '91

 
 
 
 
  

20

20

'2

 

o u 20 u on so mull) I11“

Pig. 2. (beperison of surface and botton ohservetione on profile. 1) sur-
face deteteinetions with (am-x; 2) bottoe deterainatione. A) ml: 3) miles

    
  
   

31:53.2}. 5""III"I‘3m-"“a 5‘ Table 3
KEY: l M,- --0.1 urea 6,
1) Date of observations 5) A. Aleurf - A t’ “.1
2) Tile. hours-einutes 6) A en . -o_1 "3°
3) Designation of stetion 7) B
4) Depth, I 8) 361’
Table ’0

 

 

We uneven-I. urea
m syn-me
"on-o mm gene-e ”ne-
1 I n 2 euro-"med ”2:";

6 run-R :3. a
run-I: a r.

 

7 PNK" N ‘
KEY:
1) Nutter of gravi-eter 5) Mean square
2) ﬁnder of cowerison points 6) ace-r
J) Heaeureeent error. legal 7) m

b) Systeastic

Taking into account the error ($0.4 legal) in the values of bottoa deteruin-
:Itione, reduced to sea level. the conclusion can be drawn that there is an
approximate equal accuracy of both measurements. However, it euet be noted
that these observations vere ude when waves at sea were not more then

67
FOR OPl’ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

class 2-3, and the disturbing accelerations did not exceed 20-30 gal.

The estimates cited above were made for quite short runs with an average
duration of 5-6 hours. The tie-in of regular surface profiles with sea
control points (profiles) makes possible a partial compensation of the
possible systematic errors caused by the influence of disturbing acceler-
ations and ship tilts, especially the cross-coupling effect. In this con-

nection it is of considerable interest to compare the sea observations (on
course) in a long run with bottom observations.

Using the control observations. after taking into account the corrections
for null-point shift, in accordance with the data in Table l. for each of
the surface gravimeters (on course), we computed the Ag values over bot-

tom points and carried out their comparison, the results of which are giv-
en in Table ’0.

The Olin-K instruments were more precise than the (34K? instruments. however,
the averaging of the readings for the CNN-K gravimsters for the purpose of
lessening the influence of the cross-coupling effect. and also the random
errors, did not lead to a significant increase in measurement accuracy. The
mean square error for the three instruments was 12.3 legal (systematic com-
ponent — 1 mgsl) and proved to be only a little different than the error
in measurements with the CNN-K No 1 ($2.6 mgsl). nus is attributable.
first of all, to the insignificant CC influence (in comparison with the
total error) and second. to the presence of significant systematic errors,
the influence of which is not excluded with averaging.

If it is assused that the errors 51, caused by the instability of each
gravimeter, were determined (see Table 1) using the results of repeated
KC? observations, it is possible, excluding them from the total error 5,
to estimate the magnitude of the errors 62 caused by the influence of
disturbing accelerations and the ship's tilt. and also the Bbtv8s effect.
For the Gill-K No l, OHM-K No S and WK grevimeters the 52 values were
11.2, $1.9 and 12.7 mgal respectively.

The following conclusions can be drawn from everything said above.

Our tests indicated that the GIN-K gravimeters on runs with a duration
greater than 30 days with disturbing accelerations of about 50 gal ensure
measurement of gravity with an error not greater than $2.5 mgsl. Accord-
ingly, without a special network of bottom control points it is possible
to carry out a survey with isosnomslic lines drawn each 5-10 mgal.

(In short profiles, with a length of about 100 km, resting on see bottom con-
trol points, the GUN-K instrument can ensure measurements of gravity incre-

ments with an error :tO.5-0.6 mgsl. Thus, the joint carrying out of surface
and bottom observations makes it possible to carry out an areal survey and
compile naps at a scale l:200,000 with isosnomslic lines drawn each 2 mgsl.

68
mt OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For a further increase in the accuracy of sea surface eeesureesnts it is
necessary to increase the accuracy and stability of operation of the grav-
laeters and the gyrostabilizera and also the accuracy in deter-aiming the
corrections for the influence of accelerations arising during the eovessnt
of the vessel (Ebtvds effect. cross-coupling effect, etc.).

1.

3.

lo.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Begrsuyents, V. 0.. "The GIN Automated Sea Spring Gravi-ater," PHILAD-
NAYA GBOFIZIKA (Applied Geophysics), No 79. Moscow. "Nedra." pp 159-170.
1975.

Bosrueyants. V. 0., Korhsnov, K. 21., Raynot, A. 9.. "The on See Grav-
ineter," PRIKLADNAYA GBOPIZIKA. No 67, ibscou. ”Nedra," pp 146-152.
1972.

Boyorskiy, B. A.. "Conner: Processing of Sea Profile Datereinations of
Gravity Using a Minsk-22' Electronic Comutsr." masxov AVTGIATIZIRD-
VANNYY GRAVIHETR I YBGO RAMA (Sea Automated Gravieeter and its Oper-
ation), Moscow. 12d. VINITI, pp 24-29. 1973.

Kutepov, V. 8.. "Stabilizer of a See Gravineter unstructed on the
Gyropendulun Principle," 12V. AN 8881!, $33. PIZIKA 2am (News of the

USSR Academy of Sciences, Physics of the Earth), No 1. pp 107-113. 1971.

COPYRIGRT: Izdatel'stvo "Redra," 1978

S 303

cso:

8164/0851“:

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPHYSICS. ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

006 550.831

METHOD FOR DETERMINING THE SECOND DERIVATIVES 0P GRAVITATIONAL POTENTIAL
"N A MOVING BASE

Moscow PRIKLADNAYA GEOFIZIKA in Russian N0 89, 1977 pp [11-115
[Article by' G. O. Krylov and I. I. Namaenko-Bondarenko]

lTextl M the present time both in the USSR [1-3. 5-7] and abroad [8. 9]
studies are being made of the possibility of obtaining the second deriva-
tives of gravitational potential on a moving base. This will make it poa-
uiblc to increase the productivity of variometer measurements. In addi-
tion. information on the second derivatives of gravitational potential

is necessary in solving problems related to the theory of figure of the
earth. in exploratory geophysics and i navigation.

then making measurements on a moving base to determine the second deriva-
tives of gravitational potential, the ease as in the registry of the first
derivatives, the need arises for discriminating the useful signal against
the noise background. In discriminating the first deriVative against the
background of inertial accelerations. the basis used is the frequency meth-
od for the separation of the signal from the noise. The strength of the
useful gravitational signal is tens of thousands of ELIE! less than the
noise and therefore the discrimination of the signal against the noise
background presents considerable difficulties.

The situation is different when measuring the second derivatives in move-
rent. The sensor of second derivatives. like any other gravitational sen-
sor. will be subject to the influence of inertial forces. However. for
such a sensor the noise will be created for the most part by angular ac-
celerations and to a lesser degree by the angular velocities of the base.
with careful fabrication and balancing of the sensing element it should
not react to linear accelerations.

we will assume that on a moving base information is obtained on the second
derivatives of gravitational potential. In this case, as demonstrated in
In], from the second derivatives it is possible to form a second-rank
tensor

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 098 ONLY

u... m, w"
IV.I-a[ll',. W" W,‘].
m, m, m.

where Runny" are the measured values of the second derivatives.

1he greatest noise is created by the angu ar accelerations. Even with such
a snail angular acceleration ss 10"6 sec‘ noise is formed which is equal to
1,000 units. It would seem that the diecrisination of a useful signal in

the presence of such considerable noise would be as difficult as when meas-
uring the first derivatives of gravitational potential.

However. this is not the case. ‘Ihere is an isportant peculiarity of the
local gravitational and inertial fields - a difference in the structure
of the second-rank tensors. It appears that the tensor of angular acceler-
ntions is antisymtric and the tensor of the second derivatives of gravi-
tational potential is syuatric. Such a peculiarity of the fields makes it
possible to separate the matrix formed from these derivatives into sym-
setric and anti :yuetric parts and thus to filter out the noise caused

by angular accelerations.

It should be noted that the components of the syusstric matrix are also de-
pendent on the angular velocity of the base. For example. angular velocit-
ies of 10" sec'1 create noise of about 10 units. This noise can be flltered
out if use is made of angular velocity sensors. by means of which it is

now possible to sesaure angular velocities with an accuracy to 10'6 sec'l.
In addition. the noise level when measuring the second derivatives of grav-
itstional potential can be decreased by means of placement of the sensors
on a gyroplatform. free in azimuth.

Accordingly, when measuring the second derivatives of gravitational pater.-
tial in movement the problem of contending with noise is solved completely

and essentially even when there is a coincidence of the spectra of the use-
ful signal and noise. which, as is well known, is impossible when measuring
the first derivatives.

Now we will examine the possibility of separating the useful signal and
noise when making measurements of the second derivatives.

For this purpose we will symsetrize the tensor H obtained as a result of
measurements using an algorithm with the_trsnspoe d tensor 1"“:

I i
w” .- .-J- (Wu-i- ,Iru) + -2- (Wu—av”) . .wu + .wu.
Hence
' . 0
Wu V 7 (Wat‘i' was) + T ("11" We!) 0

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

w"- ;- (Iv.,+ m.) + +(st- Wu)

As a result of this operation. from the tensor H“ we obtained two tensors
-- syn-attic .Hu and antisymtric all”:

I
"WI! - '3'“le . I‘VH" Wu—u,w.,:
wil'i‘u}. U: “.1" -ﬂ.0' “'10-'10:-
Gu'l! WII-Mm'u-e ".Ul-”I~U "'"+ ”:4, H: Wyn-0’0, :
“'u’Ma War-“w: Wn+~l+~L

I _ -
.IV“-- 3- (ﬂ .,_.Wu) I- awn:
. 0 8. ~&,
Nu" -m;- -8. o e. »

8' -.U. 0

[Initial subscripts: o - antisymtric; c - s - sy-setric]

""9" “’3. “y. 0’; are the components of the angular velocity vector;
4;) x' a; y. y s are the components of the angular acceleration vector.

The discrimination of the antisymtric tensor is of interest when it is
necessary to have information on angular accelerations; otherwise it is
possible to limit ourselves to discrimination of the sy-ctric tensor.
The operation of sysasetrisation makes it possible to filter out the errors
caused by angular accelerations of the sensing element. After formation of
the symaetric tensor ."11 it is necessary to filter out the errors caused
by the angular velocities of the sensing element.

For this it is necessary to have intonation on the comonents Ups-1y, «J:
of the angular velocity vector and form the tensor

"(“:+“3) 0.0-, “a“.
«non I- -, “a“! " (0: + 03) 0,0: .
sun, «,0, -- (a: + 0:) .

Data for formation of the tensor “’1 “dki can be obtained using two angular
velocity sensors. whose planes of sensit vity are perpendicular.

The computation and formation of a second-rank tensor of gravitational poten-
tial is accomplished using the algorithm

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m. w., "'3. Wu Was Wu
IV.;-[W,, W" Wu]-eWu-i-0nbu~ Wu W» "at +

w“ w... m. Wu w., Wu
._ 0.: 4. 01:) 0,0, 0.0:
| + Us“! “(“:+“:) “v“- -
v.0. 0w. -(u:+u:)

Thus. using a priori information on the neasured parameter and noise. with
registry on a moving base it is possible to obtain the values of the second
derivatives of gravitational potential. free of noise caused by angular
velocities and accelerations. even under the condition of a coincidence of
their spectra.

The proposed method can be realised. for example. in the following way.
Sensing elements are mounted on a gyroplatform. making it possible to meas-
ure all the second derivatives of gravity potential. In addition. this
same gyroplatforn carries two angular velocity sensors. They are placed

in such a way that the planes of sensitivity of these sensors will be
mutually perpendicular.

The readings of the sensing elements and angular velocity sensors are regis-
tered sinultaneouly. Then the tensors of the second derivatives of gravita-
tional potential and angular velocities are formed from the readings of
these instruments. After syusetriration of the second-rank tensor. which
makes it possible to filter out the noise caused by the angular accelera-
tions, the resulting symetric tensor is suited with the tensor of angular
velocities. As a result of these operations. we obtain the values of the
second derivatives of gravitational potential, free of the noise caused by
the angular velocities and accelerations.

The considered method for separating the useful signal and noise can also
be used in stationary gravimetric seasurements. For example. in determin-
ing the gravitational constant the soisaic and sicroseismic oscillations
of the base of this instrument can introduce errors into the measurements.
In this case. using the proposed sethod it is possible to increase the ac-
Curacy in determining the gravitational constant.

Thus. in su-arising, the fol lowing conclusions can be drawn. an a moving

base it is feasible to measure not the individual derivatives of gravity.

but the entire set. The local gravitational and inertial fields when uns-
uring the second derivatives of gravitational potential in movement have»
structural peculiarities melting possible a new solution of the problem of

discriminating a useful signal against a noise background. Using a priori

information on the measured parameter and noise. using the proposed method
It is possible to determine the second derivatives of gravitational poten-
tial during movement even under the condition of a coincidence of the use-
ful signal and noise spectra.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

So

60

7O

8.

9.

FOR OFI'ICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPNY

Vesc1ov. K. Yn. "Measurement of Elements of the Gravitational Field in
Noveeent.“ PRIMNAYA 6301’!!!“ (Applied Geophysics). No ‘0. Moscow.
"Nedro." pp 120-126. 1965.

Gran. n. V.. "0n the Theory of Vertical Torsion Scales." UCNBNYYE ZAPIS-
KI LOU (Scientific Natee of Leningrad State University). No 303. SEN.
FIZICNBSKIYB I GEOLOGICIIBSKIYB NAUKI (Series on the Physical and Gao-
logical Sciences). No 13, Leningrad. Isd. LOU. pp 278-287. 1962.

tvnnkln. L. 0.. ISSLBDOVANIYA Po SOZDANIYU VBRTIKAL'NYKN GMVITATSIONN-
YKN GRADIYBNNWOV (Investigations for Creating Vertical Gravitation-
ol Gradient Meters). Moscow. ”Nauke." 1968. 86 pages.

Krylov. 6. 0.. "Possibility of Use of Tensor Hethods in Gravimters."
TENZORNYYB mom POLYA V GMVIHBTNII (Tensor Field lbdels in Grav-
inctry). Moscow. Izd. VINITI. pp 5-35. 1972.

Siukov. V. 8.. "0n the Theory of Torsion Scales on a Moving Base."
12V. AN SSSR. SER. FIZIKA 2mm (News of the "SST! Acadeay of Sciences.
Physics of the Earth). No 3. pp “-55. 1968.

Fedinskiy. B. V.. "Devolopnent of Apparatus for Graviaetric Heaaure-
some in Hove-ant." 12V. AN 8851!. 883. GEOI'IZICNBSKAYA (Nevs of the
USSR Acadely of Sciences. Geophysical Series). No 1. Moscow. lad-v0
AN sssn, pp 156-152. 1959.

Chernyshev. V. A.. "Vertical Torsion Scales as a Sensor for Measuring
Bleeents of the Gravitational Field in Motion." 12V. AN SSSR. SBR. PIZ-
"(A 2mm. No 6. pp 126-129. 1967.

landherg. N. T.. "Airborne Gravity Surveys." TRANSACTIONS CANADIAN IN-
STITUTE 0? MINING AND HETALLURGY, Montreal, pp 25l-259. 1957.

Lundbcrg. II. T.. Ratcliffc. J. 11.. "Airborne Gravity thcr. Description
and Prcllainnry Results." NINING ENGINEERING. New York. Vol 8, pp 817-
820. 1959.

COPYRIGHT: deatcl'stvo "Nedra." 1978

‘3 303

680:

81“ /08566

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

000 550.34
GRAVITY MEASUREMENT DEVICES. METHODS

Hoecov PRETSIZIONNOYB 1mm 81“ TYAZHBSTI (Precision Measurement of
Gravity) in Russian 1978 signed to press 1 Sep 77 pp 2. 83

ﬁnnotation and table of contents from book by Vladimir Boriaovich Dubov-
skiy. lzdatel‘stvo "Nauka". 900 copies. 83 pages]

LTex_t_/ The principles of designing static gravimeters. methods of taking
into account their inaccuracy. the prospects of increasing tha precision,
as well as the possibilities of enlarging the group of problens which can
be solved using these inatruents are set forth in the monograph. The main
units of the aysten of a stationary automated gravimeter with a nultifunc-
tional feedback system. which has been installed on an earthquake-proof
platfors with an adjustable height. are described.

Contents Page

Introductionesesoseassesesessesseaeeeses 3

Chapter 1. The Possibilities and Prospects of Inproving Static
Gravimetera........................... I;

The Main Geophysical Problems which Can Be Solved Using Nigh-
Precision Static Gravinstera. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . lo
The Prospects of Improving Static Gravimeters . . . . . . . . . . 8

Chapter 2. Creep and Elastic After-Effect. . . . . . . . . . . . . ll
The Phenomenon of Elastic After-Effect. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Study of the Topography of the Surface of Quartz Filaments Using

an Electronic Scan Microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
The Role of Surface Phenomena in the Imperfect Elasticity of

QuartzPilaments........................23
Consideration of Elastic After-Effect When Determining the Scale

Factors of Marine Quartz Cravimeters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Design Possibilities of Reducing the Zero Creep of Quart:

Gravineters.......................... 36
Plasticity and Elastic After-Effect in Crystals . . . . . . . . . 38

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OPI’IOIAI. USE ONLY

Chapter 3. heat Disturbsnces of Gravieeter Readings. . . . . .
hethods of Reducing Temperature Disturbances. . . . . . . . .
Tel-pereture “assure-eat Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Possibilities of Bridge Methods of Measure-once Using Direct

Current..............o...o.o.......
Meesureeents of the Sesneat Out-of-Daisnce Volteees of Direct

Currentnl’ldsII..o.....................
Them.‘.tn..i'ﬂ198eaaeeaeeeeeeaeeeaeeeaas
Automatic l’roportionate ‘l'hernostat Regulation Systes with an

Integretednridse.......................

Chepter A. The Influence of Dieturbence Accoleretions end Dips on
crﬂV1mter Radius. I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
The Effect of Large Dieturbanca Accelerotions on the maeureeent

o‘cr‘vitYaa'eeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeee
The Influence of Hicroseises on the Heaeureeent of Gravity on Dry
land. I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
Liquid Electrolytic Levels. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Earthquake-Proof Platform with an Adjustable Height . . . . .

Chapter 5. The Automation of Static Gravieeters. . . . . . . . . .
The Main Advantages of e Heaeuring Systes With Rigid Feedback . .
Contectless Sensors of hechanicel Movements . . . . . . . . . . .

Dynamic Properties of e Crevieeter Hith Rigid Feedback. . . .
Autosstion of the Date Recording Systee . . . . . . . . . . .

Conclusion..............................

Bibliography............................

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'etvo "Nauke". 1978

7807
080: 1870

$6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

62
(«2
62

43

48
b9

51

54
SI.

57
59

67
6 7
69
71c
76

78
80
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

muck: 10168

some W TNHNIQUBS AND EQUIPMENT

hoacov rommm Wlmm (Space Photography) in Itueeian 1978
tigned to preae l9 Apr 78 p 4., 360-351

[Annotation and table of contenta fro- book by B. P. Pedorov and V. D. Pern-
yekov, Ilcdra, 3000 copiee. 351 pagea]

[Text] The preaent etege of epece atudiee ie characterised by the eolution
of e nuber of urgent problene vhich are of great inportance in varioua ereea
of hunan ectivity. They include the study of natural reeourcee iron apace.
ln thie reepect, photography yielda the largeet alount of information. now-
ever, to date there hae been very little apecial literature on thie aubject.

‘l'hie book containe materiala on the fundanentala of autocratic photography and
nethode of photography fro- epace. ‘l'he iirat part of the book explaine the
etructure of the necheniena and eethode for calculating the perta and aeeen-
bliee of en automatic photographic «are intended for photography fro. epace.
‘l'he aecond part diacuaeee apecial feature. of epace photography. givea the
diagram and arrangenente of verioue typee of equip-eat, and diecuaeea the
proceaaing of photographic information. The third part treate the ruler of
the operation of photographic equip-ent.

The book ia intended for engineers and techniciane engaged in the development
and operation of epace photograpnic equipment, ae vell aa for atudenta of
higher and aecondary educational inetitutiona apecialiting in aerophotogeodeey.
‘l‘ablea -- 15, figurea -- 95. bibliography -- 72 item.

Contente
Pane
10".

1.5.
1.6.
1.7.

Chapter 2.

2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.10.
2o$o

Chapter 3.
3.1.
3.2.

3.3.
.6.

uuuu U
9
“NOV!
.

o
o

Chapter 6.
10.1.
‘02.
4.3.
6.6.

(0.5.

10.6.

10.7.

Chapter 5.
5.1.

POR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY

The Concept of Spatial Proquency Reoponooa of
Rodiation

Sourceo of Radiation

Interaction of the Radiation Flux with the Media
Paaaoge of Radiation Through the Atooaphorao of the
Earth and Planet:

Pundaunontala of the Photographic Prooeoo and Ito
Automation

Booonoo of the Photographic Procooo

Photographic Hateriala and Their Characteriot ica
Light Piltora

Photographing Procaea in Space Photography
Autonotion of tho Photographic Procoao

The Structure and Calculation of the Iiochaniooo of an
Automatic Photographic Caoera
'rhe Diagram of an Auto-atic Photographic Canera and
tho Purpoaeo of Ita Main liochaniuo
Photographic Objectivoa
Caeero Shuttera
Canerao, Caooottoo, and Caoootto Mechaniau of
Photographic Caeeraa
Autonatic Pocuoing of o Coeera
Mechaniooo Conponoating Inge Shiite
Directing Dovicoa of Photographic Canoroo
Hathode for Calculating the Paralotaro of Photographic

Equip-out
Part II. Photography fro- Space

Speciel Characteriotico of Space Photography
Problem Solved in Space Photography
Hathodo of Photography fro- Space

Spocial Characteriotico of Photography from Space

and llequireoenta Iapoaod on the Photogrophic Equip-out
Special charoctariatico of the Hove-eat of the Carrier
of Photographic Equip-ant
Chongoa in the Illumination of the Earth Depending on
the Para-etera of the [A [Space Vehicle] and Pactoro
Affecting the Illumination in the Plane of the Image
Calculation of the Speed of the Image Movement over
the Senaitive Layer Depending on the Para-otere of the
Orbit
Special Characteriatica of the Computation of Bxpooure
in Space Photography

Hethodo of Ioproving the Ioage Quality
Hethoda of Ilproving the Quality of the I-age ﬂood
in Auto-ated Proceooiog of Photographic Intonation

58
1’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 6.
6.1.

6.2.
6.3.

6.6.
6.5.

686.

Chapter 7 .
7 . l .

7.2.

7.3.
70‘.
7.5.

7 .6 0
Chapter 8.

8.1.
8.2.
8.3.
8.6.
805.
8.6.

Chapter 9.
9.1.
9.2.
9.3.

9.4.

FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY

Fundamentale of Optical Piltretion

holographic Filtration

Correlation Hethod of Image Identification
Evaluation of the Quality of Identification Syetema

Evaluation of Image Quality
Criteria of the Evaluation of the Quality of Photo-
graphic and Reproduced Imagea

Some Peculiaritiea of the Eaeic Characterietica of the
Carriere of Photographic Information

Structural Scheme of the Photographic Proceee
Informational Capacity of a Photographic Image
Spatial Frequency Reeponaee of the Defocueing of the
Objective and Notion of the Image and the Scanning
Diaphragm
Block Diagram of the Acquieition of Photographic
Information

Structure of Automatic Photographic Equipment
Arrangement of Photographic Equipment Aboard a Space
Vehicle and Special Characterietice of Cartography
with the nee of a Laaer Altimeter [72]

Special Characterietice of the Structure of Equipment
for Space Photography

Spectroconal Photography and the Equipment Uaed
Photography from Space on a Color Film

Photographic Equipment for Photographing the Moon
and Planete

Phototeleviaion Equipment

Methods of Interpreting and Automatic Proceaaing of
Photographic Intonation

Hethoda of Interpreting Photographic Intonation
Kain Diecloeure Signa in Interpreting

Input of Photographic Information Into a Coquter
Recognition of Imagee in Photographa

Automated Proceeeing of Photographic Intonation
Hethoda of Accelerated Proceaaing of Photographic
Information

Part III. Operation of Photographic Equipment

Eaaic Principlea of the Operation of Photographic
and Optical Electronic Equipment
The Subject and Content of the Operation Theory
Eaaic Concepte and Definitiona
Operational and Technical Characterietica of
Photographic Equipment
Baeic Requirementa for Quantitative Indexea of
Operational and Technical Characteriatica

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9.5. Special Character-lotion of the Preparation of
lquipeent (or Uee in Space

9.6. Hatheeatical Deter-ination of the Main Indexea 0!
Reliability of unreatorable Space

9.7. Syaton of Meaauree for Preparing Photographic Equip-
nent for One

9.8. Evolution of the Bxpediency and Reliability of Con-
trol over the State of Bquipuent in the Proceaa of
Preparation

chapter 10. Operation of Photographic Equipnent
10.1. General Principlee
10.2. Preliminary Preparation
10.3. Praflight Preparation
10.10. Routine Maintenance
10.5. Care of Equip-went and Ite Storage
10.6. Docuentation
10.7. Squipnent Conaervation
10.8. Storage of Photographic Kateriala

Bibliography
Supplement
Subject Index

COPYRIGHT: Itdetel'atvo "Neda", 1978

10 , 233
080: 1870

60

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY